The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night — Volume 01 (of 10)
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night — Volume 01 (of 10)

Translator: Sir Richard Francis Burton


        
Release date: February 20, 2016 [eBook #51252]
                Most recently updated: May 21, 2025

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/51252

Credits: Produced by Richard Tonsing, Richard Hulse and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — VOLUME 01 (OF 10) ***

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

                   "TO THE PURE ALL THINGS ARE PURE."
                           (Puris omnia para)

                                                        —_Arab Proverb._

          "Niuna corrotta mente intese mai sanamente parole."

                                            —"_Decameron_"—_conclusion_.

              "Erubuit, posuitque meum Lucretia librum
                  Sed coram Bruto. Brute! recede, leget."

                                                             —_Martial._

            "Mieulx est de ris que de larmes escripre,
                Pour ce que rire est le propre des hommes."

                                                              —RABELAIS.

"The pleasure we derive from perusing the Thousand-and-One Stories makes
us regret that we possess only a comparatively small part of these truly
enchanting fictions."

                                      —CRICHTON'S "_History of Arabia_."

[Illustration]

_A PLAIN AND LITERAL TRANSLATION OF THE ARABIAN NIGHTS ENTERTAINMENTS.
NOW ENTITULED_




                           _THE BOOK OF THE_
                     =Thousand Nights and a Night=

              _WITH INTRODUCTION EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE
                MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF MOSLEM MEN AND A
                 TERMINAL ESSAY UPON THE HISTORY OF THE
                                NIGHTS_

                               VOLUME I.


                                   BY
                           RICHARD F. BURTON

[Illustration]

                 PRINTED BY THE BURTON CLUB FOR PRIVATE
                            SUBSCRIBERS ONLY

                            Shammar Edition

Limited to one thousand numbered sets, of which this is

                              Number _547_




                          PRINTED IN U. S. A.

                       =Inscribed to the Memory=

                                   OF

                           MY LAMENTED FRIEND

                     =John Frederick Steinhaeuser,=

                         (CIVIL SURGEON, ADEN)

                                  WHO

                       A QUARTER OF A CENTURY AGO

                    ASSISTED ME IN THIS TRANSLATION.




                       THE TRANSLATOR'S FOREWORD.


This work, laborious as it may appear, has been to me a labour of love,
an unfailing source of solace and satisfaction. During my long years of
official banishment to the luxuriant and deadly deserts of Western
Africa, and to the dull and dreary half-clearings of South America, it
proved itself a charm, a talisman against ennui and despondency.
Impossible even to open the pages without a vision starting into view;
without drawing a picture from the pinacothek of the brain; without
reviving a host of memories and reminiscences which are not the common
property of travellers, however widely they may have travelled. From my
dull and commonplace and "respectable" surroundings, the Jinn bore me at
once to the land of my predilection, Arabia, a region so familiar to my
mind that even at first sight, it seemed a reminiscence of some by-gone
metempsychic life in the distant Past. Again I stood under the
diaphanous skies, in air glorious as æther, whose every breath raises
men's spirits like sparkling wine. Once more I saw the evening star
hanging like a solitaire from the pure front of the western firmament;
and the after-glow transfiguring and transforming, as by magic, the
homely and rugged features of the scene into a fairy-land lit with a
light which never shines on other soils or seas. Then would appear the
woollen tents, low and black, of the true Badawin, mere dots in the
boundless waste of lion-tawny clays and gazelle-brown gravels, and the
camp-fire dotting like a glow-worm the village centre. Presently,
sweetened by distance, would be heard the wild weird song of lads and
lasses, driving or rather pelting, through the gloaming their sheep and
goats; and the measured chant of the spearsmen gravely stalking behind
their charge, the camels; mingled with the bleating of the flocks and
the bellowing of the humpy herds; while the rere-mouse flitted overhead
with his tiny shriek, and the rave of the jackal resounded through
deepening glooms, and—most musical of music—the palm-trees answered the
whispers of the night-breeze with the softest tones of falling water.

And then a shift of scene. The Shaykhs and "white-beards" of the tribe
gravely take their places, sitting with outspread skirts like hillocks
on the plain, as the Arabs say, around the camp-fire, whilst I reward
their hospitality and secure its continuance by reading or reciting a
few pages of their favourite tales. The women and children stand
motionless as silhouettes outside the ring; and all are breathless with
attention; they seem to drink in the words with eyes and mouths as well
as with ears. The most fantastic flights of fancy, the wildest
improbabilities, the most impossible of impossibilities, appear to them
utterly natural, mere matters of every-day occurrence. They enter
thoroughly into each phase of feeling touched upon by the author: they
take a personal pride in the chivalrous nature and knightly prowess of
Taj al-Mulúk; they are touched with tenderness by the self-sacrificing
love of Azízah; their mouths water as they hear of heaps of untold gold
given away in largesse like clay; they chuckle with delight every time a
Kázi or a Fakír—a judge or a reverend—is scurvily entreated by some
Pantagruelist of the Wilderness; and, despite their normal solemnity and
impassibility, all roar with laughter, sometimes rolling upon the ground
till the reader's gravity is sorely tried, at the tales of the garrulous
Barber and of Ali and the Kurdish Sharper. To this magnetising mood the
sole exception is when a Badawi of superior accomplishments, who
sometimes says his prayers, ejaculates a startling "Astaghfaru'llah"—I
pray Allah's pardon!—for listening, not to Carlyle's "downright lies,"
but to light mention of the sex whose name is never heard amongst the
nobility of the Desert.

Nor was it only in Arabia that the immortal Nights did me such notable
service: I found the wildlings of Somali-land equally amenable to its
discipline; no one was deaf to the charm and the two women-cooks of my
caravan, on its way to Harar, were incontinently dubbed by my men
"Shahrazad" and "Dinazad."

It may be permitted me also to note that this translation is a natural
outcome of my Pilgrimage to Al-Medinah and Meccah. Arriving at Aden in
the (so-called) winter of 1852, I put up with my old and dear friend,
Steinhaeuser, to whose memory this volume is inscribed; and, when
talking over Arabia and the Arabs, we at once came to the same
conclusion that, while the name of this wondrous treasury of Moslem
folk-lore is familiar to almost every English child, no general reader
is aware of the valuables it contains, nor indeed will the door open to
any but Arabists. Before parting we agreed to "collaborate" and produce
a full, complete, unvarnished, uncastrated copy of the great original,
my friend taking the prose and I the metrical part; and we corresponded
upon the subject for years. But whilst I was in the Brazil, Steinhaeuser
died suddenly of apoplexy at Berne in Switzerland and, after the fashion
of Anglo-India, his valuable MSS. left at Aden were dispersed, and very
little of his labours came into my hands.

Thus I was left alone to my work, which progressed fitfully amid a host
of obstructions. At length, in the spring of 1879, the tedious process
of copying began and the book commenced to take finished form. But,
during the winter of 1881-82, I saw in the literary journals a notice of
a new version by Mr. John Payne, well known to scholars for his prowess
in English verse, especially for his translation of "The Poems of Master
Francis Villon, of Paris." Being then engaged on an expedition to the
Gold Coast (for gold), which seemed likely to cover some months, I wrote
to the "Athenæum" (Nov. 13, 1881) and to Mr. Payne, who was wholly
unconscious that we were engaged on the same work, and freely offered
him precedence and possession of the field till no longer wanted. He
accepted my offer as frankly, and his priority entailed another delay
lasting till the spring of 1885. These details will partly account for
the lateness of my appearing, but there is yet another cause.
Professional ambition suggested that literary labours, unpopular with
the vulgar and the half-educated, are not likely to help a man up the
ladder of promotion. But common sense presently suggested to me that,
professionally speaking, I was not a success; and, at the same time,
that I had no cause to be ashamed of my failure. In our day, when we
live under a despotism of the lower "middle-class" Philister who can
pardon anything but superiority, the prizes of competitive services are
monopolised by certain "pets" of the _Médiocratie_, and prime favourites
of that jealous and potent majority—the Mediocrities who know "no
nonsense about merit." It is hard for an outsider to realise how perfect
is the monopoly of commonplace, and to comprehend how fatal a
stumbling-stone that man sets in the way of his own advancement who
dares to think for himself, or who knows more or who does more than the
mob of gentlemen-employés who know very little and who do even less.

Yet, however behindhand I may be, there is still ample room and verge
for an English version of the "Arabian Nights' Entertainments."

Our century of translations, popular and vernacular, from (Professor
Antoine) Galland's delightful abbreviation and adaptation (A.D. 1704),
in no wise represent the eastern original. The best and latest, the Rev.
Mr. Foster's, which is diffuse and verbose, and Mr. G. Moir Bussey's,
which is a re-correction, abound in gallicisms of style and idiom; and
one and all degrade a chef-d'œuvre of the highest anthropological and
ethnographical interest and importance to a mere fairy-book, a nice
present for little boys.

After nearly a century had elapsed, Dr. Jonathan Scott (LL.D. H.E.I.C.'s
S., Persian Secretary to the G. G. Bengal; Oriental Professor, etc.,
etc.), printed his "Tales, Anecdotes, and Letters, translated from the
Arabic and Persian," (Cadell and Davies, London, A.D. 1800); and
followed in 1811 with an edition of "The Arabian Nights' Entertainments"
from the MS. of Edward Wortley Montague (in 6 vols., small 8vo, London:
Longmans, etc.). This work he (and he only) describes as "Carefully
revised and occasionally corrected from the Arabic." The reading public
did not wholly reject it, sundry texts were founded upon the Scott
version and it has been imperfectly reprinted (4 vols., 8vo, Nimmo and
Bain, London, 1883). But most men, little recking what a small portion
of the original they were reading, satisfied themselves with the
Anglo-French epitome and metaphrase. At length in 1838, Mr. Henry
Torrens, B.A., Irishman, lawyer ("of the Inner Temple") and Bengal
Civilian, took a step in the right direction; and began to translate,
"The Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night," (1 vol., 8vo, Calcutta:
W. Thacker and Co.) from the Arabic of the Ægyptian (!) MS. edited by
Mr. (afterwards Sir) William H. Macnaghten. The attempt, or rather the
intention, was highly creditable; the copy was carefully moulded upon
the model and offered the best example of the _verbatim et literatim_
style. But the plucky author knew little of Arabic, and least of what is
most wanted, the dialect of Egypt and Syria. His prose is so
conscientious as to offer up spirit at the shrine of letter; and his
verse, always whimsical, has at times a manner of Hibernian whoop which
is comical when it should be pathetic. Lastly he printed only one volume
of a series which completed would have contained nine or ten.

That amiable and devoted Arabist, the late Edward William Lane does not
score a success in his "New Translation of the Tales of a Thousand and
One Nights" (London: Charles Knight and Co., MDCCCXXXIX.) of which there
have been four English editions, besides American, two edited by E. S.
Poole. He chose the abbreviating Bulak Edition; and, of its two hundred
tales, he has omitted about half and by far the more characteristic
half: the work was intended for "the drawing-room table;" and,
consequently, the workman was compelled to avoid the "objectionable" and
aught "approaching to licentiousness." He converts the Arabian Nights
into the Arabian Chapters, arbitrarily changing the division and, worse
still, he converts some chapters into notes. He renders poetry by prose
and apologises for not omitting it altogether: he neglects assonance and
he is at once too Oriental and not Oriental enough. He had small store
of Arabic at the time—Lane of the Nights is not Lane of the
Dictionary—and his pages are disfigured by many childish mistakes. Worst
of all, the three handsome volumes are rendered unreadable as Sale's
Koran by their anglicised Latin, their sesquipedalian un-English words,
and the stiff and stilted style of half a century ago when our prose
was, perhaps, the worst in Europe. Their cargo of Moslem learning was
most valuable to the student, but utterly out of place for readers of
"The Nights;" re-published, as these notes have been separately (London,
Chatto, 1883), they are an ethnological text-book.

Mr. John Payne has printed, for the Villon Society and for private
circulation only, the first and sole complete translation of the great
compendium, "comprising about four times as much matter as that of
Galland, and three times as much as that of any other translator;" and
I cannot but feel proud that he has honoured me with the dedication of
"The Book of The Thousand Nights and One Night." His version is most
readable: his English, with a sub-flavour of the Mabinogionic
archaicism, is admirable; and his style gives life and light to the
nine volumes whose matter is frequently heavy enough. He succeeds
admirably in the most difficult passages and he often hits upon choice
and special terms and the exact vernacular equivalent of the foreign
word, so happily and so picturesquely that all future translators must
perforce use the same expression under pain of falling far short. But
the learned and versatile author bound himself to issue only five
hundred copies, and "not to reproduce the work in its complete and
uncastrated form." Consequently his excellent version is caviaire to
the general—practically unprocurable.

And here I hasten to confess that ample use has been made of the three
versions above noted, the whole being blended by a _callida junctura_
into a homogeneous mass. But in the presence of so many predecessors a
writer is bound to show some _raison d'être_ for making a fresh attempt
and this I proceed to do with due reserve.

Briefly, the object of this version is to show what "The Thousand Nights
and a Night" really is. Not, however, for reasons to be more fully
stated in the terminal Essay, by straining _verbum reddere verbo_, but
by writing as the Arab would have written in English. On this point I am
all with Saint Jerome (Pref. in Jobum) "Vel verbum e verbo, vel sensum e
sensu, vel ex utroque commixtum, et medie temperatum genus
translationis." My work claims to be a faithful copy of the great
Eastern Saga-book, by preserving intact, not only the spirit, but even
the _mécanique_, the manner and the matter. Hence, however prosy and
long-drawn out be the formula, it retains the scheme of the Nights
because they are a prime feature in the original. The Ráwí or reciter,
to whose wits the task of supplying details is left, well knows their
value: the openings carefully repeat the names of the _dramatis personæ_
and thus fix them in the hearer's memory. Without the Nights no Arabian
Nights! Moreover it is necessary to retain the whole apparatus: nothing
more ill-advised than Dr. Jonathan Scott's strange device of garnishing
The Nights with fancy head-pieces and tail-pieces or the splitting-up of
Galland's narrative by merely prefixing "Nuit," etc., ending moreover,
with the ccxxxiv^{th} Night: yet this has been done, apparently with the
consent of the great Arabist Sylvestre de Sacy (Paris, Ernest Bourdin).
Moreover, holding that the translator's glory is to add something to his
native tongue, while avoiding the hideous hag-like nakedness of Torrens
and the bald literalism of Lane, I have carefully Englished the
picturesque turns and novel expressions of the original in all their
outlandishness; for instance, when the dust-cloud raised by a tramping
host is described as "walling the horizon." Hence peculiar attention has
been paid to the tropes and figures which the Arabic language often
packs into a single term; and I have never hesitated to coin a word when
wanted, such as "she snorted and snarked," fully to represent the
original. These, like many in Rabelais, are mere barbarisms unless
generally adopted; in which case they become civilised and common
currency.

Despite objections manifold and manifest, I have preserved the balance
of sentences and the prose rhyme and rhythm which Easterns look upon as
mere music. This "Saj'a," or cadence of the cooing dove, has in Arabic
its special duties. It adds a sparkle to description and a point to
proverb, epigram and dialogue; it corresponds with our "artful
alliteration" (which in places I have substituted for it) and,
generally, it defines the boundaries between the classical and the
popular styles which jostle each other in The Nights. If at times it
appear strained and forced, after the wont of rhymed prose, the scholar
will observe that, despite the immense copiousness of assonants and
consonants in Arabic, the strain is often put upon it intentionally,
like the _Rims cars_ of Dante and the Troubadours. This rhymed prose may
be "un-English" and unpleasant, even irritating to the British ear;
still I look upon it as a _sine quâ non_ for a complete reproduction of
the original. In the terminal Essay I shall revert to the subject.

On the other hand when treating the versicle portion, which may
represent a total of ten thousand lines, I have not always bound myself
by the metrical bonds of the Arabic, which are artificial in the
extreme, and which in English can be made bearable only by a _tour de
force_. I allude especially to the monorhyme, _Rim continuat_ or _tirade
monorime_, whose monotonous simplicity was preferred by the Troubadours
for threnodies. It may serve well for three or four couplets but, when
it extends, as in the Ghazal-canzon, to eighteen, and in the Kasidah,
elegy or ode, to more, it must either satisfy itself with banal
rhyme-words, when the assonants should as a rule be expressive and
emphatic; or, it must display an ingenuity, a smell of the oil, which
assuredly does not add to the reader's pleasure. It can perhaps be done
and it should be done; but for me the task has no attractions: I can
fence better in shoes than in sabots. Finally I print the couplets in
Arab form separating the hemistichs by asterisks.

And now to consider one matter of special importance in the book—its
_turpiloquium_. This stumbling-block is of two kinds, completely
distinct. One is the simple, naïve and child-like indecency which, from
Tangiers to Japan, occurs throughout general conversation of high and
low in the present day. It uses, like the holy books of the Hebrews,
expressions "plainly descriptive of natural situations;" and it treats
in an unconventionally free and naked manner of subjects and matters
which are usually, by common consent, left undescribed. As Sir William
Jones observed long ago, "that anything natural can be offensively
obscene never seems to have occurred to the Indians or to their
legislators; a singularity (?) pervading their writings and
conversation, but no proof of moral depravity." Another justly observes,
_Les peuples primitifs n'y entendent pas malice: ils appellent les
choses par leurs noms et ne trouvent pas condamnable ce qui est
naturel._ And they are prying as children. For instance the European
novelist marries off his hero and heroine and leaves them to consummate
marriage in privacy; even Tom Jones has the decency to bolt the door.
But the Eastern story-teller, especially this unknown "prose
Shakespeare," must usher you, with a flourish, into the bridal chamber
and narrate to you, with infinite gusto, everything he sees and hears.
Again we must remember that grossness and indecency, in fact _les
turpitudes_, are matters of time and place; what is offensive in England
is not so in Egypt; what scandalises us now would have been a tame joke
_tempore Elisæ_. Withal The Nights will not be found in this matter
coarser than many passages of Shakspeare, Sterne, and Swift, and their
uncleanness rarely attains the perfection of Alcofribas Nasier, "divin
maître et atroce cochon." The other element is absolute obscenity,
sometimes, but not always, tempered by wit, humour and drollery; here we
have an exaggeration of Petronius Arbiter, the handiwork of writers
whose ancestry, the most religious and the most debauched of mankind,
practised every abomination before the shrine of the Canopic Gods.

In accordance with my purpose of reproducing the Nights, not _virginibus
puerisque_, but in as perfect a picture as my powers permit, I have
carefully sought out the English equivalent of every Arabic word,
however low it may be or "shocking" to ears polite; preserving, on the
other hand, all possible delicacy where the indecency is not
intentional; and, as a friend advises me to state, not exaggerating the
vulgarities and the indecencies which, indeed, can hardly be
exaggerated. For the coarseness and crassness are but the shades of a
picture which would otherwise be all lights. The general tone of The
Nights is exceptionally high and pure. The devotional fervour often
rises to the boiling-point of fanaticism. The pathos is sweet, deep and
genuine; tender, simple and true, utterly unlike much of our modern
tinsel. Its life, strong, splendid and multitudinous, is everywhere
flavoured with that unaffected pessimism and constitutional melancholy
which strike deepest root under the brightest skies and which sigh in
the face of heaven:—

           Vita quid est hominis? Viridis floriscula mortis;
               Sole Oriente oriens, sole cadente cadens.

Poetical justice is administered by the literary Kází with exemplary
impartiality and severity; "denouncing evil doers and eulogising deeds
admirably achieved." The morale is sound and healthy; and at times we
descry, through the voluptuous and libertine picture, vistas of a
transcendental morality, the morality of Socrates in Plato. Subtle
corruption and covert licentiousness are utterly absent; we find more
real "vice" in many a short French roman, say La Dame aux Camelias, and
in not a few English novels of our day than in the thousands of pages of
the Arab. Here we have nothing of that most immodest modern modesty
which sees covert implication where nothing is implied, and "improper"
allusion, when propriety is not outraged; nor do we meet with the
Nineteenth Century refinement; innocence of the word not of the thought;
morality of the tongue not of the heart, and the sincere homage paid to
virtue in guise of perfect hypocrisy. It is, indeed, this unique
contrast of a quaint element, childish crudities and nursery indecencies
and "vain and amatorious" phrase jostling the finest and highest views
of life and character, shown in the kaleidoscopic shiftings of the
marvellous picture with many a "rich truth in a tale's pretence";
pointed by a rough dry humour which compares well with "wut;" the
alternations of strength and weakness, of pathos and bathos, of the
boldest poetry (the diction of Job) and the baldest prose (the Egyptian
of to-day); the contact of religion and morality with the orgies of
African Apuleius and Petronius Arbiter—at times taking away the reader's
breath—and, finally, the whole dominated everywhere by that marvellous
Oriental fancy, wherein the spiritual and the supernatural are as common
as the material and the natural; it is this contrast, I say, which forms
the chiefest charm of The Nights, which gives it the most striking
originality and which makes it a perfect expositor of the medieval
Moslem mind.

Explanatory notes did not enter into Mr. Payne's plan. They do with
mine: I can hardly imagine The Nights being read to any profit by men of
the West without commentary. My annotations avoid only one subject,
parallels of European folk-lore and fabliaux which, however interesting,
would overswell the bulk of a book whose speciality is anthropology. The
accidents of my life, it may be said without undue presumption, my long
dealings with Arabs and other Mahommedans, and my familiarity not only
with their idiom but with their turn of thought, and with that racial
individuality which baffles description, have given me certain
advantages over the average student, however deeply he may have studied.
These volumes, moreover, afford me a long-sought opportunity of noticing
practices and customs which interest all mankind and which "Society"
will not hear mentioned. Grote, the historian, and Thackeray, the
novelist, both lamented that the _bégueulerie_ of their countrymen
condemned them to keep silence where publicity was required; and that
they could not even claim the partial licence of a Fielding and a
Smollett. Hence a score of years ago I lent my best help to the late Dr.
James Hunt in founding the Anthropological Society, whose presidential
chair I first occupied (pp. 2-4 Anthropologia; London, Balliere, vol.
i., No. 1, 1873). My motive was to supply travellers with an organ which
would rescue their observations from the outer darkness of manuscript,
and print their curious information on social and sexual matters out of
place in the popular book intended for the Nipptisch and indeed better
kept from public view. But, hardly had we begun when "Respectability,"
that whited sepulchre full of all uncleanness, rose up against us.
"Propriety" cried us down with her brazen blatant voice, and the
weak-kneed brethren fell away. Yet the organ was much wanted and is
wanted still. All now known barbarous tribes in Inner Africa, America
and Australia, whose instincts have not been overlaid by reason, have a
ceremony which they call "making men." As soon as the boy shows proofs
of puberty, he and his coevals are taken in hand by the mediciner and
the Fetisheer; and, under priestly tuition, they spend months in the
"bush," enduring hardships and tortures which impress the memory till
they have mastered the "theorick and practick" of social and sexual
relations. Amongst the civilised this fruit of the knowledge-tree must
be bought at the price of the bitterest experience, and the consequences
of ignorance are peculiarly cruel. Here, then, I find at last an
opportunity of noticing in explanatory notes many details of the text
which would escape the reader's observation, and I am confident that
they will form a repertory of Eastern knowledge in its esoteric phase.
The student who adds the notes of Lane ("Arabian Society," etc., before
quoted) to mine will know as much of the Moslem East and more than many
Europeans who have spent half their lives in Orient lands. For facility
of reference an index of anthropological notes is appended to each
volume.

The reader will kindly bear with the following technical details.
Steinhaeuser and I began and ended our work with the first Bulak
("Bul.") Edition printed at the port of Cairo in A.H. 1251=A.D. 1835.
But when preparing my MSS. for print I found the text incomplete, many
of the stories being given in epitome and not a few ruthlessly mutilated
with head or feet wanting. Like most Eastern scribes the Editor could
not refrain from "improvements," which only debased the book; and his
sole title to excuse is that the second Bulak Edition (4 vols. A.H.
1279=A.D. 1863), despite its being "revised and corrected by Sheik
Mahommed Qotch Al-Adewi," is even worse; and the same may be said of the
Cairo Edit. (4 vols. A.H. 1297=A.D. 1881). The Calcutta ("Calc.")
Edition, with ten lines of Persian preface by the Editor, Ahmed
al-Shirwani (A.D. 1814), was cut short at the end of the first two
hundred Nights, and thus made room for Sir William Hay Macnaghten's
Edition (4 vols, royal 4to) of 1839-42. This ("Mac."), as by far the
least corrupt and the most complete, has been assumed for my basis with
occasional reference to the Breslau Edition ("Bres.") wretchedly edited
from a hideous Egyptian MS. by Dr. Maximilian Habicht (1825-43). The
Bayrut Text "Alif-Leila we Leila" (4 vols. gt. 8vo, Beirut. 1881-83) is
a melancholy specimen of The Nights taken entirely from the Bulak
Edition by one Khalil Sarkis and converted to Christianity; beginning
without Bismillah, continued with scrupulous castration and ending in
ennui and disappointment. I have not used this missionary production.

As regards the transliteration of Arabic words I deliberately reject the
artful and complicated system, ugly and clumsy withal, affected by
scientific modern Orientalists. Nor is my sympathy with their prime
object, namely to fit the Roman alphabet for supplanting all others.
Those who learn languages, and many do so, by the eye as well as by the
ear, well know the advantages of a special character to distinguish, for
instance, Syriac from Arabic, Gujrati from Marathi. Again this Roman
hand bewitched may have its use in purely scientific and literary works;
but it would be wholly out of place in one whose purpose is that of the
novel, to amuse rather than to instruct. Moreover the devices perplex
the simple and teach nothing to the learned. Either the reader knows
Arabic, in which case Greek letters, italics and "upper case,"
diacritical points and similar typographic oddities are, as a rule with
some exceptions, unnecessary; or he does not know Arabic, when none of
these expedients will be of the least use to him. Indeed it is a matter
of secondary consideration what system we prefer, provided that we
mostly adhere to one and the same, for the sake of a consistency which
saves confusion to the reader. I have especially avoided that of Mr.
Lane, adopted by Mr. Payne for special reasons against which it was vain
to protest: it represents the debased brogue of Egypt or rather of
Cairo; and such a word as Kemer (ez-Zeman) would be utterly
unpronounceable to a Badawi. Nor have I followed the practice of my
learned friend, Reverend G. P. Badger, in mixing bars and acute accents;
the former unpleasantly remind man of those hateful dactyls and
spondees, and the latter should, in my humble opinion, be applied to
long vowels which in Arabic double, or should double, the length of the
shorts. Dr. Badger uses the acute symbol to denote accent or stress of
voice; but such appoggio is unknown to those who speak with purest
articulation; for instance whilst the European pronounces Mus-cat´, and
the Arab villager Mas´-kat; the Children of the Waste, "on whose tongues
Allah descended," articulate Mas-kat. I have therefore followed the
simple system adopted in my "Pilgrimage," and have accented Arabic words
only when first used, thinking it unnecessary to preserve throughout
what is an eyesore to the reader and a distress to the printer. In the
main I follow "Johnson on Richardson," a work known to every
Anglo-Orientalist as the old and trusty companion of his studies early
and late; but even here I have made sundry deviations for reasons which
will be explained in the terminal Essay. As words are the embodiment of
ideas and writing is of words, so the word is the spoken word; and we
should write it as pronounced. Strictly speaking, the _e_-sound and the
_o_-sound (viz. the Italian _o_-sound not the English which is peculiar
to us and unknown to any other tongue) are not found in Arabic, except
when the figure Imálah obliges: hence they are called "Yá al-Majhúl" and
"Waw al-Majhúl" the unknown y (í) and u. But in all tongues
vowel-sounds, the flesh which clothes the bones (consonants) of
language, are affected by the consonants which precede and more
especially which follow them, hardening and softening the articulation;
and deeper sounds accompany certain letters as the sád (ص) compared with
the sín (س). None save a defective ear would hold, as Lane does,
"Maulid" (=birth-festival) "more properly pronounced 'Molid.'" Yet I
prefer Khokh (peach) and Jokh (broad-cloth) to Khukh and Jukh; Ohod
(mount) to Uhud; Obayd (a little slave) to Ubayd; and Hosayn (a fortlet,
not the P. N. Al-Husayn) to Husayn. As for the short _e_ in such words
as "Memlúk" for "Mamlúk" (a white slave), "Eshe" for "Asha" (supper),
and "Yemen" for "Al-Yaman," I consider it a flat Egyptianism,
insufferable to an ear which admires the Badawi pronunciation. Yet I
prefer "Shelebi" (a dandy) from the Turkish Chelebi, to "Shalabi;"
"Zebdani" (the Syrian village) to "Zabdani," and "Fes and Miknes" (by
the figure Imálah) to "Fás and Miknás," our "Fez and Mequinez."

With respect to proper names and untranslated Arabic words I have
rejected all system in favour of common sense. When a term is
incorporated in our tongue, I refuse to follow the purist and mortify
the reader by startling innovation. For instance, Aleppo, Cairo and
Bassorah are preferred to Halab, Kahirah and Al-Basrah; when a word is
half-naturalised, like Alcoran or Koran, Bashaw or Pasha, which the
French write Pacha; and Mahomet or Mohammed (for Muhammad), the modern
form is adopted because the more familiar. But I see no advantage in
retaining, simply because they are the mistakes of a past generation,
such words as "Roc" (for Rukh), Khalif (a pretentious blunder for
Khalífah and better written Caliph) and "genie" (=Jinn) a mere Gallic
corruption not so terrible, however, as "a Bedouin" (=Badawi). As little
too would I follow Mr. Lane in foisting upon the public such Arabisms as
"Khuff" (a riding-boot), "Mikra'ah" (a palm-rod) and a host of others
for which we have good English equivalents. On the other hand I would
use, but use sparingly, certain Arabic exclamations, as "Bismillah" (=in
the name of Allah!) and "Inshallah" (=if Allah please!), which have
special applications and which have been made familiar to English ears
by the genius of Fraser and Morier.

I here end these desultory but necessary details to address the reader
in a few final words. He will not think lightly of my work when I repeat
to him that with the aid of my annotations supplementing Lane's, the
student will readily and pleasantly learn more of the Moslem's manners
and customs, laws and religion than is known to the average Orientalist;
and, if my labours induce him to attack the text of The Nights he will
become master of much more Arabic than the ordinary Arab owns. This book
is indeed a legacy which I bequeath to my fellow-countrymen in their
hour of need. Over devotion to Hindu, and especially to Sanskrit
literature, has led them astray from those (so-called) "Semitic"
studies, which are the more requisite for us as they teach us to deal
successfully with a race more powerful than any pagans—the Moslem.
Apparently England is ever forgetting that she is at present the
greatest Mohammedan empire in the world. Of late years she has
systematically neglected Arabism and, indeed, actively discouraged it in
examinations for the Indian Civil Service, where it is incomparably more
valuable than Greek and Latin. Hence, when suddenly compelled to assume
the reins of government in Moslem lands, as Afghanistan in times past
and Egypt at present, she fails after a fashion which scandalises her
few (very few) friends; and her crass ignorance concerning the Oriental
peoples which should most interest her, exposes her to the contempt of
Europe as well as of the Eastern world. When the regretable raids of
1883-84, culminating in the miserable affairs of Tokar, Teb and Tamasi,
were made upon the gallant Sudani Negroids, the Bisharin outlying
Sawakin, who were battling for the holy cause of liberty and religion
and for escape from Turkish task-masters and Egyptian tax-gatherers, not
an English official in camp, after the death of the gallant and lamented
Major Morice, was capable of speaking Arabic. Now Moslems are not to be
ruled by raw youths who should be at school and college instead of
holding positions of trust and emolument. He who would deal with them
successfully must be, firstly, honest and truthful and, secondly,
familiar with and favourably inclined to their manners and customs if
not to their law and religion. We may, perhaps, find it hard to restore
to England those pristine virtues, that tone and temper, which made her
what she is; but at any rate we (myself and a host of others) can offer
her the means of dispelling her ignorance concerning the Eastern races
with whom she is continually in contact.

In conclusion I must not forget to notice that the Arabic ornamentations
of these volumes were designed by my excellent friend Yacoub Artin
Pasha, of the Ministry of Instruction, Cairo, with the aid of the
well-known writing-artist, Shaykh Mohammed Muunis the Cairene. My name,
Al-Hajj Abdullah (=the Pilgrim Abdallah) was written by an English
calligrapher, the lamented Professor Palmer who found a premature death
almost within sight of Suez.

                                                      RICHARD F. BURTON.

 WANDERERS' CLUB, _August 15, 1885_.




                     CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME.


                                                                  PAGE

  INTRODUCTION                                                       1

  STORY OF KING SHAHRYAR AND HIS BROTHER                             2

     _a._ TALE OF THE BULL AND THE ASS                              16

                     (_Lane, vol. I._, 1-16.)


  1. TALE OF THE TRADER AND THE JINNI                               24

    (_Chapt. I. Story of the Merchant and the Jinnee: p. 43._)

     _a._ THE FIRST SHAYKH'S STORY                                  27

       (_Story of the First Sheykh and the Gazelle: p. 48._)

     _b._ THE SECOND SHAYKH'S STORY                                 32

  (_Story of the Second Sheykh and the two Black Hounds: p. 52._)

     _c._ THE THIRD SHAYKH'S STORY                                  36

        (_Story of the Third Sheykh and the Mule: p. 56._)


  2. THE FISHERMAN AND THE JINNI                                    38

           (_Chapt. II. Story of the Fisherman: p. 78._)

     _a._ TALE OF THE WAZIR AND THE SAGE DUBAN                      45

       (_Story of King Yoonan and the Sage Dooban: p. 84._)

          _ab._ STORY OF KING SINDIBAD AND HIS FALCON               50

          _ac._ TALE OF THE HUSBAND AND THE PARROT                  52

          (_Story of the Husband and the Parrot: p. 89._)

          _ad._ TALE OF THE PRINCE AND THE OGRESS                   54

   (_Story of the Envious Wezeer and the Prince and the Ghoolah:
                             p. 91._)

     _b._ TALE OF THE ENSORCELLED PRINCE                            69

     (_Story of the Young King of the Black Islands: p. 106._)



  3. THE PORTER AND THE THREE LADIES OF BAGHDAD                     82

   (_Chapt. III. Story of the Porter and the Ladies of Baghdad,
        and of the three Royal Mendicants, etc.: p. 136._)

     _a._ THE FIRST KALANDAR'S TALE                                104

          (_Story of the First Royal Mendicant: p. 150._)

     _b._ THE SECOND KALANDAR'S TALE                               113

         (_Story of the Second Royal Mendicant: p. 157._)

          _ba._ TALE OF THE ENVIER AND THE ENVIED                  123

          (_Story of the Envier and the Envied: p. 166._)

     _c._ THE THIRD KALANDAR'S TALE                                139

          (_Story of the Third Royal Mendicant: p. 178._)

     _d._ THE ELDEST LADY'S TALE                                   162

     _e._ TALE OF THE PORTRESS                                     173

          CONCLUSION OF THE STORY OF THE PORTER AND THREE LADIES   184


  4. TALE OF THE THREE APPLES                                      186

      (_Chapt. IV. Story of the Three Apples, etc.: p. 250._)


  5. TALE OF NUR AL-DIN ALI AND HIS SON BADR AL-DIN HASAN          195

   (_Story of Noor ed-Deen and his Son, and of Shems ed-Deen and
                      his Daughter: p. 253._)


  6. THE HUNCHBACK'S TALE                                          255

           (_Chapt. V. Story of the Humpback: p. 238._)

     _a._ THE NAZARENE BROKER'S STORY                              262

          (_Story told by the Christian Broker: p. 334._)

     _b._ THE REEVE'S TALE                                         278

          (_Story told by the Sultan's Steward: p. 348._)

     _c._ TALE OF THE JEWISH DOCTOR                                288

          (_Story told by the Jewish Physician: p. 359._)

     _d._ TALE OF THE TAILOR                                       300

               (_Story told by the Tailor: p. 368._)

     _e._ THE BARBER'S TALE OF HIMSELF                             317

            (_The Barber's Story of Himself: p. 383._)

          _ea._ THE BARBER'S TALE OF HIS FIRST BROTHER             319

       (_The Barber's Story of His First Brother: p. 385._)

          _eb._ THE BARBER'S TALE OF HIS SECOND BROTHER            324

       (_The Barber's Story of His Second Brother: p. 389._)

          _ec._ THE BARBER'S TALE OF HIS THIRD BROTHER             328

        (_The Barber's Story of His Third Brother: p. 392_)

          _ed._ THE BARBER'S TALE OF HIS FOURTH BROTHER            331

       (_The Barber's Story of His Fourth Brother: p. 396._)

          _ee._ THE BARBER'S TALE OF HIS FIFTH BROTHER             335

       (_The Barber's Story of His Fifth Brother: p. 400._)

          _ef._ THE BARBER'S TALE OF HIS SIXTH BROTHER             343

           (_The Barber's Story of His Sixth Brother._)

                THE END OF THE TAILOR'S TALE                       348




                            THE BOOK OF THE
                      THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT.
                       (_ALF LAYLAH WA LAYLAH._)


                          In the Name of Allah,
                 the Compassionating, the Compassionate!

 _PRAISE BE TO ALLAH ✿ THE BENEFICENT KING ✿ THE CREATOR OF THE UNIVERSE
 ✿ LORD OF THE THREE WORLDS ✿ WHO SET UP THE FIRMAMENT WITHOUT PILLARS
 IN ITS STEAD ✿ AND WHO STRETCHED OUT THE EARTH EVEN AS A BED ✿ AND
 GRACE, AND PRAYER-BLESSING BE UPON OUR LORD MOHAMMED ✿ LORD OF
 APOSTOLIC MEN ✿ AND UPON HIS FAMILY AND COMPANION-TRAIN ✿ PRAYER AND
 BLESSINGS ENDURING AND GRACE WHICH UNTO THE DAY OF DOOM SHALL REMAIN ✿
 AMEN! ✿ O THOU OF THE THREE WORLDS SOVEREIGN!_

                  *       *       *       *       *

 And afterwards. Verily the works and words of those gone before us have
 become instances and examples to men of our modern day, that folk may
 view what admonishing chances befel other folk and may therefrom take
 warning; and that they may peruse the annals of antique peoples and all
 that hath betided them, and be thereby ruled and restrained:—Praise,
 therefore, be to Him who hath made the histories of the Past an
 admonition unto the Present! Now of such instances are the tales called
 "A Thousand Nights and a Night," together with their far-famed legends
 and wonders. Therein it is related (but Allah is All-knowing of His
 hidden things and All-ruling and All-honoured and All-giving and
 All-gracious and All-merciful![1]) that, in tide of yore and in time
 long gone before, there was a King of the Kings of the Banu Sásán in
 the Islands of India and China, a Lord of armies and guards and
 servants and dependents.[2] He left only two sons, one in the prime of
 manhood and the other yet a youth, while both were Knights and Braves,
 albeit the elder was a doughtier horseman than the younger. So he
 succeeded to the empire; when he ruled the land and lorded it over his
 lieges with justice so exemplary that he was beloved by all the peoples
 of his capital and of his kingdom. His name was King Shahryár,[3] and
 he made his younger brother, Shah Zamán hight, King of Samarcand in
 Barbarian-land. These two ceased not to abide in their several realms
 and the law was ever carried out in their dominions; and each ruled his
 own kingdom, with equity and fair-dealing to his subjects, in extreme
 solace and enjoyment; and this condition continually endured for a
 score of years. But at the end of the twentieth twelvemonth the elder
 King yearned for a sight of his younger brother and felt that he must
 look upon him once more. So he took counsel with his Wazir[4] about
 visiting him, but the Minister, finding the project unadvisable,
 recommended that a letter be written and a present be sent under his
 charge to the younger brother with an invitation to visit the elder.
 Having accepted this advice the King forthwith bade prepare handsome
 gifts, such as horses with saddles of gem-encrusted gold; Mamelukes, or
 white slaves; beautiful handmaids, high-breasted virgins, and splendid
 stuffs and costly. He then wrote a letter to Shah Zaman expressing his
 warm love and great wish to see him, ending with these words, "We
 therefore hope of the favour and affection of the beloved brother that
 he will condescend to bestir himself and turn his face us-wards.
 Furthermore we have sent our Wazir to make all ordinance for the march,
 and our one and only desire is to see thee ere we die; but if thou
 delay or disappoint us we shall not survive the blow. Wherewith peace
 be upon thee!" Then King Shahryar, having sealed the missive and given
 it to the Wazir with the offerings aforementioned, commanded him to
 shorten his skirts and strain his strength and make all expedition in
 going and returning. "Harkening and obedience!" quoth the Minister, who
 fell to making ready without stay and packed up his loads and prepared
 all his requisites without delay. This occupied him three days, and on
 the dawn of the fourth he took leave of his King and marched right
 away, over desert and hill-way, stony waste and pleasant lea without
 halting by night or by day. But whenever he entered a realm whose ruler
 was subject to his Suzerain, where he was greeted with magnificent
 gifts of gold and silver and all manner of presents fair and rare, he
 would tarry there three days,[5] the term of the guest-rite; and, when
 he left on the fourth, he would be honourably escorted for a whole
 day's march. As soon as the Wazir drew near Shah Zaman's court in
 Samarcand he despatched to report his arrival one of his high
 officials, who presented himself before the King; and, kissing ground
 between his hands, delivered his message. Hereupon the King commanded
 sundry of his Grandees and Lords of his realm to fare forth and meet
 his brother's Wazir at the distance of a full day's journey; which they
 did, greeting him respectfully and wishing him all prosperity and
 forming an escort and a procession. When he entered the city he
 proceeded straightway to the palace, where he presented himself in the
 royal presence; and, after kissing ground and praying for the King's
 health and happiness and for victory over all his enemies, he informed
 him that his brother was yearning to see him, and prayed for the
 pleasure of a visit. He then delivered the letter which Shah Zaman took
 from his hand and read: it contained sundry hints and allusions which
 required thought; but, when the King had fully comprehended its import,
 he said, "I hear and I obey the commands of the beloved brother!"
 adding to the Wazir, "But we will not march till after the third day's
 hospitality." He appointed for the Minister fitting quarters of the
 palace; and, pitching tents for the troops, rationed them with whatever
 they might require of meat and drink and other necessaries. On the
 fourth day he made ready for wayfare and got together sumptuous
 presents befitting his elder brother's majesty, and stablished his
 chief Wazir viceroy of the land during his absence. Then he caused his
 tents and camels and mules to be brought forth and encamped, with their
 bales and loads, attendants and guards, within sight of the city, in
 readiness to set out next morning for his brother's capital. But when
 the night was half spent he bethought him that he had forgotten in his
 palace somewhat which he should have brought with him, so he returned
 privily and entered his apartments, where he found the Queen, his wife,
 asleep on his own carpet-bed, embracing with both arms a black cook of
 loathsome aspect and foul with kitchen grease and grime. When he saw
 this the world waxed black before his sight and he said, "If such case
 happen while I am yet within sight of the city what will be the doings
 of this damned whore during my long absence at my brother's court?" So
 he drew his scymitar and, cutting the two in four pieces with a single
 blow, left them on the carpet and returned presently to his camp
 without letting anyone know of what had happened. Then he gave orders
 for immediate departure and set out at once and began his travel; but
 he could not help thinking over his wife's treason and he kept ever
 saying to himself, "How could she do this deed by me? How could she
 work her own death?," till excessive grief seized him, his colour
 changed to yellow, his body waxed weak and he was threatened with a
 dangerous malady, such an one as bringeth men to die. So the Wazir
 shortened his stages and tarried long at the watering-stations and did
 his best to solace the King. Now when Shah Zaman drew near the capital
 of his brother he despatched vaunt-couriers and messengers of glad
 tidings to announce his arrival, and Shahryar came forth to meet him
 with his Wazirs and Emirs and Lords and Grandees of his realm; and
 saluted him and joyed with exceeding joy and caused the city to be
 decorated in his honour. When, however, the brothers met, the elder
 could not but see the change of complexion in the younger and
 questioned him of his case whereto he replied, "'Tis caused by the
 travails of wayfare and my case needs care, for I have suffered from
 the change of water and air! but Allah be praised for reuniting me with
 a brother so dear and so rare!" On this wise he dissembled and kept his
 secret, adding, "O King of the time and Caliph of the tide, only toil
 and moil have tinged my face yellow with bile and hath made my eyes
 sink deep in my head." Then the two entered the capital in all honour;
 and the elder brother lodged the younger in a palace overhanging the
 pleasure garden; and, after a time, seeing his condition still
 unchanged, he attributed it to his separation from his country and
 kingdom. So he let him wend his own ways and asked no questions of him
 till one day when he again said, "O my brother, I see that art grown
 weaker of body and yellower of colour." "O my brother," replied Shah
 Zaman "I have an internal wound:"[6] still he would not tell him what
 he had witnessed in his wife. Thereupon Shahryar summoned doctors and
 surgeons and bade them treat his brother according to the rules of art,
 which they did for a whole month; but their sherbets and potions naught
 availed, for he would dwell upon the deed of his wife, and despondency,
 instead of diminishing, prevailed, and leechcraft treatment utterly
 failed. One day his elder brother said to him, "I am going forth to
 hunt and course and to take my pleasure and pastime; maybe this would
 lighten thy heart." Shah Zaman, however, refused, saying, "O my
 brother, my soul yearneth for naught of this sort and I entreat thy
 favour to suffer me tarry quietly in this place, being wholly taken up
 with my malady." So King Shah Zaman passed his night in the palace and,
 next morning, when his brother had fared forth, he removed from his
 room and sat him down at one of the lattice-windows overlooking the
 pleasure grounds; and there he abode thinking with saddest thought over
 his wife's betrayal and burning sighs issued from his tortured breast.
 And as he continued in this case lo! a postern of the palace, which was
 carefully kept private, swung open and out of it came twenty slave
 girls surrounding his brother's wife who was wondrous fair, a model of
 beauty and comeliness and symmetry and perfect loveliness and who paced
 with the grace of a gazelle which panteth for the cooling stream.
 Thereupon Shah Zaman drew back from the window, but he kept the bevy in
 sight espying them from a place whence he could not be espied. They
 walked under the very lattice and advanced a little way into the garden
 till they came to a jetting fountain amiddlemost a great basin of
 water; then they stripped off their clothes and behold, ten of them
 were women, concubines of the King, and the other ten were white
 slaves. Then they all paired off, each with each: but the Queen, who
 was left alone, presently cried out in a loud voice, "Here to me, O my
 lord Saeed!" and then sprang with a drop-leap from one of the trees a
 big slobbering blackamoor with rolling eyes which showed the whites, a
 truly hideous sight.[7] He walked boldly up to her and threw his arms
 round her neck while she embraced him as warmly; then he bussed her and
 winding his legs round hers, as a button-loop clasps a button, he threw
 her and enjoyed her. On like wise did the other slaves with the girls
 till all had satisfied their passions, and they ceased not from kissing
 and clipping, coupling and carousing till day began to wane; when the
 Mamelukes rose from the damsels' bosoms and the blackamoor slave
 dismounted from the Queen's breast; the men resumed their disguises and
 all, except the negro who swarmed up the tree, entered the palace and
 closed the postern-door as before. Now, when Shah Zaman saw this
 conduct of his sister-in-law he said in himself, "By Allah, my calamity
 is lighter than this! My brother is a greater King among the kings than
 I am, yet this infamy goeth on in his very palace, and his wife is in
 love with that filthiest of filthy slaves. But this only showeth that
 they all do it[8] and that there is no woman but who cuckoldeth her
 husband, then the curse of Allah upon one and all and upon the fools
 who lean against them for support or who place the reins of conduct in
 their hands. So he put away his melancholy and despondency, regret and
 repine, and allayed his sorrow by constantly repeating those words,
 adding "'Tis my conviction that no man in this world is safe from their
 malice!" When supper-time came they brought him the trays and he ate
 with voracious appetite, for he had long refrained from meat, feeling
 unable to touch any dish however dainty. Then he returned grateful
 thanks to Almighty Allah, praising Him and blessing Him, and he spent a
 most restful night, it having been long since he had savoured the sweet
 food of sleep. Next day he broke his fast heartily and began to recover
 health and strength, and presently regained excellent condition. His
 brother came back from the chase ten days after, when he rode out to
 meet him and they saluted each other; and when King Shahryar looked at
 King Shah Zaman he saw how the hue of health had returned to him, how
 his face had waxed ruddy and how he ate with an appetite after his late
 scanty diet. He wondered much and said, "O my brother, I was so anxious
 that thou wouldst join me in hunting and chasing, and wouldst take thy
 pleasure and pastime in my dominion!" He thanked him and excused
 himself; then the two took horse and rode into the city and, when they
 were seated at their ease in the palace, the food-trays were set before
 them and they ate their sufficiency. After the meats were removed and
 they had washed their hands, King Shahryar turned to his brother and
 said, "My mind is overcome with wonderment at thy condition. I was
 desirous to carry thee with me to the chase but I saw thee changed in
 hue, pale and wan to view, and in sore trouble of mind too. But now
 Alhamdolillah—glory be to God!—I see thy natural colour hath returned
 to thy face and that thou art again in the best of case. It was my
 belief that thy sickness came of severance from thy family and friends,
 and absence from capital and country, so I refrained from troubling
 thee with further questions. But now I beseech thee to expound to me
 the cause of thy complaint and thy change of colour, and to explain the
 reason of thy recovery and the return to the ruddy hue of health which
 I am wont to view. So speak out and hide naught! When Shah Zaman heard
 this he bowed ground-wards awhile his head, then raised it and said, "I
 will tell thee what caused my complaint and my loss of colour; but
 excuse my acquainting thee with the cause of its return to me and the
 reason of my complete recovery: indeed I pray thee not to press me for
 a reply." Said Shahryar, who was much surprised by these words, "Let me
 hear first what produced thy pallor and thy poor condition." "Know,
 then, O my brother," rejoined Shah Zaman, "that when thou sentest thy
 Wazir with the invitation to place myself between thy hands, I made
 ready and marched out of my city; but presently I minded me having left
 behind me in the palace a string of jewels intended as a gift to thee.
 I returned for it alone and found my wife on my carpet-bed and in the
 arms of a hideous black cook. So I slew the twain and came to thee, yet
 my thoughts brooded over this business and I lost my bloom and became
 weak. But excuse me if I still refuse to tell thee what was the reason
 of my complexion returning." Shahryar shook his head, marvelling with
 extreme marvel, and with the fire of wrath flaming up from his heart,
 he cried, "Indeed, the malice of woman is mighty!" Then he took refuge
 from them with Allah and said, "In very sooth, O my brother, thou hast
 escaped many an evil by putting thy wife to death,[9] and right
 excusable were thy wrath and grief for such mishap which never yet
 befel crowned King like thee. By Allah, had the case been mine, I would
 not have been satisfied without slaying a thousand women and that way
 madness lies! But now praise be to Allah who hath tempered to thee thy
 tribulation, and needs must thou acquaint me with that which so
 suddenly restored to thee complexion and health, and explain to me what
 causeth this concealment." "O King of the Age, again I pray thee excuse
 my so doing!" "Nay, but thou must." "I fear, O my brother, lest the
 recital cause thee more anger and sorrow than afflicted me." "That were
 but a better reason," quoth Shahryar, "for telling me the whole
 history, and I conjure thee by Allah not to keep back aught from me."
 Thereupon Shah Zaman told him all he had seen, from commencement to
 conclusion, ending with these words, "When I beheld thy calamity and
 the treason of thy wife, O my brother, and I reflected that thou art in
 years my senior and in sovereignty my superior, mine own sorrow was
 belittled by the comparison, and my mind recovered tone and temper: so
 throwing off melancholy and despondency, I was able to eat and drink
 and sleep, and thus I speedily regained health and strength. Such is
 the truth and the whole truth." When King Shahryar heard this he waxed
 wroth with exceeding wrath, and rage was like to strangle him; but
 presently he recovered himself and said, "O my brother, I would not
 give thee the lie in this matter, but I cannot credit it till I see it
 with mine own eyes." "An thou wouldst look upon thy calamity," quoth
 Shah Zaman, "rise at once and make ready again for hunting and
 coursing,[10] and then hide thyself with me, so shalt thou witness it
 and thine eyes shall verify it." "True," quoth the King; whereupon he
 let make proclamation of his intent to travel, and the troops and tents
 fared forth without the city, camping within sight, and Shahryar
 sallied out with them and took seat amidmost his host, bidding the
 slaves admit no man to him. When night came on he summoned his Wazir
 and said to him, "Sit thou in my stead and let none wot of my absence
 till the term of three days." Then the brothers disguised themselves
 and returned by night with all secrecy to the palace, where they passed
 the dark hours: and at dawn they seated themselves at the lattice
 overlooking the pleasure grounds, when presently the Queen and her
 handmaids came out as before, and passing under the windows made for
 the fountain. Here they stripped, ten of them being men to ten women,
 and the King's wife cried out, "Where art thou, O Saeed?" The hideous
 blackamoor dropped from the tree straightway; and, rushing into her
 arms without stay or delay, cried out, "I am Sa'ad al-Din Saood!"[11]
 The lady laughed heartily, and all fell to satisfying their lusts, and
 remained so occupied for a couple of hours, when the white slaves rose
 up from the handmaidens' breasts and the blackamoor dismounted from the
 Queen's bosom: then they went into the basin and, after performing the
 Ghusl, or complete ablution, donned their dresses and retired as they
 had done before. When King Shahryar saw this infamy of his wife and
 concubines he became as one distraught and he cried out, "Only in utter
 solitude can man be safe from the doings of this vile world! By Allah,
 life is naught but one great wrong." Presently he added, "Do not thwart
 me, O my brother, in what I propose;" and the other answered, "I will
 not." So he said, "Let us up as we are and depart forthright hence, for
 we have no concern with Kingship, and let us over-wander Allah's earth,
 worshipping the Almighty till we find some one to whom the like
 calamity hath happened; and if we find none then will death be more
 welcome to us than life." So the two brothers issued from a second
 private postern of the palace; and they never stinted wayfaring by day
 and by night, until they reached a tree a-middle of a meadow hard by a
 spring of sweet water on the shore of the salt sea. Both drank of it
 and sat down to take their rest; and when an hour of the day had gone
 by, lo! they heard a mighty roar and uproar in the middle of the main
 as though the heavens were falling upon the earth; and the sea brake
 with waves before them, and from it towered a black pillar, which grew
 and grew till it rose sky-wards and began making for that meadow.
 Seeing it, they waxed fearful exceedingly and climbed to the top of the
 tree, which was a lofty; whence they gazed to see what might be the
 matter. And behold, it was a Jinni,[12] huge of height and burly of
 breast and bulk, broad of brow and black of blee, bearing on his head a
 coffer of crystal. He strode to land, wading through the deep, and
 coming to the tree whereupon were the two Kings, seated himself beneath
 it. He then set down the coffer on its bottom and out of it drew a
 casket, with seven padlocks of steel, which he unlocked with seven keys
 of steel he took from beside his thigh, and out of it a young lady to
 come was seen, white-skinned and of winsomest mien, of stature fine and
 thin, and bright as though a moon of the fourteenth night she had been,
 or the sun raining lively sheen. Even so the poet Utayyah hath
 excellently said:—

 She rose like the morn as she shone through the night ✿ And she gilded
    the grove with her gracious sight:
 From her radiance the sun taketh increase when ✿ She unveileth and
    shameth the moonshine bright.
 Bow down all beings between her hands ✿ As she showeth charms with her
    veil undight.
 And she floodeth cities[13] with torrent tears ✿ When she flasheth her
    look of leven-light.

[Illustration]

 The Jinni seated her under the tree by his side and looking at her
 said, "O choicest love of this heart of mine! O dame of noblest line,
 whom I snatched away on thy bride night that none might prevent me
 taking thy maidenhead or tumble thee before I did, and whom none save
 myself hath loved or hath enjoyed: O my sweetheart! I would lief sleep
 a little while." He then laid his head upon the lady's thighs; and,
 stretching out his legs which extended down to the sea, slept and
 snored and snarked like the roll of thunder. Presently she raised her
 head towards the tree-top and saw the two Kings perched near the
 summit; then she softly lifted off her lap the Jinni's pate which she
 was tired of supporting and placed it upon the ground; then standing
 upright under the tree signed to the Kings, "Come ye down, ye two, and
 fear naught from this Ifrít."[14] They were in a terrible fright when
 they found that she had seen them and answered her in the same manner,
 "Allah upon thee[15] and by thy modesty, O lady, excuse us from coming
 down!" But she rejoined by saying, "Allah upon you both that ye come
 down forthright, and if ye come not, I will rouse upon you my husband,
 this Ifrit, and he shall do you to die by the illest of deaths;" and
 she continued making signals to them. So, being afraid, they came down
 to her and she rose before them and said, "Stroke me a strong stroke,
 without stay or delay, otherwise will I arouse and set upon you this
 Ifrit who shall slay you straightway." They said to her, "O our lady,
 we conjure thee by Allah, let us off this work, for we are fugitives
 from such and in extreme dread and terror of this thy husband. How then
 can we do it in such a way as thou desirest?" "Leave this talk: it
 needs must be so;" quoth she, and she swore them by Him[16] who raised
 the skies on high, without prop or pillar, that, if they worked not her
 will, she would cause them to be slain and cast into the sea. Whereupon
 out of fear King Shahryar said to King Shah Zaman, "O my brother, do
 thou what she biddeth thee do;" but he replied, "I will not do it till
 thou do it before I do." And they began disputing about futtering her.
 Then quoth she to the twain, "How is it I see you disputing and
 demurring; if ye do not come forward like men and do the deed of kind
 ye two, I will arouse upon you the Ifrit." At this, by reason of their
 sore dread of the Jinni, both did by her what she bade them do; and,
 when they had dismounted from her, she said, "Well done!" She then took
 from her pocket a purse and drew out a knotted string, whereon were
 strung five hundred and seventy[17] seal rings, and asked, "Know ye
 what be these?" They answered her saying, "We know not!" Then quoth
 she; "These be the signets of five hundred and seventy men who have all
 futtered me upon the horns of this foul, this foolish, this filthy
 Ifrit; so give me also your two seal rings, ye pair of brothers. When
 they had drawn their two rings from their hands and given them to her,
 she said to them, "Of a truth this Ifrit bore me off on my bride-night,
 and put me into a casket and set the casket in a coffer and to the
 coffer he affixed seven strong padlocks of steel and deposited me on
 the deep bottom of the sea that raves, dashing and clashing with waves;
 and guarded me so that I might remain chaste and honest, quotha! that
 none save himself might have connexion with me. But I have lain under
 as many of my kind as I please, and this wretched Jinni wotteth not
 that Destiny may not be averted nor hindered by aught, and that whatso
 woman willeth the same she fulfilleth however man nilleth. Even so
 saith one of them:—

      Rely not on women; ✿ Trust not to their hearts,
      Whose joys and whose sorrows ✿ Are hung to their parts!
      Lying love they will swear thee ✿ Whence guile ne'er departs:
      Take Yusuf[18] for sample ✿ 'Ware sleights and 'ware smarts!
      Iblis[19] ousted Adam ✿ (See ye not?) thro' their arts.

 And another saith:—

 "Stint thy blame, man! 'Twill drive to a passion without bound; ✿ My
    fault is not so heavy as fault in it hast found.
 If true lover I become, then to me there cometh not ✿ Save what
    happened unto many in the by-gone stound.
 For wonderful is he and right worthy of our praise ✿ Who from wiles of
    female wits kept him safe and kept him sound."

 Hearing these words they marvelled with exceeding marvel, and she went
 from them to the Ifrit and, taking up his head on her thigh as before,
 said to them softly, "Now wend your ways and bear yourselves beyond the
 bounds of his malice." So they fared forth saying either to other,
 "Allah! Allah!" and, "There be no Majesty and there be no Might save in
 Allah, the Glorious, the Great; and with Him we seek refuge from
 women's malice and sleight, for of a truth it hath no mate in might.
 Consider, O my brother, the ways of this marvellous lady with an Ifrit
 who is so much more powerful than we are. Now since there hath happened
 to him a greater mishap than that which befel us and which should bear
 us abundant consolation, so return we to our countries and capitals,
 and let us decide never to intermarry with womankind and presently we
 will show them what will be our action." Thereupon they rode back to
 the tents of King Shahryar, which they reached on the morning of the
 third day; and, having mustered the Wazirs and Emirs, the Chamberlains
 and high officials, he gave a robe of honour to his Viceroy and issued
 orders for an immediate return to the city. There he sat him upon his
 throne and sending for the Chief Minister, the father of the two
 damsels who (Inshallah!) will presently be mentioned, he said, "I
 command thee to take my wife and smite her to death; for she hath
 broken her plight and her faith." So he carried her to the place of
 execution and did her die. Then King Shahryar took brand in hand and
 repairing to the Serraglio slew all the concubines and their
 Mamelukes.[20] He also sware himself by a binding oath that whatever
 wife he married he would abate her maidenhead at night and slay her
 next morning to make sure of his honour; "For," said he, "there never
 was nor is there one chaste woman upon the face of earth." Then Shah
 Zaman prayed for permission to fare homewards; and he went forth
 equipped and escorted and travelled till he reached his own country.
 Meanwhile Shahryar commanded his Wazir to bring him the bride of the
 night that he might go in to her; so he produced a most beautiful girl,
 the daughter of one of the Emirs and the King went in unto her at
 eventide and when morning dawned he bade his Minister strike off her
 head; and the Wazir did accordingly for fear of the Sultan. On this
 wise he continued for the space of three years; marrying a maiden every
 night and killing her the next morning, till folk raised an outcry
 against him and cursed him, praying Allah utterly to destroy him and
 his rule; and women made an uproar and mothers wept and parents fled
 with their daughters till there remained not in the city a young person
 fit for carnal copulation. Presently the King ordered his Chief Wazir,
 the same who was charged with the executions, to bring him a virgin as
 was his wont; and the Minister went forth and searched and found none;
 so he returned home in sorrow and anxiety fearing for his life from the
 King. Now he had two daughters, Shahrázád and Dunyázád hight,[21] of
 whom the elder had perused the books, annals and legends of preceding
 Kings, and the stories, examples and instances of by-gone men and
 things; indeed it was said that she had collected a thousand books of
 histories relating to antique races and departed rulers. She had
 perused the works of the poets and knew them by heart; she had studied
 philosophy and the sciences, arts and accomplishments; and she was
 pleasant and polite, wise and witty, well read and well bred. Now on
 that day she said to her father, "Why do I see thee thus changed and
 laden with cark and care? Concerning this matter quoth one of the
 poets:—

           Tell whoso hath sorrow ✿ Grief never shall last:
           E'en as joy hath no morrow ✿ So woe shall go past."

 When the Wazir heard from his daughter these words he related to her,
 from first to last, all that had happened between him and the King.
 Thereupon said she, "By Allah, O my father, how long shall this
 slaughter of women endure? Shall I tell thee what is in my mind in
 order to save both sides from destruction?" "Say on, O my daughter,"
 quoth he, and quoth she, "I wish thou wouldst give me in marriage to
 this King Shahryar; either I shall live or I shall be a ransom for the
 virgin daughters of Moslems and the cause of their deliverance from his
 hands and thine."[22] "Allah upon thee!" cried he in wrath exceeding
 that lacked no feeding, "O scanty of wit, expose not thy life to such
 peril! How durst thou address me in words so wide from wisdom and
 un-far from foolishness? Know that one who lacketh experience in
 worldly matters readily falleth into misfortune; and whoso considereth
 not the end keepeth not the world to friend, and the vulgar say:—I was
 lying at mine ease: nought but my officiousness brought me unease."
 "Needs must thou," she broke in, "make me a doer of this good deed, and
 let him kill me an he will: I shall only die a ransom for others." "O
 my daughter," asked he, "and how shall that profit thee when thou shalt
 have thrown away thy life?" and she answered, "O my father it must be,
 come of it what will!" The Wazir was again moved to fury and blamed and
 reproached her, ending with, "In very deed I fear lest the same befal
 thee which befel the Bull and the Ass with the Husbandman." "And what,"
 asked she, "befel them, O my father?" Whereupon the Wazir began the


                  _TALE OF THE BULL[23] AND THE ASS._

 Know, O my daughter, that there was once a merchant who owned much
 money and many men, and who was rich in cattle and camels; he had also
 a wife and family and he dwelt in the country, being experienced in
 husbandry and devoted to agriculture. Now Allah Most High had endowed
 him with understanding the tongues of beasts and birds of every kind,
 but under pain of death if he divulged the gift to any. So he kept it
 secret for very fear. He had in his cowhouse a Bull and an Ass each
 tethered in his own stall one hard by the other. As the merchant was
 sitting near hand one day with his servants and his children were
 playing about him, he heard the Bull say to the Ass, "Hail and health
 to thee O Father of Waking![24] for that thou enjoyest rest and good
 ministering; all under thee is clean-swept and fresh-sprinkled; men
 wait upon thee and feed thee, and thy provaunt is sifted barley and thy
 drink pure spring-water, while I (unhappy creature!) am led forth in
 the middle of the night, when they set on my neck the plough and a
 something called Yoke; and I tire at cleaving the earth from dawn of
 day till set of sun. I am forced to do more than I can and to bear all
 manner of ill-treatment from night to night; after which they take me
 back with my sides torn, my neck flayed, my legs aching and mine
 eyelids sored with tears. Then they shut me up in the byre and throw me
 beans and crushed-straw,[25] mixed with dirt and chaff; and I lie in
 dung and filth and foul stinks through the livelong night. But thou art
 ever in a place swept and sprinkled and cleansed, and thou art always
 lying at ease, save when it happens (and seldom enough!) that the
 master hath some business, when he mounts thee and rides thee to town
 and returns with thee forthright. So it happens that I am toiling and
 distrest while thou takest thine ease and thy rest; thou sleepest while
 I am sleepless; I hunger still while thou eatest thy fill, and I win
 contempt while thou winnest good will." When the Bull ceased speaking,
 the Ass turned towards him and said, "O Broad-o'-Brow,[26] O thou lost
 one! he lied not who dubbed thee Bull-head, for thou, O father of a
 Bull, hast neither forethought nor contrivance; thou art the simplest
 of simpletons,[27] and thou knowest naught of good advisers. Hast thou
 not heard the saying of the wise:—

 For others these hardships and labours I bear ✿ And theirs is the
    pleasure and mine is the care;
 As the bleacher who blacketh his brow in the sun ✿ To whiten the
    raiment which other men wear."[28]

 But thou, O fool, art full of zeal and thou toilest and molest before
 the master; and thou tearest and wearest and slayest thyself for the
 comfort of another. Hast thou never heard the saw that saith, None to
 guide and from the way go wide? Thou wendest forth at the call to
 dawn-prayer and thou returnest not till sundown; and through the
 livelong day thou endurest all manner hardships; to wit, beating and
 belabouring and bad language. Now hearken to me, Sir Bull! when they
 tie thee to thy stinking manger, thou pawest the ground with thy
 forehand and lashest out with thy hind hoofs and pushest with thy horns
 and bellowest aloud, so they deem thee contented. And when they throw
 thee thy fodder thou fallest on it with greed and hastenest to line thy
 fair fat paunch. But if thou accept my advice it will be better for
 thee and thou wilt lead an easier life even than mine. When thou goest
 a-field and they lay the thing called Yoke on thy neck, lie down and
 rise not again though haply they swinge thee; and, if thou rise, lie
 down a second time; and when they bring thee home and offer thee thy
 beans, fall backwards and only sniff at thy meat and withdraw thee and
 taste it not, and be satisfied with thy crushed straw and chaff; and on
 this wise feign thou art sick, and cease not doing thus for a day or
 two days or even three days, so shalt thou have rest from toil and
 moil." When the Bull heard these words he knew the Ass to be his friend
 and thanked him, saying, "Right is thy rede;" and prayed that all
 blessings might requite him, and cried, "O Father Wakener![29] thou
 hast made up for my failings." (Now[30] the merchant, O my daughter,
 understood all that passed between them.) Next day the driver took the
 Bull, and settling the plough on his neck,[31] made him work as wont;
 but the Bull began to shirk his ploughing, according to the advice of
 the Ass, and the ploughman drubbed him till he broke the yoke and made
 off; but the man caught him up and leathered him till he despaired of
 his life. Not the less, however, would he do nothing but stand still
 and drop down till the evening. Then the herd led him home and stabled
 him in his stall: but he drew back from his manger and neither stamped
 nor ramped nor butted nor bellowed as he was wont to do; whereat the
 man wondered. He brought him the beans and husks, but he sniffed at
 them and left them and lay down as far from them as he could and passed
 the whole night fasting. The peasant came next morning; and, seeing the
 manger full of beans, the crushed-straw untasted and the ox lying on
 his back in sorriest plight, with legs outstretched and swollen belly,
 he was concerned for him, and said to himself, "By Allah, he hath
 assuredly sickened and this is the cause why he would not plough
 yesterday." Then he went to the merchant and reported, "O my master,
 the Bull is ailing; he refused his fodder last night; nay more, he hath
 not tasted a scrap of it this morning." Now the merchant-farmer
 understood what all this meant, because he had overheard the talk
 between the Bull and the Ass, so quoth he, "Take that rascal donkey,
 and set the yoke on his neck, and bind him to the plough and make him
 do Bull's work." Thereupon the ploughman took the Ass, and worked him
 through the livelong day at the Bull's task; and, when he failed for
 weakness, he made him eat stick till his ribs were sore and his sides
 were sunken and his neck was flayed by the yoke; and when he came home
 in the evening he could hardly drag his limbs along, either forehand or
 hind-legs. But as for the Bull, he had passed the day lying at full
 length and had eaten his fodder with an excellent appetite, and he
 ceased not calling down blessings on the Ass for his good advice,
 unknowing what had come to him on his account. So when night set in and
 the Ass returned to the byre the Bull rose up before him in honour, and
 said, "May good tidings gladden thy heart, O Father Wakener! through
 thee I have rested all this day and I have eaten my meat in peace and
 quiet." But the Ass returned no reply, for wrath and heart-burning and
 fatigue and the beating he had gotten; and he repented with the most
 grievous of repentance; and quoth he to himself: "This cometh of my
 folly in giving good counsel; as the saw saith, I was in joy and
 gladness, nought save my officiousness brought me this sadness. But I
 will bear in mind my innate worth and the nobility of my nature; for
 what saith the poet?

 Shall the beautiful hue of the Basil[32] fail ✿ Tho' the beetle's foot
    o'er the Basil crawl?
 And though spider and fly be its denizens ✿ Shall disgrace attach to
    the royal hall?
 The cowrie,[33] I ken, shall have currency ✿ But the pearl's clear
    drop, shall its value fall?

 And now I must take thought and put a trick upon him and return him to
 his place, else I die." Then he went aweary to his manger, while the
 Bull thanked him and blessed him. And even so, O my daughter, said the
 Wazir, thou wilt die for lack of wits; therefore sit thee still and say
 naught and expose not thy life to such stress; for, by Allah, I offer
 thee the best advice, which cometh of my affection and kindly
 solicitude for thee. "O my father," she answered, "needs must I go up
 to this King and be married to him." Quoth he, "Do not this deed;" and
 quoth she, "Of a truth I will:" whereat he rejoined, "If thou be not
 silent and bide still, I will do with thee even what the merchant did
 with his wife." "And what did he?" asked she. Know then, answered the
 Wazir, that after the return of the Ass the merchant came out on the
 terrace-roof with his wife and family, for it was a moonlit night and
 the moon at its full. Now the terrace overlooked the cowhouse and
 presently, as he sat there with his children playing about him, the
 trader heard the Ass say to the Bull, "Tell me, O father Broad o' Brow,
 what thou purposest to do to-morrow?" The Bull answered, "What but
 continue to follow thy counsel, O Aliboron? Indeed it was as good as
 good could be and it hath given me rest and repose; nor will I now
 depart from it one tittle: so, when they bring me my meat, I will
 refuse it and blow out my belly and counterfeit crank." The Ass shook
 his head and said, "Beware of so doing, O Father of a Bull!" The Bull
 asked, "Why," and the Ass answered, "Know that I am about to give thee
 the best of counsel, for verily I heard our owner say to the herd, If
 the Bull rise not from his place to do his work this morning and if he
 retire from his fodder this day, make him over to the butcher that he
 may slaughter him and give his flesh to the poor, and fashion a bit of
 leather[34] from his hide. Now I fear for thee on account of this. So
 take my advice ere a calamity befal thee; and when they bring thee thy
 fodder eat it and rise up and bellow and paw the ground, or our master
 will assuredly slay thee: and peace be with thee!" Thereupon the Bull
 arose and lowed aloud and thanked the Ass, and said, "To-morrow I will
 readily go forth with them;" and he at once ate up all his meat and
 even licked the manger. (All this took place and the owner was
 listening to their talk.) Next morning the trader and his wife went to
 the Bull's crib and sat down, and the driver came and led forth the
 Bull who, seeing his owner, whisked his tail and brake wind, and
 frisked about so lustily that the merchant laughed a loud laugh and
 kept laughing till he fell on his back. His wife asked him, "Whereat
 laughest thou with such loud laughter as this?"; and he answered her,
 "I laughed at a secret something which I have heard and seen but cannot
 say lest I die my death." She returned, "Perforce thou must discover it
 to me, and disclose the cause of thy laughing even if thou come by thy
 death!" But he rejoined, "I cannot reveal what beasts and birds say in
 their lingo for fear I die. Then quoth she, "By Allah, thou liest! this
 is a mere pretext: thou laughest at none save me, and now thou wouldest
 hide somewhat from me. But by the Lord of the Heavens! an thou disclose
 not the cause I will no longer cohabit with thee: I will leave thee at
 once." And she sat down and cried. Whereupon quoth the merchant, "Woe
 betide thee! what means thy weeping? Fear Allah and leave these words
 and query me no more questions." "Needs must thou tell me the cause of
 that laugh," said she, and he replied, "Thou wottest that when I prayed
 Allah to vouchsafe me understanding of the tongues of beasts and birds,
 I made a vow never to disclose the secret to any Under pain of dying on
 the spot." "No matter," cried she, "tell me what secret passed between
 the Bull and the Ass and die this very hour an thou be so minded;" and
 she ceased not to importune him till he was worn out and clean
 distraught. So at last he said, "Summon thy father and thy mother and
 our kith and kin and sundry of our neighbours," which she did; and he
 sent for the Kazi[35] and his assessors, intending to make his will and
 reveal to her his secret and die the death; for he loved her with love
 exceeding because she was his cousin, the daughter of his father's
 brother, and the mother of his children, and he had lived with her a
 life of an hundred and twenty years. Then, having assembled all the
 family and the folk of his neighbourhood, he said to them, "By me there
 hangeth a strange story, and 'tis such that if I discover the secret to
 any, I am a dead man." Therefore quoth every one of those present to
 the woman, "Allah upon thee, leave this sinful obstinacy and recognise
 the right of this matter, lest haply thy husband and the father of thy
 children die." But she rejoined, "I will not turn from it till he tell
 me, even though he come by his death." So they ceased to urge her; and
 the trader rose from amongst them and repaired to an outhouse to
 perform the Wuzu-ablution,[36] and he purposed thereafter to return and
 to tell them his secret and to die. Now, daughter Shahrazad, that
 merchant had in his out-houses some fifty hens under one cock, and
 whilst making ready to farewell his folk he heard one of his many
 farm-dogs thus address in his own tongue the Cock, who was flapping his
 wings and crowing lustily and jumping from one hen's back to another
 and treading all in turn, saying "O Chanticleer! how mean is thy wit
 and how shameless is thy conduct! Be he disappointed who brought thee
 up?[37] Art thou not ashamed of thy doings on such a day as this?" "And
 what," asked the Rooster, "hath occurred this day?," when the Dog
 answered, "Dost thou not know that our master is this day making ready
 for his death? His wife is resolved that he shall disclose the secret
 taught to him by Allah, and the moment he so doeth he shall surely die.
 We dogs are all a-mourning; but thou clappest thy wings and clarionest
 thy loudest and treadest hen after hen. Is this an hour for pastime and
 pleasuring? Art thou not ashamed of thyself?"[38] "Then by Allah,"
 quoth the Cock, "is our master a lack-wit and a man scanty of sense: if
 he cannot manage matters with a single wife, his life is not worth
 prolonging. Now I have some fifty Dame Partlets; and I please this and
 provoke that and starve one and stuff another; and through my good
 governance they are all well under my control. This our master
 pretendeth to wit and wisdom, and he hath but one wife, and yet knoweth
 not how to manage her." Asked the Dog, "What then, O Cock, should the
 master do to win clear of his strait?" "He should arise forthright,"
 answered the Cock, "and take some twigs from yon mulberry-tree and give
 her a regular back-basting and rib-roasting till she cry:—I repent, O
 my lord! I will never ask thee a question as long as I live! Then let
 him beat her once more and soundly, and when he shall have done this he
 shall sleep free from care and enjoy life. But this master of ours owns
 neither sense nor judgment." "Now, daughter Shahrazad," continued the
 Wazir, "I will do to thee as did that husband to that wife." Said
 Shahrazad, "And what did he do?" He replied, "When the merchant heard
 the wise words spoken by his Cock to his Dog, he arose in haste and
 sought his wife's chamber, after cutting for her some mulberry-twigs
 and hiding them there; and then he called to her, "Come into the closet
 that I may tell thee the secret while no one seeth me and then die."
 She entered with him and he locked the door and came down upon her with
 so sound a beating of back and shoulders, ribs, arms and legs, saying
 the while, "Wilt thou ever be asking questions about what concerneth
 thee not?" that she was well nigh senseless. Presently she cried out,
 "I am of the repentant! By Allah, I will ask thee no more questions,
 and indeed I repent sincerely and wholesomely." Then she kissed his
 hand and feet and he led her out of the room submissive as a wife
 should be. Her parents and all the company rejoiced and sadness and
 mourning were changed into joy and gladness. Thus the merchant learnt
 family discipline from his Cock and he and his wife lived together the
 happiest of lives until death. And thou also, O my daughter! continued
 the Wazir, "Unless thou turn from this matter I will do by thee what
 that trader did to his wife." But she answered him with much decision,
 "I will never desist, O my father, nor shall this tale change my
 purpose. Leave such talk and tattle. I will not listen to thy words
 and, if thou deny me, I will marry myself to him despite the nose of
 thee. And first I will go up to the King myself and alone and I will
 say to him:—I prayed my father to wive me with thee, but he refused,
 being resolved to disappoint his lord, grudging the like of me to the
 like of thee." Her father asked, "Must this needs be?" and she
 answered, "Even so." Hereupon the Wazir being weary of lamenting and
 contending, persuading and dissuading her, all to no purpose, went up
 to King Shahryar and, after blessing him and kissing the ground before
 him, told him all about his dispute with his daughter from first to
 last and how he designed to bring her to him that night. The King
 wondered with exceeding wonder; for he had made an especial exception
 of the Wazir's daughter, and said to him, "O most faithful of
 Counsellors, how is this? Thou wottest that I have sworn by the Raiser
 of the Heavens that after I have gone into her this night I shall say
 to thee on the morrow's morning:—Take her and slay her! and, if thou
 slay her not, I will slay thee in her stead without fail." "Allah guide
 thee to glory and lengthen thy life, O King of the age," answered the
 Wazir, "it is she that hath so determined: all this have I told her and
 more; but she will not hearken to me and she persisteth in passing this
 coming night with the King's Majesty." So Shahryar rejoiced greatly and
 said, "'Tis well; go get her ready and this night bring her to me." The
 Wazir returned to his daughter and reported to her the command saying,
 "Allah make not thy father desolate by thy loss!" But Shahrazad
 rejoiced with exceeding joy and gat ready all she required and said to
 her younger sister, Dunyazad, "Note well what directions I entrust to
 thee! When I have gone into the King I will send for thee and when thou
 comest to me and seest that he hath had his carnal will of me, do thou
 say to me:—O my sister, an thou be not sleepy, relate to me some new
 story, delectable and delightsome, the better to speed our waking
 hours;" and I will tell thee a tale which shall be our deliverance, if
 so Allah please, and which shall turn the King from his blood-thirsty
 custom." Dunyazad answered "With love and gladness." So when it was
 night their father the Wazir carried Shahrazad to the King who was
 gladdened at the sight and asked, "Hast thou brought me my need?" and
 he answered, "I have." But when the King took her to his bed and fell
 to toying with her and wished to go in to her she wept; which made him
 ask, "What aileth thee?" She replied, "O King of the age, I have a
 younger sister and lief would I take leave of her this night before I
 see the dawn." So he sent at once for Dunyazad and she came and kissed
 the ground between his hands, when he permitted her to take her seat
 near the foot of the couch. Then the King arose and did away with his
 bride's maidenhead and the three fell asleep. But when it was midnight
 Shahrazad awoke and signalled to her sister Dunyazad who sat up and
 said, "Allah upon thee, O my sister, recite to us some new story,
 delightsome and delectable, wherewith to while away the waking hours of
 our latter night."[39] "With joy and goodly gree," answered Shahrazad,
 "if this pious and auspicious King permit me." "Tell on," quoth the
 King who chanced to be sleepless and restless and therefore was pleased
 with the prospect of hearing her story. So Shahrazad rejoiced; and
 thus, on the first night of the Thousand Nights and a Night, she began
 with the

-----

Footnote 1:

   Ailaho A'alam, a deprecatory formula, used because the writer is
   going to indulge in a series of what may possibly be untruths.

Footnote 2:

   The "Sons of Sásán" are the famous Sassanides whose dynasty ended
   with the Arabian Conquest (A.D. 641). "Island" (Jazírah) in Arabic
   also means "Peninsula," and causes much confusion in geographical
   matters.

Footnote 3:

   Shahryár not Shahriyar (Persian)="City-friend." The Bulak edition
   corrupts it to Shahrbáz (City-hawk), and the Breslau to Shahrbán or
   "Defender of the City," like Marz-ban=Warden of the Marshes. Shah
   Zamán (Persian)="King of the Age:" Galland prefers Shah Zenan, or
   "King of women," and the Bul. edit. changes it to Shah Rummán,
   "Pomegranate King." Al-Ajam denotes all regions not Arab (Gentiles
   opposed to Jews, Mlechchhas to Hindus, Tajiks to Turks, etc., etc.),
   and especially Persia; Ajami (a man of Ajam) being an equivalent of
   the Gr. Βάρβαρος. See Vol. ii., p. 1.

Footnote 4:

   Galland writes "Vizier," a wretched frenchification of a mincing
   Turkish mispronunciation; Torrens, "Wuzeer" (Anglo-Indian and
   Gilchristian); Lane, "Wezeer" (Egyptian or rather Cairene); Payne,
   "Vizier," according to his system; Burckhardt (Proverbs), "Vizír;"
   and Mr. Keith-Falconer, "Vizir." The root is popularly supposed to be
   "wizr" (burden) and the meaning "Minister;" Wazír al-Wuzará being
   "Premier." In the Koran (chapt. xx., 30) Moses says, "Give me a Wazir
   of my family, Harun (Aaron) my brother." Sale, followed by the
   excellent version of the Rev. J. M. Rodwell, translates a
   "Counsellor," and explains by "One who has the chief administration
   of affairs under a prince." But both learned Koranists learnt their
   Orientalism in London, and, like such students generally, fail only
   upon the easiest points, familiar to all old dwellers in the East.

Footnote 5:

   This three-days term (rest-day, drest-day and departure day) seems to
   be an instinct-made rule in hospitality. Among Moslems it is a Sunnat
   or practice of the Prophet.

Footnote 6:

   _i.e._, I am sick at heart.

Footnote 7:

   Debauched women prefer negroes on account of the size of their parts.
   I measured one man in Somali-land who, when quiescent, numbered
   nearly six inches. This is a characteristic of the negro race and of
   African animals: _e.g._ the horse; whereas the pure Arab, man and
   beast, is below the average of Europe; one of the best proofs by the
   by, that the Egyptian is not an Asiatic, but a negro partially
   whitewashed. Moreover, these imposing parts do not increase
   proportionally during erection; consequently, the "deed of kind"
   takes a much longer time and adds greatly to the woman's enjoyment.
   In my time no honest Hindi Moslem would take his womenfolk to
   Zanzibar on account of the huge attractions and enormous temptations
   there and thereby offered to them. Upon the subject of
   Imsák=retention of semen and "prolongation of pleasure," I shall find
   it necessary to say more.

Footnote 8:

   The very same words were lately spoken in England proving the eternal
   truth of The Nights which the ignorant call "downright lies."

Footnote 9:

   The Arab's _Tue la!_

Footnote 10:

   Arab. "Sayd wa kanas": the former usually applied to fishing; hence
   Sayda (Sidon)=fish-town. But noble Arabs (except the Caliph Al-Amin)
   do not fish; so here it means simply "sport," chasing, coursing,
   birding (oiseler), and so forth.

Footnote 11:

   In the Mac. Edit, the negro is called "Mas'úd"; here he utters a kind
   of war-cry and plays upon the name, Sa'ád, Sa'íd, Sa'úd, and Mas'ud,
   all being derived from one root, "Sa'ad"=auspiciousness, prosperity.

Footnote 12:

   The Arab singular (whence the French "génie"); fem. Jinniyah; the Div
   and Rakshah of old Guebre-land and the "Rakshasa," or "Yaksha," of
   Hinduism. It would be interesting to trace the evident connection, by
   no means "accidental," of "Jinn" with the "Genius" who came to the
   Romans through the Asiatic Etruscans, and whose name I cannot derive
   from "gignomai" or "genitus." He was unknown to the Greeks, who had
   the Daimon (δαίμον), a family which separated, like the Jinn and the
   Genius, into two categories, the good (Agatho-dæmons) and the bad
   (Kako-dæmons). We know nothing concerning the status of the Jinn
   amongst the pre-Moslemitic or pagan Arabs: the Moslems made him a
   supernatural anthropoid being, created of subtile fire (Koran,
   chapts. xv. 27; lv. 14), not of earth like man, propagating his kind,
   ruled by mighty kings, the last being Ján bin Ján, missionarised by
   Prophets and subject to death and Judgment. From the same root are
   "Junún"=madness (_i.e._, possession or obsession by the Jinn) and
   "Majnún"=a madman. According to R. Jeremiah bin Eliazar in Psalm xli.
   5, Adam was excommunicated for one hundred and thirty years, during
   which he begat children in his own image (Gen. v. 3) and these were
   Mazikeen or Shedeem—Jinns. Further details anent the Jinn will
   presently occur.

Footnote 13:

   Arab "Amsár" (cities): in Bul. Edit. "Amtár" (rains), as in Mac.
   Edit. So Mr. Payne (I., 5) translates:—

   And when she flashes forth the lightning of her glance, She maketh
      eyes to rain, like showers, with many a tear.

   I would render it, "She makes whole cities shed tears;" and prefer it
   for a reason which will generally influence me—its superior
   exaggeration and impossibility.

Footnote 14:

   Not "A-frit," pronounced Aye-frit, as our poets have it. This variety
   of the Jinn, who, as will be shown, are divided into two races like
   mankind, is generally, but not always, a malignant being, hostile and
   injurious to mankind (Koran xxvii. 39).

Footnote 15:

   _i.e._, "I conjure thee by Allah;" the formula is technically called
   "Inshád."

Footnote 16:

   This introducing the name of Allah into an indecent tale is
   essentially Egyptian and Cairene. But see Boccacio ii. 6; and vii. 9.

Footnote 17:

   So in the Mac. Edit.; in others "ninety." I prefer the greater number
   as exaggeration is a part of the humour. In the Hindu "Kathá Sárit
   Ságara" (Sea of the Streams of Story), the rings are one hundred and
   the catastrophe is more moral; the good youth Yashodhara rejects the
   wicked one's advances; she awakes the water-sprite, who is about to
   slay him, but the rings are brought as testimony and the improper
   young person's nose is duly cut off. (Chapt. lxiii.; p. 80, of the
   excellent translation by Prof. C. H. Tawney: for the Bibliotheca
   Indica: Calcutta, 1881.) The Kathá, etc., by Somadeva (century xi),
   is a poetical version of the prose compendium, the "Vrihat Kathá"
   (Great Story) by Gunadhya (cent. vi).

Footnote 18:

   The Joseph of the Koran, very different from him of Genesis. We shall
   meet him often enough in The Nights.

Footnote 19:

   "Iblis," vulgarly written "Eblis," from a root meaning The Despairer,
   with a suspicious likeness to Diabolos; possibly from "Balas," a
   profligate. Some translate it The Calumniator, as Satan is the Hater.
   Iblis (who appears in the Arab. version of the N. Testament)
   succeeded another revolting angel Al-Haris; and his story of pride,
   refusing to worship Adam, is told four times in the Koran from the
   Talmud (Sanhedrim 29). He caused Adam and Eve to lose Paradise (ii.
   34); he still betrays mankind (xxv. 31), and at the end of time he,
   with the other devils, will be "gathered together on their knees
   round Hell" (xix. 69). He has evidently had the worst of the game and
   we wonder, with Origen, Tillotson, Burns and many others, that he
   does not throw up the cards.

Footnote 20:

   A similar tale is still told at Akká (St. John d'Acre) concerning the
   terrible "butcher"—Jazzár (Djezzar) Pasha. One can·hardly pity women
   who are fools enough to run such risks. According to Frizzi, Niccolò,
   Marquis of Este, after beheading Parisina, ordered all the faithless
   wives of Ferrara to be treated in like manner.

Footnote 21:

   "Shahrázád (Persian)=City-freer; in the older version Scheherazade
   (probably both from Shirzád=lion-born). "Dunyázád=World-freer. The
   Bres. Edit. corrupts the former to Sháhrzád or Sháhrazád; and the
   Mac. and Calc. to Shahrzád or Shehrzád. I have ventured to restore
   the name as it should be. Galland for the second prefers Dinarzade
   (?) and Richardson Dinazade (Dinázád=Religion-freer): here I have
   followed Lane and Payne; though in "First Footsteps" I was misled by
   Galland. See Vol. ii. p. 1.

Footnote 22:

   Probably she proposed to "Judith" the King. These learned and clever
   young ladies are very dangerous in the East.

Footnote 23:

   In Egypt, etc., the bull takes the place of the Western ox. The Arab.
   word is "Taur" (Thaur, Saur); in old Persian "Tora" and Lat.
   "Taurus," a venerable remnant of the days before the "Semitic" and
   "Aryan" families of speech had split into two distinct growths.
   "Taur" ends in the Saxon "Steor" and the English "Steer."

Footnote 24:

   Arab. "Abú Yakzán"=the Wakener; because the ass brays at dawn.

Footnote 25:

   Arab. "Tibn"; straw crushed under the sledge: the hay of Egypt,
   Arabia, Syria, etc. The old country custom is to pull up the corn by
   handfuls from the roots, leaving the land perfectly bare: hence the
   "plucking up" of Hebrew Holy Writ. The object is to preserve every
   atom of "Tibn."

Footnote 26:

   Arab. "Yá Aftah": Al-Aftah is an epithet of the bull, also of the
   chameleon.

Footnote 27:

   Arab. "Balid," a favourite Egyptianism often pleasantly confounded
   with "Wali" (a Santon); hence the latter comes to mean "an innocent,"
   a "ninny."

Footnote 28:

   From the Calc. Edit., Vol. I., p. 29.

Footnote 29:

   Arab. "Abu Yakzán" is hardly equivalent with "Père l'Eveillé."

Footnote 30:

   In Arab. the wa (وَ) is the sign of parenthesis.

Footnote 31:

   In the nearer East the light little plough is carried a-field by the
   bull or ass.

Footnote 32:

   Ocymum basilicum, the "royal herb," so much prized all over the East,
   especially in India, where, under the name of "Tulsi," it is a shrub
   sacred to the merry god Krishna. I found the verses in a MS. copy of
   the Nights.

Footnote 33:

   Arab. "Sadaf," the Kauri, or cowrie, brought from the Maldive and
   Lakdive Archipelago. The Kámús describes this "Wada'" or Concha
   Veneris as "a white shell [whence to "shell out"] which is taken out
   of the sea, the fissure of which is white like that of the
   date-stone. It is hung about the neck to avert the evil eye." The
   pearl in Arab. is "Murwarid," hence evidently "Margarita" and
   Margaris (woman's name).

Footnote 34:

   Arab. "Kat'a" (bit of leather): some read "Nat'a," a leather used by
   way of table-cloth, and forming a bag for victuals; but it is never
   made of bull's hide.

Footnote 35:

   The Older "Cadi," a judge in religious matters. The Shuhúd, or
   Assessors, are officers of the Mahkamah or Kazi's Court.

Footnote 36:

   Of which more in a future page. He thus purified himself ceremonially
   before death.

Footnote 37:

   This is Christian rather than Moslem: a favourite Maltese curse is
   "Yahrak Kiddísak man rabba-k!"=burn the Saint who brought thee up!

Footnote 38:

   A popular Egyptian phrase: the dog and the cock speak like Fellahs.

Footnote 39:

   _i.e._ between the last sleep and dawn when they would rise to wash
   and pray.




                   TALE OF THE TRADER AND THE JINNI.


 It is related, O auspicious King, that there was a merchant of the
 merchants who had much wealth, and business in various cities. Now on a
 day he mounted horse and went forth to recover monies in certain towns,
 and the heat sore oppressed him; so he sat beneath a tree and, putting
 his hand into his saddle-bags, took thence some broken bread and dry
 dates and began to break his fast. When he had ended eating the dates
 he threw away the stones with force and lo! an Ifrit appeared, huge of
 stature and brandishing a drawn sword, wherewith he approached the
 merchant and said, "Stand up that I may slay thee, even as thou slewest
 my son!" Asked the merchant, "How have I slain thy son?" and he
 answered, "When thou atest dates and threwest away the stones they
 struck my son full in the breast as he was walking by, so that he died
 forthwith."[40] Quoth the merchant, "Verily from Allah we proceeded and
 unto Allah are we returning. There is no Majesty, and there is no Might
 save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! If I slew thy son, I slew him
 by chance medley. I pray thee now pardon me." Rejoined the Jinni,
 "There is no help but I must slay thee." Then he seized him and dragged
 him along and, casting him to the earth, raised the sword to strike
 him; whereupon the merchant wept, and said, "I commit my case to
 Allah," and began repeating these couplets:—

 Containeth Time a twain of days, this of blessing that of bane ✿ And
    holdeth Life a twain of halves, this of pleasure that of pain.
 See'st not when blows the hurricane, sweeping stark and striking strong
    ✿ None save the forest giant feels the suffering of the strain?
 How many trees earth nourisheth of the dry and of the green ✿ Yet none
    but those which bear the fruits for cast of stone complain.
 See'st not how corpses rise and float on the surface of the tide ✿
    While pearls o' price lie hidden in the deepest of the main!
 In Heaven are unnumberèd the many of the stars ✿ Yet ne'er a star but
    Sun and Moon by eclipse is overta'en.
 Well judgest thou the days that saw thy faring sound and well ✿ And
    countedst not the pangs and pain whereof Fate is ever fain.
 The nights have kept thee safe and the safety brought thee pride ✿ But
    bliss and blessings of the night are 'genderers of bane!

 When the merchant ceased repeating his verses the Jinni said to him,
 "Cut thy words short, by Allah! needs must I slay thee." But the
 merchant spake him thus, "Know, O thou Ifrit, that I have debts due to
 me and much wealth and children and a wife and many pledges in hand; so
 permit me to go home and discharge to every claimant his claim; and I
 will come back to thee at the head of the new year. Allah be my
 testimony and surety that I will return to thee; and then thou mayest
 do with me as thou wilt and Allah is witness to what I say." The Jinni
 took sure promise of him and let him go; so he returned to his own city
 and transacted his business and rendered to all men their dues and
 after informing his wife and children of what had betided him, he
 appointed a guardian and dwelt with them for a full year. Then he
 arose, and made the Wuzu-ablution to purify himself before death and
 took his shroud under his arm and bade farewell to his people, his
 neighbours and all his kith and kin, and went forth despite his own
 nose.[41] They then began weeping and wailing and beating their breasts
 over him; but he travelled until he arrived at the same garden, and the
 day of his arrival was the head of the New Year. As he sat weeping over
 what had befallen him, behold, a Shaykh,[42] a very ancient man, drew
 near leading a chained gazelle; and he saluted that merchant and
 wishing him long life said, "What is the cause of thy sitting in this
 place and thou alone and this be a resort of evil spirits?" The
 merchant related to him what had come to pass with the Ifrit, and the
 old man, the owner of the gazelle, wondered and said, "By Allah, O
 brother, thy faith is none other than exceeding faith and thy story
 right strange; were it graven with gravers on the eye-corners, it were
 a warner to whoso would be warned." Then seating himself near the
 merchant he said, "By Allah, O my brother, I will not leave thee until
 I see what may come to pass with thee and this Ifrit." And presently as
 he sat and the two were at talk the merchant began to feel fear and
 terror and exceeding grief and sorrow beyond relief and ever-growing
 care and extreme despair. And the owner of the gazelle was hard by his
 side; when behold, a second Shaykh approached them, and with him were
 two dogs both of greyhound breed and both black. The second old man
 after saluting them with the salam, also asked them of their tidings
 and said "What causeth you to sit in this place, a dwelling of the
 Jánn?"[43] So they told him the tale from beginning to end, and their
 stay there had not lasted long before there came up a third Shaykh, and
 with him a she-mule of bright bay coat; and he saluted them and asked
 them why they were seated in that place. So they told him the story
 from first to last: and of no avail, O my master, is a twice-told tale!
 There he sat down with them, and lo! a dust-cloud advanced and a mighty
 sand-devil appeared amidmost of the waste. Presently the cloud opened
 and behold, within it was that Jinni hending in hand a drawn sword,
 while his eyes were shooting fire-sparks of rage. He came up to them
 and, haling away the merchant from among them, cried to him, "Arise
 that I may slay thee, as thou slewest my son, the life-stuff of my
 liver."[44] The merchant wailed and wept, and the three old men began
 sighing and crying and weeping and wailing with their companion.
 Presently the first old man (the owner of the gazelle) came out from
 among them and kissed the hand of the Ifrit and said, "O Jinni, thou
 Crown of the Kings of the Jann! were I to tell thee the story of me and
 this gazelle and thou shouldst consider it wondrous wouldst thou give
 me a third part of this merchant's blood?" Then quoth the Jinni "Even
 so, O Shaykh! if thou tell me this tale, and I hold it a marvellous,
 then will I give thee a third of his blood." Thereupon the old man
 began to tell


                      _THE FIRST SHAYKH'S STORY._

 Know O Jinni! that this gazelle is the daughter of my paternal uncle,
 my own flesh and blood, and I married her when she was a young maid,
 and I lived with her well-nigh thirty years, yet was I not blessed with
 issue by her. So I took me a concubine,[45] who brought to me the boon
 of a male child fair as the full moon, with eyes of lovely shine and
 eyebrows which formed one line, and limbs of perfect design. Little by
 little he grew in stature and waxed tall; and when he was a lad fifteen
 years old, it became needful I should journey to certain cities and I
 travelled with great store of goods. But the daughter of my uncle (this
 gazelle) had learned gramarye and egromancy and clerkly craft[46] from
 her childhood; so she bewitched that son of mine to a calf, and my
 handmaid (his mother) to a heifer, and made them over to the herdsman's
 care. Now when I returned after a long time from my journey and asked
 for my son and his mother, she answered me, saying "Thy slave-girl is
 dead, and thy son hath fled and I know not whither he is sped." So I
 remained for a whole year with grieving heart, and streaming eyes until
 the time came for the Great Festival of Allah.[47] Then sent I to my
 herdsman bidding him choose for me a fat heifer; and he brought me one
 which was the damsel, my handmaid, whom this gazelle had ensorcelled. I
 tucked up my sleeves and skirt and, taking a knife, proceeded to cut
 her throat, but she lowed aloud and wept bitter tears. Thereat I
 marvelled and pity seized me and I held my hand, saying to the herd,
 "Bring me other than this." Then cried my cousin, "Slay her, for I have
 not a fatter nor a fairer!" Once more I went forward to sacrifice her,
 but she again lowed aloud, upon which in ruth I refrained and commanded
 the herdsmen to slay her and flay her. He killed her and skinned her
 but found in her neither fat nor flesh, only hide and bone; and I
 repented when penitence availed me naught. I gave her to the herdsman
 and said to him, "Fetch me a fat calf;" so he brought my son
 ensorcelled. When the calf saw me, he brake his tether and ran to me,
 and fawned upon me and wailed and shed tears; so that I took pity on
 him and said to the herdsman, "Bring me a heifer and let this calf go!"
 Thereupon my cousin (this gazelle) called aloud at me, saying, "Needs
 must thou kill this calf; this is a holy day and a blessed, whereon
 naught is slain save what be perfect-pure; and we have not amongst our
 calves any fatter or fairer than this!" Quoth I, "Look thou upon the
 condition of the heifer which I slaughtered at thy bidding and how we
 turn from her in disappointment and she profited us on no wise; and I
 repent with an exceeding repentance of having killed her: so this time
 I will not obey thy bidding for the sacrifice of this calf." Quoth she,
 "By Allah the Most Great, the Compassionating, the Compassionate! there
 is no help for it; thou must kill him on this holy day, and if thou
 kill him not to me thou art no man and I to thee am no wife." Now when
 I heard those hard words, not knowing her object I went up to the calf,
 knife in hand——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
 say her permitted say.[48] Then quoth her sister to her, "How fair is
 thy tale, and how grateful, and how sweet and how tasteful!" And
 Shahrazad answered her, "What is this to that I could tell thee on the
 coming night, were I to live and the King would spare me?" Then said
 the King in himself, "By Allah, I will not slay her, until I shall have
 heard the rest of her tale." So they slept the rest of that night in
 mutual embrace till day fully brake. Then the King went forth to his
 audience-hall[49] and the Wazir went up with his daughter's shroud
 under his arm. The King issued his orders, and promoted this and
 deposed that, until the end of the day; and he told the Wazir no whit
 of what had happened. But the Minister wondered thereat with exceeding
 wonder; and when the Court broke up King Shahryar entered his palace.

                    Now when it was the Second Night,

 said Dunyazad to her sister Shahrazad, "O my sister, finish for us that
 story of the Merchant and the Jinni;" and she answered, "With joy and
 goodly gree, if the King permit me." Then quoth the King, "Tell thy
 tale;" and Shahrazad began in these words: It hath reached me, O
 auspicious King and Heaven-directed Ruler! that when the merchant
 purposed the sacrifice of the calf but saw it weeping, his heart
 relented and he said to the herdsman, "Keep the calf among my cattle."
 All this the old Shaykh told the Jinni who marvelled much at these
 strange words. Then the owner of the gazelle continued:—O Lord of the
 Kings of the Jann, this much took place and my uncle's daughter, this
 gazelle, looked on and saw it, and said, "Butcher me this calf, for
 surely it is a fat one;" but I bade the herdsman take it away and he
 took it and turned his face homewards. On the next day as I was sitting
 in my own house, lo! the herdsman came and, standing before me said, "O
 my master, I will tell thee a thing which shall gladden thy soul, and
 shall gain me the gift of good tidings."[50] I answered, "Even so."
 Then said he, "O merchant, I have a daughter, and she learned magic in
 her childhood from an old woman who lived with us. Yesterday when thou
 gavest me the calf, I went into the house to her, and she looked upon
 it and veiled her face; then she wept and laughed alternately and at
 last she said:—O my father, hath mine honour become so cheap to thee
 that thou bringest in to me strange men? I asked her:—Where be these
 strange men and why wast thou laughing, and crying?; and she answered,
 Of a truth this calf which is with thee is the son of our master, the
 merchant; but he is ensorcelled by his stepdame who bewitched both him
 and his mother: such is the cause of my laughing; now the reason of his
 weeping is his mother, for that his father slew her unawares. Then I
 marvelled at this with exceeding marvel and hardly made sure that day
 had dawned before I came to tell thee." When I heard, O Jinni, my
 herdsman's words, I went out with him, and I was drunken without wine,
 from the excess of joy and gladness which came upon me, until I reached
 his house. There his daughter welcomed me and kissed my hand, and
 forthwith the calf came and fawned upon me as before. Quoth I to the
 herdsman's daughter, "Is this true that thou sayest of this calf?"
 Quoth she, "Yea, O my master, he is thy son, the very core of thy
 heart." I rejoiced and said to her, "O maiden, if thou wilt release him
 thine shall be whatever cattle and property of mine are under thy
 father's hand." She smiled and answered, "O my master, I have no greed
 for the goods nor will I take them save on two conditions; the first
 that thou marry me to thy son and the second that I may bewitch her who
 bewitched him and imprison her, otherwise I cannot be safe from her
 malice and malpractices." Now when I heard, O Jinni, these, the words
 of the herdsman's daughter, I replied, "Beside what thou askest all the
 cattle and the household stuff in thy father's charge are thine and, as
 for the daughter of my uncle, her blood is lawful to thee." When I had
 spoken, she took a cup and filled it with water: then she recited a
 spell over it and sprinkled it upon the calf, saying, "If Almighty
 Allah created thee a calf, remain so shaped, and change not; but if
 thou be enchanted, return to thy whilom form, by command of Allah Most
 Highest!" and lo! he trembled and became a man. Then I fell on his neck
 and said, "Allah upon thee, tell me all that the daughter of my uncle
 did by thee and by thy mother." And when he told me what had come to
 pass between them I said, "O my son, Allah favoured thee with one to
 restore thee, and thy right hath returned to thee." Then, O Jinni, I
 married the herdsman's daughter to him, and she transformed my wife
 into this gazelle, saying:—Her shape is a comely and by no means
 loathsome. After this she abode with us night and day, day and night,
 till the Almighty took her to Himself. When she deceased, my son fared
 forth to the cities of Hind, even to the city of this man who hath done
 to thee what hath been done;[51] and I also took this gazelle (my
 cousin) and wandered with her from town to town seeking tidings of my
 son, till Destiny drove me to this place where I saw the merchant
 sitting in tears. Such is my tale! Quoth the Jinni, "This story is
 indeed strange, and therefore I grant thee the third part of his
 blood." Thereupon the second old man, who owned the two greyhounds,
 came up and said, "O Jinni, if I recount to thee what befel me from my
 brothers, these two hounds, and thou see that it is a tale even more
 wondrous and marvellous than what thou hast heard, wilt thou grant to
 me also the third of this man's blood?" Replied the Jinni, "Thou hast
 my word for it, if thine adventures be more marvellous and wondrous."
 Thereupon he thus began


                      _THE SECOND SHAYKH'S STORY._

 Know, O lord of the Kings of the Jann! that these two dogs are my
 brothers and I am the third. Now when our father died and left us a
 capital of three thousand gold pieces,[52] I opened a shop with my
 share, and bought and sold therein, and in like guise did my two
 brothers, each setting up a shop. But I had been in business no long
 while before the elder sold his stock for a thousand dinars, and after
 buying outfit and merchandise, went his ways to foreign parts. He was
 absent one whole year with the caravan; but one day as I sat in my
 shop, behold, a beggar stood before me asking alms, and I said to him,
 "Allah open thee another door!"[53] Whereupon he answered, weeping the
 while, "Am I so changed that thou knowest me not?" Then I looked at him
 narrowly, and lo! it was my brother, so I rose to him and welcomed him;
 then I seated him in my shop and put questions concerning his case.
 "Ask me not," answered he; "my wealth is awaste and my state hath waxed
 un-stated!" So I took him to the Hammám-bath[54] and clad him in a suit
 of my own and gave him lodging in my house. Moreover, after looking
 over the accounts of my stock-in-trade and the profits of my business,
 I found that industry had gained me one thousand dinars, while my
 principal, the head of my wealth, amounted to two thousand. So I shared
 the whole with him, saying, "Assume that thou hast made no journey
 abroad but hast remained at home; and be not cast down by thine
 ill-luck." He took the share in great glee and opened for himself a
 shop; and matters went on quietly for a few nights and days. But
 presently my second brother (yon other dog), also setting his heart
 upon travel, sold off what goods and stock-in-trade he had, and albeit
 we tried to stay him he would not be stayed: he laid in an outfit for
 the journey, and fared forth with certain wayfarers. After an absence
 of a whole year he came back to me, even as my elder brother had come
 back; and when I said to him, "O my brother, did I not dissuade thee
 from travel?" he shed tears and cried, "O my brother, this be destiny's
 decree: here I am a mere beggar, penniless[55] and without a shirt to
 my back." So I led him to the bath, O Jinni, and clothing him in new
 clothes of my own wear, I went with him to my shop and served him with
 meat and drink. Furthermore I said to him, "O my brother, I am wont to
 cast up my shop-accounts at the head of every year, and whatso I shall
 find of surplusage is between me and thee."[56] So I proceeded, O
 Ifrit, to strike a balance and, finding two thousand dinars of profit,
 I returned praises to the Creator (be He extolled and exalted!) and
 made over one half to my brother, keeping the other to myself.
 Thereupon he busied himself with opening a shop and on this wise we
 abode many days. After a time my brothers began pressing me to travel
 with them; but I refused, saying, "What gained ye by your voyage that I
 should gain thereby?" As I would not give ear to them we went back each
 to his own shop where we bought and sold as before. They kept urging me
 to travel for a whole twelvemonth, but I refused to do so till full six
 years were past and gone when I consented with these words, "O my
 brothers, here am I, your companion of travel: now let me see what
 monies you have by you." I found, however, that they had not a doit,
 having squandered their substance in high diet and drinking and carnal
 delights. Yet I spoke not a word of reproach; so far from it I looked
 over my shop accounts once more, and sold what goods and stock-in trade
 were mine; and, finding myself the owner of six thousand ducats, I
 gladly proceeded to divide that sum into halves, saying to my brothers,
 "These three thousand gold pieces are for me and for you to trade
 withal," adding, "Let us bury the other moiety underground that it may
 be of service in case any harm befal us, in which case each shall take
 a thousand wherewith to open shops." Both replied, "Right is thy
 recking;" and I gave to each one his thousand gold pieces, keeping the
 same sum for myself, to wit, a thousand dinars. We then got ready
 suitable goods and hired a ship and, having embarked our merchandise,
 proceeded on our voyage, day following day, a full month, after which
 we arrived at a city, where we sold our venture; and for every piece of
 gold we gained ten. And as we turned again to our voyage we found on
 the shore of the sea a maiden clad in worn and ragged gear, and she
 kissed my hand and said, "O master, is there kindness in thee and
 charity? I can make thee a fitting return for them." I answered, "Even
 so; truly in me are benevolence and good works, even though thou render
 me no return." Then she said, "Take me to wife, O my master, and carry
 me to thy city, for I have given myself to thee; so do me a kindness
 and I am of those who be meet for good works and charity: I will make
 thee a fitting return for these and be thou not shamed by my
 condition." When I heard her words, my heart yearned towards her, in
 such sort as willed it Allah (be He extolled and exalted!); and took
 her and clothed her and made ready for her a fair resting-place in the
 vessel, and honourably entreated her. So we voyaged on, and my heart
 became attached to her with exceeding attachment, and I was separated
 from her neither night nor day, and I paid more regard to her than to
 my brothers. Then they were estranged from me, and waxed jealous of my
 wealth and the quantity of merchandise I had, and their eyes were
 opened covetously upon all my property. So they took counsel to murder
 me and seize my wealth, saying, "Let us slay our brother and all his
 monies will be ours;" and Satan made this deed seem fair in their
 sight; so when they found me in privacy (and I sleeping by my wife's
 side) they took us both up and cast us into the sea. My wife awoke
 startled from her sleep and, forthright becoming an Ifritah,[57] she
 bore me up and carried me to an island and disappeared for a short
 time; but she returned in the morning and said "Here am I, thy faithful
 slave, who hath made thee due recompense; for I bore thee up in the
 waters and saved thee from death by command of the Almighty. Know that
 I am a Jinniyah, and as I saw thee my heart loved thee by will of the
 Lord, for I am a believer in Allah and in His Apostle (whom Heaven
 bless and preserve!). Thereupon I came to thee conditioned as thou
 sawest me and thou didst marry me, and see now I have saved thee from
 sinking. But I am angered against thy brothers and assuredly I must
 slay them." When I heard her story I was surprised and, thanking her
 for all she had done, I said, "But as to slaying my brothers this must
 not be." Then I told her the tale of what had come to pass with them
 from the beginning of our lives to the end, and on hearing it quoth
 she, "This night will I fly as a bird over them and will sink their
 ship and slay them." Quoth I, "Allah upon thee, do not thus, for the
 proverb saith, O thou who doest good to him that doth evil, leave the
 evil doer to his evil deeds. Moreover they are still my brothers." But
 she rejoined, "By Allah, there is no help for it but I slay them." I
 humbled myself before her for their pardon, whereupon she bore me up
 and flew away with me till at last she set me down on the terrace-roof
 of my own house. I opened the doors and took up what I had hidden in
 the ground; and after I had saluted the folk I opened my shop and
 bought me merchandise. Now when night came on I went home, and there I
 saw these two hounds tied up; and, when they sighted me, they arose and
 whined and fawned upon me; but ere I knew what happened my wife said,
 "These two dogs be thy brothers!" I answered, "And who hath done this
 thing by them?" and she rejoined, "I sent a message to my sister and
 she entreated them on this wise, nor shall these two be released from
 their present shape till ten years shall have passed." And now I have
 arrived at this place on my way to my wife's sister that she may
 deliver them from this condition, after their having endured it for
 half a score of years. As I was wending onwards I saw this young man,
 who acquainted me with what had befallen him, and I determined not to
 fare hence until I should see what might occur between thee and him.
 Such is my tale! Then said the Jinni, "Surely this is a strange story
 and therefor I give thee the third portion of his blood and his crime."
 Thereupon quoth the third Shaykh, the master of the mare-mule, to the
 Jinni, "I can tell thee a tale more wondrous than these two, so thou
 grant me the remainder of his blood and of his offence," and the Jinni
 answered, "So be it!" Then the old man began


                      _THE THIRD SHAYKH'S STORY._

 Know, O Sultan and head of the Jann, that this mule was my wife. Now it
 so happened that I went forth and was absent one whole year; and when I
 returned from my journey I came to her by night, and saw a black slave
 lying with her on the carpet-bed, and they were talking, and dallying,
 and laughing, and kissing and playing the close-buttock game. When she
 saw me, she rose and came hurriedly at me with a gugglet[58] of water;
 and, muttering spells over it, she besprinkled me and said, "Come forth
 from this thy shape into the shape of a dog;" and I became on the
 instant a dog. She drove me out of the house, and I ran through the
 doorway nor ceased running until I came to a butcher's stall, where I
 stopped and began to eat what bones were there. When the stall-owner
 saw me, he took me and led me into his house, but as soon as his
 daughter had sight of me she veiled her face from me, crying out, "Dost
 thou bring men to me and dost thou come in with them to me?" Her father
 asked, "Where is the man?"; and she answered, "This dog is a man whom
 his wife hath ensorcelled and I am able to release him." When her
 father heard her words, he said, "Allah upon thee, O my daughter,
 release him." So she took a gugglet of water and, after uttering words
 over it, sprinkled upon me a few drops, saying, "Come forth from that
 form into thy former form." And I returned to my natural shape. Then I
 kissed her hand and said, "I wish thou wouldest transform my wife even
 as she transformed me." Thereupon she gave me some water, saying, "As
 soon as thou see her asleep, sprinkle this liquid upon her and speak
 what words thou heardest me utter, so shall she become whatsoever thou
 desirest." I went to my wife and found her fast asleep; and, while
 sprinkling the water upon her, I said, "Come forth from that form into
 the form of a mare-mule." So she became on the instant a she-mule, and
 she it is whom thou seest with thine eyes, O Sultan and head of the
 Kings of the Jann! Then the Jinni turned towards her and said, "Is this
 sooth?" And she nodded her head and replied by signs, "Indeed, 'tis the
 truth: for such is my tale and this is what hath befallen me." Now when
 the old man had ceased speaking the Jinni shook with pleasure and gave
 him the third of the merchant's blood.——And Shahrazad perceived the
 dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say. Then quoth Dunyazad,
 "O, my sister, how pleasant is thy tale, and how tasteful; how sweet
 and how grateful!" She replied, "And what is this compared with that I
 could tell thee, the night to come, if I live and the King spare
 me?"[59] Then thought the King, "By Allah, I will not slay her until I
 hear the rest of her tale, for truly it is wondrous." So they rested
 that night in mutual embrace until the dawn. After this the King went
 forth to his Hall of Estate, and the Wazir and the troops came in and
 the court was crowded, and the King gave orders and judged and
 appointed and deposed, bidding and forbidding during the rest of the
 day. Then the Divan broke up, and King Shahryar entered his palace.

                    Now when it was the Third Night,

 And the King had had his will of the Wazir's daughter, Dunyazad, her
 sister, said to her, "Finish for us that tale of thine;" and she
 replied, "With joy and goodly gree! It hath reached me, O auspicious
 King, that when the third old man told a tale to the Jinni more
 wondrous than the two preceding, the Jinni marvelled with exceeding
 marvel; and, shaking with delight, cried, "Lo! I have given thee the
 remainder of the merchant's punishment and for thy sake have I released
 him." Thereupon the merchant embraced the old men and thanked them, and
 these Shaykhs wished him joy on being saved and fared forth each one
 for his own city. Yet this tale is not more wondrous than the
 fisherman's story." Asked the King, "What is the fisherman?s story?"
 And she answered by relating the tale of

-----

Footnote 40:

   Travellers tell of a peculiar knack of jerking the date-stone, which
   makes it strike with great force: I never saw this "Inwá" practised,
   but it reminds me of the water-splashing with one hand in the German
   baths.

Footnote 41:

   _i.e._, sorely against his will.

Footnote 42:

   Arab. "Shaykh"=an old man (primarily), an elder, a chief (of the
   tribe, guild, etc.); and honourably addressed to any man. Comp. among
   the neo-Latins "Sieur," "Signore," "Señor," "Senhor," etc. from Lat.
   "Senior," which gave our "Sire" and "Sir." Like many in Arabic the
   word has a host of different meanings and most of them will occur in
   the course of The Nights. Ibrahim (Abraham) was the first Shaykh or
   man who became grey. Seeing his hairs whiten he cried, "O Allah what
   is this?" and the answer came that it was a sign of dignified
   gravity. Hereupon he exclaimed, "O Lord increase this to me!" and so
   it happened till his locks waxed snowy white at the age of one
   hundred and fifty. He was the first who parted his hair, trimmed his
   mustachios, cleaned his teeth with the Miswák (tooth-stick), pared
   his nails, shaved his pecten, snuffed up water, used ablution after
   stool and wore a shirt (Tabari).

Footnote 43:

   The word is mostly plural=Jinnís: it is also singular=a demon; and
   Ján bin Ján has been noticed.

Footnote 44:

   With us moderns "liver" suggests nothing but malady: in Arabic and
   Persian as in the classic literature of Europe it is the seat of
   passion, the heart being that of affection. Of this more presently.

Footnote 45:

   Originally in Al-Islam the concubine (Surriyat, etc.) was a captive
   taken in war and the Koran says nothing about buying slave-girls. But
   if the captives were true believers the Moslem was ordered to marry
   not to keep them. In modern days concubinage has become an extensive
   subject. Practically the disadvantage is that the slave-girls,
   knowing themselves to be the master's property, consider him bound to
   sleep with them; which is by no means the mistress's view. Some
   wives, however, when old and childless, insist, after the fashion of
   Sarah, upon the husband taking a young concubine and treat her like a
   daughter—which is rare. The Nights abound in tales of concubines, but
   these are chiefly owned by the Caliphs and high officials who did
   much as they pleased. The only redeeming point in the system is that
   it obviated the necessity of prostitution which is, perhaps, the
   greatest evil known to modern society.

Footnote 46:

   Arab. "Al-Kahánah"=the craft of a "Káhin" (Heb. Cohen) a diviner,
   soothsayer, etc.

Footnote 47:

   Arab. "Id al-kabír"=The Great Festival; the Turkish Bayrám and Indian
   Bakar-eed (Kine-fête), the pilgrimage-time, also termed "Festival of
   the Kurbán" (sacrifice) because victims are slain; Al-Zuha (of Undurn
   or forenoon), Al-Azhá (of serene night) and Al-Nahr (of
   throat-cutting). For full details I must refer readers to my
   "Personal Narrative of a Pilgrimage to El-Medinah and Meccah" (3
   vols. 8vo. London, Longmans, 1855). I shall have often to refer to
   it.

Footnote 48:

   Arab. "Kalám al-mubáh," _i.e._, that allowed or permitted to her by
   the King, her husband.

Footnote 49:

   Moslem Kings are expected, like the old Guebre Monarchs, to hold
   "Darbar" (_i.e._, give public audience) at least twice a day, morning
   and evening. Neglect of this practice caused the ruin of the
   Caliphate and of the Persian and Moghul Empires: the great lords were
   left uncontrolled and the lieges revolted to obtain justice. The
   Guebre Kings had two levée places, the Rozistan (day station) and the
   Shabistan (night-station—istán or stán being a nominal form of
   istádan, to stand, as Hindo-stán). Moreover one day in the week the
   sovereign acted as "Mufti" or Supreme Judge.

Footnote 50:

   Arab. "Al-Bashárah," the gift everywhere claimed in the East and in
   Boccaccio's Italy by one who brings good news. Those who do the
   reverse expose themselves to a sound strappado.

Footnote 51:

   A euphemistic formula, to avoid mentioning unpleasant matters. I
   shall note these for the benefit of students who would honestly
   prepare for the public service in Moslem lands.

Footnote 52:

   Arab. "Dinár," from the Latin denarius (a silver coin worth ten
   ounces of brass) through the Greek δηνάριον: it is a Koranic word
   (chapt. iii.) though its Arab equivalent is "Miskál." It also occurs
   in the Kathá before quoted, clearly showing the derivation. In the
   "Book of Kalilah and Dimnah" it is represented by the Daric or
   Persian Dinár, δαρεικός, from Dárá=a King (whence Darius). The Dinar,
   sequin or ducat, contained at different times from 10 and 12 (Abu
   Hanifah's day) to 20 and even 25 dirhams or drachmas; and, as a
   weight, represented a drachma and a half. Its value greatly varied,
   but we may assume it here at nine shillings or ten francs to half a
   sovereign. For an elaborate article on the Dinar see Yule's "Cathay
   and the Way Thither" (ii., pp. 439-443).

Footnote 53:

   The formula used in refusing alms to an "asker" or in rejecting an
   insufficient offer: "Allah will open to thee!" (some door of gain—not
   mine)! Another favourite ejaculation is "Allah Karim" (which Turks
   pronounce "Kyereem")=Allah is All-beneficent: meaning Ask Him, not
   me.

Footnote 54:

   The public bath. London knows the word through "The Hummums."

Footnote 55:

   Arab. "Dirham" (Plur. diráhim, also used in the sense of money,
   "siller"), the Gr. δραχμή and the drachuma of Plautus (Trin. 2, 4,
   23). The word occurs in the Panchatantra also showing the derivation;
   and in the Syriac Kalilah wa Dimnah it is "Zúz." This silver piece
   was=6 obols (9¾d.) and as a weight=66½ grains. The Dirham of The
   Nights was worth six "Dánik," each of these being a fraction over a
   penny. The modern Greek Drachma is=one franc.

Footnote 56:

   In Arabic the speaker always puts himself first, even if he address
   the King, without intending incivility.

Footnote 57:

   A she-Ifrit, not necessarily an evil spirit.

Footnote 58:

   Arab. "Kullah" (in Egypt pron. "gulleh"), the wide-mouthed jug,
   called in the Hijaz "baradiyah;" "daurak" being the narrow. They are
   used either for water or sherbet and, being made of porous clay,
   "sweat," and keep the contents cool; hence all old Anglo-Egyptians
   drink from them, not from bottles. Sometimes they are perfumed with
   smoke of incense, mastich or Kafal (Amyris Kafal). For their graceful
   shapes See Lane's "Account of the Manners and Customs of the Modern
   Egyptians" (chapt. v). I quote, here and elsewhere, from the fifth
   edition, London, Murray, 1860.

Footnote 59:

   "And what is?" etc. A popular way of expressing great difference. So
   in India:—"Where is Rajah Bhoj (the great King) and where is Gangá
   the oilman?"




                      THE FISHERMAN AND THE JINNI.


 It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that there was a Fisherman well
 stricken in years who had a wife and three children, and withal was of
 poor condition. Now it was his custom to cast his net every day four
 times, and no more. On a day he went forth about noontide to the sea
 shore, where he laid down his basket; and, tucking up his shirt and
 plunging into the water, made a cast with his net and waited till it
 settled to the bottom. Then he gathered the cords together and haled
 away at it, but found it weighty; and however much he drew it
 landwards, he could not pull it up; so he carried the ends ashore and
 drove a stake into the ground and made the net fast to it. Then he
 stripped and dived into the water all about the net, and left not off
 working hard until he had brought it up. He rejoiced thereat and,
 donning his clothes, went to the net, when he found in it a dead
 jackass which had torn the meshes. Now when he saw it, he exclaimed in
 his grief, "There is no Majesty, and there is no Might save in Allah
 the Glorious, the Great!" Then quoth he, "This is a strange manner of
 daily bread;" and he began reciting in extempore verse:—

 O toiler through the glooms of night in peril and in pain ✿ Thy toiling
    stint for daily bread comes not by might and main!
 Seest thou not the fisher seek afloat upon the sea ✿ His bread, while
    glimmer stars of night as set in tangled skein.
 Anon he plungeth in despite the buffet of the waves ✿ The while to
    sight the bellying net his eager glances strain;
 Till joying at the night's success, a fish he bringeth home ✿ Whose
    gullet by the hook of Fate was caught and cut in twain.
 When buys that fish of him a man who spent the hours of night ✿
    Reckless of cold and wet and gloom in ease and comfort fain,
 Laud to the Lord who gives to this, to that denies his wishes ✿ And
    dooms one toil and catch the prey and other eat the fishes.[60]

 Then quoth he, "Up and to it; I am sure of His beneficence, Inshallah!"
 So he continued:—

 When thou art seized of Evil Fate, assume ✿ The noble soul's
    long-suffering: 'tis thy best:
 Complain not to the creature; this be 'plaint ✿ From one most Ruthful
    to the ruthlessest.

 The Fisherman, when he had looked at the dead ass, got it free of the
 toils and wrung out and spread his net; then he plunged into the sea,
 saying, "In Allah's name!" and made a cast and pulled at it, but it
 grew heavy and settled down more firmly than the first time. Now he
 thought that there were fish in it, and he made it fast, and doffing
 his clothes went into the water, and dived and haled until he drew it
 up upon dry land. Then found he in it a large earthen pitcher which was
 full of sand and mud; and seeing this he was greatly troubled and began
 repeating these verses[61]:—

 Forbear, O troubles of the world, ✿ And pardon an ye nill forbear:
 I went to seek my daily bread ✿ I find that breadless I must fare:
 For neither handcraft brings me aught ✿ Nor Fate allots to me a share:
 How many fools the Pleiads reach ✿ While darkness whelms the wise and
    ware.

 So he prayed pardon of Allah and, throwing away the jar, wrung his net
 and cleansed it and returned to the sea the third time to cast his net
 and waited till it had sunk. Then he pulled at it and found therein
 potsherds and broken glass; whereupon he began to speak these verses:—

 He is to thee that daily bread thou canst nor loose nor bind ✿ Nor pen
    nor writ avail thee aught thy daily bread to find:
 For joy and daily bread are what Fate deigneth to allow; ✿ This soil is
    sad and sterile ground, while that makes glad the hind.
 The shafts of Time and Life bear down full many a man of worth ✿ While
    bearing up to high degree wights of ignoble mind.
 So come thou, Death! for verily life is not worth a straw ✿ When low
    the falcon falls withal the mallard wings the wind:
 No wonder 'tis thou seest how the great of soul and mind ✿ Are poor,
    and many a losel carle to height of luck designed.
 This bird shall overfly the world from east to furthest west ✿ And that
    shall win her every wish though ne'er she leave the nest.

 Then raising his eyes heavenwards he said, "O my God!"[62] verily Thou
 wottest that I cast not my net each day save four times;[63] the third
 is done and as yet Thou hast vouchsafed me nothing. So this time, O my
 God, deign give me my daily bread. Then, having called on Allah's
 name,[64] he again threw his net and waited its sinking and settling;
 whereupon he haled at it but could not draw it in for that it was
 entangled at the bottom. He cried out in his vexation "There is no
 Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah!" and he began reciting:—

 Fie on this wretched world, an so it be ✿ I must be whelmed by grief
    and misery:
 Tho' gladsome be man's lot when dawns the morn ✿ He drains the cup of
    woe ere eve he see:
 Yet was I one of whom the world when asked ✿ "Whose lot is happiest?"
    oft would say "'Tis he!"

[Illustration]

 Thereupon he stripped and, diving down to the net, busied himself with
 it till it came to land. Then he opened the meshes and found therein a
 cucumber-shaped jar of yellow copper,[65] evidently full of something,
 whose mouth was made fast with a leaden cap, stamped with the seal-ring
 of our Lord Sulayman son of David (Allah accept the twain!). Seeing
 this the Fisherman rejoiced and said, "If I sell it in the brass-bazar
 'tis worth ten golden dinars." He shook it and finding it heavy
 continued, "Would to Heaven I knew what is herein. But I must and will
 open it and look to its contents and store it in my bag and sell it in
 the brass-market." And taking out a knife he worked at the lead till he
 had loosened it from the jar; then he laid the cup on the ground and
 shook the vase to pour out whatever might be inside. He found nothing
 in it; whereat he marvelled with an exceeding marvel. But presently
 there came forth from the jar a smoke which spired heavenwards into
 æther (whereat he again marvelled with mighty marvel), and which
 trailed along earth's surface till presently, having reached its full
 height, the thick vapour condensed, and became an Ifrit, huge of bulk,
 whose crest touched the clouds while his feet were on the ground. His
 head was as a dome, his hands like pitchforks, his legs long as masts
 and his mouth big as a cave; his teeth were like large stones, his
 nostrils ewers, his eyes two lamps and his look was fierce and
 lowering. Now when the fisherman saw the Ifrit his side muscles
 quivered, his teeth chattered, his spittle dried up and he became blind
 about what to do. Upon this the Ifrit looked at him and cried, "There
 is no god but _the_ God, and Sulayman is the prophet of God;" presently
 adding, "O Apostle of Allah, slay me not; never again will I gainsay
 thee in word nor sin against thee in deed."[66] Quoth the Fisherman, "O
 Márid,[67] diddest thou say, Sulayman the Apostle of Allah; and
 Sulayman is dead some thousand and eight hundred years ago,[68] and we
 are now in the last days of the world! What is thy story, and what is
 thy account of thyself, and what is the cause of thy entering into this
 cucurbit?" Now when the Evil Spirit heard the words of the Fisherman,
 quoth he; "There is no god but _the_ God: be of good cheer, O
 Fisherman!" Quoth the Fisherman, "Why biddest thou me to be of good
 cheer?" and he replied, "Because of thy having to die an ill death in
 this very hour." Said the Fisherman, "Thou deservest for thy good
 tidings the withdrawal of Heaven's protection, O thou distant one![69]
 Wherefore shouldest thou kill me and what thing have I done to deserve
 death, I who freed thee from the jar, and saved thee from the depths of
 the sea, and brought thee up on the dry land?" Replied the Ifrit, "Ask
 of me only what mode of death thou wilt die, and by what manner of
 slaughter shall I slay thee." Rejoined the Fisherman, "What is my crime
 and wherefore such retribution?"

 Quoth the Ifrit, "Hear my story, O Fisherman!" and he answered, "Say
 on, and be brief in thy saying, for of very sooth my life-breath is in
 my nostrils."[70] Thereupon quoth the Jinni, "Know, that I am one among
 the heretical Jann and I sinned against Sulayman, David-son (on the
 twain be peace!) I together with the famous Sakhr al-Jinni;[71]
 whereupon the Prophet sent his minister, Asaf son of Barkhiyá, to seize
 me; and this Wazir brought me against my will and led me in bonds to
 him (I being downcast despite my nose) and he placed me standing before
 him like a suppliant. When Sulayman saw me, he took refuge with Allah
 and bade me embrace the True Faith and obey his behests; but I refused,
 so sending for this cucurbit[72] he shut me up therein, and stopped it
 over with lead whereon he impressed the Most High Name, and gave his
 orders to the Jann who carried me off, and cast me into the midmost of
 the ocean. There I abode an hundred years, during which I said in my
 heart, "Whoso shall release me, him will I enrich for ever and ever."
 But the full century went by and, when no one set me free, I entered
 upon the second five score saying, "Whoso shall release me, for him I
 will open the hoards of the earth." Still no one set me free and thus
 four hundred years passed away. Then quoth I, "Whoso shall release me,
 for him will I fulfil three wishes." Yet no one set me free. Thereupon
 I waxed wroth with exceeding wrath and said to myself, "Whoso shall
 release me from this time forth, him will I slay and I will give him
 choice of what death he will die; and now, as thou hast released me, I
 give thee full choice of deaths." The Fisherman, hearing the words of
 the Ifrit, said, "O Allah! the wonder of it that I have not come to
 free thee save in these days!" adding, "Spare my life, so Allah spare
 thine; and slay me not, lest Allah set one to slay thee." Replied the
 Contumacious One, "There is no help for it; die thou must; so ask me by
 way of boon what manner of death thou wilt die." Albeit thus certified
 the Fisherman again addressed the Ifrit saying, "Forgive me this my
 death as a generous reward for having freed thee;" and the Ifrit,
 "Surely I would not slay thee save on account of that same release." "O
 Chief of the Ifrits," said the Fisherman, "I do thee good and thou
 requitest me with evil! in very sooth the old saw lieth not when it
 saith:—

 We wrought them weal, they met our weal with ill; ✿ Such, by my life!
    is every bad man's labour:
 To him who benefits unworthy wights ✿ Shall hap what hapt to
    Ummi-Amir's neighbour.[73]

 Now when the Ifrit heard these words he answered, "No more of this
 talk, needs must I kill thee." Upon this the Fisherman said to himself,
 "This is a Jinni; and I am a man to whom Allah hath given a passably
 cunning wit, so I will now cast about to compass his destruction by my
 contrivance and by mine intelligence; even as he took counsel only of
 his malice and his frowardness."[74] He began by asking the Ifrit,
 "Hast thou indeed resolved to kill me?" and, receiving for all answer,
 "Even so," he cried, "Now in the Most Great Name, graven on the
 seal-ring of Sulayman the Son of David (peace be with the holy twain!),
 an I question thee on a certain matter wilt thou give me a true
 answer?" The Ifrit replied "Yea;" but, hearing mention of the Most
 Great Name, his wits were troubled and he said with trembling, "Ask and
 be brief." Quoth the Fisherman, "How didst thou fit into this bottle
 which would not hold thy hand; no, nor even thy foot, and how came it
 to be large enough to contain the whole of thee?" Replied the Ifrit,
 "What! dost not believe that I was all there?" and the Fisherman
 rejoined, "Nay! I will never believe it until I see thee inside with my
 own eyes."—And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
 her permitted say.

                    Now when it was the Fourth Night,

 Her sister said to her, "Please finish us this tale, an thou be not
 sleepy!" so she resumed:—It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
 when the Fisherman said to the Ifrit, "I will never and nowise believe
 thee until I see thee inside it with mine own eyes;" the Evil Spirit on
 the instant shook[75] and became a vapour, which condensed, and entered
 the jar little and little, till all was well inside when lo! the
 Fisherman in hot haste took the leaden cap with the seal and stoppered
 therewith the mouth of the jar and called out to the Ifrit, saying,
 "Ask me by way of boon what death thou wilt die! By Allah, I will throw
 thee into the sea[76] before us and here will I build me a lodge; and
 whoso cometh hither I will warn him against fishing and will say:—In
 these waters abideth an Ifrit who giveth as a last favour a choice of
 deaths and fashion of slaughter to the man who saveth him!" Now when
 the Ifrit heard this from the Fisherman and saw himself in limbo, he
 was minded to escape, but this was prevented by Solomon's seal; so he
 knew that the Fisherman had cozened and outwitted him, and he waxed
 lowly and submissive and began humbly to say, "I did but jest with
 thee." But the other answered, "Thou liest, O vilest of the Ifrits, and
 meanest and filthiest!" and he set off with the bottle for the sea
 side; the Ifrit calling out "Nay! Nay!" and he calling out "Aye! Aye!"
 Thereupon the Evil Spirit softened his voice and smoothed his speech
 and abased himself, saying, "What wouldest thou do with me, O
 Fisherman?" "I will throw thee back into the sea," he answered; "where
 thou hast been housed and homed for a thousand and eight hundred years;
 and now I will leave thee therein till Judgment-day: did I not say to
 thee:—Spare me and Allah shall spare thee; and slay me not lest Allah
 slay thee? yet thou spurnedst my supplication and hadst no intention
 save to deal ungraciously by me, and Allah hath now thrown thee into my
 hands and I am cunninger than thou." Quoth the Ifrit, "Open for me that
 I may bring thee weal." Quoth the Fisherman, "Thou liest, thou
 accursed! my case with thee is that of the Wazir of King Yúnán with the
 sage Dúbán."[77] "And who was the Wazir of King Yunan and who was the
 sage Duban; and what was the story about them?" quoth the Ifrit,
 whereupon the Fisherman began to tell


              _THE TALE OF THE WAZIR AND THE SAGE DUBAN._

 "Know, O thou Ifrit, that in days of yore and in ages long gone before,
 a King called Yunan reigned over the city of Fars of the land of the
 Roum."[78] He was a powerful ruler and a wealthy, who had armies and
 guards and allies of all nations of men; but his body was afflicted
 with a leprosy which leaches and men of science failed to heal. He
 drank potions and he swallowed powders and he used unguents, but naught
 did him good and none among the host of physicians availed to procure
 him a cure. At last there came to his city a mighty healer of men and
 one well stricken in years, the sage Duban hight. This man was a reader
 of books, Greek, Persian, Roman, Arabian, and Syrian; and he was
 skilled in astronomy and in leechcraft, the theorick as well as the
 practick; he was experienced in all that healeth and that hurteth the
 body; conversant with the virtues of every plant, grass and herb, and
 their benefit and bane; and he understood philosophy and had compassed
 the whole range of medical science and other branches of the
 knowledge-tree. Now this physician passed but few days in the city, ere
 he heard of the King's malady and all his bodily sufferings through the
 leprosy with which Allah had smitten him; and how all the doctors and
 wise men had failed to heal him. Upon this he sat up through the night
 in deep thought and, when broke the dawn and appeared the morn and
 light was again born, and the Sun greeted the Good whose beauties the
 world adorn,[79] he donned his handsomest dress and going in to King
 Yunan, he kissed the ground before him: then he prayed for the
 endurance of his honour and prosperity in fairest language and made
 himself known saying, "O King, tidings have reached me of what befel
 thee through that which is in thy person; and how the host of
 physicians have proved themselves unavailing to abate it; and lo! I can
 cure thee, O King; and yet will I not make thee drink of draught or
 anoint thee with ointment." Now when King Yunan heard his words he said
 in huge surprise, "How wilt thou do this? By Allah, if thou make me
 whole I will enrich thee even to thy son's son and I will give thee
 sumptuous gifts; and whatso thou wishest shall be thine and thou shalt
 be to me a cup-companion[80] and a friend." The King then robed him
 with a dress of honour and entreated him graciously and asked him,
 "Canst thou indeed cure me of this complaint without drug and unguent?"
 and he answered, "Yes! I will heal thee without the pains and penalties
 of medicine." The King marvelled with exceeding marvel and said, "O
 physician, when shall be this whereof thou speakest, and in how many
 days shall it take place? Haste thee, O my son!" He replied, "I hear
 and I obey; the cure shall begin to-morrow." So saying he went forth
 from the presence, and hired himself a house in the city for the better
 storage of his books and scrolls, his medicines and his aromatic roots.
 Then he set to work at choosing the fittest drugs and simples and he
 fashioned a bat hollow within, and furnished with a handle without, for
 which he made a ball; the two being prepared with consummate art. On
 the next day when both were ready for use and wanted nothing more, he
 went up to the King; and, kissing the ground between his hands bade him
 ride forth on the parade ground[81] there to play at pall and mall. He
 was accompanied by his suite, Emirs and Chamberlains, Wazirs and Lords
 of the realm and, ere he was seated, the sage Duban came up to him, and
 handing him the bat said, "Take this mall and grip it as I do; so! and
 now push for the plain and leaning well over thy horse drive the ball
 with all thy might until thy palm be moist and thy body perspire: then
 the medicine will penetrate through thy palm and will permeate thy
 person. When thou hast done with playing and thou feelest the effects
 of the medicine, return to thy palace, and make the Ghusl-ablution[82]
 in the Hammam-bath, and lay thee down to sleep; so shalt thou become
 whole; and now peace be with thee!" Thereupon King Yunan took the bat
 from the Sage and grasped it firmly; then, mounting steed, he drove the
 ball before him and gallopped after it till he reached it, when he
 struck it with all his might, his palm gripping the bat handle the
 while; and he ceased not malling the ball till his hand waxed moist and
 his skin, perspiring, imbibed the medicine from the wood. Then the sage
 Duban knew that the drugs had penetrated his person and bade him return
 to the palace and enter the Hammam without stay or delay; so King Yunan
 forthright returned and ordered them to clear for him the bath. They
 did so, the carpet spreaders making all haste, and the slaves all hurry
 and got ready a change of raiment for the King. He entered the bath and
 made the total ablution long and thoroughly; then donned his clothes
 within the Hammam and rode therefrom to his palace where he lay him
 down and slept. Such was the case with King Yunan, but as regards the
 sage Duban, he returned home and slept as usual and when morning dawned
 he repaired to the palace and craved audience. The King ordered him to
 be admitted; then, having kissed the ground between his hands, in
 allusion to the King he recited these couplets with solemn intonation:—

 Happy is Eloquence when thou art named her sire ✿ But mourns she whenas
    other man the title claimed.
 O Lord of fairest presence, whose illuming rays ✿ Clear off the fogs of
    doubt aye veiling deeds high famed,
 Ne'er cease thy face to shine like Dawn and rise of Morn ✿ And never
    show Time's face with heat of ire inflamed!
 Thy grace hath favoured us with gifts that worked such wise ✿ As
    rain-clouds raining on the hills by wolds enframed:
 Freely thou lavishedst thy wealth to rise on high ✿ Till won from Time
    the heights whereat thy grandeur aimed.

[Illustration]

 Now when the Sage ceased reciting, the King rose quickly to his feet
 and fell on his neck; then, seating him by his side he bade dress him
 in a sumptuous dress; for it had so happened that when the King left
 the Hammam he looked on his body and saw no trace of leprosy: the skin
 was all clean as virgin silver. He joyed thereat with exceeding joy,
 his breast broadened[83] with delight and he felt thoroughly happy.
 Presently, when it was full day he entered his audience-hall and sat
 upon the throne of his kingship whereupon his Chamberlains and Grandees
 flocked to the presence and with them the sage Duban. Seeing the leach
 the King rose to him in honour and seated him by his side; then the
 food trays furnished with the daintiest viands were brought and the
 physician ate with the King, nor did he cease companying him all that
 day. Moreover, at nightfall he gave the physician Duban two thousand
 gold pieces, besides the usual dress of honour and other gifts galore,
 and sent him home on his own steed. After the Sage had fared forth King
 Yunan again expressed his amazement at the leach's art, saying, "This
 man medicined my body from without nor anointed me with aught of
 ointments: by Allah, surely this is none other than consummate skill! I
 am bound to honour such a man with rewards and distinction, and take
 him to my companion and my friend during the remainder of my days." So
 King Yunan passed the night in joy and gladness for that his body had
 been made whole and had thrown off so pernicious a malady. On the
 morrow the King went forth from his Serraglio and sat upon his throne,
 and the Lords of Estate stood about him, and the Emirs and Wazirs sat
 as was their wont on his right hand and on his left. Then he asked for
 the Sage Duban, who came in and kissed the ground before him, when the
 King rose to greet him and, seating him by his side, ate with him and
 wished him long life. Moreover he robed him and gave him gifts, and
 ceased not conversing with him until night approached. Then the King
 ordered him, by way of salary, five dresses of honour and a thousand
 dinars.[84] The physician returned to his own house full of gratitude
 to the King. Now when next morning dawned the King repaired to his
 audience-hall, and his Lords and nobles surrounded him and his
 Chamberlains and his Ministers, as the white encloseth the black of the
 eye.[85] Now the King had a Wazir among his Wazirs, unsightly to look
 upon, an ill-omened spectacle; sordid, ungenerous, full of envy and
 evil will. When this Minister saw the King place the physician near him
 and give him all these gifts, he jaloused him and planned to do him a
 harm, as in the saying on such subject, "Envy lurks in every body;" and
 the saying, "Oppression hideth in every heart: power revealeth it and
 weakness concealeth it." Then the Minister came before the King and,
 kissing the ground between his hands, said, "O King of the age and of
 all time, thou in whose benefits I have grown to manhood, I have
 weighty advice to offer thee, and if I withhold it I were a son of
 adultery and no true-born man; wherefore an thou order me to disclose
 it I will so do forthwith." Quoth the King (and he was troubled at the
 words of the Minister), "And what is this counsel of thine?" Quoth he,
 "O glorious monarch, the wise of old have said:—Whoso regardeth not the
 end, hath not Fortune to friend; and indeed I have lately seen the King
 on far other than the right way; for he lavisheth largesse on his
 enemy, on one whose object is the decline and fall of his kingship: to
 this man he hath shown favour, honouring him with over honour and
 making of him an intimate. Wherefore I fear for the King's life." The
 King, who was much troubled and changed colour, asked, "Whom dost thou
 suspect and anent whom doest thou hint?" and the Minister answered, "O
 King, an thou be asleep, wake up! I point to the physician Duban."
 Rejoined the King, "Fie upon thee! This is a true friend who is
 favoured by me above all men, because he cured me with something which
 I held in my hand, and he healed my leprosy which had baffled all
 physicians; indeed he is one whose like may not be found in these
 days—no, not in the whole world from furthest east to utmost west! And
 it is of such a man thou sayest such hard sayings. Now from this day
 forward I allot him a settled solde and allowances, every month a
 thousand gold pieces; and, were I to share with him my realm 'twere but
 a little matter. Perforce I must suspect that thou speakest on this
 wise from mere envy and jealousy as they relate of the King
 Sindibad."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day, and ceased saying
 her permitted say.

 Then quoth Dunyazad, "O my sister, how pleasant is thy tale, and how
 tasteful, how sweet, and how grateful!" She replied, "And where is this
 compared with what I could tell thee on the coming night if the King
 deign spare my life?" Then said the King in himself, "By Allah, I will
 not slay her until I hear the rest of her tale, for truly it is
 wondrous." So they rested that night in mutual embrace until the dawn.
 Then the King went forth to his Hall of Rule, and the Wazir and the
 troops came in, and the audience-chamber was thronged; and the King
 gave orders and judged and appointed and deposed and bade and forbade
 during the rest of that day till the Court broke up, and King Shahryar
 returned to his palace.

                    Now when it was the Fifth Night,

 Her sister said, "Do finish for us thy story if thou be not sleepy,"
 and she resumed:—It hath reached me, O auspicious King and mighty
 Monarch, that King Yunan said to his Minister, "O Wazir, thou art one
 whom the evil spirit of envy hath possessed because of this physician,
 and thou plottest for my putting him to death, after which I should
 repent me full sorely, even as repented King Sindibad for killing his
 falcon." Quoth the Wazir, "Pardon me, O King of the age, how was that?"
 So the King began the story of


                    _KING SINDIBAD AND HIS FALCON._

 It is said (but Allah is All-knowing![86]) that there was a King of the
 Kings of Fars, who was fond of pleasuring and diversion, especially
 coursing and hunting. He had reared a falcon which he carried all night
 on his fist, and whenever he went a-chasing he took with him this bird;
 and he bade make for her a golden cup-let hung round her neck to give
 her drink therefrom. One day as the King was sitting quietly in his
 palace, behold, the high falconer of the household suddenly addressed
 him, "O King of the age, this is indeed a day fit for birding." The
 King gave orders accordingly and set out taking the hawk on fist; and
 they fared merrily forwards till they made a Wady[87] where they
 planted a circle of nets for the chase; when lo! a gazelle came within
 the toils and the King cried, "Whoso alloweth yon gazelle to spring
 over his head and loseth her, that man will I surely slay." They
 narrowed the nets about the gazelle when she drew near the King's
 station; and, planting herself on her hind quarter, crossed her
 forehand over her breast, as if about to kiss the earth before the
 King. He bowed his brow low in acknowledgment to the beast; when she
 bounded high over his head and took the way of the waste. Thereupon the
 King turned towards his troops and, seeing them winking and pointing at
 him, he asked, "O Wazir, what are my men saying?" and the Minister
 answered, "They say thou didst proclaim that whoso alloweth the gazelle
 to spring over his head, that man shall be put to death." Quoth the
 King, "Now, by the life of my head! I will follow her up till I bring
 her back." So he set off gallopping on the gazelle's trail and gave not
 over tracking till he reached the foot-hills of a mountain-chain where
 the quarry made for a cave. Then the King cast off at it the falcon
 which presently caught it up and, swooping down, drove her talons into
 its eyes, bewildering and blinding it;[88] and the King drew his mace
 and struck a blow which rolled the game over. He then dismounted; and,
 after cutting the antelope's throat and flaying the body, hung it to
 the pommel of his saddle. Now the time was that of the siesta[89] and
 the wold was parched and dry, nor was any water to be found anywhere;
 and the King thirsted and his horse also; so he went about searching
 till he saw a tree dropping water, as it were melted butter, from its
 boughs. Thereupon the King who wore gauntlets of skin to guard him
 against poisons took the cup from the hawk's neck, and filling it with
 the water set it before the bird, and lo! the falcon struck it with her
 pounces and upset the liquid. The King filled it a second time with the
 dripping drops, thinking his hawk was thirsty; but the bird again
 struck at the cup with her talons and overturned it. Then the King
 waxed wroth with the hawk and filling the cup a third time offered it
 to his horse: but the hawk upset it with a flirt of wings. Quoth the
 King, "Allah confound thee, thou unluckiest of flying things! thou
 keepest me from drinking, and thou deprivest thyself also, and the
 horse." So he struck the falcon with his sword and cut off her wing;
 but the bird raised her head and said by signs, "Look at that which
 hangeth on the tree!" The King lifted up his eyes accordingly and
 caught sight of a brood of vipers, whose poison-drops he mistook for
 water; thereupon he repented him of having struck off his falcon's
 wing, and mounting horse, fared on with the dead gazelle, till he
 arrived at the camp, his starting place. He threw the quarry to the
 cook saying, "Take and broil it," and sat down on his chair, the falcon
 being still on his fist when suddenly the bird gasped and died;
 whereupon the King cried out in sorrow and remorse for having slain
 that falcon which had saved his life. Now this is what occurred in the
 case of King Sindibad; and I am assured that were I to do as thou
 desirest I should repent even as the man who killed his parrot. Quoth
 the Wazir, "And how was that?" And the King began to tell


             _THE TALE OF THE HUSBAND AND THE PARROT._[90]

 A certain man and a merchant to boot had married a fair wife, a woman
 of perfect beauty and grace, symmetry and loveliness, of whom he was
 mad-jealous, and who contrived successfully to keep him from travel. At
 last an occasion compelling him to leave her, he went to the
 bird-market and bought him for one hundred gold pieces a she-parrot
 which he set in his house to act as duenna, expecting her to acquaint
 him on his return with what had passed during the whole time of his
 absence; for the bird was kenning and cunning and never forgot what she
 had seen and heard. Now his fair wife had fallen in love with a young
 Turk,[91] who used to visit her, and she feasted him by day and lay
 with him by night. When the man had made his journey and won his wish
 he came home; and, at once causing the Parrot be brought to him,
 questioned her concerning the conduct of his consort whilst he was in
 foreign parts. Quoth she, "Thy wife hath a man-friend who passed every
 night with her during thine absence." Thereupon the husband went to his
 wife in a violent rage and bashed her with a bashing severe enough to
 satisfy any body. The woman, suspecting that one of the slave-girls had
 been tattling to the master, called them together and questioned them
 upon their oaths, when all swore that they had kept the secret, but
 that the Parrot had not, adding, "And we heard her with our own ears."
 Upon this the woman bade one of the girls to set a hand-mill under the
 cage and grind therewith and a second to sprinkle water through the
 cage-roof and a third to run about, right and left, flashing a mirror
 of bright steel through the livelong night. Next morning when the
 husband returned home after being entertained by one of his friends, he
 bade bring the Parrot before him and asked what had taken place whilst
 he was away. "Pardon me, O my master," quoth the bird, "I could neither
 hear nor see aught by reason of the exceeding murk and the thunder and
 lightning which lasted throughout the night." As it happened to be the
 summer-tide the master was astounded and cried, "But we are now in mid
 Tammúz,[92] and this is not the time for rains and storms." "Ay, by
 Allah," rejoined the bird, "I saw with these eyes what my tongue hath
 told thee." Upon this the man, not knowing the case nor smoking the
 plot, waxed exceeding wroth; and, holding that his wife had been
 wrongously accused, put forth his hand and pulling the Parrot from her
 cage dashed her upon the ground with such force that he killed her on
 the spot. Some days afterwards one of his slave-girls confessed to him
 the whole truth,[93] yet would he not believe it till he saw the young
 Turk, his wife's lover, coming out of her chamber, when he bared his
 blade[94] and slew him by a blow on the back of the neck; and he did
 the same by the adulteress; and thus the twain, laden with mortal sin,
 went straightways to Eternal Fire. Then the merchant knew that the
 Parrot had told him the truth anent all she had seen and he mourned
 grievously for her loss, when mourning availed him not. The Minister,
 hearing the words of King Yunan, rejoined, "O Monarch, high in dignity,
 and what harm have I done him, or what evil have I seen from him that I
 should compass his death? I would not do this thing, save to serve
 thee, and soon shalt thou sight that it is right; and if thou accept my
 advice thou shalt be saved, otherwise thou shalt be destroyed even as a
 certain Wazir who acted treacherously by the young Prince." Asked the
 King, "How was that?" and the Minister thus began


                _THE TALE OF THE PRINCE AND THE OGRESS._

 A certain King, who had a son over much given to hunting and coursing,
 ordered one of his Wazirs to be in attendance upon him whithersoever he
 might wend. One day the youth set out for the chase accompanied by his
 father's Minister; and, as they jogged on together, a big wild beast
 came in sight. Cried the Wazir to the King's son, "Up and at yon noble
 quarry!" So the Prince followed it until he was lost to every eye and
 the chase got away from him in the waste; whereby he was confused and
 he knew not which way to turn, when lo! a damsel appeared ahead and she
 was in tears. The King's son asked, "Who art thou?" and she answered,
 "I am daughter to a King among the Kings of Hind, and I was travelling
 with a caravan in the desert when drowsiness overcame me, and I fell
 from my beast unwittingly; whereby I am cut off from my people and sore
 bewildered." The Prince, hearing these words, pitied her case and,
 mounting her on his horse's crupper, travelled until he passed by an
 old ruin,[95] when the damsel said to him, "O my master, I wish to obey
 a call of nature": he therefore set her down at the ruin where she
 delayed so long that the King's son thought that she was only wasting
 time; so he followed her without her knowledge and behold, she was a
 Ghúlah,[96] a wicked Ogress, who was saying to her brood, "O my
 children, this day I bring you a fine fat youth[97] for dinner;"
 whereto they answered, "Bring him quick to us, O our mother, that we
 may browse upon him our bellies full." The Prince hearing their talk,
 made sure of death and his side-muscles quivered in fear for his life,
 so he turned away and was about to fly. The Ghulah came out and seeing
 him in sore affright (for he was trembling in every limb) cried,
 "Wherefore art thou afraid?" and he replied, "I have hit upon an enemy
 whom I greatly fear." Asked the Ghulah, "Diddest thou not say:—I am a
 King's son?" and he answered, "Even so." Then quoth she, "Why dost not
 give thine enemy something of money and so satisfy him?" Quoth he, "He
 will not be satisfied with my purse but only with my life, and I
 mortally fear him and am a man under oppression." She replied, "If thou
 be so distressed, as thou deemest, ask aid against him from Allah, who
 will surely protect thee from his ill-doing and from the evil whereof
 thou art afraid." Then the Prince raised his eyes heavenwards and
 cried, "O Thou who answerest the necessitous when he calleth upon Thee
 and dispellest his distress; O my God! grant me victory over my foe and
 turn him from me, for Thou over all things art Almighty." The Ghulah,
 hearing his prayer, turned away from him, and the Prince returned to
 his father, and told him the tale of the Wazir; whereupon the King
 summoned the Minister to his presence and then and there slew him.
 "Thou likewise, O King, if thou continue to trust this leach, shalt be
 made to die the worst of deaths. He verily thou madest much of and whom
 thou entreatedest as an intimate, will work thy destruction. Seest thou
 not how he healed the disease from outside thy body by something
 grasped in thy hand? Be not assured that he will not destroy thee by
 something held in like manner!" Replied King Yunan, "Thou hast spoken
 sooth, O Wazir, it may well be as thou hintest O my well-advising
 Minister; and belike this Sage hath come as a spy searching to put me
 to death; for assuredly if he cured me by a something held in my hand,
 he can kill me by a something given me to smell." Then asked King
 Yunan, "O Minister, what must be done with him?" and the Wazir
 answered, "Send after him this very instant and summon him to thy
 presence; and when he shall come strike him across the neck; and thus
 shalt thou rid thyself of him and his wickedness, and deceive him ere
 he can deceive thee." "Thou hast again spoken sooth, O Wazir," said the
 King and sent one to call the Sage who came in joyful mood for he knew
 not what had appointed for him the Compassionate; as a certain poet
 saith by way of illustration:—

 O Thou who fearest Fate, confiding fare, ✿ Trust all to Him who built
    the world, and wait:
 What Fate saith "Be" perforce must be, my lord! ✿ And safe art thou
    from th' undecreed of Fate.

 As Duban the physician entered he addressed the King in these lines:—

 An fail I of my thanks to thee nor thank thee day by day ✿ For whom
    composed I prose and verse, for whom my say and lay?
 Thou lavishedst thy generous gifts ere they were craved by me ✿ Thou
    lavishedst thy boons unsought sans pretext or delay
 How shall I stint my praise of thee, how shall I cease to laud ✿ The
    grace of thee in secresy and patentest display?
 Nay; I will thank thy benefits, for aye thy favours lie ✿ Light on my
    thought and tongue, though heavy on my back they weigh.

 And he said further on the same theme:—

 Turn thee from grief nor care a jot! ✿ Commit thy needs to Fate and
    Lot!
 Enjoy the Present passing well ✿ And let the Past be clean forgot;
 For whatso haply seemeth worse ✿ Shall work thy weal as Allah wot:
 Allah shall do whate'er He wills ✿ And in His will oppose Him not.

 And further still:—

 To th' All-wise Subtle One trust worldly things ✿ Rest thee from all
    whereto the worldling clings:
 Learn wisely well naught cometh by thy will ✿ But e'en as willeth
    Allah, King of Kings.

 And lastly:—

 Gladsome and gay forget thine every grief ✿ Full often grief the wisest
    hearts outwore:
 Thought is but folly in the feeble slave ✿ Shun it and so be savèd
    evermore.

 Said the King for sole return, "Knowest thou why I have summoned thee?"
 and the Sage replied, "Allah Most Highest alone kenneth hidden things!"
 But the King rejoined, "I summoned thee only to take thy life and
 utterly to destroy thee." Duban the Wise wondered at this strange
 address with exceeding wonder and asked, "O King, and wherefore
 wouldest thou slay me, and what ill have I done thee?" and the King
 answered, "Men tell me thou art a spy sent hither with intent to slay
 me; and lo! I will kill thee ere I be killed by thee;" then he called
 to his Sworder, and said, "Strike me off the head of this traitor and
 deliver us from his evil practices." Quoth the Sage, "Spare me and
 Allah will spare thee; slay me not or Allah shall slay thee." And he
 repeated to him these very words, even as I to thee, O Ifrit, and yet
 thou wouldst not let me go, being bent upon my death. King Yunan only
 rejoined, "I shall not be safe without slaying thee; for, as thou
 healedst me by something held in hand, so am I not secure against thy
 killing me by something given me to smell or otherwise." Said the
 physician, "This then, O King, is thy requital and reward; thou
 returnest only evil for good." The King replied, "There is no help for
 it; die thou must and without delay." Now when the physician was
 certified that the King would slay him without waiting, he wept and
 regretted the good he had done to other than the good. As one hath said
 on this subject:—

 Of wit and wisdom is Maymúnah[98] bare ✿ Whose sire in wisdom all the
    wits outstrippeth:
 Man may not tread on mud or dust or clay ✿ Save by good sense, else
    trippeth he and slippeth.

 Hereupon the Sworder stepped forward and bound the Sage Duban's eyes
 and bared his blade, saying to the King, "By thy leave;" while the
 physician wept and cried, "Spare me and Allah will spare thee, and slay
 me not or Allah shall slay thee," and began repeating:—

 I was kind and 'scapèd not, they were cruel and escaped; ✿ And my
    kindness only led me to Ruination Hall;
 If I live I'll ne'er be kind; if I die, then all be damned ✿ Who follow
    me, and curses their kindliness befal.

 "Is this," continued Duban, "the return I meet from thee? Thou givest
 me, meseems, but crocodile-boon." Quoth the King, "What is the tale of
 the crocodile?", and quoth the physician, "Impossible for me to tell it
 in this my state; Allah upon thee, spare me, as thou hopest Allah shall
 spare thee." And he wept with exceeding weeping. Then one of the King's
 favourites stood up and said, "O King! grant me the blood of this
 physician; we have never seen him sin against thee, or doing aught save
 healing thee from a disease which baffled every leach and man of
 science." Said the King, "Ye wot not the cause of my putting to death
 this physician, and this it is. If I spare him, I doom myself to
 certain death; for one who healed me of such a malady by something held
 in my hand, surely can slay me by something held to my nose; and I fear
 lest he kill me for a price, since haply he is some spy whose sole
 purpose in coming hither was to compass my destruction. So there is no
 help for it; die he must, and then only shall I be sure of my own
 life." Again cried Duban, "Spare me and Allah shall spare thee; and
 slay me not or Allah shall slay thee." But it was in vain. Now when the
 physician, O Ifrit, knew for certain that the King would kill him, he
 said, "O King, if there be no help but I must die, grant me some little
 delay that I may go down to my house and release myself from mine
 obligations and direct my folk and my neighbours where to bury me and
 distribute my books of medicine. Amongst these I have one, the rarest
 of rarities, which I would present to thee as an offering: keep it as a
 treasure in thy treasury." "And what is in the book?" asked the King
 and the Sage answered, "Things beyond compt; and the least of secrets
 is that if, directly after thou hast cut off my head, thou open three
 leaves and read three lines of the page to thy left hand, my head shall
 speak and answer every question thou deignest ask of it." The King
 wondered with exceeding wonder and shaking[99] with delight at the
 novelty, said, "O physician, dost thou really tell me that when I cut
 off thy head it will speak to me?" He replied, "Yes, O King!" Quoth the
 King, "This is indeed a strange matter!" and forthwith sent him closely
 guarded to his house, and Duban then and there settled all his
 obligations. Next day he went up to the King's audience hall, where
 Emirs and Wazirs, Chamberlains and Nabobs, Grandees and Lords of Estate
 were gathered together, making the presence-chamber gay as a garden of
 flower-beds. And lo! the physician came up and stood before the King,
 bearing a worn old volume and a little étui of metal full of powder,
 like that used for the eyes.[100] Then he sat down and said, "Give me a
 tray." So they brought him one and he poured the powder upon it and
 levelled it and lastly spake as follows: "O King, take this book but do
 not open it till my head falls; then set it upon this tray, and bid
 press it down upon the powder, when forthright the blood will cease
 flowing. That is the time to open the book." The King thereupon took
 the book and made a sign to the Sworder, who arose and struck off the
 physician's head, and placing it on the middle of the tray, pressed it
 down upon the powder. The blood stopped flowing, and the Sage Duban
 unclosed his eyes and said, "Now open the book, O King!" The King
 opened the book, and found the leaves stuck together; so he put his
 finger to his mouth and, by moistening it, he easily turned over the
 first leaf, and in like way the second, and the third, each leaf
 opening with much trouble; and when he had unstuck six leaves he looked
 over them and, finding nothing written thereon, said, "O physician,
 there is no writing here!" Duban replied, "Turn over yet more;" and he
 turned over three others in the same way. Now the book was poisoned;
 and before long the venom penetrated his system, and he fell into
 strong convulsions and he cried out, "The poison hath done its work!"
 Whereupon the Sage Duban's head began to improvise:—

 There be rulers who have ruled with a foul tyrannic sway ✿ But they
    soon became as though they had never, never been:
 Just, they had won justice: they oppressed and were opprest ✿ By
    Fortune, who requited them with ban and bane and teen:
 So they faded like the morn, and the tongue of things repeats ✿ "Take
    this for that, nor vent upon Fortune's ways thy spleen."

 No sooner had the head ceased speaking than the King rolled over dead.
 Now I would have thee know, O Ifrit, that if King Yunan had spared the
 Sage Duban, Allah would have spared him; but he refused so to do and
 decreed to do him dead, wherefore Allah slew him; and thou too, O
 Ifrit, if thou hadst spared me, Allah would have spared thee.——And
 Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted
 say: then quoth Dunyazad, "O my sister, how pleasant is thy tale and
 how tasteful; how sweet, and how grateful!" She replied, "And where is
 this compared with what I could tell thee this coming night, if I live
 and the King spare me?" Said the King in himself, "By Allah, I will not
 slay her until I hear the rest of her story, for truly it is wondrous."
 They rested that night in mutual embrace until dawn: then the King went
 forth to his Darbar; the Wazirs and troops came in and the
 audience-hall was crowded; so the King gave orders and judged and
 appointed and deposed and bade and forbade the rest of that day, when
 the court broke up, and King Shahryar entered his palace.

                    Now when it was the Sixth Night,

 Her sister, Dunyazad, said to her. "Pray finish for us thy story;" and
 she answered, "I will if the King give me leave." "Say on," quoth the
 King. And she continued:—It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
 when the Fisherman said to the Ifrit, "If thou hadst spared me I would
 have spared thee, but nothing would satisfy thee save my death; so now
 I will do thee die by jailing thee in this jar, and I will hurl thee
 into this sea." Then the Marid roared aloud and cried, "Allah upon
 thee, O Fisherman don't! Spare me, and pardon my past doings; and, as I
 have been tyrannous, so be thou generous, for it is said among sayings
 that go current:—O thou who doest good to him who hath done thee evil,
 suffice for the ill-doer his ill-deeds, and do not deal with me as did
 Umamah to 'Atikah."[101] Asked the Fisherman, "And what was their
 case?" and the Ifrit answered, "This is not the time for story-telling
 and I in this prison; but set me free and I will tell thee the tale."
 Quoth the Fisherman, "Leave this language: there is no help but that
 thou be thrown back into the sea nor is there any way for thy getting
 out of it for ever and ever. Vainly I placed myself under thy
 protection,[102] and I humbled myself to thee with weeping, while thou
 soughtest only to slay me, who had done thee no injury deserving this
 at thy hands; nay, so far from injuring thee by any evil act, I worked
 thee nought but weal in releasing thee from that jail of thine. Now I
 knew thee to be an evil-doer when thou diddest to me what thou didst,
 and know, that when I have cast thee back into this sea, I will warn
 whomsoever may fish thee up of what hath befallen me with thee, and I
 will advise him to toss thee back again; so shalt thou abide here under
 these waters till the End of Time shall make an end of thee." But the
 Ifrit cried aloud, "Set me free; this is a noble occasion for
 generosity and I make covenant with thee and vow never to do thee hurt
 and harm; nay, I will help thee to what shall put thee out of want."
 The Fisherman accepted his promises on both conditions, not to trouble
 him as before, but on the contrary to do him service; and, after making
 firm the plight and swearing him a solemn oath by Allah Most Highest he
 opened the cucurbit. Thereupon the pillar of smoke rose up till all of
 it was fully out; then it thickened and once more became an Ifrit of
 hideous presence, who forthright administered a kick to the bottle and
 sent it flying into the sea. The Fisherman, seeing how the cucurbit was
 treated and making sure of his own death, piddled in his clothes and
 said to himself, "This promiseth badly;" but he fortified his heart,
 and cried, "O Ifrit, Allah hath said"[103]:—Perform your covenant; for
 the performance of your covenant shall be inquired into hereafter. Thou
 hast made a vow to me and hast sworn an oath not to play me false lest
 Allah play thee false, for verily he is a jealous God who respiteth the
 sinner, but letteth him not escape. I say to thee as said the Sage
 Duban to King Yunan, "Spare me so Allah may spare thee!" The Ifrit
 burst into laughter and stalked away, saying to the Fisherman, "Follow
 me;" and the man paced after him at a safe distance (for he was not
 assured of escape) till they had passed round the suburbs of the city.
 Thence they struck into the uncultivated grounds, and crossing them
 descended into a broad wilderness, and lo! in the midst of it stood a
 mountain-tarn. The Ifrit waded in to the middle and again cried,
 "Follow me;" and when this was done he took his stand in the centre and
 bade the man cast his net and catch his fish. The Fisherman looked into
 the water and was much astonished to see therein vari-coloured fishes,
 white and red, blue and yellow; however he cast his net and, hauling it
 in, saw that he had netted four fishes, one of each colour. Thereat he
 rejoiced greatly and more when the Ifrit said to him, "Carry these to
 the Sultan and set them in his presence; then he will give thee what
 shall make thee a wealthy man; and now accept my excuse, for by Allah
 at this time I wot none other way of benefiting thee, inasmuch I have
 lain in this sea eighteen hundred years and have not seen the face of
 the world save within this hour. But I would not have thee fish here
 save once a day." The Ifrit then gave him Godspeed, saying, "Allah
 grant we meet again;"[104] and struck the earth with one foot,
 whereupon the ground clove asunder and swallowed him up. The Fisherman,
 much marvelling at what had happened to him with the Ifrit, took the
 fish and made for the city; and as soon as he reached home he filled an
 earthen bowl with water and therein threw the fish which began to
 struggle and wriggle about. Then he bore off the bowl upon his head
 and, repairing to the King's palace (even as the Ifrit had bidden him)
 laid the fish before the presence; and the King wondered with exceeding
 wonder at the sight, for never in his lifetime had he seen fishes like
 these in quality or in conformation. So he said, "Give those fish to
 the stranger slave-girl who now cooketh for us," meaning the
 bond-maiden whom the King of Roum had sent to him only three days
 before, so that he had not yet made trial of her talents in the
 dressing of meat. Thereupon the Wazir carried the fish to the cook and
 bade her fry them,[105] saying, "O damsel, the King sendeth this say to
 thee:—I have not treasured thee, O tear o' me! save for stress-time of
 me; approve, then, to us this day thy delicate handiwork and thy
 savoury cooking; for this dish of fish is a present sent to the Sultan
 and evidently a rarity." The Wazir, after he had carefully charged her,
 returned to the King, who commanded him to give the Fisherman four
 hundred dinars: he gave them accordingly, and the man took them to his
 bosom and ran off home stumbling and falling and rising again and
 deeming the whole thing to be a dream. However, he bought for his
 family all they wanted and lastly he went to his wife in huge joy and
 gladness. So far concerning him; but as regards the cookmaid, she took
 the fish and cleansed them and set them in the frying-pan, basting them
 with oil till one side was dressed. Then she turned them over and,
 behold, the kitchen wall clave asunder, and therefrom came a young
 lady, fair of form, oval of face, perfect in grace, with eyelids which
 Kohl-lines enchase.[106] Her dress was a silken head-kerchief fringed
 and tasseled with blue: a large ring hung from either ear; a pair of
 bracelets adorned her wrists; rings with bezels of priceless gems were
 on her fingers; and she hent in hand a long rod of rattan-cane which
 she thrust into the frying-pan, saying, "O fish! O fish! be ye constant
 to your covenant?" When the cook-maiden saw this apparition she swooned
 away. The young lady repeated her words a second time and a third time,
 and at last the fishes raised their heads from the pan, and saying in
 articulate speech "Yes! Yes!" began with one voice to recite:—

 Come back and so will I! Keep faith and so will I! ✿ And if ye fain
    forsake, I'll requite till quits we cry!

 After this the young lady upset the frying-pan and went forth by the
 way she came in and the kitchen wall closed upon her. When the
 cook-maiden recovered from her fainting-fit, she saw the four fishes
 charred black as charcoal, and crying out, "His staff brake in his
 first bout,"[107] she again fell swooning to the ground. Whilst she was
 in this case the Wazir came for the fish, and looking upon her as
 insensible she lay, not knowing Sunday from Thursday, shoved her with
 his foot and said, "Bring the fish for the Sultan!" Thereupon
 recovering from her fainting-fit she wept and informed him of her case
 and all that had befallen her. The Wazir marvelled greatly and
 exclaiming, "This is none other than a right strange matter!", he sent
 after the Fisherman and said to him, "Thou, O Fisherman, must needs
 fetch us four fishes like those thou broughtest before." Thereupon the
 man repaired to the tarn and cast his net; and when he landed it, lo!
 four fishes were therein exactly like the first. These he at once
 carried to the Wazir, who went in with them to the cook-maiden and
 said, "Up with thee and fry these in my presence, that I may see this
 business." The damsel arose and cleansed the fish, and set them in the
 frying-pan over the fire; however they remained there but a little
 while ere the wall clave asunder and the young lady appeared, clad as
 before and holding in hand the wand which she again thrust into the
 frying-pan, saying, "O fish! O fish! be ye constant to your olden
 covenant?" And behold, the fish lifted their heads, and repeated "Yes!
 Yes!" and recited this couplet:

 Come back and so will I! Keep faith and so will I! ✿ But if ye fain
    forsake, I'll requite till quits we cry!

 And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted
 say.

                   Now when it was the Seventh Night,

 She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
 fishes spoke, and the young lady upset the frying-pan with her rod, and
 went forth by the way she came and the wall closed up, the Wazir cried
 out, "This is a thing not to be hidden from the King," So he went and
 told him what had happened, whereupon quoth the King, "There is no help
 for it but that I see this with mine own eyes." Then he sent for the
 Fisherman and commanded him to bring four other fish like the first and
 to take with him three men as witnesses. The Fisherman at once brought
 the fish: and the King, after ordering them to give him four hundred
 gold pieces, turned to the Wazir and said, "Up and fry me the fishes
 here before me!" The Minister, replying "To hear is to obey," bade
 bring the frying-pan, threw therein the cleansed fish and set it over
 the fire; when lo! the wall clave asunder, and out burst a black slave
 like a huge rock or a remnant of the tribe Ad[108] bearing in hand a
 branch of a green tree; and he cried in loud and terrible tones, "O
 fish! O fish! be ye all constant to your antique covenant?" whereupon
 the fishes lifted their heads from the frying-pan and said, "Yes! Yes!
 we be true to our vow;" and they again recited the couplet:

 Come back and so will I! Keep faith and so will I! ✿ But if ye fain
    forsake, I'll requite till quits we cry!

 Then the huge blackamoor approached the frying-pan and upset it with
 the branch and went forth by the way he came in. When he vanished from
 their sight the King inspected the fish; and, finding them all charred
 black as charcoal, was utterly bewildered and said to the Wazir,
 "Verily this is a matter whereanent silence cannot be kept, and as for
 the fishes, assuredly some marvellous adventure connects with them." So
 he bade bring the Fisherman and asked him, saying "Fie on thee, fellow!
 whence come these fishes?" and he answered, "From a tarn between four
 heights lying behind this mountain which is in sight of thy city."
 Quoth the King, "How many days' march?" Quoth he, "O our lord the
 Sultan, a walk of half hour." The King wondered and, straightway
 ordering his men to march and horsemen to mount, led off the Fisherman
 who went before as guide, privily damning the Ifrit. They fared on till
 they had climbed the mountain and descended unto a great desert which
 they had never seen during all their lives; and the Sultan and his
 merry men marvelled much at the wold set in the midst of four
 mountains, and the tarn and its fishes of four colours, red and white,
 yellow and blue. The King stood fixed to the spot in wonderment and
 asked his troops and all present, "Hath any one among you ever seen
 this piece of water before now?" and all made answer, "O King of the
 age, never did we set eyes upon it during all our days." They also
 questioned the oldest inhabitants they met, men well stricken in years,
 but they replied, each and every, "A lakelet like this we never saw in
 this place." Thereupon quoth the King, "By Allah I will neither return
 to my capital nor sit upon the throne of my forbears till I learn the
 truth about this tarn and the fish therein." He then ordered his men to
 dismount and bivouac all around the mountain; which they did; and
 summoning his Wazir, a Minister of much experience, sagacious, of
 penetrating wit and well versed in affairs, said to him, "'Tis in my
 mind to do a certain thing, whereof I will inform thee; my heart
 telleth me to fare forth alone this night and root out the mystery of
 this tarn and its fishes. Do thou take thy seat at my tent-door, and
 say to the Emirs and Wazirs, the Nabobs and the Chamberlains, in fine
 to all who ask thee:—The Sultan is ill at ease, and he hath ordered me
 to refuse all admittance;[109] and be careful thou let none know my
 design." And the Wazir could not oppose him. Then the King changed his
 dress and ornaments and, slinging his sword over his shoulder, took a
 path which led up one of the mountains and marched for the rest of the
 night till morning dawned; nor did he cease wayfaring till the heat was
 too much for him. After his long walk he rested for a while, and then
 resumed his march and fared on through the second night till dawn, when
 suddenly there appeared a black point in the far distance. Hereat he
 rejoiced and said to himself, "Haply some one here shall acquaint me
 with the mystery of the tarn and its fishes." Presently, drawing near
 the dark object he found it a palace built of swart stone plated with
 iron; and, while one leaf of the gate stood wide open, the other was
 shut. The King's spirits rose high as he stood before the gate and
 rapped a light rap; but hearing no answer he knocked a second knock and
 a third; yet there came no sign. Then he knocked his loudest but still
 no answer, so he said, "Doubtless 'tis empty." Thereupon he mustered up
 resolution, and boldly walked through the main gate into the great hall
 and there cried out aloud, "Holla, ye people of the palace! I am a
 stranger and a wayfarer; have you aught here of victual?" He repeated
 his cry a second time and a third but still there came no reply; so
 strengthening his heart and making up his mind he stalked through the
 vestibule into the very middle of the palace and found no man in it.
 Yet it was furnished with silken stuffs gold-starred; and the hangings
 were let down over the door-ways. In the midst was a spacious court off
 which set four open saloons each with its raised daïs, saloon, facing
 saloon; a canopy shaded the court and in the centre was a jetting fount
 with four figures of lions made of red gold, spouting from their mouths
 water clear as pearls and diaphanous gems. Round about the palace birds
 were let loose and over it stretched a net of golden wire, hindering
 them from flying off; in brief there was everything but human beings.
 The King marvelled mightily thereat, yet felt he sad at heart for that
 he saw no one to give him an account of the waste and its tarn, the
 fishes, the mountains and the palace itself. Presently as he sat
 between the doors in deep thought behold, there came a voice of lament,
 as from a heart grief-spent and he heard the voice chanting these
 verses:—

 I hid what I endured of him[110] and yet it came to light, ✿ And
    nightly sleep mine eyelids fled and changed to sleepless night:
 Oh world! Oh Fate! withhold thy hand and cease thy hurt and harm ✿ Look
    and behold my hapless sprite in dolour and affright:
 Wilt ne'er show ruth to highborn youth who lost him on the way ✿ Of
    Love, and fell from wealth and fame to lowest basest wight.
 Jealous of Zephyr's breath was I as on your form he breathed ✿ But
    whenas Destiny descends she blindeth human sight,[111]
 What shall the hapless archer do who when he fronts his foe ✿ And bends
    his bow to shoot the shaft shall find his string undight?
 When cark and care so heavy bear on youth[112] of generous soul ✿ How
    shall he 'scape his lot and where from Fate his place of flight?

 Now when the Sultan heard the mournful voice he sprang to his feet;
 and, following the sound, found a curtain let down over a chamber-door.
 He raised it and saw behind it a young man sitting upon a couch about a
 cubit above the ground; and he fair to the sight, a well shaped wight,
 with eloquence dight; his forehead was flower-white, his cheek rosy
 bright, and a mole on his cheek-breadth like an ambergris-mite; even as
 the poet doth indite:—

 A youth slim-waisted from whose locks and brow ✿ The world in blackness
    and in light is set.
 Throughout Creation's round no fairer show ✿ No rarer sight thine eye
    hath ever met:
 A nut-brown mole sits throned upon a cheek ✿ Of rosiest red beneath an
    eye of jet.[113]

 The King rejoiced and saluted him, but he remained sitting in his
 caftan of silken stuff purfled with Egyptian gold and his crown studded
 with gems of sorts; but his face was sad with the traces of sorrow. He
 returned the royal salute in most courteous wise adding, "O my lord,
 thy dignity demandeth my rising to thee; and my sole excuse is to crave
 thy pardon."[114] Quoth the King, "Thou art excused, O youth; so look
 upon me as thy guest come hither on an especial object. I would thou
 acquaint me with the secrets of this tarn and its fishes and of this
 palace and thy loneliness therein and the cause of thy groaning and
 wailing." When the young man heard these words he wept with sore
 weeping;[115] till his bosom was drenched with tears and began
 reciting:—

 Say him who careless sleeps what while the shaft of Fortune flies ✿ How
    many doth this shifting world lay low and raise to rise?
 Although thine eye be sealed in sleep, sleep not th' Almighty's eyes ✿
    And who hath found Time ever fair, or Fate in constant guise?

 Then he sighed a long-fetched sigh and recited:—

 Confide thy case to Him, the Lord who made mankind; ✿ Quit cark and
    care and cultivate content of mind;
 Ask not the Past or how or why it came to pass: ✿ All human things by
    Fate and Destiny were designed!

 The King marvelled and asked him, "What maketh thee weep, O young man?"
 and he answered, "How should I not weep, when this is my case!"
 Thereupon he put out his hand and raised the skirt of his garment, when
 lo! the lower half of him appeared stone down to his feet while from
 his navel to the hair of his head he was man. The King, seeing this his
 plight, grieved with sore grief and of his compassion cried, "Alack and
 well-away! in very sooth, O youth, thou heapest sorrow upon my sorrow.
 I was minded to ask thee the mystery of the fishes only: whereas now I
 am concerned to learn thy story as well as theirs. But there is no
 Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the
 Great.[116] Lose no time, O youth, but tell me forthright thy whole
 tale." Quoth he, "Lend me thine ears, thy sight and thine insight;" and
 quoth the King, "All are at thy service!" Thereupon the youth began,
 "Right wondrous and marvellous is my case and that of these fishes; and
 were it graven with gravers upon the eye-corners it were a warner to
 whoso would be warned." "How is that?" asked the King, and the young
 man began to tell


                 _THE TALE OF THE ENSORCELLED PRINCE._

 Know then, O my lord, that whilome my sire was King of this city, and
 his name was Mahmúd, entitled Lord of the Black Islands, and owner of
 what are now these four mountains. He ruled threescore and ten years,
 after which he went to the mercy of the Lord and I reigned as Sultan in
 his stead. I took to wife my cousin, the daughter of my paternal
 uncle,[117] and she loved me with such abounding love that whenever I
 was absent she ate not and she drank not until she saw me again. She
 cohabited with me for five years till a certain day when she went forth
 to the Hammam bath; and I bade the cook hasten to get ready all
 requisites for our supper. And I entered this palace and lay down on
 the bed where I was wont to sleep and bade two damsels to fan my face,
 one sitting by my head and the other at my feet. But I was troubled and
 made restless by my wife's absence and could not sleep; for although my
 eyes were closed my mind and thoughts were wide awake. Presently I
 heard the slave-girl at my head say to her at my feet, "O Mas'údah, how
 miserable is our master and how wasted in his youth and oh! the pity of
 his being so betrayed by our mistress, the accursed whore!"[118] The
 other replied, "Yes indeed: Allah curse all faithless women and
 adulterous; but the like of our master, with his fair gifts, deserveth
 something better than this harlot who lieth abroad every night." Then
 quoth she who sat by my head, "Is our lord dumb or fit only for
 bubbling that he questioneth her not!" and quoth the other, "Fie on
 thee! doth our lord know her ways or doth she allow him his choice?
 Nay, more, doth she not drug every night the cup she giveth him to
 drink before sleep-time, and put Bhang[119] into it? So he sleepeth and
 wotteth not whither she goeth, nor what she doeth; but we know that,
 after giving him the drugged wine, she donneth her richest raiment and
 perfumeth herself and then she fareth out from him to be away till
 break of day; then she cometh to him, and burneth a pastile under his
 nose and he awaketh from his deathlike sleep." When I heard the
 slave-girls' words, the light became black before my sight and I
 thought night would never fall. Presently the daughter of my uncle came
 from the baths; and they set the table for us and we ate and sat
 together a fair half-hour quaffing our wine as was ever our wont. Then
 she called for the particular wine I used to drink before sleeping and
 reached me the cup; but, seeming to drink it according to my wont, I
 poured the contents into my bosom; and, lying down, let her hear that I
 was asleep. Then, behold, she cried, "Sleep out the night, and never
 wake again: by Allah, I loathe thee and I loathe thy whole body, and my
 soul turneth in disgust from cohabiting with thee; and I see not the
 moment when Allah shall snatch away thy life!" Then she rose and donned
 her fairest dress and perfumed her person and slung my sword over her
 shoulder; and, opening the gates of the palace, went her ill way. I
 rose and followed her as she left the palace and she threaded the
 streets until she came to the city gate, where she spoke words I
 understood not, and the padlocks dropped of themselves as if broken and
 the gate-leaves opened. She went forth (and I after her without her
 noticing aught) till she came at last to the outlying mounds[120] and a
 reed fence built about a round-roofed hut of mud-bricks. As she entered
 the door, I climbed upon the roof which commanded a view of the
 interior. And lo! my fair cousin had gone in to a hideous negro slave
 with his upper lip like the cover of a pot, and his lower like an open
 pot; lips which might sweep up sand from the gravel-floor of the cot.
 He was to boot a leper and a paralytic, lying upon a strew of
 sugar-cane trash and wrapped, in an old blanket and the foulest rags
 and tatters. She kissed the earth before him, and he raised his head so
 as to see her and said, "Woe to thee! what call hadst thou to stay away
 all this time? Here have been with me sundry of the black brethren, who
 drank their wine and each had his young lady, and I was not content to
 drink because of thine absence." Then she, "O my lord, my heart's love
 and coolth of my eyes,[121] knowest thou not that I am married to my
 cousin whose very look I loathe, and hate myself when in his company?
 And did not I fear for thy sake, I would not let a single sun arise
 before making his city a ruined heap wherein raven should croak and
 howlet hoot, and jackal and wolf harbour and loot; nay I had removed
 its very stones to the back side of Mount Káf."[122] Rejoined the
 slave, "Thou liest, damn thee! Now I swear an oath by the valour and
 honour of blackamoor men (and deem not our manliness to be the poor
 manliness of white men), from to-day forth if thou stay away till this
 hour, I will not keep company with thee nor will I glue my body with
 thy body and strum and belly-bump. Dost play fast and loose with us,
 thou cracked pot, that we may satisfy thy dirty lusts? stinkard! bitch!
 vilest of the vile whites!" When I heard his words, and saw with my own
 eyes what passed between these two wretches, the world waxed dark
 before my face and my soul knew not in what place it was. But my wife
 humbly stood up weeping before and wheedling the slave, and saying, "O
 my beloved, and very fruit of my heart, there is none left to cheer me
 but thy dear self; and, if thou cast me off who shall take me in, O my
 beloved, O light of my eyes?" And she ceased not weeping and abasing
 herself to him until he deigned be reconciled with her. Then was she
 right glad and stood up and doffed her clothes, even to her
 petticoat-trousers, and said, "O my master what hast thou here for thy
 handmaiden to eat?" "Uncover the basin," he grumbled, "and thou shalt
 find at the bottom the broiled bones of some rats we dined on; pick at
 them, and then go to that slop-pot where thou shalt find some leavings
 of beer[123] which thou mayest drink." So she ate and drank and washed
 her hands, and went and lay down by the side of the slave, upon the
 cane-trash and, stripping herself stark naked, she crept in with him
 under his foul coverlet and his rags and tatters. When I saw my wife,
 my cousin, the daughter of my uncle, do this deed[124] "I clean lost my
 wits, and climbing down from the roof, I entered and took the sword
 which she had with her and drew it, determined to cut down the twain. I
 first struck at the slave's neck and thought that the death decree had
 fallen on him:"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
 say her permitted say.

[Illustration]

                    Now when it was the Eighth Night,

 She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
 ensorcelled Prince said to the King, "When I smote the slave with
 intent to strike off his head, I thought that I had slain him; for he
 groaned a loud hissing groan, but I had cut only the skin and flesh of
 the gullet and the two arteries! It awoke the daughter of my uncle, so
 I sheathed the sword and fared forth for the city; and, entering the
 palace, lay upon my bed and slept till morning when my wife aroused me
 and I saw that she had cut off her hair and had donned mourning
 garments. Quoth she:—O son of my uncle, blame me not for what I do; it
 hath just reached me that my mother is dead, and my father hath been
 killed in holy war, and of my brothers one hath lost his life by a
 snake-sting and the other by falling down some precipice; and I can and
 should do naught save weep and lament. When I heard her words I
 refrained from all reproach and said only:—Do as thou list; I certainly
 will not thwart thee. She continued sorrowing, weeping and wailing one
 whole year from the beginning of its circle to the end, and when it was
 finished she said to me:—I wish to build me in thy palace a tomb with a
 cupola, which I will set apart for my mourning and will name the House
 of Lamentations."[125] Quoth I again:—Do as thou list! Then she builded
 for herself a cenotaph wherein to mourn, and set on its centre a dome
 under which showed a tomb like a Santon's sepulchre. Thither she
 carried the slave and lodged him; but he was exceeding weak by reason
 of his wound, and unable to do her love-service; he could only drink
 wine and from the day of his hurt he spake not a word, yet he lived on
 because his appointed hour[126] was not come. Every day, morning and
 evening, my wife went to him and wept and wailed over him and gave him
 wine and strong soups, and left not off doing after this manner a
 second year; and I bore with her patiently and paid no heed to her. One
 day, however, I went in to her unawares; and I found her weeping and
 beating her face and crying:—Why art thou absent from my sight, O my
 heart's delight? Speak to me, O my life; talk with me, O my love? Then
 she recited these verses:—

 For your love my patience fails and albeit you forget ✿ I may not; nor
    to other love my heart can make reply:
 Bear my body, bear my soul wheresoever you may fare ✿ And where you
    pitch the camp let my body buried lie:
 Cry my name above my grave, and an answer shall return ✿ The moaning of
    my bones responsive to your cry.[127]

 Then she recited, weeping bitterly the while:—

 The day of my delight is the day when draw you near ✿ And the day of
    mine affright is the day you turn away:
 Though I tremble through the night in my bitter dread of death ✿ When I
    hold you in my arms I am free from all affray.

 Once more she began reciting:—

 Though a-morn I may awake with all happiness in hand ✿ Though the world
    all be mine and like Kisra-kings[128] I reign;
 To me they had the worth of the winglet of the gnat ✿ When I fail to
    see thy form, when I look for thee in vain.

 When she had ended for a time her words and her weeping I said to
 her:—O my cousin, let this thy mourning suffice, for in pouring forth
 tears there is little profit! Thwart me not, answered she, in aught I
 do, or I will lay violent hands on myself! So I held my peace and left
 her to go her own way; and she ceased not to cry and keen and indulge
 her affliction for yet another year. At the end of the third year I
 waxed aweary of this longsome mourning, and one day I happened to enter
 the cenotaph when vexed and angry with some matter which had thwarted
 me, and suddenly I heard her say:—O my lord, I never hear thee
 vouchsafe a single word to me! Why dost thou not answer me, O my
 master? and she began reciting:—

 O thou tomb! O thou tomb! be his beauty set in shade ✿ Hast thou
    darkened that countenance all-sheeny as the noon?
 O thou tomb! neither earth nor yet heaven art to me ✿ Then how cometh
    it in thee are conjoined my sun and moon?

 When I heard such verses as these rage was heaped upon my rage; I cried
 out:—Well-away! how long is this sorrow to last? and I began
 repeating:—

 O thou tomb! O thou tomb! be his horrors set in blight? ✿ Hast thou
    darkenèd his countenance that sickeneth the soul?
 O thou tomb! neither cess-pool nor pipkin art to me ✿ Then how cometh
    it in thee are conjoinèd soil and coal?

 When she heard my words she sprang to her feet crying:—Fie upon thee,
 thou cur! all this is of thy doings; thou hast wounded my heart's
 darling and thereby worked me sore woe and thou hast wasted his youth
 so that these three years he hath lain abed more dead than alive! In my
 wrath I cried:—O thou foulest of harlots and filthiest of whores ever
 futtered by negro slaves who are hired to have at thee![129] Yes indeed
 it was I who did this good deed; and snatching up my sword I drew it
 and made at her to cut her down. But she laughed my words and mine
 intent to scorn crying: To heel, hound that thou art! Alas[130] for the
 past which shall no more come to pass nor shall any one avail the dead
 to raise. Allah hath indeed now given into my hand him who did to me
 this thing, a deed that hath burned my heart with a fire which died not
 and a flame which might not be quenched! Then she stood up; and,
 pronouncing some words to me unintelligible, she said:—By virtue of my
 egromancy become thou half stone and half man; whereupon I became what
 thou seest, unable to rise or to sit, and neither dead nor alive.
 Moreover she ensorcelled the city with all its streets and garths, and
 she turned by her gramarye the four islands into four mountains around
 the tarn whereof thou questionest me; and the citizens, who were of
 four different faiths, Moslem, Nazarene, Jew and Magian, she
 transformed by her enchantments into fishes; the Moslems are the white,
 the Magians red, the Christians blue and the Jews yellow.[131] "And
 every day she tortureth me and scourgeth me with an hundred stripes,
 each of which draweth floods of blood and cutteth the skin of my
 shoulders to strips; and lastly she clotheth my upper half with a
 hair-cloth and then throweth over them these robes." Hereupon the young
 man again shed tears and began reciting:—

 In patience, O my God, I endure my lot and fate; ✿ I will bear at will
    of Thee whatsoever be my state:
 They oppress me; they torture me; they make my life a woe ✿ Yet haply
    Heaven's happiness shall compensate my strait:
 Yea, straitened is my life by the bane and hate o' foes ✿ But Mustapha
    and Murtazá[132] shall ope me Heaven's gate.

 After this the Sultan turned towards the young Prince and said, "O
 youth, thou hast removed one grief only to add another grief; but now,
 O my friend, where is she; and where is the mausoleum wherein lieth the
 wounded slave?" "The slave lieth under yon dome," quoth the young man,
 "and she sitteth in the chamber fronting yonder door. And every day at
 sunrise she cometh forth, and first strippeth me, and whippeth me with
 an hundred strokes of the leathern scourge, and I weep and shriek; but
 there is no power of motion in my lower limbs to keep her off me. After
 ending her tormenting me she visiteth the slave, bringing him wine and
 boiled meats. And to-morrow at an early hour she will be here." Quoth
 the King, "By Allah, O youth, I will assuredly do thee a good deed
 which the world shall not willingly let die, and an act of derring-do
 which shall be chronicled long after I am dead and gone by." Then the
 King sat him by the side of the young Prince and talked till nightfall,
 when he lay down and slept; but, as soon as the false dawn[133] showed,
 he arose and doffing his outer garments[134] bared his blade and
 hastened to the place wherein lay the slave. Then was he ware of
 lighted candles and lamps, and the perfume of incenses and unguents;
 and, directed by these, he made for the slave and struck him one stroke
 killing him on the spot: after which he lifted him on his back and
 threw him into a well that was in the palace. Presently he returned
 and, donning the slave's gear, lay down at length within the mausoleum
 with the drawn sword laid close to and along his side. After an hour or
 so the accursed witch came; and, first going to her husband, she
 stripped off his clothes and, taking a whip, flogged him cruelly while
 he cried out, "Ah! enough for me the case I am in! take pity on me, O
 my cousin!" But she replied, "Didst thou take pity on me and spare the
 life of my true love on whom I doated?" Then she drew the cilice over
 his raw and bleeding skin and threw the robe upon all and went down to
 the slave with a goblet of wine and a bowl of meat-broth in her hands.
 She entered under the dome weeping and wailing, "Well-away!" and
 crying, "O my lord! speak a word to me! O my master! talk awhile with
 me!" and began to recite these couplets:—

 How long this harshness, this unlove, shall bide? ✿ Suffice thee not
    tear-floods thou hast espied?
 Thou dost prolong our parting purposely ✿ And if wouldst please my foe,
    thou'rt satisfied!

 Then she wept again and said, "O my lord! speak to me, talk with me!"
 The King lowered his voice and, twisting his tongue, spoke after the
 fashion of the blackamoors and said "'lack! 'lack! there be no Ma'esty
 and there be no Might save in Allauh, the Gloriose, the Greät!" Now
 when she heard these words she shouted for joy, and fell to the ground
 fainting; and when her senses returned she asked, "O my lord, can it be
 true that thou hast power of speech?" and the King making his voice
 small and faint answered, "O my cuss! dost thou deserve that I talk to
 thee and speak with thee?" "Why and wherefore?" rejoined she; and he
 replied "The why is that all the livelong day thou tormentest thy
 hubby; and he keeps calling on 'eaven for aid until sleep is strange to
 me even from evenin' till mawnin', and he prays and damns, cussing us
 two, me and thee, causing me disquiet and much bother: were this not
 so, I should long ago have got my health; and it is this which prevents
 my answering thee." Quoth she, "With thy leave I will release him from
 what spell is on him;" and quoth the King, "Release him and let's have
 some rest!" She cried, "To hear is to obey;" and, going from the
 cenotaph to the palace, she took a metal bowl and filled it with water
 and spake over it certain words which made the contents bubble and boil
 as a cauldron seetheth over the fire. With this she sprinkled her
 husband saying, "By virtue of the dread words I have spoken, if thou
 becamest thus by my spells, come forth out of that form into thine own
 former form." And lo and behold! the young man shook and trembled; then
 he rose to his feet and, rejoicing at his deliverance, cried aloud, "I
 testify that there is no god but _the_ God, and in very truth Mohammed
 is His Apostle, whom Allah bless and keep!" Then she said to him, "Go
 forth and return not hither, for if thou do I will surely slay thee;"
 screaming these words in his face. So he went from between her hands;
 and she returned to the dome and, going down to the sepulchre, she
 said, "O my lord, come forth to me that I may look upon thee and thy
 goodliness!" The King replied in faint low words, "What[135] thing hast
 thou done? Thou hast rid me of the branch but not of the root." She
 asked, "O my darling! O my negroling! what is the root?" And he
 answered, "Fie on thee, O my cuss! The people of this city and of the
 four islands every night when it's half passed lift their heads from
 the tank in which thou hast turned them to fishes and cry to Heaven and
 call down its anger on me and thee; and this is the reason why my
 body's baulked from health. Go at once and set them free; then come to
 me and take my hand, and raise me up, for a little strength is already
 back in me." When she heard the King's words (and she still supposed
 him to be the slave) she cried joyously, "O my master, on my head and
 on my eyes be thy command, Bismillah[136]!" So she sprang to her feet
 and, full of joy and gladness, ran down to the tarn and look a little
 of its water In the palm of her hand—And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
 of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

                    Now when it was the Ninth Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the young
 woman, the sorceress, took in hand some of the tarn-water and spake
 over it words not to be understood, the fishes lifted their heads and
 stood up on the instant like men, the spell on the people of the city
 having been removed. What was the lake again became a crowded capital;
 the bazars were thronged with folk who bought and sold; each citizen
 was occupied with his own calling and the four hills became islands as
 they were whilome. Then the young woman, that wicked sorceress,
 returned to the King and (still thinking he was the negro) said to him,
 "O my love! stretch forth thy honoured hand that I may assist thee to
 rise." "Nearer to me," quoth the King in a faint and feigned tone. She
 came close as to embrace him when he took up the sword lying hid by his
 side and smote her across the breast, so that the point showed gleaming
 behind her back. Then he smote her a second time and cut her in twain
 and cast her to the ground in two halves. After which he fared forth
 and found the young man, now freed from the spell, awaiting him and
 gave him joy of his happy release while the Prince kissed his hand with
 abundant thanks. Quoth the King, "Wilt thou abide in this city or go
 with me to my capital?" Quoth the youth, "O King of the age, wottest
 thou not what journey is between thee and thy city?" "Two days and a
 half," answered he; whereupon said the other, "An thou be sleeping, O
 King, awake! Between thee and thy city is a year's march for a
 well-girt walker, and thou haddest not come hither in two days and a
 half save that the city was under enchantment. And I, O King, will
 never part from thee; no, not even for the twinkling of an eye." The
 King rejoiced at his words and said, "Thanks be to Allah who hath
 bestowed thee upon me! From this hour thou art my son and my only son,
 for that in all my life I have never been blessed with issue."
 Thereupon they embraced and joyed with exceeding great joy; and,
 reaching the palace, the Prince who had been spell-bound informed his
 lords and his grandees that he was about to visit the Holy Places as a
 pilgrim, and bade them get ready all things necessary for the occasion.
 The preparations lasted ten days, after which he set out with the
 Sultan, whose heart burned in yearning for his city whence he had been
 absent a whole twelvemonth. They journeyed with an escort of
 Mamelukes[137] carrying all manners of precious gifts and rarities, nor
 stinted they wayfaring day and night for a full year until they
 approached the Sultan's capital, and sent on messengers to announce
 their coming. Then the Wazir and the whole army came out to meet him in
 joy and gladness, for they had given up all hope of ever seeing their
 King; and the troops kissed the ground before him and wished him joy of
 his safety. He entered and took seat upon his throne and the Minister
 came before him and, when acquainted with all that had befallen the
 young Prince, he congratulated him on his narrow escape. When order was
 restored throughout the land the King gave largesse to many of his
 people, and said to the Wazir, "Hither the Fisherman who brought us the
 fishes!" So he sent for the man who had been the first cause of the
 city and the citizens being delivered from enchantment and, when he
 came into the presence, the Sultan bestowed upon him a dress of honour,
 and questioned him of his condition and whether he had children. The
 Fisherman gave him to know that he had two daughters and a son, so the
 King sent for them and, taking one daughter to wife, gave the other to
 the young Prince and made the son his head-treasurer. Furthermore he
 invested his Wazir with the Sultanate of the City in the Black Islands
 whilome belonging to the young Prince, and dispatched with him the
 escort of fifty armed slaves together with dresses of honour for all
 the Emirs and Grandees. The Wazir kissed hands and fared forth on his
 way; while the Sultan and the Prince abode at home in all the solace
 and the delight of life; and the Fisherman became the richest man of
 his age, and his daughters wived with the Kings, until death came to
 them. And yet, O King! this is not more wondrous than the story of

-----

Footnote 60:

   Here, as in other places, I have not preserved the monorhyme, but
   have ended like the English sonnet with a couplet; as a rule the last
   two lines contain a "Husn makta'" or climax.

Footnote 61:

   Lit. "he began to say (or speak) poetry," such improvising being
   still common amongst the Badawin as I shall afterwards note. And
   although Mohammed severely censured profane poets, who "rove as
   bereft of their senses through every valley" and were directly
   inspired by devils (Koran xxvi.), it is not a little curious to note
   that he himself spoke in "Rajaz" (which see) and that the four first
   Caliphs all "spoke poetry." In early ages the verse would not be
   written, if written at all, till after the maker's death. I translate
   "inshád" by "versifying" or "repeating" or "reciting," leaving it
   doubtful if the composition be or be not original. In places,
   however, it is clearly improvised and then as a rule it is model
   doggrel.

Footnote 62:

   Arab. "Allahumma"=Yá Allah (O Allah) but with emphasis; the Fath
   being a substitute for the voc. part. Some connect it with the Heb.
   "Alihím," but that fancy is not Arab. In Al-Hariri and the
   rhetoricians it sometimes means to be sure; of course; unless indeed;
   unless possibly=Greek νὴ δἰα.

Footnote 63:

   Probably in consequence of a vow. These superstitious practices,
   which have many a parallel amongst ourselves, are not confined to the
   lower orders in the East.

Footnote 64:

   _i.e._, saying "Bismillah!" the pious ejaculation which should
   precede every act. In Boccaccio (viii., 9) it is "remembering Iddio
   e' Santí."

Footnote 65:

   Arab. Nahás asfar=brass, opposed to "Nahás" and "Nahás
   ahmar,"=copper.

Footnote 66:

   This alludes to the legend of Sakhr al-Jinni, a famous fiend cast by
   Solomon David-son into Lake Tiberias whose storms make it a suitable
   place. Hence the "Bottle imp," a world-wide fiction of folk-lore: we
   shall find it in the "Book of Sindibad," and I need hardly remind the
   reader of Le Sage's "Diable Boiteux," borrowed from "El Diablo
   Cojuelo," the Spanish novel by Luiz Velez de Guevara.

Footnote 67:

   Márid (lit. "contumacious" from the Heb. root Marad to rebel, whence
   "Nimrod" in late Semitic) is one of the tribes of the Jinn, generally
   but not always hostile to man. His female is "Máridah."

Footnote 68:

   As Solomon began to reign (according to vulgar chronometry) in B.C.
   1015, the text would place the tale circ. A.D. 785,=A.H. 169. But we
   can lay no stress on this date which may be merely fanciful.
   Professor Tawney very justly compares this Moslem Solomon with the
   Hindu King, Vikramáditya, who ruled over the seven divisions of the
   world and who had as many devils to serve him as he wanted.

Footnote 69:

   Arab. "Yá Ba'íd" a euphemism here adopted to prevent using grossly
   abusive language. Others will occur in the course of these pages.

Footnote 70:

   _i.e._ about to fly out; "My heart is in my mouth." The Fisherman
   speaks with the dry humour of a Fellah.

Footnote 71:

   "Sulayman," when going out to ease himself, entrusted his seal-ring
   upon which his kingdom depended to a concubine "Amínah" (the
   "Faithful"), when Sakhr, transformed to the King's likeness, came in
   and took it. The prophet was reduced to beggary, but after forty days
   the demon fled throwing into the sea the ring which was swallowed by
   a fish and eventually returned to Sulayman. This Talmudic fable is
   hinted at in the Koran (chapt. xxxviii.), and commentators have
   extensively embroidered it. Asaf, son of Barkhiya, was Wazir to
   Sulayman and is supposed to be the "one with whom was the knowledge
   of the Scriptures" (Koran, chapt. xxxvii.), _i.e._ who knew the
   Ineffable Name of Allah. See the manifest descendant of the
   Talmudic-Koranic fiction in the "Tale of the Emperor Jovinian" (No.
   lix.) of the Gesta Romanorum, the most popular book of mediæval
   Europe composed in England (or Germany) about the end of the
   thirteenth century.

Footnote 72:

   Arab. "Kumkum," a gourd-shaped bottle, of metal, china or glass,
   still used for sprinkling scents. Lane gives an illustration (chapt.
   viii., Mod. Egypt.).

Footnote 73:

   Arab. meaning "the Mother of Amir," a nickname for the hyena, which
   bites the hand that feeds it.

Footnote 74:

   The intellect of man is stronger than that of the Jinni; the Ifrit,
   however, enters the jar because he has been adjured by the Most Great
   Name and not from mere stupidity. The seal-ring of Solomon according
   to the Rabbis contained a chased stone which told him everything he
   wanted to know.

Footnote 75:

   The Mesmerist will notice this shudder which is familiar to him as
   preceding the "magnetic" trance.

Footnote 76:

   Arab. "Bahr" which means a sea, a large river, a sheet of water,
   etc., lit. water cut or trenched in the earth. Bahri in Egypt means
   Northern; so Yamm (Sea, Mediterranean) in Hebrew is West.

Footnote 77:

   In the Bul. Edit. "Ruyán," evidently a clerical error. The name is
   fanciful not significant.

Footnote 78:

   The geography is ultra-Shakspearean. "Fars" (whence "Persia") is the
   central Province of the grand old Empire now a mere wreck; "Rúm"
   (which I write Roum, in order to avoid Jamaica) is the neo-Roman or
   Byzantine Empire; while "Yunan" is the classical Arab term for Greece
   (Ionia) which unlearned Moslems believe to be now under water.

Footnote 79:

   The Sun greets Mohammed every morning even as it dances on Easter-Day
   for Christendom. Risum teneatis?

Footnote 80:

   Arab. "Nadím," a term often occurring. It denotes one who was
   intimate enough to drink with the Caliph, a very high honour and a
   dangerous. The last who sat with "Nudamá" was Al-Razi bi'llah A.H.
   329=940. See Al-Siyuti's famous "History of the Caliphs" translated
   and admirably annotated by Major H. S. Jarrett, for the Bibliotheca
   Indica, Calcutta, 1880.

Footnote 81:

   Arab. Maydán (from Persian); Lane generally translates it
   "horse-course," and Payne "tilting-yard." It is both and something
   more; an open space, in or near the city, used for reviewing troops,
   races, playing the Jeríd (cane-spear) and other sports and exercises:
   thus Al-Maydan=Gr. hippodrome. The game here alluded to is our
   "polo," or hockey on horseback, a favourite with the Persian Kings,
   as all old illustrations of the Shahnamah show. Maydan is also a
   natural plain for which copious Arabic has many terms; Fayhah or Sath
   (a plain generally), Khabt (a low lying plain), Bat'há (a low sandy
   flat), Mahattah (a plain fit for halting) and so forth. (Pilgrimage
   iii., 11.)

Footnote 82:

   For details concerning the "Ghusl" see Night xliv.

Footnote 83:

   A popular idiom and highly expressive, contrasting the upright
   bearing of the self-satisfied man with the slouch of the miserable
   and the skirt-trailing of the woman in grief. I do not see the
   necessity of such Latinisms as "dilated" or "expanded."

Footnote 84:

   All these highest signs of favour foreshow, in Eastern tales and in
   Eastern life, an approaching downfall of the heaviest; they are so
   great that they arouse general jealousy. Many of us have seen this at
   native courts.

Footnote 85:

   This phrase is contained in the word "ihdák"=encompassing, as the
   conjunctiva does the pupil.

Footnote 86:

   I have noted this formula, which is used even in conversation when
   about to relate some great unfact.

Footnote 87:

   We are obliged to English the word by "valley," which is about as
   correct as the "brook Kedron," applied to the grisliest of ravines.
   The Wady (in old Coptic wah, oah, whence "Oasis") is the bed of a
   watercourse which flows only after rains. I have rendered it by
   "Fiumara" (Pilgrimage i., 5, and ii., 196, etc.), an Italian or
   rather a Sicilian word which exactly describes the "wady."

Footnote 88:

   I have described this scene which Mr. T. Wolf illustrated by an
   excellent lithograph in "Falconry, etc." (London, Van Voorst,
   MDCCCLII.).

Footnote 89:

   Arab. "Kaylúlah," midday sleep; called siesta from the sixth
   canonical hour.

Footnote 90:

   This parrot-story is world-wide in folk-lore and the belief in
   metempsychosis, which prevails more or less over all the East, there
   lends it probability. The "Book of Sindibad" (see Night dlxxix. and
   "The Academy," Sept. 20, 1884, No. 646) converts it into the "Story
   of the Confectioner, his Wife and the Parrot;" and it is the base of
   the Hindostani text-book, "Tota-Kaháni" (Parrot-chat), an abridgement
   of the Tutinámah (Parrot-book) of Nakhshabi (circ. A.D. 1300), a
   congener of the Sanskrit "Suka Saptati," or Seventy Parrot-stories.
   The tale is not in the Bul. or Mac. Edit. but occurs in the Bresl.
   (i., pp. 90, 91) much mutilated; and better in the Calc. Edit. I
   cannot here refrain from noticing how vilely the twelve vols. of the
   Breslau Edit. have been edited; even a table of contents being absent
   from the first four volumes.

Footnote 91:

   The young "Turk" is probably a late addition, as it does not appear
   in many of the MSS., _e.g._ the Bresl. Edit. The wife usually spreads
   a cloth over the cage; this in the Turkish translation becomes a
   piece of leather.

Footnote 92:

   The Hebrew-Syrian month July used to express the height of summer. As
   Herodotus tells us (ii. 4) the Egyptians claimed to be the
   discoverers of the solar year and the portioners of its course into
   twelve parts.

Footnote 93:

   This proceeding is thoroughly characteristic of the servile class;
   they conscientiously conceal everything from the master till he finds
   a clew; after which they tell him everything and something more.

Footnote 94:

   Until late years, merchants and shopkeepers in the nearer East all
   carried swords, and held it a disgrace to leave the house unarmed.

Footnote 95:

   The Bresl. Edit. absurdly has Jazírah (an island).

Footnote 96:

   The Ghúlah (fem. of Ghúl) is the Heb. Lilith or Lilis; the classical
   Lamia; the Hindu Yogini and Dakini; the Chaldean Utug and Gigim
   (desert-demons) as opposed to the Mas (hill-demon) and Telal (who
   steal into towns); the Ogress of our tales and the Bala yaga
   (Granny-witch) of Russian folk-lore. Etymologically "Ghul" is a
   calamity, a panic fear; and the monster is evidently the embodied
   horror of the grave and the grave-yard.

Footnote 97:

   Arab. "Shább" (Lat. juvenis) between puberty and forty or according
   to some fifty; when the patient becomes a "Rajul ikhtiyár" (man of
   free will) politely termed, and then a Shaykh or Shaybah (grey-beard,
   oldster).

Footnote 98:

   Some proverbial name now forgotten. Torrens (p. 48) translates it
   "the giglot" (Fortune?) but "cannot discover the drift."

Footnote 99:

   Arab. "Ihtizáz," that natural and instinctive movement caused by good
   news suddenly given, etc.

Footnote 100:

   Arab "Kohl," in India, Surmah, not a "collyrium," but powdered
   antimony for the eyelids. That sold in the bazars is not the real
   grey ore of antimony but a galena or sulphuret of lead. Its use arose
   as follows. When Allah showed Himself to Moses on Sinai through an
   opening the size of a needle, the Prophet fainted and the Mount took
   fire: thereupon Allah said, "Henceforth shalt thou and thy seed grind
   the earth of this mountain and apply it to your eyes!" The powder is
   kept in an étui called Makhalah and applied with a thick blunt needle
   to the inside of the eyelid, drawing it along the rim; hence etui and
   probe denote the sexual _rem in re_ and in cases of adultery the
   question will be asked, "Didst thou see the needle in the Kohl-pot?"
   Women mostly use a preparation of soot or lamp-black (Hind. Kajala,
   Kajjal) whose colour is easily distinguished from that of Kohl. The
   latter word, with the article (Al-Kohl) is the origin of our
   "alcohol;" though even M. Littré fails to show how "fine powder"
   became "spirits of wine." I found this powder (wherewith Jezebel
   "painted" her eyes) a great preservative from ophthalmia in
   desert-travelling: the use in India was universal, but now European
   example is gradually abolishing it.

Footnote 101:

   The tale of these two women is now forgotten.

Footnote 102:

   Arab. "Atadakhkhal". When danger threatens it is customary to seize a
   man's skirt and cry "Dakhíl-ak!" (=under thy protection). Among noble
   tribes the Badawi thus invoked will defend the stranger with his
   life. Foreigners have brought themselves into contempt by thus
   applying to women or to mere youths.

Footnote 103:

   The formula of quoting from the Koran.

Footnote 104:

   Lit. "Allah not desolate me" (by thine absence). This is still a
   popular phrase—Lá tawáhishná=Do not make me desolate, _i.e._ by
   staying away too long; and friends meeting after a term of days
   exclaim "Auhashtani!"=thou hast made me desolate, _Je suis désolé_.

Footnote 105:

   Charming simplicity of manners when the Prime Minister carries the
   fish (shade of Vattel!) to the cookmaid. The "Gesta Romanorum" is
   nowhere more naive.

Footnote 106:

   Arab. "Kahílat al-taraf"=lit. eyelids lined with Kohl; and
   figuratively "with black lashes and languorous look." This is a
   phrase which frequently occurs in The Nights and which, as will
   appear, applies to the "lower animals" as well as to men. Moslems In
   Central Africa apply Kohl not to the thickness of the eyelid but upon
   both outer lids, fixing it with some greasy substance. The peculiar
   Egyptian (and Syrian) eye with its thick fringes of jet-black lashes,
   looking like lines of black drawn with soot, easily suggests the
   simile. In England I have seen the same appearance amongst miners
   fresh from the colliery.

Footnote 107:

   Of course applying to her own case.

Footnote 108:

   Prehistoric Arabs who measured from 60 to 100 cubits high: Koran,
   chapt. xxvi., etc. They will often be mentioned in The Nights.

Footnote 109:

   Arab. "Dastúr" (from Persian)=leave, permission. The word has two
   meanings (see Burckhardt, Arab. Prov. No. 609) and is much used,
   _e.g._ before walking up stairs or entering a room where strange
   women might be met. So "Tarík"=Clear the way (Pilgrimage, iii., 319).
   The old Persian occupation of Egypt, not to speak of the
   Persian-speaking Circassians and other rulers has left many such
   traces in popular language. One of them is that horror of
   travellers—"Bakhshísh" pron. bakh-sheesh and shortened to shísh from
   the Pers. "baksheesh." Our "Christmas _box_" has been most
   unnecessarily derived from the same, despite our reading:—

                Gladly the boy, with Christmas box in hand.

   And, as will be seen, Persians have bequeathed to the outer world
   worse things than bad language, _e.g._ heresy and sodomy.

Footnote 110:

   He speaks of his wife, but euphemistically in the masculine.

Footnote 111:

   A popular saying throughout Al-Islam.

Footnote 112:

   Arab. "Fata": lit=a youth; a generous man, one of noble mind (as
   youth-tide should be). It corresponds with the Lat. "vir," and has
   much the meaning of the Ital. "Giovane," the Germ. "Junker" and our
   "gentleman."

Footnote 113:

   From the Bul. Edit.

Footnote 114:

   The vagueness of his statement is euphemistic.

Footnote 115:

   This readiness of shedding tears contrasts strongly with the external
   stoicism of modern civilization; but it is true to Arab character;
   and Easterns, like the heroes of Homer and Italians of Boccaccio, are
   not ashamed of what we look upon as the result of feminine
   hysteria—"a good cry."

Footnote 116:

   The formula (constantly used by Moslems) here denotes displeasure,
   doubt how to act and so forth. Pronounce, "Lá haula wa lá kuwwata
   illá bi 'lláhi 'l-Aliyyi 'l-Azim." As a rule mistakes are marvellous:
   Mandeville (chapt. xii.) for "Lá iláha illa 'lláhu wa Muhammadun
   Rasúlu 'llah" writes "La ellec sila, Machomete rores alla." The
   former (lá haula, etc.), on account of the four peculiar Arabic
   letters, is everywhere pronounced differently; and the exclamation is
   called "Haulak" or "Haukal."

Footnote 117:

   An Arab holds that he has a right to marry his first cousin, the
   daughter of his father's brother, and if any win her from him a death
   and a blood-feud may result. It was the same in a modified form
   amongst the Jews and in both races the consanguineous marriage was
   not attended by the evil results (idiotcy, congenital deafness, etc.)
   observed in mixed races like the English and the Anglo-American. When
   a Badawi speaks of "the daughter of my uncle" he means wife; and the
   former is the dearer title, as a wife can be divorced, but blood is
   thicker than water.

Footnote 118:

   Arab. "Kahbah;" the coarsest possible term. Hence the unhappy "Cava"
   of Don Roderick the Goth, which simply means The Whore.

Footnote 119:

   The Arab "Banj" and Hindú "Bhang" (which I use as most familiar) both
   derive from the old Coptic "Nibanj" meaning a preparation of hemp
   (_Cannabis sativa_ seu _Indica_); and here it is easy to recognise
   the Homeric "Nepenthe." Al-Kazwini explains the term by "garden hemp"
   (Kinnab bostáni or Sháhdánaj). On the other hand not a few apply the
   word to the henbane (_hyoscyamus niger_) so much used in mediæval
   Europe. The Kámús evidently means henbane distinguishing it from
   "Hashish al haráfísh"=rascals' grass, _i.e._ the herb Pantagruelion.
   The "Alfáz Adwiya" (French translation) explains "Tabannuj" by
   "Endormir quelqu'un en lui faisant avaler de la jusquiame." In modern
   parlance Tabannuj is=our anæsthetic administered before an operation,
   a deadener of pain like myrrh and a number of other drugs. For this
   purpose hemp is always used (at least I never heard of henbane); and
   various preparations of the drug are sold at an especial bazar in
   Cairo. See the "powder of marvellous virtue" in Boccaccio, iii., 8;
   and iv., 10. Of these intoxicants, properly so termed, I shall have
   something to say in a future page.

   The use of Bhang doubtless dates from the dawn of civilisation, whose
   earliest social pleasures would be inebriants. Herodotus (iv. c. 75)
   shows the Scythians burning the seeds (leaves and capsules) in
   worship and becoming drunken with the fumes, as do the S. African
   Bushmen of the present day. This would be the earliest form of
   smoking: it is still doubtful whether the pipe was used or not. Galen
   also mentions intoxication by hemp. Amongst Moslems, the Persians
   adopted the drink as an ecstatic, and about our thirteenth century
   Egypt, which began the practice, introduced a number of preparations
   to be noticed in the course of The Nights.

Footnote 120:

   The rubbish heaps which outlie Eastern cities, some (near Cairo) are
   over a hundred feet high.

Footnote 121:

   Arab. "Kurrat al-ayn;" coolness of eyes as opposed to a hot eye
   ("sakhin") _i.e._ one red with tears. The term is true and
   picturesque so I translate it literally. All coolness is pleasant to
   dwellers in burning lands: thus in Al-Hariri Abu Zayd says of
   Bassorah, "I found there whatever could fill the eye with coolness."
   And a "cool booty" (or prize) is one which has been secured without
   plunging into the flames of war, or simply a pleasant prize.

Footnote 122:

   Popularly rendered Caucasus (see Night cdxcvi): it corresponds so far
   with the Hindu "Udaya" that the sun rises behind it; and the "false
   dawn" is caused by a hole or gap. It is also the Persian Alborz, the
   Indian Meru (Sumeru), the Greek Olympus, and the Rhiphæan Range
   (Veliki Camenypoys) or great starry girdle of the world, etc.

Footnote 123:

   Arab. "Mizr" or "Mizar;" vulg. Búzah; hence the medical Lat. Buza,
   the Russian Buza (millet beer), our "booze," the O. Dutch "buyzen"
   and the German "busen." This is the old ποθὸς θεῖος of negro and
   negroid Africa; the beer of Osiris, of which dried remains have been
   found in jars amongst Egyptian tombs. In Equatorial Africa it is
   known as "Pombe;" on the Upper Nile "Merissa" or "Mirisi" and amongst
   the Kafirs (Caffers) "Tshuala," "Oala" or "Boyala:" I have also heard
   of "Buswa" in Central Africa which may be the origin of "Buzah." In
   the West it became ζῦθος, (Romaic πίῤῥα), Xythum and cerevisia or
   cervisia, the humor ex hordeo, long before the days of King
   Gambrinus. Central Africans drink it in immense quantities: in
   Unyamwezi the standing bedsteads, covered with bark-slabs, are all
   made sloping so as to drain off the liquor. A chief lives wholly on
   beef and Pombe which is thick as gruel below. Hops are unknown: the
   grain, mostly Holcus, is made to germinate, then pounded, boiled and
   left to ferment. In Egypt the drink is affected chiefly by Berbers,
   Nubians and slaves from the Upper Nile; but it is a superior article
   and more like that of Europe than the "Pombe." I have given an
   account of the manufacture in The Lake Regions of Central Africa,
   vol. ii., p. 286. There are other preparations, Umm-bulbul (mother
   nightingale), Dinzáyah and Súbiyah, for which I must refer to the
   Shaykh El-Tounsy.

Footnote 124:

   There is a terrible truth in this satire, which reminds us of the
   noble dame who preferred to her handsome husband the palefrenier
   laid, ord et infâme of Queen Margaret of Navarre (Heptameron No. xx.)
   We have all known women who sacrificed everything despite themselves,
   as it were, for the most worthless of men. The world stares and
   scoffs and blames and understands nothing. There is for every woman
   one man and one only in whose slavery she is "ready to sweep the
   floor." Fate is mostly opposed to her meeting him but, when she does,
   adieu husband and children, honour and religion, life and "soul."
   Moreover Nature (human) commands the union of contrasts, such as fair
   and foul, dark and light, tall and short; otherwise mankind would be
   like the canines, a race of extremes, dwarf as toy-terriers, giants
   like mastiffs, bald as Chinese "remedy dogs," or hairy as
   Newfoundlands. The famous Wilkes said only a half-truth when he
   backed himself, with an hour's start, against the handsomest man in
   England; his uncommon and remarkable ugliness (he was, as the
   Italians say, _un bel brutto_), was the highest recommendation in the
   eyes of very beautiful women.

Footnote 125:

   Every Moslem burial-ground has a place of the kind where honourable
   women may sit and weep unseen by the multitude. These visits are
   enjoined by the Apostle:—Frequent the cemetery, 'twill make you think
   of futurity! Also:—Whoever visiteth the graves of his parents (or one
   of them) every Friday, he shall be written a pious son, even though
   he might have been in the world, before that, a disobedient.
   (Pilgrimage ii., 71.) The buildings resemble our European "mortuary
   chapels." Saíd, Pasha of Egypt, was kind enough to erect one on the
   island off Suez, for the "use of English ladies who would like
   shelter whilst weeping and wailing for their dead." But I never heard
   that any of the ladies went there.

Footnote 126:

   Arab. "Ajal"=the period of life, the appointed time of death: the
   word is of constant recurrence and is also applied to sudden death.
   See Lane's Dictionary, s.v.

Footnote 127:

   "The dying Badawi to his tribe" (and lover) appears to me highly
   pathetic. The wild people love to be buried upon hill-slopes whence
   they can look down upon the camp; and they still call out the names
   of kinsmen and friends as they pass by the grave-yards. A similar
   piece occurs in Wetzstein (p. 27, "Reisebericht ueber Hauran,"
   etc.):—

   O bear with you my bones where the camel bears his load ✿ And bury me
      before you, if buried I must be;
   And let me not be buried 'neath the burden of the vine ✿ But high
      upon the hill whence your sight I ever see!
   As you pass along my grave cry aloud and name your names ✿ The crying
      of your names shall revive the bones of me:
   I have fasted through my life with my friends, and in my death, ✿ I
      will feast when we meet, on that day of joy and glee.

Footnote 128:

   The Akásirah (plur. of Kasrá=Chosroës) is here a title of the four
   great dynasties of Persian Kings. 1. The Peshdadian or Assyrian race,
   proto-historics for whom dates fail; 2. The Káyánián (Medes and
   Persians) who ended with the Alexandrian invasion in B.C. 331; 3. The
   Ashkánián (Parthenians or Arsacides) who ruled till A.D. 202; and 4.
   The Sassanides which have already been mentioned. But strictly
   speaking "Kisri" and "Kasra" are titles applied only to the latter
   dynasty and especially to the great King Anushirwan. They must not be
   confounded with "Khusrau" (P.N. Cyrus, Ahasuerus? Chosroës?); and yet
   the three seem to have combined in "Cæsar," Kaysar and Czar. For
   details especially connected with Zoroaster see vol. I, p. 380 of the
   Dabistan or School of Manners, translated by David Shea and Anthony
   Troyer, Paris, 1843. The book is most valuable, but the proper names
   are so carelessly and incorrectly printed that the student is led
   into perpetual error.

Footnote 129:

   The words are the very lowest and coarsest; but the scene is true to
   Arab life.

Footnote 130:

   Arab. "Hayhát:" the word, written in a variety of ways is
   onomatopoetic, like our "heigh-ho!" it sometimes means "far from me
   (or you) be it!" but in popular usage it is simply "Alas."

Footnote 131:

   Lane (i., 134) finds a date for the book in this passage. The Soldan
   of Egypt, Mohammed ibn Kala'ún, in the early eighth century
   (Hijrah=our fourteenth), issued a sumptuary law compelling Christians
   and Jews to wear indigo-blue and saffron-yellow turbans, the white
   being reserved for Moslems. But the custom was much older and
   Mandeville (chapt. ix.) describes it in A.D. 1322 when it had become
   the rule. And it still endures; although abolished in the cities it
   is the rule for Christians, at least in the country parts of Egypt
   and Syria. I may here remark that such detached passages as these are
   absolutely useless for chronology: they may be simply the additions
   of editors or mere copyists.

Footnote 132:

   The ancient "Mustapha"=the Chosen (prophet, _i.e._ Mohammed), also
   titled Al-Mujtabá, the Accepted (Pilgrimage, ii., 309). "Murtazá"=the
   Elect, _i.e._ the Caliph Ali is the older "Mortada" or "Mortadi" of
   Ockley and his day, meaning "one pleasing to (or acceptable to)
   Allah." Still older writers corrupted it to "Mortis Ali" and readers
   supposed this to be the Caliph's name.

Footnote 133:

   The gleam (zodiacal light) preceding the true dawn; the Persians call
   the former Subh-i-kázib (false or lying dawn) opposed to Subh-i-sádik
   (true dawn) and suppose that it is caused by the sun shining through
   a hole in the world-encircling Mount Kaf.

Footnote 134:

   So the Heb. "Arún"=naked, means wearing the lower robe only;=our "in
   his shirt."

Footnote 135:

   Here we have the vulgar Egyptian colloquialism "Aysh" (= Ayyu
   shayyin) for the classical "Má" = what.

Footnote 136:

   "In the name of Allah!" here said before taking action.

Footnote 137:

   Arab. "Mamlúk" (plur. Mamálik) lit. a chattel; and in The Nights a
   white slave trained to arms. The "Mameluke Beys" of Egypt were
   locally called the "Ghuzz." I use the convenient word in its old
   popular sense;

                  'Tis sung, there's a valiant Mameluke
                  In foreign lands ycleped (_Sir Luke_)—

                                               HUDIBRAS.

   And hence, probably, Molière's "Mamamouchi"; and the modern French
   use "Mamaluc." See Savary's Letters, No. xl.




              THE PORTER AND THE THREE LADIES OF BAGHDAD.


 Once upon a time there was a Porter in Baghdad, who was a bachelor and
 who would remain unmarried. It came to pass on a certain day, as he
 stood about the street leaning idly upon his crate, behold, there stood
 before him an honourable woman in a mantilla of Mosul[138] silk,
 broidered with gold and bordered with brocade; her walking-shoes were
 also purfled with gold and her hair floated in long plaits. She raised
 her face-veil[139] and, showing two black eyes fringed with jetty
 lashes, whose glances were soft and languishing and whose perfect
 beauty was ever blandishing, she accosted the Porter and said in the
 suavest tones and choicest language, "Take up thy crate and follow me."
 The Porter was so dazzled he could hardly believe that he heard her
 aright, but he shouldered his basket in hot haste saying in himself, "O
 day of good luck! O day of Allah's grace!" and walked after her till
 she stopped at the door of a house. There she rapped, and presently
 came out to her an old man, a Nazarene, to whom she gave a gold piece,
 receiving from him in return what she required of strained wine clear
 as olive oil; and she set it safely in the hamper, saying, "Lift and
 follow." Quoth the Porter, "This, by Allah, is indeed an auspicious
 day, a day propitious for the granting of all a man wisheth." He again
 hoisted up the crate and followed her; till she stopped at a
 fruiterer's shop and bought from him Shámi[140] apples and Osmáni
 quinces and Omani[141] peaches, and cucumbers of Nile growth, and
 Egyptian limes and Sultáni oranges and citrons; besides Aleppine
 jasmine, scented myrtle berries, Damascene nenuphars, flower of
 privet[142] and camomile, blood-red anemones, violets, and
 pomegranate-bloom, eglantine and narcissus, and set the whole in the
 Porter's crate, saying, "Up with it." So he lifted and followed her
 till she stopped at a butcher's booth and said, "Cut me off ten pounds
 of mutton." She paid him his price and he wrapped it in a banana-leaf,
 whereupon she laid it in the crate and said "Hoist, O Porter." He
 hoisted accordingly, and followed her as she walked on till she stopped
 at a grocer's, where she bought dry fruits and pistachio-kernels,
 Tihámah raisins, shelled almonds and all wanted for dessert, and said
 to the Porter, "Lift and follow me." So he up with his hamper and after
 her till she stayed at the confectioner's, and she bought an earthen
 platter, and piled it with all kinds of sweetmeats in his shop,
 open-worked tarts and fritters scented with musk and "soap-cakes," and
 lemon-loaves and melon-preserves,[143] and "Zaynab's combs," and
 "ladies' fingers," and "Kazi's tit-bits" and goodies of every
 description; and placed the platter in the Porter's crate. Thereupon
 quoth he (being a merry man), "Thou shouldest have told me, and I would
 have brought with me a pony or a she-camel to carry all this
 market-stuff." She smiled and gave him a little cuff on the nape
 saying, "Step out and exceed not in words for (Allah willing!) thy wage
 will not be wanting." Then she stopped at a perfumer's and took from
 him ten sorts of waters, rose scented with musk, orange-flower,
 water-lily, willow flower, violet and five others; and she also bought
 two loaves of sugar, a bottle for perfume-spraying, a lump of male
 incense, aloe-wood, ambergris and musk, with candles of Alexandria wax;
 and she put the whole into the basket, saying, "Up with thy crate and
 after me." He did so and followed until she stood before the
 greengrocer's, of whom she bought pickled safflower and olives, in
 brine and in oil; with tarragon and cream-cheese and hard Syrian
 cheese; and she stowed them away in the crate saying to the Porter,
 "Take up thy basket and follow me." He did so and went after her till
 she came to a fair mansion fronted by a spacious court, a tall, fine
 place to which columns gave strength and grace: and the gate thereof
 had two leaves of ebony inlaid with plates of red gold. The lady
 stopped at the door and, turning her face-veil sideways, knocked softly
 with her knuckles whilst the Porter stood behind her, thinking of
 naught save her beauty and loveliness. Presently the door swung back
 and both leaves were opened, whereupon he looked to see who had opened
 it; and behold, it was a lady of tall figure, some five feet high; a
 model of beauty and loveliness, brilliance and symmetry and perfect
 grace. Her forehead was flower-white; her cheeks like the anemone ruddy
 bright; her eyes were those of the wild heifer or the gazelle, with
 eyebrows like the crescent-moon which ends Sha'abán and begins
 Ramazán;[144] her mouth was the ring of Sulayman,[145] her lips
 coral-red, and her teeth like a line of strung pearls or of camomile
 petals. Her throat recalled the antelope's, and her breasts, like two
 pomegranates of even size, stood at bay as it were;[146] her body rose
 and fell in waves below her dress like the rolls of a piece of brocade,
 and her navel[147] would hold an ounce of benzoin ointment. In fine she
 was like her of whom the poet said:—

 On Sun and Moon of palace cast thy sight ✿ Enjoy her flower-like face,
    her fragrant light:
 Thine eyes shall never see in hair so black ✿ Beauty encase a brow so
    purely white:
 The ruddy rosy cheek proclaims her claim ✿ Though fail her name whose
    beauties we indite:
 As sways her gait I smile at hips so big ✿ And weep to see the waist
    they bear so slight.

 When the Porter looked upon her his wits were waylaid, and his senses
 were stormed so that his crate went nigh to fall from his head, and he
 said to himself, "Never have I in my life seen a day more blessed than
 this day!" Then quoth the lady-portress to the lady-cateress, "Come in
 from the gate and relieve this poor man of his load." So the
 provisioner went in followed by the portress and the Porter and went on
 till they reached a spacious ground-floor hall,[148] built with
 admirable skill and beautified with all manner colours and carvings;
 with upper balconies and groined arches and galleries and cupboards and
 recesses whose curtains hung before them. In the midst stood a great
 basin full of water surrounding a fine fountain, and at the upper end
 on the raised dais was a couch of juniper-wood set with gems and
 pearls, with a canopy like mosquito-curtains of red satin-silk looped
 up with pearls as big as filberts and bigger. Thereupon sat a lady
 bright of blee, with brow beaming brilliancy, the dream of philosophy,
 whose eyes were fraught with Babel's gramarye[149] and her eyebrows
 were arched as for archery; her breath breathed ambergris and perfumery
 and her lips were sugar to taste and carnelian to see. Her stature was
 straight as the letter ا[150] and her face shamed the noon-sun's
 radiancy; and she was even as a galaxy, or a dome with golden marquetry
 or a bride displayed in choicest finery or a noble maid of Araby.[151]
 Right well of her sang the bard when he said:—

 Her smiles twin rows of pearls display ✿ Chamomile-buds or rimey spray
 Her tresses stray as night let down ✿ And shames her light the dawn o'
    day.

 [152] The third lady rising from the couch stepped forward with
 graceful swaying gait till she reached the middle of the saloon, when
 she said to her sisters, "Why stand ye here? take it down from this
 poor man's head!" Then the cateress went and stood before him, and the
 portress behind him while the third helped them, and they lifted the
 load from the Porter's head; and, emptying it of all that was therein,
 set everything in its place. Lastly they gave him two gold pieces,
 saying, "Wend thy ways, O Porter." But he went not, for he stood
 looking at the ladies and admiring what uncommon beauty was theirs, and
 their pleasant manners and kindly dispositions (never had he seen
 goodlier); and he gazed wistfully at that good store of wines and
 sweet-scented flowers and fruits and other matters. Also he marvelled
 with exceeding marvel, especially to see no man in the place and
 delayed his going; whereupon quoth the eldest lady, "What aileth thee
 that goest not; haply thy wage be too little?" And, turning to her
 sister the cateress, she said, "Give him another dinar!" But the Porter
 answered, "By Allah, my lady, it is not for the wage; my hire is never
 more than two dirhams; but in very sooth my heart and my soul are taken
 up with you and your condition. I wonder to see you single with ne'er a
 man about you and not a soul to bear you company; and well you wot that
 the minaret toppleth o'er unless it stand upon four, and you want this
 same fourth; and women's pleasure without man is short of measure, even
 as the poet said:—

 Seest not we want for joy four things all told ✿ The harp and lute, the
    flute and flageolet;
 And be they companied with scents four-fold ✿ Rose, myrtle, anemone and
    violet;
 Nor please all eight an four thou wouldst withhold ✿ Good wine and
    youth and gold and pretty pet.

 You be three and want a fourth who shall be a person of good sense and
 prudence; smart witted, and one apt to keep careful counsel." His words
 pleased and amused them much; and they laughed at him and said, "And
 who is to assure us of that? We are maidens and we fear to entrust our
 secret where it may not be kept, for we have read in a certain
 chronicle the lines of one Ibn al-Sumam:—

 Hold fast thy secret and to none unfold ✿ Lost is a secret when that
    secret's told:
 An fail thy breast thy secret to conceal ✿ How canst thou hope
    another's breast shall hold?

 And Abu Nowás[153] said well on the same subject:—

 Who trusteth secret to another's hand ✿ Upon his brow deserveth burn of
    brand!"

 When the Porter heard their words he rejoined, "By your lives! I am a
 man of sense and a discreet, who hath read books and perused
 chronicles; I reveal the fair and conceal the foul and I act as the
 poet adviseth:—

 None but the good a secret keep ✿ And good men keep it unrevealed:
 It is to me a well-shut house ✿ With keyless locks and door
    ensealed."[154]

 When the maidens heard his verse and its poetical application addressed
 to them they said, "Thou knowest that we have laid out all our monies
 on this place. Now say, hast thou aught to offer us in return for
 entertainment? For surely we will not suffer thee to sit in our company
 and be our cup-companion, and gaze upon our faces so fair and so rare
 without paying a round sum.[155] Wottest thou not the saying:—

                       Sans hope of gain
                       Love's not worth a grain?"

 Whereto the lady-portress added, "If thou bring anything thou art a
 something; if no thing, be off with thee, thou art a nothing;" but the
 procuratrix interposed, saying, "Nay, O my sisters, leave teasing him,
 for by Allah he hath not failed us this day, and had he been other he
 never had kept patience with me, so whatever be his shot and scot I
 will take it upon myself." The Porter, overjoyed, kissed the ground
 before her and thanked her saying, "By Allah, these monies are the
 first fruits this day hath given me." Hearing this they said, "Sit thee
 down and welcome to thee," and the eldest lady added, "By Allah, we may
 not suffer thee to join us save on one condition, and this it is, that
 no questions be asked as to what concerneth thee not, and frowardness
 shall be soundly flogged." Answered the Porter, "I agree to this, O my
 lady, on my head and my eyes be it! Lookye, I am dumb, I have no
 tongue." Then arose the provisioneress and tightening her girdle set
 the table by the fountain and put the flowers and sweet herbs in their
 jars, and strained the wine and ranged the flasks in row and made ready
 every requisite. Then sat she down, she and her sisters, placing amidst
 them the Porter who kept deeming himself in a dream; and she took up
 the wine flagon, and poured out the first cup and drank it off, and
 likewise a second and a third.[156] After this she filled a fourth cup
 which she handed to one of her sisters; and, lastly, she crowned a
 goblet and passed it to the Porter, saying:—

 Drink the dear draught, drink free and fain ✿ What healeth every grief
    and pain.

 He took the cup in his hand and, louting low, returned his best thanks
 and improvised:—

 Drain not the bowl save with a trusty friend ✿ A man of worth whose
    good old blood all know:
 For wine, like wind, sucks sweetness from the sweet ✿ And stinks when
    over stench it haply blow:

 Adding:—

 Drain not the bowl, save from dear hand like thine ✿ The cup recalls
    thy gifts; thou, gifts of wine.

 After repeating this couplet he kissed their hands and drank and was
 drunk and sat swaying from side to side and pursued:—

 All drinks wherein is blood the Law unclean ✿ Doth hold save one, the
    bloodshed of the vine:
 Fill! fill! take all my wealth bequeathed or won ✿ Thou fawn! a willing
    ransom for those eyne.

 Then the cateress crowned a cup and gave it to the portress, who took
 it from her hand and thanked her and drank. Thereupon she poured again
 and passed to the eldest lady who sat on the couch, and filled yet
 another and handed it to the Porter. He kissed the ground before them;
 and, after drinking and thanking them, he again began to recite:—

       Here! Here! by Allah, here! ✿ Cups of the sweet, the dear!
       Fill me a brimming bowl ✿ The Fount o' Life I speer

 Then the Porter stood up before the mistress of the house and said, "O
 lady, I am thy slave, thy Mameluke, thy white thrall, thy very
 bondsman;" and he began reciting:—

 A slave of slaves there standeth at thy door ✿ Lauding thy generous
    boons and gifts galore:
 Beauty! may he come in awhile to 'joy ✿ Thy charms? for Love and I part
    nevermore!

 She said to him, "Drink; and health and happiness attend thy drink." So
 he took the cup and kissed her hand and recited these lines in
 sing-song:—

 I gave her brave old wine that like her cheeks ✿ Blushed red or flame
    from furnace flaring up:
 She bussed the brim and said with many a smile ✿ How durst thou deal
    folk's cheek for folk to sup?
 "Drink!" (said I) "these are tears of mine whose tinct ✿ Is heart-blood
    sighs have boilèd in the cup."

 She answered him in the following couplet:—

 "An tears of blood for me, friend, thou hast shed ✿ Suffer me sup them,
    by thy head and eyes!"

[Illustration]

 Then the lady took the cup, and drank it off to her sisters' health,
 and they ceased not drinking (the Porter being in the midst of them),
 and dancing and laughing and reciting verses and singing ballads and
 ritornellos. All this time the Porter was carrying on with them,
 kissing, toying, biting, handling, groping, fingering; whilst one
 thrust a dainty morsel in his mouth, and another slapped him; and this
 cuffed his cheeks, and that threw sweet flowers at him; and he was in
 the very paradise of pleasure, as though he were sitting in the seventh
 sphere among the Houris[157] of Heaven. They ceased not doing after
 this fashion until the wine played tricks in their heads and worsted
 their wits; and, when the drink got the better of them, the portress
 stood up and doffed her clothes till she was mother-naked. However, she
 let down her hair about her body by way of shift, and throwing herself
 into the basin disported herself and dived like a duck and swam up and
 down, and took water in her mouth, and spurted it all over the Porter,
 and washed her limbs, and between her breasts, and inside her thighs
 and all around her navel. Then she came up out of the cistern and
 throwing herself on the Porter's lap said, "O my lord, O my love, what
 callest thou this article?" pointing to her slit, her solution of
 continuity. "I call that thy cleft," quoth the Porter, and she
 rejoined, "Wah! wah! art thou not ashamed to use such a word?" and she
 caught him by the collar and soundly cuffed him. Said he again, "Thy
 womb, thy vulva;" and she struck him a second slap crying, "O fie, O
 fie, this is another ugly word; is there no shame in thee?" Quoth he,
 "Thy coynte;" and she cried, "O thou! art wholly destitute of modesty?"
 and thumped him and bashed him. Then cried the Porter, "Thy
 clitoris,"[158] whereat the eldest lady came down upon him with a yet
 sorer beating, and said, "No;" and he said, "'Tis so," and the Porter
 went on calling the same commodity by sundry other names, but whatever
 he said they beat him more and more till his neck ached and swelled
 with the blows he had gotten; and on this wise they made him a butt and
 a laughing-stock. At last he turned upon them asking, "And what do you
 women call this article?" Whereto the damsel made answer, "The basil of
 the bridges."[159] Cried the Porter, "Thank Allah for my safety: aid me
 and be thou propitious, O basil of the bridges!" They passed round the
 cup and tossed off the bowl again, when the second lady stood up; and,
 stripping off all her clothes, cast herself into the cistern and did as
 the first had done; then she came out of the water and throwing her
 naked form on the Porter's lap pointed to her machine and said, "O
 light of mine eyes, do tell me what is the name of this concern?" He
 replied as before, "Thy slit;" and she rejoined, "Hath such term no
 shame for thee?" and cuffed him and buffeted him till the saloon rang
 with the blows. Then quoth she, "O fie! O fie! how canst thou say this
 without blushing?" He suggested, "The basil of the bridges;" but she
 would not have it and she said, "No! no!" and struck him and slapped
 him on the back of the neck. Then he began calling out all the names he
 knew, "Thy slit, thy womb, thy coynte, thy clitoris;" and the girls
 kept on saying, "No! no!" So he said, "I stick to the basil of the
 bridges;" and all the three laughed till they fell on their backs and
 laid slaps on his neck and said, "No! no! that's not its proper name."
 Thereupon he cried, "O my sisters, what _is_ its name?" and they
 replied, "What sayest thou to the husked sesame-seed?" Then the
 cateress donned her clothes and they fell again to carousing, but the
 Porter kept moaning, "Oh! and Oh!" for his neck and shoulders, and the
 cup passed merrily round and round again for a full hour. After that
 time the eldest and handsomest lady stood up and stripped off her
 garments, whereupon the Porter took his neck in hand, and rubbed and
 shampoo'd it, saying, "My neck and shoulders are on the way of
 Allah!"[160] Then she threw herself into the basin, and swam and dived,
 sported and washed; and the Porter looked at her naked figure as though
 she had been a slice of the moon[161] and at her face with the sheen of
 Luna when at full, or like the dawn when it brighteneth, and he noted
 her noble stature and shape, and those glorious forms that quivered as
 she went; for she was naked as the Lord made her. Then he cried "Alack!
 Alack!" and began to address her, versifying in these couplets:—

 "If I liken thy shape to the bough when green ✿ My likeness errs and I
    sore mistake it;
 For the bough is fairest when clad the most ✿ And thou art fairest when
    mother-naked."

 When the lady heard his verses she came up out of the basin and,
 seating herself upon his lap and knees, pointed to her genitory and
 said, "O my lordling, what be the name of this?" Quoth he, "The basil
 of the bridges;" but she said, "Bah, bah!" Quoth he, "The husked
 sesame;" quoth she, "Pooh, pooh!" Then said he, "Thy womb;" and she
 cried, "Fie, Fie! art thou not ashamed of thyself?" and cuffed him on
 the nape of the neck. And whatever name he gave declaring "'Tis so,"
 she beat him and cried "No! no!" till at last he said, "O my sisters,
 and what _is_ its name?" She replied, "It is entitled the Khan[162] of
 Abu Mansur;" whereupon the Porter replied, "Ha! ha! O Allah be praised
 for safe deliverance! O Khan of Abu Mansur!" Then she came forth and
 dressed and the cup went round a full hour. At last the Porter rose up,
 and stripping off all his clothes, jumped into the tank and swam about
 and washed under his bearded chin and armpits, even as they had done.
 Then he came out and threw himself into the first lady's lap and rested
 his arms upon the lap of the portress, and reposed his legs in the lap
 of the cateress and pointed to his prickle[163] and said, "O my
 mistresses, what is the name of this article?" All laughed at his words
 till they fell on their backs, and one said, "Thy pintle!" But he
 replied, "No!" and gave each one of them a bite by way of forfeit. Then
 said they, "Thy pizzle!" but he cried "No," and gave each of them a
 hug;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
 permitted say.

                    Now when it was the Tenth Night,

 Quoth her sister Dunyazad, "Finish for us thy story;" and she answered,
 "With joy and goodly gree." It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
 the damsels stinted not saying to the Porter "Thy prickle, thy pintle,
 thy pizzle," and he ceased not kissing and biting and hugging until his
 heart was satisfied, and they laughed on till they could no more. At
 last one said, "O our brother, what, then, is it called?" Quoth he,
 "Know ye not?" Quoth they, "No!" "Its veritable name," said he, "is
 mule Burst-all, which browseth on the basil of the bridges, and
 muncheth the husked sesame, and nighteth in the Khan of Abu Mansur."
 Then laughed they till they fell on their backs, and returned to their
 carousal, and ceased not to be after this fashion till night began to
 fall. Thereupon said they to the Porter, "Bismillah,[164] O our master,
 up and on with those sorry old shoes of thine and turn thy face and
 show us the breadth of thy shoulders!" Said he, "By Allah, to part with
 my soul would be easier for me than departing from you: come let us
 join night to day, and to-morrow morning we will each wend our own
 way." "My life on you," said the procuratrix, "suffer him to tarry with
 us, that we may laugh at him: we may live out our lives and never meet
 with his like, for surely he is a right merry rogue and a witty."[165]
 So they said, "Thou must not remain with us this night save on
 condition that thou submit to our commands, and that whatso thou seest,
 thou ask no questions thereanent, nor enquire of its cause." "All
 right," rejoined he, and they said, "Go read the writing over the
 door." So he rose and went to the entrance and there found written in
 letters of gold wash; "WHOSO SPEAKETH OF WHAT CONCERNETH HIM NOT, SHALL
 HEAR WHAT PLEASETH HIM NOT!"[166] The Porter said, "Be ye witnesses
 against me that I will not speak on whatso concerneth me not." Then the
 cateress arose, and set food before them and they ate; after which they
 changed their drinking-place for another, and she lighted the lamps and
 candles and burned ambergris and aloes-wood, and set on fresh fruit and
 the wine service, when they fell to carousing and talking of their
 lovers. And they ceased not to eat and drink and chat, nibbling dry
 fruits and laughing and playing tricks for the space of a full hour
 when lo! a knock was heard at the gate. The knocking in no wise
 disturbed the seance, but one of them rose and went to see what it was
 and presently returned, saying, "Truly our pleasure for this night is
 to be perfect." "How is that?" asked they; and she answered, "At the
 gate be three Persian Kalandars[167] with their beards and heads and
 eyebrows shaven; and all three blind of the left eye—which is surely a
 strange chance. They are foreigners from Roum-land with the mark of
 travel plain upon them; they have just entered Baghdad, this being
 their first visit to our city; and the cause of their knocking at our
 door is simply because they cannot find a lodging. Indeed one of them
 said to me:—Haply the owner of this mansion will let us have the key of
 his stable or some old outhouse wherein we may pass this night; for
 evening had surprised them and, being strangers in the land, they knew
 none who would give them shelter. And, O my sisters, each of them is a
 figure o' fun after his own fashion; and if we let them in we shall
 have matter to make sport of." She gave not over persuading them till
 they said to her, "Let them in, and make thou the usual condition with
 them that they speak not of what concerneth them not, lest they hear
 what pleaseth them not." So she rejoiced and going to the door
 presently returned with the three monoculars whose beards and
 mustachios were clean shaven.[168] They salam'd and stood afar off by
 way of respect; but the three ladies rose up to them and welcomed them
 and wished them joy of their safe arrival and made them sit down. The
 Kalandars looked at the room and saw that it was a pleasant place,
 clean swept and garnished with flowers; and the lamps were burning and
 the smoke of perfumes was spiring in air; and beside the dessert and
 fruits and wine, there were three fair girls who might be maidens; so
 they exclaimed with one voice, "By Allah, 'tis good!" Then they turned
 to the Porter and saw that he was a merry-faced wight, albeit he was by
 no means sober and was sore after his slappings. So they thought that
 he was one of themselves and said, "A mendicant like us! whether Arab
 or foreigner."[169] But when the Porter heard these words, he rose up,
 and fixing his eyes fiercely upon them, said, "Sit ye here without
 exceeding in talk! Have you not read what is writ over the door? surely
 it befitteth not fellows who come to us like paupers to wag your
 tongues at us." "We crave thy pardon, O Fakír,"[170] rejoined they,
 "and our heads are between thy hands." The ladies laughed consumedly at
 the squabble; and, making peace between the Kalandars and the Porter,
 seated the new guests before meat and they ate. Then they sat together,
 and the portress served them with drink; and, as the cup went round
 merrily, quoth the Porter to the askers, "And you, O brothers mine,
 have ye no story or rare adventure to amuse us withal?" Now the warmth
 of wine having mounted to their heads they called for musical
 instruments; and the portress brought them a tambourine of Mosul, and a
 lute of Irák, and a Persian harp; and each mendicant took one and tuned
 it; this the tambourine and those the lute and the harp, and struck up
 a merry tune while the ladies sang so lustily that there was a great
 noise.[171] And whilst they were carrying on, behold, some one knocked
 at the gate, and the portress went to see what was the matter there.
 Now the cause of that knocking, O King (quoth Shahrazad) was this, the
 Caliph, Hárún al-Rashíd, had gone forth from the palace, as was his
 wont now and then, to solace himself in the city that night, and to see
 and hear what new thing was stirring; he was in merchant's gear, and he
 was attended by Ja'afar, his Wazir, and by Masrúr his Sworder of
 Vengeance.[172] As they walked about the city, their way led them
 towards the house of the three ladies; where they heard the loud noise
 of musical instruments and singing and merriment; so quoth the Caliph
 to Ja'afar, "I long to enter this house and hear those songs and see
 who sing them." Quoth Ja'afar, "O Prince of the Faithful; these folk
 are surely drunken with wine, and I fear some mischief betide us if we
 get amongst them." "There is no help but that I go in there," replied
 the Caliph, "and I desire thee to contrive some pretext for our
 appearing among them." Ja'afar replied, "I hear and I obey;"[173] and
 knocked at the door, whereupon the portress came out and opened. Then
 Ja'afar came forward and kissing the ground before her said, "O my
 lady, we be merchants from Tiberias-town: we arrived at Baghdad ten
 days ago; and, alighting at the merchants' caravanserai, we sold all
 our merchandise. Now a certain trader invited us to an entertainment
 this night; so we went to his house and he set food before us and we
 ate: then we sat at wine and wassail with him for an hour or so when he
 gave us leave to depart; and we went out from him in the shadow of the
 night and, being strangers, we could not find our way back to our Khan.
 So haply of your kindness and courtesy you will suffer us to tarry with
 you this night, and Heaven will reward you!"[174] The portress looked
 upon them and seeing them dressed like merchants and men of grave looks
 and solid, she returned to her sisters and repeated to them Ja'afar's
 story; and they took compassion upon the strangers and said to her,
 "Let them enter." She opened the door to them, when said they to her,
 "Have we thy leave to come in?" "Come in," quoth she; and the Caliph
 entered followed by Ja'afar and Masrur; and when the girls saw them
 they stood up to them in respect and made them sit down and looked to
 their wants, saying, "Welcome, and well come and good cheer to the
 guests, but with one condition!" "What is that?" asked they, and one of
 the ladies answered, "Speak not of what concerneth you not, lest ye
 hear what pleaseth you not." "Even so," said they; and sat down to
 their wine and drank deep. Presently the Caliph looked on the three
 Kalandars and, seeing them each and every blind of the left eye,
 wondered at the sight; then he gazed upon the girls and he was startled
 and he marvelled with exceeding marvel at their beauty and loveliness.
 They continued to carouse and to converse and said to the Caliph,
 "Drink!" but he replied, "I am vowed to Pilgrimage;"[175] and drew back
 from the wine. Thereupon the portress rose and spreading before him a
 table-cloth worked with gold, set thereon a porcelain bowl into which
 she poured willow flower water with a lump of snow and a spoonful of
 sugar-candy. The Caliph thanked her and said in himself, "By Allah, I
 will recompense her to-morrow for the kind deed she hath done." The
 others again addressed themselves to conversing and carousing; and,
 when the wine gat the better of them, the eldest lady who ruled the
 house rose and making obeisance to them took the cateress by the hand,
 and said, "Rise, O my sister and let us do what is our devoir." Both
 answered "Even so!" Then the portress stood up and proceeded to remove
 the table-service and the remnants of the banquet; and renewed the
 pastiles and cleared the middle of the saloon. Then she made the
 Kalandars sit upon a sofa at the side of the estrade, and seated the
 Caliph and Ja'afar and Masrur on the other side of the saloon; after
 which she called the Porter, and said, "How scant is thy courtesy! now
 thou art no stranger; nay, thou art one of the household." So he stood
 up and, tightening his waist-cloth, asked, "What would ye I do?" and
 she answered, "Stand in thy place." Then the procuratrix rose and set
 in the midst of the saloon a low chair and, opening a closet, cried to
 the Porter, "Come help me," So he went to help her and saw two black
 bitches with chains round their necks; and she said to him, "Take hold
 of them;" and he took them and led them into the middle of the saloon.
 Then the lady of the house arose and tucked up her sleeves above her
 wrists and, seizing a scourge, said to the Porter, "Bring forward one
 of the bitches." He brought, her forward, dragging her by the chain,
 while the bitch wept, and shook her head at the lady who, however, came
 down upon her with blows on the sconce; and the bitch howled and the
 lady ceased not beating her till her forearm failed her. Then, casting
 the scourge from her hand, she pressed the bitch to her bosom and,
 wiping away her tears with her hands, kissed her head. Then said she to
 the Porter, "Take her away and bring the second;" and, when he brought
 her, she did with her as she had done with the first. Now the heart of
 the Caliph was touched at these cruel doings; his chest straitened and
 he lost all patience in his desire to know why the two bitches were so
 beaten. He threw a wink at Ja'afar wishing him to ask, but the Minister
 turning towards him said by signs, "Be silent!" Then quoth the portress
 to the mistress of the house, "O my lady, arise and go to thy place
 that I in turn may do my devoir."[176] She answered, "Even so"; and,
 taking her seat upon the couch of juniper-wood, pargetted with, gold
 and silver, said to the portress and cateress, "Now do ye what ye have
 to do." Thereupon the portress sat upon a low seat by the couch side;
 but the procuratrix, entering a closet, brought out of it a bag of
 satin with green fringes and two tassels of gold. She stood up before
 the lady of the house and shaking the bag drew out from it a lute which
 she tuned by tightening its pegs; and when it was in perfect order, she
 began to sing these quatrains:—

 Ye are the wish, the aim of me ✿ And when, O love, thy sight I see[177]
 The heavenly mansion openeth;[178] ✿ But Hell I see when lost thy
    sight.
 From thee comes madness; nor the less ✿ Comes highest joy, comes
    ecstasy:
 Nor in my love for thee I fear ✿ Or shame and blame, or hate and spite.
 When Love was throned within my heart ✿ I rent the veil of modesty;
 And stints not Love to rend that veil ✿ Garring disgrace on grace to
    alight;
 The robe of sickness then I donned ✿ But rent to rags was secrecy:
 Wherefore my love and longing heart ✿ Proclaim your high supremest
    might;
 The tear-drop railing adown my cheek ✿ Telleth my tale of ignomy:
 And all the hid was seen by all ✿ And all my riddle ree'd aright.
 Heal then my malady, for thou ✿ Art malady and remedy!
 But she whose cure is in thy hand ✿ Shall ne'er be free of bane and
    blight;
 Burn me those eyne that radiance rain ✿ Slay me the swords of phantasy;
 How many hath the sword of Love ✿ Laid low, their high degree despite?
 Yet will I never cease to pine ✿ Nor to oblivion will I flee.
 Love is my health, my faith, my joy ✿ Public and private, wrong or
    right.
 O happy eyes that sight thy charms ✿ That gaze upon thee at their gree!
 Yea, of my purest wish and will ✿ The slave of Love I'll aye be hight.

 When the damsel heard this elegy in quatrains she cried out "Alas!
 Alas!" and rent her raiment, and fell to the ground fainting; and the
 Caliph saw scars of the palm-rod[179] on her back and welts of the
 whip; and marvelled with exceeding wonder. Then the portress arose and
 sprinkled water on her and brought her a fresh and very fine dress and
 put it on her. But when the company beheld these doings their minds
 were troubled, for they had no inkling of the case nor knew the story
 thereof; so the Caliph said to Ja'afar, "Didst thou not see the scars
 upon the damsel's body? I cannot keep silence or be at rest till I
 learn the truth of her condition and the story of this other maiden and
 the secret of the two black bitches." But Ja'afar answered, "O our
 lord, they made it a condition with us that we speak not of what
 concerneth us not, lest we come to hear what pleaseth us not." Then
 said the portress, "By Allah, O my sister, come to me and complete this
 service for me." Replied the procuratrix, "With joy and goodly gree;"
 so she took the lute; and leaned it against her breasts and swept the
 strings with her finger-tips, and began singing:—

 Give back mine eyes their sleep long ravishèd ✿ And say me whither be
    my reason fled:
 I learnt that lending to thy love a place ✿ Sleep to mine eyelids
    mortal foe was made.
 They said, "We held thee righteous, who waylaid ✿ Thy soul?" "Go ask
    his glorious eyes," I said.
 I pardon all my blood he pleased to spill ✿ Owning his troubles drove
    him blood to shed.
 On my mind's mirror sun-like sheen he cast ✿ Whose keen reflection fire
    in vitals bred
 Waters of Life let Allah waste at will ✿ Suffice my wage those lips of
    dewy red:
 An thou address my love thou'lt find a cause ✿ For plaint and tears or
    ruth or lustihed.
 In water pure his form shall greet your eyne ✿ When fails the bowl nor
    need ye drink of wine.[180]

 Then she quoted from the same ode:—

 I drank, but the draught of his glance, not wine; ✿ And his swaying
    gait swayed to sleep these eyne:
 'Twas not grape-juice gript me but grasp of Past ✿ 'Twas not bowl
    o'erbowled me but gifts divine:
 His coiling curl-lets my soul ennetted ✿ And his cruel will all my wits
    outwitted.[181]

 After a pause she resumed:—

 If we 'plain of absence what shall we say? ✿ Or if pain afflict us
    where wend our way?
 An I hire a truchman[182] to tell my tale ✿ The lovers' plaint is not
    told for pay:
 If I put on patience, a lover's life ✿ After loss of love will not last
    a day:
 Naught is left me now but regret, repine ✿ And tears flooding cheeks
    for ever and aye:
 O thou who the babes of these eyes[183] hast fled ✿ Thou art homed in
    heart that shall never stray;
 Would heaven I wot hast thou kept our pact ✿ Long as stream shall flow,
    to have firmest fay?
 Or hast forgotten the weeping slave ✿ Whom groans afflict and whom
    griefs waylay?
 Ah, when severance ends and we side by side ✿ Couch, I'll blame thy
    rigours and chide thy pride!

 Now when the portress heard her second ode she shrieked aloud and said,
 "By Allah! 'tis right good!"; and laying hands on her garments tore
 them, as she did the first time, and fell to the ground fainting.
 Thereupon the procuratrix rose and brought her a second change of
 clothes after she had sprinkled water on her. She recovered and sat
 upright and said to her sister the cateress, "Onwards, and help me in
 my duty, for there remains but this one song." So the provisioneress
 again brought out the lute and began to sing these verses:—

 How long shall last, how long this rigour rife of woe ✿ May not suffice
    thee all these tears thou seest flow?
 Our parting thus with purpose fell thou dost prolong ✿ Is't not enough
    to glad the heart of envious foe?
 Were but this lying world once true to lover-heart ✿ He had not watched
    the weary night in tears of woe:
 Oh pity me whom overwhelmed thy cruel will ✿ My lord, my king, 'tis
    time some ruth to me thou show:
 To whom reveal my wrongs, O thou who murdered me? ✿ Sad, who of broken
    troth the pangs must undergo!
 Increase wild love for thee and phrenzy hour by hour ✿ And days of
    exile minute by so long, so slow;
 O Moslems, claim _vendetta_[184] for this slave of Love ✿ Whose sleep
    Love ever wastes, whose patience Love lays low:
 Doth law of Love allow thee, O my wish! to lie ✿ Lapt in another's arms
    and unto me cry "Go!"?
 Yet in thy presence, say, what joys shall I enjoy ✿ When he I love but
    works my love to overthrow?

 When the portress heard the third song she cried aloud; and, laying
 hands on her garments, rent them down to the very skirt and fell to the
 ground fainting a third time, again showing the scars of the scourge.
 Then said the three Kalandars, "Would Heaven we had never entered this
 house, but had rather nighted on the mounds and heaps outside the city!
 for verily our visit hath been troubled by sights which cut to the
 heart." The Caliph turned to them and asked, "Why so?" and they made
 answer, "Our minds are sore troubled by this matter." Quoth the Caliph,
 "Are ye not of the household?" and quoth they, "No; nor indeed did we
 ever set eyes on the place till within this hour." Hereat the Caliph
 marvelled and rejoined, "This man who sitteth by you, would he not know
 the secret of the matter?" and so saying he winked and made signs at
 the Porter. So they questioned the man but he replied, "By the
 All-might of Allah, in love all are alike![185] I am the growth of
 Baghdad, yet never in my born days did I darken these doors till to-day
 and my companying with them was a curious matter." "By Allah," they
 rejoined, "we took thee for one of them and now we see thou art one
 like ourselves." Then said the Caliph, "We be seven men, and they only
 three women without even a fourth to help them; so let us question them
 of their case; and, if they answer us not, fain we will be answered by
 force." All of them agreed to this except Ja'afar who said,[186] "This
 is not my recking; let them be; for we are their guests and, as ye
 know, they made a compact and condition with us which we accepted and
 promised to keep: wherefore it is better that we be silent concerning
 this matter; and, as but little of the night remaineth, let each and
 every of us gang his own gait." Then he winked at the Caliph and
 whispered to him, "There is but one hour of darkness left and I can
 bring them before thee to-morrow, when thou canst freely question them
 all concerning their story." But the Caliph raised his head haughtily
 and cried out at him in wrath, saying, "I have no patience left for my
 longing to hear of them: let the Kalandars question them forthright."
 Quoth Ja'afar, "This is not my rede." Then words ran high and talk
 answered talk; and they disputed as to who should first put the
 question, but at last all fixed upon the Porter. And as the jangle
 increased the house-mistress could not but notice it and asked them, "O
 ye folk! on what matter are ye talking so loudly?" Then the Porter
 stood up respectfully before her and said, "O my lady, this company
 earnestly desire that thou acquaint them with the story of the two
 bitches and what maketh thee punish them so cruelly; and then thou
 fallest to weeping over them and kissing them; and lastly they want to
 hear the tale of thy sister and why she hath been bastinado'd with
 palm-sticks like a man. These are the questions they charge me to put,
 and peace be with thee."[187] Thereupon quoth she who was the lady of
 the house to the guests, "Is this true that he saith on your part?" and
 all replied, "Yes!" save Ja'afar who kept silence. When she heard these
 words she cried, "By Allah, ye have wronged us, O our guests, with
 grievous wronging; for when you came before us we made compact and
 condition with you, that whoso should speak of what concerneth him not
 should hear what pleaseth him not. Sufficeth ye not that we took you
 into our house and fed you with our best food? But the fault is not so
 much yours as hers who let you in." Then she tucked up her sleeves from
 her wrists and struck the floor thrice with her hand crying, "Come ye
 quickly;" and lo! a closet door opened and out of it came seven negro
 slaves with drawn swords in hand to whom she said, "Pinion me those
 praters' elbows and bind them each to each." They did her bidding and
 asked her, "O veiled and virtuous! is it thy high command that we
 strike off their heads?"; but she answered, "Leave them awhile that I
 question them of their condition, before their necks feel the sword."
 "By Allah, O my lady!" cried the Porter, "slay me not for other's sin;
 all these men offended and deserve the penalty of crime save myself.
 Now by Allah, our night had been charming had we escaped the
 mortification of those monocular Kalandars whose entrance into a
 populous city would convert it into a howling wilderness." Then he
 repeated these verses:—

 How fair is ruth the strong man deigns not smother! ✿ And fairest fair
    when shown to weakest brother:
 By Love's own holy tie between us twain, ✿ Let one not suffer for the
    sin of other.

 When the Porter ended his verse the lady laughed——And Shahrazad
 perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

                   Now when it was the Eleventh Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the lady, after
 laughing at the Porter despite her wrath, came up to the party and
 spake thus, "Tell me who ye be, for ye have but an hour of life; and
 were ye not men of rank and, perhaps, notables of your tribes, you had
 not been so froward and I had hastened your doom." Then said the
 Caliph, "Woe to thee, O Ja'afar, tell her who we are lest we be slain
 by mistake; and speak her fair before some horror befal us." "'Tis part
 of thy deserts," replied he; whereupon the Caliph cried out at him
 saying, "There is a time for witty words and there is a time for
 serious work." Then the lady accosted the three Kalandars and asked
 them, "Are ye brothers?"; when they answered, "No, by Allah, we be
 naught but Fakirs and foreigners." Then quoth she to one among them,
 "Wast thou born blind of one eye?"; and quoth he, "No, by Allah, 'twas
 a marvellous matter and a wondrous mischance which caused my eye to be
 torn out, and mine is a tale which, if it were written upon the
 eye-corners with needle-gravers, were a warner to whoso would be
 warned."[188] She questioned the second and third Kalandar; but all
 replied like the first, "By Allah, O our mistress, each one of us
 cometh from a different country, and we are all three the sons of
 Kings, sovereign Princes ruling over suzerains and capital cities."
 Thereupon she turned towards them and said, "Let each and every of you
 tell me his tale in due order and explain the cause of his coming to
 our place; and if his story please us let him stroke his head[189] and
 wend his way." The first to come forward was the Hammál, the Porter,
 who said, "O my lady, I am a man and a porter. This dame, the cateress,
 hired me to carry a load and took me first to the shop of a vintner;
 then to the booth of a butcher; thence to the stall of a fruiterer;
 thence to a grocer who also sold dry fruits; thence to a confectioner
 and a perfumer-cum-druggist and from him to this place where there
 happened to me with you what happened. Such is my story and peace be on
 us all!" At this the lady laughed and said, "Rub thy head and wend thy
 ways!"; but he cried, "By Allah, I will not stump it till I hear the
 stories of my companions." Then came forward one of the Monoculars and
 began to tell her


                      _THE FIRST KALANDAR'S TALE._

 Know, O my lady, that the cause of my beard being shorn and my eye
 being out-torn was as follows. My father was a King and he had a
 brother who was a King over another city; and it came to pass that I
 and my cousin, the son of my paternal uncle, were· both born on one and
 the same day. And years and days rolled on; and, as we grew up, I used
 to visit my uncle every now and then and to spend a certain number of
 months with him. Now my cousin and I were sworn friends; for he ever
 entreated me with exceeding kindness; he killed for me the fattest
 sheep and strained the best of his wines, and we enjoyed long
 conversing and carousing. One day when the wine had gotten the better
 of us, the son of my uncle said to me, "O my cousin, I have a great
 service to ask of thee; and I desire that thou stay me not in whatso I
 desire to do!" And I replied, "With joy and goodly will." Then he made
 me swear the most binding oaths and left me; but after a little while
 he returned leading a lady veiled and richly apparelled with ornaments
 worth a large sum of money. Presently he turned to me (the woman being
 still behind him) and said, "Take this lady with thee and go before me
 to such a burial ground" (describing it, so that I knew the place),
 "and enter with her into such a sepulchre[190] and there await my
 coming." The oaths I swore to him made me keep silence and suffered me
 not to oppose him; so I led the woman to the cemetery and both I and
 she took our seats in the sepulchre; and hardly had we sat down when in
 came my uncle's son, with a bowl of water, a bag of mortar and an adze
 somewhat like a hoe. He went straight to the tomb in the midst of the
 sepulchre and, breaking it open with the adze set the stones on one
 side; then he fell to digging into the earth of the tomb till he came
 upon a large iron plate, the size of a wicket-door; and on raising it
 there appeared below it a staircase vaulted and winding. Then he turned
 to the lady and said to her, "Come now and take thy final choice!" She
 at once went down by the staircase and disappeared; then quoth he to
 me, "O son of my uncle, by way of completing thy kindness, when I shall
 have descended into this place, restore the trap-door to where it was,
 and heap back the earth upon it as it lay before; and then of thy great
 goodness mix this unslaked lime which is in the bag with this water
 which is in the bowl and, after building up the stones, plaster the
 outside so that none looking upon it shall say:—This is a new opening
 in an old tomb. For a whole year have I worked at this place whereof
 none knoweth but Allah, and this is the need I have of thee;" presently
 adding, "May Allah never bereave thy friends of thee nor make them
 desolate by thine absence, O son of my uncle, O my dear cousin!" And he
 went down the stairs and disappeared for ever. When he was lost to
 sight I replaced the iron plate and did all his bidding till the tomb
 became as it was before; and I worked almost unconsciously for my head
 was heated with wine. Returning to the palace of my uncle, I was told
 that he had gone forth a-sporting and hunting; so I slept that night
 without seeing him; and, when the morning dawned, I remembered the
 scenes of the past evening and what happened between me and my cousin;
 I repented of having obeyed him when penitence was of no avail, I still
 thought, however, that it was a dream. So I fell to asking for the son
 of my uncle; but there was none to answer me concerning him; and I went
 out to the grave-yard and the sepulchres, and sought for the tomb under
 which he was, but could not find it; and I ceased not wandering about
 from sepulchre to sepulchre, and tomb to tomb, all without success,
 till night set in. So I returned to the city, yet I could neither eat
 nor drink; my thoughts being engrossed with my cousin, for that I knew
 not what was become of him; and I grieved with exceeding grief and
 passed another sorrowful night, watching until the morning. Then went I
 a second time to the cemetery, pondering over what the son of mine
 uncle had done; and, sorely repenting my hearkening to him, went round
 among all the tombs, but could not find the tomb I sought. I mourned
 over the past, and remained in my mourning seven days, seeking the
 place and ever missing the path. Then my torture of scruples[191] grew
 upon me till I well nigh went mad, and I found no way to dispel my
 grief save travel and return to my father. So I set out and journeyed
 homeward; but as I was entering my father's capital a crowd of rioters
 sprang upon me and pinioned me.[192] I wondered thereat with all
 wonderment, seeing that I was the son of the Sultan, and these men were
 my father's subjects and amongst them were some of my own slaves. A
 great fear fell upon me, and I said to my soul,[193] "Would heaven I
 knew what hath happened to my father!" I questioned those that bound me
 of the cause of their so doing, but they returned me no answer.
 However, after a while one of them said to me (and he had been a hired
 servant of our house), "Fortune hath been false to thy father; his
 troops betrayed him and the Wazir who slew him now reigneth in his
 stead and we lay in wait to seize thee by the bidding of him." I was
 well-nigh distraught and felt ready to faint on hearing of my father's
 death; when they carried me off and placed me in presence of the
 usurper. Now between me and him there was an olden grudge, the cause of
 which was this. I was fond of shooting with the stone-bow,[194] and it
 befel one day, as I was standing on the terrace-roof of the palace,
 that a bird lighted on the top of the Wazir's house when he happened to
 be there. I shot at the bird and missed the mark; but I hit the Wazir's
 eye and knocked it out as fate and fortune decreed. Even so saith the
 poet:—

 We tread the path where Fate hath led ✿ The path Fate writ we fain must
    tread:
 And man in one land doomed to die ✿ Death no where else shall do him
    dead.

 And on like wise saith another:—

 Let Fortune have her wanton way ✿ Take heart and all her words obey:
 Nor joy nor mourn at anything ✿ For all things pass and no things stay.

 Now when I knocked out the Wazir's eye he could not say a single word,
 for that my father was King of the city; but he hated me ever after and
 dire was the grudge thus caused between us twain. So when I was set
 before him hand-bound and pinioned, he straightway gave orders for me
 to be beheaded. I asked, "For what crime wilt thou put me to death?";
 whereupon he answered, "What crime is greater than this?" pointing the
 while to the place where his eye had been. Quoth I, "This I did by
 accident not of malice prepense;" and quoth he, "If thou didst it by
 accident, I will do the like by thee with intention."[195] Then cried
 he, "Bring him forward," and they brought me up to him, when he thrust
 his finger into my left eye and gouged it out; whereupon I became
 one-eyed as ye see me. Then he bade bind me hand and foot, and put me
 into a chest and said to the sworder, "Take charge of this fellow, and
 go off with him to the waste lands about the city; then draw thy
 scymitar and slay him, and leave him to feed the beasts and birds." So
 the headsman fared forth with me and when he was in the midst of the
 desert, he took me out of the chest (and I with both hands pinioned and
 both feet fettered) and was about to bandage my eyes before striking
 off my head. But I wept with exceeding weeping until I made him weep
 with me and, looking at him I began to recite these couplets:—

 I deemed you coat-o'-mail that should withstand ✿ The foeman's shafts;
    and you proved foeman's brand;
 I hoped your aidance in mine every chance ✿ Though fail my left to aid
    my dexter hand:
 Aloof you stand and hear the railer's gibe ✿ While rain their shafts on
    me the giber-band:
 But an ye will not guard me from my foes ✿ Stand clear, and succour
    neither these nor those!

 And I also quoted:—

 I deemed my brethren mail of strongest steel ✿ And so they were—from
    foes to fend my dart!
 I deemed their arrows surest of their aim; ✿ And so they were—when
    aiming at my heart!

 When the headsman heard my lines (he had been sworder to my sire and he
 owed me a debt of gratitude) he cried, "O my lord, what can I do, being
 but a slave under orders?" presently adding, "Fly for thy life and
 nevermore return to this land, or they will slay thee and slay me with
 thee, even as the poet said:—

 Take thy life and fly whenas evils threat; ✿ Let the ruined house tell
    its owner's fate:
 New land for the old thou shalt seek and find ✿ But to find new life
    thou must not await.
 Strange that men should sit in the stead of shame, ✿ When Allah's world
    is so wide and great!
 And trust not other, in matters grave ✿ Life itself must act for a life
    beset:
 Ne'er would prowl the lion with maned neck, ✿ Did he reckon on aid or
    of others reck."

 Hardly believing in my escape, I kissed his hand and thought the loss
 of my eye a light matter in consideration of my escaping from being
 slain. I arrived at my uncle's capital; and, going in to him, told him
 of what had befallen my father and myself; whereat he wept with sore
 weeping and said, "Verily thou addest grief to my grief, and woe to my
 woe; for thy cousin hath been missing these many days; I wot not what
 hath happened to him, and none can give me news of him." And he wept
 till he fainted. I sorrowed and condoled with him; and he would have
 applied certain medicaments to my eye, but he saw that it was become as
 a walnut with the shell empty. Then said he, "O my son, better to lose
 eye and keep life!" After that I could no longer remain silent about my
 cousin, who was his only son and one dearly loved, so I told him all
 that had happened. He rejoiced with extreme joyance to hear news of his
 son and said, "Come now and show me the tomb;" but I replied, "By
 Allah, O my uncle, I know not its place, though I sought it carefully
 full many times, yet could not find the site." However, I and my uncle
 went to the grave-yard and looked right and left, till at last I
 recognised the tomb and we both rejoiced with exceeding joy. We entered
 the sepulchre and loosened the earth about the grave; then, upraising
 the trap-door, descended some fifty steps till we came to the foot of
 the staircase when lo! we were stopped by a blinding smoke. Thereupon
 said my uncle that saying whose sayer shall never come to shame, "There
 is no Majesty and there is no Might, save in Allah, the Glorious, the
 Great!" and we advanced till we suddenly came upon a saloon, whose
 floor was strewed with flour and grain and provisions and all manner
 necessaries; and in the midst of it stood a canopy sheltering a couch.
 Thereupon my uncle went up to the couch and inspecting it found his son
 and the lady who had gone down with him into the tomb, lying in each
 other's embrace; but the twain had become black as charred wood; it was
 as if they had been cast into a pit of fire. When my uncle saw this
 spectacle, he spat in his son's face and said, "Thou hast thy deserts,
 O thou hog![196] this is thy judgment in the transitory world, and yet
 remaineth the judgment in the world to come, a durer and a more
 enduring."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
 her permitted say.

                   Now when it was the Twelfth Night,

 She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Kalandar
 thus went on with his story before the lady and the Caliph and
 Ja'afar:—My uncle struck his son with his slipper[197] as he lay there
 a black heap of coal. I marvelled at his hardness of heart, and
 grieving for my cousin and the lady, said, "By Allah, O my uncle, calm
 thy wrath: dost thou not see that all my thoughts are occupied with
 this misfortune, and how sorrowful I am for what hath befallen thy son,
 and how horrible it is that naught of him remaineth but a black heap of
 charcoal? And is not that enough, but thou must smite him with thy
 slipper?" Answered he, "O son of my brother, this youth from his
 boyhood was madly in love with his own sister;[198] and often and often
 I forbade him from her, saying to myself:—They are but little ones.
 However, when they grew up sin befel between them; and, although I
 could hardly believe it, I confined him and chided him and threatened
 him with the severest threats; and the eunuchs and servants said to
 him:—Beware of so foul a thing which none before thee ever did, and
 which none after thee will ever do; and have a care lest thou be
 dishonoured and disgraced among the Kings of the day, even to the end
 of time. And I added:—Such a report as this will be spread abroad by
 caravans, and take heed not to give them cause to talk or I will
 assuredly curse thee and do thee to death. After that I lodged them
 apart and shut her up; but the accursed girl loved him with passionate
 love, for Satan had got the mastery of her as well as of him and made
 their foul sin seem fair in their sight. Now when my son saw that I
 separated them, he secretly built this souterrain and furnished it and
 transported to it victuals, even as thou seest; and, when I had gone
 out a-sporting, came here with his sister and hid from me. Then His
 righteous judgment fell upon the twain and consumed them with fire from
 Heaven; and verily the last judgment will deal them durer pains and
 more enduring!" Then he wept and I wept with him; and he looked at me
 and said, "Thou art my son in his stead." And I bethought me awhile of
 the world and of its chances, how the Wazir had slain my father and had
 taken his place and had put out my eye; and how my cousin had come to
 his death by the strangest chance: and I wept again and my uncle wept
 with me. Then we mounted the steps and let down the iron plate and
 heaped up the earth over it; and, after restoring the tomb to its
 former condition, we returned to the palace. But hardly had we sat down
 ere we heard the tom-toming of the kettle-drum and tantara of trumpets
 and clash of cymbals; and the rattling of war-men's lances; and the
 clamours of assailants and the clanking of bits and the neighing of
 steeds; while the world was canopied with dense dust and sand-clouds
 raised by the horses' hoofs.[199] We were amazed at sight and sound,
 knowing not what could be the matter; so we asked and were told us that
 the Wazir who had usurped my father's kingdom had marched his men; and
 that after levying his soldiery and taking a host of wild Arabs[200]
 into service, he had come down upon us with armies like the sands of
 the sea; their number none could tell and against them none could
 prevail. They attacked the city unawares; and the citizens, being
 powerless to oppose them, surrendered the place: my uncle was slain and
 I made for the suburbs saying to myself, "If thou fall into this
 villain's hands he will assuredly kill thee." On this wise all my
 troubles were renewed; and I pondered all that had betided my father
 and my uncle and I knew not what to do; for if the city people or my
 father's troops had recognised me they would have done their best to
 win favour by destroying me; and I could think of no way to escape save
 by shaving off my beard and my eyebrows. So I shore them off and,
 changing my fine clothes for a Kalandar's rags, I fared forth from my
 uncle's capital and made for this city; hoping that peradventure some
 one would assist me to the presence of the Prince of the Faithful,[201]
 and the Caliph who is the Viceregent of Allah upon earth. Thus have I
 come hither that I might tell him my tale and lay my case before him. I
 arrived here this very night, and was standing in doubt whither I
 should go, when suddenly I saw this second Kalandar; so I salam'd to
 him, saying:—I am a stranger! and he answered:—I too am a stranger! And
 as we were conversing behold, up came our companion, this third
 Kalandar, and saluted us saying:—I am a stranger! And we answered:—We
 too be strangers! Then we three walked on and together till darkness
 overtook us and Destiny drave us to your house. Such, then, is the
 cause of the shaving of my beard and mustachios and eyebrows; and the
 manner of my losing my right eye. They marvelled much at this tale and
 the Caliph said to Ja'afar, "By Allah, I have not seen nor have I heard
 the like of what hath happened to this Kalandar!" Quoth the lady of the
 house, "Rub thy head and wend thy ways;" but he replied, "I will not
 go, till I hear the history of the two others." Thereupon the second
 Kalandar came forward; and, kissing the ground, began to tell


                     _THE SECOND KALANDAR'S TALE._

 Know, O my lady, that I was not born one-eyed and mine is a strange
 story; an it were graven with needle-graver on the eye-corners, it were
 a warner to whoso would be warned. I am a King, son of a King, and was
 brought up like a Prince. I learned intoning the Koran according the
 seven schools;[202] and I read all manner books, and held disputations
 on their contents with the doctors and men of science; moreover I
 studied star-lore and the fair sayings of poets and I exercised myself
 in all branches of learning until I surpassed the people of my time; my
 skill in calligraphy exceeded that of all the scribes; and my fame was
 bruited abroad over all climes and cities, and all the kings learned to
 know my name. Amongst others the King of Hind heard of me and sent to
 my father to invite me to his court, with offerings and presents and
 rarities such as befit royalties. So my father fitted out six ships for
 me and my people; and we put to sea and sailed for the space of a full
 month till we made the land. Then we brought out the horses that were
 with us in the ships; and, after loading the camels with our presents
 for the Prince, we set forth inland. But we had marched only a little
 way, when behold, a dust-cloud up-flew, and grew until it walled[203]
 the horizon from view. After an hour or so the veil lifted and
 discovered beneath it fifty horsemen, ravening lions to the sight, in
 steel armour dight. We observed them straightly and lo! they were
 cutters-off of the highway, wild as wild Arabs. When they saw that we
 were only four and had with us but the ten camels carrying the
 presents, they dashed down upon us with lances at rest. We signed to
 them, with our fingers, as it were saying, "We be messengers of the
 great King of Hind, so harm us not!" but they answered on like wise,
 "We are not in his dominions to obey nor are we subject to his sway."
 Then they set upon us and slew some of my slaves and put the lave to
 flight; and I also fled after I had gotten a wound, a grievous hurt,
 whilst the Arabs were taken up with the money and the presents which
 were with us. I went forth unknowing whither I went, having become mean
 as I was mighty; and I fared on until I came to the crest of a mountain
 where I took shelter for the night in a cave. When day arose I set out
 again, nor ceased after this fashion till I arrived at a fair city and
 a well-filled. Now it was the season when Winter was turning away with
 his rime and to greet the world with his flowers came Prime, and the
 young blooms were springing and the streams flowed ringing, and the
 birds were sweetly singing, as saith the poet concerning a certain city
 when describing it:—

 A place secure from every thought of fear ✿ Safety and peace for ever
    lord it here:
 Its beauties seem to beautify its sons ✿ And as in Heaven its happy
    folk appear.

 I was glad of my arrival for I was wearied with the way, and yellow of
 face for weakness and want; but my plight was pitiable and I knew not
 whither to betake me. So I accosted a Tailor sitting in his little shop
 and saluted him; he returned my salam, and bade me kindly welcome and
 wished me well and entreated me gently and asked me of the cause of my
 strangerhood. I told him all my past from first to last; and he was
 concerned on my account and said, "O youth, disclose not thy secret to
 any: the King of this city is the greatest enemy thy father hath, and
 there is blood-wit[204] between them and thou hast cause to fear for
 thy life." Then he set meat and drink before me; and I ate and drank
 and he with me; and we conversed freely till nightfall, when he cleared
 me a place in a corner of his shop and brought me a carpet and a
 coverlet. I tarried with him three days; at the end of which time he
 said to me, "Knowest thou no calling whereby to win thy living, O my
 son?" "I am learned in the law," I replied, "and a doctor of doctrine;
 an adept in art and science, a mathematician and a notable penman." He
 rejoined, "Thy calling is of no account in our city, where not a soul
 understandeth science or even writing or aught save money-making." Then
 said I, "By Allah, I know nothing but what I have mentioned;" and he
 answered, "Gird thy middle and take thee a hatchet and a cord, and go
 and hew wood in the wold for thy daily bread, till Allah send thee
 relief; and tell none who thou art lest they slay thee." Then he bought
 me an axe and a rope and gave me in charge to certain woodcutters; and
 with these guardians I went forth into the forest, where I cut
 fuel-wood the whole of my day and came back in the evening bearing my
 bundle on my head. I sold it for half a dinar, with part of which I
 bought provision and laid by the rest. In such work I spent a whole
 year and when this was ended I went out one day, as was my wont, into
 the wilderness; and, wandering away from my companions, I chanced on a
 thickly grown lowland[205] in which there was an abundance of wood. So
 I entered and I found the gnarled stump of a great tree and loosened
 the ground about it and shovelled away the earth. Presently my hatchet
 rang upon a copper ring; so I cleared away the soil and behold, the
 ring was attached to a wooden trap-door. This I raised and there
 appeared beneath it a staircase. I descended the steps to the bottom
 and came to a door, which I opened and found myself in a noble hall
 strong of structure and beautifully built, where was a damsel like a
 pearl of great price, whose favour banished from my heart all grief and
 cark and care; and whose soft speech healed the soul in despair and
 captivated the wise and ware. Her figure measured five feet in height;
 her breasts were firm and upright; her cheek a very garden of delight;
 her colour lively bright; her face gleamed like dawn through curly
 tresses which gloomed like night, and above the snows of her bosom
 glittered teeth of a pearly white.[206] As the poet said of one like
 her:—

 Slim-waisted loveling, jetty hair-encrowned ✿ A wand of willow on a
    sandy mound:

 And as saith another:—

 Four things that meet not, save they here unite ✿ To shed my
    heart-blood and to rape my sprite:
 Brilliantest forehead; tresses jetty bright; ✿ Cheeks rosy red and
    stature beauty-dight.

 When I looked upon her I prostrated myself before Him who had created
 her, for the beauty and loveliness He had shaped in her, and she looked
 at me and said, "Art thou man or Jinni?" "I am a man," answered I, and
 she, "Now who brought thee to this place where I have abided
 five-and-twenty years without even yet seeing man in it." Quoth I (and
 indeed I found her words wonder-sweet, and my heart was melted to the
 core by them), "O my lady, my good fortune led me hither for the
 dispelling of my cark and care." Then I related to her all my mishap
 from first to last, and my case appeared to her exceeding grievous; so
 she wept and said, "I will tell thee my story in my turn. I am the
 daughter of the King Ifitamus, lord of the Islands of Abnús,[207] who
 married me to my cousin, the son of my paternal uncle; but on my
 wedding night an Ifrit named Jirjís[208] bin Rajmús, first cousin that
 is, mother's sister's son, of Iblís, the Foul Fiend, snatched me up
 and, flying away with me like a bird, set me down in this place,
 whither he conveyed all I needed of fine stuffs, raiment and jewels and
 furniture, and meat and drink and other else. Once in every ten days he
 comes here and lies a single night with me, and then wends his way, for
 he took me without the consent of his family; and he hath agreed with
 me that if ever I need him by night or by day, I have only to pass my
 hand over yonder two lines engraved upon the alcove, and he will appear
 to me before my fingers cease touching. Four days have now passed since
 he was here; and, as there remain six days before he come again, say
 me, wilt thou abide with me five days, and go hence the day before his
 coming?" I replied "Yes, and yes again! O rare, if all this be not a
 dream!" Hereat she was glad and, springing to her feet, seized my hand
 and carried me through an arched doorway to a Hammam-bath, a fair hall
 and richly decorate. I doffed my clothes, and she doffed hers; then we
 bathed and she washed me; and when this was done we left the bath, and
 she seated me by her side upon a high divan, and brought me sherbet
 scented with musk. When we felt cool after the bath, she set food
 before me and we ate and fell to talking; but presently she said to me,
 "Lay thee down and take thy rest, for surely thou must be weary." So I
 thanked her, my lady, and lay down and slept soundly, forgetting all
 that had happened to me. When I awoke I found her rubbing and
 shampooing my feet;[209] so I again thanked her and blessed her and we
 sat for a while talking. Said she, "By Allah, I was sad at heart, for
 that I have dwelt alone underground for these five-and-twenty years;
 and praise be to Allah, who hath sent me some one with whom I can
 converse!" Then she asked, "O youth, what sayest thou to wine?" and I
 answered, "Do as thou wilt." Whereupon she went to a cupboard and took
 out a sealed flask of right old wine and set off the table with flowers
 and scented herbs and began to sing these lines:—

 Had we known of thy coming we fain had dispread ✿ The cores of our
    hearts or the balls of our eyes;
 Our cheeks as a carpet to greet thee had thrown ✿ And our eyelids had
    strown for thy feet to betread.

 Now when she finished her verse I thanked her, for indeed love of her
 had gotten hold of my heart and my grief and anguish were gone. We sat
 at converse and carousal till nightfall, and with her I spent the
 night—such night never spent I in all my life! On the morrow delight
 followed delight till midday, by which time I had drunken wine so
 freely that I had lost my wits, and stood up, staggering to the right
 and to the left, and said "Come, O my charmer, and I will carry thee up
 from this underground vault and deliver thee from the spell of thy
 Jinni." She laughed and replied "Content thee and hold thy peace: of
 every ten days one is for the Ifrit and the other nine are thine."
 Quoth I (and in good sooth drink had got the better of me), "This very
 instant will I break down the alcove whereon is graven the talisman and
 summon the Ifrit that I may slay him, for it is a practise of mine to
 slay Ifrits!" When she heard my words her colour waxed wan and she
 said, "By Allah, do not!" and she began repeating:—

 This is a thing wherein destruction lies ✿ I rede thee shun it an thy
    wits be wise.

 And these also:—

 O thou who seekest severance, draw the rein ✿ Of thy swift steed nor
    seek o'ermuch t' advance;
 Ah stay! for treachery is the rule of life, ✿ And sweets of meeting end
    in severance.

 I heard her verse but paid no heed to her words, nay, I raised my foot
 and administered to the alcove a mighty kick——And Shahrazad perceived
 the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

                  Now when it was the Thirteenth Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the second
 Kalandar thus continued his tale to the lady:—But when, O my mistress,
 I kicked that alcove with a mighty kick, behold, the air starkened and
 darkened and thundered and lightened; the earth trembled and quaked and
 the world became invisible. At once the fumes of wine left my head: I
 cried to her, "What is the matter?" and she replied, "The Ifrit is upon
 us! did I not warn thee of this? By Allah, thou hast brought ruin upon
 me; but fly for thy life and go up by the way thou camest down!" So I
 fled up the staircase; but, in the excess of my fear, I forgot sandals
 and hatchet. And when I had mounted two steps I turned to look for
 them, and lo! I saw the earth cleave asunder, and there arose from it
 an Ifrit, a monster of hideousness, who said to the damsel, "What
 trouble and pother be this wherewith thou disturbest me? What mishap
 hath betided thee?" "No mishap hath befallen me" she answered, "save
 that my breast was straitened[210] and my heart heavy with sadness: so
 I drank a little wine to broaden it and to hearten myself; then I rose
 to obey a call of Nature, but the wine had gotten into my head and I
 fell against the alcove." "Thou liest, like the whore thou art!"
 shrieked the Ifrit; and he looked around the hall right and left till
 he caught sight of my axe and sandals and said to her, "What be these
 but the belongings of some mortal who hath been in thy society?" She
 answered, "I never set eyes upon them till this moment: they must have
 been brought by thee hither cleaving to thy garments." Quoth the Ifrit,
 "These words are absurd; thou harlot! thou strumpet!" Then he stripped
 her stark naked and, stretching her upon the floor, bound her hands and
 feet to four stakes, like one crucified;[211] and set about torturing
 and trying to make her confess. I could not bear to stand listening to
 her cries and groans; so I climbed the stair on the quake with fear;
 and when I reached the top I replaced the trap-door and covered it with
 earth. Then repented I of what I had done with penitence exceeding; and
 thought of the lady and her beauty and loveliness, and the tortures she
 was suffering at the hands of the accursed Ifrit, after her quiet life
 of five-and-twenty years; and how all that had happened to her was for
 cause of me. I bethought me of my father and his kingly estate and how
 I had become a woodcutter; and how, after my time had been awhile
 serene, the world had again waxed turbid and troubled to me. So I wept
 bitterly and repeated this couplet:—

 What time Fate's tyranny shall most oppress thee ✿ Perpend! one day
    shall joy thee, one distress thee!

 Then I walked till I reached the home of my friend, the Tailor, whom I
 found most anxiously expecting me; indeed he was, as the saying goes,
 on coals of fire for my account. And when he saw me he said, "All night
 long my heart hath been heavy, fearing for thee from wild beasts or
 other mischances. Now praise be to Allah for thy safety!" I thanked him
 for his friendly solicitude and, retiring to my corner, sat pondering
 and musing on what had befallen me; and I blamed and chided myself for
 my meddlesome folly and my frowardness in kicking the alcove. I was
 calling myself to account when behold, my friend, the Tailor, came to
 me and said, "O youth, in the shop there is an old man, a Persian,[212]
 who seeketh thee: he hath thy hatchet and thy sandals which he had
 taken to the woodcutters,[213] saying, I was going out at what time the
 Mu'azzin began the call to dawn-prayer, when I chanced upon these
 things and know not whose they are; so direct me to their owner. The
 woodcutters recognised thy hatchet and directed him to thee: he is
 sitting in my shop, so fare forth to him and thank him and take thine
 axe and sandals." When I heard these words I turned yellow with fear
 and felt stunned as by a blow; and, before I could recover myself, lo!
 the floor of my private room clove asunder, and out of it rose the
 Persian who was the Ifrit. He had tortured the lady with exceeding
 tortures, natheless she would not confess to him aught; so he took the
 hatchet and sandals and said to her, "As surely as I am Jirjis of the
 seed of Iblis, I will bring thee back the owner of this and
 these!"[214] Then he went to the woodcutters with the pretence
 aforesaid and, being directed to me, after waiting a while in the shop
 till the fact was confirmed, he suddenly snatched me up as a hawk
 snatcheth a mouse and flew high in air; but presently descended and
 plunged with me under the earth (I being aswoon the while), and lastly
 set me down in the subterranean palace wherein I had passed that
 blissful night. And there I saw the lady stripped to the skin, her
 limbs bound to four stakes and blood welling from her sides. At the
 sight my eyes ran over with tears; but the Ifrit covered her person and
 said, "O wanton, is not this man thy lover?" She looked upon me and
 replied, "I wot him not nor have I ever seen him before this hour!"
 Quoth the Ifrit, "What! this torture and yet no confessing;" and quoth
 she, "I never saw this man in my born days, and it is not lawful in
 Allah's sight to tell lies on him." "If thou know him not," said the
 Ifrit to her, "take this sword and strike off his head."[215] She hent
 the sword in hand and came close up to me; and I signalled to her with
 my eyebrows, my tears the while flowing adown my cheeks. She understood
 me and made answer, also by signs, "How couldest thou bring all this
 evil upon me?" and I rejoined after the same fashion, "This is the time
 for mercy and forgiveness." And the mute tongue of my case[216] spake
 aloud saying:—

 Mine eyes were dragomans for my tongue betied ✿ And told full clear the
    love I fain would hide:
 When last we met and tears in torrents railed ✿ For tongue struck dumb
    my glances testified:
 She signed with eye-glance while her lips were mute ✿ I signed with
    fingers and she kenned th' implied:
 Our eyebrows did all duty 'twixt us twain; ✿ And we being speechless
    Love spake loud and plain.

 Then, O my mistress, the lady threw away the sword and said, "How shall
 I strike the neck of one I wot not, and who hath done me no evil? Such
 deed were not lawful in my law!" and she held her hand. Said the Ifrit,
 "'Tis grievous to thee to slay thy lover; and, because he hath lain
 with thee, thou endurest these torments and obstinately refusest to
 confess. After this it is clear to me that only like loveth and pitieth
 like." Then he turned to me and asked me, "O man, haply thou also dost
 not know this woman;" whereto I answered, "And pray who may she be?
 assuredly I never saw her till this instant." "Then take the sword,"
 said he "and strike off her head and I will believe that, thou wottest
 her not and will leave thee free to go, and will not deal hardly with
 thee." I replied, "That will I do;" and, taking the sword went forward
 sharply and raised my hand to smite. But she signed to me with her
 eyebrows, "Have I failed thee in aught of love; and is it thus that
 thou requitest me?" I understood what her looks implied and answered
 her with an eye-glance, "I will sacrifice my soul for thee." And the
 tongue of the case wrote in our hearts these lines:—

 How many a lover with his eyebrows speaketh ✿ To his beloved, as his
    passion pleadeth:
 With flashing eyne his passion he inspireth ✿ And well she seeth what
    his pleading needeth.
 How sweet the look when each on other gazeth; ✿ And with what swiftness
    and how sure it speedeth:
 And this with eyebrows all his passion writeth; ✿ And that with
    eyeballs all his passion readeth.

 Then my eyes filled with tears to overflowing and I cast the sword from
 my hand saying, "O mighty Ifrit and hero, if a woman lacking wits and
 faith deem it unlawful to strike off my head, how can it be lawful for
 me, a man, to smite her neck whom I never saw in my whole life. I
 cannot do such misdeed though thou cause me drink the cup of death and
 perdition." Then said the Ifrit, "Ye twain show the good understanding
 between you; but I will let you see how such doings end." He took the
 sword, and struck off the lady's hands first, with four strokes, and
 then her feet; whilst I looked on and made sure of death and she
 farewelled me with her dying eyes. So the Ifrit cried at her, "Thou
 whorest and makest me a wittol with thine eyes;" and struck her so that
 her head went flying. Then turned he to me and said, "O mortal, we have
 it in our law that, when the wife committeth advowtry it is lawful for
 us to slay her. As for this damsel I snatched her away on her
 bride-night when she was a girl of twelve and she knew no one but
 myself. I used to come to her once in every ten days and lie with her
 the night, under the semblance of a man, a Persian; and when I was well
 assured that she had cuckolded me, I slew her. But as for thee I am not
 well satisfied that thou hast wronged me in her; nevertheless I must
 not let thee go unharmed; so ask a boon of me and I will grant it."
 Then I rejoiced, O my lady, with exceeding joy and said, "What boon
 shall I crave of thee?" He replied, "Ask me this boon; into what shape
 I shall bewitch thee; wilt thou be a dog, or an ass or an ape?" I
 rejoined (and indeed I had hoped that mercy might be shown me), "By
 Allah, spare me, that Allah spare thee for sparing a Moslem and a man
 who never wronged thee." And I humbled myself before him with exceeding
 humility, and remained standing in his presence, saying, "I am sore
 oppressed by circumstance." He replied "Talk me no long talk, it is in
 my power to slay thee; but I give thee instead thy choice." Quoth I, "O
 thou Ifrit, it would besit thee to pardon me even as the Envied
 pardoned the Envier." Quoth he, "And how was that?" and I began to tell
 him


                _THE TALE OF THE ENVIER AND THE ENVIED._

 They relate, O Ifrit, that in a certain city were two men who dwelt in
 adjoining houses, having a common party-wall; and one of them envied
 the other and looked on him with an evil eye,[217] and did his utmost
 endeavour to injure him; and, albeit at all times he was jealous of his
 neighbour, his malice at last grew on him till he could hardly eat or
 enjoy the sweet pleasures of sleep. But the Envied did nothing save
 prosper; and the more the other strove to injure him, the more he got
 and gained and throve. At last the malice of his neighbour and the
 man's constant endeavour to work him a harm came to his knowledge; so
 he said, "By Allah! God's earth is wide enough for its people;" and,
 leaving the neighbourhood, he repaired to another city where he bought
 himself a piece of land in which was a dried up draw-well,[218] old and
 in ruinous condition. Here he built him an oratory and, furnishing it
 with a few necessaries, took up his abode therein, and devoted himself
 to prayer and worshipping Allah Almighty; and Fakirs and holy
 mendicants flocked to him from all quarters; and his fame went abroad
 through the city and that country side. Presently the news reached his
 envious neighbour, of what good fortune had befallen him and how the
 city notables had become his disciples; so he travelled to the place
 and presented himself at the holy man's hermitage, and was met by the
 Envied with welcome and greeting and all honour. Then quoth the Envier,
 "I have a word to say to thee; and this is the cause of my faring
 hither, and I wish to give thee a piece of good news; so come with me
 to thy cell." Thereupon the Envied arose and took the Envier by the
 hand, and they went in to the inmost part of the hermitage; but the
 Envier said, "Bid thy Fakirs retire to their cells, for I will not tell
 thee what I have to say, save in secret where none may hear us."
 Accordingly the Envied said to his Fakirs, "Retire to your private
 cells;" and, when all had done as he bade them, he set out with his
 visitor and walked a little way until the twain reached the ruinous old
 well. And as they stood upon the brink the Envier gave the Envied a
 push which tumbled him headlong into it, unseen of any; whereupon he
 fared forth, and went his ways, thinking to have had slain him. Now
 this well happened to be haunted by the Jann who, seeing the case, bore
 him up and let him down little by little, till he reached the bottom,
 when they seated him upon a large stone. Then one of them asked his
 fellows, "Wot ye who be this man?" and they answered, "Nay." "This
 man," continued the speaker, "is the Envied hight who, flying from the
 Envier, came to dwell in our city, and here founded this holy house,
 and he hath edified us by his litanies[219] and his lections of the
 Koran; but the Envier set out and journeyed till he rejoined him, and
 cunningly contrived to deceive him and cast him into the well where we
 now are. But the fame of this good man hath this very night come to the
 Sultan of our city who designeth to visit him on the morrow on account
 of his daughter." "What aileth his daughter?" asked one, and another
 answered "She is possessed of a spirit; for Maymun, son of Damdam, is
 madly in love with her; but, if this pious man knew the remedy, her
 cure would be as easy as could be." Hereupon one of them inquired, "And
 what is the medicine?" and he replied, "The black tom-cat which is with
 him in the oratory hath, on the end of his tail, a white spot, the size
 of a dirham; let him pluck seven white hairs from the spot, then let
 him fumigate her therewith and the Marid will flee from her and not
 return; so she shall be sane for the rest of her life. All this took
 place, O Ifrit, within earshot of the Envied who listened readily. When
 dawn broke and morn arose in sheen and shone, the Fakirs went to seek
 the Shaykh and found him climbing up the wall of the well; whereby he
 was magnified in their eyes.[220] Then, knowing that naught save the
 black tom-cat could supply him with the remedy required, he plucked the
 seven tail-hairs from the white spot and laid them by him; and hardly
 had the sun risen ere the Sultan entered the hermitage, with the great
 lords of his estate, bidding the rest of his retinue to remain standing
 outside. The Envied gave him a hearty welcome, and seating him by his
 side asked him, "Shall I tell thee the cause of thy coming?" The King
 answered "Yes." He continued, "Thou hast come upon pretext of a
 visitation;[221] but it is in thy heart to question me of thy
 daughter." Replied the King, "'Tis even so, O thou holy Shaykh;" and
 the Envied continued, "Send and fetch her, and I trust to heal her
 forthright (an such it be the will of Allah!). The King in great joy
 sent for his daughter, and they brought her pinioned and fettered. The
 Envied made her sit down behind a curtain and taking out the hairs
 fumigated her therewith; whereupon that which was in her head cried out
 and departed from her. The girl was at once restored to her right mind
 and veiling her face, said, "What hath happened and who brought me
 hither?" The Sultan rejoiced with a joy which nothing could exceed, and
 kissed his daughter's eyes,[222] and the holy man's hand; then, turning
 to his great lords, he asked, "How say ye! What fee deserveth he who
 hath made my daughter whole?" and all answered "He deserveth her to
 wife;" and the King said, "Ye speak sooth!" So he married him to her
 and the Envied thus became son-in-law to the King. And after a little
 the Wazir died and the King said, "Whom can I make Minister in his
 stead?" "Thy son-in-law," replied the courtiers. So the Envied became a
 Wazir; and after a while the Sultan also died and the lieges said,
 "Whom shall we make King?" and all cried, "The Wazir." So the Wazir was
 forthright made Sultan, and he became King regnant, a true ruler of
 men. One day as he had mounted his horse; and, in the eminence of his
 kinglihood, was riding amidst his Emirs and Wazirs and the Grandees of
 his realm his eye fell upon his old neighbour, the Envier, who stood
 afoot on his path; so he turned to one of his Ministers, and said,
 "Bring hither that man and cause him no affright." The Wazir brought
 him and the King said, "Give him a thousand miskáls[223] of gold from
 the treasury, and load him ten camels with goods for trade, and send
 him under escort to his own town." Then he bade his enemy farewell and
 sent him away and forbore to punish him for the many and great evils he
 had done. See, O Ifrit, the mercy of the Envied to the Envier, who had
 hated him from the beginning and had borne him such bitter malice and
 never met him without causing him trouble; and had driven him from
 house and home, and then had journeyed for the sole purpose of taking
 his life by throwing him into the well. Yet he did not requite his
 injurious dealing, but forgave him and was bountiful to him.[224] Then
 I wept before him, O my lady, with sore weeping, never was there sorer,
 and I recited:—

 Pardon my fault, for 'tis the wise man's wont ✿ All faults to pardon
    and revenge forgo:
 In sooth all manner faults in me contain ✿ Then deign of goodness
    mercy-grace to show:
 Whoso imploreth pardon from on High ✿ Should hold his hand from sinners
    here below.

 Said the Ifrit, "Lengthen not thy words! As to my slaying thee fear it
 not, and as to my pardoning thee hope it not; but from my bewitching
 thee there is no escape." Then he tore me from the ground which closed
 under my feet and flew with me into the firmament till I saw the earth
 as a large white cloud or a saucer[225] in the midst of the waters.
 Presently he set me down on a mountain, and taking a little dust, over
 which he muttered some magical words, sprinkled me therewith, saying,
 "Quit that shape and take thou the shape of an ape!" And on the instant
 I became an ape, a tail-less baboon, the son of a century[226]. Now
 when he had left me and I saw myself in this ugly and hateful shape, I
 wept for myself, but resigned my soul to the tyranny of Time and
 Circumstance, well weeting that Fortune is fair and constant to no man.
 I descended the mountain and found at the foot a desert plain, long and
 broad, over which I travelled for the space of a month till my course
 brought me to the brink of the briny sea.[227] After standing there
 awhile, I was ware of a ship in the offing which ran before a fair wind
 making for the shore: I hid myself behind a rock on the beach and
 waited till the ship drew near, when I leaped on board. I found her
 full of merchants and passengers and one of them cried, "O Captain,
 this ill-omened brute will bring us ill-luck!" and another said, "Turn
 this ill-omened beast out from among us;" the Captain said, "Let us
 kill it!" another said, "Slay it with the sword;" a third, "Drown it;"
 and a fourth, "Shoot it with an arrow." But I sprang up and laid hold
 of the Rais's[228] skirt, and shed tears which poured down my chops.
 The Captain took pity on me, and said, "O merchants! this ape hath
 appealed to me for protection and I will protect him; henceforth he is
 under my charge: so let none do him aught hurt or harm, otherwise there
 will be bad blood between us." Then he entreated me kindly and
 whatsoever he said I understood and ministered to his every want and
 served him as a servant, albeit my tongue would not obey my wishes; so
 that he came to love me. The vessel sailed on, the wind being fair, for
 the space of fifty days; at the end of which we cast anchor under the
 walls of a great city wherein was a world of people, especially learned
 men, none could tell their number save Allah. No sooner had we arrived
 than we were visited by certain Mameluke-officials from the King of
 that city; who, after boarding us, greeted the merchants and giving
 them joy of safe arrival said, "Our King welcometh you, and sendeth you
 this roll of paper, whereupon each and every of you must write a line.
 For ye shall know that the King's Minister, a calligrapher of renown,
 is dead, and the King hath sworn a solemn oath that he will make none
 Wazir in his stead who cannot write as well as he could." He then gave
 us the scroll which measured ten cubits long by a breadth of one, and
 each of the merchants who knew how to write wrote a line thereon, even
 to the last of them; after which I stood up (still in the shape of an
 ape) and snatched the roll out of their hands. They feared lest I
 should tear it or throw it overboard; so they tried to stay me and
 scare me, but I signed to them that I could write, whereat all
 marvelled, saying, "We never yet saw an ape write." And the Captain
 cried, "Let him write; and if he scribble and scrabble we will kick him
 out and kill him; but if he write fair and scholarly I will adopt him
 as my son; for surely I never yet saw a more intelligent and
 well-mannered monkey than he. Would Heaven my real son were his match
 in morals and manners." I took the reed, and stretching out my paw,
 dipped it in ink and wrote, in the hand used for letters,[229] these
 two couplets:—

 Time hath recorded gifts she gave the great; ✿ But none recorded thine
    which be far higher;
 Allah ne'er orphan men by loss of thee ✿ Who be of Goodness mother,
    Bounty's sire.

 And I wrote in Rayháni or larger letters elegantly curved:—[230]

 Thou hast a reed[231] of rede to every land, ✿ Whose driving causeth
    all the world to thrive;
 Nil is the Nile of Misraim by thy boons ✿ Who makest misery smile with
    fingers five.

 Then I wrote in the Suls[232] character:—

 There be no writer who from Death shall fleet, ✿ But what his hand hath
    writ men shall repeat:
 Write, therefore, naught save what shall serve thee when ✿ Thou see't
    on Judgment-Day an so thou see't!

 Then I wrote in the character Naskh:—[233]

 When to sore parting Fate our love shall doom, ✿ To distant life by
    Destiny decreed,
 We cause the inkhorn's lips to 'plain our pains, ✿ And tongue our
    utterance with the talking reed.

 And I wrote in the Túmár character[234]:—

 Kingdom with none endures; if thou deny ✿ This truth, where be the
    Kings of earlier earth?
 Set trees of goodliness while rule endures, ✿ And when thou art fallen
    they shall tell thy worth.

 And I wrote in the character Muhakkak[235]:—

 When oped the inkhorn of thy wealth and fame ✿ Take ink of generous
    heart and gracious hand;
 Write brave and noble deeds while write thou can ✿ And win thee praise
    from point of pen and brand.

 Then I gave the scroll to the officials and, after we all had written
 our line, they carried it before the King. When he saw the paper no
 writing pleased him save my writing; and he said to the assembled
 courtiers, "Go seek the writer of these lines and dress him in a
 splendid robe of honour; then mount him on a she-mule,[236] let a band
 of music precede him and bring him to the presence." At these words
 they smiled and the King was wroth with them and cried "O accursed! I
 give you an order and you laugh at me?" "O King," replied they, "if we
 laugh 'tis not at thee and not without a cause." "And what is it?"
 asked he; and they answered, "O King, thou orderest us to bring to thy
 presence the man who wrote these lines; now the truth is that he who
 wrote them is not of the sons of Adam,[237] but an ape, a tail-less
 baboon, belonging to the ship-Captain." Quoth he, "Is this true that
 you say?" Quoth they "Yea! by the rights of thy munificence!" The King
 marvelled at their words and shook with mirth and said, "I am minded to
 buy this ape of the Captain." Then he sent messengers to the ship with
 the mule, the dress, the guard and the state-drums, saying, "Not the
 less do you clothe him in the robe of honour and mount him on the mule
 and let him be surrounded by the guards and preceded by the band of
 music." They came to the ship and took me from the Captain and robed me
 in the robe of honour and, mounting me on the she-mule, carried me in
 state-procession through the streets; whilst the people were amazed and
 amused. And folk said to one another "Halloo! is our Sultan about to
 make an ape his Minister?"; and came all agog crowding to gaze at me,
 and the town was astir and turned topsy-turvy on my account. When they
 brought me up to the King and set me in his presence, I kissed the
 ground before him three times, and once before the High Chamberlain and
 great officers, and he bade me be seated, and I sat respectfully on
 shins and knees,[238] and all who were present marvelled at my fine
 manners, and the King most of all. Thereupon he ordered the lieges to
 retire; and, when none remained save the King's majesty, the Eunuch on
 duty and a little white slave, he bade them set before me the table of
 food, containing all manner of birds, whatever hoppeth and flieth and
 treadeth in nest, such as quail and sand-grouse. Then he signed to me
 to eat with him; so I rose and kissed ground before him, then sat me
 down and ate with him. And when the table was removed I washed my hands
 in seven waters and took the reed-case and reed; and wrote instead of
 speaking these couplets:—

 Wail for the little partridges on porringer and plate; ✿ Cry for the
    ruin of the fries and stews well marinate:
 Keen as I keen for loved, lost daughters of the Katá-grouse,[239] ✿ And
    omelette round the fair enbrownèd fowls agglomerate:
 O fire in heart of me for fish, those _deux poissons_ I saw, ✿ Bedded
    on new made scones[240] and cakes in piles to laniate.
 For thee, O vermicelli! aches my very maw! I hold ✿ Without thee every
    taste and joy are clean annihilate.
 Those eggs have rolled their yellow eyes in torturing pains of fire ✿
    Ere served with hash and fritters hot, that delicatest cate,
 Praisèd be Allah for His baked and roast and ah! how good ✿ This pulse,
    these pot-herbs steeped in oil with eysill combinate!
 When hunger sated was, I elbow-propt fell back upon ✿ Meat-pudding[241]
    wherein gleamed the bangles that my wits amate.
 Then woke I sleeping appetite to eat as though in sport ✿ Sweets from
    brocaded trays and kickshaws most elaborate.
 Be patient, soul of me! Time is a haughty, jealous wight; ✿ To-day he
    seems dark-lowering and to-morrow fair to sight.[242]

 Then I rose and seated myself at a respectful distance while the King
 read what I had written, and marvelled, exclaiming, "O the miracle,
 that an ape should be gifted with this graceful style and this power of
 penmanship! By Allah, 'tis a wonder of wonders!"

 Presently they set before the King choice wines in flagons of glass and
 he drank: then he passed on the cup to me; and I kissed the ground and
 drank and wrote on it:—

 With fire they boilèd me to loose my tongue,[243] ✿ And pain and
    patience gave for fellowship:
 Hence comes it hands of men upbear me high ✿ And honey-dew from lips of
    maid I sip!

 And these also:—

 Morn saith to Night, "withdraw and let me shine;" ✿ So drain we
    draughts that dull all pain and pine:[244]
 I doubt, so fine the glass, the wine so clear, ✿ If 'tis the wine in
    glass or glass in wine.

 The King read my verse and said with a sigh, "Were these gifts[245] in
 a man, he would excel all the folk of his time and age!" Then he called
 for the chess-board, and said, "Say, wilt thou play with me?"; and I
 signed with my head, "Yes." Then I came forward and ordered the pieces
 and played with him two games, both of which I won. He was speechless
 with surprise; so I took the pen-case and, drawing forth a reed, wrote
 on the board these two couplets:—

 Two hosts fare fighting thro' the livelong day ✿ Nor is their battling
    ever finishèd,
 Until, when darkness girdeth them about, ✿ The twain go sleeping in a
    single bed.[246]

 The King read these lines with wonder and delight and said to his
 Eunuch,[247] "O Mukbil, go to thy mistress, Sitt al-Husn,[248] and say
 her, Come, speak the King who biddeth thee hither to take thy solace in
 seeing this right wondrous ape!" So the Eunuch went out and presently
 returned with the lady who, when she saw me veiled her face and said,
 "O my father! hast thou lost all sense of honour? How cometh it thou
 art pleased to send for me and show me to strange men?" "O Sitt
 al-Husn," said he, "no man is here save this little foot-page and the
 Eunuch who reared thee and I, thy father. From whom, then, dost thou
 veil thy face?" She answered, "This whom thou deemest an ape is a young
 man, a clever and polite, a wise and learned and the son of a King; but
 he is ensorcelled and the Ifrit Jirjaris, who is of the seed of Iblis,
 cast a spell upon him, after putting to death his own wife the daughter
 of King Ifitamus lord of the Islands of Abnus." The King marvelled at
 his daughter's words and, turning to me, said, "Is this true that she
 saith of thee?"; and I signed by a nod of my head the answer "Yea,
 verily;" and wept sore. Then he asked his daughter "Whence knewest thou
 that he is ensorcelled?"; and she answered "O my dear papa, there was
 with me in my childhood an old woman, a wily one and a wise and a witch
 to boot, and she taught me the theory of magic and its practice; and I
 took notes in writing and therein waxed perfect, and have committed to
 memory an hundred and seventy chapters of egromantic formulas, by the
 least of which I could transport the stones of thy city behind the
 Mountain Kaf and the Circumambient Main,[249] or make its site an abyss
 of the sea and its people fishes swimming in the midst of it." "O my
 daughter," said her father, "I conjure thee, by my life, disenchant
 this young man, that I may make him my Wazir and marry thee to him, for
 indeed he is an ingenious youth and a deeply learned." "With joy and
 goodly gree," she replied and, hending in hand an iron knife whereon
 was inscribed the name of Allah in Hebrew characters, she described a
 wide circle——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
 her permitted say.

                  Now when it was the Fourteenth Night,

[Illustration]

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Kalandar
 continued his tale thus:—O my lady, the King's daughter hent in hand a
 knife whereon were inscribed Hebrew characters and described a wide
 circle in the midst of the palace-hall, and therein wrote in Cufic
 letters mysterious names and talismans; and she uttered words and
 muttered charms, some of which we understood and others we understood
 not. Presently the world waxed dark before our sight till we thought
 that the sky was falling upon our heads, and lo! the Ifrit presented
 himself in his own shape and aspect. His hands were like many-pronged
 pitchforks, his legs like the masts of great ships, and his eyes like
 cressets of gleaming fire. We were in terrible fear of him but the
 King's daughter cried at him, "No welcome to thee and no greeting, O
 dog!" whereupon he changed to the form of a lion and said, "O
 traitress, how is it thou hast broken the oath we sware that neither
 should contraire other!" "O accursed one," answered she, "how could
 there be a compact between me and the like of thee?" Then said he,
 "Take what thou has brought on thyself;" and the lion opened his jaws
 and rushed upon her; but she was too quick for him; and, plucking a
 hair from her head, waved it in the air muttering over it the while;
 and the hair straightway became a trenchant sword-blade, wherewith she
 smote the lion and cut him in twain. Then the two halves flew away in
 air and the head changed to a scorpion and the Princess became a huge
 serpent and set upon the accursed scorpion, and the two fought, coiling
 and uncoiling, a stiff fight for an hour at least. Then the scorpion
 changed to a vulture and the serpent became an eagle which set upon the
 vulture, and hunted him for an hour's time, till he became a black
 tom-cat, which miauled and grinned and spat. Thereupon the eagle
 changed into a piebald wolf and these two battled in the palace for a
 long time, when the cat, seeing himself overcome, changed into a worm
 and crept into a huge red pomegranate,[250] which lay beside the
 jetting fountain in the midst of the palace hall. Whereupon the
 pomegranate swelled to the size of a water-melon in air; and, falling
 upon the marble pavement of the palace, broke to pieces, and all the
 grains fell out and were scattered about till they covered the whole
 floor. Then the wolf shook himself and became a snow-white cock, which
 fell to picking up the grains purposing not to leave one; but by doom
 of destiny one seed rolled to the fountain-edge and there lay hid. The
 cock fell to crowing and clapping his wings and signing to us with his
 beak as if to ask, "Are any grains left?" But we understood not what he
 meant, and he cried to us with so loud a cry that we thought the palace
 would fall upon us. Then he ran over all the floor till he saw the
 grain which had rolled to the fountain edge, and rushed eagerly to pick
 it up when behold, it sprang into the midst of the water and became a
 fish and dived to the bottom of the basin. Thereupon the cock changed
 to a big fish, and plunged in after the other, and the two disappeared
 for a while and lo! we heard loud shrieks and cries of pain which made
 us tremble. After this the Ifrit rose out of the water, and he was as a
 burning flame; casting fire and smoke from his mouth and eyes and
 nostrils. And immediately the Princess likewise came forth from the
 basin and she was one live coal of flaming lowe; and these two, she and
 he, battled for the space of an hour, until their fires entirely
 compassed them about and their thick smoke filled the palace. As for us
 we panted for breath, being well-nigh suffocated, and we longed to
 plunge into the water fearing lest we be burnt up and utterly
 destroyed; and the King said, "There is no Majesty and there is no
 Might save in Allah the Glorious, the Great! Verily we are Allah's and
 unto Him are we returning! Would Heaven I had not urged my daughter to
 attempt the disenchantment of this ape-fellow, whereby I have imposed
 upon her the terrible task of fighting yon accursed Ifrit against whom
 all the Ifrits in the world could not prevail. And would Heaven we had
 never seen this ape, Allah never assain nor bless the day of his
 coming! We thought to do a good deed by him before the face of
 Allah,[251] and to release him from enchantment, and now we have
 brought this trouble and travail upon our heart." But I, O my lady, was
 tongue-tied and powerless to say a word to him. Suddenly, ere we were
 ware of aught, the Ifrit yelled out from under the flames and, coming
 up to us as we stood on the estrade, blew fire in our faces. The damsel
 overtook him and breathed blasts of fire at his face and the sparks
 from her and from him rained down upon us, and her sparks did us no
 harm, but one of his sparks alighted upon my eye and destroyed it
 making me a monocular ape; and another fell on the King's face
 scorching the lower half, burning off his beard and mustachios and
 causing his under teeth to fall out; while a third alighted on the
 Castrato's breast, killing him on the spot. So we despaired of life and
 made sure of death when lo! a voice repeated the saying, "Allah is most
 Highest! Allah is most Highest! Aidance and victory to all who the
 Truth believe; and disappointment and disgrace to all who the religion
 of Mohammed, the Moon of Faith, unbelieve," The speaker was the
 Princess who had burnt the Ifrit, and he was become a heap of ashes.
 Then she came up to us and said, "Reach me a cup of water." They
 brought it to her and she spoke over it words we understood not, and
 sprinkling me with it cried, "By virtue of the Truth, and by the Most
 Great name of Allah, I charge thee return to thy former shape." And
 behold, I shook and became a man as before, save that I had utterly
 lost an eye. Then she cried out, "The fire! The fire! O my dear papa an
 arrow from the accursed hath wounded me to the death, for I am not used
 to fight with the Jann; had he been a man I had slain him in the
 beginning. I had no trouble till the time when the pomegranate burst
 and the grains scattered, but I overlooked the seed wherein was the
 very life of the Jinni. Had I picked it up he had died on the spot, but
 as Fate and Fortune decreed, I saw it not; so he came upon me all
 unawares and there befel between him and me a sore struggle under the
 earth and high in air and in the water; and, as often as I opened on
 him a gate,[252] he opened on me another gate and a stronger, till at
 last he opened on me the gate of fire, and few are saved upon whom the
 door of fire openeth. But Destiny willed that my cunning prevail over
 his cunning; and I burned him to death after I vainly exhorted him to
 embrace the religion of Al-Islam. As for me I am a dead woman; Allah
 supply my place to you!" Then she called upon Heaven for help and
 ceased not to implore relief from the fire; when lo! a black spark shot
 up from her robed feet to her thighs; then it flew to her bosom and
 thence to her face. When it reached her face she wept and said, "I
 testify that there is no god but _the_ God and that Mahommed is the
 Apostle of God!" And we looked at her and saw naught but a heap of
 ashes by the side of the heap that had been the Ifrit. We mourned for
 her and I wished I had been in her place, so had I not seen her lovely
 face who had worked me such weal become ashes; but there is no
 gainsaying the will of Allah. When the King saw his daughter's terrible
 death, he plucked out what was left of his beard and beat his face and
 rent his raiment; and I did as he did and we both wept over her. Then
 came in the Chamberlains and Grandees and were amazed to find two heaps
 of ashes and the Sultan in a fainting fit; so they stood round him till
 he revived and told them what had befallen his daughter from the Ifrit;
 whereat their grief was right grievous and the women and the
 slave-girls shrieked and keened,[253] and they continued their
 lamentations for the space of seven days. Moreover the King bade build
 over his daughter's ashes a vast vaulted tomb, and burn therein wax
 tapers and sepulchral lamps: but as for the Ifrit's ashes they
 scattered them on the winds, speeding them to the curse of Allah. Then
 the Sultan fell sick of a sickness that well nigh brought him to his
 death for a month's space; and, when health returned to him and his
 beard grew again and he had been converted by the mercy of Allah to
 Al-Islam, he sent for me and said, "O youth, Fate had decreed for us
 the happiest of lives, safe from all the chances and changes of Time,
 till thou camest to us, when troubles fell upon us. Would to Heaven we
 had never seen thee and the foul face of thee! For we took pity on thee
 and thereby we have lost our all. I have on thy account first lost my
 daughter who to me was well worth an hundred men; secondly I have
 suffered that which befel me by reason of the fire and the loss of my
 teeth, and my Eunuch also was slain. I blame thee not, for it was out
 of thy power to prevent this: the doom of Allah was on thee as well as
 on us and thanks be to the Almighty for that my daughter delivered
 thee, albeit thereby she lost her own life! Go forth now, O my son,
 from this my city, and suffice thee what hath befallen us through thee,
 even although 'twas decreed for us. Go forth in peace; and if I ever
 see thee again I will surely slay thee." And he cried out at me. So I
 went forth from his presence, O my lady, weeping bitterly and hardly
 believing in my escape and knowing not whither I should wend. And I
 recalled all that had befallen me, my meeting the tailor, my love for
 the damsel in the palace beneath the earth, and my narrow escape from
 the Ifrit, even after he had determined to do me die; and how I had
 entered the city as an ape and was now leaving it a man once more. Then
 I gave thanks to Allah and said, "My eye and not my life!" and before
 leaving the place I entered the bath and shaved my poll and beard and
 mustachios and eyebrows; and cast ashes on my head and donned the
 coarse black woollen robe of a Kalandar. Then I fared forth, O my lady,
 and every day I pondered all the calamities which had betided me, and I
 wept and repeated these couplets:—

 "I am distraught, yet verily His ruth abides with me, ✿ Tho' round me
    gather hosts of ills, whence come I cannot see:
 Patient I'll be till Patience self with me impatient wax; ✿ Patient for
    ever till the Lord fulfil my destiny:
 Patient I'll bide without complaint, a wronged and vanquisht man; ✿
    Patient as sunparcht wight that spans the desert's sandy sea:
 Patient I'll be till Aloe's[254] self unwittingly allow ✿ I'm patient
    under bitterer things than bitterest aloë:
 No bitterer things than aloes or than patience for mankind; ✿ Yet
    bitterer than the twain to me were Patience' treachery:
 My sere and seamed and seared brow would dragoman my sore ✿ If soul
    could search my sprite and there unsecret secrecy:
 Were hills to bear the load I bear they'd crumble 'neath the weight; ✿
    'Twould still the roaring wind, 'twould quench the flame-tongue's
    flagrancy,
 And whoso saith the world is sweet certès a day he'll see ✿ With more
    than aloes' bitterness and aloes' pungency."

 Then I journeyed through many regions and saw many a city intending for
 Baghdad, that I might seek audience, in the House of Peace,[255] with
 the Commander of the Faithful and tell him all that had befallen me. I
 arrived here this very night and found my brother in Allah, this first
 Kalandar, standing about as one perplexed; so I saluted him with "Peace
 be upon thee," and entered into discourse with him. Presently up came
 our brother, this third Kalandar, and said to us, "Peace be with you! I
 am a stranger;" whereto we replied, "And we too be strangers, who have
 come hither this blessed night." So we all three walked on together,
 none of us knowing the other's history, till Destiny drave us to this
 door and we came in to you. Such then is my story and my reason for
 shaving my beard and mustachios, and this is what caused the loss of my
 eye. Said the house-mistress "Thy tale is indeed a rare; so rub thy
 head and wend thy ways;" but he replied, "I will not budge till I hear
 my companions' stories." Then came forward the third Kalandar, and
 said, "O illustrious lady! my history is not like that of these my
 comrades, but more wondrous and far more marvellous. In their case Fate
 and Fortune came down on them unawares; but I drew down destiny upon my
 own head and brought sorrow on mine own soul, and shaved my own beard
 and lost my own eye. Hear then"


                      _THE THIRD KALANDAR'S TALE._

 Know, O my lady, that I also am a King and the Son of a King and my
 name is Ajíb son of Khazíb. When my father died I succeeded him; and I
 ruled and did justice and dealt fairly by all my lieges. I delighted in
 sea trips, for my capital stood on the shore, before which the ocean
 stretched far and wide; and nearhand were many great islands with
 sconces and garrisons in the midst of the main. My fleet numbered fifty
 merchantmen, and as many yachts for pleasance, and an hundred and fifty
 sail ready fitted for holy war with the Unbelievers. It fortuned that I
 had a mind to enjoy myself on the islands aforesaid, so I took ship
 with my people in ten keel; and, carrying with me a month's victual, I
 set out on a twenty days voyage. But one night a head wind struck us,
 and the sea rose against us with huge waves; the billows sorely
 buffetted us and a dense darkness settled round us. We gave ourselves
 up for lost and I said, "Whoso endangereth his days, e'en an he 'scape
 deserveth no praise." Then we prayed to Allah and besought Him; but the
 storm-blasts ceased not to blow against us nor the surges to strike us
 till morning broke, when the gale fell, the seas sank to mirrory
 stillness and the sun shone upon us kindly clear. Presently we made an
 island where we landed and cooked somewhat of food, and ate heartily
 and took our rest for a couple of days. Then we set out again and
 sailed other twenty days, the seas broadening and the land shrinking.
 Presently the current ran counter to us, and we found ourselves in
 strange waters, where the Captain had lost his reckoning, and was
 wholly bewildered in this sea; so said we to the look-out man,[256]
 "Get thee to the mast-head and keep thine eyes open." He swarmed up the
 mast and looked out and cried aloud, "O Rais, I espy to starboard
 something dark, very like a fish floating on the face of the sea, and
 to larboard there is a loom in the midst of the main, now black and now
 bright." When the Captain heard the look-out's words he dashed his
 turband on the deck and plucked out his beard and beat his face saying,
 "Good news indeed! we be all dead men; not one of us can be saved." And
 he fell to weeping and all of us wept for his weeping and also for our
 lives; and I said, "O Captain, tell us what it is the look-out saw." "O
 my Prince," answered he, "know that we lost our course on the night of
 the storm, which was followed on the morrow by a two-days' calm during
 which we made no way; and we have gone astray eleven days reckoning
 from that night, with ne'er a wind to bring us back to our true course.
 To-morrow by the end of the day we shall come to a mountain of black
 stone, hight the Magnet Mountain;[257] for thither the currents carry
 us willy-nilly. As soon as we are under its lea, the ship's sides will
 open and every nail in plank will fly out and cleave fast to the
 mountain; for that Almighty Allah hath gifted the loadstone with a
 mysterious virtue and a love for iron, by reason whereof all which is
 iron travelleth towards it; and on this mountain is much iron, how much
 none knoweth save the Most High, from the many vessels which have been
 lost there since the days of yore. The bright spot upon its summit is a
 dome of yellow laton from Andalusia, vaulted upon ten columns; and on
 its crown is a horseman who rideth a horse of brass and holdeth in hand
 a lance of laton; and there hangeth on his bosom a tablet of lead
 graven with names and talismans." And he presently added, "And, O King,
 none destroyeth folk save the rider on that steed, nor will the
 egromancy be dispelled till he fall from his horse."[258] Then, O my
 lady, the Captain wept with exceeding weeping and we all made sure of
 death-doom and each and every one of us farewelled his friend and
 charged him with his last will and testament in case he might be saved.
 We slept not that night and in the morning we found ourselves much
 nearer the Loadstone Mountain, whither the waters drave us with a
 violent send. When the ships were close under its lea they opened and
 the nails flew out and all the iron in them sought the Magnet Mountain
 and clove to it like a network; so that by the end of the day we were
 all struggling in the waves round about the mountain. Some of us were
 saved, but more were drowned and even those who had escaped knew not
 one another, so stupefied were they by the beating of the billows and
 the raving of the winds. As for me, O my lady, Allah (be His name
 exalted!) preserved my life that I might suffer whatso He willed to me
 of hardship, misfortune and calamity; for I scrambled upon a plank from
 one of the ships, and the wind and waters threw it at the feet of the
 Mountain. There I found a practicable path leading by steps carven out
 of the rock to the summit, and I called on the name of Allah
 Almighty[259]——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
 say her permitted say.

                  Now when it was the Fifteenth Night,

 She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the third
 Kalandar said to the lady (the rest of the party sitting fast bound and
 the slaves standing with swords drawn over their heads):—And after
 calling on the name of Almighty Allah and passionately beseeching Him,
 I breasted the ascent, clinging to the steps and notches hewn in the
 stone, and mounted little by little. And the Lord stilled the wind and
 aided me in the ascent, so that I succeeded in reaching the summit.
 There I found no resting-place save the dome, which I entered, joying
 with exceeding joy at my escape; and made the Wuzu-ablution[260] and
 prayed a two-bow prayer[261] a thanksgiving to God for my preservation.
 Then I fell asleep under the dome, and heard in my dream a mysterious
 Voice[262] saying, "O son of Khazib! when thou wakest from thy sleep
 dig under thy feet and thou shalt find a bow of brass and three leaden
 arrows, inscribed with talismans and characts. Take the bow and shoot
 the arrows at the horseman on the dome-top and free mankind from this
 sore calamity. When thou hast shot him he shall fall into the sea, and
 the horse will also drop at thy feet: then bury it in the place of the
 bow. This done, the main will swell and rise till it is level with the
 mountain-head, and there will appear on it a skiff carrying a man of
 laton (other than he thou shalt have shot) holding in his hand a pair
 of paddles. He will come to thee and do thou embark with him but beware
 of saying Bismillah or of otherwise naming Allah Almighty. He will row
 thee for a space of ten days, till he bring thee to certain Islands
 called the Islands of Safety, and thence thou shalt easily reach a port
 and find those who will convey thee to thy native land; and all this
 shall be fulfilled to thee so thou call not on the name of Allah." Then
 I started up from my sleep in joy and gladness and, hastening to do the
 bidding of the mysterious Voice, found the bow and arrows and shot at
 the horseman and tumbled him into the main, whilst the horse dropped at
 my feet; so I took it and buried it. Presently the sea surged up and
 rose till it reached the top of the mountain; nor had I long to wait
 ere I saw a skiff in the offing coming towards me. I gave thanks to
 Allah; and, when the skiff came up to me, I saw therein a man of brass
 with a tablet of lead on his breast inscribed with talismans and
 characts; and I embarked without uttering a word. The boatman rowed on
 with me through the first day and the second and the third, in all ten
 whole days, till I caught sight of the Islands of Safety; whereat I
 joyed with exceeding joy and for stress of gladness exclaimed, "Allah!
 Allah! In the name of Allah! There is no god but _the_ God and Allah is
 Almighty."[263] Thereupon the skiff forthwith upset and cast me upon
 the sea; then it righted and sank deep into the depths. Now I am a fair
 swimmer, so I swam the whole day till nightfall, when my forearms and
 shoulders were numbed with fatigue and I felt like to die; so I
 testified to my Faith, expecting naught but death. The sea was still
 surging under the violence of the winds, and presently there came a
 billow like a hillock; and, bearing me up high in air, threw me with a
 long cast on dry land, that His will might be fulfilled. I crawled up
 the beach and doffing my raiment wrung it out to dry and spread it in
 the sunshine: then I lay me down and slept the whole night. As soon as
 it was day, I donned my clothes and rose to look whither I should walk.
 Presently I came to a thicket of low trees; and, making a cast round
 it, found that the spot whereon I stood was an islet, a mere holm, girt
 on all sides by the ocean; whereupon I said to myself, "Whatso freeth
 me from one great calamity casteth me into a greater!" But while I was
 pondering my case and longing for death behold, I saw afar off a ship
 making for the island; so I clomb a tree and hid myself among the
 branches. Presently the ship anchored and landed ten slaves,
 blackamoors, bearing iron hoes and baskets, who walked on till they
 reached the middle of the island. Here they dug deep into the ground,
 until they uncovered a plate of metal which they lifted, thereby
 opening a trap-door. After this they returned to the ship and thence
 brought bread and flour, honey and fruits, clarified butter,[264]
 leather bottles containing liquors and many household stuffs; also
 furniture, table-service and mirrors; rugs, carpets and in fact all
 needed to furnish a dwelling; and they kept going to and fro, and
 descending by the trap-door, till they had transported into the
 dwelling all that was in the ship. After this the slaves again went on
 board and brought back with them garments as rich as may be, and in the
 midst of them came an old old man, of whom very little was left, for
 Time had dealt hardly and harshly with him, and all that remained of
 him was a bone wrapped in a rag of blue stuff, through which the winds
 whistled west and east. As saith the poet of him:—

 Time gars me tremble Ah, how sore the baulk! ✿ While Time in pride of
    strength doth ever stalk:
 Time was I walked nor ever felt I tired, ✿ Now am I tired albe I never
    walk!

 And the Shaykh held by the hand a youth cast in beauty's mould, all
 elegance and perfect grace; so fair that his comeliness deserved to be
 proverbial; for he was as a green bough or the tender young of the roe,
 ravishing every heart with his loveliness and subduing every soul with
 his coquetry and amorous ways.[265] It was of him the poet spake when
 he said:—

 Beauty they brought with him to make compare; ✿ But Beauty hung her
    head in shame and care:
 Quoth they, "O Beauty, hast thou seen his like?" ✿ And Beauty cried,
    "His like? not anywhere!"

 They stinted not their going, O my lady, till all went down by the
 trap-door and did not reappear for an hour, or rather more; at the end
 of which time the slaves and the old man came up without the youth and,
 replacing the iron plate and carefully closing the door-slab, as it was
 before, they returned to the ship and made sail and were lost to my
 sight. When they turned away to depart, I came down from the tree and,
 going to the place I had seen them fill up, scraped off and removed the
 earth; and in patience possessed my soul till I had cleared the whole
 of it away. Then appeared the trap-door which was of wood, in shape and
 size like a millstone; and when I lifted it up it disclosed a winding
 staircase of stone. At this I marvelled and, descending the steps till
 I reached the last, found a fair hall, spread with various kinds of
 carpets and silk stuffs, wherein was a youth sitting upon a raised
 couch and leaning back on a round cushion with a fan in his hand and
 nosegays and posies of sweet scented herbs and flowers before him;[266]
 but he was alone and not a soul near him in the great vault. When he
 saw me he turned pale; but I saluted him courteously and said, "Set thy
 mind at ease and calm thy fears; no harm shall come near thee; I am a
 man like thyself and the son of a King to boot; whom the decrees of
 Destiny have sent to bear thee company and cheer thee in thy
 loneliness. But now tell me, what is thy story and what causeth thee to
 dwell thus in solitude under the ground?" When he was assured that I
 was of his kind and no Jinni, he rejoiced and his fine colour returned;
 and, making me draw near to him he said, "O my brother, my story is a
 strange story and 'tis this. My father is a merchant-jeweller possessed
 of great wealth, who hath white and black slaves travelling and trading
 on his account in ships and on camels, and trafficking with the most
 distant cities; but he was not blessed with a child, not even one. Now
 on a certain night he dreamed a dream that he should be favoured with a
 son, who would be short lived; so the morning dawned on my father
 bringing him woe and weeping. On the following night my mother
 conceived and my father noted down the date of her becoming
 pregnant.[267] Her time being fulfilled she bare me; whereat my father
 rejoiced and made banquets and called together the neighbours and fed
 the Fakirs and the poor, for that he had been blessed with issue near
 the end of his days. Then he assembled the astrologers and astronomers
 who knew the places of the planets, and the wizards and wise ones of
 the time, and men learned in horoscopes and nativities;[268] and they
 drew out my birth scheme and said to my father:—Thy son shall live to
 fifteen years, but in his fifteenth there is a sinister aspect; an he
 safely tide it over he shall attain a great age. And the cause that
 threateneth him with death is this. In the Sea of Peril standeth the
 Mountain Magnet hight; on whose summit is a horseman of yellow laton
 seated on a horse also of brass and bearing on his breast a tablet of
 lead. Fifty days after this rider shall fall from his steed thy son
 will die and his slayer will be he who shoots down the horseman, a
 Prince named Ajib son of King Khazib. My father grieved with exceeding
 grief to hear these words; but reared me in tenderest fashion and
 educated me excellently well till my fifteenth year was told. Ten days
 ago news came to him that the horseman had fallen into the sea and he
 who shot him down was named Ajib son of King Khazib. My father
 thereupon wept bitter tears at the need of parting with me and became
 like one possessed of a Jinni. However, being in mortal fear for me, he
 built me this place under the earth; and, stocking it with all required
 for the few days still remaining, he brought me hither in a ship and
 left me here. Ten are already past and, when the forty shall have gone
 by without danger to me, he will come and take me away; for he hath
 done all this only in fear of Prince Ajib. Such, then, is my story and
 the cause of my loneliness." When I heard his history I marvelled and
 said in my mind, "I am the Prince Ajib who hath done all this; but as
 Allah is with me I will surely not slay him!" So said I to him, O my
 lord, far from thee be this hurt and harm and then, please Allah, thou
 shalt not suffer cark nor care nor aught disquietude, for I will tarry
 with thee and serve thee as a servant, and then wend my ways; and,
 after having borne thee company during the forty days, I will go with
 thee to thy home where thou shalt give me an escort of some of thy
 Mamelukes with whom I may journey back to my own city; and the Almighty
 shall requite thee for me. He was glad to hear these words, when I rose
 and lighted a large wax-candle and trimmed the lamps and the three
 lanterns; and I set on meat and drink and sweetmeats. We ate and drank
 and sat talking over various matters till the greater part of the night
 was gone; when he lay down to rest and I covered him up and went to
 sleep myself. Next morning I arose and warmed a little water, then
 lifted him gently so as to awake him and brought him the warm water
 wherewith he washed his face[269] and said to me, "Heaven requite thee
 for me with every blessing, O youth! By Allah, if I get quit of this
 danger and am saved from him whose name is Ajib bin Khazib, I will make
 my father reward thee and send thee home healthy and wealthy; and, if I
 die, then my blessing be upon thee." I answered, "May the day never
 dawn on which evil shall betide thee; and may Allah make my last day
 before thy last day!" Then I set before him somewhat of food and we
 ate; and I got ready perfumes for fumigating the hall, wherewith he was
 pleased. Moreover I made him a Mankalah-cloth;[270] and we played and
 ate sweetmeats and we played again and took our pleasure till
 nightfall, when I rose and lighted the lamps, and set before him
 somewhat to eat, and sat telling him stories till the hours of darkness
 were far spent. Then he lay down to rest and I covered him up and
 rested also. And thus I continued to do, O my lady for days and nights,
 and affection for him took root in my heart and my sorrow was eased,
 and I said to myself, The astrologers lied[271] when they predicted
 that he should be slain by Ajib bin Khazib: by Allah, I will not slay
 him. I ceased not ministering to him and conversing and carousing with
 him and telling him all manner tales for thirty-nine days. On the
 fortieth night[272] the youth rejoiced and said, "O my brother,
 Alhamdolillah!—praise be to Allah—who hath preserved me from death and
 this is by thy blessing and the blessing of thy coming to me; and I
 pray God that He restore thee to thy native land. But now, O my
 brother, I would thou warm me some water for the Ghusl-ablution and do
 thou kindly bathe me and change my clothes." I replied, "With love and
 gladness;" and I heated water in plenty and carrying it in to him
 washed his body all over, the washing of health,[273] with meal of
 lupins[274] and rubbed him well and changed his clothes and spread him
 a high bed whereon he lay down to rest, being drowsy after bathing.
 Then said he, "O my brother, cut me up a water-melon, and sweeten it
 with a little sugar-candy."[275] So I went to the store-room and
 bringing out a fine water-melon I found there, set it on a platter and
 laid it before him saying, "O my master hast thou not a knife?" "Here
 it is," answered he, "over my head upon the high shelf." So I got up in
 haste and taking the knife drew it from its sheath; but my foot slipped
 in stepping down and I fell heavily upon the youth holding in my hand
 the knife which hastened to fulfil what had been written on the Day
 that decided the destinies of man, and buried itself, as if planted, in
 the youth's heart. He died on the instant. When I saw that he was slain
 and knew that I had slain him, maugre myself, I cried out with an
 exceeding loud and bitter cry and beat my face and rent my raiment and
 said, "Verily we be Allah's and unto Him we be returning, O Moslems! O
 folk fain of Allah! there remained for this youth but one day of the
 forty dangerous days which the astrologers and the learned had foretold
 for him; and the predestined death of this beautiful one was to be at
 my hand. Would Heaven I had not tried to cut the water-melon. What dire
 misfortune is this I must bear lief or loath? What a disaster! What an
 affliction! O Allah mine, I implore thy pardon and declare to Thee my
 innocence of his death. But what God willeth let that come to
 pass."[276]——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
 her permitted say.

                  Now when it was the Sixteenth Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ajib thus
 continued his tale to the lady:—When I was certified that I had slain
 him, I arose and ascending the stairs replaced the trap-door and
 covered it with earth as before. Then I looked out seawards and saw the
 ship cleaving the waters and making for the island, wherefore I was
 afeard and said, "The moment they come and see the youth done to death,
 they will know 'twas I who slew him and will slay me without respite."
 So I climbed up into a high tree and concealed myself among its leaves;
 and hardly had I done so when the ship anchored and the slaves landed
 with the ancient man, the youth's father, and made direct for the place
 and when they removed the earth they were surprised to see it
 soft.[277] Then they raised the trap-door and went down and found the
 youth lying at full length, clothed in fair new garments with a face
 beaming after the bath, and the knife deep in his heart. At the sight
 they shrieked and wept and beat their faces, loudly cursing the
 murderer; whilst a swoon came over the Shaykh so that the slaves deemed
 him dead, unable to survive his son. At last they wrapped the slain
 youth in his clothes and carried him up and laid him on the ground
 covering him with a shroud of silk. Whilst they were making for the
 ship the old man revived; and, gazing on his son who was stretched out,
 fell on the ground and strewed dust over his head and smote his face
 and plucked out his beard; and his weeping redoubled as he thought of
 his murdered son and he swooned away once more. After awhile a slave
 went and fetched a strip of silk whereupon they lay the old man and sat
 down at his head. All this took place and I was on the tree above them
 watching everything that came to pass; and my heart became hoary before
 my head waxed grey, for the hard lot which was mine, and for the
 distress and anguish I had undergone, and I fell to reciting:—

 "How many a joy by Allah's will hath fled ✿ With flight escaping sight
    of wisest head!
 How many a sadness shall begin the day, ✿ Yet grow right gladsome ere
    the day is sped!
 How many a weal trips on the heels of ill, ✿ Causing the mourner's
    heart with joy to thrill!"[278]

 But the old man, O my lady, ceased not from his swoon till near sunset,
 when he came to himself and, looking upon his dead son, he recalled
 what had happened, and how what he had dreaded had come to pass; and he
 beat his face and head and recited these couplets:—

 "Racked is my heart by parting fro' my friends ✿ And two rills ever
    fro' my eyelids flow:
 With them[279] went forth my hopes, Ah, well away! ✿ What shift
    remaineth me to say or do?
 Would I had never looked upon their sight, ✿ What shift, fair sirs,
    when paths e'er straiter grow?
 What charm shall calm my pangs when this wise burn ✿ Longings of love
    which in my vitals glow?
 Would I had trod with them the road of Death! ✿ Ne'er had befel us
    twain this parting-blow:
 Allah: I pray the Ruthful show me ruth ✿ And mix our lives nor part
    them evermo'e!
 How blest were we as 'neath one roof we dwelt ✿ Conjoined in joys nor
    recking aught of woe;
 Till Fortune shot us with the severance shaft; ✿ Ah who shall patient
    bear such parting throe?
 And dart of Death struck down amid the tribe ✿ The age's pearl that
    Morn saw brightest show:
 I cried the while his case took speech and said:—✿ Would Heaven, my
    son, Death mote his doom foreslow!
 Which be the readiest road wi' thee to meet ✿ My Son! for whom I would
    my soul bestow?
 If sun I call him no! the sun doth set; ✿ If moon I call him, wane the
    moons; Ah no!
 O sad mischance o' thee, O doom of days, ✿ Thy place none other love
    shall ever know:
 Thy sire distracted sees thee, but despairs ✿ By wit or wisdom Fate to
    overthrow:
 Some evil eye this day hath cast its spell ✿ And foul befal him as it
    foul befel!"

 Then he sobbed a single sob and his soul fled his flesh. The slaves
 shrieked aloud "Alas, our lord!" and showered dust on their heads and
 redoubled their weeping and wailing. Presently they carried their dead
 master to the ship side by side with his dead son and, having
 transported all the stuff from the dwelling to the vessel, set sail and
 disappeared from mine eyes. I descended from the tree and, raising the
 trap-door, went down into the underground dwelling where everything
 reminded me of the youth; and I looked upon the poor remains of him and
 began repeating these verses:—

 Their tracks I see, and pine with pain and pang ✿ And on deserted
    hearths I weep and yearn:
 And Him I pray who doomèd them depart ✿ Some day vouchsafe the boon of
    safe return.[280]

 Then, O my lady, I went up again by the trap-door, and every day I used
 to wander round about the island and every night I returned to the
 underground hall. Thus I lived for a month, till at last, looking at
 the western side of the island, I observed that every day the tide
 ebbed, leaving shallow water for which the flow did not compensate; and
 by the end of the month the sea showed dry land in that direction. At
 this I rejoiced making certain of my safety; so I arose and fording
 what little was left of the water got me to the main land, where I fell
 in with great heaps of loose sand in which even a camel's hoof would
 sink up to the knee.[281] However I emboldened my soul and wading
 through the sand behold, a fire shone from afar burning with a blazing
 light.[282] So I made for it hoping haply to find succour and broke out
 into these verses:—

 "Belike my Fortune may her bridle turn ✿ And Time bring weal although
    he's jealous hight;
 Forward my hopes, and further all my needs, ✿ And passèd ills with
    present weals requite."

 And when I drew near the fire aforesaid lo! it was a palace with gates
 of copper burnished red which, when the rising sun shone thereon,
 gleamed and glistened from afar showing what had seemed to me a fire. I
 rejoiced in the sight, and sat down over against the gate, but I was
 hardly settled in my seat before there met me ten young men clothed in
 sumptuous gear and all were blind of the left eye which appeared as
 plucked out. They were accompanied by a Shaykh, an old, old man, and
 much I marvelled at their appearance, and their all being blind of the
 same eye. When they saw me, they saluted me with the Salam and asked me
 of my case and my history; whereupon I related to them all what had
 befallen me, and what full measure of misfortune was mine. Marvelling
 at my tale they took me to the mansion, where I saw ranged round the
 hall ten couches each with its blue bedding and coverlet of blue
 stuff[283] and amiddlemost stood a smaller couch furnished like them
 with blue and nothing else. As we entered each of the youths took his
 seat on his own couch and the old man seated himself upon the smaller
 one in the middle saying to me, "O youth, sit thee down on the floor
 and ask not of our case nor of the loss of our eyes." Presently he rose
 up and set before each young man some meat in a charger and drink in a
 large mazer, treating me in like manner; and after that they sat
 questioning me concerning my adventures and what had betided me: and I
 kept telling them my tale till the night was far spent. Then said the
 young men, "O our Shaykh, wilt not thou set before us our ordinary? The
 time is come." He replied, "With love and gladness," and rose and
 entering a closet disappeared, but presently returned bearing on his
 head ten trays each covered with a strip of blue stuff. He set a tray
 before each, youth and, lighting ten wax candles, he stuck one upon
 each tray, and drew off the covers and lo! under them was naught but
 ashes and powdered charcoal and kettle soot. Then all the young men
 tucked up their sleeves to the elbows and fell a-weeping and wailing
 and they blackened their faces and smeared their clothes and buffetted
 their brows and beat their breasts, continually exclaiming, "We were
 sitting at our ease but our frowardness brought us unease!" They ceased
 not to do thus till dawn drew nigh, when the old man rose and heated
 water for them; and they washed their faces, and donned other and clean
 clothes. Now when I saw this, O my lady, for very wonderment my senses
 left me and my wits went wild and heart and head were full of thought,
 till I forgot what had betided me and I could not keep silence feeling
 I fain must speak out and question them of these strangenesses; so I
 said to them, "How come ye to do this after we have been so
 open-hearted and frolicksome? Thanks be to Allah ye be all sound and
 sane, yet actions such as these befit none but mad men or those
 possessed of an evil spirit. I conjure you by all that is dearest to
 you, why stint ye to tell me your history, and the cause of your losing
 your eyes and your blackening your faces with ashes and soot?" Hereupon
 they turned to me and said, "O young man, hearken not to thy
 youthtide's suggestions and question us no questions." Then they slept
 and I with them and when they awoke the old man brought us somewhat of
 food; and, after we had eaten and the plates and goblets had been
 removed, they sat conversing till nightfall when the old man rose and
 lit the wax candles and lamps and set meat and drink before us. After
 we had eaten and drunken we sat conversing and carousing in
 companionage till the noon of night, when they said to the old man,
 "Bring us our ordinary, for the hour of sleep is at hand!" So he rose
 and brought them the trays of soot and ashes; and they did as they had
 done on the preceding night, nor more, nor less. I abode with them
 after this fashion for the space of a month during which time they used
 to blacken their faces with ashes every night, and to wash and change
 their raiment when the morn was young; and I but marvelled the more and
 my scruples and curiosity increased to such a point that I had to
 forego even food and drink. At last, I lost command of myself, for my
 heart was aflame with fire unquenchable and lowe unconcealable and I
 said, "O young men, will ye not relieve my trouble and acquaint me with
 the reason of thus blackening your faces and the meaning of your
 words:—We were sitting at our ease but our frowardness brought us
 unease?" Quoth they "'Twere better to keep these things secret." Still
 I was bewildered by their doings to the point of abstaining from eating
 and drinking and, at last wholly losing patience, quoth I to them,
 "There is no help for it: ye must acquaint me with what is the reason
 of these doings." They replied, "We kept our secret only for thy good:
 to gratify thee will bring down evil upon thee and thou wilt become a
 monocular even as we are." I repeated, "There is no help for it and, if
 ye will not, let me leave you and return to mine own people and be at
 rest from seeing these things, for the proverb saith:—

 Better ye 'bide and I take my leave: ✿ For what eye sees not heart
    shall never grieve."

 Thereupon they said to me, "Remember, O youth, that should ill befal
 thee we will not again harbour thee nor suffer thee to abide amongst
 us;" and bringing a ram they slaughtered it and skinned it. Lastly they
 gave me a knife saying, "Take this skin and stretch thyself upon it and
 we will sew it around thee; presently there shall come to thee a
 certain bird, hight Rukh,[284] that will catch thee up in his pounces
 and tower high in air and then set thee down on a mountain. When thou
 feelest he is no longer flying, rip open the pelt with this blade and
 come out of it; the bird will be scared and will fly away and leave
 thee free. After this fare for half a day, and the march will place
 thee at a palace wondrous fair to behold, towering high in air and
 builded of Khalanj,[285] lign-aloes and sandal-wood, plated with red
 gold, and studded with all manner emeralds and costly gems fit for
 seal-rings. Enter it and thou shalt win to thy wish for we have all
 entered that palace; and such is the cause of our losing our eyes and
 of our blackening our faces. Were we now to tell thee our stories it
 would take too long a time; for each and every of us lost his left eye
 by an adventure of his own." I rejoiced at their words and they did
 with me as they said; and the bird Rukh bore me off and set me down on
 the mountain. Then I came out of the skin and walked on till I reached
 the palace. The door stood open as I entered and found myself in a
 spacious and goodly hall, wide exceedingly, even as a horse-course; and
 around it were an hundred chambers with doors of sandal and aloes woods
 plated with red gold and furnished with silver rings by way of
 knockers.[286] At the head or upper end[287] of the hall I saw forty
 damsels, sumptuously dressed and ornamented and one and all bright as
 moons; none could ever tire of gazing upon them and all so lovely that
 the most ascetic devotee on seeing them would become their slave and
 obey their will. When they saw me the whole bevy came up to me and said
 "Welcome and well come and good cheer[288] to thee, O our lord! This
 whole month have we been expecting thee. Praised be Allah who hath sent
 us one who is worthy of us, even as we are worthy of him!" Then they
 made me sit down upon a high divan and said to me, "This day thou art
 our lord and master, and we are thy servants and thy handmaids, so
 order us as thou wilt." And I marvelled at their case. Presently one of
 them arose and set meat before me and I ate and they ate with me;
 whilst others warmed water and washed my hands and feet and changed my
 clothes, and others made ready sherbets and gave us to drink; and all
 gathered around me being full of joy and gladness at my coming. Then
 they sat down and conversed with me till nightfall, when five of them
 arose and laid the trays and spread them with flowers and fragrant
 herbs and fruits, fresh and dried, and confections in profusion. At
 last they brought out a fine wine-service with rich old wine; and we
 sat down to drink and some sang songs and others played the lute and
 psaltery and recorders and other instruments, and the bowl went merrily
 round. Hereupon such gladness possessed me that I forgot the sorrows of
 the world one and all and said, "This is indeed life; O sad that 'tis
 fleeting!" I enjoyed their company till the time came for rest; and our
 heads were all warm with wine, when they said, "O our lord, choose from
 amongst us her who shall be thy bed-fellow this night and not lie with
 thee again till forty days be past." So I chose a girl fair of face and
 perfect in shape, with eyes Kohl-edged by nature's hand;[289] hair long
 and jet black with slightly parted teeth[290] and joining brows: 'twas
 as if she were some limber graceful branchlet or the slender stalk of
 sweet basil to amaze and to bewilder man's fancy; even as the poet said
 of such an one:—

 To even her with greeny bough were vain ✿ Fool he who finds her
    beauties in the roe:
 When hath the roe those lively lovely limbs ✿ Or honey dews those lips
    alone bestow?
 Those eyne, soul-piercing eyne, which slay with love, ✿ Which bind the
    victim by their shafts laid low?
 My heart to second childhood they beguiled ✿ No wonder: love-sick man
    again is child!

 And I repeated to her the maker's words who said:—

 None other charms but thine shall greet mine eyes, ✿ Nor other image
    can my heart surprize:
 Thy love, my lady, captives all my thoughts ✿ And on that love I'll die
    and I'll arise.

 So I lay with her that night; none fairer I ever knew; and, when it was
 morning, the damsels carried me to the Hammam-bath and bathed me and
 robed me in fairest apparel. Then they served up food, and we ate and
 drank and the cup went round till nightfall when I chose from among
 them one fair of form and face, soft-sided and a model of grace, such
 an one as the poet described when he said:—

 On her fair bosom caskets twain I scanned, ✿ Sealed fast with
    musk-seals lovers to withstand;
 With arrowy glances stand on guard her eyes, ✿ Whose shafts would shoot
    who dares put forth a hand.

 With her I spent a most goodly night; and, to be brief, O my mistress,
 I remained with them in all solace and delight of life, eating and
 drinking, conversing and carousing and every night lying with one or
 other of them. But at the head of the new year they came to me in tears
 and bade me farewell, weeping and crying out and clinging about me;
 whereat I wondered and said, "What may be the matter? verily you break
 my heart!" They exclaimed, "Would Heaven we had never known thee; for,
 though we have companied with many, yet never saw we a pleasanter than
 thou or a more courteous." And they wept again. "But tell me more
 clearly," asked I, "what causeth this weeping which maketh my
 gall-bladder[291] like to burst;" and they answered, "O our lord and
 master, it is severance which maketh us weep; and thou, and thou only,
 art the cause of our tears. If thou hearken to us we need never be
 parted and if thou hearken not we part for ever; but our hearts tell us
 that thou wilt not listen to our words and this is the cause of our
 tears and cries." "Tell me how the case standeth?" "Know, O our lord,
 that we are the daughters of Kings who have met here and have lived
 together for years; and once in every year we are perforce absent for
 forty days and afterwards we return and abide here for the rest of the
 twelvemonth eating and drinking and taking our pleasure and enjoying
 delights: we are about to depart according to our custom; and we fear
 lest after we be gone thou contraire our charge and disobey our
 injunctions. Here now we commit to thee the keys of the palace which
 containeth forty chambers and thou mayest open of these thirty and
 nine, but beware (and we conjure thee by Allah and by the lives of us!)
 lest thou open the fortieth door, for therein is that which shall
 separate us for ever."[292] Quoth I, "Assuredly I will not open it, if
 it contain the cause of severance from you." Then one among them came
 up to me and falling on my neck wept and recited these verses:—

 "If Time unite us after absent-while, ✿ The world harsh frowning on our
    lot shall smile;
 And if thy semblance deign adorn mine eyes,[293] ✿ I'll pardon Time
    past wrongs and by-gone guile."

 And I recited the following:—

 "When drew she near to bid adieu with heart unstrung, ✿ While care and
    longing on that day her bosom wrung;
 Wet pearls she wept and mine like red carnelians rolled ✿ And, joined
    in sad _rivière_, around her neck they hung."

 When I saw her weeping I said, "By Allah I will never open that
 fortieth door, never and no wise!" and I bade her farewell. Thereupon
 all departed flying away like birds; signalling with their hands
 farewells as they went and leaving me alone in the palace. When evening
 drew near I opened the door of the first chamber and entering it found
 myself in a place like one of the pleasaunces of Paradise. It was a
 garden with trees of freshest green and ripe fruits of yellow sheen;
 and its birds were singing clear and keen and rills ran wimpling
 through the fair terrene. The sight and sounds brought solace to my
 sprite; and I walked among the trees, and I smelt the breath of the
 flowers on the breeze; and heard the birdies sing their melodies
 hymning the One, the Almighty in sweetest litanies; and I looked upon
 the apple whose hue is parcel red and parcel yellow; as said the poet:—

 Apple whose hue combines in union mellow ✿ My fair's red cheek, her
    hapless lover's yellow.

 Then I looked upon the quince, and inhaled its fragrance which putteth
 to shame musk and ambergris, even as the poet hath said:—

 Quince every taste conjoins; in her are found ✿ Gifts which for queen
    of fruits the Quince have crowned;
 Her taste is wine, her scent the waft of musk; ✿ Pure gold her hue, her
    shape the Moon's fair round.

 Then I looked upon the pear whose taste surpasseth sherbet and sugar;
 and the apricot[294] whose beauty striketh the eye with admiration, as
 if she were a polished ruby. Then I went out of the place and locked
 the door as it was before. When it was the morrow I opened the second
 door; and entering found myself in a spacious plain set with tall
 date-palms and watered by a running stream whose banks were shrubbed
 with bushes of rose and jasmine, while privet and eglantine, oxe-eye,
 violet and lily, narcissus, origane and the winter gilliflower carpeted
 the borders; and the breath of the breeze swept over these
 sweet-smelling growths diffusing their delicious odours right and left,
 perfuming the world and filling my soul with delight. After taking my
 pleasure there awhile I went from it and, having closed the door as it
 was before, opened the third door wherein I saw a high open hall
 pargetted with particoloured marbles and _pietra dura_ of price and
 other precious stones, and hung with cages of sandal-wood and
 eagle-wood; full of birds which made sweet music, such as the
 "Thousand-voiced,"[295] and the cushat, the merle, the turtle-dove and
 the Nubian ring-dove. My heart was filled with pleasure thereby; my
 grief was dispelled and I slept in that aviary till dawn. Then I
 unlocked the door of the fourth chamber and therein found a grand
 saloon with forty smaller chambers giving upon it. All their doors
 stood open: so I entered and found them full of pearls and jacinths and
 beryls and emeralds and corals and carbuncles, and all manner precious
 gems and jewels, such as tongue of man may not describe. My thought was
 stunned at the sight and I said to myself, "These be things methinks
 united which could not be found save in the treasuries of a King of
 Kings, nor could the monarchs of the world have collected the like of
 these!" And my heart dilated and my sorrows ceased, "For," quoth I,
 "now verily am I the monarch of the age, since by Allah's grace this
 enormous wealth is mine; and I have forty damsels under my hand nor is
 there any to claim them save myself." Then I gave not over opening
 place after place until nine and thirty days were passed and in that
 time I had entered every chamber except that one whose door the
 Princesses had charged me not to open. But my thoughts, O my mistress,
 ever ran on that forbidden fortieth[296] and Satan urged me to open it
 for my own undoing; nor had I patience to forbear, albeit there wanted
 of the trysting time but a single day. So I stood before the chamber
 aforesaid and, after a moment's hesitation, opened the door which was
 plated with red gold, and entered. I was met by a perfume whose like I
 had never before smelt; and so sharp and subtle was the odour that it
 made my senses drunken as with strong wine, and I fell to the ground in
 a fainting fit which lasted a full hour. When I came to myself I
 strengthened my heart and, entering, found myself in a chamber whose
 floor was bespread with saffron and blazing with light from branched
 candelabra of gold and lamps fed with costly oils, which diffused the
 scent of musk and ambergris. I saw there also two great censers each
 big as a mazer-bowl,[297] flaming with lign-aloes, nadd-perfume,[298]
 ambergris and honied scents; and the place was full of their fragrance.
 Presently, O my lady, I espied a noble steed, black as the murks of
 night when murkiest, standing, ready saddled and bridled (and his
 saddle was of red gold) before two mangers, one of clear crystal
 wherein was husked sesame, and the other also of crystal containing
 water of the rose scented with musk. When I saw this I marvelled and
 said to myself, "Doubtless in this animal must be some wondrous
 mystery;" and Satan cozened me, so I led him without the palace and
 mounted him; but he would not stir from his place. So I hammered his
 sides with my heels, but he moved not, and then I took the
 rein-whip[299] and struck him withal. When he felt the blow, he neighed
 a neigh with a sound like deafening thunder and, opening a pair of
 wings[300] flew up with me in the firmament of heaven far beyond the
 eyesight of man. After a full hour of flight he descended and alighted
 on a terrace roof and shaking me off his back lashed me on the face
 with his tail and gouged out my left eye causing it roll along my
 cheek. Then he flew away. I went down from the terrace and found myself
 again amongst the ten one-eyed youths sitting upon their ten couches
 with blue covers; and they cried out when they saw me, "No welcome to
 thee, nor aught of good cheer! We all lived of lives the happiest and
 we ate and drank of the best; upon brocades and cloths of gold we took
 our rest, and we slept with our heads on beauty's breast, but we could
 not await one day to gain the delights of a year!" Quoth I, "Behold I
 have become one like unto you and now I would have you bring me a tray
 full of blackness, wherewith to blacken my face, and receive me into
 your society." "No, by Allah," quoth they, "thou shalt not sojourn with
 us and now get thee hence!" So they drove me away. Finding them reject
 me thus I foresaw that matters would go hard with me, and I remembered
 the many miseries which Destiny had written upon my forehead; and I
 fared forth from among them heavy-hearted and tearful-eyed, repeating
 to myself these words, "I was sitting at mine ease but my frowardness
 brought me to unease." Then I shaved beard and mustachios and eyebrows,
 renouncing the world, and wandered in Kalandar-garb about Allah's
 earth; and the Almighty decreed safety for me till I arrived at
 Baghdad, which was on the evening of this very night. Here I met these
 two other Kalandars standing bewildered; so I saluted them saying, "I
 am a stranger!" and they answered, "And we likewise be strangers!" By
 the freak of Fortune we were like to like, three Kalandars and three
 monoculars all blind of the left eye. Such, O my lady, is the cause of
 the shearing of my beard and the manner of my losing an eye. Said the
 lady to him, "Rub thy head and wend thy ways;" but he answered, "By
 Allah, I will not go until I hear the stories of these others." Then
 the lady, turning towards the Caliph and Ja'afar and Masrur, said to
 them, "Do ye also give an account of yourselves, you men!" Whereupon
 Ja'afar stood forth and told her what he had told the portress as they
 were entering the house; and when she heard his story of their being
 merchants and Mosul-men who had outrun the watch, she said, "I grant
 you your lives each for each sake, and now away with you all." So they
 all went out and when they were in the street, quoth the Caliph to the
 Kalandars, "O company, whither go ye now, seeing that the morning hath
 not yet dawned?" Quoth they, "By Allah, O our lord, we know not where
 to go." "Come and pass the rest of the night with us," said the Caliph
 and, turning to Ja'afar, "Take them home with thee and to-morrow bring
 them to my presence that we may chronicle their adventures." Ja'afar
 did as the Caliph bade him and the Commander of the Faithful returned
 to his palace; but sleep gave no sign of visiting him that night and he
 lay awake pondering the mishaps of the three Kalandar-princes and
 impatient to know the history of the ladies and the two black bitches.
 No sooner had morning dawned than he went forth and sat upon the throne
 of his sovereignty; and, turning to Ja'afar, after all his Grandees and
 Officers of state were gathered together, he said, "Bring me the three
 ladies and the two bitches and the three Kalandars." So Ja'afar fared
 forth and brought them all before him (and the ladies were veiled);
 then the Minister turned to them and said in the Caliph's name, "We
 pardon you your maltreatment of us and your want of courtesy, in
 consideration of the kindness which forewent it, and for that ye knew
 us not: now however I would have you to know that ye stand in presence
 of the fifth[301] of the sons of Abbas, Harun al-Rashid, brother of
 Caliph Músá al-Hádi, son of Al-Mansúr; son of Mohammed the brother of
 Al-Saffáh bin Mohammed who was first of the royal house. Speak ye
 therefore before him the truth and the whole truth!" When the ladies
 heard Ja'afar's words touching the Commander of the Faithful, the
 eldest came forward and said, "O Prince of True Believers, my story is
 one which, were it graven with needle-gravers upon the eye-corners were
 a warner for whoso would be warned and an example for whoso can take
 profit from example."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
 ceased to say her permitted say.

                 Now when it was the Seventeenth Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that she stood forth
 before the Commander of the Faithful and began to tell


                       _THE ELDEST LADY'S TALE._

 Verily a strange tale is mine and 'tis this:—Yon two black bitches are
 my eldest sisters by one mother and father; and these two others, she
 who beareth upon her the signs of stripes and the third our procuratrix
 are my sisters by another mother. When my father died, each took her
 share of the heritage and, after a while my mother also deceased,
 leaving me and my sisters-german three thousand dinars; so each
 daughter received her portion of a thousand dinars and I the same, albe
 the youngest. In due course of time my sisters married with the usual
 festivities and lived with their husbands, who bought merchandise with
 their wives' monies and set out on their travels together. Thus they
 threw me off. My brothers-in-law were absent with their wives five
 years, during which period they spent all the money they had and,
 becoming bankrupt, deserted my sisters in foreign parts amid stranger
 folk. After five years my eldest sister returned to me in beggar's gear
 with her clothes in rags and tatters[302] and a dirty old
 mantilla;[303] and truly she was in the foulest and sorriest plight. At
 first sight I did not know my own sister; but presently I recognised
 her and said "What state is this?" "O our sister," she replied, "Words
 cannot undo the done; and the reed of Destiny hath run through what
 Allah decreed." Then I sent her to the bath and dressed her in a suit
 of mine own, and boiled for her a bouillon and brought her some good
 wine and said to her, "O my sister, thou art the eldest, who still
 standest to us in the stead of father and mother; and, as for the
 inheritance which came to me as to you twain, Allah hath blessed it and
 prospered it to me with increase; and my circumstances are easy, for I
 have made much money by spinning and cleaning silk; and I and you will
 share my wealth alike." I entreated her with all kindliness and she
 abode with me a whole year, during which our thoughts and fancies were
 always full of our other sister. Shortly after she too came home in yet
 fouler and sorrier plight than that of my eldest sister; and I dealt by
 her still more honorably than I had done by the first, and each of them
 had a share of my substance. After a time they said to me, "O our
 sister, we desire to marry again, for indeed we have not patience to
 drag on our days without husbands and to lead the lives of widows
 bewitched;" and I replied, "O eyes of me![304] ye have hitherto seen
 scanty weal in wedlock, for now-a-days good men and true are become
 rareties and curiosities; nor do I deem your projects advisable, as ye
 have already made trial of matrimony and have failed." But they would
 not accept my advice and married without my consent: nevertheless I
 gave them outfit and dowries out of my money; and they fared forth with
 their mates. In a mighty little time their husbands played them false
 and, taking whatever they could lay hands upon, levanted and left them
 in the lurch. Thereupon they came to me ashamed and in abject case and
 made their excuses to me, saying, "Pardon our fault and be not wroth
 with us;[305] for although thou art younger in years yet art thou older
 in wit; henceforth we will never make mention of marriage; so take us
 back as thy handmaidens that we may eat our mouthful." Quoth I,
 "Welcome to you, O my sisters, there is naught dearer to me than you."
 And I took them in and redoubled my kindness to them. We ceased not to
 live after this loving fashion for a full year, when I resolved to sell
 my wares abroad and first to fit me a conveyance for Bassorah; so I
 equipped a large ship, and loaded her with merchandise and valuable
 goods for traffic, and with provaunt and all needful for a voyage, and
 said to my sisters, "Will ye abide at home whilst I travel, or would ye
 prefer to accompany me on the voyage?" "We will travel with thee,"
 answered they, "for we cannot bear to be parted from thee." So I
 divided my monies into two parts, one to accompany me and the other to
 be left in charge of a trusty person, for, as I said to myself, "Haply
 some accident may happen to the ship and yet we remain alive; in which
 case we shall find on our return what may stand us in good stead." I
 took my two sisters and we went a-voyaging some days and nights; but
 the master was careless enough to miss his course, and the ship went
 astray with us and entered a sea other than the sea we sought. For a
 time we knew naught of this; and the wind blew fair for us ten days,
 after which the look-out man went aloft to see about him and cried,
 "Good news!" Then he came down rejoicing and said, "I have seen what
 seemeth to be a city as 'twere a pigeon." Hereat we rejoiced and, ere
 an hour of the day had passed, the buildings showed plain in the offing
 and we asked the Captain, "What is the name of yonder city?" and he
 answered, "By Allah I wot not, for I never saw it before and never
 sailed these seas in my life: but, since our troubles have ended in
 safety, remains for you only to land there with your merchandise and,
 if you find selling profitable, sell and make your market of what is
 there; and if not, we will rest here two days and provision ourselves
 and fare away." So we entered the port and the Captain went up town and
 was absent awhile, after which he returned to us and said, "Arise; go
 up into the city and marvel at the works of Allah with His creatures
 and pray to be preserved from His righteous wrath!" So we landed and
 going up into the city, saw at the gate men hending staves in hand; but
 when we drew near them, behold, they had been translated[306] by the
 anger of Allah and had become stones. Then we entered the city and
 found all who therein woned into black stones enstoned: not an
 inhabited house appeared to the espier, nor was there a blower of
 fire.[307] We were awe struck at the sight and threaded the market
 streets where we found the goods and gold and silver left lying in
 their places; and we were glad and said, "Doubtless there is some
 mystery in all this." Then we dispersed about the thoroughfares and
 each busied himself with collecting the wealth and money and rich
 stuffs, taking scanty heed of friend or comrade. As for myself I went
 up to the castle which was strongly fortified; and, entering the King's
 palace by its gate of red gold, found all the vaiselle of gold and
 silver, and the King himself seated in the midst of his Chamberlains
 and Nabobs and Emirs and Wazirs; all clad in raiment which confounded
 man's art. I drew nearer and saw him sitting on a throne incrusted and
 inlaid with pearls and gems; and his robes were of gold-cloth adorned
 with jewels of every kind, each one flashing like a star. Around him
 stood fifty Mamelukes, white slaves, clothed in silks of divers sorts
 holding their drawn swords in their hands; but when I drew near to them
 lo! all were black stones. My understanding was confounded at the
 sight, but I walked on and entered the great hall of the Harím,[308]
 whose walls I found hung with tapestries of gold-striped silk and
 spread with silken carpets embroidered with golden flowers. Here I saw
 the Queen lying at full length arrayed in robes purfled with fresh
 young[309] pearls; on her head was a diadem set with many sorts of gems
 each fit for a ring[310] and around her neck hung collars and
 necklaces. All her raiment and her ornaments were in natural state but
 she had been turned into a black stone by Allah's wrath. Presently I
 espied an open door for which I made straight and found leading to it a
 flight of seven steps. So I walked up and came upon a place pargetted
 with marble and spread and hung with gold-worked carpets and tapestry,
 amiddlemost of which stood a throne of juniper-wood inlaid with pearls
 and precious stones and set with bosses of emeralds. In the further
 wall was an alcove whose curtains, bestrung with pearls, were let down
 and I saw a light issuing therefrom; so I drew near and perceived that
 the light came from a precious stone as big as an ostrich-egg, set at
 the upper end of the alcove upon a little chryselephantine couch of
 ivory and gold; and this jewel, blazing like the sun, cast its rays
 wide and side. The couch also was spread with all manner of silken
 stuffs amazing the gazer with their richness and beauty. I marvelled
 much at all this, especially when seeing in that place candles ready
 lighted; and I said in my mind, "Needs must some one have lighted these
 candles." Then I went forth and came to the kitchen and thence to the
 buttery and the King's treasure-chambers; and continued to explore the
 palace and to pace from place to place; I forgot myself in my awe and
 marvel at these matters and I was drowned in thought till the night
 came on. Then I would have gone forth, but knowing not the gate I lost
 my way, so I returned to the alcove whither the lighted candles
 directed me and sat down upon the couch; and wrapping myself in a
 coverlet, after I had repeated somewhat from the Koran, I would have
 slept but could not, for restlessness possessed me. When night was at
 its noon I heard a voice chanting the Koran in sweetest accents; but
 the tone thereof was weak; so I rose, glad to hear the silence broken,
 and followed the sound until I reached a closet whose door stood ajar.
 Then peeping through a chink I considered the place and lo! it was an
 oratory wherein was a prayer-niche[311] with two wax candles burning
 and lamps hanging from the ceiling. In it too was spread a
 prayer-carpet whereupon sat a youth fair to see; and before him on its
 stand[312] was a copy of the Koran, from which he was reading. I
 marvelled to see him alone alive amongst the people of the city and
 entering saluted him; whereupon he raised his eyes and returned my
 salam. Quoth I, "Now by the Truth of what thou readest in Allah's Holy
 Book, I conjure thee to answer my question." He looked upon me with a
 smile and said, "O handmaid of Allah, first tell me the cause of thy
 coming hither, and I in turn will tell what hath befallen both me and
 the people of this city, and what was the reason of my escaping their
 doom." So I told him my story whereat he wondered; and I questioned him
 of the people of the city, when he replied, "Have patience with me for
 awhile, O my sister!" and, reverently closing the Holy Book, he laid it
 up in a satin bag. Then he seated me by his side; and I looked at him
 and behold, he was as the moon at its full, fair of face and rare of
 form, soft-sided and slight, of well-proportioned height, and cheek
 smoothly bright and diffusing light; in brief a sweet, a
 sugar-stick,[313] even as saith the poet of the like of him in these
 couplets:—

 That night th' astrologer a scheme of planets drew, ✿ And lo! a
    graceful shape of youth appeared in view:
 Saturn had stained his locks with Saturninest jet, ✿ And spots of
    nut-brown musk on rosy side-face blew:[314]
 Mars tinctured either cheek with tinct of martial red; ✿ Sagittal shots
    from eyelids Sagittarius threw:
 Dowered him Mercury with bright mercurial wit; ✿ Bore off the Bear[315]
    what all man's evil glances grew:
 Amazed stood Astrophil to sight the marvel-birth ✿ When louted low the
    Moon at full to buss the Earth.

 And of a truth Allah the Most High had robed him in the raiment of
 perfect grace and had purfled and fringed it with a cheek all beauty
 and loveliness, even as the poet saith of such an one:—

 By his eyelids shedding perfume and his fine slim waist I swear, ✿ By
    the shooting of his shafts barbed with sorcery passing rare;
 By the softness of his sides,[316] and glances' lingering light; ✿ And
    brow of dazzling day-tide ray and night within his hair;
 By his eyebrows which deny to who look upon them rest, ✿ Now bidding
    now forbidding, ever dealing joy and care;
 By the rose that decks his cheek, and the myrtle of its moss;[317] ✿ By
    jacinths bedded in his lips and pearl his smile lays bare;
 By his graceful bending neck and the curving of his breast; ✿ Whose
    polished surface beareth those granados, lovely pair;
 By his heavy hips that quiver as he passeth in his pride; ✿ Or he
    resteth with that waist which is slim beyond compare;
 By the satin of his skin, by that fine unsullied sprite; ✿ By the
    beauty that containeth all things bright and debonnair;
 By that ever-open hand; by the candour of his tongue; ✿ By noble blood
    and high degree whereof he's hope and heir;
 Musk from him borrows muskiness she loveth to exhale; ✿ And all the
    airs of ambergris through him perfume the air;
 The sun, methinks, the broad bright sun, before my love would pale; ✿
    And sans his splendour would appear a paring of his nail.[318]

 I glanced at him with one glance of eyes which caused me a thousand
 sighs; and my heart was at once taken captive-wise; so I asked him, "O
 my lord and my love, tell me that whereof I questioned thee;" and he
 answered, "Hearing is obeying! Know, O handmaid of Allah, that this
 city was the capital of my father who is the King thou sawest on the
 throne transfigured by Allah's wrath to a black stone, and the Queen
 thou foundest in the alcove is my mother. They and all the people of
 the city were Magians who fire adored in lieu of the Omnipotent
 Lord[319] and were wont to swear by lowe and heat and shade and light,
 and the spheres revolving day and night. My father had ne'er a son till
 he was blest with me near the last of his days; and he reared me till I
 grew up and prosperity anticipated me in all things. Now it so fortuned
 there was with us an old woman well stricken in years, a Moslemah who,
 inwardly believing in Allah and His Apostle, conformed outwardly with
 the religion of my people; and my father placed thorough confidence in
 her for that he knew her to be trustworthy and virtuous; and he treated
 her with ever-increasing kindness believing her to be of his own
 belief. So when I was well-nigh grown up my father committed me to her
 charge saying:—Take him and educate him and teach him the rules of our
 faith; let him have the best instructions and cease not thy fostering
 care of him. So she took me and taught me the tenets of Al-Islam with
 the divine ordinances[320] of the Wuzu-ablution and the five daily
 prayers and she made me learn the Koran by rote, often repeating:—Serve
 none save Allah Almighty! When I had mastered this much of knowledge
 she said to me:—O my son, keep this matter concealed from thy sire and
 reveal naught to him lest he slay thee. So I hid it from him and I
 abode on this wise for a term of days when the old woman died, and the
 people of the city redoubled in their impiety[321] and arrogance and
 the error of their ways. One day, while they were as wont, behold, they
 heard a loud and terrible sound and a crier crying out with a voice
 like roaring thunder so every ear could hear, far and near:—O folk of
 this city leave ye your fire-worshipping and adore Allah the
 All-compassionate King! At this, fear and terror fell upon the citizens
 and they crowded to my father (he being King of the city) and asked
 him:—What is this awesome voice we have heard, for it hath confounded
 us with the excess of its terror?; and he answered:—Let not a voice
 fright you nor shake your steadfast sprite nor turn you back from the
 faith which is right. Their hearts inclined to his words and they
 ceased not to worship the fire and they persisted in rebellion for a
 full year from the time they heard the first voice; and on the
 anniversary came a second cry and a third at the head of the third
 year, each year once. Still they persisted in their malpractices till
 one day at break of dawn, judgment and the wrath of Heaven descended
 upon them with all suddenness, and by the visitation of Allah all were
 metamorphosed into black stones,[322] they and their beasts and their
 cattle; and none was saved save myself who at the time was engaged in
 my devotions. From that day to this I am in the case thou seest,
 constant in prayer and fasting and reading and reciting the Koran; but
 I am indeed grown weary by reason of my loneliness, having none to bear
 me company." Then said I to him (for in very sooth he had won my heart
 and was the lord of my life and soul), "O youth, wilt thou fare with me
 to Baghdad city and visit the Olema and men learned in the law and
 doctors of divinity and get thee increase of wisdom and understanding
 and theology? And know that she who standeth in thy presence will be
 thy handmaid, albeit she be head of her family and mistress over men
 and eunuchs and servants and slaves. Indeed my life was no life before
 it fell in with thy youth. I have here a ship laden with merchandise;
 and in very truth Destiny drove me to this city that I might come to
 the knowledge of these matters, for it was fated that we should meet.
 And I ceased not to persuade him and speak him fair and use every art
 till he consented."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
 to say her permitted say.

                  Now when it was the Eighteenth Night,

 She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the lady
 ceased not persuading with soft speech the youth to depart with her
 till he consented and said "Yes." She slept that night lying at his
 feet and hardly knowing where she was for excess of joy. As soon as the
 next morning dawned (she pursued, addressing the Caliph), I arose and
 we entered the treasuries and took thence whatever was light in weight
 and great in worth; then we went down side by side from the castle to
 the city, where we were met by the Captain and my sisters and slaves
 who had been seeking for me. When they saw me they rejoiced and asked
 what had stayed me, and I told them all I had seen and related to them
 the story of the young Prince and the transformation wherewith the
 citizens had been justly visited. Hereat all marvelled, but when my two
 sisters (these two bitches, O Commander of the Faithful!) saw me by the
 side of my young lover they jaloused me on his account and were wroth
 and plotted mischief against me. We awaited a fair wind and went on
 board rejoicing and ready to fly for joy by reason of the goods we had
 gotten, but my own greatest joyance was in the youth; and we waited
 awhile till the wind blew fair for us and then we set sail and fared
 forth. Now as we sat talking, my sisters asked me, "And what wilt thou
 do with this handsome young man?"; and I answered, "I purpose to make
 him my husband!" Then I turned to him and said, "O my lord, I have that
 to propose to thee wherein thou must not cross me; and this it is that,
 when we reach Baghdad, my native city, I offer thee my life as thy
 handmaiden in holy matrimony, and thou shalt be to me baron and I will
 be femme to thee." He answered, "I hear and I obey!; thou art my lady
 and my mistress and whatso thou doest I will not gainsay." Then I
 turned to my sisters and said, "This is my gain; I content me with this
 youth and those who have gotten aught of my property let them keep it
 as their gain with my good will." "Thou sayest and doest well,"
 answered the twain, but they imagined mischief against me. We ceased
 not spooning before a fair wind till we had exchanged the sea of peril
 for the seas of safety and, in a few days, we made Bassorah-city, whose
 buildings loomed clear before us as evening fell. But after we had
 retired to rest and were sound asleep, my two sisters arose and took me
 up, bed and all, and threw me into the sea: they did the same with the
 young Prince who, as he could not swim, sank and was drowned and Allah
 enrolled him in the noble army of Martyrs.[323] As for me would Heaven
 I had been drowned with him, but Allah deemed that I should be of the
 saved; so when I awoke and found myself in the sea and saw the ship
 making off like a flash of lightning, He threw in my way a piece of
 timber which I bestrided, and the waves tossed me to and fro till they
 cast me upon an island coast, a high land and an uninhabited. I landed
 and walked about the island the rest of the night and, when morning
 dawned, I saw a rough track barely fit for child of Adam to tread,
 leading to what proved a shallow ford connecting island and mainland.
 As soon as the sun had risen I spread my garments to dry in its rays;
 and ate of the fruits of the island and drank of its waters; then I set
 out along the foot-track and ceased not walking till I reached the
 mainland. Now when there remained between me and the city but a two
 hours' journey behold, a great serpent, the bigness of a date-palm,
 came fleeing towards me in all haste, gliding along now to the right
 then to the left till she was close upon me, whilst her tongue lolled
 ground-wards a span long and swept the dust as she went. She was
 pursued by a Dragon[324] who was not longer than two lances, and of
 slender build about the bulk of a spear and, although her terror lent
 her speed, and she kept wriggling from side to side, he overtook her
 and seized her by the tail, whereat her tears streamed down and her
 tongue was thrust out in her agony. I took pity on her and, picking up
 a stone and calling upon Allah for aid, threw it at the Dragon's head
 with such force that he died then and there; and the serpent opening a
 pair of wings flew into the lift and disappeared from before my eyes. I
 sat down marvelling over that adventure, but I was weary and,
 drowsiness overcoming me, I slept where I was for a while. When I awoke
 I found a jet-black damsel sitting at my feet shampooing them; and by
 her side stood two black bitches (my sisters, O Commander of the
 Faithful!). I was ashamed before her[325] and, sitting up, asked her,
 "O my sister, who and what art thou?"; and she answered, "How soon hast
 thou forgotten me! I am she for whom thou wroughtest a good deed and
 sowedest the seed of gratitude and slewest her foe; for I am the
 serpent whom by Allah's aidance thou didst just now deliver from the
 Dragon. I am a Jinniyah and he was a Jinn who hated me, and none saved
 my life from him save thou. As soon as thou freedest me from him I flew
 on the wind to the ship whence thy sisters threw thee, and removed all
 that was therein to thy house. Then I ordered my attendant Marids to
 sink the ship and I transformed thy two sisters into these black
 bitches; for I know all that hath passed between them and thee; but as
 for the youth, of a truth he is drowned. So saying she flew up with me
 and the bitches, and presently set us down on the terrace-roof of my
 house, wherein I found ready stored the whole of what property was in
 my ship, nor was aught of it missing. Now (continued the serpent that
 was), I swear by all engraven on the seal-ring of Solomon[326] (with
 whom be peace!) unless thou deal to each of these bitches three hundred
 stripes every day I will come and imprison thee for ever under the
 earth." I answered, "Hearkening and obedience!"; and away she flew. But
 before going she again charged me saying, "I again swear by Him who
 made the two seas flow[327] (and this be my second oath) if thou
 gainsay me I will come and transform thee like thy sisters." Since then
 I have never failed, O Commander of the Faithful, to beat them with
 that number of blows till their blood flows with my tears, I pitying
 them the while, and well they wot that their being scourged is no fault
 of mine and they accept my excuses. And this is my tale and my history!
 The Caliph marvelled at her adventures and then signed to Ja'afar who
 said to the second lady, the Portress, "And thou, how camest thou by
 the welts and wheals upon thy body?" So she began the

[Illustration]


                        _TALE OF THE PORTRESS._

 Know, O Commander of the Faithful, that I had a father who, after
 fulfilling his time, deceased and left me great store of wealth. I
 remained single for a short time and presently married one of the
 richest of his day. I abode with him a year when he also died, and my
 share of his property amounted to eighty thousand dinars in gold
 according to the holy law of inheritance.[328] Thus I became passing
 rich and my reputation spread far and wide, for I had made me ten
 changes of raiment, each worth a thousand dinars. One day as I was
 sitting at home, behold, there came in to me an old woman[329] with
 lantern jaws and cheeks sucked in, and eyes rucked up, and eyebrows
 scant and scald, and head bare and bald; and teeth broken by time and
 mauled, and back bending and neck-nape nodding, and face blotched, and
 rheum running, and hair like a snake black-and-white-speckled, in
 complexion a very fright, even as saith the poet of the like of her:—

 Ill-omened hag! unshriven be her sins ✿ Nor mercy visit her on dying
    bed:
 Thousand head-strongest he-mules would her guiles, ✿ Despite their
    bolting, lead with spider thread.

 And as saith another:—

 A hag to whom th' unlawful lawfullest ✿ And witchcraft wisdom in her
    sight are grown:
 A mischief-making brat, a demon-maid, ✿ A whorish woman and a pimping
    crone.[330]

 When the old woman entered she salamed to me and kissing the ground
 before me, said, "I have at home an orphan daughter and this night are
 her wedding and her displaying.[331] We be poor folks and strangers in
 this city knowing none inhabitant and we are broken-hearted. So do thou
 earn for thyself a recompense and a reward in Heaven by being present
 at her displaying and, when the ladies of this city shall hear that
 thou art to make act of presence, they also will present themselves; so
 shalt thou comfort her affliction, for she is sore bruised in spirit
 and she hath none to look to save Allah the Most High." Then she wept
 and kissed my feet reciting these couplets:—

 Thy presence bringeth us a grace ✿ We own before thy winsome face:
 And wert thou absent ne'er an one ✿ Could stand in stead or take thy
    place.

 So pity gat hold on me and compassion and I said, "Hearing is
 consenting and, please Allah, I will do somewhat more for her; nor
 shall she be shown to her bridegroom save in my raiment and ornaments
 and jewelry." At this the old woman rejoiced and bowed her head to my
 feet and kissed them, saying, "Allah requite thee weal, and comfort thy
 heart even as thou has comforted mine! But, O my lady, do not trouble
 thyself to do me this service at this hour; be thou ready by
 supper-time,[332] when I will come and fetch thee." So saying she
 kissed my hand and went her ways. I set about stringing my pearls and
 donning my brocades and making my toilette, little recking what Fortune
 had in womb for me, when suddenly the old woman stood before me,
 simpering and smiling till she showed every tooth stump, and quoth she,
 "O my mistress, the city madams have arrived and when I apprized them
 that thou promisedst to be present, they were glad and they are now
 awaiting thee and looking eagerly for thy coming and for the honour of
 meeting thee." So I threw on my mantilla and, making the old crone walk
 before me and my handmaidens behind me, I fared till we came to a
 street well watered and swept neat, where the winnowing breeze blew
 cool and sweet. Here we were stopped by a gate arched over with a dome
 of marble stone firmly seated on solidest foundation, and leading to a
 Palace whose walls from earth rose tall and proud, and whose pinnacle
 was crowned by the clouds,[333] and over the doorway were writ these
 couplets:—

 I am the wone where Mirth shall ever smile; ✿ The home of Joyance
    through my lasting while:
 And 'mid my court a fountain jets and flows, ✿ Nor tears nor troubles
    shall that fount defile:
 The marge with royal Nu'uman's[334] bloom is dight, ✿ Myrtle,
    Narcissus-flower and Chamomile.

 Arrived at the gate, before which hung a black curtain, the old woman
 knocked and it was opened to us; when we entered and found a vestibule
 spread with carpets and hung around with lamps all alight and wax
 candles in candelabra adorned with pendants of precious gems and noble
 ores. We passed on through this passage till we entered a saloon, whose
 like for grandeur and beauty is not to be found in this world. It was
 hung and carpeted with silken stuffs, and was illuminated with
 branches, sconces and tapers ranged in double row, an avenue abutting
 on the upper or noble end of the saloon, where stood a couch of
 juniper-wood encrusted with pearls and gems and surmounted by a
 baldaquin with mosquito-curtains of satin looped up with margarites.
 And hardly had we taken note of this when there came forth from the
 baldaquin a young lady and I looked, O Commander of the Faithful, upon
 a face and form more perfect than the moon when fullest, with a favour
 brighter than the dawn gleaming with saffron-hued light, even as the
 poet sang when he said:—

 Thou pacest the palace a marvel-sight, ✿ A bride for a Kisrá's or
    Kaisar's night!
 Wantons the rose on thy roseate cheek, ✿ O cheek as the blood of the
    dragon[335] bright!
 Slim-waisted, languorous, sleepy-eyed, ✿ With charms which promise all
    love-delight:
 And the tire which attires thy tiara'd brow ✿ Is a night of woe on a
    morn's glad light.

 The fair young girl came down from the estrade and said to me, "Welcome
 and well come and good cheer to my sister, the dearly-beloved, the
 illustrious, and a thousand greetings!" Then she recited these
 couplets:—

 An but the house could know who cometh 'twould rejoice, ✿ And kiss the
    very dust whereon thy foot was placed;
 And with the tongue of circumstance the walls would say, ✿ "Welcome and
    hail to one with generous gifts engraced!"

 Then sat she down and said to me, "O my sister, I have a brother who
 hath had sight of thee at sundry wedding-feasts and festive seasons: he
 is a youth handsomer than I, and he hath fallen desperately in love
 with thee, for that bounteous Destiny hath garnered in thee all beauty
 and perfection; and he hath given silver to this old woman that she
 might visit thee; and she hath contrived on this wise to foregather us
 twain. He hath heard that thou art one of the nobles of thy tribe nor
 is he aught less in his; and, being desirous to ally his lot with thy
 lot, he hath practised this device to bring me in company with thee;
 for he is fain to marry thee after the ordinance of Allah and his
 Apostle; and in what is lawful and right there is no shame." When I
 heard these words and saw myself fairly entrapped in the house, I said,
 "Hearing is consenting." She was delighted at this and clapped her
 hands;[336] whereupon a door opened and out of it came a young man
 blooming in the prime of life, exquisitely dressed, a model of beauty
 and loveliness and symmetry and perfect grace, with gentle winning
 manners and eyebrows like a bended bow and shaft on cord, and eyes
 which bewitched all hearts with sorcery lawful in the sight of the
 Lord; even as saith some rhymer describing the like of him:—

 His face as the face of the young moon shines ✿ And Fortune stamps him
    with pearls for signs.[337]

 And Allah favour him who said:—

 Blest be his beauty; blest the Lord's decree ✿ Who cast and shaped a
    thing so bright of blee:
 All gifts of beauty he conjoins in one; ✿ Lost in his love is all
    humanity;
 For Beauty's self inscribed on his brow ✿ "I testify there be no Good
    but he!"[338]

[Illustration]

 When I looked at him my heart inclined to him and I loved him; and he
 sat by my side and talked with me a while, when the young lady again
 clapped her hands and behold, a side-door opened and out of it came the
 Kazi with his four assessors as witnesses; and they saluted us and,
 sitting down, drew up and wrote out the marriage-contract between me
 and the youth and retired. Then he turned to me and said, "Be our night
 blessed," presently adding, "O my lady, I have a condition to lay on
 thee." Quoth I, "O my lord, what is that?" Whereupon he arose and
 fetching a copy of the Holy Book presented it to me saying, "Swear
 hereon thou wilt never look at any other than myself nor incline thy
 body or thy heart to him." I swore readily enough to this and he joyed
 with exceeding joy and embraced me round the neck while love for him
 possessed my whole heart. Then they set the table[339] before us and we
 ate and drank till we were satisfied; but I was dying for the coming of
 the night. And when night did come he led me to the bride-chamber and
 slept with me on the bed and continued to kiss and embrace me till the
 morning—such a night I had never seen in my dreams. I lived with him a
 life of happiness and delight for a full month, at the end of which I
 asked his leave[340] to go on foot to the bazar and buy me certain
 especial stuffs and he gave me permission. So I donned my mantilla and,
 taking with me the old woman and a slave-girl,[341] I went to the khan
 of the silk-mercers, where I seated myself in the shop-front of a young
 merchant whom the old woman recommended, saying to me, "This youth's
 father died when he was a boy and left him great store of wealth: he
 hath by him a mighty fine[342] stock of goods and thou wilt find what
 thou seekest with him, for none in the bazar hath better stuffs than
 he." Then she said to him, "Show this lady the most costly stuffs thou
 hast by thee;" and he replied, "Hearkening and obedience!" Then she
 whispered me, "Say a civil word to him!"; but I replied, "I am pledged
 to address no man save my lord." And as she began to sound his praise I
 said sharply to her, "We want nought of thy sweet speeches; our wish is
 to buy of him whatsoever we need, and return home." So he brought me
 all I sought and I offered him his money, but he refused to take it
 saying, "Let it be a gift offered to my guest this day!" Then quoth I
 to the old woman, "If he will not take the money, give him back his
 stuff." "By Allah," cried he, "not a thing will I take from thee: I
 sell it not for gold or for silver, but I give it all as a gift for a
 single kiss; a kiss more precious to me than everything the shop
 containeth." Asked the old woman, "What will the kiss profit thee?";
 and, turning to me, whispered, "O my daughter, thou hearest what this
 young fellow saith? What harm will it do thee if he get a kiss from
 thee and thou gettest what thou seekest at that price?" Replied I, "I
 take refuge with Allah from such action! Knowest thou not that I am
 bound by an oath?"[343] But she answered, "Now whist! just let him kiss
 thee and neither speak to him nor lean over him, so shalt thou keep
 thine oath and thy silver, and no harm whatever shall befal thee." And
 she ceased not to persuade me and importune me and make light of the
 matter till evil entered into my mind and I put my head in the
 poke[344] and, declaring I would ne'er consent, consented. So I veiled
 my eyes and held up the edge of my mantilla between me and the people
 passing and he put his mouth to my cheek under the veil. But while
 kissing me he bit me so hard a bite that it tore the flesh from my
 cheek,[345] and blood flowed fast and faintness came over me. The old
 woman caught me in her arms and, when I came to myself, I found the
 shop shut up and her sorrowing over me and saying "Thank Allah for
 averting which might have been worse!" Then she said to me, "Come, take
 heart and let us go home before the matter become public and thou be
 dishonoured. And when thou art safe inside the house feign sickness and
 lie down and cover thyself up; and I will bring thee powders and
 plasters to cure this bite withal, and thy wound will be healed at the
 latest in three days." So after a while I arose and I was in extreme
 distress and terror came full upon me; but I went on little by little
 till I reached the house when I pleaded illness and lay me down. When
 it was night my husband came in to me and said, "What hath befallen
 thee, O my darling, in this excursion of thine?"; and I replied, "I am
 not well: my head acheth badly." Then he lighted a candle and drew near
 me and looked hard at me and asked, "What is that wound I see on thy
 cheek and in the tenderest part too?" And I answered, "When I went out
 to-day with thy leave to buy stuffs, a camel laden with firewood
 jostled me and one of the pieces tore my veil and wounded my cheek as
 thou seest; for indeed the ways of this city are strait." "To-morrow,"
 cried he, "I will go complain to the Governor, so shall he gibbet every
 fuel-seller in Baghdad." "Allah upon thee," said I, "burden not thy
 soul with such sin against any man. The fact is I was riding on an ass
 and it stumbled, throwing me to the ground; and my cheek lighted upon a
 stick or a bit of glass and got this wound." "Then," said he,
 "to-morrow I will go up to Ja'afar the Barmaki and tell him the story,
 so shall he kill every donkey-boy in Baghdad." "Wouldst thou destroy
 all these men because of my wound," said I, "when this which befel me
 was by decree of Allah and His destiny?" But he answered, "There is no
 help for it;" and, springing to his feet, plied me with words and
 pressed me till I was perplexed and frightened; and I stuttered and
 stammered and my speech waxed thick and I said, "This is a mere
 accident by decree of Allah." Then, O Commander of the Faithful, he
 guessed my case and said, "Thou hast been false to thine oath." He at
 once cried out with a loud cry, whereupon a door opened and in came
 seven black slaves whom he commanded to drag me from my bed and throw
 me down in the middle of the room. Furthermore, he ordered one of them
 to pinion my elbows and squat upon my head; and a second to sit upon my
 knees and secure my feet; and drawing his sword he gave it to a third
 and said, "Strike her, O Sa'ad, and cut her in twain and let each one
 take half and cast it into the Tigris[346] that the fish may eat her;
 for such is the retribution due to those who violate their vows and are
 unfaithful to their love." And he redoubled in wrath and recited these
 couplets:—

 An there be one who shares with me her love, ✿ I'd strangle Love tho'
    life by Love were slain;
 Saying, O Soul, Death were the nobler choice, ✿ For ill is Love when
    shared 'twixt partners twain.

 Then he repeated to the slave, "Smite her, O Sa'ad!" And when the slave
 who was sitting upon me made sure of the command he bent down to me and
 said, "O my mistress, repeat the profession of Faith and bethink thee
 if there be any thing thou wouldst have done; for verily this is the
 last hour of thy life." "O good slave," said I, "wait but a little
 while and get off my head that I may charge thee with my last
 injunctions." Then I raised my head and saw the state I was in, how I
 had fallen from high degree into lowest disgrace; and into death after
 life (and such life!) and how I had brought my punishment on myself by
 my own sin; whereupon the tears streamed from mine eyes and I wept with
 exceeding weeping. But he looked on me with eyes of wrath, and began
 repeating:—

 Tell her who turneth from our love to work it injury sore, ✿ And taketh
    her a fine new love the old love tossing o'er:
 We cry enough o' thee ere thou enough of us shalt cry! ✿ What past
    between us doth suffice and haply something more.[347]

 When I heard this, O Commander of the Faithful, I wept and looked at
 him and began repeating these couplets:—

 To severance you doom my love and all unmoved remain; ✿ My tear-sore
    lids you sleepless make and sleep while I complain:
 You make firm friendship reign between mine eyes and insomny; ✿ Yet can
    my heart forget you not, nor tears can I restrain:
 You made me swear with many an oath my troth to hold for aye; ✿ But
    when you reigned my bosom's lord you wrought me traitor-bane:
 I loved you like a silly child who wots not what is Love; ✿ Then spare
    the learner, let her not be by the master slain!
 By Allah's name I pray you write, when I am dead and gone, ✿ Upon my
    tomb, This died of Love whose senses Love had ta'en:
 Then haply one shall pass that way who fire of Love hath felt, ✿ And
    treading on a lover's heart with ruth and woe shall melt.

 When I ended my verses tears came again; but the poetry and the weeping
 only added fury to his fury, and he recited:—

 'Twas not satiety bade me leave the dearling of my soul, ✿ But that she
    sinned a mortal sin which clipt me in its clip:
 She sought to let another share the love between us twain, ✿ But my
    True Faith of Unity refuseth partnership.[348]

 When he ceased reciting I wept again and prayed his pardon and humbled
 myself before him and spoke him softly, saying to myself, "I will work
 on him with words; so haply he will refrain from slaying me, even
 though he take all I have." So I complained of my sufferings and began
 to repeat these couplets:—

 Now, by thy life and wert thou just my life thou hadst not ta'en, ✿ But
    who can break the severance-law which parteth lovers twain!
 Thou loadest me with heavy weight of longing love, when I ✿ Can hardly
    bear my chemisette for weakness and for pain:
 I marvel not to see my life and soul in ruin Iain ✿ I marvel much to
    see my frame such severance-pangs sustain.

 When I ended my verse I wept again; and he looked at me and reviled me
 in abusive language,[349] repeating these couplets:—

 Thou wast all taken up with love of other man, not me; ✿ 'Twas thine to
    show me severance-face, 'twas only mine to see:
 I'll leave thee for that first thou wast of me to take thy leave ✿ And
    patient bear that parting blow thou borest so patiently:
 E'en as thou soughtest other love, so other love I'll seek, ✿ And make
    the crime of murdering love thine own atrocity.

 When he had ended his verses he again cried out to the slave, "Cut her
 in half and free us from her, for we have no profit of her." So the
 slave drew near me, O Commander of the Faithful, and I ceased bandying
 verses and made sure of death and, despairing of life, committed my
 affairs to Almighty Allah, when behold, the old woman rushed in and
 threw herself at my husband's feet and kissed them and wept and said,
 "O my son, by the rights of my fosterage and by my long service to
 thee, I conjure thee pardon this young lady, for indeed she hath done
 nothing deserving such doom. Thou art a very young man and I fear lest
 her death be laid at thy door; for it is said:—Whoso slayeth shall be
 slain. As for this wanton (since thou deemest her such) drive her out
 from thy doors, from thy love and from thy heart." And she ceased not
 to weep and importune him till he relented and said, "I pardon her, but
 needs must I set on her my mark which shall show upon her all her
 life." Then he bade the slaves drag me along the ground and lay me out
 at full length, after stripping me of all my clothes;[350] and when the
 slaves had so sat upon me that I could not move, he fetched in a rod of
 quince-tree and came down with it upon my body, and continued beating
 me on the back and sides till I lost consciousness from excess of pain,
 and I despaired of life. Then he commanded the slaves to take me away
 as soon as it was dark, together with the old woman to show them the
 way and throw me upon the floor of the house wherein I dwelt before my
 marriage. They did their lord's bidding and cast me down in my old home
 and went their ways. I did not revive from my swoon till dawn appeared,
 when I applied myself to the dressing of my wounds with ointments and
 other medicaments; and I medicined myself, but my sides and ribs still
 showed signs of the rod as thou hast seen. I lay in weakly case and
 confined to my bed for four months before I was able to rise and health
 returned to me. At the end of that time I went to the house where all
 this had happened and found it a ruin; the street had been pulled down
 endlong and rubbish-heaps rose where the building erst was; nor could I
 learn how this had come about. Then I betook myself to this my sister
 on my father's side and found with her these two black bitches. I
 saluted her and told her what had betided me and the whole of my story
 and she said, "O my sister, who is safe from the despite of Time and
 secure? Thanks be to Allah who hath brought thee off safely;" and she
 began to say:—

 Such is the World, so bear a patient heart ✿ When riches leave thee and
    when friends depart!

 Then she told me her own story, and what had happened to her with her
 two sisters and how matters had ended; so we abode together and the
 subject of marriage was never on our tongues for all these years. After
 a while we were joined by our other sister, the procuratrix, who goeth
 out every morning and buyeth all we require for the day and night; and
 we continued in such condition till this last night. In the morning our
 sister went out, as usual, to make her market and then befel us what
 befel from bringing the Porter into the house and admitting these three
 Kalandar-men.

 We entreated them kindly and honourably and a quarter of the night had
 not passed ere three grave and respectable merchants from Mosul joined
 us and told us their adventures. We sat talking with them but on one
 condition which they violated, whereupon we treated them as sorted with
 their breach of promise, and made them repeat the account they had
 given of themselves. They did our bidding and we forgave their offence;
 so they departed from us and this morning we were unexpectedly summoned
 to thy presence. And such is our story! The Caliph wondered at her
 words and bade the tale be recorded and chronicled and laid up in his
 muniment-chambers.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
 saying her permitted say.

                  Now when it was the Nineteenth Night,

 She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
 commanded this story and those of the sister and the Kalandars to be
 recorded in the archives and be set in the royal muniment-chambers.
 Then he asked the eldest lady, the mistress of the house, "Knowest thou
 the whereabouts of the Ifritah who spelled thy sisters?"; and she
 answered, "O Commander of the Faithful, she gave me a ringlet of her
 hair saying:—Whenas thou wouldest see me, burn a couple of these hairs
 and I will be with thee forthright, even though I were beyond
 Caucasus-mountain." Quoth the Caliph, "Bring me hither the hair." So
 she brought it and he threw the whole lock upon the fire. As soon as
 the odour of the burning hair dispread itself, the palace shook and
 trembled, and all present heard a rumbling and rolling of thunder and a
 noise as of wings and lo! the Jinniyah who had been a serpent stood in
 the Caliph's presence. Now she was a Moslemah, so she saluted him and
 said, "Peace be with thee O Vicar[351] of Allah;" whereto he replied,
 "And with thee also be peace and the mercy of Allah and His blessing."
 Then she continued, "Know that this damsel sowed for me the seed of
 kindness, wherefor I cannot enough requite her, in that she delivered
 me from death and destroyed mine enemy. Now I had seen how her sisters
 dealt with her and felt myself bound to avenge her on them. At first I
 was minded to slay them, but I feared it would be grievous to her, so I
 transformed them to bitches; but if thou desire their release, O
 Commander of the Faithful, I will release them to pleasure thee and her
 for I am of the Moslems." Quoth the Caliph, "Release them and after we
 will look into the affair of the beaten lady and consider her case
 carefully; and if the truth of her story be evidenced I will exact
 retaliation[352] from him who wronged her." Said the Ifritah, "O
 Commander of the Faithful, I will forthwith release them and will
 discover to thee the man who did that deed by this lady and wronged her
 and took her property, and he is the nearest of all men to thee!" So
 saying she took a cup of water and muttered a spell over it and uttered
 words there was no understanding; then she sprinkled some of the water
 over the faces of the two bitches, saying, "Return to your former human
 shape!" whereupon they were restored to their natural forms and fell to
 praising their Creator. Then said the Ifritah, "O Commander of the
 Faithful, of a truth he who scourged this lady with rods is thy son
 Al-Amin brother of Al-Maamun;[353] for he had heard of her beauty and
 loveliness and he played a lover's stratagem with her and married her
 according to the law and committed the crime (such as it is) of
 scourging her. Yet indeed he is not to be blamed for beating her, for
 he laid a condition on her and swore her by a solemn oath not to do a
 certain thing; however, she was false to her vow and he was minded to
 put her to death, but he feared Almighty Allah and contented himself
 with scourging her, as thou hast seen, and with sending her back to her
 own place. Such is the story of the second lady and the Lord knoweth
 all." When the Caliph heard these words of the Ifritah, and knew who
 had beaten the damsel, he marvelled with mighty marvel and said,
 "Praise be to Allah, the Most High, the Almighty, who hath shown His
 exceeding mercy towards me, enabling me to deliver these two damsels
 from sorcery and torture, and vouchsafing to let me know the secret of
 this lady's history! And now by Allah, we will do a deed which shall be
 recorded of us after we are no more." Then he summoned his son Al-Amin
 and questioned him of the story of the second lady, the portress; and
 he told it in the face of truth; whereupon the Caliph bade call into
 presence the Kazis and their witnesses and the three Kalandars and the
 first lady with her sisters german who had been ensorcelled; and he
 married the three to the three Kalandars whom he knew to be princes and
 sons of Kings and he appointed them chamberlains about his person,
 assigning to them stipends and allowances and all that they required,
 and lodging them in his palace at Baghdad. He returned the beaten lady
 to his son, Al-Amin, renewing the marriage-contract between them and
 gave her great wealth and bade rebuild the house fairer than it was
 before. As for himself he took to wife the procuratrix and lay with her
 that night: and next day he set apart for her an apartment in his
 Serraglio, with handmaidens for her service and a fixed daily
 allowance. And the people marvelled at their Caliph's generosity and
 natural beneficence and princely wisdom; nor did he forget to send all
 these histories to be recorded in his annals. When Shahrazad ceased
 speaking Dunyazad exclaimed, "O my own sister, by Allah in very sooth
 this is a right pleasant tale and a delectable; never was heard the
 like of it, but prithee tell me now another story to while away what
 yet remaineth of the waking hours of this our night." She replied,
 "With love and gladness if the King give me leave;" and he said, "Tell
 thy tale and tell it quickly." So she began, in these words,

-----

Footnote 138:

   The name of this celebrated successor of Nineveh, where some suppose
   The Nights were written, is orig. Μεσοπύλαι (middle-gates) because it
   stood on the way where four great highways meet. The Arab. form
   "Mausil" (the vulgar "Mosul") is also significant, alluding to the
   "junction" of Assyria and Babylonia. Hence our "muslin."

Footnote 139:

   This is Mr. Thackeray's "nose-bag." I translate by "walking-shoes"
   the Arab "Khuff" which are a manner of loose boot covering the ankle;
   they are not usually embroidered, the ornament being reserved for the
   inner shoe.

Footnote 140:

   _i.e._ Syria (says Abulfeda) the "land on the left" (of one facing
   the east) as opposed to Al-Yaman the "land on the right." Osmani
   would mean Turkish, Ottoman. When Bernard the Wise (Bohn, p. 24)
   speaks of "Bagada and Axiam" (Mabillon's text) or "Axinarri" (still
   worse), he means Baghdad and Ash-Shám (Syria, Damascus), the latter
   word puzzling his Editor. Richardson (Dissert. lxxii) seems to
   support a hideous attempt to derive Shám from Shámat, a mole or wart,
   because the country is studded with hillocks! Al-Shám is often
   applied to Damascus-city whose proper name Dimishk belongs to books:
   this term is generally derived from Dimáshik b. Káli b. Málik b. Sham
   (Shem). Lee (Ibn Batútah, 29) denies that ha-Dimishki means "Eliezer
   of Damascus."

Footnote 141:

   From Oman=Eastern Arabia.

Footnote 142:

   Arab. "Tamar Hanná" lit. date of Henna, but applied to the flower of
   the eastern privet (_Lawsonia inermis_) which has the sweet scent of
   freshly mown hay. The use of Henna as a dye is known even in England.
   The "myrtle" alluded to may either have been for a perfume (as it is
   held an anti-intoxicant) or for eating, the bitter aromatic berries
   of the "Ás" being supposed to flavour wine and especially Raki (raw
   brandy).

Footnote 143:

   Lane. (i. 211) pleasantly remarks, "A list of these sweets is given
   in my original, but I have thought it better to omit the names" (!)
   Dozy does not shirk his duty, but he is not much more satisfactory in
   explaining words interesting to students because they are unfound in
   dictionaries and forgotten by the people "Akrás" (cakes) Laymuníyah
   (of limes) wa "Maymuníyah" appears in the Bresl. Edit. as
   "Ma'amuniyah" which may mean "Ma'amun's cakes" or "delectable cakes."
   "Amshát"=(combs) perhaps refers to a fine kind of Kunáfah
   (vermicelli) known in Egypt and Syria as "Ghazl al-banát"=girl's
   spinning.

Footnote 144:

   The new moon carefully looked for by all Moslems because it begins
   the Ramazán-fast.

Footnote 145:

   Solomon's signet ring has before been noticed.

Footnote 146:

   The "high-bosomed" damsel, with breasts firm as a cube, is a
   favourite with Arab tale-tellers. _Fanno baruffa_ is the Italian term
   for hard breasts pointing outwards.

Footnote 147:

   A large hollow navel is looked upon not only as a beauty, but in
   children it is held a promise of good growth.

Footnote 148:

   Arab. "Ka'ah," a high hall opening upon the central court: we shall
   find the word used for a mansion, barrack, men's quarters, etc.

Footnote 149:

   Babel=Gate of God (El), or Gate of Ilu (P.N. of God), which the Jews
   ironically interpreted "Confusion." The tradition of Babylonia being
   the very centre of witchcraft and enchantment by means of its Seven
   Deadly Spirits, has survived in Al-Islam; the two fallen angels
   (whose names will occur) being confined in a well; Nimrod attempting
   to reach Heaven from the Tower in a magical car drawn by monstrous
   birds and so forth. See p. 114, Francois Lenormant's "Chaldean
   Magic," London, Bagsters.

Footnote 150:

   Arab. "Kámat Alfiyyah"=like the letter Alif, a straight perpendicular
   stroke. In the Egyptian hieroglyphs, the origin of every alphabet
   (not syllabarium) known to man, one form was a flag or leaf of
   water-plant standing upright. Hence probably the Arabic Alif-shape;
   while other nations preferred other modifications of the letter (ox's
   head, etc.), which in Egyptian number some thirty-six varieties,
   simple and compound.

Footnote 151:

   I have not attempted to order this marvellous confusion of metaphors
   so characteristic of The Nights and the exigencies of Al-Saj'a=rhymed
   prose.

Footnote 152:

   Here and elsewhere I omit the "kála (_dice Turpino_)" of the
   original: Torrens preserves "Thus goes the tale" (which it only
   interrupts). This is simply letter-wise and sense-foolish.

Footnote 153:

   Of this worthy more at a future time.

Footnote 154:

   _i.e._, sealed with the Kazi or legal authority's seal of office.

Footnote 155:

   "Nothing for nothing" is a fixed idea with the Eastern woman: not so
   much for greed as for a sexual _point d'honneur_ when dealing with
   the adversary—man.

Footnote 156:

   She drinks first, the custom of the universal East, to show that the
   wine she had bought was unpoisoned. Easterns, who utterly ignore the
   "social glass" of Western civilisation, drink honestly to get drunk;
   and, when far gone are addicted to horseplay (in Pers. "Badmasti"=_le
   vin mauvais_) which leads to quarrels and bloodshed. Hence it is held
   highly irreverent to assert of patriarchs, prophets and saints that
   they "drank wine;" and Moslems agree with our "Teatotallers" in
   denying that, except in the case of Noah, inebriatives are anywhere
   mentioned in Holy Writ.

Footnote 157:

   Arab. "Húr al-Ayn," lit. (maids) with eyes of lively white and black,
   applied to the virgins of Paradise who will wive with the happy
   Faithful. I retain our vulgar "Houri," warning the reader that it is
   a masc. for a fem. ("Huríyah") in Arab, although accepted in Persian,
   a genderless speech.

Footnote 158:

   Arab. "Zambúr," whose head is amputated in female circumcision. See
   Night cccclxxiv.

Footnote 159:

   Ocymum basilicum noticed in Introduction; the bassilico of Boccaccio
   iv. 5. The Book of Kalilah and Dimnah represents it as "sprouting
   with something also whose smell is foul and disgusting and the sower
   at once sets to gather it and burn it with fire." (The Fables of
   Bidpai translated from the later Syriac version by I. G. N.
   Keith-Falconer, etc., etc., etc., Cambridge University Press, 1885).
   Here, however, Habk is a pennyroyal (_mentha puligium_), and probably
   alludes to the pecten.

Footnote 160:

   _i.e._ common property for all to beat.

Footnote 161:

   "A digit of the moon" is the Hindú equivalent.

Footnote 162:

   Better known to us as Caravanserai, the "Travellers' Bungalow" of
   India: in the Khan, however, shelter is to be had, but neither bed
   nor board.

Footnote 163:

   Arab. "Zubb." I would again note that this and its synonyms are the
   equivalents of the Arabic, which is of the lowest. The tale-teller's
   evident object is to accentuate the contrast with the tragical
   stories to follow.

Footnote 164:

   "In the name of Allah," is here a civil form of dismissal.

Footnote 165:

   Lane (i. 124) is scandalized and naturally enough by this scene,
   which is the only blot in an admirable tale admirably told. Yet even
   here the grossness is but little more pronounced than what we find in
   our old drama (_e.g._, Shakspeare's King Henry V.) written for the
   stage, whereas tales like The Nights are not read or recited before
   both sexes. Lastly "nothing follows all this palming work:" in Europe
   the orgie would end very differently. These "nuns of Theleme" are
   physically pure: their debauchery is of the mind, not the body.
   Galland makes them five, including the two doggesses.

Footnote 166:

   So Sir Francis Walsingham's "They which do that they should not,
   should hear that they would not."

Footnote 167:

   The old "Calendar," pleasantly associated with that form of almanac.
   The Mac. Edit. has "Karandaliyah," a vile corruption, like Ibn
   Batutah's "Karandar" and Torrens' "Kurundul:" so in English we have
   the accepted vulgarism of "Kernel" for Colonel. The Bul. Edit. uses
   for synonym "Su'ulúk"=an asker, a beggar. Of these mendicant monks,
   for such they are, much like the Sarabaites of mediæval Europe, I
   have treated, and of their institutions and its founder, Shaykh
   Sharif Bu Ali Kalandar (ob. A.H. 724=1323-24), at some length in my
   "History of Sindh," chapt. viii. See also the Dabistan (i, 136) where
   the good Kalandar exclaims:—

           If the thorn break in my body, how trifling the pain!
           But how sorely I feel for the poor broken thorn!

   D'Herbelot is right when he says that the Kalandar is not generally
   approved by Moslems: he labours to win free from every form and
   observance and he approaches the Malámati who conceals all his good
   deeds and boasts of his evil doings—our "Devil's hypocrite."

Footnote 168:

   The "Kalandar" disfigures himself in this manner to show
   "mortification."

Footnote 169:

   Arab. "Gharíb:" the porter is offended because the word implies "poor
   devil;" esp. one out of his own country.

Footnote 170:

   A religious mendicant generally.

Footnote 171:

   Very scandalous to Moslem "respectability": Mohammed said the house
   was accursed when the voices of women could be heard out of doors.
   Moreover the neighbours have a right to interfere and abate the
   scandal.

Footnote 172:

   I need hardly say that these are both historical personages; they
   will often be mentioned, and Ja'afar will be noticed in the terminal
   Essay.

Footnote 173:

   Arab. "Sama'an wa tá'atan;" a popular phrase of assent generally
   translated "to hear is to obey;" but this formula may be and must be
   greatly varied. In places it means "Hearing (the word of Allah) and
   obeying" (His prophet, viceregent, etc.)

Footnote 174:

   Arab. "Sawáb"=reward in Heaven. This word for which we have no
   equivalent has been naturalised in all tongues (_e.g._ Hindostani)
   spoken by Moslems.

Footnote 175:

   Wine-drinking, at all times forbidden to Moslems, vitiates the
   Pilgrimage-rite: the Pilgrim is vowed to a strict observance of the
   ceremonial law and many men date their "reformation" from the "Hajj."
   Pilgrimage, iii., 126.

Footnote 176:

   Here some change has been necessary; as the original text confuses
   the three "ladies."

Footnote 177:

   In Arab-the plural masc. is used by way of modesty when a girl
   addresses her lover; and for the same reason she speaks of herself as
   a man.

Footnote 178:

   Arab. "Al-Na'im;" in full "Jannat al-Na'im"=the Garden of Delights,
   _i.e._ the fifth Heaven made of white silver. The generic name of
   Heaven (the place of reward) is "Jannat," lit. a garden; "Firdaus"
   being evidently derived from the Persian through the Greek
   παράδεισος, and meaning a chase, a hunting-park. Writers on this
   subject should bear in mind Mandeville's modesty, "Of Paradise I
   cannot speak properly, for I was not there."

Footnote 179:

   Arab. "Mikra'ah," the dried mid-rib of a date-frond used for many
   purposes, especially the bastinado.

Footnote 180:

   According to Lane (i., 229) these and the immediately following
   verses are from an ode by Ibn Sahl al-Ishbili. They are in the Bul.
   Edit. not the Mac. Edit.

Footnote 181:

   The original is full of conceits and plays on words which are not
   easily rendered in English.

Footnote 182:

   Arab. "Tarjumán," same root as Chald. Targum (=a translation), the
   old "Truchman," and through the Ital. "tergomano" our "Dragoman;"
   here a messenger.

Footnote 183:

   Lit. the "person of the eyes," our "babe of the eyes," a favourite
   poetical conceit in all tongues; much used by the Elizabethans, but
   now neglected as a silly kind of conceit. See Night ccix.

Footnote 184:

   Arab. "Sár" (Thár) the revenge-right recognised by law and custom
   (Pilgrimage, iii., 69)

Footnote 185:

   That is "We all swim in the same boat."

Footnote 186:

   Ja'afar ever acts, on such occasions, the part of a wise and sensible
   man compelled to join in a foolish frolic. He contrasts strongly with
   the Caliph, a headstrong despot who will not be gainsaid, whatever be
   the whim of the moment. But Easterns would look upon this as a proof
   of his "kingliness."

Footnote 187:

   Arab. "Wa'l-Salám" (pronounce Was-Salám); meaning "and here ends the
   matter." In our slang we say, "All right, and the child's name is
   Antony."

Footnote 188:

   This is a favourite jingle; the play being upon "ibrat" (a
   needle-graver) and "'ibrat" (an example, a warning).

Footnote 189:

   That is "make his bow;" as the English peasant pulls his forelock.
   Lane (i., 249) suggests, as an afterthought, that it means:—"Recover
   thy senses; in allusion to a person's drawing his hand over his head
   after sleep or a fit." But it occurs elsewhere in the sense of "cut
   thy stick."

Footnote 190:

   This would be a separate building like our family tomb and probably
   domed, resembling that mentioned in "The King of the Black Islands."
   Europeans usually call it "a little Wali;" or, as they write it,
   "Wely;" the contained for the container; the "Santon" for the
   "Santon's tomb." I have noticed this curious confusion (which begins
   with Robinson, i. 322) in "Unexplored Syria," i. 161.

Footnote 191:

   Arab. "Wiswás;"=diabolical temptation or suggestion. The "Wiswásí" is
   a man with scruples (scrupulus, a pebble in the shoe), _e.g._ one who
   fears that his ablutions were deficient, etc.

Footnote 192:

   Arab. "Katf"=pinioning by tying the arms behind the back and
   shoulders (Kitf), a dire disgrace to freeborn men.

Footnote 193:

   Arab. "Nafs."=Heb. Nephesh (Nafash)=soul, life; as opposed to
   "Ruach"=spirit and breath. In these places it is equivalent to "I
   said to myself." Another form of the root is "Nafas," breath, with an
   idea of inspiration: so "Sáhib Nafas" (=master of breath) is a minor
   saint who heals by expiration, a matter familiar to mesmerists
   (Pilgrimage, i. 86).

Footnote 194:

   Arab. "Kaus al-Banduk;" the "pellet-bow" of modern India; with two
   strings joined by a bit of cloth which supports a ball of dry clay or
   stone. It is chiefly used for birding.

Footnote 195:

   In the East blinding was a common practice, especially in the case of
   junior princes not required as heirs. A deep perpendicular incision
   was made down each corner of the eyes; the lids were lifted and the
   balls removed by cutting the optic nerve and the muscles. The later
   Caliphs blinded their victims by passing a red-hot sword blade close
   to the orbit or a needle over the eyeball. About the same time in
   Europe the operation was performed with a heated metal basin—the
   well-known _bacinare_ (used by Ariosto), as happened to Pier delle
   Vigne (Petrus de Vineâ), the "godfather of modern Italian."

Footnote 196:

   Arab. "Khinzír" (by Europeans pronounced "Hanzír"), prop. a
   wild-boar; but popularly used like our "you pig!"

Footnote 197:

   Striking with the shoe, the pipe-stick and similar articles is highly
   insulting, because they are not made, like whips and scourges, for
   such purpose. Here the East and the West differ diametrically.
   "Wounds which are given by instruments which are in one's hands by
   chance do not disgrace a man," says Cervantes (D. Q. i., chapt. 15),
   and goes on to prove that if a Zapatero (cobbler) cudgel another with
   his form or last, the latter must not consider himself cudgelled. The
   reverse in the East where a blow of a pipe-stick cost Mahommed Ali
   Pasna's son his life: Ishmail Pasha was burned to death by Malik
   Nimr, chief of Shendy (Pilgrimage, i., 203). Moreover, the actual
   wound is less considered in Moslem law than the instrument which
   caused it: so sticks and stones are venial weapons, whilst sword and
   dagger, gun and pistol are felonious. See _ibid._ (i., 336) for a
   note upon the weapons with which nations are policed.

Footnote 198:

   Incest is now abominable everywhere except amongst the overcrowded
   poor of great and civilised cities. Yet such unions were common and
   lawful amongst ancient and highly cultivated peoples, as the
   Egyptians (Isis and Osiris), Assyrians and ancient Persians.
   Physiologically they are injurious only when the parents have
   constitutional defects: if both are sound, the issue, as amongst the
   so-called "lower animals," is viable and healthy.

Footnote 199:

   Dwellers in the Northern Temperates can hardly imagine what a
   dust-storm is in sun-parched tropical lands. In Sind we were often
   obliged to use candles at midday, while above the dust was a sun that
   would roast an egg.

Footnote 200:

   Arab. "'Urban," now always used of the wild people, whom the French
   have taught us to call _les Bedouins_; "Badw" being a waste or
   desert; and Badawi (fem. Badawíyah, plur. Badáwi and Bidwán), a man
   of the waste. Europeans have also learnt to miscall the Egyptians
   "Arabs": the difference is as great as between an Englishman and a
   Spaniard. Arabs proper divide their race into sundry successive
   families. "The Arab al-Arabá" (or al-Aribah, or al-Urubíyat) are the
   autochthones, prehistoric, proto-historic and extinct tribes; for
   instance, a few of the Adites who being at Meccah escaped the
   destruction of their wicked nation, but mingled with other classes.
   The "Arab al-Muta'arribah," (Arabised Arabs) are the first advenæ
   represented by such noble strains as the Koraysh (Koreish), some
   still surviving. The "Arab al-Musta'aribah," (insititious,
   naturalised or instituted Arabs, men who claim to be Arabs) are Arabs
   like the Sinaites, the Egyptians and the Maroccans descended by
   intermarriage with other races. Hence our "Mosarabians" and the
   "Marrabais" of Rabelais (not, "a word compounded of Maurus and
   Arabs"). Some genealogists, however, make the Muta'arribah
   descendants of Kahtan (possible the Joktan of Genesis x., a
   comparatively modern document, B.C. 700?); and the Musta'aribah those
   descended from Adnán the origin of Arab genealogy. And, lastly, are
   the "Arab al-Musta'ajimah," barbarised Arabs, like the present
   population of Meccah and Al-Medinah. Besides these there are other
   tribes whose origin is still unknown; such as the Mahrah tribes of
   Hazramaut, the "Akhdám" (=serviles) of Oman (Maskat); and the "Ebná"
   of Al-Yaman: Ibn Ishak supposes the latter to be descended from the
   Persian soldiers of Anushirwan who expelled the Abyssinian invader
   from Southern Arabia. (Pilgrimage, iii., 31, etc.).

Footnote 201:

   Arab. "Amír al-Muuminín." The title was assumed by the Caliph Omar to
   obviate the inconvenience of calling himself "Khalífah" (successor)
   of the Khalífah of the Apostle of Allah (_i.e._ Abu Bakr); which
   after a few generations would become impossible. It means "Emir
   (chief or prince) of the Muumins;" men who hold to the (true Moslem)
   Faith, the "Imán" (theory, fundamental articles) as opposed to the
   "Dín," ordinance or practice of the religion. It once became a
   Wazirial title conferred by Sultan Malikshah (King King-king) on his
   Nizám al-Mulk. (Richardson's Dissert. lviii).

Footnote 202:

   This may also mean "according to the seven editions of the Koran,"
   the old revisions and so forth (Sale, Sect. iii. and D'Herbelot
   "Alcoran.") The schools of the "Mukri," who teach the right
   pronunciation wherein a mistake might be sinful, are seven, Hamzah,
   Ibn Katír, Ya'akúb, Ibn Amir, Kisái, Asim and Hafs, the latter being
   the favourite with the Hanafis and the only one now generally known
   in Al-Islam.

Footnote 203:

   Arab. "Sadd"=wall, dyke, etc. the "bund" or "band" of Anglo-India.
   Hence the "Sadd" on the Nile, the banks of grass and floating islands
   which "wall" the stream. There are few sights more appalling than a
   sandstorm in the desert, the "Zauba'ah" as the Arabs call it. Devils,
   or pillars of sand, vertical and inclined, measuring a thousand feet
   high, rush over the plain lashing the sand at their base like a sea
   surging under a furious whirlwind; shearing the grass clean away from
   the roots, tearing up trees, which are whirled like leaves and sticks
   in air, and sweeping away tents and houses as if they were bits of
   paper. At last the columns join at the top and form, perhaps three
   thousand feet above the earth, a gigantic cloud of yellow sand which
   obliterates not only the horizon but even the midday sun. These
   sand-spouts are the terror of travellers. In Sind and the Punjab we
   have the dust-storm which for darkness, I have said, beats the
   blackest London fog.

Footnote 204:

   Arab. Sár=the vendetta, before mentioned, as dreaded in Arabia as in
   Corsica.

Footnote 205:

   Arab. "Ghútah," usually a place where irrigation is abundant. It
   especially applies (in books) to the Damascus-plain because "it
   abounds with water and fruit trees." Bochart (Geog. Sacra, p. 90)
   derives עוטה (utah) from עוץ Uz, son of Arab, who (he says) founded
   Damascus. The Ghutah is one of the four earthly paradises, the others
   being Basrah (Bassorah), Shiraz and Samarcand. Its peculiarity is the
   likeness to a seaport; the Desert which rolls up almost to its doors
   being the sea and its ships being the camels. The first Arab to whom
   we owe this admirable term for the "Companion of Job" is "Tarafah"
   one of the poets of the Suspended Poems: he likens (v.v. 3, 4) the
   camels which bore away his beloved to ships sailing from Aduli. But
   "ships of the desert" is doubtless a term of the highest antiquity.

Footnote 206:

   The exigencies of the "Saj'a," or rhymed prose, disjoint this and
   many similar passages.

Footnote 207:

   The "Ebony" Islands; Scott's "Isle of Ebene," i., 217.

Footnote 208:

   "Jarjarís" in the Bul. Edit.

Footnote 209:

   Arab. "Takbís." Many Easterns can hardly sleep without this kneading
   of the muscles, this "rubbing" whose hygienic properties England is
   now learning.

Footnote 210:

   The converse of the breast being broadened, the drooping,
   "draggle-tail" gait compared with the head held high and the chest
   inflated.

Footnote 211:

   This penalty is mentioned in the Koran (chapt. v.) as fit for those
   who fight against Allah and his Apostle; but commentators are not
   agreed if the sinners are first to be put to death or to hang on the
   cross till they die. Pharaoh (chapt xx.) threatens to crucify his
   magicians on palm-trees, and is held to be the first crucifier.

Footnote 212:

   Arab. "'Ajami"=foreigner, esp. a Persian: the latter in The Nights is
   mostly a villain. I must here remark that the contemptible condition
   of Persians in Al-Hijáz (which I noted in 1852, Pilgrimage i. 327)
   has completely changed. They are no longer, "The slippers of Ali and
   hounds of Omar:" they have learned the force of union and now,
   instead of being bullied, they bully.

Footnote 213:

   The Calc. Edit. turns them into Tailors (Khayyátín) and Torrens does
   not see the misprint.

Footnote 214:

   _i.e._ Axe and sandals.

Footnote 215:

   Lit. "Strike his neck."

Footnote 216:

   A phrase which will frequently recur; meaning the situation suggested
   such words as these.

Footnote 217:

   The smiter with the evil eye is called "A'in" and the person smitten
   "Ma'ín" or "Ma'ún."

Footnote 218:

   Arab. "Sákiyah," the well-known Persian wheel with pots and buckets
   attached to the tire. It is of many kinds, the boxed, etc., etc.; and
   it is possibly alluded to in the "pitcher broken at the fountain"
   (Ecclesiastes xii. 6) an accident often occurring to the modern
   "Noria." Travellers mostly abuse its "dismal creaking" and "mournful
   monotony": I have defended the music of the water-wheel in Pilgrimage
   ii. 198.

Footnote 219:

   Arab. "Zikr" lit. remembering, mentioning (_i.e._ the names of
   Allah), here refers to the meetings of religious for devotional
   exercises; the "Zikkírs," as they are called, mostly standing or
   sitting in a circle while they ejaculate the Holy Name. These
   "rogations" are much affected by Darwayshes, or begging friars, whom
   Europe politely divides into "dancing" and "howling"; and, on one
   occasion, greatly to the scandal of certain Engländerinns to whom I
   was showing the Ezbekiyah I joined the ring of "howlers." Lane (Mod.
   Egypt, see index) is profuse upon the subject of "Zikrs" and Zikkírs.
   It must not be supposed that they are uneducated men: the better
   class, however, prefers more privacy.

Footnote 220:

   As they thought he had been there for prayer or penance.

Footnote 221:

   Arab. "Ziyárat," a visit to a pious person or place.

Footnote 222:

   This is a paternal salute in the East where they are particular about
   the part kissed. A witty and not unusually gross Persian book, called
   the "Al-Námah" because all questions begin with "Al" (the Arab
   article) contains one "Al-Wajib al-busídan?" (what best deserves
   bussing?) and the answer is "Kus-i-nau-pashm," (a bobadilla with a
   young bush).

Footnote 223:

   A weight of 71-72 English grains in gold; here equivalent to the
   dinar.

Footnote 224:

   Compare the tale of The Three Crows in Gammer Grethel, Evening ix.

Footnote 225:

   The comparison is peculiarly apposite; the earth seen from above
   appears hollow with a raised rim.

Footnote 226:

   A hundred years old.

Footnote 227:

   "Bahr" in Arab. means sea, river, piece of water; hence the adjective
   is needed.

Footnote 228:

   The Captain or Master of the ship (not the owner). In Al Yaman the
   word also means a "barber," in virtue of the root, Raas, a head.

Footnote 229:

   The text has "in the character Ruká'í," or Riká'í, the
   correspondence-hand.

Footnote 230:

   A curved character supposed to be like the basil-leaf (rayhán).
   Richardson calls it "Rohani."

Footnote 231:

   I need hardly say that Easterns use a reed, a Calamus (Kalam applied
   only to the cut reed) for our quills and steel pens.

Footnote 232:

   Famous for being inscribed on the Kiswah (cover) of Mohammed's tomb;
   a large and more formal hand still used for engrossing and for mural
   inscriptions. Only seventy-two varieties of it are known (Pilgrimage,
   ii., 82).

Footnote 233:

   The copying and transcribing hand which is either Arabi or Ajami. A
   great discovery has lately been made which upsets all our old ideas
   of Cufic, etc. Mr. Löytved of Bayrut has found, amongst the Hauranic
   inscriptions, one in pure Naskhi, dating A.D. 568, or fifty years
   before the Hijrah; and it is accepted as authentic by my learned
   friend M. Ch. Clermont-Ganneau (p. 193, Pal. Explor. Fund; July
   1884). In D'Herbelot and Sale's day the Koran was supposed to have
   been written in rude characters, like those subsequently called
   "Cufic," invented shortly before Mohammed's birth by Murámir ibn
   Murrah of Anbar in Irák, introduced into Meccah by Bashar the
   Kindian, and perfected by Ibn Muklah (Al-Wazir, ob. A.H. 328=940). We
   must now change all that. See Catalogue of Oriental Caligraphs, etc.,
   by G. P. Badger, London, Whiteley, 1885.

Footnote 234:

   Capital and uncial letters; the hand in which the Ka'abah veil is
   inscribed (Pilgrimage iii. 299, 300).

Footnote 235:

   A "Court hand" says Mr. Payne (i. 112): I know nothing of it. Other
   hands are: the Ta'alík; hanging or oblique, used for finer MSS. and
   having, according to Richardson, "the same analogy to the Naskhi as
   our Italic has to the Roman." The Nasta' lík (not Naskh-Ta'alík) much
   used in India, is, as the name suggests, a mixture of the Naskhi
   (writing of transactions) and the Ta'alík. The Shikastah (broken
   hand) everywhere represents our running hand and becomes a hard task
   to the reader. The Kirmá is another cursive character, mostly
   confined to the receipts and disbursements of the Turkish treasury.
   The Diváni, or Court (of Justice) is the official hand, bold and
   round, a business character, the lines often rising with a sweep or
   curve towards the (left) end. The Jáli or polished has a variety, the
   Jali-Ta'alik: the Sulsi (known in many books) is adopted for titles
   of volumes, royal edicts, diplomas and so forth; "answering much the
   same purpose as capitals with us, or the flourished letters in
   illuminated manuscripts" (Richardson). The Tughrái is that of the
   Tughrá, the Prince's cypher or flourishing signature in ceremonial
   writings, and containing some such sentence as: Let this be executed.
   There are others _e.g._ Yákuti and Sirenkil known only by name.
   Finally the Maghribi (Moorish) hand differs in form and diacritical
   points from the characters used further east almost as much as German
   running hand does from English. It is curious that Richardson omits
   the Jali (intricate and convoluted) and the divisions of the Sulusí,
   Sulsi or Sulus (Thuluth) character, the Sulus al-Khafíf, etc.

Footnote 236:

   Arab. "Baghlah"; the male (Baghl) is used only for loads. This is
   everywhere the rule: nothing is more unmanageable than a restive
   "Macho"; and he knows that he can always get you off his back when so
   minded. From "Baghlah" is derived the name of the native craft
   Anglo-Indicè a "Buggalow."

Footnote 237:

   In Heb. "Ben-Adam" is any man opp. to "Beni ish" (Psalm iv. 3)=_filii
   viri_, not _homines_.

Footnote 238:

   This posture is terribly trying to European legs; and few white men
   (unless brought up to it) can squat for any time on their heels. The
   "tailor-fashion," with crossed legs, is held to be free and easy.

Footnote 239:

   Arab. "Katá"=Pterocles Alchata, the well-known sand-grouse of the
   desert. It is very poor white flesh.

Footnote 240:

   Arab. "Khubz" which I do not translate "cake" or "bread," as that
   would suggest the idea of our loaf. The staff of life in the East is
   a thin flat circle of dough baked in the oven or on the griddle, and
   corresponding with the Scotch "scone," the Spanish "tortilla" and the
   Australian "flap-jack."

Footnote 241:

   Arab. "Harísah," a favourite dish of wheat (or rice) boiled and
   reduced to a paste with shredded meat, spices and condiments. The
   "bangles" is a pretty girl eating with him.

Footnote 242:

   These lines are repeated with a difference in Night cccxxx. They
   affect _Rims cars_, out of the way, heavy rhymes: _e.g._ here Sakáríj
   (plur. of Sakrúj, platters, porringers); Tayáhíj (plur. of Tayhúj,
   the smaller caccabis-partridge); Tabáhíj (Persian Tabahjah, an omelet
   or a stew of meat, onions, eggs, etc.) Ma'áríj ("in stepped piles"
   like the pyramids; which Lane ii. 495, renders "on the stairs");
   Makáríj (plur. of Makraj, a small pot); Damálíj (plur. of dumlúj, a
   bracelet, a bangle); Dayábíj (brocades) and Tafáríj (openings,
   enjoyments). In Night cccxxx. we find also Sikábíj (plur. of Sikbáj,
   marinated meat elsewhere explained); Faráríj (plur. of farrúj, a
   chicken, vulg. farkh) and Dakákíj (plur. of dakújah, a small jar). In
   the first line we have also (though not a rhyme) Gharánik Gr.
   Τερανὸς, a crane, preserved in Romaic. The weeping and wailing are
   caused by the remembrance that all these delicacies have been
   demolished like a Badawi camp.

Footnote 243:

   This is the _vinum coctum_, the boiled wine, still a favourite in
   Southern Italy and Greece.

Footnote 244:

   Eastern topers delight in drinking at dawn: upon this subject I shall
   have more to say in other Nights.

Footnote 245:

   Arab. "Adab," a _crux_ to translators, meaning anything between good
   education and good manners. In mod. Turk. "Edibiyyet"
   (Adabiyat)=belles lettres and "Edebi" or "Edíb"=a littérateur.

Footnote 246:

   The Caliph Al-Maamún, who was a bad player, used to say, "I have the
   administration of the world and am equal to it, whereas I am
   straitened in the ordering of a space of two spans by two spans." The
   "board" was then "a square field of well-dressed leather."

Footnote 247:

   The Rabbis (after Matth. xix. 12) count three kinds of Eunuchs; (1)
   Seris chammah=of the sun, _i.e._ natural: (2) Seris Adam=manufactured
   _per homines_; and (3) Seris Chammayim=of God (_i.e._ religious
   abstainer). Seris (castrated) or Abd (slave) is the general Hebrew
   name.

Footnote 248:

   The "Lady of Beauty."

Footnote 249:

   "Káf" has been noticed as the mountain which surrounds earth as a
   ring does the finger: it is popularly used like our Alp and Alpine.
   The "circumambient Ocean" (Bahr al-muhít) is the Homeric
   Ocean-stream.

Footnote 250:

   The pomegranate is probably chosen here because each fruit is
   supposed to contain one seed from Eden-garden. Hence a host of
   superstitions (Pilgrimage iii., 104) possibly connected with the
   Chaldaic-Babylonian god Rimmon or Ramanu. Hence Persephone or Ishtar
   tasted the "rich pomegranate's seed." Lenormant, loc. cit. pp.
   166,182.

Footnote 251:

   _i.e._ for the love of God—a favourite Moslem phrase.

Footnote 252:

   Arab. "Báb," also meaning a chapter (of magic, of war, etc.),
   corresponding with the Persian "Dar" as in Sad-dar, the Hundred
   Doors. Here, however, it is figurative "I tried a new mode." This
   scene is in the Mabinogion.

Footnote 253:

   I use this Irish term=crying for the dead; as English wants the word
   for the præfica or myrialogist. The practice is not encouraged in
   Al-Islam; and Caliph Abu Bakr said, "Verily a corpse is sprinkled
   with boiling water by reason of the lamentations of the living,"
   _i.e._ punished for not having taken measures to prevent their
   profitless lamentations. But the practice is from Negroland whence it
   reached Egypt; and the people have there developed a curious system
   in the "weeping-song": I have noted this in "The Lake-Regions of
   Central Africa." In Zoroastrianism (Dabistan, chapt. xcvii.) tears
   shed for the dead form a river in hell, black and frigid.

Footnote 254:

   These lines are hardly translateable. Arab. "Sabr" means "patience"
   as well as "aloes," hereby lending itself to a host of puns and
   double entendres more or less vile. The aloe, according to
   Burckhardt, is planted in grave-yards as a lesson of patience: it is
   also slung, like the dried crocodile, over house-doors to prevent
   evil spirits entering; "thus hung without earth and water," says Lane
   (M. E., chapt. xi.), "it will live for several years and even
   blossom. Hence (?) it is called _Sabr_, which signifies patience."
   But Sibr as well as Sabr (a root) means "long-sufferance." I hold the
   practise to be one of the many Inner African superstitions. The wild
   Gallas to the present day plant aloes on graves, and suppose that
   when the plant sprouts the deceased has been admitted to the gardens
   of Wák, the Creator. (Pilgrimage iii. 350).

Footnote 255:

   Every city in the East has its specific title: this was given to
   Baghdad either on account of its superior police or simply because it
   was the Capital of the Caliphate. The Tigris was also called the
   "River of Peace (or Security)."

Footnote 256:

   This is very characteristic: the passengers finding themselves in
   difficulties at once take command. See in my Pilgrimage (I. chapt.
   xi.) how we beat and otherwise maltreated the Captain of the "Golden
   Wire."

Footnote 257:

   The fable is probably based on the currents which, as in Eastern
   Africa, will carry a ship fifty miles a day out of her course. We
   first find it in Ptolemy (vii. 2) whose Maniólai Islands, of India
   extra Gangem, cause iron nails to fly out of ships, the effect of the
   Lapis Herculeus (Loadstone). Rabelais (v. c. 37) alludes to it and to
   the vulgar idea of magnetism being counteracted by Skordon (_Scordon_
   or garlic). Hence too the Adamant (Loadstone) Mountains of Mandeville
   (chapt. xxvii.) and the "Magnetic Rock" in Mr. Puttock's clever
   "Peter Wilkins." I presume that the myth also arose from seeing craft
   built, as on the East African Coast, without iron nails. We shall
   meet with the legend again. The word Jabal ("Jebel" in Egypt) often
   occurs in these pages. The Arabs apply it to any rising ground or
   heap of rocks; so it is not always=our mountain. It has found its way
   to Europe _e.g._ Gibraltar and Monte Gibello (or Mongibel in
   poetry)="Mt. Ethne that men clepen Mounte Gybelle." Other special
   senses of Jabal will occur.

Footnote 258:

   As we learn from the Nubian Geographer the Arabs in early ages
   explored the Fortunate Islands, Jazírát al-Khálidát (=Eternal Isles),
   or Canaries, on one of which were reported a horse and horseman in
   bronze with his spear pointing west. Ibn al-Wardi notes "two images
   of hard stone, each an hundred cubits high, and upon the top of each
   a figure of copper pointing with its hand backwards, as though it
   would say:—Return for there is nothing behind me!" But this legend
   attaches to older doings. The 23rd Tobba (who succeeded Bilkis),
   Malik bin Sharhabíl, (or Sharabíl or Sharahíl) surnamed Náshir
   al-Ni'ám=scatterer of blessings, lost an army in attempting the
   Western sands and set up a statue of copper upon whose breast was
   inscribed in antique characters:—

                       There is no access behind me,
                       Nothing beyond,
                       (Saith) The Son of Sharabíl.

Footnote 259:

   _i.e._ I exclaimed "Bismillah!"

Footnote 260:

   The lesser ablution of hands, face and feet; a kind of "washing the
   points." More in Night ccccxl.

Footnote 261:

   Arab. "Ruka'tayn"; the number of these bows which are followed by the
   prostrations distinguishes the five daily prayers.

Footnote 262:

   The "Beth Kol" of the Hebrews; also called by the Moslems "Hátif";
   for which ask the Spiritualists. It is the Hindu "voice divine" or
   "voice from heaven."

Footnote 263:

   These formulæ are technically called Tasmiyah, Tahlíl (before noted)
   and Takbír: the "testifying" is Tashhíd.

Footnote 264:

   Arab. "Samn," (Pers. "Raughan" Hind. "Ghi") the "single sauce" of the
   East; fresh butter set upon the fire, skimmed and kept (for a century
   if required) in leather bottles and demijohns. Then it becomes a hard
   black mass, considered a panacea for wounds and diseases. It is very
   "filling": you say jocosely to an Eastern threatened with a sudden
   inroad of guests, "Go, swamp thy rice with Raughan." I once tried
   training, like a Hindu Pahlawan or athlete, on Gur (raw sugar), milk
   and Ghi; and the result was being blinded by bile before the week
   ended.

Footnote 265:

   These handsome youths are always described in the terms we should
   apply to women.

Footnote 266:

   The Bul. Edit. (i. 43) reads otherwise:—I found a garden and a second
   and a third and so on till they numbered thirty and nine; and, in
   each garden, I saw what praise will not express, of trees and rills
   and fruits and treasures. At the end of the last I sighted a door and
   said to myself, "What may be in this place?; needs must I open it and
   look in!" I did so accordingly and saw a courser ready saddled and
   bridled and picketed; so I loosed and mounted him; and he flew with
   me like a bird till he set me down on a terrace-roof; and, having
   landed me, he struck me a whisk with his tail and put out mine eye
   and fled from me. Thereupon I descended from the roof and found ten
   youths all blind of one eye who, when they saw me exclaimed, "No
   welcome to thee, and no good cheer!" I asked them, "Do ye admit me to
   your home and society?" and they answered, "No, by Allah, thou shalt
   not live amongst us." So I went forth with weeping eyes and grieving
   heart, but Allah had written my safety on the Guarded Tablet so I
   reached Baghdad in safety, etc. This is a fair specimen of how the
   work has been curtailed in that issue.

Footnote 267:

   Arabs date pregnancy from the stopping of the menses, upon which the
   fœtus is supposed to feed. Kalilah wa Dimnah says, "The child's navel
   adheres to that of his mother and thereby he sucks" (i. 263).

Footnote 268:

   This is contrary to the commands of Al-Islam; Mohammed expressly said
   "The Astrologers are liars, by the Lord of the Ka'abah!"; and his
   saying is known to almost all Moslems, lettered or unlettered. Yet,
   the further we go East (Indiawards) the more we find these practises
   held in honour. Turning westwards we have:

              Iuridicis, Erebo, Fisco, fas vivere rapto;
              Militibus, Medicis, Tortori occidere ludo est;
              Mentiri Astronomis, Pictoribus atque Poetis.

Footnote 269:

   He does not perform the Wuzu or lesser ablution because he neglects
   his dawn prayers.

Footnote 270:

   For this game see Lane (M. E. Chapt. xvii.) It is usually played on a
   checked cloth not on a board like our draughts; and Easterns are fond
   of eating, drinking and smoking between and even during the games.
   Torrens (p. 142) translates "I made up some dessert," confounding
   "Mankalah" with "Nukl" (dried fruit, quatre-mendiants).

Footnote 271:

   Quoted from Mohammed whose saying has been given.

Footnote 272:

   We should say "the night of the thirty-ninth."

Footnote 273:

   The bath first taken after sickness.

Footnote 274:

   Arab. "Dikák" used by way of soap or rather to soften the skin: the
   meal is usually of lupins, "Adas"="_Revalenta Arabica_," which costs
   a penny in Egypt and half-a-crown in England.

Footnote 275:

   Arab. "Sukkar-nabát." During my day (1842-49) we had no other sugar
   in the Bombay Presidency.

Footnote 276:

   This is one of the myriad Arab instances that the decrees of
   "Anagké," Fate, Destiny, Weird, are inevitable. The situation is
   highly dramatic; and indeed The Nights, as will appear in the
   terminal Essay, have already suggested a national drama.

Footnote 277:

   Having lately been moved by Ajib.

Footnote 278:

   Mr. Payne (i. 131.) omits these lines which appear out of place; but
   this mode of inappropriate quotation is a characteristic of Eastern
   tales.

Footnote 279:

   Anglicè "him."

Footnote 280:

   This march of the tribe is a _lieu commun_ of Arab verse _e.g._ the
   poet Labid's noble elegy on the "Deserted Camp." We shall find scores
   of instances in The Nights.

Footnote 281:

   I have heard of such sands in the Desert east of Damascus which can
   be crossed only on boards or camel furniture; and the same is
   reported of the infamous Region "Al-Ahkáf" ("Unexplored Syria").

Footnote 282:

   Hence the Arab. saying "The bark of a dog and not the gleam of a
   fire;" the tired traveller knows from the former that the camp is
   near, whereas the latter shows from great distances.

Footnote 283:

   Dark blue is the colour of mourning in Egypt as it was of the Roman
   Republic. The Persians hold that this tint was introduced by Kay
   Kawús (B.C. 600) when mourning for his son Siyáwush. It was continued
   till the death of Husayn on the 10th of Muharram (the first month,
   then representing the vernal equinox) when it was changed for black.
   As a rule Moslems do not adopt this symbol of sorrow (called
   "Hidád"), looking upon the practice as somewhat idolatrous and
   foreign to Arab manners. In Egypt and especially on the Upper Nile
   women dye their hands with indigo and stain their faces black or
   blacker.

Footnote 284:

   The older Roc, of which more in the Tale of Sindbad. Meanwhile the
   reader curious about the Persian Símurgh (thirty bird) will consult
   the Dabistan, i., 55, 191 and iii., 237, and Richardson's Diss. p.
   xlviii. For the Anka (Enka or Unka=long-necked bird) see Dab. iii.,
   249 and for the Humá (bird of Paradise) Richardson lxix. We still
   lack details concerning the Ben or Bennu (nycticorax) of Egypt which
   with the Article pi gave rise to the Greek "phœnix."

Footnote 285:

   Probably the _Haledj_ of Forskal (p. xcvi. Flor. Ægypt. Arab.),
   "lignum tenax, durum, obscuri generis." The Bres. Edit, has
   "ákúl"=teak wood, vulg. "Sáj."

Footnote 286:

   The knocker ring is an invention well known to the Romans.

Footnote 287:

   Arab. "Sadr"; the place of honour; hence the "Sudder Adawlut"
   (Supreme Court) in the Anglo-Indian jargon.

Footnote 288:

   Arab. "Ahlan wa sahlan wa marhabá," the words still popularly
   addressed to a guest.

Footnote 289:

   This may mean "liquid black eyes"; but also, as I have noticed, that
   the lashes were long and thick enough to make the eyelids appear as
   if Kohl-powder had been applied to the inner rims.

Footnote 290:

   A slight parting between the two front incisors, the upper only, is
   considered a beauty by Arabs; why it is hard to say except for the
   racial love of variety. "Sughr" (Thugr) in the text means, primarily,
   the opening of the mouth, the gape: hence the front teeth.

Footnote 291:

   _i.e._ makes me taste the bitterness of death, "bursting the
   gall-bladder" (Marárah) being our "breaking the heart."

Footnote 292:

   Almost needless to say that forbidden doors and rooms form a _lieu
   commun_ in Fairie: they are found in the Hindu Katha Sarit Sagara and
   became familiar to our childhood by "Bluebeard."

Footnote 293:

   Lit. "apply Kohl to my eyes," even as Jezebel "painted her face," in
   Heb. put her eyes in painting (2 Kings ix., 30).

Footnote 294:

   Arab. "Al-Barkúk," whence our older "Apricock." Classically it is
   "Burkúk" and Pers. for Arab. "Mishmish," and it also denotes a small
   plum or damson. In Syria the "side next the sun" shows a glowing red
   flush.

Footnote 295:

   Arab. "Hazáṙ" (in Persian, a thousand)=a kind of mocking bird.

Footnote 296:

   Some Edit. make the doors number a hundred, but the Princesses were
   forty and these coincidences, which seem to have significance and
   have none save for Arab symmetromania, are common in Arab stories.

Footnote 297:

   Arab. "Májúr": hence possibly our "mazer," which is popularly derived
   from Masarn, a maple.

Footnote 298:

   A compound scent of ambergris, musk and aloes.

Footnote 299:

   The ends of the bridle-reins forming the whip

Footnote 300:

   The flying horse is Pegasus which is a Greek travesty of an Egyptian
   myth developed in India.

Footnote 301:

   The Bres. Edit. wrongly says "the seventh."

Footnote 302:

   Arab. "Sharmutah" (plur. Sharámít) from the root Sharmat, to shred, a
   favourite Egyptian word also applied in vulgar speech to a strumpet,
   a punk, a piece. It is also the popular term for strips of jerked or
   boucaned meat hung up in the sun to dry, and classically called
   "Kadíd."

Footnote 303:

   Arab. "Izár," the man's waist-cloth opposed to the Ridá or
   shoulder-cloth, is also the sheet of white calico worn by the poorer
   Egyptian women out of doors and covering head and hands. See Lane (M.
   E., chapt. i). The rich prefer a "Habárah" of black silk, and the
   poor, when they have nothing else, use a bed-sheet.

Footnote 304:

   _i.e._ "My dears."

Footnote 305:

   Arab. "Lá tawákhizná:" lit. "do not chastise (or blame) us;" the pop.
   expression for, "excuse (or pardon) us."

Footnote 306:

   Arab. "Maskhút," mostly applied to change of shape as man enchanted
   to monkey, and in vulgar parlance applied to a statue (of stone,
   etc.). The list of metamorphoses in Al-Islam is longer than that
   known to Ovid. Those who have seen Petra, the Greek town of the
   Haurán and the Roman ruins in Northern Africa will readily detect the
   basis upon which these stories are built. I shall return to this
   subject in The City of Iram (Night cclxxvi.) and The City of Brass
   (dlxvii.).

Footnote 307:

   A picturesque phrase enough to express a deserted site, a spectacle
   familiar to the Nomades and always abounding in pathos to the
   citizens.

Footnote 308:

   The olden "Harem" (or gynæceum, Pers. Zenanah, Serraglio): Harím is
   also used by synecdoche for the inmates; especially the wife.

Footnote 309:

   The pearl is supposed in the East to lose 1% per ann. of its
   splendour and value.

Footnote 310:

   Arab. "Fass," properly the bezel of a ring; also a gem cut _en
   cabochon_ and generally the _contenant_ for the _contenu_.

Footnote 311:

   Arab. "Mihráb"=the arch-headed niche in the Mosque-wall facing
   Meccah-wards. Here, with his back to the people and fronting
   the Ka'abah or Square House of Meccah (hence called the
   "Kiblah"=direction of prayer), stations himself the Imám, antistes or
   fugleman, lit. "one who stands _before_ others;" and his bows and
   prostrations give the time to the congregation. I have derived the
   Mihrab from the niche in which the Egyptian God was shrined: the Jews
   ignored it, but the Christians preserved it for their statues and
   altars. Maundrell suggests that the empty niche denotes an invisible
   God. As the niche (symbol of Venus) and the minaret (symbol of
   Priapus) date only from the days of the tenth Caliph, Al-Walid (A.H.
   86-96=105-115), the Hindus charge the Moslems with having borrowed
   the two from their favourite idols—The Linga-Yoni or Cunnus-phallus
   (Pilgrimage ii. 140), and plainly call the Mihrab a Bhaga=Cunnus
   (Dabistan ii. 152.) The Guebres further term Meccah "Mah-gah," locus
   Lunæ, and Al-Medinah, "Mahdinah,"=Moon of religion. See Dabistan i.,
   49, etc.

Footnote 312:

   Arab. "Kursi," a stool of palm-fronds, etc., ❌-shaped (see Lane's
   illustration, Nights i., 197), before which the reader sits. Good
   Moslems will not hold the Holy Volume below the waist nor open it
   except when ceremonially pure. Englishmen in the East should remember
   this, for to neglect the "Adab al-Kúran" (respect due to Holy Writ)
   gives great scandal.

Footnote 313:

   Mr. Payne (i. 148) quotes the German Zuckerpüppchen.

Footnote 314:

   The Persian poets have a thousand conceits in praise of the "mole,"
   (Khál or Shámah) for which Hafiz offered "Samarkand and Bokhara"
   (they not being his, as his friends remarked). Another "topic" is the
   flight of arrows shot by eyelashes.

Footnote 315:

   Arab. "Suhá" a star in the Great Bear introduced only to balance
   "wushát"=spies, enviers, enemies, whose "evil eye" it will ward off.

Footnote 316:

   In Arab tales beauty is always "soft-sided," and a smooth skin is
   valued in proportion to its rarety.

Footnote 317:

   The myrtle is the young hair upon the side-face.

Footnote 318:

   In other copies of these verses the fourth couplet swears "by the
   scorpions of his brow" _i.e._ the _accroche-cœurs_, the
   beau-catchers, bell-ropes or "aggravators," as the B.P. calls them.
   In couplet eight the poet alludes to his love's "Unsur," or element,
   his nature made up of the four classicals, and in the last couplet he
   makes the nail-paring refer to the moon not the sun.

Footnote 319:

   This is regular formula when speaking of Guebres.

Footnote 320:

   Arab. "Faráiz"; the orders expressly given in the Koran which the
   reader will remember, is Uncreate and Eternal. In India "Farz" is
   applied to injunctions thrice repeated; and "Wájib" to those given
   twice over. Elsewhere scanty difference is made between them.

Footnote 321:

   Arab. "Kufr"=rejecting the True Religion, _i.e._ Al-Islam, such
   rejection being "Tughyán" or rebellion against the Lord. The
   "terrible sound" is taken from the legend of the prophet Sálih and
   the proto-historic tribe of Thámúd which for its impiety was struck
   dead by an earthquake and a noise from heaven. The latter, according
   to some commentators, was the voice of the Archangel Gabriel crying
   "Die all of you" (Koran, chapts. vii. xviii., etc.). We shall hear
   more of it in the "City of many-coloured Iram." According to some,
   Salih, a mysterious Badawi prophet, is buried in the Wady al-Shaykh
   of the so-called Sinaitic Peninsula.

Footnote 322:

   Yet they kept the semblance of man, showing that the idea arose from
   the basaltic statues found in Hauranic ruins. Mohammed in his various
   marches to Syria must have seen remnants of Greek and Roman
   settlements; and as has been noticed "Sesostris" left his mark near
   Meccah. (Pilgrimage iii. 137).

Footnote 323:

   Arab. "Shuhadá"; highly respected by Moslems as by other
   religionists; although their principal if not only merit seems as a
   rule to have been intense obstinacy and devotion to one idea for
   which they were ready to sacrifice even life. The Martyrs-category is
   extensive including those killed by falling walls; victims to the
   plague, pleurisy and pregnancy; travellers drowned or otherwise lost
   when journeying honestly, and chaste lovers who die of "broken
   hearts" _i.e._ impaired digestion. Their souls are at once stowed
   away in the crops of green birds where they remain till Resurrection
   Day, "eating of the fruits and drinking of the streams of Paradise,"
   a place however, whose topography is wholly uncertain. Thus the young
   Prince was rewarded with a manner of anti-Purgatory, a preparatory
   heaven.

Footnote 324:

   Arab. "Su 'ubán:" the Badawin give the name to a variety of serpents
   all held to be venomous; but in tales the word, like "Tannín."
   expresses our "dragon" or "cockatrice."

Footnote 325:

   She was ashamed to see the lady doing servile duty by rubbing her
   feet. This _massage_, which B. de la Brocquière describes in 1452 as
   "kneading and pinching," has already been noticed. The French term is
   apparently derived from the Arab. "Mas-h."

Footnote 326:

   Alluding to the Most High Name, the hundredth name of God, the Heb.
   Shem hamphorash, unknown save to a favoured few who by using it
   perform all manner of miracles.

Footnote 327:

   _i.e._ the Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean.

Footnote 328:

   _i.e._ Settled by the Koran.

Footnote 329:

   The uglier the old woman the better procuress she is supposed to
   make. See the Santa Verdiana in Boccaccio v., 10. In Arab. "Ajuz"
   (old woman) is highly insulting and if addressed to an Egyptian,
   whatever be her age she will turn fiercely and resent it. The polite
   term is Shaybah (Pilgrimage iii., 200).

Footnote 330:

   The four ages of woman, considered after Demosthenes in her
   three-fold character, prostitute for pleasure, concubine for service
   and wife for breeding.

Footnote 331:

   Arab. "Jilá" (the Hindostani Julwa)=the displaying of the bride
   before the bridegroom for the first time, in different dresses, to
   the number of seven which are often borrowed for the occasion. The
   happy man must pay a fee called "the tax of face-unveiling" before he
   can see her features. Amongst Syrian Christians he sometimes tries to
   lift the veil by a sharp movement of the sword which is parried by
   the women present, and the blade remains entangled in the cloth. At
   last he succeeds, the bride sinks to the ground covering her face
   with her hands and the robes of her friends: presently she is raised
   up, her veil is readjusted and her face is left bare.

Footnote 332:

   Arab. "Ishá"=the first watch of the night, twilight, supper-time,
   supper. Moslems have borrowed the four watches of the Romans from 6
   (a.m. or p.m.) to 6; and ignore the three original watches of the
   Jews, even, midnight and cockcrow (Sam. ii. 19, Judges vii. 19, and
   Exodus xiv. 24).

Footnote 333:

   A popular Arab hyperbole.

Footnote 334:

   Arab. "Shakáik al-Nu'umán," lit. the fissures of Nu'uman, the
   beautiful anemone, which a tyrannical King of Hirah, Nu'uman ibn
   Al-Munzir, a contemporary of Mohammed, attempted to monopolize.

Footnote 335:

   Arab. "Andam"=here the gum called dragon's blood; in other places the
   dye-wood known as brazil.

Footnote 336:

   I need hardly say that in the East, where bells are unused, clapping
   the hands summons the servants. In India men cry "Quy hye" (Koi hái?)
   and in the Brazil whistle "Pst!" after the fashion of Spain and
   Portugal.

Footnote 337:

   The moles are here compared with pearls; a simile by no means common
   or appropriate.

Footnote 338:

   A parody on the testification of Allah's Unity.

Footnote 339:

   Arab. "Simát" (prop. "Sumát"); the "dinner-table," composed of a
   round wooden stool supporting a large metal tray, the two being
   called "Sufrah" (or "Simat"): thus, "Sufrah házirah!" means dinner is
   on the table. After the meal they are at once removed.

Footnote 340:

   In the text "Dastúr," the Persian word before noticed; "Izn" would be
   the proper Arabic equivalent.

Footnote 341:

   In the Moslem East a young woman, single or married, is not allowed
   to appear alone in the streets; and the police has a right to arrest
   delinquents. As a preventive of intrigues the precaution is
   excellent. During the Crimean war hundreds of officers, English,
   French and Italian, became familiar with Constantinople; and not a
   few flattered themselves on their success with Turkish women. I do
   not believe that a single _bonâ fide_ case occurred; the "conquests"
   were all Greeks, Wallachians, Armenians or Jewesses.

Footnote 342:

   Arab. "Azím": translators do not seem to know that this word in The
   Nights often bears its Egyptian and slang sense, somewhat equivalent
   to our "deuced" or "mighty" or "awfully fine."

Footnote 343:

   This is a very serious thing amongst Moslems and scrupulous men often
   make great sacrifices to avoid taking an oath.

Footnote 344:

   We should say "into the noose."

Footnote 345:

   The man had fallen in love with her and determined to mark her so
   that she might be his.

Footnote 346:

   Arab. "Dajlah," in which we find the Heb. Hid-dekel.

Footnote 347:

   Such an execution would be contrary to Moslem law: but people would
   look leniently upon the peccadillo of beheading or sacking a
   faithless wife. Moreover the youth was of the blood royal and _A quoi
   bon être prince?_ as was said by a boy of viceroyal family in Egypt
   to his tutor who reproached him for unnecessarily shooting down a
   poor old man.

Footnote 348:

   Arab. "Shirk," partnership, evening or associating gods with God;
   polytheism: especially levelled at the Hindu triadism, Guebre dualism
   and Christian Trinitarianism.

Footnote 349:

   Arab. "Shatm"=abuse, generally couched in foulest language with
   especial reference to the privy parts of female relatives.

Footnote 350:

   When a woman is bastinadoed in the East they leave her some portion
   of dress and pour over her sundry buckets of water for a delicate
   consideration. When the hands are beaten they are passed through
   holes in the curtain separating the sufferer from mankind, and made
   fast to a "falakah" or pole.

Footnote 351:

   Arab. "Khalifah," Caliph. The word is also used for the successor of
   a Santon or holy man.

Footnote 352:

   Arab. "Sár;" here the Koranic word for carrying out the venerable and
   undying _lex talionis_, the original basis of all criminal
   jurisprudence. Its main fault is that justice repeats the offence.

Footnote 353:

   Both these sons of Harun became Caliphs, as we shall see in The
   Nights.




                    _THE TALE OF THE THREE APPLES._


 They relate, O King of the age and lord of the time and of these days,
 that the Caliph Harun al-Rashid summoned his Wazir Ja'afar one night
 and said to him, "I desire to go down into the city and question the
 common folk concerning the conduct of those charged with its
 governance; and those of whom they complain we will depose from office
 and those whom they commend we will promote." Quoth Ja'afar,
 "Hearkening and obedience!" So the Caliph went down with Ja'afar and
 Eunuch Masrur to the town and walked about the streets and markets and,
 as they were threading a narrow alley, they came upon a very old man
 with a fishing-net and crate to carry small fish on his head, and in
 his hand a staff; and, as he walked at a leisurely pace, he repeated
 these lines:—

 They say me:—Thou shinest a light to mankind ✿ With thy lore as the
    night which the Moon doth uplight!
 I answer, "A truce to your jests and your gibes; ✿ Without luck what is
    learning?—a poor-devil wight!
 If they take me to pawn with my lore in my pouch, ✿ With my volumes to
    read and my ink-case to write,
 For one day's provision they never could pledge me; ✿ As likely on
    Doomsday to draw bill at sight:"
 How poorly, indeed, doth it fare wi' the poor, ✿ With his pauper
    existence and beggarly plight:
 In summer he faileth provision to find; ✿ In winter the fire-pot's his
    only delight:
 The street-dogs with bite and with bark to him rise, ✿ And each losel
    receives him with bark and with bite:
 If he lift up his voice and complain of his wrong, ✿ None pities or
    heeds him, however he's right;
 And when sorrows and evils like these he must brave ✿ His happiest
    homestead were down in the grave.

 When the Caliph heard his verses he said to Ja'afar, "See this poor man
 and note his verses, for surely they point to his necessities." Then he
 accosted him and asked, "O Shaykh, what be thine occupation?" and the
 poor man answered, "O my lord, I am a fisherman with a family to keep
 and I have been out between midday and this time; and not a thing hath
 Allah made my portion wherewithal to feed my family. I cannot even pawn
 myself to buy them a supper and I hate and disgust my life and I hanker
 after death." Quoth the Caliph, "Say me, wilt thou return with us to
 Tigris' bank and cast thy net on my luck, and whatsoever turneth up I
 will buy of thee for an hundred gold pieces?" The man rejoiced when he
 heard these words and said, "On my head be it! I will go back with
 you;" and, returning with them river-wards, made a cast and waited a
 while; then he hauled in the rope and dragged the net ashore and there
 appeared in it a chest padlocked and heavy. The Caliph examined it and
 lifted it finding it weighty; so he gave the fisherman two hundred
 dinars and sent him about his business; whilst Masrur, aided by the
 Caliph, carried the chest to the palace and set it down and lighted the
 candles. Ja'afar and Masrur then broke it open and found therein a
 basket of palm-leaves corded with red worsted. This they cut open and
 saw within it a piece of carpet which they lifted out, and under it was
 a woman's mantilla folded in four, which they pulled out; and at the
 bottom of the chest they came upon a young lady, fair as a silver
 ingot, slain and cut into nineteen pieces. When the Caliph looked upon
 her he cried, "Alas!" and tears ran down his cheeks and turning to
 Ja'afar he said, "O dog of Wazirs,[354] shall folk be murdered in our
 reign and be cast into the river to be a burden and a responsibility
 for us on the Day of Doom? By Allah, we must avenge this woman on her
 murderer and he shall be made die the worst of deaths!" And presently
 he added, "Now, as surely as we are descended from the Sons of
 Abbas,[355] if thou bring us not him who slew her, that we do her
 justice on him, I will hang thee at the gate of my palace, thee and
 forty of thy kith and kin by thy side." And the Caliph was wroth with
 exceeding rage. Quoth Ja'afar, "Grant me three days delay;" and quoth
 the Caliph, "We grant thee this." So Ja'afar went out from before him
 and returned to his own house, full of sorrow and saying to himself,
 "How shall I find him who murdered this damsel, that I may bring him
 before the Caliph? If I bring other than the murderer, it will be laid
 to my charge by the Lord: in very sooth I wot not what to do." He kept
 his house three days and on the fourth day the Caliph sent one of the
 Chamberlains for him and, as he came into the presence, asked him,
 "Where is the murderer of the damsel?" to which answered Ja'afar, "O
 Commander of the Faithful, am I inspector of murdered folk that I
 should ken who killed her?" The Caliph was furious at his answer and
 bade hang him before the palace-gate and commanded that a crier cry
 through the streets of Baghdad, "Whoso would see the hanging of
 Ja'afar, the Barmaki, Wazir of the Caliph, with forty of the
 Barmecides,[356] his cousins and kinsmen, before the palace-gate, let
 him come and let him look!" The people flocked out from all the
 quarters of the city to witness the execution of Ja'afar and his
 kinsmen, not knowing the cause. Then they set up the gallows and made
 Ja'afar and the others stand underneath in readiness for execution, but
 whilst every eye was looking for the Caliph's signal, and the crowd
 wept for Ja'afar and his cousins of the Barmecides, lo and behold! a
 young man fair of face and neat of dress and of favour like the moon
 raining light, with eyes black and bright, and brow flower-white, and
 cheeks red as rose and young down where the beard grows, and a mole
 like a grain of ambergris, pushed his way through the people till he
 stood immediately before the Wazir and said to him, "Safety to thee
 from this strait, O Prince of the Emirs and Asylum of the poor! I am
 the man who slew the woman ye found in the chest, so hang me for her
 and do her justice on me!" When Ja'afar heard the youth's confession he
 rejoiced at his own deliverance, but grieved and sorrowed for the fair
 youth, and whilst they were yet talking behold, another man well
 stricken in years pressed forwards through the people and thrust his
 way amid the populace till he came to Ja'afar and the youth, whom he
 saluted saying, "Ho thou the Wazir and Prince sans-peer! believe not
 the words of this youth. Of a surety none murdered the damsel but I;
 take her wreak on me this moment; for, an thou do not thus, I will
 require it of thee before Almighty Allah." Then quoth the young man, "O
 Wazir, this is an old man in his dotage who wotteth not whatso he saith
 ever, and I am he who murdered her, so do thou avenge her on me!" Quoth
 the old man, "O my son, thou art young and desirest the joys of the
 world and I am old and weary and surfeited with the world: I will offer
 my life as a ransom for thee and for the Wazir and his cousins. No one
 murdered the damsel but I, so Allah upon thee, make haste to hang me,
 for no life is left in me now that hers is gone." The Wazir marvelled
 much at all this strangeness and, taking the young man and the old man,
 carried them before the Caliph, where, after kissing the ground seven
 times between his hands, he said, "O Commander of the Faithful, I bring
 thee the murderer of the damsel!" "Where is he?"; asked the Caliph and
 Ja'afar answered, "This young man saith, I am the murderer, and this
 old man giving him the lie saith, I am the murderer, and behold, here
 are the twain standing before thee." The Caliph looked at the old man
 and the young man and asked, "Which of you killed the girl?" The young
 man replied, "No one slew her save I;" and the old man answered,
 "Indeed none killed her but myself." Then said the Caliph to Ja'afar,
 "Take the twain and hang them both;" but Ja'afar rejoined, "Since one
 of them was the murderer, to hang the other were mere injustice."[357]
 "By Him who raised the firmament and dispread the earth like a carpet,"
 cried the youth, "I am he who slew the damsel;" and he went on to
 describe the manner of her murder and the basket, the mantilla and the
 bit of carpet, in fact all that the Caliph had found upon her. So the
 Caliph was certified that the young man was the murderer; whereat he
 wondered and asked him, "What was the cause of thy wrongfully doing
 this damsel to die and what made thee confess the murder without the
 bastinado, and what brought thee here to yield up thy life, and what
 made thee say Do her wreak upon me?" The youth answered, "Know, O
 Commander of the Faithful, that this woman was my wife and the mother
 of my children; also my first cousin and the daughter of my paternal
 uncle, this old man who is my father's own brother. When I married her
 she was a maid[358] and Allah blessed me with three male children by
 her; she loved me and served me and I saw no evil in her, for I also
 loved her with fondest love. Now on the first day of this month she
 fell ill with grievous sickness and I fetched in physicians to her; but
 recovery came to her little by little and, when I wished her to go to
 the Hammam-bath, she said:—There is a something I long for before I go
 to the bath and I long for it with an exceeding longing. To hear is to
 comply, said I. And what is it? Quoth she, I have a queasy craving for
 an apple, to smell it and bite a bit of it. I replied:—Hadst thou a
 thousand longings I would try to satisfy them! So I went on the instant
 into the city and sought for apples but could find none; yet, had they
 cost a gold piece each, would I have bought them. I was vexed at this
 and went home and said:—O daughter of my uncle, by Allah I can find
 none! She was distressed, being yet very weakly, and her weakness
 increased greatly on her that night and I felt anxious and alarmed on
 her account. As soon as morning dawned I went out again and made the
 round of the gardens, one by one, but found no apples anywhere. At last
 there met me an old gardener, of whom I asked about them and he
 answered:—O my son, this fruit is a rarity with us and is not now to be
 found save in the garden of the Commander of the Faithful at Bassorah,
 where the gardener keepeth it for the Caliph's eating. I returned to my
 house troubled by my ill-success; and my love for my wife and my
 affection moved me to undertake the journey. So I gat me ready and set
 out and travelled fifteen days and nights, going and coming, and
 brought her three apples which I bought from the gardener for three
 dinars. But when I went in to my wife and set them before her, she took
 no pleasure in them and let them lie by her side; for her weakness and
 fever had increased on her and her malady lasted without abating ten
 days, after which time she began to recover health. So I left my house
 and betaking me to my shop sat there buying and selling; and about
 midday behold, a great ugly black slave, long as a lance and broad as a
 bench, passed by my shop holding in hand one of the three apples
 wherewith he was playing. Quoth I:—O my good slave, tell me whence thou
 tookest that apple, that I may get the like of it? He laughed and
 answered:—I got it from my mistress, for I had been absent and on my
 return I found her lying ill with three apples by her side, and she
 said to me:—My horned wittol of a husband made a journey for them to
 Bassorah and bought them for three dinars. So I ate and drank with her
 and took this one from her.[359] When I heard such words from the
 slave, O Commander of the Faithful, the world grew black before my
 face, and I arose and locked up my shop and went home beside myself for
 excess of rage. I looked for the apples and finding only two of the
 three asked my wife:—O my cousin, where is the third apple?; and
 raising her head languidly she answered:—I wot not, O son of my uncle,
 where 'tis gone! This convinced me that the slave had spoken the truth,
 so I took a knife and coming behind her got upon her breast without a
 word said and cut her throat. Then I hewed off her head and her limbs
 in pieces and, wrapping her in her mantilla and a rag of carpet,
 hurriedly sewed up the whole which I set in a chest and, locking it
 tight, loaded it on my he-mule and threw it into the Tigris with my own
 hands. So Allah upon thee, O Commander of the Faithful, make haste to
 hang me, as I fear lest she appeal for vengeance on Resurrection Day.
 For, when I had thrown her into the river and none knew aught of it, as
 I went back home I found my eldest son crying and yet he knew naught of
 what I had done with his mother. I asked him:—What hath made thee weep,
 my boy?; and he answered:—I took one of the three apples which were by
 my mammy and went down into the lane to play with my brethren when
 behold, a big long black slave snatched it from my hand and said,
 Whence hadst thou this? Quoth I, My father travelled far for it, and
 brought it from Bassorah for my mother who was ill and two other apples
 for which he paid three ducats. He took no heed of my words and I asked
 for the apple a second and a third time, but he cuffed me and kicked me
 and went off with it. I was afraid lest my mother should swinge me on
 account of the apple, so for fear of her I went with my brother outside
 the city and stayed there till evening closed in upon us; and indeed I
 am in fear of her; and now by Allah, O my father, say nothing to her of
 this or it may add to her ailment! When I heard what my child said I
 knew that the slave was he who had foully slandered my wife, the
 daughter of my uncle, and was certified that I had slain her
 wrongfully. So I wept with exceeding weeping and presently this old
 man, my paternal uncle and her father, came in; and I told him what had
 happened and he sat down by my side and wept and we ceased not weeping
 till midnight. We have kept up mourning for her these last five days
 and we lamented her in the deepest sorrow for that she was unjustly
 done to die. This came from the gratuitous lying of the slave, the
 blackamoor, and this was the manner of my killing her; so I conjure
 thee, by the honour of thine ancestors, make haste to kill me and do
 her justice upon me, as there is no living for me after her!" The
 Caliph marvelled at his words and said, "By Allah the young man is
 excusable: I will hang none but the accursed slave and I will do a deed
 which shall comfort the ill-at-ease and suffering, and which shall
 please the All-glorious King."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
 and ceased saying her permitted say.

                  Now when it was the Twentieth Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph swore
 he would hang none but the slave, for the youth was excusable. Then he
 turned to Ja'afar and said to him, "Bring before me this accursed slave
 who was the sole cause of this calamity; and, if thou bring him not
 before me within three days, thou shalt be slain in his stead." So
 Ja'afar fared forth weeping and saying, "Two deaths have already beset
 me, nor shall the crock come off safe from every shock.[360] In this
 matter craft and cunning are of no avail; but He who preserved my life
 the first time can preserve it a second time. By Allah, I will not
 leave my house during the three days of life which remain to me and let
 the Truth (whose perfection be praised!) do e'en as He will." So he
 kept his house three days, and on the fourth day he summoned the Kazis
 and legal witnesses and made his last will and testament, and took
 leave of his children weeping. Presently in came a messenger from the
 Caliph and said to him, "The Commander of the Faithful is in the most
 violent rage that can be, and he sendeth to seek thee and he sweareth
 that the day shall certainly not pass without thy being hanged unless
 the slave be forthcoming." When Ja'afar heard this he wept, and his
 children and slaves and all who were in the house wept with him. After
 he had bidden adieu to everybody except his youngest daughter, he
 proceeded to farewell her; for he loved this wee one, who was a
 beautiful child, more than all his other children; and he pressed her
 to his breast and kissed her and wept bitterly at parting from her;
 when he felt something round inside the bosom of her dress and asked
 her, "O my little maid, what is in thy bosom pocket?"; "O my father,"
 she replied, "it is an apple with the name of our Lord the Caliph
 written upon it. Rayhán our slave brought it to me four days ago and
 would not let me have it till I gave him two dinars for it." When
 Ja'afar heard speak of the slave and the apple, he was glad and put his
 hand into his child's pocket[361] and drew out the apple and knew it
 and rejoiced saying, "O ready Dispeller of trouble!"[362] Then he bade
 them bring the slave and said to him, "Fie upon thee, Rayhan! whence
 haddest thou this apple?" "By Allah, O my master," he replied, "though
 a lie may get a man once off, yet may truth get him off, and well off,
 again and again. I did not steal this apple from thy palace nor from
 the gardens of the Commander of the Faithful. The fact is that five
 days ago, as I was walking along one of the alleys of this city, I saw
 some little ones at play and this apple in hand of one of them. So I
 snatched it from him and beat him and he cried and said, O youth this
 apple is my mother's and she is ill. She told my father how she longed
 for an apple, so he travelled to Bassorah and bought her three apples
 for three gold pieces, and I took one of them to play withal. He wept
 again, but I paid no heed to what he said and carried it off and
 brought it here, and my little lady bought it of me for two dinars of
 gold. And this is the whole story." When Ja'afar heard his words he
 marvelled that the murder of the damsel and all this misery should have
 been caused by his slave; he grieved for the relation of the slave to
 himself, while rejoicing over his own deliverance, and he repeated
 these lines:—

 If ill betide thee through thy slave, ✿ Make him forthright thy
    sacrifice:
 A many serviles thou shalt find, ✿ But life comes once and never twice.

 Then he took the slave's hand and, leading him to the Caliph, related
 the story from first to last and the Caliph marvelled with extreme
 astonishment, and laughed till he fell on his back and ordered that the
 story be recorded and be made public amongst the people. But Ja'afar
 said, "Marvel not, O Commander of the Faithful, at this adventure, for
 it is not more wondrous than the History of the Wazir Núr al-Dín Ali of
 Egypt and his brother Shams al-Dín Mohammed." Quoth the Caliph, "Out
 with it; but what can be stranger than this story?" And Ja'afar
 answered, "O Commander of the Faithful, I will not tell it thee, save
 on condition that thou pardon my slave;" and the Caliph rejoined, "If
 it be indeed more wondrous than that of the three apples, I grant thee
 his blood, and if not I will surely slay thy slave." So Ja'afar began
 in these words the

-----

Footnote 354:

   "Dog" and "hog" are still highly popular terms of abuse. The Rabbis
   will not defile their lips with "pig;" but say "Dabhar
   akhir"="another thing."

Footnote 355:

   The "hero eponymus" of the Abbaside dynasty, Abbas having been the
   brother of Abdullah, the father of Mohammed. He is a famous personage
   in Al-Islam (D'Herbelot).

Footnote 356:

   Europe translates the word "Barmecides." It is Persian from _bar_
   (up) and _makídan_ (to suck). The vulgar legend is that Ja'afar, the
   first of the name, appeared before the Caliph Abd al-Malik with a
   ring poisoned for his own need; and that the Caliph, warned of it by
   the clapping of two stones which he wore _ad hoc_, charged the
   visitor with intention to murder him. He excused himself and in his
   speech occurred the Persian word "Barmakam," which may mean "I shall
   sup it up," or, "I am a Barmak," that is, a high priest among the
   Guebres. See D'Herbelot s.v.

Footnote 357:

   Arab. "Zulm," the deadliest of monarch's sins. One of the sayings of
   Mohammed, popularly quoted, is, "Kingdom endureth with Kufr or
   infidelity (_i.e._ without accepting Al-Islam) but endureth not with
   Zulm or injustice." Hence the good Moslem will not complain of the
   rule of Kafirs or Unbelievers, like the English, so long as they rule
   him righteously and according to his own law.

Footnote 358:

   All this aggravates his crime: had she been a widow she would not
   have had upon him "the claims of maidenhead," the premio della
   verginità of Boccaccio, x. 10.

Footnote 359:

   It is supposed that slaves cannot help telling these fatal lies. Arab
   story-books are full of ancient and modern instances and some have
   become "Joe Millers." Moreover it is held unworthy of a freeborn man
   to take over-notice of these servile villanies; hence the scoundrel
   in the story escapes unpunished. I have already noticed the
   predilection of debauched women for these "skunks of the human race;"
   and the young man in the text evidently suspected that his wife had
   passed herself this "little caprice." The excuse which the Caliph
   would find for him is the _pundonor_ shown in killing one he loved so
   fondly.

Footnote 360:

   The Arab equivalent of our pitcher and well.

Footnote 361:

   _i.e._ Where the dress sits loosely about the bust.

Footnote 362:

   He had trusted in Allah and his trust was justified.




          _TALE OF NÚR AL-DÍN ALÍ & HIS SON BADR AL-DÍN HASAN_


 Know, O Commander of the Faithful, that in times of yore the land of
 Egypt was ruled by a Sultan endowed with justice and generosity, one
 who loved the pious poor and companied with the Olema and learned men;
 and he had a Wazir, a wise and an experienced, well versed in affairs
 and in the art of government. This Minister, who was a very old man,
 had two sons, as they were two moons; never man saw the like of them
 for beauty and grace, the elder called Shams al-Din Mohammed and the
 younger Nur al-Din Ali; but the younger excelled the elder in
 seemliness and pleasing semblance, so that folk heard his fame in far
 countries and men flocked to Egypt for the purpose of seeing him. In
 course of time their father, the Wazir, died and was deeply regretted
 and mourned by the Sultan, who sent for his two sons and, investing
 them with dresses of honour,[363] said to them, "Let not your hearts be
 troubled, for ye shall stand in your father's stead and be joint
 Ministers of Egypt." At this they rejoiced and kissed the ground before
 him and performed the ceremonial mourning[364] for their father during
 a full month; after which time they entered upon the Wazirate, and the
 power passed into their hands as it had been in the hands of their
 father, each doing duty for a week at a time. They lived under the same
 roof and their word was one; and whenever the Sultan desired to travel
 they took it by turns to be in attendance on him. It fortuned one night
 that the Sultan purposed setting out on a journey next morning, and the
 elder, whose turn it was to accompany him, was sitting conversing with
 his brother and said to him, "O my brother, it is my wish that we both
 marry, I and thou, two sisters; and go in to our wives on one and the
 same night." "Do, O my brother, as thou desirest," the younger replied,
 "for right is thy recking and surely I will comply with thee in whatso
 thou sayest." So they agreed upon this and quoth Shams al-Din, "If
 Allah decree that we marry two damsels and go in to them on the same
 night, and they shall conceive on their bride-nights and bear children
 to us on the same day, and by Allah's will thy wife bear thee a son and
 my wife bear me a daughter, let us wed them either to other, for they
 will be cousins." Quoth Nur al-Din, "O my brother, Shams al-Din, what
 dower[365] wilt thou require from my son for thy daughter?" Quoth Shams
 al-Din, "I will take three thousand dinars and three pleasure gardens
 and three farms; and it would not be seemly that the youth make
 contract for less than this." When Nur al-Din heard such demand he
 said, "What manner of dower is this thou wouldest impose upon my son?
 Wottest thou not that we are brothers and both by Allah's grace Wazirs
 and equal in office? It behoveth thee to offer thy daughter to my son
 without marriage settlement; or, if one need be, it should represent a
 mere nominal value by way of show to the world: for thou knowest that
 the masculine is worthier than the feminine, and my son is a male and
 our memory will be preserved by him, not by thy daughter." "But what,"
 said Shams al-Din, "is she to have?"; and Nur al-Din continued,
 "Through her we shall not be remembered among the Emirs of the earth;
 but I see thou wouldest do with me according to the saying:—An thou
 wouldst bluff off a buyer, ask him high price and higher; or as did a
 man who, they say, went to a friend and asked something of him being in
 necessity and was answered:—Bismillah,[366] in the name of Allah, I
 will do all what thou requirest but come to-morrow!" Whereupon the
 other replied in this verse:—

 When he who is asked a favour saith "To-morrow," ✿ The wise man wots
    'tis vain to beg or borrow.

 Quoth Shams al-Din, "Basta![367] I see thee fail in respect to me by
 making thy son of more account than my daughter; and 'tis plain that
 thine understanding is of the meanest and that thou lackest manners.
 Thou remindest me of thy partnership in the Wazirate, when I admitted
 thee to share with me only in pity for thee, and not wishing to mortify
 thee; and that thou mightest help me as a manner of assistant. But
 since thou talkest on this wise, by Allah, I will never marry my
 daughter to thy son; no, not for her weight in gold!" When Nur al-Din
 heard his brother's words he waxed wroth and said, "And I too, I will
 never, never marry my son to thy daughter; no, not to keep from my lips
 the cup of death." Shams al-Din replied, "I would not accept him as a
 husband for her, and he is not worth a paring of her nail. Were I not
 about to travel I would make an example of thee; however when I return
 thou shalt see, and I will show thee, how I can assert my dignity and
 vindicate my honour. But Allah doeth whatso He willeth."[368] When Nur
 al-Din heard this speech from his brother, he was filled with fury and
 lost his wits for rage; but he hid what he felt and held his peace; and
 each of the brothers passed the night in a place far apart, wild with
 wrath against the other. As soon as morning dawned the Sultan fared
 forth in state and crossed over from Cairo[369] to Jízah[370] and made
 for the Pyramids, accompanied by the Wazir Shams al-Din, whose turn of
 duty it was, whilst his brother Nur al-Din, who passed the night in
 sore rage, rose with the light and prayed the dawn-prayer. Then he
 betook himself to his treasury and, taking a small pair of saddle-bags,
 filled them with gold; and he called to mind his brother's threats and
 the contempt wherewith he had treated him, and he repeated these
 couplets:—

 Travel! and thou shalt find new friends for old ones left behind; ✿
    Toil! for the sweets of human life by toil and moil are found:
 The stay-at-home no honour wins nor aught attains but want; ✿ So leave
    thy place of birth[371] and wander all the world around!
 I've seen, and very oft I've seen, how standing water stinks, ✿ And
    only flowing sweetens it and trotting makes it sound:
 And were the moon for ever full and ne'er to wax or wane, ✿ Man would
    not strain his watchful eyes to see its gladsome round:
 Except the lion leave his lair he ne'er would fell his game; ✿ Except
    the arrow leave the bow ne'er had it reached its bound:
 Gold-dust is dust the while it lies untravelled in the mine, ✿ And
    aloes-wood mere fuel is upon its native ground:
 And gold shall win his highest worth when from his goal ungoal'd; ✿ And
    aloes sent to foreign parts grows costlier than gold.

 When he ended his verse he bade one of his pages saddle him his Nubian
 mare-mule with her padded selle. Now she was a dapple-grey,[372] with
 ears like reed-pens and legs like columns and a back high and strong as
 a dome builded on pillars; her saddle was of gold-cloth and her
 stirrups of Indian steel, and her housing of Ispahan velvet; she had
 trappings which would serve the Chosroës, and she was like a bride
 adorned for her wedding night. Moreover he bade lay on her back a piece
 of silk for a seat, and a prayer-carpet under which were his
 saddle-bags. When this was done he said to his pages and slaves, "I
 purpose going forth a-pleasuring outside the city on the road to
 Kalyúb-town,[373] and I shall lie three nights abroad; so let none of
 you follow me, for there is something straiteneth my breast." Then he
 mounted the mule in haste; and, taking with him some provaunt for the
 way, set out from Cairo and faced the open and uncultivated country
 lying around it.[374] About noontide he entered Bilbays-city,[375]
 where he dismounted and stayed awhile to rest himself and his mule and
 ate some of his victual. He bought at Bilbays all he wanted for himself
 and forage for his mule and then fared on the way of the waste. Towards
 nightfall he entered a town called Sa'adiyah[376] where he alighted and
 took out somewhat of his viaticum and ate; then he spread his strip of
 silk on the sand and set the saddle-bags under his head and slept in
 the open air; for he was still overcome with anger. When morning dawned
 he mounted and rode onward till he reached the Holy City,[377]
 Jerusalem, and thence he made Aleppo, where he dismounted at one of the
 caravanserais and abode three days to rest himself and the mule and to
 smell the air.[378] Then, being determined to travel afar and Allah
 having written safety in his fate, he set out again, wending without
 wotting whither he was going; and, having fallen in with certain
 couriers, he stinted not travelling till he had reached Bassorah-city
 albeit he knew not what the place was. It was dark night when he
 alighted at the Khan, so he spread out his prayer-carpet and took down
 the saddle-bags from the back of the mule and gave her with her
 furniture in charge of the door-keeper that he might walk her about.
 The man took her and did as he was bid. Now it so happened that the
 Wazir of Bassorah, a man shot in years, was sitting at the
 lattice-window of his palace opposite the Khan and he saw the porter
 walking the mule up and down. He was struck by her trappings of price
 and thought her a nice beast fit for the riding of Wazirs or even of
 royalties; and the more he looked the more was he perplexed till at
 last he said to one of his pages, "Bring hither yon door-keeper." The
 page went and returned to the Wazir with the porter who kissed the
 ground between his hands, and the Minister asked him, "Who is the owner
 of yonder mule and what manner of man is he?"; and he answered, "O my
 lord, the owner of this mule is a comely young man of pleasant manners,
 withal grave and dignified, and doubtless one of the sons of the
 merchants." When the Wazir heard the door-keeper's words he arose
 forthright; and, mounting his horse, rode to the Khan[379] and went in
 to Nur al-Din who, seeing the Minister making towards him, rose to his
 feet and advanced to meet him and saluted him. The Wazir welcomed him
 to Bassorah and dismounting, embraced him and made him sit down by his
 side and said, "O my son, whence comest thou and what dost thou seek?"
 "O my lord," Nur al-Din replied, "I have come from Cairo-city of which
 my father was whilome Wazir; but he hath been removed to the grace of
 Allah;" and he informed him of all that had befallen him from beginning
 to end, adding, "I am resolved never to return home before I have seen
 all the cities and countries of the world." When the Wazir heard this,
 he said to him, "O my son, hearken not to the voice of passion lest it
 cast thee into the pit; for indeed many regions be waste places and I
 fear for thee the turns of Time." Then he let load the saddle-bags and
 the silk and prayer-carpets on the mule and carried Nur al-Din to his
 own house, where he lodged him in a pleasant place and entreated him
 honourably and made much of him, for he inclined to love him with
 exceeding love. After a while he said to him, "O my son, here am I left
 a man in years and have no male children, but Allah hath blessed me
 with a daughter who eveneth thee in beauty; and I have rejected all her
 many suitors, men of rank and substance. But affection for thee hath
 entered into my heart; say me, then, wilt thou be to her a husband? If
 thou accept this, I will go up with thee to the Sultan of Bassorah[380]
 and will tell him that thou art my nephew, the son of my brother, and
 bring thee to be appointed Wazir in my place that I may keep the house
 for, by Allah, O my son, I am stricken in years and aweary." When Nur
 al-Din heard the Wazir's words, he bowed his head in modesty and said,
 "To hear is to obey!" At this the Wazir rejoiced and bade his servants
 prepare a feast and decorate the great assembly-hall, wherein they were
 wont to celebrate the marriages of Emirs and Grandees. Then he
 assembled his friends and the notables of the reign and the merchants
 of Bassorah and when all stood before him he said to them, "I had a
 brother who was Wazir in the land of Egypt, and Allah Almighty blessed
 him with two sons, whilst to me, as well ye wot, He hath given a
 daughter. My brother charged me to marry my daughter to one of his
 sons, whereto I assented; and, when my daughter was of age to marry, he
 sent me one of his sons, the young man now present, to whom I purpose
 marrying her, drawing up the contract and celebrating the night of
 unveiling with due ceremony: for he is nearer and dearer to me than a
 stranger and, after the wedding, if he please he shall abide with me,
 or if he desire to travel I will forward him and his wife to his
 father's home." Hereat one and all replied, "Right is thy recking;" and
 they looked at the bridegroom and were pleased with him. So the Wazir
 sent for the Kazi and legal witnesses and they wrote out the marriage
 contract, after which the slaves perfumed the guests with incense,[381]
 and served them with sherbet of sugar and sprinkled rose-water on them
 and all went their ways. Then the Wazir bade his servants take Nur
 al-Din to the Hammam-baths and sent him a suit of the best of his own
 especial raiment, and napkins and towelry and bowls and perfume-burners
 and all else that was required. And after the bath, when he came out
 and donned the dress, he was even as the full moon on the fourteenth
 night; and he mounted his mule and stayed not till he reached the
 Wazir's palace. There he dismounted and went in to the Minister and
 kissed his hands, and the Wazir bade him welcome.——And Shahrazad
 perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

                 Now when it was the Twenty-First Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir stood
 up to him and welcoming him said, "Arise and go in to thy wife this
 night, and on the morrow I will carry thee to the Sultan, and pray
 Allah bless thee with all manner of weal." So Nur al-Din left him and
 went in to his wife the Wazir's daughter. Thus far concerning him, but
 as regards his elder brother, Shams al-Din, he was absent with the
 Sultan a long time and when he returned from his journey he found not
 his brother; and he asked of his servants and slaves who answered, "On
 the day of thy departure with the Sultan, thy brother mounted his mule
 fully caparisoned as for state procession saying:—I am going towards
 Kalyub-town and I shall be absent one day or at most two days; for my
 breast is straitened, and let none of you follow me." Then he fared
 forth and from that time to this we have heard no tidings of him. Shams
 al-Din was greatly troubled at the sudden disappearance of his brother
 and grieved with exceeding grief at the loss and said to himself, "This
 is only because I chided and upbraided him the night before my
 departure with the Sultan; haply his feelings were hurt and he fared
 forth a-travelling; but I must send after him." Then he went in to the
 Sultan and acquainted him with what had happened and wrote letters and
 dispatches, which he sent by running footmen to his deputies in every
 province. But during the twenty days of his brother's absence Nur
 al-Din had travelled far and had reached Bassorah; so after diligent
 search the messengers failed to come at any news of him and returned.
 Thereupon Shams al-Din despaired of finding his brother and said,
 "Indeed I went beyond all bounds in what I said to him with reference
 to the marriage of our children. Would that I had not done so! This all
 cometh of my lack of wit and want of caution." Soon after this he
 sought in marriage the daughter of a Cairene merchant[382] and drew up
 the marriage contract and went in to her. And it so chanced that, on
 the very same night when Shams al-Din went in to his wife, Nur al-Din
 also went in to his wife the daughter of the Wazir of Bassorah; this
 being in accordance with the will of Almighty Allah, that He might deal
 the decrees of Destiny to His creatures. Furthermore, it was as the two
 brothers had said; for their two wives became pregnant by them on the
 same night and both were brought to bed on the same day; the wife of
 Shams al-Din, Wazir of Egypt, of a daughter, never in Cairo was seen a
 fairer; and the wife of Nur al-Din of a son, none more beautiful was
 ever seen in his time, as one of the poets said concerning the like of
 him:—

                 That jetty hair, that glossy brow,
                     My slender waisted youth, of thine,
                 Can darkness round creation throw,
                     Or make it brightly shine.
                 The dusky mole that faintly shows
                     Upon his cheek, ah! blame it not;
                 The tulip-flower never blows
                     Undarkened by its spot.[383]

 And as another also said:—

 His scent was musk and his cheek was rose; ✿ His teeth are pearls and
    his lips drop wine;
 His form is a brand and his hips a hill; ✿ His hair is night and his
    face moonshine.

 They named the boy Badr al-Din Hasan and his grandfather, the Wazir of
 Bassorah, rejoiced in him and, on the seventh day after his birth, made
 entertainments and spread banquets which would befit the birth of
 Kings' sons and heirs. Then he took Nur al-Din and went up with him to
 the Sultan, and his son-in-law, when he came before the presence of the
 King, kissed the ground between his hands and repeated these verses,
 for he was ready of speech, firm of sprite and good in heart as he was
 goodly in form:—

 The world's best joys long be thy lot, my lord! ✿ And last while
    darkness and the dawn o'erlap:
 O thou who makest, when we greet thy gifts, ✿ The world to dance and
    Time his palms to clap.[384]

 Then the Sultan rose up to honour them and, thanking Nur al-Din for his
 fine compliment, asked the Wazir, "Who may be this young man?"; and the
 Minister answered, "This is my brother's son," and related his tale
 from first to last. Quoth the Sultan, "And how comes he to be thy
 nephew and we have never heard speak of him?" Quoth the Minister, "O
 our lord the Sultan, I had a brother who was Wazir in the land of Egypt
 and he died, leaving two sons, whereof the elder hath taken his
 father's place and the younger, whom thou seest, came to me. I had
 sworn I would not marry my daughter to any but to him; so when he came
 I married him to her.[385] Now he is young and I am old; my hearing is
 dulled and my judgment is easily fooled; wherefore I would solicit our
 lord the Sultan[386] to set him in my stead, for he is my brother's son
 and my daughter's husband; and he is fit for the Wazirate, being a man
 of good counsel and ready contrivance." The Sultan looked at Nur al-Din
 and liked him, so he stablished him in office as the Wazir had
 requested and formally appointed him, presenting him with a splendid
 dress of honour and a she-mule from his private stud; and assigning to
 him solde, stipends and supplies. Nur al-Din kissed the Sultan's hand
 and went home, he and his father-in-law, joying with exceeding joy and
 saying, "All this followeth on the heels of the boy Hasan's birth!"
 Next day he presented himself before the King and, kissing the ground,
 began repeating:—

 Grow thy weal and thy welfare day by day: ✿ And thy luck prevail o'er
    the envier's spite;
 And ne'er cease thy days to be white as day, ✿ And thy foeman's day to
    be black as night!

 The Sultan bade him be seated on the Wazir's seat, so he sat down and
 applied himself to the business of his office and went into the cases
 of the lieges and their suits, as is the wont of Ministers; while the
 Sultan watched him and wondered at his wit and good sense, judgment and
 insight. Wherefor he loved him and took him into intimacy. When the
 Divan was dismissed Nur al-Din returned to his house and related what
 had passed to his father-in-law who rejoiced. And thenceforward Nur
 al-Din ceased not so to administer the Wazirate that the Sultan would
 not be parted from him night or day; and increased his stipends and
 supplies till his means were ample and he became the owner of ships
 that made trading voyages at his command, as well as of Mamelukes and
 blackamoor slaves; and he laid out many estates and set up Persian
 wheels and planted gardens. When his son Hasan was four years of age,
 the old Wazir deceased, and he made for his father-in-law a sumptuous
 funeral ceremony ere he was laid in the dust. Then he occupied himself
 with the education of this son and, when the boy waxed strong and came
 to the age of seven, he brought him a Fakih, a doctor of law and
 religion, to teach him in his own house and charged him to give him a
 good education and instruct him in politeness and good manners. So the
 tutor made the boy read and retain all varieties of useful knowledge,
 after he had spent some years in learning the Koran by heart;[387] and
 he ceased not to grow in beauty and stature and symmetry, even as saith
 the poet:—

 In his face-sky shines the fullest moon; ✿ In his cheeks' anemone glows
    the sun:
 He so conquered Beauty that he hath won ✿ All charms of humanity one by
    one.

 The professor brought him up in his father's palace teaching him
 reading, writing and cyphering, theology and belles lettres. His
 grandfather the old Wazir had bequeathed to him the whole of his
 property when he was but four years of age. Now during all the time of
 his earliest youth he had never left the house, till on a certain day
 his father, the Wazir Nur al-Din, clad him in his best clothes and,
 mounting him on a she-mule of the finest, went up with him to the
 Sultan. The King gazed at Badr al-Din Hasan and marvelled at his
 comeliness and loved him. As for the city-folk, when he first passed
 before them with his father, they marvelled at his exceeding beauty and
 sat down on the road expecting his return, that they might look their
 fill on his beauty and loveliness and symmetry and perfect grace; even
 as the poet said in these verses:—

           As the sage watched the stars, the semblance clear
           Of a fair youth on's scroll he saw appear.
           Those jetty looks Canopus o'er him threw,
           And tinged his temple curls a musky hue;
           Mars dyed his ruddy cheek; and from his eyes
           The Archer-star his glittering arrow flies;
           His wit from Hermes came; and Soha's care,
           (The half-seen star that dimly haunts the Bear)
           Kept off all evil eyes that threaten and ensnare,
           The sage stood mazed to see such fortunes meet,
           And Luna kissed the earth beneath his feet.[388]

 And they blessed him aloud as he passed and called upon Almighty Allah
 to bless him.[389] The Sultan entreated the lad with especial favour
 and said to his father, "O Wazir, thou must needs bring him daily to my
 presence;" whereupon he replied, "I hear and I obey." Then the Wazir
 returned home with his son and ceased not to carry him to court till he
 reached the age of twenty. At that time the Minister sickened and,
 sending for Badr al-Din Hasan, said to him, "Know, O my son, that the
 world of the Present is but a house of mortality, while that of the
 Future is a house of eternity. I wish, before I die, to bequeath thee
 certain charges and do thou take heed of what I say and incline thy
 heart to my words." Then he gave him his last instructions as to the
 properest way of dealing with his neighbours and the due management of
 his affairs; after which he called to mind his brother and his home and
 his native land and wept over his separation from those he had first
 loved. Then he wiped away his tears and, turning to his son, said to
 him, "Before I proceed, O my son, to my last charges and injunctions,
 know that I have a brother, and thou hast an uncle, Shams al-Din hight,
 the Wazir of Cairo, with whom I parted, leaving him against his will.
 Now take thee a sheet of paper and write upon it whatso I say to thee.
 Badr al-Din took a fair leaf and set about doing his father's bidding
 and he wrote thereon a full account of what had happened to his sire
 first and last; the dates of his arrival at Bassorah and of his
 foregathering with the Wazir; of his marriage, of his going in to the
 Minister's daughter and of the birth of his son; brief, his life of
 forty years from the day of his dispute with his brother, adding the
 words, "And this is written at my dictation and may Almighty Allah be
 with him when I am gone!" Then he folded the paper and sealed it and
 said, "O Hasan, O my son, keep this paper with all care; for it will
 enable thee to stablish thine origin and rank and lineage and, if
 anything contrary befal thee, set out for Cairo and ask for thine uncle
 and show him this paper and say to him that I died a stranger far from
 mine own people and full of yearning to see him and them." So Badr
 al-Din Hasan took the document and folded it; and, wrapping it up in a
 piece of waxed cloth, sewed it like a talisman between the inner and
 outer cloth of his skull-cap and wound his light turband[390] round it.
 And he fell to weeping over his father and at parting with him, and he
 but a boy. Then Nur al-Din lapsed into a swoon, the forerunner of
 death; but presently recovering himself he said, "O Hasan, O my son, I
 will now bequeath to thee five last behests. The FIRST BEHEST is, Be
 over-intimate with none, nor frequent any, nor be familiar with any; so
 shalt thou be safe from his mischief;[391] for security lieth in
 seclusion of thought and a certain retirement from the society of thy
 fellows; and I have heard it said by a poet:—

 In this world there is none thou mayst count upon ✿ To befriend thy
    case in the nick of need:
 So live for thyself nursing hope of none ✿ Such counsel I give thee:
    enow, take heed!

 The SECOND BEHEST is, O my son: Deal harshly with none lest fortune
 with thee deal hardly; for the fortune of this world is one day with
 thee and another day against thee and all worldly goods are but a loan
 to be repaid. And I have heard a poet say:—

 Take thought nor haste to win the thing thou wilt; ✿ Have ruth on man
    for ruth thou may'st require:
 No hand is there but Allah's hand is higher; ✿ No tyrant but shall rue
    worse tyrant's ire!

 The THIRD BEHEST is, Learn to be silent in society and let thine own
 faults distract thine attention from the faults of other men: for it is
 said:—In silence dwelleth safety, and thereon I have heard the lines
 that tell us:—

 Reserve's a jewel, Silence safety is; ✿ Whenas thou speakest many a
    word withhold:
 For an of Silence thou repent thee once, ✿ Of speech thou shalt repent
    times manifold.

 The FOURTH BEHEST, O my son, is Beware of wine-bibbing, for wine is the
 head of all frowardness and a fine solvent of human wits. So shun, and
 again I say, shun mixing strong liquor; for I have heard a poet
 say:—[392]

 From wine[393] I turn and whoso wine-cups swill; ✿ Becoming one of
    those who deem it ill:
 Wine driveth man to miss salvation-way,[394] ✿ And opes the gateway
    wide to sins that kill.

 The FIFTH BEHEST, O my son, is Keep thy wealth and it will keep thee;
 guard thy money and it will guard thee; and waste not thy substance
 lest haply thou come to want and must fare a-begging from the meanest
 of mankind. Save thy dirhams and deem them the sovereignest salve for
 the wounds of the world. And here again I have heard that one of the
 poets said:—

 When fails my wealth no friend will deign befriend: ✿ When wealth
    abounds all friends their friendship tender:
 How many friends lent aid my wealth to spend; ✿ But friends to lack of
    wealth no friendship render.

 On this wise Nur al-Din ceased not to counsel his son Badr al-Din Hasan
 till his hour came and, sighing one sobbing sigh, his life went forth.
 Then the voice of mourning and keening rose high in his house and the
 Sultan and all the grandees grieved for him and buried him; but his son
 ceased not lamenting his loss for two months, during which he never
 mounted horse, nor attended the Divan nor presented himself before the
 Sultan. At last the King, being wroth with him, stablished in his stead
 one of his Chamberlains and made him Wazir, giving orders to seize and
 set seals on all Nur al-Din's houses and goods and domains. So the new
 Wazir went forth with a mighty posse of Chamberlains and people of the
 Divan, and watchmen and a host of idlers to do this and to seize Badr
 al-Din Hasan and carry him before the King, who would deal with him as
 he deemed fit. Now there was among the crowd of followers a Mameluke of
 the deceased Wazir who, when he had heard this order, urged his horse
 and rode at full speed to the house of Badr al-Din Hasan; for he could
 not endure to see the ruin of his old master's son. He found him
 sitting at the gate with head hung down and sorrowing, as was his wont,
 for the loss of his father; so he dismounted and kissing his hand said
 to him, "O my lord and son of my lord, haste ere ruin come and lay
 waste!" When Hasan heard this he trembled and asked, "What may be the
 matter?"; and the man answered, "The Sultan is angered with thee and
 hath issued a warrant against thee, and evil cometh hard upon my track;
 so flee with thy life!" At these words Hasan's heart flamed with the
 fire of bale, and his rose-red cheek turned pale, and he said to the
 Mameluke, "O my brother, is there time for me to go in and get me some
 worldly gear which may stand me in stead during my strangerhood?" But
 the slave replied, "O my lord, up at once and save thyself and leave
 this house, while it is yet time." And he quoted these lines:—

 Escape with thy life, if oppression betide thee, ✿ And let the house
    tell of its builder's fate!
 Country for country thou'lt find, if thou seek it; ✿ Life for life
    never, early or late.
 It is strange men should dwell in the house of abjection, ✿ When the
    plain of God's earth is so wide and so great![395]

 At these words of the Mameluke, Badr al-Din covered his head with the
 skirt of his garment and went forth on foot till he stood outside of
 the city, where he heard folk saying, "The Sultan hath sent his new
 Wazir to the house of the old Wazir, now no more, to seal his property
 and seize his son Badr al-Din Hasan and take him before the presence,
 that he may put him to death;" and all cried, "Alas for his beauty and
 his loveliness!" When he heard this he fled forth at hazard, knowing
 not whither he was going, and gave not over hurrying onwards till
 Destiny drove him to his father's tomb. So he entered the cemetery and,
 threading his way through the graves, at last he reached the sepulchre
 where he sat down and let fall from his head the skirt of his long
 robe[396] which was made of brocade with a gold-embroidered hem whereon
 were worked these couplets:—

 O thou whose forehead, like the radiant East, ✿ Tells of the stars of
    Heaven and bounteous dews:
 Endure thine honour to the latest day, ✿ And Time thy growth of glory
    ne'er refuse!

 While he was sitting by his father's tomb behold, there came to him a
 Jew as he were a Shroff,[397] a money-changer, with a pair of
 saddle-bags containing much gold, who accosted him and kissed his hand,
 saying, "Whither bound, O my lord: 'tis late in the day and thou art
 clad but lightly and I read signs of trouble in thy face?" "I was
 sleeping within this very hour," answered Hasan, "when my father
 appeared to me and chid me for not having visited his tomb; so I awoke
 trembling and came hither forthright lest the day should go by without
 my visiting him, which would have been grievous to me." "O my lord,"
 rejoined the Jew[398] "thy father had many merchantmen at sea and, as
 some of them are now due, it is my wish to buy of thee the cargo of the
 first ship that cometh into port with this thousand dinars of gold." "I
 consent," quoth Hasan, whereupon the Jew took out a bag full of gold
 and counted out a thousand sequins which he gave to Hasan, the son of
 the Wazir, saying, "Write me a letter of sale and seal it." So Hasan
 took a pen and paper and wrote these words in duplicate, "The writer,
 Hasan Badr al-Din, son of Wazir Nur al-Din, hath sold to Isaac the Jew
 all the cargo of the first of his father's ships which cometh into
 port, for a thousand dinars, and he hath received the price in
 advance." And after he had taken one copy the Jew put it into his pouch
 and went away; but Hasan fell a-weeping as he thought of the dignity
 and prosperity which had erst been his and he began reciting:—

 This house, my lady, since you left is now a home no more ✿ For me, nor
    neighbours, since you left, prove kind and neighbourly:
 The friend, whilere I took to heart, alas! no more to me ✿ Is friend;
    and even Luna's self displayeth lunacy:
 You left and by your going left the world a waste, a wold, ✿ And lies a
    gloomy murk upon the face of hill and lea:
 O may the raven-bird whose cry our hapless parting croaked ✿ Find ne'er
    a nesty home and eke shed all his plumery!
 At length my patience fails me; and this absence wastes my flesh; ✿ How
    many a veil by severance rent our eyes are doomèd see:
 Ah! shall I ever sight again our fair past nights of yore; ✿ And shall
    a single house become a home for me once more?

 Then he wept with exceeding weeping and night came upon him; so he
 leant his head against his father's grave and sleep overcame him: Glory
 to Him who sleepeth not! He ceased not slumbering till the moon rose,
 when his head slipped from off the tomb and he lay on his back, with
 limbs outstretched, his face shining bright in the moonlight. Now the
 cemetery was haunted day and night by Jinns who were of the True
 Believers, and presently came out a Jinniyah who, seeing Hasan asleep,
 marvelled at his beauty and loveliness and cried, "Glory to God! this
 youth can be none other than one of the Wuldán of Paradise."[399] Then
 she flew firmament-wards to circle it, as was her custom, and met an
 Ifrit on the wing who saluted her and she said to him, "Whence comest
 thou?" "From Cairo," he replied. "Wilt thou come with me and look upon
 the beauty of a youth who sleepeth in yonder burial place?" she asked,
 and he answered, "I will." So they flew till they lighted at the tomb
 and she showed him the youth and said, "Now diddest thou ever in thy
 born days see aught like this?" The Ifrit looked upon him and
 exclaimed, "Praise be to Him that hath no equal! But, O my sister,
 shall I tell thee what I have seen this day?" Asked she, "What is
 that?" and he answered, "I have seen the counterpart of this youth in
 the land of Egypt. She is the daughter of the Wazir Shams al-Din and
 she is a model of beauty and loveliness, of fairest favour and formous
 form, and dight with symmetry and perfect grace. When she had reached
 the age of nineteen,[400] the Sultan of Egypt heard of her and, sending
 for the Wazir her father, said to him:—Hear me, O Wazir: it hath
 reached mine ear that thou hast a daughter and I wish to demand her of
 thee in marriage. The Wazir replied:—O our lord the Sultan, deign
 accept my excuses and take compassion on my sorrows, for thou knowest
 that my brother, who was partner with me in the Wazirate, disappeared
 from amongst us many years ago and we wot not where he is. Now the
 cause of his departure was that one night, as we were sitting together
 and talking of wives and children to come, we had words on the matter
 and he went off in high dudgeon. But I swore that I would marry my
 daughter to none save to the son of my brother on the day her mother
 gave her birth, which was nigh upon nineteen years ago. I have lately
 heard that my brother died at Bassorah, where he had married the
 daughter of the Wazir and that she bare him a son; and I will not marry
 my daughter but to him in honour of my brother's memory I recorded the
 date of my marriage and the conception of my wife and the birth of my
 daughter; and from her horoscope I find that her name is conjoined with
 that of her cousin;[401] and there are damsels in foison for our lord
 the Sultan. The King, hearing his Minister's answer and refusal, waxed
 wroth with exceeding wrath and cried:—When the like of me asketh a girl
 in marriage of the like of thee, he conferreth an honour, and thou
 rejectest me and puttest me off with cold[402] excuses! Now, by the
 life of my head I will marry her to the meanest of my men in spite of
 the nose of thee![403] There was in the palace a horse-groom which was
 a Gobbo with a bunch to his breast and a hunch to his back; and the
 Sultan sent for him and married him to the daughter of the Wazir, lief
 or loath, and hath ordered a pompous marriage procession for him and
 that he go in to his bride this very night. I have now just flown
 hither from Cairo, where I left the Hunchback at the door of the
 Hammam-bath amidst the Sultan's white slaves who were waving lighted
 flambeaux about him. As for the Minister's daughter she sitteth among
 her nurses and tirewomen, weeping and wailing; for they have forbidden
 her father to come near her. Never have I seen, O my sister, more
 hideous being than this Hunchback[404] whilst the young lady is the
 likest of all folk to this young man, albeit even fairer than he."——And
 Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted
 say.

                Now when it was the Twenty-Second Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Jinni
 narrated to the Jinniyah how the King had caused the wedding contract
 to be drawn up between the hunchbacked groom and the lovely young lady
 who was heart-broken for sorrow; and how she was the fairest of created
 things and even more beautiful than this youth, the Jinniyah cried at
 him "Thou liest! this youth is handsomer than any one of his day." The
 Ifrit gave her the lie again, adding, "By Allah, O my sister, the
 damsel I speak of is fairer than this; yet none but he deserveth her,
 for they resemble each other like brother and sister or at least
 cousins. And, well-away! how she is wasted upon that Hunchback!" Then
 said she, "O my brother, let us get under him and lift him up and carry
 him to Cairo, that we may compare him with the damsel of whom thou
 speakest and so determine whether of the twain is the fairer." "To hear
 is to obey!" replied he, "thou speakest to the point; nor is there a
 righter recking than this of thine, and I myself will carry him." So he
 raised him from the ground and flew with him like a bird soaring in
 upper air, the Ifritah keeping close by his side at equal speed, till
 he alighted with him in the city of Cairo and set him down on a stone
 bench and woke him up. He roused himself and finding that he was no
 longer at his father's tomb in Bassorah-city he looked right and left
 and saw that he was in a strange place; and he would have cried out;
 but the Ifrit gave him a cuff which persuaded him to keep silence. Then
 he brought him rich raiment and clothed him therein and, giving him a
 lighted flambeau, said, "Know that I have brought thee hither, meaning
 to do thee a good turn for the love of Allah: so take this torch and
 mingle with the people at the Hammam-door and walk on with them without
 stopping till thou reach the house of the wedding-festival; then go
 boldly forward and enter the great saloon; and fear none, but take thy
 stand at the right hand of the Hunchback bridegroom; and, as often as
 any of the nurses and tirewomen and singing-girls come up to thee,[405]
 put thy hand into thy pocket which thou wilt find filled with gold.
 Take it out and throw to them and spare not; for as often as thou
 thrustest fingers in pouch thou shalt find it full of coin. Give
 largesse by handsful and fear nothing, but set thy trust upon Him who
 created thee, for this is not by thine own strength but by that of
 Allah Almighty, that His decrees may take effect upon his creatures."
 When Badr al-Din Hasan heard these words from the Ifrit he said to
 himself, "Would Heaven I knew what all this means and what is the cause
 of such kindness!" However, he mingled with the people and, lighting
 his flambeau, moved on with the bridal procession till he came to the
 bath where he found the Hunchback already on horseback. Then he pushed
 his way in among the crowd, a veritable beauty of a man in the finest
 apparel, wearing tarbush[406] and turband and a long-sleeved robe
 purfled with gold; and, as often as the singing women stopped for the
 people to give them largesse, he thrust his hand into his pocket and,
 finding it full of gold, took out a handful and threw it on the
 tambourine[407] till he had filled it with gold pieces for the
 music-girls and the tirewomen. The singers were amazed by his bounty
 and the people marvelled at his beauty and loveliness and the splendour
 of his dress. He ceased not to do thus till he reached the mansion of
 the Wazir (who was his uncle), where the Chamberlains drove back the
 people and forbade them to go forward; but the singing-girls and the
 tirewomen said, "By Allah we will not enter unless this young man enter
 with us, for he hath given us length o' life with his largesse and we
 will not display the bride unless he be present." Therewith they
 carried him into the bridal hall and made him sit down defying the evil
 glances of the hunchbacked bridegroom. The wives of the Emirs and
 Wazirs and Chamberlains and Courtiers all stood in double line, each
 holding a massy cierge ready lighted; all wore thin face-veils and the
 two rows right and left extended from the bride's throne[408] to the
 head of the hall adjoining the chamber whence she was to come forth.
 When the ladies saw Badr al-Din Hasan and noted his beauty and
 loveliness and his face that shone like the new moon, their hearts
 inclined to him and the singing-girls said to all that were present,
 "Know that this beauty crossed our hands with naught but red gold; so
 be not chary to do him womanly service and comply with all he says, no
 matter what he ask."[409] So all the women crowded round Hasan with
 their torches and gazed on his loveliness and envied him his beauty;
 and one and all would gladly have lain on his bosom an hour or rather a
 year. Their hearts were so troubled that they let fall their veils from
 before their faces and said, "Happy she who belongeth to this youth or
 to whom he belongeth!"; and they called down curses on the crooked
 groom and on him who was the cause of his marriage to the girl-beauty;
 and as often as they blessed Badr al-Din Hasan they damned the
 Hunchback, saying, "Verily this youth and none else deserveth our
 Bride: ah, well-away for such a lovely one with this hideous Quasimodo;
 Allah's curse light on his head and on the Sultan who commanded the
 marriage!" Then the singing-girls beat their tabrets and lulliloo'd
 with joy, announcing the appearing of the bride; and the Wazir's
 daughter came in surrounded by her tirewomen who had made her goodly to
 look upon; for they had perfumed her and incensed her and adorned her
 hair; and they had robed her in raiment and ornaments befitting the
 mighty Chosroes Kings. The most notable part of her dress was a loose
 robe worn over her other garments: it was diapered in red gold with
 figures of wild beasts, and birds whose eyes and beaks were of gems,
 and claws of red rubies and green beryl; and her neck was graced with a
 necklace of Yamani work, worth thousands of gold pieces, whose bezels
 were great round jewels of sorts, the like of which was never owned by
 Kaysar or by Tobba King.[410] And the bride was as the full moon when
 at fullest on fourteenth night; and as she paced into the hall she was
 like one of the Houris of Heaven—praise be to Him who created her in
 such splendour of beauty! The ladies encompassed her as the white
 contains the black of the eye, they clustering like stars whilst she
 shone amongst them like the moon when it eats up the clouds. Now Badr
 al-Din Hasan of Bassorah was sitting in full gaze of the folk, when the
 bride came forward with her graceful swaying and swimming gait, and her
 hunchbacked bridegroom stood up to meet[411] and receive her: she,
 however, turned away from the wight and walked forward till she stood
 before her cousin Hasan, the son of her uncle. Whereat the people
 laughed. But when the wedding-guests saw her thus attracted towards
 Badr Al-Din they made a mighty clamour and the singing-women shouted
 their loudest; whereupon he put his hand into his pocket and, pulling
 out a handful of gold, cast it into their tambourines and the girls
 rejoiced and said, "Could we win our wish this bride were thine!" At
 this he smiled and the folk came round him, flambeaux in hand like the
 eyeball round the pupil, while the Gobbo bridegroom was left sitting
 alone much like a tail-less baboon; for every time they lighted a
 candle for him it went out willy-nilly, so he was left in darkness and
 silence and looking at naught but himself.[412] When Badr al-Din Hasan
 saw the bridegroom sitting lonesome in the dark, and all the
 wedding-guests with their flambeaux and wax candles crowding about
 himself, he was bewildered and marvelled much; but when he looked at
 his cousin, the daughter of his uncle, he rejoiced and felt an inward
 delight: he longed to greet her and gazed intently on her face which
 was radiant with light and brilliancy. Then the tirewomen took off her
 veil and displayed her in the first bridal dress which was of scarlet
 satin; and Hasan had a view of her which dazzled his sight and dazed
 his wits, as she moved to and fro, swaying with graceful gait;[413] and
 she turned the heads of all the guests, women as well as men, for she
 was even as saith the surpassing poet:—

 A sun on wand in knoll of sand she showed, ✿ Clad in her cramoisy-hued
    chemisette:
 Of her lips honey-dew she gave me drink, ✿ And with her rosy cheeks
    quencht fire she set.

 Then they changed that dress and displayed her in a robe of azure; and
 she reappeared like the full moon when it riseth over the horizon, with
 her coal-black hair and cheeks delicately fair; and teeth shown in
 sweet smiling and breasts firm rising and crowning sides of the softest
 and waist of the roundest. And in this second suit she was as a certain
 master of high conceits saith of the like of her:—

 She came apparelled in an azure vest, ✿ Ultramarine, as skies are deckt
    and dight:
 I view'd th' unparallel'd sight, which show'd my eyes ✿ A moon of
    Summer on a Winter-night.

 Then they changed that suit for another and, veiling her face in the
 luxuriance of her hair, loosed her lovelocks, so dark, so long that
 their darkness and length outvied the darkest nights, and she shot
 through all hearts with the magical shaft of her eye-babes. They
 displayed her in the third dress and she was as said of her the sayer:—

 Veiling her cheeks with hair a-morn she comes, ✿ And I her mischiefs
    with the cloud compare:
 Saying, "Thou veilest morn with night!" "Ah no!" ✿ Quoth she, "I shroud
    full moon with darkling air!"

 Then they displayed her in the fourth bridal dress and she came forward
 shining like the rising sun and swaying to and fro with lovesome grace
 and supple ease like a gazelle-fawn. And she clave all hearts with the
 arrows of her eyelashes, even as saith one who described a charmer like
 her:—·

 The sun of beauty she to sight appears ✿ And, lovely-coy, she mocks all
    loveliness;
 And when he fronts her favour and her smile ✿ A-morn, the Sun of day in
    clouds must dress.

 Then she came forth in the fifth dress, a very light of loveliness like
 a wand of waving willow or a gazelle of the thirsty wold. Those locks
 which stung like scorpions along her cheeks were bent, and her neck was
 bowed in blandishment, and her hips quivered as she went. As saith one
 of the poets describing her in verse:—

 She comes like fullest moon on happy night; ✿ Taper of waist, with
    shape of magic might:
 She hath an eye whose glances quell mankind, ✿ And Ruby on her cheeks
    reflects his light:
 Enveils her hips the blackness of her hair; ✿ Beware of curls that bite
    with viper-bite!
 Her sides are silken-soft, the while the heart ✿ Mere rock behind that
    surface lurks from sight:
 From the fringed curtains of her eyne she shoots ✿ Shafts which at
    farthest range on mark alight:
 When round her neck or waist I throw my arms ✿ Her breasts repel me
    with their hardened height.
 Ah, how her beauty all excels! ah how ✿ That shape transcends the
    graceful waving bough!

 Then they adorned her with the sixth toilette, a dress which was green.
 And now she shamed in her slender straightness the nut-brown spear; her
 radiant face dimmed the brightest beams of full moon and she outdid the
 bending branches in gentle movement and flexile grace. Her loveliness
 exalted the beauties of earth's four quarters and she broke men's
 hearts by the significance of her semblance; for she was even as saith
 one of the poets in these lines:—

 A damsel 'twas the tirer's art had decked with snares and sleight:[414]
    ✿ And robed in rays as though the sun from her had borrowed light:
 She came before us wondrous clad in chemisette of green, ✿ As veilèd by
    its leafy screen pomegranate hides from sight:
 And when he said "How callest thou the manner of thy dress?" ✿ She
    answered us in pleasant way with double meaning dight;
 "We call this garment _crève-cœur_; and rightly is it hight, ✿ For many
    a heart wi' this we broke[415] and conquered many a sprite!"

 Then they displayed her in the seventh dress, coloured between
 safflower[416] and saffron, even as one of the poets saith:—

 In vest of saffron pale and safflower red ✿ Musk'd, sandal'd,
    ambergris'd, she came to front:
 "Rise!" cried her youth, "go forth and show thyself!" ✿ "Sit!" said her
    hips, "we cannot bear the brunt!"
 And when I craved a bout, her Beauty said ✿ "Do, do!" and said her
    pretty shame, "Don't, don't!"

 Thus they displayed the bride in all her seven toilettes before Hasan
 al-Basri, wholly neglecting the Gobbo who sat moping alone; and, when
 she opened her eyes[417] she said, "O Allah make this man my goodman
 and deliver me from the evil of this hunchbacked groom." As soon as
 they had made an end of this part of the ceremony they dismissed the
 wedding guests who went forth, women children and all, and none
 remained save Hasan and the Hunchback, whilst the tirewomen led the
 bride into an inner room to change her garb and gear and get her ready
 for the bridegroom. Thereupon Quasimodo came up to Badr al-Din Hasan
 and said, "O my lord, thou hast cheered us this night with thy good
 company and overwhelmed us with thy kindness and courtesy; but now why
 not get thee up and go?" "Bismillah;" he answered, "In Allah's name so
 be it!"; and rising, he went forth by the door, where the Ifrit met him
 and said, "Stay in thy stead, O Badr al-Din, and when the Hunchback
 goes out to the closet of ease go in without losing time and seat
 thyself in the alcove; and when the bride comes say to her:—'Tis I am
 thy husband, for the King devised this trick only fearing for thee the
 evil eye, and he whom thou sawest is but a Syce, a groom, one of our
 stablemen. Then walk boldly up to her and unveil her face; for jealousy
 hath taken us of this matter." While Hasan was still talking with the
 Ifrit behold, the groom fared forth from the hall and entering the
 closet of ease sat down on the stool. Hardly had he done this when the
 Ifrit came out of the tank,[418] wherein the water was, in semblance of
 a mouse and squeaked out "Zeek!" Quoth the Hunchback, "What ails
 thee?"; and the mouse grew and grew till it became a coal-black cat and
 caterwauled "Meeao! Meeao[419]"! Then it grew still more and more till
 it became a dog and barked out "Owh! Owh!" When the bridegroom saw this
 he was frightened and exclaimed "Out with thee, O unlucky one!"[420]
 But the dog grew and swelled till it became an ass-colt that brayed and
 snorted in his face "Hauk![421] Hauk!" Whereupon the Hunchback quaked
 and cried, "Come to my aid, O people of the house!" But behold, the
 ass-colt grew and became big as a buffalo and walled the way before him
 and spake with the voice of the sons of Adam, saying, "Woe to thee, O
 thou Bunch-back, thou stinkard, O thou filthiest of grooms!" Hearing
 this the groom was seized with a colic and he sat down on the jakes in
 his clothes with teeth chattering and knocking together. Quoth the
 Ifrit, "Is the world so strait to thee thou findest none to marry save
 my lady-love?" But as he was silent the Ifrit continued, "Answer me or
 I will do thee dwell in the dust!" "By Allah," replied the Gobbo, "O
 King of the Buffaloes, this is no fault of mine, for they forced me to
 wed her; and verily I wot not that she had a lover amongst the
 buffaloes; but now I repent, first before Allah and then before thee."
 Said the Ifrit to him, "I swear to thee that if thou fare forth from
 this place, or thou utter a word before sunrise, I assuredly will wring
 thy neck. When the sun rises wend thy went and never more return to
 this house." So saying, the Ifrit took up the Gobbo bridegroom and set
 him head downwards and feet upwards in the slit of the privy,[422] and
 said to him, "I will leave thee here but I shall be on the look-out for
 thee till sunrise; and, if thou stir before then, I will seize thee by
 the feet and dash out thy brains against the wall: so look out for thy
 life!" Thus far concerning the Hunchback, but as regards Badr al-Din
 Hasan of Bassorah he left the Gobbo and the Ifrit jangling and
 wrangling and, going into the house, sat him down in the very middle of
 the alcove; and behold, in came the bride attended by an old woman who
 stood at the door and said, "O Father of Uprightness,[423] arise and
 take what God giveth thee." Then the old woman went away and the bride,
 Sitt al-Husn or the Lady of Beauty hight, entered the inner part of the
 alcove broken-hearted and saying in herself, "By Allah I will never
 yield my person to him; no, not even were he to take my life!" But as
 she came to the further end she saw Badr al-Din Hasan and she said,
 "Dearling! art thou still sitting here? By Allah I was wishing that
 thou wert my bridegroom or, at least, that thou and the hunchbacked
 horse-groom were partners in me." He replied, "O beautiful lady, how
 should the Syce have access to thee, and how should he share in thee
 with me?" "Then," quoth she, "who _is_ my husband, thou or he?" "Sitt
 al-Husn," rejoined Hasan, "we have not done this for mere fun,[424] but
 only as a device to ward off the evil eye from thee; for when the
 tirewomen and singers and wedding guests saw thy beauty being displayed
 to me, they feared fascination and thy father hired the horse-groom for
 ten dinars and a porringer of meat to take the evil eye off us; and now
 he hath received his hire and gone his gait." When the Lady of Beauty
 heard these words she smiled and rejoiced and laughed a pleasant laugh.
 Then she whispered him, "By the Lord thou hast quenched a fire which
 tortured me and now, by Allah, O my little dark-haired darling, take me
 to thee and press me to thy bosom!" Then she began singing:—

 By Allah, set thy foot upon my soul; ✿ Since long, long years for this
    alone I long:
 And whisper tale of love in ear of me; ✿ To me 'tis sweeter than the
    sweetest song!
 No other youth upon my heart shall lie; ✿ So do it often, dear, and do
    it long.

 Then she stripped off her outer gear and she threw open her chemise
 from the neck downwards and showed her parts genital and all the
 rondure of her hips. When Badr al-Din saw the glorious sight his
 desires were roused, and he arose and doffed his clothes, and wrapping
 up in his bag-trousers[425] the purse of gold which he had taken from
 the Jew and which contained the thousand dinars, he laid it under the
 edge of the bedding. Then he took off his turband and set it upon the
 settle[426] atop of his other clothes, remaining in his skull-cap and
 fine shirt of blue silk laced with gold. Whereupon the Lady of Beauty
 drew him to her and he did likewise. Then he took her to his embrace
 and set her legs round his waist and point-blanked that cannon[427]
 placed where it battereth down the bulwark of maidenhead and layeth it
 waste. And he found her a pearl unpierced and unthridden and a filly by
 all men save himself unridden; and he abated her virginity and had
 joyance of her youth in his virility and presently he withdrew sword
 from sheath; and then returned to the fray right eath; and when the
 battle and the siege had finished, some fifteen assaults he had
 furnished and she conceived by him that very night. Then he laid his
 hand under her head and she did the same and they embraced and fell
 asleep in each other's arms, as a certain poet said of such lovers in
 these couplets:—

 Visit thy lover, spurn what envy told; ✿ No envious churl shall smile
    on love ensoul'd
 Merciful Allah made no fairer sight ✿ Than coupled lovers single couch
    doth hold;
 Breast pressing breast and robed in joys their own, ✿ With pillowed
    forearms cast in finest mould:
 And when heart speaks to heart with tongue of love, ✿ Folk who would
    part them hammer steel ice-cold:
 If a fair friend[428] thou find who cleaves to thee, ✿ Live for that
    friend, that friend in heart enfold.
 O ye who blame for love us lover kind ✿ Say, can ye minister to
    diseasèd mind?

 This much concerning Badr al-Din Hasan and Sitt al-Husn his cousin; but
 as regards the Ifrit, as soon as he saw the twain asleep, he said to
 the Ifritah, "Arise; slip thee under the youth and let us carry him
 back to his place ere dawn overtake us; for the day is nearhand."
 Thereupon she came forward and, getting under him as he lay asleep,
 took him up clad only in his fine blue shirt, leaving the rest of his
 garments; and ceased not flying (and the Ifrit vying with her in
 flight) till the dawn advised them that it had come upon them mid-way,
 and the Muezzin began his call from the Minaret, "Haste ye to
 salvation![429] Haste ye to salvation!" Then Allah suffered His angelic
 host to shoot down the Ifrit with a shooting star,[430] so he was
 consumed, but the Ifritah escaped and she descended with Badr al-Din at
 the place where the Ifrit was burnt, and did not carry him back to
 Bassorah, fearing lest he come to harm. Now by the order of Him who
 predestineth all things, they alighted at Damascus of Syria, and the
 Ifritah set down her burden at one of the city-gates and flew away.
 When day arose and the doors were opened, the folk who came forth saw a
 handsome youth, with no other raiment but his blue shirt of
 gold-embroidered silk and skull-cap,[431] lying upon the ground drowned
 in sleep after the hard labour of the night which had not suffered him
 to take his rest. So the folk looking at him said, "O her luck with
 whom this one spent the night! but would he had waited to don his
 garments." Quoth another, "A sorry lot are the sons of great families!
 Haply he but now came forth of the tavern on some occasion of his own
 and his wine flew to his head,[432] whereby he hath missed the place he
 was making for and strayed till he came to the gate of the city; and
 finding it shut lay him down and went to by-by!" As the people were
 bandying guesses about him suddenly the morning breeze blew upon Badr
 al-Din and raising his shirt to his middle showed a stomach and navel
 with something below it,[433] and legs and thighs clear as crystal and
 smooth as cream. Cried the people, "By Allah he is a pretty fellow!";
 and at the cry Badr al-Din awoke and found himself lying at a city-gate
 with a crowd gathered around him. At this he greatly marvelled and
 asked, "Where am I, O good folk; and what causeth you thus to gather
 round me, and what have I had to do with you?"; and they answered, "We
 found thee lying here asleep during the call to dawn-prayer and this is
 all we know of the matter, but where diddest thou lie last night?"[434]
 "By Allah, O good people," replied he, "I lay last night in Cairo."
 Said somebody, "Thou hast surely been eating Hashísh;"[435] and
 another, "He is a fool;" and a third, "He is a _citrouille_;" and a
 fourth asked him, "Art thou out of thy mind? thou sleepest in Cairo and
 thou wakest in the morning at the gate of Damascus-city!"[436] Cried
 he, "By Allah, my good people, one and all, I lie not to you: indeed I
 lay yesternight in the land of Egypt and yesternoon I was at Bassorah."
 Quoth one, "Well! well!"; and quoth another, "Ho! ho!"; and a third,
 "So! so!"; and a fourth cried, "This youth is mad, is possessed of the
 Jinni!" So they clapped hands at him and said to one another, "Alas,
 the pity of it for his youth: by Allah a madman! and madness is no
 respecter of persons." Then said they to him, "Collect thy wits and
 return to thy reason! How couldest thou be in Bassorah yesterday and in
 Cairo yesternight and withal awake in Damascus this morning?" But he
 persisted, "Indeed I was a bridegroom in Cairo last night." "Belike
 thou hast been dreaming," rejoined they, "and sawest all this in thy
 sleep." So Hasan took thought for a while and said to them, "By Allah,
 this is no dream; nor vision-like doth it seem! I certainly was in
 Cairo where they displayed the bride before me, in presence of a third
 person, the Hunchback groom who was sitting hard by. By Allah, O my
 brother, this be no dream, and if it were a dream, where is the bag of
 gold I bore with me and where are my turband and my robe, and my
 trousers?" Then he rose and entered the city, threading its highways
 and by-ways and bazar-streets; and the people pressed upon him and
 jeered at him, crying out "Madman! madman!" till he, beside himself
 with rage, took refuge in a cook's shop. Now that Cook had been a
 trifle too clever, that is, a rogue and thief; but Allah had made him
 repent and turn from his evil ways and open a cook-shop; and all the
 people of Damascus stood in fear of his boldness and his mischief. So
 when the crowd saw the youth enter his shop, they dispersed being
 afraid of him, and went their ways. The Cook looked at Badr al-Din and,
 noting his beauty and loveliness, fell in love with him forthright and
 said, "Whence comest thou, O youth? Tell me at once thy tale, for thou
 art become dearer to me than my soul." So Hasan recounted to him all
 that had befallen him from beginning to end (but in repetition there is
 no fruition) and the Cook said, "O my lord Badr al-Din, doubtless thou
 knowest that this case is wondrous and this story marvellous;
 therefore, O my son, hide what hath betided thee, till Allah dispel
 what ills be thine; and tarry with me here the meanwhile, for I have no
 child and I will adopt thee." Badr al-Din replied, "Be it as thou wilt,
 O my uncle!" Whereupon the Cook went to the bazar and bought him a fine
 suit of clothes and made him don it; then fared with him to the Kazi,
 and formally declared that he was his son. So Badr al-Din Hasan became
 known in Damascus-city as the Cook's son and he sat with him in the
 shop to take the silver, and on this wise he sojourned there for a
 time. Thus far concerning him; but as regards his cousin, the Lady of
 Beauty, when morning dawned she awoke and missed Badr al-Din Hasan from
 her side; but she thought that he had gone to the privy and she sat
 expecting him for an hour or so; when behold, entered her father Shams
 al-Din Mohammed, Wazir of Egypt. Now he was disconsolate by reason of
 what had befallen him through the Sultan, who had entreated him harshly
 and had married his daughter by force to the lowest of his menials and
 he too a lump of a groom hunchbacked withal, and he said to himself, "I
 will slay this daughter of mine if of her own free will she have
 yielded her person to this accursed carle." So he came to the door of
 the bride's private chamber, and said, "Ho! Sitt al-Husn." She answered
 him, "Here am I! here am I![437] O my lord," and came out unsteady of
 gait after the pains and pleasures of the night; and she kissed his
 hand, her face showing redoubled brightness and beauty for having lain
 in the arms of that gazelle, her cousin. When her father, the Wazir,
 saw her in such case, he asked her, "O thou accursed, art thou
 rejoicing because of this horse-groom?", and Sitt al-Husn smiled
 sweetly and answered, "By Allah, don't ridicule me: enough of what
 passed yesterday when folk laughed at me, and evened me with that
 groom-fellow who is not worthy to bring my husband's shoes or slippers;
 nay who is not worth the paring of my husband's nails! By the Lord,
 never in my life have I nighted a night so sweet as yesternight!, so
 don't mock by reminding me of the Gobbo." When her parent heard her
 words he was filled with fury, and his eyes glared and stared, so that
 little of them showed save the whites and he cried, "Fie upon thee!
 What words are these? 'Twas the hunchbacked horse-groom who passed the
 night with thee!" "Allah upon thee," replied the Lady of Beauty, "do
 not worry me about the Gobbo, Allah damn his father;[438] and leave
 jesting with me; for this groom was only hired for ten dinars and a
 porringer of meat and he took his wage and went his way. As for me I
 entered the bridal-chamber, where I found my true bridegroom sitting,
 after the singer-women had displayed me to him; the same who had
 crossed their hands with red gold, till every pauper that was present
 waxed wealthy; and I passed the night on the breast of my bonny man, a
 most lively darling, with his black eyes and joined eyebrows."[439]
 When her parent heard these words the light before his face became
 night, and he cried out at her saying, "O thou whore! What is this thou
 tellest me? Where be thy wits?" "O my father," she rejoined, "thou
 breakest my heart; enough for thee that thou hast been so hard upon me!
 Indeed my husband who took my virginity is but just now gone to the
 draught house and I feel that I have conceived by him."[440] The Wazir
 rose in much marvel and entered the privy where he found the
 hunchbacked horse-groom with his head in the hole and his heels in the
 air. At this sight he was confounded and said, "This is none other than
 he, the rascal Hunchback!" So he called to him, "Ho, Hunchback!" The
 Gobbo grunted out, "_Taghúm! Taghúm!_"[441] thinking it was the Ifrit
 spoke to him; so the Wazir shouted at him and said, "Speak out, or I'll
 strike off thy pate with this sword." Then quoth the Hunchback, "By
 Allah, O Shaykh of the Ifrits, ever since thou settest me in this
 place, I have not lifted my head; so Allah upon thee, take pity and
 entreat me kindly!" When the Wazir heard this he asked, "What is this
 thou sayest? I'm the bride's father and no Ifrit." "Enough for thee
 that thou hast well nigh done me die," answered Quasimodo; "now go thy
 ways before he come upon thee who hath served me thus. Could ye not
 marry me to any save the lady-love of buffaloes and the beloved of
 Ifrits? Allah curse her and curse him who married me to her and was the
 cause of this my case."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day, and
 ceased to say her permitted say.

                 Now when it was the Twenty-third Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the hunchbacked
 groom spake to the bride's father saying, "Allah curse him who was the
 cause of this my case!" Then said the Wazir to him, "Up and out of this
 place!" "Am I mad," cried the groom, "that I should go with thee
 without leave of the Ifrit whose last words to me were:—When the sun
 rises, arise and go thy gait. So hath the sun risen or no?; for I dare
 not budge from this place till then." Asked the Wazir, "Who brought
 thee hither?"; and he answered "I came here yesternight for a call of
 nature and to do what none can do for me, when lo! a mouse came out of
 the water, and squeaked at me and swelled and waxed gross till it was
 big as a buffalo, and spoke to me words that entered my ears. Then he
 left me here and went away, Allah curse the bride and him who married
 me to her!" The Wazir walked up to him and lifted his head out of the
 cess-pool hole; and he fared forth running for dear life and hardly
 crediting that the sun had risen; and repaired to the Sultan to whom he
 told all that had befallen him with the Ifrit. But the Wazir returned
 to the bride's private chamber, sore troubled in spirit about her, and
 said to her, "O my daughter, explain this strange matter to me!" Quoth
 she, "'Tis simply this. The bridegroom to whom they displayed me
 yester-eve lay with me all night, and took my virginity and I am with
 child by him. He is my husband and if thou believe me not, there are
 his turband, twisted as it was, lying on the settle and his dagger and
 his trousers beneath the bed with a something, I wot not what, wrapped
 up in them." When her father heard this he entered the private chamber
 and found the turband which had been left there by Badr al-Din Hasan,
 his brother's son, and he took it in hand and turned it over, saying,
 "This is the turband worn by Wazirs, save that it is of Mosul
 stuff."[442] So he opened it and, finding what seemed to be an amulet
 sewn up in the Fez, he unsewed the lining and took it out; then he
 lifted up the trousers wherein was the purse of the thousand gold
 pieces and, opening that also, found in it a written paper. This he
 read and it was the sale-receipt of the Jew in the name of Badr al-Din
 Hasan, son of Nur al-Din Ali, the Egyptian; and the thousand dinars
 were also there. No sooner had Shams al-Din read this than he cried out
 with a loud cry and fell to the ground fainting; and as soon as he
 revived and understood the gist of the matter he marvelled and said,
 "There is no god, but _the_ God, whose All-might is over all things!
 Knowest thou, O my daughter, who it was that became the husband of thy
 virginity?" "No," answered she, and he said, "Verily he is the son of
 my brother, thy cousin, and this thousand dinars is thy dowry. Praise
 be to Allah! and would I wot how this matter came about!" Then opened
 he the amulet which was sewn up and found therein a paper in the
 handwriting of his deceased brother, Nur al-Din the Egyptian, father of
 Badr al-Din Hasan; and, when he saw the handwriting, he kissed it again
 and again; and he wept and wailed over his dead brother and improvised
 these lines:—

 I see their traces and with pain I melt, ✿ And on their whilome homes I
    weep and yearn:
 And Him I pray who dealt this parting-blow ✿ Some day he deign
    vouchsafe a safe return.[443]

 When he ceased versifying, he read the scroll and found in it recorded
 the dates of his brother's marriage with the daughter of the Wazir of
 Bassorah, and of his going in to her, and her conception, and the birth
 of Badr al-Din Hasan and all his brother's history and doings up to his
 dying day. So he marvelled much and shook with joy and, comparing the
 dates with his own marriage and going in unto his wife and the birth of
 his daughter, Sitt al-Husn, he found that they perfectly agreed. So he
 took the document and, repairing with it to the Sultan, acquainted him
 with what had passed, from first to last; whereat the King marvelled
 and commanded the case to be at once recorded.[444] The Wazir abode
 that day expecting to see his brother's son but he came not; and he
 waited a second day, a third day and so on to the seventh day, without
 any tidings of him. So he said, "By Allah, I will do a deed such as
 none hath ever done before me!"; and he took reed-pen and ink and drew
 upon a sheet of paper the plan of the whole house, showing whereabouts
 was the private chamber with the curtain in such a place and the
 furniture in such another and so on with all that was in the room. Then
 he folded up the sketch and, causing all the furniture to be collected,
 he took Badr al-Din's garments and the turband and Fez and robe and
 purse, and carried the whole to his house and locked them up, against
 the coming of his nephew, Badr al-Din Hasan, the son of his lost
 brother, with an iron padlock on which he set his seal. As for the
 Wazir's daughter, when her tale of months was fulfilled, she bare a son
 like the full moon, the image of his father in beauty and loveliness
 and fair proportions and perfect grace. They cut his navel-string[445]
 and Kohl'd his eyelids to strengthen his eyes, and gave him over to the
 nurses and nursery governesses,[446] naming him Ajíb, the Wonderful.
 His day was as a month and his month was as a year;[447] and, when
 seven years had passed over him, his grandfather sent him to school,
 enjoining the master to teach him Koran-reading, and to educate him
 well. He remained at the school four years, till he began to bully his
 schoolfellows and abuse them and bash them and thrash them and say,
 "Who among you is like me? I am the son of the Wazir of Egypt!" At last
 the boys came in a body to complain to the Monitor[448] of what hard
 usage they were wont to have from Ajib, and he said to them, "I will
 tell you somewhat you may do to him so that he shall leave off coming
 to the school, and it is this. When he enters to-morrow, sit ye down
 about him and say some one of you to some other:—By Allah none shall
 play with us at this game except he tell us the names of his mamma and
 his papa; for he who knows not the names of his mother and his father
 is a bastard, a son of adultery,[449] and he shall not play with us."
 When morning dawned the boys came to school, Ajib being one of them,
 and all flocked round him saying, "We will play a game wherein none
 shall join save he can tell the name of his mamma and his papa." And
 they all cried, "By Allah, good!" Then quoth one of them, "My name is
 Májid and my mammy's name is Alawiyah and my daddy's Izz al-Din."
 Another spoke in like guise and yet a third, till Ajib's turn came, and
 he said, "My name is Ajib, and my mother's is Sitt al-Husn, and my
 father's Shams al-Din, the Wazir of Cairo." "By Allah," cried they,
 "the Wazir is not thy true father." Ajib answered, "The Wazir is my
 father in very deed." Then the boys all laughed and clapped their hands
 at him, saying "He does not know who is his papa: get out from among
 us, for none shall play with us except he know his father's name."
 Thereupon they dispersed from around him and laughed him to scorn; so
 his breast was straitened and he well nigh choked with tears and hurt
 feelings. Then said the Monitor to him, "We know that the Wazir is thy
 grandfather, the father of thy mother, Sitt al-Husn, and not thy
 father. As for thy father, neither dost thou know him nor yet do we;
 for the Sultan married thy mother to the hunchbacked horse-groom; but
 the Jinni came and slept with her and thou hast no known father. Leave,
 then, comparing thyself too advantageously with the little ones of the
 school, till thou know that thou hast a lawful father; for until then
 thou wilt pass for a child of adultery amongst them. Seest thou not
 that even a huckster's son knoweth his own sire? Thy grandfather is the
 Wazir of Egypt; but as for thy father we wot him not and we say indeed
 that thou hast none. So return to thy sound senses!" When Ajib heard
 these insulting words from the Monitor and the school boys and
 understood the reproach they put upon him, he went out at once and ran
 to his mother, Sitt al-Husn, to complain; but he was crying so bitterly
 that his tears prevented his speech for a while. When she heard his
 sobs and saw his tears her heart burned as though with fire for him,
 and she said, "O my son, why dost thou weep? Allah keep the tears from
 thine eyes! Tell me what hath betided thee?" So he told her all that he
 heard from the boys and from the Monitor and ended with asking, "And
 who, O my mother, is my father?" She answered, "Thy father is the Wazir
 of Egypt;" but he said, "Do not lie to me. The Wazir is thy father, not
 mine! who then is my father? Except thou tell me the very truth I will
 kill myself with this hanger."[450] When his mother heard him speak of
 his father she wept, remembering her cousin and her bridal night with
 him and all that occurred there and then, and she repeated these
 couplets:—

 Love in my heart they lit and went their ways, ✿ And all I love to
    furthest lands withdrew;
 And when they left me sufferance also left, ✿ And when we parted
    Patience bade adieu:
 They fled and flying with my joys they fled, ✿ In very constancy my
    spirit flew:
 They made my eyelids flow with severance tears ✿ And to the
    parting-pang these drops are due:
 And when I long to see reunion-day, ✿ My groans prolonging sore for
    ruth I sue:
 Then in my heart of hearts their shapes I trace, ✿ And love and longing
    care and cark renew:
 O ye, whose names cling round me like a cloak, ✿ Whose love yet closer
    than a shirt I drew,
 Belovèd ones! how long this hard despite? ✿ How long this severance and
    this coy shy flight?

 Then she wailed and shrieked aloud and her son did the like; and
 behold, in came the Wazir whose heart burnt within him at the sight of
 their lamentations and he said, "What makes you weep?" So the Lady of
 Beauty acquainted him with what happened between her son and the school
 boys; and he also wept, calling to mind his brother and what had past
 between them and what had betided his daughter and how he had failed to
 find out what mystery there was in the matter. Then he rose at once
 and, repairing to the audience-hall, went straight to the King and told
 his tale and craved his permission[451] to travel eastward to the city
 of Bassorah and ask after his brother's son. Furthermore he besought
 the Sultan to write for him letters patent, authorising him to seize
 upon Badr al-Din, his nephew and son-in-law, wheresoever he might find
 him. And he wept before the King, who had pity on him and wrote royal
 autographs to his deputies in all climes[452] and countries and cities;
 whereat the Wazir rejoiced and prayed for blessings on him. Then,
 taking leave of his Sovereign, he returned to his house, where he
 equipped himself and his daughter and his adopted child Ajib, with all
 things meet for a long march; and set out and travelled the first day
 and the second and the third and so forth till he arrived at
 Damascus-city. He found it a fair place abounding in trees and streams,
 even as the poet said of it:—

 When I nighted and dayed in Damascus-town, ✿ Time sware such another he
    ne'er should view:
 And careless we slept under wing of night, ✿ Till dappled Morn 'gan her
    smiles renew:
 And dew-drops on branch in their beauty hung, ✿ Like pearls to be dropt
    when the Zephyr blew:
 And the Lake[453] was the page where birds read and note, ✿ And the
    clouds set points to what breezes wrote.

 The Wazir encamped on the open space called Al-Hasá;[454] and, after
 pitching tents, said to his servants, "A halt here for two days!" So
 they went into the city upon their several occasions, this to sell and
 that to buy; this to go to the Hammam and that to visit the
 Cathedral-mosque of the Banu Umayyah, the Ommiades, whose like is not
 in this world.[455] Ajib also went, with his attendant eunuch, for
 solace and diversion to the city and the servant followed with a
 quarter-staff[456] of almond-wood so heavy that if he struck a camel
 therewith the beast would never rise again.[457] When the people of
 Damascus saw Ajib's beauty and brilliancy and perfect grace and
 symmetry (for he was a marvel of comeliness and winning loveliness,
 softer than the cool breeze of the North, sweeter than limpid waters to
 man in drowth, and pleasanter than the health for which sick man
 sueth), a mighty many followed him, whilst others ran on before and sat
 down on the road until he should come up, that they might gaze on him,
 till, as Destiny had decreed, the Eunuch stopped opposite the shop of
 Ajib's father, Badr al-Din Hasan. Now his beard had grown long and
 thick and his wits had ripened during the twelve years which had passed
 over him, and the Cook and ex-rogue having died, the so-called Hasan of
 Bassorah had succeeded to his goods and shop, for that he had been
 formally adopted before the Kazi and witnesses. When his son and the
 Eunuch stepped before him he gazed on Ajib and, seeing how very
 beautiful he was, his heart fluttered and throbbed, and blood drew to
 blood and natural affection spake out and his bowels yearned over him.
 He had just dressed a conserve of pomegranate grains with sugar, and
 Heaven-implanted love wrought within him; so he called to his son Ajib
 and said, "O my lord, O thou who hast gotten the mastery of my heart
 and my very vitals and to whom my bowels yearn; say me, wilt thou enter
 my house and solace my soul by eating of my meat?" Then his eyes
 streamed with tears which he could not stay, for he bethought him of
 what he had been and what he had become. When Ajib heard his father's
 words his heart also yearned himwards and he looked at the Eunuch and
 said to him, "Of a truth, O my good guard, my heart yearns to this
 cook; he is as one that hath a son far away from him: so let us enter
 and gladden his heart by tasting of his hospitality. Perchance for our
 so doing Allah may reunite me with my father." When the Eunuch heard
 these words he cried, "A fine thing this, by Allah! Shall the sons of
 Wazirs be seen eating in a common cook-shop? Indeed I keep off the folk
 from thee with this quarter-staff lest they even look upon thee; and I
 dare not suffer thee to enter this shop at all." When Hasan of Bassorah
 heard his speech he marvelled and turned to the Eunuch with the tears
 pouring down his cheeks; and Ajib said, "Verily my heart loves him!"
 But he answered, "Leave this talk, thou shalt not go in." Thereupon the
 father turned to the Eunuch and said, "O worthy sir, why wilt thou not
 gladden my soul by entering my shop? O thou who art like a chesnut,
 dark without but white of heart within! O thou of the like of whom a
 certain poet said * * *" The Eunuch burst out a-laughing and
 asked—"Said what? Speak out by Allah and be quick about it." So Hasan
 the Bassorite began reciting these couplets:—

 If not master of manners or aught but discreet ✿ In the household of
    Kings no trust could he take:
 And then for the Harem! What Eunuch[458] is he ✿ Whom angels would
    serve for his service sake.

 The Eunuch marvelled and was pleased at these words, so he took Ajib by
 the hand and went into the cook's shop: whereupon Hasan the Bassorite
 ladled into a saucer some conserve of pomegranate-grains wonderfully
 good, dressed with almonds and sugar, saying, "You have honoured me
 with your company: eat then and health and happiness to you!" Thereupon
 Ajib said to his father, "Sit thee down and eat with us; so perchance
 Allah may unite us with him we long for." Quoth Hasan, "O my son, hast
 thou then been afflicted in thy tender years with parting from those
 thou lovest?" Quoth Ajib, "Even so, O nuncle mine; my heart burns for
 the loss of a beloved one who is none other than my father; and indeed
 I come forth, I and my grandfather,[459] to circle and search the world
 for him. Oh, the pity of it, and how I long to meet him!" Then he wept
 with exceeding weeping, and his father also wept seeing him weep and
 for his own bereavement, which recalled to him his long separation from
 dear friends and from his mother; and the Eunuch was moved to pity for
 him. Then they ate together till they were satisfied; and Ajib and the
 slave rose and left the shop. Hereat Hasan the Bassorite felt as though
 his soul had departed his body and had gone with them; for he could not
 lose sight of the boy during the twinkling of an eye, albeit he knew
 not that Ajib was his son. So he locked up his shop and hastened after
 them; and he walked so fast that he came up with them before they had
 gone out of the western gate. The Eunuch turned and asked him, "What
 ails thee?"; and Badr al-Din answered, "When ye went from me, meseemed
 my soul had gone with you; and, as I had business without the
 city-gate, I purposed to bear you company till my matter was ordered
 and so return." The Eunuch was angered and said to Ajib, "This is just
 what I feared! we ate that unlucky mouthful (which we are bound to
 respect), and here is the fellow following us from place to place; for
 the vulgar are ever the vulgar." Ajib, turning and seeing the Cook just
 behind him, was wroth and his face reddened with rage and he said to
 the servant, "Let him walk the highway of the Moslems; but, when we
 turn off it to our tents, and find that he still follows us, we will
 send him about his business with a flea in his ear." Then he bowed his
 head and walked on, the Eunuch walking behind him. But Hasan of
 Bassorah followed them to the plain Al-Hasa; and, as they drew near to
 the tents, they turned round and saw him close on their heels; so Ajib
 was very angry, fearing that the Eunuch might tell his grandfather what
 had happened. His indignation was the hotter for apprehension lest any
 say that after he had entered a cook-shop the cook had followed him. So
 he turned and looked at Hasan of Bassorah and found his eyes fixed on
 his own, for the father had become a body without a soul; and it seemed
 to Ajib that his eye was a treacherous eye or that he was some lewd
 fellow. So his rage redoubled and, stooping down, he took up a stone
 weighing half a pound and threw it at his father. It struck him on the
 forehead, cutting it open from eye-brow to eye-brow and causing the
 blood to stream down: and Hasan fell to the ground in a swoon whilst
 Ajib and the Eunuch made for the tents. When the father came to himself
 he wiped away the blood and tore off a strip from his turband and bound
 up his head, blaming himself the while, and saying, "I wronged the lad
 by shutting up my shop and following, so that he thought I was some
 evil-minded fellow." Then he returned to his place where he busied
 himself with the sale of his sweetmeats; and he yearned after his
 mother at Bassorah, and wept over her and broke out repeating:—

 Unjust it were to bid the World[460] be just ✿ And blame her not: She
    ne'er was made for justice:
 Take what she gives thee, leave all grief aside, ✿ For now to fair and
    then to foul her lust is.

 So Hasan of Bassorah set himself steadily to sell his sweetmeats; but
 the Wazir, his uncle, halted in Damascus three days and then marched
 upon Emesa, and passing through that town he made enquiry there and at
 every place where he rested. Thence he fared on by way of Hamah and
 Aleppo and thence through Diyár Bakr and Máridin and Mosul, still
 enquiring, till he arrived at Bassorah-city. Here, as soon as he had
 secured a lodging, he presented himself before the Sultan, who
 entreated him with high honour and the respect due to his rank, and
 asked the cause of his coming. The Wazir acquainted him with his
 history and told him that the Minister Nur al-Din was his brother;
 whereupon the Sultan exclaimed, "Allah have mercy upon him!" and added,
 "My good Sáhib![461]; he was my Wazir for fifteen years and I loved him
 exceedingly. Then he died leaving a son who abode only a single month
 after his father's death; since which time he has disappeared and we
 could gain no tidings of him. But his mother, who is the daughter of my
 former Minister, is still among us." When the Wazir Shams al-Din heard
 that his nephew's mother was alive and well, he rejoiced and said, "O
 King I much desire to meet her." The King on the instant gave him leave
 to visit her; so he betook himself to the mansion of his brother, Nur
 al-Din, and cast sorrowful glances on all things in and around it and
 kissed the threshold. Then he bethought him of his brother, Nur al-Din
 Ali, and how he had died in a strange land far from kith and kin and
 friends; and he wept and repeated these lines:—

 I wander 'mid these walls, my Lavla's walls, ✿ And kissing this and
    other wall I roam:
 'Tis not the walls or roof my heart so loves, ✿ But those who in this
    house had made their home.

 Then he passed through the gate into a courtyard and found a vaulted
 doorway builded of hardest syenite[462] inlaid with sundry kinds of
 multi-coloured marble. Into this he walked and wandered about the house
 and, throwing many a glance around, saw the name of his brother, Nur
 al-Din, written in gold wash upon the walls. So he went up to the
 inscription and kissed it and wept and thought of how he had been
 separated from his brother and had now lost him for ever, and he
 recited these couplets:—

 I ask of you from every rising sun, ✿ And eke I ask when flasheth
    leven-light:
 Restless I pass my nights in passion-pain, ✿ Yet ne'er I 'plain me of
    my painful plight:
 My love! if longer last this parting throe ✿ Little by little shall it
    waste my sprite.
 An thou wouldst bless these eyne with sight of thee ✿ One day on earth,
    I crave none other sight:
 Think not another could possess my mind ✿ Nor length nor breadth for
    other love I find.

 Then he walked on till he came to the apartment of his brother's widow,
 the mother of Badr al-Din Hasan, the Egyptian. Now from the time of her
 son's disappearance she had never ceased weeping and wailing through
 the light hours and the dark; and, when the years grew longsome with
 her, she built for him a tomb of marble in the midst of the saloon and
 there used to weep for him day and night, never sleeping save thereby.
 When the Wazir drew near her apartment, he heard her voice and stood
 behind the door while she addressed the sepulchre in verse and said:—

 Answer, by Allah! Sepulchre, are all his beauties gone? ✿ Hath change
    the power to blight his charms, that Beauty's paragon?
 Thou art not earth, O Sepulchre! nor art thou sky to me; ✿ How comes
    it, then, in thee I see conjoint the branch and moon?

 While she was bemoaning herself after this fashion, behold, the Wazir
 went in to her and saluted her and informed her that he was her
 husband's brother; and, telling her all that had passed between them,
 laid open before her the whole story, how her son Badr al-Din Hasan had
 spent a whole night with his daughter full ten years ago but had
 disappeared in the morning. And he ended with saying, "My daughter
 conceived by thy son and bare a male child who is now with me, and he
 is thy son and thy son's son by my daughter." When she heard the
 tidings that her boy, Badr al-Din, was still alive and saw her
 brother-in-law, she rose up to him and threw herself at his feet and
 kissed them, reciting these lines:—

 Allah be good to him that gives glad tidings of thy steps; ✿ In very
    sooth for better news mine ears would never sue:
 Were he content with worn-out robe, upon his back I'd throw ✿ A heart
    to pieces rent and torn when heard the word Adieu.

 Then the Wazir sent for Ajib and his grandmother stood up and fell on
 his neck and wept; but Shams al-Din said to her, "This is no time for
 weeping; this is the time to get thee ready for travelling with us to
 the land of Egypt; haply Allah will reunite me and thee with thy son
 and my nephew." Replied she, "Hearkening and obedience;" and, rising at
 once, collected her baggage and treasures and her jewels, and equipped
 herself and her slave-girls for the march, whilst the Wazir went to
 take his leave of the Sultan of Bassorah, who sent by him presents and
 rarities for the Soldan of Egypt. Then he set out at once upon his
 homeward march and journeyed till he came to Damascus-city where he
 alighted in the usual place and pitched tents, and said to his suite,
 "We will halt a se'nnight here to buy presents and rare things for the
 Soldan." Now Ajib bethought him of the past so he said to the Eunuch,
 "O Láik, I want a little diversion; come, let us go down to the great
 bazar of Damascus,[463] and see what hath become of the cook whose
 sweetmeats we ate and whose head we broke, for indeed he was kind to us
 and we entreated him scurvily." The Eunuch answered, "Hearing is
 obeying!" So they went forth from the tents; and the tie of blood drew
 Ajib towards his father, and forthwith they passed through the gateway,
 Báb al-Farádís[464] hight, and entered the city and ceased not walking
 through the streets till they reached the cook-shop, where they found
 Hasan of Bassorah standing at the door. It was near the time of
 mid-afternoon prayer[465] and it so fortuned that he had just dressed a
 confection of pomegranate-grains. When the twain drew near to him and
 Ajib saw him, his heart yearned towards him, and noticing the scar of
 the blow, which time had darkened on his brow, he said to him, "Peace
 be on thee, O man![466]; know that my heart is with thee." But when
 Badr al-Din looked upon his son his vitals yearned and his heart
 fluttered, and he hung his head earthwards and sought to make his
 tongue give utterance to his words, but he could not. Then he raised
 his head humbly and suppliant-wise towards his boy and repeated these
 couplets:—

 I longed for my beloved but when I saw his face, ✿ Abashed I held my
    tongue and stood with downcast eye;
 And hung my head in dread and would have hid my love, ✿ But do whatso I
    would hidden it would not lie:
 Volumes of plaints I had prepared, reproach and blame, ✿ But when we
    met, no single word remembered I.

 And then said he to them, "Heal my broken heart and eat of my
 sweetmeats; for, by Allah, I cannot look at thee but my heart flutters.
 Indeed I should not have followed thee the other day, but that I was
 beside myself." "By Allah," answered Ajib, "thou dost indeed love us!
 We ate in thy house a mouthful when we were here before and thou madest
 us repent of it, for that thou followedst us and wouldst have disgraced
 us; so now we will not eat aught with thee save on condition that thou
 make oath not to go out after us nor dog us. Otherwise we will not
 visit thee again during our present stay; for we shall halt a week
 here, whilst my grandfather buys certain presents for the King." Quoth
 Hasan of Bassorah, "I promise you this." So Ajib and the Eunuch entered
 the shop, and his father set before them a saucer-full of conserve of
 pomegranate-grains. Said Ajib, "Sit thee down and eat with us, so haply
 shall Allah dispel our sorrows." Hasan the Bassorite was joyful and sat
 down and ate with them; but his eyes kept gazing fixedly on Ajib's
 face, for his very heart and vitals clove to him; and at last the boy
 said to him, "Did I not tell thee thou art a most noyous dotard?; so do
 stint thy staring in my face!" But when Hasan of Bassorah heard his
 son's words he repeated these lines:—

 Thou hast some art the hearts of men to clip; ✿ Close-veiled,
    far-hidden mystery dark and deep:
 O thou whose beauties shame the lustrous moon, ✿ Wherewith the saffron
    Morn fears rivalship!
 Thy beauty is a shrine shall ne'er decay; ✿ Whose signs shall grow
    until they all outstrip;[467]
 Must I be thirst-burnt by that Eden-brow ✿ And die of pine to taste
    that Kausar[468]-lip?

 Hasan kept putting morsels into Ajib's mouth at one time and at another
 time did the same by the Eunuch and they ate till they were satisfied
 and could no more. Then all rose up and the cook poured water on their
 hands;[469] and, loosing a silken waist-shawl, dried them and sprinkled
 them with rose-water from a casting-bottle he had by him. Then he went
 out and presently returned with a gugglet of sherbet flavoured with
 rose-water, scented with musk and cooled with snow; and he set this
 before them saying, "Complete your kindness to me!" So Ajib took the
 gugglet and drank and passed it to the Eunuch; and it went round till
 their stomachs were full and they were surfeited with a meal larger
 than their wont. Then they went away and made haste in walking till
 they reached the tents, and Ajib went in to his grandmother, who kissed
 him and, thinking of her son, Badr al-Din Hasan, groaned aloud and wept
 and recited these lines:—

 I still had hoped to see thee and enjoy thy sight, ✿ For in thine
    absence life had lost its kindly light:
 I swear my vitals wot none other love but thine ✿ By Allah, who can
    read the secrets of the sprite!

 Then she asked Ajib, "O my son! where hast thou been?"; and he
 answered, "In Damascus-city;" Whereupon she rose and set before him a
 bit of scone and a saucer of conserve of pomegranate-grains (which was
 too little sweetened), and she said to the Eunuch, "Sit down with thy
 master!" Said the servant to himself, "By Allah, we have no mind to
 eat: I cannot bear the smell of bread;" but he sat down and so did
 Ajib, though his stomach was full of what he had eaten already and
 drunken. Nevertheless he took a bit of the bread and dipped it in the
 pomegranate-conserve and made shift to eat it, but he found it too
 little sweetened, for he was cloyed and surfeited, so he said, "Faugh;
 what be this wild-beast[470] stuff?" "O my son," cried his grandmother,
 "dost thou find fault with my cookery? I cooked this myself and none
 can cook it as nicely as I can save thy father, Badr al-Din Hasan." "By
 Allah, O my lady," Ajib answered, "this dish is nasty stuff; for we saw
 but now in the city of Bassorah a cook who so dresseth
 pomegranate-grains that the very smell openeth a way to the heart and
 the taste would make a full man long to eat; and, as for this mess
 compared with his, 'tis not worth either much or little." When his
 grandmother heard his words she waxed wroth with exceeding wrath and
 looked at the servant——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
 ceased to say her permitted say.

                Now when it was the Twenty-Fourth Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ajib's
 grandmother heard his words, she waxed wroth and looked at the servant
 and said, "Woe to thee! dost thou spoil my son,[471] and dost take him
 into common cookshops?" The Eunuch was frightened and denied, saying,
 "We did not go into the shop; we only passed by it." "By Allah," cried
 Ajib, "but we _did_ go in and we ate till it came out of our nostrils,
 and the dish was better than thy dish!" Then his grandmother rose and
 went and told her brother-in-law, who was incensed against the Eunuch,
 and sending for him asked him, "Why didst thou take my son into a
 cook-shop?"; and the Eunuch being frightened answered, "We did not go
 in." But Ajib said, "We _did_ go inside and ate conserve of
 pomegranate-grains till we were full; and the cook gave us to drink of
 iced and sugared sherbet." At this the Wazir's indignation redoubled
 and he questioned the Castrato but, as he still denied, the Wazir said
 to him, "If thou speak sooth, sit down and eat before us." So he came
 forward and tried to eat, but could not and threw away the mouthful
 crying "O my lord! I am surfeited since yesterday." By this the Wazir
 was certified that he had eaten at the cook's and bade the slaves throw
 him[472] which they did. Then they came down on him with a rib-basting
 which burned him till he cried for mercy and help from Allah, saying,
 "O my master, beat me no more and I will tell thee the truth;"
 whereupon the Wazir stopped the bastinado and said, "Now speak thou
 sooth." Quoth the Eunuch, "Know then that we did enter the shop of a
 cook while he was dressing conserve of pomegranate-grains and he set
 some of it before us: by Allah! I never ate in my life its like, nor
 tasted aught nastier than this stuff which is now before us."[473] Badr
 al-Din Hasan's mother was angry at this and said, "Needs must thou go
 back to the cook and bring me a saucer of conserved pomegranate-grains
 from that which is in his shop and show it to thy master, that he may
 say which be the better and the nicer, mine or his." Said the unsexed
 "I will." So on the instant she gave him a saucer and a half dinar and
 he returned to the shop and said to the cook, "O Shaykh of all
 Cooks,[474] we have laid a wager concerning thy cookery in my lord's
 house, for they have conserve of pomegranate-grains there also; so give
 me this half-dinar's worth and look to it; for I have eaten a full meal
 of stick on account of thy cookery, and so do not let me eat aught more
 thereof." Hasan of Bassorah laughed and answered, "By Allah, none can
 dress this dish as it should be dressed save myself and my mother, and
 she at this time is in a far country." Then he ladled out a
 saucer-full; and, finishing it off with musk and rose-water, put it in
 a cloth which he sealed[475] and gave it to the Eunuch, who hastened
 back with it. No sooner had Badr al-Din Hasan's mother tasted it and
 perceived its fine flavour and the excellence of the cookery, than she
 knew who had dressed it, and she screamed and fell down fainting. The
 Wazir, sorely startled, sprinkled rose-water upon her and after a time
 she recovered and said, "If my son be yet of this world, none dressed
 this conserve of pomegranate-grains but he; and this Cook is my very
 son Badr al-Din Hasan; there is no doubt of it nor can there be any
 mistake, for only I and he knew how to prepare it and I taught him."
 When the Wazir heard her words he joyed with exceeding joy and said,
 "Oh the longing of me for a sight of my brother's son! I wonder if the
 days will ever unite us with him! Yet it is to Almighty Allah alone
 that we look for bringing about this meeting." Then he rose without
 stay or delay and, going to his suite said to them, "Be off, some fifty
 of you with sticks and staves to the Cook's shop and demolish it; then
 pinion his arms behind him with his own turband, saying:—It was thou
 madest that foul mess of pomegranate-grains! and drag him here perforce
 but without doing him a harm." And they replied, "It is well." Then the
 Wazir rode off without losing an instant to the Palace and,
 foregathering with the Viceroy of Damascus, showed him the Sultan's
 orders. After careful perusal he kissed the letter, and placing it upon
 his head said to his visitor, "Who is this offender of thine?" Quoth
 the Wazir, "A man which is a cook." So the Viceroy at once sent his
 apparitors to the shop; which they found demolished and everything in
 it broken to pieces; for whilst the Wazir was riding to the palace his
 men had done his bidding. Then they awaited his return from the
 audience, and Hasan of Bassorah who was their prisoner kept saying, "I
 wonder what they have found in the conserve of pomegranate-grains to
 bring things to this pass!"[476] When the Wazir returned to them, after
 his visit to the Viceroy who had given him formal permission to take up
 his debtor and depart with him, on entering the tents he called for the
 Cook. They brought him forward pinioned with his turband; and, when
 Badr al-Din Hasan saw his uncle, he wept with exceeding weeping and
 said, "O my lord, what is my offence against thee?" "Art thou the man
 who dressed that conserve of pomegranate-grains?"; asked the Wazir, and
 he answered "Yes! didst thou find in it aught to call for the cutting
 off of my head?" Quoth the Wazir, "That were the least of thy deserts!"
 Quoth the cook, "O my lord, wilt thou not tell me my crime and what
 aileth the conserve of pomegranate-grains?" "Presently," replied the
 Wazir and called aloud to his men, saying "Bring hither the camels." So
 they struck the tents and by the Wazir's orders the servants took Badr
 al-Din Hasan, and set him in a chest which they padlocked and put on a
 camel. Then they departed and stinted not journeying till nightfall,
 when they halted and ate some victual, and took Badr al-Din Hasan out
 of his chest and gave him a meal and locked him up again. They set out
 once more and travelled till they reached Kimrah, where they took him
 out of the box and brought him before the Wazir who asked him, "Art
 thou he who dressed that conserve of pomegranate-grains?" He answered
 "Yes, O my lord!"; and the Wazir said "Fetter him!" So they fettered
 him and returned him to the chest and fared on again till they reached
 Cairo and lighted at the quarter called Al-Raydaniyah.[477] Then the
 Wazir gave order to take Badr al-Din Hasan out of the chest and sent
 for a carpenter and said to him, "Make me a cross of wood[478] for this
 fellow!" Cried Badr al-Din Hasan, "And what wilt thou do with it?"; and
 the Wazir replied, "I mean to crucify thee thereon, and nail thee
 thereto and parade thee all about the city." "And why wilt thou use me
 after this fashion?" "Because of thy villanous cookery of conserved
 pomegranate-grains; how durst thou dress it and sell it lacking
 pepper?" "And for that it lacked pepper wilt thou do all this to me? Is
 it not enough that thou hast broken my shop and smashed my gear and
 boxed me up in a chest and fed me only once a day?" "Too little pepper!
 too little pepper! this is a crime which can be expiated only upon the
 cross!" Then Badr al-Din Hasan marvelled and fell a-mourning for his
 life; whereupon the Wazir asked him, "Of what thinkest thou?"; and he
 answered him, "Of maggoty heads like thine;[479] for an thou had one
 ounce of sense thou hadst not treated me thus." Quoth the Wazir, "It is
 our duty to punish thee lest thou do the like again." Quoth Badr al-Din
 Hasan, "Of a truth my offence were over-punished by the least of what
 thou hast already done to me; and Allah damn all conserve of
 pomegranate-grains and curse the hour when I cooked it and would I had
 died ere this!" But the Wazir rejoined, "There is no help for it: I
 must crucify a man who sells conserve of pomegranate-grains lacking
 pepper." All this time the carpenter was shaping the wood and Badr
 al-Din looked on; and thus they did till night, when his uncle took him
 and clapped him into the chest, saying, "The thing shall be done
 to-morrow!" Then he waited till he knew Badr al-Din Hasan to be asleep,
 when he mounted; and, taking the chest up before him, entered the city
 and rode on to his own house, where he alighted and said to his
 daughter, Sitt al-Husn, "Praised be Allah who hath reunited thee with
 thy husband, the son of thine uncle! Up now, and order the house as it
 was on thy bridal night." So the servants arose and lit the candles;
 and the Wazir took out his plan of the nuptial chamber, and directed
 them what to do till they had set everything in its stead, so that
 whoever saw it would have no doubt but it was the very night of the
 marriage. Then he bade them put down Badr al-Din Hasan's turband on the
 settle, as he had deposited it with his own hand, and in like manner
 his bag-trousers and the purse which were under the mattress; and told
 his daughter to undress herself and go to bed in the private chamber as
 on her wedding-night, adding, "When the son of thine uncle comes in to
 thee, say to him:—Thou hast loitered while going to the privy; and call
 him to lie by thy side and keep him in converse till day-break, when we
 will explain the whole matter to him." Then he bade take Badr al-Din
 Hasan out of the chest, after loosing the fetters from his feet and
 stripping off all that was on him save the fine shirt of blue silk in
 which he had slept on his wedding-night; so that he was well nigh naked
 and trouserless. All this was done whilst he was sleeping on utterly
 unconscious. Then, by doom of Destiny, Badr al-Din Hasan turned over
 and awoke; and, finding himself in a lighted vestibule, said to
 himself, "Surely I am in the mazes of some dream." So he rose and went
 on a little to an inner door and looked in and lo! he was in the very
 chamber wherein the bride had been displayed to him; and there he saw
 the bridal alcove and the settle and his turband and all his clothes.
 When he saw this he was confounded and kept advancing with one foot,
 and retiring with the other, saying, "Am I sleeping or waking?" And he
 began rubbing his forehead and saying (for indeed he was thoroughly
 astounded), "By Allah, verily this is the chamber of the bride who was
 displayed before me! Where am I then? I was surely but now in a box!"
 Whilst he was talking with himself, Sitt al-Husn suddenly lifted the
 corner of the chamber-curtain and said, "O my lord, wilt thou not come
 in? Indeed thou hast loitered long in the water-closet." When he heard
 her words and saw her face he burst out laughing and said, "Of a truth
 this is a very nightmare among dreams!" Then he went in sighing, and
 pondered what had come to pass with him and was perplexed about his
 case, and his affair became yet more obscure to him when he saw his
 turband and bag-trousers and when, feeling the pocket, he found the
 purse containing the thousand gold pieces. So he stood still and
 muttered, "Allah is all knowing! Assuredly I am dreaming a wild waking
 dream!" Then said the Lady of Beauty to him, "What ails thee to look
 puzzled and perplexed?"; adding, "Thou wast a very different man during
 the first of the night!" He laughed and asked her, "How long have I
 been away from thee?"; and she answered him, "Allah preserve thee and
 His Holy Name be about thee! Thou didst but go out an hour ago for an
 occasion and return. Are thy wits clean gone?" When Badr al-Din Hasan
 heard this, he laughed,[480] and said, "Thou hast spoken truth; but,
 when I went out from thee, I forgot myself awhile in the draught-house
 and dreamed that I was a cook at Damascus and abode there ten years;
 and there came to me a boy who was of the sons of the great, and with
 him an Eunuch." Here he passed his hand over his forehead and, feeling
 the scar, cried, "By Allah, O my lady, it must have been true, for he
 struck my forehead with a stone and cut it open from eye-brow to
 eye-brow; and here is the mark: so it must have been on wake." Then he
 added, "But perhaps I dreamt it when we fell asleep, I and thou, in
 each other's arms, for meseems it was as though I travelled to Damascus
 without tarbush and trousers and set up as a cook there." Then he was
 perplexed and considered for awhile, and said, "By Allah, I also
 fancied that I dressed a conserve of pomegranate-grains and put too
 little pepper in it. By Allah, I must have slept in the numero-cent and
 have seen the whole of this in a dream; but how long was that dream!"
 "Allah upon thee," said Sitt al-Husn, "and what more sawest thou?" So
 he related all to her; and presently said, "By Allah, had I not woke up
 they would have nailed me to a cross of wood!" "Wherefore?" asked she;
 and he answered, "For putting too little pepper in the conserve of
 pomegranate-grains, and meseemed they demolished my shop and dashed to
 pieces my pots and pans, destroyed all my stuff and put me in a box;
 then they sent for the carpenter to fashion a cross for me and would
 have crucified me thereon. Now Alhamdolillah! thanks be to Allah, for
 that all this happened to me in sleep, and not on wake." Sitt al-Husn
 laughed and clasped him to her bosom and he her to his: then he thought
 again and said, "By Allah, it could not be save while I was awake:
 truly I know not what to think of it." Then he lay him down and all the
 night he was bewildered about his case, now saying, "I was dreaming!"
 and then saying, "I was awake!", till morning, when his uncle Shams
 al-Din, the Wazir, came to him and saluted him. When Badr al-Din Hasan
 saw him he said, "By Allah, art thou not he who bade bind my hands
 behind me and smash my shop and nail me to a cross on a matter of
 conserved pomegranate-grains because the dish lacked a sufficiency of
 pepper?" Whereupon the Wazir said to him, "Know, O my son, that truth
 hath shown it soothfast and the concealed hath been revealed![481] Thou
 art the son of my brother, and I did all this with thee to certify
 myself that thou wast indeed he who went in unto my daughter that
 night. I could not be sure of this, till I saw that thou knewest the
 chamber and thy turband and thy trousers and thy gold and the papers in
 thy writing and in that of thy father, my brother; for I had never seen
 thee afore that and knew thee not; and as to thy mother I have
 prevailed upon her to come with me from Bassorah." So saying, he threw
 himself on his nephew's breast and wept for joy; and Badr al-Din Hasan,
 hearing these words from his uncle, marvelled with exceeding marvel and
 fell on his neck and also shed tears for excess of delight. Then said
 the Wazir to him, "O my son, the sole cause of all this is what passed
 between me and thy sire;" and he told him the manner of his father
 wayfaring to Bassorah and all that had occurred to part them. Lastly
 the Wazir sent for Ajib; and when his father saw him he cried, "And
 this is he who struck me with the stone!" Quoth the Wazir "This is thy
 son!" And Badr al-Din Hasan threw himself upon his boy and began
 repeating:—

 Long have I wept o'er severance' ban and bane, ✿ Long from mine eyelids
    tear-rills rail and rain:
 And vowèd I if Time re-union bring ✿ My tongue from name of "Severance"
    I'll restrain:
 Joy hath o'ercome me to this stress that I ✿ From joy's revulsion to
    shed tears am fain:
 Ye are so trained to tears, O eyne of me! ✿ You weep with pleasure as
    you weep with pain.[482]

 When he had ended his verse his mother came in and threw herself upon
 him and began reciting:—

        When we met we complained, ✿ Our hearts were sore wrung:
        But plaint is not pleasant ✿ Fro' messenger's tongue.

 Then she wept and related to him what had befallen her since his
 departure, and he told her what he had suffered, and they thanked Allah
 Almighty for their reunion. Two days after his arrival the Wazir Shams
 al-Din went in to the Sultan and, kissing the ground between his hands,
 greeted him with the greeting due to Kings. The Sultan rejoiced at his
 return and his face brightened and, placing him hard by his side,[483]
 asked him to relate all he had seen in his wayfaring and whatso had
 betided him in his going and coming. So the Wazir told him all that had
 passed from first to last and the Sultan said, "Thanks be to Allah for
 thy victory[484] and the winning of thy wish and thy safe return to thy
 children and thy people! And now I needs must see the son of thy
 brother, Hasan of Bassorah, so bring him to the audience-hall
 to-morrow." Shams al-Din replied, "Thy slave shall stand in thy
 presence to-morrow, Inshallah, if it be God's will." Then he saluted
 him and, returning to his own house, informed his nephew of the
 Sultan's desire to see him, whereto replied Hasan, whilome the
 Bassorite, "The slave is obedient to the orders of his lord." And the
 result was that next day he accompanied his uncle, Shams al-Din, to the
 Divan; and, after saluting the Sultan and doing him reverence in most
 ceremonious obeisance and with most courtly obsequiousness, he began
 improvising these verses:—

 The first in rank to kiss the ground shall deign ✿ Before you, and all
    ends and aims attain:
 You are Honour's fount; and all that hope of you, ✿ Shall gain more
    honour than Hope hoped to gain.

 The Sultan smiled and signed to him to sit down. So he took a seat
 close to his uncle, Shams al-Din, and the King asked him his name.
 Quoth Badr al-Din Hasan, "The meanest of thy slaves is known as Hasan
 the Bassorite, who is instant in prayer for thee day and night." The
 Sultan was pleased at his words and, being minded to test his learning
 and prove his good breeding, asked him, "Dost thou remember any verses
 in praise of the mole on the cheek?" He answered, "I do," and began
 reciting:—

 When I think of my love and our parting-smart, ✿ My groans go forth and
    my tears upstart:
 He's a mole that reminds me in colour and charms ✿ O' the black o' the
    eye and the grain[485] of the heart.

 The King admired and praised the two couplets and said to him, "Quote
 something else; Allah bless thy sire and may thy tongue never tire!" So
 he began:—

 That cheek-mole's spot they evened with a grain ✿ Of musk, nor did they
    here the simile strain:
 Nay, marvel at the face comprising all ✿ Beauty, nor falling short by
    single grain.

 The King shook with pleasure[486] and said to him, "Say more: Allah
 bless thy days!" So he began:—

 O you whose mole on cheek enthroned recalls ✿ A dot of musk upon a
    stone of ruby,
 Grant me your favours! Be not stone at heart! ✿ Core of my heart whose
    only sustenance _you_ be!

 Quoth the King, "Fair comparison, O Hasan![487] thou hast spoken
 excellently well and hast proved thyself accomplished in every
 accomplishment! Now explain to me how many meanings be there in the
 Arabic language[488] for the word _Khál_ or _mole_." He replied, "Allah
 keep the King! Seven and fifty and some by tradition say fifty." Said
 the Sultan, "Thou sayest sooth," presently adding, "Hast thou knowledge
 as to the points of excellence in beauty?" "Yes," answered Badr al-Din
 Hasan, "Beauty consisteth in brightness of face, clearness of
 complexion, shapeliness of nose, gentleness of eyes, sweetness of
 mouth, cleverness of speech, slenderness of shape and seemliness of all
 attributes." But the acme of beauty is in the hair and, indeed,
 al-Shiháb the Hijazi hath brought together all these items in his
 doggrel verse of the metre Rajaz[489] and it is this:—

 Say thou to skin "Be soft," to face "Be fair;" ✿ And gaze, nor shall
    they blame howso thou stare:
 Fine nose in Beauty's list is high esteemed; ✿ Nor less an eye full,
    bright and debonnair
 Eke did they well to laud the lovely lips ✿ (Which e'en the sleep of me
    will never spare);
 A winning tongue, a stature tall and straight;[490] ✿ A seemly union of
    gifts rarest rare:
 But Beauty's acme in the hair one views it; ✿ So hear my strain and
    with some few excuse it!

 The Sultan was captivated by his converse and, regarding him as a
 friend, asked, "What meaning is there in the saw "Shurayh is foxier
 than the fox"?" And he answered, "Know, O King (whom Almighty Allah
 keep!) that the legist Shurayh[491] was wont, during the days of the
 plague, to make a visitation to Al-Najaf; and, whenever he stood up to
 pray, there came a fox which would plant himself facing him and which,
 by mimicking his movements, distracted him from his devotions. Now when
 this became longsome to him, one day he doffed his shirt and set it
 upon a cane and shook out the sleeves; then placing his turband on the
 top and girding its middle with a shawl, he stuck it up in the place
 where he used to pray. Presently up trotted the fox according to his
 custom and stood over against the figure, whereupon Shurayh came behind
 him, and took him." Hence the sayer saith, "Shurayh is foxier than the
 fox." When the Sultan heard Badr al-Din Hasan's explanation he said to
 his uncle, Shams al-Din, "Truly this the son of thy brother is perfect
 in courtly breeding and I do not think that his like can be found in
 Cairo." At this Hasan arose and kissed the ground before him and sat
 down again as a Mameluke should sit before his master. When the Sultan
 had thus assured himself of his courtly breeding and bearing and his
 knowledge of the liberal arts and belles-lettres, he joyed with
 exceeding joy and invested him with a splendid robe of honour and
 promoted him to an office whereby he might better his condition.[492]
 Then Badr al-Din Hasan arose and, kissing the ground before the King,
 wished him continuance of glory and asked leave to retire with his
 uncle, the Wazir Shams al-Din. The Sultan gave him leave and he issued
 forth and the two returned home, where food was set before them and
 they ate what Allah had given them. After finishing his meal Hasan
 repaired to the sitting-chamber of his wife, the Lady of Beauty, and
 told her what had past between him and the Sultan; whereupon quoth she,
 "He cannot fail to make thee a cup-companion and give thee largesse in
 excess and load thee with favours and bounties; so shalt thou, by
 Allah's blessing, dispread, like the greater light, the rays of thy
 perfection wherever thou be, on shore or on sea." Said he to her, "I
 purpose to recite a Kasídah, an ode, in his praise, that he may
 redouble in affection for me." "Thou art right in thine intent," she
 answered, "so gather thy wits together and weigh thy words, and I shall
 surely see my husband favoured with his highest favour." Thereupon
 Hasan shut himself up and composed these couplets on a solid base and
 abounding in inner grace and copied them out in a handwriting of the
 nicest taste. They are as follows:—

 Mine is a Chief who reached most haught estate, ✿ Treading the pathways
    of the good and great:
 His justice makes all regions safe and sure, ✿ And against froward foes
    bars every gate:
 Bold lion, hero, saint, e'en if you call ✿ Seraph or Sovran[493] he
    with all may rate!
 The poorest suppliant rich from him returns, ✿ All words to praise him
    were inadequate.
 He to the day of peace is saffron Morn, ✿ And murky Night in furious
    warfare's bate.
  Bow 'neath his gifts our necks, and by his deeds ✿ As King of
     freeborn[494] souls he 'joys his state:
 Allah increase for us his term of years, ✿ And from his lot avert all
    risks and fears!

 When he had finished transcribing the lines, he despatched them, in
 charge of one of his uncle's slaves, to the Sultan, who perused them
 and his fancy was pleased; so he read them to those present and all
 praised them with the highest praise. Thereupon he sent for the writer
 to his sitting chamber and said to him, "Thou art from this day forth
 my boon-companion and I appoint to thee a monthly solde of a thousand
 dirhams, over and above that I bestowed on thee aforetime." So Hasan
 rose and, kissing the ground before the King several times, prayed for
 the continuance of his greatness and glory and length of life and
 strength. Thus Badr al-Din Hasan the Bassorite waxed high in honour and
 his fame flew forth to many regions and he abode in all comfort and
 solace and delight of life with his uncle and his own folk till Death
 overtook him. When the Caliph Harun al-Rashid heard this story from the
 mouth of his Wazir, Ja'afar the Barmecide, he marvelled much and said,
 "It behoves that these stories be written in letters of liquid gold."
 Then he set the slave at liberty and assigned to the youth who had
 slain his wife such a monthly stipend as sufficed to make his life
 easy; he also gave him a concubine from amongst his own slave-girls and
 the young man became one of his cup-companions. "Yet this story"
 (continued Shahrazad) "is in no wise stranger than the tale of the
 Tailor and the Hunchback and the Jew and the Reeve and the Nazarene,
 and what betided them." Quoth the King, "And what may that be?" So
 Shahrazad began, in these words,[495]

-----

Footnote 363:

   Arab. "Khila'ah" prop. what a man strips from his person: gen. an
   honorary gift. It is something more than the "robe of honour" of our
   chivalrous romances, as it includes a horse, a sword (often
   gold-hilted), a black turban (amongst the Abbasides) embroidered with
   gold, a violet-coloured mantle, a waist-shawl and a gold neck-chain
   and shoe-buckles.

Footnote 364:

   Arab. "Izá," _i.e._ the visits of condolence and so forth which are
   long and terribly wearisome in the Moslem East.

Footnote 365:

   Arab. "Mahr," the money settled by the man before marriage on the
   woman and without which the contract is not valid. Usually half of it
   is paid down on the marriage-day and the other half when the husband
   dies or divorces his wife. But if she take a divorce she forfeits her
   right to it, and obscene fellows, especially Persians, often compel
   her to demand divorce by unnatural and preposterous use of her
   person.

Footnote 366:

   Bismillah here means "Thou art welcome to it."

Footnote 367:

   Arab. "Bassak," half Pers. (bas=enough) and—ak=thou; for thee. "Bas"
   sounds like our "buss" (to kiss) and there are sundry good old
   Anglo-Indian jokes of feminine mistakes on the subject.

Footnote 368:

   This saving clause makes the threat worse. The scene between the two
   brothers is written with characteristic Arab humour; and it is true
   to nature. In England we have heard of a man who separated from his
   wife because he wished to dine at six and she preferred half-past
   six.

Footnote 369:

   Arab. "Misr" (vulg. Masr). The word, which comes of a very ancient
   house, was applied to the present Capital about the time of its
   conquest by the Osmanli Turks A.H. 923=1517.

Footnote 370:

   The Arab. "Jízah,"=skirt, edge; the modern village is the site of an
   ancient Egyptian city, as the "Ghizah inscription" proves (Brugsch,
   History of Egypt, ii. 415).

Footnote 371:

   Arab. "Watan" literally meaning "birth-place" but also used for
   "patria, native country"; thus "Hubb al-Watan"=patriotism. The Turks
   pronounce it "Vatan," which the French have turned into Va-t'en!

Footnote 372:

   Arab. "Zarzariyah"=the colour of a stare or starling (Zurzúr).

Footnote 373:

   Now a Railway Station on the Alexandria-Cairo line.

Footnote 374:

   Even as late as 1852, when I first saw Cairo, the city was girt by
   waste lands and the climate was excellent. Now cultivation comes up
   to the house walls; while the Mahmudiyah Canal, the planting the
   streets with avenues and over-watering have seriously injured it;
   those who want the air of former Cairo must go to Thebes. Gout,
   rheumatism and hydrophobia (before unknown) have become common of
   late years.

Footnote 375:

   This is the popular pronunciation: Yákút calls it "Bilbís."

Footnote 376:

   An outlying village on the "Long Desert," between Cairo and
   Palestine.

Footnote 377:

   Arab. "Al-Kuds"=holiness. There are few cities which in our day have
   less claim to this title than Jerusalem; and, curious to say, the
   "Holy Land" shows Jews, Christians and Moslems all in their worst
   form. The only religion (if it can be called one) which produces men
   in Syria is the Druse. "Heiligen-landes Jüden" are proverbial and
   nothing can be meaner than the Christians while the Moslems are famed
   for treachery.

Footnote 378:

   Arab. "Shamm al-hawá." In vulgar parlance to "smell the air" is to
   take a walk especially out of town. There is a peculiar Egyptian
   festival called "Shamm al-Nasím" (smelling the Zephyr) which begins
   on Easter-Monday (O.S.), thus corresponding with the Persian Nau-roz,
   vernal equinox and introducing the fifty days of "Khammasín" or
   "Mirisi" (hot desert winds). On awaking, the people smell and bathe
   their temples with vinegar in which an onion has been soaked and
   break their fast with a "fisikh" or dried "búri"=mullet from Lake
   Menzalah: the late Hekekiyan Bey had the fish-heads counted in one
   public garden and found 70,000. The rest of the day is spent out of
   doors "Gypsying," and families greatly enjoy themselves on these
   occasions. For a longer description see a paper by my excellent
   friend Yacoub Artin Pasha, in the Bulletin de l'Institut Égyptien,
   2nd series, No. 4, Cairo, 1884. I have noticed the Mirisi
   (Southwester) and other winds in the Land of Midian, i., 23.

Footnote 379:

   So in the days of the "Mameluke Beys" in Egypt a man of rank would
   not cross the street on foot.

Footnote 380:

   Arab. Basrah. The city now in decay and not to flourish again till
   the advent of the Euphrates Valley R.R., is a modern place, founded
   in A.H. 15, by the Caliph Omar upon the Aylah, a feeder of the
   Tigris. Here, according to Al-Hariri, the "whales and the lizards
   meet;" and, as the tide affects the river,

               Its stream shows prodigy, ebbing and flowing.

   In its far-famed market-place, Al-Marbad, poems used to be recited;
   and the city was famous for its mosques and Saint-shrines, fair women
   and school of Grammar which rivalled that of Kúfah. But already in
   Al-Hariri's day (nat. A.H. 446=A.D. 1030) Baghdad had drawn off much
   of its population.

Footnote 381:

   This fumigation (Bukhúr) is still used. A little incense or perfumed
   wood is burnt upon an open censer (Mibkharah) of earthenware or
   metal, and passed round, each guest holding it for a few moments
   under his beard. In the Somali Country, the very home of incense,
   both sexes fumigate the whole person after carnal intercourse. Lane
   (Mod. Egypt, chapt. viii.) gives an illustration of the Mibkharah.

Footnote 382:

   The reader of The Nights will remark that the merchant is often a
   merchant-prince, consorting and mating with the highest dignitaries.
   Even amongst the Romans, a race of soldiers, statesmen and lawyers,
   "mercatura" on a large scale was "not to be vituperated." In
   Boccaccio (x. 19) they are netti e delicati uomini. England is
   perhaps the only country which has made her fortune by trade, and
   much of it illicit trade, like that in slaves which built Liverpool
   and Bristol, and which yet disdains or affects to disdain the trader.
   But the unworthy prejudice is disappearing with the last generation,
   and men who formerly would have half starved as curates and ensigns,
   barristers and _carabins_ are now only too glad to become merchants.

Footnote 383:

   These lines in the Calc. and Bul. Edit. have already occurred (Night
   vii.) but such carelessness is characteristic despite the proverb,
   "In repetition is no fruition." I quote Torrens (p. 60) by way of
   variety. As regards the anemone (here called a tulip) being named
   "Shakík"=fissure, I would conjecture that it derives from the flower
   often forming long lines of red like stripes of blood in the
   landscape. Travellers in Syria always observe this.

Footnote 384:

   Such an address to a royalty (Eastern) even in the present day, would
   be a passport to future favours.

Footnote 385:

   In England the man marries and the woman is married: there is no such
   distinction in Arabia.

Footnote 386:

   "Sultan" (and its corruption "Soldan") etymologically means lord,
   victorious, ruler, ruling over. In Arabia it is a not uncommon proper
   name; and as a title it is taken by a host of petty kinglets. The
   Abbaside Caliphs (as Al-Wásik who has been noticed) formally created
   these Sultans as their regents. Al-Tá'i bi'llah (regn. A.H. 363=974),
   invested the famous Sabuktagin with the office; and, as
   Alexander-Sikandar was wont to do, fastened for him two flags, one of
   silver, after the fashion of nobles, and the other of gold, as
   Viceroy-designate. Sabuktagin's son, the famous Mahmúd of the
   Ghaznavite dynasty in A.H. 393=1002, was the first to adopt "Sultan"
   as an independent title some two hundred years after the death of
   Harun al-Rashid. In old writers we have the Soldan of Egypt, the
   Soudan of Persia, and the Sowdan of Babylon; three modifications of
   one word.

Footnote 387:

   _i.e._ he was a "Háfiz," one who commits to memory the whole of the
   Koran. It is a serious task and must be begun early. I learnt by rote
   the last "Juzw" (or thirtieth part) and found that quite enough. This
   is the vulgar use of "Hafiz": technically and theologically it means
   the third order of Traditionists (the total being five) who know by
   heart 300,000 traditions of the Prophet with their ascriptions. A
   curious "spiritualist" book calls itself "Hafed, Prince of Persia,"
   proving by the very title that the Spirits are equally ignorant of
   Arabic and Persian.

Footnote 388:

   Here again the Cairo Edit. repeats the six couplets already given in
   Night xvii. I take them from Torrens (p. 163).

Footnote 389:

   This naïve admiration of beauty in either sex characterised our
   chivalrous times. Now it is mostly confined to "professional
   beauties" of what is conventionally called the "fair sex"; as if
   there could be any comparison between the beauty of man and the
   beauty of woman, the Apollo Belvidere with the Venus de Medici.

Footnote 390:

   Arab. "Shásh" (in Pers. urine), a light turband generally of muslin.

Footnote 391:

   This is a _lieu commun_ of Eastern worldly wisdom. Quite true! Very
   unadvisable to dive below the surface of one's acquaintances, but
   such intimacy is like marriage of which Johnson said, "Without it
   there is no pleasure in life."

Footnote 392:

   The lines are attributed to the famous Al-Mutanabbi=the claimant to
   "Prophecy," of whom I have given a few details in my Pilgrimage (iii.
   60, 62). He led the life of a true poet, somewhat Chauvinistic
   withal; and, rather than run away, was killed in A.H. 354=965.

Footnote 393:

   Arab. "Nabíz"=wine of raisins or dates; any fermented liquor; from a
   root to "press out" in Syriac, like the word "Talmiz" (or Tilmiz,
   says the Kashf al-Ghurrah) a pupil, student. Date-wine (fermented
   from the fruit, not the Tádi, or juice of the stem, our "toddy") is
   called Fazikh. Hence the Masjid al-Fazikh at Al-Medinah where the
   Ansar or Auxiliaries of that city were sitting cup in hand when they
   heard of the revelation forbidding inebriants and poured the liquor
   upon the ground (Pilgrimage ii. 322).

Footnote 394:

   Arab. "Huda"=direction (to the right way), salvation, a word
   occurring in the Opening Chapter of the Koran. Hence to a Kafir who
   offers the Salam-salutation many Moslems reply "Allah yahdík"=Allah
   direct thee! (_i.e._ make thee a Moslem), instead of Allah
   yusallimak=Allah lead thee to salvation. It is the root word of the
   Mahdi and Mohdi.

Footnote 395:

   These lines have already occurred in The First Kalandar's Story
   (Night xi). I quote by way of change and with permission Mr. Payne's
   version (i. 93).

Footnote 396:

   Arab. "Farajíyah," a long-sleeved robe worn by the learned (Lane, M.
   E., chapt. i.)

Footnote 397:

   Arab. "Sarráf" (vulg. Sayrafi), whence the Anglo-Indian "Shroff," a
   familiar corruption.

Footnote 398:

   Arab. "Yahúdí" which is less polite than "Banú Isráíl"=Children of
   Israel. So in Christendom "Israelite" when in favour and "Jew" (with
   an adjective or a participle) when nothing is wanted of him.

Footnote 399:

   Also called "Ghilmán"=the beautiful youths appointed to serve the
   True Believers in Paradise. The Koran says (chapt. lvi. 9 etc.)
   "Youths, which shall continue in their bloom for ever, shall go round
   about to attend them, with goblets, and beakers, and a cup of flowing
   wine," etc. Mohammed was an Arab (not a Persian, a born pederast) and
   he was too fond of women to be charged with love of boys: even
   Tristram Shandy (vol. vii. chapt. 7; "No, quoth a third; the
   gentleman has been committing——") knew that the two tastes are
   incompatibles. But this and other passages in the Koran have given
   the Chevaliers de la Paille a hint that the use of boys, like that of
   wine, here forbidden, will be permitted in Paradise.

Footnote 400:

   Which, by the by, is the age of an oldish old maid in Egypt. I much
   doubt puberty being there earlier than in England where our
   grandmothers married at fourteen. But Orientals are aware that the
   period of especial feminine devilry is between the first menstruation
   and twenty when, according to some, every girl is a "possible
   murderess." So they wisely marry her and get rid of what is called
   the "lump of grief," the "domestic calamity"—a daughter. Amongst them
   we never hear of the abominable egotism and cruelty of the English
   mother, who disappoints her daughter's womanly cravings in order to
   keep her at home for her own comfort; and an "old maid" in the house,
   especially a stout, plump old maid, is considered not "respectable."
   The ancient virgin is known by being lean and scraggy; and perhaps
   this diagnosis is correct.

Footnote 401:

   This prognostication of destiny by the stars and a host of follies
   that end in-mancy is. an intricate and extensive subject. Those who
   would study it are referred to chapt. xiv. of the "Qanoon-e-Islam, or
   the Customs of the Mussulmans of India; etc., etc., by Jaffur
   Shurreeff and translated by G. A. Herklots, M.D. of Madras." This
   excellent work first appeared in 1832 (Allen and Co., London) and
   thus it showed the way to Lane's "Modern Egyptians" (1833-35). The
   name was unfortunate as "Kuzzilbash" (which rhymed to guzzle and
   hash), and kept the book back till a second edition appeared in 1863
   (Madras: J. Higginbotham).

Footnote 402:

   Arab. "Bárid," lit. cold: metaph. vain, foolish, insipid.

Footnote 403:

   Not to "spite thee" but "in spite of thee." The phrase is still used
   by high and low.

Footnote 404:

   Arab. "Ahdab," the common hunchback: in classical language the Gobbo
   in the text would be termed "Ak'as" from "Ka'as," one with protruding
   back and breast; sometimes used for hollow back and protruding
   breast.

Footnote 405:

   This is the custom with such gentry, who, when they see a likely man
   sitting, are allowed by custom to ride astraddle upon his knees with
   most suggestive movements, till he buys them off. These Ghawází are
   mostly Gypsies who pretend to be Moslems; and they have been confused
   with the Almahs or Moslem dancing-girls proper (Awálim, plur. of
   Alimah, a learned feminine) by a host of travellers. They call
   themselves Barámikah or Barmecides only to affect Persian origin.
   Under native rule they were perpetually being banished from and
   returning to Cairo (Pilgrimage i., 202). Lane (M. E., chapts. xviii.
   and xix.) discusses the subject, and would derive Al'mah, often so
   pronounced, from Heb. Almah, girl, virgin, singing girl, hence he
   would translate Al-Alamoth shir (Psalm xlvi.) and Nebalim al-alamoth
   (1 Chron., xv. 20) by a "song for singing-girls" and "harps for
   singing-girls." He quotes also St. Jerome as authority that Alma in
   Punic (Phœnician) signified a virgin, not a common article, I may
   observe, amongst singing-girls. I shall notice in a future page
   Burckhardt's description of the Ghawazi, p. 173, "Arabic Proverbs;"
   etc., etc. Second Edition. London: Quaritch, 1875.

Footnote 406:

   I need hardly describe the Tarbúsh, a corruption of the Pers.
   "Sar-púsh" (head-cover) also called "Fez," from its old home; and
   "Tarbrush" by the travelling Briton. In old days it was a calotte
   worn under the turban; and it was protected from scalp-perspiration
   by an "Arakiyah" (Pers. Arak-chín), a white skull-cap. Now it is worn
   without either and as a head-dress nothing can be worse (Pilgrimage
   ii. 275.)

Footnote 407:

   Arab. "Tár.": the custom still prevails. Lane (M. E., chapt. xviii.)
   describes and figures this hoop-drum.

Footnote 408:

   The couch on which she sits while being displayed. It is her throne,
   for she is the Queen of the occasion, with all the Majesty of
   Virginity.

Footnote 409:

   This is a solemn "chaff;" such liberties being permitted at weddings
   and festive occasions.

Footnote 410:

   The pre-Islamític dynasty of Al-Yaman in Arabia Felix, a region
   formerly famed for wealth and luxury. Hence the mention of Yamani
   work. The caravans from Sana'á, the capital, used to carry patterns
   of vases to be made in China and bring back the porcelains at the end
   of the third year: these are the Arabic inscriptions which have
   puzzled so many collectors. The Tobba, or Successors, were the old
   Himyarite Kings, a dynastic name like Pharaoh, Kisra (Persia), Negush
   (Abyssinia), Khakan or Khan (Tartary), etc., who claimed to have
   extended their conquests to Samarcand and made war on China. Any
   history of Arabia (as Crichton I., chapt iv.) may be consulted for
   their names and annals. I have been told by Arabs that "Tobba" (or
   Tubba) is still used in the old Himyar-land=the Great or the Chief.

Footnote 411:

   Lane and Payne (as well as the Bres. Edit.) both render the word "to
   kiss her," but this would be clean contrary to Moslem usage.

Footnote 412:

   _i.e._ he was full of rage which he concealed.

Footnote 413:

   The Hindus (as the Katha shows) compare this swimming gait with an
   elephant's roll.

Footnote 414:

   Arab. "Fitnah," a word almost as troublesome as "Adab." Primarily,
   revolt seduction, mischief: then a beautiful girl (or boy), and
   lastly a certain aphrodisiac perfume extracted from mimosa-flowers
   (Pilgrimage i., 118).

Footnote 415:

   Lit. burst the "gall-bladder:" In this and in the "liver" allusions I
   dare not be baldly literal.

Footnote 416:

   Arab. "Usfur" the seeds of Carthamus tinctorius=Safflower (Forskål,
   Flora, etc. lv.). The seeds are crushed for oil and the flowers,
   which must be gathered by virgins or the colour will fail, are
   extensively used for dyeing in Southern Arabia and Eastern Africa.

Footnote 417:

   On such occasions Miss Modesty shuts her eyes and looks as if about
   to faint.

Footnote 418:

   After either evacuation the Moslem is bound to wash or sand the part;
   first however he should apply three pebbles, or potsherds or clods of
   earth. Hence the allusion in the Koran (chapt. ix.), "men who love to
   be purified." When the Prophet was questioning the men of Kuba, where
   he founded a mosque (Pilgrimage ii., 215), he asked them about their
   legal ablutions, especially after evacuation; and they told him that
   they used three stones before washing. Moslems and Hindus (who prefer
   water mixed with earth) abhor the unclean and unhealthy use of paper
   without ablution; and the people of India call Europeans
   draught-houses, by way of opprobrium, "Kághaz-khánah"=paper closets.
   Most old Anglo-Indians, however, learn to use water.

Footnote 419:

   "Miao" or "Mau" is the generic name of the cat in the Egyptian of the
   hieroglyphs.

Footnote 420:

   Arab. "Ya Mash'úm" addressed to an evil spirit.

Footnote 421:

   "Heehaw!" as we should say. The Bresl. Edit. makes the cat cry "Nauh!
   Nauh!" and the ass-colt "Manu! Manu!" I leave these onomatopoeics as
   they are in Arabic; they are curious, showing the unity in variety of
   hearing inarticulate sounds. The bird which is called "Whip poor
   Will" in the U.S., is known to the Brazilians as "Joam corta páo"
   (John cut wood); so differently do they hear the same notes.

Footnote 422:

   It is usually a slab of marble with a long slit in front and a round
   hole behind. The text speaks of a Kursi (=stool); but this is now
   unknown to native houses which have not adopted European fashions.

Footnote 423:

   This again is chaff as she addresses the Hunchback. The Bul. Edit.
   has "O Abu Shiháb" (Father of the shooting-star=evil spirit); the
   Bresl. Edit. "O son of a heap! O son of a Something!" (al-Aísh, a
   vulgarism).

Footnote 424:

   As the reader will see, Arab ideas of "fun" and practical jokes are
   of the largest, putting the Hibernian to utter rout, and comparing
   favourably with those recorded in Don Quixote.

Footnote 425:

   Arab. "Saráwil" a corruption of the Pers. "Sharwál"; popularly called
   "libás" which, however, may also mean clothing in general and
   especially outer-clothing. I translate "bag-trousers" and
   "petticoat-trousers," the latter being the divided skirt of our
   future. In the East, where Common Sense, not Fashion, rules dress,
   men, who have a protuberance to be concealed, wear petticoats and
   women wear trousers. The feminine article is mostly baggy but
   sometimes, as in India, _collant_-tight. A quasi-sacred part of it is
   the inkle, tape or string, often a most magnificent affair, with
   tassels of pearl and precious stones; and "laxity in the
   trouser-string" is equivalent to the loosest conduct. Upon the
   subject of "libás," "sarwál" and its variants the curious reader will
   consult Dr. Dozy's "Dictionnaire Détaillé des Noms des Vêtements chez
   les Arabes," a most valuable work.

Footnote 426:

   The turban out of respect is not put upon the ground (Lane, M. E.,
   chapt. i.).

Footnote 427:

   Arab. "Madfa'" showing the modern date or the modernization of the
   tale. In Lebid "Madáfi'" (plur. of Madfa') means water-courses or
   leats.

Footnote 428:

   In Arab, the "he" is a "she;" and Habíb ("friend") is the Attic
   φίλος, a euphemism for lover. This will occur throughout The Nights.
   So the Arabs use a phrase corresponding with the Stoic φιλε~ι _i.e._
   is wont, is fain.

Footnote 429:

   Part of the Azán, or call to prayer.

Footnote 430:

   Arab. "Shiháb," these meteors being the flying shafts shot at evil
   spirits who approach too near Heaven. The idea doubtless arose from
   the showers of August and November meteors (The Perseides and
   Taurides) which suggest a battle raging in upper air. Christendom
   also has its superstition concerning them and called those of August
   the "fiery tears of Saint Lawrence," whose festival was on August 10.

Footnote 431:

   Arab. "Tákiyah"=Pers. Arak-chin; the calotte worn under the Fez. It
   is, I have said, now obsolete and the red woollen cap (mostly made in
   Europe) is worn over the hair; an unclean practice.

Footnote 432:

   Often the effect of cold air after a heated room.

Footnote 433:

   _i.e._ He was not a Eunuch, as the people guessed.

Footnote 434:

   In Arab, "this night" for the reason before given.

Footnote 435:

   Meaning especially the drink prepared of the young leaves and florets
   of Cannabis Sativa. The word literally means "dry grass" or
   "herbage." This intoxicant was much used by magicians to produce
   ecstacy and thus to "deify themselves and receive the homage of the
   genii and spirits of nature."

Footnote 436:

   Torrens, being an Irishman, translates "and woke in the morning
   sleeping at Damascus."

Footnote 437:

   Arab. "Labbayka," the cry technically called "Talbiyah" and used by
   those entering Meccah (Pilgrimage iii. 125-232). I shall also
   translate it by "Adsum." The full cry is:—

        Here am I, O Allah, here am I!
        No partner hast Thou, here am I:
        Verily the praise and the grace and the kingdom are thine:
        No partner hast Thou: here am I!

   A single Talbiyah is a "Shart" or positive condition: and its
   repetition is a Sunnat or Custom of the Prophet. See Night xci.

Footnote 438:

   The staple abuse of the vulgar is cursing parents and relatives,
   especially feminine, with specific allusions to their "shame." And
   when dames of high degree are angry, Nature, in the East as in the
   West, sometimes speaks out clearly enough, despite Mistress Chapone
   and all artificial restrictions.

Footnote 439:

   A great beauty in Arabia and the reverse in Denmark, Germany and
   Slav-land, where it is a sign of being a were-wolf or a vampire. In
   Greece also it denotes a "Brukolak" or vampire.

Footnote 440:

   This is not physiologically true: a bride rarely conceives the first
   night, and certainly would not know that she had conceived. Moreover
   the number of courses furnished by the bridegroom would be against
   conception. It is popularly said that a young couple often undoes in
   the morning what it has done during the night.

Footnote 441:

   Torrens (Notes, xxiv.) quotes "Fleisher" upon the word "Ghamghama"
   (Diss. Crit. de Glossis Habichtionis), which he compares with
   "Dumduma" and "Humbuma" determining them to be onomatopoeics, "an
   incomplete and an obscure murmur of a sentence as it were lingering
   between the teeth and lips and therefore difficult to be understood."
   Of this family is "Taghúm"; not used in modern days. In my Pilgrimage
   (i. 313) I have noticed another, "Khyas, Khyas!" occurring in a Hizb
   al-Bahr (Spell of the Sea). Herklots gives a host of them; and their
   sole characteristics are harshness and strangeness of sound, uniting
   consonants which are not joined in Arabic. The old Egyptians and
   Chaldeans had many such words composed at will for theurgic
   operations.

Footnote 442:

   This may mean either "it is of Mosul fashion" or, it is of muslin.

Footnote 443:

   To the English reader these lines would appear the reverse of
   apposite; but Orientals have their own ways of application, and all
   allusions to Badawi partings are effective and affecting. The
   civilised poets of Arab cities throw the charm of the Desert over
   their verse by images borrowed from its scenery, the dromedary, the
   mirage and the well, as naturally as certain of our bards who hated
   the country, babbled of purling rills, etc. Thoroughly to feel Arabic
   poetry one must know the Desert (Pilgrimage iii., 63).

Footnote 444:

   In those days the Arabs and the Portuguese recorded everything which
   struck them, as the Chinese and Japanese do in our times. And yet we
   complain of the amount of our modern writing!

Footnote 445:

   This is mentioned because it is the act preliminary to naming the
   babe.

Footnote 446:

   Arab. "Kahramánát" from Kahramán, an old Persian hero who conversed
   with the Simurgh-Griffon. Usually the word is applied to
   women-at-arms who defend the Harem, like the Urdu-begani of India,
   whose services were lately offered to England (1885), or the
   "Amazons" of Dahome.

Footnote 447:

   Meaning he grew as fast in one day as other children in a month.

Footnote 448:

   Arab. Al-Aríf; the tutor, the assistant-master.

Footnote 449:

   Arab. "Ibn harám," a common term of abuse; and not a factual
   reflection on the parent. I have heard a mother apply the term to her
   own son.

Footnote 450:

   Arab. "Khanjar" from the Persian, a syn. with the Arab. "Jambiyah."
   It is noticed in my Pilgrimage iii., pp. 72, 75. To "silver the
   dagger," means to become a rich man. From "Khanjar," not from its
   fringed loop or strap, I derive our silly word "hanger." Dr.
   Steingass would connect it with Germ. Fänger, _e.g._, Hirschfänger.

Footnote 451:

   Again we have "Dastur" for "Izn."

Footnote 452:

   Arab. "Iklím"; the seven climates of Ptolemy.

Footnote 453:

   Arab. "Al-Ghadir," lit. a place where water sinks, a lowland: here
   the drainage-lakes east of Damascus into which the Baradah (Abana?)
   discharges. The higher eastern plain is "Al-Ghutah" before noticed.

Footnote 454:

   The "Plain of Pebbles" still so termed at Damascus; an open space
   west of the city.

Footnote 455:

   Every Guide-book, even the Reverend Porter's "Murray," gives a long
   account of this Christian Church 'verted to a Mosque.

Footnote 456:

   Arab. "Nabút"; Pilgrimage i. 336.

Footnote 457:

   The Bres. Edit. says, "would have knocked him into Al-Yaman"
   (Southern Arabia) something like our slang phrase "into the middle of
   next week."

Footnote 458:

   Arab. "Khádim": lit. a servant, politely applied (like Aghá=master)
   to a castrato. These gentry wax furious if baldly called
   "Tawáshi"=Eunuch. A mauvais plaisant in Egypt used to call me The
   Agha because a friend had placed his wife under my charge.

Footnote 459:

   This sounds absurd enough in English, but Easterns always put
   themselves first for respect.

Footnote 460:

   In Arabic the World is feminine.

Footnote 461:

   Arab. "Sáhib"=lit. a companion; also a friend and especially applied
   to the Companions of Mohammed. Hence the Sunnis claim for them the
   honour of "friendship" with the Apostle; but the Shia'hs reply that
   the Arab says "Sahaba-hu'l-himár" (the Ass was his Sahib or
   companion). In the text it is a Wazirial title, in modern India it
   is=gentleman, _e.g._ "Sahib log" (the Sahib people) means their white
   conquerors, who, by the by, mostly mispronounce the word "Sáb."

Footnote 462:

   Arab. "Suwán," prop. Syenite, from Syene (Al-Suwan) but applied to
   flint and any hard stone.

Footnote 463:

   It was famous in the middle ages, and even now it is, perhaps, the
   most interesting to travellers after that "Sentina Gentium," the
   "Bhendi Bazar" of unromantic Bombay.

Footnote 464:

   "The Gate of the Gardens," in the northern wall, a Roman archway of
   the usual solid construction shaming not only our modern shams, but
   our finest masonry.

Footnote 465:

   Arab. "Al-Asr," which may mean either the hour or the prayer. It is
   also the moment at which the Guardian Angels relieve each other
   (Sale's Koran, chapt. v.).

Footnote 466:

   Arab. "Ya házá"=O this (one)! a somewhat slighting address equivalent
   to "Heus tu! O thou, whoever thou art." Another form is "Yá hú"=O he!
   Can this have originated Swift's "Yahoo?"

Footnote 467:

   Alluding to the τήρατα ("minor miracles which cause surprise")
   performed by Saints' tombs, the mildest form of thaumaturgy. One of
   them gravely recorded in the Dabistan (ii. 226) is that of the holy
   Jamen, who opened the Sámran or bead-bracelet from the arm of the
   beautiful Chistápá with member erect, "thus evincing his manly
   strength and his command over himself"(!)

Footnote 468:

   The River of Paradise, a _lieu commun_ of poets (Koran, chapt.
   cviii.): the water is whiter than milk or silver, sweeter than honey,
   smoother than cream, more odorous than musk; its banks are of
   chrysolite and it is drunk out of silver cups set around it thick as
   stars. Two pipes conduct it to the Prophet's Pond which is an exact
   square, one month's journey in compass. Kausar is spirituous like
   wine; Salsabil sweet like clarified honey; the Fount of Mildness is
   like milk and the Fount of Mercy like liquid crystal.

Footnote 469:

   The Moslem does not use the European basin because water which has
   touched an impure skin becomes impure. Hence it is poured out from a
   ewer ("ibrík" Pers. Abríz) upon the hands and falls into a basin
   ("tisht") with an open-worked cover.

Footnote 470:

   Arab. "Wahsh," a word of many meanings; nasty, insipid, savage, etc.
   The offside of a horse is called Wahshi opposed to Insi, the near
   side. The Amir Taymur ("Lord Iron") whom Europeans unwittingly call
   after his Persian enemies' nickname, "Tamerlane," _i.e._
   Taymur-i-lang, or limping Taymur, is still known as "Al-Wahsh" (the
   wild beast) at Damascus, where his Tartars used to bury men up to
   their necks and play at bowls with their heads for ninepins.

Footnote 471:

   For "grandson" as being more affectionate. Easterns have not yet
   learned that clever Western saying:—The enemies of our enemies are
   our friends.

Footnote 472:

   This was a simple bastinado on the back, not the more ceremonious
   affair of beating the feet-soles. But it is surprising what the
   Egyptians can bear; some of the rods used in the time of the Mameluke
   Beys are nearly as thick as a man's wrist.

Footnote 473:

   The woman-like spite of the eunuch intended to hurt the grandmother's
   feelings.

Footnote 474:

   The usual Cairene "chaff."

Footnote 475:

   A necessary precaution against poison (Pilgrimage i. 84, and iii.
   43).

Footnote 476:

   The Bresl. Edit. (ii. 108) describes the scene at greater length.

Footnote 477:

   The Bul. Edit. gives by mistake of diacritical points, "Zabdaniyah:"
   Raydaniyah is or rather was a camping ground to the North of Cairo.

Footnote 478:

   Arab. "La'abat"=a plaything, a puppet, a lay figure. Lane (i. 326)
   conjectures that the cross is so called because it resembles a man
   with arms extended. But Moslems never heard of the fanciful ideas of
   mediæval Christian divines who saw the cross everywhere and in
   everything. The former hold that Pharaoh invented the painful and
   ignominious punishment. (Koran, chapt. vii.)

Footnote 479:

   Here good blood, driven to bay, speaks out boldly. But, as a rule the
   humblest and mildest Eastern when in despair turns round upon his
   oppressors like a wild cat. Some of the criminals whom Fath Ali Shah
   of Persia put to death by chopping down the fork, beginning at the
   scrotum, abused his mother till the knife reached their vitals and
   they could no longer speak.

Footnote 480:

   These repeated "laughs" prove the trouble of his spirit. Noble Arabs
   "show their back-teeth" so rarely that their laughter is held worthy
   of being recorded by their biographers.

Footnote 481:

   A popular phrase, derived from the Koranic "Truth is come, and
   falsehood is vanished: for falsehood is of short continuance" (chapt.
   xvii.). It is an equivalent of our adaptation from 1 Esdras iv. 41,
   "Magna est veritas et prævalebit." But the great question still
   remains, What is Truth?

Footnote 482:

   In Night lxxv. these lines will occur with variants.

Footnote 483:

   This is always mentioned: the nearer the seat the higher the honour.

Footnote 484:

   Alluding to the phrase "Al-safar zafar"=voyaging is victory
   (Pilgrimage i., 127).

Footnote 485:

   Arab. "Habb;" alluding to the black drop in the human heart which the
   Archangel Gabriel removed from Mohammed by opening his breast.

Footnote 486:

   This phrase, I have said, often occurs: it alludes to the
   horripilation (Arab. Kush'arírah), horror or gooseflesh which, in
   Arab as in Hindu fables, is a symptom of great joy. So Boccaccio's
   "pelo arriciato" v., 8: Germ. Gänsehaut.

Footnote 487:

   Arab. "Hasanta ya Hasan"=Bene detto, Benedetto! the usual word-play
   vulgarly called "pun:" Hasan (not Hassan, as we _will_ write it)
   meaning "beautiful."

Footnote 488:

   Arab. "Loghah" also=a vocabulary, a dictionary; the Arabs had them by
   camel-loads.

Footnote 489:

   The seventh of the sixteen "Bahr" (metres) in Arabic prosody; the
   easiest because allowing the most licence and, consequently, a
   favourite for didactic, homiletic and gnomic themes. It means
   literally "agitated" and was originally applied to the rude song of
   the Cameleer. De Sacy calls this doggrel "the poet's ass" (Torrens,
   Notes xxvi.). It was the only metre in which Mohammed the Apostle
   ever spoke: he was no poet (Koran xxxvi., 69) but he occasionally
   recited a verse and recited it wrongly (Dabistan iii., 212). In
   Persian prosody Rajaz is the seventh of nineteen and has six distinct
   varieties (pp. 79-81, "Gladwin's Dissertations on Rhetoric," etc.
   Calcutta, 1801). I shall have more to say about it in the terminal
   Essay.

Footnote 490:

   "Her stature tall—I hate a dumpy woman" (Don Juan).

Footnote 491:

   A worthy who was Kazi of Kufah (Cufa) in the seventh century.
   Al-Najaf, generally entitled "Najaf al-Ashraf" (the Venerand) is the
   place where Ali, the son-in-law of Mohammed, lies or is supposed to
   lie buried, and has ever been a holy place to the Shi'ahs. I am not
   certain whether to translate "Sa'alab" by fox or jackal; the Arabs
   make scant distinction between them. "Abu Hosayn" (Father of the
   Fortlet) is certainly the fox, and as certainly "Sha'arhar" is the
   jackal from the Pehlevi Shagál or Shaghál.

Footnote 492:

   Usually by all manner of extortions and robbery, corruption and
   bribery, the ruler's motto being

                       Fiat _in_justitia ruat Cœlum.

   There is no more honest man than the Turkish peasant or the private
   soldier; but the process of deterioration begins when he is made a
   corporal and culminates in the Pasha. Moreover official dishonesty is
   permitted by public opinion, because it belongs to the condition of
   society. A man buys a place (as in England two centuries ago) and
   retains it by presents to the heads of offices. Consequently he must
   recoup himself in some way, and he mostly does so by grinding the
   faces of the poor and by spoiling the widow and the orphan. The
   radical cure is high pay; but that phase of society refuses to afford
   it.

Footnote 493:

   Arab. "Malik" (King) and "Malak" (angel) the words being written the
   same when lacking vowels and justifying the jingle.

Footnote 494:

   Arab. "Hurr"; the Latin "ingenuus," lit. freeborn; metaph. noble as
   opp. to a slave who is not expected to do great or good deeds. In
   pop. use it corresponds, like "Fatá," with our "gentleman."

Footnote 495:

   This is one of the best tales for humour and movement, and Douce and
   Madden show what a rich crop of fabliaux, whose leading incident was
   the disposal of a dead body, it produced.




                        _THE HUNCHBACK'S TALE._


 It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that there dwelt during times of
 yore, and years and ages long gone before, in a certain city of
 China,[496] a Tailor who was an open-handed man that loved pleasuring
 and merry making; and who was wont, he and his wife, to solace
 themselves from time to time with public diversions and amusements. One
 day they went out with the first of the light and were returning in the
 evening when they fell in with a Hunchback, whose semblance would draw
 a laugh from care and dispel the horrors of despair. So they went up to
 enjoy looking at him and invited him to go home with them and converse
 and carouse with them that night. He consented and accompanied them
 afoot to their home; whereupon the Tailor fared forth to the bazar
 (night having just set in) and bought a fried fish and bread and lemons
 and dry sweetmeats for dessert; and set the victuals before the
 Hunchback and they ate. Presently the Tailor's wife took a great fid of
 fish and gave it in a gobbet to the Gobbo, stopping his mouth with her
 hand and saying, "By Allah, thou must down with it at a single gulp;
 and I will not give thee time to chew it." So he bolted it; but therein
 was a stiff bone which stuck in his gullet and, his hour being come, he
 died.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
 permitted say.

                 Now when it was the Twenty-Fifth Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Tailor's
 wife gave the Hunchback that mouthful of fish which ended his term of
 days he died on the instant. Seeing this the Tailor cried aloud, "There
 is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah! Alas, that this poor
 wretch should have died in so foolish fashion at our hands!" and the
 woman rejoined, "Why this idle talk? Hast thou not heard his saying who
 said?—

 Why then waste I my time in grief, until ✿ I find no friend to bear my
    weight of woe?
 How sleep upon a fire that flames unquenched? ✿ Upon the flames to rest
    were hard enow!"

 Asked her husband, "And what shall I do with him?"; and she answered,
 "Rise and take him in thine arms and spread a silken kerchief over him;
 then I will fare forth, with thee following me, this very night and if
 thou meet any one say:—This is my son, and his mother and I are
 carrying him to the doctor that he may look at him." So he rose and
 taking the Hunchback in his arms bore him along the streets, preceded
 by his wife who kept crying, "O my son, Allah keep thee! what part
 paineth thee and where hath this small-pox[497] attacked thee?" So all
 who saw them said "'Tis a child sick of small-pox."[498] They went
 along asking for the physician's house till folk directed them to that
 of a leach which was a Jew. They knocked at the door, and there came
 down to them a black slave-girl who opened and, seeing a man bearing a
 babe, and a woman with him, said to them, "What is the matter?" "We
 have a little one with us," answered the Tailor's wife "and we wish to
 show him to the physician: so take this quarter dinar and give it to
 thy master and let him come down and see my son who is sore sick." The
 girl went up to tell her master, whereupon the Tailor's wife walked
 into the vestibule and said to her husband, "Leave the Hunchback here
 and let us fly for our lives." So the Tailor carried the dead man to
 the top of the stairs and propped him upright against the wall and ran
 away, he and his wife. Meanwhile the girl went in to the Jew and said
 to him, "At the door are a man and a woman with a sick child and they
 have given me a quarter-dinar for thee, that thou mayest go down and
 look at the little one and prescribe for it." As soon as the Jew saw
 the quarter-dinar he rejoiced and rose quickly in his greed of gain and
 went forth hurriedly in the dark; but hardly had he made a step when he
 stumbled on the corpse and threw it over, when it rolled to the bottom
 of the staircase. So he cried out to the girl to hurry up with the
 light, and she brought it, whereupon he went down and examining the
 Hunchback found that he was stone dead. So he cried out, "O for
 Esdras![499] O for Moses! O for Aaron! O for Joshua, son of Nun! O the
 Ten Commandments! I have stumbled against the sick one and he hath
 fallen downstairs and he is dead! How shall I get this man I have
 killed out of my house? O by the hoofs of the ass of Esdras!" Then he
 took up the body and, carrying it into the house, told his wife what
 had happened and she said to him, "Why dost thou sit still? If thou
 keep him here till day-break we shall both lose our lives. Let us two
 carry him to the terrace-roof and throw him over into the house of our
 neighbour, the Moslem, for if he abide there a night the dogs will come
 down on him from the adjoining terraces and eat him up." Now his
 neighbour was a Reeve, the controller of the Sultan's kitchen, and was
 wont to bring back great store of oil and fat and broken meats; but the
 cats and rats used to eat it, or, if the dogs scented a fat sheep's
 tail they would come down from the nearest roofs and tear at it; and on
 this wise the beasts had already damaged much of what he brought home.
 So the Jew and his wife carried the Hunchback up to the roof; and,
 letting him down by his hands and feet through the wind-shaft[500] into
 the Reeve's house, propped him up against the wall and went their ways.
 Hardly had they done this when the Reeve, who had been passing an
 evening with his friends hearing a recitation of the Koran, came home
 and opened the door and, going up with a lighted candle, found a son of
 Adam standing in the corner under the ventilator. When he saw this, he
 said, "Wah! by Allah, very good forsooth! He who robbeth my stuff is
 none other than a man." Then he turned to the Hunchback and said, "So
 'tis thou that stealest the meat and the fat! I thought it was the cats
 and dogs, and I kill the dogs and cats of the quarter and sin against
 them by killing them. And all the while 'tis thou comest down from the
 house terrace through the wind-shaft. But I will avenge myself upon
 thee with my own hand!" So he snatched up a heavy hammer and set upon
 him and smote him full on the breast and he fell down. Then he examined
 him and, finding that he was dead, cried out in horror, thinking that
 he had killed him, and said, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might
 save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!" And he feared for his life,
 and added, "Allah curse the oil and the meat and the grease and the
 sheep's tails to boot! How hath fate given this man his quietus at my
 hand!" Then he looked at the body and seeing it was that of a Gobbo,
 said, "Was it not enough for thee to be a hunchback,[501] but thou must
 likewise be a thief and prig flesh and fat! O thou Veiler,[502] deign
 to veil me with Thy curtain of concealment!" So he took him up on his
 shoulders and, going forth with him from his house about the latter end
 of the night, carried him to the nearest end of the bazar, where he set
 him up on his feet against the wall of a shop at the head of a dark
 lane, and left him and went away. After a while up came a
 Nazarene,[503] the Sultan's broker who, much bemused with liquor, was
 purposing for the Hammam-bath as his drunkenness whispered in his ear,
 "Verily the call to matins[504] is nigh." He came plodding along and
 staggering about till he drew near the Hunchback and squatted down to
 make water[505] over against him; when he happened to glance around and
 saw a man standing against the wall. Now some person had snatched off
 the Christian's turband[506] in the first of the night; so when he saw
 the Hunchback hard by he fancied that he also meant to steal his
 head-dress. Thereupon he clenched his fist and struck him on the neck,
 felling him to the ground, and called aloud to the watchman of the
 bazar, and came down on the body in his drunken fury and kept on
 belabouring and throttling the corpse. Presently the Charley came up
 and, finding a Nazarene kneeling on a Moslem and frapping him, asked,
 "What harm hath this one done?"; and the Broker answered, "The fellow
 meant to snatch off my turband." "Get up from him," quoth the watchman.
 So he arose and the Charley went up to the Hunchback and finding him
 dead, exclaimed, "By Allah, good indeed! A Christian killing a
 Mahometan!" Then he seized the Broker and, tying his hands behind his
 back, carried him to the Governor's house,[507] and all the while the
 Nazarene kept saying to himself, "O Messiah! O Virgin! how came I to
 kill this fellow? And in what a hurry he must have been to depart this
 life when he died of a single blow!" Presently, as his drunkenness
 fled, came dolour in its stead. So the broker and the body were kept in
 the Governor's place till morning morrowed, when the Wali came out and
 gave order to hang the supposed murderer and commanded the
 executioner[508] make proclamation of the sentence. Forthwith they set
 up a gallows under which they made the Nazarene stand and the
 torch-bearer, who was hangman, threw the rope round his neck and passed
 one end through the pulley, and was about to hoist him up[509] when lo!
 the Reeve, who was passing by, saw the Broker about to be hanged; and,
 making his way through the people, cried out to the executioner, "Hold!
 Hold! I am he who killed the Hunchback!" Asked the Governor, "What made
 thee kill him?"; and he answered, "I went home last night and there
 found this man who had come down the ventilator to steal my property;
 so I smote him with a hammer on the breast and he died forthright. Then
 I took him up and carried him to the bazar and set him up against the
 wall in such a place near such a lane;" adding, "Is it not enough for
 me to have killed a Moslem without also killing a Christian? So hang
 none other but me." When the Governor heard these words he released the
 Broker and said to the torch-bearer, "Hang up this man on his own
 confession." So he loosed the cord from the Nazarene's neck and threw
 it round that of the Reeve and, making him stand under the
 gallows-tree, was about to string him up when behold, the Jewish
 physician pushed through the people and shouted to the executioner,
 "Hold! Hold! It was I and none else killed the Hunchback! Last night I
 was sitting at home when a man and a woman knocked at the door carrying
 this Gobbo who was sick, and gave my handmaid a quarter-dinar, bidding
 her hand me the fee and tell me to come down and see him. Whilst she
 was gone the man and the woman brought him into the house and, setting
 him on the stairs, went away; and presently I came down and not seeing
 him, for I was in the dark, stumbled over him and he fell to the foot
 of the staircase and died on the moment. Then we took him up, I and my
 wife, and carried him on to the top terrace; and, the house of this
 Reeve being next door to mine, we let the body down through the
 ventilator. When he came home and found the Hunchback in his house, he
 fancied he was a thief and struck him with a hammer, so that he fell to
 the ground, and our neighbour made certain that he had slain him. Now
 is it not enough for me to have killed one Moslem unwittingly, without
 burdening myself with taking the life of another Moslem wittingly?"
 When the Governor heard this he said to the hangman, "Set free the
 Reeve, and hang the Jew."

 Thereupon the torch-bearer took him and slung the cord round his neck
 when behold, the Tailor pushed through the people, and shouted to the
 executioner, "Hold! Hold! It was I and none else killed the Hunchback;
 and this was the fashion thereof. I had been out a-pleasuring yesterday
 and, coming back to supper, fell in with this Gobbo, who was drunk and
 drumming away and singing lustily to his tambourine. So I accosted him
 and carried him to my house and bought a fish, and we sat down to eat.
 Presently my wife took a fid of fish and, making a gobbet of it,[510]
 crammed it into his mouth; but some of it went down the wrong way or
 stuck in his gullet and he died on the instant. So we lifted him up, I
 and my wife, and carried him to the Jew's house where the slave-girl
 came down and opened the door to us and I said to her:—Tell thy master
 that there are a man and a woman and a sick person for thee to see! I
 gave her a quarter-dinar and she went up to tell her master; and,
 whilst she was gone, I carried the Hunchback to the head of the
 staircase and propped him up against the wall, and went off with my
 wife. When the Jew came down he stumbled over him and thought that he
 had killed him." Then he asked the Jew, "Is this the truth?"; and the
 Jew answered, "Yes." Thereupon the Tailor turned to the Governor, and
 said, "Leave go the Jew and hang me." When the Governor heard the
 Tailor's tale he marvelled at the matter of this Hunchback and
 exclaimed, "Verily this is an adventure which should be recorded in
 books!" Then he said to the hangman, "Let the Jew go and hang the
 Tailor on his own confession." The executioner took the Tailor and put
 the rope around his neck and said, "I am tired of such slow work: we
 bring out this one and change him for that other, and no one is hanged
 after all!" Now the Hunchback in question was, they relate, jester to
 the Sultan of China who could not bear him out of his sight; so when
 the fellow got drunk and did not make his appearance that night or the
 next day till noon, the Sultan asked some of his courtiers about him
 and they answered, "O our lord, the Governor hath come upon him dead
 and hath ordered his murderer to be hanged; but, as the hangman was
 about to hoist him up there came a second and a third and a fourth and
 each one said:—It is I, and none else killed the Hunchback!; and each
 gave a full and circumstantial account of the manner of the jester
 being killed." When the King heard this he cried aloud to the
 Chamberlain-in-waiting, "Go down to the Governor and bring me all four
 of them." So the Chamberlain went down at once to the place of
 execution, where he found the torch-bearer on the point of hanging the
 Tailor and shouted to him, "Hold! Hold!" Then he gave the King's
 command to the Governor who took the Tailor, the Jew, the Nazarene and
 the Reeve (the Hunchback's body being borne on men's shoulders) and
 went up with one and all of them to the King. When he came into the
 presence, he kissed the ground and acquainted the ruler with the whole
 story which it is needless to relate for, as they say:—There is no
 avail in a thrice-told tale. The Sultan hearing it marvelled and was
 moved to mirth and commanded the story to be written in letters of
 liquid gold, saying to those present, "Did ye ever hear a more wondrous
 tale than that of my Hunchback?" Thereupon the Nazarene broker came
 forward and said, "O King of the age, with thy leave I will tell thee a
 thing which happened to myself and which is still more wondrous and
 marvellous and pleasurable and delectable than the tale of the
 Hunchback." Quoth the King, "Tell us what thou hast to say!" So he
 began in these words


                     _THE NAZARENE BROKER'S STORY._

 O King of the age, I came to this thy country with merchandise and
 Destiny stayed me here with you: but my place of birth was Cairo, in
 Egypt, where I also was brought up, for I am one of the Copts and my
 father was a broker before me. When I came to man's estate he departed
 this life and I succeeded to his business. One day, as I was sitting in
 my shop, behold, there came up to me a youth as handsome as could be,
 wearing sumptuous raiment and riding a fine ass.[511] When he saw me he
 saluted me, and I stood up to do him honour: then he took out a
 kerchief containing a sample of sesame and asked, "How much is this
 worth per Ardabb[512]?"; whereto I answered, "An hundred dirhams."
 Quoth he, "Take porters and gaugers and metesmen and come to-morrow to
 the Khan al-Jawáli,[513] by the Gate of Victory quarter where thou wilt
 find me." Then he fared forth leaving with me the sample of sesame in
 his kerchief; and I went the round of my customers and ascertained that
 every Ardabb would fetch an hundred and twenty dirhams. Next day I took
 four metesmen and walked with them to the Khan, where I found him
 awaiting me. As soon as he saw me he rose and opened his magazine, when
 we measured the grain till the store was empty; and we found the
 contents fifty Ardabbs, making five thousand pieces of silver. Then
 said he, "Let ten dirhams on every Ardabb be thy brokerage; so take the
 price and keep in deposit four thousand, and five hundred dirhams for
 me; and, when I have made an end of selling the other wares in my
 warehouses, I will come to thee and receive the amount." "I will well,"
 replied I and kissing his hand went away, having made that day a profit
 of a thousand dirhams. He was absent a month, at the end of which he
 came to me and asked, "Where be the dirhams?" I rose and saluted him
 and answered to him, "Wilt thou not eat somewhat in my house?" But he
 refused with the remark, "Get the monies ready and I will presently
 return and take them." Then he rode away. So I brought out the dirhams
 and sat down to await him, but he stayed away for another month, when
 he came back and said to me, "Where be the dirhams?" I rose and
 saluting him asked, "Wilt thou not eat something in my house?" But he
 again refused adding, "Get me the monies ready and I will presently
 return and take them." Then he rode off. So I brought out the dirhams
 and sat down to await his return; but he stayed away from me a third
 month, and I said, "Verily this young man is liberality in incarnate
 form." At the end of the month he came up, riding a mare-mule and
 wearing a suit of sumptuous raiment; he was as the moon on the night of
 fullness, and he seemed as if fresh from the baths, with his cheeks
 rosy bright, and his brow flower-white, and a mole-spot like a grain of
 ambergris delighting the sight; even as was said of such an one by the
 poet:—

 Full moon with sun in single mansion ✿ In brightest sheen and fortune
    rose and shone,
 With happy splendour changing every sprite: ✿ Hail to what guerdons
    prayer with blissfull boon!
 Their charms and grace have gained perfection's height, ✿ All hearts
    have conquered and all wits have won.
 Laud to the Lord for works so wonder-strange, ✿ And what th' Almighty
    wills His hand hath done!

 When I saw him I rose to him and invoking blessings on him asked, "O my
 lord, wilt thou not take thy monies?" "Whence the hurry?"[514] quoth
 he, "Wait till I have made an end of my business and then I will come
 and take them." Again he rode away and I said to myself, "By Allah,
 when he comes next time needs must I make him my guest; for I have
 traded with his dirhams and have gotten large gains thereby." At the
 end of the year he came again, habited in a suit of clothes more
 sumptuous than the former; and, when I conjured him by the Evangel to
 alight at my house and eat of my guest-food, he said, "I consent, on
 condition that what thou expendest on me shall be of my monies still in
 thy hands." I answered, "So be it," and made him sit down whilst I got
 ready what was needful of meat and drink and else besides; and set the
 tray before him, with the invitation "Bismillah"![515] Then he drew
 near the tray and put out his left hand[516] and ate with me; and I
 marvelled at his not using the right hand. When we had done eating, I
 poured water on his hand and gave him wherewith to wipe it. Upon this
 we sat down to converse after I had set before him some sweetmeats; and
 I said to him, "O my master, prithee relieve me by telling me why thou
 eatest with thy left hand? Perchance something aileth thy other hand?"
 When he heard my words, he repeated these verses:—

 Dear friend, ask not what burneth in my breast, ✿ Lest thou see fiery
    pangs eye never saw:
 Wills not my heart to harbour Salmá in stead ✿ Of Laylá's[517] love,
    but need hath ne'er a law!

 And he put out his right arm from his sleeve and behold, the hand was
 cut off, a wrist without a fist. I was astounded at this but he said,
 "Marvel not, and think not that I ate with my left hand for conceit and
 insolence, but from necessity; and the cutting off my right hand was
 caused by an adventure of the strangest." Asked I, "And what caused
 it?"; and he answered:—Know that I am of the sons of Baghdad and my
 father was of notables of that city. When I came to man's estate I
 heard the pilgrims and wayfarers, travellers and merchants talk of the
 land of Egypt and their words sank deep into my mind till my parent
 died, when I took a large sum of money and furnished myself for trade
 with stuffs of Baghdad and Mosul and, packing them up in bales, set out
 on my wanderings; and Allah decreed me safety till I entered this your
 city. Then he wept and began repeating:—

      The blear-eyed scapes the pits ✿ Wherein the lynx-eyed fall:
      A word the wise man slays ✿ And saves the natural:
      The Moslem fails of food ✿ The Káfir feasts in hall:
      What art or act is man's? ✿ God's will obligeth all!

 Now when he had ended his verse he said, So I entered Cairo and took
 off my loads and stored my stuffs in the Khan "Al-Masrúr."[518] Then I
 gave the servant a few silvers wherewith to buy me some food and lay
 down to sleep awhile. When I awoke I went to the street called "Bayn
 al-Kasrayn"—Between the two Palaces—and presently returned and rested
 my night in the Khan. When it was morning I opened a bale and took out
 some stuff saying to myself, "I will be off and go through some of the
 bazars and see the state of the market." So I loaded the stuff on some
 of my slaves and fared forth till I reached the Kaysariyah or Exchange
 of Jahárkas;[519] where the brokers who knew of my coming came to meet
 me. They took the stuffs and cried them for sale, but could not get the
 prime cost of them. I was vexed at this, however the Shaykh of the
 brokers said to me, "O my lord, I will tell thee how thou mayest make a
 profit of thy goods. Thou shouldest do as the merchants do and sell thy
 merchandise at credit for a fixed period, on a contract drawn up by a
 notary and duly witnessed; and employ a Shroff to take thy dues every
 Monday and Thursday. So shalt thou gain two dirhams and more, for every
 one; and thou shalt solace and divert thyself by seeing Cairo and the
 Nile." Quoth I, "This is sound advice," and carried the brokers to the
 Khan. They took my stuffs and went with them on 'Change where I sold
 them well taking bonds for the value. These bonds I deposited with a
 Shroff, a banker, who gave me a receipt with which I returned to the
 Khan. Here I stayed a whole month, every morning breaking my fast with
 a cup of wine and making my meals on pigeon's meat, mutton and
 sweetmeats, till the time came when my receipts began to fall due. So,
 every Monday and Thursday I used to go on 'Change and sit in the shop
 of one or other of the merchants, whilst the notary and money-changer
 went round to recover the monies from the traders, till after the time
 of mid-afternoon prayer, when they brought me the amount, and I counted
 it and, sealing the bags, returned with them to the Khan. On a certain
 day which happened to be a Monday,[520] I went to the Hammam and thence
 back to my Khan, and sitting in my own room[521] broke my fast with a
 cup of wine, after which I slept a little. When I awoke I ate a chicken
 and, perfuming my person, repaired to the shop of a merchant hight Badr
 al-Din al-Bostáni, or the Gardener,[522] who welcomed me; and we sat
 talking awhile till the bazar should open. Presently, behold, up came a
 lady of stately figure wearing a head-dress of the most magnificent,
 perfumed with the sweetest of scents and walking with graceful swaying
 gait; and seeing me she raised her mantilla allowing me a glimpse of
 her beautiful black eyes. She saluted Badr al-Din who returned her
 salutation and stood up, and talked with her; and the moment I heard
 her speak, the love of her gat hold of my heart. Presently she said to
 Badr al-Din "Hast thou by thee a cut piece of stuff woven with thread
 of pure gold?" So he brought out to her a piece from those he had
 bought of me and sold it to her for one thousand two hundred dirhams;
 when she said, "I will take the piece home with me and send thee its
 price." "That is impossible, O my lady," the merchant replied, "for
 here is the owner of the stuff and I owe him a share of profit." "Fie
 upon thee!" she cried, "Do I not use to take from thee entire rolls of
 costly stuff, and give thee a greater profit than thou expectest, and
 send thee the money?" "Yes," rejoined he; "but I stand in pressing need
 of the price this very day." Hereupon she took up the piece and threw
 it back upon his lap, saying "Out on thee! Allah confound the tribe of
 you which estimates none at the right value;" and she turned to go. I
 felt my very soul going with her; so I stood up and stayed her, saying,
 "I conjure thee by the Lord, O my lady, favour me by retracing thy
 gracious steps." She turned back with a smile and said, "For thy sake I
 return," and took a seat opposite me in the shop. Then quoth I to Badr
 al-Din "What is the price they asked thee for this piece?"; and quoth
 he, "Eleven hundred dirhams." I rejoined, "The odd hundred shall be thy
 profit: bring me a sheet of paper and I will write thee a discharge for
 it." Then I wrote him a receipt in my own handwriting and gave the
 piece to the lady, saying, "Take it away with thee and, if thou wilt,
 bring me its price next bazar-day; or better still, accept it as my
 guest-gift to thee." "Allah requite thee with good," answered she, "and
 make thee my husband and lord and master of all I have!"[523] And Allah
 favoured her prayer. I saw the Gates of Paradise swing open before me
 and said, "O my lady, let this piece of stuff be now thine and another
 like it is ready for thee; only let me have one look at thy face." So
 she raised her veil and I saw a face the sight of which bequeathed to
 me a thousand sighs, and my heart was so captivated by her love that I
 was no longer ruler of my reason. Then she let fall her face-veil and
 taking up the piece of stuff said, "O my lord make me not desolate by
 thine absence!" and turned away and disappeared from my sight. I
 remained sitting on 'Change till past the hour of afternoon prayer,
 lost to the world by the love which had mastered me; and the violence
 of my passion compelled me to make enquiries concerning her of the
 merchant, who answered me, "This is a lady and a rich: she is the
 daughter of a certain Emir who lately died and left her a large
 fortune." Then I took leave of him and returned home to the Khan where
 they set supper before me; but I could not eat for thinking of her and
 when I lay down to sleep, sleep came not near me. So I watched till
 morning, when I arose and donned a change of raiment and drank a cup of
 wine; and, after breaking my fast on some slight matter, I went to the
 merchant's shop where I saluted him and sat down by him. Presently up
 came the lady as usual, followed by a slave-girl and wearing a dress
 more sumptuous than before; and she saluted me without noticing Badr
 al-Din and said in fluent graceful speech (never heard I voice softer
 or sweeter), "Send one with me to take the thousand and two hundred
 dirhams, the price of the piece." "Why this hurry?" asked I and she
 answered, "May we never lose thee!"[524] and handed me the money. Then
 I sat talking with her and presently I signed to her in dumb show,
 whereby she understood that I longed to enjoy her person,[525] and she
 rose up in haste with a show of displeasure. My heart clung to her and
 I went forth from the bazar and followed on her track. As I was walking
 suddenly a black slave-girl stopped me and said, "O my master, come
 speak with my mistress."[526] At this I was surprised and replied,
 "There is none who knows me here;" but she rejoined, "O my lord, how
 soon hast thou forgotten her! My lady is the same who was this day at
 the shop of such a merchant." Then I went with her to the Shroff's,
 where I found the lady who drew me to her side and said, "O my beloved,
 thine image is firmly stamped upon my fancy, and love of thee hath
 gotten hold of my heart: from the hour I first saw thee nor sleep nor
 food nor drink hath given me aught of pleasure." I replied, "The double
 of that suffering is mine and my state dispenseth me from complaint."
 Then said she, "O my beloved, at thy house, or at mine?" "I am a
 stranger here and have no place of reception save the Khan, so by thy
 favour it shall be at thy house." "So be it; but this is Friday[527]
 night and nothing can be done till to-morrow after public prayers; go
 to the Mosque and pray; then mount thine ass, and ask for the
 Habbániyah[528] quarter; and, when there, look out for the mansion of
 Al-Nakib[529] Barakát, popularly known as Abu Shámah the Syndic; for I
 live there: so do not delay as I shall be expecting thee." I rejoiced
 with still greater joy at this; and took leave of her and returned to
 my Khan, where I passed a sleepless night. Hardly was I assured that
 morning had dawned when I rose, changed my dress, perfumed myself with
 essences and sweet scents and, taking fifty dinars in a kerchief, went
 from the Khan Masrúr to the Zuwaylah[530] gate, where I mounted an ass
 and said to its owner, "Take me to the Habbaniyah." So he set off with
 me and brought up in the twinkling of an eye at a street known as Darb
 al-Munkari, where I said to him, "Go in and ask for the Syndic's
 mansion." He was absent a while and then returned and said, "Alight."
 "Go thou before me to the house," quoth I, adding, "Come back with the
 earliest light and bring me home;" and he answered, "In Allah's name;"
 whereupon I gave him a quarter-dinar of gold, and he took it and went
 his ways. Then I knocked at the door and out came two white
 slave-girls, both young; high-bosomed virgins, as they were moons, and
 said to me, "Enter, for our mistress is expecting thee and she hath not
 slept the night long for her delight in thee." I passed through the
 vestibule into a saloon with seven doors, floored with particoloured
 marbles and furnished with curtains and hangings of coloured silks: the
 ceiling was _cloisonné_ with gold and corniced with inscriptions[531]
 emblazoned in lapis lazuli; and the walls were stuccoed with Sultání
 gypsum[532] which mirrored the beholder's face. Around the saloon were
 latticed windows overlooking a garden full of all manner of fruits;
 whose streams were railing and rilling and whose birds were trilling
 and shrilling; and in the heart of the hall was a jetting fountain at
 whose corners stood birds fashioned in red gold crusted with pearls and
 gems and spouting water crystal-clear. When I entered and took a
 seat,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
 permitted say.

                 Now when it was the Twenty-Sixth Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
 merchant continued, When I entered and took a seat, the lady at once
 came in crowned with a diadem[533] of pearls and jewels; her face
 dotted with artificial moles in indigo,[534] her eyebrows pencilled
 with Kohl and her hands and feet reddened with Henna. When she saw me
 she smiled in my face and took me to her embrace and clasped me to her
 breast; then she put her mouth to my mouth and sucked my tongue[535]
 (and I did likewise) and said, "Can it be true, O my little darkling,
 thou art come to me?" adding, "Welcome and good cheer to thee! By
 Allah, from the day I saw thee sleep hath not been sweet to me nor hath
 food been pleasant." Quoth I, "Such hath also been my case: and I am
 thy slave, thy negro slave." Then we sat down to converse and I hung my
 head earthwards in bashfulness, but she delayed not long ere she set
 before me a tray of the most exquisite viands, marinated meats,
 fritters soaked in bee's honey[536] and chickens stuffed with sugar and
 pistachio-nuts, whereof we ate till we were satisfied. Then they
 brought basin and ewer and I washed my hands and we scented ourselves
 with rose-water musk'd and sat down again to converse. So she began
 repeating these couplets:[537]—

        Had we wist of thy coming, thy way had been strown
          With the blood of our heart and the balls of our sight:
        Our cheek as a foot-cloth to greet thee been thrown,
          That thy step on our eyelids should softly alight.

 And she kept plaining of what had befallen her and I of what had
 betided me; and love of her gat so firm hold of my heart that all
 my wealth seemed a thing of naught in comparison with her. Then we
 fell to toying and groping and kissing till nightfall, when the
 handmaidens set before us meats and a complete wine service, and we
 sat carousing till the noon of night; when we lay down and I lay
 with her, never in my life saw I a night like that night. When
 morning morrowed I arose and took leave of her, throwing under the
 carpet-bed the kerchief wherein were the dinars[538] and as I went
 out she wept and said, "O my lord, when shall I look upon that
 lovely face again?" "I will be with thee at sunset," answered I,
 and going out found the donkey-boy, who had brought me the day
 before, awaiting at the door. So I mounted ass and rode to the Khan
 of Masrur where I alighted and gave the man a half-dinar, saying,
 "Return at sunset;" and he said "I will." Then I breakfasted and
 went out to seek the price of my stuffs; after which I returned,
 and taking a roast lamb and some sweetmeats, called a porter and
 put the provision in his crate, and sent it to the lady paying the
 man his hire.[539] I went back to my business till sunset, when the
 ass-driver came to me; and I took fifty dinars in a kerchief and
 rode to her house where I found the marble floor swept, the brasses
 burnisht, the branch-lights burning, the wax-candles ready lighted,
 the meat served up and the wine strained.[540] When my lady saw me
 she threw her arms about my neck, and cried, "Thou hast desolated
 me by thine absence." Then she set the tables before me and we ate
 till we were satisfied, when the slave girls carried off the trays
 and served up wine. We gave not over drinking till half the night
 was past; and, being well warmed with drink, we went to the
 sleeping-chamber and lay there till morning. I then arose and fared
 forth from her leaving the fifty dinars with her as before; and,
 finding the donkey-boy at the door, rode to the Khan and slept
 awhile. After that I went out to make ready the evening meal and
 took a brace of geese with gravy on two platters of dressed and
 peppered rice, and got ready colocasia[541]-roots fried and soaked
 in honey, and wax-candles and fruits and conserves and nuts and
 almonds and sweet-scented flowers; and I sent them all to her. As
 soon as it was night I again tied up fifty dinars in a kerchief
 and, mounting the ass as usual, rode to the mansion where we ate
 and drank and lay together till morning when I threw the kerchief
 and dinars[542] to her and rode back to the Khan. I ceased not
 doing after that fashion till, after a sweet night, I woke one fine
 morning and found myself beggared, dinar-less and dirham-less. So
 said I to myself "All this be Satan's work;" and began to recite
 these couplets:—

 Poverty dims the sheen of man whate'er his wealth has been, ✿ E'en as
    the sun about to set shines with a yellowing light:
 Absent he falls from memory, forgotten by his friends; ✿ Present he
    shareth not their joys for none in him delight:
 He walks the market shunned of all, too glad to hide his head; ✿ In
    desert places tears he sheds and moans his bitter plight:
 By Allah, 'mid his kith and kin a man, however good, ✿ Waylaid by want
    and penury is but a stranger-wight!

 I fared forth from the Khan and walked down "Between the Palaces"
 street till I came to the Zuwaylah Porte, where I found the people
 crowding and the gateway blocked for the much folk. And by the decree
 of Destiny I saw there a trooper against whom I pressed
 unintentionally, so that my hand came upon his bosom pocket and I felt
 a purse inside it. I looked and seeing a string of green silk hanging
 from the pocket knew it for a purse; and the crush grew greater every
 minute and just then, a camel laden with a load of fuel happened to
 jostle the trooper on the opposite side, and he turned round to fend it
 off from him, lest it tear his clothes; and Satan tempted me, so I
 pulled the string and drew out a little bag of blue silk, containing
 something which chinked like coin. But the soldier, feeling his pocket
 suddenly lightened, put his hand to it and found it empty; whereupon he
 turned to me and, snatching up his mace from his saddle-bow, struck me
 with it on the head. I fell to the ground, whilst the people came round
 us and seizing the trooper's mare by the bridle said to him, "Strikest
 thou this youth such a blow as this for a mere push!" But the trooper
 cried out at them, "This fellow is an accursed thief!" Whereupon I came
 to myself and stood up, and the people looked at me and said, "Nay, he
 is a comely youth: he would not steal anything;" and some of them took
 my part and others were against me and question and answer waxed loud
 and warm. The people pulled at me and would have rescued me from his
 clutches; but as fate decreed behold, the Governor, the Chief of
 Police, and the watch[543] entered the Zuwaylah Gate at this moment
 and, seeing the people gathered together around me and the soldier, the
 Governor asked, "What is the matter?" "By Allah! O Emir," answered the
 trooper, "this is a thief! I had in my pocket a purse of blue silk
 lined with twenty good gold pieces and he took it, whilst I was in the
 crush." Quoth the Governor, "Was any one by thee at the time?"; and
 quoth the soldier, "No." Thereupon the Governor cried out to the Chief
 of Police who seized me, and on this wise the curtain of the Lord's
 protection was withdrawn from me. Then he said "Strip him;" and, when
 they stripped me, they found the purse in my clothes. The Wali took it,
 opened it and counted it; and, finding in it twenty dinars as the
 soldier had said, waxed exceeding wroth and bade his guard bring me
 before him. Then said he to me, "Now, O youth, speak truly: didst thou
 steal this purse?"[544] At this I hung my head to the ground and said
 to myself, "If I deny having stolen it, I shall get myself into
 terrible trouble." So I raised my head and said, "Yes, I took it." When
 the Governor heard these words he wondered and summoned witnesses who
 came forward and attested my confession. All this happened at the
 Zuwaylah Gate. Then the Governor ordered the link-bearer to cut off my
 right hand, and he did so; after which he would have struck off my left
 foot also; but the heart of the soldier softened and he took pity on me
 and interceded for me with the Governor that I should not be
 slain.[545] Thereupon the Wali left me, and went away and the folk
 remained round me and gave me a cup of wine to drink. As for the
 trooper he pressed the purse upon me, and said, "Thou art a comely
 youth and it befitteth not thou be a thief." So I repeated these
 verses:—

 I swear by Allah's name, fair sir! no thief was I, ✿ Nor, O thou best
    of men! was I a bandit bred:
 But Fortune's change and chance o'erthrew me suddenly, ✿ And cark and
    care and penury my course misled:
 I shot it not, indeed, 'twas Allah shot the shaft ✿ That rolled in dust
    the Kingly diadem from my head.[546]

 The soldier turned away after giving me the purse; and I also went my
 ways having wrapped my hand in a piece of rag and thrust it into my
 bosom. My whole semblance had changed, and my colour had waxed yellow
 from the shame and pain which had befallen me. Yet I went on to my
 mistress's house where, in extreme perturbation of spirit I threw
 myself down on the carpet-bed.

 She saw me in this state and asked me, "What aileth thee and why do I
 see thee so changed in looks?"; and I answered, "My head paineth me and
 I am far from well." Whereupon she was vexed and was concerned on my
 account and said, "Burn not my heart, O my lord, but sit up and raise
 thy head and recount to me what hath happened to thee to-day, for thy
 face tells me a tale." "Leave this talk," replied I. But she wept and
 said, "Meseems thou art tired of me, for I see thee contrary to thy
 wont." But I was silent; and she kept on talking to me albeit I gave
 her no answer, till night came on. Then she set food before me, but I
 refused it fearing lest she see me eating with my left hand and said to
 her, "I have no stomach to eat at present." Quoth she, "Tell me what
 hath befallen thee to-day, and why art thou so sorrowful and broken in
 spirit and heart?" Quoth I, "Wait awhile; I will tell thee all at my
 leisure." Then she brought me wine, saying, "Down with it, this will
 dispel thy grief: thou must indeed drink and tell me of thy tidings." I
 asked her, "Perforce must I tell thee?"; and she answered, "Yes." Then
 said I, "If it needs must be so, then give me to drink with thine own
 hand." She filled and drank,[547] and filled again and gave me the cup
 which I took from her with my left hand and wiped the tears from my
 eyelids and began repeating:—

 When Allah willeth aught befal a man ✿ Who hath of ears and eyes and
    wits full share;
 His ears He deafens and his eyes He blinds ✿ And draws his wits e'en as
    we draw a hair[548]
 Till, having wrought His purpose, He restores ✿ Man's wits, that warned
    more circumspect he fare.

 When I ended my verses I wept, and she cried out with an exceeding loud
 cry, "What is the cause of thy tears? Thou burnest my heart! What makes
 thee take the cup with thy left hand?" Quoth I, "Truly I have on my
 right hand a boil;" and quoth she, "Put it out and I will open it for
 thee."[549] "It is not yet time to open it," I replied, "So worry me
 not with thy words, for I will not take it out of the bandage at this
 hour." Then I drank off the cup, and she gave not over plying me with
 drink until drunkenness overcame me and I fell asleep in the place
 where I was sitting; whereupon she looked at my right hand and saw a
 wrist without a fist. So she searched me closely and found with me the
 purse of gold and my severed hand wrapped up in the bit of rag.[550]
 With this such sorrow came upon her as never overcame any and she
 ceased not lamenting on my account till the morning. When I awoke I
 found that she had dressed me a dish of broth of four boiled chickens,
 which she brought to me together with a cup of wine. I ate and drank
 and laying down the purse, would have gone out; but she said to me,
 "Whither away?"; and I answered, "Where my business calleth me;" and
 said she, "Thou shalt not go: sit thee down." So I sat down and she
 resumed, "Hath thy love for me so overpowered thee that thou hast
 wasted all thy wealth and hast lost thine hand on my account? I take
 thee to witness against me and also Allah be my witness that I will
 never part with thee, but will die under thy feet; and soon thou shalt
 see that my words are true." Then she sent for the Kazi and witnesses
 and said to them, "Write my contract of marriage with this young man,
 and bear ye witness that I have received the marriage-settlement."[551]
 When they had drawn up the document she said, "Be witness that all my
 monies which are in this chest and all I have in slaves and handmaidens
 and other property is given in free gift to this young man." So they
 took act of this statement enabling me to assume possession in right of
 marriage; and then withdrew, after receiving their fees. Thereupon she
 took me by the hand and, leading me to a closet, opened a large chest
 and said to me, "See what is herein;" and I looked and behold, it was
 full of kerchiefs. Quoth she, "This is the money I had from thee and
 every kerchief thou gavest me, containing fifty dinars, I wrapped up
 and cast into this chest; so now take thine own, for it returns to
 thee, and this day thou art become of high estate. Fortune and Fate
 afflicted thee so that thou didst lose thy right hand for my sake; and
 I can never requite thee; nay, although I gave my life 'twere but
 little and I should still remain thy debtor." Then she added, "Take
 charge of thy property;" so I transferred the contents of her chest to
 my chest, and added my wealth to her wealth which I had given her, and
 my heart was eased and my sorrow ceased. I stood up and kissed her and
 thanked her; and she said, "Thou hast given thy hand for love of me and
 how am I able to give thee an equivalent? By Allah, if I offered my
 life for thy love, it were indeed but little and would not do justice
 to thy claim upon me." Then she made over to me by deed all that she
 possessed in clothes and ornaments of gold and pearls, and goods and
 farms and chattels, and lay not down to sleep that night, being sorely
 grieved for my grief, till I told her the whole of what had befallen
 me. I passed the night with her. But before we had lived together a
 month's time she fell sorely sick and illness increased upon her, by
 reason of her grief for the loss of my hand, and she endured but fifty
 days before she was numbered among the folk of futurity and heirs of
 immortality. So I laid her out and buried her body in mother earth and
 let make a pious perlection of the Koran[552] for the health of her
 soul, and gave much money in alms for her; after which I turned me from
 the grave and returned to the house. There I found that she had left
 much substance in ready money and slaves, mansions, lands and domains,
 and among her storehouses was a granary of sesame-seed, whereof I sold
 part to thee; and I had neither time nor inclination to take count with
 thee till I had sold the rest of the stock in store; nor, indeed, even
 now have I made an end of receiving the price. So I desire thou baulk
 me not in what I am about to say to thee: twice have I eaten of thy
 food and I wish to give thee as a present the monies for the sesame
 which are by thee. Such is the cause of the cutting of my right hand
 and my eating with my left. "Indeed," said I, "thou hast shown me the
 utmost kindness and liberality." Then he asked me, "Why shouldst thou
 not travel with me to my native country whither I am about to return
 with Cairene and Alexandrian stuffs? Say me, wilt thou accompany me?;"
 and I answered "I will." So I agreed to go with him at the head of the
 month, and I sold all I had and bought other merchandise; then we set
 out and travelled, I and the young man, to this country of yours, where
 he sold his venture and bought other investment of country stuffs and
 continued his journey to Egypt. But it was my lot to abide here, so
 that these things befel me in my strangerhood which befel last night,
 and is not this tale, O King of the age, more wondrous and marvellous
 than the story of the Hunchback? "Not so," quoth the King, "I cannot
 accept it: there is no help for it but that you be hanged, every one of
 you."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day, and ceased saying her
 permitted say.

                Now when it was the Twenty-seventh Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the King of
 China declared "There is no help for it but that you be hanged," the
 Reeve of the Sultan's Kitchen came forward and said, "If thou permit me
 I will tell thee a tale of what befel me just before I found this
 Gobbo; and, if it be more wondrous than his story, do thou grant us our
 lives." And when the King answered "Yes" he began to recount


                          _THE REEVE'S TALE._

 Know, O King, that last night I was at a party where they made a
 perlection of the Koran and got together doctors of law and religion
 skilled in recitation and intoning; and, when the readers ended, the
 table was spread and amongst other things they set before us was a
 marinated ragout[553] flavoured with cumin-seed. So we sat down, but
 one of our number held back and refused to touch it. We conjured him to
 eat of it but he swore he would not; and, when we again pressed him, he
 said, "Be not instant with me; sufficeth me that which hath already
 befallen me through eating it"; and he began reciting:—

 Shoulder thy tray and go straight to thy goal; ✿ And, if suit thee this
    Kohl, why,—use this Kohl![554]

 When he ended his verse we said to him, "Allah upon thee, tell us thy
 reason for refusing to eat of the cumin-ragout?" "If so it be," he
 replied, "and needs must I eat of it, I will not do so except I wash my
 hand forty times with soap, forty times with potash and forty times
 with galangale,[555] the total being one hundred and twenty washings."
 Thereupon the hospitable host bade his slaves bring water and whatso he
 required; and the young man washed his hand as afore mentioned. Then he
 sat down, as if disgusted and frightened withal, and dipping his hand
 in the ragout, began eating and at the same time showing signs of
 anger. And we wondered at him with extreme wonderment, for his hand
 trembled and the morsel in it shook and we saw that his thumb had been
 cut off and he ate with his four fingers only. So we said to him,
 "Allah upon thee, what happened to thy thumb? Is thy hand thus by the
 creation of God or hath some accident befallen it?" "O my brothers," he
 answered, "it is not only thus with this thumb, but also with my other
 thumb and with both my great toes, as you shall see." So saying he
 uncovered his left hand and his feet, and we saw that the left hand was
 even as the right and in like manner that each of his feet lacked its
 great toe. When we saw him after this fashion, our amazement waxed
 still greater and we said to him, "We have hardly patience enough to
 await thy history and to hear the manner of the cutting off of thy
 thumbs, and the reason of thy washing both hands one hundred and twenty
 times." Know then, said he, that my father was chief of the merchants
 and the wealthiest of them all in Baghdad-city during the reign of the
 Caliph Harun al-Rashid; and he was much given to wine-drinking and
 listening to the lute and the other instruments of pleasaunce; so that
 when he died he left nothing. I buried him and had perlections of the
 Koran made for him, and mourned for him days and nights: then I opened
 his shop and found that he had left in it few goods, while his debts
 were many. However I compounded with his creditors for time to settle
 their demands and betook myself to buying and selling, paying them
 something from week to week on account; and I gave not over doing this
 till I had cleared off his obligations in full and began adding to my
 principal. One day, as I sat in my shop, suddenly and unexpectedly
 there appeared before me a young lady, than whom I never saw a fairer,
 wearing the richest raiment and ornaments and riding a she mule, with
 one negro-slave walking before her and another behind her. She drew
 rein at the head of the exchange-bazar and entered followed by an
 eunuch who said to her, "O my lady come out and away without telling
 any one, lest thou light a fire which will burn us all up." Moreover he
 stood before her guarding her from view whilst she looked at the
 merchants' shops. She found none open but mine; so she came up with the
 eunuch behind her and sitting down in my shop saluted me; never heard I
 aught fairer than her speech or sweeter than her voice. Then she
 unveiled her face, and I saw that she was like the moon and I stole a
 glance at her whose sight caused me a thousand sighs, and my heart was
 captivated with love of her, and I kept looking again and again upon
 her face repeating these verses:—

 Say to the charmer in the dove-hued veil, ✿ Death would be welcome to
    abate thy bale!
 Favour me with thy favours that I live: ✿ See, I stretch forth my palm
    to take thy vail!

 When she heard my verse she answered me saying:—

 I've lost all patience by despite of you; ✿ My heart knows nothing save
    love-plight to you!
 If aught I sight save charms so bright of you; ✿ My parting end not in
    the sight of you!
 I swear I'll ne'er forget the right of you; ✿ And fain this breast
    would soar to height of you:
 You made me drain the love-cup, and I lief ✿ A love-cup tender for
    delight of you:
 Take this my form where'er you go, and when ✿ You die, entomb me in the
    site of you:
 Call on me in my grave, and hear my bones ✿ Sigh their responses to the
    shright of you:
 And were I asked "Of God what wouldst thou see?" ✿ I answer, "first His
    will then Thy decree!"

 When she ended her verse she asked me, "O youth, hast thou any fair
 stuffs by thee?"; and I answered, "O my lady, thy slave is poor; but
 have patience till the merchants open their shops, and I will suit thee
 with what thou wilt." Then we sat talking, I and she (and I was drowned
 in the sea of her love, dazed in the desert[556] of my passion for
 her), till the merchants opened their shops; when I rose and fetched
 her all she sought to the tune of five thousand dirhams. She gave the
 stuff to the eunuch and, going forth by the door of the Exchange, she
 mounted mule and went away, without telling me whence she came, and I
 was ashamed to speak of such trifle. When the merchants dunned me for
 the price, I made myself answerable for five thousand dirhams and went
 home, drunken with the love of her. They set supper before me and I ate
 a mouthful, thinking only of her beauty and loveliness, and sought to
 sleep, but sleep came not to me. And such was my condition for a whole
 week, when the merchants required their monies of me, but I persuaded
 them to have patience for another week, at the end of which time she
 again appeared mounted on a she-mule and attended by her eunuch and two
 slaves. She saluted me and said, "O my master, we have been long in
 bringing thee the price of the stuffs; but now fetch the Shroff and
 take thy monies." So I sent for the money-changer and the eunuch
 counted out the coin before him and made it over to me. Then we sat
 talking, I and she, till the market opened, when she said to me, "Get
 me this and that." So I got her from the merchants whatso she wanted,
 and she took it and went away without saying a word to me about the
 price. As soon as she was out of sight, I repented me of what I had
 done; for the worth of the stuffs bought for her amounted to a thousand
 dinars, and I said in my soul, "What manner of love is this? She hath
 brought me five thousand dirhams, and hath taken goods for a thousand
 dinars."[557] I feared lest I should be beggared through having to pay
 the merchants their money, and I said, "They know none other but me;
 this lovely lady is naught but a cheat and a swindler, who hath diddled
 me with her beauty and grace; for she saw that I was a mere youth and
 laughed at me for not asking her address. I ceased not to be troubled
 by these doubts and fears, as she was absent more than a month, till
 the merchants pestered me for their money and were so hard upon me that
 I put up my property for sale and stood on the very brink of ruin."
 However, as I was sitting in my shop one day, drowned in melancholy
 musings, she suddenly rode up and, dismounting at the bazar-gate, came
 straight towards me. When I saw her all my cares fell from me and I
 forgot every trouble. She came close up to me and greeted me with her
 sweet voice and pleasant speech and presently said, "Fetch me the
 Shroff and weigh thy money.[558]" So she gave me the price of what
 goods I had gotten for her and more, and fell to talking freely with
 me, till I was like to die of joy and delight. Presently she asked me,
 "Hast thou a wife?"; and I answered "No, indeed: I have never known
 woman"; and began to shed tears. Quoth she "Why weepest thou?" Quoth I
 "It is nothing!" Then giving the eunuch some of the gold pieces, I
 begged him to be go-between[559] in the matter; but he laughed and
 said, "She is more in love with thee than thou with her: she hath no
 occasion for the stuffs she hath bought of thee and did all this only
 for the love of thee; so ask of her what thou wilt and she will deny
 thee nothing." When she saw me giving the dinars to the eunuch, she
 returned and sat down again; and I said to her, "Be charitable to thy
 slave and pardon him what he is about to say." Then I told her what was
 in my mind and she assented and said to the eunuch, "Thou shalt carry
 my message to him," adding to me, "And do thou whatso the eunuch
 biddeth thee." Then she got up and went away, and I paid the merchants
 their monies and they all profited; but as for me, regret at the
 breaking off of our intercourse was all my gain; and I slept not the
 whole of that night. However, before many days passed her eunuch came
 to me, and I entreated him honourably and asked him after his mistress.
 "Truly she is sick with love of thee," he replied and I rejoined, "Tell
 me who and what she is." Quoth he, "The Lady Zubaydah, queen-consort of
 Harun al-Rashid, bought her up as a rearling[560] and hath advanced her
 to be stewardess of the Harim, and gave her the right of going in and
 out of her own sweet will. She spoke to her lady of thee and begged her
 to marry her to thee; but she said:—I will not do this, till I see the
 young man; and, if he be worthy of thee, I will marry thee to him. So
 now we look for the moment to smuggle thee into the Palace and if thou
 succeed in entering privily thou wilt win thy wish to wed her; but if
 the affair get wind, the Lady Zubaydah will strike off thy head.[561]
 What sayest thou to this?" I answered, "I will go with thee and abide
 the risk whereof thou speakest." Then said he, "As soon as it is night,
 go to the Mosque built by the Lady Zubaydah on the Tigris and pray the
 night-prayers and sleep there." "With love and gladness," cried I. So
 at nightfall I repaired to the Mosque, where I prayed and passed the
 night. With earliest dawn, behold, came sundry eunuchs in a skiff with
 a number of empty chests which they deposited in the Mosque, then all
 of them went their ways but one, and looking curiously at him, I saw he
 was our go-between. Presently in came the handmaiden, my mistress,
 walking straight up to us; and I rose to her and embraced her while she
 kissed me and shed tears.[562] We talked awhile; after which she made
 me get into one of the chests which she locked upon me. Presently the
 other eunuchs came back with a quantity of packages and she fell to
 stowing them in the chests, which she locked down, one by one, till all
 were shut. When all was done the eunuchs embarked the chests in the
 boat and made for the Lady Zubaydah's palace. With this, thought began
 to beset me and I said to myself, "Verily thy lust and wantonness will
 be the death of thee; and the question is after all shalt thou win to
 thy wish or not?" And I began to weep, boxed up as I was in the box and
 suffering from cramp; and I prayed Allah that He deliver me from the
 dangerous strait I was in, whilst the boat gave not over going on till
 it reached the Palace-gate where they lifted out the chests and amongst
 them that in which I was. Then they carried them in, passing through a
 troop of eunuchs, guardians of the Harim and of the ladies behind the
 curtain, till they came to the post of the Eunuch-in-Chief[563] who
 started up from his slumbers and shouted to the damsel "What is in
 those chests?" "They are full of wares for the Lady Zubaydah!" "Open
 them, one by one, that I may see what is in them." "And wherefore
 wouldst thou open them?" "Give me no words and exceed not in talk!
 these chests must and shall be opened." So saying, he sprang to his
 feet, and the first which they brought to him to open was that wherein
 I was; and, when I felt his hands upon it, my senses failed me and I
 bepissed myself in my funk, the water running out of the box. Then said
 she to the Eunuch-in-Chief, "O steward! thou wilt cause me to be killed
 and thyself too, for thou hast damaged goods worth ten thousand dinars.
 This chest contains coloured dresses, and four gallon flasks of Zemzem
 water;[564] and now one of them hath got unstoppered and the water is
 running out over the clothes and it will spoil their colours." The
 eunuch answered, "Take up thy boxes and get thee gone to the curse of
 God!" So the slaves carried off all the chests, including mine; and
 hastened on with them till suddenly I heard the voice of one saying,
 "Alack, and alack! the Caliph! the Caliph!" When that cry struck mine
 ears I died in my skin and said a saying which never yet shamed the
 sayer, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
 Glorious, the Great! I and only I have brought this calamity upon
 myself." Presently I heard the Caliph say to my mistress, "A plague on
 thee, what is in those boxes?"; and she answered, "Dresses for the Lady
 Zubaydah";[565] whereupon he, "Open them before me!" When I heard this
 I died my death outright and said to myself, "By Allah, to-day is the
 very last of my days in this world: if I come safe out of this I am to
 marry her and no more words, but detection stares me in the face and my
 head is as good as stricken off." Then I repeated the profession of
 Faith, saying, "There is no god but _the_ God, and Mohammed is the
 Apostle of God!"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
 say her permitted say.

                Now when it was the Twenty-Eighth Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
 merchant continued as follows: Now when I testified, "I bear witness
 that there is no god save _the_ God, I heard my mistress the handmaid
 declare to the Caliph, "These chests, O Commander of the Faithful, have
 been committed to my charge by the Lady Zubaydah, and she doth not wish
 their contents to be seen by any one." "No matter!" quoth the Caliph,
 "needs must they be opened, I _will_ see what is in them"; and he cried
 aloud to the eunuchs, "Bring the chests here before me." At this I made
 sure of death (without benefit of a doubt) and swooned away. Then the
 eunuchs brought the chests up to him one after another and he fell to
 inspecting the contents, but he saw in them only ottars and stuffs and
 fine dresses; and they ceased not opening the chests and he ceased not
 looking to see what was in them, finding only clothes and such matters,
 till none remained unopened but the box in which I was boxed. They put
 forth their hands to open it, but my mistress the handmaid made haste
 and said to the Caliph, "This one thou shalt see only in the presence
 of the Lady Zubaydah, for that which is in it is her secret." When he
 heard this he gave orders to carry in the chests; so they took up that
 wherein I was and bore it with the rest into the Harim and set it down
 in the midst of the saloon; and indeed my spittle was dried up for very
 fear.[566] Then my mistress opened the box and took me out, saying,
 "Fear not: no harm shall betide thee now nor dread; but broaden thy
 breast and strengthen thy heart and sit thee down till the Lady
 Zubaydah come, and surely thou shalt win thy wish of me." So I sat down
 and, after a while, in came ten handmaidens, virgins like moons, and
 ranged themselves in two rows, five facing five; and after them twenty
 other damsels, high-bosomed virginity, surrounding the Lady Zubaydah
 who could hardly walk for the weight of her raiment and ornaments. As
 she drew near, the slave-girls dispersed from around her, and I
 advanced and kissed the ground between her hands. She signed to me to
 sit and, when I sat down before her chair, she began questioning me of
 my forbears and family and condition, to which I made such answers that
 pleased her, and she said to my mistress, "Our nurturing of thee, O
 damsel, hath not disappointed us." Then she said to me, "Know that this
 handmaiden is to us even as our own child and she is a trust committed
 to thee by Allah." I again kissed the ground before her, well pleased
 that I should marry my mistress, and she bade me abide ten days in the
 palace. So I abode there ten days, during which time I saw not my
 mistress nor any body save one of the concubines, who brought me the
 morning and evening meals. After this the Lady Zubaydah took counsel
 with the Caliph on the marriage of her favourite handmaid, and he gave
 leave and assigned to her a wedding portion of ten thousand gold
 pieces. So the Lady Zubaydah sent for the Kazi and witnesses who wrote
 our marriage-contract, after which the women made ready sweetmeats and
 rich viands and distributed them among all the Odahs[567] of the Harim.
 Thus they did other ten days, at the end of which time my mistress went
 to the baths.[568] Meanwhile, they set before me a tray of food whereon
 were various meats and among those dishes, which were enough to daze
 the wits, was a bowl of cumin-ragout containing chickens' breasts,
 fricandoed[569] and flavoured with sugar, pistachios, musk and
 rose-water. Then, by Allah, fair sirs, I did not long hesitate; but
 took my seat before the ragout and fell to and ate of it till I could
 no more. After this I wiped my hands, but forgot to wash them; and sat
 till it grew dark, when the wax-candles were lighted and the singing
 women came in with their tambourines and proceeded to display the bride
 in various dresses and to carry her in procession from room to room all
 round the palace, getting their palms crossed with gold. Then they
 brought her to me and disrobed her. When I found myself alone with her
 on the bed I embraced her, hardly believing in our union; but she smelt
 the strong odours of the ragout upon my hands and forthwith cried out
 with an exceeding loud cry, at which the slave-girls came running to
 her from all sides. I trembled with alarm, unknowing what was the
 matter, and the girls asked her, "What aileth thee, O our sister?" She
 answered them, "Take this madman away from me: I had thought he was a
 man of sense!" Quoth I to her, "What makes thee think me mad?" Quoth
 she, "Thou madman! what made thee eat of cumin-ragout and forget to
 wash thy hand? By Allah, I will requite thee for thy misconduct. Shall
 the like of thee come to bed with the like of me with unclean
 hands?[570]" Then she took from her side a plaited scourge and came
 down with it on my back and the place where I sit till her forearms
 were benumbed and I fainted away from the much beating; when she said
 to the handmaids, "Take him and carry him to the Chief of Police, that
 he may strike off the hand wherewith he ate of the cumin-ragout, and
 which he did not wash." When I heard this I said, "There is no Majesty
 and there is no Might save in Allah! Wilt thou cut off my hand, because
 I ate of a cumin-ragout and did not wash?" The handmaidens also
 interceded with her and kissed her hand saying, "O our sister, this man
 is a simpleton, punish him not for what he hath done this nonce;" but
 she answered, "By Allah, there is no help but that I dock him of
 somewhat, especially the offending member." Then she went away and I
 saw no more of her for ten days, during which time she sent me meat and
 drink by a slave-girl who told me that she had fallen sick from the
 smell of the cumin-ragout. After that time she came to me and said, "O
 black of face[571]! I will teach thee how to eat cumin-ragout without
 washing thy hands!" Then she cried out to the handmaids, who pinioned
 me; and she took a sharp razor and cut off my thumbs and great toes;
 even as you see, O fair assembly! Thereupon I swooned away, and she
 sprinkled some powder of healing herbs upon the stumps and when the
 blood was staunched, I said, "Never again will I eat of cumin-ragout
 without washing my hands forty times with potash and forty times with
 galangale and forty times with soap!" And she took of me an oath and
 bound me by a covenant to that effect. When, therefore, you brought me
 the cumin-ragout my colour changed and I said to myself, "It was this
 very dish that caused the cutting off of my thumbs and great toes;"
 and, when you forced me, I said, "Needs must I fulfil the oath I have
 sworn." "And what befel thee after this?" asked those present; and he
 answered, When I swore to her, her anger was appeased and I slept with
 her that night. We abode thus awhile till she said to me one day,
 "Verily the Palace of the Caliph is not a pleasant place for us to live
 in, and none ever entered it save thyself; and thou only by grace of
 the Lady Zubaydah. Now she hath given me fifty thousand dinars,"
 adding, "Take this money and go out and buy us a fair dwelling-house."
 So I fared forth and bought a fine and spacious mansion, whither she
 removed all the wealth she owned and what riches I had gained in stuffs
 and costly rarities. Such is the cause of the cutting off of my thumbs
 and great toes." We ate, (continued the Reeve) and were returning to
 our homes when there befel me with the Hunchback that thou wottest of.

 This then is my story, and peace be with thee! Quoth the King, "This
 story is on no wise more delectable than the story of the Hunchback;
 nay, it is even less so, and there is no help for the hanging of the
 whole of you." Then came forward the Jewish physician and kissing the
 ground said, "O King of the age, I will tell thee an history more
 wonderful than that of the Hunchback." "Tell on," said the King of
 China; so he began the


                      _TALE OF THE JEWISH DOCTOR._

 Right marvellous was a matter which came to pass to me in my youth. I
 lived in Damascus of Syria studying my art and, one day, as I was
 sitting at home behold, there came to me a Mameluke from the household
 of the Sáhib and said to me, "Speak with my lord!" So I followed him to
 the Viceroy's house and, entering the great hall, saw at its head a
 couch of cedar plated with gold whereon lay a sickly youth beautiful
 withal; fairer than he one could not see. I sat down by his head and
 prayed to Heaven for a cure; and he made me a sign with his eyes, so I
 said to him, "O my lord! favour me with thy hand, and safety be with
 thee!"[572] Then he put forth his left hand and I marvelled thereat and
 said, "By Allah, strange that this handsome youth, the son of a great
 house, should so lack good manners. This can be nothing but pride and
 conceit!" However I felt his pulse and wrote him a prescription and
 continued to visit him for ten days, at the end of which time he
 recovered and went to the Hammam,[573] whereupon the Viceroy gave me a
 handsome dress of honour and appointed me superintendent of the
 hospital which is in Damascus.[574] I accompanied him to the baths, the
 whole of which they had kept private for his accommodation; and the
 servants came in with him and took off his clothes within the bath, and
 when he was stripped I saw that his right hand had been newly cut off,
 and this was the cause of his weakliness. At this I was amazed and
 grieved for him: then, looking at his body, I saw on it the scars of
 scourge-stripes whereto he had applied unguents. I was troubled at the
 sight and my concern appeared in my face. The young man looked at me
 and, comprehending the matter, said, "O Physician of the age, marvel
 not at my case; I will tell thee my story as soon as we quit the
 baths." Then we washed and, returning to his house, ate somewhat of
 food and took rest awhile; after which he asked me, "What sayest thou
 to solacing thee by inspecting the supper-hall"; and I answered "So let
 it be." Thereupon he ordered the slaves to carry out the carpets and
 cushions required and roast a lamb and bring us some fruit. They did
 his bidding and we ate together, he using the left hand for the
 purpose. After a while I said to him, "Now tell me thy tale." "O
 Physician of the age," replied he, "Hear what befel me. Know that I am
 of the sons of Mosul, where my grandfather died leaving nine children
 of whom my father was the eldest. All grew up and took to them wives,
 but none of them was blessed with offspring except my father, to whom
 Providence vouchsafed me. So I grew up amongst my uncles who rejoiced
 in me with exceeding joy, till I came to man's estate. One day which
 happened to be a Friday, I went to the Cathedral-mosque of Mosul with
 my father and my uncles, and we prayed the congregational prayers,
 after which the folk went forth, except my father and uncles, who sat
 talking of wondrous things in foreign parts and the marvellous sights
 of strange cities. At last they mentioned Egypt, and one of my uncles
 said, "Travellers tell us that there is not on earth's face aught
 fairer than Cairo and her Nile;" and these words made me long to see
 Cairo. Quoth my father, "Whoso hath not seen Cairo hath not seen the
 world. Her dust is golden and her Nile a miracle holden; and her women
 are as Houris fair; puppets, beautiful pictures; her houses are palaces
 rare; her water is sweet and light[575] and her mud a commodity and a
 medicine beyond compare, even as said the poet in this his poetry:—

 The Nile[576]-flood this day is the gain you own; ✿ You alone in such
    gain and bounties wone:
 The Nile is my tear-flood of severance, ✿ And here none is forlorn but
    I alone.

 Moreover temperate is her air, and with fragrance blent, which
 surpasseth aloes-wood in scent; and how should it be otherwise, she
 being the Mother of the World? And Allah favour him who wrote these
 lines:—

 An I quit Cairo and her pleasaunces, ✿ Where can I wend to find so
    gladsome ways?
 Shall I desert that site, whose grateful scents ✿ Joy every soul and
    call for loudest praise?
 Where every palace, as another Eden, ✿ Carpets and cushions richly
    wrought displays;
 A city wooing sight and sprite to glee, ✿ Where Saint meets Sinner and
    each 'joys his craze;
 Where friend meets friend, by Providence united ✿ In greeny garden and
    in palmy maze:
 People of Cairo, an by Allah's doom ✿ I fare, with you in thoughts I
    wone always!
 Whisper not Cairo in the ear of Zephyr, ✿ Lest for her like of garden
    scents he reave her.[577]

 And if your eyes saw her earth, and the adornment thereof with bloom,
 and the purfling of it with all manner blossoms, and the islands of the
 Nile and how much is therein of wide-spread and goodly prospect, and if
 you bent your sight upon the Abyssinian Pond[578], your glance would
 not revert from the scene quit of wonder; for nowhere would you behold
 the fellow of that lovely view; and, indeed, the two arms of the Nile
 embrace most luxuriant verdure[579], as the white of the eye
 encompasseth its black or like filagree'd silver surrounding
 chrysolites. And divinely gifted was the poet who thereanent said these
 couplets:—

 By th' Abyssinian Pond, O day divine! ✿ In morning twilight and in
    sunny shine:
 The water prisoned in its verdurous walls, ✿ Like sabre flashes before
    shrinking eyne:
 And in The Garden sat we while it drains ✿ Slow draught, with purfled
    sides dyed finest fine:
 The stream is rippled by the hands of clouds; ✿ We too, a-rippling, on
    our rugs recline,
 Passing pure wine, and whoso leaves us there ✿ Shall ne'er arise from
    fall his woes design:
 Draining long draughts from large and brimming bowls, ✿ Administ'ring
    thirst's only medicine—wine.

 And what is there to compare with the Rasad, the Observatory, and its
 charms whereof every viewer as he approacheth saith:—"Verily this spot
 is specialised with all manner of excellence! And if thou speak of the
 Night of Nile-full,[580] give the rainbow and distribute it![581] And
 if thou behold The Garden at eventide, with the cool shades sloping far
 and wide, a marvel thou wouldst see and wouldst incline to Egypt in
 ecstacy. And wert thou by Cairo's river side,[582] when the sun is
 sinking and the stream dons mail-coat and habergeon[583] over its other
 vestments, thou wouldst be quickened to new life by its gentle zephyrs
 and by its all-sufficient shade." So spake he and the rest fell to
 describing Egypt and her Nile. As I heard their accounts, my thoughts
 dwelt upon the subject and when, after talking their fill, all arose
 and went their ways, I lay down to sleep that night, but sleep came not
 because of my violent longing for Egypt; and neither meat pleased me
 nor drink. After a few days my uncles equipped themselves for a
 trade-journey to Egypt; and I wept before my father till he made ready
 for me fitting merchandise, and he consented to my going with them,
 saying however, "Let him not enter Cairo, but leave him to sell his
 wares at Damascus." So I took leave of my father and we fared forth
 from Mosul and gave not over travelling till we reached Aleppo[584]
 where we halted certain days. Then we marched onwards till we made
 Damascus and we found her a city as though she were a Paradise,
 abounding in trees and streams and birds and fruits of all kinds. We
 alighted at one of the Khans, where my uncles tarried awhile selling
 and buying; and they bought and sold also on my account, each dirham
 turning a profit of five on prime cost, which pleased me mightily.
 After this they left me alone and set their faces Egyptwards; whilst I
 abode at Damascus, where I had hired from a jeweller, for two dinars a
 month, a mansion[585] whose beauties would beggar the tongue. Here I
 remained, eating and drinking and spending what monies I had in hand
 till, one day, as I was sitting at the door of my house behold, there
 came up a young lady clad in costliest raiment—never saw my eyes
 richer. I winked[586] at her and she stepped inside without hesitation
 and stood within. I entered with her and shut the door upon myself and
 her; whereupon she raised her face-veil and threw off her mantilla,
 when I found her like a pictured moon of rare and marvellous
 loveliness; and love of her gat hold of my heart. So I rose and brought
 a tray of the most delicate eatables and fruits and whatso befitted the
 occasion, and we ate and played and after that we drank till the wine
 turned our heads. Then I lay with her the sweetest of nights and in the
 morning I offered her ten gold pieces; when her face lowered and her
 eyebrows wrinkled and shaking with wrath she cried, "Fie upon thee, O
 my sweet companion! dost thou deem that I covet thy money?" Then she
 took out from the bosom of her shift[587] fifteen dinars and, laying
 them before me, said, "By Allah! unless thou take them I will never
 come back to thee." So I accepted them and she said to me, "O my
 beloved! expect me again in three days' time, when I will be with thee
 between sunset and supper-tide; and do thou prepare for us with these
 dinars the same entertainment as yesternight." So saying, she took
 leave of me and went away and all my senses went with her. On the third
 day she came again, clad in stuff weft with gold wire, and wearing
 raiment and ornaments finer than before. I had prepared the place for
 her ere she arrived and the repast was ready; so we ate and drank and
 lay together, as we had done, till the morning, when she gave me other
 fifteen gold pieces and promised to come again after three days.
 Accordingly, I made ready for her and, at the appointed time, she
 presented herself more richly dressed than on the first and second
 occasion, and said to me, "O my lord, am I not beautiful?" "Yea, by
 Allah thou art!" answered I, and she went on, "Wilt thou allow me to
 bring with me a young lady fairer than I, and younger in years, that
 she may play with us and thou and she may laugh and make merry and
 rejoice her heart, for she hath been very sad this long time past, and
 hath asked me to take her out and let her spend the night abroad with
 me?" "Yea, by Allah!" I replied; and we drank till the wine turned our
 heads and slept till the morning, when she gave me other fifteen
 dinars, saying, "Add something to thy usual provision on account of the
 young lady who will come with me." Then she went away, and on the
 fourth day I made ready the house as usual, and soon after sunset
 behold, she came, accompanied by another damsel carefully wrapped in
 her mantilla. They entered and sat down; and when I saw them I repeated
 these verses:—

 How dear is our day and how lucky our lot, ✿ When the cynic's away with
    his tongue malign!
 When love and delight and the swimming of head ✿ send cleverness
    trotting,—the best boon of wine.
 When the full moon shines from the cloudy veil, ✿ And the branchlet
    sways in her greens that shine:
 When the red rose mantles in freshest cheek, ✿ And Narcissus[588] opeth
    his love-sick eyne:
 When pleasure with those I love is so sweet, ✿ When friendship with
    those I love is complete!

 I rejoiced to see them, and lighted the candles after receiving them
 with gladness and delight. They doffed their heavy outer dresses and
 the new damsel uncovered her face when I saw that she was like the moon
 at its full—never beheld I aught more beautiful. Then I rose and set
 meat and drink before them, and we ate and drank; and I kept giving
 mouthfuls to the new comer, crowning her cup and drinking with her till
 the first damsel, waxing inwardly jealous, asked me, "By Allah, is she
 not more delicious than I?"; whereto I answered, "Ay, by the Lord!" "It
 is my wish that thou lie with her this night; for I am thy mistress but
 she is our visitor." "Upon my head be it, and my eyes." Then she rose
 and spread the carpets for our bed[589] and I took the young lady and
 lay with her that night till morning, when I awoke and found myself
 wet, as I thought, with sweat. I sat up and tried to arouse the damsel;
 but when I shook her by the shoulders my hand became crimson with blood
 and her head rolled off the pillow. Thereupon my senses fled and I
 cried aloud, saying, "O All-powerful Protector, grant me Thy
 protection!" Then finding her neck had been severed, I sprung up and
 the world waxed black before my eyes, and I looked for the lady, my
 former love, but could not find her. So I knew that it was she who had
 murdered the damsel in her jealousy[590], and said, "There is no
 Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!
 What is to be done now?" I considered awhile then, doffing my clothes,
 dug a hole in the middle of the courtyard, wherein I laid the murdered
 girl with her jewellery and golden ornaments; and, throwing back the
 earth on her, replaced the slabs of the marble[591] pavement. After
 this I made the Ghusl or total ablution,[592] and put on pure clothes;
 then, taking what money I had left, locked up the house and summoned
 courage and went to its owner to whom I paid a year's rent, saying, "I
 am about to join my uncles in Cairo." Presently I set out and,
 journeying to Egypt, foregathered with my uncles who rejoiced in me,
 and I found that they had made an end of selling their merchandise.
 They asked me, "What is the cause of thy coming?;" and I answered "I
 longed for a sight of you;" but did not let them know that I had any
 money with me. I abode with them a year, enjoying the pleasures of
 Cairo and her Nile,[593] and squandering the rest of my money in
 feasting and carousing till the time drew near for the departure of my
 uncles, when I fled from them and hid myself. They made enquiries and
 sought for me, but hearing no tidings they said, "He will have gone
 back to Damascus." When they departed I came forth from my hiding-place
 and abode in Cairo three years, until naught remained of my money. Now
 every year I used to send the rent of the Damascus house to its owner,
 until at last I had nothing left but enough to pay him for one year's
 rent and my breast was straitened. So I travelled to Damascus and
 alighted at the house whose owner, the jeweller, was glad to see me and
 I found everything locked up as I had left it. I opened the closets and
 took out my clothes and necessaries and came upon, beneath the
 carpet-bed whereon I had lain that night with the girl who had been
 beheaded, a golden necklace set with ten gems of passing beauty. I took
 it up and, cleansing it of the blood, sat gazing upon it and wept
 awhile. Then I abode in the house two days and on the third I entered
 the Hammam and changed my clothes. I had no money by me now; so Satan
 whispered temptation to me that the Decree of Destiny be carried out.
 Next day I took the jewelled necklace to the bazar and handed it to a
 broker who made me sit down in the shop of the jeweller, my landlord,
 and bade me have patience till the market was full[594], when he
 carried off the ornament and proclaimed it for sale, privily and
 without my knowledge. The necklet was priced as worth two thousand
 dinars but the broker returned to me and said, "This collar is of
 copper, a mere counterfeit after the fashion of the Franks[595] and a
 thousand dirhams have been bidden for it." "Yes," I answered, "I knew
 it to be copper, as we had it made for a certain person that we might
 mock her: now my wife hath inherited it and we wish to sell it; so go
 and take over the thousand dirhams."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
 of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

                 Now when it was the Twenty-ninth Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the beautiful
 youth said to the broker, "Take over the thousand dirhams"; and when
 the broker heard this, he knew that the case was suspicious. So he
 carried the collar to the Syndic of the bazar, and the Syndic took it
 to the Governor who was also prefect of police, and said to him falsely
 enough, "This necklet was stolen from my house, and we have found the
 thief in traders' dress." So before I was aware of it the watch got
 round me and, making me their prisoner, carried me before the Governor
 who questioned me of the collar. I told him the tale I had told to the
 broker; but he laughed and said, "These words are not true." Then,
 before I knew what was doing, the guard stripped off my clothes and
 came down with palm-rods upon my ribs, till for the smart of the stick
 I confessed, "It was I who stole it;" saying to myself, "'Tis better
 for thee to say, I stole it, than to let them know that its owner was
 murdered in thy house, for then would they slay thee to avenge her." So
 they wrote down that I had stolen it and they cut off my hand and
 scalded the stump in oil,[596] when I swooned away for pain; but they
 gave me wine to drink and I recovered and, taking up my hand, was going
 to my fine house, when my landlord said to me, "Inasmuch, O my son, as
 this hath befallen thee, thou must leave my house and look out for
 another lodging for thee, since thou art convicted of theft. Thou art a
 handsome youth, but who will pity thee after this?" "O my master" said
 I, "bear with me but two days or three, till I find me another place."
 He answered, "So be it," and went away and left me. I returned to the
 house where I sat weeping and saying, "How shall I go back to my own
 people with my hand lopped off and they know not that I am innocent?
 Perchance even after this Allah may order some matter for me." And I
 wept with exceeding weeping; grief beset me and I remained in sore
 trouble for two days; but on the third day my landlord came suddenly in
 to me, and with him some of the guard and the Syndic of the bazar, who
 had falsely charged me with stealing the necklet. I went up to them and
 asked, "What is the matter?" however, they pinioned me without further
 parley and threw a chain about my neck, saying, "The necklet which was
 with thee hath proved to be the property of the Wazir of Damascus who
 is also her Viceroy;" and they added, "It was missing from his house
 three years ago at the same time as his younger daughter." When I heard
 these words, my heart sank within me and I said to myself, "Thy life is
 gone beyond a doubt! By Allah, needs must I tell the Chief my story;
 and, if he will, let him kill me, and if he please, let him pardon me."
 So they carried me to the Wazir's house and made me stand between his
 hands. When he saw me, he glanced at me out of the corner of his eye
 and said to those present, "Why did ye lop off his hand? This man is
 unfortunate, and there is no fault in him; indeed ye have wronged him
 in cutting off his hand." When I heard this, I took heart and, my soul
 presaging good, I said to him, "By Allah, O my lord, I am no thief; but
 they calumniated me with a vile calumny, and they scourged me midmost
 the market, bidding me confess till, for the pain of the rods, I lied
 against myself and confessed the theft, albeit I am altogether innocent
 of it." "Fear not," quoth the Viceroy, "no harm shall come to thee."
 Then he ordered the Syndic of the bazar to be imprisoned and said to
 him, "Give this man the blood-money for his hand; and, if thou delay I
 will hang thee and seize all thy property." Moreover he called to his
 guards who took him and dragged him away, leaving me with the Chief.
 Then they loosed by his command the chain from my neck and unbound my
 arms; and he looked at me, and said, "O my son, be true with me, and
 tell me how this necklace came to thee." And he repeated these verses:—

 Truth best befits thee, albeit truth ✿ Shall bring thee to burn on the
    threatened fire.

 "By Allah, O my lord," answered I, "I will tell thee nothing but the
 truth." Then I related to him all that had passed between me and the
 first lady, and how she had brought me the second and had slain her out
 of jealousy, and I detailed for him the tale to its full. When he heard
 my story, he shook his head and struck his right hand upon the
 left,[597] and putting his kerchief over his face wept awhile and then
 repeated:—

 I see the woes of the world abound, ✿ And worldings sick with spleen
    and teen;
 There's One who the meeting of two shall part, ✿ And who part not are
    few and far between!

 Then he turned to me and said, "Know, O my son, that the elder damsel
 who first came to thee was my daughter whom I used to keep closely
 guarded. When she grew up, I sent her to Cairo and married her to her
 cousin, my brother's son. After a while he died and she came back: but
 she had learnt wantonness and ungraciousness from the people of
 Cairo[598]; so she visited thee four times and at last brought her
 younger sister. Now they were sisters german and much attached to each
 other; and, when that adventure happened to the elder, she disclosed
 her secret to her sister who desired to go out with her. So she asked
 thy leave and carried her to thee; after which she returned alone and,
 finding her weeping, I questioned her of her sister, but she said:—I
 know nothing of her. However, she presently told her mother privily of
 what had happened and how she had cut off her sister's head and her
 mother told me. Then she ceased not to weep and say:—By Allah! I shall
 cry for her till I die. Nor did she give over mourning till her heart
 broke and she died; and things fell out after that fashion. See then, O
 my son, what hath come to pass; and now I desire thee not to thwart me
 in what I am about to offer thee, and it is that I purpose to marry
 thee to my youngest daughter; for she is a virgin and born of another
 mother[599]; and I will take no dower of thee but, on the contrary,
 will appoint thee an allowance, and thou shalt abide with me in my
 house in the stead of my son." "So be it," I answered, "and how could I
 hope for such good fortune?" Then he sent at once for the Kazi and
 witnesses, and let write my marriage-contract with his daughter and I
 went in to her. Moreover, he got me from the Syndic of the bazar a
 large sum of money and I became in high favour with him. During this
 year news came to me that my father was dead and the Wazir despatched a
 courier, with letters bearing the royal sign-manual, to fetch me the
 money which my father had left behind him, and now I am living in all
 the solace of life. Such was the manner of the cutting off my right
 hand. "I marvelled at his story (continued the Jew), and I abode with
 him three days after which he gave me much wealth, and I set out and
 travelled Eastward till I reached this your city and the sojourn suited
 me right well; so I took up my abode here and there befel me what thou
 knowest with the Hunchback." Thereupon the King of China shook his
 head[600] and said, "This story of thine is not stranger and more
 wondrous and marvellous and delectable than the tale of the Hunchback;
 and so needs must I hang the whole number of you. However there yet
 remains the Tailor who is the head of all the offence;" and he added,
 "O Tailor, if thou canst tell me any thing more wonderful than the
 story of the Hunchback, I will pardon you all your offences." Thereupon
 the man came forward and began to tell the


                         _TALE OF THE TAILOR._

 Know, O King of the age, that most marvellous was that which befel me
 but yesterday, before I foregathered with the Hunchback. It so chanced
 that in the early day I was at the marriage-feast of one of my
 companions, who had gotten together in his house some twenty of the
 handicraftsmen of this city, amongst them tailors and silk-spinners and
 carpenters and others of the same kidney. As soon as the sun had risen,
 they set food[601] before us that we might eat when behold, the master
 of the house entered, and with him a foreign youth and a well-favoured
 of the people of Baghdad, wearing clothes as handsome as handsome could
 be; and he was of right comely presence save that he was lame of one
 leg. He came and saluted us and we stood up to receive him; but when he
 was about to sit down he espied amongst us a certain man which was a
 Barber; whereupon he refused to be seated and would have gone away. But
 we stopped him and our host also stayed him, making oath that he should
 not leave us and asked him, "What is the reason of thy coming in and
 going out again at once?"; whereto he answered, "By Allah, O my lord,
 do not hinder me; for the cause of my turning back is yon Barber of bad
 omen,[602] yon black o' face, yon ne'er-do-well!" When the house-master
 heard these words he marvelled with extreme marvel and said, "How
 cometh this young man, who haileth from Baghdad, to be so troubled and
 perplexed about this Barber?" Then we looked at the stranger and said,
 "Explain the cause of thine anger against the Barber." "O fair
 company," quoth the youth, "there befel me a strange adventure with
 this Barber in Baghdad (which is my native city); he was the cause of
 the breaking of my leg and of my lameness, and I have sworn never to
 sit in the same place with him, nor even tarry in any town where he
 happens to abide; and I have bidden adieu to Baghdad and travelled far
 from it and came to stay in this your city; yet I have hardly passed
 one night before I meet him again. But not another day shall go by ere
 I fare forth from here." Said we to him, "Allah upon thee, tell us the
 tale;" and the youth replied (the Barber changing colour from brown to
 yellow as he spoke):—Know, O fair company, that my father was one of
 the chief merchants of Baghdad, and Almighty Allah had blessed him with
 no son but myself. When I grew up and reached man's estate, my father
 was received into the mercy of Allah (whose Name be exalted!) and left
 me money and eunuchs, servants and slaves; and I used to dress well and
 diet well. Now Allah had made me a hater of women-kind and one day, as
 I was walking along a street in Baghdad a party of females met me face
 to face in the footway; so I fled from them and, entering an alley
 which was no thoroughfare, sat down upon a stone-bench at its other
 end. I had not sat there long before the latticed window of one of the
 houses opposite was thrown open, and there appeared at it a young lady,
 as she were the full moon at its fullest; never in my life saw I her
 like; and she began to water some flowers on the window-sill.[603] She
 turned right and left and, seeing me watching her, shut the window and
 went away.

 Thereupon fire was suddenly enkindled in my heart; my mind was
 possessed with her and my woman-hate turned to woman-love. I continued
 sitting there, lost to the world, till sunset when lo! the Kazi of the
 city came riding by with his slaves before him and his eunuchs behind
 him, and dismounting entered the house in which the damsel had
 appeared. By this I knew that he was her father; so I went home
 sorrowful and cast myself upon my carpet-bed in grief. Then my
 handmaids flocked in and sat about me, unknowing what ailed me; but I
 addressed no speech to them, and they wept and wailed over me.
 Presently in came an old woman who looked at me and saw with a glance
 what was the matter with me: so she sat down by my head and spoke me
 fair, saying, "O my son, tell me all about it and I will be the means
 of thy union with her."[604] So I related to her what had happened and
 she answered, "O my son, this one is the daughter of the Kazi of
 Baghdad who keepeth her in the closest seclusion; and the window where
 thou sawest her is her floor, whilst her father occupies the large
 saloon in the lower story. She is often there alone and I am wont to
 visit at the house; so thou shalt not win to her save through me. Now
 set thy wits to work and be of good cheer." With these words she went
 away and I took heart at what she said and my people rejoiced that day,
 seeing me rise in the morning safe and sound. By and by the old woman
 returned looking chopfallen[605], and said, "O my son, do not ask me
 how I fared with her! When I told her that, she cried at me:—If thou
 hold not thy peace, O hag of ill-omen, and leave not such talk, I will
 entreat thee as thou deservest and do thee die by the foulest of
 deaths. But needs must I have at her a second time.[606]" When I heard
 this it added ailment to my ailment and the neighbours visited me and
 judged that I was not long for this world; but after some days, the old
 woman came to me and, putting her mouth close to my ear, whispered, "O
 my son; I claim from thee the gift of good news." With this my soul
 returned to me and I said, "Whatever thou wilt shall be thine."
 Thereupon she began, "Yesterday I went to the young lady who, seeing me
 broken in spirit and shedding tears from reddened eyes, asked me:—O
 naunty[607] mine, what ails thee, that I see thy breast so
 straitened?"; and I answered her, weeping bitterly, "O my lady, I am
 just come from the house of a youth who loves thee and who is about to
 die for sake of thee!" Quoth she (and her heart was softened), "And who
 is this youth of whom thou speakest?"; and quoth I, "He is to me as a
 son and the fruit of my vitals. He saw thee, some days ago, at the
 window watering thy flowers and espying thy face and wrists he fell in
 love at first sight. I let him know what happened to me the last time I
 was with thee, whereupon his ailment increased, he took to the pillow
 and he is naught now but a dead man, and no doubt whatever of it." At
 this she turned pale and asked, "All this for my sake?"; and I
 answered, "Ay, by Allah![608] what wouldst thou have me do?" Said she,
 "Go back to him and greet him for me and tell him that I am twice more
 heartsick than he is. And on Friday, before the hour of public prayer,
 bid him here to the house, and I will come down and open the door for
 him. Then I will carry him up to my chamber and foregather with him for
 awhile, and let him depart before my father return from the Mosque."
 When I heard the old woman's words, all my sickness suddenly fell from
 me, my anguish ceased and my heart was comforted, I took off what
 clothes were on me and gave them to her and, as she turned to go, she
 said; "Keep a good heart!" "I have not a jot of sorrow left," I
 replied. My household and intimates rejoiced in my recovery and I abode
 thus till Friday, when behold, the old woman came in and asked me how I
 did, to which I answered that I was well and in good case. Then I
 donned my clothes and perfumed myself and sat down to await the
 congregation going in to prayers, that I might betake myself to her.
 But the old woman said to me, "Thou hast time and to spare: so thou
 wouldst do well to go to the Hammam and have thy hair shaven off
 (especially after thy ailment), so as not to show traces of sickness."
 "This were the best way," answered I, "I have just now bathed in hot
 water; but I will have my head shaved." Then I said to my page, "Go to
 the bazar and bring me a barber, a discreet fellow and one not inclined
 to meddling or impertinent curiosity or likely to split my head with
 his excessive talk."[609] The boy went out at once and brought back
 with him this wretched old man, this Shaykh of ill-omen. When he came
 in he saluted me and I returned his salutation; then quoth he, "Of a
 truth I see thee thin of body;" and quoth I, "I have been ailing." He
 continued, "Allah drive far away from thee thy woe and thy sorrow and
 thy trouble and thy distress." "Allah grant thy prayer!" said I. He
 pursued, "All gladness to thee, O my master, for indeed recovery is
 come to thee. Dost thou wish to be polled or to be blooded? Indeed it
 was a tradition of Ibn Abbas[610] (Allah accept of him!) that the
 Apostle said:—Whoso cutteth his hair on a Friday, the Lord shall avert
 from him threescore and ten calamities; and again is related of him
 also that he said:—Cupping on a Friday keepeth from loss of sight and a
 host of diseases." "Leave this talk," I cried; "come, shave me my head
 at once for I can't stand it." So he rose and put forth his hand in
 most leisurely way and took out a kerchief and unfolded it, and lo! it
 contained an astrolabe[611] with seven parallel plates mounted in
 silver. Then he went to the middle of the court and raised head and
 instrument towards the sun's rays and looked for a long while. When
 this was over, he came back and said to me, "Know that there have
 elapsed of this our day, which be Friday, and this Friday be the tenth
 of the month Safar in the six hundred and fifty-third year since the
 Hegira or Flight of the Apostle (on whom be the bestest of blessings
 and peace!) and the seventh thousand three hundred and twentieth year
 of the era of Alexander, eight degrees and six minutes. Furthermore the
 ascendant of this our day is, according to the exactest science of
 computation, the planet Mars; and it so happeneth that Mercury is in
 conjunction with him, denoting an auspicious moment for hair-cutting;
 and this also maketh manifest to me that thou desirest union with a
 certain person and that your intercourse will not be propitious. But
 after this there occurreth a sign respecting a matter which will befal
 thee and whereof I will not speak." "O thou," cried I, "by Allah, thou
 weariest me and scatterest my wits and thy forecast is other than good;
 I sent for thee to poll my head and naught else: so up and shave me and
 prolong not thy speech." "By Allah," replied he, "if thou but knew what
 is about to befal thee, thou wouldst do nothing this day, and I counsel
 thee to act as I tell thee by computation of the constellations." "By
 Allah," said I, "never did I see a barber who excelled in judicial
 astrology save thyself: but I think and I know that thou art most
 prodigal of frivolous talk. I sent for thee only to shave my head, but
 thou comest and pesterest me with this sorry prattle." "What more
 wouldst thou have?" replied he. "Allah hath bounteously bestowed on
 thee a Barber, who is an astrologer, one learned in alchemy and white
 magic[612]; syntax, grammar, and lexicology; the arts of logic,
 rhetoric and elocution; mathematics, arithmetic and algebra; astronomy,
 astromancy and geometry; theology, the Traditions of the Apostle and
 the Commentaries on the Koran. Furthermore, I have read books galore
 and digested them and have had experience of affairs and comprehended
 them. In short I have learned the theorick and the practick of all the
 arts and sciences; I know everything of them by rote and I am a past
 master _in totâ re scibili_. Thy father loved me for my lack of
 officiousness, argal, to serve thee is a religious duty incumbent on
 me. I am no busy-body as thou seemest to suppose, and on this account I
 am known as The Silent Man, also, The Modest Man. Wherefore it behoveth
 thee to render thanks to Allah Almighty and not cross me, for I am a
 true counsellor to thee and benevolently minded towards thee. Would
 that I were in thy service a whole year that thou mightest do me
 justice; and I would ask thee no wage for all this." When I heard his
 flow of words, I said to him, "Doubtless thou wilt be my death this
 day!"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
 permitted say.

[Illustration]

                  Now when it was the Thirtieth Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young man
 said to the Barber, "Thou certainly wilt be the death of me this very
 day!" "O master mine," replied he, "I am he, The Silent Man hight, by
 reason of the fewness of my words, to distinguish me from my six
 brothers. For the eldest is called Al-Bakbúk, the prattler; the second
 Al-Haddár, the babbler; the third Al-Fakík, the gabbler; the fourth,
 his name is Al-Kuz al-aswáni, the long-necked Gugglet, from his eternal
 chattering; the fifth is Al-Nashshár, the tattler and tale-teller; the
 sixth Shakáshik, or many-clamours; and the seventh is famous as
 Al-Sámit, the Silent Man, and this is my noble self!" Whilst he
 redoubled his talk, I thought my gall-bladder would have burst; so I
 said to the servant, "Give him a quarter-dinar and dismiss him and let
 him go from me in the name of God who made him. I won't have my head
 shaved to-day." "What words be these, O my lord?" cried he. "By Allah!
 I will accept no hire of thee till I have served thee and have
 ministered to thy wants; and I care not if I never take money of thee.
 If thou know not my quality, I know thine; and I owe thy father, honest
 man, on whom Allah Almighty have mercy! many a kindness, for he was a
 liberal soul and a generous. By Allah, he sent for me one day, as it
 were this blessed day, and I went in to him and found a party of his
 intimates about him." Quoth he to me, "Let me blood;" so I pulled out
 my astrolabe and, taking the sun's altitude for him, I ascertained that
 the ascendant was inauspicious and the hour unfavourable for blooding.
 I told him of this, and he did according to my bidding and awaited a
 better opportunity. So I made these lines in honour of him:—

 I went to my patron some blood to let him, ✿ But found that the moment
    was far from good:
 So I sat and I talked of all strangenesses, ✿ And with jests and jokes
    his good will I wooed:
 They pleased him and cried he, 'O man of wit, ✿ Thou hast proved thee
    perfect in merry mood!'
 Quoth I, 'O thou Lord of men, save thou ✿ Lend me art and wisdom I'm
    fou and wood:
 In thee gather grace, boon, bounty, suavity; ✿ And I guerdon the world
    with lore, science and gravity.

 Thy father was delighted and cried out to the servant, "Give him an
 hundred and three gold pieces with a robe of honour!" The man obeyed
 his orders, and I awaited an auspicious moment, when I blooded him; and
 he did not baulk me; nay he thanked me and I was also thanked and
 praised by all present. When the bloodletting was over I had no power
 to keep silence and asked him, "By Allah, O my lord, what made thee say
 to the servant:—Give him an hundred and _three_ dinars?"; and he
 answered, "One dinar was for the astrological observation, another for
 thy pleasant conversation, the third for the phlebotomisation, and the
 remaining hundred and the dress were for thy verses in my
 commendation." "May Allah show small mercy to my father," exclaimed I,
 "for knowing the like of thee." He laughed and ejaculated, "There is no
 god but _the_ God and Mohammed is the Apostle of God! Glory to Him that
 changeth and is changed not! I took thee for a man of sense, but I see
 thou babblest and dotest for illness. Allah hath said in the Blessed
 Book[613]:—Paradise is prepared for the goodly who bridle their anger
 and forgive men, and so forth; and in any case thou art excused. Yet I
 cannot conceive the cause of thy hurry and flurry; and thou must know
 that thy father and thy grandfather did nothing without consulting me,
 and indeed it hath been said truly enough:—Let the adviser be prized;
 and:—There is no vice in advice; and it is also said in certain saws,
 Whoso hath no counsellor elder than he, will never himself an elder
 be[614]; and the poet says:—

 Whatever needful thing thou undertake, ✿ Consult th' experienced and
    contraire him not!"

 And indeed thou shalt never find a man better versed in affairs than I,
 and I am here standing on my feet to serve thee. I am not vexed with
 thee: why shouldest thou be vexed with me? But whatever happen I will
 bear patiently with thee in memory of the much kindness thy father
 shewed me." "By Allah," cried I, "O thou with tongue long as the tail
 of a jackass, thou persistest in pestering me with thy prate and thou
 becomest more longsome in thy long speeches, when all I want of thee is
 to shave my head and wend thy way!" Then he lathered my head saying, "I
 perceive thou art vexed with me, but I will not take it ill of thee,
 for thy wit is weak and thou art but a laddy: it was only yesterday I
 used to take thee on my shoulder[615] and carry thee to school." "O my
 brother," said I, "for Allah's sake do what I want and go thy gait!"
 And I rent my garments.[616] When he saw me do this he took the razor
 and fell to sharpening it and gave not over stropping it until my
 senses were well nigh leaving me. Then he came up to me and shaved part
 of my head; then he held his hand and then he said, "O my lord, haste
 is Satan's gait whilst patience is of Allah the Compassionate. But
 thou, O my master, I ken thou knowest not my rank; for verily this hand
 alighteth upon the heads of Kings and Emirs and Wazirs, and sages and
 doctors learned in the law, and the poet said of one like me:—

 All crafts are like necklaces strung on a string, ✿ But this Barber's
    the union pearl of the band:
 High over all craftsmen he ranketh, and why? ✿ The heads of the Kings
    are under his hand!"[617]

 Then said I, "_Do_ leave off talking about what concerneth thee not:
 indeed thou hast straitened my breast and distracted my mind." Quoth
 he, "Meseems thou art a hasty man;" and quoth I, "Yes! yes! yes!" and
 he, "I rede thee practise restraint of self, for haste is Satan's pelf
 which bequeatheth only repentance and ban and bane, and He (upon whom
 be blessings and peace!) hath said, The best of works is that wherein
 deliberation lurks: but I, by Allah! have some doubt about thine
 affair; and so I should like thee to let me know what it is thou art in
 such haste to do; for I fear me it is other than good." Then he
 continued, "It wanteth three hours yet to prayer-time; but I do not
 wish to be in doubt upon this matter; nay, I must know the moment
 exactly, for truly:—A guess shot in times of doubt, oft brings harm
 about; especially in the like of me, a superior person whose merits are
 famous amongst mankind at large; and it doth not befit me to talk at
 random, as do the common sort of astrologers." So saying, he threw down
 the razor and taking up the astrolabe, went forth under the sun and
 stood there a long time; after which he returned and counting on his
 fingers said to me, "There remain still to prayer-time three full hours
 and complete, neither more nor yet less, according to the most learned
 astronomicals and the wisest makers of almanacks." "Allah upon thee,"
 cried I, "hold thy tongue with me, for thou breakest my liver in
 pieces." So he took the razor and, after sharpening it as before and
 shaving other two hairs of my head, he again held his hand and said, "I
 am concerned about thy hastiness and indeed thou wouldst do well to let
 me into the cause of it; 'twere the better for thee, as thou knowest
 that neither thy father nor thy grandfather ever did a single thing
 save by my advice." When I saw that there was no escape from him I said
 to myself, "The time for prayer draws near and I wish to go to her
 before the folk come out of the mosque. If I am delayed much longer, I
 know not how to come at her." Then said I aloud, "Be quick and stint
 this talk and impertinence, for I have to go to a party at the house of
 some of my intimates." When he heard me speak of the party, he said,
 "This thy day is a blessed day for me! In very sooth it was but
 yesterday I invited a company of my friends and I have forgotten to
 provide anything for them to eat. This very moment I was thinking of
 it: Alas, how I shall be disgraced in their eyes!" "Be not distressed
 about this matter," answered I; "have I not told thee that I am bidden
 to an entertainment this day? So everything in my house, eatable and
 drinkable, shall be thine, if thou wilt only get through thy work and
 make haste to shave my head." He replied, "Allah requite thee with
 good! Specify to me what is in thy house for my guests that I may be
 ware of it." Quoth I, "Five dishes of meat and ten chickens with
 reddened breasts[618] and a roasted lamb." "Set them before me," quoth
 he, "that I may see them." So I told my people to buy, borrow or steal
 them and bring them in anywise, and had all this set before him. When
 he saw it he cried, "The wine is wanting," and I replied, "I have a
 flagon or two of good old grape-juice in the house," and he said, "Have
 it brought out!" So I sent for it and he exclaimed, "Allah bless thee
 for a generous disposition! But there are still the essences and
 perfumes." So I bade them set before him a box containing Nadd,[619]
 the best of compound perfumes, together with fine lign-aloes, ambergris
 and musk unmixed, the whole worth fifty dinars. Now the time waxed
 strait and my heart straitened with it; so I said to him, "Take it all
 and finish shaving my head by the life of Mohammed (whom Allah bless
 and keep!)." "By Allah," said he, "I will not take it till I see all
 that is in it." So I bade the page open the box and the Barber laid
 down the astrolabe, leaving the greater part of my head unpolled; and,
 sitting on the ground, turned over the scents and incense and
 aloes-wood and essences till I was well nigh distraught. Then he took
 the razor and coming up to me shaved off some few hairs and repeated
 these lines:—

 The boy like his father shall surely show, ✿ As the tree from its
    parent root shall grow.[620]

 Then said he, "By Allah, O my son, I know not whether to thank thee or
 thy father; for my entertainment this day is all due to thy bounty and
 beneficence; and, although none of my company be worthy of it, yet I
 have a set of honourable men, to wit Zantút the bath-keeper and Salí'a
 the corn-chandler; and Sílat the bean-seller; and Akrashah the
 greengrocer; and Humayd the scavenger; and Sa'íd the camel-man; and
 Suwayd the porter; and Abu Makárish the bathman[621]; and Kasím the
 watchman; and Karím the groom. There is not among the whole of them a
 bore or a bully in his cups; nor a meddler nor a miser of his money,
 and each and every hath some dance which he danceth and some of his own
 couplets which he caroleth; and the best of them is that, like thy
 servant, thy slave here, they know not what much talking is nor what
 forwardness means." The bath-keeper sings to the tom-tom[622] a song
 which enchants; and he stands up and dances and chants,

                 I am going, O mammy, to fill up my pot.

 As for the corn-chandler he brings more skill to it than any; he dances
 and sings,

           O Keener,[623] O sweetheart, thou fallest not short

 and he leaves no one's vitals sound for laughing at him. But the
 scavenger sings so that the birds stop to listen to him and dances and
 sings,

             News my wife wots is not locked in a box![624]

 And he hath privilege, for 'tis a shrewd rogue and a witty;[625] and
 speaking of his excellence I am wont to say:—

 "My life for the scavenger! right well I love him, ✿ Like a waving
    bough he is sweet to my sight:
 Fate joined us one night, when to him quoth I ✿ (The while I grew weak
    and love gained more might)
 'Thy love burns my heart!' 'And no wonder,' quoth he ✿ 'When the drawer
    of dung turns a stoker wight.'[626]

 And indeed each is perfect in whatso can charm the wit with joy and
 jollity;" adding presently, "But hearing is not seeing; and indeed if
 thou make up thy mind to join us and put off going to thy friends,
 'twill be better for us and for thee. The traces of illness are yet
 upon thee and haply thou art going among folk who be mighty talkers,
 men who commune together of what concerneth them not; or there may be
 amongst them some forward fellow who will split thy head, and thou half
 thy size from sickness." "This shall be for some other day," answered
 I, and laughed with heart angered: "finish thy work and go, in Allah
 Almighty's guard, to thy friends, for they will be expecting thy
 coming." "O my lord," replied he, "I seek only to introduce thee to
 these fellows of infinite mirth, the sons of men of worth, amongst whom
 there is neither procacity nor dicacity nor loquacity; for never, since
 I grew to years of discretion, could I endure to consort with one who
 asketh questions concerning what concerneth him not, nor have I ever
 frequented any save those who are, like myself, men of few words. In
 sooth if thou were to company with them or even to see them once, thou
 wouldst forsake all thy intimates." "Allah fulfil thy joyance with
 them," said I, "needs must I come amongst them some day or other." But
 he said, "Would it were this very day, for I had set my heart upon thy
 making one of us; yet if thou must go to thy friends to-day, I will
 take these good things, wherewith thou hast honoured and favoured me,
 to my guests and leave them to eat and drink and not wait for me;
 whilst I will return to thee in haste and accompany thee to thy little
 party; for there is no ceremony between me and my intimates to prevent
 my leaving them. Fear not, I will soon be back with thee and wend with
 thee whithersoever thou wendest. There is no Majesty and there is no
 Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!" I shouted; "Go thou to
 thy friends and make merry with them; and _do_ let me go to mine and be
 with them this day, for they expect me." But the Barber cried, "I will
 not let thee go alone;" and I replied, "The truth is none can enter
 where I am going save myself." He rejoined, "I suspect that to-day thou
 art for an assignation with some woman, else thou hadst taken me with
 thee; yet am I the right man to take, one who could aid thee to the end
 thou wishest. But I fear me thou art running after strange women and
 thou wilt lose thy life; for in this our city of Baghdad one cannot do
 any thing in this line, especially on a day like Friday: our Governor
 is an angry man and a mighty sharp blade." "Shame on thee, thou wicked,
 bad, old man!" cried I, "Be off! what words are these thou givest me?"
 "O cold of wit,"[627] cried he, "thou sayest to me what is not true and
 thou hidest thy mind from me, but I know the whole business for certain
 and I seek only to help thee this day with my best endeavour." I was
 fearful lest my people or my neighbours should hear the Barber's talk,
 so I kept silence for a long time whilst he finished shaving my head;
 by which time the hour of prayer was come and the Khutbah, or sermon,
 was about to follow. When he had done, I said to him, "Go to thy
 friends with their meat and drink, and I will await thy return. Then we
 will fare together." In this way I hoped to pour oil on troubled waters
 and to trick the accursed loon, so haply I might get quit of him; but
 he said, "Thou art cozening me and thou wouldst go alone to thy
 appointment and cast thyself into jeopardy, whence there will be no
 escape for thee. Now by Allah! and again by Allah! do not go till I
 return, that I may accompany thee and watch the issue of thine affair."
 "So be it," I replied, "do not be long absent." Then he took all the
 meat and drink I had given him and the rest of it and went out of my
 house; but the accursed carle gave it in charge of a porter to carry to
 his home but hid himself in one of the alleys. As for me I rose on the
 instant, for the Muezzins had already called the Salám of Friday, the
 salutation to the Apostle;[628] and I dressed in haste and went out
 alone and, hurrying to the street, took my stand by the house wherein I
 had seen the young lady. I found the old woman on guard at the door
 awaiting me, and went up with her to the upper story, the damsel's
 apartment. Hardly had I reached it when behold, the master of the house
 returned from prayers and entering the great saloon, closed the door. I
 looked down from the window and saw this Barber (Allah's curse upon
 him!) sitting over against the door and said, "How did this devil find
 me out?" At this very moment, as Allah had decreed it for rending my
 veil of secrecy, it so happened that a handmaid of the house-master
 committed some offence for which he beat her. She shrieked out and his
 slave ran in to intercede for her, whereupon the Kazi beat him to boot,
 and he also roared out. The damned Barber fancied that it was I who was
 being beaten; so he also fell to shouting and tore his garments and
 scattered dust on his head and kept on shrieking and crying Help! Help!
 So the people came round about him and he went on yelling, "My master
 is being murdered in the Kazi's house!" Then he ran clamouring to my
 place with the folk after him, and told my people and servants and
 slaves; and, before I knew what was doing, up they came tearing their
 clothes and letting loose their hair[629] and shouting, "Alas, our
 master!"; and this Barber leading the rout with his clothes rent and in
 sorriest plight; and he also shouting like a madman and saying, "Alas
 for our murdered master!" And they all made an assault upon the house
 in which I was. The Kazi, hearing the yells and the uproar at his door
 said to one of his servants, "See what is the matter"; and the man went
 forth and returned and said, "O my master, at the gate there are more
 than ten thousand souls what with men and women, and all crying out,
 Alas for our murdered master!; and they keep pointing to our house."
 When the Kazi heard this, the matter seemed serious and he waxed wroth;
 so he rose and opening the door saw a great crowd of people; whereat he
 was astounded and said, "O folk! what is there to do?" "O accursed! O
 dog! O hog!" my servants replied; "'Tis thou who hast killed our
 master!" Quoth he, "O good folk, and what hath your master done to me
 that I should kill him?"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
 ceased saying her permitted say.

                 Now when it was the Thirty-first Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Kazi said to
 the servants, "What hath your master done to me that I should kill him?
 This is my house and it is open to you all." Then quoth the Barber,
 "Thou didst beat him and I heard him cry out;" and quoth the Kazi, "But
 what was he doing that I should beat him, and what brought him in to my
 house; and whence came he and whither went he?" "Be not a wicked,
 perverse old man!" cried the Barber, "for I know the whole story; and
 the long and short of it is that thy daughter is in love with him and
 he loves her; and when thou knewest that he had entered the house, thou
 badest thy servants beat him and they did so: by Allah, none shall
 judge between us and thee but the Caliph; or else do thou bring out our
 master that his folk may take him, before they go in and save him
 perforce from thy house, and thou be put to shame." Then said the Kazi
 (and his tongue was bridled and his mouth was stopped by confusion
 before the people), "An thou say sooth, do thou come in and fetch him
 out." Whereupon the Barber pushed forward and entered the house. When I
 saw this I looked about for a means of escape and flight, but saw no
 hiding-place except a great chest in the upper chamber where I was. So
 I got into it and pulled the lid down upon myself and held my breath.
 The Barber was hardly in the room before he began to look about for me,
 then turned him right and left and came straight to the place where I
 was, and stepped up to the chest and, lifting it on his head, made off
 as fast as he could. At this, my reason forsook me, for I knew that he
 would not let me be; so I took courage and opening the chest threw
 myself to the ground. My leg was broken in the fall, and the door being
 open I saw a great concourse of people looking in. Now I carried in my
 sleeve much gold and some silver, which I had provided for an ill day
 like this and the like of such occasion; so I kept scattering it
 amongst the folk to divert their attention from me and, whilst they
 were busy scrambling for it, I set off, hopping as fast as I could,
 through the by-streets of Baghdad, shifting and turning right and left.
 But whithersoever I went this damned Barber would go in after me,
 crying aloud, "They would have bereft me of my maa-a-ster! They would
 have slain him who was a benefactor to me and my family and my friends!
 Praised be Allah who made me prevail against them and delivered my lord
 from their hands!" Then to me, "Where wilt thou go now? Thou wouldst
 persist in following thine own evil devices, till thou broughtest
 thyself to this ill pass; and, had not Allah vouchsafed me to thee,
 ne'er hadst thou escaped this strait into which thou hast fallen, for
 they would have cast thee into a calamity whence thou never couldest
 have won free. But I will not call thee to account for thine ignorance,
 as thou art so little of wit and inconsequential and addicted to
 hastiness!" Said I to him, "Doth not what thou hast brought upon me
 suffice thee, but thou must run after me and talk me such talk in the
 bazar-streets?" And I well-nigh gave up the ghost for excess of rage
 against him. Then I took refuge in the shop of a weaver amiddlemost of
 the market and sought protection of the owner who drove the Barber
 away; and, sitting in the back-room,[630] I said to myself, "If I
 return home I shall never be able to get rid of this curse of a Barber,
 who will be with me night and day; and I cannot endure the sight of him
 even for a breathing-space." So I sent out at once for witnesses and
 made a will, dividing the greater part of my property among my people,
 and appointed a guardian over them, to whom I committed the charge of
 great and small, directing him to sell my houses and domains. Then I
 set out on my travels that I might be free of this pimp[631]; and I
 came to settle in your town where I have lived some time. When you
 invited me and I came hither, the first thing I saw was this accursed
 pander seated in the place of honour. How then can my heart be glad and
 my stay be pleasant in company with this fellow who brought all this
 upon me, and who was the cause of the breaking of my leg and of my
 exile from home and native land? And the youth refused to sit down and
 went away. When we heard his story (continued the Tailor) we were
 amazed beyond measure and amused and said to the Barber, "By Allah, is
 it true what this young man saith of thee?" "By Allah," replied he, "I
 dealt thus by him of my courtesy and sound sense and generosity. Had it
 not been for me he had perished and none but I was the cause of his
 escape. Well it was for him that he suffered in his leg and not in his
 life! Had I been a man of many words, a meddler, a busy body, I had not
 acted thus kindly by him; but now I will tell you a tale which befel
 me, that you may be well assured I am a man sparing of speech in whom
 is no forwardness and a very different person from those six Brothers
 of mine; and this it is."


                    _THE BARBER'S TALE OF HIMSELF._

 I was living in Baghdad during the times of Al-Mustansir bi'llah,[632]
 son of Al-Mustazi bi'llah the then Caliph, a prince who loved the poor
 and needy and companied with the learned and pious. One day it happened
 to him that he was wroth with ten persons, highwaymen who robbed on the
 Caliph's highway, and he ordered the Prefect of Baghdad to bring them
 into the presence on the anniversary of the Great Festival.[633] So the
 Prefect sallied out and, making them his prisoners, embarked with them
 in a boat. I caught sight of them as they were embarking and said to
 myself, "These are surely assembled for a marriage-feast; methinks they
 are spending their day in that boat eating and drinking, and none shall
 be companion of their cups but I myself." So I rose, O fair assembly;
 and, of the excess of my courtesy and the gravity of my understanding,
 I embarked with them and entered into conversation with them. They
 rowed across to the opposite bank, where they landed and there came up
 the watch and guardians of the peace with chains, which they put round
 the robbers' necks. They chained me among the rest of them; and, O
 people, is it not a proof of my courtesy and spareness of speech, that
 I held my peace and did not please to speak? Then they took us away in
 bilbos and next morning carried us all before Al-Mustansir bi'llah,
 Commander of the Faithful, who bade smite the necks of the ten robbers.
 So the Sworder came forward after they were seated on the leather of
 blood:[634] then drawing his blade, struck off one head after another
 until he had smitten the neck of the tenth; and I alone remained. The
 Caliph looked at me and asked the Headsman, saying, "What ails thee
 that thou hast struck off only nine heads?"; and he answered, "Allah
 forbid that I should behead only nine, when thou biddest me behead
 ten!" Quoth the Caliph, "Meseems thou hast smitten the necks of only
 nine, and this man before thee is the tenth." "By thy beneficence!"
 replied the Headsman, "I have beheaded ten." "Count them!" cried the
 Caliph and whenas they counted heads, lo! there were ten. The Caliph
 looked at me and said, "What made thee keep silence at a time like this
 and how camest thou to company with these men of blood. Tell me the
 cause of all this, for albeit thou art a very old man, assuredly thy
 wits are weak." Now when I heard these words from the Caliph I sprang
 to my feet and replied, "Know, O Prince of the Faithful, that I am the
 Silent Shaykh and am thus called to distinguish me from my six
 brothers. I am a man of immense learning whilst, as for the gravity of
 my understanding, the wiliness of my wits and the spareness of my
 speech, there is no end to them; and my calling is that of a barber. I
 went out early on yesterday morning and saw these men making for a
 skiff; and, fancying they were bound for a marriage-feast, I joined
 them and mixed with them. After a while up came the watch and guardians
 of the peace, who put chains round their necks and round mine with the
 rest; but, in the excess of my courtesy, I held my peace and spake not
 a word; nor was this other but generosity on my part. They brought us
 into thy presence, and thou gavest an order to smite the necks of the
 ten; yet did I not make myself known to thee and remained silent before
 the Sworder, purely of my great generosity and courtesy which led me to
 share with them in their death. But all my life long have I dealt thus
 nobly with mankind, and they requite me the foulest and evillest
 requital!" When the Caliph heard my words and knew that I was a man of
 exceeding generosity and of very few words, one in whom is no
 forwardness (as this youth would have it whom I rescued from mortal
 risk and who hath so scurvily repaid me), he laughed with excessive
 laughter till he fell upon his back. Then said he to me, "O Silent Man,
 do thy six brothers favour thee in wisdom and knowledge and spareness
 of speech?" I replied, "Never were they like me! Thou puttest reproach
 upon me, O Commander of the Faithful, and it becomes thee not to even
 my brothers with me; for, of the abundance of their speech and their
 deficiency of courtesy and gravity, each one of them hath gotten some
 maim or other. One is a monocular, another palsied, a third
 stone-blind, a fourth cropped of ears and nose and a fifth shorn of
 both lips, while the sixth is a hunchback and a cripple. And conceive
 not, O Commander of the Faithful, that I am prodigal of speech; but I
 must perforce explain to thee that I am a man of greater worth and
 fewer words than any of them. From each one of my brothers hangs a tale
 of how he came by his bodily defect and these I will relate to thee."
 So the Caliph gave ear to


               _THE BARBER'S TALE OF HIS FIRST BROTHER._

[Illustration]

 Know then, O Commander of the Faithful, that my first brother,
 Al-Bakbuk, the prattler, is a Hunchback who took to tailoring in
 Baghdad, and he used to sew in a shop hired from a man of much wealth,
 who dwelt over the shop,[635] and there was also a flour-mill in the
 basement. One day as my brother, the Hunchback, was sitting in his shop
 a-tailoring, he chanced to raise his head and saw a lady like the
 rising full moon at a balconied window of his landlord's house, engaged
 in looking out at the passers-by.[636] When my brother beheld her, his
 heart was taken with love of her and he passed his whole day gazing at
 her and neglected his tailoring till eventide. Next morning he opened
 his shop and sat him down to sew; but, as often as he stitched a
 stitch, he looked to the window and saw her as before; and his passion
 and infatuation for her increased. On the third day as he was sitting
 in his usual place, gazing on her, she caught sight of him and,
 perceiving that he had been captivated with love of her, laughed in his
 face,[637] and he smiled back at her. Then she disappeared and
 presently sent her slave-girl to him with a bundle containing a piece
 of red flowered silk. The handmaid accosted him and said, "My lady
 salameth to thee and desireth thee, of thy skill and good will, to
 fashion for her a shift of this piece and to sew it handsomely with thy
 best sewing." He replied, "Hearkening and obedience"; and shaped for
 her a chemise and finished sewing it the same day. When the morning
 morrowed the girl came back and said to him, "My lady salameth to thee
 and asks how thou hast passed yesternight; for she hath not tasted
 sleep by reason of her heart being taken up with thee." Then she laid
 before him a piece of yellow satin and said, "My lady biddeth thee cut
 her two pair of petticoat-trousers out of this piece and sew them this
 very day." Hearkening and obedience!" replied he, "greet her for me
 with many greetings and say to her, Thy slave is obedient to thine
 order; so command him as thou wilt." Then he applied himself to cutting
 out and worked hard at sewing the trousers; and after an hour the lady
 appeared at the lattice and saluted him by signs, now casting down her
 eyes, then smiling in his face, and he began to assure himself that he
 would soon make a conquest. She did not let him stir till he had
 finished the two pair of trousers, when she withdrew and sent the
 handmaid to whom he delivered them; and she took them and went her
 ways. When it was night, he threw himself on his carpet-bed, and lay
 tossing about from side to side till morning, when he rose and sat down
 in his place. Presently the damsel came to him and said, "My master
 calleth for thee." Hearing these words he feared with exceeding fear;
 but the slave-girl, seeing his affright, said to him, "No evil is meant
 to thee: naught but good awaiteth thee. My lady would have thee make
 acquaintance with my lord." So my brother the tailor, rejoicing with
 great joy, went with her; and when he came into the presence of his
 landlord, the lady's husband, he kissed the ground before him, and the
 master of the house returned his greeting and gave him a great piece of
 linen saying, "Shape me shirts out of this stuff and sew them well;"
 and my brother answered, "To hear is to obey." Thereupon he fell to
 work at once, snipping, shaping and sewing till he had finished twenty
 shirts by supper time, without stopping to taste food. The house-master
 asked him, "How much the wage for this?"; and he answered, "Twenty
 dirhams." So the gentleman cried out to the slave-girl, "Bring me
 twenty dirhams," and my brother spake not a word; but the lady signed,
 "Take nothing from him;" whereupon my brother said, "By Allah I will
 take naught from thy hand." And he carried off his tailor's gear and
 returned to his shop, although he was destitute even to a red
 cent.[638] Then he applied himself to do their work; eating, in his
 zeal and diligence, but a bit of bread and drinking only a little water
 for three days. At the end of this time came the handmaid and said to
 him, "What hast thou done?" Quoth he, "They are finished," and carried
 the shirts to the lady's husband, who would have paid him his hire: but
 he said, "I will take nothing," for fear of her and, returning to his
 shop, passed the night without sleep because of his hunger. Now the
 dame had informed her husband how the case stood (my brother knowing
 naught of this); and the two had agreed to make him tailor for nothing,
 the better to mock and laugh at him. Next morning he went to his shop,
 and, as he sat there, the handmaid came to him and said, "Speak with my
 master." So he accompanied her to the husband who said to him, "I wish
 thee to cut out for me five long-sleeved robes.[639]" So he cut them
 out[640] and took the stuff and went away. Then he sewed them and
 carried them to the gentleman, who praised his sewing and offered him a
 purse of silver. He put out his hand to take it, but the lady signed to
 him from behind her husband not to do so, and he replied, "O my lord,
 there is no hurry, we have time enough for this." Then he went forth
 from the house meaner and meeker than a donkey, for verily five things
 were gathered together in him viz:—love, beggary, hunger, nakedness and
 hard labour. Nevertheless he heartened himself with the hope of gaining
 the lady's favours. When he had made an end of all their jobs, they
 played him another trick and married him to their slave-girl; but, on
 the night when he thought to go in to her, they said to him, "Lie this
 night in the mill; and to-morrow all will go well." My brother
 concluded that there was some good cause for this and nighted alone in
 the mill. Now the husband had set on the miller to make the tailor turn
 the mill: so when night was half spent the man came into him and began
 to say, "This bull of ours hath become useless and standeth still
 instead of going round: he will not turn the mill this night, and yet
 we have great store of corn to be ground. However, I'll yoke him
 perforce and make him finish grinding it before morning, as the folk
 are impatient for their flour." So he filled the hoppers with grain
 and, going up to my brother with a rope in his hand, tied it round his
 neck and said to him, "Gee up! Round with the mill! thou, O bull,
 wouldst do nothing but grub and stale and dung!" Then he took a whip
 and laid it on the shoulders and calves of my brother, who began to
 howl and bellow; but none came to help him; and he was forced to grind
 the wheat till hard upon dawn, when the house-master came in and,
 seeing my brother still tethered to the yoke and the man flogging him,
 went away. At day-break the miller returned home and left him still
 yoked and half dead; and soon after in came the slave-girl who unbound
 him, and said to him, "I and my lady are right sorry for what hath
 happened and we have borne thy grief with thee." But he had no tongue
 wherewith to answer her from excess of beating and mill-turning. Then
 he retired to his lodging and behold, the clerk who had drawn up the
 marriage-deed came to him[641] and saluted him, saying, "Allah give
 thee long life! May thy espousal be blessed! This face telleth of
 pleasant doings and dalliance and kissing and clipping from dusk to
 dawn." "Allah grant the liar no peace, O thou thousandfold cuckold!",
 my brother replied, "by Allah, I did nothing but turn the mill in the
 place of the bull all night till morning!" "Tell me thy tale," quoth
 he; and my brother recounted what had befallen him and he said, "Thy
 star agrees not with her star; but an thou wilt I can alter the
 contract for thee," adding, "'Ware lest another cheat be not in store
 for thee." And my brother answered him, "See if thou have not another
 contrivance." Then the clerk left him and he sat in his shop, looking
 for some one to bring him a job whereby he might earn his day's bread.
 Presently the handmaid came to him and said, "Speak with my lady."
 "Begone, O my good girl," replied he, "there shall be no more dealings
 between me and thy lady." The handmaid returned to her mistress and
 told her what my brother had said and presently she put her head out of
 the window, weeping and saying, "Why, O my beloved, are there to be no
 more dealings 'twixt me and thee?" But he made her no answer. Then she
 wept and conjured him, swearing that all which had befallen him in the
 mill was not sanctioned by her and that she was innocent of the whole
 matter. When he looked upon her beauty and loveliness and heard the
 sweetness of her speech, the sorrow which had possessed him passed from
 his heart; he accepted her excuse and he rejoiced in her sight. So he
 saluted her and talked with her and sat tailoring awhile, after which
 the handmaid came to him and said, "My mistress greeteth thee and
 informeth thee that her husband purposeth to lie abroad this night in
 the house of some intimate friends of his; so, when he is gone, do thou
 come to us and spend the night with my lady in delightsomest joyance
 till the morning." Now her husband had asked her, "How shall we manage
 to turn him away from thee?;" and she answered, "Leave me to play him
 another trick and make him a laughing-stock for all the town." But my
 brother knew naught of the malice of women. As soon as it was dusk, the
 slave-girl came to him and carried him to the house, and when the lady
 saw him she said to him, "By Allah, O my lord, I have been longing
 exceedingly for thee." "By Allah," cried he, "kiss me quick before thou
 give me aught else.[642]" Hardly had he spoken, when the lady's husband
 came in from the next room[643] and seized him, saying, "By Allah, I
 will not let thee go, till I deliver thee to the chief of the town
 watch." My brother humbled himself to him; but he would not listen to
 him and carried him before the Prefect who gave him an hundred lashes
 with a whip and, mounting him on a camel, promenaded him round about
 the city, whilst the guards proclaimed aloud, "This is his reward who
 violateth the Harims of honourable men!" Moreover, he fell off the
 camel and broke his leg and so became lame. Then the Prefect banished
 him from the city; and he went forth unknowing whither he should wend;
 but I heard of him and fearing for him went out after him, and brought
 him back secretly to the city and restored him to health and took him
 into my house where he still liveth." The Caliph laughed at my story
 and said, "Thou hast done well, O Samit, O Silent Man, O spare of
 speech!"; and he bade me take a present and go away. But I said, "I
 will accept naught of thee except I tell thee what befel all my other
 brothers; and do not think me a man of many words." So the Caliph gave
 ear to,


               _THE BARBER'S TALE OF HIS SECOND BROTHER._

[Illustration]

 Know, O Commander of the Faithful, that my second brother's name was
 Al-Haddár, that is the babbler, and he was the paralytic. Now it
 happened to him one day, as he was going about his business, that an
 old woman accosted him and said, "Stop a little, my good man, that I
 may tell thee of somewhat which, if it be to thy liking, thou shalt do
 for me and I will pray Allah to give thee good of it!" My brother
 stopped and she went on, "I will put thee in the way of a certain
 thing, so thou not be prodigal of speech." "On with thy talk," quoth
 he; and she, "What sayest thou to handsome quarters and a fair garden
 with flowing waters, flowers blooming, and fruit growing, and old wine
 going and a pretty young face whose owner thou mayest embrace from dark
 till dawn? If thou do whatso I bid thee thou shalt see something
 greatly to thy advantage." "And is all this in the world?" asked my
 brother; and she answered, "Yes, and it shall be thine, so thou be
 reasonable and leave idle curiosity and many words, and do my bidding,"
 "I will indeed, O my lady," said he, "how is it thou hast preferred me
 in this matter before all men and what is it that so much pleaseth thee
 in me?" Quoth she, "Did I not bid thee be spare of speech? Hold thy
 peace and follow me. Know, that the young lady, to whom I shall carry
 thee, loveth to have her own way and hateth being thwarted and all who
 gainsay; so, if thou humour her, thou shalt come to thy desire of her."
 And my brother said, "I will not cross her in anything." Then she went
 on and my brother followed her, an-hungering after what she described
 to him till they entered a fine large house, handsome and choicely
 furnished, full of eunuchs and servants and showing signs of prosperity
 from top to bottom. And she was carrying him to the upper story when
 the people of the house said to him, "What dost thou here?" But the old
 woman answered them, "Hold your peace and trouble him not: he is a
 workman and we have occasion for him." Then she brought him into a fine
 great pavilion, with a garden in its midst, never eyes saw a fairer;
 and made him sit upon a handsome couch. He had not sat long, before he
 heard a loud noise and in came a troop of slave-girls surrounding a
 lady like the moon on the night of its fullest. When he saw her, he
 rose up and made an obeisance to her, whereupon she welcomed him and
 bade him be seated. So he sat down and she said to him, "Allah advance
 thee to honour! Is all well with thee?" "O my lady," he answered, "all
 with me is right well." Then she bade bring in food, and they set
 before her delicate viands; so she sat down to eat, making a show of
 affection to my brother and jesting with him, though all the while she
 could not refrain from laughing; but as often as he looked at her, she
 signed towards her handmaidens as though she were laughing at them. My
 brother (the ass!) understood nothing; but, in the excess of his
 ridiculous passion, he fancied that the lady was in love with him and
 that she would soon grant him his desire. When they had done eating,
 they set on the wine and there came in ten maidens like moons, with
 lutes ready strung in their hands, and fell to singing with full
 voices, sweet and sad, whereupon delight gat hold upon him and he took
 the cup from the lady's hands and drank it standing. Then she drank a
 cup of wine and my brother (still standing) said to her "Health," and
 bowed to her. She handed him another cup and he drank it off, when she
 slapped him hard on the nape of his neck.[644] Upon this my brother
 would have gone out of the house in anger; but the old woman followed
 him and winked to him to return. So he came back and the lady bade him
 sit and he sat down without a word. Then she again slapped him on the
 nape of his neck; and the second slapping did not suffice her, she must
 needs make all her handmaidens also slap and cuff him, while he kept
 saying to the old woman, "I never saw aught nicer than this." She on
 her side ceased not exclaiming, "Enough, enough, I conjure thee, O my
 mistress!"; but the women slapped him till he well nigh swooned away.
 Presently my brother rose and went out to obey a call of nature, but
 the old woman overtook him, and said, "Be patient a little and thou
 shalt win to thy wish." "How much longer have I to wait," my brother
 replied, "this slapping hath made me feel faint." "As soon as she is
 warm with wine," answered she, "thou shalt have thy desire." So he
 returned to his place and sat down, whereupon all the handmaidens stood
 up and the lady bade them perfume him with pastiles and besprinkle his
 face with rose-water. Then said she to him, "Allah advance thee to
 honour! Thou hast entered my house and hast borne with my conditions,
 for whoso thwarteth me I turn him away, and whoso is patient hath his
 desire." "O mistress mine," said he, "I am thy slave and in the hollow
 of thine hand!" "Know, then," continued she, "that Allah hath made me
 passionately fond of frolic; and whoso falleth in with my humour cometh
 by whatso he wisheth." Then she ordered her maidens to sing with loud
 voices till the whole company was delighted; after which she said to
 one of them, "Take thy lord, and do what is needful for him and bring
 him back to me forthright." So the damsel took my brother (and he not
 knowing what she would do with him); but the old woman overtook him and
 said, "Be patient; there remaineth but little to do." At this his face
 brightened and he stood up before the lady while the old woman kept
 saying, "Be patient; thou wilt now at once win to thy wish!"; till he
 said, "Tell me what she would have the maiden do with me?" "Nothing but
 good," replied she, "as I am thy sacrifice! She wisheth only to dye thy
 eyebrows and pluck out thy mustachios." Quoth he, "As for the dyeing of
 my eyebrows, that will come off with washing,[645] but for the plucking
 out of my mustachios that indeed is a somewhat painful process." "Be
 cautious how thou cross her," cried the old woman; "for she hath set
 her heart on thee." So my brother patiently suffered her to dye his
 eyebrows and pluck out his mustachios; after which the maiden returned
 to her mistress and told her. Quoth she, "Remaineth now only one other
 thing to be done; thou must shave his beard and make him a smooth o'
 face.[646]" So the maiden went back and told him what her mistress had
 bidden her do; and my brother (the blockhead!) said to her, "How shall
 I do what will disgrace me before the folk?" But the old woman said,
 "She would do on this wise only that thou mayst be as a beardless youth
 and that no hair be left on thy face to scratch and prick her delicate
 cheeks; for indeed she is passionately in love with thee. So be patient
 and thou shalt attain thine object." My brother _was_ patient and did
 her bidding and let shave off his beard and, when he was brought back
 to the lady, lo! he appeared dyed red as to his eyebrows, plucked of
 both mustachios, shorn of his beard, rouged on both cheeks. At first
 she was affrighted at him; then she made mockery of him and, laughing
 till she fell upon her back, said, "O my lord, thou hast indeed won my
 heart by thy good nature!" Then she conjured him, by her life, to stand
 up and dance, and he arose, and capered about, and there was not a
 cushion in the house but she threw it at his head, and in like manner
 did all her women who also kept pelting him with oranges and lemons and
 citrons till he fell down senseless from the cuffing on the nape of the
 neck, the pillowing and the fruit-pelting. "Now thou hast attained thy
 wish," said the old woman when he came round; "there are no more blows
 in store for thee and there remaineth but one little thing to do. It is
 her wont, when she is in her cups, to let no one have her until she put
 off her dress and trousers and remain stark naked.[647] Then she will
 bid thee doff thy clothes and run; and she will run before thee as if
 she were flying from thee; and do thou follow her from place to place
 till thy prickle stands at fullest point, when she will yield to
 thee[648];" adding, "Strip off thy clothes at once." So he rose, well
 nigh lost in ecstacy and, doffing his raiment, showed himself
 mother-naked.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
 say her permitted say.

[Illustration]

                Now when it was the Thirty-Second Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the old
 woman said to the Barber's second brother, "Doff thy clothes," he rose,
 well nigh lost in ecstacy; and, stripping off his raiment, showed
 himself mother-naked. Whereupon the lady stripped also and said to my
 brother, "If thou want anything run after me till thou catch me." Then
 she set out at a run and he ran after her while she rushed into room
 after room and rushed out of room after room, my brother scampering
 after her in a rage of desire like a veritable madman, with yard
 standing terribly tall. After much of this kind she dashed into a
 darkened place, and he dashed after her; but suddenly he trod upon a
 yielding spot, which gave way under his weight; and, before he was
 aware where he was, he found himself in the midst of a crowded market,
 part of the bazar of the leather-sellers who were crying the prices of
 skins and hides and buying and selling. When they saw him in his
 plight, naked, with standing yard, shorn of beard and moustachios, with
 eyebrows dyed red, and cheeks ruddled with rouge, they shouted and
 clapped their hands at him, and set to flogging him with skins upon his
 bare body till a swoon came over him. Then they threw him on the back
 of an ass and carried him to the Chief of Police. Quoth the Chief "What
 is this?" Quoth they, "This fellow fell suddenly upon us out of the
 Wazir's house[649] in this state." So the Prefect gave him an hundred
 lashes and then banished him from Baghdad. However I went out after him
 and brought him back secretly into the city and made him a daily
 allowance for his living: although, were it not for my generous humour,
 I could not have put up with the like of him. Then the Caliph gave ear
 to


               _THE BARBER'S TALE OF HIS THIRD BROTHER._

 My third brother's name was Al-Fakík, the Gabbler, who was blind. One
 day Fate and Fortune drove him to a fine large house, and he knocked at
 the door, desiring speech of its owner that he might beg somewhat of
 him. Quoth the master of the house, "Who is at the door?" But my
 brother spake not a word and presently he heard him repeat with a loud
 voice, "Who is this?" Still he made no answer and immediately heard the
 master walk to the door and open it and say, "What dost thou want?" My
 brother answered "Something for Allah Almighty's sake.[650]" "Art thou
 blind?" asked the man, and my brother answered "Yes." Quoth the other,
 "Stretch me out thy hand." So my brother put out his hand thinking that
 he would give him something; but he took it and, drawing him into the
 house, carried him up from stair to stair till they reached the terrace
 on the house-top, my brother thinking the while that he would surely
 give him something of food or money. Then he asked my brother, "What
 dost thou want, O blind man?" and he answered, "Something for the
 Almighty's sake." "Allah open for thee some other door!" "O thou! why
 not say so when I was below stairs?" "O cadger, why not answer me when
 I first called to thee?" "And what meanest thou to do for me now?"
 "There is nothing in the house to give thee." "Then take me down the
 stair." "The path is before thee." So my brother rose and made his way
 downstairs, till he came within twenty steps of the door, when his foot
 slipped and he rolled to the bottom and broke his head. Then he went
 out, unknowing whither to turn, and presently fell in with two other
 blind men, companions of his, who said to him, "What didst thou gain
 to-day?" He told them what had befallen him and added, "O my brothers,
 I wish to take some of the money in my hands and provide myself with
 it." Now the master of the house had followed him and was listening to
 what they said; but neither my brother nor his comrades knew of this.
 So my brother went to his lodging and sat down to await his companions,
 and the house-owner entered after him without being perceived. When the
 other blind men arrived, my brother said to them, "Bolt the door and
 search the house lest any stranger have followed us." The man, hearing
 this, caught hold of a cord that hung from the ceiling and clung to it,
 whilst they went round about the house and searched but found no one.
 So they came back, and, sitting beside my brother, brought out their
 money which they counted and lo! it was twelve thousand dirhams. Each
 took what he wanted and they buried the rest in a corner of the room.
 Then they set on food and sat down, to eat. Presently my brother,
 hearing a strange pair of jaws munching by his side,[651] said to his
 friends, "There is a stranger amongst us;" and, putting forth his hand,
 caught hold of that of the house-master. Thereupon all fell on him and
 beat him;[652] and when tired of belabouring him they shouted, "O ye
 Moslems! a thief is come in to us, seeking to take our money!" A crowd
 gathered around them, whereupon the intruder hung on to them; and
 complained with them as they complained; and, shutting his eyes like
 them, so that none might doubt his blindness, cried out, "O Moslems, I
 take refuge with Allah and the Governor, for I have a matter to make
 known to him!" Suddenly up came the watch and, laying hands on the
 whole lot (my brother being amongst them), drove them[653] to the
 Governor's who set them before him and asked, "What news with you?"
 Quoth the intruder, "Look and find out for thyself, not a word shall be
 wrung from us save by torture, so begin by beating me and after me beat
 this man our leader."[654] And he pointed to my brother. So they threw
 the man at full length and gave him four hundred sticks on his
 backside. The beating pained him, whereupon he opened one eye and, as
 they redoubled their blows, he opened the other eye. When the Governor
 saw this he said to him, "What have we here, O accursed?"; whereto he
 replied, "Give me the seal-ring of pardon! We four have shammed blind,
 and we impose upon people that we may enter houses and look upon the
 unveiled faces of the women and contrive for their corruption. In this
 way we have gotten great gain and our store amounts to twelve thousand
 dirhams. Said I to my company:—Give me my share, three thousand; but
 they rose and beat me and took away my money, and I seek refuge with
 Allah and with thee; better thou have my share than they. So, if thou
 wouldst know the truth of my words, beat one and every of the others
 more than thou hast beaten me, and he will surely open his eyes." The
 Governor gave orders for the question to begin with my brother, and
 they bound him to the whipping-post,[655] and the Governor said, "O
 scum of the earth, do ye abuse the gracious gifts of Allah and make as
 if ye were blind!" "Allah! Allah!" cried my brother, "by Allah, there
 is none among us who can see." Then they beat him till he swooned away
 and the Governor cried, "Leave him till he come to and then beat him
 again." After this he caused each of the companions to receive more
 than three hundred sticks, whilst the sham-abraham kept saying to them
 "Open your eyes or you will be beaten afresh." At last the man said to
 the Governor, "Dispatch some one with me to bring thee the money; for
 these fellows will not open their eyes, lest they incur disgrace before
 the folk." So the Governor sent to fetch the money and gave the man his
 pretended share, three thousand dirhams; and, keeping the rest for
 himself, banished the three blind men from the city. But I, O Commander
 of the Faithful, went out and overtaking my brother questioned him of
 his case; whereupon he told me of what I have told thee; so I brought
 him secretly into the city, and appointed him (in the strictest
 privacy) an allowance for meat and drink! The Caliph laughed at my
 story and said, "Give him a gift and let him go;" but I said, "By
 Allah! I will take naught till I have made known to the Commander of
 the Faithful what came to pass with the rest of my brothers; for truly
 I am a man of few words and spare of speech." Then the Caliph gave ear
 to


               _THE BARBER'S TALE OF HIS FOURTH BROTHER._

 Now as for my fourth brother, O Commander of the Faithful, Al-Kuz
 al-aswáni, or the long-necked Gugglet hight, from his brimming over
 with words, the same who was blind of one eye, he became a butcher in
 Baghdad and he sold flesh and fattened rams; and great men and rich
 bought their meat of him, so that he amassed much wealth and got him
 cattle and houses. He fared thus a long while, till one day, as he was
 sitting in his shop, there came up an old man and long o' the beard,
 who laid down some silver and said, "Give me meat for this." He gave
 him his money's worth of flesh and the oldster went his ways. My
 brother examined the Shaykh's silver, and, seeing that the dirhams were
 white and bright, he set them in a place apart. The grey-beard
 continued to return to the shop regularly for five months, and my
 brother ceased not to lay up all the coin he received from him in its
 own box. At last he thought to take out the money to buy sheep; so he
 opened the box and found in it nothing, save bits of white paper cut
 round to look like coin[656]; so he buffetted his face and cried aloud
 till the folk gathered about him, whereupon he told them his tale which
 made them marvel exceedingly. Then he rose as was his wont, and
 slaughtering a ram hung it up inside his shop; after which he cut off
 some of the flesh, and hanging it outside kept saying to himself, "O
 Allah, would the ill-omened old fellow but come!" And an hour had not
 passed before the Shaykh came with his silver in hand; whereupon my
 brother rose and caught hold of him calling out, "Come aid me, O
 Moslems, and learn my story with this villain!" When the old man heard
 this, he quietly said to him, "Which will be the better for thee, to
 let go of me or to be disgraced by me amidst the folk?" "In what wilt
 thou disgrace me?" "In that thou sellest man's flesh for mutton!" "Thou
 liest, thou accursed!" "Nay, he is the accursed who hath a man hanging
 up by way of meat in his shop." "If the matter be as thou sayest, I
 give thee lawful leave to take my money and my life." Then the old man
 cried out aloud, "Ho, ye people! if you would prove the truth of my
 words, enter this man's shop." The folk rushed in and found that the
 ram was become a dead man[657] hung up for sale. So they set upon my
 brother crying out, "O Infidel! O villain!"; and his best friends fell
 to cuffing and kicking him and kept saying, "Dost thou make us eat
 flesh of the sons of Adam?" Furthermore, the old man struck him on the
 eye and put it out. Then they carried the carcass, with the throat cut,
 before the Chief of the city-watch, to whom the old man said, "O Emir,
 this fellow butchers men and sells their flesh for mutton and we have
 brought him to thee; so arise and execute the judgments of Allah (to
 whom be honour and glory!)" My brother would have defended himself, but
 the Chief refused to hear him and sentenced him to receive five hundred
 sticks and to forfeit the whole of his property. And, indeed, had it
 not been for that same property which he expended in bribes, they would
 have surely slain him. Then the Chief banished him from Baghdad; and my
 brother fared forth at a venture, till he came to a great town, where
 he thought it best to set up as a cobbler; so he opened a shop and sat
 there doing what he could for his livelihood. One day, as he went forth
 on his business, he heard the distant tramp of horses and, asking the
 cause, was told that the King was going out to hunt and course; so my
 brother stopped to look at the fine suite. It so fortuned that the
 King's eye met my brother's; whereupon the King hung down his head and
 said, "I seek refuge with Allah from the evil of this day!"[658]; and
 turned the reins of his steed and returned home with all his retinue.
 Then he gave orders to his guards, who seized my brother and beat him
 with a beating so painful that he was well-nigh dead; and my brother
 knew not what could be the cause of his maltreatment, after which he
 returned to his place in sorriest plight. Soon afterwards he went to
 one of the King's household and related what had happened to him; and
 the man laughed till he fell upon his back and cried, "O brother mine,
 know that the King cannot bear to look at a monocular, especially if he
 be blind of the right eye, in which case he doth not let him go without
 killing him." When my brother heard this, he resolved to fly from that
 city; so he went forth from it to another wherein none knew him and
 there he abode a long while. One day, being full of sorrowful thought
 for what had befallen him, he sallied out to solace himself; and, as he
 was walking along, he heard the distant tramp of horses behind him and
 said, "The judgment of Allah is upon me!" and looked about for a
 hiding-place but found none. At last he saw a closed door which he
 pushed hard: it yielded and he entered a long gallery in which he took
 refuge, but hardly had he done so, when two men set upon him crying
 out, "Allah be thanked for having delivered thee into our hands, O
 enemy of God! These three nights thou hast robbed us of our rest and
 sleep, and verily thou hast made us taste of the death-cup." My brother
 asked, "O folk, what ails you?"; and they answered, "Thou givest us the
 change and goest about to disgrace us and plannest some plot to cut the
 throat of the house-master! Is it not enough that thou hast brought him
 to beggary, thou and thy fellows? But now give us up the knife
 wherewith thou threatenest us every night." Then they searched him and
 found in his waist-belt the knife used for his shoe-leather; and he
 said, "O people, have the fear of Allah before your eyes and maltreat
 me not, for know that my story is a right strange!" "And what is thy
 story?" said they; so he told them what had befallen him, hoping they
 would let him go; however they paid no heed to what he said and,
 instead of showing some regard, beat him grievously and tore off his
 clothes: then, finding on his sides the scars of beating with rods,
 they said, "O accursed! these marks are the manifest signs of thy
 guilt!" They carried him before the Governor, whilst he said to
 himself, "I am now punished for my sins and none can deliver me save
 Allah Almighty!" The Governor addressing my brother asked him, "O
 villain, what led thee to enter their house with intention to
 murther?"; and my brother answered, "I conjure thee by Allah, O Emir,
 hear my words and be not hasty in condemning me!". But the Governor
 cried, "Shall we listen to the words of a robber who hath beggared
 these people, and who beareth on his back the scar of his stripes?"
 adding, "They surely had not done this to thee, save for some great
 crime." So he sentenced him to receive an hundred cuts with the
 scourge, after which they set him on a camel and paraded him about the
 city, proclaiming, "This is the requital and only too little to requite
 him who breaketh into people's houses." Then they thrust him out of the
 city, and my brother wandered at random, till I heard what had befallen
 him; and, going in search of him, questioned him of his case; so he
 acquainted me with his story and all his mischances, and I carried him
 secretly to the city where I made him an allowance for his meat and
 drink. Then the Caliph gave ear to


               _THE BARBER'S TALE OF HIS FIFTH BROTHER._

 My fifth brother Al-Nashshár,[659] the Babbler, the same who was
 cropped of both ears, O Commander of the Faithful, was an asker wont
 to beg of folk by night and live on their alms by day. Now when our
 father, who was an old man well stricken in years, sickened and died,
 he left us seven hundred dirhams whereof each son took his hundred;
 but, as my fifth brother received his portion, he was perplexed and
 knew not what to do with it. While in this uncertainty he bethought
 him to lay it out on glass-ware of all sorts and turn an honest penny
 on its price. So he bought an hundred dirhams worth of verroterie
 and, putting it into a big tray, sat down to sell it on a bench at
 the foot of a wall against which he leant back. As he sat with the
 tray before him he fell to musing and said to himself, "Know, O my
 good Self, that the head of my wealth, my principal invested in this
 glass-ware, is an hundred dirhams. I will assuredly sell it for two
 hundred, with which I will forthright buy other glass and make by it
 four hundred; nor will I cease to sell and buy on this wise, till I
 have gotten four thousand and soon find myself the master of much
 money. With these coins I will buy merchandize and jewels and
 ottars[660] and gain great profit on them; till, Allah willing, I
 will make my capital an hundred thousand dirhams. Then I will
 purchase a fine house with white slaves and eunuchs and horses; and I
 will eat and drink and disport myself; nor will I leave a singing man
 or a singing woman in the city, but I will summon them to my palace
 and make them perform before me." All this he counted over in his
 mind, while the tray of glass-ware, worth an hundred dirhams, stood
 on the bench before him, and, after looking at it, he continued, "And
 when, Inshallah! my capital shall have become one hundred
 thousand[661] dinars, I will send out marriage-brokeresses to require
 for me in wedlock the daughters of Kings and Wazirs; and I will
 demand to wife the eldest daughter of the Prime Minister; for it hath
 reached me that she is perfect in beauty and prime in loveliness and
 rare in accomplishments. I will give a marriage-settlement of one
 thousand dinars; and, if her father consent, well: but if not I will
 take her by force from under his very nose. When she is safely homed
 in my house, I will buy ten little eunuchs[662] and for myself a robe
 of the robes of Kings and Sultans; and get me a saddle of gold and a
 bridle set thick with gems of price. Then I will mount with the
 Mamelukes preceding me and surrounding me, and I will make the round
 of the city whilst the folk salute me and bless me; after which I
 will repair to the Wazir (he that is father of the girl), with armed
 white slaves before and behind me and on my right and on my left.
 When he sees me, the Wazir stands up, and seating me in his own place
 sits down much below me; for that I am to be his son-in-law. Now I
 have with me two eunuchs carrying purses, each containing a thousand
 dinars; and of these I deliver to him the thousand, his daughter's
 marriage-settlement, and make him a free gift of the other thousand,
 that he may have reason to know my generosity and liberality and my
 greatness of spirit and the littleness of the world in my eyes. And
 for ten words he addresses to me I answer him two. Then back I go to
 my house, and if one come to me on the bride's part, I make him a
 present of money and throw on him a dress of honour; but if he bring
 me a gift, I give it back to him and refuse to accept it,[663] that
 they may learn what a proud spirit is mine which never condescends to
 derogate. Thus I establish my rank and status. When this is done I
 appoint her wedding night and adorn my house showily! gloriously! And
 as the time for parading the bride is come, I don my finest attire
 and sit down on a mattress of gold brocade, propping up my elbow with
 a pillow, and turning neither to the right nor to the left; but
 looking only straight in front for the haughtiness of my mind and the
 gravity of my understanding. And there before me stands my wife in
 her raiment and ornaments, lovely as the full moon; and I, in my
 loftiness and dread lordliness,[664] will not glance at her till
 those present say to me, "O our lord and our master, thy wife, thy
 handmaid, standeth before thee; vouchsafe her one look for standing
 wearieth her." Then they kiss the ground before me many times;
 whereupon I raise my eyes and cast at her one single glance and turn
 my face earthwards again. Then they bear her off to the
 bride-chamber,[665] and I arise and change my clothes for a far finer
 suit; and, when they bring in the bride a second time, I deign not to
 throw her a look till they have begged me many times; after which I
 glance at her out of the corner of one eye, and then bend down my
 head. I continue acting after this fashion till the parading and
 displaying are completed"[666]——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
 day and ceased saying her permitted say.

                 Now when it was the Thirty-Third Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Barber's
 fifth brother proceeded:—Then I bend down my head and continue acting
 after this fashion till her parading and displaying are completed.
 Thereupon I order one of my eunuchs to bring me a bag of five hundred
 dinars which I give as largesse to the tirewomen present and bid them
 one and all lead me to the bride-chamber. When they leave me alone with
 her I neither look at her nor speak to her, but lie[667] by her side
 with my face to the wall showing my contempt, that each and every may
 again remark how high and haughty I am. Presently her mother comes in
 to me; and kissing[668] my head and hand, says to me, "O my lord, look
 upon thine handmaid who longs for thy favour; so heal her broken
 spirit!" I give her no answer; and when she sees this she rises and
 busses my feet many times and says, "O my lord, in very sooth my
 daughter is a beautiful maid, who hath never known man; and if thou
 show her this backwardness and aversion, her heart will break; so do
 thou incline to her and speak to her and soothe her mind and spirit."
 Then she rises and fetches a cup of wine; and says to her daughter,
 "Take it and hand it to thy lord." But as she approaches me I leave her
 standing between my hands and sit, propping my elbow on a round cushion
 purfled with gold thread, leaning lazily back, and without looking at
 her in the majesty of my spirit, so that she may deem me indeed a
 Sultan and a mighty man. Then she says to me, "O my lord, Allah upon
 thee, do not refuse to take the cup from the hand of thine handmaid,
 for verily I am thy bondswoman." But I do not speak to her and she
 presses me, saying, "There is no help but that thou drink it;" and she
 puts it to my lips. Then I shake my fist in her face and kick her with
 my foot thus. So he let out with his toe and knocked over the tray of
 glass-ware which fell to the ground and, falling from the bench, all
 that was on it was broken to bits. "O foulest of pimps,[669] this comes
 from the pride of my spirit!" cried my brother; and then, O Commander
 of the Faithful, he buffeted his face and rent his garments, and kept
 on weeping and beating himself. The folk who were flocking to their
 Friday prayers saw him; and some of them looked at him and pitied him,
 whilst others paid no heed to him, and in this way my brother lost both
 capital and profit. He remained weeping a long while, and at last up
 came a beautiful lady, the scent of musk exhaling from her, who was
 going to Friday prayers riding a mule with a gold saddle and followed
 by several eunuchs. When she saw the broken glass and my brother
 weeping, her kind heart was moved to pity for him, and she asked what
 ailed him and was told that he had a tray full of glass-ware by the
 sale of which he hoped to gain his living, but it was broken, and (said
 they), "there befel him what thou seest." Thereupon she called up one
 of her eunuchs and said to him, "Give what thou hast with thee to this
 poor fellow!" And he gave my brother a purse in which he found five
 hundred dinars; and when it touched his hand he was well-nigh dying for
 excess of joy and he offered up blessings for her. Then he returned to
 his abode a substantial man; and, as he sat considering, some one
 rapped at the door. So he rose and opened and saw an old woman whom he
 had never seen. "O my son," said she, "know that prayertide is near and
 I have not yet made my Wuzu-ablution[670]; so kindly allow me the use
 of thy lodging for the purpose." My brother answered, "To hear is to
 comply;" and going in bade her follow him. So she entered and he
 brought her an ewer wherewith to wash, and sat down like to fly with
 joy because of the dinars which he had tied up in his belt for a purse.
 When the old woman had made an end of her ablution, she came up to
 where he sat, and prayed a two-bow prayer; after which she blessed my
 brother with a godly benediction, and he while thanking her put his
 hand to the dinars and gave her two, saying to himself "These are my
 voluntaries."[671] When she saw the gold she cried, "Praise be to
 Allah! why dost thou look on one who loveth thee as if she were a
 beggar? Take back thy money: I have no need of it; or, if thou want it
 not, return it to her who gave it thee when thy glass-ware was broken.
 Moreover, if thou wish to be united with her, I can manage the matter,
 for she is my mistress." "O my mother," asked my brother, "by what
 manner of means can I get at her?"; and she answered, "O my son! she
 hath an inclination for thee, but she is the wife of a wealthy man; so
 take the whole of thy money with thee and follow me, that I may guide
 thee to thy desire: and when thou art in her company spare neither
 persuasion nor fair words, but bring them all to bear upon her; so
 shalt thou enjoy her beauty and wealth to thy heart's content." My
 brother took all his gold and rose and followed the old woman, hardly
 believing in his luck. She ceased not faring on, and my brother
 following her, till they came to a tall gate at which she knocked and a
 Roumi slave-girl[672] came out and opened to them. Then the old woman
 led my brother into a great sitting-room spread with wondrous fine
 carpets and hung with curtains, where he sat down with his gold before
 him, and his turband on his knee.[673] He had scarcely taken seat
 before there came to him a young lady (never eye saw fairer) clad in
 garments of the most sumptuous; whereupon my brother rose to his feet,
 and she smiled in his face and welcomed him, signing to him to be
 seated. Then she bade shut the door and, when it was shut, she turned
 to my brother, and taking his hand conducted him to a private chamber
 furnished with various kinds of brocades and gold-cloths. Here he sat
 down and she sat by his side and toyed with him awhile; after which she
 rose and saying, "Stir not from thy seat till I come back to thee;"
 disappeared. Meanwhile as he was on this wise, lo! there came in to him
 a black slave big of body and bulk and holding a drawn sword in hand,
 who said to him, "Woe to thee! Who brought thee hither and what dost
 thou want here?" My brother could not return him a reply, being
 tongue-tied for terror; so the blackamoor seized him and stripped him
 of his clothes and bashed him with the flat of his sword-blade till he
 fell to the ground, swooning from excess of belabouring. The ill-omened
 nigger fancied that there was an end of him and my brother heard him
 cry, "Where is the salt-wench?"[674] Whereupon in came a handmaid
 holding in hand a large tray of salt, and the slave kept rubbing it
 into my brother's wounds;[675] but he did not stir fearing lest the
 slave might find out that he was not dead and kill him outright. Then
 the salt-girl went away, and the slave cried "Where is the
 souterrain[676]-guardianess?" Hereupon in came the old woman and
 dragged my brother by his feet to a souterrain and threw him down upon
 a heap of dead bodies. In this place he lay two full days, but Allah
 made the salt the means of preserving his life by staunching the blood
 and staying its flow. Presently, feeling himself able to move,
 Al-Nashshár rose and opened the trap-door in fear and trembling and
 crept out into the open; and Allah protected him, so that he went on in
 the darkness and hid himself in the vestibule till dawn, when he saw
 the accursed beldam sally forth in quest of other quarry. He followed
 in her wake without her knowing it, and made for his own lodging where
 he dressed his wounds and medicined himself till he was whole.
 Meanwhile he used to watch the old woman, tracking her at all times and
 seasons, and saw her accost one man after another and carry them to the
 house. However he uttered not a word; but, as soon as he waxed hale and
 hearty, he took a piece of stuff and made it into a bag which he filled
 with broken glass and bound about his middle. He also disguised himself
 as a Persian that none might know him, and hid a sword under his
 clothes of foreign cut. Then he went out and presently, falling in with
 the old woman, said to her, speaking Arabic with a Persian accent,
 "Venerable lady,[677] I am a stranger arrived but this day here where I
 know no one. Hast thou a pair of scales wherein I may weigh eleven
 hundred dinars? I will give thee somewhat of them for thy pains." "I
 have a son, a money-changer, who keepeth all kinds of scales," she
 answered, "so come with me to him before he goeth out and he will weigh
 thy gold." My brother answered "Lead the way!" She led him to the house
 and the young lady herself came out and opened it, whereupon the old
 woman smiled in her face and said, "I bring thee fat meat to-day."[678]
 Then the damsel took my brother by the hand, and led him to the same
 chamber as before; where she sat with him awhile then rose and went
 forth saying, "Stir not from thy seat till I come back to thee."
 Presently in came the accursed slave with the drawn sword and cried to
 my brother, "Up and be damned to thee!" So he rose, and as the slave
 walked on before him he drew the sword from under his clothes and smote
 him with it, making head fly from body. Then he dragged the corpse by
 the feet to the souterrain and called out, "Where is the salt-wench?"
 Up came the girl carrying the tray of salt and, seeing my brother sword
 in hand, turned to fly; but he followed her and struck off her head.
 Then he called out "Where is the souterrain-guardianess?"; and in came
 the old woman to whom he said, "Dost know me again, O ill-omened hag?"
 "No my lord," she replied, and he said, "I am the owner of the five
 hundred gold pieces, whose house thou enteredst to make the ablution
 and to pray, and whom thou didst snare hither and betray." "Fear Allah
 and spare me," cried she; but he regarded her not and struck her with
 the sword till he had cut her in four. Then he went to look for the
 young lady; and when she saw him her reason fled and she cried out
 piteously "Amán![679] Mercy!" So he spared her and asked, "What made
 thee consort with this blackamoor?;" and she answered, "I was slave to
 a certain merchant, and the old woman used to visit me till I took a
 liking to her. One day she said to me:—We have a marriage festival at
 our house the like of which was never seen and I wish thee to enjoy the
 sight. To hear is to obey, answered I and rising arrayed myself in my
 finest raiment and ornaments, and took with me a purse containing an
 hundred gold pieces. Then she brought me hither and hardly had I
 entered the house when the black seized on me, and I have remained in
 this case three whole years through the perfidy of the accursed
 beldam." Then my brother asked her, "Is there anything of his in the
 house?"; whereto she answered, "Great store of wealth, and if thou art
 able to carry it away, do so and Allah give thee good of it!" My
 brother went with her and she opened to him sundry chests wherein were
 money bags, at which he was astounded; then she said to him, "Go now
 and leave me here, and fetch men to remove the money." He went out and
 hired ten men, but when he returned he found the door wide open, the
 damsel gone and nothing left but some small matter of coin and the
 household stuffs.[680] By this he knew that the girl had overreached
 him; so he opened the store rooms and seized what was in them, together
 with the rest of the money, leaving nothing in the house. He passed the
 night rejoicing, but when morning dawned he found at the door some
 twenty troopers who laid hands on him saying, "The Governor wants
 thee!" My brother implored them hard to let him return to his house;
 and even, offered them a large sum of money; but they refused and,
 binding him fast with cords, carried him off. On the way they met a
 friend of my brother who clung to his skirt and implored his
 protection, begging him to stand by him and help to deliver him out of
 their hands. The man stopped, and asked them what was the matter, and
 they answered, "The Governor hath ordered us to bring this fellow
 before him and, look ye, we are doing so." My brother's friend urged
 them to release him, and offered them five hundred dinars to let him
 go, saying, "When ye return to the Governor tell him that you were
 unable to find him." But they would not listen to his words and took my
 brother, dragging him along on his face, and set him before the
 Governor who asked him, "Whence gottest thou these stuffs and monies?";
 and he answered, "I pray for mercy!" So the Governor gave him the
 kerchief of mercy;[681] and he told him all that had befallen him from
 first to last with the old woman and the flight of the damsel; ending
 with, "Whatso I have taken, take of it what thou wilt, so thou leave me
 sufficient to support life."[682] But the Governor took the whole of
 the stuffs and all the money for himself; and, fearing lest the affair
 come to the Sultan's ears, he summoned my brother and said, "Depart
 from this city, else I will hang thee." "Hearing and obedience" quoth
 my brother and set out for another town. On the way thieves fell foul
 of him and stripped and beat him and docked his ears; but I heard
 tidings of his misfortunes and went out after him taking him clothes;
 and brought him secretly into the city where I assigned to him an
 allowance for meat and drink. And presently the Caliph gave ear to,


               _THE BARBER'S TALE OF HIS SIXTH BROTHER._

 My sixth brother, O Commander of the Faithful, Shakashik,[683] or
 Many-clamours, the shorn of both lips, was once rich and became poor;
 so one day he went out to beg somewhat to keep life in him. As he was
 on the road he suddenly caught sight of a large and handsome mansion,
 with a detached building wide and lofty at the entrance, where sat
 sundry eunuchs bidding and forbidding.[684] My brother enquired of one
 of those idling there and he replied. "The palace belongs to a scion of
 the Barmaki house;" so he stepped up to the door-keepers and asked an
 alms of them. "Enter," said they, "by the great gate and thou shalt get
 what thou seekest from the Wazir our master." Accordingly he went in
 and, passing through the outer entrance, walked on a while and
 presently came to a mansion of the utmost beauty and elegance, paved
 with marble, hung with curtains and having in the midst of it a flower
 garden whose like he had never seen.[685] My brother stood awhile as
 one bewildered not knowing whither to turn his steps; then, seeing the
 farther end of the sitting-chamber tenanted, he walked up to it and
 there found a man of handsome presence and comely beard. When this
 personage saw my brother he stood up to him and welcomed him and asked
 him of his case; whereto he replied that he was in want and needed
 charity. Hearing these words the grandee showed great concern and,
 putting his hand to his fine robe, rent it exclaiming, "What! am I in a
 city, and thou here an-hungered? I have not patience to bear such
 disgrace!" Then he promised him all manner of good cheer and said,
 "There is no help but that thou stay with me and eat of my salt.[686]"
 "O my lord," answered my brother, "I can wait no longer; for I am
 indeed dying of hunger." So he cried, "Ho boy! bring basin and ewer;"
 and, turning to my brother, said, "O my guest come forward and wash thy
 hands." My brother rose to do so but he saw neither ewer nor basin; yet
 his host kept washing his hands with invisible soap in imperceptible
 water and cried, "Bring the table!" But my brother again saw nothing.
 Then said the host, "Honour me by eating of this meat and be not
 ashamed." And he kept moving his hand to and fro as if he ate and
 saying to my brother, "I wonder to see thee eating thus sparely: do not
 stint thyself for I am sure thou art famished." So my brother began to
 make as though he were eating whilst his host kept saying to him, "Fall
 to, and note especially the excellence of this bread and its
 whiteness!" But still my brother saw nothing. Then said he to himself,
 "This man is fond of poking fun at people;" and replied, "O my lord, in
 all my days I never knew aught more winsome than its whiteness or
 sweeter than its savour." The Barmecide said, "This bread was baked by
 a handmaid of mine whom I bought for five hundred dinars." Then he
 called out, "Ho boy, bring in the meat pudding[687] for our first dish,
 and let there be plenty of fat in it;" and, turning to my brother said,
 "O my guest, Allah upon thee, hast ever seen anything better than this
 meat-pudding? Now by my life, eat and be not abashed." Presently he
 cried out again, "Ho boy, serve up the marinated stew[688] with the
 fatted sand-grouse in it;" and he said to my brother, "Up and eat, O my
 guest, for truly thou art hungry and needest food." So my brother began
 wagging his jaws and made as if champing and chewing,[689] whilst the
 host continued calling for one dish after another and yet produced
 nothing save orders to eat. Presently he cried out, "Ho boy, bring us
 the chickens stuffed with pistachio nuts;" and said to my brother, "By
 thy life, O my guest, I have fattened these chickens upon pistachios;
 eat, for thou hast never eaten their like." "O my lord," replied my
 brother, "they are indeed first-rate." Then the host began motioning
 with his hand as though he were giving my brother a mouthful; and
 ceased not to enumerate and expatiate upon the various dishes to the
 hungry man whose hunger waxt still more violent, so that his soul
 lusted after a bit of bread, even a barley-scone.[690] Quoth the
 Barmecide, "Didst thou ever taste anything more delicious than the
 seasoning of these dishes?"; and quoth my brother, "Never O my lord!"
 "Eat heartily and be not ashamed," said the host, and the guest, "I
 have eaten my fill of meat." So the entertainer cried, "Take away and
 bring in the sweets;" and turning to my brother said, "Eat of this
 almond conserve for it is prime and of these honey fritters; take this
 one, by my life, the syrup runs out of it." "May I never be bereaved of
 thee, O my lord," replied the hungry one and began to ask him about the
 abundance of musk in the fritters. "Such is my custom," he answered:
 "they put me a dinar-weight of musk in every honey-fritter and half
 that quantity of ambergris." All this time my brother kept wagging head
 and jaws till the master cried, "Enough of this. Bring us the dessert!"
 Then said he to him, "Eat of these almonds and walnuts and raisins; and
 of this and that (naming divers kinds of dried fruits), and be not
 abashed." But my brother replied, "O my lord, indeed I am full: I can
 eat no more." "O my guest," repeated the host, "if thou have a mind to
 these good things eat: Allah! Allah![691] do not remain hungry;" but my
 brother rejoined, "O my lord, he who hath eaten of all these dishes how
 can he be hungry?" Then he considered and said to himself, "I will do
 that shall make him repent of these pranks." Presently the entertainer
 called out "Bring me the wine;" and, moving his hands in the air, as
 though they had set it before them, he gave my brother a cup and said,
 "Take this cup and, if it please thee, let me know." "O my lord," he
 replied, "it is notable good as to nose but I am wont to drink wine
 some twenty years old." "Knock then at this door,[692]" quoth the host,
 "for thou canst not drink of aught better." "By thy kindness," said my
 brother, motioning with his hand as though he were drinking. "Health
 and joy to thee," exclaimed the house-master and feigned to fill a cup
 and drink it off; then he handed another to my brother who quaffed it
 and made as if he were drunken. Presently he took the host unawares;
 and, raising his arm till the white of his armpit appeared, dealt him
 such a cuff on the nape of his neck that the palace echoed to it. Then
 he came down upon him with a second cuff and the entertainer cried
 aloud, "What is this, O thou scum of the earth?" "O my lord," replied
 my brother, "thou hast shown much kindness to thy slave, and admitted
 him into thine abode and given him to eat of thy victual; then thou
 madest him drink of thine old wine till he became drunken and
 boisterous; but thou art too noble not to bear with his ignorance and
 pardon his offence." When the Barmaki heard my brother's words he
 laughed his loudest and said, "Long have I been wont to make mock of
 men and play the madcap among my intimates, but never yet have I come
 across a single one who had the patience and the wit to enter into all
 my humours save thyself: so I forgive thee, and thou shalt be my
 boon-companion in very sooth and never leave me." Then he ordered the
 servants to lay the table in earnest and they set on all the dishes of
 which he had spoken in sport; and he and my brother ate till they were
 satisfied; after which they removed to the drinking-chamber, where they
 found damsels like moons who sang all manner songs and played on all
 manner instruments. There they remained drinking till their wine got
 the better of them and the host treated my brother like a familiar
 friend, so that he became as it were his brother, and bestowed on him a
 robe of honour and loved him with exceeding love. Next morning the two
 fell again to feasting and carousing, and ceased not to lead this life
 for a term of twenty years; at the end of which the Barmecide died and
 the Sultan took possession of all his wealth and squeezed my brother of
 his savings, till he was left a pauper without a penny to handle. So he
 quitted the city and fled forth following his face;[693] but, when he
 was half way between two towns, the wild Arabs fell on him and bound
 him and carried him to their camp, where his captor proceeded to
 torture him, saying, "Buy thy life of me with thy money, else I will
 slay thee!" My brother began to weep and replied, "By Allah, I have
 nothing, neither gold nor silver; but I am thy prisoner; so do with me
 what thou wilt." Then the Badawi drew a knife, broad-bladed and so
 sharp-grinded that if plunged into a camel's throat[694] it would sever
 it clean across from one jugular to the other, and cut off my brother's
 lips and waxed more instant in requiring money. Now this Badawi had a
 fair wife who in her husband's absence used to make advances to my
 brother and offer him her favours, but he held off from her. One day
 she began to tempt him as usual and he played with her and made her sit
 on his lap, when behold, in came the Badawi who, seeing this, cried
 out, "Woe to thee, O accursed villain, wouldest thou debauch my wife
 for me?" Then he took out a knife and cut off my brother's yard, after
 which he bound him on the back of a camel and, carrying him to a
 mountain, left him there. He was at last found by some who recognised
 him and gave him meat and drink and acquainted me with his condition;
 whereupon I went forth to him and brought him back to Baghdad where I
 made him an allowance sufficient to live on. This, then, O Commander of
 the Faithful, is the history of my six brothers and I feared to go away
 without relating it all to thee and leave thee in the error of judging
 me to be like them. And now thou knowest that I have six brothers upon
 my hands and, being more upright than they, I support the whole family.
 When the Caliph heard my story and all I told him concerning my
 brothers, he laughed and said, "Thou sayest sooth, O Silent Man! thou
 art indeed spare of speech nor is there aught of forwardness in thee;
 but now go forth out of this city and settle in some other." And he
 banished me under edict. I left Baghdad and travelled in foreign parts
 till I heard of his death and the accession of another to the
 Caliphate. Then I returned to Baghdad where I found all my brothers
 dead and chanced upon this young man, to whom I rendered the kindliest
 service, for without me he had surely been killed. Indeed he slanders
 me and accuses me of a fault which is not in my nature; and what he
 reports concerning impudence and meddling and forwardness is idle and
 false; for verily on his account I left Baghdad and travelled about
 full many a country till I came to this city and met him here in your
 company. And was not this, O worthy assemblage, of the generosity of my
 nature?


                    _THE END OF THE TAILOR'S TALE._

 Then quoth the Tailor to the King of China:—When we heard the Barber's
 tale and saw the excess of his loquacity and the way in which he had
 wronged this young man, we laid hands on him and shut him up, after
 which we sat down in peace, and ate and drank and enjoyed the good
 things of the marriage-feast till the time of the call to mid-afternoon
 prayer, when I left the party and returned home. My wife received me
 with sour looks and said, "Thou goest a-pleasuring among thy friends
 and thou leavest me to sit sorrowing here alone. So now, unless thou
 take me abroad and let me have some amusement for the rest of the day,
 I will cut the rope[695] and it will be the cause of my separation from
 thee." So I took her out and we amused ourselves till supper time, when
 we returned home and fell in with this Hunchback who was brimful of
 drink and trolling out these rhymes:—

     Clear's the wine, the cup's fine; ✿ Like to like they combine:
     It is wine and not cup! ✿ 'Tis a cup and not wine!

 So I invited him to sup with us and went out to buy fried fish; after
 which we sat down to eat; and presently my wife took a piece of bread
 and a fid of fish and stuffed them into his mouth and he choked; and,
 though I slapped him long and hard between the shoulders, he died. Then
 I carried him off and contrived to throw him into the house of this
 leach, the Jew; and the leach contrived to throw him into the house of
 the Reeve; and the Reeve contrived to throw him on the way of the
 Nazarene broker. This, then, is my adventure which befel me but
 yesterday. Is not it more wondrous than the story of the Hunchback?
 When the King of China heard the Tailor's tale he shook his head for
 pleasure; and, showing great surprise, said, "This that passed between
 the young man and the busy-body of a Barber is indeed more pleasant and
 wonderful than the story of my lying knave of a Hunchback." Then he
 bade one of his Chamberlains go with the Tailor and bring the Barber
 out of jail, saying, "I wish to hear the talk of this Silent Man and it
 shall be the cause of your deliverance one and all: then we will bury
 the Hunchback, for that he is dead since yesterday, and set up a tomb
 over him."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
 her permitted say.

                Now when it was the Thirty-fourth Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King of China
 bade, "Bring me the Barber who shall be the cause of your deliverance;
 then we will bury this Hunchback, for that he is dead since yesterday
 and set up a tomb over him." So the Chamberlain and the Tailor went to
 the jail and, releasing the Barber, presently returned with him to the
 King. The Sultan of China looked at him and considered him carefully
 and lo and behold! he was an ancient man, past his ninetieth year;
 swart of face, white of beard, and hoar of eyebrows; lop-eared and
 proboscis-nosed,[696] with a vacant, silly and conceited expression of
 countenance. The King laughed at this figure o' fun and said to him, "O
 Silent Man, I desire thee to tell me somewhat of thy history." Quoth
 the Barber, "O King of the age, allow me first to ask thee what is the
 tale of this Nazarene and this Jew and this Moslem and this Hunchback
 (the corpse) I see among you? And prithee what may be the object of
 this assemblage?" Quoth the King of China, "And why dost thou ask?" "I
 ask," he replied, "in order that the King's majesty may know that I am
 no forward fellow or busy-body or impertinent meddler; and that I am
 innocent of their calumnious charges of overmuch talk; for I am he
 whose name is the Silent Man, and indeed peculiarly happy is my
 sobriquet, as saith the poet:—

 When a nickname or little name men design, ✿ Know that nature with name
    shall full oft combine."

 Then said the King, "Explain to the Barber the case of this Hunchback
 and what befel him at supper-time; also repeat to him the stories told
 by the Nazarene, the Jew, the Reeve, and the Tailor; and of no avail to
 me is a twice told tale." They did his bidding, and the Barber shook
 his head and said, "By Allah, this is a marvel of marvels! Now uncover
 me the corpse of yonder Hunchback." They undid the winding-sheet and he
 sat down and, taking the Hunchback's head in his lap, looked at his
 face, and laughed and guffaw'd[697] till he fell upon his back and
 said, "There is wonder in every death,[698] but the death of this
 Hunchback is worthy to be written and recorded in letters of liquid
 gold!" The by-standers were astounded at his words and the King
 marvelled and said to him, "What ails thee O Silent Man? Explain to us
 thy words!" "O King of the age," said the Barber, "I swear by thy
 beneficence that there is still life in this Gobbo Golightly!"
 Thereupon he pulled out of his waist-belt a barber's budget, whence he
 took a pot of ointment and anointed therewith the neck of the Hunchback
 and its arteries. Then he took a pair of iron tweezers and, inserting
 them into the Hunchback's throat, drew out the fid of fish with its
 bone; and, when it came to sight, behold, it was soaked in blood.
 Thereupon the Hunchback sneezed a hearty sneeze and jumped up as if
 nothing had happened and passing his hand over his face said, "I
 testify that there is no god, but _the_ God, and I testify that
 Mohammed is the Apostle of God." At this sight all present wondered;
 the King of China laughed till he fainted and in like manner did the
 others. Then said the Sultan, "By Allah, of a truth this is the most
 marvellous thing I ever saw! O Moslems, O soldiers all, did you ever in
 the lives of you see a man die and be quickened again? Verily had not
 Allah vouchsafed to him this Barber, he had been a dead man!" Quoth
 they, "By Allah, 'tis a marvel of marvels." Then the King of China bade
 record this tale, so they recorded it and placed it in the royal
 muniment-rooms; after which he bestowed costly robes of honour upon the
 Jew, the Nazarene and the Reeve, and bade them depart in all esteem.
 Then he gave the Tailor a sumptuous dress and appointed him his own
 tailor, with suitable pay and allowances; and made peace between him
 and the Hunchback, to whom also he presented a splendid and expensive
 suit with a suitable stipend. He did as generously with the Barber
 giving him a gift and a dress of honour; moreover he settled on him a
 handsome solde and created him Barber-surgeon[699] of state and made
 him one of his cup-companions. So they ceased not to live the most
 pleasurable life and the most delectable, till there came to them the
 Destroyer of all delights and the Sunderer of all societies, the
 Depopulator of palaces and the Garnerer for graves. Yet, O most
 auspicious King! (continued Shahrazad) this tale is by no means more
 wonderful than that of the two Wazirs and Anís al-Jalís. Quoth her
 sister Dunyazad, "And what may that be?"; whereupon she began to relate
 the following tale of

-----

Footnote 496:

   Other editions read, "at Bassorah" and the Bresl. (ii. 123) "at
   Bassorah and Kájkár" (Káshghár): somewhat like in Dover and
   Sebastopol. I prefer China because further off and making the
   improbabilities more notable.

Footnote 497:

   Arab. "Judri," lit. "small stones" from the hard gravelly feeling of
   the pustules (Rodwell, p. 20). The disease is generally supposed to
   be the growth of Central Africa where it is still a plague and passed
   over to Arabia about the birth-time of Mohammed. Thus is usually
   explained the "war of the elephant" (Koran, chapt. cv.) when the
   Abyssinian army of Abrahah, the Christian, was destroyed by swallows
   (Abábíl which Major Price makes the plural of Abilah=a vesicle) which
   dropped upon them "stones of baked clay," like vetches (Pilgrimage
   ii. 175). See for details Sale (_in loco_) who seems to accept the
   miraculous defence of the Ka'abah. For the horrors of small-pox in
   Central Intertropical Africa the inoculation, known also to the
   Badawin of Al-Hijáz and other details, readers will consult "The Lake
   Regions of Central Africa" (ii. 318). The Hindus "take the bull by
   the horns" and boldly make "Sítlá" (small-pox) a goddess, an
   incarnation of Bhawáni, deëss of destruction-reproduction. In China
   small pox is believed to date from B.C. 1200; but the chronology of
   the Middle Kingdom still awaits the sceptic.

Footnote 498:

   In Europe we should add "and all fled, especially the women." But the
   fatalism inherent in the Eastern mind makes the great difference.

Footnote 499:

   Arab. "Uzayr." Esdras was a manner of Ripp van Winkle. He was riding
   over the ruins of Jerusalem when it had been destroyed by the
   Chaldeans and he doubted by what means Allah would restore it;
   whereupon he died and at the end of a hundred years he revived. He
   found his basket of figs and cruse of wine as they were; but of his
   ass only the bones remained. These were raised to life as Ezra looked
   on and the ass began at once to bray. Which was a lesson to Esdras.
   (Koran, chapt. ii). The oath by the ass's hoofs is to ridicule the
   Jew. Mohammed seems to have had an _idée fixe_ that "the Jews say,
   Ezra is the son of God" (Koran ix.); it may have arisen from the
   heterodox Jewish belief that Ezra, when the Law was utterly lost,
   dictated the whole anew to the scribes of his own memory. His tomb
   with the huge green dome is still visited by the Jews of Baghdad.

Footnote 500:

   Arab. "Bádhanj," the Pers. Bád (wind)-gír (catcher): a wooden
   pent-house on the terrace-roof universal in the nearer East.

Footnote 501:

   The hunchback, in Arabia as in Southern Europe, is looked upon by the
   vulgar with fear and aversion: The reason is that he is usually
   sharper-witted than his neighbours.

Footnote 502:

   Arab. "Yá Sattár"=Thou who veilest the discreditable secrets of Thy
   creatures.

Footnote 503:

   Arab. "Nasráni," a follower of Him of Nazareth and an older name than
   "Christian" which (Acts xi., 26) was first given at Antioch about
   A.D. 43. The cry in Alexandria used to be "Ya Nasráni, Kalb awáni!"=O
   Nazarene! O dog obscene! (Pilgrimage, 1., 160). "Christian" in Arabic
   can be expressed only by "Masíhi"=follower of the Messiah.

Footnote 504:

   Arab. "Tasbíh,"=Saluting in the Subh (morning).

Footnote 505:

   In the East women stand on minor occasions while men squat on their
   hunkers in a way hardly possible to an untrained European. The custom
   is old. Herodotus (ii., 35) says, "The women stand up when they make
   water, but the men sit down." Will it be believed that Canon
   Rawlinson was too modest to leave this passage in his translation?
   The custom was perpetuated by Al-Islam because the position prevents
   the ejection touching the clothes and making them ceremonially
   impure; possibly they borrowed it from the Guebres. Dabistan, Gate
   xvi. says, "It is improper, whilst in an erect posture, to make
   water; it is therefore necessary to sit at squat and force it to some
   distance, repeating the Avesta mentally."

Footnote 506:

   This is still a popular form of the "Kinchin lay," and as the
   turbands are often of fine stuff, the _petite industrie_ pays well.

Footnote 507:

   Arab. "Wali"=Governor; the term still in use for the Governor-General
   of a Province as opposed to the "Muháfiz," or district-governor. In
   Eastern Arabia the Wali is the Civil Governor opposed to the Amir or
   Military Commandant. Under the Caliphate the Wali acted also as
   Prefect of Police (the Indian Faujdár), who is now called "Zábit."
   The older name for the latter was "Sáhib al-Shartah" (=chief of the
   watch) or "Mutawalli"; and it was his duty to go the rounds in
   person. The old "Charley," with his lantern and cudgel, still guards
   the bazars in Damascus.

Footnote 508:

   Arab. "Al-Mashá ilí"=the bearer of a cresset (Mash'al) who was also
   Jack Ketch. In Anglo-India the name is given to a lower body-servant.
   The "Mash'al" which Lane (M. E., chapt vi.) calls "Mesh'al" and
   illustrates, must not be confounded with its congener the "Sha'ílah"
   or link (also lamp, wick, etc.).

Footnote 509:

   I need hardly say that the civilised "drop" is unknown to the East
   where men are strung up as to a yardarm. This greatly prolongs the
   suffering.

Footnote 510:

   Arab. "Lukmah":=a mouthful. It is still the fashion amongst Easterns
   of primitive manners to take up a handful of rice, etc., ball it and
   put it into a friend's mouth _honoris causâ_. When the friend is a
   European the expression of his face is generally a study.

Footnote 511:

   I need hardly note that this is an old Biblical practice. The ass is
   used for city-work as the horse for fighting and travelling, the mule
   for burdens and the dromedary for the desert. But the Badawi, like
   the Indian, despises the monture and sings:—

                The back of the steed is a noble place;
                But the mule's dishonour, the ass disgrace!

   The fine white asses, often thirteen hands high, sold by the Banu
   Salíb and other Badawi tribes, will fetch £100, and more. I rode a
   little brute from Meccah to Jedda (42 miles) in one night and it came
   in with me cantering.

Footnote 512:

   A dry measure of about five bushels (Cairo). The classical
   pronunciation is Irdabb and it measured 24 sa'a (gallons) each
   filling four outstretched hands.

Footnote 513:

   "Al-Jawáli" should be Al-Jáwali (Al-Makrizi) and the Bab al-Nasr
   (Gate of Victory) is that leading to Suez. I lived in that quarter as
   shown by my Pilgrimage (i. 62).

Footnote 514:

   Arab. "Al-'ajalah," referring to a saying in every Moslem mouth,
   "Patience is from the Protector (Allah): Hurry is from Hell." That
   and "Inshallah bukra!" (Please God to-morrow!) are the traveller's
   _bêtes noires_.

Footnote 515:

   Here it is a polite equivalent for "fall to!"

Footnote 516:

   The left hand is used throughout the East for purposes of ablution
   and is considered unclean. To offer the left hand would be most
   insulting and no man ever strokes his beard with it or eats with it:
   hence, probably, one never sees a left-handed man throughout the
   Moslem east. In the Brazil for the same reason old-fashioned people
   will not take snuff with the right hand. And it is related of the
   Khataians that they prefer the left hand, "Because the heart, which
   is the Sultan of the city of the Body, hath his mansion on that side"
   (Rauzat al-Safá).

Footnote 517:

   Two feminine names; as we might say Mary and Martha.

Footnote 518:

   It was near the Caliph's two Palaces (Al-Kasrayn); and was famous in
   the 15th century A.D. The Kazi's Mahkamah (Court-house) now occupies
   the place of the Two Palaces.

Footnote 519:

   A Kaysariah is a superior kind of bazar, a "bezestein." That in the
   text stood to the east of the principal street in Cairo and was built
   in A. H. 502 (=1108-9) by a Circassian Emir, known as Fakhr al-Din
   Jahárkas, a corruption of the Persian "Chehár-kas"=four persons
   (Lane, i. 422, from Al-Makrizi and Ibn Khallikan). For Jahárkas the
   Mac. Edit. has Jirjís (George) a common Christian name. I once lodged
   in a "Wakálah (the modern Khan) Jirjis." Pilgrimage, i. 255.

Footnote 520:

   Arab. "Second Day," _i.e._ after Saturday, the true Sabbath, so
   marvellously ignored by Christendom.

Footnote 521:

   Readers who wish to know how a traveller is lodged in a Wakálah,
   Khan, or Caravanserai, will consult my Pilgrimage, i. 60.

Footnote 522:

   The original occupation of the family had given it a name, as amongst
   us.

Footnote 523:

   The usual "chaff" or banter allowed even to modest women when
   shopping, and—many a true word is spoken in jest.

Footnote 524:

   "La adamnák"=Heaven deprive us not of thee, _i.e._ grant I see thee
   often!

Footnote 525:

   This is a somewhat cavalier style of advance; but Easterns under such
   circumstances go straight to the point, hating to filer the parfait
   amour.

Footnote 526:

   The peremptory formula of a slave delivering such a message.

Footnote 527:

   This would be our Thursday night, preceding the day of public prayers
   which can be performed only when in a state of ceremonial purity.
   Hence many Moslems go to the Hammam on Thursday and have no
   connection with their wives till Friday night.

Footnote 528:

   Lane (i. 423) gives ample details concerning the Habbániyah, or
   grain-sellers' quarter in the southern part of Cairo; and shows that
   when this tale was written (or transcribed?) the city was almost as
   extensive as it is now.

Footnote 529:

   Nakíb is a caravan-leader, a chief, a syndic; and "Abú Shámah"=Father
   of a cheek mole, while "Abú Shámmah"=Father of a smeller, a nose, a
   snout. The "Kuniyah," bye-name, patronymic or matronymic, is
   necessary amongst Moslems whose list of names, all connected more or
   less with religion, is so scanty. Hence Buckingham the traveller was
   known as Abu Kidr, the Father of a Cooking-pot and Hajj Abdullah as
   Abu Shawárib, Father of Mustachios (Pilgrimage, iii., 263).

Footnote 530:

   More correctly Bab Zawilah from the name of a tribe in Northern
   Africa. This gate dates from the same age as the Eastern or Desert
   gate, Bab al-Nasr (A.D. 1087) and is still much admired. M. Jomard
   describes it (Description, etc., ii. 670) and lately my good friend
   Yacoub Artin Pasha has drawn attention to it in the Bulletin de
   l'Inst. Egypt., Deuxième Série, No. 4, 1883.

Footnote 531:

   This ornament is still seen in the older saloons of Damascus: the
   inscriptions are usually religious sentences, extracts from the
   Koran, etc., in uncial characters. They take the place of our
   frescos; and, as a work of art, are generally far superior.

Footnote 532:

   Arab. "Bayáz al-Sultání," the best kind of gypsum which shines like
   polished marble. The stucco on the walls of Alexandria, built by
   Alexander of the two Horns, was so exquisitely tempered and
   beautifully polished that men had to wear masks for fear of
   blindness.

Footnote 533:

   This Iklíl, a complicated affair, is now obsolete, its place having
   been taken by the "Kurs," a gold plate, some five inches in diameter,
   set with jewels, etc. Lane (M. E. Appendix A) figures it.

Footnote 534:

   The woman-artist who applies the dye is called "Munakkishah."

Footnote 535:

   "Kissing with th' inner lip," as Shakespeare calls it; the French
   _langue fourrée_; and Sankrit "Samputa." The subject of kissing is
   extensive in the East. Ten different varieties are duly enumerated in
   the "Ananga-Ranga;" or, The Hindu Art of Love (Ars Amoris Indica)
   translated from the Sanscrit, and annotated by A. F. F. and B. F. R.
   It is also connected with unguiculation, or impressing the nails, of
   which there are seven kinds; morsication (seven kinds); handling the
   hair and tappings or pattings with the fingers and palm (eight
   kinds).

Footnote 536:

   Arab. "asal-nahl," to distinguish it from "honey" _i.e._ syrup of
   sugar-cane and fruits.

Footnote 537:

   The lines have occurred in Night xii. By way of variety I give
   Torrens' version p. 273.

Footnote 538:

   The way of carrying money in the corner of a pocket-handkerchief is
   still common.

Footnote 539:

   He sent the provisions not to be under an obligation to her in this
   matter. And she received them to judge thereby of his liberality.

Footnote 540:

   Those who have seen the process of wine-making in the Libanus will
   readily understand why it is always strained.

Footnote 541:

   Arab. "Kulkasá," a kind of arum or yam, eaten boiled like our
   potatoes.

Footnote 542:

   At first he slipped the money into the bed-clothes: now he gives it
   openly and she accepts it for a reason.

Footnote 543:

   Arab. Al-Zalamah: lit.=tyrants, oppressors, applied to the police and
   generally to the employés of Government. It is a word which tells a
   history.

Footnote 544:

   Moslem law is never completely satisfied till the criminal confess.
   It also utterly ignores circumstantial evidence and for the best of
   reasons: amongst so sharp-witted a people the admission would lead to
   endless abuses. I greatly surprised a certain Governor-General of
   India by giving him this simple information.

Footnote 545:

   Cutting off the right hand is the Koranic punishment (chapt. v.) for
   one who robs an article worth four dinars, about forty francs to
   shillings. The left foot is to be cut off at the ankle for a second
   offence and so on; but death is reserved for a hardened criminal. The
   practice is now obsolete and theft is punished by the bastinado, fine
   or imprisonment. The old Guebres were as severe. For stealing one
   dirham's worth they took a fine of two, cut off the ear-lobes, gave
   ten stick-blows and dismissed the criminal who had been subjected to
   an hour's imprisonment. A second theft caused the penalties to be
   doubled; and after that the right hand was cut off or death was
   inflicted according to the proportion stolen.

Footnote 546:

   Koran viii. 17.

Footnote 547:

   A universal custom in the East, the object being originally to show
   that the draught was not poisoned.

Footnote 548:

   Out of paste or pudding.

Footnote 549:

   Boils and pimples are supposed to be caused by broken hair-roots and
   in Hindostani are called Bál-tor.

Footnote 550:

   He intended to bury it decently, a respect which Moslems always show
   even to the exuviæ of the body, as hair and nail parings. Amongst
   Guebres the latter were collected and carried to some mountain. The
   practice was intensified by fear of demons or wizards getting
   possession of the spoils.

Footnote 551:

   Without which the marriage was not valid. The minimum is ten dirhams
   (drachmas) now valued at about five francs to shillings; and if a man
   marry without naming the sum, the woman, after consummation, can
   compel him to pay this minimum.

Footnote 552:

   Arab. "Khatmah"=reading or reciting the whole Koran, by one or more
   persons, usually in the house, not over the tomb. Like the "Zikr,"
   Litany or Rogation, it is a pious act confined to certain occasions.

Footnote 553:

   Arab. "Zírbájah"=meat dressed with vinegar, cumin-seed (Pers. Zír)
   and hot spices. More of it in the sequel of the tale.

Footnote 554:

   A saying not uncommon meaning, let each man do as he seems fit;
   also="age quod agis": and at times corresponding with our saw about
   the cap-fitting.

Footnote 555:

   Arab. "Su'úd," an Alpinia with pungent rhizome like ginger; here used
   as a counter-odour.

Footnote 556:

   Arab. "Tá'ih"=lost in the "Tíh," a desert wherein man _may_ lose
   himself, translated in our maps "The Desert of the Wanderings," scil.
   of the children of Israel. "Credat Judæus."

Footnote 557:

   _i.e._, £125 and £500.

Footnote 558:

   A large sum was weighed by a professional instead of being counted,
   the reason being that the coin is mostly old and worn: hence our
   words "pound" and "pension" (or what is weighed out).

Footnote 559:

   The eunuch is the best possible go-between on account of his almost
   unlimited power over the Harem.

Footnote 560:

   _i.e._ a slave-girl brought up in the house and never sold except for
   some especial reason, as habitual drunkenness, etc.

Footnote 561:

   Smuggling men into the Harem is a stock "topic" of eastern tales. "By
   means of their female attendants, the ladies of the royal harem
   generally get men into their apartments in the disguise of women."
   Says Vatsyayana in The Kama Sutra, Part V., London: Printed for the
   Hindoo Kamashastra Society, 1883. For private circulation only.

Footnote 562:

   These tears are shed over past separation. So the "Indians" of the
   New World never meet after long parting without beweeping mutual
   friends they have lost.

Footnote 563:

   A most important Jack in office whom one can see with his smooth chin
   and blubber lips, starting up from his lazy snooze in the shade and
   delivering his orders more peremptorily than any Dogberry. These
   epicenes are as curious and exceptional in character as in external
   conformation. Disconnected, after a fashion, with humanity, they are
   brave, fierce and capable of any villany or barbarity (as Agha
   Mohammed Khan in Persia 1795-98). The frame is unnaturally long and
   lean, especially the arms and legs; with high, flat, thin shoulders;
   big protruding joints and a face by contrast extraordinarily large, a
   veritable mask; the Castrato is expert in the use of weapons and sits
   his horse admirably, riding well "home" in the saddle for the best of
   reasons; and his hoarse thick voice, which apparently does not break,
   as in the European "Cáppone," invests him with all the circumstance
   of command.

Footnote 564:

   From the Meccan well used by Moslems much like Eau de Lourdes by
   Christians: the water is saltish, hence the touch of Arab humour
   (Pilgrimage III., 201-202.)

Footnote 565:

   Such articles would be sacred from Moslem eyes.

Footnote 566:

   Physiologically true, but not generally mentioned in describing the
   emotions.

Footnote 567:

   Properly "Uta," the different rooms, each "Odalisque," or concubine,
   having her own.

Footnote 568:

   Showing that her monthly ailment was over.

Footnote 569:

   Arab. "Muhammarah"=either browned before the fire or artificially
   reddened.

Footnote 570:

   The insolence and licence of these palace-girls was (and is)
   unlimited; especially when, as in the present case, they have to deal
   with a "softy." On this subject numberless stories are current
   throughout the East.

Footnote 571:

   _i.e._ blackened by the fires of Jehannam.

Footnote 572:

   Arab. "Bi'l-Salámah"=in safety (to avert the evil eye). When visiting
   the sick it is usual to say something civil; "The Lord heal thee! No
   evil befal thee!" etc.

Footnote 573:

   Washing during sickness is held dangerous by Arabs; and "going to the
   Hammam" is, I have said, equivalent to convalescence.

Footnote 574:

   Arab. "Máristán" (pronounced Múristan) a corruption of the Pers.
   "Bímáristán"=place of sickness, a hospital much affected by the old
   Guebres (Dabistan, i., 165, 166). That of Damascus was the first
   Moslem hospital, founded by Al-Walid Son of Abd al-Malik the Ommiade
   in A.H. 88=706-7. Benjamin of Tudela (A.D. 1164) calls it
   "Dar-al-Maraphtan" which his latest Editor explains by
   "Dar-al-Mora-bittan" (abode of those who require being chained).
   Al-Makrizi (Khitat) ascribes the invention of "Spitals" to
   Hippocrates; another historian to an early Pharaoh "Manákiyush;" thus
   ignoring the Persian Kings, Saint Ephrem (or Ephraim) Syru etc. In
   modern parlance "Maristan" is a madhouse where the maniacs are
   treated with all the horrors which were universal in Europe till
   within a few years and of which occasional traces occur to this day.
   In A.D. 1399 Katherine de la Court held a "hospital in the Court
   called Robert de Paris;" but the first madhouse in Christendom was
   built by the legate Ortiz in Toledo A.D. 1483, and was therefore
   called Casa del Nuncio. The Damascus "Maristan" was described by
   every traveller of the last century: and it showed a curious contrast
   between the treatment of the maniac and the idiot or omadhaun, who is
   humanely allowed to wander about unharmed, if not held a Saint. When
   I saw it last (1870) it was all but empty and mostly in ruins. As far
   as my experience goes, the United States is the only country where
   the insane are rationally treated by the sane.

Footnote 575:

   Hence the trite saying "Whoso drinks the water of the Nile will ever
   long to drink it again." "Light" means easily digested water; and the
   great test is being able to drink it at night between the sleeps,
   without indigestion.

Footnote 576:

   "Níl" in popular parlance is the Nile in flood, although also used
   for the River as a proper name. Egyptians (modern as well as
   ancient), have three seasons Al-Shitá (winter), Al-Sayf (summer) and
   Al-Níl (the Nile _i.e._ flood season, our mid-summer); corresponding
   with the Growth-months; Housing (or granary) months and Flood-months
   of the older race.

Footnote 577:

   These lines are in the Mac. Edit.

Footnote 578:

   Arab. "Birkat al-Habash," a tank formerly existing in Southern Cairo:
   Galland (Night 128) says "en remontant vers l'Éthiopie."

Footnote 579:

   The Bres. Edit. (ii., 190) from which I borrow this description, here
   alludes to the well-known Island, Al-Rauzah (Rodah)=The Garden.

Footnote 580:

   Arab. "Laylat al-Wafá," the night of the completion or abundance of
   the Nile (flood), usually between August 6th and 16th, when the
   government proclaims that the Nilometer shows a rise of 16 cubits. Of
   course it is a great festival and a high ceremony, for Egypt is still
   the gift of the Nile (Lane M. E. chapt. xxvi—a work which would be
   much improved by a better index).

Footnote 581:

   _i.e._ admiration will be complete.

Footnote 582:

   Arab. "Sáhil Masr" (Misr): hence I suppose Galland's _villes
   maritimes_.

Footnote 583:

   A favourite simile, suggested by the broken glitter and shimmer of
   the stream under the level rays and the breeze of eventide.

Footnote 584:

   Arab. "Halab," derived by Moslems from "He (Abraham) milked
   (_halaba_) the white and dun cow." But the name of the city occurs in
   the Cuneiforms as Halbun or Khalbun, and the classics knew it as
   Βέροια, Beroea, written with variants.

Footnote 585:

   Arab. "Ká'ah," usually a saloon; but also applied to a fine house
   here and elsewhere in The Nights.

Footnote 586:

   Arab. "Ghamz"=winking, signing with the eye which, amongst Moslems,
   is not held "vulgar."

Footnote 587:

   Arab. "Kamís" from low Lat. "Camicia," first found in St.
   Jerome:—"Solent militantes habere lineas, quas Camicias vocant." Our
   shirt, chemise, chemisette, etc. was unknown to the Ancients of
   Europe.

Footnote 588:

   Arab. "Narjís." The Arabs borrowed nothing, but the Persians much,
   from Greek Mythology. Hence the eye of Narcissus, an idea hardly
   suggested by the look of the daffodil (or asphodel) flower, is at
   times the glance of a spy and at times the die-away look of a
   mistress. Some scholars explain it by the form of the flower, the
   internal calyx resembling the iris, and the stalk being bent just
   below the petals suggesting drooping eyelids and languid eyes. Hence
   a poet addresses the Narcissus:—

   O Narjis, look away! Before those eyes ✿ I may not kiss her as
      a-breast she lies.
   What! Shall the lover close his eyes in sleep ✿ While thine watch all
      things between earth and skies?

   The fashionable lover in the East must affect a frantic jealousy if
   he does not feel it.

Footnote 589:

   In Egypt there are neither bedsteads nor bed-rooms: the carpets and
   mattresses, pillows and cushions (sheets being unknown) are spread
   out when wanted, and during the day are put into chests or cupboards,
   or only rolled up in a corner of the room (Pilgrimage i., 53).

Footnote 590:

   The women of Damascus have always been famed for the sanguinary
   jealousy with which European story-books and novels credit the
   "Spanish lady." The men were as celebrated for intolerance and
   fanaticism, which we first read of in the days of Bertrandon de la
   Brocquière and which culminated in the massacre of 1860. Yet they are
   a notoriously timid race and make, physically and morally, the worst
   of soldiers: we proved that under my late friend Fred. Walpole in the
   Bashi-Buzuks during the old Crimean war. The men looked very fine
   fellows and after a month in camp fell off to the condition of old
   women.

Footnote 591:

   Arab. "Rukhám," properly=alabaster and "Marmar"=marble; but the two
   are often confounded.

Footnote 592:

   He was ceremonially impure after touching a corpse.

Footnote 593:

   The phrase is perfectly appropriate: Cairo without "her Nile" would
   be nothing.

Footnote 594:

   "The market was hot" say the Hindustanis. This would begin between 7
   and 8 a.m.

Footnote 595:

   Arab. Al-Faranj, Europeans generally. It is derived from "Gens
   Francorum," and dates from Crusading days when the French played the
   leading part. Hence the Lingua Franca, the Levantine jargon, of which
   Molière has left such a witty specimen.

Footnote 596:

   A process familiar to European surgery of the same date.

Footnote 597:

   In sign of disappointment, regret, vexation; a gesture still common
   amongst Moslems and corresponding in significance to a certain extent
   with our stamping, wringing the hands and so forth. It is not
   mentioned in the Koran where, however, we find "biting fingers' ends
   out of wrath" against a man (chapt. iii).

Footnote 598:

   This is no unmerited scandal. The Cairenes, especially the feminine
   half (for reasons elsewhere given), have always been held exceedingly
   debauched. Even the modest Lane gives a "shocking" story of a woman
   enjoying her lover under the nose of her husband and confining the
   latter in a madhouse (chapt. xiii.) With civilisation, which objects
   to the good old remedy, the sword, they become worse: and the Kazi's
   court is crowded with would-be divorcees. Under English rule the evil
   has reached its acme because it goes unpunished: in the avenues of
   the new Isma'iliyah Quarter, inhabited by Europeans, women, even
   young women, will threaten to expose their persons unless they
   receive "bakhshísh." It was the same in Sind when husbands were
   assured that they would be hanged for cutting down adulterous wives:
   at once after its conquest the women broke loose; and in 1843-50, if
   a young officer sent to the bazar for a girl, half-a-dozen would
   troop to his quarters. Indeed more than once the professional
   prostitutes threatened to memorialise Sir Charles Napier because the
   "modest women," the "ladies" were taking the bread out of their
   mouths. The same was the case at Kabul (Caboul) of Afghanistan in the
   old war of 1840; and here the women had more excuse, the husbands
   being notable sodomites as the song has it:—

                    The worth of slit the Afghan knows;
                    The worth of hole the Kábul-man.

Footnote 599:

   So that he might not have to do with three sisters german. Moreover
   amongst Moslems a girl's conduct is presaged by that of her mother;
   and if one sister go wrong, the other is expected to follow suit.
   Practically the rule applies everywhere: "like mother like daughter."

Footnote 600:

   In sign of dissent; as opposed to nodding the head which signifies
   assent. These are two items, apparently instinctive and universal, of
   man's gesture-language which has been so highly cultivated by sundry
   North American tribes and by the surdo-mute establishments of Europe.

Footnote 601:

   This "Futur" is the real "breakfast" of the East, the "Chhoti házri"
   (petit déjeûner) of India, a bit of bread, a cup of coffee or tea and
   a pipe on rising. In the text, however it is a ceremonious affair.

Footnote 602:

   Arab. "Nahs," a word of many meanings; a sinister aspect of the stars
   (as in Heb. and Aram.) or, adjectively, sinister, of ill-omen.
   Vulgarly it is used as the reverse of nice and corresponds, after a
   fashion with our "nasty."

Footnote 603:

   "Window-gardening," new in England, is an old practise in the East.

Footnote 604:

   Her pimping instinct at once revealed the case to her.

Footnote 605:

   The usual "pander-dodge" to get more money.

Footnote 606:

   The writer means that the old woman's account was all false, to
   increase apparent difficulties and _pour se faire valoir_.

Footnote 607:

   Arab. "Yá Khálati"=mother's sister; a familiar address to the old, as
   uncle or nuncle (father's brother) to a man. The Arabs also hold that
   as a girl resembles her mother so a boy follows his uncle (mother's
   brother): hence the address "Ya tayyib al-Khál!"=O thou nephew of a
   good uncle. I have noted that physically this is often fact.

Footnote 608:

   "Ay w' Alláhi," contracted popularly to Aywa, a word in every Moslem
   mouth and shunned by Christians because against orders Hebrew and
   Christian. The better educated Turks now eschew that eternal
   reference to Allah which appears in The Nights and which is still the
   custom of the vulgar throughout the world of Al-Islam.

Footnote 609:

   The "Muzayyin" or barber in the East brings his basin and budget
   under his arm: he is not content only to shave, he must scrape the
   forehead, trim the eyebrows, pass the blade lightly over the nose and
   correct the upper and lower lines of the mustachios, opening the
   central parting and so forth. He is not a whit less a tattler and a
   scandalmonger than the old Roman tonsor or Figaro his _confrère_ in
   Southern Europe. The whole scene of the Barber is admirable, an
   excellent specimen of Arab humour and not over-caricatured. We all
   have met him.

Footnote 610:

   Abdullah ibn Abbas was a cousin and a companion of the Apostle; also
   a well-known Commentator on the Koran and conserver of the traditions
   of Mohammed.

Footnote 611:

   I have noticed the antiquity of this father of our sextant, a
   fragment of which was found in the Palace of Sennacherib. More
   concerning the "Arstable" (as Chaucer calls it) is given in my
   "Camoens: his Life and his Lusiads" p. 381.

Footnote 612:

   Arab. "Simiyá" to rhyme with Kímiyá (alchemy proper). It is a
   subordinate branch of the Ilm al-Ruháni which I would translate
   "Spiritualism," and which is divided into two great branches, "Ilwí
   or Rahmáni" (the high or related to the Deity) and Siflí or Shaytáni
   (low, Satanic). To the latter belongs Al-Sahr, magic or the black art
   proper, gramarye, egromancy, while Al-Simiyá is white magic,
   electro-biology, a kind of natural and deceptive magic, in which
   drugs and perfumes exercise an important action. One of its principal
   branches is the Darb al-Mandal or magic mirror, of which more in a
   future page. See Boccaccio's Day x. Novel 5.

Footnote 613:

   Chapt. iii. 128. See Sale (in loco) for the noble application of this
   text by the Imam Hasan, son of the Caliph Ali.

Footnote 614:

   These proverbs at once remind us of our old friend Sancho Panza and
   are equally true to nature in the mouth of the Arab and of the
   Spaniard.

Footnote 615:

   Our nurses always carry in the arms: Arabs place the children
   astraddle upon the hip and when older on the shoulder.

Footnote 616:

   Eastern clothes allow this biblical display of sorrow and vexation,
   which with our European garb would look absurd: we must satisfy
   ourselves with maltreating our hats.

Footnote 617:

   Koran xlviii., 8. It may be observed that according to the Ahádis
   (sayings of the Prophet) and the Sunnat (sayings and doings of
   Mahommed), all the hair should be allowed to grow or the whole head
   be clean shaven. Hence the "Shúshah," or topknot supposed to be left
   as a handle for drawing the wearer into Paradise; and the Zulf, or
   side-locks, somewhat like the ringlets of the Polish Jews, are both
   vain "Bida'at," or innovations, and therefore technically termed
   "Makrúh," a practice not laudable, neither "Halál" (perfectly lawful)
   nor "Harám" (forbidden by the law). When boys are first shaved,
   generally in the second or third year, a tuft is left on the crown
   and another over the forehead: but this is not the fashion amongst
   adults. Abu Hanifah, if I am rightly informed, wrote a treatise on
   the Shushah or long lock growing from the Násiyah (head-poll) which
   is also a precaution lest the decapitated Moslem's mouth be defiled
   by an impure hand; and thus it would resemble the chivalry-lock by
   which the Redskin brave (and even the "cowboy" of better times)
   facilitated the removal of his own scalp. Possibly the Turks had
   learned the practice from the Chinese and introduced it into Baghdad
   (Pilgrimage i., 240). The Badawi plait their locks in Kurún (horns)
   or Jadáil (ringlets) which are undone only to be washed with the
   water of the she-camel. The wild Sherifs wear Haffah, long elf-locks
   hanging down both sides of the throat, and shaved away about a
   finger's breadth round the forehead and behind the neck (Pilgrimage
   iii., 35-36). I have elsewhere noted the _accroche-cœurs_, the
   "idiot-fringe," etc.

Footnote 618:

   Meats are rarely coloured in modern days; but Persian cooks are great
   adepts in staining rice for the "Puláo" (which we call after its
   Turkish corruption "pilaff"): it sometimes appears in
   rainbow-colours, red, yellow and blue; and in India is covered with
   gold and silver leaf. Europe retains the practice in tinting Pasch
   (Easter) eggs, the survival of the mundane ovum which was hatched at
   Easter-tide; and they are dyed red in allusion to the Blood of
   Redemption.

Footnote 619:

   As I have noticed this is a mixture.

Footnote 620:

   We say:—

                  'Tis rare the father in the son we see:
                  He sometimes rises in the third degree.

Footnote 621:

   Arab. "Ballán" _i.e._ the body-servant: "Ballánah" is a tire-woman.

Footnote 622:

   Arab. "Darabukkah" a drum made of wood or earthenware (Lane, M. E.,
   xviii.), and used by all in Egypt.

Footnote 623:

   Arab. "Naihah" more generally "Naddábah" Lat. præfica or carina, a
   hired mourner, the Irish "Keener" at the conclamatio or coronach,
   where the Hullabaloo, Hulululu or Ululoo showed the survivors'
   sorrow.

Footnote 624:

   These doggrels, which are like our street melodies, are now forgotten
   and others have taken their place. A few years ago one often heard,
   "Dus ya lallí" (tread, O my joy) and "Názil il'al-Ganínah" (Down into
   the garden) and these in due turn become obsolete. Lane (M. E. chapt.
   xviii.) gives the former _e.g._

                    Tread, O my joy! Tread, O my joy!
                    Love of my love brings sore annoy,

   A chorus to such stanzas as:—

   Alexandrian damsels rare! ✿ Daintily o'er the floor ye fare:
   Your lips are sweet, are sugar-sweet, ✿ And purfled Cashmere shawls
      ye wear!

   It maybe noted that "humming" is not a favourite practice with
   Moslems; if one of the company begin, another will say, "Go to the
   Kahwah" (the coffee-house, the proper music-hall) "and sing there!" I
   have elsewhere observed their dislike to Al-sifr or whistling.

Footnote 625:

   Arab. Khalí'a=worn out, crafty, an outlaw; used like Span. "Perdido."

Footnote 626:

   "Zabbál" is the scavenger, lit. a dung-drawer, especially for the use
   of the Hammam which is heated with the droppings of animals. "Wakkád"
   (stoker) is the servant who turns the fire. The verses are mere
   nonsense to suit the Barber's humour.

Footnote 627:

   Arab. "Yá bárid"=O fool.

Footnote 628:

   This form of blessing is chaunted from the Minaret about half-an-hour
   before midday, when the worshippers take their places in the mosque.
   At noon there is the usual Azán or prayer-call, and each man performs
   a two-bow, in honour of the mosque and its gathering, as it were. The
   Prophet is then blessed and a second Salám is called from the raised
   ambo or platform ("dikkah") by the divines who repeat the
   midday-call. Then an Imam recites the first Khutbah, or sermon "of
   praise"; and the congregation worships in silence. This is followed
   by the second exhortation "of Wa'az," dispensing the words of wisdom.
   The Imam now stands up before the Mihráb (prayer niche) and recites
   the Ikámah which is the common Azan with one only difference: after
   "Hie ye to salvation" it adds "Come is the time of supplication";
   whence the name, "causing" (prayer) to stand (_i.e._ to begin).
   Hereupon the worshippers recite the Farz or Koran-commanded
   noon-prayer of Friday; and the unco'guid add a host of
   supererogatories. Those who would study the subject may consult Lane
   (M. E. chapt. iii. and its abstract in his "Arabian Nights," I, p.
   430, or note 69 to Chapt. v.)

Footnote 629:

   _i.e._, The women loosed their hair; an immodesty sanctioned only by
   a great calamity.

Footnote 630:

   These small shops are composed of a "but" and a "ben" (Pilgrimage i.
   99.)

Footnote 631:

   Arab. "Kawwád," a popular term of abuse; hence the Span. and Port.
   "Alcoviteiro." The Italian "Galeotto" is from Galahalt, not Galahad.

Footnote 632:

   _i.e._ "one seeking assistance in Allah." He was the son of Al-Záhir
   bi'lláh (one pre-eminent by the decree of Allah). Lane says (i. 430),
   "great-grandson of Harun al-Rashid," alluding to the first Mustansir
   son of Al-Mutawakkil (regn. A.H. 247-248=861-2). But this is the 56th
   Abbaside and regn. A.H. 623-640 (=1226-1242).

Footnote 633:

   Arab. "Yaum al-Id," the Kurban Bairam of the Turks, the Pilgrimage
   festival. The story is historical. In the "Akd," a miscellany
   compiled by Ibn Abd Rabbuh (vulg. Rabbi-hi) of Cordova, who ob. A.H.
   328=940 we read:—A spunger found ten criminals and followed them,
   imagining they were going to a feast; but lo, they were going to
   their deaths. And when they were slain and he remained, he was
   brought before the Khalifah (Al-Maamun) and Ibrahim son of Al-Mahdi
   related a tale to procure pardon for the man, whereupon the Khalifah
   pardoned him. Lane ii, 506.

Footnote 634:

   Arab. "Nata' al-Dam"; the former word was noticed in the Tale of the
   Bull and the Ass. The leather of blood was not unlike the Sufrah and
   could be folded into a bag by a string running through rings round
   the edges. Moslem executioners were very expert and seldom failed to
   strike off the head with a single blow of the thin narrow blade with
   razor-edge, hard as diamond withal, which contrasted so strongly with
   the great coarse chopper of the European headsman.

Footnote 635:

   The ground floor, which in all hot countries is held, and rightly so,
   unwholesome during sleep, is usually let for shops. This is also the
   case throughout Southern Europe, and extends to the Canary Islands
   and the Brazil.

Footnote 636:

   This serious contemplation of street-scenery is one of the pleasures
   of the Harems.

Footnote 637:

   We should say "smiled at him": the laugh was not intended as an
   affront.

Footnote 638:

   Arab. "Fals ahmar." Fals is a fish-scale, also the smaller coin and
   the plural "Fulús" is the vulgar term for money (=Ital. _quattrini_)
   without specifying the coin. It must not be confounded with the
   "Fazzah," alias "Nuss," alias "Páráh" (Turk.); the latter being made,
   not of "red copper" but of a vile alloy containing like the Greek
   "Asper," some silver; and representing, when at par, the fortieth of
   a piastre, the latter being=2d. ⅖ths.

Footnote 639:

   Arab. "Farajiyah," a long-sleeved robe; Lane's "Farageeyeh," M. E.,
   chapt. i.

Footnote 640:

   The tailor in the East, as in Southern Europe, is made to cut out the
   cloth in presence of its owner to prevent "cabbaging."

Footnote 641:

   Expecting a present.

Footnote 642:

   Alluding to the saying, "Kiss is the key to Kitty."

Footnote 643:

   The "panel-dodge" is fatally common throughout the East, where a man
   found in the house of another is helpless.

Footnote 644:

   This was the beginning of horseplay which often ends in a bastinado.

Footnote 645:

   Hair-dyes, in the East, are all of vegetable matter, henna,
   indigo-leaves, galls, etc.: our mineral dyes are, happily for them,
   unknown. Herklots will supply a host of recipes. The Egyptian mixture
   which I quoted in Pilgrimage (ii., 274) is sulphate of iron and
   ammoniure of iron one part and gall nuts two parts, infused in eight
   parts of distilled water. It is innocuous but very poor as a dye.

Footnote 646:

   Arab. Amrad, etymologically "beardless and handsome," but often used
   in a bad sense, to denote an effeminate, a catamite.

Footnote 647:

   The Hindus prefer "having the cardinal points as her sole garment."
   Vêtu de climat, says Madame de Stael. In Paris nude statues are
   "draped in cerulean blue." Rabelais (iv., 29) robes King Shrovetide
   in grey and gold of a comical cut, nothing before, nothing behind
   with sleeves of the same.

Footnote 648:

   This scene used to be enacted a few years ago in Paris for the
   benefit of concealed spectators, a young American being the victim.
   It was put down when one of the lookers-on lost his eye by a
   pen-knife thrust into the "crevice."

Footnote 649:

   Meaning that the trick had been played by the Wazir's wife or
   daughter. I could mention sundry names at Cairo whose charming owners
   have done worse things than this unseemly frolic.

Footnote 650:

   Arab. "Shayyun li'lláhi," a beggar's formula=per amor di Dio.

Footnote 651:

   Noting how sharp-eared the blind become.

Footnote 652:

   The blind in Egypt are notorious for insolence and violence,
   fanaticism and rapacity. Not a few foreigners have suffered from them
   (Pilgrimage i. 148). In former times many were blinded in infancy by
   their mothers, and others blinded themselves to escape conscription
   or honest hard work. They could always obtain food, especially as
   Mu'ezzins; and were preferred because they could not take advantage
   of the minaret by spying into their neighbours' households. The
   Egyptian race is chronically weak-eyed, the effect of the damp hot
   climate of the valley, where ophthalmia prevailed even during the
   pre-Pharaohnic days. The great Sesostris died stone-blind and his
   successor lost his sight for ten years (Pilgrimage ii., 176). That
   the Fellahs are now congenitally weak-eyed, may by seen by comparing
   them with negroes imported from Central Africa. Ophthalmia rages,
   especially during the damp season, in the lower Nile-valley; and the
   best cure for it is a fortnight's trip to the Desert where, despite
   glare, sand and wind, the eye readily recovers tone.

Footnote 653:

   _i.e._ With kicks and cuffs, and blows, as is the custom. (Pilgrimage
   i., 174.)

Footnote 654:

   Arab. Káid (whence "Alcayde") a word still much used in North Western
   Africa.

Footnote 655:

   Arab. "Sullam"=lit. a ladder; a frame-work of sticks, used by way of
   our triangles or whipping-posts.

Footnote 656:

   This is one of the feats of Al-Simiyá=white magic; fascinating the
   eyes. In Europe it has lately taken the name of "Electro-biology."

Footnote 657:

   Again by means of the "Simiyá" or power of fascination possessed by
   the old scoundrel.

Footnote 658:

   A formula for averting "Al-Ayn," the evil eye. It is always unlucky
   to meet a one-eyed man, especially the first thing in the morning and
   when setting out on any errand. The idea is that the fascinated one
   will suffer from some action of the physical eye. Monoculars also are
   held to be rogues: so the Sanskrit saying "Few one-eyed men be honest
   men."

Footnote 659:

   Al-Nashshár from Nashr=sawing: so the fiddler in Italian is called
   the "village-saw" (_Sega del villaggio_). He is the Alnaschar of the
   Englished Galland and Richardson. The tale is very old. It appears as
   the Brahman and the Pot of Rice in the Panchatantra; and Professor
   Benfey believes (as usual with him) that this, with many others,
   derives from a Buddhist source. But I would distinctly derive it from
   Æsop's market-woman who kicked over her eggs; whence the Lat. prov.
   Ante victoriam canere triumphum=to sell the skin before you have
   caught the bear. In the "Kalilah and Dimnah" and its numerous
   offspring it is the "Ascetic with his Jar of oil and honey;" in
   Rabelais (i, 33) Echephron's shoemaker spills his milk, and so La
   Perette in La Fontaine. See M. Max Muller's "Chips," vol. iii.,
   appendix. The curious reader will compare my version with that which
   appears at the end of Richardson's Arabic Grammar (Edit. of 1811): he
   had a better, or rather a fuller MS. (p. 199) than any yet printed.

Footnote 660:

   Arab. "Atr"=any perfume especially oil of roses; whence our word
   "Ottar," through the Turkish corruption.

Footnote 661:

   The texts give "dirhams" (100,000=5,000 dinars) for "dinars," a
   clerical error as the sequel shows.

Footnote 662:

   "Young slaves," says Richardson, losing "colour."

Footnote 663:

   Nothing more calculated to give affront than such a refusal.
   Richardson (p. 204) who, however, doubts his own version (p. 208)
   here translates, "and I will not give liberty to my soul (spouse) but
   in her apartments." The Arabic or rather Cairene, is, "wa lá akhalli
   rúhi"=I will not let myself go _i.e._ be my every-day self, etc.

Footnote 664:

   "Whilst she is in astonishment and terror." (Richardson).

Footnote 665:

   "Chamber of robes," Richardson whose text has "Nám" for "Manám."

Footnote 666:

   "Till I compleat her distress," Richardson, whose text is corrupt.

Footnote 667:

   "Sleep by her side," R. the word "Náma" bearing both senses.

Footnote 668:

   "Will take my hand," R. "takabbal" being also ambiguous.

Footnote 669:

   Arab. "Mu'arras" one who brings about "'Ars," marriages, etc. So the
   Germ. "Kupplerinn," a Coupleress. It is one of the many synonyms for
   a pimp, and a word in general use (Pilgrimage i., 276). The most
   insulting term, like Dayyús, insinuates that the man panders for his
   own wife.

Footnote 670:

   Of hands and face, etc. See Night cccclxiv.

Footnote 671:

   Arab. "Sadakah" (sincerity), voluntary or superogatory alms, opposed
   to "Zakát" (purification), legal alms which are indispensable.
   "Prayer carries us half way to Allah; fasting brings us to the door
   of His palace and alms-deeds (Sadakah) causes us to enter." For
   "Zakát" no especial rate is fixed; but it should not be less than
   one-fortieth of property or two and a half per cent. Thus Al-Islam
   is, as far as I know, the only faith which makes a poor-rate (Zakát)
   obligatory and which has invented a property-tax, as opposed to the
   unjust and unfair income-tax upon which England prides herself.

Footnote 672:

   A Greek girl.

Footnote 673:

   This was making himself very easy; and the idea is that the gold in
   pouch caused him to be so bold. Lane's explanation (in loco) is all
   wrong. The pride engendered by sudden possession of money is a _lieu
   commun_ amongst Eastern story-tellers; even in the beast-fables the
   mouse which has stolen a few gold pieces becomes confident and
   stouthearted.

Footnote 674:

   Arab. "Al-Málihah" also means the beautiful (fem.), from "Milh"=salt,
   splendour, etc. The Mac. Edit. has "Mumallihah"=a salt-vessel.

Footnote 675:

   _i.e._ to see if he felt the smart.

Footnote 676:

   Arab. "Sardábeh" (Persian)=an underground room used for coolness in
   the hot season. It is unknown in Cairo but every house in Baghdad, in
   fact throughout the Mesopotamian cities, has one. It is on the
   principle of the underground cellar without which wine will not keep:
   Lane (i., 406) calls it a "vault."

Footnote 677:

   In the orig. "O old woman!" which is insulting.

Footnote 678:

   So the Italians say "a quail to skin."

Footnote 679:

   "Amán" is the word used for quarter on the battle-field; and there
   are Joe Millers about our soldiers in India mistaking it for "a man"
   or (_Scotticè_) "a mon."

Footnote 680:

   Illustrating the Persian saying "Allah himself cannot help a fool."

Footnote 681:

   Any article taken from the person and given to a criminal is a
   promise of pardon, of course on the implied condition of plenary
   confession and of becoming "King's evidence."

Footnote 682:

   A naive proposal to share the plunder.

Footnote 683:

   In popular literature "Schacabac." And from this tale comes our
   saying "a Barmecide's Feast," _i.e._ an illusion.

Footnote 684:

   The Castrato at the door is still (I have said,) the fashion of Cairo
   and he acts "Suisse" with a witness.

Footnote 685:

   As usual in the East, the mansion was a hollow square surrounding
   what in Spain is called _Patio_: the outer entrance was far from the
   inner, showing the extent of the grounds.

Footnote 686:

   "Nahnu málihín"=we are on terms of salt, said and say the Arabs. But
   the traveller must not trust in these days to the once sacred tie;
   there are tribes which will give bread with one hand and stab with
   the other. The Eastern use of salt is a curious contrast with that of
   Westerns, who made it an invidious and inhospitable distinction,
   _e.g._ to sit above the salt-cellar and below the salt. Amongst the
   ancients, however, "he took bread and salt" means he swore, the food
   being eaten when an oath was taken. Hence the "Bride cake" of salt,
   water and flour.

Footnote 687:

   Arab. "Harísah," the meat-pudding before explained.

Footnote 688:

   Arab. "Sikbáj," before explained; it is held to be a lordly dish,
   invented by Khusraw Parwiz. "Fatted duck" says the Bresl. Edit. ii.
   308, with more reason.

Footnote 689:

   I was reproved in Southern Abyssinia for eating without this
   champing, "Thou feedest like a beggar who muncheth silently in his
   corner;" and presently found that it was a sign of good breeding to
   eat as noisily as possible.

Footnote 690:

   Barley in Arabia is, like our oats, food for horses: it fattens at
   the same time that it cools them. Had this been known to our cavalry
   when we first occupied Egypt in 1883-4 our losses in horse-flesh
   would have been far less; but official ignorance persisted in feeding
   the cattle upon heated oats and the riders upon beef, which is
   indigestible, instead of mutton, which is wholesome.

Footnote 691:

   _i.e._ "I conjure thee by God."

Footnote 692:

   _i.e._ "This is the very thing for thee."

Footnote 693:

   _i.e._, at random.

Footnote 694:

   This is the way of slaughtering the camel, whose throat is never cut
   on account of the thickness of the muscles. "Égorger un chameau" is a
   mistake often made in French books.

Footnote 695:

   _i.e._ I will break bounds.

Footnote 696:

   The Arabs have a saying corresponding with the dictum of the
   Salernitan school:—

          Noscitur a labiis quantum sit virginis antrum:
          Noscitur a naso quanta sit hasta viro;
          (A maiden's mouth shows what's the make of her _chose_;
          And man's mentule one knows by the length of his nose.)

   Whereto I would add:—

            And the eyebrows disclose how the lower wig grows.

   The observations are purely empirical but, as far as my experience
   extends, correct.

Footnote 697:

   Arab. "Kahkahah," a very low proceeding.

Footnote 698:

   Or "for every death there is a cause;" but the older Arabs had a
   saying corresponding with "Deus non fecit mortem."

Footnote 699:

   The King's barber is usually a man of rank for the best of reasons
   that he holds his Sovereign's life between his fingers. One of these
   noble Figaros in India married an English lady who was, they say,
   unpleasantly surprised to find out what were her husband's official
   duties.




                             END OF VOL. I.

                                 وآلسلام




                                 INDEX.


 Abbas "hero eponymus" of the Abbaside dynasty, 188

 Abdullah ibn Abbas, companion and traditioner, 304

 Abú Kidr=father of the cooking-pot, _ib._

 Abú Shámah=father of a cheek-mole, 269

 Abú Shámmah=father of a smeller or nose, _ib._

 Abú Shawárib=father of mustachios, _ib._

 Abu Shiháb, father of the shooting star=evil spirit, 221

 Abú Yakzán=the wakener=ass, 16
   =cock, 18

 Ad=tribe of prehistoric Arabs, 65

 Adab=anything between good education and good manners, 132

 Aghá=master, politely applied to an Eunuch, 235

 Ahdab, hunchback=classical Ak'as, 213

 A'in=Smiter with the evil eye, 123

 Ajal=appointed period of life, 74

 'Ajami=foreigner, esp. Persian, 120

 Ajuz, for old woman, highly insulting; use Shaybah, 174

 Akásirah=Kisra-Kings, 75

 Akrás=cakes, 83

 Al-Aftah=Broad-o'-Brow, 17

 Al-Ajam=region not Arab, Persia, 2

 Al-Amin, son and successor of Hárún al-Rashíd, 185

 Al-Aríf=monitor, 231

 Al-Asr=time or prayer of mid-afternoon, 240

 Al-Bashárah=gift of good tidings, guerdon, 30

 Al-Bostáni=gardener, family name from original occupation, 266

 Al-Faranj=European, 296

 Al-Hasá=plain of pebbles, west of Damascus, 234

 Al-Kahánah=the craft of a Káhin or soothsayer, 28

 Al-Maamún, son and successor of Hárún al-Rashíd, 185

 Al-Málihah=salt-girl; beautiful, 340

 Al-Mustansir bi'llah=one seeking help in Allah, 317

 Al-Nashshár=sawing, 335

 Al-Níl=flood season corresponding to mid-summer, 290

 Al-Rauzah=the gardens, 291

 Al-Safar Zafar=voyaging is victory, 250

 Al-Sahr=magic, black art, 305

 Al-Záhir bi'llah=one pre-eminent by the decree of Allah, 317

 Al-Zalamah (tyrants, oppressors)=police and employés, 273

 Allah! Allah!=I conjure thee by God, _Passim_

 Allah hath said, formula of quoting the Koran, 61

 Allah Karím=Allah is all beneficent, 32

 Allah will open thee, a formula of refusing, _ib._

 Ailaho a'alam=God is all knowing, 2; 50

 Allahumma=Yá Allah with emphasis, 39

 Amán=quarter, mercy, 342

 Amír=Military Commandant, 259

 Amír al-Muuminín=Prince of the Faithful, 112

 Amrad=beardless and handsome, effeminate, 327

 Amsár=cities, 11

 Amshát (combs) perhaps=Kunáfah (vermicelli), 83

 Andam=the gum called dragon's blood; brazilwood, 176

 Arab al-Arabá=prehistoric tribes of the Arabs, 112

 Arab al-Musta'ajimah=barbarised Arabs, _ib._

 Arab al-Musta'aribah=naturalised Arabs, _ib._

 Arab al-Muta'arribah=Arabised Arabs, _ib._

 Arakiyah=white scull-cap, 215

 Ardabb (Irdabb)=about five bushels, 263

 Arún (Heb.)=in his shirt, 78

 Asal-nahl=bee's honey, 271

 Ashkánián=race of Persian Kings, 78

 Astrolabe, father of our sextant, 304

 Atr=any perfume, 335

 Auhashtani=thou hast made me desolate, 62

 Awálim pl. of Alimah=dancing girls, 214

 Aysh (Egypt.)=Ayyu shayyin for classical "Má"=what, 79

 Aywa (for Ay w' Alláhi)=Ay, by Allah, 303

 Azim="deuced" or "mighty fine", 178


 Báb=gate; chapter, 136

 Báb al-Farádís=gate of the gardens at Damascus, 240

 Babel=Gate of God, 85

 Babes of the eyes=pupils, 100

 Badawi's dying farewell, 75

 Bádhanj=wind-shaft, ventilator, 257

 Badmasti=le vin mauvais, 88

 Baghlah=she-mule, 129

 Bahr=water cut or trenched in the earth, sea, large river, 44

 Bahr al-muhít=circumambient ocean, 133

 Balid=simpleton, 17

 Ballán=body servant, 311

 Ballánah=tire-woman, _ib._

 Banj=Nibanj=Nepenthe, hemp, 70

 Baradiyah=wide-mouthed jug, 36

 Bárid=vain, foolish, insipid, 213

 Barley, food for horses, 345

 Barmecides, 188

 Basaltic statues in Hauranic ruins give rise to the idea of men
    metamorphosed into black stones, 170

 Basil=the Indian Tulsi, Ocymum basilicum, 19

 Basil of the bridges=pennyroyal, 91

 Bastinado of women, 183

 Bayáz al-Sultáni=the best kind of gypsum, 270

 Bazar of Damascus famous in the Middle Ages, 2

 Beheading or sacking a faithless wife unlawful but leniently looked
    upon, 181

 Before the face of Allah=for the love of God, 135

 Bi'l-Salámah=in safety (to avert the evil eye), 288

 Birkat al-Habash=Abyssinian pond, 291

 Bismillah=in the name of God, 40

 —— said before taking action, 80

 —— a civil form of dismissal, 98

 ——="fall to!", 264

 Blackamoors preferred by debauched women, 6

 Blind notorious for insolence, etc., 330

 Blinding a common practice in the East, how done, 108

 Blue and yellow turbans prescribed to Christians and Jews, 77

 Boils and pimples supposed to be caused by broken hair-roots, 275

 Breast broadening with delight, 48

 Breast straitened, the converse of breast broadening (48), 119

 Bride's throne, 215

 Búzah=beer, 72


 Cairenes held exceedingly debauched, 298

 Cairo nothing without the Nile, 295

 Camel, how slaughtered, 347

 Carpet-beds, 294

 Chaff or banter allowed even to modest women, 267

 Champing sign of good breeding, 345

 Chess-anecdote, 132

 Children carried astraddle upon hip or shoulder, 308

 Claims of maidenhead, 190

 Clapping of hands to summon servants, 177

 Clever young ladies dangerous in the East, 15

 Conception on the bride-night rare, 227

 Confession after concealment a characteristic of the servile class, 53

 Confession on the criminal's part required by Moslem Law, 274

 Confusion of metaphors characteristic of The Nights, 86

 Contemplation of street-scenery one of the pleasures of the Harem, 319

 Corpse pollutes him who touches it, 295

 Cutting off the right hand Koranic punishment for theft, 274

 Cutting of the navel string preliminary to naming the babe, 231

 Cutting the rope=breaking bounds, 349


 Dajlah=Tigris, Heb. Hid-dekel, 180

 Dakhíl-ak=under thy protection, 61

 Damascus women famed for sanguinary jealousy, 295

 Darabukkah=tom-tom, 311

 Darbar=public audience, 29

 Dastúr=leave, permission, 66

 Daughter of my uncle=my wife, 69

 Daurak=narrow-mouthed jug, 36

 Despite his nose=against his will, 26

 Destiny blindeth human sight, 67

 Dinár=gold piece, Daric, Miskál, 32

 Dirham=silver piece, 33

 "Dog" and "hog" popular terms of abuse, 188

 Drinking first to show that the draught is not poisoned, 88; 295

 "Drop" unknown to the Eastern gallows, 260

 Dunyázád=world-free, 14

 Dust-storm in tropical lands, 111


 Elephant's roll (to Hindu)=swaying and graceful gait, 217

 Erotic inferences drawn from parts of body, 350

 Eternal truth of The Nights, 7

 Eunuch best go-between, 282

 Eunuch employed as porter, 343

 Eunuch-in-Chief a most important Jack in office, 283

 Eunuchs, different kinds of, 132

 Euphemistic formulas to avoid mentioning unpleasant matters, 31

 Exaggeration part of humour, 12

 Eyebrows joined a great beauty in Arabia, 227

 Eyes of me=my dears, 163


 Face-veil="nose-bag", 82

 Fakír=religious mendicant generally, 95

 Falcon=blinding the quarry, 51

 Fals ahmar=a red cent, 321

 Faráiz=orders expressly given in the Koran, 169

 Farajíyah=a long sleeved robe, 210, 321

 Fass=bezel of a ring, gem cut en cabochon, contenant for contenu, 165

 Fata=a youth; generous man, etc., 67

 Favours foreshadowing downfall, 48

 Female depravity going hand in hand with perversity of taste, 73

 Fiat _in_justitia ruat cœlum, 253

 First personal pronoun placed first for respect, 237

 Fitnah=revolt, seduction, mischief; beautiful girl; aphrodisiac
    perfume, 219

 Following one's face=at random, 347

 Friday night=our Thursday night, 269

 Friday Service described, 313

 Frolics of highborn ladies, 328

 "Fun"=practical jokes of the largest, 20

 Futur=breakfast, 300


 Gall-bladder and liver allusions, 219

 Ghadir=a place where water sinks, lowland, 233

 Ghamz=winking, signing with the eye, 292

 Gharíb=foreigner, 95

 Ghawází=singing girls, 214

 Ghazl al-banát (spinning of girls)=vermicelli, 83

 Ghilmán=Wuldán, the beautiful youths of Paradise, 211

 Ghútah=thickly grown lowland, 115

 Ghúlah=ogress, 55

 Going straight to the point preferred to filer le parfait amour, 268

 Gold makes bold, 340

 Ground-floor usually let for shops, 319


 Habb=grain of the heart, 250

 Habbániyah=grain-seller's quarter, 269

 Habíb, euphemism for lover, 223

 Hayhát, onomatopoetic=heigh-ho!, 76

 Hair should be allowed all to grow or be shaven off, 308

 Hair-dyes all vegetable matter, 326

 Halab=Aleppo, 292

 Hammam, going to the=convalescence, 288

 ——, showing that a woman's monthly ailment is over, 286

 Harím=Harem, used for the inmates, wife, etc., 165

 Harísah, a favourite dish, 131

 Hasanta ya Hasan=bene detto, Benedetto!, 251

 Hashísh, intoxicant prepared of hemp, 225

 Haste ye to salvation, part of the Azán, 224

 Hátif=mysterious voice, 142

 Hauk! Hauk!=heehaw!, 221

 Head in the poke=into the noose, 179

 High-bosomed damsel a favourite with Arab tale-tellers, 84

 Hog, popular term of abuse, 188

 Horoscopes, etc., 213

 Horseplay frequently ending in bastinado, 325

 House of Peace=Baghdad, 139

 Houses of Lamentation in Moslem burial-grounds, 94

 Humming not a favourite practice with Moslems, 311

 Hunchback looked upon with fear and aversion, 258

 Húr al-Ayn=with eyes of lively white and black, 90

 Hurr=gentleman, 254

 Hurry is from Hell, 264


 Iblis=Despairer, 13

 Ibn Harám=son of adultery, abuse not necessarily reflecting on the
    parent, 231

 Ibrat=needle-graver and Ibrat=warning, a favourite jingle, 104

 Ibrík=ewer, and Tisht=basin, used for washing the hands, 241

 Id al-Kabír=the Great Festival, 28

 Ifrít, divided into two races like mankind, 11

 Ifritah=she-Ifrit, 34

 Ihdák=encompassing, as the white encloses the black of the eye, 49

 Ihtizáz=shaking with delight, 50

 Iklíl=diadem, now obsolete, 270

 Iklím=the seven climates of Ptolemy, 233

 Ilm al-Ruháni=Spiritualism, 305

 Improvising still common amongst the Badawin, 39

 Incest lawful amongst ancient peoples, 110

 Inheritance, law of, settled by the Koran, 174

 Inshád=conjuring by Allah, 11

 Insolence and licence of palace girls, 286

 Intellect of man stronger than a Jinni's, 43

 Internally wounded=sick at heart, 5

 Inwá=jerking the date-stone, 25

 Ishá=the first watch of the night, 175

 Izár=sheet worn as veil, 163


 Ja'afar=contrasting strongly with his master, 102

 Jahárkas=Pers. Chehár-kas, four persons, 266

 Jannat al-Na'ím=The Garden of Delights _i.e._ Heaven, 98

 Jazírah=Peninsula, Arabia, 2

 Jazírát al-Khálidát=Eternal Isles=Canaries, 141

 Jilá=displaying the bride before the bridegroom, 174

 Jinn=the French génie, the Hindu Rakshasa or Yaksha, 10

 Joseph of the Koran very different from him of Genesis, 13

 Judri=small-pox, 256

 Junún=madness, 10


 Ká'ah=ground-floor hall, 85

 Ká'ah (saloon)=fine house, mansion, 292

 Kábul-men noted for Sodomy, 299

 Káf, popularly=Caucasus, 72, 133

 Kahbah=whore, 70

 Kahílat al-taraf=having the eyelids lined with Kohl, 63

 Kahkahah=horse-laughter, 350

 Kahramánát=nursery governess, 231

 Káid=leader, 330

 Kalam=reed-pen, 128

 Kalám al-Mubáh=the permitted say, 29

 Kalandar=mendicant monk, 94

 Kámat Alfiyyah=straight stature, 85

 Kamís=shift, etc., 293

 Kat'a=bit of leather, 20

 Katá=sand-grouse, 131

 Katf=pinioning, 106

 Kathá-Sarit-Ságara=poetical version of the Vrihat-Kathá, 12

 Kaus al-Banduk=pellet-bow, 10

 Kausar=a lieu commun of poets, 241

 Kawwád=pimp, 316

 Káyánián race of Persian Kings, 75

 Kaylúlah=siesta, 51

 Kaysariyah=superior kind of Bazar, 266

 Kazi=judge in religious matters, 21

 Kerchief of mercy, 343

 Khádim=servant, politely applied to a castrato, 235

 Khalí'a=worn out; wag, 311

 Khalífah=Vicar of Allah; successor of a Santon, 184

 Khan=caravanserai, 92

 Khan Al-Masrúr, in Cairo, famous in the 15th century, 265

 Khanjar=hanger, 232

 Khatmah=reading or reciting the whole Koran, 277

 Khinzír=hog, 108

 Khubz=scones, 131

 Khuff=walking shoes, 82

 Khyas, Khyas, onomatopoetic, used in a sea-spell, 228

 King's barber a man of rank, 351

 "Kiss, key to Kitty", 323

 Kissing the eyes a paternal salute, 125

 Kohl=powdered antimony for the eyelids, 89

 —— proverbially used, 278

 Koran quoted (xx.), 2

 —— (ii. 34), 13

 —— (xxv. 31), _ib._

 —— (xix. 69), _ib._

 —— (xxvi.), 39

 —— (xxvii.), 42

 —— (v., xx.), 119

 —— (vii., xviii.), 169

 —— (i.), 208

 —— (lvi. 9), 211

 —— (lx.), 220

 —— (v.), 240

 —— (cviii.), 241

 —— (xvii.), 249

 —— (xxxvi. 69), 251

 —— (cv.), 256

 —— (ii., ix.), 257

 —— (v.), 274

 —— (viii. 17), _ib._

 —— (iii.), 298

 —— (iii. 128), 307

 Kufr=rejecting the True Religion, 169

 Kulkasá=colocasia roots, 272

 Kullah=gugglet, 36

 Kumkum=a gourd-shaped bottle for sprinkling scents, 42

 Kári=teacher of the correct pronunciation of the Koran, 113

 Kurrat al-Ayn=coolness of the eye, 72

 Kurs has taken the place of Iklíl, 270

 Kursi (choir, throne)=desk or stool for the Koran, 167

 Kush'arírah=horripilation, symptom of great joy or fear, 251


 La'abat=a plaything, a puppet, a lay figure, 245

 Lá adamnák=Heaven deprive us not of thee, 268

 Labbayka=Here am I, called Talbiyah, 226

 Laylat al-Wafá=the night of completion of the Nile-flood, 291

 Lá Haula, etc.=there is no Majesty etc., 69

 Lá tawáhishná=do not make us desolate, 62

 Lá tawákhizná=do not chastise us=excuse us, 164

 Latter night=hours between the last sleep and dawn, 24

 Laughing in one's face not intended as an affront, 320

 Laughter rare and sign of a troubled spirit, 248

 Life-breath in the nostrils=heart in the mouth, 42

 Like mother like daughter, 299

 Liver=seat of passion, 27

 Loghah=Arabic language, also a vocabulary, dictionary, 251

 Loosening the hair an immodesty in women sanctioned only by a great
    calamity, 314

 Lukmah=mouthful, 261


 Madfa'=cannon, showing modern date, 223

 Magnet Mountains, fable probably based on the currents, 140

 Mail-coat and habergeon simile for a glittering stream, 291

 Ma'ín, Ma'ún=smitten with the evil eye, 123

 Majnún=madman, 10

 Making water, 259

 Mahkamah=Kazi's Court, 21

 Malik or Malak=Seraph or Sovran, 253

 Mamlúk=white slaves trained to arms, 81

 Márid=contumacious Jinni, 41

 Máristán (from Pers. Bímáristán=place of sickness), 288

 Marmar=marble, 295

 Marriage not valid without receipt of settlement, 276

 Mashá ilí=bearer of a cresset (Mash'al), 259

 Masíhi=follower of the Messiah, 258

 Maskhút=transformed (mostly into something hideous); a statue, 165

 Massage (shampooing), 172

 Mausil (Mosul) alluding to the junction of Assyria and Babylonia, 82

 Maydán=parade ground, 46

 Maymúnah, proverbial name now forgotten, 57

 Meat rarely coloured in modern days, 310

 Merchants and shopkeepers carrying, swords, 54

 Miao or Mau=cat, 220

 Mikra'ah=palm-rod, 99

 Mihráb and Minaret, symbols of Venus and Priapus?, 166

 Milh=salt, 340

 Miracles performed by Saints' tombs, 241

 Miskál=71-72 grams in gold, used for dinar, 126

 Mizr, Mizar=beer, 72

 Moles compared with pearls, 177

 Monday=second day, reckoning from Sabbath (Saturday), 266

 Money carried in the corner of a handkerchief, 271

 Monoculars unlucky to meet, 333

 Mosul stuff=muslin, 229

 Mounds=rubbish heaps outlying Eastern cities, 71

 Mouth compared to the ring of Sulayman, 84

 Mu'arras=pimp, 338

 Muháfiz=district-governor, 259

 Muhakkak="Court-hand", 129

 Muhammarah=fricandoed, 286

 Mujtabá=the Accepted, 77

 Munakkishah=woman who applies the dye to a face, 270

 Murtazá=the Elect, 77

 Mustapha=the Chosen, _ib._

 Mutawalli=Prefect of Police, 259

 Muzayyin=Figaro of the East, 304


 Nabút=quarter-staff, 234

 Nadd, a compound perfume, 310

 Naddábah=mourning woman, 311

 Nadím=cup-companion, 46

 Nafas=breath, 107

 Nafs=soul, life, _ib._

 Nahás asfar=brass, 40

 Nahás (ahmar)=copper, _ib._

 Nahnu málihín=we are on term of salt, 344

 Nahs=nasty, 301

 Naihah=keener, hired mourner, 311

 Nakedness paraphrased, 327

 Nakíb a caravan-leader, chief, syndic, 269

 Name of Allah introduced into an indecent tale essentially Egyptian, 12

 Narjis=Narcissus, 294

 Naskh=copying hand, 128

 Nasráni=follower of Him of Nazareth, 258

 Nat'a=leather used by way of table-cloth, 20

 Nata' al-dam=the leather of blood, 318

 Navel as to beauty and health, 84

 Nearness of seat a mark of honour, 250

 Negroes preferred by debauched women, 6

 New-moon beginning Ramazán carefully looked for, 84

 Nile-water sweet and light, 290

 Nineteen the age of an oldish old maid in Egypt, 212

 Noisy merriment scandalous to Moslem "respectability", 95

 Nothing for nothing a sexual _point d'honneur_, 87


 Oath a serious thing amongst Moslems, 179

 Oman=Eastern Arabia, 83

 Oriental orgie different from European, 93


 Pander-dodge to get more money, 302

 Panel-dodge fatally common, 323

 Paris Jockey-club scene anticipated, 327

 Parody on the testification of Allah's Unity, 177

 Parrot-story a world-wide folk-lore, 52

 Passengers in difficulties take command, 140

 Pearl, supposed to lose one per cent. per ann. of its splendour, 165

 Peshdadians, race of Persian Kings, 75

 Plain (ground), synonyms for, 46

 Plural masc. used by way of modesty when a girl addresses her lover, 98

 Poetry of the Arabs requires knowledge of the Desert to be understood,
    230

 Pomegranate fruit supposed to contain seed from Eden garden, 134

 Prime Minister carrying fish to the cookmaid, 63

 Privy, a slab with slit in front and a round hole behind, 221

 Proverbs true to nature, 307


 Qanoon-e-Islam quoted on the subject of horoscopes, etc., 213


 Raydaniyah, a camping ground near Cairo, 245

 Rayháni=a curved character, 128

 Rais=captain of a ship, 127

 Rajaz=the seventh Bahr of Arabic prosody, 251

 Rajul ikhtiyár=middle-aged man, 55

 Refusal of a gift greatest affront, 336

 Rending of garments as sign of sorrow or vexation, 308

 Respect shown to parts of the body, exuviæ, etc., 276

 Riding on the ass an old Biblical practice, 262

 Rims cars, 131

 Rozistan=day station, 29

 Ruká'í=correspondence hand, 128

 Rukhám=alabaster, 295

 Ruka'tayn=two-bow prayer, 142


 Sa'ad=auspiciousness, prosperity; derivatives, 9

 Sabr=patience and aloes, source of puns, 138

 Sadaf=cowrie, 19

 Sadakah=voluntary alms, opposed to Zakát, 339

 Sadd=wall, dyke, 114

 Sáhib=companion, used as a Wazirial title, 237

 Sáhib al-Shartah=chief of the watch (Prefect of Police), 259

 Sáhib Nafas=master of breath, a minor saint healing by expiration, 107

 Sáhil Masr=the river side (at Cairo), 291

 Saj'a=rhymed prose, 116

 Sakhr al-Jinni alluded to, 41

 Sákiyah=the Persian water wheel, 123

 Sálih, prophet sent to Thámúd, 169

 Salmá and Layla=our "Mary and Martha", 265

 Sama'an wa ta atan to be translated variously, 96

 Samn=clarified butter, 144

 Sár=vendetta, 101, 114

 Saráwil=bag or petticoat trousers, 222

 Sardábeh=underground room, 340

 Sarráf=Anglo-Indian "Shroff", 210

 Sassanides, 75

 Sawáb=reward in Heaven, 96

 Sayd wa Kanas=hunting and coursing, 9

 Scalding a stump in oil common surgery practice, 297

 Scorpions of the brow=accroche-cœurs, etc., 168

 Sealing a covered dish a necessary precaution against poison, 244

 Seas, the two=the Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean, 173

 Sepulchre, erroneously called "a little Wali", 105

 Seven schools or editions of the Koran, 113

 Shább=youth between puberty and forty, 55

 Shabistan=night station, 29

 Shakáik al-Nu'umán=anemone, 175

 Shahrázád=city-freer, 14

 Shahryár=city friend, 2

 Shah Zamán=King of the Age, _ib._

 Shaykh=an old man, elder, chief, 26

 Shaykh, Shaybah=grey-beard, oldster, 55

 Sha'ílah=link (also lamp, wick, etc.), 259

 Shaking and nodding the head, universal items of gesture language, 300

 Shám (Syria)=land on the left, opposed to Al-Yaman=land on the right,
    83

 "Shame" alluded to in cursing parents of an abused person, 227

 Shampooing the feet, 117

 Sharmutah=rags, tatters; strumpets; shreds of meat=Kadíd, 163

 Shámah=Khál, mole on the cheek, 167

 Shart=a single Talbiyah or cry Labbayka, 226

 Shatm=obscene abuse, 182

 Shayyun li'lláhi=per amor di Dio, 329

 Shedding tears no disgrace for a man, 68

 Sham hamphorash=the hundredth name of God, engraved on the seal-ring of
    Solomon, 173

 Shiháb=shooting stars, 224

 Shirk (partnership)=Syntheism, Dualism, Trinitarianism, 181

 Shops composed of a "but" and a "ben", 316

 Shudder preceding the magnetic trance, 44

 Shuhadá, martyrs, extensive category, 171

 Shuhúd=assessors of the Kazi's Court, 21

 Shurayh, foxier than the fox, 252

 Shúshah=topknot of hair, 308

 Simát=dinner table, 178

 Simiyá=white magic, 305, 332

 Sitting on shins and knees a trying posture, 130

 Slaves fancied by debauched women, 191

 Slice of the moon=digit of the moon, 91

 Smuggling men into the Harem, 282

 Snatching off the turband a paying industry, 259

 Soft-sided, attribute of beauty, 168

 Solomon's death fixing the date of a tale, 41

 "Son" used for "grandson" more affectionate, 243

 Son of a century=hundred years old, 126

 Sons of Adam=men, 130

 Sons of Sásán=Sassanides, 2

 Speaker puts himself first, 33

 Spittle dried up from fear, 285

 Staff broken in the first bout=failure in the first attempt, 64

 Street melodies changing with fashion, 311

 Striking the right hand upon the left sign of vexation, 298

 Striking with the shoe, the pipe-stick, etc., highly insulting, 110

 Subh-i-kázib=false dawn, 78

 Subh-i-sádik=true dawn, _ib._

 Sucking the tongue="kissing with th' inner lip", 270

 Sufrah=dinner table, 178

 Sugar-stick=German Zuckerpüppchen, 167

 Suhá, star in the Great Bear, _ib._

 Sulayman and Sakhr al-Jinni, 42

 Sullam=ladder; whipping-post, 331

 Sulus=engrossing hand, 128

 Sums of large amount weighed, 281

 Sun greeting Mohammed, 45

 Superstitious practices not confined to the lower orders, 40

 Surriyat=concubine, 27

 Su 'ubán=dragon, cockatrice=Tannín, 172

 Su'úd used as a counter odour, 279

 Suwán=syenite, 238


 Taghúm a kind of onomatopoetic grunt, 228

 Tailor made to cut out the cloth in owner's presence, 321

 Tákiyah, calotte worn under the Fez, scull-cap, 224

 Talbiyah=the cry Labbayka, 226

 Tammúz=July, 53

 Tamar Hanná=flower of privet, 83

 Tár=tambourine, 215

 Tarbúsh=Pers. Sar-púsh, head cover, _ib._

 Tarík=clear the way, 66

 Tarjumán=truchman, dragoman, 100

 Tasbíh=saluting in the Subh, 258

 Taur (Thaur, Saur), a venerable remnant of un-split speech, 16

 Tawáshi, obnoxious name for a Eunuch, 235

 Tears shed over past separation, 283

 Thousand dirhams and thousand dinars=£125 and £500 respectively, 281

 Three days term of hospitality, 3

 Throwing one=bastinado on the back, 243

 Tibn=crushed straw, 16

 Tobba (Himyaritic)=the Great or Chief, 216

 Tongue of the case=words suggested by the circumstances, 121

 Tughyán=Kufr, rejection of the True Religion, 169

 Túmár=uncial letters, 129

 Turband not put upon the ground out of respect, 223

 "Turk" probably a late addition, 52

 Turning round in despair against an oppressor, 246


 Odah, properly Uta=private room of a concubine, 286

 Ultra-Shakspearean geography, "Fars of Roum", 45

 Umamah and Atikah, tale of two women now forgotten, 61

 Umm Amir=Mother of Amir, nickname for the hyena, 43

 'Urban=wild Arabs, 112

 Usfur=safflower, 219

 Uzayr=Esdras, 257


 Varieties of handwriting, 129


 Wady, Anglicè "valley", 51

 Wahsh=wild-beast and synonyms, 242

 Wakálah; described in Pilgrimage i. 60, 266

 Wakkád=stoker, 312

 Wali=(civil) Governor, 259

 Wa'l-Salám=and here ends the matter, 102

 Washings after evacuation, 220

 Way of Allah=common property, 91

 Wazir=Minister, 2

 "What is it compared with," popular way of expressing great difference,
    37

 Wife euphemistically spoken of in the masculine, 67

 Window-gardening, old practice in the East, 301

 Wine boiled=vinum coctum, 132

 Wine-drinking vitiates the Pilgrimage-rite, 97

 Wine flying to the head, effect of the cold after a heated room, 224

 Wine why strained? 27

 Wiswás=diabolical temptation or suggestion, 106

 Women bastinadoed, 183

 Wonder (=cause) in every death, 351

 Wuldán=Ghilmán, the beautiful youths of Paradise, 211

 Wuzu-ablution=lesser ablutions, 142


 Yá Ba'íd=O distant one, euphemism for gross abuse, 41

 Yá bárid=O fool, 313

 Yá hú=O he! Swift's Yahoo? 240

 Yahúdí for Jew, less polite than Banu Isráíl, 210

 Yá Khálati=mother's sister, in addressing the old, 303

 Yá Mash'úm=O unlucky one, 221

 Yá házá=O this (one), somewhat slightingly, 240

 Yá Sattár=Thou who veilest the discreditable secrets of Thy creatures,
    258

 Yá Tayyib al-Khál=O thou nephew of a good uncle, 303

 Yaum al-Id=the great festival, 317

 Youth described in terms applying to women, 144


 Zábit=Prefect of Police, 259

 Zakát=legal alms, 339

 Zambúr=clitoris, 90

 Zemzem=water saltish, 284

 Zikr=litanies, 124

 Zírbájah=meat dressed with cumin-seed, etc., 278

 Ziyárat=visit to a pious person or place, 125

 Zauba'ah=sandstorm the desert, 114

 Zubb=penis, 92

 Zabbál=scavenger, 312

 Zulf=side-lock, 308

 Zulm, injustice, tyranny; worst of a monarch's crimes, 190

 Zuwaylah gate, more correctly Báb Zawilah, 269

[Illustration]




                          TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES


  1. Added missing anchors for footnotes on p. 44, p. 87, p. 181, p.
     208, and p. 218.
  2. Corrected footnote numbering on p. 181 and p. 182.
  3. Corrected footnote anchor numbering on p. 263 and p. 272.
  4. Added footnote number on p. 297.
  5. Added missing page number 253 to Index entry "Malik or Malak=Seraph
     or Sovran" on p. 358.
  6. The dates ("A.H. 86-96=105-115") on p. 208 are probably incorrect
     as the Caliph lived from 691-743 CE per Wikipedia.
  7. Silently corrected simple spelling, grammar, and typographical
     errors.
  8. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
  9. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 10. Enclosed bold font in =equals=.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — VOLUME 01 (OF 10) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night — Volume 02 (of 10)
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night — Volume 02 (of 10)

Translator: Sir Richard Francis Burton


        
Release date: April 17, 2016 [eBook #51775]
                Most recently updated: May 21, 2025

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/51775

Credits: Produced by Richard Tonsing, Richard Hulse and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — VOLUME 02 (OF 10) ***

[Illustration]

[Illustration: لا لابرار كلّ شي تبر]

                   "TO THE PURE ALL THINGS ARE PURE."
                           (Puris omnia pura)

                                                        —_Arab Proverb._

          "Niuna corrotta mente intese mai sanamente parole."

                                            —"_Decameron_"—_conclusion_.

              "Erubuit, posuitque meum Lucretia librum
                  Sed coram Bruto. Brute! recede, leget."

                                                             —_Martial._

            "Mieulx est de ris que de larmes escripre,
                Pour ce que rire est le propre des hommes."

                                                              —RABELAIS.

"The pleasure we derive from perusing the Thousand-and-One Stories makes
us regret that we possess only a comparatively small part of these truly
enchanting fictions."

                                      —CRICHTON'S "_History of Arabia_."

[Illustration]

_A PLAIN AND LITERAL TRANSLATION OF THE ARABIAN NIGHTS ENTERTAINMENTS.
NOW ENTITULED_




                           _THE BOOK OF THE_
                     =Thousand Nights and a Night=

              _WITH INTRODUCTION EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE
                MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF MOSLEM MEN AND A
                 TERMINAL ESSAY UPON THE HISTORY OF THE
                                NIGHTS_

                               VOLUME II.


                                   BY
                           RICHARD F. BURTON

[Illustration]

        PRINTED BY THE BURTON CLUB FOR PRIVATE SUBSCRIBERS ONLY

                            Shammar Edition

Limited to one thousand numbered sets, of which this is

                              Number _547_




                          PRINTED IN U. S. A.

                          TO JOHN PAYNE, ESQ.

                             ETC. ETC. ETC.

 MY DEAR SIR,

Allow me, thus publicly to express my admiration of your magnum opus,
"The Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night;" and to offer you my
cordial thanks for honouring me with the dedication of that scholar-like
and admirable version.

                                            Ever yours sincerely,

                                                      RICHARD F. BURTON.

 QUEEN'S COLLEGE, OXFORD
     _August 1, 1885_.




                     CONTENTS OF THE SECOND VOLUME.


                                                                  PAGE

  7. NUR AL-DIN ALI AND THE DAMSEL ANIS AL-JALIS.                    1

   (_Lane, Chapt. VI. Story of Noor ed-Deen and Enees el-Jelees:
                         vol. I. p. 436._)


  8. TALE OF GHANIM BIN AYYUB, THE DISTRAUGHT, THE THRALL O' LOVE   45

    (_Lane, Chapt. VII. Story of Ghanim the Son of Eiyoob, the
                Distracted Slave of Love: p. 487._)

     _a._ TALE OF THE FIRST EUNUCH, BUKHAYT                         49

     _b._ TALE OF THE SECOND EUNUCH, KAFUR                          51

              (_Story of the Slave Kafoor: p. 491._)


  9. TALE OF KING OMAR BIN AL-NU'UMAN AND HIS SONS SHARRKAN AND     77
    ZAU AL-MAKAN

     _a._ TALE OF TAJ AL-MULUK AND THE PRINCESS DUNYA              283

  (_Lane, Chapt. VIII. Story of Taj el-Mulook and the Lady Dunya:
                             p. 523._)

          _aa._ TALE OF AZIZ AND AZIZAH                            298

    (_Lane, Chapt. VIII. Story of Azeez and Azeezah: p. 535._)




              NUR AL-DIN ALI AND THE DAMSEL ANIS AL-JALIS


Quoth Shahrazad[1]:—It hath reached me, O auspicious King of
intelligence penetrating, that there was, amongst the Kings of
Bassorah,[2] a King who loved the poor and needy and cherished his
lieges, and gave of his wealth to all who believed in Mohammed (whom
Allah bless and assain!), and he was even as one of the poets described
him:—

      A King who when hosts of the foe invade, ✿ Receives them
          with lance-lunge and sabre-sway;
      Writes his name on bosoms in thin red lines, ✿ And scatters
          the horsemen in wild dismay.[3]

His name was King Mohammed bin Sulayman al-Zayni, and he had two Wazirs,
one called Al-Mu'in, son of Sawi and the other Al-Fazl son of Khákán.
Now Al-Fazl was the most generous of the people of his age, upright of
life, so that all hearts united in loving him and the wise flocked to
him for counsel; whilst the subjects used to pray for his long life,
because he was a compendium of the best qualities, encouraging the good
and lief, and preventing evil and mischief. But the Wazir Mu'in bin Sawi
on the contrary hated folk[4] and loved not the good and was a mere
compound of ill; even as was said of him:—

    Hold to nobles, sons of nobles! 'tis ever Nature's test ✿ That
        nobles born of nobles shall excel in noble deed:
    And shun the mean of soul, meanly bred, for 'tis the law, ✿ Mean
        deeds come of men who are mean of blood and breed.

And as much as the people loved and fondly loved Al-Fazl bin Khakan, so
they hated and thoroughly hated the mean and miserly Mu'in bin Sawi. It
befel one day by the decree of the Decreer, that King Mohammed bin
Sulayman al-Zayni, being seated on his throne with his officers of state
about him, summoned his Wazir Al-Fazl and said to him, "I wish to have a
slave-girl of passing beauty, perfect in loveliness, exquisite in
symmetry and endowed with all praiseworthy gifts." Said the courtiers,
"Such a girl is not to be bought for less than ten thousand gold
pieces:" whereupon the Sultan called out to his treasurer and said,
"Carry ten thousand dinars to the house of Al-Fazl bin Khakan." The
treasurer did the King's bidding; and the Minister went away, after
receiving the royal charge to repair to the slave-bazar every day, and
entrust to brokers the matter aforesaid. Moreover the King issued orders
that girls worth above a thousand gold pieces should not be bought or
sold without being first displayed to the Wazir. Accordingly no broker
purchased a slave-girl ere she had been paraded before the minister; but
none pleased him, till one day a dealer came to the house and found him
taking horse and intending for the palace. So he caught hold of his
stirrup saying:—

   O thou, who givest to royal state sweet savour, ✿ Thou'rt a Wazir
       shalt never fail of favour!
   Dead Bounty thou hast raised to life for men; ✿ Ne'er fail of
       Allah's grace such high endeavour!

Then quoth he, "O my lord, that surpassing object for whom the gracious
mandate was issued is at last found;[5]" and quoth the Wazir, "Here with
her to me!" So he went away and returned after a little, bringing a
damsel in richest raiment robed, a maid spear-straight of stature and
five feet tall; budding of bosom with eyes large and black as by Kohl
traced, and dewy lips sweeter than syrup or the sherbet one sips, a
virginette smooth cheeked and shapely faced, whose slender waist with
massive hips was engraced; a form more pleasing than branchlet waving
upon the topmost trees, and a voice softer and gentler than the morning
breeze, even as saith one of those who have described her:—

 Strange is the charm which dights her brows like Luna's disk
     that shine; ✿ O sweeter taste than sweetest Robb[6] or raisins of
     the vine.
 A throne th' Empyrean keeps for her in high and glorious state, ✿
     For wit and wisdom, wandlike form and graceful bending line:
 She in the Heaven of her face[7] the seven-fold stars displays, ✿
     That guard her cheeks as satellites against the spy's design:
 If man should cast a furtive glance or steal far look at her, ✿
     His heart is burnt by devil-bolts shot by those piercing eyne.

When the Wazir saw her she made him marvel with excess of admiration, so
he turned, perfectly pleased, to the broker and asked, "What is the
price of this girl?"; whereto he answered, "Her market-value stands at
ten thousand dinars, but her owner swears that this sum will not cover
the cost of the chickens she hath eaten, the wine she hath drunken and
the dresses of honour bestowed upon her instructor: for she hath learned
calligraphy and syntax and etymology; the commentaries of the Koran; the
principles of law and religion; the canons of medicine, and the calendar
and the art of playing on musical instruments."[8] Said the Wazir,
"Bring me her master." So the broker brought him at once and, behold, he
was a Persian of whom there was left only what the days had left; for he
was as a vulture bald and scald and a wall trembling to its fall. Time
had buffetted him with sore smart, yet was he not willing this world to
depart; even as said the poet:—

 Time hath shattered all my frame, ✿ Oh! how time hath shattered me.
 Time with lordly might can tame ✿ Manly strength and vigour free.
 Time was in my youth, that none ✿ Sped their way more fleet and fast:
 Time is and my strength is gone, ✿ Youth is sped, and speed is
     past.[9]

The Wazir asked him, "Art thou content to sell this slave-girl to the
Sultan for ten thousand dinars?"; and the Persian answered, "By Allah,
if I offered her to the King for naught, it were but my devoir,"[10] So
the Minister bade bring the monies and saw them weighed out to the
Persian, who stood up before him and said, "By the leave of our lord the
Wazir, I have somewhat to say;" and the Wazir replied, "Out with all
thou hast!" "It is my opinion," continued the slave-dealer, "that thou
shouldst not carry the maid to the King this day; for she is newly off a
journey; the change of air[11] hath affected her and the toils of
trouble have fretted her. But keep her quiet in thy palace some ten
days, that she may recover her looks and become again as she was. Then
send her to the Hammam and clothe her in the richest of clothes and go
up with her to the Sultan: this will be more to thy profit." The Wazir
pondered the Persian's words and approved of their wisdom; so he carried
her to his palace, where he appointed her private rooms, and allowed her
every day whatever she wanted of meat and drink and so forth. And on
this wise she abode a while. Now the Wazir Al-Fazl had a son like the
full moon when sheeniest dight, with face radiant in light, cheeks ruddy
bright, and a mole like a dot of ambergris on a downy site; as said of
him the poet and said full right:—

 A moon which blights you[12] if you dare behold; ✿ A branch which
     folds you in its waving fold:
 Locks of the Zanj[13] and golden glint of hair; ✿ Sweet gait and form
     a spear to have and hold:
 Ah! hard of heart with softest slenderest waist, ✿ That evil to
     this weal why not remould?[14]
 Were thy form's softness placed in thy heart, ✿ Ne'er would thy
     lover find thee harsh and cold:
 Oh thou accuser! be my love's excuser, ✿ Nor chide if love-pangs
     deal me woes untold!
 I bear no blame; 'tis all my heart and eyne; ✿ So leave thy
     blaming, let me yearn and pine.

Now the handsome youth knew not the affair of the damsel; and his father
had enjoined her closely, saying, "Know, O my daughter, that I have
bought thee as a bedfellow for our King, Mohammed bin Sulayman al-Zayni;
and I have a son who is a Satan for girls and leaves no maid in the
neighbourhood without taking her maidenhead; so be on thy guard against
him and beware of letting him see thy face or hear thy voice."
"Hearkening and obedience," said the girl; and he left her and fared
forth. Some days after this it happened by decree of Destiny, that the
damsel repaired to the baths in the house, where some of the slave women
bathed her; after which she arrayed herself in sumptuous raiment; and
her beauty and loveliness were thereby redoubled. Then she went in to
the Wazir's wife and kissed her hand; and the dame said to her, "Naiman!
May it benefit thee,[15] O Anis al-Jalis![16] Are not our baths
handsome?" "O my mistress," she replied, "I lacked naught there save thy
gracious presence." Thereupon the lady said to her slave-women, "Come
with us to the Hammam, for it is some days since we went there:" they
answered, "To hear is to obey!" and rose and all accompanied her. Now
she had set two little slave-girls to keep the door of the private
chamber wherein was Anis al-Jalis and had said to them, "Suffer none go
in to the damsel." Presently, as the beautiful maiden sat resting in her
rooms, suddenly came in the Wazir's son whose name was Nur al-Din
Ali,[17] and asked after his mother and her women, to which the two
little slave-girls replied, "They are in the Hammam." But the damsel,
Anis al-Jalis, had heard from within Nur al-Din Ali's voice and had said
to herself, "O would Heaven I saw what like is this youth against whom
the Wazir warned me, saying that he hath not left a virgin in the
neighbourhood without taking her virginity: by Allah, I do long to have
sight of him!" So she sprang to her feet with the freshness of the bath
on her and, stepping to the door, looked at Nur al-Din Ali and saw a
youth like the moon in its full and the sight bequeathed her a thousand
sighs. The young man also glanced at her and the look made him heir to a
thousand thoughts of care; and each fell into Love's ready snare. Then
he stepped up to the two little slave-girls and cried aloud at them;
whereupon both fled before him and stood afar off to see what he would
do. And behold, he walked to the door of the damsel's chamber and,
opening it, went in and asked her "Art thou she my father bought for
me?" and she answered "Yes." Thereupon the youth, who was warm with
wine, came up to her and embraced her; then he took her legs and passed
them round his waist and she wound her arms about his neck, and met him
with kisses and murmurs of pleasure and amorous toyings. Next he sucked
her tongue and she sucked his and, lastly, he loosed the strings of her
petticoat-trousers and abated her maidenhead. When the two little
slave-girls saw their young master get in unto the damsel, Anis
al-Jalis, they cried out and shrieked; so as soon as the youth had had
his wicked will of her, he rose and fled forth fearing the consequences
of his ill-doing. When the Wazir's wife heard the slave-girls' cries,
she sprang up and came out of the baths with the perspiration pouring
from her face, saying, "What is this unseemly clamour in the house[18]?"
Then she came up to the two little slave-girls and asked them saying,
"Fie upon you! what is the matter?"; and both answered, "Verily our lord
Nur al-Din came in and beat us, so we fled; then he went up to Anis
al-Jalis and threw his arms round her and we know not what he did after
that; but when we cried out to thee he ran away." Upon this the lady
went to Anis al-Jalis and said to her, "What tidings?" "O my lady," she
answered, "as I was sitting here lo! a handsome young man came in and
said to me:—Art thou she my father bought for me?; and I answered Yes;
for, by Allah, O mistress mine, I believed that his words were true; and
he instantly came in and embraced me." "Did he nought else with thee but
this?" quoth the lady, and quoth she, "Indeed he did! But he did it only
three times." "He did not leave thee without dishonouring thee!" cried
the Wazir's wife and fell to weeping and buffetting her face, she and
the girl and all the handmaidens, fearing lest Nur al-Din's father
should kill him.[19] Whilst they were thus, in came the Wazir and asked
what was the matter, and his wife said to him, "Swear that whatso I tell
thee thou wilt attend to it." "I will," answered he. So she related to
him what his son had done, whereat he was much concerned and rent his
raiment and smote his face till his nose bled, and plucked out his beard
by the handful. "Do not kill thyself," said his wife, "I will give thee
ten thousand dinars, her price, of my own money." But he raised his head
and cried; "Out upon thee! I have no need of her purchase-money: my fear
is lest life as well as money go." "O my lord, and how is that?"
"Wottest thou not that yonder standeth our enemy Al-Mu'in bin Sawi who,
as soon as he shall hear of this matter, will go up to the Sultan?"——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

[Illustration]


                Now when it was the Thirty-fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
said to his wife, "Wottest thou not that yonder standeth our enemy
Al-Mu'in bin Sawi who, as soon as he hears of this matter will go up to
the Sultan and say to him:—Thy Wazir who, thou wilt have it loveth thee,
took from thee ten thousand ducats and bought therewith a slave-girl
whose like none ever beheld; but when he saw her, she pleased him and he
said to his son:—Take her: thou art worthier of her than the Sultan. So
he took her and did away with her virginity and she is now in his house.
The King will say:—Thou liest! to which he will reply:—With thy leave I
will fall upon him unawares and bring her to thee. The King will give
him warranty for this and he will come down upon the house and will take
the girl and present her to the Sultan, who will question her and she
will not be able to deny the past. Then mine enemy will say:—O my lord,
thou wottest that I give thee the best of counsel; but I have not found
favour in thine eyes. Thereupon the Sultan will make an example of me,
and I shall be a gazing-stock to all the people and my life will be
lost." Quoth his wife, "Let none know of this thing which hath happened
privily, and commit thy case to Allah and trust in Him to save thee from
such strait; for He who knoweth the future shall provide for the
future." With this she brought the Wazir a cup of wine and his heart was
quieted, and he ceased to feel wrath and fear. Thus far concerning him;
but as regards his son Nur al-Din Ali, fearing the consequence of his
misdeed he abode his day long in the flower-garden and came back only at
night to his mother's apartment where he slept; and, rising before dawn,
returned to the gardens. He ceased not to do thus for two whole months
without showing his face to his parent, till at last his mother said to
his father, "O my lord, shall we lose our boy as well as the girl? If
matters continue long in this way he will flee from us." "And what to
do?" asked he; and she answered, "Do thou watch this night; and, when he
cometh, seize on him and frighten him: I will rescue him from thee and
do thou make peace with him and give him the damsel to wife, for she
loveth him as he loveth her. And I will pay thee her price." So the
Minister sat up that night and, when his son came, he seized him and
throwing him down knelt on his breast and showed as though he would cut
his throat; but his mother ran to the youth's succour and asked her
husband, "What wouldest thou do with him?" He answered her, "I will
split his weasand." Said the son to the father, "Is my death, then, so
light a matter to thee?"; and his father's eyes welled with tears, for
natural affection moved him, and he rejoined, "O my son, how light was
to thee the loss of my good and my life!" Quoth Nur al-Din, "Hear, O my
father, what the poet hath said:—

      Forgive me! thee-ward sinned I, but the wise ✿ Ne'er to the
          sinner shall deny his grace:
      Thyfoe may pardon sue when lieth he ✿ In lowest, and thou
          holdest highest place!"

Thereupon the Wazir rose from off his son's breast saying, "I forgive
thee!"; for his heart yearned to him; and the youth kissed the hand of
his sire who said, "O my son, were I sure that thou wouldest deal justly
by Anis al-Jalis, I would give her to thee." "O my father, what justice
am I to do to her?" "I enjoin thee, O my son, not to take another wife
or concubine to share with her, nor sell her." "O my father! I swear to
thee that verily I will not do her injustice in either way." Having
sworn to that effect Nur al-Din went in to the damsel and abode with her
a whole year, whilst Allah Almighty caused the King to forget the matter
of the maiden; and Al-Mu'in, though the affair came to his ears, dared
not divulge it by reason of the high favour in which his rival stood
with the Sultan. At the end of the year Al-Fazl went one day to the
public baths; and, as he came out whilst he was still sweating, the air
struck him[20] and he caught a cold which turned to a fever; then he
took to his bed. His malady gained ground and restlessness was longsome
upon him and weakness bound him like a chain; so he called out, "Hither
with my son;" and when Nur al-Din Ali came he said to him, "O my son,
know that man's lot and means are distributed and decreed; and the end
of days by all must be dree'd; and that every soul drain the cup of
death is nature's need." Then he repeated these lines:—

   I die my death, but He alone is great who dieth not! ✿ And well I
       wot, soon shall I die, for death was made my lot:
   A King there's not that dies and holds his kingdom in his hand, ✿
       For Sovranty the Kingdom is of Him who dieth not.

Then he continued, "O my son, I have no charge to leave thee save that
thou fear Allah and look to the issues of thine acts and bear in mind my
injunctions anent Anis al-Jalis." "O my father!" said Nur al-Din, "who
is like unto thee? Indeed thou art famed for well doing and preachers
offer prayers for thee in their pulpits!" Quoth Al-Fazl, "O my son, I
hope that Allah Almighty may grant me acceptance!" Then he pronounced
the Two Testimonies,[21] or Professions of the Faith, and was recorded
among the blessed. The palace was filled with crying and lamentation and
the news of his death reached the King, and the city-people wept, even
those at their prayers and women at household cares and the
schoolchildren shed tears for Bin-Khakan. Then his son Nur al-Din Ali
arose and made ready his funeral, and the Emirs and Wazirs and high
Officers of State and city-notables were present, amongst them the Wazir
al-Mu'in bin Sawi. And as the bier went forth from the house some one in
the crowd of mourners began to chant these lines:—

   On the fifth day I quitted all my friends for evermore, ✿ And they
       laid me out and washed me on a slab without my door:[22]
   They stripped me of the clothes I was ever wont to wear, ✿ And
       they clothed me in the clothes which till then I never wore.
   On four men's necks they bore me and carried me from home ✿ To
       chapel; and some prayed for him on neck they bore:
   They prayed for me a prayer that no prostration knows;[23] ✿
       They prayed for me who praised me and were my friends of yore;
   And they laid me in a house with a ceiling vaulted o'er, ✿ And
       Time shall be no more ere it ope to me its door.

When they had shovelled in the dust over him and the crowd had
dispersed, Nur al-Din returned home and he lamented with sobs and tears;
and the tongue of the case repeated these couplets:—

 On the fifth day at even-tide they went away from me: ✿ I
     farewelled them as faring they made farewell my lot:
 But my spirit as they went, with them went and so I cried, ✿ "Ah
     return ye!" but replied she, "Alas! return is not
 To a framework lere and lorn that lacketh blood and life, ✿ A
     frame whereof remaineth naught but bones that rattle and rot:
 Mine eyes are blind and cannot see quencht by the flowing tear! ✿
     Mine ears are dull and lost to sense: they have no power to hear!"

He abode a long time sorrowing for his father till, one day, as he was
sitting at home, there came a knocking at the door; so he rose in haste
and opening let in a man, one of his father's intimates and who had been
the Wazir's boon-companion. The visitor kissed Nur al-Din's hand and
said to him, "O my lord, he who hath left the like of thee is not dead;
and this way went also the Chief of the Ancients and the Moderns.[24] O
my lord Ali, be comforted and leave sorrowing." Thereupon Nur al-Din
rose and going to the guest-saloon transported thither all he needed.
Then he assembled his companions and took his handmaid again; and,
collecting round him ten of the sons of the merchants, began to eat meat
and drink wine, giving entertainment after entertainment and lavishing
his presents and his favours. One day his Steward came to him and said,
"O my lord Nur al-Din, hast thou not heard the saying, Whoso spendeth
and reckoneth not, to poverty wendeth and recketh not?" And he repeated
what the poet wrote:—

  I look to my money and keep it with care, ✿ For right well I wot
      'tis my buckler and brand:
  Did I lavish my dirhams on hostilest foes,[25] ✿ I should truck my
      good luck by mine ill luck trepanned:
  So I'll eat it and drink it and joy in my wealth; ✿ And no spending
      my pennies on others I'll stand:
  I will keep my purse close 'gainst whoever he be; ✿ And a niggard
      in grain a true friend ne'er I fand:
  Far better deny him than come to say:—Lend, ✿ And five-fold the
      loan shall return to thy hand!
  And he turns face aside and he sidles away, ✿ While I stand like a
      dog disappointed, unmanned.
  Oh, the sorry lot his who hath yellow-boys none, ✿ Though his
      genius and virtues shine bright as the sun!

"O my master," continued the Steward, "this lavish outlay and these
magnificent gifts waste away wealth." When Nur al-Din Ali heard these
words he looked at his servant and cried, "Of all thou hast spoken I
will not heed one single word, for I have heard the saying of the poet
who saith;—

    An my palm be full of wealth and my wealth I ne'er bestow, ✿ A
        palsy take my hand and my foot ne'er rise again!
    Show me niggard who by niggardise e'er rose to high degree, ✿ Or
        the generous in gifts generosity hath slain."

And he pursued, "Know, O Steward, it is my desire that so long as thou
hast money enough for my breakfast, thou trouble me not with taking
thought about my supper." Thereupon the Steward asked, "Must it be so?";
and he answered, "It must." So the honest man went his way and Nur
al-Din Ali devoted himself to extravagance; and, if any of his
cup-companions chanced to say, "This is a pretty thing;" he would reply,
"'Tis a gift to thee!"; or if another said, "O my lord, such a house is
handsome;" he would answer, "Take it: it is thine!" After this reckless
fashion he continued to live for a whole year, giving his friends a
banquet in the morning and a banquet in the evening and a banquet at
midnight, till one day, as the company was sitting together, the damsel
Anis al-Jalis repeated these lines:

   Thou deemedst well of Time when days went well, ✿ And fearedst not
       what ills might deal thee Fate:
   Thy nights so fair and restful cozened thee, ✿ For peaceful
       nights bring woes of heavy weight.

When she had ended her verse behold, somebody knocked at the door. So
Nur al-Din rose to open it and one of his boon-companions followed him
without being perceived. At the door he found his Steward and asked him,
"What is the matter?"; and he answered, "O my lord, what I dreaded for
thee hath come to pass!" "How so?" "Know that there remains not a
dirham's worth, less or more in my hands. Here are my Daftars and
account books showing both income and outlay and the registers of thine
original property." When Nur al-Din heard these words he bowed his head
and said, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah!"
When the man who had followed him privily to spy on him heard the
Steward's words, he returned to his friends and warned them saying,
"Look ye well to what ye do: Nur al-Din is penniless;" and, as the young
host came back to his guests, vexation showed itself in his face.
Thereupon one of the intimates rose; and, looking at the entertainer,
said to him, "O my lord, may be thou wilt give me leave to retire?" "And
why so early retirement this day?"; asked he and the other answered him,
"My wife is in child-birth and I may not be absent from her: indeed I
must return and see how she does." So he gave him leave, whereupon
another rose and said, "O my lord Nur al-Din, I wish now to go to my
brother's for he circumciseth his son to day."[26] In short each and
every asked permission to retire on some pretence or other, till all the
ten were gone leaving Nur al-Din alone. Then he called his slave-girl
and said to her, "O Anis al-Jalis, hast thou seen what case is mine?"
And he related to her what the Steward had told him. Then quoth she, "O
my lord, for many nights I had it in my mind to speak with thee of this
matter, but I heard thee repeating:—

   When the World heaps favours on thee, pass on ✿ Thy favours to
       friends ere her hand she stay:
   Largesse never let her when fain she comes, ✿ Nor niggardise kept
       her from turning away!"

"When I heard these verses I held my peace and cared not to exchange a
word with thee." "O Anis al-Jalis," said Nur al-Din, "thou knowest that
I have not wasted my wealth save on my friends, especially these ten who
have now left me a pauper, and I think they will not abandon and desert
me without relief." "By Allah," replied she, "they will not profit thee
with aught of aid." Said he, "I will rise at once and go to them and
knock at their doors; it may be I shall get from them somewhat wherewith
I may trade and leave pastime and pleasuring." So he rose without stay
or delay, and repaired to a street wherein all his ten friends lived. He
went up to the nearest door and knocked; whereupon a handmaid came out
and asked him, "Who art thou?"; and he answered, "Tell thy master that
Nur al-Din Ali standeth at the door and saith to him:—Thy slave kisseth
thy hand and awaiteth thy bounty." The girl went in and told her master,
who cried at her, "Go back and say:—My master is not at home." So she
returned to Nur al-Din, and said to him, "O my lord, my master is out."
Thereupon he turned away and said to himself, "If this one be a whoreson
knave and deny himself, another may not prove himself such knave and
whoreson." Then he went up to the next door and sent in a like message
to the house-master, who denied himself as the first had done, whereupon
he began repeating:—

   He is gone who when to his gate thou go'st, ✿ Fed thy famisht maw
       with his boiled and roast.

When he had ended his verse he said, "By Allah, there is no help but
that I make trial of them all: perchance there be one amongst them who
will stand me in the stead of all the rest." So he went the round of the
ten, but not one of them would open his door to him or show himself or
even break a bit of bread before him; whereupon he recited:—

    Like a tree is he who in wealth doth wone, ✿ And while fruits he
        the folk to his fruit shall run:
    But when bared the tree of what fruit it bare, ✿ They leave it
        to suffer from dust and sun.
    Perdition to all of this age! I find ✿ Ten rogues for every
        righteous one.

Then he returned to his slave-girl and his grief had grown more grievous
and she said to him, "O my lord, did I not tell thee, none would profit
thee with aught of aid?" And he replied, "By Allah, not one of them
would show me his face or know me!" "O my lord," quoth she, "sell some
of the moveables and household stuff, such as pots and pans, little by
little; and expend the proceeds until Allah Almighty shall provide." So
he sold all of that was in the house till nothing remained when he
turned to Anis al-Jalis and asked her "What shall we do now?"; and she
answered, "O my lord, it is my advice that thou rise forthwith and take
me down to the bazar and sell me. Thou knowest that thy father bought me
for ten thousand dinars: haply Allah may open thee a way to get the same
price, and if it be His will to bring us once more together, we shall
meet again." "O Anis al-Jalis," cried he, "by Allah it is no light
matter for me to be parted from thee for a single hour!" "By Allah, O my
lord," she replied, nor is it easy to me either, but Need hath its own
law, as the poet said:—

    Need drives a man into devious roads, ✿ And pathways doubtful of
        trend and scope:
    No man to a rope[27] will entrust his weight, ✿ Save for cause
        that calleth for case of rope.

Thereupon he rose to his feet and took her,[28] whilst the tears rolled
down his cheek like rain; and he recited with the tongue of the case
these lines:—

   Stay! grant one parting look before we part, ✿ Nerving my heart
       this severance to sustain:
   But, an this parting deal thee pain and bane, ✿ Leave me to die of
       love and spare thee pain!

Then he went down with her to the bazar and delivered her to the broker
and said to him, "O Hájj Hasan,[29] I pray thee note the value of her
thou hast to cry for sale." "O my lord Nur al-Din," quoth the broker,
"the fundamentals are remembered;"[30] adding, "Is not this the Anis
al-Jalis whom thy father bought of me for ten thousand dinars?" "Yes,"
said Nur al-Din. Thereupon the broker went round to the merchants, but
found that all had not yet assembled. So he waited till the rest had
arrived and the market was crowded with slave-girls of all nations,
Turks, Franks and Circassians; Abyssinians, Nubians and Takrúrís;[31]
Tartars, Georgians and others; when he came forward and standing cried
aloud, "O merchants! O men of money! every round thing is not a walnut
and every long thing a banana is not; all reds are not meat nor all
whites fat, nor is every brown thing a date![32] O merchants, I have
here this union-pearl that hath no price: at what sum shall I cry her?"
"Cry her at four thousand five hundred dinars," quoth one of the
traders. The broker opened the door of sale at the sum named and, as he
was yet calling, lo! the Wazir Al-Mu'in bin Sawi passed through the
bazar and, seeing Nur al-Din Ali waiting at one side, said to himself,
"Why is Khakan's son[33] standing about here? Hath this gallows-bird
aught remaining wherewith to buy slave-girls?" Then he looked round and,
seeing the broker calling out in the market with all the merchants
around him, said to himself, "I am sure that he is penniless and hath
brought hither the damsel Anis al-Jalis for sale;" adding, "O how
cooling and grateful is this to my heart!" Then he called the crier, who
came up and kissed the ground before him; and he said to him, "I want
this slave-girl whom thou art calling for sale." The broker dared not
cross him, so he answered, "O my lord, Bismillah! in Allah's name so be
it;" and led forward the damsel and showed her to him. She pleased him
much whereat he asked, "O Hasan, what is bidden for this girl?" and tie
answered, "Four thousand five hundred dinars to open the door of sale."
Quoth Al-Mu'in, "Four thousand five hundred is _my_ bid." When the
merchants heard this, they held back and dared not bid another dirham,
wotting what they did of the Wazir's tyranny, violence and treachery. So
Al-Mu'in looked at the broker and said to him, "Why stand still? Go and
offer four thousand dinars for me and the five hundred shall be for
thyself." Thereupon the broker went to Nur al-Din and said, "O my lord,
thy slave is going for nothing!" "And how so?" asked he. The broker
answered, "We had opened the biddings for her at four thousand five
hundred dinars; when that tyrant, Al-Mu'in bin Sawi, passed through the
bazar and, as he saw the damsel she pleased him, so he cried to me:—Call
me the buyer at four thousand dinars and thou shalt have five hundred
for thyself. I doubt not but that he knoweth that the damsel is thine,
and if he would pay thee down her price at once it were well; but I know
his injustice and violence; he will give thee a written order upon some
of his agents and will send after thee to say to them:—Pay him nothing.
So as often as thou shalt go in quest of the coin they will say:—We'll
pay thee presently! and they will put thee off day after day, and thou
art proud of spirit; till at last, when they are wearied with thine
importunity, they will say:—Show us the cheque. Then, as soon as they
have got hold of it they will tear it up and so thou wilt lose the
girl's price." When Nur al-Din heard this he looked at the broker and
asked him, "How shall this matter be managed?"; and he answered, "I will
give thee a counsel which, if thou follow, it shall bring thee complete
satisfaction." "And what is that?" quoth Nur al-Din. Quoth the broker,
"Come thou to me anon when I am standing in the middle of the market
and, taking the girl from my hand, give her a sound cuffing and say to
her:—Thou baggage, I have kept my vow and brought thee down to the
slave-market, because I swore an oath that I would carry thee from home
to the bazar, and make brokers cry thee for sale. If thou do this,
perhaps the device will impose upon the Wazir and the people, and they
will believe that thou broughtest her not to the bazar but for the
quittance of thine oath." He replied, "Such were the best way." Then the
broker left him and, returning into the midst of the market, took the
damsel by the hand, and signed to the Wazir and said, "O my lord, here
is her owner." With this up came Nur al-Din Ali and, snatching the girl
from the broker's hand, cuffed her soundly and said to her, "Shame on
thee, O thou baggage! I have brought thee to the bazar for quittance of
mine oath; now get thee home and thwart me no more as is thy wont. Woe
to thee! do I need thy price, that I should sell thee? The furniture of
my house would fetch thy value many times over!" When Al-Mu'in saw this
he said to Nur al-Din, "Out on thee! Hast thou anything left for selling
or buying?" And he would have laid violent hands upon him, but the
merchants interposed (for they all loved Nur al-Din), and the young man
said to them, "Here am I in your hands and ye all know his tyranny." "By
Allah," cried the Wazir, "but for you I had slain him!" Then all signed
with significant eyes to Nur al-Din as much as to say, "Take thy wreak
of him; not one of us will come between thee and him." Thereupon Nur
al-Din, who was stout of heart as he was stalwart of limb, went up to
the Wazir and, dragging him over the pommel of his saddle, threw him to
the ground. Now there was in that place a puddling-pit for
brick-clay,[34] into the midst of which he fell, and Nur al-Din kept
pummelling and fisti-cuffing him, and one of the blows fell full on his
teeth, and his beard was dyed with his blood. Also there were with the
minister ten armed slaves who, seeing their master entreated after this
fashion, laid hand on sword-hilt and would have bared blades and fallen
on Nur al-Din to cut him down; but the merchants and bystanders said to
them, "This is a Wazir and that is the son of a Wazir; haply they will
make friends some time or other, in which case you will forfeit the
favour of both. Or perchance a blow may befal your lord, and you will
all die the vilest of deaths; so it were better for you not to
interfere." Accordingly they held aloof and, when Nur al-Din had made an
end of thrashing the Wazir, he took his handmaid and fared homewards.
Al-Mu'in also went his ways at once, with his raiment dyed of three
colours, black with mud, red with blood and ash coloured with
brick-clay. When he saw himself in this state, he bound a bit of
matting[35] round his neck and, taking in hand two bundles of coarse
Halfah-grass,[36] went up to the palace and standing under the Sultan's
windows cried aloud, "O King of the age, I am a wronged man! I am foully
wronged!" So they brought him before the King who looked at him; and
behold, it was the chief Minister; whereupon he said, "O Wazir who did
this deed by thee?" Al-Mu'in wept and sobbed and repeated these lines:—

     Shall the World oppress me when thou art in't? ✿ In the lion's
         presence shall wolves devour?
     Shall the dry all drink of thy tanks and I ✿ Under rain-cloud
         thirst for the cooling shower?

"O my lord," cried he, "the like will befal every one who loveth and
serveth thee well." "Be quick with thee," quoth the Sultan, "and tell me
how this came to pass and who did this deed by one whose honour is part
of my honour." Quoth the Wazir, "Know, O my lord, that I went out this
day to the slave-market to buy me a cookmaid, when I saw there a damsel,
never in my life long saw I a fairer; and I designed to buy her for our
lord the Sultan; so I asked the broker of her and of her owner, and he
answered, "She belongeth to Ali son of Al-Fazl bin Khakan. Some time ago
our lord the Sultan gave his father ten thousand dinars wherewith to buy
him a handsome slave-girl, and he bought this maiden who pleased him; so
he grudged her to our lord the Sultan and gave her to his own son. When
the father died, the son sold all he had of houses and gardens and
household gear, and squandered the price till he was penniless. Then he
brought the girl to the market that he might sell her, and he handed her
over to the broker to cry and the merchants bid higher and higher on
her, until her price reached four thousand dinars; whereupon quoth I to
myself:—I will buy this damsel for our lord the Sultan, whose money was
paid for her. So I said to Nur al-Din:—O my son, sell her to me for four
thousand dinars. When he heard my words he looked at me and cried:—O
ill-omened oldster, I will sell her to a Jew or to a Nazarene, but I
will not sell her to thee! I do not buy her for myself, said I, I buy
her for our lord and benefactor the Sultan. Hearing my words he was
filled with rage; and, dragging me off my horse (and I a very old man),
beat me unmercifully with his fists and buffeted me with his palms till
he left me as thou seest, and all this hath befallen me only because I
thought to buy this damsel for thee!" Then the Wazir threw himself on
the ground and lay there weeping and shivering. When the Sultan saw his
condition and heard his story, the vein of rage started out between his
eyes[37] and he turned to his body-guard who stood before him, forty
white slaves, smiters with the sword, and said to them, "Go down
forthright to the house built by the son of Khakan and sack it and raze
it and bring to me his son Nur al-Din with the damsel; and drag them
both on their faces with their arms pinioned behind them." They replied,
"To hear is to obey;" and, arming themselves, they set out for the house
of Nur al-Din Ali. Now about the Sultan was a Chamberlain, Alam[38]
al-Din Sanjar hight, who had aforetime been Mameluke to Al-Fazl; but he
had risen in the world and the Sultan had advanced him to be one of his
Chamberlains. When he heard the King's command and saw the enemies make
them ready to slay his old master's son, it was grievous to him: so he
went out from before the Sultan and, mounting his beast, rode to Nur
al-Din's house and knocked at the door. Nur al-Din came out and knowing
him would have saluted him: but he said, "O my master this is no time
for greeting or treating. Listen to what the poet said:—

     Fly, fly with thy life if by ill overtaken!
     Let thy house speak thy death by its builder forsaken!
     For a land else than this land thou may'st reach, my brother,
     But thy life tho'lt ne'er find in this world another.[39]

"O Alam al-Din what cheer?" asked Nur al-Din, and he answered, "Rise
quickly and fly for thy life, thou and the damsel; for Al-Mu'in hath set
a snare for you both; and, if you fall into his hands, he will slay you.
The Sultan hath despatched forty sworders against you and I counsel you
to flee ere harm can hurt you." Then Sanjar put his hand to his purse
and finding there forty gold pieces took them and gave them to Nur
al-Din, saying, "O my lord receive these and journey with them. Had I
more I would give them to thee, but this is not the time to take
exception." Thereupon Nur al-Din went in to the damsel and told her what
had happened, at which she wrung her hands. Then they fared forth at
once from the city, and Allah spread over them His veil of protection,
so that they reached the river-bank where they found a vessel ready for
sea. Her skipper was standing amidships and crying, "Whoso hath aught to
do, whether in the way of provisioning or taking leave of his people; or
whoso hath forgotten any needful thing, let him do it at once and
return, for we are about to sail"; and all of them saying, "There is
naught left to be done by us, O captain!", he cried to his crew, "Hallo
there! cast off the cable and pull up the mooring-pole!"[40] Quoth Nur
al-Din, "Whither bound, O captain?" and quoth he, "To the House of
Peace, Baghdad,"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Thirty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the skipper
answered, "To the House of Peace, Baghdad," Nur al-Din Ali and the
damsel went on board, and they launched the craft and shook out the
sails, and the ship sped forth as though she were a bird on wing; even
as said one of them and said right well:—

     Watch some tall ship, she'll joy the sight of thee, ✿ The
         breeze outstripping in her haste to flee;
     As when a bird, with widely-spreading wings, ✿ Leaveth the sky
         to settle on the sea.

So the vessel sailed on her fastest and the wind to her was fairest.
Thus far concerning them; but as regards the Mamelukes, they went to Nur
al-Din's mansion and, breaking open the doors, entered and searched the
whole place, but could find no trace of him and the damsel; so they
demolished the house and, returning to the Sultan, reported their
proceedings; whereupon quoth he, "Make search for them both, wherever
they may be;" and they answered, "Hearing is obeying." The Wazir
Al-Mu'in had also gone home after the Sultan had bestowed upon him a
robe of honour, and had set his heart at rest by saying, "None shall
take blood-wreak for thee save I;" and he had blessed the King and
prayed for his long life and prosperity. Then the Sultan bade proclaim
about the city, "Oyez, O ye lieges one and all! It is the will of our
lord the Sultan that whoso happeneth on Nur al-Din Ali son of Al-Fazl
bin Khakan, and bringeth him to the Sultan, shall receive a robe of
honour and one thousand gold pieces; and he who hideth him or knoweth
his abiding place and informeth not, deserveth whatsoever pains and
penalties shall befal him." So all began to search for Nur al-Din Ali,
but they could find neither trace nor tidings of him. Meanwhile he and
his handmaid sailed on with the wind right aft, till they arrived in
safety at Baghdad, and the captain said to them, "This is Baghdad and
'tis the city where security is to be had: Winter with his frosts hath
turned away and Prime hath come his roses to display; and the flowers
are a-glowing and the trees are blowing and the streams are flowing." So
Nur al-Din landed, he and his handmaid and, giving the captain five
dinars, walked on a little way till the decrees of Destiny brought them
among the gardens, and they came to a place swept and sprinkled, with
benches along the walls and hanging jars filled with water.[41] Overhead
was a trellis of reed-work and canes shading the whole length of the
avenue, and at the upper end was a garden gate, but this was locked. "By
Allah," quoth Nur al-Din to the damsel, "right pleasant is this place!";
and she replied, "O my lord sit with me a while on this bench and let us
take our ease." So they mounted and sat them down on the bench, after
which they washed their faces and hands; and the breeze blew cool on
them and they fell asleep and glory be to Him who never sleepeth! Now
this garden was named the Garden of Gladness[42] and therein stood a
belvedere hight the Palace of Pleasure and the Pavilion of Pictures, the
whole belonging to the Caliph Harun al-Rashid who was wont, when his
breast was straitened with care, to frequent garden and palace and there
to sit. The palace had eighty latticed windows and fourscore lamps
hanging round a great candelabrum of gold furnished with wax-candles;
and, when the Caliph used to enter, he would order the handmaids to
throw open the lattices and light up the rooms; and he would bid Ishak
bin Ibrahim the cup-companion and the slave-girls to sing till his
breast was broadened and his ailments were allayed. Now the keeper of
the garden, Shaykh Ibrahim, was a very old man, and he had found from
time to time, when he went out on any business, people pleasuring about
the garden gate with their bona robas; at which he was angered with
exceeding anger.[43] But he took patience till one day when the Caliph
came to his garden; and he complained of this to Harun al-Rashid who
said, "Whomsoever thou surprisest about the door of the garden, deal
with him as thou wilt." Now on this day the Gardener chanced to be
abroad on some occasion and returning found these two sleeping at the
gate covered with a single mantilla; whereupon said he, "By Allah, good!
These twain know not that the Caliph hath given me leave to slay anyone
I may catch at the door; but I will give this couple a shrewd whipping,
that none may come near the gate in future." So he cut a green
palm-frond[44] and went up to them and, raising his arm till the white
of his arm-pit appeared, was about to strike them, when he bethought
himself and said, "O Ibrahim, wilt thou beat them unknowing their case?
Haply they are strangers or of the Sons of the Road,[45] and the decrees
of Destiny have thrown them here. I will uncover their faces and look at
them." So he lifted up the mantilla from their heads and said, "They are
a handsome couple; it were not fitting that I should beat them." Then he
covered their faces again and, going to Nur al-Din's feet, began to rub
and shampoo them,[46] whereupon the youth opened his eyes and, seeing an
old man of grave and reverend aspect rubbing his feet, he was ashamed
and drawing them in, sat up. Then he took Shaykh Ibrahim"s hand and
kissed it. Quoth the old man, "O my son, whence art thou?"; and quoth
he, "O my lord, we two are strangers," and the tears started from his
eyes. "O my son," said Shaykh Ibrahim, "know that the Prophet (whom
Allah bless and preserve!) hath enjoined honour to the stranger;" and
added, "Wilt not thou arise, O my son, and pass into the garden and
solace thy self by looking at it and gladden thy heart?" "O my lord,"
said Nur al-Din, "to whom doth this garden belong?;" and the other
replied, "O my son, I have inherited it from my folk." Now his object in
saying this was to set them at their ease and induce them to enter the
garden. So Nur al-Din thanked him and rose, he and the damsel, and
followed him into the garden: and lo! it was a garden, and what a
garden! The gate was arched like a great hall and over walls and roof
ramped vines with grapes of many colours; the red like rubies and the
black like ebonies; and beyond it lay a bower of trelliced boughs
growing fruits single and composite, and small birds on branches sang
with melodious recite, and the thousand-noted nightingale shrilled with
her varied shright; the turtle with her cooing filled the site; the
blackbird whistled like human wight[47] and the ring-dove moaned like a
drinker in grievous plight. The trees grew in perfection all edible
growths and fruited all manner fruits which in pairs were bipartite;
with the camphor-apricot, the almond-apricot and the apricot "Khorasani"
hight; the plum, like the face of beauty, smooth and bright; the cherry
that makes teeth shine clear by her sleight, and the fig of three
colours, green, purple and white. There also blossomed the violet as it
were sulphur on fire by night; the orange with buds like pink coral and
marguerite; the rose whose redness gars the loveliest cheeks blush with
despight; and myrtle and gilliflower and lavender with the blood-red
anemone from Nu'uman hight. The leaves were all gemmed with tears the
clouds had dight; the chamomile smiled showing teeth that bite, and
Narcissus with his negro[48] eyes fixed on Rose his sight; the citrons
shone with fruits embowled and the lemons like balls of gold; earth was
carpeted with flowers tinctured infinite; for Spring was come
brightening the place with joy and delight; and the streams ran ringing,
to the birds' gay singing, while the rustling breeze upspringing
attempered the air to temperance exquisite. Shaykh Ibrahim carried them
up into the pavilion, and they gazed on its beauty, and on the lamps
aforementioned in the latticed windows; and Nur al-Din, remembering his
entertainments of time past, cried, "By Allah, this is a pleasant place;
it hath quenched in me anguish which burned as a fire of
Ghazá-wood.[49]" Then they sat down and Shaykh Ibrahim set food before
them; and they ate till they were satisfied and washed their hands:
after which Nur al-Din went up to one of the latticed windows, and,
calling to his handmaid fell to gazing on the trees laden with all
manner fruits. Presently he turned to the Gardener and said to him, "O
Shaykh Ibrahim hast thou no drink here, for folk are wont to drink after
eating?" The Shaykh brought him sweet water, cool and pleasant, but he
said, "This is not the kind of drink I wanted." "Perchance thou wishest
for wine?" "Indeed I do, O Shaykh!" "I seek refuge from it with Allah:
it is thirteen years since I did this thing, for the Prophet (Abhak[50])
cursed its drinker, presser, seller and carrier!" "Hear two words of
me." "Say on." "If yon cursed ass[51] which standeth there be cursed,
will aught of his curse alight upon thee?" "By no means!" "Then take
this dinar and these two dirhams and mount yonder ass and, halting afar
from the wine-shop, call the first man thou seest buying liquor and say
to him:—Take these two dirhams for thyself, and with this dinar buy me
some wine and set it on the ass. So shalt thou be neither the presser,
nor the buyer, nor the carrier; and no part of the curse will fall upon
thee." At this Shaykh Ibrahim laughed and said, "By Allah, O my son, I
never saw one wilier of wit than thou art, nor heard aught sweeter than
thy speech." So he did as he was bidden by Nur al-Din who thanked him
and said, "We two are now dependent on thee, and it is only meet that
thou comply with our wishes; so bring us here what we require." "O my
son," replied he, "this is my buttery before thee" (and it was the
store-room provided for the Commander of the Faithful); "so go in, and
take whatso thou wilt, for there is over and above what thou wantest."
Nur al-Din then entered the pantry and found therein vessels of gold and
silver and crystal set with all kinds of gems, and was amazed and
delighted with what he saw. Then he took out what he needed and set it
on and poured the wine into flagons and glass ewers, whilst Shaykh
Ibrahim brought them fruit and flowers and aromatic herbs. Then the old
man withdrew and sat down at a distance from them, whilst they drank and
made merry, till the wine got the better of them, so that their cheeks
reddened and their eyes wantoned like the gazelle's; and their locks
became dishevelled and their brightness became yet more beautiful. Then
said Shaykh Ibrahim to himself, "What aileth me to sit apart from them?
Why should I not sit with them? When shall I ever find myself in company
with the like of these two that favour two moons?" So he stepped forward
and sat down on the edge of the daïs, and Nur al-Din said to him, "O my
lord, my life on thee, come nearer to us!" He came and sat by them, when
Nur al-Din filled a cup and looked towards the Shaykh and said to him,
"Drink, that thou mayest try the taste of it!" I take refuge from it
with Allah!" replied he; "for thirteen years I have not done a thing of
the kind." Nur al-Din feigned to forget he was there and, drinking off
the cup, threw himself on the ground as if the drink had overcome him;
whereupon Anis al-Jalis glanced at him and said, "O Shaykh Ibrahim see
how this husband of mine treateth me;" and he answered, "O my lady, what
aileth him?" "This is how he always serveth me," cried she, "he drinketh
awhile, then falleth asleep and leaveth me alone with none to bear me
company over my cup nor any to whom I may sing when the bowl goeth
round." Quoth the Shaykh (and his mien unstiffened for that his soul
inclined towards her), "By Allah, this is not well!" Then she crowned a
cup and looking towards him said, "By my life thou must take and drink
it, and not refuse to heal my sick heart!" So he put forth his hand and
took it and drank it off and she filled a second and set it on the
chandelier and said, "O master mine, there is still this one left for
thee." "By Allah, I cannot drink it;" cried he, "what I have already
drunk is enough for me;" but she rejoined, "By Allah, there is no help
for it." So he took the cup and drank; and she filled him a third which
he took and was about to drink when behold, Nur al-Din rolled round and
sat upright——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


               Now when it was the Thirty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nur al-Din sat
upright and said, "Ho, Shaykh Ibrahim, what is this? Did I not adjure
thee a while ago and thou refusedst, saying:—What, I! 'tis thirteen
years ago since I have done such a thing!" "By Allah," quoth the Shaykh
(and indeed he was abashed), "no sin of mine this, she forced me to do
it." Nur al-Din laughed and they sat down again to wine and wassail, but
the damsel turned to her master and said in a whisper, "O my lord, drink
and do not press him, that I may show thee some sport with him." Then
she began to fill her master's cup and he hers and so they did time
after time, till at last Shaykh Ibrahim looked at them and said, "What
fashion of good fellowship is this? Allah curse the glutton who keepeth
the cup to himself! Why dost thou not give me to drink, O my brother?
What manners are these, O blessed one?" At this the two laughed until
they fell on their backs; then they drank and gave him to drink and
ceased not their carousal till a third part of the night was past. Then
said the damsel, "O Shaykh Ibrahim, with thy leave I will get up and
light one of these candles." "Do so," he replied, "but light no more
than one." So she sprang to her feet and, beginning with one candle,
lighted all the eighty and sat down again. Presently Nur al-Din said, "O
Shaykh Ibrahim, in what favour am I with thee? May I not light one of
these lamps?" "Light one," replied he, "and bother me no more in thy
turn!" So he rose and lighted one lamp after another, till he had
lighted the whole eighty and the palace seemed to dance with brilliancy.
Quoth the Shaykh (and indeed intoxication had overcome him), "Ye two are
bolder than I am." Then he rose to his feet and opened all the lattices
and sat down again; and they fell to carousing and reciting verses till
the place rang with their noisy mirth. Now Allah, the Decreer who
decreeth all things and who for every effect appointeth a cause, had so
disposed that the Caliph was at that moment sitting in the light of the
moon at one of the windows of his palace overlooking the Tigris. He saw
the blaze of the lamps and wax candles reflected in the river and,
lifting his eyes, perceived that it came from the Garden Palace which
was all ablaze with brilliancy. So he cried, "Here to me with Ja'afar
the Barmaki!"; and the last word was hardly spoken ere the Wazir was
present before the Commander of the Faithful, who cried at him, "O dog
of a Minister, hast thou taken from me this city of Baghdad without
saying aught to me?" "What words are these words?" asked Ja'afar; and
the Caliph answered, "If Baghdad city were not taken from me, the Palace
of Pictures would not be illuminated with lamps and candles, nor would
its windows be thrown open. Woe to thee! who durst do a deed like this
except the Caliphate had been taken from me?" Quoth Ja'afar (and indeed
his side-muscles trembled as he spoke), "Who told thee that the Palace
of Pictures was illuminated and the windows thrown open?" Come hither
and see," replied the Caliph. Then Ja'afar came close to the Caliph and,
looking towards the garden, saw the palace blazing with illumination
that rayed through the gloom of the night; and, thinking that this might
have been permitted by the keeper for some reason of his own, he wished
to make an excuse for him; so quoth he, "O Commander of the Faithful,
Shaykh Ibrahim said to me last week:—O my lord Ja'afar, I much wish to
circumcise my sons during the life of the Commander of the Faithful and
thy life. I asked:—What dost thou want?; and he answered:—Get me leave
from the Caliph to hold the festival in the Garden Palace. So said I to
him:—Go circumcise them and I will see the Caliph and tell him.
Thereupon he went away and I forgot to let thee know." "O Ja'afar," said
the Caliph, "thou hast committed two offences against me; first in that
thou didst not report to me, secondly, thou didst not give him what he
sought; for he came and told thee this only as excuse to ask for some
small matter of money, to help him with the outlay; and thou gavest him
nothing nor toldest me." "O Commander of the Faithful," said Ja'afar, "I
forgot." "Now by the rights of my forefathers and the tombs of my
forbears," quoth the Caliph, "I will not pass the rest of this night
save in company with him; for truly he is a pious man who frequenteth
the Elders of the Faith and the Fakirs and other religious mendicants
and entertaineth them; doubtless they are now assembled together and it
may be that the prayer of one of them will work us weal both in this
world and in the next. Besides, my presence may profit and at any rate
be pleasing to Shaykh Ibrahim." "O Commander of the Faithful," quoth
Ja'afar, "the greater part of the night is passed, and at this time they
will be breaking up." Quoth the Caliph, "It matters not: I needs must go
to them." So Ja'afar held his peace, being bewildered and knowing not
what to do. Then the Caliph rose to his feet and, taking with him
Ja'afar and Masrur the eunuch sworder, the three disguised themselves in
merchants' gear and leaving the City-palace, kept threading the streets
till they reached the garden. The Caliph went up to the gate and finding
it wide open, was surprised and said, "See, O Ja'afar, how Shaykh
Ibrahim hath left the gate open at this hour contrary to his custom!"
They went in and walked on till they came under the pavilion, when the
Caliph said, "O Ja'afar, I wish to look in upon them unawares before I
show myself, that I may see what they are about and get sight of the
elders; for hitherto I have heard no sound from them, nor even a Fakir
calling upon the name of Allah.[52]" Then he looked about and, seeing a
tall walnut-tree, said to Ja'afar, "I will climb this tree, for its
branches are near the lattices and so look in upon them." Thereupon he
mounted the tree and ceased not climbing from branch to branch, till he
reached a bough which was right opposite one of the windows, and here he
took seat and looked inside the palace. He saw a damsel and a youth as
they were two moons (glory be to Him who created them and fashioned
them!), and by them Shaykh Ibrahim seated cup in hand and saying, "O
Princess of fair ones, drinking without music is nothing worth; indeed I
have heard a poet say:—

   Round with big and little, the bowl and cup, ✿ Take either
       that moon[53] in his sheen hath crowned:
   Nor drink without music, for oft I've seen, ✿ The horse drink best
       to the whistle's sound!

When the Caliph saw this, the vein of wrath started up between his eyes
and he came down and said to the Wazir, "O Ja'afar, never beheld I yet
men of piety in such case; so do thou mount this tree and look upon
them, lest the blessings of the blest be lost to thee." Ja'afar, hearing
the words of the Commander of the Faithful and being confounded by them,
climbed to the tree-top and looking in, saw Nur al-Din and the damsel,
and Shaykh Ibrahim holding in his hand a brimming bowl. At this sight he
made sure of death and, descending, stood before the Commander of the
Faithful, who said to him, "O Ja'afar, praise be to Allah who hath made
us of those that observe external ordinances of Holy Law and hath
averted from us the sin of disguising ourselves after the manner of
hypocrites!"[54] But Ja'afar could not speak a word for excess of
confusion; so the Caliph looked at him and said, "I wonder how they came
hither, and who admitted them into my pavilion! But aught like the
beauty of this youth and this damsel my eyes never yet saw!" "Thou
sayest sooth, O our Lord the Sultan!" replied Ja'afar (and he hoped to
propitiate the Caliph Harun al-Rashid). Then quoth the Caliph, "O
Ja'afar, let us both mount the branch opposite the window, that we may
amuse ourselves with looking at them." So the two climbed the tree and,
peering in, heard Shaykh Ibrahim say, "O my lady, I have cast away all
gravity mine by the drinking of wine, but 'tis not sweet save with the
soft sounds of the lute-strings it combine." "By Allah," replied Anis
al-Jalis, "O Shaykh Ibrahim, an we had but some instrument of music our
joyance were complete." Hearing this he rose to his feet and the Caliph
said to Ja'afar, "I wonder what he is about to do!" and Ja'afar
answered, "I know not." The Shaykh disappeared and presently reappeared
bringing a lute; and the Caliph took note of it and knew it for that of
Abu Ishak the Cup-companion.[55] "By Allah," said the Caliph, "if this
damsel sing ill I will crucify all of you; but if she sing well I will
forgive them and only gibbet thee." "O Allah cause her to sing vilely!"
quoth Ja'afar. Asked the Caliph, "Why so?"; and he answered, "If thou
crucify us all together, we shall keep one another company." The Caliph
laughed at his speech. Presently the damsel took the lute and, after
looking at it and tuning it, she played a measure which made all hearts
yearn to her; then she sang these lines:—

   O ye that can aid me, a wretched lover, ✿ Whom longing burns nor
       can rest restore me!
   Though all you have done I have well deserved, ✿ I take refuge
       with you, so exult not o'er me:
   True, I am weak and low and vile, ✿ But I'll bear your will and
       whatso you bore me:
   My death at your hands what brings it of glory? ✿ I fear but your
       sin which of life forlore me!

Quoth the Caliph, "By Allah, good! O Ja'afar, never in my life have I
heard a voice so enchanting as this." "Then haply the Caliph's wrath
hath passed away," said Ja'afar, and he replied, "Yes, 'tis gone."
Thereupon they descended from the tree, and the Caliph said to Ja'afar,
"I wish to go in and sit with them and hear the damsel sing before me."
"O Commander of the Faithful," replied Ja'afar, "if thou go in to them
they will be terribly troubled, and Shaykh Ibrahim will assuredly die of
fright." But the Caliph answered, "O Ja'afar, thou must teach me some
device wherewith to delude them and whereby I can foregather with them
without their knowing me." So they walked towards the Tigris pondering
the matter, and presently came upon a fisherman who stood fishing under
the pavilion windows. Now some time before this, the Caliph (being in
the pavilion) had called to Shaykh Ibrahim and asked him, "What noise is
this I hear under the windows?" and he had answered, "It is voices of
fisher folk catching fish:" so quoth the Caliph, "Go down and forbid
them this place;" and he forbade them accordingly. However that night a
fisherman named Karim, happening to pass by and seeing the garden gate
open, said to himself, "This is a time of negligence; and I will take
advantage of it to do a bit of fishing." So he took his net and cast it,
but he had hardly done so when behold, the Caliph came up single-handed
and, standing hard by, knew him and called aloud to him, "Ho, Karim!"
The fisherman, hearing himself named, turned round, and seeing the
Caliph, trembled and his side-muscles quivered, as he cried, "By Allah,
O Commander of the Faithful, I did it not in mockery of the mandate; but
poverty and a large family drove me to what thou seest!" Quoth the
Caliph, "Make a cast in my name." At this the fisherman was glad and
going to the bank threw his net, then waiting till it had spread out at
full stretch and settled down, hauled it up and found in it various
kinds of fish. The Caliph was pleased and said, "O Karim, doff thy
habit." So he put off a gaberdine of coarse woollen stuff patched in an
hundred places whereon the lice were rampant, and a turband which had
never been untwisted for three years but to which he had sewn every rag
he came upon. The Caliph also pulled off his person two vests of
Alexandrian and Ba'lbak silk, a loose inner robe and a long-sleeved
outer coat, and said to the fisherman, "Take them and put them on,"
while he assumed the foul gaberdine and filthy turband and drew a corner
of the head-cloth as a mouth-veil[56] before his face. Then said he to
the fisherman, "Get thee about thy business!"; and the man kissed the
Caliph's feet and thanked him and improvised the following couplets:—

     Thou hast granted more favours than ever I craved; ✿ Thou
         hast satisfied needs which my heart enslaved:
     I will thank thee and thank whileas life shall last, ✿ And my
         bones will praise thee in grave engraved!

Hardly had the fisherman ended his verse, when the lice began to crawl
over the Caliph's skin, and he fell to catching them on his neck with
his right and left and throwing them from him, while he cried, "O
fisherman, woe to thee! what be this abundance of lice on thy
gaberdine." "O my lord," replied he, "they may annoy thee just at first,
but before a week is past thou wilt not feel them nor think of them."
The Caliph laughed and said to him, "Out on thee! Shall I leave this
gaberdine of thine so long on my body?" Quoth the fisherman, "I would
say a word to thee but I am ashamed in presence of the Caliph!"; and
quoth he, "Say what thou hast to say." "It passed through my thought, O
Commander of the Faithful," said the fisherman, "that, since thou
wishest to learn fishing so thou mayest have in hand an honest trade
whereby to gain thy livelihood, this my gaberdine besitteth thee right
well."[57] The Commander of the Faithful laughed at this speech, and the
fisherman went his way. Then the Caliph took up the basket of fish and,
strewing a little green grass over it, carried it to Ja'afar and stood
before him. Ja'afar thinking him to be Karim the fisherman feared for
him and said, "O Karim, what brought thee hither? Flee for thy life, for
the Caliph is in the garden to-night and, if he see thee, thy neck is
gone." At this the Caliph laughed and Ja'afar recognized him and asked,
"Can it be thou, our lord the Sultan?"; and he answered, "Yes, O
Ja'afar, and thou art my Wazir and I and thou came hither together; yet
thou knowest me not; so how should Shaykh Ibrahim know me, and he drunk?
Stay here, till I come back to thee." "To hear is to obey," said
Ja'afar. Then the Caliph went up to the door of the pavilion and knocked
a gentle knock, whereupon said Nur al-Din, "O Shaykh Ibrahim, some one
taps at the door." "Who goes there?" cried the Shaykh and the Caliph
replied, "It is I, O Shaykh Ibrahim!" "Who art thou," quoth he, and
quoth the other, "I am Karim the fisherman: I hear thou hast a feast, so
I have brought thee some fish, and of a truth 'tis good fish." When Nur
al-Din heard the mention of fish, he was glad, he and the damsel, and
they both said to the Shaykh, "O our lord, open the door and let him
bring us his fish." So Shaykh Ibrahim opened and the Caliph came in (and
he in fisherman guise), and began by saluting them. Said Shaykh Ibrahim,
"Welcome to the blackguard, the robber, the dicer! Let us see thy fish."
So the Caliph showed them his catch and behold, the fishes were still
alive and jumping, whereupon the damsel exclaimed, "By Allah! O my lord,
these are indeed fine fish: would they were fried!" and Shaykh Ibrahim
rejoined, "By Allah, O my lady, thou art right." Then said he to the
Caliph, "O fisherman, why didst thou not bring us the fish ready fried?
Up now and cook them and bring them back to us." "On my head be thy
commands!" said the Caliph, "I will fry thee a dish and bring it." Said
they, "Look sharp." Thereupon he went out and ran till he came up to
Ja'afar when he called to him, "Hallo, Ja'afar!"; and he replied, "Here
am I, O Commander of the Faithful, is all well?" "They want the fish
fried," said the Caliph, and Ja'afar answered, "O Commander of the
Faithful, give it to me and I'll fry it for them." "By the tombs of my
forbears," quoth the Caliph, "none shall fry it but I, with mine own
hand!" So he went to the gardener's hut, where he searched and found all
that he required, even to salt and saffron and wild marjoram and else
besides. Then he turned to the brasier and, setting on the frying-pan,
fried a right good fry. When it was done, he laid it on a banana-leaf,
and gathering from the garden wind-fallen fruits, limes and lemons,
carried the fish to the pavilion and set the dish before them. So the
youth and the damsel and Shaykh Ibrahim came forward and ate; after
which they washed their hands and Nur al-Din said to the Caliph, "By
Allah, O fisherman, thou hast done us a right good deed this night."
Then he put hand in pouch and, taking out three of the dinars which
Sanjar had given him, said, "O fisherman, excuse me. By Allah had I
known thee before that which hath lately befallen me, I had done away
the bitterness of poverty from thy heart; but take thou this as the best
I can do for thee." Then he threw the gold pieces to the Caliph, who
took them and kissed them and put them in pouch. Now his sole object in
doing all this was to hear the damsel sing; so he said to Nur al-Din,
"Thou hast rewarded me most liberally, but I beg of thy boundless bounty
that thou let this damsel sing an air, that I may hear her."[58] So Nur
al-Din said, "O Anis al-Jalis!" and she answered "Yes!" and he
continued, "By my life, sing us something for the sake of this fisherman
who wisheth so much to hear thee." Thereupon she took the lute and
struck the strings, after she had screwed them tight and tuned them, and
sang these improvised verses:—

    The fawn of a maid hent her lute in hand ✿ And her music made us
        right mettlesome:
    For her song gave hearing to ears stone-deaf, ✿ While Brava!
        Brava! exclaimed the dumb.

Then she played again and played so ravishingly, that she charmed their
wits and burst out improvising and singing these couplets:—

  You have honoured us visiting this our land, ✿ And your
      splendour illumined the glooms that blent:
  So 'tis due that for you I perfume my place ✿ With rose-water, musk
      and the camphor-scent!

Hereupon the Caliph was agitated, and emotion so overpowered him that he
could not command himself for excess of pleasure, and he exclaimed, "By
Allah, good! by Allah, good! by Allah, good!"[59] Asked Nur al-Din, "O
fisherman, doth this damsel please thee?" and the Caliph answered, "Ay,
by Allah!" Whereupon said Nur al-Din, "She is a gift to thee, a gift of
the generous who repenteth him not of his givings and who will never
revoke his gift!" Then he sprang to his feet and, taking a loose robe,
threw it over the fisherman and bade him receive the damsel and be gone.
But she looked at him and said, "O my lord, art thou faring forth
without farewell? If it must be so, at least stay till I bid thee
good-bye and make known my case." And she began versifying in these
verses:—

  When love and longing and regret are mine, ✿ Must not this body show
      of ills a sign?
  My love! say not, "Thou soon shalt be consoled"; ✿ When state
      speaks state none shall allay my pine.
  If living man could swim upon his tears, ✿ I first should float
      on waters of these eyne:
  O thou, who in my heart infusedst thy love, ✿ As water mingles in
      the cup with wine,
  This was the fear I feared, this parting blow. ✿ O thou whose love
      my heart-core ne'er shall tyne!
  O Bin Khákán! my sought, my hope, my will, ✿ O thou whose love
      this breast made wholly thine!
  Against thy lord the King thou sinn'dst for me, ✿ And winnedst exile
      in lands peregrine:
  Allah ne'er make my lord repent my loss ✿ To cream[60] o' men
      thou gavest me, one right digne.

When she had ended her verses, Nur al-Din answered her with these
lines:—

  She bade me farewell on our parting day, ✿ And she wept in the fire
      of our bane and pains:
  "What wilt thou do when fro' thee I'm gone?" ✿ Quoth I, "say this
      to whom life remains!"

When the Caliph heard her saying in her verse:—

               To Karim, the cream of men thou gavest me;

his inclination for her redoubled and it seemed a hard matter and a
grievous to part them; so quoth he to the youth, "O my lord, truly the
damsel said in her verses that thou didst transgress against her master
and him who owned her; so tell me, against whom didst thou transgress
and who is it hath a claim on thee?" "By Allah, O fisherman," replied
Nur al-Din, "there befel me and this damsel a wondrous tale and a
marvellous matter: an 'twere graven with needle-gravers on the
eye-corners it would be a warner to whoso would be warned." Cried the
Caliph, "Wilt thou not tell me thy story and acquaint me with thy case?
Haply it may bring thee relief, for Allah's aid is ever nearhand." "O
fisherman," said Nur al-Din, "wilt thou hear our history in verse or in
prose?" "Prose is a wordy thing, but verses," rejoined the Caliph, "are
pearls on string." Then Nur al-Din bowed his head, and made these
couplets:—

  O my friend! reft of rest no repose I command, ✿ And my grief
      is redoubled in this far land:
  Erst I had a father, a kinder ne'er was; ✿ But he died and to
      Death paid the deodand:
  When he went from me, every matter went wrong ✿ Till my heart
      was nighbroken, my nature unmanned:
  He bought me a handmaid, a sweeting who shamed ✿ A wand of the
      willow by Zephyr befanned:
  I lavisht upon her mine heritage, ✿ And spent like a nobleman
      puissant and grand:
  Then to sell her compelled, my sorrow increased; ✿ The parting was
      sore but I mote not gainstand:
  Now as soon as the crier had called her, there bid ✿ A wicked
      old fellow, a fiery brand:
  So I raged with a rage that I could not restrain, ✿ And snatched
      her from out of his hireling's hand;
  When the angry curmudgeon made ready for blows, ✿ And the fire of
      a fight kindled he and his band,
  I smote him in fury with right and with left, ✿ And his hide, till
      well satisfied, curried and tanned:
  Then in fear I fled forth and lay hid in my house, ✿ To escape from
      the snares which my foeman had spanned:
  So the King of the country proclaimed my arrest; ✿ When access to me
      a good Chamberlain fand:
  And warned me to flee from the city afar, ✿ Disappear, disappoint
      what my enemies planned:
  Then we fled from our home 'neath the wing of the night, ✿ And
      sought us a refuge by Baghdad strand:
  Of my riches I've nothing on thee to bestow, ✿ O Fisher, except
      the fair gift thou hast scanned:
  The loved of my soul, and when I from her part, ✿ Know for sure that
      I give thee the blood of my heart.[61]

When he had ended his verse, the Caliph said to him, "O my lord Nur
al-Din, explain to me thy case more fully." So he told him the whole
story from beginning to end, and the Caliph said to him, "Whither dost
thou now intend?" "Allah's world is wide," replied he. Quoth the Caliph,
"I will write thee a letter to carry to the Sultan Mohammed bin Sulayman
al-Zayni, which when he readeth, he will not hurt nor harm thee in
aught."—And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


                Now when it was the Thirty-eighth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Caliph said to Nur al-Din Ali, "I will write thee a letter to carry to
the Sultan Mohammed bin Sulayman al-Zayni, which when he readeth, he
will not hurt nor harm thee in aught," Nur al-Din asked "What! is there
in the world a fisherman who writeth to Kings? Such a thing can never
be!"; and the Caliph answered, "Thou sayest sooth, but I will tell thee
the reason. Know that I and he learnt in the same school under one
schoolmaster, and that I was his monitor. Since that time Fortune
befriended him and he is become a Sultan, while Allah hath abased me and
made me a fisherman; yet I never send to him to ask aught but he doeth
my desire; nay, though I should ask of him a thousand favours every day,
he would comply." When Nur al-Din heard this he said, "Good! write that
I may see." So the Caliph took ink-case and reed-pen and wrote as
follows,—"In the name of Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate!
But after.[62] This letter is written by Harun al-Rashid, son of
Al-Mahdi, to his highness Mohammed bin Sulayman al-Zayni, whom I have
encompassed about with my favour and made my viceroy in certain of my
dominions. The bearer of these presents is Nur al-Din Ali, son of Fazl
bin Khakan the Wazir. As soon as they come to thy hand divest thyself
forthright of the kingly dignity and invest him therewith; so oppose not
my commandment and peace be with thee." He gave the letter to Nur
al-Din, who took it and kissed it, then put it in his turband and set
out at once on his journey. So far concerning him; but as regards the
Caliph, Shaykh Ibrahim stared at him (and he still in fisher garb) and
said, "O vilest of fishermen, thou hast brought us a couple of fish
worth a score of half-dirhams,[63] and hast gotten three dinars for
them; and thinkest thou to take the damsel to boot?" When the Caliph
heard this, he cried out at him, and signed to Masrur who discovered
himself and rushed in upon him. Now Ja'afar had sent one of the
gardener-lads to the doorkeeper of the palace to fetch a suit of royal
raiment for the Prince of the Faithful; so the man went and, returning
with the suit, kissed the ground before the Caliph and gave it him. Then
he threw off the clothes he had on[64] and donned kingly apparel. Shaykh
Ibrahim was still sitting upon his chair and the Caliph tarried to
behold what would come next. But seeing the Fisherman become the Caliph,
Shaykh Ibrahim was utterly confounded and he could do nothing but bite
his finger-ends[65] and say, "Would I knew whether am I asleep or am I
awake!" At last the Caliph looked at him and cried, "O Shaykh Ibrahim,
what state is this in which I see thee?" Thereupon he recovered from his
drunkenness and, throwing himself upon the ground, repeated these
verses:—

   Pardon the sinful ways I did pursue; ✿ Ruth from his lord to
       every slave is due:
   Confession pays the fine that sin demands; ✿ Where, then, is that
       which grace and mercy sue?[66]

The Caliph forgave him and bade carry the damsel to the city-palace,
where he set apart for her an apartment and appointed slaves to serve
her, saying to her, "Know that we have sent thy lord to be Sultan in
Bassorah and, Almighty Allah willing, we will dispatch him the dress of
investiture and thee with it." Meanwhile, Nur al-Din Ali ceased not
travelling till he reached Bassorah, where he repaired to the Sultan's
palace and he shouted a loud shout.[67] The Sultan heard him and sent
for him; and when he came into his presence, he kissed the ground
between his hands and, producing the letter, presented it to him. Seeing
the superscription in the writing of the Commander of the Faithful, the
Sultan rose to his feet and kissed it three times; and after reading it
said, "I hear and I obey Allah Almighty and the Commander of the
Faithful!" Then he summoned the four Kazis[68] and the Emirs and was
about to divest himself of the rule royal, when behold, in came Al-Mu'in
bin Sawi. The Sultan gave him the Caliph's letter and he read it, then
tore it to pieces and putting it into his mouth, chewed it[69] and spat
it out. "Woe to thee," quoth the Sultan (and indeed he was sore
angered); "what induced thee to do this deed?" "Now by thy life! O our
lord the Sultan," replied Mu'in, "this man hath never foregathered with
the Caliph nor with his Wazir; but he is a gallows-bird, a limb of
Satan, a knave who, having come upon a written paper in the Caliph's
hand, some idle scroll, hath made it serve his own end. The Caliph would
surely not send him to take the Sultanate from thee without the imperial
autograph[70] and the diploma of investiture, and he certainly would
have despatched with him a Chamberlain or a Minister. But he hath come
alone and he never came from the Caliph, no, never! never! never!" "What
is to be done?" asked the Sultan, and the Minister answered, "Leave him
to me and I will take him and keep him away from thee, and send him in
charge of a Chamberlain to Baghdad-city. Then, if what he says be sooth,
they will bring us back autograph and investiture; and if not, I will
take my due out of this debtor." When the Sultan heard the Minister's
words he said, "Hence with thee and him too." Al-Mu'in took trust of him
from the King and, carrying him to his own house, cried out to his pages
who laid him flat and beat him till he fainted. Then he let put upon his
feet heavy shackles and carried him to the jail, where he called the
jailor, one Kutayt,[71] who came and kissed the ground before him. Quoth
the Wazir, "O Kutayt, I wish thee to take this fellow and throw him into
one of the underground cells[72] in the prison and torture him night and
day." "To hear is to obey," replied the jailor and, taking Nur al-Din
into the prison, locked the door upon him. Then he gave orders to sweep
a bench behind the door and, spreading on it a sitting-rug and a
leather-cloth, seated Nur al-Din thereon and loosed his shackles and
entreated him kindly. The Wazir sent every day enjoining the jailor to
beat him, but he abstained from this, and so continued to do for forty
days. On the forty-first day there came a present from the Caliph; which
when the Sultan saw, it pleased him and he consulted his Ministers on
the matter, when one of them said, "Perchance this present was for the
new Sultan." Cried Al-Mu'in, "We should have done well had we put him to
death at his first coming;" and the Sultan cried "By Allah, thou hast
reminded me of him! Go down to the prison and fetch him, and I will
strike off his head." "To hear is to obey," replied Al-Mu'in: then he
stood up and said, "I will make proclamation in the city:—Whoso would
solace himself with seeing the beheading of Nur al-Din bin al-Fazl bin
Khakan, let him repair to the palace! So follower and followed, great
and small will flock to the spectacle, and I shall heal my heart and
harm my foe." "Do as thou wilt," said the Sultan. The Wazir went off
(and he was glad and gay), and ordered the Chief of Police to make the
aforementioned proclamation. When the people heard the crier, they all
sorrowed and wept, even the little ones at school and the traders in
their shops; and some strove to get places for seeing the sight, whilst
others went to the prison with the object of escorting him thence.
Presently, the Wazir came with ten Mamelukes to the jail and Kutayt the
jailor asked him, "Whom seekest thou, O our lord the Wazir?"; whereto he
answered, "Bring me out that gallows-bird." But the jailor said, "He is
in the sorriest of plights for the much beating I have given him." Then
he went into the prison and found Nur al-Din repeating these verses:—

  Who shall support me in calamities, ✿ When fail all cures and
      greater cares arise?
  Exile hath worn my heart, my vitals torn; ✿ The World to foes
      hath turned my firm allies.
  O folk, will not one friend amidst you all ✿ Wail o'er my woes, and
      cry to hear my cries?
  Death and its agonies seem light to me, ✿ Since life has lost all
      joys and jollities:
  O Lord of Mustafá,[73] that Science-sea ✿ Sole Intercessor,
      Guide all-ware, all-wise!
  I pray thee free me and my fault forego, ✿ And from me drive mine
      evil and my woe.

The jailor stripped off his clean clothes and, dressing him in two
filthy vests, carried him to the Wazir. Nur al-Din looked at him and saw
it was his foe that sought to compass his death; so he wept and said,
"Art thou, then, so secure against the World? Hast thou not heard the
saying of the poet:—

  Kisras and Cæsars in a bygone day ✿ Stored wealth; where is it, and
      ah! where are they?"

"O Wazir," he continued, "know that Allah (be He extolled and exalted!)
will do whatso He will!" "O Ali," replied he, "thinkest thou to frighten
me with such talk? I mean this very day to smite thy neck despite the
noses of the Bassorah folk and I care not; let the days do as they
please; nor will I turn me to thy counsel but rather to what the poet
saith:—

    Leave thou the days to breed their ban and bate, ✿ And make thee
        strong t' upbear the weight of Fate.

And also how excellently saith another:—

  Whoso shall see the death-day of his foe, ✿ One day surviving, wins
      his bestest wish."

Then he ordered his attendants to mount Nur al-Din upon the bare back of
a mule; and they said to the youth (for truly it was irksome to them),
"Let us stone him and cut him down though our lives go for it." But Nur
al-Din said to them, "Do not so: have ye not heard the saying of the
poet?—

   Needs must I bear the term by Fate decreed, ✿ And when that day be
       dead needs must I die:
   If lions dragged me to their forest-lair, ✿ Safe should I live
       till draw my death-day nigh."

Then they proceeded to proclaim before Nur al-Din, "This is the least of
the retribution for him who imposeth upon Kings with forgeries." And
they ceased not parading him round about Bassorah, till they made him
stand beneath the palace-windows and set him upon the leather of
blood,[74] and the sworder came up to him and said, "O my lord, I am but
a slave commanded in this matter: an thou have any desire, tell it me
that I may fulfil it, for now there remaineth of thy life only so much
as may be till the Sultan shall put his face out of the lattice."
Thereupon Nur al-Din looked to the right and to the left, and before him
and behind him and began improvising:—

   The sword, the sworder and the blood-skin waiting me I sight, ✿
       And cry, Alack, mine evil fate! ah, my calamity!
   How is't I see no loving friend with eye of sense or soul? ✿ What!
       no one here? I cry to all: will none reply to me?
   The time is past that formed my life, my death term draweth nigh,
       ✿ Will no man win the grace of God showing me clemency;
   And look with pity on my state, and clear my dark despair, ✿ E'en
       with a draught of water dealt to cool death's agony?

The people fell to weeping over him; and the headsman rose and brought
him a draught of water; but the Wazir sprang up from his place and smote
the gugglet with his hand and broke it: then he cried out at the
executioner and bade him strike off Nur al-Din's head. So he bound the
eyes of the doomed man and folk clamoured at the Wazir and loud wailings
were heard and much questioning of man and man. At this moment behold,
rose a dense dust-cloud filling sky and wold; and when the Sultan, who
was sitting in the palace, descried this, he said to his suite, "Go and
see what yon cloud bringeth:" Replied Al-Mu'in, "Not till we have
smitten this fellow's neck;" but the Sultan said, "Wait ye till we see
what this meaneth." Now the dust-cloud was the dust of Ja'afar the
Barmecide, Wazir to the Caliph, and his host; and the cause of his
coming was as follows. The Caliph passed thirty days without calling to
mind the matter of Nur al-Din Ali,[75] and none reminded him of it, till
one night, as he passed by the chamber of Anis al-Jalis, he heard her
weeping and singing with a soft sweet voice these lines of the poet:—

   In thought I see thy form when farthest far or nearest near; ✿ And
       on my tongue there dwells a name which man shall ne'er unhear.

Then her weeping redoubled; when lo! the Caliph opened the door and,
entering the chamber, found Anis al-Jalis in tears. When she saw him she
fell to the ground and kissing his feet three times repeated these
lines:—

    O fertile root and noble growth of trunk; ✿ Ripe-fruitful branch
        of never sullied race;
    I mind thee of what pact thy bounty made; ✿ Far be't from thee
        thou should'st forget my case!

Quoth the Caliph, "Who art thou?" and she replied, "I am she whom Ali
bin Khakan gave thee in gift, and I wish the fulfilment of thy promise
to send me to him with the robe of honour; for I have now been thirty
days without tasting the food of sleep." Thereupon the Caliph sent for
Ja'afar and said to him, "O Ja'afar, 'tis thirty days since we have had
news of Nur al-Din bin Khakan, and I cannot but suppose that the Sultan
hath slain him; but, by the life of my head and by the sepulchres of my
forefathers, if aught of foul play hath befallen him, I will surely make
an end of him who was the cause of it, though he be the dearest of all
men to myself! So I desire that thou set out for Bassorah within this
hour and bring me tidings of my cousin, King Mohammed bin Sulayman
al-Zayni, and how he hath dealt with Nur al-Din Ali bin Khakan;" adding,
"If thou tarry longer on the road than shall suffice for the journey, I
will strike off thy head. Furthermore, do thou tell the son of my uncle
the whole story of Nur al-Din, and how I sent him with my written
orders; and if thou find, O my cousin,[76] that the King hath done
otherwise than as I commanded, bring him and the Wazir Al-Mu'in bin Sawi
to us in whatsoever guise thou shalt find them."[77] "Hearing and
obedience," replied Ja'afar and, making ready on the instant, he set out
for Bassorah where the news of his coming had foregone him and had
reached to the ears of King Mohammed. When Ja'afar arrived and saw the
crushing and crowding of the lieges, he asked, "What means all this
gathering?" so they told him what was doing in the matter of Nur al-Din;
whereupon he hastened to go to the Sultan and saluting him, acquainted
him with the cause why he came and the Caliph's resolve, in case of any
foul play having befallen the youth, to put to death whoso should have
brought it about. Then he took into custody the King and the Wazir and
laid them in ward and, giving order for the release of Nur al-Din Ali,
enthroned him as Sultan in the stead of Mohammed bin Sulayman. After
this Ja'afar abode three days in Bassorah, the usual guest-time, and on
the morning of the fourth day, Nur al-Din Ali turned to him and said, "I
long for the sight of the Commander of the Faithful." Then said Ja'afar
to Mohammed bin Sulayman, "Make ready to travel, for we will say the
dawn-prayer and mount Baghdad-wards;" and he replied, "To hear is to
obey." Then they prayed and they took horse and set out, all of them,
carrying with them the Wazir, Al-Mu'in bin Sawi, who began to repent him
of what he had done. Nur al-Din rode by Ja'afar's side and they stinted
not faring on till they arrived at Baghdad, the House of Peace, and
going in to the Caliph told him how they had found Nur al-Din nigh upon
death. Thereupon the Caliph said to the youth, "Take this sword and
smite with it the neck of thine enemy." So he took the sword from his
hand and stepped up to Al-Mu'in who looked at him and said, "I did
according to my mother's milk, do thou according to thine."[78] Upon
this Nur al-Din cast the sword from his hand and said to the Caliph, "O
Commander of the Faithful, he hath beguiled me with his words;" and he
repeated this couplet:—

   By craft and sleight I snared him when he came; ✿ A few fair words
       aye trap the noble-game!

"Leave him then," cried the Caliph and, turning to Masrur said, "Rise
thou and smite his neck." So Masrur drew his sword and struck off his
head. Then quoth the Caliph to Nur al-Din Ali, "Ask a boon of me." "O my
lord," answered he, "I have no need of the Kingship of Bassorah; my sole
desire is to be honoured by serving thee and by seeing thy countenance."
"With love and gladness," said the Caliph. Then he sent for the damsel,
Anis al-Jalis, and bestowed plentiful favours upon them both and gave
them one of his palaces in Baghdad, and assigned stipends and
allowances, and made Nur al-Din Ali bin Fazl bin Khakan, one of his
cup-companions; and he abode with the Commander of the Faithful enjoying
the pleasantest of lives till death overtook him. "Yet (continued
Shahrazad) is not his story in any wise more wondrous than the history
of the merchant and his children." The King asked "And what was that?"
and Shahrazad began to relate the

-----

Footnote 1:

  Supplementary to note 2, p. 2, and note 2, p. 14, vol. i., I may add
  that "Shahrazad," in the Shams al-Loghat, is the P.N. of a King. L.
  Langlès (Les Voyages de Sindibâd Le Marin et La Ruse des Femmes, first
  appended to Savary's Grammar and reprinted 12mo. pp. 161 + 113,
  Imprimerie Royale, Paris, M.D.CCC.XIV) explains it by Le cyprès, la
  beauté de la ville; and he is followed by (A. de Biberstein)
  Kazimirski (Enis el-Djelis, Paris, Barrois, 1847). Ouseley (Orient.
  Collect.) makes Shahrzád=town-born; and others an Arabisation of
  Chehr-ázád (free of face, ingenuous of countenance) the petit nom of
  Queen Humay, for whom see the terminal Essay. The name of the sister,
  whom the Fihrist converts into a Kahramánah, or nurse, vulgarly
  written Dínár-zád, would=child of gold pieces, freed by gold pieces,
  or one who has no need of gold pieces: Dinzád=child of faith and
  Daynázád, proposed by Langlès, "free from debt(!)" I have adopted
  Macnaghten's Dunyazad. "Shahryar," which Scott hideously writes
  "Shier-ear," is translated by the Shams, King of the world, absolute
  monarch and the court of Anushirwan while the Burhán-i-Káti'a renders
  it a King of Kings, and P.N. of a town. Shahr-báz is also the P.N. of
  a town in Samarcand.

Footnote 2:

  Arab. "Malik," here used as in our story-books: "Pompey was a wise and
  powerful King" says the Gesta Romanorum. This King is, as will appear,
  a Regent or Governor under Harun al-Rashid. In the next tale he is
  Viceroy of Damascus, where he is also called "Sultan."

Footnote 3:

  The Bul. Edit. gives the lines as follows:—

   The lance was his pen, and the hearts of his foes ✿ His paper,
       and dipped he in blood for ink;
   Hence our sires entitled the spear Khattíyah, ✿ Meaning that withal
       man shall write, I think.

  The pun is in "Khattíyah" which may mean a writer (feminine) and also
  a spear, from Khatt-Hajar, a tract in the province Al-Bahrayn (Persian
  Gulf), and Oman, where the best Indian bamboos were landed and
  fashioned into lances. Imr al-Kays (Mu'allakah v. 4.) sings of "our
  dark spears firmly wrought of Khattiyan cane;" Al-Busírí of "the brown
  lances of Khatt;" also see Lebid v. 50 and Hamásah pp. 26, 231: Antar
  notes the "Spears of Khatt" and "Rudaynian lances." Rudaynah is said
  to have been the wife of one Samhár, the Ferrara of lances; others
  make her the wife of Al-Ka'azab and hold Samhár to be a town in
  Abyssinia where the best weapons were manufactured. The pen is the
  Calamus or Kalam (reed cut for pen) of which the finest and hardest
  are brought from Java: they require the least nibbing. The rhetorical
  figure in the text is called Husn al-Ta'alíl, our ætiology; and is as
  admirable to the Arabs as it appears silly to us.

Footnote 4:

  "He loves folk" is high praise, meaning something more than
  benevolence and beneficence. Like charity it covers a host of sins.

Footnote 5:

  The sentence is euphuistic.

Footnote 6:

  Arab. "Rubb"=syrup a word Europeanised by the "Rob Laffecteur."

Footnote 7:

  The Septentriones or four oxen and their wain.

Footnote 8:

  The list fatally reminds us of "astronomy and the use of the globes"
  ... "Shakespeare and the musical glasses."

Footnote 9:

  The octave occurs in Night xv. I quote Torrens (p. 360) by way of
  variety.

Footnote 10:

  A courteous formula of closing with the offer.

Footnote 11:

  To express our "change of climate" Easterns say, "change of water and
  air," water coming first.

Footnote 12:

  "The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night" (Psalm
  cxxi. 6). Easterns still believe in the blighting effect of the moon's
  rays, which the Northerners of Europe, who view it under different
  conditions, are pleased to deny. I have seen a hale and hearty Arab,
  after sitting an hour in the moonlight, look like a man fresh from a
  sick bed; and I knew an Englishman in India whose face was temporarily
  paralysed by sleeping with it exposed to the moon.

Footnote 13:

  The negroids and negroes of Zanzibar.

Footnote 14:

  _i.e._ Why not make thy heart as soft as thy sides! The converse of
  this was reported at Paris during the Empire, when a man had by
  mistake pinched a very high personage: "Ah, Madame! if your heart be
  as hard as (what he had pinched) I am a lost man."

Footnote 15:

  "Na'íman" is said to one after bathing or head-shaving: the proper
  reply, for in the East every sign of ceremony has its countersign, is
  "Allah benefit thee!" (Pilgrimage i. II, iii. 285; Lane M. E. chapt.
  viii.; Caussin de Perceval's Arabic Grammar, etc., etc.). I have given
  a specimen (Pilgrimage i., 122) not only of sign and countersign, but
  also of the rhyming repartee which rakes love. Hanien! (pleasant to
  thee! said when a man drinks). Allah pleasure thee (Allah yuhanník
  which Arnauts and other ruffians perverted to Allah yaník, Allah
  copulate with thee); thou drinkest for _ten_!—I am the cock and thou
  art the _hen_! (_i.e._ a passive catamite)—Nay, I am the thick one
  (the penis which gives pleasure) and thou art the _thin_! And so forth
  with most unpleasant pleasantries.

Footnote 16:

  In the old version she is called "The Fair Persian," probably from the
  owner: her name means "The Cheerer of the Companion."

Footnote 17:

  Pronounce "Nooraddeen." I give the name as written in Arabic.

Footnote 18:

  Amongst Moslems, I have said, it is held highly disgraceful when the
  sound of women's cries can be heard by outsiders.

Footnote 19:

  In a case like this, the father would be justified by Rasm (or usage)
  not by Koranic law, in playing Brutus with his son. The same would be
  the case in a detected intrigue with a paternal concubine and, in very
  strict houses, with a slave-girl.

Footnote 20:

  Orientals fear the "Zug" or draught as much as Germans; and with even
  a better reason. Draughts are most dangerous in hot climates.

Footnote 21:

  The Unity of the Godhead and the Apostleship of Mohammed.

Footnote 22:

  This would be done only in the case of the very poor.

Footnote 23:

  Prayers over the dead are not universal in Al-Islam; but when they are
  recited they lack the "sijdah" or prostration.

Footnote 24:

  Or, "Of the first and the last," _i.e._ Mohammed, who claimed (and
  claimed justly) to be the "Seal" or head and end of all Prophets and
  Prophecy. For note that whether the Arab be held inspired or a mere
  impostor, no man making the same pretension has moved the world since
  him. Mr. J. Smith the Mormon (to mention one in a myriad) made a bold
  attempt and failed.

Footnote 25:

  _i.e._ flatterers.

Footnote 26:

  In one matter Moslems contrast strongly with Christians, by most
  scrupulously following the example of their law-giver: hence they are
  the model Conservatives. But (European) Christendom is here, as in
  other things, curiously contradictory: for instance, it still keeps a
  "Feast of the Circumcision," and practically holds circumcision in
  horror. Eastern Christians, however, have not wholly abolished it, and
  the Abyssinians, who find it a useful hygienic precaution, still
  practise it. For ulcers, syphilis and other venereals which are
  readily cured in Egypt become dangerous in the Highlands of Ethiopia.

Footnote 27:

  Arab. "Sabab," the orig. and material sense of the word; hence "a
  cause," etc.

Footnote 28:

  Thus he broke his promise to his father, and it is insinuated that
  retribution came upon him.

Footnote 29:

  "O Pilgrim" (Ya Hájj) is a polite address even to those who have not
  pilgrimaged. The feminine "Hájjah" (in Egypt pronounced "Hággeh") is
  similarly used.

Footnote 30:

  Arab. usúl=roots, _i.e._ I have not forgotten my business.

Footnote 31:

  Moslems from Central and Western North Africa. (Pilgrimage i. 261;
  iii. 7, etc.); the "Jabarti" is the Moslem Abyssinian.

Footnote 32:

  This is a favourite bit of chaff and is to be lengthened out almost
  indefinitely _e.g._ every brown thing is not civet nor every shining
  thing a diamond; every black thing is not charcoal nor every white
  chalk; every red thing is not a ruby nor every yellow a topaz; every
  long-necked thing is not a camel, etc., etc., etc.

Footnote 33:

  He gives him the name of his grandfather; a familiar usage.

Footnote 34:

  Arab. "Ma'janah," a place for making unbaked bricks (Tob=Span. Adobe)
  with chaff and bruised or charred straw. The use of this article in
  rainless lands dates from ages immemorial, and formed the outer walls
  of the Egyptian temple.

Footnote 35:

  Arab. "Barsh," a bit of round matting used by the poor as a seat. The
  Wazir thus showed that he had been degraded to the condition of a
  mat-maker.

Footnote 36:

  The growth (a _Poa_ of two species) which named Wady Halfá (vulg.
  "Halfah"), of which the home public has of late heard perhaps a trifle
  too much. Burckhardt (Prov. 226) renders it "dry reeds"—incorrectly
  enough.

Footnote 37:

  This "Háshimi" vein, as they call it, was an abnormal development
  between the eyes of the house of Abbas, inherited from the great
  grandfather of the Prophet; and the latter had it remarkably large,
  swelling in anger and battle-rage. The text, however, may read "The
  sweat of wrath," etc.

Footnote 38:

  Torrens and Payne prefer "Ilm"=knowledge. Lane has more correctly
  "Alam"=a sign, a flag.

Footnote 39:

  The lines were in Night xi: I have quoted Torrens (p. 379) for a
  change.

Footnote 40:

  Still customary in Tigris-Euphrates land, where sea-craft has not
  changed since the days of Xisisthrus-Noah, and long before.

Footnote 41:

  To cool the contents.

Footnote 42:

  Hence the Khedivial Palace near Cairo "Kasr al-Nuzhah;" literally "of
  Delights;" one of those flimsy new-Cairo buildings which contrast so
  marvellously with the architecture of ancient and even of mediæval
  Egypt, and which are covering the land with modern ruins. Compare
  Mohammed Ali's mosque in the citadel with the older Sultan Hasan. A
  popular tale is told that, when the conquering Turk, Yáwúz Sultan
  Selim, first visited Cairo, they led him to Mosque Al-Ghúri. "This is
  a splendid Ká'ah (saloon)!" quoth he. When he entered Sultan Hasan, he
  exclaimed, "This is a citadel!"; but after inspecting the Mosque
  Al-Mu'ayyad he cried, "'Tis a veritable place of prayer, a fit stead
  for the Faithful to adore the Eternal!"

Footnote 43:

  Arab. gardeners are very touchy on this point. A friend of mine was on
  a similar occasion addressed, in true Egyptian lingo, by an old
  Adam-son, "Ya ibn al-Kalb! beta'mil ay?" (O dog-son, what art thou up
  to?).

Footnote 44:

  "The green palm-stick is of the trees of Paradise;" say the Arabs in
  Solomonic style but not Solomonic words: so our "Spare the rod," etc.

Footnote 45:

  Wayfarers, travellers who have a claim on the kindness of those at
  home: hence Abd al-Rahman al-Burai sings in his famous Ode:—

       He hath claim on the dwellers in the places of their birth,
       Whoso wandereth the world, for he lacketh him a home.

  It is given in my "First Footsteps in East Africa" (pp. 53-55).

Footnote 46:

  The good old man treated the youth like a tired child.

Footnote 47:

  In Moslem writings the dove and turtle-dove are mostly feminine,
  whereas the female bird is always mute and only the male sings to
  summon or to amuse his mate.

Footnote 48:

  An unsavoury comparison of the classical Narcissus with the yellow
  white of a nigger's eyes.

Footnote 49:

  A tree whose coals burn with fierce heat: Al-Hariri (Vth Séance). This
  Artemisia is like the tamarisk but a smaller growth and is held to be
  a characteristic of the Arabian Desert. A Badawi always hails with
  pleasure the first sight of the Ghazá, after he has sojourned for time
  away from his wilds. Mr. Palgrave (i. 38) describes the "Ghadá" as an
  Euphorbia with a woody stem often 5-6 feet high and slender flexible
  green twigs (?), "forming a feathery tuft, not ungraceful to the eye,
  while it affords some shelter to the traveller, and food to his
  camels."

Footnote 50:

  Arab. Sal'am=S(alla) A(llah) a(layhi) wa S(allam); A(llah) b(less)
  h(im) a(nd) k(eep)=Allah keep him and assain!

Footnote 51:

  The ass is held to be ill-omened. I have noticed the braying
  elsewhere. According to Mandeville the Devil did not enter the Ark
  with the Ass, but he left it when Noah said "Benedicite." In his day
  (A.D. 1322) and in that of Benjamin of Tudela, people had seen and
  touched the ship on Ararat, the Judi (Gordiæi) mountains; and this
  dates from Berosus (S.C. 250) who, of course, refers to the Ark of
  Xisisthrus. See Josephus Ant. i. 3, 6; and Rodwell (Koran, pp. 65,
  530).

Footnote 52:

  As would happen at a "Zikr," rogation or litany. Those who wish to see
  how much can be made of the subject will read "Pearls of the Faith, or
  Islam's Rosary, being the ninety-nine beautiful names of Allah"
  (Asmá-el-Husna) etc. by Edwin Arnold: London. Trübner, 1883.

Footnote 53:

  _i.e._ the Sáki, cup-boy or cup-bearer. "Moon-faced," as I have shown
  elsewhere, is no compliment in English, but it is in Persian and
  Arabic.

Footnote 54:

  He means we are "Záhirí," plain honest Moslems, not "Bátiní" gnostics
  (ergò reprobates) and so forth, who disregard all appearances and
  external ordinances. This suggests his opinion of Shaykh Ibrahim and
  possibly refers to Ja'afar's suspected heresy.

Footnote 55:

  This worthy will be noticed in a subsequent page.

Footnote 56:

  Arab. "Lisám," the end of the "Kúfiyah," or head-kerchief passed over
  the face under the eyes and made fast on the other side. This
  mouth-veil serves as a mask (eyes not being recognisable) and defends
  from heat, cold and thirst. I also believe that hooding the eyes with
  this article, Badawi-fashion, produces a sensation of coolness, at any
  rate a marked difference of apparent temperature; somewhat like a pair
  of dark spectacles or looking at the sea from a sandy shore.
  Pilgrimage i., 210 and 346. The woman's "Lisám" (chin-veil) or Yashmak
  is noticed in i., 337.

Footnote 57:

  Most characteristic is this familiarity between the greatest man then
  in the world and his pauper subject. The fisherman alludes to a
  practise of Al-Islam, instituted by Caliph Omar, that all rulers
  should work at some handicraft in order to spare the public treasure.
  Hence Sultan Mu'ayyad of Cairo was a calligrapher who sold his
  handwriting, and his example was followed by the Turkish Sultans
  Mahmúd, Abd al-Majíd and Abd al-Aziz. German royalties prefer
  carpentering and Louis XVI. watch-making.

Footnote 58:

  There would be nothing singular in this request. The democracy of
  despotism levels all men outside the pale of politics and religion.

Footnote 59:

  "Wa'lláhi tayyib!" an exclamation characteristic of the Egyptian
  Moslem.

Footnote 60:

  The pretended fisherman's name Karím=the Generous.

Footnote 61:

  Such an act of generosity would appear to Europeans well-nigh
  insanity, but it is quite in Arab manners. Witness the oft-quoted tale
  of Hátim and his horse. As a rule the Arab is the reverse of generous,
  contrasting badly, in this point, with his cousin the Jew: hence his
  ideal of generosity is of the very highest. "The generous (_i.e._
  liberal) is Allah's friend, aye, though he be a sinner; and the miser
  is Allah's foe, aye, though he be a saint!" Indian Moslems call a
  skin-flint Makhi-chús=fly-sucker (Pilgrimage i. 242).

Footnote 62:

  Arab. Ammá ba'ad (or Wa ba'ad), an initiatory formula attributed to
  Koss ibn Sa'idat al-Iyadi, bishop of Najrán (the town in Al-Yaman
  which D'Herbelot calls Negiran and a famous preacher in Mohammed's
  day) hence "more eloquent than Koss" (Maydáni, Arab. Prov., 189). He
  was the first who addressed letters with the incept, "from A. to B.";
  and the first who preached from a pulpit and who leant on a sword or a
  staff when discoursing. Many Moslems date Ammá ba'ad from the Prophet
  David, relying upon a passage of the Koran (xxxviii. 19).

Footnote 63:

  Arab. "Nusf"=half (a dirham): vulgarly pronounced "nuss," and
  synonymous with the Egypt. "Faddah" (=silver), the Greek Asper, and
  the Turkish "paráh." It is the smallest Egyptian coin, made of very
  base metal and, there being forty to the piastre, it is worth nearly a
  quarter of a farthing.

Footnote 64:

  The too literal Torrens and Lane make the Caliph give the gardener-lad
  the clothes in which he was then clad, forgetting, like the author or
  copier, that he wore the fishermen's lousy suit.

Footnote 65:

  In sign of confusion, disappointment and so forth: not "biting his
  nails," which is European and utterly un-Asiatic.

Footnote 66:

  See lines like these in Night xiii. (i. 136); the sentiment is trite.

Footnote 67:

  The Arab will still stand under his ruler's palace and shout aloud to
  attract his attention. Sayyid Sa'id known as the "Imán of Muskat" used
  to encourage the patriarchal practice. Mohammed repeatedly protested
  against such unceremonious conduct (Koran xciv. 11, etc.). The "three
  times of privacy" (Koran cv. 57) are before the dawn prayer, during
  the Siesta (noon) and after the even-prayer.

Footnote 68:

  The Judges of the four orthodox schools.

Footnote 69:

  That none might see it or find it ever after.

Footnote 70:

  Arab. "Khatt Sharif"=a royal autographical letter: the term is still
  preserved in Turkey, but Europeans will write "Hatt."

Footnote 71:

  Meaning "Little tom-cat"; a dim. of "Kitt" vulg. Kutt or Gutt.

Footnote 72:

  Arab. "Matmúrah"—the Algerine "Matamor"—a "silo," made familiar to
  England by the invention of "Ensilage."

Footnote 73:

  The older "Mustapha"=Mohammed. This Intercession-doctrine is fiercely
  disputed. Pilgrimage ii. 77. The Apostle of Al-Islam seems to have
  been unable to make up his mind upon the subject: and modern opinion
  amongst Moslems is apparently borrowed from the Christians.

Footnote 74:

  Lane (i. 486) curiously says, "The place of the stagnation of blood:"
  yet he had translated the word aright in the Introduction (i. 41). I
  have noticed that the Nat'a is made like the "Sufrah," of well-tanned
  leather, with rings in the periphery, so that a thong passed through
  turns it into a bag. The Sufrah used for provisions is usually yellow,
  with a black border and small pouches for knives or spoons (Pilgrimage
  i. 111).

Footnote 75:

  This improbable detail shows the Caliph's greatness.

Footnote 76:

  "Cousin" is here a term of familiarity, our "coz."

Footnote 77:

  _i.e._ without allowing them a moment's delay to change clothes.

Footnote 78:

  _i.e._ according to my nature, birth, blood, _de race_.




             _TALE OF GHANIM BIN AYYUB[79], THE DISTRAUGHT,
                          THE THRALL O' LOVE._


It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that in times of yore and in
years and ages long gone before, there lived in Damascus a merchant
among the merchants, a wealthy man who had a son like the moon on the
night of his fullness[80] and withal sweet of speech, who was named
Ghanim bin 'Ayyúb surnamed the Distraught, the Thrall o' Love. He had
also a daughter, own sister to Ghanim, who was called Fitnah, a damsel
unique in beauty and loveliness. Their father died and left them
abundant wealth,—And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Thirty-ninth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the merchant left
his two children abundant wealth and amongst other things an hundred
loads[81] of silks and brocades, musk-pods and mother o' pearl; and
there was written on every bale, "This is of the packages intended for
Baghdad," it having been his purpose to make the journey thither, when
Almighty Allah took him to Himself, which was in the time of the Caliph
Harun al-Rashid. After a while his son took the loads and, bidding
farewell to his mother and kindred and townsfolk, went forth with a
company of merchants, putting his trust in Allah Almighty, who decreed
him safety, so that he arrived without let or stay at Baghdad. There he
hired for himself a fair dwelling house which he furnished with carpets
and cushions, curtains and hangings; and therein stored his bales and
stabled his mules and camels, after which he abode a while resting.
Presently the merchants and notables of Baghdad came and saluted him,
after which he took a bundle containing ten pieces of costly stuffs,
with the prices written on them, and carried it to the merchants' bazar,
where they welcomed and saluted him and showed him all honour; and,
making him dismount from his beast, seated him in the shop of the Syndic
of the market, to whom he delivered the package. He opened it and
drawing out the pieces of stuff, sold them for him at a profit of two
dinars on every dinar of prime cost. At this Ghanim rejoiced and kept
selling his silks and stuffs one after another, and ceased not to do on
this wise for a full year. On the first day of the following year he
went, as was his wont, to the Exchange which was in the bazar, but found
the gate shut; and enquiring the reason was told, "One of the merchants
is dead and all the others have gone to follow his bier,[82] and why
shouldst thou not win the meed of good deeds by walking with them?"[83]
He replied "Yes," and asked for the quarter where the funeral was taking
place, and one directed him thereto. So he purified himself by the
Wuzu-ablution[84] and repaired with the other merchants to the oratory,
where they prayed over the dead, then walked before the bier to the
burial-place, and Ghanim, who was a bashful man, followed them being
ashamed to leave them. They presently issued from the city, and passed
through the tombs until they reached the grave where they found that the
deceased's kith and kin had pitched a tent over the tomb and had brought
thither lamps and wax-candles. So they buried the body and sat down
while the readers read out and recited the Koran over the grave; and
Ghanim sat with them, being overcome with bashfulness and saying to
himself "I cannot well go away till they do." They tarried listening to
the Koranic perlection till nightfall, when the servants set supper and
sweetmeats[85] before them and they ate till they were satisfied; then
they washed their hands and again took their places. But Ghanim's mind
was preoccupied with his house and goods, being in fear of robbers, and
he said to himself, "I am a stranger here and supposed to have money: if
I pass the night abroad the thieves will steal my money-bags and my
bales to boot." So when he could no longer control his fear he arose and
left the assembly, having first asked leave to go about some urgent
business; and following the signs of the road he soon came to the
city-gate. But it was midnight and he found the doors locked and saw
none going or coming nor heard aught but the hounds baying and the
wolves howling. At this he exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and there is
no Might save in Allah! I was in fear for my property and came back on
its account, but now I find the gate shut and I am in mortal fear for my
life!" Then he turned back and, looking out for a place where he could
sleep till morning, presently found a Santon's tomb, a square of four
walls with a date-tree in the central court and a granite gateway. The
door was wide open; so he entered and would fain have slept, but sleep
came not to him; and terror and a sense of desolation oppressed him, for
that he was alone amidst the tombs. So he rose to his feet and, opening
the door, looked out and lo! he was ware of a light afar off in the
direction of the city-gate; then walking a little way towards it, he saw
that it was on the road whereby he had reached the tomb. This made him
fear for his life, so he hastily shut the door and climbed to the top of
the date-tree where he hid himself in the heart of the fronds. The light
came nearer and nearer till it was close to the tomb; then it stopped
and he saw three slaves, two bearing a chest and one with a lanthorn, an
adze and a basket containing some mortar. When they reached the tomb,
one of those who were carrying the case said, "What aileth thee O
Sawab?"; and said the other, "What is the matter O Kafur?"[86] Quoth he,
"Were we not here at supper-tide and did we not leave the door open?"
"Yes," replied the other, "that is true." "See," said Kafur, "now it is
shut and barred." "How weak are your wits!" cried the third who bore the
adze and his name was Bukhayt,[87] "know ye not that the owners of the
gardens use to come out from Baghdad and tend them and, when evening
closes upon them, they enter this place and shut the door, for fear lest
the wicked blackmen, like ourselves, should catch them and roast 'em and
eat 'em."[88] "Thou sayest sooth," said the two others, "but by Allah,
however that may be, none amongst us is weaker of wits than thou." "If
ye do not believe me," said Bukhayt, "let us enter the tomb and I will
rouse the rat for you; for I doubt not but that, when he saw the light
and us making for the place, he ran up the date-tree and hid there for
fear of us." When Ghanim heard this, he said in himself, "O curstest of
slaves! May Allah not have thee in His holy keeping for this thy craft
and keenness of wit! There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great! How shall I win free of these
blackamoors?" Then said the two who bore the box to him of the adze,
"Swarm up the wall and open the gate for us, O Bukhayt, for we are tired
of carrying the chest on our necks; and when thou hast opened the gate
thou shalt have one of those we catch inside, a fine fat rat which we
will fry for thee after such excellent fashion that not a speck of his
fat shall be lost." But Bukhayt answered, "I am afraid of somewhat which
my weak wits have suggested to me: we should do better to throw the
chest over the gateway; for it is our treasure." "If we throw it 'twill
break," replied they; and he said, "I fear lest there be robbers within
who murder folk and plunder their goods, for evening is their time of
entering such places and dividing their spoil." "O thou weak o' wits,"
said both the bearers of the box, "how could they ever get in here!"[89]
Then they set down the chest and climbing over the wall dropped inside
and opened the gate, whilst the third slave (he that was called Bukhayt)
stood by them holding the adze, the lanthorn and the hand-basket
containing the mortar. After this they locked the gate and sat down; and
presently one of them said, "O my brethren, we are wearied with walking
and with lifting up and setting down the chest, and with unlocking and
locking the gate; and now 'tis midnight, and we have no breath left to
open, a tomb and bury the box: so let us rest here two or three hours,
then rise and do the job. Meanwhile each of us shall tell how he came to
be castrated and all that befel him from first to last, the better to
pass away our time while we take our rest." Thereupon the first, he of
the lanthorn and whose name was Bukhayt, said, "I'll tell you my tale."
"Say on," replied they; so he began as follows the


                  _TALE OF THE FIRST EUNUCH BUKHAYT._

Know, O my brothers, that when I was a little one, some five years old,
I was taken home from my native country by a slave-driver who sold me to
a certain Apparitor.[90] My purchaser had a daughter three years old,
with whom I was brought up, and they used to make mock of me, letting me
play with her and dance for her[91] and sing to her, till I reached the
age of twelve and she that of ten; and even then they did not forbid me
seeing her. One day I went in to her and found her sitting in an inner
room, and she looked as if she had just come out of the bath which was
in the house; for she was scented with essences and reek of aromatic
woods, and her face shone like the circle of the moon on the fourteenth
night. She began to sport with me, and I with her. Now I had just
reached the age of puberty; so my prickle stood at point, as it were a
huge key. Then she threw me on my back and, mounting astraddle on my
breast, fell a-wriggling and a-bucking upon me till she had uncovered my
yard. When she saw it standing with head erect, she hent it in hand and
began rubbing it upon the lips of her little slit[92] outside her
petticoat-trousers. Thereat hot lust stirred in me and I threw my arms
round her, while she wound hers about my neck and hugged me to her with
all her might, till, before I knew what I did, my pizzle split up her
trousers and entered her slit and did away her maidenhead. When I saw
this, I ran off and took refuge with one of my comrades. Presently her
mother came in to her; and, seeing her in this case, fainted clean away.
However she managed the matter advisedly and hid it from the girl's
father out of good will to me; nor did they cease to call to me and coax
me, till they took me from where I was. After two months had passed by,
her mother married her to a young man, a barber who used to shave her
papa, and portioned and fitted her out of her own monies; whilst the
father knew nothing of what had passed. On the night of consummation
they cut the throat of a pigeon-poult and sprinkled the blood on her
shift.[93] After a while they seized me unawares and gelded me; and,
when they brought her to her bridegroom, they made me her Agha,[94] her
eunuch, to walk before her wheresoever she went, whether to the bath or
to her father's house. I abode with her a long time enjoying her beauty
and loveliness by way of kissing and clipping and coupling with her,[95]
till she died, and her husband and mother and father died also; when
they seized me for the Royal Treasury as being the property of an
intestate, and I found my way hither, where I became your comrade. This,
then, O my brethren, is the cause of my cullions being cut off; and
peace be with you! He ceased and his fellow began in these words the


                  _TALE OF THE SECOND EUNUCH, KAFUR._

Know, O my brothers that, when beginning service as a boy of eight, I
used to tell the slave-dealers regularly and exactly one lie every year,
so that they fell out with one another, till at last my master lost
patience with me and, carrying me down to the market, ordered the
brokers to cry, "Who will buy this slave, knowing his blemish and making
allowance for it?" He did so and they asked him, "Pray, what may be his
blemish?" and he answered, "He telleth me one single lie every year."
Now a man that was a merchant came up and said to the broker, "How much
do they allow for him with his blemish?" "They allow six hundred
dirhams," he replied; and said the other, "Thou shalt have twenty
dirhams for thyself." So he arranged between him and the slave-dealer
who took the coin from him and the broker carried me to the merchant's
house and departed, after receiving his brokerage. The trader clothed me
with suitable dress, and I stayed in his service the rest of my
twelvemonth, until the new year began happily. It was a blessed season,
plenteous in the produce of the earth, and the merchants used to feast
every day at the house of some one among them, till it was my master's
turn to entertain them in a flower-garden without the city. So he and
the other merchants went to the garden, taking with them all that they
required of provaunt and else beside, and sat eating and carousing and
drinking till mid-day, when my master, having need of some matter from
his home, said to me, "O slave, mount the she-mule and hie thee to the
house and bring from thy mistress such and such a thing and return
quickly." I obeyed his bidding and started for the house but, as I drew
near it, I began to cry out and shed tears, whereupon all the people of
the quarter collected, great and small; and my master's wife and
daughters, hearing the noise I was making, opened the door and asked me
what was the matter. Said I, "My master was sitting with his friends
beneath an old wall, and it fell on one and all of them; and when I saw
what had happened to them, I mounted the mule and came hither in haste
to tell you." When my master's daughters and wife heard this, they
screamed and rent their raiment and beat their faces, whilst the
neighbours came around them. Then the wife overturned the furniture of
the house, one thing upon another, and tore down the shelves and broke
the windows and the lattices and smeared the walls with mud and indigo,
saying to me, "Woe to thee, O Kafur! come help me to tear down these
cupboards and break up these vessels and this chinaware,[96] and the
rest of it." So I went to her and aided her to smash all the shelves in
the house with whatever stood upon them, after which I went round about
the terrace-roofs and every part of the place, spoiling all I could and
leaving no china in the house unbroken till I had laid waste the whole,
crying out the while "Well-away! my master!" Then my mistress fared
forth bare-faced wearing a head-kerchief and naught else, and her
daughters and the children sallied out with her, and said to me, "O
Kafur, go thou before us and show us the place where thy master lieth
dead, that we may take him from under the fallen wall and lay him on a
bier and bear him to the house and give him a fine funeral." So I went
forth before them crying out, "Alack, my master!"; and they after me
with faces and heads bare and all shrieking, "Alas! Alas for the man!"
Now there remained none in the quarter, neither man nor woman, nor
epicene, nor youth nor maid, nor child nor old trot, but went with us
smiting their faces and weeping bitterly, and I led them leisurely
through the whole city. The folk asked them what was the matter,
whereupon they told them what they had heard from me, and all exclaimed,
"There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah!" Then said one
of them, "He was a personage of consequence; so let us go to the
Governor and tell him what hath befallen him." When they told the
Governor,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


                Now when it was the Fortieth Night,[97]

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when they told the
Governor, he rose and mounted and, taking with him labourers, with
spades and baskets, went on my track, with many people behind him; and I
ran on before them, howling and casting dust on my head and beating my
face, followed by my mistress and her children keening for the dead. But
I got ahead of them and entered the garden before them, and when my
master saw me in this state, I smiting my face and saying, "Well-away!
my mistress Alas! Alas! Alas! who is left to take pity on me, now that
my mistress is gone? Would I had been a sacrifice for her!", he stood
aghast and his colour waxed yellow and he said to me, "What aileth thee
O Kafur! What _is_ the matter?" "O my lord," I replied, "when thou
sentest me to the house, I found that the saloon-wall had given way and
had fallen like a layer upon my mistress and her children!" "And did not
thy mistress escape?" "No, by Allah, O my master; not one of them was
saved; the first to die was my mistress, thine elder daughter!" "And did
not my younger daughter escape?"; "No, she did not!" "And what became of
the mare-mule I use to ride, is she safe?" "No, by Allah, O my master,
the house-walls and the stable-walls buried every living thing that was
within doors, even to the sheep and geese and poultry, so that they all
became a heap of flesh and the dogs and cats are eating them and not one
of them is left alive." "And hath not thy master, my elder son,
escaped?" "No, by Allah! not one of them was saved, and now there is
naught left of house or household, nor even a sign of them: and, as for
the sheep and geese and hens, the cats and dogs have devoured them."
When my master heard this the light became night before his sight; his
wits were dazed and he so lost command of his senses that he could not
stand firm on his feet: he was as one struck with a sudden palsy and his
back was like to break. Then he rent his raiment and plucked out his
beard and, casting his turband from off his head, buffetted his face
till the blood ran down and he cried aloud, "Alas, my children! Alas, my
wife! Alas, my calamity! To whom ever befel that which hath befallen
me?" The merchants, his friends, also cried aloud at his crying and wept
for his weeping and tore their clothes, being moved to pity of his case;
and so my master went out of the garden, smiting his face with such
violence that from excess of pain he staggered like one drunken with
wine. As he and the merchants came forth from the garden-gate, behold,
they saw a great cloud of dust and heard a loud noise of crying and
lamentation; so they looked and lo! it was the Governor with his
attendants and the townsfolk, a world of people, who had come out to
look on, and my master's family following them, all screaming and crying
aloud and weeping exceeding sore weeping. The first to address my owner
were his wife and children; and when he saw them he was confounded and
laughed[98] and said to them, "How is it with all of you and what befel
you in the house and what hath come to pass to you?" When they saw him
they exclaimed, "Praise be to Allah for thy preservation!" and threw
themselves upon him and his children hung about him crying, "Alack, our
father! Thanks to Allah for thy safety, O our father!" And his wife said
to him, "Art thou indeed well? Laud to Allah who hath shown us thy face
in safety!" And indeed she was confounded and her reason fled when she
saw him, and she asked, "O, my lord, how didst thou escape, thou and thy
friends the merchants?"; and he answered her, "And how fared it with
thee in the house?" Quoth they, "We were all well, whole and healthy,
nor hath aught of evil befallen us in the house, save that thy slave
Kafur came to us, bareheaded with torn garments and howling:—Alas, the
master! Alas the master! So we asked him:—What tidings, O Kafur? and he
answered:—A wall of the garden hath fallen on my master and his friends
the merchants, and they are all crushed and dead!" "By Allah," said my
master, "he came to me but now howling:—Alas, my mistress! Alas, the
children of the mistress!, and said:—My mistress and her children are
all dead, every one of them!" Then he looked round and seeing me with my
turband rent in rags round my neck, howling and weeping with exceeding
weeping and throwing dust upon my head, he cried out at me. So I came to
him and he said, "Woe to thee, O ill-omened slave! O whoreson knave! O
thou damned breed! What mischief thou hast wrought? By Allah! I will
flog thy skin from thy flesh and cut thy flesh from thy bones!" I
rejoined, "By Allah, thou canst do nothing of the kind with me, O my
lord, for thou boughtest me with my blemish; and there are honest men to
bear witness against thee that thou didst so accepting the condition,
and that thou knewest of my fault which is to tell one lie every year.
Now this is only a half-lie, but by the end of the year I will tell the
other half, then will the lie stand whole and complete." "O dog, son of
a dog!", cried my master, "O most accursed of slaves, is this all of it
but a half-lie? Verily if it be a half-lie 'tis a whole calamity! Get
thee from me, thou art free in the face of Allah!" "By Allah," rejoined
I, "if thou free me, I will not free thee till my year is completed and
I have told thee the half-lie which is left. When this is done, go down
with me to the slave-market and sell me as thou boughtest me to whoso
will buy me with my blemish; but thou shalt not manumit me, for I have
no handicraft whereby to gain my living;[99] and this my demand is a
matter of law which the doctors have laid down in the Chapter of
Emancipation."[100] While we were at these words, up came the crowd of
people, and the neighbours of the quarter, men, women and children,
together with the Governor and his suite offering condolence. So my
master and the other merchants went up to him and informed him of the
adventure, and how this was but a half-lie, at which all wondered,
deeming it a whole lie and a big one. And they cursed me and reviled me,
while I stood laughing and grinning at them, till at last I asked, "How
shall my master slay me when he bought me with this my blemish?" Then my
master returned home and found his house in ruins, and it was I who had
laid waste the greater part of it,[101] having broken things which were
worth much money, as also had done his wife, who said to him, "'Twas
Kafur who broke the vessels and chinaware." Thereupon his rage redoubled
and he struck hand upon hand exclaiming, "By Allah! in my life never saw
I a whoreson like this slave; and he saith this is but a half-lie! How,
then, if he had told me a whole lie? He would ruin a city, aye or even
two." Then in his fury he went to the Governor, and they gave me a neat
thing in the bastinado-line and made me eat stick till I was lost to the
world and a fainting-fit came on me; and, whilst I was yet senseless,
they brought the barber who docked me and gelded me[102] and cauterised
the wound. When I revived I found myself a clean eunuch with nothing
left, and my master said to me, "Even as thou hast burned my heart for
the things I held dearest, so have I burnt thy heart for that of thy
members whereby thou settest most store!" Then he took me and sold me at
a profit, for that I was become an eunuch. And I ceased not bringing
trouble upon all, wherever I was sold, and was shifted from lord to lord
and from notable to notable, being sold and being bought, till I entered
the palace of the Commander of the Faithful. But now my spirit is broken
and my tricks are gone from me, so—alas!—are my ballocks. When the two
slaves heard his history, they laughed at him and chaffed him and said,
"Truly thou art skite[103] and skite-son! Thou liedest an odious lie."
Then quoth they to the third slave, "Tell us thy tale." "O sons of my
uncle," quoth he, "all that ye have said is idle: I will tell you the
cause of my losing my testicles, and indeed I deserved to lose even
more, for I futtered both my mistress and my master's eldest son and
heir: but my story is a long one and this is not the time to tell it;
for the dawn, O my cousins, draweth near and if morning come upon us
with this chest still unburied, we shall get into sore disgrace and our
lives will pay for it. So up with you and open the door and, when we get
back to the palace, I will tell you my story and the cause of my losing
my precious stones." Then he swarmed up and dropped down from the wall
inside and opened the door, so they entered and, setting down the
lantern, dug between four tombs a hole as long as the chest and of the
same breadth. Kafur plied the spade and Sawab removed the earth by
baskets-full till they reached the depth of the stature of a man;[104]
when they laid the chest in the hole and threw back the earth over it:
then they went forth and shutting the door disappeared from Ghanim's
eyes. When all was quiet and he felt sure that he was left alone in the
place, his thought was busied about what the chest contained and he said
to himself, "Would that I knew the contents of that box!" However, he
waited till day broke, when morning shone and showed her sheen:
whereupon he came down from the date-tree and scooped away the earth
with his hands, till the box was laid bare and disengaged from the
ground. Then he took a large stone and hammered at the lock till he
broke it and, opening the lid, beheld a young lady, a model of beauty
and loveliness, clad in the richest of garments and jewels of gold and
such necklaces of precious stones that, were the Sultan's country evened
with them, it would not pay their price. She had been drugged with
Bhang, but her bosom, rising and falling, showed that her breath had not
departed. When Ghanim saw her, he knew that some one had played her
false and hocussed her; so he pulled her out of the chest and laid her
on the ground with her face upwards. As soon as she smelt the breeze and
the air entered her nostrils, mouth and lungs, she sneezed and choked
and coughed; when there fell from out her throat a pill of Cretan Bhang,
had an elephant smelt it he would have slept from night to night. Then
she opened her eyes and glancing around said, in sweet voice and
gracious words, "Woe to thee O wind! there is naught in thee to satisfy
the thirsty, nor aught to gratify one whose thirst is satisfied! Where
is Zahr al-Bostan?" But no one answered her, so she turned her and cried
out, "Ho Sabíhah! Shajarat al-Durr! Núr al-Hudá! Najmat al-Subh! be ye
awake? Shahwah, Nuzhah, Halwá, Zarífah, out on you, speak![105]" But no
one answered; so she looked all around and said, "Woe's me! have they
entombed me in the tombs? O Thou who knowest what man's thought enwombs
and who givest compensation on the Day of Doom, who can have brought me
from amid hanging screens and curtains veiling the Harím-rooms and set
me down between four tombs?" All this while Ghanim was standing by: then
he said to her, "O my lady, here are neither screened rooms nor
palace-Haríms nor yet tombs; only the slave henceforth devoted to thy
love, Ghanim bin Ayyub, sent to thee by the Omniscient One above, that
all thy troubles He may remove and win for thee every wish that doth
behove!" Then he held his peace. She was reassured by his words and
cried, "I testify that there is no god but _the_ God, and I testify that
Mohammed is the Apostle of God!"; then she turned to Ghanim and, placing
her hands before her face, said to him in the sweetest speech, "O
blessed youth, who brought me hither? See, I am now come to myself." "O
my lady," he replied, "three slave-eunuchs came here bearing this
chest;" and related to her the whole of what had befallen him, and how
evening having closed upon him had proved the cause of her preservation,
otherwise she had died smothered.[106] Then he asked her who she was and
what was her story, and she answered, "O youth, thanks be to Allah who
hath cast me into the hands of the like of thee! But now rise and put me
back into the box; then fare forth upon the road and hire the first
camel-driver or muleteer thou findest to carry it to thy house. When I
am there, all will be well and I will tell thee my tale and acquaint
thee with my adventures, and great shall be thy gain by means of me." At
this he rejoiced and went outside the tomb. The day was now dazzling
bright and the firmament shone with light and the folk had begun to
circulate; so he hired a man with a mule and, bringing him to the tomb,
lifted the chest wherein he had put the damsel and set it on the mule.
Her love now engrossed his heart and he fared homeward with her
rejoicing, for that she was a girl worth ten thousand gold pieces and
her raiment and ornaments would fetch a mint of money. As soon as he
arrived at his house he carried in the chest and opening it——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


                 Now when it was the Forty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ghanim son of
Ayyub arrived with the chest at his house, he opened it and took out the
young lady, who looked about her and, seeing that the place was
handsome, spread with carpets and dight with cheerful colours and other
deckings; and noting the stuffs up-piled and packed bales and other else
than that, knew that he was a substantial merchant and a man of much
money. Thereupon she uncovered her face and looked at him, and lo! he
was a fair youth; so when she saw him she loved him and said, "O my
lord, bring us something to eat." "On my head and mine eyes!" replied
he; and, going down to the bazar, bought a roasted lamb and a dish of
sweetmeats and with these dry fruits and wax-candles, besides wine and
whatsoever was required of drinking materials, not forgetting perfumes.
With all this gear he returned to the house; and when the damsel saw him
she laughed and kissed him and clasped his neck. Then she began
caressing him, which made his love wax hotter till it got the mastery of
his heart. They ate and drank and each had conceived the fondest
affection; for indeed the two were one in age and one in loveliness; and
when night came on Ghanim bin Ayyub, the Distraught, the Thrall of Love,
rose and lit the wax candles and lamps till the place blazed with
light;[107] after which he produced the wine-service and spread the
table. Then both sat down again, he and she, and he kept filling and
giving her to drink, and she kept filling and giving him to drink, and
they played and toyed and laughed and recited verses; whilst their joy
increased and they clove in closer love each to each (glory be to the
Uniter of Hearts!). They ceased not to carouse after this fashion till
near upon dawn when drowsiness overcame them and they slept where they
were, apart each from other, till the morning.[108] Then Ghanim arose
and going to the market, bought all they required of meat and vegetables
and wine and what not, and brought them to the house; whereupon both sat
down to eat and ate their sufficiency, when he set on wine. They drank
and each played with each, till their cheeks flushed red and their eyes
took a darker hue and Ghanim's soul longed to kiss the girl and to lie
with her and he said, "O my lady, grant me one kiss of that dear mouth:
perchance 'twill quench the fire of my heart." "O Ghanim," replied she,
"wait till I am drunk and dead to the world; then steal a kiss of me,
secretly and on such wise that I may not know thou hast kissed me." Then
she rose and taking off her upper dress sat in a thin shift of fine
linen and a silken head-kerchief.[109] At this passion inflamed Ghanim
and he said to her, "O my lady, wilt thou not vouchsafe me what I asked
of thee?" "By Allah," she replied, "that may not be thine, for there is
written upon my trouser-string[110] a hard word!" Thereupon Ghanim's
heart sank and desire grew on him as its object offered difficulties;
and he improvised these verses:—

 I asked the author of mine ills ✿ To heal the wound with one sweet
     kiss:
 No! No! she cried,[111] for ever no! ✿ But I, soft whispering, urged
     yes:
 Quoth she, Then take it by my leave, ✿ When smiles shall pardon thine
     amiss:
 By force, cried I? Nay, she replied ✿ With love and gladness eke I
     wis.
 Now ask me not what next occurred ✿ Seek grace of God and whist of
     this!
 Deem what thou wilt of us, for love ✿ By calumnies the sweeter is:
 Nor after this care I one jot ✿ Whether my foe be known or not.

Then his affection increased and love-fires rose hotter in his heart,
while she refused herself to him saying, "Thou canst not possess me."
They ceased not to make love and enjoy their wine and wassail, whilst
Ghanim was drowned in the sea of love and longing; but she redoubled in
coyness and cruelty till the night brought on the darkness and let fall
on them the skirts of sleep. Thereupon Ghanim rose and lit the lamps and
wax-candles, and refreshed the room and removed the table; then he took
her feet and kissed them and, finding them like fresh cream, pressed his
face[112] on them and said to her, "O my lady, take pity on one thy love
hath ta'en and thine eyes hath slain; for indeed I were heart-whole but
for thy bane!" And he wept somewhat. "O my lord, and light of my eyes,"
quoth she, "by Allah, I love thee in very sooth and I trust to thy
truth, but I know that I may not be thine." "And what is the obstacle?"
asked he; when she answered, "To-night I will tell thee my tale, that
thou mayst accept my excuse." Then she threw herself upon him and
winding her arms like a necklace about his neck, kissed him and caressed
him and promised him her favours; and they ceased not playing and
laughing till love gat the firmest hold upon both their hearts. And so
it continued a whole month, both passing the night on a single
carpet-bed, but whenever he would enjoy her, she put him off; whilst
mutual love increased upon them and each could hardly abstain from
other. One night, as he lay by her side, and both were warm with wine,
Ghanim passed his hand over her breasts and stroked them; then he
slipped it down to her waist as far as her navel. She awoke and, sitting
up, put her hand to her trousers and finding them fast tied, once more
fell asleep. Presently, he again felt her and sliding his hand down to
her trouser-string, began pulling at it, whereupon she awoke and sat
upright. Ghanim also sat up by her side and she asked him, "What dost
thou want?" "I want to lie with thee," he answered, "and that we may
deal openly and frankly with each other." Quoth she, "I must now declare
to thee my case, that thou mayst know my quality; then will my secret be
disclosed to thee and my excuse become manifest to thee." Quoth he, "So
be it!" Thereat she opened the skirt of her shift and, taking up her
trouser-string, said to him, "O my lord, read what is worked on the flat
of this string:" so he took it in hand, and saw these words broidered on
it in gold, "I AM THINE, AND THOU ART MINE, O COUSIN OF THE
APOSTLE!"[113] When he read this, he withdrew his hand and said to her,
"Tell me who thou art!" "So be it," answered she; "know that I am one of
the concubines of the Commander of the Faithful, and my name is Kut
al-Kulub—the Food of Hearts. I was brought up in his palace and, when I
grew to woman's estate, he looked on me and, noting what share of beauty
and loveliness the Creator had given me, loved me with exceeding love,
and assigned me a separate apartment, and gave me ten slave-girls to
wait on me and all these ornaments thou seest me wearing. On a certain
day he set out for one of his provinces, and the Lady Zubaydah came to
one of the slave-girls in my service and said to her:—I have something
to require of thee. What is it, O my lady? asked she and the Caliph's
wife answered:—When thy mistress Kut al-Kulub is asleep, put this piece
of Bhang into her nostrils or drop it into her drink, and thou shalt
have of me as much money as will satisfy thee. With love and gladness;
replied the girl and took the Bhang from her, being a glad woman because
of the money and because aforetime she had been one of Zubaydah's
slaves. So she put the Bhang in my drink, and when it was night I drank,
and the drug had no sooner settled in my stomach than I fell to the
ground, my head touching my feet, and knew naught of my life but that I
was in another world. When her device succeeded, she bade put me in this
chest, and secretly brought in the slaves and the doorkeepers and bribed
them; and, on the night when thou wast perched upon the date-tree, she
sent the blacks to do with me as thou sawest. So my delivery was at thy
hands, and thou broughtest me to this house and hast entreated me
honourably and with thy kindest. This is my story, and I wot not what is
become of the Caliph during my absence. Know then my condition and
divulge not my case." When Ghanim heard her words and knew that she was
a concubine of the Caliph, he drew back, for awe of the Caliphate beset
him, and sat apart from her in one of the corners of the place, blaming
himself and brooding over his affair and patiencing his heart bewildered
for love of one he could not possess. Then he wept for excess of
longing, and plained him of Fortune and her injuries, and the world and
its enmities (and praise be to Him who causeth generous hearts to be
troubled with love and the beloved, and who endoweth not the minds of
the mean and miserly with so much of it as eveneth a grain-weight!). So
he began repeating:—

    The lover's heart for his beloved must meet ✿ Sad pain, and from
        her charms bear sore defeat:
    What is Loves taste? They asked and answered I, ✿ Sweet is the
        taste but ah! 'tis bitter-sweet.

Thereupon Kut al-Kulub arose and took him to her bosom and kissed him;
for the love of him was firm fixed in her heart, so that she disclosed
to him her secret and all the affection she felt; and, throwing her arms
round Ghanim's neck like a collar of pearls, kissed him again and yet
again. But he held off from her in awe of the Caliph. Then they talked
together a long while (and indeed both were drowned in the sea of their
mutual love); and, as the day broke, Ghanim rose and donned his clothes
and going to the bazar, as was his wont, took what the occasion required
and returned home. He found her weeping; but when she saw him she
checked herself and, smiling through her tears, said, "Thou hast
desolated me, O beloved of my heart. By Allah, this hour of absence hath
been to me like a year![114] I have explained to thee my condition in
the excess of my eager love for thee; so come now near me, and forget
the past and have thy will of me." But he interrupted her crying, "I
seek refuge with Allah! This thing may never be. How shall the dog sit
in the lion's stead? What is the lord's is unlawful to the slave!" So he
withdrew from her, and sat down on a corner of the mat. Her passion for
him increased with his forbearance; so she seated herself by his side
and caroused and played with him, till the two were flushed with wine,
and she was mad for her own dishonour. Then she sang these verses:—

[Illustration]

    The lover's heart is like to break in twain: ✿ Till when these
        coy denials ah! till when?
    O thou who fliest me sans fault of mine, ✿ Gazelles are wont at
        times prove tame to men:
    Absence, aversion, distance and disdain, ✿ How shall young lover
        all these ills sustain?

Thereupon Ghanim wept and she wept at his weeping, and they ceased not
drinking till nightfall, when he rose and spread two beds, each in its
place. "For whom is this second bed?" asked she, and he answered her,
"One is for me and the other is for thee: from this night forth we must
not sleep save thus, for that which is the lord's is unlawful to the
thrall." "O my master!" cried she, "let us have done with this, for all
things come to pass by Fate and Fortune." But he refused, and the fire
was lighted in her heart and, as her longing waxed fiercer, she clung to
him and cried, "By Allah, we will not sleep save side by side!" "Allah
forefend!" he replied and prevailed against her and lay apart till the
morning, when love and longing redoubled on her and distraction and
eager thirst of passion. They abode after this fashion three full-told
months, which were long and longsome indeed, and every time she made
advances to him, he would refuse himself and say, "Whatever belongeth to
the master is unlawful to the man." Now when time waxed tiresome and
tedious to her and anguish and distress grew on her, she burst out from
her oppressed heart with these verses:—

  How long, rare beauty! wilt do wrong to me? ✿ Who was it bade thee
      not belong to me?
  With outer charms thou weddest inner grace ✿ Comprising every point
      of piquancy:
  Passion thou hast infused in every heart, ✿ From eyelids driven
      sleep by deputy:
  Erst was (I wot) the spray made thin of leaf ✿ O Cassia-spray!
      Unlief thy sin I see:[115]
  The hart erst hunted I: how is't I spy ✿ The hunter hunted (fair
      my hart!) by thee?
  Wondrouser still I tell thee aye that I ✿ Am trapped while never up
      to trap thou be!
  Ne'er grant my prayer! For if I grudge thyself ✿ To thee, I grudge
      my _me_ more jealously;
  And cry so long as life belong to me, ✿ Rare beauty how, how long
      this wrong to me?

They abode in this state a long time, and fear kept Ghanim aloof from
her. So far concerning these two; but as regards the Lady Zubaydah,
when, in the Caliph's absence she had done this deed by Kut al-Kulub she
became perplexed, saying to herself, "What shall I tell my cousin when
he comes back and asks for her? What possible answer can I make to him?"
Then she called an old woman, who was about her and discovered her
secret to her saying, "How shall I act seeing that Kut al-Kulub died by
such untimely death?" "O my lady," quoth the old crone, "the time of the
Caliph's return is near; so do thou send for a carpenter and bid him
make thee a figure of wood in the form of a corpse. We will dig a grave
for it midmost the palace and there bury it: then do thou build an
oratory over it and set therein lighted candles and lamps, and order
each and every in the palace to be clad in black.[116] Furthermore
command thy handmaids and eunuchs as soon as they know of the Caliph's
returning from his journey, to spread straw over the vestibule-floors
and, when the Commander of the Faithful enters and asks what is the
matter, let them say:—Kut al-Kulub is dead, and may Allah abundantly
compensate thee for the loss of her![117]; and, for the high esteem in
which she was held of our mistress, she hath buried her in her own
palace. When he hears this he will weep and it shall be grievous to him;
then will he cause perlections of the Koran to be made for her and he
will watch by night at her tomb. Should he say to himself:—Verily
Zubaydah, the daughter of my uncle, hath compassed in her jealousy the
death of Kut al-Kulub; or, if love-longing overcome him and he bid her
be taken out of her tomb, fear thou not; for when they dig down and come
to the image in human shape he will see it shrouded in costly
grave-clothes; and, if he wish to take off the winding-sheet that he may
look upon her, do thou forbid him or let some other forbid him,
saying:—The sight of her nakedness is unlawful. The fear of the world to
come will restrain him and he will believe that she is dead and will
restore the figure to its place and thank thee for thy doings; and thus
thou shalt escape, please Almighty Allah, from this slough of despond."
When the Lady Zubaydah heard her words, she commended the counsel and
gave her a dress of honour and a large sum of money, ordering her to do
all she had said. So the old woman set about the business forthright and
bade the carpenter make her the aforesaid image; and, as soon as it was
finished, she brought it to the lady Zubaydah, who shrouded it and
buried it and built a sepulchre over it, wherein they lighted candles
and lamps, and laid down carpets about the tomb. Moreover she put on
black and she spread abroad in the Harim that Kut al-Kulub was dead.
After a time the Caliph returned from his journey and went up to the
palace, thinking only of Kut al-Kulub. He saw all the pages and eunuchs
and handmaids habited in black, at which his heart fluttered with
extreme fear; and, when he went in to the Lady Zubaydah, he found her
also garbed in black. So he asked the cause of this and they gave him
tidings of the death of Kut al-Kulub, whereon he fell a-swooning. As
soon as he came to himself, he asked for her tomb, and the Lady Zubaydah
said to him, "Know, O Prince of the Faithful, that for especial honour I
have buried her in my own palace." Then he repaired in his
travelling-garb[118] to the tomb that he might wail over her, and found
the carpets spread and the candles and lamps lighted. When he saw this,
he thanked Zubaydah for her good deed and abode perplexed, halting
between belief and unbelief till at last suspicion overcame him and he
gave order to open the grave and take out the body. When he saw the
shroud and would have removed it to look upon her, the fear of Allah
Almighty restrained him, and the old woman (taking advantage of the
delay) said, "Restore her to her place." Then he sent at once for Fakirs
and Koran-readers, and caused perlections to be made over her tomb and
sat by the side of the grave, weeping till he fainted; and he continued
to frequent the tomb and sit there for a whole month,——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Forty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph ceased
not to frequent the tomb for the period of a whole month, at the end of
which time it so happened one day that he entered the Serraglio, after
dismissing the Emirs and Wazirs, and lay down and slept awhile; and
there sat at his head a slave-girl fanning him, and at his feet a second
rubbing and shampooing them. Presently he awoke and, opening his eyes,
shut them again and heard the handmaid at his head saying to her who was
at his feet, "A nice business this, O Khayzarán!" and the other answered
her "Well, O Kazíb al-Bán?"[119] "Verily" said the first, "our lord
knoweth naught of what hath happened and sitteth waking and watching by
a tomb wherein is only a log of wood carved by the carpenter's art."
"And Kut al-Kulub," quoth the other, "what hath befallen her?" She
replied, "Know that the Lady Zubaydah sent a pellet of Bhang by one of
the slave-women who was bribed to drug her; and when sleep overpowered
her she let put her in a chest, and ordered Sawab and Kafur and Bukhayt
to throw her amongst the tombs." "What dost thou say, O Kazíb al-Bán;"
asked Khayzarán, "is not the lady Kut al-Kulub dead?" "Nay, by Allah!"
she answered "and long may her youth be saved from death! but I have
heard the Lady Zubaydah say that she is in the house of a young merchant
named Ghanim bin Ayyub of Damascus, hight the Distraught, the Thrall o'
Love; and she hath been with him these four months, whilst our lord is
weeping and watching by night at a tomb wherein is no corpse." They kept
on talking this sort of talk, and the Caliph gave ear to their words;
and, by the time they had ceased speaking, he knew right well that the
tomb was a feint and a fraud, and that Kut al-Kulub had been in Ghanim's
house for four months. Whereupon he was angered with exceeding anger and
rising up, he summoned the Emirs of his state; and his Wazir Ja'afar the
Barmaki came also and kissed the ground between his hands. The Caliph
said to him in fury; "Go down, O Ja'afar, with a party of armed men and
ask for the house of Ghanim son of Ayyub: fall upon it and spoil it and
bring him to me with my slave-girl, Kut al-Kulub, for there is no help
but that I punish him!" "To hear is to obey," said Ja'afar; and setting
out with the Governor and the guards and a world of people, repaired to
Ghanim's house. Now about that time the youth happened to have brought
back a pot of dressed meat and was about to put forth his hand to eat of
it, he and Kut al-Kulub, when the lady, happening to look out saw
calamity surrounding the house on every side; for the Wazir and the
Governor, the night-guard and the Mamelukes with swords drawn had girt
it as the white of the eye girdeth the black. At this she knew that
tidings of her had reached the Caliph, her lord; and she made sure of
ruin, and her colour paled and her fair features changed and her favour
faded. Then she turned to Ghanim and said to him, "O my love? fly for
thy life!" "What shall I do," asked he, "and whither shall I go, seeing
that my money and means of maintenance are all in this house?"; and she
answered, "Delay not lest thou be slain and lose life as well as
wealth." "O my loved one and light of mine eyes!" he cried, "How shall I
do to get away when they have surrounded the house?" Quoth she, "Fear
not;" and, stripping off his fine clothes, dressed him in ragged old
garments, after which she took the pot and, putting in it bits of broken
bread and a saucer of meat,[120] placed the whole in a basket and
setting it upon his head said, "Go out in this guise and fear not for me
who wotteth right well what thing is in my hand for the Caliph."[121] So
he went out amongst them, bearing the basket with its contents, and the
Protector vouchsafed him His protection and he escaped the snares and
perils that beset him, by the blessing of his good conscience and pure
conduct. Meanwhile Ja'afar dismounted and entering the house, saw Kut
al-Kulub who had dressed and decked herself in splendid raiments and
ornaments and filled a chest with gold and jewellery and precious stones
and rarities and what else was light to bear and of value rare. When she
saw Ja'afar come in, she rose and, kissing the ground before him, said,
"O my lord, the Reed hath written of old the rede which Allah
decreed!"[122] "By Allah, O my lady," answered Ja'afar, "he gave me an
order to seize Ghanim son of Ayyub;" and she rejoined, "O my lord, he
made ready his goods and set out therewith for Damascus and I know
nothing more of him; but I desire thee take charge of this chest and
deliver it to me in the Harim of the Prince of the Faithful." "Hearing
and obedience," said Ja'afar, and bade his men bear it away to the
head-quarters of the Caliphate together with Kut al-Kulub, commanding
them to entreat her with honour as one in high esteem. They did his
bidding after they had wrecked and plundered Ghanim's house. Then
Ja'afar went in to the Caliph and told him all that had happened, and he
ordered Kut al-Kulub to be lodged in a dark chamber and appointed an old
woman to serve her, feeling convinced that Ghanim had debauched her and
slept with her. Then he wrote a mandate to the Emir Mohammed bin
Sulayman al-Zayni, his viceroy in Damascus, to this effect:—"The instant
thou shalt receive this our letter, seize upon Ghanim bin Ayyub and send
him to us." When the missive came to the viceroy, he kissed it and laid
it on his head; then he let proclaim in the bazars, "Whoso is desirous
to plunder, away with him to the house of Ghanim son of Ayyub."[123] So
they flocked thither, when they found that Ghanim's mother and sister
had built him a tomb[124] in the midst of the house and sat by it
weeping for him; whereupon they seized the two without telling them the
cause and, after spoiling the house, carried them before the viceroy. He
questioned them concerning Ghanim and both replied, "For a year or more
we have had no news of him." So they restored them to their place. Thus
far concerning them; but as regards Ghanim, when he saw his wealth
spoiled and his ruin utterest he wept over himself till his heart
well-nigh brake. Then he fared on at random till the last of the day,
and hunger grew hard on him and walking wearied him. So coming to a
village he entered a mosque[125] where he sat down upon a mat and
propped his back against the wall; but presently he sank to the ground
in his extremity of famine and fatigue. There he lay till dawn, his
heart fluttering for want of food; and, owing to his sweating, the
lice[126] coursed over his skin; his breath waxed fetid and his whole
condition was changed. When the villagers came to pray the dawn-prayer,
they found him prostrate, ailing, hunger-lean, yet showing evident signs
of former affluence. As soon as prayers were over, they drew near him;
and, understanding that he was starved with hunger and cold, they gave
him an old robe with ragged sleeves and said to him, "O stranger, whence
art thou and what sickness is upon thee?" He opened his eyes and wept
but returned no answer; whereupon one of them, who saw that he was
starving, brought him a saucer of honey and two barley scones. He ate a
little and they sat with him till sun-rise, when they went to their
work. He abode with them in this state for a month, whilst sickness and
weakliness grew upon him; and they wept for him and, pitying his
condition, took counsel with one another upon his case and agreed to
forward him to the hospital in Baghdad.[127] Meanwhile behold, two
beggar-women, who were none other than Ghanim's mother and sister,[128]
came into the mosque and, when he saw them, he gave them the bread that
was at his head; and they slept by his side that night but he knew them
not. Next day the villagers brought a camel and said to the cameleer,
"Set this sick man on thy beast and carry him to Baghdad and put him
down at the Spital-door; so haply he may be medicined and be healed and
thou shalt have thy hire."[129] "To hear is to comply," said the man. So
they brought Ghanim, who was asleep, out of the mosque and set him, mat
and all, on the camel; and his mother and sister came out among the
crowd to gaze upon him, but they knew him not. However, after looking at
him and considering him carefully they said, "Of a truth he favours our
Ghanim, poor boy!; can this sick man be he?" Presently, he woke and
finding himself bound with ropes on a camel's back, he began to weep and
complain,[130] and the village-people saw his mother and sister weeping
over him, albeit they knew him not. Then they fared forth for Baghdad,
but the camel-man forewent them and, setting Ghanim down at the
Spital-gate, went away with his beast. The sick man lay there till dawn
and, when the folk began to go about the streets, they saw him and stood
gazing on him, for he had become as thin as a toothpick, till the Syndic
of the bazar came up and drove them away from him, saying, "I will gain
Paradise through this poor creature; for if they take him into the
Hospital, they will kill him in a single day."[131] Then he made his
young men carry him to his house, where they spread him a new bed with a
new pillow,[132] and he said to his wife, "Tend him carefully;" and she
replied, "Good! on my head be it!" Thereupon she tucked up her sleeves
and warming some water, washed his hands, feet and body; after which she
clothed him in a robe belonging to one of her slave-girls and made him
drink a cup of wine and sprinkled rose-water over him. So he revived and
complained, and the thought of his beloved Kut al-Kulub made his grief
redouble. Thus far concerning him; but as regards Kut al-Kulub, when the
Caliph was angered against her,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


                 Now when it was the Forty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Caliph
was angered against Kut al-Kulub, he ordered her to a dark chamber where
she abode eighty days, at the end of which the Caliph, happening to pass
on a certain day the place where she was, heard her repeating poetry,
and after she ceased reciting her verse, saying, "O my darling, O my
Ghanim! how great is thy goodness and how chaste is thy nature! thou
didst well by one who did ill by thee and thou guardedst his honour who
garred thine become dishonour, and his Harim thou didst protect who to
enslave thee and thine did elect! But thou shalt surely stand, thou and
the Commander of the Faithful, before the Just Judge, and thou shalt be
justified of him on the Day when the Lord (to whom be honour and glory!)
shall be Kazi and the Angels of Heaven shall be witnesses!" When the
Caliph heard her complaint, he knew that she had been wronged and,
returning to the palace, sent Masrur the Eunuch for her. She came before
him with bowed head and eyes tearful and heart sorrowful; and he said to
her, "O Kut al-Kulub, I find thou accusest me of tyranny and oppression,
and thou avouchest that I have done ill by one who did well by me. Who
is this who hath guarded my honour while I garred his become dishonour?
Who protected my Harim and whose Harim I wrecked?" "He is Ghanim son of
Ayyub," replied she, "for he never approached me in wantonness or with
lewd intent, I swear by thy munificence, O Commander of the Faithful!"
Then said the Caliph, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah! Ask what thou wilt of me, O Kut al-Kulub." "O Prince of the
Faithful!", answered she, "I require of thee only my beloved Ghanim son
of Ayyub." He did as she desired, whereupon she said, "O Lord of the
Moslems, if I bring him to thy presence, wilt thou bestow me on him?";
and he replied, "If he come into my presence, I will give thee to him as
the gift of the generous who revoketh not his largesse." "O Prince of
True Believers," quoth she, "suffer me to go and seek him; haply Allah
may unite me with him:" and quoth he, "Do even as thou wilt." So she
rejoiced and, taking with her a thousand dinars in gold, went out and
visited the elders of the various faiths and gave alms in Ghanim's
name.[133] Next day she walked to the merchants' bazar and disclosed her
object to the Syndic and gave him money, saying, "Bestow this in charity
to the stranger!" On the following Friday she fared to the bazar (with
other thousand dinars) and, entering the goldsmiths' and jewellers'
market-street, called the Chief and presented to him a thousand dinars
with these words, "Bestow this in charity to the stranger!" The Chief
looked at her (and he was the Syndic who had taken in Ghanim) and said,
"O my lady, wilt thou come to my house and look upon a youth, a stranger
I have there and see how goodly and graceful he is?" Now the stranger
was Ghanim, son of Ayyub, but the Chief had no knowledge of him and
thought him to be some wandering pauper, some debtor whose wealth had
been taken from him, or some lover parted from his beloved. When she
heard his words her heart fluttered[134] and her vitals yearned, and she
said to him, "Send with me one who shall guide me to thy house." So he
sent a little lad who brought her to the house wherein was the head
man's stranger-guest and she thanked him for this. When she reached the
house, she went in and saluted the Syndic's wife, who rose and kissed
the ground between her hands, for she knew her. Then quoth Kut al-Kulub,
"Where is the sick man who is with thee?" She wept and replied, "Here is
he, O my lady; by Allah, he is come of good folk and he beareth the
signs of gentle breeding: you see him lying on yonder bed." So she
turned and looked at him: and she saw something like him, but he was
worn and wasted till he had become lean as a toothpick, so his identity
was doubtful to her and she could not be certain that it was he. Yet
pity for him possessed her and she wept saying, "Verily the stranger is
unhappy, even though he be a prince in his own land!"; and his case was
grievous to her and her heart ached for him, yet she knew him not to be
Ghanim. Then she furnished him with wine and medicines and she sat
awhile by his head, after which she mounted and returned to her palace
and continued to visit every bazar in quest of her lover. Meanwhile
Ghanim's mother and sister Fitnah arrived at Baghdad and met the Syndic,
who carried them to Kut al-Kulub and said to her, "O Princess of
beneficent ladies, there came to our city this day a woman and her
daughter, who are fair of favour and signs of good breeding and dignity
are apparent in them, though they be dressed in hair-cloth and have each
one a wallet hanging to her neck; and their eyes are tearful and their
hearts are sorrowful. So I have brought them to thee that thou mayst
give them refuge, and rescue them from beggary, for they are not of
asker-folk and, if it please Allah, we shall enter Paradise through
them." "By Allah, O my master," cried she, "thou makest me long to see
them! Where are they?", adding, "Here with them to me!" So he bade the
eunuch bring them in; and, when she looked on them and saw that they
were both of distinguished beauty, she wept for them and said, "By
Allah, these are people of condition and show plain signs of former
opulence." "O my lady," said the Syndic's wife, "we love the poor and
the destitute, more especially as reward in Heaven will recompense our
love; and, as for these persons, haply the oppressor hath dealt hardly
with them and hath plundered their property and harried their houses."
Then Ghanim's mother and sister wept with sore weeping, remembering
their former prosperity and contrasting it with their present poverty
and miserable condition; and their thoughts dwelt upon son and brother,
whilst Kut al-Kulub wept for their weeping; and they said, "We beseech
Allah to reunite us with him whom we desire, and he is none other but my
son named Ghanim bin Ayyub!" When Kut al-Kulub heard this, she knew them
to be the mother and sister of her lover and wept till a swoon came over
her. When she revived she turned to them and said, "Have no fear and
sorrow not, for this day is the first of your prosperity and the last of
your adversity!" ——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Forty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Kut al-Kulub
had consoled them she bade the Syndic lead them to his house and let his
wife carry them to the Hamman and dress them in handsome clothes and
take care of them and honour them with all honour; and she gave him a
sufficient sum of money. Next day, she mounted and, riding to his house,
went in to his wife who rose up and kissed her hands and thanked her for
her kindness. There she saw Ghanim's mother and sister whom the Syndic's
wife had taken to the Hammam and clothed afresh, so that the traces of
their former condition became manifest upon them. She sat talking with
them awhile, after which she asked the wife about the sick youth who was
in her house and she replied, "He is in the same state." Then said Kut
al-Kulub, "Come, let us go and visit him." So she arose, she and the
Chief's wife and Ghanim's mother and sister, and went in to the room
where he lay and sat down near him. Presently Ghanim bin Ayyub, the
Distraught, the Thrall o' Love, heard them mention the name of Kut
al-Kulub; whereupon life returned to him, emaciated and withered as he
was, and he raised his head from the pillow and cried aloud, "O Kut
al-Kulub!" She looked at him and made certain it was he and shrieked
rather than said, "Yes, O my beloved!" "Draw near to me;" said he, and
she replied, "Surely thou art Ghanim bin Ayyub?"; and he rejoined "I am
indeed!" Hereupon a swoon came upon her; and, as soon as Ghanim's mother
and his sister Fitnah heard these words, both cried out "O our joy!" and
fainted clean away. When they all recovered, Kut al-Kulub exclaimed,
"Praise be to Allah who hath brought us together again and who hath
reunited thee with thy mother and thy sister!" And she related to him
all that had befallen her with the Caliph and said, "I have made known
the truth to the Commander of the Faithful, who believed my words and
was pleased with thee; and now he desireth to see thee," adding, "He
hath given me to thee." Thereat he rejoiced with extreme joy, when she
said, "Quit not this place till I come back" and, rising forthwith,
betook herself to her palace. There she opened the chest which she had
brought from Ghanim's house and, taking out some of the dinars, gave
them to the Syndic saying, "Buy with this money for each of them four
complete suits of the finest stuffs and twenty kerchiefs, and else
beside of whatsoever they require;" after which she carried all three to
the baths and had them washed and bathed and made ready for them
consommés, and galangale-water and cider against their coming out. When
they left the Hammam, they put on the new clothes, and she abode with
them three days feeding them with chicken meats and bouillis, and making
them drink sherbet of sugar candy. After three days their spirits
returned; and she carried them again to the baths, and when they came
out and had changed their raiment, she led them back to the Syndic's
house and left them there, whilst she returned to the palace and craved
permission to see the Caliph. When he ordered her to come in, she
entered and, kissing the ground between his hands, told him the whole
story and how her lord, Ghanim bin Ayyub, yclept the Distraught, the
Thrall o' Love, and his mother and sister were now in Baghdad. When the
Caliph heard this, he turned to the eunuchs and said, "Here with Ghanim
to me." So Ja'afar went to fetch him; but Kut al-Kulub forewent him and
told Ghanim, "The Caliph hath sent to fetch thee before him," and
charged him to show readiness of tongue and firmness of heart and
sweetness of speech. Then she robed him in a sumptuous dress and gave
him dinars in plenty, saying, "Be lavish of largesse to the Caliph's
household as thou goest in to him." Presently Ja'afar, mounted on his
Nubian mule, came to fetch him; and Ghanim advanced to welcome the Wazir
and, wishing him long life, kissed the ground before him. Now the star
of his good fortune had risen and shone brightly; and Ja'afar took him;
and they ceased not faring together, he and the Minister, till they went
in to the Commander of the Faithful. When he stood in the presence, he
looked at the Wazirs and Emirs and Chamberlains, and Viceroys and
Grandees and Captains, and then at the Caliph. Hereupon he sweetened his
speech and his eloquence and, bowing his head to the ground, broke out
in these extempore couplets:—

   May that Monarch's life span a mighty span, ✿ Whose lavish of
       largesse all lieges scan:
   None other but he shall be Kaysar hight, ✿ Lord of lordly hall and
       of haught Divan:
   Kings lay their gems on his threshold-dust ✿ As they bow and salam
       to the mighty man;
   And his glances foil them and all recoil, ✿ Bowing beards aground
       and with faces wan:
   Yet they gain the profit of royal grace, ✿ The rank and station of
       high soldan.
   Earth's plain is scant for thy world of men, ✿ Camp there
       in Kaywán's[135] Empyrean!
   May the King of Kings ever hold thee dear; ✿ Be counsel thine and
       right steadfast plan,
   Till thy justice spread o'er the wide-spread earth ✿ And the near
       and the far be of equal worth.

When he ended his improvisation the Caliph was pleased by it and
marvelled at the eloquence of his tongue and the sweetness of his
speech,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


                 Now when it was the Forty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph, after
marvelling at his eloquence of tongue and sweetness of speech, said to
him, "Draw near to me." So he drew near and quoth the King, "Tell me thy
tale and declare to me thy case." So Ghanim sat down and related to him
what had befallen him in Baghdad, of his sleeping in the tomb and of his
opening the chest after the three slaves had departed, and informed him,
in short, of everything that had happened to him from commencement to
conclusion—none of which we will repeat for interest fails in twice told
tales. The Caliph was convinced that he was a true man; so he invested
him with a dress of honour, and placed him near himself in token of
favour, and said to him, "Acquit me of the responsibility I have
incurred."[136] And Ghanim so did, saying, "O our lord the Sultan, of a
truth thy slave and all things his two hands own are his master's." The
Caliph was pleased at this and gave orders to set apart a palace for him
and assigned to him pay and allowances, rations and donations, which
amounted to something immense. So he removed thither with sister and
mother; after which the Caliph, hearing that his sister Fitnah was in
beauty a very "fitnah,"[137] a mere seduction, demanded her in marriage
of Ghanim who replied, "She is thy handmaid as I am thy slave." The
Caliph thanked him and gave him an hundred thousand dinars, then
summoned the witnesses and the Kazi, and on one and the same day they
wrote out the two contracts of marriage between the Caliph and Fitnah
and between Ghanim bin Ayyub and Kut al-Kulub; and the two marriages
were consummated on one and the same night. When it was morning, the
Caliph gave orders to record the history of what had befallen Ghanim
from first to last and to deposit it in the royal muniment-rooms, that
those who came after him might read it and marvel at the dealings of
Destiny and put their trust in Him who created the night and the day.
Yet, O auspicious King, this story to which thou hast deigned give ear
is on no wise more wondrous than the

-----

Footnote 79:

  Our "Job." The English translators of the Bible, who borrowed Luther's
  system of transliteration (of A.D. 1522), transferred into English the
  German "j" which has the sound of "i" or "y"; intending us to
  pronounce Yacob (or Yakob), Yericho, Yimnites, Yob (or Hiob) and
  Yudah. Tyndall who copied Luther (A.D. 1525-26), preserved the true
  sound by writing Iacob, Ben Iamin and Iudas. But his successors
  unfortunately returned to the German; the initial I having from the
  xiii. century been ornamentally lengthened and bent leftwards became a
  consonant; the public adopted the vernacular sound of "j" (dg) and
  hence our language and our literature are disgraced by such barbarisms
  as "Jehovah" and "Jesus"—Dgehovah and Dgeesus for Yehovah and Yesus.
  Future generations of school-teachers may remedy the evil; meanwhile
  we are doomed for the rest of our days to hear

                      Gee-rusalem! Gee-rusalem! etc.

  Nor is there one word to be said in favour of the corruption except
  that, like the Protestant mispronunciation of Latin and the Erasmian
  ill-articulation of Greek, it has become "English," and has lent its
  little aid in dividing the Britons from the rest of the civilised
  world.

Footnote 80:

  The moon, I repeat, is masculine in the so-called "Semitic" tongues.

Footnote 81:

  _i.e._ camel-loads about lbs. 300; and for long journeys lbs. 250.

Footnote 82:

  Arab. "Janázah," so called only when carrying a corpse; else Na'ash,
  Sarír or Tábút: Irán being the large hearse on which chiefs are borne.
  It is made of plank or stick-work; but there are several varieties
  (Lane, M. E. chapt. xxviii).

Footnote 83:

  It is meritorious to accompany the funeral cortège of a Moslem even
  for a few paces.

Footnote 84:

  Otherwise he could not have joined in the prayers.

Footnote 85:

  Arab. "Halwá" made of sugar, cream, almonds, etc. That of Maskat is
  famous throughout the East.

Footnote 86:

  _i.e._ "Camphor" to a negro as we say "Snowball," by the figure
  antiphrase.

Footnote 87:

  "Little Good Luck," a dim. form of "bakht"=luck, a Persian word
  naturalized in Egypt.

Footnote 88:

  There are, as I have shown, not a few cannibal tribes in Central
  Africa and these at times find their way into the slave market.

Footnote 89:

  _i.e._ After we bar the door.

Footnote 90:

  Arab. "Jáwísh" from Turk. Cháwúsh, Chiaoosh, a sergeant, poursuivant,
  royal messenger. I would suggest that this is the word "Shálish" or
  "Jálish" in Al-Siyúti's History of the Caliphs (p. 501) translated by
  Carlyle "milites," by Schultens "Sagittarius" and by Jarett "picked
  troops."

Footnote 91:

  This familiarity with blackamoor slave-boys is common in Egypt and
  often ends as in the story: Egyptian blood is sufficiently mixed with
  negro to breed inclination for miscegenation. But here the girl was
  wickedly neglected by her mother at such an age as ten.

Footnote 92:

  Arab. "Farj"; hence a facetious designation of the other sex is
  "Zawi'l-furuj" (grammatically Zawátu'l-furúj)=habentes rimam, slit
  ones.

Footnote 93:

  This ancient and venerable practice of inspecting the marriage-sheet
  is still religiously preserved in most parts of the East; and in
  old-fashioned Moslem families it is publicly exposed in the Harem to
  prove that the "domestic calamity" (the daughter) went to her husband
  a clean maid. Also the general idea is that no blood will impose upon
  the experts, or jury of matrons, except that of a pigeon-poult which
  exactly resembles hymeneal blood—when not subjected to the microscope.
  This belief is universal in Southern Europe and I have heard of it in
  England. Further details will be given in Night ccxi.

Footnote 94:

  "Agha" Turk.=sir, gentleman, is, I have said, politely addressed to a
  eunuch.

Footnote 95:

  As Bukhayt tells us he lost only his testes, consequently his _erectio
  et distensio penis_ was as that of a boy before puberty and it would
  last as long as his heart and circulation kept sound. Hence the eunuch
  who preserves his penis is much prized in the Zenanah where some women
  prefer him to the entire man, on account of his long performance of
  the deed of kind. Of this more in a future page.

Footnote 96:

  It is or rather was the custom in Egypt and Syria to range long rows
  of fine China bowls along the shelves running round the rooms at the
  height of six or seven feet, and they formed a magnificent cornice. I
  bought many of them at Damascus till the people, learning their value,
  asked prohibitive prices.

Footnote 97:

  The tale is interesting as well as amusing, excellently describing the
  extravagances still practised in middle-class Moslem families on the
  death of the pater familias. I must again note that Arab women are
  much more unwilling to expose the back of the head covered by the
  "Tarhah" (head-veil) than the face, which is hidden by the "Burka" or
  nose-bag.

Footnote 98:

  The usual hysterical laughter of this nervous race.

Footnote 99:

  Here the slave refuses to be set free and starve. For a master so to
  do without ample reason is held disgraceful. I well remember the
  weeping and wailing throughout Sind when an order from Sir Charles
  Napier set free the negroes whom British philanthropy thus doomed to
  endure if not to die of hunger.

Footnote 100:

  Manumission, which is founded upon Roman law, is an extensive subject
  discussed in the Hidáyah and other canonical works. The slave here
  lays down the law incorrectly, but his claim shows his truly "nigger"
  impudence.

Footnote 101:

  This is quite true to nature. The most remarkable thing in the wild
  central African is his enormous development of "destructiveness." At
  Zanzibar I never saw a slave break a glass or plate without a grin or
  a chuckle of satisfaction.

Footnote 102:

  Arab. "Khassá-ni"; Khusyatáni (vulg.) being the testicles, also called
  "bayzatán" (the two eggs) a _double entendre_ which has given rise to
  many tales. For instance in the witty Persian book "Dozd o Kazi" (The
  Thief and the Judge) a footpad strips the man of learning and offers
  to return his clothes if he can ask him a puzzle in law or religion.
  The Kazi (in folk-lore mostly a fool) fails, and his wife bids him ask
  the man to supper for a trial of wits on the same condition. She
  begins with compliments and ends by producing five eggs which she
  would have him distribute equally amongst the three; and, when he is
  perplexed, she gives one to each of the men taking three for herself.
  Whereupon the "Dozd" wends his way, having lost his booty as his
  extreme stupidity deserved. In the text the eunuch, Kafur, is made a
  "Sandali" or smooth-shaven, so that he was of no use to women.

Footnote 103:

  Arab. "Khara," the lowest possible word: Yá Khara! is the commonest of
  insults, used also by modest women. I have heard one say it to her
  son.

Footnote 104:

  Arab. "Kámah," a measure of length, a fathom, also called "Bá'a." Both
  are omitted in that sadly superficial book, Lane's Modern Egyptians,
  App. B.

Footnote 105:

  Names of her slave-girls which mean (in order), Garden-bloom, Dawn (or
  Beautiful), Tree o' Pearl (P. N. of Saladin's wife), Light of (right)
  Direction, Star o' the Morn, Lewdness (=Shahwah, I suppose this is a
  chaff), Delight, Sweetmeat and Miss Pretty.

Footnote 106:

  This mode of disposing of a rival was very common in Harems. But it
  had its difficulties and on the whole the river was (and is)
  preferred.

Footnote 107:

  An Eastern dislikes nothing more than drinking in a dim dingy place:
  the brightest lights seem to add to his "drinkitite."

Footnote 108:

  He did not sleep with her because he suspected some palace-mystery
  which suggested prudence, she also had her reasons.

Footnote 109:

  This is called in Egypt "Aslah" (Lane M. E. chapt. i.).

Footnote 110:

  It would be a broad ribbon-like band upon which the letters could be
  worked.

Footnote 111:

  In the Arab. "_he_ cried." These "Yes, Yes! and No! No!" trifles are
  very common amongst the Arabs.

Footnote 112:

  Arab. "Maragha" lit. rubbed his face on them like a fawning dog.
  Ghanim is another "softy" lover, a favourite character in Arab tales;
  and by way of contrast, the girl is masterful enough.

Footnote 113:

  Because the Abbaside Caliphs descend from Al-Abbas paternal uncle of
  Mohammed. The text means more explicitly, "O descendant of the
  Prophet's uncle!"

Footnote 114:

  The most terrible part of a _belle passion_ in the East is that the
  beloved will not allow her lover leave of absence for an hour.

Footnote 115:

  It is hard to preserve these wretched puns. In the original we have "O
  spray" (or branch) of capparis-shrub (_aráki_) which has been thinned
  of leaf and fruit (_tujna_, _i.e._, whose fruit, the hymen, has been
  plucked before and not by me) I see thee (_aráka_) against me sinning
  (_tajní_).

Footnote 116:

  Apparently the writer forgets that the Abbaside banners and dress were
  black, originally a badge of mourning for the Imám Ibrahim bin
  Mohammed put to death by the Ommiade Caliph Al-Marwán. The modern
  Egyptian mourning, like the old Persian, is indigo-blue of the
  darkest; but, as before noted, the custom is by no means universal.

Footnote 117:

  Koran, chapt. iv. In the East as elsewhere the Devil quotes Scripture.

Footnote 118:

  A servant returning from a journey shows his master due honour by
  appearing before him in travelling suit and uncleaned.

Footnote 119:

  The first name means "Rattan"; the second "Willow-wand," from the
  "Bán" or "Khiláf" the Egyptian willow (_Salix Ægyptiaca_ Linn.)
  vulgarly called "Safsáf." Forskal holds the "Bán" to be a different
  variety.

Footnote 120:

  Arab. "Ta'ám," which has many meanings: in mod. parlance it would
  signify millet, holcus-seed.

Footnote 121:

  _i.e._ "I well know how to deal with him."

Footnote 122:

  The Pen (title of the Koranic chapt. lxviii.) and the Preserved Tablet
  (before explained).

Footnote 123:

  These plunderings were sanctioned by custom. But a few years ago, when
  the Turkish soldiers mutinied about arrears of pay (often delayed for
  years) the governing Páshá would set fire to the town and allow the
  men to loot what they pleased during a stated time. Rochet
  (_soi-disant_ D'Héricourt) amusingly describes this manœuvre of the
  Turkish Governor of Al-Hodaydah in the last generation (Pilgrimage
  iii. 381).

Footnote 124:

  Another cenotaph whose use was to enable women to indulge in their pet
  pastime of weeping and wailing in company.

Footnote 125:

  The lodging of pauper travellers, as the chapel in Iceland is of the
  wealthy. I have often taken benefit of the mosque, but as a rule it is
  unpleasant, the matting being not only torn but over-populous. Juvenal
  seems to allude to the Jewish Synagogue similarly used:—"in quâ te
  quæro proseuchâ"? (iii. 296) and in Acts iii. we find the lame, blind
  and impotent in the Temple-porch.

Footnote 126:

  This foul sort of vermin is supposed to be bred by perspiration. It is
  an epoch in the civilised traveller's life when he catches his first
  louse.

Footnote 127:

  The Moslem peasant is a kind-hearted man and will make many sacrifices
  for a sick stranger even of another creed. It is a manner of
  "pundonor" with the village.

Footnote 128:

  Such treatment of innocent women was only too common under the
  Caliphate and in contemporary Europe.

Footnote 129:

  This may also mean, "And Heaven will reward thee;" but camel-men do
  not usually accept any drafts upon futurity.

Footnote 130:

  He felt that he was being treated like a corpse.

Footnote 131:

  This hatred of the Hospital extends throughout Southern Europe, even
  in places where it is not justified.

Footnote 132:

  The importance of the pillow (wisádah or makhaddah) to the sick man is
  often recognised in The Nights. "He took to his pillow" is=took to his
  bed.

Footnote 133:

  _i.e._ in order that the reverend men, who do not render such suit and
  service gratis, might pray for him.

Footnote 134:

  The reader will notice in The Nights the frequent mention of these
  physical prognostications, with which mesmerists are familiar.

Footnote 135:

  The Pers. name of the planet Saturn in the Seventh Heaven. Arab.
  "Zuhal"; the Kiun or Chiun of Amos vi. 26.

Footnote 136:

  _i.e._ "Pardon me if I injured thee"—a popular phrase.

Footnote 137:

  A "seduction," a charmer. The double-entendre has before been noticed.




             TALE OF KING OMAR BIN AL-NU'UMAN AND HIS SONS
                       SHARRKAN AND ZAU AL-MAKAN,

      AND WHAT BEFEL THEM OF THINGS SELD-SEEN AND PEREGRINE.[138]


The King asked her, "And what was their story?" and she answered:—It
hath reached me, O auspicious King, that there was in the City of
Safety, Baghdad, before the Caliphate of Abd al-Malik bin Marwán,[139] a
King, Omar bin al-Nu'uman hight, who was of the mighty giants and had
subjected the Chosroes of Persia and the Kaysars of Eastern Rome; for
none could warm himself at his fire;[140] nor could any avail to meet
him in the field of foray and fray; and, when he was an-angered, there
came forth from his nostrils sparks of flame. He had made himself King
over all quarters, and Allah had subjected to him all His creatures; his
word went forth to all great cities and his hosts had harried the
farthest lands. East and West had come under his command with whatsoever
regions lay interspersed between them, Hind and Sind and Sin,[141] the
Holy Land, Al-Hijaz, the rich mountains of Al-Yaman and the archipelagos
of India and China. Moreover, he reigned supreme over the north country
and Diyár Bakr, or Mesopotamia, and over Sudán, the Eastern Negro-land
and the Islands of the Ocean, and all the far famed rivers of the earth,
Sayhún and Jayhún,[142] Nile and Euphrates. He sent envoys and
ambassadors to capitals the most remote, to provide him with true
report; and they would bring back tidings of justice and peace, with
assurance of loyalty and obedience and of prayers in the pulpits for
King Omar bin al-Nu'uman; for he was, O Ruler of the Age, a right noble
King; and there came to him presents of rarities and toll and tribute
from all lands of his governing. This mighty monarch had a son yclept
Sharrkan,[143] who was likest of all men to his father and who proved
himself one of the prodigies of his time for subduing the brave and
bringing his contemporaries to bane and ban. For this his father loved
him with love so great none could be greater, and made him heir to the
kingdom after himself. This Prince grew up till he reached man's estate
and was twenty years old, and Allah subjected His servants to him, by
reason of his great might and prowess in battle. Now his father, King
Omar, had four wives legally married, but Allah had vouchsafed him no
son by them, save Sharrkan, whom he had begotten upon one of them, and
the rest were barren. Moreover he had three hundred and sixty
concubines, after the number of days in the Coptic year, who were of all
nations; and he had furnished for each and every a private chamber
within his own palace. For he had built twelve pavilions, after the
number of the months, each containing thirty private chambers, which
thus numbered three hundred and three score, wherein he lodged his
handmaids: and he appointed according to law for each one her night,
when he lay with her and came not again to her for a full year;[144] and
on this wise he abode for a length of time. Meanwhile his son Sharrkan
was making himself renowned in all quarters of the world and his father
was proud of him and his might waxed and grew mightier; so that he
passed all bounds and bore himself masterfully and took by storm castles
and cities. Presently, by decree of the Decreer, a handmaid among the
handmaids of Omar bin Nu'uman became pregnant; and, her pregnancy being
announced to the Harim, the King was informed thereof; whereupon he
rejoiced with exceeding joy and said, "Haply 'twill be a son, and so all
my offspring will be males!" Then he documented the date of her
conception and entreated her with all manner of kindness. But when the
tidings came to Sharrkan, he was troubled and the matter seemed to him a
sore one and a grievous; and he said, "Verily one cometh who shall
dispute with me the sovereignty:" so quoth he to himself, "If this
concubine bear a male child I will kill it:" but he kept that intention
hidden in his heart. Such was the case with Sharrkan; but what happened
in the matter of the damsel was as follows. She was a Roumiyah, a Greek
girl, by name Sofiyah or Sophia,[145] whom the King of Roum and Lord of
Cæsarea had sent to King Omar as a present, together with great store of
gifts and of rarities: she was the fairest of favour and loveliest of
all his handmaids and the most regardful of her honour; and she was
gifted with a wit as penetrating as her presence was fascinating. Now
she had served the King on the night of his sleeping with her, saying to
him, "O King! I desire of the God of the Heavens that he bless thee this
night with a male child by me, so I may bring him up with the best of
rearing, and enable him to reach man's estate perfect in intelligence,
good manners and prudent bearing"[146]—a speech which much pleased the
King. During her pregnancy she was instant in prayer, fervently
supplicating the Lord to bless her with a goodly male child and make his
birth easy to her; and Allah heard her petition so that after her months
were accomplished she sat safely upon the birth-stool.[147] Now the King
had deputed a eunuch to let him know if the child she should bring forth
were male or female; and in like way his son Sharrkan had sent one to
bring him tidings of the same. In due time Sophia was delivered of a
child, which the midwives examined and found to be a girl with a face
sheenier than the moon. So they announced this to all present in the
room, whereupon the King's messenger carried the news to him; and
Sharrkan's eunuch did the like with his master, who rejoiced with
exceeding joy. But, after the two had departed, quoth Sophia to the
midwives, "Wait with me awhile, for I feel as if there were still
somewhat in my womb." Then she cried out and the pains of child-bed
again took her; and Allah made it easy to her and she gave birth to a
second child. The wise women looked at it and found it a boy like the
full moon, with forehead flower-white, and cheek ruddy-bright with rosy
light; whereupon the mother rejoiced, as did the eunuchs and attendants
and all the company; and Sophia was delivered of the after-birth whilst
all in the palace sent forth the trill of joy.[148] The rest of the
concubines heard it and envied her lot; and the tidings reached Omar son
of Al-Nu'uman, who was glad and rejoiced at the excellent news. Then he
rose and went to her and kissed her head, after which he looked at the
boy; and, bending over him, kissed him, whilst the damsels struck the
tabors and played on instruments of music; and the King gave order that
the boy should be named Zau al-Makan and his sister Nuzhat
al-Zaman.[149] They answered "Hearing and obedience," and did his
bidding; so he appointed wet nurses and dry nurses and eunuchs and
attendants to serve them; and assigned them rations of sugar and
diet-drinks and unguents and else beside, beyond the power of tongue to
rehearse. Moreover the people of Baghdad, hearing that Allah had blessed
their King with issue, decorated the city and made proclamation of the
glad tidings with drum and tom-tom; and the Emirs and Wazirs and high
dignitaries came to the palace and wished King Omar bin al-Nu'uman joy
of his son, Zau al-Makan, and of his daughter Nuzhat al-Zaman, wherefor
he thanked them and bestowed on them dresses of honour and further
favoured them with gifts, and dealt largesse to all, gentle and simple,
who were present. After this fashion he did for four days full told, and
he lavished upon Sophia raiment and ornaments and great store of wealth;
and, every few days he would send a messenger to ask after her and the
new-borns. And when four years had gone by, he provided her with the
wherewithal to rear the two children carefully and educate them with the
best of instructions. All this while his son Sharrkan knew not that a
male child had been born to his father, Omar son of Al-Nu'uman, having
news only that he had been blessed with the birth of Nuzhat al-Zaman;
and they hid the intelligence from him, until days and years had sped
by, whilst he was busied in battling with the brave and fighting
single-handed against the knights. One day, as King Omar was sitting in
his palace, his Chamberlains came in to him and, kissing the ground
before him, said, "O King there be come Ambassadors from the King of
Roum, Lord of Constantinople the Great, and they desire admission to
thee and submission to thy decree: if the King command us to introduce
them we will so do; and, if not, there is no disputing his behest." He
bade them enter and, when they came in, he turned to them and,
courteously receiving them, asked them of their case, and what was the
cause of their coming. They kissed the ground before him and said, "O
King glorious and strong! O lord of the arm that is long! know that he
who despatched us to thee is King Afridun,[150] Lord of Ionia-land[151]
and of the Nazarene armies, the sovereign who is firmly established in
the empery of Constantinople, to acquaint thee that he is now waging
fierce war and fell with a tyrant and a rebel, the Prince of Cæsarea;
and the cause of this war is as follows. One of the Kings of the Arabs
in past time, during certain of his conquests, chanced upon a hoard of
the time of Alexander,[152] whence he removed wealth past compute; and,
amongst other things, three round jewels, big as ostrich eggs, from a
mine of pure white gems whose like was never seen by man. Upon each were
graven characts in Ionian characters, and they have many virtues and
properties, amongst the rest that if one of these jewels be hung round
the neck of a newborn child, no evil shall befal him and he shall
neither wail, nor shall fever ail him as long as the jewel remain
without fail.[153] When the Arab King laid hands upon them and learned
their secrets, he sent to King Afridun presents of certain rarities and
amongst them the three jewels afore mentioned; and he equipped for the
mission two ships, one bearing the treasure and the other men of might
to guard it from any who might offer hindrance on the high seas, albeit
well assured that none would dare waylay his vessels, for that he was
King of the Arabs, and more by token that their course lay over waters
subject to the King of Constantinople and they were bound to his port;
nor were there on the shores of that sea any save the subjects of the
Great King, Afridun. The two ships set out and voyaged till they drew
near our city, when there sallied out on them certain corsairs from that
country and amongst them troops from the Prince of Cæsarea, who took all
the treasures and rarities in the ships, together with the three jewels,
and slew the crews. When our King heard of this, he sent an army against
them, but they routed it; then he marched a second and a stronger but
they put this also to flight, whereupon the King waxed wroth and swore
that he would not go forth[154] against them save in his own person at
the head of his whole army; nor would he turn back from them till he had
left Cæsarea of Armenia[155] in ruins and had laid waste all the lands
and cities over which her Prince held sway. So he sent us to the Lord of
the age and the time, Sultan Omar bin al-Nu'uman, King of Baghdad and of
Khorasan, desiring that he aid us with an army, so may honour and glory
accrue to him; and he hath also forwarded by us somewhat of various
kinds of presents, and of the King's grace he beggeth their acceptance
and the friendly boon of furtherance." Then the Ambassadors kissed the
ground before him——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


                 Now when it was the Forty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that, after the
Ambassadors and retinue from the Constantinopolitan King had kissed the
ground before Omar and had delivered their embassage, they brought out
the presents, which were fifty damsels of the choicest from Græcia-land,
and fifth Mamelukes in tunics of brocade, belted with girdles of gold
and silver, each wearing in his ears hoops of gold with pendants of fine
pearls costing a thousand ducats every one. The girls were adorned in
like fashion and were clad in stuffs worth a treasury of money. When the
King saw them, he rejoiced in them and accepted them; then he bade the
Ambassadors be honourably entreated and, summoning his Wazirs, took
counsel with them of what he should do. Herewith rose up among them a
Wazir, an ancient man, Dandán[156] hight, who kissed the ground before
Omar and said, "O King, there is nothing better to do in this matter
than equip an army valiant and victorious, and set over it thy son
Sharrkan with us as his lieutenants; and this rede commendeth itself to
me on two counts: first, because the King of Roum hath invoked thine
assistance and hath sent thee gifts which thou hast accepted; and,
secondly, because while no enemy dareth attack our country, thine army
may go forth safely and, should it succour the King of Græcia-land and
defeat his foe, the glory will be thine. Moreover, the news of it will
be noised abroad in all cities and countries; and especially, when the
tidings shall reach the Islands of the Ocean and the Kings of Mauritania
shall hear it, they will send thee offerings of rarities and pay thee
tribute of money." The King, pleased by the Wazir's words and approving
his rede, gave him a dress of honour and said to him, "Of the like of
thee should Kings ask counsel, and it seemeth fit that thou shouldst
conduct the van of our army and our son Sharrkan command the main
battle." Then he sent for his son who came and kissed ground before him
and sat down; and he expounded to him the matter, telling him what the
Ambassadors and the Wazir Dandan had said, and he charged him to take
arms and equip himself for the campaign, enjoining him not to gainsay
Dandan in aught he should do. Moreover, he ordered him to pick out of
his army ten thousand horsemen, armed cap-à-pie and inured to onset and
stress of war. Accordingly, Sharrkan arose on the instant, and chose out
a myriad of horsemen, after which he entered his palace and mustered his
host and distributed largesse to them, saying, "Ye have delay of three
days." They kissed the earth before him in obedience to his commands and
began at once to lay in munitions, and provide provisions for the
occasion; whilst Sharrkan repaired to the armouries and took therefrom
whatsoever he required of arms and armour, and thence to the stable
where he chose horses of choice blood and others. When the appointed
three days were ended, the army drew out to the suburbs of Baghdad
city;[157] and King Omar came forth to take leave of his son who kissed
the ground before him and received from the King seven parcels of
money.[158] Then he turned to Dandan and commended to his care the army
of his son; and the Wazir kissed the ground before him and answered, "I
hear and I obey;" and lastly he charged Sharrkan that he should consult
the Wazir on all occasions, which he promised to do. After this, the
King returned to his city and Sharrkan ordered the officers to muster
their troops in battle-array. So they mustered them and their number was
ten thousand horsemen, besides footmen and camp-followers. Then they
loaded their baggage on their beasts and the war-drums beat and the
trumpets blared and the bannerols and standards were unfurled, whilst
Sharrkan mounted horse, with the Wazir Dandan by his side, and the
colours fluttering over their heads. So the host fared forth and stinted
not faring, with the Ambassadors preceding them, till day departed and
night drew nigh, when they alighted and encamped for the night. And as
soon as Allah caused the morn to morrow, they mounted and hied on,
guided by the Ambassadors, for a space of twenty days; and by the night
of the twenty-first they came to a fine and spacious Wady well grown
with trees and shrubbery. Here Sharrkan ordered them to alight and
commanded a three days' halt, so they dismounted and pitched their
tents, spreading their camp over the right and the left slopes of the
extensive valley, whilst the Wazir Dandan and the Ambassadors of King
Afridun pitched in the sole of the Wady.[159] As for Sharrkan, he
tarried behind them for awhile till all had dismounted and had dispersed
themselves over the valley-sides; he then slacked the reins of his
steed, being minded to explore the Wady and to mount guard in his own
person, because of his father's charge and owing to the fact that they
were on the frontier of Græcia-land and in the enemy's country. So he
rode out alone after ordering his armed slaves and his body-guard to
camp near the Wazir Dandan, and he fared on along the side of the valley
till a fourth part of the night was passed, when he felt tired and
drowsiness overcame him, so that he could no longer urge horse with
heel. Now he was accustomed to take rest on horseback; so when slumber
overpowered him, he slept and the steed ceased not going on with him
till half the night was spent and entered one of the thickets[160] which
was dense with growth; but Sharrkan awoke not until his horse stumbled
over wooded ground. Then he started from sleep and found himself among
the trees; and the moon arose and shone brightly over the two horizons,
Eastern and Western. He was startled when he found himself alone in this
place and said the say which ne'er yet shamed its sayer, "There is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!"
But as he rode on, in fear of wild beasts, behold, the moon spread her
glad light over a meadow as if 'twere of the meads of Paradise; and he
heard pleasant voices and a loud noise of talk and laughter captivating
the senses of men. So King Sharrkan alighted and, tying his steed to one
of the trees, went over a little way till he came upon a stream and
heard a woman talking in Arabic and saying, "Now by the truth of the
Messiah, this is not well of you! but whoso utters a word, I will throw
her and truss her up with her own girdle[161]!" He kept walking in the
direction of the sound and when he reached the further side he looked
and behold, a stream was gushing and flowing, and antelopes at large
were frisking and roving, and wild cattle amid the pasture moving, and
birds expressed joy and gladness in their divers tongues, and that place
was purfled with all manner flowers and green herbs, even as a poet
described it in these couplets:—

    Most beautiful is earth in budding bloom, ✿ When lucid waters
        course through plain and wood:
    No work but His th' All-great, th' All-glorious, ✿ Giver of all
        gifts, Giver of all good!

And as Sharrkan considered the place, he saw in it a Christian Monastery
within whose enceinte a castle towered high in air catching the light of
the moon.[162] Through the midst of the convent passed a stream, the
water flowing amongst its gardens; and upon the bank sat the woman whose
voice he had heard, while before her stood ten handmaids like moons and
wearing various sorts of raiment and ornaments that dazed and dazzled
the beholder, high-bosomed virgins, as saith of them the poet in these
couplets:—

 The mead is bright with what is on't ✿ Of merry maidens debonnair:
 Double its beauty and its grace ✿ Those trooping damsels slender-fair:
 Virgins of graceful swimming gait ✿ Ready with eye and lip to ensnare;
 And like the tendril'd vine they loose ✿ The rich profusion of
     their hair:
 Shooting their shafts and arrows from ✿ Beautiful eyes beyond compare;
 Overpowering and transpiercing ✿ Every froward adversaire.

Sharrkan gazed upon the ten girls and saw in their midst a lady like the
moon at fullest, with ringleted hair and forehead sheeny-white, and eyes
wondrous wide and black and bright, and temple-locks like the scorpion's
tail; and she was perfect in essence and attributes, as the poet said of
her in these couplets:—

  She beamed on my sight with a wondrous glance, ✿ And her
      straight slender stature enshamed the lance:
  She burst on my sight with cheeks rosy-red, ✿ Where all manner
      of beauties have habitance:
  And the locks on her forehead were lowering as night ✿ Whence issues
      a dawn-tide of happiest chance.

Then Sharrkan heard her say to the handmaids, "Come ye on, that I may
wrestle with you and gravel you, ere the moon set and the dawn break!"
So each came up to her in turn and she grounded them forthright, and
pinioned them with their girdles, and ceased not wrestling and pitching
them until she had overthrown one and all. Then there turned to her an
old woman who was before her, and the beldam said as in wrath, "O
strumpet, dost thou glory in grounding these girls? Behold I am an old
woman, yet have I thrown them forty times! So what hast thou to boast
of? But if thou have the strength to wrestle with me, stand up that I
may grip thee and set thy head between thy heels!" The young lady smiled
at her words, but she was filled with inward wrath, and she jumped up
and asked, "O my lady Zát al-Dawáhí,[163] by the truth of the Messiah,
wilt thou wrestle with me in very deed, or dost thou jest with me?"; and
she answered, "Yea,"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Forty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the young
lady asked Zat al-Dawahi, "By the truth of the Messiah, wilt wrestle
with me or dost jest?", and she answered, "Yea, I will wrestle with thee
in very deed" (Sharrkan looking on the while), the damsel cried, "Rise
up for the fall an thou have spunk so to do." When the old woman heard
this, she raged with exceeding rage, and her body-hair stood on end like
the bristles of a fretful hedgehog.[164] Then she sprang to her feet,
whilst the damsel stood up to her, and said, "Now by the truth of the
Messiah, I will not wrestle with thee unless I be naked, Mistress
whore!"[165] So she loosed her petticoat-trousers and, putting her hand
under her clothes, tore them off her body; then twisted up a silken
kerchief into cord-shape, girt it round her middle and became as she
were a scald-head Ifritah or a spotted snake. With this she inclined
towards the damsel and said, "Do thou as I have done." All this time,
Sharrkan was gazing at the twain, and laughing at the beldam's loathly
semblance. So the damsel leisurely rose and, taking a sash of Yamani
stuff, passed it twice round her waist, then she tucked up her trousers
and displayed two calves of alabaster carrying a mound of crystal,
smooth and rounded, and a stomach which exhaled musk from its dimples,
as it were a bed of Nu'uman's anemones; and breasts like double
pomegranates. Then the old woman leant towards her, and the two laid
hold either of each, while Sharrkan raised his head Heavenwards and
prayed Allah that the belle might beat the beldam. Presently the young
woman gat beneath the old woman; and, gripping her waist-cloth with the
left and circling her neck with the right hand, hoisted her off the
ground with both; whereupon the old woman strove to free herself and, in
so doing fell on her back arsiversy, with her legs high in air and her
hairy bush between them showed manifest in the moonshine; furthermore
she let fly two great farts[166] one of which blew up the dust from the
earth's face and the other steamed up to the gate of Heaven. Sharrkan
laughed till he fell back upon the ground. Then he arose and, baring his
brand looked right and left, but he saw no one save the old woman
sprawling on her back, and said to himself, "He lied not who named thee
Lady of Calamities! Verily thou knewest her prowess by her performance
upon the others." So he drew near them to hear what should pass between
them. Then the young lady went up to the old one and, throwing a wrapper
of thin silk upon her nakedness, helped her to don her clothes and made
excuses saying, "O my lady Zat al-Dawahi, I intended only to throw thee
and not all this, but thou triedst to twist out of my hands; so laud to
Allah for safety!" She returned her no answer, but rose in her shame and
walked away till out of sight, leaving the handmaids prostrate and
pinioned, with the fair damsel standing amongst them. Quoth Sharrkan to
himself, "Every luck hath its cause. Sleep did not fall upon me nor the
war-horse bear me hither save for my good fortune; for doubtless this
maid and what is with her shall become booty to me." So he made towards
his steed and mounted and heeled[167] him on, when he sped as the shaft
speeds from the bow, and in his hand he still hent his brand bare of
sheath, which he brandished shouting the while his war-cry, "Allah is
All-mighty[168]!" When the damsel saw him she sprang to her feet and,
taking firm stand on the bank of the stream, whose breadth was six ells,
the normal cubits, made one bound and landed clear on the farther
side,[169] where she turned and cried out with a loud voice, "Who art
thou, O thou fellow, that breakest in upon our privacy and pastime, and
that too hanger in hand as if charging a host? Whence camest thou and
whither art thou going? Speak sooth, for truth will stand thee in good
stead, and lie not, for lies come of villein-breed. Doubtless thou hast
wandered this night from thy way, that thou chancedst upon this place
whence escape were the greatest of mercies; for thou art now in an open
plain and, did we shout but a single shout, would come to our rescue
four thousand knights.[170] So tell me what thou wantest; and if thou
wouldst only have us set thee on the right road, we will do so." When
Sharrkan heard her words he replied, "I am a stranger of the Moslems,
who fared forth this night single-handed, seeking for spoil; nor could
this moonlight show me a fairer booty than these ten maidens; so I shall
seize them and rejoin my comrades with them." Quoth she, "I would have
thee know that as for the booty thou hast not come at it; and, as for
the handmaids, by Allah, they shall never be thy spoil. Have I not told
thee that to lie is villein-vile?" Quoth he, "The wise man is he who
taketh warning by others." Thereupon quoth she, "By the truth of the
Messiah, did I not fear that thy death would be on my hands, I would
shout a shout should fill the mead for thee with war steeds and with men
of might, but I take pity upon the stranger. So, if thou seek booty, I
require of thee that thou alight from thy steed and swear to me, by thy
faith, that thou wilt not advance against me aught like arms in hand,
and we will wrestle, I and thou. If thou throw me, set me on thy steed
and take all of us to thy booty; but if I throw thee, thou shalt become
under my command. Swear this to me, for I fear thy treachery: indeed it
hath become a common saw, Where Perfidy is innate there Trust is a
weakly mate. Now an thou wilt swear I will return and draw near to thee
and tackle thee." Answered Sharrkan (and indeed he lusted to seize her
and said in his soul, "Truly she knoweth not that I am a champion of
champions"); "Swear me by what oath thou wilt and by what thou deemest
most binding, and I will not approach thee with aught till thou hast
made thy preparation and sayest:—Draw near that I wrestle with thee. If
thou throw me, I have money wherewithal to ransom myself; and if I throw
thee, 'twill be booty and booty enough for me!" Rejoined the damsel, "I
am content herewith!" and Sharrkan was astounded at her words and said,
"And by the truth of the Apostle (whom Allah bless and keep!) I too am
content on the other part!" Then said she, "Swear to me by Him who
sprite in body dight and dealt laws to rule mankind aright, that thou
wilt not offer me aught of violence save by way of wrestling; else mayst
thou die without the pale of Al-Islam." Sharrkan replied, "By Allah!
were a Kazi to swear me, even though he were a Kazi of the Kazis,[171]
he would not impose upon me such an oath as this!" Then he sware to her
by all she named and tied his steed to a tree; but he was drowned in the
sea of thought, saying in himself, "Praise be to Him who fashioned her
from dirty water!"[172] Then he girt himself and made ready for
wrestling, and said to her, "Cross the stream to me;" but she replied,
"It is not for me to come over to thee: if thou wilt, pass thou over
here to me." "I cannot do that," quoth he, and quoth she, "O boy, I will
come across to thee." So she tucked up her skirts and, leaping, landed
on the other side of the stream by his side; whereupon he drew near to
her and bent him forwards and clapped palms.[173] But he was confounded
by her beauty and loveliness; for he saw a shape which the Hand of Power
had tanned with the dye-leaves of the Jánn, which had been fostered by
the Hand of Beneficence and fanned by the Zephyrs of fair fortune and
whose birth a propitious ascendant had greeted. Then she called out to
him, "O Moslem, come on and let us wrestle ere the break of morning,"
and tucked up her sleeves from a fore-arm like fresh curd, which
illumined the whole place with its whiteness; and Sharrkan was dazzled
by it. Then he bent forwards and clapped his palms by way of challenge,
she doing the like, and caught hold of her, and the two grappled and
gripped and interlocked hands and arms. Presently he shifted his hands
to her slender waist, when his finger tips sank into the soft folds of
her middle, breeding languishment, and he fell a trembling like the
Persian reed in the roaring gale. So she lifted him up and, throwing him
to the ground, sat upon his breast with hips and hinder cheeks like
mounds of sand, for his soul had lost mastery over his senses. Then she
asked him, "O Moslem! the slaying of Nazarenes is lawful to you folk;
what then hast thou to say about being slain thyself?"; and he answered,
"O my lady, thy speech as regards slaying me is not other than unlawful;
for our prophet Mohammed (whom Allah bless and preserve!) prohibited the
slaying of women and children, old men and monks!" "As it was thus
revealed to your Prophet," she replied, "it behoveth us to render the
equivalent of his mercy; so rise. I give thee thy life, for generosity
is never lost upon the generous." Then she got off his breast and he
rose and stood shaking the dust from his head against the owners of the
curved rib, even women; and she said to him, "Be not ashamed; but verily
one who entereth the land of Roum in quest of booty, and cometh to
assist Kings against Kings, how happeneth it that he hath not strength
enough to defend himself from one made out of the curved rib?" "'Twas
not for lack of strength in me," he answered; "nor didst thou throw me
by thy force; it was thy loveliness overthrew me; so if thou wilt grant
me another bout, it will be of thy courtesy." She laughed and said, "I
grant thee thy request: but these handmaids have long been pinioned and
their arms and sides are weary, and it were only right I should loose
them, for haply this next wrestling bout will be long." Then she went to
the slave-girls and, unbinding them, said to them in the tongue of
Greece, "Get ye to some safe place, till I foil this Moslem's lust and
longing for you." So they went away, whilst Sharrkan kept gazing at them
and they kept turning to look at the two. Then each approached the
adversary and he set his breast against hers, but when he felt waist
touch waist, his strength failed him; and she, waxing ware of this,
lifted him with her hands swiftlier than the blinding leven-flash, and
threw him to the ground. He fell on his back,[174] and then she said to
him, "Rise: I give thee thy life a second time. I spared thee in the
first count because of thy Prophet, for that he made unlawful the
slaying of women; and I do so on the second count because of thy
weakliness and the greenness of thine years and thy strangerhood; but I
charge thee, if there be in the Moslem army sent by Omar bin al-Nu'uman
to succour the King of Constantinople, a stronger than thou, send him
hither and tell him of me: for in wrestling there are shifts and trips,
catches and holds, such as the feint or falsing and the snap or first
grip, the hug, the feet-catch, the thigh-bite,[175] the jostle and the
leg-lock." "By Allah, O my lady," quoth Sharrkan (and indeed he was
highly incensed against her), "had I been Master al-Safdí, Master
Mohammed Kimál or Ibn al-Saddí,[176] as they were in their prime, I had
kept no note of these shifts thou mentionest; for O my mistress, by
Allah, thou hast not grassed me by thy strength, but by the
blandishments of thy back-parts; for we men of Mesopotamia so love a
full-formed thigh that nor sense was left me nor foresight. But now, an
thou wish, thou shalt try a third fall with me while my wits are about
me, and this last match is allowed me by the laws of the game which
sayeth the best of three: moreover I have regained my presence of mind."
When she heard his words she said to him, "Hast thou not had a
belly-full of this wrestling, O vanquished one? However come on, an thou
wilt; but know that this must be the last round." Then she bent forward
and challenged him and Sharrkan did likewise, setting to it in real
earnest and being right cautious about the throw: so the two strove
awhile and the damsel found in him a strength such as she had not
observed before and said to him, "O Moslem, thou art now on thy mettle."
"Yes," he replied, "thou knowest that there remaineth to me but this one
round, after which each of us will wend a different way." She laughed
and he laughed too;[177] then she overreached at his thigh and caught
firm hold of it unawares, which made him greet the ground and fall full
on his back. She laughed at him and said, "Art thou an eater of bran?
Thou art like a Badawi's bonnet which falleth off with every touch or
else the Father of Winds[178] that droppeth before a puff of air. Fie
upon thee, O thou poor thing!" adding, "Get thee back to the Moslem army
and send us other than thyself, for thou failest of thews; and proclaim
for us, among the Arabs and Persians, the Turks and Daylamites,[179]
whoso hath might in him, let him come to us." Then she made a spring and
landed on the other side of the stream and said to Sharrkan, laughing,
"Parting with thee is right grievous to me, O my lord; but get thee to
thy mates before dawn, lest the Knights come upon thee and pick thee up
on their lance-points. Thou hast no strength to defend thee against a
woman, so how couldst thou hold thine own amongst men of might and
Knights?" Sharrkan was confounded and called to her (as she turned from
him making towards the convent), "O my lady, wilt thou go away and leave
the miserable stranger, the broken hearted slave of love?" So she turned
to him laughing and said, "What is thy want? I will grant thee thy
prayer." "Have I set foot in thy country and tasted the sweetness of thy
courtesy," replied he, "and shall I return without eating of thy victual
and tasting thy hospitality; I who have become one of thy servitors!"
"None baulk kindliness save the base," she rejoined, "honour us in
Allah's name, on my head and eyes be it! Mount thy steed and ride along
the brink of the stream over against me, for now thou art my guest." At
this Sharrkan was glad and, hastening back to his horse, mounted and
walked him abreast of her, and she kept faring on till they came to a
drawbridge[180] built of beams of the white poplar, hung by pullies and
steel-chains and made fast with hooks and padlocks. When Sharrkan
looked, he saw awaiting her upon the bridge the same ten handmaids whom
she had thrown in the wrestling-bouts; and, as she came up to them, she
said to one in the Greek tongue, "Arise and take the reins of his horse
and conduct him across into the convent." So she went up to Sharrkan and
led him over, much puzzled and perturbed with what he saw, and saying to
himself, "O would that the Wazir Dandan were here with me that his eyes
might look upon these fairest of favours." Then he turned to the young
lady and said to her, "O marvel of loveliness, now I have two claims
upon thee; first the claim of good-fellowship, and secondly for that
thou hast carried me to thy home and offered me thy hospitality. I am
now under thy commandance and thy guidance; so do me one last favour by
accompanying me to the lands of Al-Islam; where thou shalt look upon
many a lion-hearted warrior and thou shalt learn who I am." When she
heard this she was angered and said to him, "By the truth of the
Messiah, thou hast proved thyself with me a man of keen wit; but now I
see what mischief there is in thy heart, and how thou canst permit
thyself a speech which proveth thy traitorous intent. How should I do as
thou sayest, when I wot that if I came to that King of yours, Omar bin
al-Nu'uman, I should never get free from him? For truly he hath not the
like of me or behind his city walls or within his palace-halls, Lord of
Baghdad and of Khorasan though he be, who hath built for himself twelve
pavilions, in number as the months of the year, and in each a concubine
after the number of the days; and if I come to him he would not prove
shy of me, for your folk believe I am lawful to have and to hold as is
said in your writ:—Or those women whom your right hand shall possess as
slaves.[181] So how canst thou speak thus to me? As for thy saying:—Thou
shalt look upon the braves of the Moslems, by the truth of the Messiah,
thou sayest that which is not true, for I saw your army when it reached
our land, these two days ago; and I did not see that your ordinance was
the ordinance of Kings, but I beheld only a rabble of tribesmen gathered
together. And as to thy words:—Thou shalt know who I am, I did not do
thee kindness because of thy dignity but out of pride in myself; and the
like of thee should not talk thus to the like of me, even wert thou
Sharrkan, Omar bin al-Nu'uman's son, the prowest name in these days!"
"Knowest thou Sharrkan?" asked he; and she answered "Yes! and I know of
his coming with an army numbering ten thousand horsemen; also that he
was sent by his sire with this force to gain prevalence for the King of
Constantinople." "O my lady," said Sharrkan, "I adjure thee by thy
religion, tell me the cause of all this, that sooth may appear to me
clear of untruth, and with whom the fault lies." "Now by the virtue of
thy faith," she replied, "did I not fear lest the news of me be bruited
abroad that I am of the daughters of Roum, I would adventure myself and
sally forth single-handed against the ten thousand horsemen and slay
their leader, the Wazir Dandan and vanquish their champion
Sharrkan.[182] Nor would aught of shame accrue to me thereby, for I have
read books and studied the rules of good breeding in the language of the
Arabs. But I have no need to vaunt my own prowess to thee, more by token
as thou hast proved in thy proper person my skill and strength in
wrestling; and thou hast learnt my superiority over other women. Nor,
indeed, had Sharrkan himself been here this night and it were said to
him:—Clear this stream, could he have done it; and I only long and lust
that the Messiah would throw him into my hands in this very convent,
that I might go forth to him in the habit of a man and drag him from his
saddle-seat and make him my captive and lay him in bilboes."——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

[Illustration]


                Now when it was the Forty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Nazarene
damsel said to Sharrkan (and he listening impatiently enow), "Verily if
Sharrkan fell into my hands, I would go forth to him in the habit of a
man and drag him from his saddle-seat and make him my captive and lay
him in bilboes," pride and passion and knightly jealousy took possession
of him and he desired to discover and declare himself and to lay on
load; but her loveliness restrained him and he began repeating:—

        An faulty of one fault the Beauty prove, ✿ Her charms a
            thousand advocates shall move.

So she went up and Sharrkan after her; and, when he saw the maiden's
back and hinder cheeks that clashed against each other, like rollers in
the rolling sea, he extemporised these couplets:—

 For her sins is a pleader that brow, ✿ And all hearts its fair
     pleading must trow:
 When I saw it I cried, "To-night ✿ The moon at its fullest doth show;
 Tho' Balkís' own Ifrit[183] try a bout, ✿ Spite his force she
     would deal him a throw.

The two fared on till they reached a gate over which rose a marble
archway. This she opened and ushered Sharrkan into a long vestibule,
vaulted with ten connected arches, from each of which hung a crystal
lamp glistening like a spark of fire. The handmaids met her at the
further end bearing wax candles of goodly perfume, and wearing on their
heads golden fillets crusted with all manner bezel-gems,[184] and went
on before her (Sharrkan still following), till they reached the inner
convent. There the Moslem saw couches and sofas ranged all around, one
opposite the other and all overhung with curtains flowered in gold. The
monastery floor was paved with every kind of vari-coloured marbles and
mosaic-work, and in the midst stood a basin that held four-and-twenty
jetting fountains of gold, whence the water ran like molten silver;
whilst at the upper end stood a throne spread with silks fit only for
Kings. Then said the damsel, "Ascend, O my lord, this throne." So he
went up to it and sat down and she withdrew to remain absent for some
time. Sharrkan asked of her from one of the servants who answered him,
"She hath gone to her dormitory; but we will serve thee even as she
ordered." So they set before him viands of rare varieties, and he ate
his sufficiency, when they brought him a basin of gold and an ewer of
silver, and he washed his hands. Then his thoughts reverted to his army,
knowing not what had befallen it in his absence and calling to mind also
how he had forgotton his father's injunctions: so he was troubled about
his case, repenting of what he had done till the dawn broke and the day
appeared; when he lamented and sighed and became drowned in the sea of
sadness and repeated:—

  I am not lost to prudence, but indeed ✿ Here I'm bewildered, what
      shall be my rede?
  Would any aid me in mine ails of love, ✿ By my own might and
      sleight would I be free'd:
  But ah! my heart is lost and passion-shent: ✿ To none save Allah can
      I trust my need!

When he ended his verse behold, there came up to him a rare show and a
fair, more than twenty maidens like crescents encompassing the young
lady, who shone in their midst as the full moon among the constellations
guarding and girding her. She was clad in brocades befitting Kings; her
breasts were like twin pomegranates, a woven zone set with all kinds of
jewels tightly clasped her waist which expanded below into jutting hips;
and her hinder cheeks stood out as a mound of crystal[185] supporting a
silvern shaft. When Sharrkan looked at her his wits went nigh to fly
away from him with delight; and he forgot army and Wazir as he gazed on
her fair head decked and dight with a net-work of pearls set off by
divers sorts of gems. Handmaids on her right and handmaids on her left
bore her train, as she paced with dainty graceful gait in all the pride
of seemlihead. He sprang to his feet seeing such beauty and loveliness,
and cried aloud, "Beware and beware of that zone rarely fair!" and broke
out into these couplets:—

  With heavy back-parts, high breasts delicate, ✿ And lissome form
      that sways with swimming gait,
  She deftly hides love-longing in her breast; ✿ But I may never hide
      its ban and bate:
  While hosts of followers her steps precede,[186] ✿ Like pearls
      now necklaced and now separate.

She gazed upon him for a long time and considered him till she was
assured of him, when she came up to him and said, "In very sooth the
place is honoured and illumined by thee, O Sharrkan! How sped thy night,
O hero, after we went away and left thee?"; adding, "Verily lying is a
vile thing and a shameful, especially in great Kings! and thou art
Crown-Prince Sharrkan, son and heir of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman; so
henceforth make no secret of thy rank and condition, nor let me hear
aught from thee but the truth; for leasing bequeatheth hate and despite.
And as thou art pierced by the shaft of Fate, be resignation thine and
abide content to wait." When he heard her words he saw that artifice
availed him naught and he acknowledged the truth, saying, "I am
Sharrkan, bin Omar bin al-Nu'uman, whom fortune hath afflicted, and cast
into this place; so whatso thou willest, do it in my case!" She hung her
head groundwards a long while, then turned to him and said, "Be of good
cheer and let thine eyes be cool and clear;[187] for thou art the guest
of my hospitality, and bread-and-salt hath made a tie between me and
thee; wherefore thou art in my ward and under my safeguard. Have no fear
for, by the truth of the Messiah, if all on earth sought to do thee hurt
they should not come at thee, till life had left my body for thy sake:
indeed thou art now under the charge of the Messiah and of me." Hereat
she sat her down by his side and fell to playing with him, till his
alarm subsided and he knew that had she desired to slay him, she would
have done so during the past night. Presently she bespoke in the Grecian
tongue one of her slave-girls, who went away and soon came back bringing
a beaker and a tray of food; but Sharrkan abstained from eating and said
to himself, "Haply she hath put somewhat in this meat." She knew what
was in his thought; so she turned to him and said, "By the truth of the
Messiah, the case is not on such wise, nor is there aught in this meat
of what thou suspectest! Had my mind been set on slaying thee, I had
slain thee ere now." Then she walked up to the tray and ate of every
dish a mouthful; whereupon Sharrkan came forward and ate too. She was
pleased at this and both ate till they were satisfied. They washed their
hands and after that she rose and ordered a handmaid to bring perfumes
and herbs of sweet savour, wines of all colours and kinds and a
wine-service with vessels of gold, silver and crystal. She filled a
first goblet and drank it off before offering it to him, even as she had
done with the food: then she downed a second and handed it to him. He
drank and she said to him, "O Moslem, see how thou art here in all
solace and delight of life!" And she ceased not to drink and ply him
with drink, till he took leave of his wits,——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day, and ceased saying her permitted say.


                 Now when it was the Forty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the damsel ceased
not to drink and ply Sharrkan with drink till he took leave of his wits,
for the wine and the intoxication of love he bore her. Presently she
said to the slave-girl, "O Marjánah[188]! bring us some instruments of
music!" "To hear is to obey," said the handmaid and going out, returned
in the twinkling of an eye with a Damascus lute,[189] a Persian harp, a
Tartar pipe, and an Egyptian dulcimer. The young lady took the lute and,
after tuning each several string, began in gentle undersong to sing,
softer, than zephyr's wing and sweeter than Tasmin[190]-spring, with
heart safe and secure from everything the couplets following:—

  Allah assain those eyne! What streams of blood they shed! ✿ How many
      an arrowy glance those lids of thine have sped.
  I love all lovers who to lovers show them dure; ✿ Twere wrong to
      rue the love in wrong-head born and bred:
  Haply fall hapless eye for thee no sleeping kens! ✿ Heaven help
      the hapless heart by force of thee misled!
  Thou doomest me to death who art my king, and I ✿ Ransom with life
      the deemster who would doom me dead.

Thereupon each and every of the maidens rose up and taking an
instrument, played and recited couplets in the Roumi tongue; then their
mistress sang also and seeing Sharrkan in ecstasies asked him, "O
Moslem, dost thou understand what I say?"; and he answered, "Nay, my
ecstasy cometh from the beauty of thy finger-tips." She laughed and
continued, "If I sing to thee in Arabic what wouldst thou do?" "I should
no longer," quoth he, "be master of my senses." Then she took an
instrument and, changing the measure, began singing these verses:—

 The smack of parting's myrrh to me, ✿ How, then, bear patience' aloë?
 I'm girt by ills in trinity ✿ Severance, distance, cruelty!
 My freedom stole that fairest she, ✿ And parting irks me bitterly.

When she ended her verse, she looked at Sharrkan and found him lost to
existence, and he lay for a while stretched at full length and prone
among the maidens.[191] Then he revived and, remembering the songs,
again inclined to mirth and merriment; and the twain returned to their
wine and wassail, and continued their playing and toying, their pastime
and pleasure till day ceased illuminating and night drooped her wing.
Then the damsel went off to her dormitory and when Sharrkan asked after
her they answered, "She is gone to her sleeping-chamber," whereto he
rejoined, "Under Allah's ward and His good guard!" As soon as it was
morning, a handmaid came to him and said to him, "My mistress biddeth
thee to her." So he rose and followed her and, as he drew near her
lodging, the damsels welcomed him with smitten tabrets and songs of
greeting, and led him through a great door of ivory studded with pearls
and jewels. Thence they passed with him into a tall and spacious hall,
at the upper end of which was a wide daïs carpeted with all kinds of
silks, and round it open lattices commanding a view of trees and
streams. About the saloon were figures carved in human form, and
fashioned on such wise that the air passed through them and set in
motion musical instruments within, so that the beholder would fancy they
spoke.[192] Here sat the young lady, looking at the figures; but when
she saw Sharrkan, she sprang to her feet and, taking him by the hand,
made him sit down by her side, and asked him how he had passed the
night. He blessed her and the two sat talking awhile till she asked him,
"Knowest thou aught touching lovers and slaves of love?"; and he
answered "Yes! I wot somewhat in verse on that matter." "Let me hear
it," quoth she, so he began quoting:—

   Pleasure and health, good cheer, good appetite ✿ To Azzah, freest
       with our name and fame!
   By Allah! would I near her off she flies ✿ At tangent, granting
       less the more I claim:
   I dote on Azzah, but when clear I off ✿ My rivals, clears me too
       that dearest dame;
   Like wandering wight that chose for shade a cloud ✿ Which, ere
       siesta done, thin air became.

When she heard this she said, "Verily Al-Kuthayyir[193] was conspicuous
for sweet speech and chaste, and he was superlative in his praise of
Azzah when he sang (and she began to recite):—

    "Did Azzah deal behest to Sun o' noon, ✿ The judge had 'judged
        her beauty's bestest boon;
    And girls who come to me and carp at her, ✿ God make their rosy
        cheeks her sandal-shoon!"

"And indeed," quoth she, "'twas said that Azzah boasted exceeding beauty
and loveliness." Then she asked Sharrkan saying, "O Prince, dost thou
know aught of Jamíl's[194] verses to Buthaynah? if so repeat to us
somewhat of them;" and he answered, "Yes, I know them better than any;"
whereupon he began repeating these couplets:—

 "Jamíl, in Holy war go fight!" to me they say: ✿ What war save
     fight for fair ones would I e'er essay?
 To me their every word and work are mere delight, ✿ And martyrs clepe
     I all they slay in fight and fray:
 An ask I, "O Buthaynah! what's this love, I pray, ✿ Which eats
     my heart? quoth she "'Twill stay for ever and aye!"
 And when I cry, "Of wits return some small display ✿ For daily
     use," quoth she, "Far, far 'tis fled away!"
 Thou seekst my death; naught else thy will can satisfy ✿ While I
     no goal espy save thee and thee alway.

"Thou hast spoken right well," said she, "O King's son, and Jamíl also
spoke excellently well. But what would Buthaynah have done with him that
he saith in his hemistich:—

        Thou seekst my death; naught else thy will can satisfy?"

"O my lady," quoth Sharrkan, "she willed to do him what thou willest to
do with me, and even that will not satisfy thee." She laughed at his
opportune reply and they ceased not carousing till Day put out her light
and Night came in darkness dight. Then she rose and went to her
dormitory and slept, while Sharrkan slept in his place till morning
dawned. As soon as he awoke, the handmaids came to him with tabrets and
other instruments of mirth and merriment, as wont; and, kissing the
ground between his hands, said to him, "Bismillah!—in Allah's name—be so
kind as to come[195]: our mistress biddeth thee to her presence!" So he
rose and accompanied the slave-girls who surrounded him, playing on
tabrets and other instruments of music, till they passed from that
saloon into another and a yet more spacious hall, decorated with
pictured likenesses and figures of birds and beasts, passing all
description. Sharrkan marvelled at the art and artifice of the place and
began reciting:—

    He pluckt fruits of her necklace in rivalry, ✿ And her
        breast-pearls that bedded in gold-mine lie.
    Pure water on silvern bars is her brow, ✿ And her cheeks show
        roses with rubies vie:
    Meseems in her eyne that the violet's hue ✿ Lies purpling set in
        the Ithmid's[196] dye.

When the lady saw Sharrkan, she stood up to him in honour and, taking
his hand, seated him by her side and asked, "O son of King Omar bin
al-Nu'uman, hast thou any cunning in the game of chess?" "Yes," he
answered, "but do not thou with me as said the poet:—

   I speak and longing love upties me and unties me; ✿ Till with
       her honey-dew of inner lip she plies me:
   I brought the chess-board and my liefest lover plays me ✿ With
       white and black,[197] but black-cum-white ne'er satisfies me:
   'Twas as if King for Castle I were fain to place me ✿ Till wilful
       loss of game atwixt two queens surprise me:
   And if I seek to read intent in eyes that eye me ✿ Oh man! that
       glance askance with hint of wish defies me."

Then she brought the chess-board and played with him; but Sharrkan,
instead of looking at her moves, kept gazing at her fair mouth, and
putting knight in place of elephant and elephant[198] in stead of
knight. She laughed and said to him, "If thy play be after this fashion,
thou knowest naught of the game." "This is only our first," replied he,
"judge not by this bout." When she beat him he replaced the pieces in
position and played again with her; but she beat him a second time, a
third, a fourth and a fifth. So she turned to him and said, "Thou art
beaten in everything;" and he replied, "O my lady, how should one
playing with the like of thee avoid being beaten?" Then she bade bring
food, and they ate and washed their hands; after which the wine was set
before them and they drank. Presently, she took the dulcimer, for her
hand was cunning in smiting it, and she began repeating to an
accompaniment these couplets:—

 Twixt the close-tied and open-wide no medium Fortune knoweth; ✿
     Now ebb and flow then flow and ebb this wise her likeness showeth:
 Then drink her wine the syne she's thine and smiling thou dost
     find her; ✿ Anon she'll fall and fare away when all thy good
     forth goeth.

They ceased not to carouse till nightfall and this day was pleasanter
even than the first. When darkness set in, the lady betook her to her
dormitory, leaving him alone with the handmaids; so he threw himself on
the ground and slept till dawn, when the damsels came to him with
tambourines and other instruments according to custom. Seeing them he
roused him hastily and sat up; and they carried him to their mistress,
who came to meet him and, taking him by the hand, seated him by her
side. Then she asked him how he had passed his night, whereat he prayed
that her life be prolonged; and she took the lute and sang to it these
verses which she improvised:—

        Ne'er incline thee to part ✿ Which embitters the heart;
        E'en the sun when he sets ✿ Shall in pallor depart.

While they were solacing themselves after this fashion, behold, there
arose a great and sudden clamour, and a confused crowd of knights and
men rushed in, holding drawn swords that glittered and gleamed in their
hands, and cried aloud in the Grecian tongue, "Thou hast fallen into our
hands, O Sharrkan, so make thee sure of death!" When he heard this, he
said to himself, "By Allah, she hath entrapped me and held me in play,
till her men should come. These are the Knights with whom she threatened
me; but 'tis I who have thrown myself into this strait." Then he turned
towards the young lady to reproach her, but saw that she had changed
colour and her face was pale; and she sprang to her feet and asked the
crowd, "Who are ye?" "O most gracious Princess and peerless
union-pearl," answered the leading Knight, "dost thou weet who is yon
man by thy side?" "Not I," she replied, "who may he be?" Quoth the
Patrician, "This is of towns the highwayman! This is he who rideth in
the horseman's van! This is Sharrkan, son of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman!
This is he that forceth fortalice and penetrateth every impregnable
place! The news of him reached King Hardub, thy father, by report of the
ancient dame Zat al-Dawahi; and thy sire, our sovereign, hath made sure
that thou hast rendered good service to the army of the Greeks by taking
captive this ominous lion." When she heard this, she looked at the
Knight and asked him, "What be thy name?" and he answered, "I am
Masurah, son of thy slave Mausúrah bin Káshardah, Knight of Knights."
"And how?" quoth she, "durst thou enter my presence without leave?"
Quoth he, "O my lady, when I came to the gate, none forbade me, neither
chamberlain nor porter, but all the doorkeepers rose and forewent us as
of wont; although, when others come, they leave them standing at the
gate while they ask permission to admit them. But this is not a time for
long talking, when the King is expecting our return with this Prince,
the scorpion-sting[199] of the Islamitic host, that he may kill him and
drive back his men whither they came, without the bane of battling with
them." "These words be ill words," rejoined the Princess, "and Dame Zat
al-Dawahi lied, avouching an idle thing and a vain, whereof she weeteth
not the truth; for by the virtue of the Messiah, this man who is with me
is not Sharrkan, nor is he a captive, but a stranger who came to us
seeking our hospitality, and I made him my guest. So even were we
assured that this be Sharrkan and were it proved to us that it is he
beyond a doubt, I say it would ill befit mine honour that I should
deliver into your hands one who hath entered under my protection. So
make me not a traitor to my guest and a disgrace among men; but return
to the King, my father, and kiss the ground before him, and inform him
that the case is contrariwise to the report of the Lady Zat al-Dawahi."
"O Abrizah," replied Masurah, the Knight, "I cannot return to the King's
majesty without his debtor and enemy." Quoth she (and indeed she had
waxed very wroth), "Out on thee! Return to him with my answer, and no
blame shall befal thee!" Quoth Masurah, "I will not return without him."
Thereupon her colour changed and she exclaimed, "Exceed not in talk and
vain words; for verily this man had not come in to us, were he not
assured that he could of himself and single-handed make head against an
hundred riders; and if I said to him:—Thou art Sharrkan, son of King
Omar bin al-Nu'uman, he would answer, Yes. But 'tis not of your
competence to let or hinder him; for if you so do, he will not turn back
from you till he hath slain all that are in this place. Behold, here he
is by my side, and I will bring him before you sword and targe in hand."
"Albeit I were safe from thy wrath," answered Masurah the Knight, "I am
not safe from that of thy father, and when I see him, I shall sign to
the Knights to take him captive, and we will carry him to the King bound
and in abject sort." When she heard this, she said, "The matter shall
not pass thus, for 'twould be blazoning mere folly. This man is but one
and ye are an hundred Knights: so if you would attack him come out
against him, one after one, that it may appear to the King which is the
valiant amongst you."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


                  Now when it was the Fiftieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Princess Abrizah
said to the Knight, "This man is but one, and ye are an hundred: so if
ye would attack him, come out against him, one after one, that it may
appear to the King which is the valiant." Quoth Masurah, the Knight, "By
the truth of the Messiah, thou sayest sooth, and none but I shall sally
out against him first." Quoth she, "Wait till I go to him and acquaint
him with the case and hear what answer he will make. If he consent, 'tis
well; but if he refuse, ye shall on no wise come to him, for I and my
handmaids and whosoever is in the convent will be his ransom." So she
went to Sharrkan and told him the news, whereat he smiled and knew that
she had not informed any of the Emirs; but that tidings of him had been
bruited and blazed abroad, till the report reached the King, against her
wish and intent. So he again began reproaching himself and said, "How
came I to adventure and play with my life by coming to the country of
the Greeks?" But hearing the young lady's proposal he said to her,
"Indeed their onset, one after one, would be overburdensome to them.
Will they not come out against me, ten by ten?" "That would be
villeiny," said she; "Let one have at one." When he heard this, he
sprang to his feet and made for them with his sword and battle-gear; and
Masurah, the Knight, also sprang up and bore down upon him. Sharrkan met
him like a lion and delivered a shoulder cut[200] which clove him to the
middle, and the blade came out gleaming and glittering from his back and
bowels. When the lady beheld that swashing blow, Sharrkan's might was
magnified in her sight and she knew that when she overthrew him in the
wrestle it was not by her strength but by her beauty and loveliness. So
she turned to the Knights and said, "Take wreak for your chief!"
Thereupon out came the slain man's brother, a fierce and furious Knight,
and rushed upon Sharrkan, who delayed not, but smote him also with the
shoulder-cut and the sword came out glittering from his vitals. Then
cried the Princess, "O ye servants of the Messiah, avenge your comrade!"
So they ceased not charging down upon him, one after one; and Sharrkan
also ceased not playing upon them with the blade, till he had slain
fifty knights, the lady looking on the while. And Allah cast a panic
into the hearts of the survivors, so that they held back and dared not
meet him in the duello, but fell upon him in a body; and he laid on load
with heart firmer than a rock, and smote them and trod them down like
straw under the threshing-sled,[201] till he had driven sense and soul
out of them. Then the Princess called aloud to her damsels, saying, "Who
is left in the convent?"; and they replied, "None but the gate-keepers;"
whereupon she went up to Sharrkan and took him to her bosom, he doing
the same, and they returned to the palace, after he had made an end of
the melée. Now there remained a few of the Knights hiding from him in
the cells of the monastery, and when the Princess saw this she rose from
Sharrkan's side and left him for a while, but presently came back clad
in closely-meshed coat of ring-mail and holding in her hand a fine
Indian scymitar. And she said, "Now by the truth of the Messiah, I will
not be a niggard of myself for my guest; nor will I abandon him though
for this I abide a reproach and a byword in the land of the Greeks."
Then she took reckoning of the dead and found that he had slain
fourscore of the Knights, and other twenty had taken to flight.[202]
When she saw what work he had made with them she said to him, "Allah
bless thee, O Sharrkan! The Cavaliers may well glory in the like of
thee." Then he rose and wiping his blade clean of the blood of the slain
began reciting these couplets:—

  How oft in the mellay I've cleft the array, ✿ And given their
      bravest to lions a prey:
  Ask of me and of them when I proved me prow ✿ O'er creation, on days
      of the foray and fray:
  When I left in the onslaught their lions to lie ✿ On the sands of
      the lowlands[203] in fieriest day.

When he ended his verse, the Princess came up to him with smiles and
kissed his hand; then she doffed her hauberk and he said to her, "O lady
mine, wherefore didst thou don that coat of mail and bare thy brand?"
"To guard thee against these caitiffs,"[204] she replied. Then she
summoned the gate-keepers and asked them, "How came ye to admit the
King's Knights into my dwelling without leave of me?"; and they
answered, "O Princess, it is not our custom to ask leave of thee for the
King's messengers, and especially for the chief of his Knights." Quoth
she, "I think ye were minded only to disgrace me and murder my guest;"
and bade Sharrkan smite their necks. He did so and she cried to the rest
of her servants, "Of a truth, they deserved even more than that!" Then
turning to Sharrkan, she said to him, "Now that there hath become
manifest to thee what was concealed, thou shalt be made acquainted with
my history. Know, then, that I am the daughter of King Hardub of Roum;
my name is Abrizah and the ancient dame, yclept Zat al-Dawahi, is my
grandmother by the sword side. She it certainly is who told my father of
thee, and as surely she will compass a sleight to slay me, more by token
as thou hast slain my father's chivalry and it is noised abroad that I
have separated myself from the Nazarenes and have become no better than
I should be with the Moslems. Wherefore it were wiser that I leave this
dwelling while Zat al-Dawahi is on my track; but I require of thee the
like kindness and courtesy I have shown thee, for enmity will presently
befal between me and my father on thine account. So do not thou neglect
to do aught that I shall say to thee, remembering all this betided me
not save by reason of thee." Hearing her words, Sharrkan joyed greatly;
his breast broadened and his wits flew from him for delight, and he
said, "By Allah, none shall come at thee, while life is in my bosom! But
hast thou patience to bear parting from thy parents and thy people?"
"Even so," she answered; and Sharrkan swore to her and the two plighted
their troth. Then said she, "Now is my heart at ease; but there
remaineth one other condition for thee." "What is it?" asked he and she
answered, "It is that thou return with thy host to thine own country."
Quoth he, "O lady mine, my father, King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, sent me to
wage war upon thy sire, on account of the treasure he plundered from the
King of Constantinople, and amongst the rest three great jewels, noted
givers of good fortune." Quoth she, "Cheer thy heart and clear thine
eyes: I will tell thee the whole of the tale and the cause of our feud
with the King of Constantinople. Know that we have a yearly festival,
hight the Convent-Feast, whereat Kings from all quarters and the noblest
women are wont to congregate; thither also come merchants and traders
with their wives and families, and the visitors abide there seven days.
I was wont to be one of them; but, when there befel enmity between us,
my father forbade me to be present at the festival for the space of
seven years. One year, it chanced that amongst the daughters of the
great who resorted to the patron, as was their custom, came a daughter
of the King of Constantinople, a beautiful girl called Sophia. They
tarried at the monastery six days and on the seventh the folk went their
ways;[205] but Sophia said, I will not return to Constantinople save by
water. So they equipped for her a ship in which she embarked with her
suite; and making sail they put out to sea; but as they were voyaging
behold, a contrary wind caught them and drove the vessel from her course
till, as Fate and Fortune would have it, she fell in with a Nazarene
craft from the Camphor Island[206] carrying a crew of five hundred armed
Franks, who had been cruising about a long time. When they sighted the
sails of the ship, wherein Sophia and her women were, they gave chase in
all haste and in less than an hour they came up with her, when they laid
the grappling-irons aboard her and captured her. Then taking her in tow
they made all sail for their own island and were but a little distant
from it when the wind veered round and, splitting their sails, drove
them on to a shoal which lies off our coast. Thereupon we sallied forth
and, looking on them as spoil driven to us by Fate,[207] boarded and
took them; and, slaying the men, made prize of the wreck, wherein we
found the treasures and rarities in question and forty maidens, amongst
whom was the King's daughter, Sophia. After the capture we carried the
Princess and her women to my father, not knowing her to be a daughter of
King Afridun of Constantinople; and he chose out for himself ten
including her; and divided the rest among his dependants. Presently he
set apart five damsels, amongst whom was the King's daughter, and sent
them to thy father, King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, together with other gifts,
such as broadcloth[208] and woollen stuffs and Grecian silks. Thy father
accepted them and chose out from amongst the five girls Sophia, daughter
of King Afridun; nor did we hear more of her till the beginning of this
year, when her father wrote to my father in words unfitting for me to
repeat, rebuking him with menaces and saying to him:—Two years ago, you
plundered a ship of ours which had been seized by a band of Frankish
pirates in which was my daughter Sophia, attended by her maidens
numbering some threescore. Yet ye informed me not thereof by messenger
or otherwise; nor could I make the matter public, lest reproach befal me
amongst the Kings, by reason of my daughter's honour. So I concealed my
case till this year, when I wrote to certain Frankish corsairs and
sought news of my daughter from the Kings of the Isles. They replied:—By
Allah we carried her not forth of thy realm; but we have heard that King
Hardub rescued her from certain pirates. And they told me the whole
tale. Then he added in the writing which he writ to my father:—Except
you wish to be at feud with me and design to disgrace me and dishonour
my daughter, you will, the instant my letter reacheth you, send my
daughter back to me. But if you slight my letter and disobey my
commandment, I will assuredly make you full return for your foul dealing
and the baseness of your practices.[209] When my father read this letter
and understood the contents,[210] it vexed him and he regretted not
having known that Sophia, King Afridun's daughter, was among the
captured damsels, that he might have sent her back to her sire; and he
was perplexed about the case because, after so long a time, he could not
send to King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and demand her back from him,
especially as he had lately heard that Heaven had granted him boon of
babe by this Sophia. So when we pondered that truth, we knew that this
letter was none other than a grievous calamity; and my father found
nothing for it but to write an answer to King Afridun, making his
excuses and swearing to him by strong oaths that he knew not his
daughter to be among the bevy of damsels in the ship and setting forth
how he had sent her to King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, who had gotten the
blessing of issue by her. When my father's reply reached King Afridun he
rose up and sat down,[211] and roared and foamed at the mouth
crying:—What! shall he take captive my daughter and even her with
slave-girls and pass her on from hand to hand sending her for a gift to
Kings, and they lie with her without marriage-contract? By the Messiah
and the true Faith, said he, I will not desist till I have taken my
blood-vengeance for this and have wiped out my shame; and indeed I will
do a deed which the chroniclers shall chronicle after me! So he bided
his time till he devised a device and laid notable toils and snares,
when he sent an embassy to thy father, King Omar, to tell him that which
thou hast heard: accordingly thy father equipped thee and an army with
thee and sent thee to King Afridun, whose object is to seize thee and
thine army to boot. As for the three jewels whereof he told thy father
when asking his aid, there was not one soothfast word in that matter,
for they were with Sophia, his daughter; and my father took them from
her, when he got possession of her and of her maidens, and gave them to
me in free gift, and they are now with me. So go thou to thy host and
turn them back ere they be led deep into, and shut in by, the land of
the Franks and the country of the Greeks; for as soon as you have come
far enough into their interior, they will stop the roads upon you and
there will be no escape for you till the Day of retribution and
retaliation. I know that thy troops are still halting where thou leftest
them, because thou didst order a three days' rest; withal they have
missed thee all this time and they wot not what to do." When Sharrkan
heard her words, he was absent awhile in thought; then he kissed
Princess Abrizah's hand and said, "Praise be to Allah who hath bestowed
thee on me and appointed thee to be the cause of my salvation and the
salvation of whoso is with me! But 'tis grievous to me to part from thee
and I know not what will become of thee after my departure." "Go now to
thine army," she replied, "and turn them back, while ye are yet near
your own country. If the envoys be still with them, lay hands on them
and keep them, that the case may be made manifest to you; and, after
three days, I will be with you all and we will enter Baghdad together."
As he turned to depart she said, "Forget not the compact which is
between me and thee;" then she rose to bid[212] him farewell and embrace
him and quench the fire of desire, so she took leave of him and,
throwing her arms round his neck, wept with exceeding weeping, and
repeated these verses:—

    I bade adieu, my right hand wiped my tears away, ✿ The while my
        left hand held her in a close embrace:
    "Fearest thou naught," quoth she, "of shame?" I answered "Nay, ✿
        The lover's parting day is lover's worst disgrace."

Then Sharrkan left her and walked down from the convent. They brought
his steed, so he mounted and rode down-stream to the drawbridge which he
crossed and presently threaded the woodland paths and passed into the
open meadow. As soon as he was clear of the trees he was aware of
horsemen which made him stand on the alert, and he bared his brand and
rode cautiously; but as they drew near and exchanged curious looks he
recognized them and behold, it was the Wazir Dandan and two of his
Emirs. When they saw him and knew him, they dismounted and saluting him,
asked the reason of his absence; whereupon he told them all that had
passed between him and Princess Abrizah from first to last. The Wazir
returned thanks to Almighty Allah for his safety and said,[213] "Let us
at once leave these lands; for the envoys who came with us are gone to
inform the King of our approach, and haply he will hasten to fall on us
and take us prisoners." So Sharrkan cried to his men to saddle and
mount, which they did and, setting out at once, they stinted not faring
till they reached the sole of the valley wherein the host lay. The
Ambassadors meanwhile had reported Sharrkan's approach to their King,
who forthright equipped a host to lay hold of him and those with him.
But Sharrkan, escorted by the Wazir Dandan and the two Emirs, had no
sooner sighted the army, than he raised the cry "March! March!" They
took horse on the instant and fared through the first day and second and
third day, nor did they cease faring for five days; at the end of which
time they alighted in a well-wooded valley, where they rested awhile.
Then they again set out and stayed not riding for five and twenty days
which placed them on the frontiers of their own country. Here, deeming
themselves safe, they halted to rest; and the country people came out to
them with guest-gifts for the men and provender and forage for the
beasts. They tarried there two days after which, as all would be making
for their homes, Sharrkan put the Wazir Dandan in command, bidding him
lead the host back to Baghdad. But he himself remained behind with an
hundred riders, till the rest of the army had made one day's march: then
he called "To horse!" and mounted with his hundred men. They rode on two
parasangs'[214] space till they arrived at a gorge between two mountains
and lo! there arose before them a dark cloud of sand and dust. So they
checked their steeds awhile till the dust opened and lifted, discovering
beneath it an hundred cavaliers, lion-faced and in mail-coats cased. As
soon as they drew within earshot of Sharrkan and his meiny they cried
out to them, saying, "By the virtue of John and Mary, we have won to our
wish! We have been following you by forced marches, night and day, till
we forewent you to this place. So dismount and lay down your arms and
yield yourselves, that we may grant you your lives." When Sharrkan heard
this, his eyes stood out from his head and his cheeks flushed red and he
said "How is it, O Nazarene dogs, ye dare enter our country and
overmarch our land? And doth not this suffice you, but ye must adventure
your selves and address us in such unseemly speech? Do you think to
escape out of our hands and return to your country?" Then he shouted to
his hundred horsemen, "Up and at these hounds, for they even you in
number!" So saying, he bared his sabre and bore down on them, he and
his, but the Franks met them with hearts firmer than rocks, and wight
clashed against wight, and knight dashed upon knight, and hot waxed the
fight, and sore was the affright, and nor parley nor cries of quarter
helped their plight; and they stinted not to charge and to smite, right
hand meeting right, nor to hack and hew with blades bright-white, till
day turned to night and gloom oppressed the sight. Then they drew apart
and Sharrkan mustered his men and found none wounded save four only, who
showed hurts but not death-hurts. Said he to them, "By Allah, my life
long have I waded in the clashing sea of fight and I have met many a
gallant sprite, but none so unfrightened of the sword that smites and
the shock of men that affrights like these valiant Knights!" "Know, O
King," said they, "that there is among them a Frankish cavalier who is
their leader and, indeed, he is a man of valour and fatal is his
spear-thrust: but, by Allah, he spares us great and small; for whoso
falls into his hands he lets him go and forbears to slay him. By Allah,
had he willed he had killed us all." Sharrkan was astounded when he
heard what the Knight had done and such high report of him, so he said,
"When the morn shall morrow, we will draw out and defy them, for we are
an hundred to their hundred; and we will seek aid against them from the
Lord of the Heavens." So they rested that night in such intent; whilst
the Franks gathered round their Captain and said, "Verily this day we
did not win our will of these;" and he replied, "At early dawn when the
morrow shall morn, we will draw out and challenge them, one after one."
They also rested in that mind, and both camps kept guard until Almighty
Allah sent the light of day-dawn. Thereupon King Sharrkan and his
hundred riders took horse and rode forth to the plain, where they found
the Franks ranged in line of battle; and Sharrkan said to his followers,
"Our foes have determined like ourselves to do their devoir; so up and
at them and lay on load." Then came forth an Herald of the Franks and
cried out, saying, "Let there be no general engagement betwixt us this
day, save by the duello, a champion of yours against a champion of
ours." Whereupon one of Sharrkan's riders dashed out from the ranks and
drave between the two lines crying, "Ho! who is for smiting? Let no
dastard engage me this day nor nidering!" Hardly had he made an end of
his vaunt, when there sallied forth to him a Frankish cavalier, armed
cap-à-pie and clad in a surcoat of gold stuff, riding on a grey-white
steed,[215] and he had no hair on his cheeks. He urged his charger on to
the midst of the battle-plain and the two fell to derring-do of cut and
thrust, but it was not long before the Frank foined the Moslem with the
lance-point; and, toppling him from his steed, took him prisoner and led
him off crestfallen. His folk rejoiced in their comrade and, forbidding
him to go out again to the field, sent forth another, to whom sallied
out another Moslem, brother to the captive, and offered him battle. The
two fell to, either against other, and fought for a little while, till
the Frank bore down upon the Moslem and, falsing him with a feint,
tumbled him by a thrust of the lance-heel from his destrier and took him
prisoner. After this fashion the Moslems ceased not dashing forwards,
one after one, and the Franks to unhorse them and take them captive,
till day departed and the night with darkness upstarted. Now they had
captured of the Moslems twenty cavaliers, and when Sharrkan saw this, it
was grievous to him and he mustered his men and said to them, "What is
this thing that hath befallen us? To-morrow, I myself will go forth to
the field and offer singular combat to their chief and learn what is the
cause of his entering our land and warn him against doing battle with
our band. If he persist, we will punish him with death, and if he prove
peaceable we will make peace with him." They nighted on this wise till
Allah Almighty caused the morn to dawn, when mounted the twain and drew
up for battle fain; and Sharrkan was going forth to the plain, but
behold, more than one half of the Franks dismounted and remained on foot
before one of them who was mounted, till they reached the midst of the
battle-plain. Sharrkan looked at that horseman and lo! he was their
chief. He was clad in a surcoat of blue satin and a close-ringed mail
shirt; his face was as the moon when it rises and no hair was upon his
cheeks. He hent in hand an Indian scymitar and he rode a sable steed
with a white blaze on brow, like a dirham; and he smote the horse with
heel till he stood almost in the midst of the field when, signing to the
Moslems, he cried out in fluent Arab speech, "Ho, Sharrkan! Ho, son of
Omar bin al-Nu'uman! Ho, thou who forcest fortalice and overthrowest
cities and countries! up and out to battle-bout, and blade single-handed
wield with one who halves with thee the field! Thou art Prince of thy
people and I am Prince of mine; and whoso overcometh his adversary, him
let the other's men obey and come under his sway." Hardly had he ended
his speech, when out came Sharrkan with a heart full of fury, and urging
his steed into the midst of the field, closed like a raging lion with
the Frank who encountered him with wariness and steadfastness and met
him with the meeting of warriors. Then they fell to foining and hewing,
and they stinted not of onset and offset, and give and take, as they
were two mountains clashing together or two seas together dashing; nor
did they cease fighting until day darkened and night starkened. Then
they drew apart and each returned to his own party; but as soon as
Sharrkan foregathered with his comrades, he said, "Never looked I on the
like of this cavalier: he hath one quality I have not yet seen in any
and this it is that, when his foemen uncovereth a place for the
death-blow, he reverseth his weapon and smiteth with the lance-heel! In
very deed I know not what will be the issue 'twixt him and me; but 'tis
my wish that we had in our host his like and the like of his men." Then
he went to his rest for the night and, when morning dawned, the Frank
came forth and rode down to the mid-field, where Sharrkan met him; and
they fell to fighting and to wheeling, left and right; and necks were
stretched out to see the sight, nor did they stint from strife and
sword-play and lunge of lance with main and might, till the day turned
to night and darkness overwhelmed the light. Then the twain drew asunder
and returned each to his own camp, where both related to their comrades
what had befallen them in the duello; and at last the Frank said to his
men, "To-morrow shall decide the matter!" So they both passed that night
restfully till dawn; and, as soon as it was day, they mounted and each
bore down on other and ceased not to fight till half the day was done.
Then the Frank bethought him of a ruse; first urging his steed with heel
and then checking him with the rein, so that he stumbled and fell with
his rider; thereupon Sharrkan threw himself on the foe, and would have
smitten him with the sword fearing lest the strife be prolonged, when
the Frank cried out to him, "O Sharrkan, champions are not wont to do
thus! This is the act of a man accustomed to be beaten by a woman."[216]
When Sharrkan heard this, he raised his eyes to the Frank's face and
gazing steadfastly at him, recognized in him Princess Abrizah with whom
that pleasant adventure had befallen him in the convent; whereupon he
cast brand from hand and, kissing the earth before her, asked her, "What
moved thee to a deed like this?"; and she answered, "I desired to prove
thy prowess afield and test thy doughtiness in tilting and jousting.
These that are with me are my handmaids, and they are all clean maids;
yet they have vanquished thy horsemen in fair press and stress of plain;
and had not my steed stumbled with me, thou shouldst have seen my might
and prowess in combat." Sharrkan smiled at her speech and said, "Praise
be to Allah for safety and for my reunion with thee, O Queen of the
age." Then she cried out to her damsels to loose the twenty captives of
Sharrkan's troop and dismount. They did as she bade and came and kissed
the earth before her and Sharrkan who said to them, "It is the like of
you that Kings keep in store for the need-hour." Then he signed to his
comrades to salute the Princess; so all alighted and kissed the earth
before her, for they knew the story. After this, the whole two hundred
took horse, and fared on night and day for six days' space, till they
drew near to Baghdad, when they halted and Sharrkan bade Abrizah and her
handmaids doff the Frankish garb that was on them——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


                 Now when it was the Fifty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sharrkan bade
Princess Abrizah and her damsels doff the garb that was on them and don
the garments of daughters of Greece; and thus did they. Then he
despatched a company of his companions to Baghdad to acquaint his father
Omar bin al-Nu'uman, with his arrival and report that he was accompanied
by Princess Abrizah, daughter of King Hardub, Lord of Græcia-land. They
halted forthright in the place they had reached, and Sharrkan also
halted and all nighted there; and when Almighty Allah made morning dawn,
Sharrkan and his company and Abrizah and her company took horse and
fared on towards the city; when lo! on the way they met the Wazir
Dandan, who had come out amongst a thousand horse, to honour Abrizah and
Sharrkan, by especial commandment of King Omar Son of Al-Nu'uman. When
the two drew near, they turned towards them and kissed ground before
them; then they mounted again and escorted them into the city and went
up with them to the palace. Sharrkan walked in to his father, who rose
and embraced him and questioned him of his case. So he told him all that
Abrizah had told him, and what had passed between them and said, "She
hath parted from her sire and departed from her reign and hath chosen to
take part with us and to make her abode with us; and indeed (he said to
his father) the King of Constantinople hath plotted to do us a mischief,
because of his daughter Sophia, for that the King of Greece had made
known to him her story and the cause of her being given to thee; and he
(the Grecian King) not knowing her to be daughter of King Afridun, Lord
of Constantinople; and, had he known that, he would not have bestowed
her upon thee, but he would have restored her to her parent. And of a
verity (he continued) we were saved from these perils only by the Lady
Abrizah, and never saw we a more valiant than she." And he went on to
tell his father all that had passed from first to last of the wrestling
and the single-fighting. When King Omar heard the story of Sharrkan,
Abrizah was exalted in his eyes, and he longed to see her and question
her. Thereupon Sharrkan went out to her and said, "The King calleth for
thee;" she replied, "I hear and I obey;" and he took her and brought her
in to his father, who was seated on his throne and who, having dismissed
his high officers, was attended only by his eunuchs. The Princess
entered and kissing the ground between his hands, saluted him in choice
terms. He was amazed at her eloquent speech and thanked her for her
dealing with his son Sharrkan and bade her be seated. So she sat down
and unveiled her face;[217] and, when the King saw her beauty, his
reason fled his head and he made her draw near and showed her favour,
appointing her an especial palace for herself and her damsels, and
assigning them solde and allowances. Then began he to ask her of the
three jewels aforesaid, and she answered, "Here be they with me, O King
of the age!" So saying, she rose and going to her lodging, unpacked her
baggage and from it brought out a box and from the box a casket of gold.
She opened the casket and taking out those three jewels, kissed them and
gave them to the King. Then she went away bearing his heart with her.
After her going the King sent for his son Sharrkan and gave him one
jewel of the three, and when he enquired of the other two replied, "O my
son! I mean to give one to thy brother Zau al-Makan, and the other to
thy sister Nuzhat al-Zaman." But when Sharrkan heard that he had a
brother (for to that time he knew only of his sister) he turned to his
sire and said to him, "O King, hast thou a son other than myself?" He
answered, "Yes, and he is now six years old;" adding that his name was
Zau al-Makan and that he and Nuzhat al-Zaman were twins, born at a
birth. This news was grievous to Sharrkan, but he kept his secret and
said, "The blessing of Allah Most High be upon them!"; and he cast the
jewel from his hand and shook the dust off his clothes. Quoth the King,
"How do I see thee change thy manner when hearing of this, considering
that after me thou becomest heir of the kingdom. Of a truth the troops
have sworn to thee and the Emirs and Grandees have taken the oath of
succession to thee; and this one of the three jewels is thine." Sharrkan
bowed his head to the ground and was ashamed to bandy words with his
parent so he accepted the jewel and went away, knowing not what to do
for exceeding wrath, and stayed not walking till he had entered
Abrizah's palace. As he approached she stood up to meet him and thanked
him for what he had done and prayed for blessings on him and his sire.
Then she sat down and seated him by her side; but when he had taken his
place she saw rage in his face and questioned him, whereupon he told her
that Allah had blessed his father with two children by Sophia, a boy and
a girl, and that he had named the boy Zau al-Makan and the girl Nuzhat
al-Zaman; adding, "He hath kept the other two jewels for them and hath
given me one of thine, so I left it behind; I knew naught of Zau
al-Makan's birth till this day, and the twain are now six years old. So
when I learnt this, wrath possessed me; and I tell thee the reason of my
rage and hide nothing from thee. But now I fear lest my father take thee
to wife, for he loveth thee and I saw in him signs of desire for thee:
so what wilt thou say, if he wish this?" Quoth she, "Know, O Sharrkan,
that thy father hath no dominion over me, nor can he have me without my
consent; and if he prevail over me by force, I will take my own life. As
for the three jewels, it was not my intent that he should give any of
them to either of his children and I had no thought but that he would
lay them up in his treasury with his things of price; but now I desire
of thy favour that thou make me a present of the jewel which he gave
thee, if thou have accepted it." "Hearkening and obedience," replied
Sharrkan, and gave it to her. Then said she, "Fear nothing," and talked
with him awhile and continued, "I fear lest my father hear that I am
with you and sit not patiently under my loss, but do his endeavours to
find me; and to that end he may ally himself with King Afridun, on
account of his daughter Sophia, and both come on thee with armies and so
there befal great turmoil." When Sharrkan heard these words, he said to
her, "O my lady, if it please thee to sojourn with us, take no thought
of them; though there gather together against us all that be on land and
on sea." "'Tis well," rejoined she; "if ye entreat me fair, I will tarry
with you, and if ye deal evilly by me, I will depart from you." Then she
bade her slave-maidens bring food; so they set the tables, and Sharrkan
ate a little and went away to his own house, disturbed and perturbed.
Such was his case; but regarding the affairs of his father, Omar bin
al-Nu'uman, after dismissing his son Sharrkan he arose and, taking the
other two jewels, betook himself to the Lady Sophia, who stood up when
she saw him and remained standing till he was seated. Presently, his two
children, Zau al-Makan and Nuzhat al-Zaman, came to him and he kissed
them and hung a jewel round each one's neck, at which they rejoiced and
kissed his hands. Then went they to their mother, who joyed in their joy
and wished the King long life; so he asked her, "Why hast thou not
informed me all this time that thou art the daughter of King Afridun,
Lord of Constantinople, that I might have honoured thee still more and
enlarged thee in dignity and raised thy rank?" "O King," answered
Sophia, "and what could I desire greater or higher than this my standing
with thee, overwhelmed as I am with thy favours and thy benefits? And,
furthermore, Allah hath blessed me with two children by thee, a son and
a daughter." Her reply pleased the King and after leaving her, he set
apart for her and her children a wondrous fine palace. Moreover, he
appointed for them eunuchs and attendants and doctors of law and doctors
of philosophy and astrologers and physicians and surgeons to do them
service; and in every way he redoubled his favour and entreated them
with the best of treatment. And presently he returned to the palace of
his dominion and to his Court where he distributed justice among the
lieges. So far concerning him and Sophia and her children; but in the
matter of Abrizah the King was greatly occupied with love of her and
burnt with desire of her night and day; and every night, he would go in
to her and converse with her and pay his court to her, but she gave him
no answer, only saying, "O King of the age! I have no desire for men at
this present." When he saw her withdraw from him, his passion waxed
hotter and his longing and pining increased until, when weary of this,
he summoned his Wazir Dandan and, opening his very heart to him, told
him of his love for Princess Abrizah, daughter of Hardub, and informed
him how she refused to yield to his wishes and how desire for her was
doing him to die, for that he could get no grace of her. The Wazir,
hearing these words, said to the King, "As soon as it is dark night,
take thou a piece of Bhang the measure of a miskal, about an ounce, and
go in to her and drink somewhat of wine with her. When the hour of
ending the carousal shall draw near, fill her a last cup and dropping
therein the Bhang, give it to her to drink, and she will not reach her
sleeping-chamber ere the drug take effect on her. Then do thou go in to
her and take thy will of her; and such is my advice."[218] "Thy rede is
aright," quoth the King, and seeking his treasury, he took thence a
piece of concentrated Bhang, if an elephant smelt it he would sleep from
year to year. This he put in his bosom-pocket and waited till some
little of the night went by, when he betook himself to the palace of
Princess Abrizah, who seeing him stood up to receive him; but he bade
her sit down. So she sat down, and he sat by her, and he began to talk
with her of wine and wassail, whereupon she furnished the
carousing-table[219] and placed it before him. Then she set on the
drinking vessels and lighted the candles and ordered to bring dried
fruits and sweetmeats and all that pertaineth to drinking. So they fell
to tippling and the King ceased not to pledge her till drunkenness crept
into her head; and seeing this he took out the bit of Bhang from his
pocket and, holding it between his fingers, filled a cup with his own
hand and drank it off. Then filling a second he said, "To thy
companionship!"; and dropped the drug into her cup, she knowing naught
of it. She took it and drank it off; then she rose and went to her
sleeping-chamber. He waited for less than an hour till he was assured
that the dose had taken effect on her and had robbed her of her senses,
when he went in to her and found her thrown on her back: and she had
doffed her petticoat-trousers and the air raised the skirt of her shift
and discovered what was between her thighs. When the King saw the state
of things and found a lighted candle at her head and another at her
feet, shining upon what her thighs enshrined he took leave of his five
senses for lust and Satan seduced him and he could not master himself,
but put off his trousers and fell upon her and abated her maidenhead.
Then he rose off her and went to one of her women, by name Marjánah, and
said, "Go in to thy lady and speak with her." So she went in to her
mistress and found her lying on her back insensible, with the blood
running down to the calves of her legs, whereupon she took a kerchief
and wiped away the blood and lay by her that night. As soon as Almighty
Allah brought the dawn, the handmaid Marjanah washed her mistress's
hands and feet and brought rose-water and bathed her face and mouth with
it, whereupon she sneezed and yawned and cast up from her inside that
bit of Bhang like a bolus.[220] Then she revived and washed her hands
and mouth and said to Marjanah, "Tell me what hath befallen me." So she
told her what had passed and how she had found her, lying on her back,
with the blood running down, wherefore she knew that King Omar bin
al-Nu'uman had lain with her and had undone her and taken his will of
her. At this she grieved with exceeding grief and retired into privacy,
saying to her damsels, "Deny me to whoso would come in to me and say to
him that I am ill, till I see what Allah will do with me." Presently the
news of her sickness came to the King; so he sent her sherbets and sugar
electuaries. Some months she thus passed in solitude, during which time
the King's flame cooled and his desire for her was quenched, so that he
abstained from her. Now she had conceived by him, and when the months of
child-breeding had gone by, her pregnancy appeared and her belly
swelled, and the world was straitened upon her, so she said to her
handmaid Marjanah, "Know that it is not the folk who have wronged me,
but I who sinned against my own self[221] in that I left my father and
mother and country. Indeed, I abhor life, for my spirit is broken and
neither courage nor strength is left me. I used, when I mounted my
steed, to have the mastery of him, but now I am unable to ride. If I be
brought to bed among them I shall be dishonoured before my hand-women
and every one in the palace will know that he hath taken my maidenhead
in the way of shame; and if I return to my father, with what face shall
I meet him or with what face shall I have recourse to him? How well
quoth the poet:—

  Say, what shall solace one who hath nor home nor stable stead ✿ Nor
      cup-companion, nor a cup, nor place to house his head?"

Marjanah answered her, "It is thine to command; I will obey;" and
Abrizah said, "I desire at once to leave this place secretly, so that
none shall know of me but thou; and return to my father and my mother,
for when flesh stinketh, there is naught for it but its own folk and
Allah shall do with me e'en as He will." "O Princess," Marjanah replied,
"what thou wouldest do is well." Then she made matters ready and kept
her secret and waited for some days till the King went out to chase and
hunt, and his son Sharrkan betook himself to certain of the fortresses
to sojourn there awhile. Then said she to Marjanah, "I wish to set out
this night, but how shall I do against my destiny? For already I feel
the pangs of labour and child-birth, and if I abide other four or five
days, I shall be brought to bed here, and I shall be unable to travel to
my country. But this is what was written on my forehead." Then she
considered awhile, and said to Marjanah, "Look us out a man who will go
with us and serve us by the way, for I have no strength to bear arms."
"By Allah, O my lady," replied Marjanah, "I know none but a black slave
called Al-Ghazban,[222] who is one of the slaves of King Omar bin
al-Nu'uman; he is a valiant wight, and he keepeth guard at our palace
gate. The King appointed him to attend us, and indeed we have
overwhelmed him with our favours; so, look ye, I will go out and speak
with him of this matter, and promise him some monies and tell him that,
if he have a mind to tarry with us, I will marry him to whom he will. He
told me before to-day that he had been a highwayman; so if he consent to
us we shall win our wish and reach to our own land." She rejoined, "Call
him, that I may talk with him;" whereupon Marjanah fared forth and said
to the slave, "O Ghazban, Allah prosper thee, so thou fall in with what
my lady saith to thee!" Then she took him by the hand and brought him to
the Princess, whose hands he kissed, but as she beheld him, her heart
took fright at him. "However," she said to herself, "of a truth, Need
giveth the law;" and she approached to speak with him, yet her heart
started away from him. Presently she said, "O Ghazban, say me, wilt thou
help me against the perfidies of Fortune and conceal my secret if I
discover it to thee?" When the slave saw her, his heart was taken by
storm and he fell in love with her forthright and could not but reply,
"O my mistress, whatsoever thou biddest me do, I will not depart
therefrom." Quoth she, "I would have thee take me at this hour and take
this my handmaid and saddle us two camels and two of the King's horses
and set on each horse a saddle-bag of goods and somewhat of provaunt,
and go with us to our own country; where, if thou desire to abide with
us, I will marry thee to her thou shalt choose of my handmaidens; or, if
thou prefer return to thine own land, we will marry thee and give thee
whatso thou desirest after thou hast taken of money what shall satisfy
thee." When Al-Ghazban heard this, he rejoiced with great joy and
replied, "O my lady, I will serve both of you with mine eyes and will go
at once and saddle the horses." Then he went away gladsome and saying to
himself, "I shall get my will of them; and if they will not yield to me,
I will kill them both and take their riches." But he kept this his
intent to himself, and presently returned with two camels and three head
of horses, one of which he rode, and Princess Abrizah made Marjanah
mount the second, she mounting the third, albeit she was in labour-pains
and possessed not her soul for anguish. And the slave ceased not
travelling with them night and day through the passes of the mountains,
till there remained but a single march between them and their own
country; when the travail pangs came upon Abrizah and she could no
longer resist; so she said to Al-Ghazban, "Set me down, for the pains of
labour are upon me;" and cried to Marjanah, "Do thou alight and sit by
me and deliver me" Then Marjanah dismounted from her horse, and
Al-Ghazban did in like sort, and they made fast the bridles and helped
the Princess to dismount, for she was aswoon from excess of anguish.
When Al-Ghazban saw her on the ground, Satan entered into him and he
drew his falchion and brandishing it in her face, said, "O my lady,
vouchsafe me thy favours." Hearing these words she turned to him and
said, "It remaineth for me only that I yield me to negro slaves, after
having refused Kings and Braves!"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Fifty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Princess Abrizah
said to the black slave Al-Ghazban, "It remaineth for me only that I
yield me to negro slaves, after having refused Kings and Braves!" And
she was wroth with him and cried, "Woe to thee! what words are these
thou sayest? Out on thee, and talk not thus in my presence and know that
I will never consent to what thou sayest, though I drink the cup of
death. Wait till I have cast my burden and am delivered of the
after-birth, and then, if thou be able thereto, do with me as thou wilt;
but, an thou leave not lewd talk at this time, assuredly I will slay
myself with my own hand and quit the world and be at peace from all
this." And she began reciting extempore[223]:—

  O spare me, thou Ghazban, indeed enow for me ✿ Are heavy strokes
      of time, mischance and misery!
  Whoredom my Lord forfends to all humanity; ✿ Quoth He, "Who breaks
      my bidding Hell for home shall see!"
  And if thou leave not suing me to whoredom's way ✿ Against
      th' Almighty's choicest gift, my chastity,
  Upon my tribesmen I with might and main will call ✿ And gather
      all, however far or near they be;
  And with Yamáni blade were I in pieces hewn, ✿ Ne'er shall he sight
      my face who makes for villeiny,
  The face of free-born come of noble folk and brave; ✿ What then can
      be to me the seed of whoreson slave?

[Illustration]

When Ghazban heard these lines he was wroth exceedingly; his eyes
reddened with blood and his face became a dusty-grey[224]; his nostrils
swelled, his lips protruded and the repulsiveness of his aspect
redoubled. And he repeated these couplets:—

  Ho thou, Abrizah, mercy! leave me not for I ✿ Of thy love
      and Yamáni[225] glance the victim lie
  My heart is cut to pieces by thy cruelty, ✿ My body wasted and
      my patience done to die:
  From glances ravishing all hearts with witchery ✿ Reason far flies,
      the while desire to thee draws nigh;
  Though at thy call should armies fill the face of earth ✿ E'en now
      I'd win my wish and worlds in arms defy!

When Abrizah heard these words, she wept with sore weeping and said to
him, "Woe to thee, O Ghazban! How dareth the like of thee to address me
such demand, O base-born and obscene-bred? Dost thou deem all folk are
alike?" When the vile slave heard this from her, he waxt more enraged
and his eyes grew redder: and he came up to her and smiting her with the
sword on her neck wounded her to the death. Then he drove her horse
before him with the treasure and made off with himself to the mountains.
Such was the case with Al-Ghazban; but as regards Abrizah, she gave
birth to a son, like the moon, and Marjanah took the babe and did him
the necessary offices and laid him by his mother's side; and lo and
behold! the child fastened to its mother's breast and she dying.[226]
When Marjanah saw this, she cried out with a grievous cry and rent her
raiment and cast dust on her head and buffeted her cheeks till blood
flowed, saying, "Alas, my mistress! Alas, the pity of it! Thou art dead
by the hand of a worthless black slave, after all thy knightly prowess!"
And she ceased not weeping when suddenly a great cloud of dust arose and
walled the horizon[227]; but, after awhile, it lifted and discovered a
numerous conquering host. Now this was the army of King Hardub, Princess
Abrizah's father, and the cause of his coming was that when he heard of
his daughter and her handmaids having fled to Baghdad, and that they
were with King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, he had come forth, leading those
with him, to seek tidings of her from travellers who might have seen her
with the King. When he had gone a single day's march from his capital,
he espied three horsemen afar off and made towards them, intending to
ask whence they came and seek news of his daughter. Now these three whom
he saw at a distance were his daughter and Marjanah and the slave
Al-Ghazban; and he made for them to push enquiry. Seeing this the
villain blackamoor feared for himself; so he killed Abrizah and fled for
his life. When they came up, King Hardub saw his daughter lying dead and
Marjanah weeping over her, and he threw himself from his steed and fell
fainting to the ground. All the riders of his company, the Emirs and
Wazirs, took foot and forthright pitched their tents on the mountain and
set up for the King a great pavilion, domed and circular, without which
stood the grandees of the realm. When Marjanah saw her master, she at
once recognized him and her tears redoubled; and, when he came to
himself, he questioned her and she told him all that had passed and
said, "Of a truth he that hath slain thy daughter is a black slave
belonging to King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, and she informed him how
Sharrkan's father had dealt with the Princess." When King Hardub heard
this, the world grew black in his sight and he wept with sore weeping.
Then he called for a litter and, therein laying his dead daughter,
returned to Cæsarea and carried her into the palace, where he went in to
his mother, Zat al-Dawahi, and said to that Lady of Calamities, "Shall
the Moslems deal thus with my girl? Verily King Omar bin al-Nu'uman
despoiled her of her honour by force, and after this, one of his black
slaves slew her. By the truth of the Messiah, I will assuredly take
blood-revenge for my daughter and clear away from mine honour the stain
of shame; else will I kill myself with mine own hand!" And he wept
passing sore. Quoth his mother, "None other than Marjanah killed thy
daughter, for she hated her in secret;" and she continued to her son,
"Fret not for taking the blood-wit of thy daughter, for, by the truth of
the Messiah, I will not turn back from King Omar bin al-Nu'uman till I
have slain him and his sons; and of a very truth I will do with him a
deed, passing the power of Sage and Knight, whereof the chroniclers
shall tell chronicles in all countries and in every place: but needs
must thou do my bidding in all I shall direct, for whoso be firmly set
on the object of his desire shall surely compass his desire." "By the
virtue of the Messiah," replied he, "I will not cross thee in aught thou
shalt say." Then quoth she, "Bring me a number of handmaids,
high-bosomed virgins, and summon the wise men of the age and let them
teach them philosophy and the rules of behaviour before Kings, and the
art of conversation and making verses; and let them talk with them of
all manner science and edifying knowledge. And the sages must be
Moslems, that they may teach them the language and traditions of the
Arabs, together with the history of the Caliphs and the ancient annals
of the Kings of Al-Islam; and if we persevere in this for four years'
space, we shall gain our case. So possess thy soul in patience and wait;
for one of the Arabs saith:—If we take man-bote after years forty the
time were short to ye. When we have taught the girls these things, we
shall be able to work our will with our foe, for he doteth on women and
he hath three hundred and sixty concubines, whereto are now added an
hundred of the flowers of thy handmaidens who were with thy daughter,
she that hath found mercy.[228] As soon as I have made an end of their
education, as described to thee, I will take them and set out with them
in person." When King Hardub heard his mother's words, he rejoiced and
arose and kissed her head; and at once despatched messengers and
couriers to lands sundry and manifold to fetch him Moslem sages. They
obeyed his commands and fared to far countries and thence brought him
the sages and the doctors he sought. When these came into presence, he
honoured them with notable honours and bestowed dresses on them and
appointed to them stipends and allowances and promised them much money
whenas they should have taught the damsels. Then he committed the
handmaidens to their hands——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


                 Now when it was the Fifty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the sages and
the doctors stood in presence of King Hardub, he honoured them with
notable honours and committed the handmaidens to their hands, enjoining
that these be instructed in all manner of knowledge, philosophy and
polite accomplishments; and they set themselves to do his bidding. Such
was the case with King Hardub; but as for King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, when
he returned from coursing and hunting and entered his palace, he sought
Princess Abrizah but found her not, nor any one knew of her nor could
any give him news of her. This was grievous to him and he said, "How
could the lady leave the palace unknown of any? Had my kingdom been at
stake in this case, it were in perilous condition there being none to
govern it! I will never again go to sport and hunt till I have stationed
at the gates those who shall keep good guard over them!" And he was sore
vexed and his breast was straitened for the loss of Princess Abrizah.
Hereupon behold, his son Sharrkan returned from his journey; and the
father told him what had happened, and informed him how the lady had
fled, whilst he was chasing and hunting, whereat he grieved with
exceeding grief. Then King Omar took to visiting his children every day
and making much of them and brought them learned men and doctors to
teach them, appointing for them stipends. When Sharrkan saw this, he
raged with exceeding rage and envied thereupon his brother and sister
till the signs of chagrin appeared in his face and he ceased not to
languish by reason of this matter: so one day his father said to him,
"Why do I see thee grown weak in body and yellow of face?" "O my
father," replied Sharrkan, "every time I see thee fondle my brother and
sister and make much of them, jealousy seizeth on me, and I fear lest it
grow on me till I slay them and thou slay me in return. And this is the
reason of my weakness of body and change of complexion. But now I crave
of thy favour that thou give me one of thy castles outlying the rest,
that I may abide there the remnant of my life, for as the sayer of
bywords saith:—Absence from my friend is better and fitter for me; and,
Whatso eye doth not perceive, that garreth not heart to grieve." And he
bowed his head towards the ground. When King Omar bin al-Nu'uman heard
his words and knew the cause of his ailment and of his being broken
down, he soothed his heart and said to him, "O my son, I grant thee this
and I have not in my reign a greater than the Castle of Damascus, and
the government of it is thine from this time." Thereupon he forthright
summoned his secretaries of state and bade them write Sharrkan's patent
of investiture to the viceroyalty of Damascus of Syria. And when they
had written it, he equipped him and sent with him the Wazir Dandan, and
invested him with the rule and government and gave him instructions as
to policy and regulations; and took leave of him, and the grandees and
officers of state did likewise, and he set out with his host. When he
arrived at Damascus, the townspeople beat the drums and blew the
trumpets and decorated the city and came out to meet him in great state;
whilst all the notables and grandees paced in procession, and those who
stood to the right of the throne walked on his right flank, and the
others to the left. Thus far concerning Sharrkan; but as regards his
father, Omar bin al-Nu'uman, soon after the departure of his son, the
children's tutors and governors presented themselves before him and said
to him, "O our lord, thy children have now learnt knowledge and they are
completely versed in the rules of manners and the etiquette of
ceremony." The King rejoiced thereat with exceeding joy and conferred
bountiful largesse upon the learned men, seeing Zau al-Makan grown up
and flourishing and skilled in horsemanship. This Prince had reached the
age of fourteen and he occupied himself with piety and prayers, loving
the poor, the Olema and the Koran-students, so that all the people of
Baghdad loved him, men and women. One day, the procession of the
Mahmil[229] of Irák passed round Baghdad before its departure for the
pilgrimage to Meccah and visitation of the tomb of the Prophet (whom
Allah bless and preserve!). When Zau al-Makan saw the Mahmil procession
he was seized with longing desire to become a pilgrim,[230] so he went
in to his sire and said, "I come to ask thy leave to make the
pilgrimage." But his father forbade him saying, "Wait till next year and
I will go and thou too." When the Prince saw that the matter was
postponed, he betook himself to his sister Nuzhat al-Zaman, whom he
found standing at prayer. As soon as she had ended her devotions he said
to her, "I am dying with desire of pilgrimage to the Holy House of Allah
at Meccah and to visit the tomb of the Prophet, upon whom be peace! I
asked my father's leave, but he forbade me that, so I mean to take
privily somewhat of money and set out on the pilgrimage without his
knowledge." "Allah upon thee," exclaimed she, "take me with thee and
deprive me not of visitation to the tomb of the Prophet, whom Allah
bless and keep!" And he answered, "As soon as it is dark night, do thou
come forth from this place, without telling any." Accordingly, when it
was the middle of the night she arose and took somewhat of money and
donned a man's habit; and she ceased not walking to the palace-gate,
where she found Zau al-Makan with camels ready for marching. So he
mounted and mounted her; and the two fared on till they were in the
midst of the Iraki[231] pilgrim-party, and they ceased not marching and
Allah wrote safety for them, till they entered Meccah the Holy and stood
upon Arafat and performed the pilgrimage-rites. Then they made a
visitation to the tomb of the Prophet (whom Allah bless and assain!) and
thought to return with the pilgrims to their native land. But Zau
al-Makan said to his sister, "O my sister, it is in my mind to visit the
Holy House,[232] Jerusalem, and Abraham the Friend of Allah[233] (on
whom be peace!)." "I also desire so to do," replied she. So they agreed
upon this and he fared forth and took passage for himself and her and
they made ready and set out in the ship with a company of Jerusalem
palmers. That very night the sister fell sick of an aguish chill, and
was grievously ill, but presently recovered, after which the brother
also sickened. She tended him during his malady and they ceased not
wayfaring till they arrived at Jerusalem, but the fever increased on him
and he grew weaker and weaker. They alighted at a Khan and there hired a
lodging; but Zau al-Makan's sickness ceased not to increase on him, till
he was wasted with leanness and became delirious. At this, his sister
was greatly afflicted and exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and there is
no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! This is the decree of
Allah!" They sojourned in that place awhile, his weakness ever
increasing and she attending him and buying necessaries for him and for
herself, till all the money she had was expended and she became so poor
that she had not so much as a dirham left. Then she sent a servant of
the Khan to the bazar with some of her clothes, and he sold them and she
spent the price upon her brother; then sold she something more and she
ceased not selling all she had, piece by piece, till nothing was left
but an old rug. Whereupon she wept and exclaimed, "Verily is Allah the
Orderer of the past and the future!" Presently her brother said to her,
"O my sister, I feel recovery drawing near and my heart longeth for a
little roast meat." "By Allah! O my brother," replied she, "I have no
face to beg; but to-morrow I will enter some rich man's house and serve
him and earn somewhat for our living." Then she bethought herself awhile
and said, "Of a truth 'tis hard for me to leave thee and thou in this
state, but I must despite myself!" He rejoined, "Allah forbid! Thou wilt
be put to shame; but there is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah!" And he wept and she wept too. Then she said, "O my brother, we
are strangers who have dwelt here a full year, but none hath yet knocked
at our door. Shall we then die of hunger? I know no resource but that I
go out and do service and earn somewhat to keep us alive, till thou
recover from thy sickness, when we will travel back to our native land."
She sat weeping awhile and he wept too, propped upon his elbow. Then
Nuzhat al-Zaman arose and, veiling her head with a bit of camlet,[234]
which had been of the cameleer's clothes and which the owner had
forgotten and left with them; she kissed the head of her brother and
embraced him and went forth from him, weeping and knowing not whither
she should wend. And she stinted not going and her brother Zau al-Makan
awaiting her return till the supper-time; but she came not, and he
watched for her till the morning morrowed but still she returned not;
and this endured till two days went by. He was greatly troubled thereat
and his heart fluttered for her, and hunger was sore upon him. At last
he left the chamber and, calling the servant of the caravanserai, said,
"I wish thee to bear me to the bazar." So he carried him to the
market-street and laid him down there; and the people of Jerusalem
gathered round him and were moved to tears seeing his condition. He
signed to them begging for somewhat to eat; so they brought him some
money from certain of the merchants who were in the bazar, and bought
food and fed him therewith; after which they carried him to a shop,
where they spread him a mat of palm-leaves and set an ewer of water at
his head. When night fell, all the folk went away, sore concerned for
him and, in the middle of the night, he called to mind his sister and
his sickness redoubled on him, so that he abstained from eating and
drinking and became insensible to the world around him. Then the
bazar-people arose and took for him from the merchants thirty-seven
dirhams, and hiring a camel, said to the driver, "Carry this sick man to
Damascus and leave him in the hospital; haply he may be cured and
recover health." "On my head be it!" replied the camel-man; but he said
to himself, "How shall I take this sick man to Damascus, and he nigh
upon death?" So he carried him away to a place and hid with him till the
night, when he threw him down on the ash-heap near the fire-hole of a
Hammam and went his way. When morning dawned the Stoker[235] of the bath
came to his work and, finding Zau al-Makan cast on his back, exclaimed,
"Why did they not throw their dead body any where but here?" So saying,
he gave him a kick and he moved; whereupon quoth the Fireman, "Some one
of you who hath eaten a bit of Hashish and hath thrown himself down in
whatso place it be!" Then he looked at his face and saw his hairless
cheeks and his grace and comeliness; so he took pity on him and knew
that he was sick and a stranger in the land. And he cried, "There is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah! verily, I have sinned
against this youth, for indeed the Prophet (whom Allah bless and keep!)
enjoineth honour to the stranger, more especially when the stranger is
sick." Then he carried him home and went in with him to his wife and
bade her tend him. So she spread him a sleeping-rug and set a cushion
under his head, then warmed water for him and washed therewith his hands
and feet and face. Meanwhile, the Stoker went to the market and bought
some rose-water and sugar, and sprinkled Zau al-Makan's face with the
water and gave him to drink of the sherbet. Then he fetched a clean
shirt and put it on him. With this, Zau al-Makan sniffed the zephyr of
health and recovery returned to him; and he sat up and leant against the
pillow. Hereat the Fireman rejoiced and exclaimed, "Praise be to Allah
for the welfare of this youth! O Allah, I beseech Thee by Thy knowledge
of hidden things, that Thou make the salvation of this youth to be at my
hands!"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


                Now when it was the Fifty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Fireman
exclaimed, "O Allah, I beseech Thee of Thy knowledge of hidden things,
that thou make this young man's life the work of my hands!" And he
ceased not to nurse him for three days, giving him to drink of sherbet
of sugar and willow-flower water and rose-water; and doing him all
manner of service and kindness, till health began to return to his body
and Zau al-Makan opened his eyes. Presently came in the Fireman and,
seeing him sitting up and showing signs of amendment, said to him, "What
is now thy state, O my son?" "Praise be to Allah," replied Zau al-Makan,
"I am well and like to recover, if such be the will of Allah Almighty at
this time." The Stoker praised the Lord of All for this and, wending
fast to the market, bought ten chickens, which he carried to his wife
and said, "Kill two of these for him every day, one at dawn of day and
the other at fall of day." So she rose up and killed a fowl and brought
it to him boiled, and fed him with the flesh and made him drink its
broth. When he had done eating, she fetched hot water and he washed his
hands and lay back upon the pillow, whereupon she covered him up with
the coverlet, and he slept till the time of the mid-afternoon prayer.
Then she arose and killed another fowl and boiled it; after which she
cut it up and, bringing it to Zau al-Makan, said, "Eat, O my son!" While
he was eating; behold, her husband entered and seeing her feeding him,
sat down at his head and said to him, "How is it with thee now, O my
son?" "Thanks be to Allah for recovery!" he replied: "may the Almighty
requite thee thy kindness to me." At this the Fireman rejoiced and going
out, bought sherbet of violets and rose-water and made him drink it. Now
the Stoker used to work at the Hammam all day for a wage of five
dirhams, whereof he spent every day, for Zau al-Makan, one dirham upon
sugar and sherbet of rose-water and willow-flower water,[236] and
another dirham for fowls; and he ceased not to entreat him thus kindly
during a whole month, till the traces of illness ceased from him and he
was once more sound and whole. Thereupon the Fireman and his wife
rejoiced and asked him, "O my son, wilt thou go with me to the bath?";
whereto he answered, "Yes!" So the Stoker went to the bazar and fetched
a donkey-boy, and he mounted Zau al-Makan on the ass and supported him
in the saddle till they came to the bath. Then he made him sit down and
seated the donkey-boy in the furnace-room and went forth to the market
and bought lote-leaves and lupin-flour,[237] with which he returned to
the bath and said to Zau al-Makan, "O my master, in Allah's name, walk
in and I will wash thy body." So they entered the inner room of the
bath, and the Fireman took to rubbing Zau al-Makan's legs and began to
wash his body with the leaves and meal, when there came to them a
bathman, whom the bath-keeper had sent to Zau al-Makan; and he, seeing
the Stoker washing and rubbing him, said, "This is doing injury to the
keeper's rights." Replied the Fireman, "The master overwhelmeth us with
his favours!" Then the bathman proceeded to shave Zau al-Makan's head,
after which he and the Stoker washed themselves and returned to the
house, where he clad Zau al-Makan in a shirt of fine stuff and a robe of
his own; and gave him a handsome turband and girdle and a light kerchief
which he wound about his neck. Meanwhile the Fireman's wife had killed
and cooked two chickens; so, as soon as Zau al-Makan entered and seated
himself on the carpet, the husband arose and, dissolving sugar in
willow-flower water, made him drink of it. Then he brought the food-tray
and, cutting up the chickens, fed him with the flesh and gave him the
broth to drink till he was satisfied; when he washed his hands and
praised Allah for recovery, and said to the Fireman, "Thou art he whom
the Almighty vouchsafed to me and made the cause of my cure!" "Leave
this talk," replied the other, "and tell us the cause of thy coming to
this city and whence thou art. Thy face showeth signs of gentle
breeding." "Tell me first how thou camest to fall in with me," said Zau
al-Makan; "and after I will tell thee my story." Rejoined the Fireman,
"As for that, I found thee lying on the rubbish-heap by the door of the
fire-house, as I went to my work near the morning, and knew not who had
thrown thee there. So I carried thee home with me; and this is all my
tale." Quoth Zau al-Makan, "Glory to Him who quickeneth the bones,
though they be rotten! Indeed, O my brother, thou hast not done good
save to one worthy of it, and thou shalt presently gather its fruitage."
And he added, "But where am I now?" "Thou art in the city of Jerusalem,"
replied the Stoker; whereupon Zau al-Makan called to mind his
strangerhood and remembered his separation from his sister and wept.
Then he discovered his secret to the Fireman and told him his story and
began repeating:

    In love they bore me further than my force would go, ✿ And for
        them made me suffer resurrection-throe:
    Oh, have compassion, cruel! on this soul of mine ✿ Which, since
        ye fared, is pitied by each envious foe;
    Nor grudge the tender mercy of one passing glance ✿ My case to
        lighten, easing this excess of woe:
    Quoth I "Heart, bear this loss in patience!" Patience cried ✿
        "Take heed! no patience in such plight I'm wont to show."

Then he redoubled his weeping, and the Fireman said to him, "Weep not,
but rather praise Allah for safety and recovery." Asked Zau al-Makan,
"How far is it hence to Damascus?" Answered the other, "Six days'
journey." Then quoth Zau al-Makan, "Wilt thou send me thither?" "O my
lord," quoth the Stoker, "how can I allow thee to go alone, and thou a
youth and a stranger to boot? If thou would journey to Damascus, I am
one who will go with thee; and if my wife will listen to and obey me and
accompany me, I will take up my abode there; for it is no light matter
to part with thee." Then said he to his wife, "Wilt thou travel with me
to Damascus of Syria or wilt thou abide here, whilst I lead this my lord
thither and return to thee? For he is bent upon going to Damascus of
Syria and, by Allah, it is hard to me to part with him, and I fear for
him from highway-men." Replied she, "I will go with you both;" and he
rejoined, "Praised be Allah for accord, and we have said the last word!"
Then he rose and selling all his own goods and his wife's gear——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


              Now when it was the Five-and-Fiftieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Fireman and
his wife agreed with Zau al-Makan to travel with him Damascus-wards.
Then the Stoker sold his goods and his wife's gear and bought a camel
and hired an ass for Zau al-Makan; and they set out, and ceased not
wayfaring for six days till they reached Damascus. And they arrived
there towards eventide; when the Fireman went forth and, as was his
wont, bought some meat and drink. They had dwelt but five days in
Damascus, when his wife sickened and, after a short illness, was
translated to the mercy of Almighty Allah. Her death was a heavy matter
to Zau al-Makan, for he was grown used to her as she had tended him
assiduously; and the Fireman grieved for her with excessive grief.
Presently the Prince turned to the Stoker and finding him mourning, said
to him, "Grieve not, for at this gate we must all go in." Replied he,
"Allah make weal thy lot, O my son! Surely He will compensate us with
His favours and cause our mourning to cease. What sayst thou, O my son,
about our walking abroad to view Damascus and cheer thy spirits?"
Replied Zau al-Makan, "Thy will is mine." So the Fireman arose and
placed his hand in that of Zau al-Makan and the two walked on till they
came to the stables of the Viceroy of Damascus, where they found camels
laden with chests and carpets and brocaded stuffs, and horses ready
saddled and Bactrian dromedaries, while Mamelukes and negro slaves and
folk in a hubbub were running to and fro. Quoth Zau al-Makan, "I wonder
to whom belong all these chattels and camels and stuffs!" So he asked
one of the eunuchs, "Whither this dispatching?" and he answered, "These
are presents sent by the Emir of Damascus to King Omar bin al-Nu'uman,
with the tribute of Syria." Now when Zau al-Makan heard his father's
name, his eyes brimmed over with tears, and he began repeating:—

   Oh ye gone from the gaze of these lidded eyne, ✿ Ye whose sight in
       my spirit shall ever dwell!
   Your charms are gone, but this heart of me ✿ Hath no sweet, and
       no pleasures its sour dispel;
   If Allah's grace make us meet again, ✿ In long-drawn love-tale my
       love I'll tell.

And when he had ended his verse, he wept and the Fireman said to him, "O
my son, we hardly believed that thy health had returned;[238] so take
heart and do not weep, for I fear a relapse for thee." And he ceased not
comforting and cheering him, whilst Zau al-Makan sighed and moaned over
his strangerhood and separation from his sister and his family; and
tears streamed from his eyes and he recited these couplets:—

 Get thee provaunt in this world ere thou wend upon thy way; ✿ And
     know how surely Death descends thy life-lot to waylay:
 All thy worldly goods are pride and the painfullest repine; ✿ All
     thy worldly life is vexing of thy soul in vain display:
 Say is not worldly wone like a wanderer's place of rest, ✿ Where
     at night he "nakhs[239]" his camels and moves off at dawn of day?

And he continued to weep and wail over his separation; whilst the
Fireman also bewept the loss of his wife, yet ceased not to comfort Zau
al-Makan till morning dawned. When the sun rose, he said to him,
"Meseemeth thou yearnest for thy native land?" "Yes," replied Zau
al-Makan, "and I can no longer tarry here; so I will commend thee to
Allah's care and set out with these folk and journey with them, little
by little, till I come to my motherland." Said the Stoker, "And I with
thee; for of a truth I cannot bear to part with thee. I have done thee
kindly service and I mean to complete it by tending thee on thy travel."
At this, Zau al-Makan rejoiced and said, "Allah abundantly requite thee
for me!" and was pleased with the idea of their travelling together. The
Fireman at once went forth and bought another ass, selling the camel;
and laid in his provaunt and said to Zau al-Makan, "This is for thee to
ride by the way; and, when thou art weary of riding, thou canst dismount
and walk." Said Zau al-Makan, "May Allah bless thee and aid me to
requite thee! for verily thou hast dealt with me more lovingly than one
with his brother." Then he waited till it was dark night, when he laid
the provisions and baggage on that ass and set forth upon their journey.
This much befel Zau al-Makan and the Fireman; but as regards what
happened to his sister Nuzhat al-Zaman, when she left her brother in the
Khan where they abode and, wrapped in the old camlet, went out to seek
service with some one, that she might earn wherewithal to buy him the
roast meat he longed for, she fared on, weeping and knowing not whither
to go, whilst her mind was occupied with thoughts of her brother and of
her family and her native land. So she implored Allah Almighty to do
away with these calamities from them and began versifying:—

  Dark falls the night and Passion comes sore pains to gar me dree, ✿
      And pine upstirs those ceaseless pangs which work my tormentry,
  And cease not separation-flames my vitals to consume, ✿ And drives
      me on destruction-way this sorrow's ecstacy;
  And longing breeds me restlessness; desire for ever fires, ✿ And
      tears to all proclaim what I would keep in secrecy:
  No cunning shift is known to me a meeting to secure, ✿ That I may
      quit this sickly state, may cure my malady:
  The love which blazeth in my heart is fed with fancy-fuel, ✿ The
      lover from its hell of fire must bear Hell's agony![240]
  O thou who blamest me for all befel me, 'tis enough, ✿ Patient I
      bear whatever wrote the Reed of Doom for me:
  By Love I swear I'll never be consoled, no, never more; ✿ I swear
      the oath of Love's own slaves who know no perjury:
  O Night, to chroniclers of Love the news of me declare; ✿ That
      sleep hath fed mine eyelids of thy knowledge witness bear!

Then she walked on, weeping and turning right and left as she went, when
behold, there espied her an old Badawi[241] who had come into the town
from the desert with wild Arabs other five. The old man took note of her
and saw that she was lovely, but she had nothing on her head save a
piece of camlet, and, marvelling at her beauty, he said to himself,
"This charmer dazzleth men's wits but she is in squalid condition, and
whether she be of the people of this city or she be a stranger, I needs
must have her." So he followed her, little by little, till he met her
face to face and stopped the way before her in a narrow lane, and called
out to her, asking her case, and said, "Tell me, O my little daughter!
art thou a free-woman or a slave?" When she heard this, she said to him,
"By thy life, do not add to my sorrows!" Quoth he, "Allah hath blessed
me with six daughters, of whom five died and only one is left me, the
youngest of all; and I came to ask thee if thou be of the folk of this
city or a stranger; that I might take thee and carry thee to her, to
bear her company so as to divert her from pining for her sisters. If
thou have no kith and kin, I will make thee as one of them and thou and
she shall be as my two children." Nuzhat al-Zaman bowed her head in
bashfulness when she heard what he said and communed with herself,
"Haply I may trust myself to this old man." Then she said to him, "O
nuncle, I am a maiden of the Arabs and a stranger and I have a sick
brother; but I will go with thee to thy daughter on one condition, which
is, that I may spend only the day with her and at night may return to my
brother. If thou strike this bargain I will fare with thee, for I am a
stranger and I was high in honour among my tribe, and I awoke one
morning to find myself vile and abject. I came with my brother from the
land of Al-Hijaz and I fear lest he know not where I am." When the
Badawi heard this, he said to himself, "By Allah, I have got my desire!"
Then he turned to her and replied, "There shall none be dearer to me
than thou; I wish thee only to bear my daughter company by day and thou
shalt go to thy brother at earliest nightfall. Or, if thou wilt, bring
him over to dwell with us." And the Badawi ceased not to console her
heart and coax her, till she trusted in him and agreed to serve him.
Then he walked on before her and, when she followed him, he winked to
his men to go in advance and harness the dromedaries and load them with
their packs and place upon them water and provisions, ready for setting
out as soon as he should come up with the camels. Now this Badawi was a
base-born churl, a highway thief and a traitor to the friend he held
most lief, a rogue in grain, past master of plots and chicane. He had no
daughter and no son and was only passing through the town when, by the
decree of the Decreer, he fell in with this unhappy one. And he ceased
not to hold her in converse on the highway till they came without the
city of Jerusalem and, when outside, he joined his companions and found
they had made ready the dromedaries. So the Badawi mounted a camel,
having seated Nuzhat al-Zaman behind him and they rode on all night.
Then she knew that the Badawi's proposal was a snare and that he had
tricked her; and she continued weeping and crying out the whole night
long, while they journeyed on making for the mountains, in fear any
should see them. Now when it was near dawn, they dismounted from their
dromedaries and the Badawi came up to Nuzhat al-Zaman and said to her,
"O city-strumpet, what is this weeping? By Allah, an thou hold not thy
peace, I will beat thee to death, O thou town-filth!" When she heard
this she loathed life and longed for death; so she turned to him and
said, "O accursed old man, O gray-beard of hell, how have I trusted thee
and thou hast played me false, and now thou wouldst torture me?" When he
heard her reply he cried out, "O lazy baggage, dost thou dare to bandy
words with me?" And he stood up to her and beat her with a whip, saying,
"An thou hold not thy peace, I will kill thee!" So she was silent
awhile, then she called to mind her brother and the happy estate she had
been in and she shed tears secretly. Next day, she turned to the Badawi
and said to him, "How couldst thou play me this trick and lure me into
these bald and stony mountains, and what is thy design with me?" When he
heard her words he hardened his heart and said to her, "O lazy baggage
of ill-omen and insolent! wilt thou bandy words with me?" and he took
the whip and came down with it on her back till she felt faint. Then she
bowed down over his feet and kissed[242] them; and he left beating her
and began reviling her and said, "By the rights of my bonnet,[243] if I
see or hear thee weeping, I will cut out thy tongue and stuff it up thy
coynte, O thou city-filth!" So she was silent and made him no reply, for
the beating pained her; but sat down with her arms round her knees and,
bowing her head upon her collar, began to look into her case and her
abasement after her lot of high honour; and the beating she had endured;
and she called to mind her brother and his sickness and forlorn
condition, and how they were both strangers in a far country, which
drave her tears down her cheeks and she wept silently and began
repeating:—

   Time hath for his wont to upraise and debase, ✿ Nor is
       lasting condition for human race:
   In this world each thing hath appointed turn; ✿ Nor may man
       transgress his determined place:
   How long these perils and woes? Ah woe ✿ For a life, all woeful
       in parlous case!
   Allah bless not the days which have laid me low ✿ I' the world,
       with disgrace after so much grace!
   My wish is baffled, my hopes cast down, ✿ And distance forbids me
       to greet his face:
   O thou who passeth that dear one's door, ✿ Say for me, these
       tears shall flow evermore!

When she had finished her verses, the Badawi came up to her and, taking
compassion on her, bespoke her kindly and wiped away her tears. Then he
gave her a barley-scone and said, "I love not one who answereth at times
when I am in wrath: so henceforth give me no more of these impertinent
words and I will sell thee to a good man like myself, who will do well
with thee, even as I have done." "Yes; whatso thou doest is right,"
answered she; and when the night was longsome upon her and hunger burnt
her, she ate very little of that barley bread. In the middle of the
night the Badawi gave orders for departure——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


              Now when it was the Six-and-Fiftieth Night.

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Badawi
gave the barley scone to Nuzhat al-Zaman and promised he would sell her
to a good man like himself, she replied, "Whatso thou doest is right!"
and, about midnight, when hunger burned her,[244] she ate a very little
of that barley-bread and the Badawi ordered his party to set out; so
they loaded their loads and he mounted a camel setting Nuzhat al-Zaman
behind him. Then they journeyed and ceased not journeying for three
days, till they entered the city of Damascus and alighted at the
Sultan's Khan, hard by the Viceroy's Gate. Now she had lost her colour
by grief and the fatigue of such travelling, and she ceased not to weep
over her misfortunes. So the Badawi came up to her and said, "O thou
city-filth, by the right of my bonnet, if thou leave not this weeping, I
will sell thee to none but a Jew!" Then he arose and took her by the
hand and carried her to a chamber, and walked off to the bazar, and he
went round to the merchants who dealt in slave-girls, and began to
parley with them, saying, "I have brought a slave-girl whose brother
fell ill, and I sent him to my people about Jerusalem, that they might
tend him till he is cured. As for her I want to sell her, but after the
dog her brother fell sick, the separation from him was grievous to her,
and since then she doth nothing but weep, and now I wish that whoso is
minded to buy her of me speak softly to her and say:—Thy brother is with
me in Jerusalem ill; and I will be easy with him about her price." Then
one of the merchants came up to him and asked, "How old is she?" He
answered "She is a virgin, just come to marriageable age, and she is
endowed with sense and breeding and wit and beauty and loveliness. But
from the day I sent her brother to Jerusalem, her heart hath been
yearning for him, so that her beauty is fallen away and her value
lessened." Now when the merchant heard this, he set forth with the
Badawi and said, "O Shaykh[245] of the Arabs, I will go with thee and
buy of thee this girl whom thou praisest so highly for wit and manners
and beauty and loveliness; and I will pay thee her price but it must be
upon conditions which if thou accept, I will give thee ready money, and
if thou accept not I will return her to thee." Quoth the Badawi, "An
thou wilt, take her up to the Sultan Sharrkan, son of Omar bin
al-Nu'uman lord of Baghdad and of the land of Khorasan, and condition me
any conditions thou likest, for when thou hast brought her before King
Sharrkan, haply she will please him, and he will pay thee her price and
a good profit for thyself to boot." Rejoined the merchant, "It happens
that I have just now something to ask from him, and it is this that he
write me an order upon the office, exempting me from custom-dues and
also that he write me a letter of recommendation to his father, King
Omar bin al-Nu'uman. So if he take the girl, I will weigh[246] thee out
her price at once." "I agree with thee to this condition," answered the
Badawi. So they returned together to the place where Nuzhat al-Zaman was
and the wild Arab stood at the chamber door and called out, saying, "O
Nájiyah[247]!" which was the name wherewith he had named her. When she
heard him, she wept and made no answer. Then he turned to the merchant
and said to him, "There she sitteth; go to her and look at her and speak
to her kindly as I enjoined thee." So the trader went up to her in
courteous wise and saw that she was wondrous beautiful and loveable,
especially as she knew the Arabic tongue; and he said to the Badawi, "If
she be even as thou saidest, I shall get of the Sultan what I will for
her." Then he bespake her, "Peace be on thee, my little maid! How art
thou?" She turned to him and replied, "This also was registered in the
Book of Destiny." Then she looked at him and, seeing him to be a man of
respectable semblance with a handsome face, she said to herself, "I
believe this one cometh to buy me;" and she continued, "If I hold aloof
from him, I shall abide with my tyrant and he will do me to death with
beating. In any case, this person is handsome of face and maketh me hope
for better treatment from him than from my brute of a Badawi. May be he
cometh only to hear me talk; so I will give him a fair answer." All this
while her eyes were fixed on the ground; then she raised them to him and
said in a sweet voice, "And upon thee be peace, O my lord, and Allah's
mercy and His benediction![248] This is what is commanded of the
Prophet, whom Allah bless and preserve! As for thine enquiry how I am,
if thou wouldst know my case, it is such as thou wouldst not wish but to
thy foe." And she held her peace. When the merchant heard what she said,
his fancy took wings for delight in her and, turning to the Badawi, he
asked him, "What is her price, for indeed she is noble?" Thereupon the
Badawi waxed angry and answered, "Thou wilt turn me the girl's head with
this talk! Why dost thou say that she is noble,[249] while she is of the
scum of slave-girls and of the refuse of folk? I will not sell her to
thee!" When the merchant heard this, he knew the man to be weak of wits
and said to him, "Calm thyself, for I will buy her of thee with these
blemishes thou mentionest." "And how much wilt thou give me for her?"
enquired the Badawi. Replied the merchant, "Name thy price for her: none
should name the son save his sire." Rejoined the Badawi, "None shall
name it but thou thyself." Quoth the merchant to himself, "This wildling
is a rudesby and a maggotty head. By Allah, I cannot tell her price, for
she hath won my heart with her fair speech and good looks; and, if she
can read and write, it will be complete fair luck to her and to her
purchaser. But this Badawi does not know her worth." Then he turned and
said to him, "O Shaykh of the Arabs, I will give thee in ready money,
clear of the tax and the Sultan's dues, two hundred gold pieces." Now
when the Badawi heard this, he flew into a violent rage and cried at the
merchant, saying, "Get up and go thy ways! By Allah, wert thou to offer
me two hundred dinars for the bit of camlet she weareth, I would not
sell it to thee. And now I will not sell her, but will keep her by me,
to pasture the camels and grind my grist." And he cried out to her,
saying, "Come here, thou stinkard! I will not sell thee." Then he turned
to the merchant and said to him, "I used to think thee a man of
judgment; but, by the right of my bonnet, if thou begone not from me, I
will let thee hear what shall not please thee!" Quoth the merchant to
himself, "Of a truth this Badawi is mad and knoweth not her value, and I
will say no more to him about her price at the present time; for by
Allah, were he a man of sense, he would not say:—By the rights of my
bonnet! By the Almighty, she is worth the kingdom of the Chosroes and I
have not her price by me, but if he ask even more, I will give him what
he will, though it be all my goods." Then he turned and said to him, "O
Shaykh of the Arabs, take patience and calm thyself and tell me what
clothes she hath with thee?" Cried the Badawi, "And what hath the
baggage to do with clothes? By Allah, this camlet in which she is
wrapped is ample for her." "With thy leave," said the merchant, "I will
unveil her face and examine her even as folk examine slave-girls whom
they think of buying."[250] Replied the other, "Up and do what thou wilt
and Allah keep thy youth! Examine her outside and inside and, if thou
wilt, strip off her clothes and look at her when she is naked." Quoth
the trader, "Allah forfend! I will look at naught save her face."[251]
Then he went up to her and was put to shame by her beauty and
loveliness,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Fifty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the merchant went
up to Nuzhat al-Zaman and was put to shame by her beauty and loveliness,
so he sat by her side and asked her, "O my mistress, what is thy name?"
She answered, "Dost thou ask what is my name this day or what it was
before this day?" Thereupon the merchant enquired, "Hast thou then two
names: to day's and yesterday's?" "Yes," replied she, "my name in the
past was Nuzhat al-Zaman, the Delight of the Age; but my name at this
present is Ghussat[252] al-Zaman, the Despight of the Age." When the
merchant heard this his eyes brimmed over with tears and quoth he to
her, "Hast thou not a sick brother?" "Ay by Allah, O my lord, I have,"
quoth she, "but fortune hath parted me and him and he lieth sick in
Jerusalem." The merchants head was confounded at the sweetness of her
speech and he said to himself, "Verily, the Badawi spake the truth of
her." Then she called to mind her brother and his sickness and his
strangerhood and her separation from him in his hour of weakness and her
not knowing what had befallen him; and she thought of all that had
happened to her with the Badawi and of her severance from her mother and
father and native land; and the tears coursed down her cheeks and fast
as they started they dropped; and she began reciting:—

   Allah, where'er thou be, His aid impart ✿ To thee, who distant
       dwellest in my heart!
   Allah be near thee how so far thou fare; ✿ Ward off all shifts of
       Time, all dangers thwart!
   Mine eyes are desolate for thy vanisht sight, ✿ And start my
       tears—ah me, how fast they start!
   Would Heaven I kenned what quarter or what land ✿ Homes thee, and
       in what house and tribe thou art;
   An fount of life thou drain in greenth of rose, ✿ While drink
       I tear-drops for my sole desart?
   An thou 'joy slumber in those hours, when I ✿ Feel 'twixt my side
       and couch coals' burning smart?
   All things were easy save to part from thee, ✿ For my sad heart
       this grief is hard to dree.

When the merchant heard her verses, he wept and put out his hand to wipe
away the tears from her cheeks; but she let down her veil over her face,
saying, "Heaven forbid, O my lord!"[253] Then the Badawi, who was
sitting at a little distance watching them, saw her cover her face from
the merchant while about to wipe the tears from her cheeks; and he
concluded that she would have hindered him from handling her: so he rose
and running to her, dealt her, with a camel's halter he had in his hand,
such a blow on the shoulders that she fell to the ground on her face.
Her eyebrow struck a stone which cut it open, and the blood streamed
down her cheeks; whereupon she screamed a loud scream and felt faint and
wept bitterly. The merchant was moved to tears for her and said in
himself, "There is no help for it but that I buy this damsel, though at
her weight in gold, and free her from this tyrant." And he began to
revile the Badawi whilst Nuzhat al-Zaman lay insensible. When she came
to herself, she wiped away the tears and blood from her face; and she
bound up her head: then, raising her glance to heaven, she besought her
Lord with a sorrowful heart and began repeating:—

    And pity one who erst in honour throve, ✿ And now is fallen into
        sore disgrace.
    She weeps and bathes her cheeks with railing tears, ✿ And asks
        "What cure can meet this fatal case?"

When she had ended her verse, she turned to the merchant and said in an
undertone, "By the Almighty, do not leave me with a tyrant who knoweth
not Allah the Most High! If I pass this night in his place, I shall kill
myself with my own hand: save me from him, so Allah save thee from
Gehenna-fire." Then quoth the merchant to the Badawi, "O Shaykh of the
Arabs, this slave is none of thine affair; so do thou sell her to me for
what thou wilt." "Take her," quoth the Badawi, "and pay me down her
price, or I will carry her back to the camp and there set her to feed
the camels and gather their dung."[254] Said the merchant, "I will give
thee fifty thousand dinars for her." "Allah will open!"[255] replied the
Badawi. "Seventy thousand," said the merchant. "Allah will open!"
repeated the Badawi: "this is not the capital spent upon her, for she
hath eaten with me barley-bread to the value of ninety thousand gold
pieces." The merchant rejoined, "Thou and thine and all thy tribe in the
length of your lives have not eaten a thousand ducats' worth of barley;
but I will say thee one word, wherewith if thou be not satisfied, I will
set the Viceroy of Damascus on thee and he will take her from thee by
force." The Badawi continued, "Say on!" "An hundred thousand," quoth the
merchant. "I have sold her to thee at that price," answered the Badawi;
"I shall be able to buy salt with her." The merchant laughed and, going
to his lodgings, brought the money and put it into the hand of the
Badawi, who took it and made off, saying to himself, "Needs must I go to
Jerusalem where, haply, I shall happen on her brother, and I will bring
him here and sell him also." So he mounted and journeyed till he arrived
at Jerusalem, where he went to the Khan and asked for Zau al-Makan, but
could not find him. Such was the case with him; but for what regards the
merchant and Nuzhat al-Zaman, when he took her he threw some of his
clothes over her and carried her to his lodgings——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


             Now when it was the Eight-and-Fiftieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the trader
saved Nuzhat al-Zaman from the Badawi and bore her to his lodgings and
robed her in the richest raiment, he went down with her to the bazar,
where he bought her what ornaments she chose and put them in a satin
bag, which he set before her, saying, "All is for thee and I ask nothing
of thee in return but that, when I lead thee to the Sultan, Viceroy of
Damascus, thou acquaint him with the price I paid for thee, albeit it
was little compared with thy value: and, if seeing thee he buy thee of
me, thou tell him how I have dealt with thee and ask of him for me a
royal patent, and a written recommendation wherewith I can repair to his
father, King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, Lord of Baghdad, to the intent that he
may forbid the tax on my stuffs or any other goods in which I traffic."
When she heard his words, she wept and sobbed, and the merchant said to
her, "O my lady, I observe that, every time I mention Baghdad, thine
eyes are tearful: is there any one there whom thou lovest? If it be a
trader or the like, tell me; for I know all the merchants and so forth
there and, if thou wouldst send him a message, I will bear it for thee."
Replied she, "By Allah, I have no acquaintance among merchant-folk and
the like! I know none there but King Omar bin Nu'uman, Lord of Baghdad."
When the merchant heard her words, he laughed and rejoiced with
exceeding joy and said in himself, "By Allah, I have won my wish!" Then
he said to her, "Hast thou been shown to him in time past?" She
answered, "No, but I was brought up with his daughter and he holdeth me
dear and I have high honour with him; so if thou wouldst have the King
grant thee thy desire, give me ink-case and paper and I will write thee
a letter; and when thou reachest the city of Baghdad, do thou deliver it
into the hand of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and say to him:—Thy handmaid,
Nuzhat al-Zaman, would have thee to know that the chances and changes of
the nights and days have struck her as with a hammer, and have smitten
her so that she hath been sold from place to place; and she sendeth thee
her salams. And, if he ask further of her, say that I am now with the
Viceroy at Damascus." The merchant wondered at her eloquence, and his
affection for her increased and he said to her, "I cannot but think that
men have played upon thine understanding and sold thee for money. Tell
me, dost thou know the Koran by heart?" "Yes," answered she; "and I am
also acquainted with philosophy and medicine and the prolegomena of
science and the commentaries of Galen, the physician, on the canons of
Hippocrates; and I have commented him and I have read the Tazkirah and
have commented the Burhán; and I have studied the Simples of Ibn Baytár,
and I have something to say of the canon of Meccah, by Avicenna. I can
ree riddles and can solve ambiguities, and discourse upon geometry and
am skilled in anatomy. I have read the books of the Sháfi'í[256] school
and the Traditions of the Prophet and syntax; and I can argue with the
Olema and discourse of all manner learning. Moreover I am skilled in
logic and rhetoric and arithmetic and the making of talismans and
almanacs, and I know thoroughly the Spiritual Sciences[257] and the
times appointed for religious duties and I understand all these branches
of knowledge." Then quoth she to the merchant, "Bring me ink-case and
paper, that I write thee a letter which shall aid thee on thy journey to
Baghdad and enable thee to do without passports." Now when the merchant
heard this, he cried out, "Brava! Brava![258] Then O happy he in whose
palace thou shalt be!" Thereupon he brought her paper and ink-case and a
pen of brass and bussed the earth before her face to do her honour. She
took a sheet and handled the reed and wrote therewith these verses:—

   I see all power of sleep from eyes of me hath flown; ✿ Say, did
       thy parting teach these eyne on wake to wone?
   What makes thy memory light such burnings in my heart? ✿ Hath
       every lover strength such memories to own?
   How sweet the big-dropped cloud which rained on summer-day; ✿
       'Tis gone: and ere I taste its sweets afar 'tis flown:
   I pray the wind with windy breath to bring some news ✿ From thee,
       to lover-wight wi' love so woe-begone:
   Complains to thee a lover of all hope forlorn, ✿ For parting-pangs
       can break not only heart but stone.

And when she had ended writing the verses she continued, "These words
are from her who saith that melancholy destroyeth her and that watching
wasteth her; in the murk of whose night is found no light and darkness
and day are the same in her sight. She tosseth on the couch of
separation and her eyes are blackened with the pencils of sleeplessness;
she watcheth the stars arise and into the gloom she strains her eyes:
verily, sadness and leanness have consumed her strength and the setting
forth of her case would run to length. No helper hath she but tears and
she reciteth these verses:—

  No ring-dove moans from home on branch in morning light, ✿ But
      shakes my very frame with sorrow's killing might:
  No lover sigheth for his love or gladdeth heart ✿ To meet his mate,
      but breeds in me redoubled blight
  I bear my plaint to one who has no ruth for me; ✿ Ah me, how Love
      can part man's mortal frame and sprite!"

Then her eyes welled over with tears, and she wrote also these two
couplets:—

     "Love smote my frame so sore on parting day, ✿ That severance
         severed sleep and eyes for aye
     I waxt so lean that I am still a man, ✿ But for my speaking,
         thou wouldst never say."

Then she shed tears and wrote at the foot of the sheet, "This cometh
from her who is far from her folk and her native land, the
sorrowful-hearted woman Nuzhat al-Zaman." In fine, she folded the sheet
and gave it to the merchant, who took it and kissed it and understood
its contents and exclaimed, "Glory to Him who fashioned thee!"——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


              Now when it was the Nine-and-Fiftieth Night,

She said, It reached me, O auspicious King, that Nuzhat al-Zaman wrote
the letter and gave it to the merchant; and he took it and read it and
understood the contents and exclaimed, "Glory to Him who fashioned
thee!" Then he redoubled his kindness and made himself pleasant to her
all that day; and when night came, he sallied out to the bazar and
bought some food, wherewith he fed her; after which he carried her to
the Hammam and said to the bath-woman, "As soon as thou hast made an end
of washing her head, dress her and send and let me know of it." And she
replied "Hearing is obeying." Meanwhile he fetched food and fruit and
wax-candles and set them on the bench in the outer room of the bath; and
when the tire-woman had done washing her, she dressed her and led her
out of the bath and seated her on the bench. Then she sent to tell the
merchant, and Nuzhat al-Zaman went forth to the outer room, where she
found the tray spread with food and fruit. So she ate and the tire-woman
with her, and gave the rest to the people and keeper of the bath. Then
she slept till the morning, and the merchant lay the night in a place
apart from her. When he aroused himself from sleep he came to her and
waking her, presented her with a shift of fine stuff and a head-kerchief
worth a thousand dinars, a suit of Turkish embroidery and walking boots
purfled with red gold and set with pearls and gems. Moreover, he hung in
each of her ears a circlet of gold with a fine pearl therein, worth a
thousand dinars, and threw round her neck a collar of gold with bosses
of garnet and a chain of amber beads that hung down between her breasts
over her navel. Now to this chain were attached ten balls and nine
crescents, and each crescent had in its midst a bezel of ruby, and each
ball a bezel of balass: the value of the chain was three thousand dinars
and each of the balls was priced at twenty thousand dirhams, so that the
dress she wore was worth in all a great sum of money. When she had put
these on, the merchant bade her adorn herself, and she adorned herself
to the utmost beauty; then she let fall her fillet over her eyes and she
fared forth with the merchant preceding her. But when folk saw her, all
wondered at her beauty and exclaimed, "Blessed be Allah, the most
excellent Creator! O lucky the man in whose house she shall be!" And the
trader ceased not walking (and she behind him) till they entered the
palace of Sultan Sharrkan; when he sought an audience and, kissing the
earth between his hands, said, "O auspicious King, I have brought thee a
rare gift, unmatched in this time and richly gifted with beauty and with
good qualities." Quoth the King, "Let me see it." So the merchant went
out and brought her, she following him till he made her stand before
King Sharrkan. When he beheld her, blood yearned to blood, though she
had been parted from him in childhood and though he had never seen her,
having only heard a long time after her birth that he had a sister
called Nuzhat al-Zaman and a brother Zau al-Makan, he having been
jealous of them, because of the succession. And such was the cause of
his knowing little about them. Then, having placed her before the
presence, the merchant said, "O King of the age, besides being peerless
in her time for beauty and loveliness, she is also versed in all
learning, sacred and profane, including the art of government and the
abstract sciences." Quoth the King to the trader, "Take her price,
according as thou boughtest her, and go thy ways." "I hear and I obey,"
replied the merchant; "but first write me a patent, exempting me for
ever from paying tithe on my merchandise." Said the King, "I will do
this, but first tell me what price thou paidest for her." Said the
merchant, "I bought her for an hundred thousand dinars, and her clothes
cost me another hundred thousand." When the Sultan heard these words, he
declared, "I will give thee a higher price than this for her;" and,
calling his treasurer, said to him, "Pay this merchant three hundred and
twenty thousand ducats; so will he have an hundred and twenty thousand
dinars profit." Thereupon the Sultan summoned the four Kazis and paid
him the money in their presence and then he said, "I call you to witness
that I free this my slave-girl and purpose to marry her." So the Kazis
wrote out the deed of emancipation and the contract of marriage, when
the Sultan scattered much gold on the heads of those present; and the
pages and the eunuchs picked up this largesse. Then, after paying him
his monies, Sharrkan bade them write for the merchant a perpetual
patent, exempting him from toll, tax or tithe upon his merchandise and
forbidding each and every in all his government to molest him, and
lastly bestowed on him a splendid dress of honour.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day, and ceased saying her permitted say.


                Now when it was the full Sixtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Sharrkan bade
them write for the merchant a mandate, after paying him his monies; and
they wrote a perpetual patent, exempting him from the tithe upon his
merchandise and forbidding any in his government to molest him; and
lastly bestowed upon him a splendid dress of honour. Then all about him
retired, and none remained save the Kazis and the merchant, whereupon
said he to the judges, "I wish you to hear such discourse from this
damsel as may prove her knowledge and accomplishments in all claimed for
her by this trader, that we ascertain the truth of his assertions." They
answered, "There is no evil in that!"; and he commanded the curtain to
be let down between him and those with him and the maiden and those with
her; and the women about the damsel behind the curtains began to wish
her joy and kiss her hands and feet, when they learned that she was
become the King's wife. Then they came round her and took off her
dresses easing her of the weight of her clothes and began to look upon
her beauty and loveliness. Presently the wives of the Emirs and Wazirs
heard that King Sharrkan had bought a handmaiden unmatched for her
beauty and learning and philosophy and account-keeping, and versed in
all branches of knowledge, that he had paid for her three hundred and
twenty thousand dinars, and that he had set her free and had written a
marriage-contract with her and had summoned the four Kazis to make trial
of her, how she would answer all their questions and hold disputation
with them. So they asked leave of their husbands and repaired to the
palace wherein was Nuzhat al-Zaman. When they came in to her, they found
the eunuchs standing before her; and, as soon as she saw the wives of
the Emirs and Wazirs and Grandees of the realm coming to call upon her,
she arose to them on her feet and met them with courtesy, her
handmaidens standing behind her, and she received them saying, "Ye be
welcome!" The while she smiled in their faces so as to win their hearts;
and she promised them all manner of good and seated them in their proper
stations, as if she had been brought up with them; so all wondered at
her beauty and loveliness and said to one another, "This damsel is none
other than a Queen, the daughter of a King." Then they sat down,
magnifying her worth and said to her, "O our lady, this our city is
illumined by thee, and our country and abode and birthplace and reign
are honoured by thy presence. The kingdom indeed is thy kingdom and the
palace is thy palace, and we all are thy handmaids; so, by Allah, do not
shut us out from thy favours and from the sight of thy beauty." And she
thanked them for this. All this while the curtains were let down between
Nuzhat al-Zaman and the women with her, on the one side, and King
Sharrkan and the four Kazis and the merchant seated by him on the other.
Presently King Sharrkan called to her and said, "O Queen, the glory of
thine age, this merchant hath described thee as being learned and
accomplished; and he claimeth that thou art skilled in all branches of
knowledge, even to astrology: so let us hear something of all this he
hath mentioned, and favour us with a short discourse on such subjects."
She replied, saying:—"O King, to hear is to obey.[259] The first
subjects whereof I will treat are the art of government and the duties
of Kings and what behoveth governors of commandments according to
religious law, and what is incumbent on them in respect of satisfactory
speech and manners. Know then, O King, that all men's works tend either
to religious or to laical life, for none attaineth to religion save
through this world, because it is the best road to futurity. Now the
works of this world are not ordered save by the doings of its people,
and men's doings are divided into four divisions, government, commerce,
husbandry and craftmanship. Now government requireth perfect
administration with just and true judgment; for government is the pivot
of the edifice of the world, which world is the road to futurity; since
Allah Almighty hath made the world for His servants as viaticum to the
traveller for the attainment of his goal; and it befitteth each man that
he receive of it such measure as shall bring him to Allah, and that he
follow not herein his own mind and his individual lust. If folk would
take of worldly goods with justice and equity, all cause of contention
would be cut off; but they take thereof with violence and after their
own desires, and their persistence therein giveth rise to contentions;
so they have need of the Sultan, that he do justice between them and
order their affairs; and, if the King restrain not his folk from one
another, the strong will drive the weak to the wall. Hence Ardeshir[260]
saith, Religion and Kingship be twins; religion is a hidden treasure and
the King is its keeper; and the Divine Ordinances and men's intelligence
point out that it behoveth the people to adopt a Sultan who shall
withhold oppressor from oppressed and do the weak justice against the
strong and restrain the violence of the proud and the rebels against
rule. For know, O King, that according to the measure of the Sultan's
good morals, even so will be the time; as saith the Apostle of Allah (on
whom be peace and salvation!), There be two classes who, if they be
good, the people will be good; and if they be bad, the people will be
bad, even the Olema and the Emirs. And it is said by a certain
sage:—There be three kinds of Kings, the King of the Faith, the King who
protecteth things to which reverence is due, and the King of his own
lusts. The King of the Faith obligeth his subjects to follow their
faith, and it behoveth he be the most faithful,[261] for it is by him
that they take pattern in the things of the Faith; and it becometh the
folk to obey him in whatso he commandeth according to Divine Ordinance;
but he shall hold the discontented in the same esteem as the contented,
because of submission to the decrees of Destiny. As for the King who
protecteth things to be reverenced, he upholdeth the things of the Faith
and of the World and compelleth his folk to follow the Divine Law and to
preserve the rights of humanity; and it fitteth him to unite Pen and
Sword; for whoso declineth from what Pen hath written, his feet slip and
the King shall rectify his error with the sharp Sword and dispread his
justice over all mankind. As for the King of his own lusts, he hath no
religion but the following his desire and, as he feareth not the wrath
of his Lord who set him on the throne, so his Kingdom inclineth to
deposition and the end of his pride is in the house of perdition. And
sages say, The King hath need of many people, but the people have need
of but one King; wherefore it beseemeth that he be well acquainted with
their natures, that he reduce their discord to concord, that with his
justice he encompass them all and with his bounties overwhelm them all.
And know, O King, that Ardeshir, styled Jamr Shadíd, or the Live Coal,
third of the Kings of Persia, conquered the whole world and divided it
into four divisions and, for this purpose, gat for himself four
seal-rings, one for each division. The first seal was that of the sea
and the police of prohibition and on it was written, Alternatives. The
second was the seal of tribute and of the receipt of monies, and on it
was written, Building up. The third was the seal of the provisioning
department and on it was written, Plenty. The fourth was the seal of the
oppressed, and on it was written, Justice. And these usages remained
valid in Persia until the revelation of Al-Islam. Chosroes also wrote
his son, who was with the army:—Be not thou too open-handed with thy
troops, or they will be too rich to need thee."——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


                 Now when it was the Sixty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Chosroes wrote his
son:—Be not thou too open-handed with thy troops, or they will be too
rich to need thee; nor be thou niggardly with them, or they will murmur
against thee. Give thy giving deliberately and confer thy favours
advisedly; open thy hand to them in time of success and stint them not
in time of distress. There is a legend that a desert Arab came once to
the Caliph Al-Mansúr[262] and said, Starve thy dog and he shall follow
thee. When the Caliph heard his words, he was enraged with the Arab, but
Abu 'l-Abbás of Tús said to him, I fear that if some other than thou
should show him a scone, the dog would follow him and leave thee alone.
Thereupon the Caliph Al-Mansúr's wrath subsided and he knew that the
wild Arab had intended no offence and ordered him a present. And know, O
King, that Abd al-Malik bin Marwán wrote to his brother Abd al-Aziz,
when he despatched him to Egypt, as follows:—Pay heed to thy Secretaries
and thy Chamberlains, for the Secretaries will acquaint thee with
established matters and the Chamberlains with matters of official
ceremony, whilst thine expenditure will make thy troops known to thee.
Omar bin Al-Khattab[263] (whom Allah accept!) when engaging a servant
was in the habit of conditioning him with four conditions; the first
that he should not ride the baggage-beasts, the second that he should
not wear fine clothes, the third that he should not eat of the spoil and
the fourth that he should not put off praying till after the proper
period. It is said that there is no wealth more profitable than
understanding, and there is no understanding like common sense and
prudence, and there is no prudence like piety; that there is no means of
drawing near to God like good morals, no measure like good breeding, no
traffic like good works and no profit like earning the Divine favour;
that there is no temperance like standing within the limits of the law,
no science like that of meditation, no worship like obeying the Divine
commands, no faith like modesty, no calculation like self-abasement and
no honour like knowledge. So guard the head and what it containeth and
the belly and what it compriseth; and think of death and doom ere it
ariseth. Saith Ali (whose face Allah honour!), Beware of the wickedness
of women and be on thy guard against them: consult them not in
aught;[264] but grudge not complaisance to them, lest they greed for
intrigue. And eke quoth he, whoso leaveth the path of moderation his
wits become perplexed; and there be rules for this which we will
mention, if it be Allah's will. And Omar (whom Allah accept!) saith,
there are three kinds of women, firstly the true-believing,
Heaven-fearing, love-full and fruit-full, who helpeth her mate against
fate, not helping fate against her mate; secondly, she who loveth her
children but no more and, lastly, she who is a shackle Allah setteth on
the neck of whom He will. Men be also three: the wise when he exerciseth
his own judgement; the wiser who, when befalleth somewhat whereof he
knoweth not the issue, seeketh folk of good counsel and acteth by their
advice; and the unwise-irresolute ignoring the right way nor heeding
those who would guide him straight. Justice is indispensable in all
things; even slave-girls have need of justice; and men quote as an
instance highway robbers who live by violenting mankind, for did they
not deal equitably among themselves and observe justice in dividing
their booty, their order would fall to pieces.[265] In short, for the
rest, the Prince of noble qualities is Beneficence-cum-Benevolence; and
how excellent is the saying of the poet:—

   By open hand and ruth the youth rose to his tribe's command; ✿ Go
       and do likewise for the same were easy task to thee.

And quoth another:—

  In ruth and mildness surety lies and mercy wins respect; ✿ And Truth
      is best asylum for the man of soothfast soul:
  Whoso for wealth of gold would win and wear the world's good word, ✿
      On glory's course must ever be the first to gain the goal.

And Nuzhat al-Zaman discoursed upon the policy of Kings till the
bystanders said, "Never have we seen one reason of rule and government
like this damsel! Haply she will let us hear some discourse upon subject
other than this." When she heard their words and understood them she
said, "As for the chapter of good breeding, it is wide of comprehension,
being a compend of things perfect. Now it so happened that one day there
came to the Caliph Mu'áwiyah[266] one of his companions, who mentioned
the people of Irak and the goodness of their wit; and the Caliph's wife
Maysun, mother of Yezid, heard his words. So, when he was gone, she said
to the Caliph:—O Prince of the Faithful, I would thou let some of the
people of Irak come in and talk to thee, that I may hear their
discourse. Therewith Mu'awiyah said to his attendants, See who is at the
door? And they answered, The Banu Tamím. Let them come in, said he. So
they came in and with them Al-Ahnaf son of Kays.[267] Then quoth
Mu'awiyah:—Enter, O Abu Bahr, and drew a curtain between himself and
Maysun, that she might hear what they said without being seen herself;
then he said to Al-Ahnaf:—O Son of the Sea, draw near and tell me what
counsel thou hast for me. Quoth Al-Ahnaf, Part thy hair and trim thy
moustachio and pare thy nails and pluck thine armpits and shave thy
pubes[268] and ever use the toothstick because therein be
two-and-seventy virtues, and make the Ghusl or complete ablution on
Friday, as an expiation for all between the Fridays."——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Sixty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ahnaf bin Kays
replied to Al-Mu'awiyah's[269] question, "And ever use the toothstick,
because therein be two-and-seventy virtues and make the complete Friday
ablution as an expiation for all between the two Fridays." Quoth
Mu'awiyah, "What is thy counsel to thyself?" "To set my feet firmly on
the ground, to move them deliberately and watch over them with mine
eyes!" "How dost thou order thyself when thou goest in to one not of the
nobles of thy tribe?" "I lower mine eyes modestly and I salute first; I
avoid what concerneth me not and I spare my words!" "And how when thou
goest in to thine equals?" "I give ear to them when they speak and I do
not assail them when they err!" "When thou goest in to thy chiefs?" "I
salute without making any sign and await the reply: if they bid me draw
near, I draw near; and if they draw off from me I withdraw!" "How dost
thou with thy wife?" Quoth Ahnaf, "Excuse me from answering this, O
Commander of the Faithful!"; but Mu'awiyah cried, "I conjure thee inform
me." He said, "I entreat her kindly and show her familiarity and am
large in expenditure, for woman was created of a crooked rib."[270] "And
how dost thou when thou hast a mind to lie with her?" "I bid her perfume
herself and kiss her till she is moved to desire; then, should it be as
thou knowest,[271] I throw her on her back. If the seed abide in her
womb I say:—O Allah make it blessed and let it not be a wastrel, but
fashion it into the best of fashions![272] Then I rise from her to
ablution and first I pour water over my hands and then over my body and
lastly, I praise Allah for the joy He hath given me." Said Mu'awiyah,
"Thou hast answered right well and now tell me what be thy
requirements?" Said Ahnaf, "I would have thee rule thy subjects in the
fear of Allah and do even-handed justice between them." Thereupon Ahnaf
rose to his feet and left the Caliph's presence, and when he had gone
Maysun said, "Were there but this man in Irak, he would suffice to it."
Then continued Nuzhat al-Zaman, "And all this is a section of the
chapter of good-breeding, and know O King, that Mu'aykib was intendant
of the public treasury during the Caliphate of Omar bin
al-Khattáb,"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


                 Now when it was the Sixty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nuzhat al-Zaman
continued, "Know, O King, that Mu'aykib was intendant of the public
treasury during the Caliphate of Omar bin Al-Khattab; and it so befel
him that he saw Omar's son and gave him a dirham out of the treasury.
Thereupon, quoth Mu'aykib, I returned to my own house, and while I was
sitting there behold, a messenger came to me from Omar and I was afraid
and went to him, and when I came into his presence, in his hand was the
dirham I had given his son. He said to me, Woe to thee, Mu'aykib! I have
found somewhat concerning thy soul. I asked, And what is that?; and he
answered, It is that thou hast shown thyself a foe to the followers of
Mohammed (on whom be peace and salvation!) in the matter of this dirham,
and thou wilt have to account for it on Resurrection Day.[273] And Omar
also wrote a letter to Abú Músá al-Ashári[274] as follows:—When these
presents reach thee, give the people what is theirs and remit to me the
rest. And he did so. Now when Othmán succeeded to the Caliphate, he
wrote a like letter to Abu Musa, who did his bidding and sent him the
tribute accordingly, and with it came Ziyád.[275] And when Ziyad laid
the tribute before Othman, the Caliph's son came in and took a dirham,
whereupon Ziyad shed tears. Othman asked Why weepest thou?; and Ziyad
answered, I once brought Omar bin Al-Khattab the like of this and his
son took a dirham, whereupon Omar bade snatch it from his hand. Now thy
son hath taken of the tribute, yet I have seen none say aught to him or
snatch the money from him. Then Othman[276] cried, And where wilt thou
find the like of Omar? Again Zayd bin Aslam relates of his father that
he said:—I went out one night with Omar till we approached a blazing
fire. Quoth Omar, O Aslam, I think these must be travellers who are
suffering from the cold. Come, let us join them. So we walked on till we
came to them and behold! we found a woman who had lighted a fire under a
cauldron and by her side were two children, both a-wailing. Said Omar,
Peace be with you, O folk of light (for it was repugnant to him to say
'folk of fire'),[277] what aileth you? Said she, The cold and the night
trouble us. He asked, What aileth these little people that they weep?;
and she answered, They are hungry. He enquired, And what is in this
cauldron?; and she replied, It is what I quiet them withal, and Allah
will question Omar bin Al-Khattab of them, on the Day of Doom. He said,
And what should Omar know of their case? Why then, rejoined she, should
he manage people's affairs and yet be unmindful of them? Thereupon Omar
turned to me (continued Aslam) and cried, Come with us! So we set off
running till we reached the pay-department of his treasury, where he
took out a sack containing flour and a pot holding fat and said to me,
Load these on my back! Quoth I, O Commander of the Faithful, I will
carry them for thee. He rejoined, Wilt thou bear my load for me on the
Day of Resurrection? So I put the things on his back, and we set off,
running, till we threw down the sack hard by her. Then he took out some
of the flour and put it in the cauldron; and, saying to the woman, Leave
it to me, he began blowing the fire under the cauldron. Now he was a
long-bearded man[278] and I saw the smoke issuing from between the hairs
of his beard till the flour was cooked, when he took some of the fat and
threw it in and said to the woman, Feed them while I cool it for them.
So they fell to eating till they had eaten their fill, and he left the
rest with her. Then he turned to me and said, O Aslam, I see it was
indeed hunger made them weep; and I am glad I did not go away ere I
found out the cause of the light I saw."——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Sixty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nuzhat al-Zaman
continued, "It is related that Omar passed by a flock of sheep, kept by
a Mameluke, and asked him to sell him a sheep. He answered, They are not
mine. Thou art the man I sought, said Omar, and bought him and freed
him; whereupon the slave exclaimed, O Allah, as thou hast bestowed on me
the lesser emancipation; so vouchsafe me the greater![279] It is also
said that Omar bin Al-Khattab was wont to give his servants sweet milk
and himself eat coarse fare, and to clothe them softly and himself wear
rough garments. He rendered unto all men their due, and exceeded in his
giving to them. He once gave a man four thousand dirhams and added
thereto a thousand, wherefore it was said to him, Why dost thou not
increase to thy son as thou increasest to this man? He answered, This
man's father stood firm at the battle-day of Ohod.[280] Al-Hasan relates
that Omar once came back from foray with much money, and that
Hafsah[281] approached him and said, O Commander of the Faithful, the
due of kinship! O Hafsah! replied he, verily Allah hath enjoined us to
satisfy the dues of kinship, but not with the monies of the True
Believers. Indeed, thou pleasest thy family, but thou angerest thy
father. And she went away trailing her skirts.[282] The son of Omar
said, I implored the Lord to show me my father one year after his death,
till at last I saw him wiping the sweat from his brow and asked him, How
is it with thee, O my father? He answered, But for my Lord's mercy thy
father surely had perished." Then said Nuzhat al-Zaman, "Hear, O
auspicious King, the second division of the first chapter of the
instances of the followers of the Apostle and other holy men. Saith
Al-Hasan al-Basrí,[283] Not a soul of the sons of Adam goeth forth of
the world without regretting three things, failure to enjoy what he hath
amassed, failure to compass what he hoped, failure to provide himself
with sufficient viaticum for that whereto he goeth.[284] It was said to
Sufyan,[285] Can a man be a religious and yet possess wealth? He
replied, Yes, so he be patient when grieved and be thankful when he hath
received. Abdullah bin Shaddád, being about to die, sent for his son
Mohammed and admonished him, saying, O my son, I see the Summoner of
Death summoning me, and so I charge thee to fear Allah both in public
and private, to praise Allah and to be soothfast in thy speech, for such
praise bringeth increase of prosperity, and piety in itself is the best
of provision for the next world; even as saith one of the poets:—

  I see not happiness lies in gathering gold; ✿ The man most pious is
      man happiest:
  In truth the fear of God is best of stores, ✿ And God shall make
      the pious choicely blest."

Then quoth Nuzhat al-Zaman, "Let the King also give ear to these notes
from the second section of the first chapter." He asked her what be
they?; and she answered, "When Omar bin Abd al-Aziz[286] succeeded to
the Caliphate, he went to his household and laying hands on all that was
in their hold, put it into the public treasury. So the Banu Umayyah flew
for aid to his father's sister, Fátimah, daughter of Marwán, and she
sent to him saying, I must needs speak to thee. So she came to him by
night and, when he had made her alight from her beast and sit down, he
said to her, O aunt, it is for thee to speak first, since thou hast
something to ask: tell me then what thou wouldst with me. Replied she, O
Commander of the Faithful, it is thine to speak first, for thy judgment
perceiveth that which is hidden from the intelligence of others. Then
said Omar, Of a verity Allah Almighty sent Mohammed as a blessing to
some and a bane to others; and He elected for him those with him, and
commissioned him as His Apostle and took him to Himself,"——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


                 Now when it was the Sixty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nuzhat al-Zaman
continued thus, "Said Omar, Verily Allah commissioned as His Apostle
Mohammed (upon whom be the benediction of Allah and His salvation!), for
a blessing to some and a bane to others; and He elected for him those
with him and took him to Himself, leaving the people a stream whereof
they might drink. After him Abu Bakr[287] the Truth-teller became Caliph
and he left the river as it was, doing what was pleasing to Allah. Then
arose Omar and worked a work and strove in holy war and strife whereof
none might do the like. But when Othman arose to power he diverted a
streamlet from the stream, and Mu'awiyah in his turn diverted from it
several streamlets; and without ceasing in like manner, Yezid and the
Banu Marwán such as Abd al-Malik and Walíd and Sulaymán[288] drew away
water from the stream, and the main course dried up, till rule devolved
upon me, and now I am minded to restore the stream to its normal
condition. When Fatimah heard this, she said, I came wishing only to
speak and confer with thee, but if this be thy word, I have nothing to
say to thee. Then she returned to the Ommiades and said to them, Now
take ye the consequences of your act when ye allied yourselves by
marriage with Omar bin Al-Khattab[289]." And it is also said that when
Omar was about to die, he gathered his children round him, and
Maslamah[290] bin Abd al-Malik said to him, O Prince of the Faithful,
how wilt thou leave thy children paupers and thou their protector? None
can hinder thee in thy lifetime from giving them what will suffice them
out of the treasury; and this indeed were better than leaving the good
work to him who shall rule after thee. Omar looked at him with a look of
wrath and wonder and presently replied, O Maslamah, I have defended them
from this sin all the days of my life, and shall I make them miserable
after my death? Of a truth my sons are like other men, either obedient
to Almighty Allah who will prosper them, or disobedient and I will not
help them in their disobedience. Know, O Maslamah, that I was present,
even as thou, when such an one of the sons of Marwán was buried, and I
fell asleep by him and saw him in a dream given over to one of the
punishments of Allah, to whom belong Honour and Glory! This terrified me
and made me tremble, and I vowed to Allah, that if ever I came to power,
I would not do such deeds as the dead man had done. I have striven to
fulfil this vow all the length of my life and I hope to die in the mercy
of my Lord. Quoth Maslamah:—A certain man died and I was present at his
burial, and when all was over I fell asleep and I saw him as a sleeper
seeth a dream, walking in a garden of flowing waters clad in white
clothes. He came up to me and said: O Maslamah, it is for the like of
this that rulers should rule. Many are the instances of this kind, and
quoth one of the men of authority, I used to milk the ewes in the
Caliphate of Omar bin Abd al-Aziz, and one day I met a shepherd, among
whose sheep I saw a wolf or wolves. I thought them to be dogs, for I had
never before seen wolves; so I asked, What dost thou with these dogs?
They are not dogs, but wolves, answered the shepherd. Quoth I, Can
wolves be with sheep and not hurt them? Quoth he, When the head is
whole, the body is whole.[291] Omar bin Abd al-Aziz once preached from a
pulpit of clay and, after praising and glorifying Allah Almighty, said
three words as follows, O folk, make clean your inmost hearts, that your
outward lives may be clean to your brethren, and abstain ye from the
things of the world. Know that between us and Adam there is no one man
alive among the dead. Dead are Abd al-Malik and those who forewent him,
and Omar also shall die and those who forewent him. Asked Maslamah, O
Commander of the Faithful, an we set a pillow behind thee, wilt thou
lean on it a little while? But Omar answered, I fear lest it be a fault
about my neck on Resurrection Day. Then he gasped with the death rattle
and fell back in a faint; whereupon Fatimah cried out, saying, Ho,
Maryam! Ho, Muzáhim![292] Ho, such an one! Look to this man! And she
began to pour water on him weeping, till he revived from his swoon; and,
seeing her in tears said to her, What causeth thee to weep, O Fatimah?
She replied, O Commander of the Faithful, I saw thee lying prostrate
before us and thought of thy prostration in death before Almighty Allah,
of thy departure from the world and of thy separation from us. This is
what made me weep. Answered he, Enough, O Fatimah, for indeed thou
exceedest. Then he would have risen, but fell down and Fatimah strained
him to her and said, "Thou art to me as my father and my mother, O
Commander of the Faithful! We cannot speak to thee, all of us." Then
quoth Nuzhat al-Zaman to her brother Sharrkan and the four Kazis, "Here
endeth the second section of the first chapter."——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


                 Now when it was the Sixty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nuzhat al-Zaman
said to her brother Sharrkan and the four Kazis, "Here endeth the second
section of the first chapter. And it so happened that Omar bin Abd
al-Aziz wrote to the people of the festival at Meccah as follows:—I call
Allah to witness, in the Holy Month, in the Holy City and on the day of
the Greater Pilgrimage,[293] that I am innocent of your oppression and
of his wrongs that doth wrong you, in that I have neither commanded this
nor purposed it, neither hath any report of aught thereof hitherto
reached me, nor have I compassed any knowledge thereof; and I trust that
a cause for pardon will be found in that none hath authority from me to
oppress any man, for I shall assuredly be questioned concerning every
one opprest. And if any of my officers swerve from the right and act
otherwise than the Holy Book and the Traditions of the Apostle do
authorise, obey him not so that he may return to the way of
righteousness. He said also (Allah accept of him!), I do not wish to be
relieved from death, because it is the supreme thing for which the True
Believer is rewarded. Quoth one of authority, I went to the Prince of
the Faithful, Omar bin Abd al-Aziz, who was then Caliph, and saw before
him twelve dirhams, which he ordered for deposit in the public treasury.
So I said to him, O Commander of the Faithful, thou impoverishest thy
children and reducest them to beggary having nothing whereon to live. An
thou wouldst appoint somewhat by will to them and to those who are poor
of the people of thy house, it were well. Draw near to me, answered he:
so I drew near to him and he said, Now as for thy saying, Thou beggarest
thy children; provide for them and for the poor of thy household, it is
without reason; for Allah of a truth will replace me to my children and
to the poor of my house, and He will be their guardian. Verily, they are
like other men; he who feareth Allah, right soon will Allah provide for
him a happy issue, and he that is addicted to sins, I will not uphold
him in his sin against Allah. Then he summoned his sons who numbered
twelve, and when he beheld them his eyes dropped tears and presently he
said to them, Your Father is between two things; either ye will be well
to do, and your parent will enter the fire, or ye will be poor and your
parent will enter Paradise; and your father's entry into Paradise is
liefer to him than that ye should be well to do.[294] So arise and go,
Allah be your helper, for to Him I commit your affair! Khálid bin
Safwán[295] said, Yúsuf bin Omar[296] accompanied me to Hishám bin Abd
al-Malik,[297] and as I met him he was coming forth with his kinsmen and
attendants. He alighted and a tent was pitched for him. When the people
had taken their seats, I came up to the side of the carpet whereon he
sat reclining and looked at him; and, waiting till my eyes met his eyes,
bespoke him thus, May Allah fulfil His bounty to thee, O Commander of
the Faithful, I have an admonition for thee, which hath come down to us
from the history of the Kings preceding thee! At this, he sat up whenas
he had been reclining and said to me, Bring what thou hast, O son of
Safwan! Quoth I, O Commander of the Faithful, one of the Kings before
thee went forth in a time before this thy time, to this very country and
said to his companions, Saw ye ever any state like mine and say me, hath
such case been given to any man even as it hath been given unto me? Now
there was with him a man of those who survive to bear testimony to
Truth; upholders of the Right and wayfarers in its highway, and he said
to him, O King, thou askest of a grave matter. Wilt thou give me leave
to answer? Yes, replied the King, and the other said, Dost thou judge
thy present state to be short-lasting or everlasting? It is temporary,
replied the King. How then, rejoined the man, do I see thee exulting in
that which thou wilt enjoy but a little while and whereof thou wilt be
questioned for a long while, and for the rendering an account whereof
thou shalt be as a pledge which is pawned? Quoth the King, Whither shall
I flee and what must I seek for me? That thou abide in thy kingship,
replied the other, or else robe thee in rags[298] and apply thyself to
obey Almighty Allah thy Lord until thine appointed hour. I will come to
thee again at daybreak. Khalid bin Safwan further relates that the man
knocked at the door at dawn and behold, the King had put off his crown
and resolved to become an anchorite, for the stress of his exhortation.
When Hishám bin Abd al-Malik heard this, he wept till his beard was wet;
and, bidding his rich apparel be put off, shut himself up in his palace.
Then the grandees and dependants came to Khalid and said, What is this
thou hast done with the Commander of the Faithful? Thou hast troubled
his pleasure and disturbed his life!" Then quoth Nuzhat al-Zaman,
addressing herself to Sharrkan, "How many instances of admonition are
there not in this chapter! Of a truth I cannot report all appertaining
to this head in a single sitting"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Sixty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nuzhat al-Zaman
continued, speaking to Sharrkan, "Know, O King, that in this chapter be
so many instances of admonition that of a truth I cannot report all
appertaining to this head in a single sitting but, with length of days,
O King of the age, all will be well." Then said the Kazis, "O King, of a
truth this damsel is the wonder of the world, and of our age the unique
pearl! Never heard we her like in the length of time or in the length of
our lives." And they called down blessings on the King and went away.
Then Sharrkan turned to his attendants and said, "Begin ye to prepare
the marriage festival and make ready food of all kinds." So they
forthright did his bidding as regards the viands, and he commanded the
wives of the Emirs and Wazirs and Grandees depart not until the time of
the wedding-banquet and of the unveiling of the bride. Hardly came the
period of afternoon-prayer when the tables were spread with whatso heart
can desire or eye can delight in of roast meats and geese and fowls; and
the subjects ate till they were satisfied. Moreover, Sharrkan had sent
for all the singing-women of Damascus and they were present, together
with every slave-girl of the King and of the notables who knew how to
sing. And they went up to the palace in one body. When the evening came
and darkness starkened they lighted candles, right and left, from the
gate of the citadel to that of the palace; and the Emirs and Wazirs and
Grandees marched past before King Sharrkan, whilst the singers and the
tire-women took the damsel to dress and adorn her, but found she needed
no adornment. Meantime King Sharrkan went to the Hammam and coming out,
sat down on his seat of estate, whilst they paraded the bride before him
in seven different dresses: after which they eased her of the weight of
her raiment and ornaments and gave such injunctions as are enjoined upon
virgins on their wedding-nights. Then Sharrkan went in unto her and took
her maidenhead;[299] and she at once conceived by him and, when she
announced it, he rejoiced with exceeding joy and commanded the savants
to record the date of her conception. On the morrow he went forth and
seated himself on his throne, and the high officers came in to him and
gave him joy. Then he called his private secretary and bade him write a
letter to his father, King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, saying that he had
bought him a damsel, who excels in learning and good breeding and who is
mistress of all kinds of knowledge. Moreover he wrote, "There is no help
but that I send her to Baghdad to visit my brother Zau al-Makan and my
sister Nuzhat al-Zaman. I have set her free and married her and she hath
conceived by me." And he went on to praise her wit and salute his
brother and sister together with the Wazir Dandan and all the Emirs.
Then he sealed the letter and despatched it to his father by a
post-courier who was absent a whole month, after which time he returned
with the answer and presented it in the presence. Sharrkan took it and
read as follows, "After the usual Bismillah, this is from the afflicted
distracted man, from him who hath lost his children and home by bane and
ban, King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, to his son Sharrkan. Know that, since thy
departure from me, the place is become contracted upon me, so that no
longer I have power of patience nor can I keep my secret: and the cause
thereof is as follows. It chanced that when I went forth to hunt and
course Zau al-Makan sought my leave to fare Hijaz-wards, but I, fearing
for him the shifts of fortune, forbade him therefrom until the next year
or the year after. My absence while sporting and hunting endured for a
whole month"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Sixty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Omar bin
al-Nu'uman wrote in his letter, "My absence while sporting and hunting
endured for a whole month, and when I returned I found that thy brother
and sister had taken somewhat of money and had set out with the
pilgrim-caravan for pilgrimage by stealth. When I knew this, the wide
world narrowed on me, O my son! but I awaited the return of the caravan,
hoping that haply they would come back with it. Accordingly, when the
palmers appeared I asked concerning the twain, but they could give me no
news of them; so I donned mourning for them, being heavy at heart, and
in sleep I have no part and I am drowned in the tears of my eyes." Then
he wrote in verse:—

     That pair in image quits me not one single hour, ✿ Whom in my
         heart's most honourable place I keep:
     Sans hope of their return I would not live one hour, ✿ Without
         my dreams of them I ne'er would stretch me in sleep.

The letter went on, "And after the usual salutations to thee and thine,
I command thee neglect no manner of seeking news of them, for indeed
this is a shame to us." When Sharrkan read the letter, he felt grief for
his father and joy for the loss of his brother and sister. Then he took
the missive and went in with it to Nuzhat al-Zaman who knew not that he
was her brother, nor he that she was his sister, albeit he often visited
her both by night and by day, till the months were accomplished and she
sat down on the stool of delivery. Allah made the child-birth easy to
her and she bare a daughter, whereupon she sent for Sharrkan and seeing
him she said to him, "This is thy daughter: name her as thou wilt."
Quoth he, "It is usual to name children on the seventh day after
birth."[300] Then he bent over the child to kiss it and he saw, hung
about its neck, a jewel, which he knew at once for one of those which
Princess Abrizah had brought from the land of the Greeks. Now when he
saw the jewel hanging from his babe's neck he recognised it right well,
his senses fled and wrath seized on him; his eyes rolled in rage and he
looked at Nuzhat al-Zaman and said to her, "Whence hadst thou this
jewel, O slave girl?" When she heard this from Sharrkan she replied, "I
am thy lady, and the lady of all in thy palace! Art thou not ashamed to
say to me, Slave-girl? I am a Queen, daughter of King Omar bin
al-Nu'uman." Hearing this, he was seized with trembling and hung his
head earthwards,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


                 Now when it was the Sixty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious king, that when Sharrkan
heard these words, his heart fluttered and his colour waxed yellow and
he was seized with trembling and he hung his head earthwards, for he
knew that she was his sister by the same father. Then he lost his
senses; and, when he revived, he abode in amazement, but did not
discover his identity to her and asked, "O my lady, say, art thou in
sooth the daughter of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman?" "Yes," answered she;
and he continued, "Tell me the cause of thy leaving thy sire and of thy
being sold for a slave." So she related to him all that had befallen her
from beginning to end, how she had left her brother sick in the
Sanctified City, Jerusalem, and how the Badawi had kidnapped her and had
sold her to the trader. When Sharrkan heard this, he was certified of
her being his sister on the sword-side and said to himself, "How can I
have my sister to wife? By Allah, needs must I marry her to one of my
chamberlains; and, if the thing get wind, I will declare that I divorced
her before consummation and married her to my Chief Chamberlain." Then
he raised his head and sighing said, "O Nuzhat al-Zaman, thou art my
very sister and I cry:—I take refuge with Allah from this sin whereinto
we have fallen, for I am Sharrkan, son of Omar bin al-Nu'uman." She
looked at him and knew he spoke the truth; and, becoming as one
demented, she wept and buffetted her face, exclaiming, "There is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah! Verily have we fallen into
mortal sin![301] What shall I do and what shall I say to my father and
my mother when they ask me, Whence hadst thou thy daughter?" Quoth
Sharrkan, "It were meetest that I marry thee to my Chamberlain and let
thee bring up my daughter in his house, that none may know thou be my
sister. This hath befallen us from Almighty Allah for a purpose of his
own, and nothing shall cover us but thy marriage with this Chamberlain,
ere any know." Then he fell to comforting her and kissing her head and
she asked him, "What wilt thou call the girl?" "Call her
Kuzia-Fakan,"[302] answered he. Then he gave the mother in marriage to
the Chief Chamberlain, and transferred her to his house with the child,
which they reared on the laps of the slave-girls, and fed with milk and
dosed with powders. Now all this occurred whilst the brother, Zau
al-Makan, still tarried with the Fireman at Damascus. One day there came
to King Sharrkan a courier from his father, with a letter which he took
and read and found therein, "After the Bismillah know, O beloved King,
that I am afflicted with sore affliction for the loss of my children:
sleep ever faileth me and wakefulness ever assaileth me. I send thee
this letter that, as soon as thou receivest it, thou make ready the
monies and the tribute, and send them to us, together with the damsel
whom thou hast bought and taken to wife; for I long to see her and hear
her discourse; more especially because there hath come to us from
Roum-land an old woman of saintly bearing and with her be five damsels,
high-bosomed virgins, endowed with knowledge and good-breeding and all
arts and sciences befitting mortals to know; and indeed tongue faileth
me to describe this old woman and these who with her wend; for of a
truth they are compendiums of perfections in learning and
accomplishments. As soon as I saw them I loved them, and I wished to
have them in my palace and in the compass of my hand; for none of the
Kings owneth the like of them; so I asked the old woman their price and
she answered:—I will not sell them but for the tribute of Damascus. And
I, by Allah, did not hold this price exorbitant, indeed it is but
little, for each one of them is worth the whole valuation. So I agreed
to that and took them into my palace, and they remain in my possession.
Wherefore do thou forward the tribute to us that the woman may return to
her own country; and send to us the damsel to the end that she may
dispute with them before the doctors; and, if she prevail over them, I
will return her to thee accompanied by the tribute of Baghdad."——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


               Now when it was the full Seventieth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Omar son of
Al-Nu'uman said in his letter, "And send to us the damsel to the end
that she may dispute with them before the doctors; and, if she prevail
over them, I will return her to thee accompanied with the tribute of
Baghdad." As soon as Sharrkan knew the contents, he went in to his
brother-in-law and said to him, "Bring the damsel to whom I married
thee;" and when she came he showed her the letter and said, "O my
sister! what answer wouldst thou advise me make to this letter?" Replied
she, "Seek advice from thyself!" and presently added (for she yearned
after her people and her native land), "Send me together with my husband
the Chamberlain, to Baghdad, that I may tell my father my tale and let
him know whatso befel me with the Badawi who sold me to the merchant,
and that I also inform him how thou boughtest me of the trader and
gavest me in marriage to the Chamberlain, after setting me free." "Be it
so," replied Sharrkan. Then Sharrkan took his daughter, Kuzia Fakan, and
committed her to the charge of the wet-nurses and the eunuchs, and he
made ready the tribute in haste, bidding the Chamberlain travel with the
Princess and the treasure to Baghdad. He also furnished him two
travelling litters; one for himself and the other for his wife. And the
Chamberlain replied, "To hear is to obey." Moreover Sharrkan collected
camels and mules and wrote a letter to his father and committed it to
the Chamberlain; then he bade farewell to his sister, after he had taken
the jewel from her and hung it round his daughter's neck by a chain of
pure gold; and she and her husband set out for Baghdad the same night.
Now it so happened that Zau al-Makan and his friend the Fireman had come
forth from the hut in which they were, to see the spectacle, and they
beheld camels and Bukhti[303] dromedaries and bât-mules and torches and
lanterns alight; and Zau al-Makan enquired about the loads and their
owner and was told that it was the tribute of Damascus going to King
Omar bin al-Nu'uman, Lord of the City of Baghdad. He then asked, "Who be
the leader of the caravan?" and they answered, "The Head Chamberlain who
hath married the damsel so famous for learning and science." Thereupon
Zau al-Makan wept with bitter weeping and was minded of his mother and
his father and his sister and his native land, and he said to the
Stoker, "I will join this caravan and, little by little, will journey
homewards." Quoth the Fireman, "I would not suffer thee to travel
single-handed from the Holy City to Damascus, then how shall I be sure
of thy safety when thou farest for Baghdad? But I will go with thee and
care for thee till thou effectest thine object." "With joy and good
will," answered Zau al-Makan. Then the Fireman gat him ready for the
journey and hired an ass and threw saddle-bags over it and put therein
something of provaunt; and, when all was prepared, he awaited the
passage of the caravan. And presently the Chamberlain came by on a
dromedary and his footmen about him. Then Zau al-Makan mounted the ass
and said to his companion, "Do thou mount with me." But he replied, "Not
so: I will be thy servant." Quoth Zau al-Makan, "There is no help for it
but thou ride awhile." "'Tis well," quoth the Stoker; "I will ride when
I grow tired." Then said Zau al-Makan, "O my brother, soon shalt thou
see how I will deal with thee, when I come to my own folk." So they
fared on till the sun rose and, when it was the hour of the noonday
sleep[304] the Chamberlain called a halt and they alighted and reposed
and watered their camels. Then he gave the signal for departure and,
after five days, they came to the city of Hamah,[305] where they set
down and made a three day's halt;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Seventy-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that they halted in the
city of Hamah three days; they then fared forwards and ceased not
travelling till they reached another city. Here also they halted three
days and thence they travelled till they entered the province Diyár
Bakr. Here blew on them the breezes of Baghdad, and Zau al-Makan
bethought him of his father and mother and native land, and how he was
returning to his sire without his sister: so he wept and sighed and
complained, and his regrets grew on him, and he began improvising these
couplets:—

    Sweetheart! How long must I await by so long-suffering tried? ✿
        Nor cometh messenger to tell me where thou dost abide:
    Ah me! in very sooth our meeting-time was short enow: ✿ Would
        Heaven shorter prove to me the present parting-tide!
    Now hend my hand and ope my robe and thou within shall sight ✿
        How wasted are the limbs of me and yet the waste I hide:
    When say they "Comfort take for loss of love" I but reply ✿ "By
        Allah, till the Day of Doom no comfort shall betide!"

Thereupon said to him the Fireman, "Leave this weeping and wailing, for
we are near the Chamberlain's tent." Quoth Zau al-Makan, "Needs must I
recite somewhat of verse; haply it may quench the fire of my heart."
"Allah upon thee," cried the other, "cease this lamentation till thou
come to thine own country; then do what thou wilt, and I will be with
thee wherever thou art." Replied Zau al-Makan, "By Allah! I cannot
forbear from this!" Then he turned his face towards Baghdad and the moon
was shining brightly and shedding her light on the place, and Nuzhat
al-Zaman could not sleep that night, but was restless and called to mind
her brother and wept. And while she was in tears, she heard Zau al-Makan
weeping and improvising the following distichs:—

 "Al-Yaman's[306] leven-gleam I see, ✿ And sore despair despaireth me
 For friend who erst abode wi' me ✿ Crowning my cup with gladdest gree;
 It minds me o' one who jilted me ✿ To mourn my bitter liberty.
 Say sooth, thou fair sheet-lightning! shall ✿ We meet once more in
     joy and glee?
 O blamer! spare to me thy blame ✿ My Lord hath sent this dule to dree,
 Of friend who left me, fain to flee; ✿ Of Time that breeds calamity:
 All bliss hath fled the heart of me ✿ Since Fortune proved mine enemy.
 He[307] brimmed a bowl of merest pine, ✿ And made me drain the
     dregs, did he:
 I see me, sweetheart, dead and gone ✿ Ere I again shall gaze on thee.
 Time! prithee bring our childhood back, ✿ Restore our happy infancy,
 When joy and safety 'joyed we ✿ From shafts that now they shoot at me!
 Who aids the hapless stranger-wight, ✿ That nights in fright
     and misery,
 That wastes his days in lonely grief, ✿ For "Time's Delight"[308]
     no more must be?
 Doomed us despite our will to bear ✿ The hands of base-borns cark
     and care.

When he ended his verse he cried out and fell down in a fainting-fit.
This is how it fared with him; but as regards Nuzhat al-Zaman, when she
heard that voice in the night, her heart was at rest and she rose and in
her joy she called the Chief Eunuch, who said to her, "What is thy
will?" Quoth she, "Arise and bring me him who recited verses but now."
Replied he, "Of a truth I did not hear him"——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


               Now when it was the Seventy-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Nuzhat
al-Zaman heard her brother reciting, she called the Chief Eunuch and
said to him, "Go, fetch me the man who is repeating this poetry!"
Replied he, "Of a truth I heard him not and I wot him not and folks are
all sleeping." But she said, "Whomsoever thou seest awake, he is the
reciter." So he went, yet found none on wake save the Stoker; for Zau
al-Makan was still insensible, and when his companion saw the Eunuch
standing by his head he was afraid of him. Then said the Eunuch, "Art
thou he who repeated poetry but now and my lady heard him?" The Stoker
fancied that the dame was wroth with the reciter; and, being afraid, he
replied, "By Allah, 'twas not I!" Rejoined the Eunuch, "Who then was the
reciter?: point him out to me. Thou must know who it was, seeing that
thou art awake." The Fireman feared for Zau al-Makan and said in
himself, "Haply the Eunuch will do him some hurt"; so he answered, "By
Allah, I know not who it was." Said the Eunuch, "By Allah, thou liest,
for there is none on wake here but thou! So needs must thou know him."
"By Allah," replied the Fireman, "I tell thee the truth!: some
passer-by, some wayfarer must have recited the verses and disturbed me
and kept me awake; Allah requite him!" Quoth the Eunuch, "If thou happen
upon him, point him out to me and I will lay hands on him and bring him
to the door of our lady's litter;[309] or do thou take him with thine
own hand." Said the Fireman, "Go thou back and I will bring him to
thee." So the Eunuch left him and went his ways; and, going in to his
mistress, told her all this and said to her, "None knoweth who it was;
it must have been some passer-by, some wayfarer." And she was silent.
Meanwhile, Zau al-Makan came to himself and saw that the moon had
reached the middle Heavens; the breath of the dawn-breeze[310] breathed
upon him and his heart was moved to longing and sadness; so he cleared
his throat and was about to recite verses, when the Fireman asked him,
"What wilt thou do?" Answered Zau al-Makan, "I have a mind to repeat
somewhat of poetry, that I may quench therewith the fire of my heart."
Quoth the other, "Thou knowest not what befel me whilst thou wast
a-faint, and how I escaped death only by beguiling the Eunuch." "Tell me
what happened," quoth Zau al-Makan. Replied the Stoker, "Whilst thou
wast aswoon there came up to me but now an Eunuch, with a long staff of
almond-tree wood in his hand, who took to looking in all the people's
faces, as they lay asleep, and asked me who it was recited the verses,
finding none awake but myself. I told him in reply it was some
passer-by, some wayfarer; so he went away and Allah delivered me from
him; else had he killed me. But first he said to me:—If thou hear him
again, bring him to us." When Zau al-Makan heard this he wept and said,
"Who is it would forbid me to recite? I will surely recite, befal me
what may; for I am near mine own land and care for none." Rejoined the
Fireman, "Thy design is naught save to lose thy life;" and Zau al-Makan
retorted, "Needs must I recite verses." "Verily," said the Stoker,
"Needs must there be a parting between me and thee in this place, albeit
I had intended not to leave thee, till I had brought thee to thy native
city and reunited thee with thy mother and father. Thou hast now tarried
with me a year and a half and I have never harmed thee in aught. What
ails thee, then, that thou must needs recite verses, seeing that we are
tired out with walking and watching and all the folk are asleep, for
they require sleep to rest them of their fatigue?" But Zau al-Makan
answered, "I will not be turned away from my purpose."[311] Then grief
moved him and he threw off concealment and began repeating these
couplets:—

  Stand thou by the homes and hail the lords of the ruined stead; ✿
      Cry thou for an answer, belike reply to thee shall be sped:
  If the night and absence irk thy spirit kindle a torch ✿ Wi'
      repine; and illuminate the gloom with a gleaming gleed:
  If the snake of the sand-dunes hiss, I shall marvel not at all! ✿
      Let him bite so I bite those beauteous lips of the luscious red:
  O Eden, my soul hath fled in despite of the maid I love: ✿ Had I
      lost hope of Heaven my heart in despair were dead.

And he also improvised the two following distichs:

   We were and were the days enthralled to all our wills, ✿ Dwelling
       in union sweet and homed in fairest site:
   Who shall restore the home of the beloved, where showed ✿ Light of
       the Place for aye conjoined with Time's Delight?[312]

And as he ceased his verses, he shrieked three shrieks and fell
senseless to the ground and the Fireman rose and covered him. When
Nuzhat al-Zaman heard the first improvisation, she called to mind her
father and her mother and her brother and their whilom home; then she
wept and cried at the Eunuch and said to him, "Woe to thee! He who
recited the first time hath recited a second time and I heard him hard
by. By Allah, an thou fetch him not to me, I will assuredly rouse the
Chamberlain on thee, and he shall beat thee and cast thee out. But take
these hundred dinars and give them to the singer and bring him to me
gently, and do him no hurt. If he refuse, hand to him this purse of a
thousand dinars, then leave him and return to me and tell me, after thou
hast informed thyself of his place and his calling and what countryman
he is. Return quickly and linger not."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Seventy-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nuzhat al-Zaman
sent the Eunuch to make enquiries concerning the singer and said,
"Beware how thou come back to me and report, I could not find him." So
the Eunuch went out and laid about the people and trod in their tents,
but found none awake, all being asleep for weariness, till he came to
the Stoker and saw him sitting up, with his head uncovered. So he drew
near and seizing him by the hand, said to him, "It was thou didst recite
the verses!" The Fireman was afeard for his life and replied, "No, by
Allah, O chief of the people, it was not I!" But the Eunuch said, "I
will not leave thee till thou show me who it was that recited the
verses, for I dread returning to my lady without him." Now when the
Fireman heard these words he feared for Zau al-Makan and wept with
exceeding weeping and said to the Eunuch, "By Allah, it was not I, and I
know him not. I only heard some passer-by, some wayfarer, recite verses:
so do not thou commit sin on me, for I am a stranger and come from the
Holy City of Jerusalem; and Abraham, the friend of Allah, be with you
all." "Rise up and fare with me," rejoined the Eunuch, "and tell my lady
this with thine own mouth, for I have seen none awake save thyself."
Quoth the Stoker, "Hast thou not come and seen me sitting in the place
where I now am, and dost thou not know my station? Thou wottest none can
stir from his place, except the watchmen seize him. So go thou to thy
station and if thou again meet any one after this hour reciting aught of
poetry, whether he be near or far, it will be I or some one I know, and
thou shalt not learn of him but by me." Then he kissed the Eunuch's head
and spake him fair till he went away; but the Castrato fetched a round
and, returning secretly, came and stood behind the Fireman, fearing to
go back to his mistress without tidings. As soon as he was gone, the
Stoker arose and aroused Zau al-Makan and said to him, "Come, sit up,
that I may tell thee what hath happened." So Zau al-Makan sat up, and
his companion told him what had passed, and he answered, "Let me alone;
I will take no heed of this and I care for none, for I am near mine own
country."[313] Quoth the Stoker, "Why wilt thou obey thy flesh and the
devil? If thou fear no one, I fear for thee and for my life, so Allah
upon thee! recite nothing more of verses till thou come to thine own
land. Indeed, I had not deemed thee so ill-conditioned. Dost thou not
know that this lady is the wife of the Chamberlain and is minded to
chastise thee for disturbing her? Belike, she is ill or restless for
fatigue of the journey and the distance of the place from her home, and
this is the second time she hath sent the Eunuch to look for thee."
However Zau al-Makan paid no heed to the Fireman's words but cried out a
third time and began versifying with these couplets:—

 I fly the carper's injury, ✿ Whose carping sorely vexeth me:
 He chides and taunts me, wotting not ✿ He burns me but more
     grievously.
 The blamer cries "He is consoled!" ✿ I say, "My own dear land[314] to
     see:"
 They ask, "Why be that land so dear?" ✿ I say "It taught me in love
     to be:"
 They ask, "What raised its dignity?" ✿ I say, "What made my ignomy:"
 Whate'er the bitter cup I drain, ✿ Far be fro' me that land to flee:
 Nor will I bow to those who blame, ✿ And for such love would deal me
     shame.

Hardly had he made an end of his verses and come to a conclusion, when
the Eunuch (who had heard him from his hiding-place at his head) came up
to him; whereupon the Fireman fled and stood afar off to see what passed
between them. Then said the Eunuch to Zau al-Makan, "Peace be with thee,
O my lord!" "And on thee be peace," replied Zau al-Makan, "and the mercy
of Allah and His blessings!" "O my lord," continued the Eunuch——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


               Now when it was the Seventy-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Eunuch said to
Zau al-Makan, "O my lord, I have sought thee these several times this
night, for my mistress biddeth thee to her." Quoth Zau al-Makan, "And
who be this bitch that seeketh for me? Allah curse her and curse her
husband with her!"[315] And he began to revile the Eunuch, who could
make him no answer, because his mistress had charged him to do Zau
al-Makan no hurt, nor bring him save of his own especial free will; and,
if he would not accompany him, to give him the thousand dinars. So the
Castrato began to speak him fair and say to him, "O my lord, take this
purse and go with me. We will do thee no unright, O my son, nor wrong
thee in aught; but our object is that thou bend thy gracious steps with
me to my mistress, to receive her answer and return in weal and safety:
and thou shalt have a handsome present as one who bringeth good news."
When Zau al-Makan heard this, he arose and went with the Eunuch and
walked among the sleeping folk, stepping over them; whilst the Fireman
followed after them from afar, and kept his eye upon him and said to
himself, "Alas the pity of his youth! To-morrow they will hang him." And
he ceased not following them till he approached their station,[316]
without any observing him. Then he stood still and said, "How base it
will be of him, if he say it was I who bade him recite the verses!" This
was the case of the Stoker; but as regards what befel Zau al-Makan, he
ceased not walking with the Eunuch till he reached his station and the
Castrato went in to Nuzhat al-Zaman and said, "O my lady, I have brought
thee him whom thou soughtest, and he is a youth, fair of face and
bearing the marks of wealth and gentle breeding." When she heard this,
her heart fluttered and she cried, "Let him recite some verses, that I
may hear him nearhand, and after ask him his name and his condition and
his native land." Then the Eunuch went out to Zau al-Makan and said to
him, "Recite what verses thou knowest, for my lady is here hard by,
listening to thee, and after I will ask thee of thy name and thy native
country and thy condition." Replied he, "With love and gladness but, an
thou ask my name, it is erased and my trace is unplaced and my body
awaste. I have a story, the beginning of which is not known nor can the
end of it be shown, and behold, I am even as one who hath exceeded in
wine-drinking and who hath not spared himself; one who is afflicted with
distempers and who wandereth from his right mind, being perplexed about
his case and drowned in the sea of thought." When Nuzhat al-Zaman heard
this, she broke out into excessive weeping and sobbing, and said to the
Eunuch, "Ask him if he have parted from one he loveth even as his mother
or father." The Castrato asked as she bade him, and Zau al-Makan
replied, "Yes, I have parted from every one I loved: but the dearest of
all to me was my sister, from whom Fate hath separated me." When Nuzhat
al-Zaman heard this, she exclaimed, "Allah Almighty reunite him with
what he loveth!"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Seventy-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Nuzhat
al-Zaman heard his words she said, "Allah reunite him with what he
loveth!" Then quoth she to the Eunuch, "Tell him to let me hear somewhat
anent his separation from his countrymen and his country." The Eunuch
did so, and Zau al-Makan sighed heavily and began repeating these
couplets[317]:—

   Is not her love a pledge by all mankind confest? ✿ The house
       that hometh Hinda be for ever blest!
   Her love all levels; man can reck of naught beside; ✿ Naught or
       before or after can for man have zest.
   'Tis though the vale is paved with musk and ambergris ✿ That day
       when Hinda's footstep on its face is prest:
   Hail to the beauty of our camp, the pride of folk, ✿ The dearling
       who enslaves all hearts by her behest:
   Allah on "Time's Delight" send large-dropped clouds that teem ✿
       With genial rain but bear no thunder in their breast.

And also these:—

 I vow to Allah if at home I sight ✿ My sister Nuzhat al-Zamáni hight,
 I'll pass the days in joyance and delight ✿ Mid bashful
     minions, maidens soft and white:
 To sound of harps in various modes they smite ✿ Draining the
     bowl, while eyes rain lively light
 'Neath half-closed lids, a-sipping lips red-bright ✿ By
     stream-bank flowing through my garden-site.

When he had finished his verse, Nuzhat al-Zaman lifted up a skirt of the
litter-curtain and looked at him. As soon as her eyes fell on his face,
she knew him for certain and cried out, "O my brother! O Zau al-Makan!"
He also looked at her and knew her and cried out, "O my sister! O Nuzhat
al-Zaman!" Then she threw herself upon him and he gathered her to his
bosom and the twain fell down in a fainting fit. When the Eunuch saw
this case, he wondered at them and throwing over them somewhat to cover
them, waited till they should recover. After a while they came to
themselves, and Nuzhat al-Zaman rejoiced with exceeding joy: oppression
and depression left her and gladness took the mastery of her, and she
repeated these verses:—

   Time sware my life should fare in woeful waste; ✿ Forsworn art
       Time, expiate thy sin in haste![318]
   Comes weal and comes a welcome friend to aid; ✿ To him who brings
       good news, rise, gird thy waist:
   I spurnèd old-world tales of Eden-bliss; ✿ Till came I Kausar[319]
       on those lips to taste.

When Zau al-Makan heard this, he pressed his sister to his breast; tears
streamed from his eyes for excess of joy and he repeated these
couplets[320]:—

   Long I lamented that we fell apart, ✿ While tears repentant railèd
       from these eyne;
   And sware, if Time unite us twain once more, ✿ "Severance" shall
       never sound from tongue of mine:
   Joy hath so overwhelmed me that excess ✿ Of pleasure from mine
       eyes draws gouts of brine:
   Tears, O mine eyes, have now become your wont ✿ Ye weep for
       pleasure and you weep for pine!

They sat awhile at the litter-door till she said to him, "Come with me
into the litter and tell me all that hath befallen thee, and I will tell
thee what happened to me." So they entered and Zau al-Makan said, "Do
thou begin thy tale." Accordingly she told him all that had come to her
since their separation at the Khan and what had happened to her with the
Badawi; how the merchant had bought her of him and had taken her to her
brother Sharrkan and had sold her to him; how he had freed her at the
time of buying; how he had made a marriage-contract with her and had
gone in to her and how the King, their sire, had sent and asked for her
from Sharrkan. Then quoth she, "Praised be Allah who hath vouchsafed
thee to me and ordained that, even as we left our father together, so
together shall we return to him!" And she added, "Of a truth my brother
Sharrkan gave me in marriage to this Chamberlain that he might carry me
to my father. And this is what befel me from first to last; so now tell
me how it hath fared with thee since I left thee." Thereupon he told her
all that had happened to him from beginning to end; and how Allah
vouchsafed to send the Fireman to him, and how he had journeyed with him
and spent his money on him and had served him night and day. She praised
the Stoker for this and Zau al-Makan added, "Of a truth, O my sister,
this Fireman hath dealt with me in such benevolent wise as would not
lover with lass nor sire with son, for that he fasted and gave me to
eat, and he walked whilst he made me ride; and I owe my life to him."
Said she, "Allah willing, we will requite him for all this, according to
our power." Then she called the Eunuch, who came and kissed Zau
al-Makan's hand, and she said, "Take thy reward for glad tidings, O face
of good omen! It was thy hand reunited me with my brother; so the purse
I gave thee and all in it are thine. But now go to thy master and bring
him quickly to me." The Castrato rejoiced and, going in to the
Chamberlain, summoned him to his mistress. Accordingly, he came in to
his wife and finding Zau al-Makan with her, asked who he was. So she
told him all that had befallen them both, first and last, and added,
"Know, O Chamberlain, that thou hast married no slave-girl; far from it,
thou hast taken to wife the daughter of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman for I
am Nuzhat al-Zaman, and this is my brother, Zau al-Makan." When the
Chamberlain heard the story he knew it to be sooth, and its manifest
truth appeared to him and he was certified that he was become King Omar
bin al-Nu'uman's son-in-law, so he said to himself, "'Twill be my fate
to be made viceroy of some province."[321] Then he went up to Zau
al-Makan and gave him joy of his safety and reunion with his sister, and
bade his servants forthwith make him ready a tent and one of the best of
his own horses to ride. Thereupon said Nuzhat al-Zaman, "We are now near
our country and I would be left alone with my brother, that we may enjoy
each other's company and take our fill of it ere we reach Baghdad; for
we have been parted a long, long time." "Be it as thou biddest," replied
the Chamberlain, and, going forth from them, sent them wax-candles and
various kinds of sweetmeats, together with three suits of the costliest
for Zau al-Makan. Then he returned to the litter and related the good he
had done and Nuzhat al-Zaman said to him, "Bid the Eunuch bring me the
Fireman and give him a horse to ride and ration him with a tray of food
morning and evening, and let him be forbidden to leave us." The
Chamberlain called the Castrato and charged him to do accordingly; so he
replied, "I hear and I obey;" and he took his pages with him and went
out in search of the Stoker till he found him in the rear of the
caravan, girthing his ass and preparing for flight. The tears were
running adown his cheeks, out of fear for his life and grief for his
separation from Zau al-Makan; and he was saying to himself, "Indeed, I
warned him for the love of Allah, but he would not listen to me; Oh
would I knew what is become of him!" Ere he had done speaking the Eunuch
was standing by his head whilst the pages surrounded him. The Fireman
turned and seeing the Eunuch and the pages gathered around him became
yellow with fear——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Seventy-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Stoker
girthed his ass for flight and bespake himself, saying, "Oh would I knew
what is become of him!"; ere he had done speaking the Castrato was
standing by his head and his side-muscles quivered for fear and he
lifted up his voice and cried, "Verily he knoweth not the value of the
good offices I have done him! I believe he hath denounced me to the
Eunuch (hence these pages get about me) and he hath made me an
accomplice in his crime." Then the effeminated one cried at him, saying,
"Who was it recited the verses? O liar! why didst thou say:—I never
repeated these couplets, nor do I know who repeated them; when it was
thy companion? But now I will not leave thee between this place and
Baghdad, and what betideth thy comrade shall betide thee." Quoth the
Fireman, "What I feared hath befallen me." And he repeated this
couplet:—

   'Twas as I feared the coming ills discerning: ✿ But unto Allah we
       are all returning.

Then the Eunuch cried upon the pages, saying, "Take him off the ass." So
they carried him along with the caravan, surrounded by the pages, as the
white contains the black of the eye; and the Castrato said to them, "If
a hair of him be lost, you will be lost with it." And he bade them
privily treat him with honour and not humiliate him. But when the Stoker
saw himself beset by the pages, he despaired of his life and turning to
the Eunuch, said to him, "O Chief, I am neither this youth's brother nor
am I akin to him, nor is he sib to me; but I was a Fireman in a Hammam
and found him cast out, in his sickness, on the dung-heap." Then the
caravan fared on and the Stoker wept and imagined in himself a thousand
things, whilst the Eunuch walked by his side and told him nothing, but
said to him, "Thou disturbedst our mistress by reciting verses, thou and
this youth: but fear nothing for thyself;" and kept laughing at him the
while to himself. Whenever the caravan halted, they served him with
food, and he and the Castrato ate from one dish.[322] Then the Eunuch
bade his lads bring a gugglet of sugared sherbet and, after drinking
himself, gave it to the Fireman, who drank; but all the while his tears
never dried, out of fear for his life and grief for his separation from
Zau al-Makan and for what had befallen them in their strangerhood. So
they both travelled on with the caravan, whilst the Chamberlain now rode
by the door of his wife's litter, in attendance on Zau al-Makan and his
sister, and now gave an eye to the Fireman; and Nuzhat al-Zaman and her
brother occupied themselves with converse and mutual condolence; and
they ceased not after this fashion till they came within three days'
journey from Baghdad. Here they alighted at eventide and rested till the
morning morrowed; and as they awoke and they were about to load the
beasts, behold, there appeared afar off a great cloud of dust that
darkened the firmament till it became black as gloomiest night.[323]
Thereupon the Chamberlain cried out to them, "Stay, and your loading
delay!"; then, mounting with his Mamelukes, rode forward in the
direction of the dust-cloud. When they drew near, suddenly appeared
under it a numerous conquering host like the full-tide sea, with flags
and standards, drums and kettledrums, horsemen and footmen. The
Chamberlain marvelled at this; and when the troops saw him, there
detached itself from amongst them a plump of five hundred cavaliers, who
fell upon him and his suite and surrounded them, five for one; whereupon
said he to them, "What is the matter and what are these troops, that ye
do this with us?" Asked they, "Who art thou; and whence comest thou, and
whither art thou bound?" and he answered, "I am the Chamberlain of the
Emir of Damascus, King Sharrkan, son of Omar bin al-Nu'uman, Lord of
Baghdad and of the land of Khorasan, and I bring tribute and presents
from him to his father in Baghdad." When the horsemen heard his words
they let their head-kerchiefs fall over their faces and wept, saying,
"In very sooth King Omar is dead and he died not but of poison. So fare
ye forwards; no harm shall befal you till you join his Grand Wazir,
Dandan." Now when the Chamberlain heard this, he wept sore and
exclaimed, "Oh for our disappointment in this our journey!" Then he and
all his suite wept till they had come up with the host and sought access
to the Wazir Dandan, who granted an interview and called a halt and,
causing his pavilion to be pitched, sat down on a couch therein and
commanded to admit the Chamberlain. Then he bade him be seated and
questioned him; and he replied that he was Chamberlain to the Emir of
Damascus and was bound to King Omar with presents and the tribute of
Syria. The Wazir, hearing the mention of King Omar's name, wept and
said, "King Omar is dead by poison, and upon his dying the folk fell out
amongst themselves as to who should succeed him, until they were like to
slay one another on this account; but the notables and grandees and the
four Kazis interposed and all the people agreed to refer the matter to
the decision of the four judges and that none should gainsay them. So it
was agreed that we go to Damascus and fetch thence the King's son,
Sharrkan, and make him Sultan over his father's realm. And amongst them
were some who would have chosen the cadet, Zau al-Makan, for, quoth
they, his name be Light of the Place, and he hath a sister Nuzhat
al-Zaman hight, the Delight of the Time; but they set out five years ago
for Al-Hijaz and none wotteth what is become of them." When the
Chamberlain heard this, he knew that his wife had told him the truth of
her adventures; and he grieved with sore grief for the death of King
Omar, albeit he joyed with exceeding joy, especially at the arrival of
Zau al-Makan, for that he would now become Sultan of Baghdad in his
father's stead.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


               Now when it was the Seventy-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Sharrkan's
Chamberlain heard of the death of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman he mourned,
but he rejoiced because of his wife and her brother Zau al-Makan who
would become Sultan of Baghdad in his father's stead. So he turned to
the Wazir Dandan and said to him, "Verily your tale is a wonder of
wonders! Know, O Chief Wazir, that here, where you have encountered me,
Allah hath given you rest from fatigue and bringeth you your desire
after the easiest of fashions, for that His Almighty Will restoreth to
you Zau al-Makan and his sister Nuzhat al-Zaman; whereby we will settle
the matter as we easily can." When the Minister heard these words he
rejoiced with great joy and said, "O Chamberlain, tell me the tale of
the twain and what befel them and the cause of their long absence." So
he repeated to him the whole story and told him that Nuzhat al-Zaman was
his wife and related to him the adventures of Zau al-Makan from first to
last. As soon as he had ended his tale, the Wazir sent for the Emirs and
Wazirs and Chief Officers and acquainted them with the matter; whereat
they rejoiced with great joy and wondered at the happy chance. Then they
gathered in a body and went in to the Chamberlain and did their service
to him, kissing the ground between his hands; and the Wazir Dandan also
rose and went out to meet him and stood before him in honour. After
this, the Chamberlain held on that day a Divan-council; and he and the
Wazir sat upon a throne, whilst all the Emirs and Grandees and Officers
of State took their places before them, according to their several
ranks.[324] Then they melted sugar in rose-water and drank, after which
the Emirs sat down to hold council and permitted the rest of the host to
mount and ride forward leisurely, till they should make an end of their
debate and overtake them. So the officers kissed the ground between
their hands and mounting, rode onwards, preceded by the standards of
war. When the grandees had finished their conference, they took horse
and rejoined the host; and the Chamberlain approached the Wazir Dandan
and said, "I deem it well to ride on before you, and precede you, that I
may get ready a place for the Sultan and notify him of your coming and
of your choosing him as Sultan over the head of his brother Sharrkan."
"Aright thou reckest," answered the Wazir. Then the Chamberlain rose up
in haste and Dandan also stood up to do him honour and brought him
presents, which he conjured him to accept. In similar guise did all the
Emirs and Grandees and Officers of State, bringing him gifts and calling
down blessings on him and saying to him, "Haply thou wilt mention our
case to Sultan Zau al-Makan and speak to him to continue us in our
dignities."[325] The Chamberlain promised all they required and bade his
pages be ready to march, whereupon the Wazir Dandan sent with him tents
and bade the tent-pitchers set them up at a day's journey from the city.
And they did his bidding. Then the Chamberlain mounted and rode forward,
full of joy and saying to himself, "How blessed is this journey!"; and
indeed his wife was exalted in his eyes, she and her brother Zau
al-Makan. They made all haste over their wayfare, till they reached a
place distant a day's journey from Baghdad, where the Chamberlain called
a halt for rest, and bade his men alight and make ready a sitting place
for the Sultan Zau al-Makan, son of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, while he
rode forward with his Mamelukes and, alighting at a distance from Nuzhat
al-Zaman's litter, commanded the eunuchs to ask leave of admission to
the presence. They did so and she gave permission; whereupon he went in
to her and conversed with her and her brother; and told them of the
death of their father; and of Zau al-Makan, how the heads of the people
had made him King over them in the stead of his sire; and he gave them
joy of the kingdom. They both wept for their father and asked the manner
of his being killed; but the Chamberlain answered, "The news rests with
the Wazir Dandan who will be here to-morrow leading all the host; and it
only remaineth for thee, O King, to do what they counsel, since they
have unanimously chosen thee Sultan; for if thou do not this, they will
choose some one else and thou canst not be sure of thy life with another
Sultan. Haply he will kill thee, or discord may befal between you twain
and the kingdom pass out of the hands of both." Zau al-Makan bowed his
head awhile and then said, "I accept this position;" for indeed there
was no refusing; and he was certified that the Chamberlain had
counselled him well and wisely and set him on the right way. Then he
added, "O my uncle, how shall I do with my brother Sharrkan?" "O my
son," replied the Chamberlain, "thy brother will be Sultan of Damascus
and thou Sultan of Baghdad; so take heart of grace and get ready thy
case." Zau al-Makan accepted this and the Chamberlain presented him with
a suit of royal raiment and a dagger[326] of state, which the Wazir
Dandan had brought with him; then leaving him he bade the tent-pitchers
choose a spot of rising ground and set up thereon a spacious pavilion,
wherein the Sultan might sit to receive the Emirs and Grandees. Moreover
he ordered the kitcheners to cook rich viands and serve them and he
commanded the water-carriers to dispose the water-troughs. They did as
he bade them and presently arose a cloud of dust from the ground and
spread till it walled the horizon round. After awhile, the dust
dispersed and there appeared under it the army of Baghdad and Khorasan,
a conquering host like the full-tide sea.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


               Now when it was the Seventy-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Chamberlain bade the tent-pitchers set up a pavilion spacious enough to
receive the subjects flocking to their Sultan, they planted a splendid
Sháhmiyánah[327] befitting Kings. And as they ended their labours
behold, a dust cloud spired aloft and the breeze made it lift and
beneath it showed a conquering host; and presently it appeared that this
was the army of Baghdad and Khorasan preceded by the Wazir Dandan. And
in it all rejoiced at the accession of the "Light of the Place." Now Zau
al-Makan had donned robes of royal estate and girt himself with the
sword of state: so the Chamberlain brought him a steed and he mounted,
surrounded by the Mamelukes and all the company from the tents on foot,
to do him service, and he rode on until he came to the great pavilion,
where he sat down and he laid the royal dagger across his thighs, whilst
the Chamberlain stood in attendance on him and his armed slaves
stationed themselves under the entrance-awning of the Sháhmiyánah, with
drawn swords in their hands. Presently, up came the troops and the host
and craved admission; so the Chamberlain went in to Zau al-Makan and
asked his leave, whereupon he bade admit them, ten by ten. The
Chamberlain acquainted them with the King's commands, to which they
replied, "We hear and we obey;" and all drew up before the
pavilion-entrance. Then he took ten of them and carried them through the
vestibule into the presence of Sultan Zau al-Makan, whom when they saw,
they were awed; but he received them with most gracious kindness and
promised them all good. So they gave him joy of his safe return and
invoked Allah's blessings upon him, after which they took the oath of
fealty never to gainsay him in aught and they kissed ground before him
and withdrew. Then other ten entered and he entreated them as he had
entreated the others; and they ceased not to enter, ten by ten, till
none was left but the Wazir Dandan. Lastly the Minister went in and
kissed the ground before Zau al-Makan, who rose to meet him, saying,
"Welcome, O Wazir and sire sans peer! Verily, thine acts are those of a
counsellor right dear, and judgement and foreseeing clear are in the
hands of the Subtle of Lere." Then bade he the Chamberlain forthwith go
out and cause the tables to be spread and order all the troops thereto.
So they came and ate and drank. Moreover the Sultan commanded his Wazir
Dandan call a ten days' halt of the army, that he might be private with
him and learn from him how and wherefore his father had been slain. The
Wazir obeyed the commands of the Sultan with submission and wished him
eternity of glory and said, "This needs must be!" He then repaired to
the heart of the encampment and ordered the host to halt ten days. They
did as he bade them and, moreover, he gave them leave to divert
themselves and ordered that none of the lords in waiting should attend
upon the King for service during the space of three days. Then the Wazir
went to the Sultan and reported all to him, and Zau al-Makan waited
until nightfall, when he went in to his sister Nuzhat al-Zaman and asked
her, "Dost thou know the cause of my father's murder or not?" "I have no
knowledge of the cause," she answered, and drew a silken curtain before
herself, whilst Zau al-Makan seated himself without the curtain and
commanded the Wazir to the presence and, when he came, said to him, "I
desire thou relate to me in detail the cause of the killing of my sire,
King Omar bin al-Nu'uman!" Know then, O King, replied Dandan, that King
Omar bin al-Nu'uman, when he returned to Baghdad from his chasing and
hunting and entered the city, enquired for thee and thy sister, but
could not find you and knew that you twain had gone on the Pilgrimage;
whereat he was greatly grieved and much angered, and his breast was
straitened and he abode thus half a year, seeking news of you from all
who came and went, but none could give him any tidings. Now while we
were in attendance upon him one day, after a whole year had sped since
ye were lost to his sight, lo! there came to us an ancient dame with
signs of being a devotee, accompanied by five damsels, high-bosomed
virgins like moons, endowed with such beauty and loveliness as tongue
faileth to describe; and, to crown their perfections of comeliness, they
could read the Koran and were versed in various kinds of learning and in
the histories of bygone peoples. Then that old woman sought audience of
the King, and he bade admit her; whereupon she entered the presence and
kissed the ground between his hands. I was then sitting by his side and
he, seeing in her the signs of asceticism and devoutness, made her draw
near and take seat hard by him. And when she had sat down she addressed
him and said, "Know, O King, that with me are five damsels, whose like
no King among the Kings possesseth; for they are endowed with wit and
beauty and loveliness and perfection. They read the Koran and the
Traditions and are skilled in all manner of learning and in the history
of bygone races. They stand here between thy hands to do thee service, O
King of the Age, and it is by trial that folk are prized or despised."
Thy father, who hath found mercy;[328] looked at the damsels and their
favour pleased him; so he said to them, "Let each and every of you make
me hear something of what she knoweth anent the history of the folk of
yore and of peoples long gone before!"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Seventy-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir Dandan
said unto King Zau al-Makan:—Thy father, who hath found mercy, glanced
at the damsels and their favour pleased him and he said to them, "Let
each and every of you make me hear something of what she knoweth anent
the history of the folk of yore and of peoples long gone before!"
Thereupon one of them came forward and, kissing the ground before him,
spake as follows.[329] "Know, O King, that it behoveth one of
good-breeding to eschew impertinence and adorn himself with
excellencies, and observe the Divine injunctions and avoid mortal sins;
and to this he should apply himself with the assiduity of one who, if he
stray therefrom, falleth into perdition; for the foundation of good
breeding is virtuous behaviour. And know that the chief cause and reason
of man's existence is the endeavour after life everlasting, and the
right way thereto is the service of Allah. Wherefore it behoveth thee to
deal beneficently with the people: and swerve not from this canon, for
the mightier men are in dignity, the more their need of prudence and
foresight; and indeed Monarchs need this more than the many, for the
general cast themselves into affairs, without taking thought to the
issue thereof. Be thou prodigal of thy life and thy good in the way of
Allah, and know that, if an enemy dispute with thee, thou mayst dispute
with him and refute him with proofs and be proof against him; but as for
thy friend, there is none can judge between thee and him save
righteousness and fair-dealing. Choose, therefore, thy friend for
thyself, after thou hast proved him. If he be of the brotherhood of
futurity,[330] let him be zealous in observing the externals of the Holy
Law and versed in its inner meaning, as far as may be; and if he be of
the brotherhood of the world, let him be free-born, sincere, neither a
fool nor a perverse, for the fool man is such that even his parents
might well flee from him, and a liar cannot be a true friend. Indeed the
word, Siddík[331] ('friend') deriveth from Sidk ('truth') that welleth
up from the bottom of the heart; and how can this be the case, when
falsehood is manifest upon the tongue? And know, that the observance of
the Law profiteth him who practiseth it: so love thy brother, if he be
of this quality and do not cast him off, even if thou see in him that
which irketh thee, for a friend is not like a wife, whom one can divorce
and re-marry: nay, his heart is like glass: once broken, it may not be
mended. And Allah bless him who saith:—

   Ware how thou hurtest man with hurt of heart; ✿ 'Tis hard to win
       thee back the heart offended:
   For hearts indeed, whence love is alien made, ✿ Like broken-glass
       may nevermore be mended."

The maiden continued and concluded with pointing out to us what sages
say, "The best of brethren is he who is the most constant in good
counsel; the best of action is that which is fairest in its consequence,
and the best of praise is not that which is in the mouths of men. It is
also said:—It behoveth not the servant to neglect thanking Allah
especially for two favours, health and reason. Again it is said:—Whoso
honoureth himself, his lust is a light matter to him, and he who maketh
much of his small troubles, Allah affiicteth him with the greater; he
who obeyeth his own inclination neglecteth his duties and he who
listeneth to the slanderer loseth the true friend. He who thinketh well
of thee, do thou fulfill his thought of thee. He who exceedeth in
contention sinneth, and he who against unright standeth not on ward, is
not safe from the sword. Now will I tell thee somewhat of the duties of
Kazis and judges. Know, O King, that no judgement serveth the cause of
justice save it be given after proof positive, and it behoveth the judge
to treat all people on the same level, to the intent that the great may
not hunger for oppression nor the small despair of justice. Furthermore
he should extract proof from the complainant and impose an oath upon the
defendant; and mediation is admissible between Moslems, except it be a
compromise sanctioning the unlawful or forbidding the lawful.[332] If
thou shalt have done aught during the day, of which thy reason is
doubtful but thy good intention is proved, thou (O Kazi) shouldst revert
to the right, for to do justice is a religious obligation and to return
to that which is right is better than persistence in wrong. Then (O
judge) thou shouldest study precedents and the law of the case and do
equal justice between the suitors, withal fixing thine eyes upon the
truth and committing thine affair to Allah (be He extolled and
exalted!). And require thou proof of the complainant, and if he adduce
evidence let him have due benefit of it; and if not, put the defendant
to his oath; for this is the ordinance of Allah. Receive thou the
testimony of competent Moslem witnesses, one against other, for Almighty
Allah hath commanded judges to judge by externals, He Himself taking
charge of the inner and secret things. It behoveth the judge also to
avoid giving judgement, whilst suffering from stress of pain or
hunger,[333] and that in his decisions between folk he seek the face of
Allah Almighty, for he whose intent is pure and who is at peace with
himself, Allah shall guarantee him against what is between him and the
people. Quoth al-Zuhri[334]:—There are three things for which, if they
be found in a Kazi, he should be deposed; namely, if he honour the base,
if he love praise and if he fear dismissal. And Omar bin Abd al-Aziz
once deposed a Kazi, who asked him, Why hast thou dismissed me? It hath
reached me, answered Omar, that thy converse is greater than thy
condition. It is said also that Iskandar[335] said to his Kazi:—I have
invested thee with this function and committed to thee in it my soul and
mine honour and my manliness; so do thou guard it with thy sense and
thine understanding. To his Cook he said, Thou art the Sultan of my
body; so look thou tender it as thine own self. To his Secretary he
said, Thou art the controller of my wit: so do thou watch over me in
what thou writest for me and from me." Thereupon the first damsel backed
out from the presence and a second damsel came forward.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


               Now when it was the full Eightieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan said to Zau al-Makan:—Thereupon the first damsel backed out from
the presence and a second damsel came forward and, kissing the ground
seven times before the King thy father, spake as follows, "The sage
Lukmán[336] said to his son, There be three who are known only in three
several cases; the merciful man is unknown save in time of wrath, the
brave only in battle, and thy friend in time of need. It is said that
the oppressor shall be deprest though by people praised, and that the
opprest is at rest though by people blamed. Quoth Allah Almighty,[337]
Assuredly deem not that those who rejoice in what they have done, and
who love to be praised for what they have not done, shall escape
reckoning of punishment: indeed there is reserved for them a grievous
penalty. And he said[338] (on whom be salvation and salutation!):—Works
are according to intention and to each man is attributed that which he
intendeth. He said also:—In the body is a part which being sound the
rest is sound, and which being unsound the whole is unsound. And this is
the heart. Now this heart is the most marvellous of what is in man,
since it is that which ordereth his whole affair: If covetise stir in
it, desire destroyeth him; and if affliction master it, anguish slayeth
him; if anger rage in it, danger is hard upon him; if it be blest with
contentment, he is safe from discontent; if fear surprise it, he is full
of mourning; and if calamity overtake it, affliction betideth him. If a
man gain the use of wealth, peradventure he is diverted thereby from the
remembrance of his Lord; if poverty choke him, his heart is distracted
by woe, or if disquietude waste his heart, weakness causeth him to fall.
Thus, in any case, nothing profiteth him but that he be mindful of Allah
and occupy himself with gaining his livelihood in this world and
securing his place in the next. It was asked of a certain sage, Who is
the most ill-conditioned of men?; and he answered, The man whose lusts
master his manhood and whose mind soareth over high, so that his
knowledge dispreadeth and his excuse diminisheth; and how excellently
saith the poet:—

    Freest am I of all mankind fro' meddling wight ✿ Who, seeing
        others err, self-error ne'er can sight:
    Riches and talents are but loans to creature lent; ✿ Each wears
        the cloak of that he bears in breast and sprite:
    If by mistaken door attempt on aught thou make, ✿ Thou shalt go
        wrong; and if the door be right, go right!"

Continued the maiden, "As for anecdotes of devotees, quoth Hishám bin
Bashar:—I asked Omar bin Ubayd, What is true piety?; and he answered,
The Apostle of Allah (to whom be salutation and salvation!) hath
explained it when he sayeth, The pious is he who forgetteth not the
grave nor calamity and who preferreth that which endureth to that which
passeth away; who counteth not the morrow as of his days but reckoneth
himself among the dead. And it is related that Abu Zarr[339] used to
say, Want is dearer to me than wealth, and unheal is dearer to me than
health. Quoth one of the listeners, May Allah have mercy on Abu Zarr!
For my part, I say, Whoso putteth his trust in the goodness of the
election of Almighty Allah should be content with that condition which
Allah hath chosen for him. Quoth one of the Companions of the Prophet,
Ibn Abi Aufa[340] once prayed with us the dawn-prayer. When he had done,
he recited, O Thou Enwrapped![341] till he came to where Allah saith,
When there shall be a trumping on the trumpet, and fell down dead. It is
said that Sabit al-Banáni wept till he well-nigh lost his eyes. They
brought him a man to medicine him who said to him, I will cure thee,
provided thou obey my bidding. Asked Sabit, In what matter? Quoth the
leach, In that thou leave weeping! What is the worth of mine eyes?,
rejoined Sabit, if they do not weep? Quoth a man to Mohammed bin
Abdillah, Exhort thou me!"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Eighty-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan said to Zau al-Makan:—Thus spake the second handmaid to the King
who hath found mercy, Omar bin al-Nu'uman. "Quoth a man to Mohammed bin
Abdillah, Exhort thou me! I exhort thee, replied he, to be a self-ruler,
an abstainer in this world, and in the next a greedy slave. How so?
asked the other and Mohammed answered, The abstinent man in this world
conquereth both the world that is and the world to come. And quoth Ghaus
bin Abdillah, There were two brothers among the sons of Israel, one of
whom said to the other, What be the most perilous[342] thing thou hast
done? Replied the brother, I once came upon a nest of young birds; so I
took out one and threw it back into the nest; but among the chickens
were some which drew apart from it. This is the most perilous thing I
ever did; now what be the most perilous thing thou hast ever done? He
rejoined, When I arise for prayer I am fearful that it is only for the
sake of the reward. Now their father heard these words and exclaimed, O
Allah, an say they sooth take them to Thyself! It was declared by one of
the wise men, Verily, these were of the most virtuous of children. Quoth
Sa'id bin Jubayr,[343] I was once in company with Fuzalah bin 'Ubayd and
said to him, Exhort thou me! Replied he, Bear in mind these two
necessaries, Shun syntheism[344] and harm not any of Allah's creatures.
And he repeated these two couplets:—

     Be as thou wilt, for Allah still is bounteous Lord, ✿
         And care-dispeller; dread not therefore bane and ban
     To two things only never draw thee nigh, nor give ✿ Partner to
         Allah, trouble to thy brother-man."

And how well saith the poet:—

   An thou of pious works a store neglect ✿ And after death meet one
       who _did_ collect,
   Thou shalt repent thou diddest not as he, ✿ Nor madest ready as he
       did elect."

Then the third damsel came forward, after the second had withdrawn, and
said, "Of a truth, the chapter of piety is exceeding wide; but I will
mention what occurreth to me thereof, concerning the pious of old. Quoth
a certain holy man, I congratulate myself in death, though I am not
assured of rest therein, save that I know death interveneth between a
man and his works; so I hope for the doubling of good works and the
docking off of ill works. And Itá'a al-Salamí, when he had made an end
of an exhortation, was wont to tremble and grieve and weep sore; and as
they asked him why he did this he answered, I desire to enter upon a
grave matter, and it is the standing up before Almighty Allah to do in
accordance with my exhortation. In similar guise Zayn al-Abidín,[345]
son of Al-Husayn, was wont to tremble when he rose to pray. Being asked
the cause of this, he replied, Know ye not before whom I stand and whom
I address? It is said that there lived near Sufyán al-Thauri[346] a
blind man who, when the month of Ramazán came, went out with the folk to
pray,[347] but remained silent and hung back. Said Sufyan, On the Day of
Resurrection he shall come with the people of the Koran and they will be
distinguished by increase of honour from their fellows. Quoth Sufyan,
Were the soul established in the heart as befitteth, it would fly away
for joy and pining for Paradise, and for grief and fear of hell-fire. It
is related also of Sufyan al-Thauri that he said, To look upon the face
of a tyrant is a sin." Then the third damsel retired and came forward
the fourth, who said, "Here am I to treat of sundry traditions of pious
men which suggest themselves to me. It is related that Bishr
Barefoot[348] said, I once heard Khálid say, Beware of secret
polytheism. I asked, What may secret polytheism be?; and he answered,
When one of you in praying prolong his inclinations and prostrations
till a cause of impurity[349] come upon him. And one of the sages said,
Doing works of weal expiateth what is ill. Quoth Ibrahim,[350] I
supplicated Bishr Barefoot to acquaint me with some theological
mysteries; but he said, O my son, this knowledge it behoveth us not to
teach to every one; of every hundred five, even as the legal alms upon
money. Said Ibrahim, I thought his reply excellent and approved of it
and while I was praying behold, Bishr was also praying: so I stood
behind him[351] making the prayer-bow till the Mu'ezzin called his call.
Then rose a man of tattered appearance and said, O folk, beware of a
truth which bringeth unweal, for there is no harm in a lie bringing
weal,[352] and in time of need no choice we heed: speech booteth not in
the absence of good qualities even as silence hurteth not in the
presence of good. Presently I saw Bishr drop a danik,[353] so I picked
it up and exchanged it for a dirham which I gave him. Quoth he, I will
not take it. Quoth I, It is perfectly lawful change; but he rejoined I
cannot take in exchange the riches of the present world for those of the
future world. It is related also that Bishr Barefoot's sister once went
to Ahmad bin Hanbal"[354]——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Eighty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir Dandan
continued to bespeak Zau al-Makan on this wise:—And quoth the maiden to
thy father, "Bishr Barefoot's sister once went to Ahmad bin Hanbal and
said to him, O Imam of the Faith, we are a family that spin thread by
night and work for our living by day; and oftentimes the cressets of the
watch of Baghdad pass by and we on the roof spinning by their light. Is
this forbidden to us? Asked Ahmad:—Who art thou? I am the sister of
Bishr Barefoot, answered she. Rejoined the Imam, O household of Bishr, I
shall never cease to drink full draughts of piety from your hearts.
Quoth one of the sages, When Allah willeth well to His servant He
openeth upon him the gate of action. Malik bin Dinár,[355] when he
passed through the bazar and saw aught he desired, was wont to say:—O
soul, take patience, for I will not accord to thee what thou desirest.
He said also (Allah accept him!), The salvation of the soul lies in
resistance to it and its damnation in submission to it. Quoth Mansúr bin
Ammár,[356] I made a pilgrimage and was faring Meccahwards by way of
Cufa, and the night was overcast, when I heard a voice crying out from
the deeps of the darkness saying, O Allah, I swear by Thy Greatness and
Thy Glory, I meant not through my disobedience to transgress against
Thee; for indeed I am not ignorant of Thee; but my fault is one Thou
didst foreordain to me from eternity without beginning;[357] so do Thou
pardon my transgression, for indeed I disobeyed Thee of my ignorance!
When he had made an end of his prayer he recited aloud the verse, O true
believers, save your souls and those of your families from the fire
whose fuel is men and stones.[358] Then I heard a fall, but not knowing
what it was I passed on. When the morning morrowed, as we went our way,
behold, we fell in with a funeral-train, followed by an old woman whose
strength had left her. I asked her of the dead, and she answered:—This
is the funeral of a man who passed by us yesterday whilst my son was
standing at prayer and after his prayers he recited a verse from the
Book of Allah Almighty when the man's gall-bladder burst and he fell
dead." Therewith the fourth damsel retired and the fifth came forward
and said, "I here will also repeat what occurreth to me regarding the
acts of devotees in olden time. Maslamah bin Dinár used to say:—By
making sound the secret thoughts, sins great and small are covered; and,
when the servant of Allah is resolved to leave sinning, victory cometh
to him. Also quoth he, Every worldly good which doth not draw one nearer
to Allah is a calamity, for a little of this world distracteth from a
mickle of the world to come and a mickle of the present maketh thee
forget the whole of the future. It was asked of Abú Házim,[359] Who is
the most prosperous of men?; and he answered, Whoso spendeth his life in
submission to Allah. The other enquired, And who is the most foolish of
mankind? Whoso selleth his future for the worldly goods of others,
replied Abu Házim. It is reported of Moses[360] (on whom be peace!) that
when he came to the waters of Midian he exclaimed:—O Lord, verily I
stand in need of the good which thou shalt send down to me.[361] And he
asked of his Lord and not of his folk. There came two damsels and he
drew water for them both and allowed not the shepherds to draw first.
When the twain returned, they informed their father Shu'ayb (on whom be
peace!) who said, Haply, he is hungry, adding to one of them, Go back to
him and bid him hither. Now when she came to Moses, she veiled her face
and said, My father biddeth thee to him that he may pay thee thy wage
for having drawn water for us. Moses was averse to this and was not
willing to follow her. Now she was a woman large in the back parts, and
the wind blowing upon her garment[362] discovered the hinder cheeks to
Moses; which when Moses saw, he lowered his eyes and said to her, Get
thee behind while I walk in front. So she followed him till he entered
the house of Shu'ayb where supper was ready,"——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Eighty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir Dandan
continued to Zau al-Makan:—Now, quoth the fifth damsel to thy sire,
"When Moses (on whom be peace!) entered the home of Shu'ayb where supper
was ready, Shu'ayb said to him, O Moses, I desire to pay thee thy wage
for having drawn water for these two. But Moses answered, I am of a
household which selleth nothing of the fashion of the next world[363]
for what is on earth of gold and silver." Then quoth Shu'ayb, O youth!
nevertheless thou art my guest, and it is my wont and that of my
forbears to honour the guest by setting food before him. So Moses sat
down and ate. Then Shu'ayb hired Moses for eight pilgrimages, that is to
say, eight years, and made his wage marriage with one of his two
daughters, and Moses' service to him was to stand for her dowry. As
saith the Holy Writ of him:—Verily I will give thee one of these my two
daughters in marriage, on condition that thou serve me for hire eight
pilgrimages: and if thou fulfil ten years, it is in thine own breast;
for I seek not to impose a hardship on thee.[364] A certain man once
said to one of his friends whom he had not met for many days:—Thou hast
made me desolate, for that I have not seen thee this long while. Quoth
the other, I have been distracted from thee by Ibn Shiháb: dost thou
know him? Quoth his friend, Yes, he hath been my neighbour these thirty
years, but I have never spoken to him. He replied, Verily thou
forgettest Allah in forgetting thy neighbour! If thou lovedst Allah thou
wouldst love thy neighbour. Knowest thou not that a neighbour hath a
claim upon his neighbour,[365] even as the right of kith and kin? Said
Huzayfah, "We entered Meccah with Ibráhím bin Adham, and Shakik
al-Balkhí was also making a pilgrimage that year. Now we met whilst
circumambulating the Ka'abah and Ibrahim said to Shakik, What is your
fashion in your country? Replied Shakik, When we are blest with our
daily bread we eat, and when we hunger we take patience. This wise, said
Ibrahim, do the dogs of Balkh; but we, when blest with plenty, do honour
to Allah and when an-hungered we thank Him. And Shakik seated himself
before Ibrahim and said to him, Thou art my master. Also said Mohammed
bin Imrán, A man once asked of Hátim the Deaf[366] What maketh thee to
trust in Allah? Two things, answered he, I know that none save myself
shall eat my daily bread, so my heart is at rest as to that; and I know
that I was not created without the knowledge of Allah, and am abashed
before Him." Then the fifth damsel retired and the ancient dame came
forward and, kissing the ground before thy father nine times, said,
"Thou hast heard, O King, what these all have spoken on the subject of
piety; and I will follow their example in relating what hath reached me
of the famous men of past times. It is said that the Imam al-Sháfi'í
departed the night into three portions, the first for study, the second
for sleep and the third for prayer. The Imam Abú Hanífah[367] was wont
also to pass half the night in prayer. One day a man pointed him out to
another, as he walked by and remarked, Yonder man watcheth the whole
night. When he heard this Abu Hanifah said, I was abashed before Allah
to hear myself praised for what was not in me; so after this he used to
watch the whole night. And one of the Sages hath said:—

   Who seeketh for pearl in the Deep dives deep; ✿ Who on high would
       hie robs his night of sleep.

Al-Rabí a relates that Al-Shafi'i used to recite the whole Koran seventy
times during the month of Ramazán, and that in his daily prayers. Quoth
Al-Shafi'i (Allah accept him!), During ten years I never ate my fill of
barley-bread, for fullness hardeneth the heart and deadeneth the wit and
induceth sleep and enfeebleth one from standing up to pray.[368] It is
reported of Abdullah bin Mohammed al-Sakrá that he said, I was once
talking with Omar and he observed to me, Never saw I a more God-fearing
or eloquent man than Mohammed bin Idris al-Sháfi'í. It so happened I
went out one day with Al-Háris bin Labíb al-Saffár, who was a disciple
of Al-Muzani[369] and had a fine voice and he read the saying of the
Almighty:—This shall be a day whereon they shall not speak to any
purpose, nor shall they be permitted to excuse themselves.[370] I saw
Al-Shafi'i's colour change; his skin shuddered with horripilation, he
was violently moved and he fell down in a fainting fit. When he revived
he said, I take refuge with Allah from the stead of the liars and the
lot of the negligent! O Allah, before whom the hearts of the wise abase
themselves, O Allah, of Thy beneficence accord to me the remission of my
sins, adorn me with the curtain of Thy protection and pardon me my
shortcomings, by the magnanimity of Thy Being! Then I rose and went
away. Quoth one of the pious, When I entered Baghdad, Al-Shafi'i was
there. So I sat down on the river-bank to make the ablution before
prayer; and behold, there passed me one who said, O youth, make thy
Wuzu-ablution well and Allah will make it well for thee in this world
and in the next. I turned and lo! there was a man behind whom came a
company of people. So I hastened to finish my ablution and followed him.
Presently, he turned and asked me, Say, dost thou want aught? Yes,
answered I; I desire that thou teach me somewhat of that which Allah
Almighty hath taught thee. He said, Know then that whoso believeth in
Allah shall be saved, and whoso jealously loveth his faith shall be
delivered from destruction, and whoso practiseth abstinence in this
world, his eyes shall be solaced on the morrow of death. Shall I tell
thee any more? I replied, Assuredly; and he continued, Be thou of the
world that is, heedless; and of the world to come, greediest. Be
truthful in all thy dealings, and thou shalt be saved with the
Salvationists. Then he went on and I asked about him and was told that
he was the Imam Al-Shafi'i. Al-Shafi'i was wont to remark, I love to see
folk profit by this learning of mine, on condition that nothing of it be
attributed to me."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Eighty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir Dandan
continued to Zau al-Makan:—The old woman bespake thy sire, saying, "The
Imam Al-Shafi'i was wont to remark, I love to see folk profit by this
learning of mine on condition that nothing of it be attributed to me. He
also said:—I never disputed with any one, but I would that Almighty
Allah should give him the knowledge of the Truth and aid him to dispread
it: nor did I ever dispute with anyone at all but for the showing forth
of the Truth, and I reck not whether Allah manifest it by my tongue or
by His. He said also (whom Allah accept!), if thou fear to grow
conceited of thy lore, then bethink thee Whose grace thou seekest and
for what good thou yearnest and what punishment thou dreadest. It was
told to Abu Hanífah that the Commander of the Faithful, Abú Ja'afar
al-Mansúr, had appointed him Kazi and ordered him a salary of ten
thousand dirhams; but he would not accept of this; and, when the day
came on which the money was to be paid him, he prayed the dawn-prayer,
then covered his head with his robe and spoke not. When the Caliph's
messenger came with the money, he went in to the Imam and accosted him,
but he would not speak to him. So the messenger said, Verily this money
is lawfully thine. I know that it is lawfully mine, replied he: but I
abhor that the love of tyrants get a hold upon my heart.[371] Asked the
other, If thou go in to them canst thou not guard thyself from loving
them. Answered Abu Hanifah, Can I look to enter the sea without my
clothes being wet? Another of Al-Shafi'i's sayings (Allah accept him!)
is:—

   Oh soul of me, an thou accept my rede, ✿ Thou shalt be wealthy and
       of grace entire:
   Cast off ambitious hopes and vain desires; ✿ How many a death was
       done by vain desire!"

Among the sayings of Sufyán al-Thaurí, with which he admonished Ali bin
al-Hasan al-Salamí was, Be thou a man of truth and 'ware lies and
treachery and hypocrisy and pride. Be not indebted save to Him who is
merciful to His debtors; and let thine associate be one who shall
dissociate thee from the world. Be ever mindful of death and be constant
in craving pardon of Allah and in beseeching of Allah peace for what
remaineth of thy life. Counsel every True Believer, when he asketh thee
concerning the things of his faith; and beware of betraying a Believer,
for whoso betrayeth a Believer, betrayeth Allah and His Apostle. Avoid
dissensions and litigation; and leave that which causeth doubt in thee
for things which breed no doubt:[372] so shalt thou be at peace. Enjoin
beneficence and forbid malevolence: so shalt thou be loved of Allah.
Adorn thine inner man and Allah shall adorn thine outer man. Accept the
excuse of him who excuseth self to thee and hate not any one of the
Moslems. Draw near unto those who withdraw from thee and excuse those
that misuse thee: so shalt thou be the friend of the Prophets. Let thine
affairs, both public and private, be in Allah's charge, and fear Him
with the fear of one who knoweth he is dead and who fareth towards
Resurrection and Judgement-stead between the hands of the Lord of Dread;
and remember that to one of two houses thou art sped, either for Heavens
eterne or to the Hell fires that burn." Thereupon the old woman sat down
beside the damsels. Now when thy father, who hath found mercy, heard
their discourse, he knew that they were the most accomplished of the
people of their time; and, seeing their beauty and loveliness and the
extent of their wisdom and lore, he showed them all favour. Moreover, he
turned to the ancient dame and treated her with honour, and set apart
for her and her damsels the palace which had lodged Princess Abrizah,
daughter of the King of Greece, to which he bade carry all the luxuries
they needed. They abode with him ten days and the old woman abode with
them; and, whenever the King visited them, he found her absorbed in
prayer, watching by night and fasting by day; whereby love of her took
hold upon his heart and he said to me, "O Wazir, verily this old woman
is of the pious, and awe of her is strong in my heart." Now on the
eleventh day, the King visited her, that he might pay her the price of
the damsels; but she said to him, "O King, know that the price of these
maidens surpasseth the competence of men; indeed I seek not for them
either gold or silver or jewels, be it little or much." Now when thy
father heard these words he wondered and asked her, "O my lady and what
is their price?"; whereto she answered, "I will not sell them to thee
save on condition that thou fast, watching by night a whole month, and
abstaining by day, all for the love of Allah Almighty; and, if thou do
this, they are thy property to use in thy palace as thou please. So the
King wondered at the perfection of her rectitude and piety and
abnegation; she was magnified in his eyes and he said, "Allah make this
pious woman to profit us!" Then he agreed with her to fast for a month
as she had stipulated, and she said to him, "I will help thee with the
prayers I pray for thee and now bring me a gugglet of water." They
brought one and she took it and recited over it and muttered spells, and
sat for an hour speaking in speech no one understood or knew aught
thereof. Lastly she covered it with a cloth and, sealing it with her
signet-ring, gave it to thy sire, saying, "When thou hast fasted the
first ten days, break thy fast on the eleventh night with what is in
this gugglet, for it will root out the love of the world from thy heart
and fill it with light and faith. As for me to-morrow I will go forth to
my brethren, the Invisible[373] Controuls, for I yearn after them, and I
will return to thee when the first ten days are past." Thy father took
the gugglet and arose and set it apart in a closet of his palace, then
locked the door and put the key in his pocket. Next day the King fasted
and the old woman went her ways. And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Eighty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir Dandan
thus continued to Zau al-Makan:—Now when came the day for the Sultan's
fast, the old woman went her ways. And after he had accomplished the ten
days thereof, on the eleventh he opened the gugglet and drank what was
therein and found it cordial to his stomach. Within the second ten days
of the month the old woman returned, bringing sweetmeats wrapped in a
green leaf, like no leaf of known tree. She went in to thy sire and
saluted him; and, when he saw her, he rose to her saying, "Welcome, O
pious lady!" "O King," quoth she, "the Invisible Controuls salute thee,
for I told them of thee, and they rejoiced in thee and have sent thee
their Halwá,[374] which is of the sweetmeats of the other world. Do thou
break thy fast on it at the end of the day." The King rejoiced at this
with great joy, and exclaimed, "Praised be Allah, who hath given me
brethren of the Invisible World!" Thereupon he thanked the ancient dame
and kissed her hands; and he honoured her and the damsels with exceeding
honour. She went forth for the twenty days of thy father's fast, at the
end of which time she came to him and said, "Know, O King, that I told
the Invisible Controuls of the love which is between me and thee, and
informed them how I had left the maidens with thee, and they were glad
that the damsels should belong to a King like thee; for they were wont,
when they saw them, to be strenuous in offering on their behalf prayers
and petitions ever granted. So I would fain carry them to the Invisible
Controuls that they may benefit by the breath of their favour, and
peradventure, they shall not return to thee without some treasure of the
treasures of the earth, that thou, after completing thy fast, mayst
occupy thyself with their raiment and help thyself by the money they
shall bring thee, to the extent of thy desires." When thy sire heard her
words, he thanked her for them and said, "Except that I fear to cross
thee, I would not accept the treasure or aught else; but when wilt thou
set out with them?" Replied she, "On the seven-and-twentieth night; and
I will bring them back to thee at the head of the month, by which time
thou wilt have accomplished thy fast and they will have had their
courses and be free from impurity; and they shall become thine and be at
thy disposal. By Allah, each damsel of them is worth many times thy
kingdom!" He said, "I know it, O pious lady!" Then quoth the old woman,
"There is no help but that thou send with them someone in thy palace who
is dear to thee, that she may find solace and seek a blessing of the
Invisible Controuls." Quoth he, "I have a Greek slave called Sophia, by
whom I have been blessed with two children, a girl and a boy; but they
were lost years ago. Take her with thee that she may get the
blessing."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Eighty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir Dandan
continued to Zau al-Makan:—Quoth thy sire to the ancient woman when she
demanded the handmaids of him, "I have a Greek slave called Sophia, by
whom I have been blest with two children, a girl and a boy, but they
were lost years ago; so take her with thee, haply she may get the
benediction and, belike, the Invisible Controuls will sue Allah for her
that her two children may be restored to her." "Thou hast said well,"
replied she; "for that indeed was her grievousest want." Thy sire gave
not over finishing his fast till the old woman said to him, "O my son, I
am going to the Invisible Controuls; so bring me Sophia." Accordingly,
he summoned her and she came forthright, and he delivered her to the old
woman who mixed her up with the other damsels. Then she went in to her
chamber and bringing out a sealed cup, presented it to the Sultan
saying, "On the thirtieth day, do thou repair to the Hammam and when
thou comest out, enter one of the closets in thy palace and drink what
is in this cup. Then sleep, and thou shalt attain what thou seekest, and
peace be with thee!" Thereat the King was glad and thanked her and
kissed her hands. Quoth she, "I commend thee to Allah's care;" whereat
quoth he, "And when shall I see thee again, O pious lady? In very sooth
I love not to part with thee." Then she called down blessings on him and
departed with the five damsels and the Queen; whilst the King fasted
after her departure other three days, till the month ended, when he
arose and went to the Hammam and coming out, shut himself up in a closet
of his palace, commanding that none should go in to him. There, after
making fast the door, he drank what was in the cup and lay down to
sleep; and we sat awaiting him till the end of the day, but he did not
come out and we said, "Perchance he is tired with the bath and with
watching by night and fasting by day; wherefore he sleepeth." So we
waited till next day; but still he did not come forth. Then we stood at
the closet-door and cried aloud so haply he might awake and ask what was
the matter. But nothing came of that; so at last we lifted up the
door;[375] and, going in, found him dead, with his flesh torn into
strips and bits and his bones broken.[376] When we saw him in this
condition it was grievous to us, and we took up the cup and found within
its cover a piece of paper whereon was inscribed, "Whoso doeth evil
leaveth no regrets, and this be the reward of him who playeth traitor
with the daughters of Kings and who debaucheth them; and we make known
to all who fall upon this scroll that Sharrkan, when he came to our
country, seduced our Queen Abrizah; nor did that suffice him but he must
needs take her from us and bring her to you. Then he[377] sent her away
in company of a black slave who slew her, and we found her lying dead on
the desert sward and thrown out to wild beasts. This be no kingly deed,
and he who did this is requited with naught but what he merited. So do
ye suspect none of having killed him, for no one slew him but the
cunning witch, whose name is Zat al-Dawahi. And behold, I have taken the
King's wife, Sophia, and have carried her to her father, Afridun King of
Constantinople. Moreover, there is no help for it but that we wage war
upon you and kill you and take your country from you, and ye shall be
cut off even to the last man, nor shall a living soul be spared by Death
nor one who bloweth fire with his breath, save he who Cross and
Belt[378] worshippeth." When we read this paper, we knew that the
ancient woman had beguiled us and carried out her plot against us:
whereupon we cried aloud and buffeted our faces and wept sore when
weeping availed us naught. And the troops fell out as to whom they
should make Sultan; some would have thee, and others would have thy
brother Sharrkan; and we ceased not to dispute about this for the space
of a month, at the end of which certain of us drew together and agreed
to repair to thy brother Sharrkan: so we set out and journeyed on till
we fell in with thee. And such is the manner of the death of Sultan Omar
bin al-Nu'uman! Now when the Wazir Dandan had made an end of his story,
Zau al-Makan and his sister, Nuzhat al-Zaman, wept; and the Chamberlain,
who wept also, said to Zau al-Makan, "O King, weeping will avail thee
naught; nor shall aught profit thee but that thou harden thy heart and
strengthen thy stress and stablish thy sovranty; for verily whoso
leaveth the like of thee is not dead." Thereupon Zau al-Makan gave over
his weeping and caused his throne to be set up without the pavilion, and
then commanded the army to pass in review-order before him. And the
Chamberlain sat by his side and all the armour-bearers[379] behind him,
whilst the Wazir Dandan and the rest of the Emirs and Grandees stood
each in his dividual stead. Then quoth King Zau al-Makan to the Minister
Dandan, "Inform me concerning my sire's treasures;" and he replied, "I
hear and I obey;" and gave him to know of the late King's hoards and
monies, and what was in the treasury of amassed wealth and jewels, and
acquainted him with other precious things. So Zau al-Makan opened his
hand to the army, and gave a sumptuous robe of honour to the Wazir
Dandan, saying, "Thou continuest in office." Whereupon Dandan kissed the
ground before him and wished him long life. Then he bestowed dresses on
the Emirs, after which he said to the Chamberlain, "Bring out before me
the tribute of Damascus that is with thee." So he was shown the chests
of money and rarities and jewels, when he took them and parted them all
amongst the troops,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

[Illustration]


               Now when it was the Eighty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Zau al-Makan
ordered the Chamberlain to bring out before him what he had brought of
the tribute of Damascus; and, when he was shown the chests of money and
rarities and jewels, he took them and parted them all amongst the
troops, till nothing was left. And the Emirs kissed the ground before
him and wished him long life, saying, "Never saw we a King, who gave the
like of these gifts." Then all went away to their tents and when it was
morning he gave orders for marching. So they marched for three days,
till, on the fourth day, they drew near to Baghdad. When they entered
the city, they found it decorated, and Zau al-Makan, the Sultan, went up
to his father's palace and sat down on the throne, whilst the Emirs of
the army and the Wazir Dandan and the Chamberlain of Damascus stood
between his hands. Then he bade his private secretary write a writ to
his brother Sharrkan, acquainting him with all that had passed, from
first to last, and he concluded, "As soon as thou hast read this letter,
make ready thine affair and join us with thine army, that we may turn to
Holy War upon the Infidels and take man-bote for our father and wipe out
the stain upon our honour." Then he folded the letter and sealed it with
his seal-ring and said to the Minister Dandan, "None shall carry this
letter but thou; and it behoveth thee speak my brother fair and say to
him:—If thou have a mind to thy father's kingdom, it is thine, and thy
brother shall be Viceroy for thee in Damascus; for to this effect am I
instructed by him." So the Wazir went down from before him and made
ready for his march. Then Zau al-Makan bade set apart a magnificent
house for the Fireman and furnished it with the best of furniture and
long is the tale of that Fireman.[380] Presently Zau al-Makan went out
chasing and hunting and, as he was returning to Baghdad, one of the
Emirs presented him with blood-horses and with beauteous handmaids whose
description the tongue evades. One of the damsels pleased him: so he
went in unto her and knew her that night, and she conceived by him
forthright. After a while, the Wazir Dandan returned from his journey,
bringing him news of his brother Sharrkan and that he was then on his
way to him, and said, "It were fitting thou go forth to meet him." Zau
al-Makan replied, "I hear and I consent;" and, riding forth with his
Grandees a day's journey from Baghdad, he pitched his pavilions there
awaiting his brother. Next morning appeared King Sharrkan amid the army
of Syria, a horseman of might, a lion fierce in fight, a prow and
doughty knight. As the squadrons drew nigh and the dust-clouds came hard
by and the troops rode up with banners on high, Zau al-Makan and those
with him pushed forward to meet Sharrkan and his men; and when Zau
al-Makan saw his brother, he desired to dismount, but Sharrkan conjured
him not to do on this wise, and himself footed it, and walked a few
paces towards him.[381] As soon as he reached Zau al-Makan, the new
Sultan threw himself upon him, and Sharrkan embraced him and wept with
great weeping and the twain condoled with each other. Then they mounted
and rode onward, they and their troops, till they reached Baghdad, where
they alighted and went up to the royal palace and there they passed that
night, and when next morning came, Zau al-Makan went forth and bade
summon the troops from all parts, and proclaimed a Holy War and a
Razzia.[382] They then awaited the coming of the levies from each
quarter of the kingdom, and every one who came they entreated with
honour and promised him all manner of good; till in so doing a full
month had sped, and the fighting men flocked to them in a continuous
body. Then Sharrkan said to Zau al-Makan, "O my brother, tell me thy
history." So he told him all that had befallen him from first to last,
including the benevolent dealing of the Fireman with him. Asked
Sharrkan, "Hast thou requited his kindness?"; and he answered, "O my
brother! I have not rewarded him as yet, but Inshallah! I will
recompense him whenas I return from this raid."—And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Eighty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sharrkan asked his
brother Zau al-Makan, "Hast thou requited the Fireman for his
kindness?"; and he answered, "O my brother, I have not rewarded him as
yet, but Inshallah! I will recompense him whenas I return from this raid
and find time so to do." Therewith Sharrkan was certified that his
sister, Nuzhat al-Zaman, had told him the whole truth; but he concealed
what had passed between them and offered his salutation to her by her
husband the Chamberlain. She sent him back her greeting, calling down
blessings on him and enquiring after her daughter Kuzia-Fakan, to which
he replied that the maiden was well and in the best of health and
safety. Whereupon she praised Almighty Allah and gave him thanks. Then
Sharrkan went to his brother to take counsel with him for departure; and
Zau al-Makan said, "O my brother, as soon as the army is complete and
the Arabs have come in from all parts, we will march forth." So he bade
make ready the commissariat and prepare munitions of war and went in to
his wife, who was now five months gone with child; and he put under her
astrologers and mathematicians, to whom he appointed stipends and
allowances. Then he set out three months after the arrival of the army
of Syria, and as soon as the Arabs were come in and the troops were
assembled from all directions; and, as he fared forth, he was followed
by the warriors and the united host. Now the name of the General of the
Daylam army was Rustam and that of the General of the army of the
Turks[383] Bahram. And Zau al-Makan marched in mid-host and on his right
was his brother Sharrkan, and on his left the Chamberlain his
brother-in-law. So the squadrons broke up and pushed forward and the
battalions and companies filed past in battle-array, till the whole army
was in motion. They ceased not to fare on for the space of a month, and
each body dismounted at its own ground and there rested every week three
days (for the host was great); and they advanced in this order till they
came to the country of the Greeks. Then the people of the villages and
hamlets and the poorer sort took fright at them and fled to
Constantinople. But when King Afridun heard the tidings he arose and
betook himself to Zat al-Dawahi, the same who had contrived the
stratagem, and had travelled to Baghdad and had slain King Omar bin
al-Nu'uman; and who, after carrying off her slaves and Queen Sophia, had
returned with them all to her native land. Now when she had been
restored to her son, the King of Greece, and felt herself safe, she said
to King Hardub, "Cool thine eyes; for I have avenged by blood the shame
of thy daughter Abrizah, and have killed Omar bin al-Nu'uman and have
brought back Sophia. So now let us go to the King of Constantinople and
carry to him his daughter and acquaint him with what hath happened, that
all of us be on guard and prepare our forces; and I will fare with thee
to King Afridun, Lord of Constantinople, for I opine that the Moslems
will not await our attack." Said Hardub, "Tarry thou till they draw near
our country, that we may make us ready meantime and assemble our power."
Accordingly they took to levying their forces and preparing for war,
and, when the news of the Moslems' advance reached them, they were
prepared for defence; and Zat al-Dawahi had preceded them. Now when she
and her son arrived at Constantinople, the King of Kings, Afridun,
hearing of the approach of Hardub, King of the Greeks, came forth to
meet him and asked how it was with him and the cause of his visit. So
Hardub acquainted him with the cunning doings of his mother, Zat
al-Dawahi, how she had slain the Moslem King and recovered from him
Queen Sophia, and had said, "The Moslems have assembled their forces and
are on their way to attack us, wherefore it behoveth that we two join
hands in single band and meet them." Now King Afridun rejoiced in the
return of his daughter and the killing of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman; and
he sent to all countries seeking succour and acquainting the folk with
the cause of slaying the Moslem King. So the Nazarene troops flocked to
him and three months were not past ere the army of the Greeks was
complete, besides which there joined themselves to him Franks from all
their lands, French, Germans[384] and Ragusans,[385] with men of
Zara,[386] Venetians, Genoese, and all the hosts of the Yellow
Faces[387]; and, when the gathering was at its full, earth was
straitened on them by reason of their multitude. Then Afridun, the Great
King, ordered a march; so they set out and ceased not to defile through
the city for ten days. They fared on till they reached the Wady hight Al
Nu'uman, a broad-sided vale hard by the Salt Sea, where they halted
three days; and on the fourth they were about to set out again, when
news came that the army of Al-Islam on them prest, and the defenders of
the faith of Mohammed, of Men the Best. So they halted in it other three
days, and on the eighth they espied a dust-cloud which towered till it
walled the whole land; nor was an hour of the day past ere that dust
began to drift and was torn to shreds in the lift, and pierced through
its shades the starry radiance of lance and the white leven of blades.
Presently there appeared beneath it the banners Islamitan and the
ensigns Mahometan; the horsemen urged forward, like the letting loose of
seas that surged, clad in mail, as they were mackerel-back clouds which
the moon enveil; whereupon the two hosts clashed, like two torrents on
each other dashed. Eyes fell upon eyes; and the first to seek combat
singular was the Wazir Dandan, he and the army of Syria, numbering
thirty thousand bridles, and with him were the General of the Turks, and
the General of Daylam, Rustam and Bahram, amid twenty thousand horse,
behind whom came the men from the shores of the Salt Sea, clad in iron
mail, as they were full moons that past through a night o'ercast. Then
the Nazarene host called out on Jesus and Mary, and the defiled[388]
Cross and they heaped themselves upon the Wazir Dandan and those with
him of the Syrian host. Now all this was in pursuance of a stratagem
devised by that ancient woman Zat al-Dawahi; for, before his departure,
King Afridun had gone in to her and asked her, "How shall I do and what
plan shall I pursue?; it is thou hast caused this great distress to us;"
and she had answered, "O great King and mighty Cohen![389] I will teach
thee a trick would baffle Iblis himself, though he summon to his
assistance all his grisly hosts."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Eighty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, all this was a
stratagem of the ancient woman, for that the King before his departure
had gone to her and asked, "How shall I do and what plan shall I pursue?
it is thou hast caused this great distress to us!" And she had answered,
"O great King and mighty Cohen, I will teach thee a trick would baffle
the Devil himself though he summon to his assistance all his grisly
hosts. It is that thou send fifty thousand men going down in ships, and
sailing over the sea to the Mountain of Smoke; and there let them land
and stir not till the standards of Al-Islam come upon thee, when do thou
up and at them. Then bid the troops from the seaward sally out upon the
Moslems and take them in rear, whilst we confront them from the
landward. So not one of them shall escape, and our sorrows shall cease
and peace abide with us." Now the counsel of this ancient woman
commended itself to King Afridun, and he replied, "Right is the recking
thou reckest, O Princess of wits and recourse of Kings and Cohens
warring for their blood-wit!" So when the army of Al-Islam came upon
them in that valley, before they knew of it the flames began to burn up
the tents and the swords in men's bodies to make rents. Then hurried up
the army of Baghdad and Khorasan who numbered one hundred and twenty
thousand horse, with Zau al-Makan in the front of war. When the host of
the Infidels that lay by the sea saw them, they sallied out against them
and followed in their tracks; and when Zau al-Makan espied this he cried
out to his men, "Turn back to the Infidels, O People of the Chosen
Apostle, and slay those who deny and hate the authority of the
Compassionating, the Compassionate!" So they turned and fought with the
Christians. Then Sharrkan marched up with another corps of the Moslem
host, some hundred thousand men, whilst the Infidels numbered nigh upon
a thousand and six hundred thousand men. When the Moslems were united,
their hearts were strengthened and they cried out, saying, "Verily Allah
hath promised us victory, and to the Infidels hath assigned defeat." And
they clashed together with sword and spear. Now Sharrkan tare through
rank and row and raged among the masses of the foe, fighting so fierce a
fight as to make children grey grow; nor did he cease tourneying among
the infidel horde and working havoc among them with the keen-edged
sword, shouting "Allaho Akbar!"—Allah is Most Great—till he drove back
the host to the coast. Then failed the force of the foe and Allah gave
victory to the faith of Al-Islam, and folk fought folk, drunken without
strong drink, till they slew of the Infidels in this affair forty and
five thousand, while of the Moslems but three thousand and five hundred
fell. Moreover, the Lion of the Faith, King Sharrkan, and his brother,
Zau al-Makan, slept not that night, but occupied themselves with
congratulating their braves and with looking to the wounded and with
assuring the army of victory and salvation and promise of reward in the
world to come. Thus far concerning the Moslem; but as regards King
Afridun, Lord of Constantinople and Sovran of Roum, and Zat al-Dawahi,
they assembled the Emirs of the host and said to them, "Verily, we had
worked our will and solaced our hearts, but our over-confidence in our
numbers, and that only, defeated us." Then quoth to them the ancient
one, the Lady of Calamities, "In very sooth nought shall profit you,
except ye draw you nigh unto the Messiah and put your trust in the True
Belief; for, by the virtue of the Messiah, the whole strength of the
Moslem host lieth in that Satan, King Sharrkan." "To-morrow," said King
Afridun, "I have resolved to draw up in battle array and to send out
against them that redoubtable cavalier, Luka bin Shȧmlút; for if King
Sharrkan come forth as a champion to fight single-handed, our man will
slay him and will slay the other Moslem Knights, till not one is left.
And I purpose this night to sacre you all with the Holy Incense." When
the Emirs heard these words they kissed the ground before him. Now the
incense which he designated was the excrement of the Chief Patriarch,
the denier, the defiler of the Truth, and they sought for it with such
instance, and they so highly valued it that the high priests of the
Greeks used to send it to all the countries of the Christians in silken
wraps after mixing it with musk and ambergris. Hearing of it Kings would
pay a thousand gold pieces for every dram and they sent for and sought
it to fumigate brides withal; and the Chief Priests and the great Kings
were wont to use a little of it as collyrium for the eyes and as a
remedy in sickness and colic; and the Patriarchs used to mix their own
skite[390] with it, for that the skite of the Chief Patriarch could not
suffice for ten countries.[391] So, as soon as dawn was seen and the
morning shone with its shine and sheen, the horsemen ran to their spears
full keen, and King Afridun——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


               Now when it was the Full Ninetieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, as soon as dawn was
seen and the morning shone with its shine and sheen, the horsemen ran to
their spears full keen and King Afridun summoned his chief Knights and
Nobles and invested them with dresses of honour; and, drawing the sign
of the cross on their brows, incensed them with the incense which as
aforesaid was the skite of the Chief Patriarch, the Cohen, the
Heresiarch. This incensing done, he called for Luka bin Shamlut,
surnamed the Sword of the Messiah; and, after fumigating him and rubbing
his palate with the Holy Merde, caused him to snuff it and smeared his
cheeks and anointed his moustaches with the rest. Now there was no
stouter champion in the land of Roum than this accursed Luka, nor any
better at bending of bow or sway of sword or lunge with lance on the day
of devoir; but he was foul of favour, for his face was as the face of an
ass, his shape that of an ape and his look as the look of a malignant
snake: his presence was grievouser than parting from the beloved make;
and blacker than night was his blackness and more fetid than the lion
was his breath for foulness; more crooked than a bow was his crookedness
and grimmer than the leopard was his ugliness, and he was branded with
the mark of the Infidels on face.[392] After this he came up to King
Afridun and kissed his feet and stood before him; and the King said to
him, "I desire thou go out against Sharrkan, King of Damascus, son of
Omar bin al-Nu'uman, and deliver us from this affliction." Quoth Luka,
"Hearkening and obedience;" and the King made the sign of the cross on
his forehead and felt assured of help from Heaven being near hand. Then
Luka went out from the presence and the accursed one mounted a sorrel
horse; he was clad in a red robe and a hauberk of gold set with jewels,
and he bore a trident spear, as he were Iblis the damned on the day of
drewing out his hosts war to darraign. Then he rode forward, he and his
horde of Infidels, even as though they were driving to the Fire,
preceded by a herald, crying aloud in the Arabic tongue and saying, "Ho,
sect of Mohammed (upon whom be salutation and salvation!), let none of
you come out but your champion Sharrkan, the Sword of Al-Islam, Lord of
Damascus in Shám[393]!" Nor had he made an end of speaking, when arose a
tumult in the plain; all the people heard the strain and the whole
moving bodies of the armies twain called to mind the Day of Complain.
Then the cowards trembled and all necks turned towards the sound, and
lo! it was King Sharrkan, son of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman. For when his
brother, Zau al-Makan, saw that accursed one push out on the plain, and
heard the pursuivant, he turned to Sharrkan and said to him, "Of a
surety they seek for thee." Said he, "Should it so be, 'twere most
pleasing to me." So when they made sure of the matter and heard the
herald crying in the plain, "Let none of you come out against me save
Sharrkan," they knew this cursed Luka to be champion of the land of Roum
who had sworn to sweep the earth clean of Moslems. Now he was one of the
greatest of villains, a wretch who caused hearts to pain; and the
Daylamites, Turks and Kurds dreaded his might and main. Presently
Sharrkan drave at him like a lion angry-grim, mounted on a courser like
a wild gazelle flying snell and slim; and coming nigh to him made the
spear he hent to shake as it were a darting snake, and recited these
couplets:—

 I have a sorrel steed, whose pride is fain to bear the rein, ✿
     Shall give thee what thou likest not and make thee feel his main:
 I have a handy limber spear full bright and keen of point, ✿ Upon
     whose shaft the dam of Death her throny seat hath ta'en:
 I have a trenchant glaive of Hind; and, when I bare its face ✿
     Of scabbard-veil, from out its brow the rays of leven rain.

Luka understood not the sense of his speech nor did he apprehend the
vehemence of the verse: but he smote his forehead with his hand, in
honour of the Cross drawn thereon and kissed it; then he couched his
throw-spear and ran at Sharrkan. But first he tossed the javelin with
one hand in air to such height that it was lost to the spectators'
sight; and, catching it with the other hand as do the jugglers, hurled
it at Sharrkan. It flew from his grasp like a shooting star and folk
clamoured and feared for Sharrkan; but, as the spear flew near him, he
put out his hand and caught it in full flight to the amazement of all
who saw the sight. Then he shook it with the hand that took it till it
was well-nigh broken, and hurled it so high into the welkin that it
disappeared from view. As it descended, he caught it again with the
other hand, in less than the twinkling of an eye, and cried out from his
heart-core, saying, "By the truth of Him who created the seven-fold
skies, I will assuredly make this cursed wight a byword for mankind to
despise!" Then threw he the throw-spear at Luka, who thought to do as
Sharrkan had done and put forth his hand to bend it in mid-flight; but
Sharrkan prevented him, and sped at him a second throw-spear which smote
him and the point fell on his forehead, in the very centre of the sign
of the Cross, and Allah hurried his soul to the Fire and Dwelling-place
dire.[394] But when the Infidels saw Luka bin Shamlut fall slain, they
buffeted their faces and they cried, "Alas!" and "Woe worth the day!"
and called for aid upon the Abbots of the monasteries——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Infidels
saw Luka bin Shamlut fall slain, they buffeted their faces and cried,
"Alas!" and "Woe worth the day!" and called upon the Abbots of the
monasteries and cried, "Where be the crosses?" So the Religious offered
up prayers and the Christians all drew together against Sharrkan; and,
brandishing their scymitars and lances, rushed forward to the attack.
Then army met army and breasts fell under hoof, whilst spear and sword
ruled the day and fore-arms and wrists grew weak and the coursers seemed
created without legs;[395] nor did the herald of war cease calling to
fight, till arms were aweary and day took flight and night came on with
darkness dight. So the two hosts drew apart, whilst every brave
staggered like a drunken knave, for that with so much cut and thrust
they strave; and the place was choked with the slain; fell were the
wounds and the hurt knew not by whom they fell. Then Sharrkan joined his
brother, Zau al-Makan, and the Chamberlain and the Wazir Dandan, and
said to them, "Verily Allah hath opened a door for the Infidels to fall,
praised be the Lord of the Worlds one and all!" Replied Zau al-Makan,
"Let us never cease to praise Allah, for that He hath dispelled trouble
from the Arab and the Ajam. Indeed the folk, generation after
generation, shall tell of thy derring-do against the accursed Luka, the
falsifier of the Evangel;[396] of thy catching the throw spear in
mid-flight, and how the enemy of Allah among men thou didst smite; and
thy fame shall endure until the end of time." Then said Sharrkan,
"Harkye, O grand Chamberlain and doughty Capitayne!" and he answered,
"Adsum!"[397] Quoth Sharrkan, "Take with thee the Wazir Dandan and
twenty thousand horse, and lead them seven parasangs towards the sea,
and force the march till ye shall have come near the shore, and there
remain only two parasangs between thee and the foe. Then ambush ye in
the hollows of the ground till ye hear the tumult of the Infidels
disembarking from their ships; and the war-cry from every side strike
your ear and ye know that the sabres have begun labour between us and
them; and, whenso ye see our troops falling back, as if defeated, and
all the Infidels following them, as well those in front as those from
the seaward and the tents, do ye still lie in wait for them: but as soon
as ye see the standard with the words, There is no god but _the_ God,
and Mohammed is God's Apostle (on whom be salutation and salvation!),
then up with the green banner, and do your endeavour and fall on their
rear and shout, Allaho Akbar! Allah is most Great! and circle round that
they may not interpose between the retreating army and the sea." He
replied, "To hear is to obey!"; and forthright they agreed upon this
matter and they went forth. Now the Chamberlain took with himself the
Wazir Dandan and twenty thousand men even as Sharrkan had commanded. As
soon as dawned the morn, the troops sprung to horse when they had donned
their armour-gear and drawn the scymitar and slung the spear. Then the
Christians dispread themselves over hill and dale and the
Ecclesiasts[398] cried out and all heads were bared, and those in the
ships hoisted the Cross at their mast-heads and began making for shore
from every side, and landed their horses and gat them ready for fight
and fray, whilst the sword-blades glittered bright and the javelins
glanced like leven-light on mail-shirt white; and all joined fight and
the grind-mill of Death whirled round and ground those who fought from
horse and aground: heads from bodies flew and tongues mute grew and eyes
no vision knew. Scymitars strave with utmost strain and heads flew over
the battle plain; gall-bladders clave and wrists were shorn in twain;
steeds plashed in pools of gore and beards were gripped right sore; the
host of Al-Islam called out, saying, "On the Prince of Mankind be
blessings and peace, and to the Compassionate glory and praise, which
ne'er shall cease, for His boons which aye increase;" and the host of
the Infidels shouted, "Glory to the Cross and the Belt and the
vine-prest juice, and the wine-presser and the Priests and the Monks and
the Festival of Palms and the Metropolitan!" Now Zau al-Makan and
Sharrkan held back and their troops gave way and feigned flight from
before the enemy, while the Infidel array pressed hard upon them deeming
them in rout, and made ready to foin and hew. Then the meiny of the
Moslems raised their voices, reciting the first verses of the Chapter of
the Cow,[399] whilst the dead were trampled under hoofs of steeds, and
the heralds of the Greeks cried out, "Ho, servants of the Messiah! Ho,
people of the True Faith! Ho, followers of the Primate![400] Verily
Divine grace upon you opes; for see, the hosts of Al-Islam like birds
with broken wings incline to elope! So turn ye not to them your backs,
but let your swords cleave deep in their necks and hold not your hands
from them, else are ye outcasts from the Messiah, Mary's son, who spoke
even when a cradled one!"[401] Now Afridun, King of Constantinople,
deemed that the Infidels were victorious, knowing not that this was but
a clever stratagem of the Moslems, and sent to King Hardub of Roum
congratulations on success, adding, "Availed us naught but the Holy
Merde of the Arch-Patriarch, whose fragrance exhaled from the beards and
mustachios of the slaves of the Cross near and far; and I swear, by the
Miracles of the Messiah; and by thy daughter Abrizah, the Nazarene, the
Mariolater; and by the Waters of Baptism, that I will not leave upon the
earth a single defender of Al-Islam! And to the bitter end will I carry
out this plan." So the messenger betook himself with the address to King
Hardub, whilst the Infidels called to one another saying, "Take we
vengeance-wreak for Luka!"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Ninety-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Infidels
called to one another, saying, "Take we vengeance-wreak for Luka!" while
Hardub King of Greece cried aloud, "Ho, to our revenge for Abrizah!"
Thereupon King Zau al-Makan shouted "Ho, servants of the Requiting
King!: smite the children of denial and disobedience with the blanch of
sword and the brown of spear!" So the Moslems returned to the Infidels
and plied them with the keen-edged scymitar, whilst their herald cried
aloud, "Up, and at the foes of the Faith, all ye who love the Prophet
Elect, with hope of salvation on the Day of Fear, to win favour of the
Bountiful, the Forgiving One; for verily the Garden of Paradise is under
the shadow of swords!" And behold, Sharrkan and his men charged down
upon the Infidels and cut off their retreat and wheeled and tourneyed
among the ranks; when lo! a knight of goodly presence opened a passage
through the army of Unbelievers and circled hither and thither amongst
the Deniers, cutting and thrusting and covering the ground with heads
and trunks, so that the Faithless feared him and their necks bent under
his lunge and hew. He was girt with two swords, his glances and his
brand, and he was armed with two lances, one of bamboo-cane and the
other his straight wandlike shape; and his flowing hair stood him in
stead of many warriors, even as saith the poet:—

  Laud not long hair,[402] except it be dispread ✿ In two-fold locks,
      on day of fight and fray,
  O'er youth who bears his lance 'twixt flank and thigh, ✿ From many
      a whiskered knight to win the day.

And as singeth another:—

    I say to him, what while he slings his sword, ✿ "For sword shall
        serve those looks that sword-like show!"
    Says he, "My sabre-looks for those I love, ✿ My sword for those
        who sweets of love unknow!"

When Sharrkan saw him, he said to him, "I conjure thee by the Koran and
the attributes of the Compassionate One, O Champion of the Champions!
tell me who thou art: for verily by thy deeds this day thou hast pleased
the Requiting King, whom one thing distracteth not from other thing; in
that thou hast been discomfiting the children of impiety and in
rebellion revelling." Then cried the Cavalier to him saying, "Thou art
he who madest brother-covenant with me but yesterday: how quickly thou
hast forgotten me!" Thereupon he withdrew his mouth-veil,[403] so that
what was hidden of his beauty was disclosed, and lo! it was none other
than Zau al-Makan. Then Sharrkan rejoiced in his brother, save that he
feared for him the rush of fighting and the crush of braves a-smiting;
and this for two reasons, the first, his tender age and exposure to the
evil eye, and the second, that his safety was to the kingdom the greater
of the two overshadowing wings. So he said to him, "O King! thou riskest
thy life, so join thy steed to mine; in very sooth I fear for thee from
the foe; and better thou stint hazarding thyself forth of these
squadrons, that we may shoot at the enemy thine unerring shaft." Quoth
Zau al-Makan, "I desire to even thee in fray and I will not be niggard
of myself before thee in the mellay." Then the host of Al-Islam, heaping
itself upon the Infidels, girt them on all sides, warred on them a right
Holy War, and brake the power of the children of impiety and pride and
stowre. But King Afridun sighed when he saw the evil wreak that had
fallen on the Greek, and they turned their backs from fight and
addressed themselves to flight, making for the ships, when lo! there
came out upon them from the sea-coast another host, led by the Minister
Dandan, the champion who was wont to make champions bite the dust, and
to lay load on them with cut and thrust. Nor less came forth the Emir
Bahram, Lord of the Provinces of Sham, amid twenty thousand horse
doughty of arm; and the host of Al-Islam pressed them in front and on
flank and wrought them grievous harm. Then a body of the Moslems turned
against those who in the ships remained, and perdition on them rained,
till they threw themselves into the main, and they slew of them many
slain, more than a hundred thousand noblemen, nor was one of their
champions, great or small, saved from bale and bane. Moreover, they took
their ships, with all the money and treasure and cargo, save a score of
keel, and the Moslems got that loot whose like was never gotten in
bygone years; nor was such cut and thrust ever heard of by men's
ears.[404] Now amongst the booty were fifty thousand horses, besides
treasure and spoil past reckoning and arithmetic, whereat the Moslems
rejoiced with an exceeding joy for that Allah had given them victory and
protection. Such was the case with them; but as regards the fugitive
Infidels they soon reached Constantinople, whither the tidings preceded
them that King Afridun had prevailed over the Moslems; so quoth the
ancient dame, Zat al-Dawahi, "I know that my son Hardub, King of Roum,
is no runagate and that he feareth not the Islamitic hosts, but will
restore the whole world to the Nazarene faith." Then she bade the Great
King, Afridun, give command that the city be decorated, and the people
held festival high and drank their wines drunkenly and knew not the
decrees of Destiny. Now whilst they were in the midst of their
rejoicings, behold, the raven of dule and downfall croaked over them,
and up came the twenty fugitive ships wherein was the King of Cæsarea.
So King Afridun, Lord of Constantinople, met them on the sea-shore, and
they told him all that had befallen them from the Moslem, and they wept
sore and groaned and moaned; and rejoicing at weal was turned into
dismay for unheal; and they informed him concerning Luka son of Shamlut,
how calamity had betided him and how Death had shot him with his shaft.
Thereat the horrors of Doomday rose upon King Afridun,[405] and he knew
that there was no making straight their crook. Then came up from them
the sound of weeping and wailing; the city was full of men mourning and
the keeners were keening, and sighs and cries were heard from all sides.
And when King Hardub of Greece met King Afridun he told him the truth of
the case and how the flight of the Moslems was by way of stratagem and
deceit, and said to him, "Look not to see any of the army, save those
who have already reached thee." When King Afridun heard these words he
fell down in a fainting fit, with his nose under his feet; and, as soon
as he revived, he exclaimed, "Surely the Messiah was wroth with them
that he caused the Moslems to prevail over them!" Then came the
Arch-Patriarch sadly to the King who said to him, "O our father,
annihilation hath overtaken our army and the Messiah hath punished us!"
Replied the Patriarch, "Grieve not nor feel concerned, for it cannot be
but that one of you have sinned against the Messiah, and all have been
punished for his offence; but now we will read prayers for you in the
churches, that the Mohammedan hosts may be repelled from you." After
which the old woman, Zat al-Dawahi, came to Afridun and said to him, "O
King, verily the Moslem hosts are many, and we shall never overcome them
save by wile: wherefor I purpose to work upon them by guile and repair
to this army of Al-Islam, haply I may win my wish of their leader and
slay their champion, even as I slew his father. If my stratagem succeed
in his case, not one of the host he leads shall return to his native
land, for all are strong only because of him; but I desire to have some
Christian dwellers of Syria, such as go out every month and year to sell
their goods, that they may help me (for this they can do) in carrying
out my plan." Replied the King, "Be it so whenever thou wilt." So she
bade fetch an hundred men, natives of Najrán,[406] in Sham, and the King
asked them, "Have ye not heard what hath befallen the Christians with
the Moslems?" "Yes," answered they; and he rejoined, "Know ye that this
woman hath devoted her life to the Messiah and purposeth to go forth
with you, disguised as Monotheists and Mohammedans, to work out a device
which shall profit us and hinder the Moslem from us: say, then, are ye
also willing to devote yourselves to the Anointed and I will give you a
quintal of gold?[407] He of you who escapeth shall have the money, and
him of you who dieth will the Messiah reward." "O King," replied they,
"we will devote our lives to the Messiah, and we will be thy sacrifice."
Thereupon the old woman took all she required of aromatic roots and
placed them in water which she boiled over the fire till the black
essence of them was extracted. She waited till the decoction was cold,
then dipped the corner of a long kerchief therein and stained her face
therewith. Moreover, she donned over her clothes a long gaberdine with
an embroidered border and took in her hand a rosary, and afterwards went
in to King Afridun, who knew her not, nor did any of his companions know
her, till she discovered herself to them: and there was none in the
assembly but who thanked and praised her for her cunning; and her son
rejoiced and said, "May the Messiah never fail thee!" Thereupon she took
with her the Syrian Christians, and set out for the army of Baghdad.—And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Ninety-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King Afridun
heard these words, he fell into a fainting-fit with his nose under his
feet; and, as soon as he revived, fear fluttered the scrotum[408] below
his belly and he complained to the ancient dame, Zat al-Dawahi. Now this
accursed old woman was a witch of the witches, past mistress in sorcery
and deception; wanton and wily, deboshed and deceptious; with foul
breath, red eyelids, yellow cheeks, dull-brown face, eyes bleared, mangy
body, hair grizzled, back humped, skin withered and wan and nostrils
which ever ran. But she had studied the scriptures of Al-Islam and had
made the Pilgrimage to the Holy House of Meccah and all this that she
might come to the knowledge of the Mohammedan ordinances and the
miraculous versets of the Koran; and she had professed Judaism in the
Holy City of Jerusalem[409] for two years' space, that she might master
the magic of men and demons; so that she was a plague of plagues and a
pest of pests, wrong-headed as to belief and to no religion lief. Now
the chief reason of her sojourn with her son, King Hardub of Greece, was
on account of the slave virgins at his court: for she was given to
tribadism[410] and could not exist without sapphism or she went mad: so
if any damsel pleased her, she was wont to teach her the art of rubbing
clitoris against clitoris and would anoint her with saffron[411] till
she fainted away for excess of volupty. Whoso obeyed her she was wont to
favour and make her son incline towards her; but whoso repelled her she
would contrive to destroy; and so she abode for a length of time. This
was known to Marjanah and Rayhánah and Utrijah, the handmaids of
Abrizah, and their Princess loathed the old woman and abhorred to lie
with her, because of the rank smell from her armpits, the stench of her
fizzles more fetid than carrion, and the roughness of her hide coarser
than palm fibre. She was wont to bribe those who rubbed parts with her
by means of jewels and instructions; but Abrizah held aloof from her and
sought refuge with the Omnipotent, the Omniscient; for, by Allah, right
well quoth the poet:—

[Illustration]

     Ho thou who grovellest low before the great ✿ Nor over-lording
         lesser men dost blench,
     Who gildest dross by dirham-gathering, ✿ No ottar-scent
         disguises carrion-stench!

And now to return to the story of her stratagem and the woes of her
working. Presently she departed, taking the chief Nazarenes with their
hosts, and turned towards the army of the Moslems. Whereupon King Hardub
went in to King Afridun and said to him, "O King, we have no need of the
Chief Patriarch nor of his prayers, but will consult my mother's counsel
and observe what she will do with her craft unending against the Moslem
hosts; for these are marching with all their power, they will soon be
upon us and they will encircle us on all sides." When King Afridun heard
this, terror took hold upon his heart and he wrote letters, without stay
or delay, to all the nations of the Nazarenes, saying, "It behoveth none
of the Messiahites or Cross-knights to hold back, especially the folk of
the strongholds and forts: but let them all come to us, foot and horse,
women and children, for the Moslem hosts already tread our soil. So
haste! haste ye! ere what we fear to us here appear." Thus much
concerning them; but regarding the work of the old woman, Zat al-Dawahi;
when she went forth from the city with her suite, she clad them in the
clothing of Moslem merchants, having provided herself with an hundred
mules carrying stuffs of Antioch, such as goldwoven satins and royal
brocades and so forth. And she had taken a letter from King Afridun to
the following effect:—"These be merchantmen from the land of Sham who
have been with us: so it befitteth none to do them harm or hindrance,
nor take tax and tithe of them, till they reach their homes and safe
places, for by merchants a country flourisheth, and these are no men of
war nor of ill-faith." Then quoth the accursed Zat al-Dawahi to those
with her, "Verily I wish to work out a plot for the destruction of the
Moslem." Replied they, "O Queen, command us whatso thou wilt; we are at
thy disposal and may the Messiah never disappoint thy dealings!" Then
she donned a gown of fine white wool and rubbed her forehead, till she
made a great mark as of a scar and anointed it with an ointment of her
own fashion, so that it shone with prodigious sheen. Now the old hag was
lean-bodied and hollow-eyed, and she bound her legs tightly round with
cords[412] just above her feet, till she drew near the Moslem camp, when
she unwound them, leaving their marks deeply embedded in her ankles.
Then she anointed the wheals with dragon's blood and bade her companions
beat her with a severe beating, and set her in a chest and, quoth she,
"Cry abroad the Refrain of Unity,[413] nor fear from it aught of
damage!" Replied they, "How can we beat thee, who be our sovereign lady,
Zat al-Dawahi, mother of the King we glory in?" Then said she, "We blame
not nor deal reproach to him who goeth to the jakes, and in need evil
becometh good deed. When ye have set me in the chest, take it and make
it one of the bales and place it on mule-back and fare forth with it and
the other goods through the Moslem camp, and fear ye no blame. And if
any of the Moslems hinder you, give up the mules and their lading and
betake yourselves to their King, Zau al-Makan, and implore his
protection saying:—We were in the land of the Infidels and they took
nothing from us, but wrote us a passport, that none shall do us
hindrance or work our mischance. If he ask you, What profit had ye of
your property in the land of Roum? answer him:—We profited in the
deliverance of a pious man, who had been bound down in an underground
cell nigh fifteen years, crying out for help yet none helped him. Nay,
the Infidels tortured him night and day. We knew not this; but, after we
had tarried in Constantinople for some time, having sold our goods and
bought others in their stead, we determined on and made ready for a
return to our native land. We spent that night conversing about our
journey, and when day broke, we saw figured upon the wall a human form;
and as we drew nigh it, behold, it moved and said:—O Moslems, is there
amongst you one who is minded to woo the favour of the Lord of the three
Worlds?[414] How so? asked we; and the figure answered:—Know that Allah
hath made me speak to you, to the intent that your faith be fortified,
and that your belief embolden you and that you may go forth of the
country of the Infidels and repair to the Moslem host; for with them
wones the Sword of the Compassionate One, of our Age the Champion, King
Sharrkan, by whom He shall conquer Constantinople town and destroy the
sect of the Nazarene. And when ye shall have journeyed three days, you
will find an hermitage known as the Hermitage of the ascetic
Matruhina[415] and containing a cell; visit it with pure intent and
contrive to arrive there by force of will, for therein is a Religious
from the Holy City, Jerusalem, by name Abdullah, and he is one of the
devoutest of mankind, endowed with the power of working saintly
miracles[416] such as dispel doubts and obscurity. Certain of the monks
seized him by fraud and shut him up in a souterrain where he hath lain a
long time. By his deliverance you will please the Lord of Faithful Men,
for such release is better than fighting for the Faith." Now when the
ancient dame and those with her had agreed upon such words, she said,
"As soon as that which I impart shall reach the ears of King Sharrkan,
say him further:—Hearing this from that image we knew that the holy
man"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


                Now when it was the Ninety-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the old
woman, Zat al-Dawahi, and those with her had agreed upon such words, she
said, "Now as soon as that which I impart shall reach the ears of King
Sharrkan say him further:—Hearing these words from that image we knew
that the holy man was indeed of the chiefest devotees and Allah's
servants of purest qualities; so we made three days' march till we came
in sight of that hermitage, and then we went up to it and passed the day
in buying and selling, as is the wont of merchants. As soon as day had
departed our sight and night was come to darken light, we repaired to
the cell wherein was the dungeon, and we heard the holy man, after
chanting some verses of the Koran, repeat the following couplets:—

   My heart disheartened is, my breast is strait, ✿ And sinks my soul
       in sea of bale and bate:
   Unless escape be near I soon shall die; ✿ And Death were better
       than this doleful strait:
   O Lightning an thou light my home and folk, ✿ An their still
       brighter charms thy shine abate,
   Say, what my path to meet them, being barred ✿ By wars; and
       barricado'd succour's gate?"

"When once ye have brought me into the Moslem camp, and I mix with them
you shall see," the old woman continued, "how I will make shift to
beguile them and slay them all, even to the last man." The Nazarenes
hearing what she said, kissed her hands and set her in the chest, after
they had beaten her with a grievous beating in obedience to her
commands, for they saw it was incumbent on them to do her bidding in
this; then they all made for the Moslem host as hath erst been said.
Such was the case with the damned hag, Zat al-Dawahi and her companions;
but as regards the Mohammedan army, they indeed, after Allah had given
them victory over their enemies and they had plundered everything in the
ships of money and hoards, all sat down to converse with one another and
Zau al-Makan said to his brother Sharrkan, "Verily, Allah hath granted
us to prevail because of our just dealing and discipline and concord
amongst ourselves; wherefore continue, O Sharrkan, to obey my
commandment, in submission to Allah (be He exalted and extolled!), for I
mean to slay ten Kings in blood-revenge for my sire, to cut the throat
of fifty thousand Greeks and to enter Constantinople." Replied Sharrkan,
"My life be thy ransom against death! Needs must I follow out the Holy
War, though I wone many a year in their country. But I have, O my
brother, in Damascus a daughter, named Kuzia Fakan, whom I love
heartily, for she is one of the marvels of the time and she will soon be
of age." Said Zau al-Makan, "And I also have left my wife with child and
near her time, nor do I know what Allah will vouchsafe me by her. But
promise me, O my brother, that if Allah bless me with a son, thou wilt
grant me thy daughter for wife to him, and make covenant with me and
pledge me thy faith thereon." "With love and good will," replied
Sharrkan; and, stretching out his hand to his brother, he said, "If she
bring thee a son, I will give him my daughter Kuzia Fakan, to wife." At
this Zau al-Makan rejoiced, and they fell to congratulating each other
on the victory over the enemy. And the Wazir Dandan also congratulated
the two brothers and said to them, "Know, O ye Kings, that Allah hath
given us the victory, for that we have devoted our lives to Him (be He
exalted and extolled!); and we have left our homes and households; and
it is my counsel that we follow up the foe and press upon him and harass
him; so haply Allah shall enable us to win our wishes, and we shall
destroy our enemies, branch and root. If it please you, do ye go down in
these ships and sail over the sea, whilst we fare forward by land and
bear the brunt of battle and the thrust of fight." And the Minister
Dandan ceased not to urge them to combat and repeated his words who
said:—

    To slay my foes is chiefest bliss I wist, ✿ And on the courser's
        back be borne a-list;
    Comes promising tryst a messenger from friend ✿ Full oft, when
        comes the friend withouten tryst.

And these words of another:—

    War for my mother (an I live) I'll take; ✿ Spear for my
        brother; scymitar for sire,
    With every shag-haired brave who meets his death ✿ Smiling, till
        won from Doom his dear desire!

And when the Wazir ended his verses, he said, "Praise be to Him who
aided us dear victory to uphold and who hath given us spoil of silver
and fine gold!" Then Zau al-Makan commanded the army to depart; and they
fared on forcing their marches for Constantinople, till they came to a
wide and spacious champaign, full of all things fair and fain, with wild
cattle frisking and gazelles pacing to and fro across the plain. Now
they had traversed great deserts and drink had been six days cut off
from them, when they drew near this meadow and saw therein waters
founting and ripe fruits flaunting and that land as it were Paradise;
for it had donned its adornments and decked itself.[417] Gently waved
the branches of its trees drunken with the new wine of the dew, and
combined with the nectar of Tasnim the soft breathings of the morning
breeze. Mind and gazer were confounded by its beauty, even as saith the
poet:—

   Behold this lovely garden! 'tis as though ✿ Spring o'er its frame
       her greeny cloak had spread.
   Looking with fleshly eyne, thou shalt but sight ✿ A lake whose
       waters balance in their bed;
   But look with spirit-eyes and lo! shalt see ✿ Glory in every
       leaf o'erwaves thy head.

And as another saith:—

     The stream's a cheek by sunlight rosy dyed, ✿ Whose down[418]
         is creeping shade of tamarisk-stems;
     Round legs of tree-trunks wavelets roll in rings ✿ Silvern,
         and blossoms are the diadems.

When Zau al-Makan saw this champaign, with its trees bowing and its
flowers blooming and its birds warbling, he called to his brother
Sharrkan and said, "O my brother, verily in Damascus is naught the like
of this place. We will not march from it save after three days, that we
may take rest ourselves and that the army of Al-Islam may regain
strength and their souls be fortified to encounter the blamed Infidels."
So they halted therein and while camping behold, they heard a noise of
voices from afar, and Zau al-Makan asked the cause thereof, and was
answered that a caravan of merchants from the Land of Syria had halted
there to rest and that the Moslem troops had come on them and had haply
seized something of the goods which they had brought from the country of
the Infidels. After a while up came the merchants, crying out and
appealing to the King for aidance. When Zau al-Makan saw this, he bade
them be brought before him and, when in presence, they said to him, "O
King, we have been in the country of the Infidels and they plundered us
of nothing: why then do our brothers the Moslems despoil our goods, and
we in their own land? Of a truth when we saw your troops, we went up to
them, and they robbed us of what we had with us and we have now reported
to thee all that hath befallen us." Thereupon they brought out to him
the letter of the King of Constantinople, and Sharrkan read it and said,
"We will presently restore to you what hath been taken from you; but yet
it behoveth you not to carry merchandise to the country of the
Infidels." Replied they, "O our Lord, in very sooth Allah despatched us
thither that we might win what Gházi[419] never won the like of, not
even thou in all thy razzias." Asked Sharrkan, "What was it ye won?" "O
King," answered they, "we will not tell thee save in private; for if
this matter be noised among the folk, haply it may come to the ears of
some,[420] and this will be the cause of our ruin and of the ruin of all
Moslems who resort to the land of the Greeks." Now they had hidden the
chest wherein was the damned Zat al-Dawahi. So Zau al-Makan and his
brother brought them to a private place, where they laid bare to both of
them the story of the devotee, and wept till they made the two Kings
weep——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


                Now when it was the Ninety-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Nazarenes who
wore merchants' weed, when brought to a private place by Zau al-Makan
and his brother Sharrkan, laid bare to both of them the story of the
devotee and wept till they made the two Kings weep and repeated to them
all which had been taught by the old witch Zat al-Dawahi. Thereupon
Sharrkan's heart yearned to the devotee and he was moved to ruth for him
and was fired with zeal for the service of Almighty Allah. So quoth he
to them, "Did ye rescue this holy man or is he still in the hermitage?"
Quoth they, "We delivered him and slew the hermit, fearing for our
lives; after which we made haste to fly for dread of death; but a trusty
man told us that in this hermitage are quintals of gold and silver and
stones of price." Then they fetched the chest and brought out the
accursed old woman, as she were a cassia-pod[421] for excess of
blackness and leanness, and she was laden with the same fetters and
shackles. When Zau al-Makan and the bystanders saw her, they took her
for a man of the best of Allah's devotees and surpassing in pious
qualities, more especially because of the shining of her forehead for
the ointment wherewith she had anointed her face. So Zau al-Makan and
Sharrkan wept sore; then they rose up in honour and kissed her hands and
feet, sobbing aloud: but she signed to them and said, "Cease this
weeping and hear my words." Hereat they dried their tears in obedience
to her bidding, and she said, "Know ye both that I was content to accept
what my Lord did unto me, for I kenned that the affliction which befel
me was a trial from Him (be He exalted and extolled!); and whoso hath
not patience under calamity and tribulation, for him there is no coming
to the delights of Paradise. I had indeed supplicated Him that I might
return to my native land, not as a compensation for the sufferings
decreed to me, but that I might die under the horse-hoofs of warriors
fighting for the Faith who, being slain in fray, live again without
suffering death."[422] Then she repeated the following couplets:—

  Our Fort is Tor,[423] and flames the fire of fight: ✿ Moses art
      thou and this is time for aid:
  Cast down thy rod, 'twill swallow all they wrought, ✿ Nor dread for
      men their ropes be vipers made:[424]
  For Chapters read on fight-day lines of foes, ✿ And on their
      necks 'grave versets[425] wi' thy blade!

When the old woman had ended her verse, her eyes overflowed with tears
and her forehead under the unguent shone like gleaming light, and
Sharrkan rose and kissed her hand and caused food be brought before her:
but she refused it, saying, "I have not broken my fast by day for
fifteen years; and how should I break it at such a time when my Lord
hath been bountiful to me in delivering me from the captivity of the
Infidels and removing from me that which was more grievous to me than
torment of fire? I will wait till sundown." So when it was nightfall,
Sharrkan and Zau al-Makan came and served her with food and said, "Eat O
ascetic!" But she said, "This is no time for eating; it is the time for
worshipping the Requiting King." Then she stood up in the prayer-niche
and remained praying till the night was spent; and she ceased not to do
after this fashion for three days and nights, sitting not but at the
time of the Salám or salutation[426] ending the several prayers. When
Zau al-Makan saw her on this wise, firm belief in her gat hold of his
heart and he said to Sharrkan, "Cause a tent of perfumed leather to be
pitched for this Religious, and appoint a body servant to wait upon
him." On the fourth day she called for food; so they brought her all
kinds of meats that could seduce the sense or delight the sight; but of
all this she would eat only a scone with salt. Then she again turned to
her fast and, as the night came, she rose anew to pray; when Sharrkan
said to Zau al-Makan, "Verily, this man carrieth renunciation of the
world to the extreme of renouncing, and, were it not for this Holy War,
I would join myself to him and worship Allah in his service, till I came
before His presence. And now I desire to enter his tent and talk with
him for an hour." Quoth Zau al-Makan, "And I also: to-morrow we sally
forth to fight against Constantinople, and we shall find no time like
the present." Said the Wazir Dandan, "And I no less desire to see this
ascetic; haply he will pray for me that I find death in this Holy War
and come to the presence of my Lord, for I am aweary of the world." So
as soon as night had darkened, they repaired to the tent of that witch,
Zat al-Dawahi; and, seeing her standing to pray, they drew near her and
fell a-weeping for pity of her; but she paid no heed to them till
midnight was past, when she ended her orisons by pronouncing the
salutation. Then she turned to them and after wishing them long life,
asked them "Wherefore come ye?"; whereto they answered, "O thou holy
man! diddest thou not hear us weep around thee?" She rejoined, "To him
who standeth in the presence of Allah, remaineth no existence in time,
either for hearing any or for seeing aught about him." Quoth they, "We
would have thee recount to us the cause of thy captivity and pray for us
this night, for that will profit us more than the possession of
Constantinople." Now when she heard their words she said, "By Allah,
were ye not the Emirs of the Moslems, I would not relate to you aught of
this at any time; for I complain not but to Allah alone. However, to you
I will relate the circumstances of my captivity. Know, then, that I was
in the saintly City of Jerusalem with certain ecstatics and inspired
men, and did not magnify myself among them, for that Allah (be He
exalted and extolled!) had endowed me with humility and abnegation, till
I chanced to go down to the sea one night and walked upon the water.
Then entered into me pride; whence I know not, and I said to myself:—Who
like me can walk the water? And my heart from that time hardened and
Allah afflicted me with the love of travel. So I journeyed to Roum-land
and visited every part for a whole year, and left no place but therein I
worshiped Allah. When I came to this spot,[427] I clomb the mountain and
saw there an hermitage, inhabited by a monk called Matruhina, who, when
he sighted me, came out and kissed my hands and feet and said:—Verily, I
have seen thee since thou enteredst the land of the Greeks, and thou
hast filled me with longing for the land of Al-Islam. Then he took my
hand and carried me into that hermitage, and brought me to a dark room;
and, when I entered it unawares, he locked the door on me and left me
there forty days, without meat or drink; for it was his intent to kill
me by delay. It chanced one day, that a Knight called Dakianús[428] came
to the hermitage, accompanied by ten squires and his daughter Tamasil, a
girl whose beauty was incomparable. When they entered that hermitage,
the monk Matruhina told them of me, and the Knight said:—Bring him out,
for surely there is not on him a bird's meal of meat. So they opened the
door of the dark room and found me standing in the niche, praying and
reciting the Koran and glorifying Allah and humbling myself before the
Almighty. When they saw me in this state Matruhina exclaimed:—This man
is indeed a sorcerer of the sorcerers!; and hearing his words, they all
came in on me, Dakianus and his company withal, and they beat me with a
grievous beating, till I desired death and reproached myself, saying,
This is his reward who exalteth himself and who prideth himself on that
which Allah hath vouchsafed to him, beyond his own competence! And thou,
O my soul, verily self-esteem and arrogance have crept into thee. Dost
thou not know that pride angereth the Lord and hardeneth the heart and
bringeth men to the Fire? Then they laid me in fetters and returned me
to my place which was the dungeon under ground. Every three days, they
threw me down a scone of barley bread and a draught of water; and every
month or two the Knight came to the hermitage. Now his daughter Tamasil
had grown up, for she was nine years old when I first saw her, and
fifteen years passed over me in captivity, so that she had reached her
four-and-twentieth year. There is not in our land nor in the land of the
Greeks a fairer than she, and her father feared lest the King take her
from him; for she had vowed herself to the Messiah and rode with
Dakianus in the habit of a cavalier, so that albeit none might compare
with her in loveliness, no one who saw her knew her for a woman. And her
father had laid up his monies in this hermitage, every one who had aught
of price or treasured hoard being wont to deposit it therein; and I saw
there all manner of gold and silver and jewels and precious vessels and
rarities, none may keep count of them save Almighty Allah. Now ye are
worthier of these riches than those Infidels; so lay hands on that which
is in the hermitage and divide it among the Moslems and especially on
fighters in the Holy War. When these merchants came to Constantinople
and sold their merchandise, that image which is on the wall spoke to
them, by grace of a marvel which Allah granted to me; so they made for
that hermitage and slew Matruhina, after torturing him with most
grievous torments, and dragging him by the beard, till he showed them
the place where I was; when they took me and found no path but flight
for dread of death. Now to-morrow night Tamasil will visit that
hermitage as is her habit, and her father and his squires will come
after her, as he feareth for her so, if ye would witness these things,
take me with you and I will deliver to you the monies and the riches of
the Knight Dakianus which be in that mountain; for I saw them bring out
vessels of gold and silver to drink therefrom, and I heard a damsel of
their company sing to them in Arabic and well-away! that so sweet a
voice should not be busied in chaunting the Koran. If, then, ye will;
enter into that hermitage and hide there against the coming of Dakianus
and his daughter; and take her, for she is fit only for the King of the
Age, Sharrkan, or King Zau al-Makan." Thereat they all rejoiced with the
exception of the Wazir Dandan, who put scant faith in her story, for her
words took no hold on his reason, and signs of doubt in her and
disbelief showed in his face.[429] Yet he was confounded at her
discourse, but he feared to speak with her for awe of the King. Then
quoth the ancient dame, Zat al-Dawahi, "Verily, I fear lest the Knight
come and, seeing these troops encamped in the meadow, be afraid to enter
the hermitage." So Zau al-Makan ordered the army to march upon
Constantinople and said, "I have resolved to take with me an hundred
horse and many mules and make for that mountain, where we will load the
beasts with the monies which be in the hermitage." Then he sent at once
for the Chief Chamberlain whom they brought into the presence; and he
summoned likewise the leaders of the Turks and Daylamites and said, "As
soon as it is dawn, do ye set forth for Constantinople; and thou, O
Chamberlain, shalt take my place in council and contrivance, while thou,
O Rustam, shalt be my brother's deputy in battle. But let none know that
we are not with you and after three days we will rejoin you." Then he
chose out an hundred of the doughtiest riders, and he and Sharrkan and
the Minister Dandan set out for the hermitage, and the hundred horsemen
led the mules with chests for transporting the treasure.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Ninety-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sharrkan and his
brother, Zau al-Makan and the Wazir Dandan set off with an hundred horse
for the hermitage described to them by that accursed Zat al-Dawahi; and
they took with them mules and chests for transporting the treasure. Now
as soon as dawned the morn, the Chamberlain signalled to the host an
order for departure, and they set out thinking that the two Kings and
the Wazir were with them; knowing not that the three had made for the
monastery. Such was the case with the host; but as regards the two Kings
and the Minister, they tarried in their place till the end of that day.
Now the Infidels who were with Zat al-Dawahi took their departure
privily, after they had gone in to her and kissed her hands and feet and
obtained her leave to march. So she not only gave them permission but
also taught them all she minded of wile and guile. And when it was dark
night, she arose and went in to Zau al-Makan and his companions and said
to them, "Come, let us set out for the mountain, and take with you a few
men-at-arms." They obeyed her and left five horsemen at the foot of the
mountain, whilst the rest rode on before Zat al-Dawahi, who gained new
strength for excess of joy, so that Zau al-Makan said, "Glory be to Him
who sustaineth this holy man, whose like we never saw!" Now the witch
had written a letter to the King of Constantinople and despatched it on
the wings of a bird,[430] acquainting him with what had passed and
ending, "I wish thee to send me ten thousand horsemen of the bravest of
the Greeks and let them steal along the foot of the mountains with
caution, lest the host of Al-Islam get sight of them; and, when they
reach the hermitage, let them ambush themselves there, till I come to
them with the Moslem King and his brother, for I shall inveigle them and
will bring them thither, together with the Wazir and an hundred horse
and no more, that I may presently deliver to them the crosses which be
in the hermitage. I am resolved to slay the Monk Matruhina, since my
scheme cannot be carried out but by taking his life. If my plot work
well, not one of the Moslems shall return to his own country; no, not a
living wight nor one who blows the fire alight; and Matruhina shall be a
sacrifice for the followers of the Nazarene faith and the servants of
the Cross, and praise be to the Messiah, first and last." When this
letter reached Constantinople, the keeper of the carrier-pigeons carried
it to King Afridun, who read it and forthwith inspected his host and
equipped ten thousand cavaliers with horses and dromedaries and mules
and provaunt and bade them repair to that hermitage and, after reaching
the tower, to hide therein. Thus far concerning them; but as regards
King Zau al-Makan and his brother Sharrkan and the Wazir Dandan and the
escort, when they reached the hermitage they entered and met the Monk
Matruhina, who came out to see who and what they were; whereupon quoth
that pious man Zat al-Dawahi, "Slay this damned fellow."[431] So they
smote him with their swords and made him drink the cup of death. Then
the accursed old woman carried them to the place of offerings and ex
votos, and brought out to them treasures and precious things more than
she had described to them; and after gathering the whole together, they
set the booty in chests and loaded the mules therewith. As for Tamasil,
she came not, she or her father, for fear of the Moslems; so Zau
al-Makan tarried there, awaiting her all that day and the next and a
third, till Sharrkan said to him, "By Allah, I am troubled anent the
army of Al-Islam, for I know not what is become of them." His brother
replied, "And I also am concerned for them: we have come by this great
treasure and I do not believe that Tamasil or any one else will approach
the hermitage, after that befel which hath befallen the host of the
Christians. It behoveth us, then, to content ourselves with what Allah
hath given us and depart; so haply He will help us conquer
Constantinople." Accordingly they came down from the mountain, while Zat
al-Dawahi was impotent to oppose their march for fear of betraying her
deceit; and they fared forwards till they reached the head of a defile,
where the old woman had laid an ambush for them with the ten thousand
horse. As soon as these saw the Moslems they encircled them from all
sides, couching lance and baring the white sabre blade; and the Infidels
shouted the watchword of their faithless Faith and set the shafts of
their mischief astring. When Zau al-Makan and his brother Sharrkan and
the Minister Dandan looked upon this host, they saw that it was a
numerous army and said, "Who can have given these troops information of
us?" Replied Sharrkan, "O my brother, this be no time for talk; this is
the time for smiting with swords and shooting with shafts; so gird up
your courage and hearten your hearts, for this strait is like a street
with two gates; though, by the virtue of the Lord of Arabs and Ajams,
were not the place so narrow I would bring them to naught, even though
they were an hundred thousand men!" Said Zau al-Makan, "Had we wotted
this we would have brought with us five thousand horse;" and the Wazir
Dandan continued, "If we had ten thousand horse they had availed us
naught in these narrows; but Allah will succour us against them. I know
this defile and its straitness, and I know there be many places of
refuge in it; for I have been here on razzia with King Omar bin
al-Nu'uman, what while we besieged Constantinople. We abode in this
place, and here is water colder than snow. So come, let us push out of
this defile ere the Infidel host increase on us and get the start of us
to the mountain-top, whence they will hurl down rocks upon us, and we
powerless to come at them." So they began hurrying on to get out of
those narrows; but the pious man, Zat al-Dawahi, looked at them and
said, "What is it ye fear, ye who have vowed yourselves to the Lord, and
to working His will? By Allah, I abode imprisoned underground for
fifteen years, yet never gainsaid the Almighty in aught he did with me!
Fight ye in Allah's way; so whoever of you is slain Paradise shall be
his abode, and whoso slayeth, his striving shall be to his honour." When
they heard from the ascetic these words, their care and anxiety ceased
from them and they stood firm till the Infidels charged down from all
sides, whilst the swords played upon their necks and the cup of death
went round amongst them. The Moslems fought for the service of Allah a
right good fight, and wrought upon His foes with sway of sword and lunge
of lance; whilst Zau al-Makan smote upon the men and garred the knights
bite the dust and their heads from their bodies take flight, five by
five and ten by ten, till he had done to death a number of them past
numbering and an accompt beyond counting. Now while so doing, he looked
at the accursed old woman who was waving her sword and heartening them,
and all who feared fled to her for shelter; but she was also signing the
Infidels to slay Sharrkan. So troop after troop rushed on him with
design to do him die; but each troop that charged, he charged and drove
back; and when another troop attacked him he repelled the assault with
the sword in their backs; for he thought it was the devotee's blessing
that gave him the victory, and he said in himself, "Verily on this holy
man Allah looketh with eyes of His favour and strengtheneth my prowess
against the Infidels with the purity of his pious intent: for I see that
they fear me and cannot prevail against me, but every one who assaileth
me turneth tail and taketh flight." So they battled the rest of the day
and, when night fell, the Moslems took refuge in a cave of that defile
being weary with stress of war and cast of stone: and that day were
slain of them five-and-forty. And when they were gathered together, they
sought the devotee, but could find no trace of him; and this was
grievous to them and they said, "Belike, he hath died a martyr." Quoth
Sharrkan, "I saw him heartening the horsemen with divine instances and
using as talisman verses of Holy Writ." Now while they were talking,
behold, the accursed old woman, Zat al-Dawahi, stood before them,
hending in hand the head of the Chief Captain of the ten thousand horse,
a noble knight, a champion fierce in fight and a Satan for blight. One
of the Turks had slain him with an arrow, and Allah hurried his soul to
the fire; and when the Infidels saw what that Moslem had done with their
leader, they all fell on him and wrought his bane and hewed him in
pieces with their swords, and Allah hurried his soul to Heaven. Then the
accursed old woman cut off that Knight's head and brought it and threw
it at the feet of Sharrkan and Zau al-Makan and the Wazir Dandan. Now
when Sharrkan saw her, he sprang up hastily before her and exclaimed,
"Praised be Allah for thy safety and for our sighting thee, O holy man
and devout champion of the Religion!" Replied she, "O my son, I have
sought martyrdom this day, and have thrown my life away amid the Infidel
array, but they feared me with dismay. When ye dispersed, I waxed
jealous for your honour; so I rushed on the Chief Knight their leader,
albeit he was a match for a thousand horse, and I smote him till I
severed head from trunk. Not one of the Infidels could near me; so I
brought his head to you,"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


               Now when it was the Ninety-seventh Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the damned
witch, Zat al-Dawahi, took the head of the Knight, the leader of the
twenty thousand Infidels, she brought it and threw it down before Zau
al-Makan and his brother Sharrkan and the Wazir Dandan, saying, "When I
saw your condition, I waxed jealous for your honour; so I rushed on the
Chief Knight and smote him with the sword till I severed head from
trunk. And none could near me, so I brought his head to you, that you
may be strengthened in Holy War and work out with your swords the will
of the Lord of the Faithful. And now I purpose leaving you to strive
against the Infidels, whilst I go to your army, though they be at the
gates of Constantinople, and return with twenty thousand horse to
destroy these Unfaithfuls." Quoth Sharrkan, "How wilt thou pass to them,
O thou holy man, seeing that the valley is blocked up on all sides by
the Miscreants?" Quoth the accursed hag, "Allah will veil me from their
eyes and they shall not sight me;[432] nor, if any saw me, would he dare
to attack me at that time, for I shall be as one non-existing, absorbed
in Allah, and He will fend off from me His foes." "Thou sayest sooth, O
holy man," rejoined Sharrkan, "for indeed I have been witness of that;
so, if thou can pass out at the first of the night, 'twill be best for
us." Replied she, "I will set out at this very hour and, if thou desire,
thou shalt go with me and none shall see thee. Furthermore if thy
brother also have a mind to go with us we will take him, but none else;
for the shadow of a saint can cover only twain." Sharrkan said, "As for
me I will not leave my comrades; but, if my brother will, there is no
harm in his going with thee and setting us free of this strait; for he
is the stronghold of the Moslems and the sword of the Lord of the three
Worlds; and if it be his pleasure, let him take with him the Wazir
Dandan, or whom else he may elect and send us ten thousand horse to
succour us against these caitiffs." So after debate they agreed on this
and the old woman said, "Give me leisure to go before you and consider
the condition of the Infidels, if they be asleep or awake." Quoth they,
"We will not go forth save with thee and trust our affair to Allah." "If
I do your bidding," replied she, "blame me not but blame yourselves; for
it is my rede that you await me till I bring you tidings of the case."
Then said Sharrkan, "Go to them and delay not from us, for we shall be
awaiting thee." Thereupon she fared forth and Sharrkan turned to his
brother addressing him and said, "Were not this holy man a
miracle-worker, he had never slain yonder furious knight. This is proof
sufficient of the ascetic's power; and of a truth the pride of the
Infidels is laid low by the slaying of this cavalier, for he was
violent, evil devil and a stubborn." Now whilst they were thus devising
of the mighty works of the devotee, behold, the accursed Zat al-Dawahi
came upon them and promised them victory over the Unbelievers; wherefor
they thanked her (not knowing that all this was wile and guile) and the
damned hag asked, "Where be the King of the Age, Zau al-Makan, and the
Minister Dandan?" Answered he, "Here am I!" "Take with thee thy Wazir,"
said she, "and follow after me, that we may fare forth to
Constantinople." Now she had acquainted the Infidels with the cheat she
had put upon the Moslems, and they rejoiced with exceeding great joy,
and said, "Our hearts will not be contented till we shall have slain
their King in return for the Knight's death; because we had no stouter
rider than he;" and they added (bespeaking the ill-omened hag as she
told them her plan of faring to the land of the Moslems), "When thou
bringest him to us, we will bear him to King Afridun." Then she went out
and went out with her Zau al-Makan and the Minister Dandan, and she
walked on before the two saying, "Fare forth with the blessing of
Almighty Allah!" So they did her bidding, for the shaft of Fate and
Fortune of man's lot had shot them, and she ceased not leading them both
through the midst of the Grecian camp, till they came to the defile, the
narrow pass aforesaid, whilst the Infidel enemy watched them, but did
them no hindrance; for the infernal old woman had enjoined this. Now
when Zau al-Makan and the Wazir Dandan saw that the Infidel host offered
them no let and stay and yet had them in sight, the Wazir exclaimed, "By
Allah, this is one of the holy man's saintly miracles! and doubtless he
be of the elect." Rejoined Zau al-Makan, "By Allah, I think the Infidels
be naught but blind, for we see them and they see us not." And while
they were thus praising the holy man and recounting his mighty works and
his piety and his prayers, behold, the Infidels charged down on them
from all sides and surrounded them and seized them, saying, "Is there
anyone else with you twain, that we may seize upon him too?" And the
Wazir Dandan replied, "See you not yon other man that is before us?"
Replied the Unbelievers, "By the truth of the Messiah and the Monks, and
the Primate and the Metropolitan, we see none save you two!" Then Zau
al-Makan said, "By Allah, this is a chastisement decreed to us by
Almighty Allah!"—And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Ninety-eighth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Unfaithful had seized upon King Zau al-Makan and the Wazir Dandan, they
said to the two, "Is there anyone else with you twain, that we may seize
upon him also?" And the Wazir Dandan replied, "See you not yon other man
who be with us?" They rejoined, "By the truth of the Messiah and the
Monks and the Primate and the Metropolitan, we see none save you two!"
Then the Infidels laid shackles on their feet and set men to guard them
during the night, whilst Zat al-Dawahi fared on and disappeared from
their sight. So they fell to lamenting and saying to each other,
"Verily, the opposing of pious men leadeth to greater distress than
this, and we are punished by the strait which hath befallen us." So far
concerning Zau al-Makan and the Wazir Dandan; but as regards King
Sharrkan, he passed that night in the cavern with his comrades, and when
dawned the day and he had prayed the morn-prayer, he and his men made
ready to do battle with the Infidel and he heartened them and promised
them all good. Then they sallied out till they were hard upon the
Unbelievers and, when these saw them from afar, they cried out to them,
saying, "O Moslems, we have taken captives your Sultan and your Wazir
who hath the ordering of your affairs; and except ye leave off fighting
us, we will slay you to the last man; but an you yield yourselves we
will take you to our King, who will make peace with you on condition
that you quit our country and return home and harm us in naught, and we
will do you no harm in aught. If ye accept, it will be well for you; but
if ye refuse there remaineth nothing for you but death. So we have told
you sooth, and this is our last word to you." Now when Sharrkan heard
this and was certified of the captivity of his brother and the Wazir
Dandan, he was weighed down with woe and wept; his force failed him and,
making sure of death, he said to himself, "Would I knew the cause of
their capture! Did they fail of respect to the holy man or disobey him,
or what was the matter?" Then they sprang up to battle with the
Unbelievers and slew great numbers of them. The brave was known that day
from craven men, and sword and spear were dyed with bloody stain; for
the Infidels flocked upon them, as flies flock to drink, from hill and
from plain; but Sharrkan and his men ceased not to wage the fight of
those who fear not to die, nor let death hinder them from the pursuit of
victory, till the valley ran gore and earth was full of the slain she
bore. And when night fell the armies separated, each making for his own
place; and the Moslems returned to the cavern where gain and loss were
manifest to them: few remained of them and there was no dependence for
them but on Allah and the scymitar. Now there had been slain of them
that day five-and-thirty men of the chiefest Emirs, and they had killed
thousands of the Infidels, footmen and fighters on horse. When Sharrkan
saw this, the case was grievous to him and he asked his comrades, "What
shall we do?"; whereto all answered, "That which Almighty Allah willeth
shall befal us." On the morning of the second day, Sharrkan said to the
remnant of his troop, "If ye go forth to fight, not one of you will
remain alive and we have but little left of food and water; so I deem ye
would do better to bare your brands and go forth and stand at the mouth
of this cavern, to hinder any from entering. Haply the holy man may have
reached the Moslem host, and may return with ten thousand horse to
succour us in fight with the Infidels, for belike the Unfaithful may
have failed to see him and those with him." They said, "This were the
better course to take, and of its expediency no doubt we make." So the
troop went out and held the cavern mouth standing by its walls; and
every one of the Infidels who sought to enter in, they slew. Thus did
they fend off the foe from the gape of the cave and they patiently
supported all such assaults, till day was done and night came on dusky
and dun;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


                Now when it was the Ninety-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the army of the
Moslems held the cavern-mouth and stood by its walls and they fended off
the foe, and every one of the Infidels attempted to charge them, him
they slew; and they patiently supported all such assaults till day was
done and night came on dusky and dun; by which time King Sharrkan had
only five-and-twenty men and no more left. Then quoth the Infidels to
one another, "When shall these battle days have an end? We are weary of
warring the Moslems." And quoth one of them, "Up and at them, for there
remain of them but five-and-twenty men! If we cannot prevail on them to
fight, let us light a fire upon them;[433] and if they submit themselves
and yield to us, we will take them prisoners; but if they refuse we will
leave them for fuel to the fire, so shall they become to men of
foreseeing mind a warning dire. May the Messiah on their fathers have no
grace, and may the sojourn of the Nazarenes be for them no
abiding-place!" So they carried fuel to the jaws of the cavern and set
fire to it. Thereupon Sharrkan and his companions made sure of perdition
and yielded themselves prisoners. And while they were in this condition,
lo! the knight their captain said to those who counselled their
slaughter, "It is not for any save for King Afridun to kill them, that
he may gratify his wrath; therefore it behoveth us to keep them in
durance by us till the morrow, when we will journey with them to
Constantinople and deliver them to our King, who shall deal with them as
he please." Said they, "This is the right course;" and he commanded to
pinion them and set guards over them. Then, as soon as it was black
night, the Infidels busied themselves with feasting and making festival;
and they called for wine and drank it till all fell upon their backs.
Now Sharrkan and his brother, Zau al-Makan, were in confinement and so
also were his companion knights; whereupon the elder turned to the
younger brother and said to him, "O my brother, how win free?" "By
Allah," replied Zau al-Makan, "I know not; for here we be like birds in
cage." Then Sharrkan waxed wroth and sighed for excess of rage and
stretched himself, till his pinion-bonds brast asunder; whereupon being
free he arose and went up to the Captain of the guard, and taking from
his pocket the keys of the fetters, freed Zau al-Makan and the Wazir
Dandan and the rest of his men. Then he turned to the two and said, "I
desire to slay three of these Infidels and take and don their dress, we
three; so that we shall be guised as Greeks and we will pass through
them, without their knowing us, and fare forth to our own force."
Replied Zau al-Makan, "This is no safe counsel for if we kill them, I
fear some of their comrades may hear their shrieks and the foe be
aroused upon us and kill us. 'Twere the surer way to pass out of the
defile." So they agreed upon this and set out; and, when they had left
the head of the strait a little distance behind, they saw horses
picketed and the riders sleeping: and Sharrkan said to his brother,
"Better we take each one of us a steed." There were five-and-twenty
horsemen, so they took five-and-twenty horses, whilst Allah sent sleep
upon the Infidels for a purpose He knew; and the Faithful mounted and
fared on till they were out of reach. Meanwhile Sharrkan set to
gathering from the Infidels as many weapons, swords, and spears, as were
wanted. And while they took saddle and struck forwards none of the
Infidels supposed that anyone could release Zau al-Makan and his brother
and their men; or that their prisoners had power to escape. Now when all
the captives were safe from the Unfaithful, Sharrkan came up with his
comrades, and found them awaiting his arrival, on coals of flame,
expecting him in anxious grame, so he turned to them and said, "Feel no
fear since Allah protecteth us. I have that to propose which haply shall
effect our purpose." "What is it?" asked they, and he answered, "I
desire that ye all climb to the mountain top and cry out with one voice,
Allaho Akbar! and ye add, The army of Al-Islam is upon you! Allaho
Akbar! This wise their company will surely be dissolved nor will they
find out the trick for they are drunk, but they will think that the
Moslem troops have encompassed them about on all sides and have mingled
with them; so they will fall on one another brand in hand during the
confusion of drunkenness and sleep, and we will cleave them asunder with
their own swords and the scymitar will go round amongst them till dawn."
Replied Zau al-Makan, "This plan is not good; we should do better to
make our way to our army and speak not a word; for if we cry out Allaho
Akbar, they will wake and fall on us and not one of us will escape."
Rejoined Sharrkan, "By Allah, though they should awake 'tis no matter,
and I long that ye fall in with my plan, for naught save good can come
of it!" So they agreed thereon and clomb the mountain and shouted,
"Allaho Akbar!" And hills and trees and rocks re-worded their Allaho
Akbar for fear of the Almighty. But when the Kafirs heard this slogan
they cried out to one another——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


                  Now when it was the Hundredth Night,

She said, It hath reached me O auspicious King, that Sharrkan spake
thus, "I long that ye fall in with this my plan, for naught save good
can come of it." So they agreed thereon and clomb the mountain head
and shouted, "Allaho Akbar!"; and hills and trees and rocks re-worded
their Allaho Akbar for fear of the Almighty. The Infidels heard it and
cried out one to other and donned their armour and said, "The foe is
upon us, by the truth of the Messiah!" Then they fell on one another
and slew of their own men more than any knoweth save Almighty Allah.
As soon as it was dawn, they sought for the captives, but found no
trace of them, and their captains said, "They who did this were the
prisoners in our possession; up, then, and after them in all haste
till ye overtake them, when we will make them quaff the cup of
requital; and let not fright nor the panic of sudden awaking possess
you." So they took horse and rode after the fugitives and it wanted
but an eye-twinkling before they overtook them and surrounded them.
Now when Zau al-Makan saw this, he was seized with increase of terror
and said to his brother, "What I feared would come, is come upon us,
and now it remaineth only for us to fight for the Faith." But Sharrkan
preferred to hold his peace. Then Zau al-Makan and his companions
rushed down from the hill-crest, shouting, "Allaho Akbar!" and his men
repeated the war cry and addressed themselves to fight and to sell
their lives in the service of the Lord of Faithful Men; and while they
were in this case, behold, they heard many voices voicing, "There is
no god but _the_ God! God is most great! Salutation and salvation upon
the Apostle, the Bringer of glad Tidings, the Bearer of bad
Tidings!"[434] So they turned towards the direction of the sound and
saw a company of Moslems who believed in one God, pushing towards
them, whereat their hearts were heartened and Sharrkan charged upon
the Infidels crying out, "There is no god but _the_ God! God is most
great!" he and those with him, so that earth quaked as with an
earthquake and the Unbeliever host brake asunder and fled into the
mountains and the Moslems followed them with lunge and blow; and Zau
al-Makan and his comrades of the Moslems ceased not to smite the hosts
of the Infidel foe, and parted heads from bodies till day darkened and
night coming on starkened sight. Thereupon the Moslems drew together
and passed the night in congratulations; and, when morning dawned and
daybreak shone with its shine and sheen, they saw Bahram, the captain
of the Daylamites, and Rustam, the captain of the Turks, advancing to
join them, with twenty thousand cavaliers like lions grim. As soon as
they saw Zau al-Makan, the riders dismounted and saluted him, and
kissed ground between his hands when he said to them, "Rejoice ye in
the glad tidings of the victory of the Moslem and the discomfiture of
the tribe of Unbelievers!" Then they gave one another joy of their
deliverance and of the greatness of their reward after Resurrection
Day. Now the cause of the coming of the succours to that place was
this. When the Emir Bahram and the Emir Rustam and the Chief
Chamberlain, with the Moslem host and flags flaunting high ahead, came
in sight of Constantinople they saw that the Nazarenes had mounted the
walls and manned the towers and the forts, and had set all their
defenders in order of defence, as soon as they learned of the approach
of the host of Al-Islam and the banners Mohammedan, and they heard the
clash of arms and the noise of war-voices and tramp of horse-hoofs;
and from their look-outs they beheld the Moslems, with their standards
and ensigns of the Faith of Unity under the dust-clouds and lo! they
were like a flight of locusts or rain clouds raining rain; and the
voices of the Moslems chanting the Koran and glorifying the
Compassionate One, struck their ears. Now the Infidels knew of the
approach of this host through Zat al-Dawahi with her craft and
whoredom,[435] calumny and contrivance. And the armies of Al-Islam
drew near, as it were the swollen sea, for the multitude of footmen
and horsemen and women and children. Then quoth the General of the
Turks to the General of the Daylamites, "O Emir, of a truth, we are in
jeopardy from the multitude of the foe who is on the walls. Look at
yonder bulwarks and at this world of folk like the seas that clash
with dashing billows. Indeed yon Infidel outnumbereth us an
hundredfold and we cannot be safe from spies who may inform them that
we are without a Sultan. In very sooth, we run danger from these
enemies, whose numbers may not be told and whose resources none can
withhold, especially in the absence of King Zau al-Makan and his
brother Sharrkan and the illustrious Wazir Dandan. If they know of
this, they will be emboldened to attack us in their absence and with
the sword they will annihilate us to the last man; not one of us
safety shall see. So it is my counsel that thou take ten thousand
riders of the allies and the Turks, and march them to the hermitage of
Matruhina and the meadow of Malúkhiná in quest of our brothers and
comrades. If thou act by my advice, it may be we shall approve
ourselves the cause of their deliverance, in case they be hard pressed
by the Infidels; and if thou act not, blame will not attach to me.
But, an ye go, it behoveth that ye return quickly, for ill-suspicion
is part of prudence." The Emir aforesaid fell in with his counsel; so
they chose twenty thousand horse and they set out covering the roads
and making for the monastery above mentioned. So much for the cause of
their coming; but as regards the ancient dame, Zat al-Dawahi, as soon
as she had delivered Sultan Zau al-Makan and his brother Sharrkan and
the Wazir Dandan into the hands of the Infidels, the foul whore
mounted a swift steed, saying to the Faithless, "I design to rejoin
the Moslem army which is at Constantinople and contrive for their
destruction; for I will inform them that their chiefs are dead, and
when they hear that from me, their joining will be disjointed and the
cord of their confederation cut and their host scattered. Then will I
go to King Afridun, Lord of Constantinople, and to my son Hardub, King
of Roum, and relate to them their tidings and they will sally forth on
the Moslems with their troops and will destroy them and will not leave
one of them alive." So she mounted and struck across country on her
good steed all the livelong night; and, when day dawned, appeared the
armies of Bahram and Rustam advancing towards her. So she turned into
a wayside brake and hid her horse among the trees and she walked a
while saying to herself, "Haply the Moslem hosts be returning, routed,
from the assault of Constantinople." However, as she drew near them
she looked narrowly and made sure that their standards were not
reversed,[436] and she knew that they were coming not as conquered
men, but fearing for their King and comrades. When she was assured of
this, she hastened towards them, running at speed, like a devil of ill
rede, till reaching them she cried out, "Haste ye! haste ye! O
soldiers of the Compassionate One, hasten to the Holy War against the
hosts of Satan!" When Bahram saw her he dismounted and kissed the
ground before her and asked her, "O friend of Allah, what is behind
thee?" Answered she, "Question not of sad case and sore condition; for
when our comrades had taken the treasure from the hermitage of
Matruhina, and designed to win their way Constantinople-wards,
thereupon came out on them a driving host and a dreadful of the
Infidels." And the damned witch repeated to them the story to fill
them with trouble and terror, adding, "The most of them are dead, and
there are but five-and-twenty men left." Said Bahram, "O holy man!
when didst thou leave them?" "But this night,"[437] replied she. He
cried, "Glory be to Allah! to Him who hath rolled up the far distance
for thee like a rug, so that thou hast sped thus walking upon thy feet
and propt upon a mid-rib of palm-tree! But thou art one of the saints
which fly like birds when inspired and possessed by His
directions."[438] Then he mounted his horse, and he was perplexed and
confounded by what he had heard from the beldam so strong in lies and
ill calumnies, and he said, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might
save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! Verily our labour is lost and
our hearts are heavy within us, for our Sultan is a prisoner and those
who are with him." Then they cut across the country, wide and side,
night and day, and when morning dawned they reached the head of the
defile and saw Zau al-Makan and Sharrkan shouting. "There is no god
but _the_ God! Allaho Akbar! and Salutation and Salvation upon the
Congratulator, the Comminator."[439] Whereupon he and his drove at the
Unbelievers and whelmed them, as the rain-torrent whelms the waste;
and cried out their war-cries, till fear gat hold of the prowest
Knights and the mountains were cloven in affright. And when shone the
day and showed its shine and sheen, the breeze of morning blew upon
them sweet and fragrant, and each recognised other as hath been said
before. Then they kissed the ground before the King and before his
brother Sharrkan, who told them all that had befallen the party in the
cave. Now thereat they marvelled and said to one another, "Hasten we
back to Constantinople, for we left our companions there, and our
hearts are with them." So they hurried departure, commending
themselves to the Subtle, the All-wise, and Zau al-Makan exhorted the
Moslems to steadfastness and versified in the following
couplets:[440]—

   Be praises mine to all-praiseworthy Thee, ✿ O Lord, who stinted
       not mine aid to be!
   Though was I lost abroad, Thou wast to me ✿ Strongest support
       which vouchsafed victory:
   Thou gav'st me wealth and reign and goodly gifts, ✿ And
       slungest conquering sword of valiancy:
   Thou mad'st me blest beneath Thy kingly shade, ✿ Engraced with
       generous boons dealt fain and free:
   Thou savedst from every fear I feared, by aid ✿ Of my Wazir, the
       Age's noblest he!
   Garred us Thy grace in fight to throw the Greek, ✿ Who yet came
       back dight in War's cramoisie:
   Then made I feint to fly from out the fight; ✿ But like grim
       lion turning made them flee,
   And left on valley-sole my foemen, drunk ✿ Not with old wine[441]
       but Death-cup's revelry:
   Then came the Saintly Hermit, and he showed ✿ His marvels wrought
       for town and wold to see;
   When slew they hero-wights who woke to dwell ✿ In Eden bowers
       wherein sweet rill-lets well.

But, when Zau al-Makan had made an end of versifying, his brother
Sharrkan congratulated him on his safety and thanked him for the deeds
he had done; after which both set out forcing their marches to rejoin
their army.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


              Now when it as the Hundred-and-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sharrkan
congratulated his brother, Zau al-Makan, on his safety and thanked him
for the deeds he had done; after which both set out forcing their
marches to rejoin their army. Such was their case; but as regards the
old woman, Zat al-Dawahi, after she had foregathered with the hosts of
Rustam and Bahram, she returned to the coppice, where she took her steed
and mounted and sped on at speed, till she drew near the Moslem army
that beleaguered Constantinople, when she lighted down from her destrier
and led it to the pavilion-tent of the Chief Chamberlain. And when he
saw her, he stood up to her in honour and signed to her with his right
hand and said, "Welcome O pious recluse!" Then he questioned her of what
had befallen, and she repeated to him her disquieting lies and deluding
calumnies, saying, "In sooth I fear for the Emir Rustam, and the Emir
Bahram, for that I met them and theirs on the way and sent them and
their following to relieve the King and his companions. Now there are
but twenty thousand horse and the Unbelievers outnumber them; so I would
have thee at this moment send off the rest of thy troops at full speed
to their succour, lest they be slain to the last man." And she cried to
them, "Haste! Haste!" When the Chamberlain and the Moslems heard these
words, their spirits fell and they wept; but Zat al-Dawahi said to them,
"Ask aidance of Allah and bear patiently this tribulation; for ye have
the example of those who have been before you of the people of Mohammed;
and Paradise with its palaces is laid out by Allah for those who die
martyrs; and needs must all die, but most praiseworthy is dying while
fighting for the Faith." The Chamberlain, hearing this speech of the
accursed old woman, called for the Emir Bahram's brother, a knight by
name Tarkash; and, choosing out for him ten thousand horse, riders famed
for force, bade him set out at once. So he fared forth and marched all
that day and the whole of the next night, till he neared the Moslems.
When daylight dawned, Sharrkan saw the dust cloud about them and feared
for the men of Al-Islam and said, "If these troops which are coming upon
us be Moslem men our victory is assured by them; but, if these be
Nazarenes, there is no gainsaying Destiny's decrees." Then he turned to
his brother, Zau al-Makan, and said, "Never fear, for with my life I
will ransom thee from death. If these be Mohammedan troops, then were it
an increase of heavenly favours; but, if they be our foes, there is no
help save that we fight them. Yet do I long to meet the Holy Man ere I
die, so I may beg him to pray that I die not save by death of
martyrdom." Whilst the twain were thus speaking, behold, there appeared
the banners inscribed with the words, "There is no God but _the_ God and
Mohammed is the Apostle of God;" and Sharrkan cried out, "How is it with
the Moslems?" "All are sound and safe," replied they, "and we came not
but out of concern for you." Then the Chief of the army dismounted and,
kissing ground before Sharrkan, asked, "O my lord, how be the Sultan and
the Wazir Dandan and Rustam and my brother Bahram; are they all in
safety?" He answered, "All well; but who brought thee tidings of us?"
Quoth Tarkash; "It was the Holy Man who told us that he had met my
brother Bahram and Rustam and had sent them both to you and he also
assured us that the Infidels had encompassed you and outnumbered you;
but I see not the case save the contrary thereof and that you are
victorious." They questioned him, "And how did the Holy Man reach you?";
and he replied, "Walking on his feet and he had compassed in a day and a
night, ten days' journey for a well girt horseman." "There is no doubt
but that he is a Saint of Allah," said Sharrkan, "but where is he now?"
They rejoined, "We left him with our troops, the folk of the Faith,
moving them to do battle with the rebels and the Faithless." Thereat
Sharrkan rejoiced and all thanked Allah for their own deliverance and
the safety of the Holy Man; and commended the dead to His mercy saying,
"This was writ in the Book." Then they set out making for Constantinople
by forced marches, and whilst they were on this enterprise, behold, a
dust-cloud arose to such height that it walled the two horizons, the
eastern and the western, from man's sight and the day was darkened by it
to night. But Sharrkan looked at it and said, "Verily, I fear lest this
be the Infidels who have routed the army of Al-Islam for that this dust
walleth the world, east and west, and hideth the two horizons, north and
south." Presently appeared under the dust a pillar of darkness, blacker
than the blackness of dismal days; nor ceased to come upon them that
column more dreadful than the dread of the Day of Doom. Horse and foot
hastened up to look at it and know the terrors of the case, when behold,
they saw it to be the recluse aforesaid; so they thronged round him to
kiss his hands and he cried out, "O people of the Best of Mankind,[442]
the lamp which shineth in darkness blind, verily the Infidels have
outwitted the Moslems by guile, for they fell upon the host of the One
God whilst they deemed themselves safe from the Faithless, and attacked
them in their tents and made a sore slaughter of them what while they
looked for no wile; so hasten to the aid of the Believers in the unity
of God, and deliver them from those who deny Him!" Now when Sharrkan
heard these words, his heart flew from his breast with sore trouble;
and, alighting from his steed in amazement, he kissed the Recluse's
hands and feet. On like wise did his brother, Zau al-Makan, and the rest
of the foot and horse-troops; except the Wazir Dandan, who dismounted
not but said, "By Allah, my heart flieth from this devotee, for I never
knew show of devotion to religion that bred not bane. So leave him and
rejoin your comrades the Moslems, for this man is of the outcasts from
the gate of the mercy of the Lord of the Three Worlds! How often have I
here made razzias with King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and trodden the earth of
these lands!" Said Sharrkan, "Put away from thee such evil thought, hast
thou not seen this Holy Man exciting the Faithful to fight, and holding
spears and swords light? So slander him not, for backbiting is blameable
and poisoned is the flesh of the pious.[443] Look how he inciteth us to
fight the foe; and, did not Almighty Allah love him, He had cast him
aforetime into fearful torment." Then Sharrkan bade bring a Nubian mule
for the ascetic to ride and said, "Mount, O pious man, devout and
virtuous!" But the devotee refused to ride and feigned self-denial, that
he might attain his end; and they knew not that this holy personage was
like him of whom the poet saith:—

   He prayeth and he fasteth for an end he doth espy; ✿ When once his
       end is safely won then fast and prayer good-bye.[444]

So the devotee ceased not to walk among the horsemen and the footmen,
like a wily fox meditating guile, and began to uplift her voice,
chanting the Koran and praising the Compassionate One. And they
continued pressing forward till they approached the camp of Al-Islam,
where Sharrkan found the Moslem in conquered plight and the Chamberlain
upon the brink of falling back in flight, whilst the sword of Greece
havoc dight among the Faithful, the righteous and those who work
unright,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


             Now when it was the Hundred-and-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Sharrkan saw
the Moslems in conquered plight and the Chamberlain upon the brink of
retreat and flight and the sword havoc dight among the righteous and the
workers of unright, the cause of this weakness among the Moslems was
that the accursed old woman, Zat al-Dawahi, the foe of the Faith, after
seeing that Bahram and Rustam had set forward with their troops to join
Sharrkan and his brother Zau al-Makan, repaired to the camp of the
Mahometans before Constantinople and caused the mission of the Emir
Tarkash, as hath been before said. In this her purpose was to divide the
Moslem forces the better to weaken them. Then she left them and entered
Constantinople, and called with a loud voice on the knights of the
Greeks, saying, "Let me down a cord that I may tie thereto this letter,
and do ye bear it to your King Afridun, that he may read it and to my
son King Hardub that they both do what is written therein of bidding and
forbidding." So they let down for her a string and she tied thereto a
letter whose purport was the following: "From the terriblest of
tribulations[445] and the chiefest of all calamities, Zat al-Dawahi, to
King Afridun greeting. But afterwards. Of a truth I have contrived a
device for destroying the Moslems; so bide ye quiet and content. I have
cozened and captured their Sultan and the Wazir Dandan; and then I
returned to their camp and acquainted them therewith, whereby their
pride had a fall and their withers were wrung. And I have so wrought
upon the host 'leaguering Constantinople that they have sent ten
thousand men under the Emir Tarkash to succour the captives, of whom
there be now left but few; it is therefore my object that ye sally forth
against them with all your power while this day endureth; and that ye
fall on them in their tents and that ye leave them not till ye shall
have slain them to the last man; for, verily the Messiah looketh down
upon you and the Blessed Virgin favoureth you; and I hope of the Messiah
that he forget not what deed I have done." When her letter came to King
Afridun, he rejoiced with great joyance; and, sending at once for King
Hardub of Greece, son of Zat al-Dawahi, read the letter to him as soon
as he came, whereat he was exceeding glad and said, "See my mother's
craft; verily it dispenseth with swords, and her aspect standeth in
stead of the terrors of the Day of Dread." Rejoined Afridun, "May the
Messiah not bereave us of thy venerable parent nor deprive her of her
wile and guile!" Then he bade the Knights give orders for sallying
outside the city, and the news was noised abroad in Constantinople. So
the Nazarenes and the cohorts of the Cross burst forth and unsheathed
their keen sabres in their numbers, shouting out their professions of
impiety and heresies, and blaspheming the Lord of all Creatures. When
the Chamberlain saw the sally, he said, "Behold, the Greek is upon us
and they surely have learned that our Sultan is far away; and haply they
have attacked us, for that the most part of our troops have marched to
the succour of King Zau al-Makan!" Therewith he waxed wroth and cried
out, "Ho, soldiers of Al-Islam and favourers of the True Faith, an you
flee you are lost, but if ye stand fast, ye win! Know ye that valiancy
lieth in endurance of outrance and that no case is so strait but that
the Almighty is able to make it straight; Allah assain you and look upon
you with eyes of compassion fain!" Thereupon the Moslems cried out,
"Allaho Akbar!" and the believer in the One God shouted his slogan, and
whirled the mill-wheels of fight with cutting and thrusting in main and
might; scymitars and spears played sore and the plains and valleys were
swamped with gore. The priests and monks priested it, tight-girding
their girdles and uplifting the Crucifixes, while the Moslem shouted out
the professions of the Requiting King and verses of the Koran began to
sing. The hosts of the Compassionate One fought against the legions of
Satan; and head flew from body of man, while the good Angels hovered
above the people of the Chosen Prophet, nor did the sword cease to smite
till the day darkened and night came on and starkened. Now the
miscreants had encompassed the Moslems and made sure of escaping the
pains that awaited them; and the Faithless greeded for victory over the
Faithful until day dawned and dazzled. Thereupon the Chamberlain
mounted, he and his men, trusting that Allah would help them to victory;
and host was mingled with host and battle rose a-foot and took post. And
heads flew from trunks whilst the brave stood fast in stead; the craven
turned tail and fled; and the Judge of death judged and sentence sped,
so that the champions fell from their saddles slain and corpses cumbered
meadow and plain. Then the Moslem began to give ground and rearwards
bent; and the Greek took possession of some of their tents; whereupon
the Moslems were about to break and retreat and take flight, when
meanwhile behold, up came Sharrkan with the rest of the host of Al-Islam
and the standards of the Believers in Unity. And having come up with
them, he charged the Infidels; and followed him Zau al-Makan and the
Wazir Dandan and the Emirs Bahram and Rustam with his brother Tarkash.
When the foe saw this, they lost head and their reason fled, and the
dust clouds towered till they covered the country, whilst the righteous
Believers joined their pious comrades. Then Sharrkan accosted the
Chamberlain and praised him for his steadfastness; and he in turn gave
the Prince joy of his timely succour and his gaining the day. Thereat
the Moslems were glad and their hearts were heartened; so they rushed
upon their enemies and devoted themselves to Allah in their Fight for
the Faith. But when the Idolaters beheld the standards Mohammedan and
thereon the profession of Faith Islamitan, proclaiming the Unity, they
shrieked "Woe!" and "Ruin!" and besought succour of the Patriarchs of
the Monasteries. Then fell they to calling upon John and Mary and the
Cross abhorrent and stayed their hands from slaughter, whilst King
Afridun went up to consult King Hardub of Greece, for the two Kings
stood one at the head of each wing, right and left. Now there was with
them also a famous cavalier, Lawiyá hight, who commanded the centre; and
they drew out in battle array, but indeed they were full of alarm and
affray. Meanwhile, the Moslems aligned their forces and thereupon
Sharrkan came to his brother, Zau al-Makan, and said, "O King of the
Age, doubtless they mean to champion it, and that is also the object of
our desire; but it is my wish to push forward the stoutest-hearted of
our fighters, for by forethought is one half of life wrought." Replied
the Sultan, "As thou wilt, O companion of good counsel!" "It is my
wish," added Sharrkan, "to stand in mid-line opposite the Infidel, with
the Wazir Dandan on my left and thee on my right, whilst the Emir Bahram
leads the dexter-wing and the Emir Rustam leads the wing sinistral; and
thou, O mighty King, shalt be under the standards and the ensigns, for
that thou art the pillar of our defence; upon thee, after Allah, is our
dependence and we will all be thy ransom from aught that can harm thee."
Zau al-Makan thanked him therefor, and the slogan arose and the sabre
was drawn; but, as things stood thus, behold, there came forth a
cavalier from the ranks of Roum; and, as he drew near, they saw that he
was mounted on a slow-paced she-mule, fleeing with her master from the
shock of swords. Her housings were of white silk covered by a
prayer-carpet of Cashmere stuff, and on her back sat a Shaykh, an old
man of comely presence and reverend aspect, garbed in a gown of white
wool. He stinted not pushing her and hurrying her on till he came near
the Moslem and said, "I am an ambassador to you all, and an ambassador
hath naught to do save to deliver; so give me safe conduct and permit of
speech, that I communicate to you my message." Replied Sharrkan, "Thou
art in safety: fear neither sway of sword nor lunge of lance." Thereupon
the old man dismounted and, taking the Cross from his neck, placed it
before the Sultan and humbled himself with much humility. Then quoth to
him the Moslems, "What is with thee of news?"; and quoth he, "I am an
ambassador from King Afridun, for I counselled him to avert the
destruction of all these frames of men and temples of the Compassionate
One; and to him it seemed righteous to stay the shedding of blood and
limit it to the encounter of two knights in shock of fight singular; so
he agreed to that and he saith to you:—Verily, I will ransom my army
with my life; so let the Moslem King do as I do and with his life ransom
his host. And if he kill me, there will be no stay left in the army of
Roum, and if I kill him, there will be no stability with the Moslems."
When Sharrkan heard this he said, "O monk, I agree to that, for it is
just nor may it be gainsaid; and behold, I will meet him in duello and
do with him derring-do, for I am Champion of the Faithful even as he is
Champion of the Faithless; and if he slay me, he will have won the day
and naught will remain for the Moslems' forces save flight. So return to
him, O thou monk, and say that the single combat shall take place
to-morrow, for this day we have come off our journey and are aweary; but
after rest neither reproach nor blame fear ye." So the monk returned
(and he rejoicing) to King Afridun and King Hardub, and told them both
what Sharrkan had said, whereat King Afridun was glad with exceeding
gladness and fell from him anxiety and sadness, and he said to himself,
"No doubt but this Sharrkan is their doughtiest swayer of the sword and
the dourest at lunge of lance; and when I shall have slain him, their
hearts will be disheartened and their strength will be shattered." Now
Zat al-Dawahi had written to King Afridun of that and had told him how
Sharrkan was a Knight of the Braves and the bravest of knights and had
warned him against him; but Afridun was a stalwart cavalier who fought
in many a fashion; he could hurl rocks and throw spears and smite with
the iron mace and he feared not the prowest of the prow. So when he
heard the report of the monk that Sharrkan agreed to the duello, he was
like to fly for exceeding joy, because he had self-confidence and he
knew that none could withstand him. The Infidels passed that night in
joy and jubilee and wine-bibbing; and, as soon as it was dawn, the two
armies drew out with the swart of spear and the blanch of blade. And
behold, a cavalier rode single-handed into the plain, mounted on a steed
of purest strain, and for foray and fray full ready and fain. And that
Knight had limbs of might and he was clad in an iron cuirass made for
stress of fight. On his breast he wore a jewelled mirror and in his hand
he bore a keen scymitar and his lance of Khalanj-wood,[446] the curious
work of the Frank, weighing a quintal. Then the rider uncovered his face
and cried out, saying, "Whoso knoweth me verily hath enough of me, and
whoso knoweth me not right soon[447] shall ken who I be. I am Afridun
the overwhelmed by the well-omened Shawáhi,[448] Zat al-Dawahi." But he
had not ended speaking ere Sharrkan, the Champion of the Moslems, fared
forth to meet him, mounted on a sorrel horse worth a thousand pieces of
red gold with accoutrements purfled in pearls and precious stone; and he
bore in baldrick a blade of watered Indian steel that through necks
shore and made easy the hard and sore. He drave his charger between the
two hosts in line whilst the horsemen all fixed on him their eyne, and
he cried out to Afridun, "Woe to thee, O accursed! dost thou deem me one
of the horsemen thou hast overta'en who cannot stand against thee on
battle-plain?" Then each rushed upon other and they bashed together like
two mountains crashing or two billows dashing and clashing: they
advanced and retreated; and drew together and withdrew; and stinted not
of fray and fight and weapon-play, and strife and stay, with stroke of
sword and lunge of lance. Of the two armies looking on, some said,
"Sharrkan is victor!" and others, "Afridun will conquer!"; and the two
riders stayed not their hands from the hustle until ceased the clamour
and the bustle; and the dust-columns rose and the day waned and the sun
waxed yellow and wan. Then cried out King Afridun to Sharrkan, saying,
"By the truth of the Messiah and the Faith which is no liar, thou art
nought save a doughty rider and a stalwart fighter; but thou art
fraudful and thy nature is not that of the noble. I ken thy work is
other than praiseworthy nor is thy prowess that of a Prince; for thy
people behave to thee as though thou wert a slave;[449] and see! they
bring thee out a charger which is not thine, that thou mayst mount and
return to the fight. But by the truth of my Faith, thy fighting irketh
and fatigueth me and I am weary of cutting and thrusting with thee; and
if thou purpose to lay on load with me to-night, thou wouldst not change
aught of thy harness nor thy horse, till thou approve to the cavaliers
thy generous blood and skill in brunt." When Sharrkan heard him say
these words concerning his own folk behaving to him though he were a
slave, he waxt wroth and turned towards his men, meaning to sign to them
and bid them not prepare him change of harness or horse, when lo!
Afridun shook his throw-spear high in air and cast it at Sharrkan. Now
when the Moslem turned his back, he found none of the men near him, and
he knew this to be a trick of the accursed Infidel; so he wheeled round
in haste and behold, the javelin came at him, so he swerved from it,
till his head was bent low as his saddle-bow. The weapon grazed his
breast, and pierced the skin of his chest, for Sharrkan was
high-bosomed: whereupon he gave one cry and swooned away. Thereat the
accursed Afridun was joyful, thinking he had slain him; and shouted to
the Infidels bidding them rejoice, whereat the Faithless were encouraged
and the Faithful wept. When Zau al-Makan saw his brother reeling in
selle so that he well-nigh fell, he despatched cavaliers towards him and
the braves hurried to his aid and came up with him. Thereupon the
Infidels drove at the Moslems; the two hosts joined battle and the two
lines were mingled, whilst the keen scymitar of Al-Yaman did good work.
Now the first to reach Sharrkan was the Wazir Dandan——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


              Now when it was the Hundred-and-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King Zau
al-Makan saw that the accursed Infidel had struck with javelin his
brother Sharrkan, he deemed him dead, and despatched cavaliers towards
him; and the first to reach him were the Wazir Dandan and the Emir of
the Turks, Bahram, and the Emir of the Daylamites, Rustam. They found
him falling from his horse; so they stayed him in his saddle and
returned with him to his brother, Zau al-Makan; then they gave him in
charge to his pages, and went again to do the work of cut and thrust. So
the strife redoubled and the weapons together clashed and ceased not
bate and debate and naught was to be seen but blood flowing and necks
bowing; nor did the swords cease on the napes of men to make play nor
the strife to rage with more and more affray, till the most part of the
night was past away and the two hosts were aweary of the mellay. So they
called a truce and each army returned to its tents, whilst all the
Infidels repaired to King Afridun and kissed the ground before him, and
the priests and monks wished him joy of his victory over Sharrkan. Then
the King fared for Constantinople and sat upon the throne of his realm,
when King Hardub came to him and said, "May the Messiah strengthen thy
fore-arm and never cease to be thy helper and hearken to what prayers my
pious mother, Zat al-Dawahi, shall pray for thee! Know that the Moslems
can make no stay without Sharrkan." Replied Afridun, "To-morrow shall
end the affair when to fight I fare: I will seek Zau al-Makan and slay
him, and their army shall turn tail and of flight shall avail." Such was
the case with the Kafirs; but as regards the host of Al-Islam, when Zau
al-Makan returned to his tent, he thought of naught but his brother and,
going into the pavilion, found him in evil case and sore condition;
whereupon he summoned for counsel the Wazir Dandan and Rustam and
Bahram. When they entered, they opined to assemble the physicians that
they might medicine Sharrkan, and they wept and said, "The world will
not readily afford his like!" and they watched by him all that night,
and about the later hours came to them the Recluse in tears. When Zau
al-Makan saw him, he rose in honour; and the Religious stroked
Sharrkan's wound with his hand, chanting somewhat of the Koran and
repeating by way of talisman some of the verses of the Compassionate
One. And the pretender ceased not to watch over him till dawn, when he
came to himself and, opening his eyes, moved his tongue in his mouth and
spoke. At this Zau al-Makan rejoiced, saying, "Of a truth the blessing
of the Holy Man hath taken effect on him!" And Sharrkan said, "Praised
be Allah for recovery; indeed, I am well at this hour. That accursed one
played me false; and, but that I swerved aside lighter than lightning,
the throw-spear had pierced through my breast. So praised be Allah for
saving me! And how is it with the Moslems?" Answered Zau al-Makan, "All
are weeping for thee." Quoth Sharrkan, "I am well and in good case; but
where is the Holy Man?" Now he was sitting by him and said, "At thy
head." So the Prince turned to him and kissed his hand when he said, "O
my son! be of good patience and Allah shall increase thy reward; for the
wage is measured by the work." Sharrkan rejoined, "Pray for me," and he
prayed for him. As soon as morning dawned and day brake in shine and
sheen, the Moslems sallied out to the plain and the Kafirs made ready to
thrust and cut. Then the Islamite host advanced and offered fight with
weapons ready dight, and King Zau al-Makan and Afridun made to charge
one at other. But when Zau al-Makan fared forth into the field, there
came with him the Wazir Dandan and the Chamberlain and Bahram, saying,
"We will be thy sacrifice." He replied, "By the Holy House and Zemzem
and the Place![450] I will not be stayed from going forth against these
wild asses." And when he rode out into the field he played with sword
and spear till riders marvelled and both armies wondered; then he rushed
upon the foe's right wing and of it he slew two knights and in like
manner he dealt with the left wing. Presently he stayed his steed in the
midst of the field and cried out, "Where is Afridun, that I may make him
taste the cup of disgrace?" But when King Hardub saw the case he
conjured Afridun not to attack him, saying, "O King, yesterday it was
thy turn to fight: it is mine to-day. I care naught for his prowess." So
he rushed out towards Zau al-Makan brand in hand and under him a
stallion like Abjar, which was Antar's charger, and its coat was jet
black even as saith the poet:—

  On the glancing racer outracing glance ✿ He speeds, as though he
      would collar Doom:
  His steed's black coat is of darkest jet, ✿ And likest Night in
      her nightliest gloom:
  Whose neigh sounds glad to the hearer's ears ✿ Like thunders rolling
      in thund'rous boom:
  If he race the wind he will lead the way, ✿ And the
      lightning-flash will behind him loom.[451]

Then each rushed upon the opponent, parrying blows and proving the
marvellous qualities were stored in him; and they fell to drawing on and
withdrawing till the breasts of the bystanders were straitened and they
were weary of waiting for the event. At last Zau al-Makan cried out his
war-cry and rushed upon Hardub, King of Cæsarea,[452] and struck him a
stroke that shore head from trunk and slew him on the spot. When the
Infidels saw this, they charged in a body, compact and united, upon Zau
al-Makan, who met them amidfield, and they engaged in hewing and
foining, till blood ran in rills. Then the Moslems cried out, "Allaho
Akbar!"—God is most great—and "There is no god but _the_ God!"; and
invoked salvation for the Prophet, the Bringer of Glad Tidings, the
Bearer of Bad Tidings. And there befel a great fight, but Allah assigned
victory to the Faithful and defeat to the Faithless. The Wazir Dandan
shouted, "Take your blood-revenge for King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and his
son Sharrkan!"; and bared his head and cried out to the Turks. Now there
were by his side more than twenty thousand horse, and all charged with
him as one man, when the Faithless found naught to save their lives but
flight. So they turned tail to fly while the biting sabre wrought its
havoc and the Moslems slew of them that day some fifty thousand horse
and took more than that number: much folk also were slain while going in
at the gates, for the flock was great. Then the Greeks hove to the doors
and swarmed up the walls to await the assault; and in fine the Moslem
hosts returned to their tents aided to glory and victory, and King Zau
al-Makan went in to his brother whom he found in most joyous case. So he
made a prostration of thanks to the Bountiful and the Exalted; and then
he came forward and gave Sharrkan joy of his recovery. Answered he,
"Verily we are all under the benediction of this Religious, holy and
righteous, nor would you have been victorious, but for his accepted
orisons; indeed all day he remained at prayer to invoke victory on the
Moslems."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


             Now when it was the Hundred-and-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Zau al-Makan
went in to his brother Sharrkan, he found him sitting with the Holy Man
by his side; so he rejoiced and drew near him and gave him joy of his
recovery. Answered he, "Verily we are all under the benediction of this
Recluse nor would you have been victorious but for his prayers, indeed
he felt no fear this day and he ceased not supplication for the Moslems.
I found strength return to me, when I heard your 'Allaho Akbar,' for
then I knew you to be victorious over your enemies. But now recount to
me, O my brother, what befel thee." So he told him all that had passed
between him and the accursed Hardub and related how he had slain him and
sent him to the malediction of Allah; and Sharrkan praised him and
thanked him for his prowess. When Zat al-Dawahi heard tell of her son's
death (and she still drest as a devotee), her face waxed yellow and her
eyes ran over with railing tears: she kept her counsel, however, and
feigned to the Moslems that she was glad and wept for excess of joy. But
she said to herself, "By the truth of the Messiah, there remaineth no
profit of my life, if I burn not his heart for his brother, Sharrkan,
even as he hath burnt my heart for King Hardub, the mainstay of
Christendom and the hosts of Crossdom!" Still she kept her secret. And
the Wazir Dandan and King Zau al-Makan and the Chamberlain remained
sitting with Sharrkan till they had dressed and salved his wound; after
which they gave him medicines and he began to recover strength; whereat
they joyed with exceeding joy and told the troops who congratulated
themselves, saying, "To-morrow he will ride with us and do manly devoir
in the siege." Then said Sharrkan to them, "Ye have fought through all
this day and are aweary of fight; so it behoveth that you return to your
places and sleep and not sit up." They accepted his counsel and then
each went away to his own pavilion, and none remained with Sharrkan but
a few servants and the old woman Zat al-Dawahi. He talked with her
through part of the night, then he stretched himself to rest: and his
servants did likewise and presently sleep overcame them all and they lay
like the dead. Such was the case with Sharrkan and his men; but as
regards the old woman she alone abode awake while they slumbered in the
tent and, looking at Sharrkan she presently saw that he was drowned in
sleep. Thereupon she sprang to her feet, as she were a scald she-bear or
a speckled snake, and drew from her waist-cloth a dagger so poisoned
that if laid thereon it would have melted a rock. Then she unsheathed
the poniard and went up to Sharrkan's head and she drew the knife across
his throat and severed his weasand and hewed off his head from his body.
And once more she sprang to her feet; and, going the round of the
sleeping servants, she cut off their heads also, lest they should awake.
Then she left the tent and made for the Sultan's pavilion, but finding
the guards on the alert, turned to that of the Wazir Dandan. Now she
found him reading the Koran and when his sight fell upon her he said,
"Welcome to the Holy Man!" Hearing this from the Wazir, her heart
trembled and she said, "The reason of my coming hither at this time is
that I heard the voice of a saint amongst Allah's Saints and am going to
him." Then she turned her back, but the Wazir said to himself, "By
Allah, I will follow our Devotee this night!" So he rose and walked
after her; but when the accursed old woman sensed his footsteps, she
knew that he was following her: wherefore she feared the disgrace of
discovery and said in herself, "Unless I serve some trick upon him he
will disgrace me." So she turned and said to him from afar, "Ho, thou
Wazir, I am going in search of this Saint that I may learn who he is;
and, after learning this much, I will ask his leave for thee to visit
him. Then I will come back and tell thee; for I fear thine accompanying
me, without having his permission, lest he take umbrage at me seeing
thee in my society." Now when the Wazir heard these words, he was
ashamed to answer her; so he left her and returned to his tent, and
would have slept; but sleep was not favourable to him and the world
seemed heaped upon him. Presently he rose and went forth from the tent
saying in himself, "I will go to Sharrkan and chat with him till
morning." But when he entered into Sharrkan's pavilion, he found the
blood running like an aqueduct and saw the servants lying with their
throats cut like beasts for food. At this he cried a cry which aroused
all who were asleep; the folk hastened to him and, seeing the blood
streaming, set up a clamour of weeping and wailing. Then the noise awoke
the Sultan, who enquired what was the matter, and it was said to him,
"Sharrkan thy brother and his servants are murthered." So he rose in
haste and entered the tent, and found the Wazir Dandan shrieking aloud
and he saw his brother's body without a head. Thereat he swooned away
and all the troops crowded around him, weeping and crying out, and so
remained for a while, till he came to himself, when he looked at
Sharrkan and wept with sore weeping, while the Wazir and Rustam and
Bahram did the like. But the Chamberlain cried and lamented more than
the rest and asked leave to absent himself, such was his alarm. Then
said Zau al-Makan, "Know ye who did this deed and how is it I see not
the Devotee, him who the things of this world hath put away?" Quoth the
Wazir, "And who should have been the cause of this affliction, save that
Devotee, that Satan? By Allah, my heart abhorred him from the first,
because I know that all who pretend to be absorbed in practices
religious are vile and treacherous!" And he repeated to the King the
tale of how he would have followed the Religious, but he forbade him,
whereupon the folk broke out into a tumult of weeping and lamentation
and humbled themselves before Him who is ever near, Him who ever
answereth prayer, supplicating that He would cause the false Devotee who
denied Allah's testimony to fall into their hands. Then they laid
Sharrkan out and buried him in the mountain aforesaid and mourned over
his far-famed virtues.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


              Now when it was the Hundred-and-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that they laid Sharrkan
out and buried him in the mountain aforesaid and mourned over his
far-famed virtues. Then they looked for the opening of the city-gate;
but it opened not and no sign of men appeared to them on the walls;
whereat they wondered with exceeding wonder. But King Zau al-Makan said,
"By Allah, I will not turn back from them, though I sit here for years
and years, till I take blood-revenge for my brother Sharrkan and waste
Constantinople and kill the King of the Nazarenes, even if death
overcome me and I be at rest from this woeful world!" Then he bade be
brought out the treasure taken from the Monastery of Matruhina; and
mustered the troops and divided the monies among them, and he left not
one of them but he gave him gifts which contented him. Moreover, he
assembled in the presence three hundred horse of every division and said
to them, "Do ye send supplies to your households, for I am resolved to
abide by this city, year after year, till I have taken man-bote for my
brother Sharrkan, even if I die in this stead." And when the army heard
these words and had received his gifts of money they replied, "To hear
is to obey!" Thereupon he summoned couriers and gave them letters and
charged them to deliver the same, together with the monies, to the
soldiers' families and inform them that all were safe and satisfied, and
acquaint them saying, "We are encamped before Constantinople and we will
either destroy it or die; and, albeit we be obliged to abide here months
and years, we will not depart hence till we take it." Moreover, he bade
the Wazir Dandan write to his sister, Nuzhat al-Zaman, and said to him,
"Acquaint her with what hath befallen us, and what be our situation and
commend my child to her care since that, when I went out to war, my wife
was near her delivery and by this time she must needs have been brought
to bed; and if she hath given birth to a boy, as I have heard say,
hasten your return and bring me the acceptable news." Then he gave them
somewhat of money, which they pouched and set out at once; and all the
people flocked forth to take leave of them and entrust them with the
monies and the messages. After they had departed, Zau al-Makan turned to
the Wazir Dandan and commanded him to advance with the army against the
city-walls. So the troops pushed forward, but found none on the
ramparts, whereat they marvelled, while Zau al-Makan was troubled at the
case, for he deeply mourned the severance from his brother Sharrkan and
he was sore perturbed about that traitor the Ascetic. In this condition
they abode three days without seeing anyone. So far concerning the
Moslems; but as regards the Greeks and the cause of their refusing fight
during these three days the case was this. As soon as Zat al-Dawahi had
slain Sharrkan, she hastened her march and reached the walls of
Constantinople, where she called out in the Greek tongue to the guards
to throw her down a rope. Quoth they, "Who art thou?"; and quoth she, "I
am Zat al-Dawahi." They knew her and let down a cord to which she tied
herself and they drew her up; and, when inside the city, she went in to
the King Afridun and said to him, "What is this I hear from the Moslems?
They say that my son King Hardub is slain." He answered, "Yes;" and she
shrieked out and wept right grievously and ceased not weeping thus till
she made Afridun and all who were present weep with her. Then she told
the King how she had slain Sharrkan and thirty of his servants, whereat
he rejoiced and thanked her; and, kissing her hands, exhorted her to
resignation for the loss of her son. Said she, "By the truth of the
Messiah, I will not rest content with killing that dog of the Moslem
dogs in blood-revenge for my son, a King of the Kings of the age! Now
there is no help for it but that I work some guile and I contrive a wile
whereby to slay the Sultan Zau al-Makan and the Wazir Dandan and the
Chamberlain and Rustam and Bahram and ten thousand cavaliers of the army
of Al-Islam; for it shall never be said that my son's head be paid with
the blood-wit of Sharrkan's head; no, never!" Then said she to King
Afridun, "Know, O King of the Age, that it is my wish to set forth
mourning for my son and to cut my Girdle and to break the Crosses."
Replied Afridun, "Do what thou desire; I will not gainsay thee in aught.
And if thou prolong thy mourning for many days it were a little thing;
for though the Moslems resolve to beleaguer us years and years, they
will never win their will of us nor gain aught of us save trouble and
weariness." Then the Accursed One (when she had ended with the calamity
she had wrought and the ignominies which in herself she had thought)
took ink-case and paper and wrote thereon:—"From Shawáhi, Zat al-Dawahi,
to the host of the Moslems. Know ye that I entered your country and
duped by my cunning your nobles and at first hand I slew your King Omar
bin al-Nu'uman in the midst of his palace. Moreover, I slew, in the
affair of the mountain-pass and of the cave, many of your men; and the
last I killed were Sharrkan and his servants. And if fortune do not stay
me and Satan obey me, I needs must slay me your Sultan and the Wazir
Dandan, for I am she who came to you in disguise of a Recluse and who
heaped upon you my devices and deceits. Wherefore, an you would be in
safety after this, fare ye forth at once; and if you seek your own
destruction cease not abiding for the nonce; and though ye tarry here
years and years, ye shall not do your desire on us. And so peace be
yours!" After writing her writ she devoted three days to mourning for
King Hardub; and, on the fourth, she called a Knight and bade him take
the letter and make it fast to a shaft and shoot it into the Moslem
camp. When this was done, she entered the church and gave herself up to
weeping and wailing for the loss of her son, saying to him who took the
kingship after him, "Nothing will serve me but I must kill Zau al-Makan
and all the nobles of Al-Islam." Such was the case with her; but as
regards what occurred to the Moslems, all passed three days in trouble
and anxiety, and on the fourth when gazing at the walls behold, they saw
a knight holding a bow and about to shoot an arrow along whose side a
letter was bound. So they waited till he had shot it among them and the
Sultan bade the Wazir Dandan take the missive and read it. He perused it
accordingly; and, when Zau al-Makan heard it to end and understood its
purport, his eyes filled with tears and he shrieked for agony at her
perfidy; and the Minister Dandan said, "By Allah, my heart shrank from
her!" Quoth the Sultan, "How could this whore play her tricks upon us
twice? But by the Almighty I will not depart hence till I fill her cleft
with molten lead and jail her with the jailing of a bird encaged, then
bind her with her own hair and crucify her over the gate of
Constantinople." And he called to mind his brother and wept with
excessive weeping. But when Zat al-Dawahi arrived amongst the Infidels
and related to them her adventures at length, they rejoiced at her
safety and at the slaying of Sharrkan. Thereupon the Moslems addressed
themselves again to the siege of the city and the Sultan promised his
men that, if it should be taken, he would divide its treasures among
them in equal parts. But he dried not his tears grieving for his brother
till his body was wasted and sick, growing thin as a toothpick.
Presently the Wazir Dandan came in to him and said, "Be of good cheer
and keep thine eyes cool and clear; in very sooth thy brother died not
but because his hour was come, and there is no profit in this mourning.
How well saith the poet:—

    Whatso is not to be no sleight shall bring to pass; ✿ What is to
        be without a failure shall become;
    Soon the becoming fortune shall be found to be, ✿ And
        Folly's brother[453] shall abide forlorn and glum."

"Wherefore do thou leave this weeping and wailing and hearten thy heart
to bear arms." He replied, "O Wazir, my heart is heavy for the death of
my father and my brother and for our absence from hearth and home; and
my mind is concerned for my subjects." Thereupon the Wazir and the
bystanders wept; but they ceased not from pushing forward the siege of
Constantinople for a length of days. And they being thus, behold, news
arrived from Baghdad, by one of the Emirs to the effect that the King's
wife had been blessed with a boy, and that his sister, Nuzhat al-Zaman,
had named him Kanmakan.[454] Moreover, that the boy bid fair to be
famous, already showing wondrous signs and marvellous tokens; and that
she had commanded the Olema and the preachers to pray for mother and
child from the pulpits and bless them in all wise; furthermore that the
twain were well, that the land had enjoyed abundant rains, and that his
comrade the Fireman was established in all prosperity, with eunuchs and
slaves to wait upon him; but that he was still ignorant of what had
befallen him. And she ended with the greeting of peace. Then quoth Zau
al-Makan to the Wazir Dandan, "Now is my back strengthened for that I
have been blest with a son whose name is Kanmakan."——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


              Now when it was the Hundred-and-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when they brought
him the news of his wife having borne him a boy child, Zau al-Makan
rejoiced with great joy and cried, "Now is my back strengthened, for
that I have been blessed with a son[455] whose name is Kanmakan." And he
spake to the Wazir Dandan, saying, "I am minded to leave this mourning
and order perlections of the Koran for my brother and command almsdeeds
on his account." Quoth the Wazir, "Thy design is good." Thereupon he
caused tents to be pitched over his brother's tomb; so they raised them
and gathered together such of the men-at-arms as could repeat the Koran;
and some began reciting the Holy volume; whilst others chanted litanies
containing the names of Allah, and thus they did till the morning. Then
Zau al-Makan went up to the grave of his brother Sharrkan and poured
forth copious tears, and improvised these couplets:—

   They bore him bier'd, and all who followed wept ✿ With Moses'
       shrieks what day o'erhead shook Tor;[456]
   Till reached the grave which Fate had made his home, ✿ Dug in
       men's souls who one sole God adore:
   Ne'er had I thought before to see my joy ✿ Borne on the bier
       which heads of bearers bore:
   Ah no! nor ere they homed thee in the dust ✿ That stars of heaven
       earth ever covered o'er.
   Is the tomb-dweller hostage of a stead, ✿ Where light and
       splendour o'er thy face shall pour?
   Praise to restore his life her word hath pledged: ✿ Cribbed
       and confined he shall dispread the more!

When Zau al-Makan had made an end of his versifying he wept and wept
with him all the troops; then he came to the grave and threw himself
upon it wild with woe, and the Wazir repeated the words of the poet:—

   Fain leaving life that fleets thou hast th' eternal won; ✿ Thou
       didst as whilom many a doer like thee hath done;
   Leftest this worldly house without reproach or blame; ✿ Ah, may
       th' exchange secure thee every benison!
   Thou wast from hostile onset shield and firm defence, ✿ For us
       to baffle shafts and whistling spears to shun.
   I see this world is only cheat and vanity, ✿ Where man naught else
       must seek but please the Truthful One:
   Th' Empyrean's Lord allow thee bower of heavenly bliss, ✿ And wi'
       thy faithful friends The Guide show goodly wone:
   I bid thee last good e'en with sigh of bitter grief, ✿ Seeing the
       West in woe for lack of Easting Sun.

When the Wazir Dandan had finished his reciting, he wept with sore
weeping and the tears rained from his eyes like cushioned pearls. Then
came forward one who had been of Sharrkan's boon-companions in his cups
and he wept till ran in rills the drops, and he enumerated the dead
man's generous qualities, reciting the following pentastichs:—

  Where gone is Bounty since thy hand is turned to clay? ✿ And I
      in misery lie since thou wast ta'en away.
  See'st not, O litter-guide[457] (Heaven keep thee glad and gay!), ✿
      How tears adorn my cheeks, these furrowed wrinkles fray?
          A sight to joy thine eyes and fill thee with dismay.[458]
  By Allah ne'er this heart within I spoke of thee; ✿ Ah no! nor dared
      my sight to see thy brilliancy:
  Save that my tear-drops sorest wound have garred me dree ✿ Yea! and
      if e'er on other rest these eyne of me,
          May yearning draw their reins nor suffer sleep to see.

And when the man stinted reciting, Zau al-Makan and the Minister Dandan
wept and the whole army was moved to tears; after which all retired to
their tents, and the King turning to the Wazir took counsel with him
concerning the conduct of the campaign. On this wise the two passed days
and nights, while Zau al-Makan was weighed down with grief and mourning
till at last he said, "I long to hear stories and adventures of Kings
and tales of lover-folk enslaved by love; haply Allah may make this to
solace that which is on my heart of heavy anxiety, and stint and stay my
weeping and wailing." Quoth the Wazir, "If naught can dispel thy trouble
but hearing curious tales of Kings and people long gone before and
stories of folk enslaved by love of yore, and so forth, this thing were
easy, for I had no other business, in the lifetime of thy father (who
hath found mercy) than to relate stories and to repeat verses to him.
This very night I will tell thee a tale of a lover and his beloved, so
shall thy breast be broadened." When Zau al-Makan heard these words from
the Minister, his heart was set upon that which had been promised to him
and he did nothing but watch for the coming of the night, that he might
hear what the Wazir Dandan had to tell of the Kings of yore and
distracted lovers long gone before. And hardly would he believe that
night had fallen ere he bade light the wax-candles and the lamps and
bring all that was needful of meat and drink and perfume-gear, and what
not; and when all was in presence, he summoned the Wazir Dandan, and the
Emirs Rustam and Bahram and Tarkash and the Grand Chamberlain; then
waited till the whole party was seated before him; whereupon he turned
to the Minister and said, "Know, O Wazir, that night is come and hath
let down over us its veil of gloom, and we desire that thou tell us
those tales which thou promisedst us." Replied the Wazir, "With joy and
good will."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


             Now when it was the Hundred-and-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King Zau
al-Makan summoned the Wazir and the Chamberlain and Rustam and Bahram,
he turned towards the Minister Dandan and said, "Know, O Wazir, that
night is come and hath let down over us its veil of gloom, and we desire
that thou tell us those tales which thou promisedst us." Replied the
Wazir:—With love and gladness! Know, O auspicious King, that there
reached my ears a relation of a lover and a loved one and of the
discourse between them and what befel them of things rare and fair, a
story such as repelleth care from the heart and dispelleth sorrow like
unto that of the patriarch Jacob[459]; and it is as follows:—


             _TALE OF TAJ AL-MULUK AND THE PRINCESS DUNYA:
                       THE LOVER AND THE LOVED._

There stood in times long gone by behind the Mountains of Ispahan, a
city hight the Green City, wherein dwelt a King named Sulaymán Sháh. Now
he was a man of liberality and beneficence, of justice and integrity, of
generosity and sincerity, to whom travellers repaired from every
country, and his name was noised abroad in all regions and cities and he
reigned many a year in high worship and prosperity, save that he owned
neither wives nor children. He had a Minister who rivalled him in
goodness and generosity and it so happened that one day, he sent for him
and when he came into the presence said to him, "O my Wazir, my heart is
heavy and my patience is past and my force faileth me, for that I have
neither wife nor child. This is not the way of Kings who rule over all
men, princes and paupers; for they rejoice in leaving behind them
children and successors whereby are doubled their number and their
strength. Quoth the Prophet (whom Allah bless and keep!):—Marry ye,
increase ye, and multiply ye, that I may boast me of your superiority
over the nations on the Day of Resurrection. So what is thy rede, O
Wazir? Advise me of what course and contrivance be advisable!" When the
Minister heard these words, the tears sprang from his eyes in streams,
and he replied, "Far be it from me, O King of the Age, that I debate on
that which appertaineth to the Compassionate One! Wilt thou have me cast
into the fire by the All-powerful King's wrath and ire? Buy thee a
concubine." Rejoined the King, "Know, O Wazir, that when a sovereign
buyeth a female slave, he knoweth neither her rank nor her lineage and
thus he cannot tell if she be of simple origin that he may abstain from
her, or of gentle strain that he may be intimate in her companionship.
So, if he have commerce with her, haply she will conceive by him and her
son be a hypocrite, a man of wrath and a shedder of blood. Indeed the
like of such woman may be instanced by a salt and marshy soil, which if
one till for ever it yieldeth only worthless growth and no endurance
showeth; for it may be that her son will be obnoxious to his Lord's
anger, doing not what He biddeth him or abstaining from what He
forbiddeth him. Wherefore will I never become the cause of this through
the purchase of a concubine; and it is my desire that thou demand for me
in marriage the daughter of some one of the Kings, whose lineage is
known and whose loveliness hath renown. If thou can direct me to some
maiden of birth and piety of the daughters of Moslem Sovranty, I will
ask her in marriage and wed her in presence of witnesses, so may accrue
to me the favour of the Lord of all Creatures." Said the Wazir, "O King,
verily Allah hath fulfilled thy wish and hath brought thee to thy
desire;" presently adding, "Know, O King, it hath come to my knowledge
that King Zahr Shah,[460] Lord of the White Land, hath a daughter of
surpassing loveliness whose charms talk and tale fail to express: she
hath not her equal in this age, for she is perfect in proportion and
symmetry, black eyed as if Kohl-dyed and long locked, wee of waist and
heavy of hip. When she draweth nigh she seduceth and when she turneth
her back[461] she slayeth; she ravisheth heart and view and she looketh
even as saith of her the poet:—

  A thin-waist maid who shames the willow-wand; ✿ Nor sun nor moon
      can like her rising shine:
  'Tis as her honey-dew of lips were blent ✿ With wine, and pearls
      of teeth were bathed in wine;
  Her form, like heavenly Houri's, graceful slim; ✿ Fair face; and
      ruin dealt by glancing eyne:
  How many a dead-done man her eyes have slain ✿ Upon her way of love
      in ruin li'en:
  An live I she's my death! I'll say no more ✿ But dying without her
      vain were life of mine."

Now when the Wazir had made an end of describing that maiden, he said to
King Zahr Shah, "It is my counsel, O King, that thou despatch to her
father an ambassador, sagacious, experienced and trained in the ways of
the world, who shall courteously demand her in marriage for thee of her
sire; for in good sooth she hath not her equal in the far parts of the
world nor in the near." So shalt thou enjoy her lovely face in the way
of grace, and the Lord of Glory be content with thy case; for it is
reported of the Prophet (whom Allah bless and preserve!) that he said,
"There be no monkery in Al-Islam." At this the King was transported to
perfect joy; his breast was broadened and lightened; care and cark
ceased from him and he turned to the Wazir and said, "Know thou, O
Minister, that none shall fare about this affair save thou, by reason of
thy consummate intelligence and good breeding; wherefore hie thee home
and do all thou hast to do and get thee ready by the morrow and depart
and demand me in marriage this maiden, with whom thou hast occupied my
heart and thought; and return not to me but with her." Replied the
Wazir, "I hear and I obey." Then he hied to his own house and bade make
ready presents befitting Kings, of precious stones and things of price
and other matters light of load but weighty of worth, besides Rabite
steeds and coats of mail, such as David made[462] and chests of treasure
for which speech hath no measure. And the Wazir loaded the whole on
camels and mules, and set out attended by an hundred slave-girls with
flags and banners flaunting over his head. The King charged him to
return to him after a few days; and, when he was gone, Sulayman Shah lay
on coals of fire, engrossed night and day with desire; while the envoy
fared on without ceasing through gloom and light, spanning fertile field
and desert site, till but a day's march remained between him and the
city whereto he was bound. Here he sat him down on the banks of a river
and, summoning one of his confidants, bade him wend his way to King Zahr
Shah and announce his approach without delay. Quoth the messenger, "I
hear and I obey!" And he rode on in haste to that city and, as he was
about to enter therein, it so chanced that the King, who was sitting in
one of his pleasaunces before the city-gate, espied him as he was
passing the doors, and knowing him for a stranger, bade bring him before
the presence. So the messenger coming forward informed him of the
approach of the Wazir of the mighty King Sulayman Shah, Lord of the
Green Land and of the Mountains of Ispahan: whereat King Zahr Shah
rejoiced and welcomed him. Then he carried him to his palace and asked
him, "Where leavedst thou the Wazir?"; and he answered, "I left him in
early day on the banks of such a river and to-morrow he will reach thee,
Allah continue his favours to thee and have mercy upon thy parents!"
Thereupon King Zahr Shah commanded one of his Wazirs to take the better
part of his Grandees and Chamberlains and Lieutenants and Lords of the
land, and go out to meet the ambassador in honour of King Sulayman Shah;
for that his dominion extended over the country. Such was the case with
Zahr Shah; but as regards the Wazir he abode in his stead till night was
half spent[463] and then set out for the city; but when morning shone
and the sun rose upon hill and down, of a sudden he saw King Zahr Shah's
Wazir approaching him, with his Chamberlains and high Lords and Chief
Officers of the kingdom; and the two parties joined company at some
parasangs' distance from the city.[464] Thereat the Wazir made sure of
the success of his errand and saluted the escort, which ceased not
preceding him till they reached the King's palace and passed in before
him through the gate to the seventh vestibule, a place where none might
enter on horseback, for it was near to where the King sat. So the
Minister alighted and fared on a-foot till he came to a lofty saloon, at
whose upper end stood a marble couch, set with pearls and stones of
price, and having for legs four elephant's tusks. Upon it was a coverlet
of green satin purfled with red gold, and above it hung a canopy adorned
with pearls and gems, whereon sat King Zahr Shah, whilst his officers of
state stood in attendance before him. When the Wazir went in to him, he
composed his mind and, unbinding his tongue, displayed the oratory of
Wazirs and saluted the King in the language of eloquence——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


             Now when it was the Hundred-and-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Wazir of
King Sulayman Shah entered the presence of King Zahr Shah he composed
his mind and, unbinding his tongue, displayed the oratory of Wazirs and
saluted the King in the language of eloquence and improvised these
couplets:—

 He cometh robed and bending gracefully: ✿ O'er crop and cropper dews
     of grace sheds he:
 He charms; nor characts, spells nor gramarye ✿ May fend the glances
     of those eyne from thee:
 Say to the blamer, "Blame me not, for I ✿ From love of him will
     never turn to flee":
 My heart hath played me false while true to him, ✿ And Sleep, in
     love with him, abhorreth me:
 O heart! th'art not the sole who loveth him, ✿ So bide with him while
     I desertion dree:
 There's nought to joy mine ears with joyous sound ✿ Save praise of
     King Zahr Shah in jubilee:
 A King albeit thou leave thy life to win ✿ One look, that look
     were all-sufficiency:
 And if a pious prayer thou breathe for him, ✿ Shall join all
     Faithfuls in such pious gree:
 Folk of his realm! If any shirk his right ✿ For other hoping,
     gross Unfaith I see.

When the Wazir had ended his poetry, King Zahr Shah bade him draw near
and honoured him with the highmost honours; then, seating him by his own
side, smiled in his face and favoured him with a gracious reply. They
ceased not on this wise till the time of the under-meal when the
attendants brought forward the tables of food in that saloon and all ate
till they were sated; after which the tables were removed and those who
were in the assembly withdrew, leaving only the chief officers. Now when
the Minister saw this, he rose to his feet and, after complimenting the
King a second time and kissing the ground before him, spake as follows,
"O mighty King and dread Lord! I have travelled hither and have visited
thee upon a matter which shall bring thee peace, profit and prosperity:
and it is this, that I come as ambassador to thee, seeking in marriage
thy daughter, the noble and illustrious maid, from Sulayman Shah, a
Prince famed for justice and integrity, sincerity and generosity, Lord
of the Green Land and of the Mountains of Ispahan, who sendeth thee of
presents a store, and gifts of price galore, ardently desiring to become
thy son-in-law. But art thou inclined to him as he to thee?" He then
kept silence, awaiting a reply. When King Zahr Shah heard these words,
he sprang to his feet and kissed the ground respectfully before the
Wazir, while the bystanders were confounded at his condescension to the
ambassador and their minds were amazed. Then he praised Him who is the
Lord of Honour and Glory and replied (and he still standing), "O mighty
Wazir and illustrious Chief; hear thou what I say! Of a truth we are to
King Sulayman Shah of the number of his subjects, and we shall be
ennobled by his alliance and we covet it ardently; for my daughter is a
handmaid of his handmaidens, and it is my dearest desire that he may
become my stay and my reliable support." Then he summoned the Kazis and
the witnesses, who should bear testimony that King Sulayman Shah had
despatched his Wazir as proxy to conclude the marriage, and that King
Zahr Shah joyfully acted and officiated for his daughter. So the Kazis
concluded the wedding-contract and offered up prayers for the happiness
and prosperity of the wedded feres; after which the Wazir arose and,
fetching the gifts and rarities and precious things, laid them all
before the King. Then Zahr Shah occupied himself anent the fitting out
of his daughter and honourably entertained the Wazir and feasted his
subjects all, great and small; and for two months they held high
festival, omitting naught that could rejoice heart and eye. Now when all
things needful for the bride were ready, the King caused the tents to be
carried out and they pitched the camp within sight of the city, where
they packed the bride's stuffs in chests and gat ready the Greek
handmaids and Turkish slave-girls, and provided the Princess with great
store of precious treasures and costly jewels. Then he had made for her
a litter of red gold, inlaid with pearls and stones of price, and set
apart two mules to carry it; a litter which was like one of the chambers
of a palace, and within which she seemed as she were of the loveliest
Houris and it became as one of the pavilions of Paradise. And after they
had made bales of the treasures and monies, and had loaded them upon the
mules and camels, King Zahr Shah went forth with her for a distance of
three parasangs; after which he bade farewell to her and the Wazir and
those with him, and returned to his home in gladness and safety.
Thereupon the Wazir, faring with the King's daughter, pushed on and
ceased not his stages over desert ways——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


              Now when it was the Hundred-and-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir fared on
with the King's daughter and ceased not forcing his stages over desert
ways and hastened his best through nights and days, till there remained
between him and his city but three marches. Thereupon he sent forward to
King Sulayman Shah one who should announce the coming of the bride. The
King rejoiced thereat and bestowed on the messenger a dress of honour;
and bade his troops march forth in grand procession to meet the Princess
and her company for due worship and honour, and don their richest
apparel with banners flying over their heads. And his orders were
obeyed. He also commanded to cry throughout the city that neither
curtained damsel nor honoured lady nor time-ruptured crone should fail
to fare forth and meet the bride. So they all went out to greet her and
the grandest of them vied in doing her service and they agreed to bring
her to the King's palace by night. Moreover, the chief officers decided
to decorate the road and to stand in espalier of double line, whilst the
bride should pass by preceded by her eunuchs and serving-women and clad
in the gear her father had given her. So when she made her appearance,
the troops surrounded her, these of the right wing and those of the
left, and the litter ceased not advancing with her till she approached
the palace; nor remained any but came forth to gaze upon the Princess.
Drums were beaten and spears were brandished and horns blared and flags
fluttered and steeds pranced for precedence and scents shed fragrance
till they reached the Palace gate and the pages entered with the litter
through the Harim-wicket. The place shone with its splendours and the
walls glittered for the glamour of its gear. Now when night came, the
eunuchs threw open the doors of the bridal-chamber and stood surrounding
the chief entrance; whereupon the bride came forward and amid her
damsels she was like the moon among stars or an union shining on a
string of lesser pearls, and she passed into the bridal closet where
they had set for her a couch of alabaster inlaid with unions and jewels.
As soon as she had taken seat there, the King came in to her and Allah
filled his heart with her love so he abated her maidenhead and ceased
from him his trouble and disquiet. He abode with her well-nigh a month
but she had conceived by him the first night; and, when the month was
ended, he went forth and sat on his sofa of state, and dispensed justice
to his subjects, till the months of her pregnancy were accomplished. On
the last day of the ninth month, towards daybreak, the Queen was seized
with the pangs of labour; so she sat down on the stool of delivery and
Allah made the travail easy to her and she gave birth to a boy child, on
whom appeared auspicious signs. When the King heard of this, he joyed
with exceeding joy and rewarded the bearer of the good tidings with much
treasure; and of his gladness he went in to the child and kissed him
between the eyes and wondered at his brilliant loveliness; for in him
was approved the saying of the poet:—

   In the towering forts Allah throned him King, ✿ A lion, a star in
       the skies of reign:
   At his rising the spear and the throne rejoiced, ✿ The gazelle,
       the ostrich, the men of main:[465]
   Mount him not on the paps, for right soon he'll show ✿ That to
       throne on the war-steed's loins he's fain:
   And wean him from sucking of milk, for soon ✿ A sweeter drink,
       the foe's blood, he'll drain.

Then the midwives took the newborn child and cut the navel-cord and
darkened his eyelids with Kohl-powder[466] and named him Táj al-Mulúk
Khárán.[467] He was suckled at the breast of fond indulgence and was
reared in the lap of happy fortune; and thus his days ceased not running
and the years passing by till he reached the age of seven. Thereupon
Sulayman Shah summoned the doctors and learned men and bade them teach
his son writing and science and belle-lettres. This they continued to do
for some years, till he had learnt what was needful; and, when the King
saw that he was well grounded in whatso he desired, he took him out of
the teachers' and professors' hands and engaged for him a skilful
master, who taught him cavalarice and knightly exercises till the boy
attained the age of fourteen; and when he fared abroad on any occasion,
all who saw him were ravished by his beauty and made him the subject of
verse; and even pious men were seduced by his brilliant loveliness.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


              Now when it was the Hundred-and-tenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, That when Taj al-Muluk
Kharan, son of Sulayman Shah, became perfect in riding-craft and
excelled all those of his time, his excessive beauty, when he fared
abroad on any occasion, caused all who saw him to be ravished and to
make him the subject of verse; and even pious men were seduced by his
brilliant loveliness. Quoth the poet of him:—

   I clipt his form and wax'd drunk with his scent, ✿ Fair branch to
       whom Zephyr gave nutriment:
   Nor drunken as one who drinks wine, but drunk ✿ With night-draught
       his lips of the honey-dew lent:
   All beauty is shown in the all of him, ✿ Hence all human hearts he
       in hand hath hent:
   My mind, by Allah! shall ne'er unmind ✿ His love, while I wear
       life's chains till spent:
   If I live, in his love I'll live; if I die ✿ For pine and longing,
       "O blest!" I'll cry.

When he reached the eighteenth year of his age, tender down[468]
sprouted, on his side-face fresh with youth, from a mole upon one rosy
cheek and a second beauty-spot, like a grain of ambergris, adorned the
other; and he won the wits and eyes of every wight who looked on him,
even as saith the poet:—

   He is Caliph of Beauty in Yúsufs lieu, ✿ And all lovers fear when
       they sight his grace:
   Pause and gaze with me; on his cheek thou'lt sight ✿ The
       Caliphate's banner of sable hue.[469]

And as saith another:—

   Thy sight hath never seen a fairer sight, ✿ Of all things men can
       in the world espy,
   Than yon brown mole, that studs his bonny cheek ✿ Of rosy red
       beneath that jet black eye.

And as saith another:—

  I marvel seeing yon mole that serves his cheeks' bright flame ✿
      Yet burneth not in fire albeit Infidel[470];
  I wonder eke to see that apostolic glance, ✿ Miracle-working, though
      it work by magic spell:
  How fresh and bright the down that decks his cheek, and yet ✿
      Bursten gall-bladders feed which e'en as waters well.

And as saith another:—

   I marvel hearing people questioning of ✿ The Fount of Life and in
       what land 'tis found:
   I see it sprung from lips of dainty fawn, ✿ Sweet rosy mouth with
       green mustachio down'd:
   And wondrous wonder 'tis when Moses viewed ✿ That Fount, he rested
       not from weary round.[471]

Now having developed such beauty, when he came to man's estate his
loveliness increased, and it won for him many comrades and intimates;
while every one who drew near to him wished that Taj al-Muluk Kharan
might become Sultan after his father's death, and that he himself might
be one of his Emirs. Then took he passionately to chasing and hunting
which he would hardly leave for a single hour. His father, King Sulayman
Shah, would have forbidden him the pursuit fearing for him the perils of
the waste and the wild beasts; but he paid no heed to his warning voice.
And it so chanced that once upon a time he said to his attendants "Take
ye ten days food and forage;" and, when they obeyed his bidding, he set
out with his suite for sport and disport. They rode on into the desert
and ceased not riding four days, till they came to a place where the
ground was green, and they saw in it wild beasts grazing and trees with
ripe fruit growing and springs flowing. Quoth Taj al-Muluk to his
followers, "Set up the nets here and peg them in a wide ring and let our
trysting place be at the mouth of the fence, in such a spot." So they
obeyed his words and staked out a wide circle with toils; and there
gathered together a mighty matter of all kinds of wild beasts and
gazelles, which cried out for fear of the men and threw themselves for
fright in the face of the horses. Then they loosed on to them the hounds
and lynxes[472] and hawks;[473] and they shot the quarry down with
shafts which pierced their vitals; and, by the time they came to the
further end of the net-ring, they had taken a great number of the wild
beasts, and the rest fled. Then Taj al-Muluk dismounted by the
water-side and bade the game be brought before himself, and divided it,
after he had set apart the best of the beasts for his father, King
Sulayman Shah, and despatched the game to him; and some he distributed
among the officers of his court. He passed the night in that place, and
when morning dawned there came up a caravan of merchants conveying negro
slaves and white servants, and halted by the water and the green ground.
When Taj al-Muluk saw them, he said to one of his companions, "Bring me
news of yonder men and question them why they have halted in this
place.[474]" So the messenger went up to them and addressed them, "Tell
me who ye be, and answer me an answer without delay." Replied they, "We
are merchants and have halted to rest, for that the next station is
distant and we abide here because we have confidence in King Sulayman
Shah and his son, Taj al-Muluk, and we know that all who alight in his
dominions are in peace and safety; moreover we have with us precious
stuffs which we have brought for the Prince." So the messenger returned
and told these news to the King's son who, hearing the state of the case
and what the merchants had replied, said, "If they have brought stuff on
my account I will not enter the city nor depart hence till I see it
shown to me." Then he mounted horse and rode to the caravan and his
Mamelukes followed him till he reached it. Thereupon the merchants rose
to receive him and invoked on him Divine aid and favour with continuance
of glory and virtues; after which they pitched him a pavilion of red
satin, embroidered with pearls and jewels, wherein they spread him a
kingly divan upon a silken carpet worked at the upper end with emeralds
set in gold. There Taj al-Muluk seated himself whilst his white servants
stood in attendance upon him, and sent to bid the merchants bring out
all that they had with them. Accordingly, they produced their
merchandise, and displayed the whole and he viewed it and took of it
what liked him, paying them the price. Then he looked about him at the
caravan, and remounted and was about to ride onwards, when his glance
fell on a handsome youth in fair attire, and of comely and shapely make,
with flower-white brow and moon-like face, save that his beauty was
wasted and that yellow hues had overspread his cheeks by reason of
parting from those he loved;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


            Now when it was the Hundred-and-eleventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Taj al-Muluk, when
he looked about him at the caravan, saw a handsome youth in neat attire
and of shapely make, with flower-like forehead and moon-like face, save
that his beauty was wasted and yellow hues had overspread his cheeks by
reason of parting from those he loved; and great was his groaning and
moaning, and the tears streamed from his eyelids as he repeated these
couplets:—

  Longsome is Absence; Care and Fear are sore, ✿ And ceaseless tears,
      O friend, mine eyes outpour:
  Yea, I farewelled my heart on parting-day ✿ And heartless,
      hopeless, now I bide forlore:
  Pause, O my friend, with me farewelling one ✿ Whose words my cure
      can work, my health restore!

Now when the youth ended his poetry he wept awhile and fell down in a
fainting-fit, whilst Taj al-Muluk looked at him and wondered at his
case. Then, coming to himself, he stared with distracted air, and
versified in these couplets:—

   Beware her glance I rede thee, 'tis like wizard-wight, ✿ None
       can escape unscathed those eye-shafts' glancing flight:
   In very sooth black eyes, with languorous sleepy look, ✿ Pierce
       deeper than white swords however these may bite.
   Be not thy senses by her sweets of speech beguiled, ✿ Whose
       brooding fever shall ferment in thought and sprite:
   Soft-sided Fair,[475] did silk but press upon her skin, ✿ 'Twould
       draw red blood from it, as thou thyself canst sight.
   Chary is she of charms twixt neck and anklets dwell; ✿ And ah!
       what other scent shall cause me such delight?[476]

Then he sobbed a loud sob and swooned away. But when Taj al-Muluk saw
him in this case, he was perplexed about his state and went up to him;
and, as the youth came to his senses and saw the King's son standing at
his head, he sprang to his feet and kissed the ground between his hands.
Taj al-Muluk asked him, "Why didst thou not show us thy merchandise?"
and he answered, "O my lord, there is naught among my stock worthy of
thine august highness." Quoth the Prince, "Needs must thou show me what
thou hast and acquaint me with thy circumstance; for I see thee
weeping-eyed and heavy-hearted. If thou have been oppressed, we will end
thine oppression, and if thou be in debt, we will pay thy debt; for of a
truth my heart burneth to see thee, since I first set eyes on
thee."[477] Then Taj al-Muluk bade the seats be set, and they brought
him a chair of ivory and ebony with a net-work of gold and silk, and
spread him a silken rug for his feet. So he sat down on the chair and
bidding the youth seat himself on the rug said to him, "Show me thy
stock in trade!" The young merchant replied, "O my Lord, do not name
this to me, for my goods be unworthy of thee." Rejoined Taj al-Muluk,
"It needs must be thus!"; and bade some of the pages fetch the goods. So
they brought them in despite of him; and, when he saw them, the tears
streamed from his eyes and he wept and sighed and lamented; sobs rose in
his throat and he repeated these couplets:—

     By what thine eyelids show of Kohl and coquetry! ✿ By what thy
         shape displays of lissome symmetry!
     By what thy liplets store of honey-dew and wine! ✿ By what thy
         mind adorns of gracious kindly gree!
     To me thy sight dream-visioned, O my hope! exceeds ✿ The
         happiest escape from horriblest injury.

Then the youth opened his bales and displayed his merchandise to Taj
al-Muluk in detail, piece by piece, and amongst them he brought out a
gown of satin brocaded with gold, worth two thousand dinars. When he
opened the gown there fell a piece of linen from its folds. As soon as
the young merchant saw this, he caught up the piece of linen in haste
and hid it under his thigh; and his reason wandered, and he began
versifying:—

  When shall be healed of thee this heart that ever bides in woe? ✿
      Than thee the Pleiad-stars more chance of happy meeting show.
  Parting and banishment and longing pain and lowe of love,
      ✿ Procrastinating[478] and delay—these ills my life lay low:
  Nor union bids me live in joy, nor parting kills by grief, ✿ Nor
      travel draws me nearer thee nor nearer comest thou:
  Of thee no justice may be had, in thee dwells naught of ruth; ✿
      Nor gain of grace by side of thee, nor flight from thee I know:
  For love of thee all goings forth and comings back are strait ✿ On
      me; and I am puzzled sore to know where I shall go.

Taj al-Muluk wondered with great wonder at his verse, and could not
comprehend the cause. But when the youth snatched up the bit of linen
and placed it under thigh, he asked him, "What is that piece of linen?"
"O my Lord," answered the merchant, "thou hast no concern with this
piece." Quoth the King's son, "Show it me;" and quoth the merchant, "O
my Lord, I refused to show thee my goods on account of this piece of
linen; for I cannot let thee look upon it."——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


             Now when it was the Hundred-and-twelfth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young merchant
said to Taj al-Muluk, "I did not refuse to show thee my goods save on
this account, for I cannot let thee look upon it." Whereupon Taj
al-Muluk retorted, "Perforce I must and will see it;" and insisted and
became angry. So the youth drew it out from under his thigh, and wept
and moaned and redoubled his sighs and groans, and repeated these
verses:—

  Now blame him not; for blame brings only irk and pain! ✿ Indeed,
      I spake him sooth but ne'er his ear could gain:
  May Allah guard my moon which riseth in the vale ✿ Beside our
      camp, from loosed robe like skyey plain:[479]
  I left him but had Love vouchsafed to leave for me ✿ Some peace in
      life such leave of him I ne'er had ta'en:
  How long he pleaded for my sake on parting morn, ✿ While down
      his cheeks and mine tears ran in railing rain:
  Allah belie me not: the garb of mine excuse ✿ This parting rent, but
      I will mend that garb again!
  No couch is easy to my side, nor on such wise ✿ Aught easeth him,
      when all alone without me lain:
  Time with ill-omened hand hath wrought between us two, ✿ And made
      my waxing joys to wane and his to wane,
  And poured mere grief and woe, what time Time fain had crowned ✿
      The bowl he made me drink and gave for him to drain.

When he ended his recitation, quoth Taj al-Muluk, "I see thy conduct
without consequence; tell me then why weepest thou at the sight of this
rag!" When the young merchant heard speak of the piece of linen, he
sighed and answered, "O my lord, my story is a strange and my case out
of range, with regard to this piece of linen and to her from whom I
brought it and to her who wrought on it these figures and emblems."
Hereupon, he spread out the piece of linen, and behold, thereon was the
figure of a gazelle wrought in silk and worked with red gold, and facing
it was another gazelle traced in silver with a neck-ring of red gold and
three bugles[480] of chrysolite upon the ring. When Taj al-Muluk saw the
beauty of these figures, he exclaimed, "Glory be to Allah who teacheth
man that which he knoweth not!"[481] And his heart yearned to hear the
youth's story; so he said to him, "Tell me thy story with her who owned
these gazelles." Replied the young man:—Hear, O my Lord, the


                    _TALE OF AZIZ AND AZIZAH._[482]

My father was a wealthy merchant and Allah had vouchsafed him no other
child than myself; but I had a cousin, Azízah hight, daughter of my
paternal uncle and we twain were brought up in one house; for her father
was dead and before his death, he had agreed with my father that I
should marry her. So when I reached man's estate and she reached
womanhood, they did not separate her from me or me from her, till at
last my father spoke to my mother and said, "This very year we will draw
up the contract of marriage between Aziz and Azizah." So having agreed
upon this he betook himself to preparing provision for the
wedding-feast. Still we ceased not to sleep on the same carpet knowing
naught of the case, albeit she was more thoughtful, more intelligent and
quicker-witted than I. Now when my father had made an end of his
preparations, and naught remained for him but to write out the contract
and for me but to consummate the marriage with my cousin, he appointed
the wedding for a certain Friday, after public prayers; and, going round
to his intimates among the merchants and others, he acquainted them with
that, whilst my mother went forth and invited her women friends and
summoned her kith and kin. When the Friday came, they cleaned the saloon
and prepared for the guests and washed the marble floor; then they
spread tapestry about our house and set out thereon what was needful,
after they had hung its walls with cloth of gold. Now the folk had
agreed to come to us after the Friday prayers; so my father went out and
bade them make sweetmeats and sugared dishes, and there remained nothing
to do but to draw up the contract. Then my mother sent me to the bath
and sent after me a suit of new clothes of the richest; and, when I came
out of the Hammam, I donned those habits which were so perfumed that as
I went along, there exhaled from them a delicious fragrance scenting the
wayside. I had designed to repair to the Cathedral-mosque, when I
bethought me of one of my friends and returned in quest of him that he
might be present at the writing of the contract; and quoth I to myself,
"This matter will occupy me till near the time of congregational
prayer." So I went on and entered a by-street which I had never before
entered, perspiring profusely from the effects of the bath and the new
clothes on my body; and the sweat streamed down whilst the scents of my
dress were wafted abroad: I therefore sat me at the upper end of the
street resting on a stone bench, after spreading under me an embroidered
kerchief I had with me. The heat oppressed me more and more, making my
forehead perspire and the drops trickled along my cheeks; but I could
not wipe my face with my kerchief because it was dispread under me. I
was about to take the skirt of my robe and wipe my cheeks with it, when
unexpectedly there fell on me from above a white kerchief, softer to the
touch than the morning breeze and pleasanter to the sight than healing
to the diseased. I hent it in hand and raised my head to see whence it
had fallen, when my eyes met the eyes of the lady who owned these
gazelles.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


           Now when it was the Hundred-and-thirteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the youth
continued to Taj al-Muluk:—So I raised my head to see whence this
kerchief had fallen, when my eyes met those of the lady who owned these
gazelles. And lo! she was looking out of a wicket in a lattice of brass
and never saw my eyes a fairer than she; and in fine my tongue faileth
to describe her beauty. When she caught sight of me looking at her, she
put her forefinger into her mouth, then joined her middle finger and her
witness-finger[483] and laid them on her bosom, between her breasts;
after which she drew in her head and closed the wicket-shutter and went
her ways. Thereupon fire broke out in and was heaped upon my heart, and
greater grew my smart; the one sight cost me a thousand sighs and I
abode perplexed, for that I heard no word by her spoken, nor understood
the meaning of her token. I looked at the window a second time, but
found it shut and waited patiently till sundown, but sensed no sound and
saw no one in view. So when I despaired of seeing her again, I rose from
my place and taking up the handkerchief, opened it, when there breathed
from it a scent of musk which caused me so great delight I became as one
in Paradise.[484] Then I spread it before me and out dropped from it a
delicate little scroll; whereupon I opened the paper which was perfumed
with a delicious perfume, and therein were writ these couplets:—

    I sent to him a scroll that bore my plaint of love, ✿ Writ in
        fine delicate hand; for writing proves man's skill:
    Then quoth to me my friend, "Why is thy writing thus; ✿ So fine,
        so thin-drawn 'tis to read unsuitable?"
    Quoth I, "For that I'm fine-drawn, wasted, waxed thin; ✿ Thus
        lovers' writ should be, for so Love wills his will."

And after casting my eyes on the beauty of the kerchief,[485] I saw upon
one of its two borders the following couplets worked in with the
needle:—

  His cheek-down writeth (O fair fall the goodly scribe!) ✿ Two lines
      on table of his face in Rayhán-hand:[486]
  O the wild marvel of the Moon when comes he forth! ✿ And when he
      bends, O shame to every Willow-wand!

And on the opposite border these two couplets were traced:—

   His cheek-down writeth on his cheek with ambergris on pearl ✿
       Two lines, like jet on apple li'en, the goodliest design:
   Slaughter is in those languid eyne whene'er a glance they deal, ✿
       And drunkenness in either cheek and not in any wine.

When I read the poetry on the handkerchief the flames of love darted
into my heart, and yearning and pining redoubled their smart. So I took
the kerchief and the scroll and went home, knowing no means to win my
wish, for that I was incapable of conducting love-affairs and
inexperienced in interpreting hints and tokens. Nor did I reach my home
ere the night was far spent and I found the daughter of my uncle sitting
in tears. But as soon as she saw me she wiped away the drops and came up
to me, and took off my walking dress and asked me the reason of my
absence, saying, "All the folk, Emirs and notables and merchants and
others, assembled in our house; and the Kazi and the witnesses were also
present at the appointed time. They ate and tarried awhile sitting to
await thine appearance for the writing of the contract; and, when they
despaired of thy presence, they dispersed and went their ways. And
indeed," she added, "thy father raged with exceeding wrath by reason of
this, and swore that he would not celebrate our marriage save during the
coming year, for that he hath spent on these festivities great store of
money." And she ended by asking, "What hath befallen thee this day to
make thee delay till now?; and why hast thou allowed that to happen
which happened because of thine absence?" Answered I, "O daughter of
mine uncle, question me not concerning what hath befallen me."[487] Then
I told her all that had passed from beginning to end, and showed her the
handkerchief. She took the scroll and read what was written therein; and
tears ran down her cheeks and she repeated these cinquains:—

   Who saith that Love at first of free will came, ✿ Say him:—Thou
       liest! Love be grief and grame:
   Yet shall such grame and grief entail no shame; ✿ All annals teach
       us one thing and the same—
           Good current coin clipt coin we may not clepe!

   An please thou, say there's pleasure in thy pain, ✿ Find
       Fortune's playful gambols glad and fain:
   Or happy blessings in th' unhappy's bane, ✿ That joy or grieve
       with equal might and main:—
           'Twixt phrase and antiphrase I'm all a-heap!

   But he, withal, whose days are summer-bright, ✿ Whom maids e'er
       greet with smiling lips' delight;
   Whom spicey breezes fan in every site ✿ And wins whate'er he
       wills, that happy wight
           White-blooded coward heart should never keep!

Then she asked me, "What said she, and what signs made she to thee?" I
answered, "She uttered not a word, but put her forefinger in her mouth,
then joining it to her middle finger, laid both fingers on her bosom and
pointed to the ground. Thereupon she withdrew her head and shut the
wicket; and after that I saw her no more. However, she took my heart
with her, so I sat till sundown, expecting her again to look out of the
window; but she did it not; and, when I despaired of her, I rose from my
seat and came home. This is my history and I beg thee to help me in this
my sore calamity." Upon this she raised her face to me and said, "O son
of mine uncle, if thou soughtest my eye, I would tear it for thee from
its eyelids, and perforce I cannot but aid thee to thy desire and aid
her also to her desire; for she is whelmed in passion for thee even as
thou for her." Asked I, "And what is the interpretation of her signs?";
and Azizah answered, "As for the putting her finger in her mouth,[488]
it showed that thou art to her as her soul to her body and that she
would bite into union with thee with her wisdom teeth. As for the
kerchief, it betokeneth that her breath of life is bound up in thee. As
for the placing her two fingers on her bosom between her breasts, its
explanation is that she saith:—The sight of thee may dispel my grief.
For know, O my cousin, that she loveth thee and she trusteth in thee.
This is my interpretation of her signs and, could I come and go at will,
I would bring thee and her together in shortest time, and curtain you
both with my skirt." Hearing these words I thanked her (continued the
young merchant) for speaking thus, and said to myself, "I will wait two
days." So I abode two days in the house, neither going out nor coming
in; neither eating nor drinking but I laid my head on my cousin's lap,
whilst she comforted me and said to me, "Be resolute and of good heart
and hope for the best!"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Hundred-and-fourteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the youth pursued
to Taj al-Muluk:—And when the two days were past she said to me, "Be of
good cheer and clear thine eyes of tears and take courage to dress
thyself and go to her, according to thy tryst." Then she rose and
changed my clothes and perfumed me with incense-smoke. So I braced
myself up and heartened my heart and went out and walked on till I came
to the by-street, where I sat down on the bench awhile. And behold, the
wicket suddenly opened and I looked up and seeing her, fell down in a
swoon. When I revived, I called up resolution and took courage and gazed
again at her and again became insensible to the world around me. Then I
came to myself and looking at her, saw that she held in hand a mirror
and a red kerchief. Now when she caught my glance, she bared her
fore-arms and opened her five fingers and smote her breast with palm and
digits; and after this she raised her hands and, holding the mirror
outside the wicket, she took the red kerchief and retired into the room
with it, but presently returned and putting out her hand with the
kerchief, let it down towards the lane three several times, dipping it
and raising it as often. Then she wrung it out and folded it in her
hands, bending down her head the while; after which she drew it in from
the lattice and, shutting the wicket-shutter, went away without a single
word; nay, she left me confounded and knowing not what signified her
signs.[489] I tarried sitting there till supper-time and did not return
home till near midnight; and there I found the daughter of my uncle with
her cheek propt in her hand and her eyelids pouring forth tears; and she
was repeating these couplets:—

   Woe's me! why should the blamer gar thee blaming trow? ✿ How
       be consoled for thee that art so tender bough?
   Bright being! on my vitals dost thou prey, and drive ✿ My heart
       before platonic passion's[490] force to bow.
   Thy Turk-like[491] glances havoc deal in core of me, ✿ As
       furbished sword thin-ground at curve could never show:
   Thou weigh'st me down with weight of care, while I have not ✿
       Strength e'en to bear my shift, so weakness lays me low:
   Indeed I weep blood-tears to hear the blamer say:—✿ "The lashes of
       thy lover's eyne shall pierce thee through!"
   Thou hast, my prince of loveliness! an Overseer,[492] ✿ Who wrongs
       me, and a Groom[493] who beats me down with brow.
   He foully lies who says all loveliness belonged ✿ To Joseph, in
       thy loveliness is many a Joe:
   I force myself to turn from thee, in deadly fright ✿ Of spies; and
       what the force that turns away my sight!

When I heard her verse, cark increased and care redoubled on me and I
fell down in a corner of our house; whereupon she arose in haste and,
coming to me, lifted me up and took off my outer clothes and wiped my
face with her sleeve. Then she asked me what had befallen me, and I
described all that had happened from her. Quoth she, "O my cousin, as
for her sign to thee with her palm and five fingers its interpretation
is, Return after five days; and the putting forth of her head out of the
window, and her gestures with the mirror and the letting down and
raising up and wringing out of the red kerchief,[494] signify, Sit in
the dyer's shop till my messenger come to thee." When I heard her words
fire flamed up in my heart and I exclaimed, "O daughter of my uncle,
thou sayest sooth in this thine interpretation; for I saw in the street
the shop of a Jew dyer." Then I wept, and she said, "Be of good cheer
and strong heart: of a truth others are occupied with love for years and
endure with constancy the ardour of passion, whilst thou hast but a week
to wait; why then this impatience?" Thereupon she went on cheering me
with comfortable talk and brought me food: so I took a mouthful and
tried to eat but could not; and I abstained from meat and drink and
estranged myself from the solace of sleep, till my colour waxed yellow
and I lost my good looks; for I had never been in love before nor had I
ever savoured the ardour of passion save this time. So I fell sick and
my cousin also sickened on my account; but she would relate to me, by
way of consolation, stories of love and lovers every night till I fell
asleep; and whenever I awoke, I found her wakeful for my sake with tears
running down her cheeks. This ceased not till the five days were past,
when my cousin rose and warmed some water and bathed me with it. Then
she dressed me in my best and said to me, "Repair to her and Allah
fulfil thy wish and bring thee to thy desire of thy beloved!" So I went
out and ceased not walking on till I came to the upper end of the
by-street. As it was the Sabbath[495] I found the dyer's shop locked and
sat before it, till I heard the call to mid afternoon prayer. Then the
sun yellowed and the Mu'ezzins[496] chanted the call to sundown-prayer
and the night came; but I saw no sign nor heard one word, nor knew any
news of her. So I feared for my life sitting there alone; and at last I
arose and walked home reeling like a drunken man. When I reached the
house, I found my cousin Azizah standing, with one hand grasping a peg
driven into the wall and the other on her breast; and she was sighing
and groaning and repeating these couplets:—

  The longing of an Arab lass forlorn of kith and kin ✿ (Who to
      Hijázian willow-wand and myrtle[497] doth incline,
  And who, when meeting caravan, shall with love-lowe set light ✿
      To bivouac-fire, and bring for drink her tears of pain and pine)
  Exceeds not mine for him nor more devotion shows, but he ✿ Seeing
      my heart is wholly his spurns love as sin indign.

Now when she had finished her verse she turned to me and, seeing me,
wiped away her tears and my tears with her sleeve. Then she smiled in my
face and said, "O my cousin, Allah grant thee enjoyment of that which He
hath given thee! Why didst thou not pass the night by the side of thy
beloved and why hast thou not fulfilled thy desire of her?" When I heard
her words, I gave her a kick in the breast and she fell down in the
saloon and her brow struck upon the edge of the raised pavement and hit
against a wooden peg therein. I looked at her and saw that her forehead
was cut open and the blood running——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


            Now when it was the Hundred-and-fifteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young merchant
continued to Taj al-Muluk:—Now when I kicked the daughter of my uncle in
the breast she fell on the edge of the raised pavement in the saloon and
her brow struck upon a wooden peg. Thereby her forehead was cut open and
the blood ran down, but she was silent and did not utter a single
sound.[498] Presently she rose up, and made some tinder of rags, then
staunching with it the bleeding wound, bound her forehead with a
bandage; after which she wiped up the blood that had fallen on the
carpet, and it was as if nothing had been. Presently she came up to me
and smiling in my face, said with gentle voice, "By Allah, O son of my
uncle, I spake not these words to mock at thee or at her! But I was
troubled with an ache in my head and was minded to be blooded, but now
thou hast eased my head and lightened my brow; so tell me what hath
befallen thee to-day." Thereupon I told her all that had passed between
me and her that day; and she wept as she heard my words and said, "O son
of my uncle, rejoice at the good tidings of thy desire being fulfilled
and thine aim being attained. Of a truth this is a sign of acceptance;
for that she stayed away only because she wisheth to try thee and know
if thou be patient or not, and sincere in thy love for her or otherwise.
To-morrow, repair to her at the old place and see what sign she maketh
to thee; for indeed thy gladness is near and the end of thy sadness is
at hand." And she went on to comfort me; but my cark and care ceased not
to increase on me. Presently she brought me food which I kicked away
with my foot so that the contents of every saucer were scattered in all
directions, and I said, "Every lover is a madman; he inclineth not to
food neither enjoyeth he sleep." And my cousin Azizah rejoined, "By
Allah, O son of my uncle, these be in very deed the signs of love!" And
the tears streamed down her cheeks whenas she gathered the fragments of
the saucers and wiped up the food; then she took seat and talked to me,
whilst I prayed Allah to hasten the dawn. At last, when morning arose
with its sheen and shine, I went out to seek her and hastening to her
by-street sat down on that bench, when lo! the wicket opened and she put
out her head laughing. Then she disappeared within and returned with a
mirror, a bag, and a pot full of green plants and she held in hand a
lamp. The first thing she did was to take the mirror and, putting it
into the bag, tie it up and throw it back into the room; then she let
down her hair over her face and set the lamp on the pot of flowers
during the twinkling of an eye; then she took up all the things and went
away shutting the window without saying a word. My heart was riven by
this state of the case, and by her secret signals, her mysterious
secrets and her utter silence; and thereby my longing waxed more violent
and my passion and distraction redoubled on me. So I retraced my steps,
tearful-eyed and heavy-hearted, and returned home, where I found the
daughter of my uncle sitting with her face to the wall; for her heart
was burning with grief and galling jealousy; albeit her affection
forbade her to acquaint me with what she suffered of passion and pining
when she saw the excess of my longing and distraction. Then I looked at
her and saw on her head two bandages, one on account of the accident to
her forehead and the other over her eye in consequence of the pain she
endured for stress of weeping; and she was in miserable plight shedding
tears and repeating these couplets:—

   I number rights; indeed I count night after night; ✿ Yet lived I
       long ere learnt so sore accompt to see, ah!
   Dear friend, I compass not what Allah pleased to doom ✿ For Laylá,
       nor what Allah destinèd for me, ah!
   To other giving her and unto me her love, ✿ What loss but Layla's
       loss would He I ever dree, ah!

And when she had finished her reciting, she looked towards me and seeing
me through her tears, wiped them away and came up to me hastily, but
could not speak for excess of love. So she remained silent for some
while and then said, "O my cousin, tell me what befel thee with her this
time." I told her all that had passed and she said, "Be patient, for the
time of thy union is come and thou hast attained the object of thy
hopes. As for her signal to thee with the mirror which she put in the
bag, it said to thee, When the sun is set; and the letting down of her
hair over her face signified, When night is near and letteth fall the
blackness of the dark and hath starkened the daylight, come hither. As
for her gesture with the pot of green plants it meant, When thou comest,
enter the flower-garden which is behind the street; and as for her sign
with the lamp it denoted, When thou enterest the flower-garden walk down
it and make for the place where thou seest the lamp shining; and seat
thyself beneath it and await me; for the love of thee is killing me."
When I heard these words from my cousin, I cried out from excess of
passion and said, "How long wilt thou promise me and I go to her, but
get not my will nor find any true sense in thine interpreting." Upon
this she laughed and replied, "It remaineth for thee but to have
patience during the rest of this day till the light darken and the night
starken and thou shalt enjoy union and accomplish thy hopes; and indeed
all my words be without leasing. Then she repeated these two couplets:—

    Let days their folds and plies deploy, ✿ And shun the house that
        deals annoy!
    Full oft when joy seems farthest far ✿ Thou nighmost art to hour
        of joy."

Then she drew near to me and began to comfort me with soothing speech,
but dared not bring me aught of food, fearing lest I be angry with her
and hoping I might incline to her; so when coming to me she only took
off my upper garment and said to me, "Sit O my cousin, that I may divert
thee with talk till the end of the day and, Almighty Allah willing, as
soon as it is night thou shalt be with thy beloved." But I paid no heed
to her and ceased not looking for the approach of darkness, saying, "O
Lord, hasten the coming of the night!" And when night set in, the
daughter of my uncle wept with sore weeping and gave me a crumb of pure
musk, and said to me, "O my cousin, put this crumb in thy mouth, and
when thou hast won union with thy beloved and hast taken thy will of her
and she hath granted thee thy desire, repeat to her this couplet:—

   Ho, lovers all! by Allah say me sooth ✿ What shall he do when love
       sore vexeth youth?[499]"

And she kissed me and swore me not to repeat this couplet till I should
be about to leave my lover and I said, "Hearing is obeying!" And when it
was supper-tide I went out and ceased not walking on till I came to the
flower-garden whose door I found open. So I entered and, seeing a light
in the distance, made towards it and reaching it, came to a great
pavilion vaulted over with a dome of ivory and ebony, and the lamp hung
from the midst of the dome. The floor was spread with silken carpets
embroidered in gold and silver, and under the lamp stood a great candle,
burning in a candelabrum of gold. In mid-pavilion was a fountain adorned
with all manner of figures;[500] and by its side stood a table covered
with a silken napkin, and on its edge a great porcelain bottle full of
wine, with a cup of crystal inlaid with gold. Near all these was a large
tray of silver covered over, and when I uncovered it I found therein
fruits of every kind, figs and pomegranates, grapes and oranges, citrons
and shaddocks[501] disposed amongst an infinite variety of sweet-scented
flowers, such as rose, jasmine, myrtle, eglantine, narcissus and all
sorts of sweet-smelling herbs. I was charmed with the place and I joyed
with exceeding joy, albeit I found not there a living soul and my grief
and anxiety ceased from me.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day,
and ceased to say her permitted say.


            Now when it was the Hundred-and-sixteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young merchant
continued to Taj al-Muluk:—I was charmed with the place and joyed with
great joy albeit there I found not a living soul of Almighty Allah's
creatures, and saw nor slave nor handmaid to oversee these things or to
watch and ward these properties. So I sat down in the pavilion to await
the coming of the beloved of my heart; but the first hour of the night
passed by, and the second hour, and the third hour, and still she came
not. Then hunger grew sore upon me, for that it was long since I had
tasted food by reason of the violence of my love: but when I found the
place even as my cousin had told me, and saw the truth of her
interpretation of my beloved's signs, my mind was set at rest and I felt
the pangs of hunger; moreover, the odour of the viands on the table
excited me to eat. So making sure of attaining my desire, and being
famished for food I went up to the table and raised the cover and found
in the middle a china dish containing four chickens reddened with
roasting and seasoned with spices, round the which were four saucers,
one containing sweetmeats, another conserve of pomegranate-seeds, a
third almond-pastry[502] and a fourth honey fritters; and the contents
of these saucers were part sweet and part sour. So I ate of the fritters
and a piece of meat, then went on to the almond-cakes and ate what I
could; after which I fell upon the sweetmeats, whereof I swallowed a
spoonful or two or three or four, ending with part of a chicken and a
mouthful of something beside. Upon this my stomach became full and my
joints loose and I waxed too drowsy to keep awake; so I laid my head on
a cushion, after having washed my hands, and sleep overcame me; I knew
not what happened to me after this, and I awoke not till the sun's heat
scorched me, for that I had never once tasted sleep for days past. When
I awoke I found on my stomach a piece of salt and a bit of charcoal; so
I stood up and shook my clothes and turned to look right and left, but
could see no one; and discovered that I had been sleeping on the marble
pavement without bedding beneath me. I was perplexed thereat and
afflicted with great affliction; the tears ran down my cheeks and I
mourned for myself. Then I returned home, and when I entered, I found my
cousin beating her hand on her bosom and weeping tears like
rain-shedding clouds; and she versified with these couplets:—

   Blows from my lover's land a Zephyr cooly sweet, ✿ And with its
       every breath makes olden love new glow:
   O Zephyr of the morning hour, come show to us ✿ Each lover hath
       his lot, his share of joy and woe:
   Could I but win one dearest wish, we had embraced ✿ With what
       embrace and clip of breast fond lovers know.
   Allah forbids, while bides unseen my cousin's face, ✿ All joys
       the World can give or hand of Time bestow.
   Would Heaven I knew his heart were like this heart of me, ✿ Melted
       by passion-flame and charged with longing lowe.

When she saw me, she rose in haste and wiped away her tears and
addressed me with her soft speech, saying, "O son of my uncle, verily
Allah hath been gracious to thee in thy love, for that she whom thou
lovest loveth thee, whilst I pass my time in weeping and bewailing my
severance from thee who blamest me and chidest me; but may Allah not
punish thee for my sake!" Thereupon she smiled in my face a smile of
reproach and caressed me; then taking off my walking clothes, she spread
them out and said, "By Allah, this is not the scent of one who hath
enjoyed his lover! So tell me what hath befallen thee, O my cousin." I
told her all that had passed, and she smiled again a smile of reproach
and said, "Verily, my heart is full of pain; but may he not live who
would hurt thy heart! Indeed, this woman maketh herself inordinately
dear and difficult to thee, and by Allah, O son of my uncle, I fear for
thee from her.[503] Know, O my cousin, that the meaning of the salt is
thou wast drowned in sleep like insipid food, disgustful to the taste;
and it is as though she said to thee:—It behoveth thou be salted lest
the stomach eject thee; for thou professest to be of the lovers noble
and true; but sleep is unlawful and to a lover undue; therefore is thy
love but a lie. However, it is her love for thee that lieth; for she saw
thee asleep yet aroused thee not and were her love for thee true, she
had indeed awoken thee. As for the charcoal, it means Allah blacken thy
face[504] for thou makest a lying pretence of love, whereas thou art
naught but a child and hast no object in life other than eating and
drinking and sleeping! such is the interpretation of her signs, and may
Allah Almighty deliver thee from her!" When I heard my cousin's words, I
beat my hand upon my breast and cried out, "By Allah, this is the very
truth, for I slept and lovers sleep not! Indeed I have sinned against
myself, for what could have wrought me more hurt than eating and
sleeping? Now what shall I do?" Then I wept sore and said to the
daughter of my uncle, "Tell me how to act and have pity on me, so may
Allah have pity on thee: else I shall die." As my cousin loved me with
very great love,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Hundred-and-seventeenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young merchant
continued his tale to Taj al-Muluk:—Thereupon quoth I to the daughter of
my uncle, "Tell me what to do and have pity on me, so may Allah have
pity on thee!" As the daughter of my uncle loved me with great love, she
replied, "On my head and eyes! But, O my cousin, I repeat what I have
told thee oftentimes, if I could go in and out at will, I would at once
bring you two together and cover you both with my skirt: nor would I do
this but hoping to win thy favour. Inshallah, I will do my utmost
endeavour to unite you; but hear my words and do my bidding. Go thou to
the very same place and sit down where thou sattest before and at
supper-tide look thou eat not, for eating induceth sleep; and have a
care thou slumber not, for she will not come to thee till a fourth part
of the night be passed. And the Almighty avert her mischief from thee!"
Now when I heard these words I rejoiced and besought Allah to hasten the
night; and, as soon as it was dark, I was minded to go, and my cousin
said to me, "When thou shalt have met her, repeat to her the couplet I
taught thee before, at the time of thy leave-taking." Replied I, "On my
head and eyes!" and went out and repaired to the garden, where I found
all made ready in the same state as on the previous night, with every
requisite of meat and drink, dried fruits, sweet-scented flowers and so
forth. I went up into the pavilion and smelt the odour of the viands and
my spirit lusted after them; but I possessed my soul in patience for a
while, till at last I could no longer withstand temptation. So I arose
from my seat and went up to the table and, raising its cover, found a
dish of fowls, surrounded by four saucers containing four several meats.
I ate a mouthful of each kind and as much as I would of the sweetmeats
and a piece of meat: then I drank from the saucer a sauce yellowed with
saffron[505] and as it pleased me, I supped it up by the spoonful till I
was satisfied and my stomach was full. Upon this, my eyelids drooped; so
I took a cushion and set it under my head, saying, "Haply I can recline
upon it without going to sleep." Then I closed my eyes and slept, nor
did I wake till the sun had risen, when I found on my stomach a cube of
bone,[506] a single tip-cat stick,[507] the stone of a green date[508]
and a carob pod. There was no furniture nor aught else in the place, and
it was as if there had been nothing there yesterday. So I rose and
shaking all these things off me, fared forth in fury; and, going home,
found my cousin groaning and versifying with these couplets:—

   A wasted body, heart enpierced to core, ✿ And tears that down my
       poor cheeks pour and pour:
   And lover dure of access; but, but still ✿ Naught save what's fair
       can come from fairest flow'r;
   O cousin mine thou fill'st my soul with pain, ✿ And from these
       tears mine eyelids ache full sore!

I chid the daughter of my uncle and abused her, whereat she wept; then,
wiping away her tears, she came up to me and kissed me and began
pressing me to her bosom, whilst I held back from her blaming myself.
Then said she to me, "O my cousin, it seemeth thou sleptest again this
night?" Replied I, "Yes; and when I awoke, I found on my stomach a cube
of bone, a single tip-cat stick, a stone of a green date and a
carob-pod, and I know not why she did this." Then I wept and went up to
her and said, "Expound to me her meaning in so doing and tell me how
shall I act and aid me in my sore strait." She answered, "On my head and
eyes! By the single tip-cat stick and the cube of bone which she placed
upon thy stomach she saith to thee, Thy body is present but thy heart is
absent; and she meaneth, Love is not thus: so do not reckon thyself
among lovers. As for the date-stone, it is as if she said to thee, An
thou wert in love thy heart would be burning with passion and thou
wouldst not taste the delight of sleep; for the sweet of love is like a
green date[509] which kindleth a coal of fire in the vitals. As for the
carob-pod[510] it signifieth to thee, The lover's heart is wearied; and
thereby she saith, Be patient under our separation with the patience of
Job." When I heard this interpretation, fires darted into my vitals like
a dart and grief redoubled upon my heart and I cried out, saying, "Allah
decreed sleep to me for my ill-fortune." Then I said to her, "O my
cousin, by my life, devise me some device whereby I may win my will of
her!" She wept and answered, "O Aziz, O son of my uncle, verily my heart
is full of sad thought which I cannot speak: but go thou again to-night
to the same place and beware thou sleep not, and thou shalt surely
attain thy desire. This is my counsel and peace be with thee!" Quoth I,
"If Allah please I will not sleep, but will do as thou biddest me." Then
my cousin rose, and brought me food, saying, "Eat now what may suffice
thee, that nothing may divert thy heart." So I ate my fill and, when
night came, my cousin rose and bringing me a sumptuous suit of clothes
clad me therein. Then she made me swear I would repeat to my lover the
verse aforesaid and bade me beware of sleeping. So I left her and
repaired to the garden and went up into that same pavilion where I
occupied myself in holding my eyelids open with my fingers and nodding
my head as the night darkened on me.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Hundred-and-eighteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young merchant
continued to Taj al-Muluk:—So I repaired to the garden and went up into
that same pavilion and occupied myself in gazing upon the flower-beds
and in holding my eyelids open with my fingers and nodding my head as
the night darkened on me. And presently I grew hungry with watching and
the smell of the meats being wafted towards me, my appetite increased:
so I went up to the table and took off the cover and ate a mouthful of
every dish and a bit of meat; after which I turned to the flagon of
wine, saying to myself, I will drink one cup. I drank it, and then I
drank a second and a third, till I had drunk full ten, when the cool air
smote me and I fell to the earth like a felled man. I ceased not to lie
thus till day arose, when I awoke and found myself outside the garden,
and on my stomach were a butcher's knife and a dram-weight of iron.[511]
Thereat I trembled and, taking them with me, went home, where I found my
cousin saying, "Verily, I am in this house wretched and sorrowful,
having no helper but weeping." Now when I entered, I fell down at full
length and throwing the knife and the dram-weight from my hand, I
fainted clean away. As soon as I came to myself, I told her what had
befallen me and said, "Indeed, I shall never enjoy my desire." But when
she saw my tears and my passion, they redoubled her distress on my
account, and she cried, "Verily, I am helpless! I warned thee against
sleeping; but thou wouldst not hearken to my warning, nor did my words
profit thee aught." I rejoined, "By Allah, I conjure thee to explain to
me the meaning of the knife and the iron dram-weight." "By the
dram-weight," replied my cousin, "she alludeth to her right eye,[512]
and she sweareth by it and saith:—By the Lord of all creatures and by my
right eye! if thou come here again and sleep, I will cut thy throat with
this very knife. And indeed I fear for thee, O my cousin, from her
malice; my heart is full of anguish for thee and I cannot speak.
Nevertheless, if thou can be sure of thyself not to sleep when thou
returnest to her, return to her and beware of sleeping and thou shalt
attain thy desire; but if when returning to her thou wilt sleep, as is
thy wont, she will surely slaughter thee." Asked I, "What shall I do, O
daughter of my uncle: I beg thee, by Allah, to help me in this my
calamity." Answered she, "On my head and eyes! if thou wilt hearken to
my words and do my bidding, thou shalt have thy will." Quoth I, "I will
indeed hearken to thy words and do thy bidding;" and quoth she, "When it
is time for thee to go, I will tell thee." Then she pressed me to her
bosom and laying me on the bed, shampoo'd my feet, till drowsiness
overcame me and I was drowned in sleep; then she took a fan and seated
herself at my head with the fan in her hand and she was weeping till her
clothes were wet with tears. Now when she saw that I was awake, she
wiped away the drops and fetched me some food and set it before me. I
refused it, but she said to me, "Did I not tell thee that thou must do
my bidding? Eat!" So I ate and thwarted her not and she proceeded to put
the food into my mouth and I to masticate it, till I was full. Then she
made me drink jujube-sherbet[513] and sugar and washed my hands and
dried them with a kerchief; after which she sprinkled me with
rose-water, and I sat with her awhile in the best of spirits. When the
darkness had closed in, she dressed me and said to me, "O son of my
uncle, watch through the whole night and sleep not; for she will not
come to thee this tide till the last of the dark hours and, Allah
willing, thou shalt be at one with her this night; but forget not my
charge." Then she wept, and my heart was pained for her by reason of her
over much weeping, and I asked, "What is the charge thou gavest me?" She
answered, "When thou takest leave of her repeat to her the verse before
mentioned." So, full of joy I left her and repairing to the garden, went
up into the pavilion where, being satiated with food, I sat down and
watched till a fourth part of the dark hours was past. That night seemed
longsome to me as it were a year: but I remained awake till it was three
quarters spent and the cocks crew and I was famished for long watching.
Accordingly I went up to the table and ate my fill, whereupon my head
grew heavy and I wanted to sleep, when behold, a light appeared making
towards me from afar. I sprang up and washed my hands and mouth and
roused myself; and before long she came with ten damsels, in whose midst
she was like the full moon among the stars. She was clad in a dress of
green satin purfled with red gold, and she was as saith the poet:—

    She lords it o'er our hearts in grass-green gown, ✿ With
        buttons[514] loose and locks long flowing down.
    Quoth I, "What is thy name?" Quoth she, "I'm she, ✿ Who burns
        the loverheart live coals upon:"
    I made my plaint to her of loving lowe; ✿ Laughed she, "To stone
        thou moanest useless moan!"
    Quoth I, "An be of hardest stone thy heart, ✿ Allah drew
        sweetest spring from hardest stone."

When she saw me she laughed and said, "How is it that thou art awake and
that sleep overcame thee not? Forasmuch as thou hast watched through the
night, I know that thou art a lover; for night-watching is the mark of
lovers displaying brave endurance of their desires." Then she turned to
her women and signed to them and they went away from her, whereupon she
came up to me and strained me to her breast and kissed me, whilst I
kissed her, and she sucked my upper lip whilst I sucked her lower lip. I
put my hand to her waist and pressed it and we came not to the ground
save at the same moment. Then she undid her petticoat-trousers which
slipped down to her anklets, and we fell to clasping and embracing and
toying and speaking softly and biting and intertwining of legs and going
round about the Holy House and the corners thereof,[515] till her joints
became relaxed for love-delight and she swooned away. I entered the
sanctuary, and indeed that night was a joy to the sprite and a solace to
the sight even as saith the poet:—

     Sweetest of nights the world can show to me, that night ✿ When
         cups went round and round as fed by ceaseless spring:
     There utter severance made I 'twixt mine eyes and sleep, ✿ And
         joined, rejoined mine ear-drop with the anklet-ring.[516]

We lay together in close embrace till the morning when I would have gone
away, but she stopped me and said, "Stay till I tell thee
something"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Hundred-and-nineteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young merchant
continued his recital to Taj al-Muluk:—When I would have gone away, she
stopped me and said, "Stay, till I tell thee something and charge thee
with a charge." So I stayed whilst she unfolded a kerchief and drew out
this piece of linen and spread it open before me. I found worked on it
these two figures of gazelles and admired it with great admiration. Then
I took the piece of linen and went away, joyful, after we had agreed
that I should visit her every night in the garden; but in my joy I
forgot to repeat to her the verse my cousin had taught me. For when
giving me the piece of linen with the gazelles she had said to me, "Keep
this carefully, as it is my sister's handiwork." I asked her, "What is
thy sister's name?"; and she answered, "Her name is Núr al-Hudà." When I
went to my cousin, I found her lying down; but as soon as she saw me,
she rose, with the tears running from her eyes, and came up to me, and
kissed me on the breast and said, "Didst thou do as I enjoined thee? and
repeat the verse to her?" "I forgot it," replied I; "and nothing drove
it out of my mind but these two figured gazelles." And I threw the piece
of linen on the floor before her. She rose and sat down again, but was
unable to contain herself for impatience, and her eyes ran over with
tears, whilst she repeated these two couplets:—

   O thou who seekest parting, softly fare! ✿ Let not the Fair delude
       with cunning art:
   Fare softly, Fortune's nature is to 'guile, ✿ And end of every
       meeting is to part.

And when she ended her recitation she said, "O my cousin, give me this
piece of linen." So I gave it to her and she took it and unfolding it,
saw what was therein. When the tryst-time came for my going to my lover,
the daughter of my uncle said to me, "Go, and peace attend thee; and
when thou art about to leave her, recite to her the verse I taught thee
long ago and which thou didst forget." Quoth I, "Tell it me again"; and
she repeated it. Then I went to the garden and entered the pavilion,
where I found the young lady awaiting me. When she saw me, she rose and
kissed me and made me sit in her lap; and we ate and drank and did our
desire as before. In the morning, I repeated to her my cousin's verse
which was this:—

   Ho, lovers all! by Allah say me sooth ✿ What shall he do when Love
       sore vexeth youth?

When she heard this, her eyes filled with tears and she answered and
said:—

   Strive he to cure his case, to hide the truth; ✿ Patiently humble
       self and sue for ruth!

I committed it to memory and returned home rejoicing at having done my
cousin's bidding. When I entered the house I found her lying down and my
mother at her head weeping over her case; but as soon as I went in to
her my mother said to me, "A foul plague on such a cousin! How couldst
thou leave the daughter of thy uncle ailing and not ask what ailed her?"
But when my cousin saw me she raised her head and sat up and asked me,
"O Aziz, didst thou repeat to her the couplet I taught thee?" I
answered, "Yes, and when she heard it she wept and recited in answer
another couplet which I committed to memory." Quoth my cousin, "Tell it
me." I did so; and when she heard it she wept with much weeping and
repeated the following verses:—

    How shall youth cure the care his life undo'th, ✿ And every day
        his heart in pieces hew'th?
    In sooth he would be patient, but he findeth ✿ Naught save a
        heart which love with pains imbu'th.

Then added my cousin, "When thou goest to her as of wont, repeat to her
also these two couplets which thou hast heard." I replied, "Hearkening
and obedience!" and I went at the wonted time, to the garden, where
there passed between my mistress and myself what tongue faileth to
describe. When I was about to leave her, I repeated to her those two
couplets of my cousin's; whereupon the tears streamed from her eyes and
she replied:—

    If he of patience fail the truth to hide ✿ For him no cure save
        Death my vision view'th!

I committed them to memory and returned home, and when I went in to my
cousin I found her fallen into a fit and my mother sitting at her head.
When she heard my voice, she opened her eyes and asked, "O Aziz! didst
thou repeat the two couplets to her?" whereto I answered, "Yes; but she
wept on hearing them and she replied with this couplet beginning, If he
of patience fail, to the end." And I repeated it; whereupon my cousin
swooned again, and when she came to herself, she recited these two
couplets:—

  Hearkening, obeying, with my dying mouth ✿ I greet who joy of
      union ne'er allow'th:
  Fair fall all happy loves, and fair befal ✿ The hapless lover dying
      in his drowth!

Again when it was night, I repaired to the garden as usual where I found
the young lady awaiting me. We sat down and ate and drank, after which
we did all we wanted and slept till the morning; and, as I was going
away, I repeated to her the saying of my cousin. When she heard the
couplet she cried out with a loud cry and was greatly moved and
exclaimed, "Awáh! Awáh![517] By Allah, she who spake these lines is
dead!" Then she wept and said to me, "Woe to thee! How is she who spoke
thus related to thee?" Replied I, "She is the daughter of my father's
brother." "Thou liest," rejoined she; "by Allah, were she thy cousin,
thou hadst borne her the same love as she bore thee! It is thou who hast
slain her and may the Almighty kill thee as thou killedst her! By Allah,
hadst thou told me thou hadst a cousin, I would not have admitted thee
to my favours!" Quoth I, "Verily it was she who interpreted to me the
signs thou madest and it was she who taught me how to come to thee and
how I should deal with thee; and, but for her, I should never have been
united to thee." She then asked me, "Did thy cousin then know of us?";
and I answered, "Yes;" whereupon she exclaimed, "Allah give thee sorrow
of thy youth, even as thou hast sorrowed her youth!" Then she cried to
me, "Go now and see after her." So I went away troubled at heart, and
ceased not walking till I reached our street, when I heard sounds of
wailing, and asking about it, was answered, "Azizah, we found her dead
behind the door." I entered the house, and when my mother saw me, she
said, "Her death lieth heavy on thy neck and may Allah not acquit thee
of her blood!"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


            Now when it was the Hundred-and-twentieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young merchant
continued to Taj al-Muluk:—So I entered the house and when my mother saw
me she said, "Her death lieth heavy on thy neck and may Allah not acquit
thee of her blood! A plague on such a cousin!" Then came my father, and
we laid her out and gat ready her bier and buried her; and we had
recitations of the whole Koran over her tomb and we abode by her grave
three days, after which we returned to our home, and I grieving for her
grievously. Then my mother came to me and said, "I would fain know what
thou didst to her, to break her heart[518] for, O my son, I questioned
her at all times of the cause of her complaint, but she would tell me
nothing nor let me know aught of it. So Allah upon thee, tell me what
thou hast been doing to her that she died." Quoth I, "I did nothing."
Quoth my mother, "Allah avenge her on thee! Verily she told me naught,
but kept her secret till she died of her love-longings for thee; but
when she died I was with her and she opened her eyes and said to me:—O
wife of my uncle, may Allah hold thy son guiltless of my blood and
punish him not for what he hath done by me! And now Allah transporteth
me from the house of the world which is perishable to the house of the
other world which is eternal. Said I, O my daughter, Allah preserve thee
and preserve thy youth! And as I questioned her of the cause of her
illness, she made me no answer; but she smiled and said, O wife of my
uncle, bid thy son, whenever he would go whither he goeth every day,
repeat these two saws at his going away:—Faith is fair! Unfaith is foul!
For this is of my tender affection to him, that I am solicitous
concerning him during my lifetime and after my death. Then she gave me
somewhat for thee and sware me that I would not give it until I see thee
weeping for her and lamenting her death. The thing is with me; and, when
I have seen thy case as I have said, I will make it over to thee." "Show
it me," cried I: but she would not. Then I gave myself up to
love-delights and thought no more of my cousin's death: for my mind was
unsettled and fain would I have been with my lover the livelong day and
night.[519] So hardly had I perceived the darkness fall when I betook
myself to the garden, where I found the young lady sitting on coals of
fire for much impatience. As soon as she was sure that she saw me, she
ran to me and throwing her arms about my neck, enquired of the daughter
of my uncle. I replied, "Sooth to say she is dead, and we have caused
Zikr-litanies and recitations of the Koran to be performed for her; and
it is now four nights and this be the fifth since she is gone." When she
heard that, she shrieked aloud and wept and said, "Did I not tell thee
that thou hast slain her? Hadst thou let me know of her before her
death, I would have requited her the kindness she did me, in that she
served me and united thee to me; for without her, we had never
foregathered, we twain, and I fear lest some calamity befal thee because
of thy sin against her." Quoth I, "She acquitted me of offence ere she
died;" and I repeated to her what my mother had told me. Quoth she,
"Allah upon thee! when thou returnest to thy mother, learn what thing
she keepeth for thee." I rejoined, "My mother also said to me:—Before
the daughter of thy uncle died, she laid a charge upon me, saying,
Whenever thy son would go whither he is wont to go, teach him these two
saws, Faith is fair; Unfaith is foul!" When my lady heard this she
exclaimed, "The mercy of Almighty Allah be upon her! Indeed, she hath
delivered thee from me, for I minded to do thee a mischief, but now I
will not harm thee nor trouble thee." I wondered at this and asked her,
"What then wast thou minded to do with me in time past and we two being
in bond of love?" Answered she, "Thou art infatuated with me; for thou
art young in life and a raw laddie; thy heart is void of guile and thou
weetest not our malice and deceit. Were she yet alive, she would protect
thee; for she is the cause of thy preservation and she hath delivered
thee from destruction. And now I charge thee speak not with any woman,
neither accost one of our sex, be she young or be she old; and again I
say Beware! for thou art simple and raw and knowest not the wiles of
women and their malice, and she who interpreted the signs to thee is
dead. And indeed I fear for thee, lest thou fall into some disgrace and
find none to deliver thee from it, now that the daughter of thy uncle is
no more."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young merchant
continued to Taj al-Muluk:—Then the young lady said to me, "I fear for
thee lest thou fall into some disgrace and find none to deliver thee
from it. Alas for thy cousin and ah, the pity of her! Would I had known
her before her death, that I might have requited by waiting upon her the
fair service she did me. The mercy of Allah Almighty be upon her, for
she kept her secret and revealed not what she suffered, and but for her
thou hadst never foregathered with me; no, never! But there is one thing
I desire of thee." I asked, "What is it?"; and she answered, "It is that
thou bring me to her grave, that I may visit her in the tomb wherein she
is and write some couplets thereon." I rejoined, "To-morrow, if Allah
please!"[520] I slept with her that night, and she ceased not saying
after every hour, "Would thou hadst told me of thy cousin before her
death!" And I asked her, "What is the meaning of the two saws she taught
me? Faith is fair! Unfaith is foul?" But she made no answer. As soon as
it was day she rose and, taking a purse of gold pieces, said to me,
"Come, show me her tomb, that I may visit it and grave some verses
thereon and build a dome over it and commend her to Allah's mercy and
bestow these dinars in alms for her soul." I replied, "To hear is to
obey!"; and walked on before her, whilst she followed me, giving alms as
she went and saying to all upon whom she lavisht bounty, "This is an
alms for the soul of Azizah, who kept her counsel till she drank the cup
of death and never told the secret of her love." And she stinted not
thus to give alms and say, "For Azizah's soul," till the purse was empty
and we came to the grave. And when she looked at the tomb, she wept and
threw herself on it; then, pulling out a chisel of steel and a light
hammer, she graved therewith upon the head-stone in fine small
characters these couplets:—

 I past by a broken tomb amid a garth right sheen, ✿ Whereon
     seven blooms of Nu'uman[521] glowed with cramoisie;
 Quoth I, "Who sleepeth in this tomb?" Quoth answering Earth ✿ "Before
     a lover Hades-tombed[522] bend reverently!"
 Quoth I, "May Allah help thee, O thou slain of Love, ✿ And grant
     thee home in Heaven and Paradise-height to see!"
 Hapless are lovers all e'en tombèd in their tombs, ✿ Where amid
     living folk the dust weighs heavily!
 Fain would I plant a garden blooming round thy grave, ✿ And water
     every flower with tear-drops flowing free!

Then she turned away in tears and I with her and returned to the garden
where she said to me, "By Allah! I conjure thee never leave me!" "To
hear is to obey," replied I. Then I gave myself wholly up to her and
paid her frequent visits: she was good and generous to me; and as often
as I passed the night with her, she would make much of me and would ask
me of the two saws my cousin Azizah told my mother and I would repeat
them to her. And matters ceased not to be on this wise and I continued
for a whole year eating and drinking and enjoying dalliance and wearing
change of rich raiment until I waxed gross and fat, so that I lost all
thought of sorrowing and mourning, and I clean forgot my cousin Azizah.
And on New Year's day I went to the bath, where I refreshed myself and
put on a suit of sumptuous clothes; then coming out I drank a cup of
wine and smelt the scent of my new gear which was perfumed with various
essences; and my breast was broadened thereby, for I knew not the tricks
of Fate nor the changing ways of Time. When the hour of night-prayer
came, I was minded to repair to my lover; but, being the worse for wine,
I knew not when going to her whither I went, so my drunkenness turned me
into a by-street called Syndic Street;[523] and the while I walked up
that street behold, I caught sight of an old woman faring with a lighted
taper in one hand, and in the other a folded letter.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say


          Now when it was the Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant, whose name was Aziz, continued to Taj al-Muluk:—And when I
entered the street called Syndic Street behold, I caught sight of an old
woman walking with a lighted taper in one hand and in the other a folded
letter and I drew near her and lo! she was weeping and repeating these
couplets:—

  O glad-news bearer well come! Welcome! Hail! ✿ How sweet thy speech
      to me, what treat thy tale:
  O messenger from him whose weal I love, ✿ God bless thee long
      as breathes soft morning-gale!

Now when she saw me she asked, "O my son! canst thou read?"; and I
answered, of my officiousness, "Yes, old naunty!" Rejoined she, "Then
take this letter and read it to me." And when she handed it to me, I
took it and unfolding it read it to her and behold it was from an absent
man to his friends and lovers whom he greeted; and, when she heard its
purport, she rejoiced at the good tidings and blessed me, saying, "Allah
dispel thine anxiety, even as thou hast dispelled mine!" Then she took
the letter and walked on. Meanwhile, I was urged by a call of nature and
sat down on my heels to make water.[524] When I had ended I stood up and
wiped the orifice with a pebble and then, letting down my clothes, I was
about to wend my way, when suddenly the old woman came up to me again
and, bending down over my hand, kissed it and said, "O my master! the
Lord give thee joy of thy youth! I entreat thee to walk with me a few
steps as far as yonder door, for I told them what thou didst read to me
of the letter, and they believe me not; so come with me two steps and
read them the letter from behind the door and accept the prayers of a
righteous woman." I enquired, "What is the history of this letter?", and
she replied, "O my son, this letter is from my son, who hath been absent
for a term of ten years. He set out with a stock of merchandise and
tarried long in foreign parts, till we lost hope of him and supposed him
to be dead. Now after all that delay cometh this letter from him, and he
hath a sister who weepeth for him night and day; so I said to her, He is
well and all right. But she will not believe me and declares, There is
no help but thou bring me one who will read this letter in my presence,
that my heart may be at rest and my mind at ease. Thou knowest, O my
son, that all who love are wont to think evil: so be good enough to go
with me and read to her this letter, standing behind the curtain, whilst
I call his sister to listen within the door, so shalt thou dispel our
heed and fulfil our need. Verily quoth the Apostle of Allah (whom Allah
bless and preserve!):—Whoso easeth the troubled of one of the troubles
of this troublous world, Allah will ease him of an hundred troubles; and
according to another tradition:—Whoso easeth his brother of one of the
troubles of this troublous world, Allah shall relieve him of
seventy-and-two troubles on the Day of Resurrection. And I have betaken
myself to thee; so disappoint me not." Replied I, "To hear is to obey;
do thou go before me!" So she walked on devancing me and I followed her
a little way, till she came to the gate of a large and handsome mansion
whose door was plated with copper.[525] I stood behind the door, whilst
the old woman cried out in Persian, and ere I knew it a damsel ran up
with light and nimble step. She had tucked up her trousers to her knees,
so that I saw a pair of calves that confounded thinker and sighter, and
the maid herself was as saith the poet describing her:—

[Illustration]

      O thou who barest leg-calf, better to suggest ✿ For
          passion-madded amourist better things above!
      Towards its lover doth the bowl go round and run; ✿ Cup[526]
          and cup-bearer only drive us daft with love.[527]

Now these legs were like two pillars of alabaster adorned with anklets
of gold, wherein were set stones of price. And the damsel had tucked up
the end of her gown under her arm-pit and had rolled up her sleeves to
the elbow, so that I could see her white wrists whereon were two pairs
of bracelets with clasps of great pearls; and round her neck was a
collar of costly gems. Her ears were adorned with pendants of pearls and
on her head she wore a kerchief[528] of brocade, brand-new and broidered
with jewels of price. And she had thrust the skirt of her shift into her
trousers-string being busy with some household business. So when I saw
her in this undress, I was confounded at her beauty, for she was like a
shining sun. Then she said, with soft, choice speech, never heard I
sweeter, "O my mother! is this he who cometh to read the letter?" "It
is," replied the old woman; and she put out her hand to me with the
letter. Now between her and the door was a distance of about half a
rod[529]; so I stretched forth my hand to take the letter from her and
thrust head and shoulders within the door, thinking to draw near her and
read the letter when, before I knew what her design was, the old woman
butted her head against my back and pushed me forwards with the letter
in my hand, so that ere I could take thought I found myself in the
middle of the hall far beyond the vestibule. Then she entered, faster
than a flash of blinding leven, and had naught to do but to shut the
door.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the youth Aziz
pursued to Taj al-Muluk:—When the old woman pushed me forwards I found
myself, ere I could think, inside the vestibule; and the old woman
entered faster than a flash of blinding leven and had naught to do but
to shut the door. When the girl saw me in the vestibule, she came up to
me and strained me to her bosom, and threw me to the floor; then she sat
astraddle upon my breast and kneaded my belly with her fingers, till I
well-nigh lost my senses. Thereupon she took me by the hand and led me,
unable to resist for the violence of her pressure, through seven
vestibules, whilst the old woman forewent us with the lighted candle,
till we came to a great saloon with four estrades whereon a horseman
might play Polo.[530] Here she released me, saying, "Open thine eyes."
So I opened them still giddy for the excess of her embracing and
pressing, and saw that the whole saloon was built of the finest marbles
and alabasters, and all its furniture was of silk and brocade even to
the cushions and mattrasses. Therein also were two benches of yellow
brass and a couch of red gold, set with pearls and precious stones,
befitting none save Kings like thyself. And off the saloon were smaller
sitting rooms; and the whole place was redolent of wealth. Then she
asked, "O Aziz, which is liefer to thee life or death?" "Life," answered
I; and she said, "If life be liefer to thee, marry me." Quoth I, "Indeed
I should hate to marry the like of thee." Quoth she, "If thou marry me
thou wilt at least be safe from the daughter of Dalílah the Wily
One."[531] I asked, "And who be that daughter of the Wily One?"
Whereupon she laughed and replied, "'Tis she who hath companied with
thee this day for a year and four months (may the Almighty destroy and
afflict her with one worse than herself!). By Allah, there liveth not a
more perfidious than she. How many men hath she not slain before thee
and what deeds hath she not done. Nor can I understand how thou hast
been all the time in her company, yet she hath not killed thee nor done
thee a mischief." When I heard her words, I marvelled with exceeding
marvel and said, "O my lady, who made thee to know her?" Said she, "I
know her as the age knoweth its calamities; but now I would fain have
thee tell me all that hath passed between you two, that I may ken the
cause of thy deliverance from her." So I told her all that had happened
between us, including the story of my cousin Azizah. She expressed her
pity when she heard of the death, and her eyes ran over with tears and
she clapt hand on hand and cried out, "Her youth was lost on Allah's
way,[532] and may the Lord bless thee for her good works! By Allah, O
Aziz, she who died for thee was the cause of thy preservation from the
daughter of Dalilah the Wily; and, but for her, thou hadst been lost.
And now she is dead I fear for thee from the Crafty One's perfidy and
mischief; but my throat is choking and I cannot speak." Quoth I, "Ay, by
Allah: all this happened even as thou sayest." And she shook her head
and cried, "There liveth not this day the like of Azizah." I continued,
"And on her death bed she bade me repeat to my lover these two
saws:—Faith is fair! Unfaith is foul!" When she heard me say this, she
exclaimed, "O Aziz, by Allah, those same words saved thee from dying by
her hand; and now my heart is at ease for thee from her, for she will
never kill thee; and the daughter of thy uncle preserved thee during her
lifetime and after her death. By Allah, I have desired thee day after
day, but could not get at thee till this time when I tricked thee and
outwitted thee; for thou art a raw youth[533] and knowest not the wiles
of young women nor the deadly guile of old women." Rejoined I, "No, by
Allah!" Then said she to me, "Be of good cheer and eyes clear; the dead
hath found Allah's grace, and the live shall be in good case. Thou art a
handsome youth and I do not desire thee but according to the ordinance
of Allah and His Apostle (on whom be salutation and salvation!).
Whatever thou requirest of money and stuff, thou shalt have forthright
without stint, and I will not impose any toil on thee, no, never!; for
there is with me always bread baked hot and water in pot. All I need of
thee is that thou do with me even as the cock doth." I asked, "And what
doth the cock?" Upon this she laughed and clapped her hands and fell
over on her back for excess of merriment: then she sat up and smiled and
said, "O light of my eyes, really dost thou not know what cock's duty
is?" "No, by Allah!" replied I, and she, "The cock's duty is to eat and
drink and tread." I was abashed at her words and asked, "Is that the
cock's duty?" "Yes," answered she; "and all I ask of thee now is to gird
thy loins and strengthen thy will and futter thy best." Then she clapped
her hands and cried out, saying, "O my mother, bring forward those who
are with thee." And behold, in came the old woman accompanied by four
lawful witnesses, and carrying a veil of silk. Then she lighted four
candles, whilst the witnesses saluted me and sat down; and the girl
veiled herself with the veil and deputed one of them to execute the
contract on her behalf. So they wrote out the marriage-bond and she
testified to have received the whole sum settled upon her, both the half
in advance and the half in arrears; and that she was indebted to me in
the sum of ten thousand dirhams.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young merchant
continued to Taj al-Muluk:—When they wrote out the marriage-contract,
she testified to having received the whole sum settled upon her, the
half in advance and the half in arrears and that she was indebted to me
in the sum of ten thousand dirhams. She paid the witnesses their wage
and they withdrew whence they came. Thereupon she arose and cast off her
clothes and stood in a chemise of fine silk edged with gold-lace, after
which she took off her trousers and seized my hand and led me up to the
couch, saying, "There is no sin in a lawful put-in." She lay down on the
couch outspread upon her back; and, drawing me on to her breast, heaved
a sigh and followed it up with a wriggle by way of being coy. Then she
pulled up the shift above her breasts, and when I saw her in this pose,
I could not withhold myself from thrusting it into her, after I had
sucked her lips, whilst she whimpered and shammed shame and wept when no
tears came, and then said she, "O my beloved, do it, and do thy best!"
Indeed the case reminded me of his saying, who said:—

   When I drew up her shift from the roof of her coynte, ✿ I found it
       as strait as my mind and my money:
   So I drove it half-way, and she sighed a loud sigh: ✿ Quoth I,
       "Why this sigh?": "For the rest of it, honey!"

And she repeated, "O my beloved, let the finish be made for I am thine
handmaid. My life on thee, up with it! give it me, all of it! that I may
take it in my hand and thrust it into my very vitals!" And she ceased
not to excite me with sobs and sighs and amorous cries in the intervals
of kissing and clasping until amid our murmurs of pleasure we attained
the supreme delight and the term we had in sight. We slept together till
the morning, when I would have gone out; but lo! she came up to me,
laughing, and said, "So! So! thinkest thou that going into the Hammam is
the same as going out?[534] Dost thou deem me to be the like of the
daughter of Dalilah the Wily One? Beware of such a thought, for thou art
my husband by contract and according to law. If thou be drunken return
to thy right mind, and know that the house wherein thou art openeth but
one day in every year. Go down and look at the great door." So I arose
and went down and found the door locked and nailed up and returned and
told her of the locking and nailing. "O Aziz," said she, "We have in
this house flour, grain, fruits and pomegranates; sugar, meat, sheep,
poultry and so forth enough for many years; and the door will not be
opened till after the lapse of a whole twelvemonth and well I weet thou
shalt not find thyself without this house till then." Quoth I, "There is
no Majesty, and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the
Great!" "And how can this harm thee," rejoined she; "seeing thou knowest
cock's duty, whereof I told thee?" Then she laughed and I laughed too,
and I conformed to what she said and abode with her, doing cock's duty
and eating and drinking and futtering for a year of full twelve months,
during which time she conceived by me, and I was blessed with a babe by
her. On the New Year's day I heard the door opened and behold, men came
in with cates and flour and sugar. Upon this, I would have gone out but
my wife said, "Wait till supper-tide and go out even as thou camest in."
So I waited till the hour of night-prayer and was about to go forth in
fear and trembling, when she stopped me, saying, "By Allah, I will not
let thee go until thou swear to come back this night before the closing
of the door." I agreed to this, and she swore me a solemn oath on Blade
and Book,[535] and the oath of divorce to boot, that I would return to
her. Then I left her and going straight to the garden, found the door
open as usual; whereat I was angry and said to myself, "I have been
absent this whole year and come here unawares and find the place open as
of wont! I wonder is the damsel still here as before? I needs must enter
and see before I go to my mother, more by reason that it is now
nightfall." So I entered the flower-garden——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

-----

Footnote 138:

  This knightly tale, the longest in the Nights (xliv-cxlv.), about
  one-eighth of the whole, does not appear in the Bres. Edit. Lane, who
  finds it "objectionable," reduces it to two of its episodes,
  Aziz-cum-Azízah and Táj al-Mulúk. On the other hand it has been
  converted into a volume (8vo, pp. 240) "Scharkan, Conte Arabe;" etc.
  Traduit par M. Asselan Riche, etc. Paris: Dondey-Dupré. 1829. It has
  its _longueurs_ and at times is longsome enough; but it is interesting
  as a comparison between the chivalry of Al-Islam and European
  knight-errantry. Although all the characters are fictitious the period
  is evidently in the early crusading days. Cæsarea, the second capital
  of Palestine, taken during the Caliphate of Omar (A.H. 19) and
  afterwards recovered, was fortified in A.H. 353=963 as a base against
  the Arabs by the Emperor Phocas, the Arab. "Nakfúr" _i.e._ Nicephorus.
  In A.H. 498=1104, crusading craft did much injury by plundering
  merchantmen between Egypt and Syria, to which allusion is found in the
  romance. But the story-teller has not quite made up his mind about
  which Cæsarea he is talking, and M. Riche tells us that Césarée is a
  "ville de la Mauritanie, en Afrique" (p. 20).

Footnote 139:

  The fifth Ommiade Caliph reign. A.H. 65-86=685-704.

Footnote 140:

  This does not merely mean that no one was safe from his wrath: or,
  could approach him in the heat of fight: it is a reminiscence of the
  masterful "King Kulayb," who established game-laws in his dominions
  and would allow no man to approach his camp-fire. Moreover the Jinn
  lights a fire to decoy travellers; but if his victim be bold enough to
  brave him, he invites him to take advantage of the heat.

Footnote 141:

  China.

Footnote 142:

  The Jaxartes and the Bactrus (names very loosely applied).

Footnote 143:

  In full "Sharrun kána" _i.e._ an evil (Sharr) has come to being
  (kána), that is, "bane to the foe"—a pagan and knightly name. The hero
  of the Romance "Al-Dalhamah" is described as a bitter gourd
  (colocynth), a viper, a calamity.

Footnote 144:

  This is a Moslem law (Koran chapt. iv. bodily borrowed from the
  Talmud) which does not allow a man to marry one wife unless he can
  carnally satisfy her. Moreover he must distribute his honours equally
  and each wife has a right to her night unless she herself give it up.
  This was the case even with the spouses of the Prophet; and his
  biography notices several occasions when his wives waived their rights
  in favour of one another. M. Riche kindly provides the King with _la
  piquante française_ (p. 15).

Footnote 145:

  So the celebrated mosque in Stambul, famed for being the largest
  church in the world, is known to the Greeks as "Agia (pron. Aya)
  Sophia" and to Moslems as "Aya Sofíyeh" (Holy Wisdom) _i.e._ the Logos
  or Second Person of the Trinity (not a Saintess). The sending a
  Christian girl as a present to a Moslem would, in these days be
  considered highly scandalous. But it was done by the Mukaukis or
  Coptic Governor of Egypt (under Heraclius) who of course hated the
  Greeks. This worthy gave two damsels to Mohammed, one called Sírín and
  the other Máriyah (Maria) whom the Prophet reserved for his especial
  use and whose abode is still shown at Al-Medinah. The Rev. Doctor
  Badger (loc. cit. p. 972) gives the translation of an epistle by
  Mohammed to this Mukaukis, written in the Cufic character (??) and
  sealed "Mohammed, The Apostle of Allah." My friend seems to believe
  that it is an original, but upon this subject opinions will differ. It
  is, however, exceedingly interesting, beginning with "Bismillah,"
  etc., and ending (before the signature) with a quotation from the
  Koran (iii. 57); and may be assumed as a formula addressed to foreign
  potentates by a Prophet who had become virtually "King of Arabia."

Footnote 146:

  This prayer before "doing the deed of kind" is, I have said, Moslem as
  well as Christian.

Footnote 147:

  Exodus i. 16, quoted by Lane (M. E., chapt. xxvii.). Torrens in his
  Notes cites Drayton's "Moon-calf":—

              Bring forth the birth-stool—no, let it alone;
              She is so far beyond all compass grown,
              Some other new device us needs must stead,
              Or else she never can be brought to bed.

  It is the "groaning-chair" of Poor Robin's Almanac (1676) and we find
  it alluded to in Boccaccio, the classical sedile which according to
  scoffers has formed the papal chair (a curule seat) ever since the
  days of Pope Joan, when it has been held advisable for one of the
  Cardinals to ascertain that His Holiness possesses all the instruments
  of virility. This "Kursí al-wiládah" is of peculiar form on which the
  patient is seated. A most interesting essay might be written upon the
  various positions preferred during delivery, _e.g._ the wild Irish
  still stand on all fours, like the so-called "lower animals." Amongst
  the Moslems of Waday, etc., a cord is hung from the top of the hut,
  and the woman in labour holds on to it standing with her legs apart,
  till the midwife receives the child.

Footnote 148:

  Some Orientalists call "lullilooing" the trilling cry, which is made
  by raising the voice to its highest pitch and breaking it by a rapid
  succession of touches on the palate with the tongue-tip, others
  "Ziraleet" and Zagaleet, and one traveller tells us that it began at
  the marriage-festival of Isaac and Rebecca(!). Arabs term it
  classically Tahlíl and vulgarly Zaghrutah (Plur. Zaghárit) and
  Persians "Kil." Finally in Don Quixote we have "Lelilies," the
  battle-cry of the Moors (Duffield iii. 289). Dr. Buchanan likens it to
  a serpent uttering human sounds, but the good missionary heard it at
  the festival of Jagannath (Pilgrimage iii. 197).

Footnote 149:

  _i.e._ "Light of the Place" (or kingdom) and "Delight of the Age."

Footnote 150:

  It is utterly absurd to give the old heroic Persian name Afridun or
  Furaydun, the destroyer of Zohák or Zahhák, to a Greek, but such
  anachronisms are characteristic of The Nights and are evidently
  introduced on purpose. See Boccaccio, ix. 9.

Footnote 151:

  Arab. "Yunán" lit. Ionia, which applies to all Greece, insular and
  continental, especially to ancient Greece.

Footnote 152:

  In 1870 I saw at Sidon a find of some hundreds of gold "Philippi" and
  "Alexanders."

Footnote 153:

  M. Riche has (p. 21):—Ces talismans travaillés par le ciseau du
  célèbre _Calfaziri_, adding in a note:—Je pense que c'est un sculpteur
  Arabe.

Footnote 154:

  This periphrase, containing what seems to us a useless negative, adds
  emphasis in Arabic.

Footnote 155:

  This bit of geographical information is not in the Bul. Edit.

Footnote 156:

  In Pers.=a tooth, the popular word.

Footnote 157:

  This preliminary move, called in Persian Nakl-i-Safar, is generally
  mentioned. So the Franciscan monks in California, when setting out for
  a long journey through the desert, marched three times round the
  convent and pitched tents for the night under its walls.

Footnote 158:

  In Arab. "Khazinah" or "Khaznah" lit. a treasure, representing 1,000
  "Kis" or purses (each=£5). The sum in the text is 7,000 purses ×
  5=£35,000.

Footnote 159:

  Travellers often prefer such sites because they are sheltered from the
  wind, and the ground is soft for pitching tents; but many have come to
  grief from sudden torrents following rain.

Footnote 160:

  Arab. "Ghábah" not a forest in our sense of the word, but a place
  where water sinks and the trees (mostly Mimosas), which elsewhere are
  widely scattered, form a comparatively dense growth and collect in
  thickets. These are favourite places for wild beasts during
  noon-heats.

Footnote 161:

  At various times in the East Jews and Christians were ordered to wear
  characteristic garments, especially the Zunnár or girdle.

Footnote 162:

  The description is borrowed from the Coptic Convent, which invariably
  has an inner donjon or keep. The oldest monastery in the world is Mar
  Antonios (St. Anthony the Hermit) not far from Suez (Gold Mines of
  Midian, p. 85).

Footnote 163:

  "Dawáhi," plur. of Dáhiyah=a mishap. The title means "Mistress of
  Misfortunes" or Queen of Calamities (to the enemy); and the venerable
  lady, as will be seen, amply deserved her name, which is pronounced
  Zát ad-Dawáhí.

Footnote 164:

  Arab. "Kunfuz"=hedgehog or porcupine.

Footnote 165:

  These flowers of speech are mere familiarities, not insults. In
  societies where the sexes are separated speech becomes exceedingly
  free. Étourdie que vous êtes, says M. Riche, toning down the text.

Footnote 166:

  Arab. "Zirt," a low word. The superlative "Zarrát" (fartermost) or,
  "Abu Zirt" (Father of farts) is a facetious term among the bean-eating
  Fellahs and a deadly insult amongst the Badawin (Night ccccx.). The
  latter prefer the word Taggáa (Pilgrimage iii. 84). We did not disdain
  the word in farthingale=pet en air.

Footnote 167:

  Arab. "kicked" him, _i.e._ with the sharp corner of the
  shovel-stirrup. I avoid such expressions as "spurring" and "pricking
  over the plain," because apt to give a wrong idea.

Footnote 168:

  Arab. "Allaho Akbar!" the classical Moslem slogan.

Footnote 169:

  Arab horses are never taught to leap, so she was quite safe on the
  other side of a brook nine feet broad.

Footnote 170:

  "Batrík" (vulg. Bitrík)=patricius, a title given to Christian knights
  who commanded ten thousand men; the Tarkhan (or Nobb) heading four
  thousand, and the Kaumas (Arab. Káid) two hundred. It must not be
  confounded with Batrak (or Batrik)=patriarcha (Lane's Lex.).

Footnote 171:

  Arab. "Kázi al-Kuzát," a kind of Chief Justice or Chancellor. The
  office was established under the rule of Harun al-Rashid, who so
  entitled Abú Yúsuf Ya'akub al-Ansári: therefore the allusion is
  anachronistic. The same Caliph also caused the Olema to dress as they
  do still.

Footnote 172:

  The allusion is Koranic: "O men, if ye be in doubt concerning the
  resurrection, consider that he first created you of the dust of the
  ground (Adam); afterwards of seed" (chapt. xxii.). But the
  physiological ideas of the Koran are curious. It supposes that the
  Mani or male semen is in the loins and that of women in the breast
  bone (chapt. lxxxvi.); that the mingled seed of the two (chapt.
  lxxvi.) fructifies the ovary and that the child is fed through the
  navel with menstruous blood, hence the cessation of the catamenia.
  Barzoi (Kalilah and Dímnah) says:—"Man's seed, falling into the
  woman's womb, is mixed with her seed and her blood: when it thickens
  and curdles the Spirit moves it and it turns about like liquid cheese;
  then it solidifies, its arteries are formed, its limbs constructed and
  its joints distinguished. If the babe is a male, his face is placed
  towards his mother's back; if a female, towards her belly. (P. 262,
  Mr. I. G. N. Keith-Falconer's translation.) But there is a curious
  prolepsis of the spermatozoa-theory. We read (Koran chapt. vii.), "Thy
  Lord drew forth their posterity from the loins of the sons of Adam;"
  and the commentators say that Allah stroked Adam's back and extracted
  from his loins all his posterity, which shall ever be, in the shape of
  small ants; these confessed their dependence on God and were dismissed
  to return whence they came." From this fiction it appears (says Sale)
  that the doctrine of pre-existence is not unknown to the Mohammedans;
  and there is some little conformity between it and the modern theory
  of generatio ex animalculis in semine marium. The poets call this
  Yaum-i-Alast=the Day of Am-I-not (-your Lord)? which Sir William Jones
  most unhappily translated "Art thou not with thy Lord?" (Alasta bi
  Rabbi-kum); and they produce a grand vision of unembodied spirits
  appearing in countless millions before their Creator.

Footnote 173:

  The usual preliminary of a wrestling bout.

Footnote 174:

  In Eastern wrestling this counts as a fair fall. So Ajax fell on his
  back with Ulysses on his breast (Iliad xxxii., 700, etc.).

Footnote 175:

  So biting was allowed amongst the Greeks in the ἀνακλινοπάλη, the
  final struggle on the ground.

Footnote 176:

  Supposed to be names of noted wrestlers. "Kayim" (not El-Kim as
  Torrens has it) is a term now applied to a juggler or "professor" of
  legerdemain who amuses people in the streets with easy tricks (Lane,
  M. E., chapt. xx.).

Footnote 177:

  Lit. "laughed in his face" which has not the unpleasant meaning it
  bears in English.

Footnote 178:

  Arab. "Abu riyáh"=a kind of child's toy. It is the "Ρόμβος" of the
  Greeks, our "bull-roarer" well known in Australia and parts of Africa.

Footnote 179:

  The people of the region south of the Caspian which is called "Sea of
  Daylam." It has a long history; for which see D'Herbelot, _s. v._
  "Dilem."

Footnote 180:

  Coptic convents in Egypt still affect these drawbridges over the
  keep-moat.

Footnote 181:

  Koran iv., xxii. etc., meaning it is lawful to marry women taken in
  war after the necessary purification although their husbands be still
  living. This is not permitted with a free woman who is a True
  Believer. I have noted that the only concubine slave-girls mentioned
  in the Koran are these "captives possessed by the right hand."

Footnote 182:

  The Amazonian dame is a favourite in folk-lore and is an ornament to
  poetry from the Iliad to our modern day. Such heroines, apparently
  unknown to the Pagan Arabs, were common in the early ages of Al-Islam
  as Ockley and Gibbon prove, and that the race is not extinct may be
  seen in my Pilgrimage (iii. 55) where the sister of Ibn Rumi resolved
  to take blood revenge for her brother.

Footnote 183:

  And Solomon said, "O nobles, which of you will bring me her throne?" A
  terrible genius (_i.e._ an Ifrit of the Jinn named Dhakwan or the
  notorious Sakhr) said, "I will bring it unto thee before thou arise
  from thy seat (of justice); for I am able to perform it, and may be
  trusted" (Koran, xxvii. 38-39). Balkís or _Bilkís_ (says the Durrat
  al-Ghawwás) daughter of Hozád bin Sharhabíl, twenty-second in the list
  of the rulers of Al-Yaman, according to some murdered her husband, and
  became, by Moslem ignorance, the Biblical "Queen of Sheba." The
  Abyssinians transfer her from Arabian Saba to Ethiopia and make her
  the mother by Solomon of Menelek, their proto-monarch; thus claiming
  for their royalties an antiquity compared with which all reigning
  houses in the world are of yesterday. The dates of the Tabábi'ah or
  Tobbas prove that the Bilkís of history ruled Al-Yaman in the early
  Christian era.

Footnote 184:

  Arab. "Fass," fiss or fuss; the gem set in a ring; also applied to a
  hillock rounded _en cabochon_. In The Nights it is used to signify "a
  fine gem."

Footnote 185:

  This prominence of the glutæi muscles is always insisted upon, because
  it is supposed to promise well in a bedfellow. In Somali-land, where
  the people are sub-steatopygous, a rich young man, who can afford such
  luxury, will have the girls drawn up in line and choose her to wife
  who projects furthest behind.

Footnote 186:

  The "bull" is only half mine.

Footnote 187:

  A favourite Arab phrase, the "hot eye" is one full of tears.

Footnote 188:

  _i.e._ "Coral," coral branch; a favourite name for a slave-girl,
  especially a negress. It is the older "Morgiana." I do not see why
  Preston in Al-Hariri's "Makamah (Séance) of Singar" renders it pearls,
  because Golius gives "small pearls," when it is evidently "coral."
  Richardson (Dissert. xlviii.) seems to me justified in finding the
  Pari (fairy) Marjan of heroic Persian history reflected in the Fairy
  Morgain who carried off King Arthur after the battle of Camelon.

Footnote 189:

  Arab. "'Ud Jalaki"=Jalak or Jalik being a poetical and almost obsolete
  name of Damascus.

Footnote 190:

  The fountain in Paradise whose water shall be drunk with "pure" wine
  mixed and sealed with musk (for clay). It is so called because it
  comes from the "Sanam" (Sanima, to be high) boss or highest ridge of
  the Moslem Heaven (Koran lv. 78 and lxxxiii. 27). Mr. Rodwell says "it
  is conveyed to the highest apartments in the Pavilions of Paradise."
  (?)

Footnote 191:

  This "hysterical" temperament is not rare even amongst the bravest
  Arabs.

Footnote 192:

  An idea evidently derived from the Æolipyla (olla animatoria) the
  invention of Hero Alexandrinus, which showed that the ancient
  Egyptians could apply the motive force of steam.

Footnote 193:

  Kuthayyir ibn Abi Jumah, a poet and far-famed Ráwí or Tale-reciter,
  mentioned by Ibn Kballikan: he lived at Al-Medinah and sang the
  attractions of one Azzah, hence his soubriquet Sáhib (lover of) Azzah.
  As he died in A.H. 105 (=726), his presence here is a gross
  anachronism: the imaginary Sharrkan flourished before the Caliphate of
  Abd al-Malik bin Marwán A.H. 65-86.

Footnote 194:

  Jamíl bin Ma'amar, a poet and lover contemporary with Al-Kuthayyir.

Footnote 195:

  Arab. "Tafazzal," a word of frequent use in conversations="favour me,"
  etc.

Footnote 196:

  The word has a long history. From the Gr. στίμμι or στίβι is the Lat.
  stibium; while the Low-Latin "antimonium" and the Span. Althimod are
  by metathesis for Al-Ithmid. The dictionaries define the substance as
  a stone from which antimony is prepared; but the Arabs understand a
  semi-mythical mineral of yellow colour which enters into the veins of
  the eyes and gives them lynx-like vision. The famous Anz nicknamed
  Zarká (the blue-eyed) of Yamámah (Province) used it; and, according to
  some, invented Kohl. When her (protohistoric) tribe Jadis had
  destroyed all the rival race of Tasm, except Ribáh ibn Murrah; the
  sole survivor fled to the Tobba of Al-Yaman, who sent a host to avenge
  him. The king commanded his Himyarites to cut tree-boughs and use them
  as screens (again Birman wood). Zarká from her Utum, or peel-tower,
  saw the army three marches off and cried, "O folk, either trees or
  Himyar are coming upon you!" adding, in Rajaz verse:—

     I swear by Allah that trees creep onward, or that Himyar beareth
         somewhat which he draweth along!

  She then saw a man mending his sandal. But Jadis disbelieved;
  Cassandra was slain and, when her eyes were cut out, the vessels were
  found full of Ithmid. Hence Al-Mutanabbi sang:

              "Sharper-sighted than Zarká of Jau" (Yamámah).

  See C. de Perceval i. 101; Arab. Prov. i. 192; and Chenery (p. 381.
  The Assemblies of Al-Hariri; London, Williams and Norgate, 1867). I
  have made many enquiries into the true nature of Ithmid and failed to
  learn anything: on the Upper Nile the word is=Kohl.

Footnote 197:

  The general colour of chessmen in the east, where the game is played
  on a cloth more often than a board.

Footnote 198:

  Arab. "Al-fil," the elephant=the French fol or fou and our bishop. I
  have derived "elephant" from Píl (old Persian, Sansk. Pilu) and Arab.
  Fil, with the article Al-Fil, whence the Greek ἐλέφας the suffix—as
  being devoted to barbarous words as Obod-as (Al-Ubayd), Aretas
  (Al-Háris), etc. Mr. Isaac Taylor (The Alphabet i. 169), preserves the
  old absurdity of "eleph-ant or ox-like (!) beast of Africa." Prof.
  Sayce finds the word al-ab (two distinct characters) in line 3, above
  the figure of an (Indian) elephant, on the black obelisk of Nimrod
  Mound, and suggests an Assyrian derivation.

Footnote 199:

  Arab. "Shaukat" which may also mean the "pride" or "mainstay" (of the
  army).

Footnote 200:

  Lit. "smote him on the tendons of his neck." This is the famous
  shoulder-cut (Tawashshuh) which, with the leg-cut (Kalam), formed, and
  still forms, the staple of Eastern attack with the sword.

Footnote 201:

  Arab. "Dirás." Easterns do not thresh with flails. The material is
  strewed over a round and smoothed floor of dried mud in the open air
  and threshed by different contrivances. In Egypt the favourite is a
  chair-like machine called "Norag," running on iron plates and drawn by
  bulls or cows over the corn. Generally, however, Moslems prefer the
  old classical Τρίβολον, the Tribulum of Virgil and Varro, a
  slipper-shaped sled of wood garnished on the sole with large-headed
  iron nails, or sharp fragments of flint or basalt. Thus is made the
  "Tibn" or straw, the universal hay of the East, which our machines
  cannot imitate.

Footnote 202:

  These numbers appear to be grossly exaggerated, but they were possible
  in the days of sword and armour: at the battle of Saffayn the Caliph
  Ali is said to have cut down five hundred and twenty-three men in a
  single night.

Footnote 203:

  Arab. "Biká'a": hence the "Buka'ah" or Cœlesyria.

Footnote 204:

  Richardson in his excellent dictionary (note 103) which modern
  priggism finds "unscientific," wonderfully derives this word from
  Arab. "Khattáf," a snatcher (_i.e._ of women), a ravisher. It is an
  evident corruption of "captivus" through Italian and French.

Footnote 205:

  These periodical and fair-like visitations to convents are still
  customary; especially amongst the Christians of Damascus.

Footnote 206:

  Camphor being then unknown.

Footnote 207:

  The "wrecker" is known all over the world; and not only barbarians
  hold that ships driven ashore become the property of the shore.

Footnote 208:

  Arab. "Jokh": it is not a dictionary word, but the only term in
  popular use for European broadcloth.

Footnote 209:

  The second person plural is used because the writer would involve the
  subjects of his correspondent in the matter.

Footnote 210:

  This part of the phrase, which may seem unnecessary to the European,
  is perfectly intelligible to all Orientalists. You may read many an
  Eastern letter and _not_ understand it. Compare Boccaccio iv. 1.

Footnote 211:

  _i.e._, he was greatly agitated.

Footnote 212:

  In text "_Li-ajal al-Taudí'a_," for the purpose of farewelling, a low
  Egyptianism; emphatically a "Kalám wáti." (Pilgrimage iii. 330.)

Footnote 213:

  In the Mac. Edit. Sharrkan speaks, a clerical error.

Footnote 214:

  The Farsakh (Germ. Stunde) a measure of time rather than distance, is
  an hour's travel or its equivalent, a league, a meile=three English
  stat. miles. The word is still used in Persia its true home, but not
  elsewhere. It is very old, having been determined as a lineal measure
  of distance by Herodotus (ii. 5 and 6; v. 53), who computes it at 30
  furlongs (=furrow-lengths, 8 to the stat. mile). Strabo (xi.) makes it
  range from 40 to 60 stades (each=606 feet 9 inches); and even now it
  varies between 1500 to 6,000 yards. Captain Francklin (Tour to Persia)
  estimates it=about four miles. (Pilgrimage ii. 113.)

Footnote 215:

  Arab. "Ashhab." Names of colours are few amongst semi-civilised
  peoples, but in Arabia there is a distinct word for every shade of
  horseflesh.

Footnote 216:

  She had already said to him "Thou art beaten in everything!"

Footnote 217:

  Showing that she was still a Christian.

Footnote 218:

  This is not Badawi sentiment: the honoratioren amongst wild people
  would scorn such foul play; but amongst the settled Arabs honour
  between men and women is unknown; and such "hocussing" would be held
  quite fair.

Footnote 219:

  The table of wine, in our day, is mostly a japanned tray with glasses
  and bottles, saucers of pickles and fruits and, perhaps, a bunch of
  flowers and aromatic herbs. During the Caliphate the "wine-service"
  was on a larger scale.

Footnote 220:

  Here the "Bhang" (almost a generic term applied to hellebore, etc.)
  may be hyoscyamus or henbane. Yet there are varieties of Cannabis,
  such as the Dakha of South Africa, capable of most violent effect. I
  found the use of the drug well known to the negroes of the Southern
  United States and of the Brazil, although few of their owners had ever
  heard of it.

Footnote 221:

  Amongst Moslems this is a reference to Adam who first "sinned against
  himself," and who therefore is called "Safíyu'llah," the Pure of Allah
  (Pilgrimage iii. 333).

Footnote 222:

  Meaning, an angry, violent man.

Footnote 223:

  Arab. "Inshád," which may mean reciting the verse of another or
  improvising one's own. In Modern Egypt "Munshid" is the singer or
  reciter of poetry at Zikrs (Lane M. E. chapt. xxiv.). Here the verses
  are quite bad enough to be improvised by the hapless Princess.

Footnote 224:

  The negro skin assumes this dust-colour in cold, fear, concupiscence
  and other mental emotions.

Footnote 225:

  He compares her glance with the blade of a Yamani sword, a _lieu
  commun_ of Eastern poetry. The weapons are famous in The Nights; but
  the best sword-cutlery came from Persia as the porcelain from China to
  Sana'á. Here, however, is especial allusion as to the sword "Samsam"
  or "Samsamah." It belonged to the Himyarite Tobba, Amru bin Ma'ad
  Kurb, and came into the hands of Harun al-Rashid. When the Emperor of
  the Greeks sent a present of superior sword-blades to him by way of a
  brave, the Caliph, in the presence of the Envoys, took "Samsam" in
  hand and cut the others in twain as if they were cabbages without the
  least prejudice to the edge of "Samsam."

Footnote 226:

  This touch of pathos is truly Arab. So in the "Romance of Dalhamah"
  (Lane, M. E. xxiii.) the infant Gundubah sucks the breast of its dead
  mother and the King exclaims, "If she had committed this crime she
  would not be affording the child her milk after she was dead."

Footnote 227:

  Arab. Sadda'l-Aktár, a term picturesque enough to be preserved in
  English. "Sadd," I have said, is a wall or dyke, the term applied to
  the great dam of water-plants which obstructs the navigation of the
  Upper Nile, the lilies and other growths floating with the current
  from the (Victoria) Nyanza Lake. I may note that we need no longer
  derive from India the lotus-lily so extensively used by the Ancient
  Egyptians and so neglected by the moderns that it has well nigh
  disappeared. All the Central African basins abound in the Nymphæa and
  thence it found its way down the Nile-Valley.

Footnote 228:

  Arab. "Al-Marhúmah": equivalent to our "late lamented."

Footnote 229:

  Vulgarly pronounced "Mahmal," and by Egyptians and Turks "Mehmel."
  Lane (M. E. xxiv.) has figured this queenly litter and I have sketched
  and described it in my Pilgrimage (iii. 12).

Footnote 230:

  For such fits of religious enthusiasm see my Pilgrimage (iii. 254).

Footnote 231:

  "Irák" (Mesopotamia) means "a level country beside the banks of a
  river."

Footnote 232:

  "Al-Kuds," or "Bayt al-Mukaddas," is still the popular name of
  Jerusalem, from the Heb. Yerushalaim ha-Kadushah (legend on shekel of
  Simon Maccabeus).

Footnote 233:

  "Follow the religion of Abraham" says the Koran (chapt. iii. 89).
  Abraham, titled "Khalílu'llah," ranks next in dignity to Mohammed,
  preceding Isa; I need hardly say that his tomb is not in Jerusalem nor
  is the tomb itself at Hebron ever visited. Here Moslems (soi disant)
  are allowed by the jealousies of Europe to close and conceal a place
  which belongs to the world, especially to Jews and Christians. The
  tombs, if they exist, lie in a vault or cave under the Mosque.

Footnote 234:

  Abá, or Abá'ah, vulg. Abáyah, is a cloak of hair, goat's or camel's;
  too well known to require description.

Footnote 235:

  Arab. "Al-Wakkád;" the man who lights and keeps up the bath-fires.

Footnote 236:

  Arab. "Má al-Khaláf"(or "Khiláf") a sickly perfume but much prized,
  made from the flowers of the Salix Ægyptiaca.

Footnote 237:

  Used by way of soap; like glasswort and other plants.

Footnote 238:

  _i.e._, "Thou art only just recovered."

Footnote 239:

  To "Nakh" is to gurgle "Ikh! Ikh!" till the camel kneels. Hence the
  space called "Barr al-Manákhah" in Al-Medinah (Pilgrimage i. 222, ii.
  91). There is a regular camel-vocabulary amongst the Arabs, made up
  like our "Gee" (go ye!), etc. of significant words worn down.

Footnote 240:

  Arab. "Laza," the Second Hell provided for Jews.

Footnote 241:

  The word has been explained (vol. i. 112). It is trivial, not
  occurring in the Koran which uses "Arabs of the Desert;" "Arabs who
  dwell in tents," etc. (chapt. ix. and xxxiii.). "A'arábi" is the
  classical word and the origin of "Arab" is disputed. According to
  Pocock (Notæ Spec. Hist. Arab.): "Diverse are the opinions concerning
  the denomination of the Arabs; but the most certain of all is that
  which draws it from Arabah, which is part of the region of Tehamah,
  (belonging to Al-Medinah, Pilgrimage ii. 118), which their father
  Ismail afterwards inhabited." Tehamah (tierra caliente) is the
  maritime region of Al-Hijaz, the Moslem's Holy Land; and its "Arabah,"
  a very small tract which named a very large tract, must not be
  confounded, as some have done, with the Wady Arabah, the ancient
  outlet of the Dead Sea. The derivation of "Arab" from "Ya'arab" a
  fancied son of Joktan is mythological. In Heb. Arabia may be called
  "Eretz Ereb" (or "Arab")=land of the West; but in Arabic "Gharb" (not
  Ereb) is the Occident and the Arab dates long before the Hebrew.

Footnote 242:

  "When thine enemy extends his hand to thee, cut it off if thou can, or
  kiss it," wisely said Caliph al-Mansúr.

Footnote 243:

  The Tartur was a peculiar turban worn by the Northern Arabs and shown
  in old prints. In modern Egypt the term is applied to the tall
  sugar-loaf caps of felt affected mostly by regular Dervishes.
  Burckhardt (Proverbs 194 and 398) makes it the high cap of felt or fur
  proper to the irregular cavalry called Dely or Delaty. In Dar For
  (Darfour) "Tartur" is a conical cap adorned with beads and cowries
  worn by the Manghwah or buffoon who corresponds with the Egyptian
  "Khalbús" or "Maskharah" and the Turkish "Sutari." For an illustration
  see Plate iv. fig. 10 of Voyage au Darfour par Mohammed El-Tounsy (The
  Tunisian), Paris, Duprat, 1845.

Footnote 244:

  The term is picturesque and true; we say "gnaw" which is not so good.

Footnote 245:

  Here, meaning an Elder, a Chief, etc.; the word has been almost
  naturalised in English. I have noted that Abraham was the first
  "Shaykh."

Footnote 246:

  This mention of weighing suggests the dust of Dean Swift and the money
  of the Gold Coast. It was done, I have said, because the gold coin,
  besides being "sweated" was soft and was soon worn down.

Footnote 247:

  Fem. of Nájí (a deliverer, a saviour)=Salvadora.

Footnote 248:

  This, I have noted, is according to Koranic command (chapt. iv. 88).
  "When you are saluted with a salutation, salute the person with a
  better salutation." The longer answer to "Peace be with (or upon)
  thee!" is still universally the custom. The "Salám" is so differently
  pronounced by every Eastern nation that the observant traveller will
  easily make of it a Shibboleth.

Footnote 249:

  The Badawi, who was fool as well as rogue, begins to fear that he has
  kidnapped a girl of family.

Footnote 250:

  These examinations being very indecent are usually done in strictest
  privacy. The great point is to make sure of virginity.

Footnote 251:

  This is according to strict Moslem law: the purchaser may not look at
  the girl's nakedness till she is his, and he ought to manage matters
  through an old woman.

Footnote 252:

  Lit. wrath; affliction which chokes; in Hindustani it means simply
  anger.

Footnote 253:

  _i.e._, Heaven forbid I be touched by a strange man.

Footnote 254:

  Used for fuel and other purposes, such as making "Joss stick."

Footnote 255:

  Arab. "Yaftah' Allah" the offer being insufficient. The rascal is
  greedy as a Badawi and moreover he is a liar, which the Badawi is not.

Footnote 256:

  The third of the four great Moslem schools of Theology, taking its
  name from the Imam al-Sháfi'í (Mohammed ibn Idris) who died in Egypt
  A.H. 204, and lies buried near Cairo (Sale's Prel. Disc. sect. viii.).

Footnote 257:

  The Moslem form of Cabbala, or transcendental philosophy of the
  Hebrews.

Footnote 258:

  Arab. "Bakh" the word used by the Apostle to Ali his son-in-law. It is
  the Latin "Euge."

Footnote 259:

  Readers, who read for amusement, will do well to "skip" the fadaises
  of this highly educated young woman.

Footnote 260:

  There are three Persian Kings of this name (Artaxerxes) which means
  "Flour and milk," or "high lion." The text alludes to Ardeshir
  Babegan, so called because he married the daughter of Babak the
  shepherd, founder of the Sassanides in A.D. 202. See D'Herbelot, and
  the Dabistan.

Footnote 261:

  Alluding to the proverb, "Folk follow their King's faith," "Cujus
  regio ejus religio," etc.

Footnote 262:

  Second Abbaside, A.H. 136-158 (=754-775).

Footnote 263:

  The celebrated companion of Mohammed who succeeded Abu Bakr in the
  Caliphate (A. H. 13-23=634-644). The Sunnis know him as Al-Adil, the
  Just; and the Shiahs detest him for his usurpation, his austerity and
  harshness. It is said that he laughed once, and wept once. The laugh
  was caused by recollecting how he ate his dough-gods (the idols of the
  Hanifah tribe) in The Ignorance. The tears were drawn by remembering
  how he buried alive his baby daughter who, while the grave was being
  dug, patted away the dust from his hair and beard. Omar was doubtless
  a great man, but he is one of the most ungenial figures in Moslem
  history which does not abound in genialities. To me he suggests a
  Puritan, a Covenanter of the sourest and narrowest type; and I cannot
  wonder that the Persians abhor him, and abuse him on all occasions.

Footnote 264:

  The austere Caliph Omar whose scourge was more feared than the sword
  was the author of the celebrated saying "Consult them (feminines) and
  do clear contrary-wise." The dictum is illustrated by a dozen Joe
  Millers known throughout the East.

Footnote 265:

  Our "honour amongst thieves."

Footnote 266:

  The sixth successor of Mohammed and founder of the Banu Umayyah or
  Ommiades, called the "sons of the little mother" from their eponymus
  (A.H. 41-60=661-680). For his Badawi wife Maysun, and her abuse of her
  husband, see Pilgrimage iii. 262.

Footnote 267:

  Shaykh of the noble tribe, or rather nation, Banu Tamím and a notable
  of the day, surnamed, no one knows why, "Sire of the Sea."

Footnote 268:

  This is essential for cleanliness in hot lands: however much the bath
  may be used, the body-pile and lower hair, if submitted to a
  microscope, will show more or less sordes adherent. The axilla-hair is
  plucked because if shaved the growing pile causes itching and the
  depilatories are held deleterious. At first vellication is painful but
  the skin becomes used to it. The pecten is shaved either without or
  after using depilatories, of which more presently. The body-pile is
  removed by "Takhfíf"; the Libán Shámi (Syrian incense), a fir-gum
  imported from Scio, is melted and allowed to cool in the form of a
  pledget. This is passed over the face and all the down adhering to it
  is pulled up by the roots (Burckhardt No. 420). Not a few
  Anglo-Indians have adopted these precautions.

Footnote 269:

  This Caliph was a tall, fair, handsome man of awe-inspiring aspect.
  Omar used to look at him and say, "This is the Cæsar of the Arabs,"
  while his wife called him a "fatted ass."

Footnote 270:

  The saying is attributed to Abraham when "exercised" by the unkindly
  temper of Sarah; "woman is made hard and crooked like a rib;" and the
  modern addition is, "whoso would straighten her, breaketh her."

Footnote 271:

  _i.e._, "When ready and in erection."

Footnote 272:

  "And do first (before going in to your wives) some act which may be
  profitable unto your souls"—or, for your soul's good. (Koran, chapt.
  ii. 223.). Hence Ahnaf makes this prayer.

Footnote 273:

  It was popularly said that "Truth-speaking left Omar without a
  friend." Entitled "The Just" he was murdered by Abu Lúlúah, alias
  Fírúz, a (Magian?) slave of Al-Maghírah for denying him justice.

Footnote 274:

  Governor of Bassorah under the first four Caliphs. See D'Herbelot _s.
  v._ "Aschári."

Footnote 275:

  Ziyad bin Abi Sufyan, illegitimate brother of the Caliph Mu'awiyah
  afterwards governor of Bassorah, Cufa and Al-Hijaz.

Footnote 276:

  The seditions in Kufah were mainly caused by the wilful nepotism of
  Caliph Othman bin Asákir which at last brought about his death. His
  main quality seems to have been personal beauty: "never was seen man
  or woman of fairer face than he and he was the most comely of men:" he
  was especially famed for beautiful teeth which in old age he bound
  about with gold wire. He is described as of middling stature,
  large-limbed, broad shouldered, fleshy of thigh and long in the
  fore-arm which was hairy. His face inclined to yellow and was
  pock-marked; his beard was full and his curly hair, which he dyed
  yellow, fell below his ears. He is called "writer of the Koran" from
  his edition of the MS., and "Lord of the two Lights" because he
  married two of the Prophet's daughters, Rukayyah and Umm Kulthum; and,
  according to the Shi'ahs who call him Othman-i-Lang or "limping
  Othman," he vilely maltreated them. They justify his death as the act
  of an Ijmá' al-Muslimin, the general consensus of Moslems which
  ratifies "Lynch law." Altogether Othman is a mean figure in history.

Footnote 277:

  "Nár" (fire) is a word to be used delicately from its connection with
  Gehenna. You say, _e.g._ "bring me a light, a coal (bassah)" etc.; but
  if you say "bring me fire!" the enemy will probably remark "He wanteth
  fire even before his time!" The slang expression would be "bring the
  sweet:" (Pilgrimage i. 121.)

Footnote 278:

  Omar is described as a man of fair complexion, and very ruddy, but he
  waxed tawny with age, when he also became bald and grey. He had little
  hair on the cheeks but a long mustachio with reddish ends. In stature
  he overtopped the people and was stout as he was tall. A popular
  saying of Mohammed's is, "All (very) long men are fools save Omar, and
  all (very) short men are knaves save Ali." The Persians, who abhor
  Omar, compare every lengthy, ungainly, longsome thing with him; they
  will say, "This road never ends, like the entrails of Omar." We know
  little about Ali's appearance except that he was very short and stout,
  broad and full-bellied with a tawny complexion and exceedingly hairy,
  his long beard, white as cotton filling all the space between his
  shoulders. He was a "pocket-Hercules," and incredible tales, like that
  about the gates of Khaybar, are told of his strength. Lastly, he was
  the only Caliph who bequeathed anything to literature: his
  "Cantiloquium" is famous and he has left more than one mystical and
  prophetic work. See Ockley for his "Sentences" and D'Herbelot _s. v._
  "Ali" and "Gebr." Ali is a noble figure in Moslem history.

Footnote 279:

  The emancipation from the consequences of his sins; or it may mean a
  holy death.

Footnote 280:

  Battle fought near Al-Medinah A.D. 625. The word is derived from
  "Ahad" (one). I have described the site in my Pilgrimage, vol. ii.
  227.

Footnote 281:

  "Haphsa" in older writers; Omar's daughter and one of Mohammed's
  wives, famous for her connection with the manuscripts of the Koran.
  From her were (or claimed to be) descended the Hafsites who reigned in
  Tunis and extended their power far and wide over the Maghrib
  (Mauritania), till dispossessed by the Turks.

Footnote 282:

  _i.e._ humbly without the usual strut or swim: it corresponds with the
  biblical walking or going softly (1 Kings xxi. 27; Isaiah xxxviii. 15,
  etc.).

Footnote 283:

  A theologian of the seventh and eighth centuries.

Footnote 284:

  _i.e._ to prepare himself by good works, especially alms-giving, for
  the next world.

Footnote 285:

  A theologian of the eighth century.

Footnote 286:

  Abd al-Aziz was eighth Ommiade (regn. A.H. 99=717) and the fifth of
  the orthodox, famed for a piety little known to his house. His most
  celebrated saying was, "Be constant in meditation on death: if thou be
  in straitened case 'twill enlarge it, and if in affluence 'twill
  straiten it upon thee." He died, poisoned, it is said, in A.H. 101.

Footnote 287:

  Abu Bakr originally called Abd al-Ka'ahah (slave of the Ka'abah) took
  the name of Abdullah and was surnamed Abu Bakr (father of the virgin)
  when Mohammed, who before had married only widows, took to wife his
  daughter, the famous or infamous Ayishah. "Bikr" is the usual form,
  but "Bakr," primarily meaning a young camel, is metaphorically applied
  to human youth (Lane's Lex. _s. v._). The first Caliph was a
  cloth-merchant, like many of the Meccan chiefs. He is described as
  very fair with bulging brow, deep-set eyes and thin-cheeked, of
  slender build and lean-loined, stooping and with the backs of his
  hands fleshless. He used tinctures of Henna and Katam for his beard.
  The Persians who hate him, call him "Pir-i-Kaftár," the old she-hyæna,
  and believe that he wanders about the deserts of Arabia in perpetual
  rut which the males must satisfy.

Footnote 288:

  The second, fifth, sixth and seventh Ommiades.

Footnote 289:

  The mother of Omar bin Abd al-Aziz was a granddaughter of Omar bin
  Al-Khattab.

Footnote 290:

  Brother of this Omar's successor, Yezid II.

Footnote 291:

  So the Turkish proverb "The fish begins to stink at the head."

Footnote 292:

  Calling to the slaves.

Footnote 293:

  When the "Day of Arafat" (9th of Zú'l-Hijjah) falls upon a Friday. For
  this Hajj al-Akbar see my Pilgrimage iii. 226. It is often confounded
  by writers (even by the learned M. Caussin de Perceval) with the
  common Pilgrimage as opposed to the Umrah, or "Lesser Pilgrimage"
  (ibid. iii. 342, etc.). The latter means etymologically cohabiting
  with a woman in her father's house as opposed to 'Ars or leading her
  to the husband's home: it is applied to visiting Meccah and going
  through all the pilgrim-rites but not at the Pilgrimage-season. Hence
  its title "Hajj al-Asghar" the "Lesser Hajj." But "Umrah" is also
  applied to a certain ceremony between the hills Safá (a large hard
  rock) and Marwah (stone full of flints), which accompanies the Hajj
  and which I have described (ibid. iii. 344). At Meccah I also heard of
  two places called Al-Umrah, the Greater in the Wady Fátimah and the
  Lesser half way nearer the city (ibid. iii. 344).

Footnote 294:

  A fair specimen of the unworthy egoism which all religious systems
  virtually inculcate. Here a pious father leaves his children miserable
  to save his own dirty soul.

Footnote 295:

  Chief of the Banú Tamím, one of noblest of tribes derived from Tamím,
  the uncle of Kuraysh (Koreish); hence the poets sang:—

                There cannot be a son nobler than Kuraysh,
                Nor an uncle nobler than Tamím.

  The high-minded Tamím is contrasted with the mean-spirited Kays, who
  also gave rise to a tribe; and hence the saying concerning one
  absolutely inconsistent, "Art thou now Tamím and then Kays?"

Footnote 296:

  Surnamed Al-Sakafí, Governor of Al-Yaman and Irak.

Footnote 297:

  Tenth Ommiade (regn. A.H. 105-125=724-743).

Footnote 298:

  Or "clothe thee in worn-out clothes" _i.e._ "Become a Fakir" or
  religious mendicant.

Footnote 299:

  This gratuitous incest in ignorance injures the tale and is as
  repugnant to Moslem as to Christian taste.

Footnote 300:

  The child is named either on the day of its birth or on that day week.
  The father whispers it in the right ear, often adding the Azán or
  prayer-call, and repeating in the left ear the "Ikámah" or Friday
  sentence. There are many rules for choosing names according to the
  week-day, the ascendant planet, the "Sortes Coranicæ," etc.

Footnote 301:

  Amongst Moslems as amongst Christians there are seven deadly sins:
  idolatry, murder, falsely charging modest women with unchastity,
  robbing orphans, usury, desertion in Holy War and disobedience to
  parents. The difference between the two creeds is noteworthy. And the
  sage knows only three, intemperance, ignorance and egoism.

Footnote 302:

  Meaning, "It was decreed by Destiny; so it came to pass," appropriate
  if not neat.

Footnote 303:

  The short, stout, dark, long-haired and two bunched camel from
  "Bukhtar" (Bactria), the "Eastern" (Bakhtar) region on the Amu or
  Jayhún (Oxus) River; afterwards called Khorasan. The two-humped camel
  is never seen in Arabia except with northern caravans, and to speak of
  it would be a sore test of Badawi credulity.

Footnote 304:

  "Kaylúlah" is the "forty-winks" about noon: it is a Sunnat or Practice
  of the Prophet who said, "Make the mid-day siesta, for verily at this
  hour the devils sleep not." "Aylúlah" is slumbering after morning
  prayers (our "beauty-sleep"), causing heaviness and idleness:
  "Ghaylúlah" is dozing about 9 a.m. engendering poverty and
  wretchedness: "Kaylúlah" (with the guttural Kaf) is sleeping before
  evening prayers and "Faylúlah" is slumbering after sunset—both held to
  be highly detrimental. (Pilgrimage ii. 49.)

Footnote 305:

  The Biblical "Hamath" (Hightown) too well known to require
  description. It is still famous for the water-wheels mentioned by
  al-Hariri (assembly of the Banu Harám).

Footnote 306:

  When they say, The leven flashes bright on the hills of Al-Yaman, the
  allusion is to the south quarter, where summer-lightning is seen.
  Al-Yaman (always with the article) means, I have said, the right-hand
  region to one facing the rising sun and Al-Sham (Syria) the left-hand
  region.

Footnote 307:

  Again "he" for "she," in delicacy and jealousy of making public the
  beauty or conditions of the "veiled sex." Even public singers would
  hesitate to use a feminine pronoun. As will be seen, however, the rule
  is not invariably kept and hardly ever in Badawi poetry.

Footnote 308:

  The normal pun on "Nuzhat al-Zaman"=Delight of the Age or Time.

Footnote 309:

  The reader will find in my Pilgrimage (i. 305) a sketch of the
  Takht-rawan or travelling-litter, in which pilgrimesses are wont to
  sleep.

Footnote 310:

  In poetry it holds the place of our Zephyr; and the
  "Bád-i-Sabá"=Breeze o' the morn, is much addressed by Persian poets.

Footnote 311:

  Here appears the nervous, excitable, hysterical Arab temperament which
  is almost phrensied by the neighbourhood of a home from which he had
  run away.

Footnote 312:

  Zau al-Makan and Nuzhat al-Zaman.

Footnote 313:

  The idea is essentially Eastern, "A lion at home and a lamb abroad" is
  the popular saying.

Footnote 314:

  Arab. "Hubb al-Watan" (=love of birthplace, patriotism) of which the
  Tradition says "Min al-Imán" (=is part of man's religion).

Footnote 315:

  He is supposed to speak _en prince_; and he yields to a prayer when he
  spurns a command.

Footnote 316:

  In such caravans each party must keep its own place under pain of
  getting into trouble with the watchmen and guards.

Footnote 317:

  Mr. Payne (ii. 109) borrows this and the next quotation from the Bul.
  Edit. i. 386.

Footnote 318:

  For the expiation of inconsiderate oaths see Koran (chapt. v.) I
  cannot but think that Al-Islam treats perjury too lightly: all we can
  say is that it improves upon Hinduism, which practically seems to
  leave the punishment to the gods.

Footnote 319:

  "Kausar," as has been said, represents the classical nectar, the
  Amrita of the Hindus.

Footnote 320:

  From Bul. Edit. i. 186. The couplet in the Mac. Edit. i. 457 is very
  wildly applied.

Footnote 321:

  The "insula" of Sancho Panza.

Footnote 322:

  This should have assured him that he stood in no danger.

Footnote 323:

  Here ends the wearisome tale of the brother and sister and the romance
  of chivalry begins once more with the usual Arab digressions.

Footnote 324:

  I have derived this word from the Persian "rang"=colour, hue, kind.

Footnote 325:

  Otherwise all would be superseded, like U. S. officials under a new
  President.

Footnote 326:

  Arab. "Nímshah" from the Pers. Nímchah, a "half-sword," a long dagger
  worn in the belt. Richardson derives it from Namsh, being freckled
  (damasked).

Footnote 327:

  The Indian term for a tent large enough to cover a troop of cavalry.

Footnote 328:

  Arab. "Marhúm" a formula before noticed. It is borrowed from the
  Jewish, "of blessed memory" (after the name of the honoured dead,
  Prov. x. 17.); with the addition of "upon whom be peace," as opposed
  to the imprecation, "May the name of the wicked rot!"

Footnote 329:

  The speeches of the five damsels should be read only by students.

Footnote 330:

  _i.e._ Those who look for "another and a better."

Footnote 331:

  The title of Caliph Abu Bakr because he bore truthful witness to the
  Apostle's mission or, others say, he confirmed the "Mi'ráj" or
  nocturnal journey to Heaven.

Footnote 332:

  All this is Koranic (chapt. ii., etc.)

Footnote 333:

  This may have applied more than once to "hanging judges" in the Far
  West.

Footnote 334:

  A traditionist and jurisconsult of Al-Medinah in the seventh and
  eighth centuries.

Footnote 335:

  The Alexander of the Koran and Eastern legends not to be confounded
  with the Alexander of Macedon. He will be noticed in a future Night.

Footnote 336:

  Æsop, according to the Arabs: of him or rather of the two Lukmans,
  more presently.

Footnote 337:

  Koran ii. 185.

Footnote 338:

  Mohammed.

Footnote 339:

  One of the Asháb or Companions of Mohammed.

Footnote 340:

  A noted traditionist at Cufa in the seventh century.

Footnote 341:

  Koran, chapt. lxxiv. 1 (and verse 8 follows). The Archangel Gabriel is
  supposed to address Mohammed and not a few divines believe this Surah
  (chapter) to have been first revealed. Mr. Rodwell makes it No. ii.
  following the Fatrah or silent interval which succeeded No. xcvi.
  "Clots of Blood." See his 2nd Edit. p. 3 for further details.

Footnote 342:

  _i.e._ dangerous to soul-health.

Footnote 343:

  In the Mac. Edit. "Abd" for "Sa'id." The latter was a black and a
  native of Cufa during the first century (A.H.) and is still famous as
  a traditionist.

Footnote 344:

  Arab. "Shirk," giving a partner to Allah, attending chiefly to
  Christians and idolaters; and in a minor degree to Jews and Guebres.
  We usually English it by "polytheism," which is clumsy and conveys a
  wrong idea.

Footnote 345:

  Grandson of the Caliph Ali. He is one of the Imams (High-priests) of
  the Shi'ah school.

Footnote 346:

  An eminent traditionist of the eighth century (A.D.)

Footnote 347:

  The prayers of the Fast-month and Pilgrimage-month are often said in
  especial places outside the towns and cities; these are the Indian
  Id(Eed-)gáh. They have a screen of wall about a hundred yards long
  with a central prayer-niche and the normal three steps for the
  preacher; and each extremity is garnished with an imitation minaret.
  They are also called Namáz-gah and one is sketched by Herklots (Plate
  iii. fig. 2). The object of the trips thither in Zu'l-Ka'adah and
  Zú'l-Hijjah is to remind Moslems of the "Ta'aríf," or going forth from
  Meccah to Mount Arafat.

Footnote 348:

  Arab. "Al-Háfi," which in Egyptian means sore-footed as well. He was
  an ascetic of the eighth and ninth centuries (A.D.). He relates a
  tradition of the famous soldier-saint Khálid bin Walíd who lies buried
  like the poet Ka'ab al-Ahbár near Hums (Emessa) once the Bœotia,
  Phrygia, Abdera, Suabia of Syria now Halbun (pronounced Halbáun) near
  Damascus. I cannot explain how this Kuraysh noble (a glorious figure
  in Moslem history) is claimed by the Afghans as one of their
  countrymen and made to speak Pukhtu or Pushtu, their rough old dialect
  of Persian. The curious reader will consult my Pilgrimage iii. 322 for
  the dialogue between Mohammed and Khalid. Again there is general
  belief in Arabia that the English sent a mission to the Prophet,
  praying that Khalid might be despatched to proselytise them:
  unfortunately Mohammed was dead and the "Ingriz" ratted. It is
  popularly held that no armed man can approach Khalid's grave; but I
  suppose my revolver did not count.

Footnote 349:

  When he must again wash before continuing prayer.

Footnote 350:

  Bin Adham; another noted ascetic of the eighth century. Those curious
  about these unimportant names will consult the great Biographical
  Dictionary of Ibn Khallikan, translated by Baron MacGuckin de Slane
  (1842-45).

Footnote 351:

  Thus making Bishr the "Imám" (antistes) lit. one who stands in front.
  In Koran xvii. 74 it means "leader": in ii. 118 Allah makes Abraham an
  "Imam to mankind."

Footnote 352:

  A favourite sentiment in the East: we find it at the very beginning of
  Sa'di's Gulistan: better a weal-bringing lie than a harm-dealing
  truth.

Footnote 353:

  A penny, one sixth of the drachma.

Footnote 354:

  Founder of the Hanbali, fourth (in date) of the four orthodox Moslem
  schools. The Caliph al-Mu'atasim bi'llah, son of Harun al-Rashid, who
  believed the Koran to have been created and not a Logos (whatever that
  may be), co-eternal with Allah, scourged this Imam severely for
  "differing in opinion" (A.H. 220=833). In fact few of the notable
  reverends of that day escaped without a caress of the scourge or the
  sword.

Footnote 355:

  A learned man of the eighth century at Bassorah (A.D.).

Footnote 356:

  A traditionist of Khorasan in the ninth century (A.D.).

Footnote 357:

  "Azal," opp. to "Abad," eternity without end, infinity.

Footnote 358:

  Koran lxvi. 6.

Footnote 359:

  A traditionist of Al-Medinah, eighth century (A.D.).

Footnote 360:

  Arab. "Músá": the Egyptian word was "Mesu," the "child" or the "boy"
  (brought up in the palace?), and the Hebrews made it "Mosheh" or "one
  drawn out of the water;" "Mu" in Egypt being water, the Arab "Ma";
  whence probably the moderns have derived the dim. "Moyeh;" vulg.
  Egyptian for water.

Footnote 361:

  Koran, chapt. xxviii.: Shu'ayb is our Jethro: Koran, chapt. vii. and
  xi. Mr Rodwell suggests (p. 101) that the name has been altered from
  Hobab (Numb. x 29).

Footnote 362:

  Arab. "Taub" (Saub), the long shirt popularly written in English Tobe
  and pronounced so by Egyptians. It is worn by both sexes (Lane, M. E.
  chapt. i. "Tob") in Egypt, and extends into the heart of Moslem
  Africa: I can compare it with nothing but a long nightgown dyed a
  dirty yellow by safflower and about as picturesque as a carter's
  smock-frock.

Footnote 363:

  There is nothing of this in the Koran; and it is a most unhappy
  addition, as Moses utterly and pretentiously ignored a "next world."

Footnote 364:

  Koran xxviii. 22-27. Mohammed evidently confounded the contract
  between Laban and Jacob (Gen. xxix. 15-39).

Footnote 365:

  So says Al Hariri (Ass. of Sasan), "The neighbour before the house and
  the traveller before the journey." In certain cities the neighbourhood
  is the real detective police, noting every action and abating scandals
  (such as orgies, etc.) with a strong hand and with the full consent of
  public opinion and of the authorities. This loving the neighbour shows
  evident signs of being borrowed from Christianity.

Footnote 366:

  Al-Asamm, a theologian of Balkh, ninth century (A.D.).

Footnote 367:

  The founder of the Senior School, for which see Sale Prel. Disc. sect.
  viii.

Footnote 368:

  Thus serving the Lord by sinning against his own body.

Footnote 369:

  An Egyptian doctor of the law (ninth century).

Footnote 370:

  Koran lxxvii. 35, 36. This is one of the earliest and most poetical
  chapters of the book.

Footnote 371:

  Abu Hanifah was scourged for refusing to take office and was put to
  death in prison, it is said by poison (A.H. 150=A.D. 767), for a
  judicial sentence authorising rebellion against the second Abbaside,
  Al-Mansúr, surnamed Abu'l-Dawánik (Father of Pence) for his exceeding
  avarice.

Footnote 372:

  "Lá rayba fí-hi" says the Koran (ii. 1) of itself; and the saying is
  popularly applied to all things of the Faith.

Footnote 373:

  Arab. "Rijál al-Ghayb," somewhat like the "Himalayan Brothers" of
  modern superstition. See Herklots (Qanoon-e-Islam) for a long and
  careful description of these "Mardán-i-Ghayb" (Pers.), a "class of
  people mounted on clouds," invisible, but moving in a circular orbit
  round the world; and suggesting the Hindu "Lokapálas." They should not
  be in front of the traveller nor on his right, but either behind or on
  his left hand. Hence tables, memorial couplets and hemistichs are
  required to ascertain the station, without which precaution journeys
  are apt to end badly.

Footnote 374:

  A sweetmeat before noticed.

Footnote 375:

  Door-hinges in the east are two projections for the top and bottom of
  the leaf playing in hollows of the lintel and threshold. It appears to
  be the primitive form, for we find it in the very heart of Africa. In
  the basaltic cities of the Hauran, where the doors are of thick stone,
  they move easily on these pins. I found them also in the official (not
  the temple) City of Palmyra, but all broken.

Footnote 376:

  The effect of the poison and of the incantation which accompanied it.

Footnote 377:

  King Omar who had raped her. My sympathies are all with the old woman
  who rightly punished the royal lecher.

Footnote 378:

  Arab. "Zunnár," the Gr. ζώνη. Christians and Jews were compelled by
  the fanatical sumptuary laws of the Caliph Al-Mutawakkil (A.D. 856) to
  wear a broad leather belt in public; hence it became a badge of the
  Faith. Probably it was confounded with the "Janeo" (Brahmanical
  thread) and the Parsi sacred girdle called Kashti. (Dabistan i, 297,
  etc.). Both Mandeville and La Brocquière speak of "Christians of the
  Girdle, because they are all girt above;" intending Jacobites or
  Nestorians.

Footnote 379:

  "Siláh-dár" (Arab. and Pers.)=a military officer of high rank;
  literally an "armour-bearer," chosen for valour and trustworthiness.
  So Jonathan had a "young man" (brave) who bare his armour (1 Sam. xiv.
  1, 6 and 7); and Goliath had a man that bare the shield before him
  (ibid. xvii. 7, 41). Men will not readily forget the name of Sulayman
  Agha, called the Silahdar, in Egypt (Lane M. E. chapt. iv.).

Footnote 380:

  It will be told afterwards.

Footnote 381:

  The elder brother thus showed himself a vassal and proved himself a
  good Moslem by not having recourse to civil war.

Footnote 382:

  Arab. "Ghazwah," the corrupt Gallicism, now Europeanised=raid, foray.

Footnote 383:

  Turk in modern parlance means a Turkoman, a nomade: the settled people
  call themselves Osmanli or Othmanli. Turkoman=Turk-like.

Footnote 384:

  Arab. "Nimsá;" southern Germans, Austrians; from the Slav. "Nemica"
  (any Germans), literally meaning "The dumb" (nemac), because they
  cannot speak Slav.

Footnote 385:

  Arab. "Dubárá" from the Slav. "Dubrovnik," from "Dub" (an oak) and
  "Dubrava" (an oak forest). Ragusa, once a rival of Venice, gave rise
  to the word "Argosy." D'Herbelot calls it "Dobravenedik" or "Good
  Venice," the Turkish name, because it paid tribute when Venice would
  not (?).

Footnote 386:

  Arab. "Jawarnah," or, "Júrnah" evidently Zara, a place of many names,
  Jadera (Hirtius de Bell. Alex. cap. 13), Jadra, Zadra (whence the
  modern term), Diadora, Diadosca and Jadrossa. This important Liburnian
  city sent forth many cruisers in crusading days; hence the Arabs came
  to know its name.

Footnote 387:

  Arab. "Banu 'l-Asfar;" which may mean "Pale faces," in the sense of
  "yaller girls" (New Orleans) and that intended by North American
  Indians, or, possibly, the peoples with yellow (or rather
  tow-coloured) hair we now call Russians. The races of Hindostan term
  the English not "white men," but "red men;" and the reason will at
  once be seen by comparing a Britisher with a high-caste Nágar Brahman
  whose face is of parchment-colour as if he had drunk _exsangue
  cuminum_. The Yellow-faces of the text correspond with the Sansk.
  "Svetadvipa"—Whiteman's Land.

Footnote 388:

  Arab. "Al-Musakhkham." No Moslem believes that Isa was crucified and a
  favourite fancy is that Judas, changed to the likeness of Jesus, thus
  paid for his treason. (Evangel. Barnabæ). Hence the resurrection is
  called not "Kiyámah" but "Kumámah"=rubbish. This heresy about the
  Cross they share with the Docetes, "certain beasts in the shape of
  men" (says Ignatius), who held that a phantom was crucified. So far
  the Moslems are logical, for "Isa," being angelically, miraculously
  and immaculately conceived, could not die; but they contradict
  themselves when they hold a vacant place near Mohammed's tomb for the
  body of Isa after his second coming as a forerunner to Mohammed and
  Doomday (Pilgrimage ii. 89).

Footnote 389:

  A Diviner, a priest, esp. Jewish, and not belonging to the tribe of
  Levi.

Footnote 390:

  Again the coarsest word "Khara." The allusion is to the vulgar saying,
  "Thou eatest skite!" (_i.e._ thou talkest nonsense). Decent English
  writers modify this to, "Thou eatest dirt:" and Lord Beaconsfield made
  it ridiculous by turning it into "eating _sand_."

Footnote 391:

  These silly scandals, which cause us only to smile, excite Easterns to
  fury. I have seen a Moslem wild with rage on hearing a Christian
  parody the opening words of the Koran, "Bismillahi 'l-Rahmáni
  'l-Rahím, Mismish wa Kamar al-din," roughly translated, "In the name
  of Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate! Apricots and
  marmalade." The idea of the Holy Merde might have been suggested by
  the Hindus: see Mandeville, of the archiprotopapaton (prelate)
  carrying ox-dung and urine to the King, who therewith anoints his brow
  and breast, &c. And, incredible to relate, this is still practised
  after a fashion by the Parsis, one of the most progressive and the
  sharpest witted of Asiatic races.

Footnote 392:

  Meaning that he had marked his brow with a cross (of ashes?) as
  certain do on Ash-Wednesday.

Footnote 393:

  Syria, the "left-hand land" as has before been explained. The popular
  saying about its people is "Shámi shúmi!"—the Syrian is small potatoes
  (to render the sense Americanicè). Nor did Syrus, the slave in Roman
  days, bear the best of names. In Al-Hijaz the Syrian is addressed "Abú
  Shám" (Father of Syria) and insulted as "Abuser of the Salt" a
  (traitor). Yet many sayings of Mohammed are recorded in honour of
  Syria, and he sometimes used Syriac words. Such were "Bakh, bakh"
  (=euge, before noticed), and "Kakh," a congener of the Latin Cacus and
  Caca which our day has docked to "cack." (Pilgrimage iii. 115).

Footnote 394:

  Koran xiv. 34. "They (Unbelievers) shall be thrown therein (_i.e._,
  the House of Perdition=Hell); and an unhappy dwelling shall it be."

Footnote 395:

  The leg-cut is a prime favourite with the Eastern Sworder, and a heavy
  two-handed blade easily severs a horse's leg.

Footnote 396:

  Mohammed repeatedly declared (Koran lxi.) that the Christians had
  falsified the passage ("I go to my Father and the Paraclete shall
  come," John xvi. 7) promising the advent of the Comforter, παράκλητος,
  (ibid. xiv. 20; xv. 26) by substituting the latter word for περικλυτός
  glorious, renowned, _i.e._, Ahmed or Mohammed=the praised one. This
  may have been found in the Arabic translation of the Gospels made by
  Warakah, cousin to Mohammed's first wife; and hence in Koran lxi. we
  find Jesus prophesying of an Apostle "whose name shall be Ahmad." The
  word has consequently been inserted into the Arabic Gospel of Saint
  Barnabas (Dabistan iii. 67). Moslems accept the Pentateuch, the
  Psalter and the Gospel; but assert (Koran, _passim_) that all extant
  copies have been Hopelessly corrupted, and they are right. Moses, to
  whom the Pentateuch is attributed, notices his own death and
  burial—"the mair the miracle," said the old Scotch lady. The "Psalms
  of David" range over a period of some five hundred years, and there
  are three Isaiahs who pass with the vulgar for one. The many
  apocryphal Gospels, all of which have been held genuine and canonical
  at different times and in different places, prove that the four, which
  are still in use, were retained because they lack the manifest
  absurdities of their discarded rivals.

Footnote 397:

  Arab. "Labbayka;" the Pilgrimage-cry (Night xxii.) which in Arabic is,

               Labbayk' Allahumma, Labbayk'!
               Lá Sharíka laka, Labbayk'!
               Inna 'l-hamda w'al ni'amata laka wa'l mulk!
               Labbayk' Allahumma, Labbayk'!

  Some add "Here am I, and I honour Thee, the son of Thy two slaves;
  beneficence and good are all between Thy hands." With the "Talbiyah"
  the pilgrim should bless the Prophet, pray Allah to grant Heaven and
  exclaim, "By Thy mercy spare us from the pains of Hell-fire!"
  (Pilgrimage iii. 232.) Labbayka occurs in the verses attributed to
  Caliph Ali; so labba=he faced and yalubbu=it faces (as one house faces
  another); lastly, he professed submission to Allah; in which sense,
  together with the verbal noun "Talbiyah," it is used by Al-Hariri
  (Pref. and Ass. of Su'adah).

Footnote 398:

  Arab. Kissís (plur. Kusús) from Ἐκκλησιαστὴς.

Footnote 399:

  Koran ii. The "red cow" is evidently the "red heifer" of Barnabas,
  chapt. vii.

Footnote 400:

  Arab. "Al-Jásalík"=Καθολικὸς.

Footnote 401:

  This is from the first "Gospel of Infancy," wherein Jesus said to his
  mother, "Verily I am Jesus, the Son of God, the Word which thou hast
  brought forth, as the Angel Gabriel did declare unto thee; and my
  Father hath sent me to save the world" (chapt. i. 2). The passage is
  virtually quoted in the Koran (chapt. iii. 141), of course omitting
  "the Son of God."

Footnote 402:

  Mohammed allowed his locks to grow down to his ear-lobes but never
  lower.

Footnote 403:

  Arab. "Lisám" I have explained as a covering for the lower face, made
  by drawing over it the corner of the head-kerchief (Pilgrimage i.
  346). The Lisám of the African Tawárik hoods the eyes so that a man
  must turn up his face to see, and swathes all the lower half, leaving
  only the nose exposed. And this is worn by many men by night as well
  as by day, doubtless to avoid the evil eye. The native Sultans of
  Darfur, like those of Bornu and others further west, used white muslin
  as a face-wrap: hence, too, the ceremonies when spitting, etc., etc.
  The Kúfiyah or head-kerchief of the Arabs soon reached Europe and
  became in Low Latin Cuphia; in Spanish Escofia; in Ital. Cuffia or
  Scuffia; in French Escoffion, Scofion (Reine Marguerite) Coëffe (une
  pellicule, marque de bonheur), Coiffe and Coife, &c.; the Scotch Curch
  or Coif, opposed to the maiden snood; and, lastly our
  Sergeant-at-Law's Coif. Littré, the Learned, who in erudition was _né
  coiffé_, has missed this obvious derivation.

Footnote 404:

  "Cutting," throughout the book, alludes to the scymitar with which
  Arabs never give point; and "thrusting" to the footman's spear and the
  horseman's lance.

Footnote 405:

  A popular phrase, I repeat, for extreme terror and consternation.

Footnote 406:

  The name usually applies to a well-known district and city of
  Al-Yaman, where "Koss the eloquent" was bishop in Mohammed's day: the
  Negiran of D'Herbelot. Here, however, it is the Syrian Najrán (Nejrân
  of Missionary Porter's miserable Handbook); now a wretched village
  near the volcanic Lajjá, about one hundred and twenty miles direct
  south of Damascus and held by Druzes and Christians.

Footnote 407:

  The Kantár (quintal) of 100 ratls (lbs.)=98-99 lbs. avoir.

Footnote 408:

  Arab. "Juráb" (bag) mi'adat-ih (of his belly), the "curdling of the
  testicles" in fear is often mentioned.

Footnote 409:

  Clearly alluding to the magic so deeply studied by mediæval Jews.

Footnote 410:

  Arab. "Sahákah," lit. rubbing. The Moslem Harem is a great school for
  this "Lesbian (which I would call Atossan) love"; but the motive of
  the practice lies deeper. As amongst men the mixture of the feminine
  with the masculine temperament leads to sodomy, so the reverse makes
  women prefer their own sex. These tribades are mostly known by
  peculiarities of form and features, hairy cheeks and upper lips, gruff
  voices, hircine odour and the large projecting clitoris with erectile
  powers known to the Arabs as "bazar" (بظر), hence Tabzír=circumcision
  or amputation of such clitoris. Burckhardt (Prov. 436) translates
  "Bazarah" by slut or wench. He adds "it originally signifies the labia
  which the Cairenes also entitle Zambúr and which are cut off in
  girlhood." See also Lane, Lex. s. v.; Tabzír. Both writers confuse
  excision of the nymphæ with circumcision of the clitoris (Zambúr).
  Al-Siyúti (Kitab al-Izá' fi'Ilm al-Nikah) has a very interesting
  chapter on Sapphic venery, which is well known to Europe as proved by
  such works as "Gamiani," and "Anandria ou Confessions de Mademoiselle
  Sappho, avec la Clef," Lesbos, 1778. Onanism is fatally prevalent: in
  many Harems and girls' schools tallow-candles and similar succedania
  are vainly forbidden and bananas when detected are cut into four so as
  to be useless; of late years, however, China has sent some marvellous
  artificial phalli of stuffed bladder, horn and even caoutchouc, the
  latter material of course borrowed from Europe.

Footnote 411:

  This is considered a powerful aphrodisiac in the East. Hence male
  devotees are advised to avoid the "two reds," _i.e._ meat and wine;
  while the "two reds," which corrupt women, are gold and saffron, that
  is perfumery. Hence also the saying of Mohammed:—"Perfumes for men
  should have scent and not colour; for women should have colour and not
  scent." (Mishkát al-Masábíh ii. 361.)

Footnote 412:

  These are the "Hibás" or thin cords of wool which the Badawi binds
  round his legs, I believe to keep off cramp. (Pilgrimage iii. 78).

Footnote 413:

  Crying out "La iláha illa 'llah." (There is no god but _the_ God.);
  technically called "Tahlíl."

Footnote 414:

  _i.e._ Men, angels and devils, the "Triloka" (triple people) of the
  Hindus. Alamín (plur.), never Alamayn (dual), is the Triregno denoted
  by the papal Tiara, the three Christian kingdoms being Heaven, Hell
  and Purgatory.

Footnote 415:

  Matrahinna or Mit-Rahinah is a well-known village near Memphis; the
  name being derived from the old Egyptian Minat-ro-hinnu, the port at
  the mouth of the canal. Let me remark that two of these three words,
  "Minat" and "Ru," are still common in "Aryan" Persian.

Footnote 416:

  Kirámat, a sign, a prodigy, opposed to Mu'ujizah, a miracle wrought by
  a prophet. The Súfis explain this thaumaturgy by Allah changing
  something of Nature's ordinary course in favour of an especial
  worshipper; and, after a fashion, this is Catholic doctrine (See
  Dabistan, iii. 173).

Footnote 417:

  Koran, x. 25, "until the earth receive its vesture and be adorned with
  various plants."

Footnote 418:

  _i.e._ the young hair sprouting on the boy's cheek.

Footnote 419:

  A fighter for the faith and now a title which follows the name, _e.g._
  Osmán Páshá Gházi, whom the English press dubbed "Gházi Osmán."

Footnote 420:

  That is the King of Constantinople.

Footnote 421:

  Cassia fistularis, a kind of carob: "Shambar" is the Arab. form of the
  Persian "Chambar."

Footnote 422:

  Koran, ii. 149. Hence the vulgar idea that Martyrs are still alive in
  the flesh. See my Pilgrimage (ii. 110 and elsewhere) for the romantic
  and picturesque consequences of that belief. The Commentators (Jalál
  al-Dín, etc.) play tricks with the Koranic words, "they (martyrs) are
  not dead but living" (iii. 179) by placing the happy souls in the
  crops of green birds which eat of the fruits and drink of the waters
  of Paradise; whereas the reprobates and the (very) wicked are
  deposited in black birds which drain the sanies and the boiling waters
  of Hell. Amongst the Greeks a body remaining entire long after death
  suggests Anathema Maranatha: it is the contrary with Catholic
  Christians (Boccaccio iv. 5, of the Pot of Basil). Concerning this
  creed see Maundrell, Letter of 1698.

Footnote 423:

  Tor is "Mount Sinai" in the Koran (xcv. I). I have only to repeat my
  opinion concerning the present site so called: "It is evident that
  Jebel Serbal dates only from the early days of Coptic Christianity;
  that Jebel Musa, its Greek rival, rose after the visions of Helena in
  the fourth century; whilst the building of the Convent by Justinian
  belongs to A.D. 527. Ras Safsáfah, its rival to the north, is an
  affair of yesterday, and may be called the invention of Robinson; and
  Jebel Katerina, to the South is the property of Rüppell" (Midian
  Revisited i., 237.). I would therefore call the "Sinaitic" Peninsula,
  Peninsula of Paran in old days and Peninsula of Tor (from its chief
  port) in our time. It is still my conviction that the true Mount Sinai
  will be found in Jabal Aráif, or some such unimportant height to the
  north of the modern Hajj-road from Suez to Akabah. Even about the name
  (which the Koran writes "Sainá" and "Sínín") there is a dispute: It is
  usually derived from the root "Sanah"=sentis, a bush; but this is not
  satisfactory. Our eminent Assyriologist, Professor Sayce, would
  connect it with "Sin," the Assyrian Moon-god, as Mount Nebo with the
  Sun-god and he expects to find there the ruins of a Lunar temple as a
  Solar fane stands on Ba'al Zapuna (Baal Zephon) or the classical Mount
  Casius.

Footnote 424:

  Alluding to the miracle of Aaron's rod (the gift of Jethro) as related
  in the Koran (chapts. vii. I., xx., etc.), where the Egyptian
  sorcerers threw down thick ropes which by their magic twisted and
  coiled like serpents.

Footnote 425:

  Arab. "Ayát" lit. "signs," here "miracles of the truth," l.c. Koranic
  versets as opposed to chapters. The ranks of the enemy represent the
  latter, sword-cuts the former—a very persuasive mode of preaching.

Footnote 426:

  Lane (M. E. chapt. iii.) shows by a sketch the position of the
  worshipper during this "Salám" which is addressed, some say, to the
  guardian angels, others suppose to all brother-believers and angels.

Footnote 427:

  _i.e._, where the Syrians found him.

Footnote 428:

  _i.e._, Dedianus Arabised; a name knightly and plebeian.

Footnote 429:

  In such tales the Wazir is usually the sharp-witted man, contrasting
  with the "dummy," his master.

Footnote 430:

  Carrier-pigeons were extensively used at this time. The Caliph
  Al-Násir li-Díni 'llah (regn. A. H. 575=1180) was, according to Ibn
  Khaldún, very fond of them. The moderns of Damascus still affect them.
  My successor, Mr. Consul Kirby Green, wrote an excellent report on
  pigeon-fancying at Damascus. The so-called Maundeville or Mandeville
  in A.D. 1322 speaks of carrier-pigeons in Syria as a well-known mode
  of intercourse between lord and lord.

Footnote 431:

  Mohammed who declared "There is no monkery in Al-Islam," and who
  virtually abolished the priest, had an especial aversion to the
  shaveling (Ruhbán). But the "Gens æterna in quâ nemo nascitur" (Pliny
  v. 17) managed to appear even in Al-Islam, as Fakirs, Dervishes,
  Súfis, etc. Of this more hereafter.

Footnote 432:

  _i.e._ her holiness would act like a fascinating talisman.

Footnote 433:

  The "smoking out" practice is common amongst the Arabs: hence Marshal
  Pelissier's so-called "barbarity." The Public is apt to forget that on
  a campaign the general's first duty is to save his own men by any
  practice which the laws of fair warfare do not absolutely forbid.

Footnote 434:

  _i.e._, Mohammed, who promised Heaven and threatened Hell.

Footnote 435:

  Arab. "Ahr" or "ihr," fornication or adultery, _i.e._, irreligion,
  infidelity as amongst the Hebrews. (Isaiah xxiii. 17).

Footnote 436:

  A sign of defeat.

Footnote 437:

  In English "last night": I have already noted that the Moslem day,
  like the Jewish and the Scandinavian, begins at sundown; and "layl," a
  night, is often used to denote the twenty-four hours between sunset
  and sunset, whilst "yaum," a day, would by us be translated in many
  cases "battle-day."

Footnote 438:

  Iterum the "Himalayan Brothers."

Footnote 439:

  Again, Mohammed who promised Good to the Good, and _vice versâ_.

Footnote 440:

  They are sad doggrel like most of the _pièces d'occasion_ inserted in
  The Nights.

Footnote 441:

  Here "Kahwah" (coffee) is used in its original sense of strong old
  wine. The derivation is "Akhá"=fastidire fecit, causing disinclination
  for food, the Matambre (kill-hunger) of the Iberians. In old days the
  scrupulous called coffee "Kihwah" in order to distinguish it from
  "Kahwah," wine.

Footnote 442:

  _i.e._ Mohammed, a common title.

Footnote 443:

  That is, fatal to the scoffer and the impious.

Footnote 444:

  Equivalent to our "The Devil was sick," etc.

Footnote 445:

  _i.e._ to the enemy: the North American Indians (so called) use
  similar forms of "inverted speech"; and the Australian aborigines are
  in no way behind them.

Footnote 446:

  See Vol. i., p. 154 (Night xvi.).

Footnote 447:

  Arab. "Sauf," a particle denoting a near future whereas "Sa-" points
  to one which may be very remote.

Footnote 448:

  From the root "Shauh"=having a fascinating eye, terrifying. The Irish
  call the fascinater "eybitter" and the victim (who is also rhymed to
  death) "eybitten."

Footnote 449:

  _i.e._, not like the noble-born, strong in enduring the stress of
  fight.

Footnote 450:

  _i.e._, of Abraham. For the Well Zemzem and the Place of Abraham, see
  my Pilgrimage (iii. 171-175, etc.), where I described the water as of
  salt-bitter taste, like that of Epsom (iii. 203). Sir William Muir (in
  his excellent life of Mahomet, I. cclviii.) remarks that "the flavour
  of stale water bottled up for months would not be a criterion of the
  same water freshly drawn;" but soldered tins-full of water drawn a
  fortnight before are to be had in Calcutta and elsewhere after
  Pilgrimage time; and analysis would at once detect the salt.

Footnote 451:

  Racing was and is a favourite pastime with those hippomanists, the
  Arabs; but it contrasts strongly with our civilised form being a trial
  of endurance rather than of speed. The Prophet is said to have limited
  betting in these words, "There shall be no wagering save on the Khuff
  (camel's foot), the Hafir (hoof of horse, ass, etc.) or the Nasal
  (arrow-pile or lance head)."

Footnote 452:

  In the Mac. Edit. "Arman"=Armenia, which has before occurred. The
  author or scribe here understands by "Cæsarea" not the old Turris
  Stratonis, Herod's city called after Augustus, but Cæsareia the
  capital of Cappadocia (Pliny, vi. 3), the royal residence before
  called Mazaca (Strabo).

Footnote 453:

  An idiom meaning "a very fool."

Footnote 454:

  _i.e._ Kána (was) má (that which) was (kána).

Footnote 455:

  A son being "the lamp of a dark house."

Footnote 456:

  When the Israelites refused to receive the Law (the souls of all the
  Prophets even those unborn being present at the Covenant), Allah tore
  up the mountain (Sinai which is not mentioned) by the roots and shook
  it over their heads to terrify them, saying, "Receive the Law which we
  have given you with a resolution to keep it" (Koran chapt. xlx. 170).
  Much of this story is from the Talmud (Abodah Sar. 2, 2, Tract
  Sabbath, etc.) whence Al-Islam borrowed so much of its Judaism, as it
  took Christianity from the Apocryphal New Testament. This tradition is
  still held by the Israelites, says Mr. Rodwell (p. 333) who refers it
  to a misunderstanding of Exod. xix. 17, rightly rendered in the E.
  version "at the nether part of the mountain."

Footnote 457:

  Arab. "Azghán"=the camel-litters in which women travel.

Footnote 458:

  _i.e._ to joy foes and dismay friends.

Footnote 459:

  Whose eyes became white (_i.e._ went blind) with mourning for his son
  Joseph (Koran, chapt. xii. 84). He recovered his sight when his face
  was covered with the shirt which Gabriel had given to the youth after
  his brethren had thrown him into the well.

Footnote 460:

  "Poison King" (Persian); or "Flower-King" (Arabic).

Footnote 461:

  A delicate allusion to the size of her hips and back parts, in which
  volume is, I have said, greatly admired for the best of reasons.

Footnote 462:

  All Prophets had some manual trade and that of David was making coats
  of mail, which he invented, for before his day men used plate-armour.
  So "Allah softened the iron for him" and in his hands it became like
  wax (Koran xxi., xxxiv., etc.). Hence a good coat of mail is called
  "Davidean." I have noticed (First Footsteps, p. 33 and elsewhere) the
  homage paid to the blacksmith on the principle which made Mulciber
  (Malik Kabir) a god. The myth of David inventing mail possibly arose
  from his peculiarly fighting career. Moslems venerate Dáúd on account
  of his extraordinary devotion; nor has this view of his character
  ceased: a modern divine preferred him to "all characters in history."

Footnote 463:

  "Travel by Night," said the Prophet, "when the plagues of earth
  (scorpions, serpents, etc.) afflict ye not." Yet the night-march in
  Arabia is detestable (Pilgrimage iii.)

Footnote 464:

  This form of ceremony is called "Istikbál" (coming forth to greet) and
  is regulated by the severest laws of etiquette. As a rule the greater
  the distance (which may be a minimum of one step) the higher the
  honour. Easterns infinitely despise strangers who ignore these vitals
  of politeness.

Footnote 465:

  _i.e._ he will be a desert Nimrod and the game will delight to be
  killed by him.

Footnote 466:

  This serves to keep the babe's eyes free from inflammation.

Footnote 467:

  _i.e._ Crown of the Kings of amorous Blandishment.

Footnote 468:

  Lane (i. 531) translates "the grey down." The Arabs use "Akhzar"
  (prop. "green") in many senses, fresh, grey-hued, etc.

Footnote 469:

  Allusion to the well-known black banners of the house of Abbas. The
  Persians describe the growth of hair on a fair young face by, "His
  cheeks went into mourning for the loss of their charms."

Footnote 470:

  Arab. "Káfir" a Koranic word meaning Infidel, the active participle of
  Kufr=Infidelity _i.e._ rejecting the mission of Mohammed. It is
  insulting and in Turkish has been degraded to "Giaour." Here it means
  black, as Hafiz of Shiraz terms a cheek-mole "Hindu" _i.e._
  dark-skinned and idolatrous.

Footnote 471:

  Alluding to the travel of Moses (Koran chapt. xviii.) with Al-Khizr
  (the "evergreen Prophet") who had drunk of the Fountain of Life and
  enjoyed flourishing and continual youth. Moses is represented as the
  external and superficial religionist; the man of outsight; Al-Khizr as
  the spiritual and illuminated man of insight.

Footnote 472:

  The lynx was used like the lion in Ancient Egypt and the Chita-leopard
  in India: I have never seen or heard of it in these days.

Footnote 473:

  Arab. "Sukúr," whence our "Saker" the falcon, not to be confounded
  with the old Falco Sacer, the Gr. ἱέραξ. Falconry which, like all
  arts, began in Egypt, is an extensive subject throughout Moslem lands.
  I must refer my readers to "Falconry in the Valley of the Indus" (Van
  Voorst, 1852) and a long note in Pilgrimage iii. 71.

Footnote 474:

  It was not respectful to pitch their camp within dog-bark.

Footnote 475:

  Easterns attach great importance to softness and smoothness of skin
  and they are right: a harsh rough epidermis spoils sport with the
  handsomest woman.

Footnote 476:

  Canticles vii. 8: Hosea xiv. 6.

Footnote 477:

  The mesmeric attraction of like to like.

Footnote 478:

  Arab. "Taswif"=saying "Sauf," I will do it soon. It is a beautiful
  word—etymologically.

Footnote 479:

  A very far-fetched allusion. The face of the beloved springing from an
  unbuttoned robe is the moon rising over the camp in the hollow (_bat'
  há_).

Footnote 480:

  Arab. "Kasabát"="canes," long beads, bugles.

Footnote 481:

  Koran, xcvi. 5.

Footnote 482:

  Both words (masc. and fem.) mean "dear, excellent, highly-prized." The
  tale is the Arab form of the European "Patient Griselda" and shows a
  higher conception of womanly devotion, because Azizah, despite her
  wearisome weeping, is a girl of high intelligence and Aziz is a
  vicious zany, weak as water and wilful as wind. The phenomenon (not
  rare in life) is explained by the couplet:—

                I love my love with an S—
                Because he is stupid and not intellectual.

  This fond affection of clever women for fools can be explained only by
  the law of unlikeness which mostly governs sexual unions in physical
  matters; and its appearance in the story gives novelty and point. Aziz
  can plead only the violence of his passion which distinguished him as
  a lover among the mob of men who cannot love anything beyond
  themselves. And none can pity him for losing a member which he so much
  abused.

Footnote 483:

  Arab. "Sháhid," the _index_, the pointer raised in testimony: the
  comparison of the Eastern and the Western names is curious.

Footnote 484:

  Musk is one of the perfumes of the Moslem Heaven; and "musky" is much
  used in verse to signify scented and dark-brown.

Footnote 485:

  Arab. "Mandíl": these kerchiefs are mostly oblong, the short sides
  being worked with gold and coloured silk, and often fringed, while the
  two others are plain.

Footnote 486:

  Arab. "Rayhání," of the Ocymum Basilicum or sweet basil: a delicate
  handwriting, so called from the pen resembling a leaf (?) See vol. i.
  p. 128.

Footnote 487:

  An idiom meaning "something unusual happened."

Footnote 488:

  An action common in grief and regret: here the lady would show that
  she sighs for union with her beloved.

Footnote 489:

  Lane (i. 608) has a valuable note on the language of signs, from M. du
  Vigneau's "Secretaire Turc," etc. (Paris, 1688), Baron von
  Hammer-Purgstall ("Mines de l'Orient," No. 1, Vienna, 1809) and
  Marcel's "Contes du Cheykh El-Mohdy" (Paris, 1833). It is practised in
  Africa as well as in Asia. At Abeokuta in Yoruba a man will send a
  symbolical letter in the shape of cowries, palm-nuts and other kernels
  strung on rice-straw; and sharp wits readily interpret the meaning. A
  specimen is given in p. 262 of Miss Tucker's "Abbeokuta; or Sunrise
  within the Tropics."

Footnote 490:

  Mr. Payne (ii. 227) translates "Hawá al-'Uzrí" by "the love of the
  Beni Udhra, an Arabian tribe famous for the passion and devotion with
  which love was practised among them." See Night dclxxxiii. I
  understand it as "excusable love" which, for want of a better term, is
  here translated "platonic." It is, however, more like the old
  "bundling" of Wales and Northern England; and allows all the pleasures
  but one, the toyings which the French call _les plaisirs de la petite
  oie_; a term my dear old friend Fred. Hankey derived from _la petite
  voie_. The Afghans know it as "Námzad-bází" or betrothed-play
  (Pilgrimage, ii. 56); the Abyssinians as eye-love; and the Kafirs as
  Slambuka a Shlabonka, for which see the traveller Delegorgue.

Footnote 491:

  "Turk" in Arabic and Persian poetry means a plunderer, a robber. Thus
  Hafiz: "Agar án Turk-i-Shirázi ba-dast árad dil-i-márá," If that
  Shirazi (ah, the Turk!) would deign to take my heart in hand, etc.

Footnote 492:

  Arab. "Názir," a steward or an eye (a "looker"). The idea is borrowed
  from Al-Hariri (Assemblies, xiii.), and

Footnote 493:

  Arab. "Hájib," a groom of the chambers, a chamberlain; also an
  eyebrow. See Al-Hariri, ibid. xiii. and xxii.

Footnote 494:

  This gesture speaks for itself: it is that of a dyer staining a cloth.
  The "Sabbágh's" shop is the usual small recess, open to the street and
  showing pans of various dyes sunk like "dog-laps" in the floor.

Footnote 495:

  The Arab. Sabt (from sabata, he kept Sabt) and the Heb. "Sabbath" both
  mean Saturn's day, Saturday, transferred by some unknown process
  throughout Christendom to Sunday. The change is one of the most
  curious in the history of religions. If there be a single command
  stronger than all others it is "Keep the Saturday holy." It was so
  kept by the Founder of Christianity; the order was never abrogated and
  yet most Christians are not aware that Sabbath, or "Sawbath," means
  Saturn's day, the "Shiyár" of the older Arabs. And to complete its
  degradation "Sabbat" in French and German means a _criaillerie_, a
  "row," a disorder, an abominable festival of Hexen (witches). This
  monstrous absurdity can be explained only by aberrations of sectarian
  zeal, of party spirit in religion.

Footnote 496:

  The men who cry to prayer. The first was Bilál, the Abyssinian slave
  bought and manumitted by Abu Bakr. His simple cry was "I testify there
  is no Iláh (god) but Allah (God)! Come ye to prayers!" Caliph Omar,
  with the Prophet's permission, added, "I testify that Mohammed is the
  Apostle of Allah." The prayer-cry which is beautiful and human,
  contrasting pleasantly with the brazen clang of the bell, now is

         Allah is Almighty (bis).
         I declare no god is there but Allah (bis).
         Hie ye to Rogation (Hayya=halumma).
         Hie ye to Salvation (Faláh=prosperity, Paradise).
         ("Hie ye to Edification," a Shi'ah adjunct).
         Prayer is better than sleep (in the morning, also bis).
         No god is there but Allah.

  This prayer-call is similarly worded and differently pronounced and
  intoned throughout Al-Islam.

Footnote 497:

  _i.e._ a graceful youth of Al-Hijaz, the Moslem Holy Land, whose
  "sons" claim especial privileges.

Footnote 498:

  Arab. "harf"=a letter, as we should say a syllable.

Footnote 499:

  She uses the masculine "fatá," in order to make the question more
  mysterious.

Footnote 500:

  The fountain-bowl is often ornamented by a rude mosaic of black and
  white marble with enlivenments of red stone or tile in complicated
  patterns.

Footnote 501:

  Arab. "Kubád"=shaddock (citrus decumana): the huge orange which
  Captain Shaddock brought from the West Indies; it is the Anglo-Indian
  pompelmoose, vulg. pummelo. An excellent bitter is made out of the
  rind steeped in spirits. Citronworts came from India whence they
  spread throughout the tropics: they were first introduced into Europe
  by the heroic Joam de Castro and planted in his garden at Cintra where
  their descendants are still seen.

Footnote 502:

  Arab. Bakláwah, Turk. Baklává, a kind of pastry with blanched almonds
  bruised small between layers of dough, baked in the oven and cut into
  lozenges. It is still common.

Footnote 503:

  Her just fear was that the young woman might prove "too clever by
  half" for her simpleton cousin.

Footnote 504:

  The curse is pregnant with meaning. On Judgement-day the righteous
  shall arise with their faces shining gloriously: hence the blessing,
  "Bayyaz' Allaho wajh-ak" (=Allah whiten thy countenance!). But the
  wicked shall appear with faces scorched black and deformed by horror
  (Koran xxiv.): hence "God blacken thy brow!" I may observe that
  Easterns curse, the curse being everywhere the language of excited
  destructiveness; but only Westerns, and these chiefly English, swear,
  a practice utterly meaningless. "Damn _it_" without specifying what
  the "it" is, sounds like the speech of a naughty child anxious only to
  use a "wicked word." "Damn _you_!" is intelligible all the world over.
  It has given rise to "les goddams" in France; "Godámes" in the Brazil
  and "Gotáma" amongst the Somal of Eastern Africa, who learn it in
  Aden.

Footnote 505:

  Arab. "Zardah," usually rice dressed with saffron and honey, from
  Pers. "Zard," saffron, yellow. See Night dccxii.

Footnote 506:

  Vulgarly called "knuckle-bone," concerning which I shall have
  something to say.

Footnote 507:

  A bit of wood used in the children's game called "Táb" which resembles
  our tip-cat (Lane M. E. chapt. xvii.)

Footnote 508:

  Arab. "Balah," the unripened date, which is considered a laxative and
  eaten in hot weather.

Footnote 509:

  Lane (i. 611), quoting Al-Kazwíní, notes that the date-stone is called
  "Nawá" (dim. "Nawáyah") which also means distance, absence, severance.
  Thus the lady threatens to cast off her greedy and sleepy lover.

Footnote 510:

  The pod of the carob-bean which changes little after being plucked is
  an emblem of constancy.

Footnote 511:

  This dirham=48 grains avoir.

Footnote 512:

  The weight would be round: also "Hadíd" (=iron) means sharp or
  piercing (Koran chapt. vii. 21). The double "swear" is intended to be
  very serious. Moreover iron conjures away fiends: when a water-spout
  or a sand-devil (called Shaytán also in Arabia) approaches, you point
  the index at the Jinn and say, "Iron, O thou ill-omened one!" Amongst
  the Ancient Egyptians the metal was ill-omened being the bones of
  Typhon, so here, possibly, we have an instance of early
  homœopathy—similia similibus.

Footnote 513:

  Probably fermented to a kind of wine. The insipid fruit (Unnáb) which
  looks like an apple in miniature, is much used in stews, etc. It is
  the fruit (Nabak classically Nabik) of Rhamnus Nabeca (or Sidrat) also
  termed Zizyphus Jujuba, seu Spina Christi because fabled to have
  formed the crown of thorns: in the English market this plum is called
  Chinese Japonica. I have described it in Pilgrimage ii. 205, and have
  noticed the infusion of the leaves for washing the dead (ibid. ii.
  105): this is especially the use of the "Ber" in India, where the
  leaves are superstitiously held peculiarly pure. Our dictionaries
  translate "Sidr" by "Lote-tree"; and no wonder that believers in
  Homeric writ feel their bile aroused by so poor a realisation of the
  glorious myth. The Homerids probably alluded to Hashish or Bhang.

Footnote 514:

  Arab. "Azrár": the open collar of the Saub ("Tobe") or long loose
  dress is symptomatic. The Eastern button is on the same principle as
  ours (both having taken the place of the classical fibula); but the
  Moslem affects a loop (like those to which we attach our "frogs") and
  utterly ignores a button-hole.

Footnote 515:

  Alluding to the ceremonious circumambulation of the Holy House at
  Meccah, a notable irreverence worthy of Kneph-town (Canopus).

Footnote 516:

  The ear-drop is the penis and the anklet its crown of glory.

Footnote 517:

  Equivalent to our "Alas! Alas!" which, by the by, no one ever says.
  "Awáh," like "Yauh," is now a woman's word although used by Al-Hariri
  (Assembly of Basrah) and so Al-awwáh=one who cries from grief "Awáh."
  A favourite conversational form is "Yehh" with the aspirate
  exasperated; but it is an expression of astonishment rather than
  sorrow. It enters into Europe travel-books.

Footnote 518:

  In the text "burst her gall-bladder."

Footnote 519:

  The death of Azizah is told with true Arab pathos and simplicity: it
  still draws tears from the eyes of the Badawi, and I never read it
  without a "lump in the throat."

Footnote 520:

  Arab. "Inshallah bukra!" a universal saying which is the horror of
  travellers.

Footnote 521:

  I have explained "Nu'uman's flower" as the anemone which in Grecised
  Arabic is "Anúmiyá." Here they are strewed over the tomb; often the
  flowers are planted in a small bed of mould sunk in the upper surface.

Footnote 522:

  Arab. "Barzakh" lit. a bar, a partition: in the Koran (chapts. xxiii.
  and xxxv.) the space or the place between death and resurrection where
  souls are stowed away. It corresponds after a fashion with the
  classical Hades and the Limbus (Limbo) of Christendom, _e.g._ Limbus
  patrum, infantum, fatuorum. But it must not be confounded with
  Al-A'aráf, the Moslem purgatory.

Footnote 523:

  Arab. "Zukák al-Nakíb," the latter word has been explained as a chief,
  leader, head man.

Footnote 524:

  Moslems never stand up at such times, for a spray of urine would make
  their clothes ceremonially impure: hence the scrupulous will break up
  with stick or knife the hard ground in front of them. A certain
  pilgrim was reported to have made this blunder which is hardly
  possible in Moslem dress. A high personage once asked me if it was
  true that he killed a man who caught him in a standing position; and I
  found to my surprise that the absurd scandal was already twenty years
  old. After urining the Moslem wipes the _os penis_ with one to three
  bits of stone, clay or handfuls of earth, and he must perform Wuzu
  before he can pray. Tournefort (Voyage au Levant iii. 335) tells a
  pleasant story of certain Christians at Constantinople who powdered
  with "_Poivre-d'Inde_" the stones in a wall where the Moslems were in
  the habit of rubbing the _os penis_ by way of wiping. The same author
  (ii. 336) strongly recommends a translation of Rabelais'
  _Torcheculative_ chapter (Lib. i., chapt. 13) for the benefit of
  Mohammedans.

Footnote 525:

  Arab. "Nuhás ahmar," lit. red brass.

Footnote 526:

  The cup is that between the lady's legs.

Footnote 527:

  A play upon "Sák"=calf, or leg, and "Sákí," a cup-bearer. The going
  round (Tawáf) and the running (Sa'í) allude to the circumambulation of
  the Ka'abah, and the running between Mount Safá and Marwah (Pilgrimage
  ii. 58, and iii. 343). A religious Moslem would hold the allusion
  highly irreverent.

Footnote 528:

  Lane (i. 614) never saw a woman wearing such kerchief which is
  deshabille. It is either spread over the head or twisted turband-wise.

Footnote 529:

  The "Kasabah" was about two fathoms of long measure, and sometimes 12½
  feet; but the length has been reduced.

Footnote 530:

  "Bat and ball," or hockey on horseback (Polo) is one of the earliest
  Persian games as shown by every illustrated copy of Firdausi's
  "Shahnámeh." This game was played with a Kurrah or small hand-ball and
  a long thin bat crooked at the end called in Persian Chaugán and in
  Arabic Saulaján. Another sense of the word is given in the
  Burhán-i-Káti, translated by Vullers (Lex. Persico-Latinum), a large
  bandy with bent head to which is hung an iron ball, also called
  Kaukabah (our "morning-star") and like the umbrella it denotes the
  grandees of the court. The same Kaukabah particularly distinguished
  one of the Marquesses of Waterford. This Polo corresponds with the
  folliculus, the pallone, the baloun-game (moyen âge) of Europe, where
  the horse is not such a companion of man; and whereof the classics
  sang:—

                 Folle decet pueros ludere, folle senes.

  In these days we should spell otherwise the "folle" of seniors playing
  at the ball or lawn-tennis.

Footnote 531:

  "Dalíl" means a guide; "Dalílah," a woman who misguides, a bawd. See
  the Tale of Dalílah the Crafty, Night dcxcviii.

Footnote 532:

  _i.e._ she was a martyr.

Footnote 533:

  Arab. "Ghashím" a popular and insulting term, our "Johnny Raw." Its
  use is shown in Pilgrimage i. 110.

Footnote 534:

  Bathers pay on leaving the Hammam; all enter without paying.

Footnote 535:

  _i.e._ she swore him upon his sword and upon the Koran: a loaf of
  bread is sometimes added. See Lane (i. 615).




                                 INDEX.


 Aaron's Rod, 242

 Abá, Abá'ah=cloak of hair, 133

 Abad=eternity without end, 205

 Abbasides (descendants of the Prophet's uncle), 61

 —— (black banners and dress), 64; 292

 Abd al-Azíz(Caliph), 166

 Abd al-Malik (Caliph), 77; 167

 Abhak=Allah bless him and keep (_see_ Sal'am), 24

 Abraham (an Imám to mankind), 203

 —— (place of), 272

 Abú Bakr (Caliph), 167; 197

 Abú Hanífah (founder of the Senior School), 207

 —— —— (scourged for refusing to take office), 210

 Abú Házim, 205

 Abú Ishak (Hárún's cup-companion), 302

 Abú Lúlúah (murderer of Caliph Omar), 162

 Abú Músá al-Ashári, _ib._

 Abú Riyáh=father of winds, a toy, 93

 Abú Zarr (companion of the Prophet), 200

 Acquit me of responsibility=pardon me, 76

 Æolipyla, 101

 Afridun (Furaydun) absurd name for a Greek king, 82

 Agha=sir, gentleman, to a Eunuch, 50

 Ahmad=the praised one, Mohammed, 226

 Ahmad bin Hanbal (founder of the fourth Moslem School), 204

 Ahnaf (Al-) bin Kays, 160

 Ahr (ihr)=fornication, in the sense of irreligion, 258

 Akhzar (green, grey, fresh, applied to cheek-down), 292

 Ali (Caliph), his deeds of prowess, 108

 Alam (not Ilm) al-Dín=flag of the faith, 19

 Alexander (of the Koran) not to be confounded with the Macedonian, 199

 Alms to reverend men for securing their prayers, 71

 Allah (names, by Edwin Arnold), 28

 —— Wa'lláhi tayyib (exclamation of the Egyptian Moslem), 34

 Allaho akbar (as a war-cry), 89

 Amazon (a favourite in folk-lore), 96

 Ammá ba'ad=but after, initiatory formula, 37

 Anemone on a tomb, 325

 Anis al-Jalis=the Cheerer of the Companion, 5

 Anklet-ring and ear-drops (erotic meaning of), 318

 Arab exaggerates generosity, 36

 —— shouting under his ruler's palace, 39

 —— Temperament, 54, 101, 181

 —— Cap (Turtúr), 143

 —— Derivation of the name, 140

 Arafat day, 169

 Aráki (capparis shrub), 54

 Ardeshir (Artaxerxes), three Persian Kings of the name, 156

 Arman=Armenia, 273

 Ashhab=grey-white, 116

 Aslah=head-kerchief, 59

 Ass held ill-omened, 25

 Attraction of like to like, 296

 Awáh! Awáh=Alas! Alas!, 321

 Ayát (Coranic verses), 242

 Aylúlah (slumbering after morning prayers), 178

 Ayyúb=Job, 45

 Azal=eternity without beginning, 205

 Azán (call to prayer), 306

 Azghán=camel litters, 282

 Azíz (f. Azízah)=dear, excellent, highly prized, 298

 Azrár (buttons), 318


 Badawi not used in the Koran for Desert Arab, 140

 —— bonnet, 143

 —— a fool as well as a rogue, 146

 Bád-i-Sabá=breeze o' the morn, 181

 Bakh! Bakh!=bravo! brava!, 151

 Bakláwah=almond-pastry, 311

 Balah=green date, 314

 Banú 'l-Asfar (people of the yellow faces), 220

 Beni Udhra (tribe famous for love-passion), 304

 Barr al-Manákhah in Al-Medinah, 139

 Barsh=matting, 18

 Barzakh=bar, partition, Hades, 325

 Bathers pay on leaving the Hammam, 332

 Bátiní=gnostic, 29

 Batrak (Batrik)=patriarcha, 89

 Batrík (Bitrík)=patricius, _ib._

 Bayt al-Mukaddas=Jerusalem, 132

 Bayzatán=testicles; egg-story, 55

 Belle passion in the East, 62

 Bhang (its kinds and use), 123

 Biká'a=low-land, 109

 Bilál (first Muazzin), 306

 Bilkís and her throne, 79

 Birth-stool (Kursí al-wiládah), 80

 Bishr al-Háfi (Barefoot), 203

 Biting the finger ends (not nails) sign of confusion, etc., 38

 Bismillah parodied, 223

 Black (colour of the Abbaside banner), 292

 Boccaccio quoted, 112

 Brother of Folly=a very fool, 279

 Brotherhood of futurity=lookers out for a better world, 197

 Buka'ah=Cœlesyria, 109

 Bukhait=little good luck, 48

 Bukhti (dromedaries), 177

 Bull (followers preceding), 98

 Burka'=nose-bag, 52

 Bursting of the gall-bladder=our breaking of the heart, 322

 Burying a rival, 58

 Buttons (azrár), 318


 Cabbala=Spiritual Sciences, 151

 Caliphs:
   Abú Bakr, 167, 197
   Abd al-Azíz, 166
   Abd al-Malik, 77, 167
   Ali, 108
   Hishám bin Abd al-Malik, 170
   Mansúr (Al-), 142, 158, 210
   Mu'áwiyah, 160, 161
   Omar, 158, 159
   Othmán, 163
   Walíd bin Marwán, 167

 Caitiff=Captivus, 109

 Camel-load=lbs. 300, for long journeys lbs. 250, 45

 —— men do not accept drafts on futurity, 69

 Cannibal tribes in Central Africa, 48

 Caravan (each one's place to be kept in), 184

 Carob (Cassia fistularis), 241

 —— bean, emblem of constancy, 315

 Carrier-pigeons, 247

 Cesarea, 77

 —— "of Armenia", 273

 Chaff, 15

 Chewing a document that none might see it after, 39

 Chess and chessmen, 104

 China-ware displayed on shelves, 52

 Clapping hands preliminary to a wrestling-bout, 91

 Clerical error of Bulak Edition, 114

 Climate (water and air), 4

 Coffee (_see_ Kahwah), 261

 Cohen (Káhin)=diviner, priest, esp. Jewish, 221

 Continuation in dignities requested by office-holders from a new ruler,
    192

 Coptic convents, 86

 —— visitations to, still customary, 110

 Copulation, praying before or after, 161

 Coral (name of slave-girl), 101

 Cousin (term of familiarity=our "coz."), 43

 Cursing intelligible, swearing meaningless, although English, 312

 Cup and cup-bearer, 327

 Cutting (alluding to the scymitar), 231


 Dakianús=Decianus, 244

 Dalíl=guide; f. Dalílah=misguiding woman, bawd, 329

 Dandán (N.P.)=tooth, 83

 Dánik=sixth of a drachma, 204

 Dáúd=David, 286

 David (makes coats of mail), 286

 Dawn-breeze, 181

 Daylamites, 94

 Deeds of prowess not exaggerated, 108

 Destructiveness of slaves, 55

 Devil (the, was sick, etc.), 264

 Dirás=thrashing-sled, 108

 Dirham-weight=48 grains avoir, 316

 Doomsday, horrors of, come upon a man, 232

 Door-hinges, 214

 Dove and turtle-dove female, 23

 Down (of the cheek), 246

 Dozd o Kázi (Persian book), 55

 Draught of air (Zug) feared by Orientals, 9

 Drawbridges in Coptic convents, 94

 Drinking in the dark disliked, 59

 "Drugging" not a Badawi sentiment, 122

 Dúbarah (Dubárá)=Dubrovnik, Ragusa, 219

 Dung (used as fuel, etc.), 149


 Ear-drop=penis, 318

 Eedgáh see Idgáh, 202

 Eggs for testicles, 55

 Emancipation, the greater=pardon for sins or holy death, 165

 Elephant (derivation of the word), 104

 Enemy his offered hand to be kissed or cut off, 142

 Eunuchs, if without testes only, highly prized, 50

 Expiration of oaths, 186

 Eyes, hot=full of tears, 99

 —— becoming white=blind, 283


 Fadaises of a blue stocking, 156

 Falling on the back a fair fall in wrestling, 92

 Familiarity between the great and paupers, 32

 —— of girls with black slave-boys, 49

 Farj=slit; Zawi'l-Furúj=slit ones, _ib._

 Faisakh=three English miles, 114

 Faylúlah=slumbering after sunset, 178

 Fass (fiss, fuss)=bezel; hillock, 97

 Finger in mouth (sign of grief), 302

 Fish begins to stink at the head, 168

 Fitnah=seduction, charmer, 76

 Fits of religious enthusiasm, 132

 Flatterers (the worst of foes), 11

 Flowers of speech, 88

 Folk follow their King's faith, 157

 Fountain-bowl, ornamented with mosaic, etc., 310

 "Fundamentals (Usúl) remembered"=the business is not forgotten, 15

 Funerals (meritorious to accompany), 46

 Furaydun (_see_ Afridun), 82


 Gardeners touchy on the point of mated visitors, 22

 Generosity an Arab's ideal because the reverse of his nature, 36

 Ghábah=thicket, 85

 Ghashím="Johnny Raw", 330

 Ghaylúlah=slumbering in the morning, 178

 Ghazá (Artemesia, a desert shrub), 24

 Ghazban (N. P.)=an angry, violent man, 125

 Gházi=fighter for the faith, 240

 Ghazwah=raid, foray, razzia, 217

 Ghussah=calamity which chokes, wrath, 147

 Glance compared with a Yamáni sword, 127

 Grandfather's name given familiarly, 15

 Gospel of Infancy, 228


 Hadíd=iron, 316

 Hafsah (Caliph Omar's daughter and wife of Mohammed), 165

 Hafsites (Dynasty in Mauritania), _ib._

 Hajj al-Akbar and Hajj al-Asghar, 169

 Hájib=groom, chamberlain, 304

 Halfah-grass (Poa), 18

 Halwá=sweetmeats, 47, 212

 Hamah=Hightown, 178

 Hanbal (_see_ Ahmad bin Hanbal), 204

 Hanien=pleasant to thee! after drinking, 5

 Hanífah (_see_ Abu Hanífah), 207

 Hard of heart and soft of sides, 5

 Harf=letter, syllable, 307

 Hasan al-Basrí (theologian), 165

 Háshimi vein, 19

 Hátim al-Asamm (the Deaf), 207

 Hawá al-'Uzrí=platonic love, 304

 "He" for "She" out of delicacy, 179

 Head-kerchief (deshabille), 328

 Hibá=cords, garters, 236

 Hijáz (al)=Moslem Holy Land, 306

 Himalayan brothers, 211, 260

 Hips (their volume admired), 285

 Hishám bin Abd al-Malik (Caliph), 170

 Holiness supposed to act as talisman, 251

 Honour amongst thieves, 159

 Horses not taught to leap, 89

 Hospitals hated, 70

 Hubb al-Watan=patriotism, 183

 Hunger (burns), 144

 Hungry judges "hanging judges", 198

 Hymeneal blood resembles that of pigeon-poult, 50

 Hysterical Arab temperament, 54, 101,


 Ibn Abi Aufa, 200

 Ibráhím bin Adham, 203

 Idgáh (place of prayer), 202

 Ikh! Ikh! (cry to a camel to make it kneel down), 139

 Imám=leader, antistes, 203

 Incest repugnant to Moslem taste, 172

 Index finger (Sháhid), 300

 Inshád=reciting, improvising, 126

 Inshallah bukra=to-morrow if, Allah please, 324

 Intercession-doctrine disputed amongst Moslems, 40

 Inverted speech (forms of), 265

 Irák=level country beside river banks, 132

 Iron (conjures away fiends), 316

 Istikbál=coming forth to greet, 287

 Ithmid (stibium, antimone)=Sp. Althimod, 103


 J, how it came to take the place of Y in the English Bible, 43

 Jabarti=Moslem Abyssinian, 15

 Jamíl ibn Ma'amar (poet), 102

 Janázah=bier with corpse, 46

 Jars for cooling water, 21

 Jásalík (Al-)=Καθολικὸς, Primate, 228

 Jawarnah (Júrnah)=Zara, 219

 Jáwísh=apparitor, sergeant, royal messenger, 49

 Jews adepts in magic, 233

 Jokh=broadcloth, 111

 Jujube-sherbet, 317

 Juráb mi'adat-hu (bag of his belly=scrotum), 233


 Káfir=Infidel, Giaour, 292

 Kafur=Camphor, 47

 Kahwah (Kihwah)=strong old wine, 261

 Kalam=leg cut, 107

 Kalám wáti=vulgarism, 113

 Kámah=fathom, 56

 Kanmakan (p. n.) "was that which was", 280

 Kantár (quintal)=98·99 lbs. avoir, 233

 Karím=generous (cream of men), 35

 Kasabah=rod (measurement), 328

 Kasabát=canes, bugles, 298

 Kasr al-Nuzhat=palace of delights, 22

 Kausar (fountain)=nectar-amrita, 186

 Kaywán (Persian for Saturn), 75

 Kayim (professional wrestler, names of such), 93

 Kaylúlah=siesta, 178

 Kazi al-Kuzát=Chief Justice, 90

 Kazis (the four of the orthodox schools), 39

 Kazíb al-Bán=willow-wand, 66

 Khalbús=buffoon, 143

 Khálid bin al-Walíd, 203

 —— bin Safwán, 170

 Khalílu 'llah (friend of Allah=Abraham), 132

 Khara=dung, lowest insult, 56

 Khara (Holy Merde), 223

 Khalanj (a hard kind of wood), 269
       (Vol. I. 154)

 Khattíyah=writer, f.;
   spear, from Khatt Hajar, 1

 Khatt Sharif=a royal hand letter, 39

 Khayzarán=rattan, 66

 Khaznah (Khazinah)=1,000 kís of £5 each, 84

 Khiláf (Khaláf)=Salix Ægyptiaca, 66

 Khusyatán=testicles, 55

 Kirámat=prodigy, 237

 Kissís=ecclesiast, 228

 Knight errant of the East, 77

 Knuckle-bone, 314

 Kohl-powder keeps the eyes from inflammation, 291

 Koran quoted (xxxviii. 19), 37

 —— (xciv. 11; cv. 57), 38

 —— (iv.), 64, 78

 —— (iii. 57), 79

 —— (vii., lxxvi. lxxxvi.), 91

 —— (iv., xxii.), 95

 —— (iii. 89), 132

 —— (ix., xxxiii.), 140

 —— (iv. 88), 146

 —— (v.), 186

 —— (ii. etc.), 198

 —— (ii. 185), 199

 —— (lxxiv. 1, 8; xcvi.), 201

 —— (xvi. 74; ii. 118), 203

 —— (lvi. 6; xxviii.; vii.; ix), 205

 —— (xxviii. 22-27), 207

 —— (xiv. 34), 225

 —— (lxi.), 226

 —— (ii.), 228

 —— (iii. 141), _ib._

 —— (x. 25), 239

 —— (ii. 149; xcv.), 242

 —— (xlx. 170), 281

 —— (xviii.), 293

 —— (xcvi. 5), 298

 —— (xxiv.), 312

 —— (vii. 21), 316

 Koss ibn Sa'idat (Bishop of Najrán), 37

 Kubád=shaddock, 310

 Kuds (Al-) _see_ Bayt al-Mukaddas, 132

 Kúfiyah=coif, etc., 230

 Kulaib allows no one to approach his camp-fire, 77

 Kunfuz=hedgehog, 88

 Kurrah=ball in the Polo game, 329

 Kursí al-wiládah=birth-stool, 80

 Kutait=little tom cat, 39

 Kuthayyir (poet), 102

 Kuzia Fakán (P.N.) "it was decreed by destiny; so it came to pass", 175


 Labbayka=here I am, 227

 Lá iláha illa 'llah=there is no God but _the_ God (tahlíl), 236

 Language of signs, 304

 Lá rayba fí-hi, 210

 Layl (night) frequently=the interval between sunset and sunset, 260

 Laza (Hell for Jews), 140

 Leg-cut (severs horse's leg), 226

 Letter (reading _not_ always understanding), 112

 Li-ajal=for the sake of, low Egyptian, 113

 Lice bred by perspiration, 69

 Lion at home, lamb abroad, 183

 Lisám (mouth-band for men), chin-veil(=Yashmak) for women, 31, 230

 Locks (Mohammed's), 230

 Lost on Allah's way=martyr, 330

 Loving folk=something more than benevolence, 2

 Lukmán (Æsop of the Arabs), 199

 Lullilooing (Tahlíl, Zaghrutah, Kil), 80

 Lupin-flour used as soap, 136

 Lynx (trained for hunting), 293


 Má al-Khiláf, 136

 Magic studied by Jews, 234

 Mahmil (mahmal)=litter, 131

 Ma'ajanah (a place for making bricks), 17

 Makhaddah=pillow, 70

 Malik, used as in our story-books, 1

 —— bin Dinár, 204

 Mandíl=kerchief, 301

 Manumission of slaves, 55

 Man's creation, 91

 Mansúr (Al-) Caliph, 142, 153, 210

 —— bin Ammár, 204

 Maragha=he rubbed his face, 60

 Mardán-i-Ghayb (Himalayan brothers), 211

 Marhúm (f. Marhúmah)=late lamented, 129, 196

 Marjánah=coral branch (P.N.), 100

 Marriage-sheet inspected, 50

 Martyrs (still alive), 242

 Maskharah=buffoon, 143

 Maslamah bin Abd al-Malik, 167

 Matmúrah=underground cell, 39

 Mayzún (Badawi wife of Caliph Mu'áwiyah), 160

 Mitrahinna (Minat-ro-hinnu)=port at mouth of canal, 237

 Mohammed (best of the first and last), 11

 —— (Mustafá), 40

 —— (Periclytus and Paracletus), 226

 —— His letter to the Mukaukis, 79

 —— abhors the shaveling, 248

 —— (Bearer of glad and bad tidings), 257

 —— (Congratulator and Commiserator), 260

 —— (Best of mankind), 263

 Money weighed when old and worn, 145

 Monkery abhorred by Mohammed, 248

 Moon (blighting effect of its rays), 4

 —— masculine in Semitic, 45

 Mooring-pole customary in Tigris-Euphrates land, 20

 Moses (derivation of the name), 205

 —— and Jethro, _ib._

 —— and the next world, 206

 —— and Al-Khizr, 263

 Moslems, model Conservatives, 13

 —— external, 29

 —— peasants kind-hearted, 69

 —— familiarity between high and low, 32

 Mosques serving as lodgings for poor travellers, 69

 Mother's milk=nature, 44

 Mu'áwiyah (Caliph), 160; 161

 Muazzin (who calls to prayer), 306

 Mu'ujizah=miracle of a prophet, 237

 Músá=Moses, 205

 Musakhkham (Al-)=the defiled Cross, 220

 Musk (scent of heaven), 300

 Muzaní (Al-), 208

 Mu'ayyad (Sultan and calligrapher), 32

 Mustafá (the chosen)=Mohammed, 40


 Nahás ahmar=copper, 327

 Na'íman=may it benefit thee! after bathing, etc., 5

 Nájiyah=Salvadora, 145

 Najrán (in Syria), 232

 Nakfúr=Nicephorus, 77

 Nakh=make a camel kneel down by the cry Ikh! Ikh!, 139

 Nakl-i-safar (move preliminary to a journey), 84

 Naming of a child, 174

 Nár (fire), 163

 Narcissus (with negro eyes=yellowish white), 24

 Nawá=date-stone; Nawáyah=severance, 315

 Nat'a=leather of blood, 41

 Názir=Overseer, 304

 Neighbour before the house, companion before the journey, 207

 Negroes (_see_ Slaves) familiarity of boys with white girls

 —— skin assumes dust-colour in cold, etc., 127

 Nimrod of the desert, 291

 Nimsá=Germans, 219

 Nímshah (Namshah?)=dagger of state, 193

 Nufs (nifs, nuss)=half (a dirham), 37

 Nu'uman's flower=anemone, 325

 Nuzhat al Zamán=delight of the age, 81


 Oath (inconsiderate), 136

 Obscene abuse meant as familiarity, not insult, 88

 Offering for naught=closing with the offer, 4

 Ohod (battle of), 165

 Omar bin al-Khattáb (Caliph), 158; 159; 162; 164

 Othmán (Caliph), 163


 Palm-stick (a salutary rod), 22

 Payne quoted, 19; 185; 304

 Pen and Preserved Tablet, 68

 Periphrase containing a negative adds emphasis, 83

 "Philippi" and "Alexanders" in Sidon, 82

 Physical prognostication familiar to Mesmerists, 72

 Pièces d'occasion mostly sad doggrels, 261

 Pillow (wisádah, makhaddah), taking to=taking to one's bed, 70

 Pilgrimage quoted (i. 11; iii. 285), 5

 —— (i. 261; iii. 7), 15

 —— (i. 210, 346), 31

 —— (ii. 77), 40

 —— (iii. 330), 113

 —— (ii. 113), 114

 —— (iii. 333), 124

 —— (iii. 12), 131

 —— (iii. 254), 132

 —— (i. 222; ii. 91), 139

 —— (ii. 118), 140

 —— (i. 121), 163

 —— (ii. 227), 165

 —— (iii. 226, 342, 344), 169

 —— (ii. 49), 178

 —— (i. 305), 180

 —— (iii. 322), 203

 —— (ii. 89), 220

 —— (iii. 115), 224

 —— (iii. 232), 227

 —— (i. 346), 230

 —— (iii. 78), 236

 —— (ii. 110), 242

 —— (iii. 171-175, 203), 272

 —— (iii. 113), 286

 —— (iii. 71), 293

 —— (ii. 105, 205), 317

 —— (ii. 58; iii. 343), 327

 —— (i. 110), 330

 Pitching tents within dog-bark from Royalty disrespectful, 294

 Plunder sanctioned by custom, 68

 Prayer for the dead lack the Sijdah, 10

 —— of Ramazán, 202

 Preserved Tablet, 68

 Prognostication frequently mentioned, 72

 Preliminaries of a wrestling bout, 92

 Prominence of the pugaic muscles insisted upon, 98

 Prophets (have some manual trade), 286

 Province ("some"=Sancho Panza's "insula"), 188

 Puns (wretched and otherwise), 64, 179, 182

 Purifying (after evacuation), 326


 Racing a favourite pastime, 273

 Rank (derived from Pers. rang=colour), 192

 Rasm=usage (justifies a father killing his son), 7

 Rayháni (handwriting), 301

 Reed=pen (title of the Koranic chapt. lxviii.), 68

 Rijál al-Ghayb (invisible controls), 211

 Rising up and sitting down sign of agitation, 112

 Robing one's self in rags=becoming a Fakir, 171

 Rubb=syrup "Rob", 3

 Rudaynah and Rudaynian lances, 1


 Sabab=rope (hence "a cause"), 14

 Sabbágh=dyer, 305

 Sabt=Sabbath, _ib._

 Sadd=wall, dyke, 128

 Saffron (Aphrodisiac), 234

 Safíyu 'llah (Adam)=pure of Allah, 124

 Sahákah=tribadism, 234

 Sa'í=running between Safá and Marwah, 327

 Sa'íd bin Jubayr, 201

 Sayhún and Jayhún=Jaxartes and Bactrus, 78

 Sák=calf of the leg, 327

 Sáki=cup-bearer 27, 327

 Saker=hawk, 293

 Sal'am=S (alla) A (llah) a (layhi) wa S (allam) see Abhak, 24

 Salám (to be answered by a better salutation), 146

 —— (of prayers), 243

 Samsam (sword of the Tobba Amru bin Ma'ad Kurb), 127

 Sapphic venery, 234

 Sarír=bier (empty), 46

 Saulaján=bat in "bat and ball", 329

 Scrotum curdling in fear, 233

 Seditions in Kufah caused by Caliph Othman's nepotism, 163

 Septentriones (four oxen and their wain), 3

 Serving the Lord by sinning against one's body, 208

 Seven deadly sins, 175

 Sháfi'i (school of Theology), 151

 Sháhid=index, pointer, 300

 Sháhmiyánah (large tent), 194

 Shahrazad (various explanations of the name), 1

 Shakespeare and musical glasses, 3

 Shambar=Cassia fistularis, 241

 Sharrkan (Sharrun kána)=bane to the foe, 78

 Shaukat=sting, pride, 106

 Shaving and depilation, 160

 Shaykh=elder, chief, 144

 Shawáhi (from Shauh)=having a fascinating eye, 269

 Shirk=giving a partner to Allah, 202

 Shiyár (old name for Saturday), 305

 Shouting under a ruler's palace to attract attention, 38

 Shu'aib=Jethro, 205

 Siddík=true friend, 197

 Sign of the cross on the forehead, 224

 Sin=China, 77

 Sins (seven deadly), 175

 Sijdah=prostration, 10

 Siláh-dár=armour-bearer, 215

 Slander (poisoned=fatal), 264

 Slaves, Cannibals, 48

 —— Familiarity, 49

 —— called "Camphor," like "Snowball", 47

 —— refuse to be set free, 55

 —— Manumission of, _ib._

 —— Destructiveness, _ib._

 —— Girls' names, 57

 —— Returning from a journey, 65

 —— Christian girls sent to Moslems, 79

 —— Girls examined as to virginity, 147

 —— Behaving like one, 270

 Sledge (thrashing=tribulum), 23

 Sleeping and slumbering, 178

 Smoking out (a common practice), 255

 Smothering a rival common in Harems, 58

 Softness of skin highly prized, 295

 Sole of a valley often preferred to encamp in, 85

 Solomon and al-Sakhr, 97

 Sons of the Road=wayfarers, 23

 Son (the lamp of a dark house), 280

 Sophia (P.N. and Mosque), 79

 Speaking _en prince_, 184

 Spiritual Sciences (Moslem form of Cabbala), 151

 Spurring=kicking with the shovel-stirrup, 89

 Standards reversed in sign of defeat, 259

 Sucking the dead mother's breast, touch of Arab pathos, 128

 Sufyán al-Thaurí, 202

 Sulaymán bin Marwán (Caliph), 167

 Sweet, the (slang for fire), 163

 Swearing on Blade and Book, 332

 Syria (Shám)=left-hand land, 224


 Táb (game)=tip-cat, 314

 Tábút=bier (empty), 46

 Ta ám=meat; millet, 67

 Tabzír=female circumcision, 234

 Tafazzal=favorisca (have the kindness), 103

 Taggáa, 88

 Tahlíl=Refrain of Unity, 236

 Taj al-Mulúk Khárán=crown of the kings of amorous blandishment, 291

 Takht-rawan=travelling litter, 180

 Talbiyat (formula labbayka), 227

 Takrúrí=Moslem from Central and Western North Africa, 15

 Tarhah=head-veil, 52

 Tasnim (from sanam)=a fountain in Paradise, 100

 Taswif=saying "Sauf" a particle to express near future, 296

 Tawashshuh=shoulder-cut, 107

 Taub (Saub, Tobe)=loose garment, 206

 Tawáf (circumambulation of the Ka'abah), 327

 Testimonies (the two Shahádatain), 10

 Testicles (names for), 55

 —— (curdling in fear), 233

 Thigh-bite allowed in wrestling, 93

 Thrusting (applied to spear and lance), 231

 Tip-cat stick, 314

 Tob=Span. Adobe (unbaked brick), 17

 Tor (Mount Sinai), 242

 —— (its shaking), 281

 Torrens quoted, 5, 19, 80

 Traditionists—
   Al-Zuhri, 198
   Ibn Abí Ausfá, 200
   Sa'íd bin Jubayr, 201
   Sufyán al-Thaurí, 202
   Bishr al-Háfi, 203
   Mansúr bin Ammár, 204

 Trailing the skirts (humbly), 165

 Travelling at night, 286

 Tribulum (threshing-sledge), 108

 Triregno (denoted by the Papal Tiara), 236

 Trouser-string, 60

 Turk=Turkoman, nomade, 218

 ——=plunderer, robber, 304

 Turtúr (an Arab's bonnet), 143


 'Ud Jalaki=Damascus lute, 100

 Umrah=lesser Pilgrimage, 169

 Unveiling the face a sign of being a Christian, 119

 Urining, 326

 Usúl (fundamentals), 15


 Veil, _see_ Lisám, 31


 Wady=valley, 85

 Wakkád (Al-)=stoker, fireman of a Hammam-bath, 134

 Walíd bin Marwán (Caliph), 167

 Wa 'lláhi tayyib=By Allah, good!, 34

 Warm one's self at a man's fire, 76

 Washing the dead without doors only in case of poverty, 10

 Wazir (the sharp-witted in the tales), 246

 Whitening and blackening of the faces on Judgment-day, 312

 Wine (kahwah), 261

 —— (table and service), 122

 Wisádah=pillow, 70

 Wives have their night in turns, 78

 Women, cries of, 6

 —— weeping and wailing before cenotaphs, 68

 —— maltreated under the Caliphate, 69

 —— captives, 94

 —— of the blue-stocking type, 156

 —— Consult them and do the contrary, 184

 —— created of a crooked rib, 161

 Worlds (the three=Triloka), 236

 Wreckers, 111

 Wrestling and Wrestlers, 93

 Wuzu-ablution necessary before joining in prayers, 46


 Xisisthrus=Noah, 20, 25


 Yaftah Allah=Allah will open, an offer being insufficient, 149

 Yá Hájj=O Pilgrim, 15

 Yaman (Al-)=right hand region, 179

 —— Lightning on the hills of ... _ib._

 Yashmak (chin-veil for women), 31

 Yauh (conversationally Yehh) expression of astonishment, 321

 Yaum-i-Alast=Day of am-I-not (your Lord)?, 91

 Yes, Yes! and No, No! trifles common amongst the Arabs, 60

 Yunán, Yunáníya=Greece, 82

 Yúsuf bin Omar, 170


 Záhirí=plain honest Moslems, 29

 Zahr Sháh (P. N.), 284

 Zanj=negroes of Zanzibar, 5

 Zardah=rice with saffron, etc., 313

 Zarká (Cassandra of Yamámah), 104

 Zát al-Dawáhí=Lady of Calamities, 87

 Zau al-Makan (Light of the Place), 81

 Zawi 'l-furúj=habentes rimam, 49

 Zayn al-Abidín (grandson of Ali), 202

 Zemzem (well), 272

 Zikr (and Edwin Arnold's Pearls of Faith), 28

 Zirt=broken wind; derivatives, 88

 Ziyád bin Abí Sufyán, 163

 "Zug" (draught) feared by Orientals, 9

 Zuhal=Saturn, 75

 Zuhrí (Al-), 198

 Zukák al-Nakíb=Syndic street, 325

 Zunnár=ζώνη, confounded with the "Janeo", 215




                          TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES


 1. Added missing footnote anchor on p. 188.
 2. Silently corrected simple spelling, grammar, and typographical
    errors.
 3. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
 4. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 5. Enclosed bold font in =equals=.
 6. From a footnote in volume 10, "It has been pointed out to me 
    that in vol. ii. p. 285, line 18 "Zahr Shah" is a mistake for 
	Sulayman Shah."







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — VOLUME 02 (OF 10) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night — Volume 03 (of 10)
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night — Volume 03 (of 10)

Translator: Sir Richard Francis Burton


        
Release date: July 12, 2016 [eBook #52564]
                Most recently updated: May 21, 2025

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/52564

Credits: Produced by Richard Tonsing, Richard Hulse and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — VOLUME 03 (OF 10) ***

[Illustration]

[Illustration: لا لابرار كلّ شي تبر]

                   "TO THE PURE ALL THINGS ARE PURE."
                           (Puris omnia pura)

                                                        —_Arab Proverb._

          "Niuna corrotta mente intese mai sanamente parole."

                                            —"_Decameron_"—_conclusion_.

              "Erubuit, posuitque meum Lucretia librum
                  Sed coram Bruto. Brute! recede, leget."

                                                             —_Martial._

            "Mieulx est de ris que de larmes escripre,
                Pour ce que rire est le propre des hommes."

                                                              —RABELAIS.

"The pleasure we derive from perusing the Thousand-and-One Stories makes
us regret that we possess only a comparatively small part of these truly
enchanting fictions."

                                      —CRICHTON'S "_History of Arabia_."

[Illustration]

_A PLAIN AND LITERAL TRANSLATION OF THE ARABIAN NIGHTS ENTERTAINMENTS.
NOW ENTITULED_




                           _THE BOOK OF THE_
                     =Thousand Nights and a Night=

              _WITH INTRODUCTION EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE
                MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF MOSLEM MEN AND A
                 TERMINAL ESSAY UPON THE HISTORY OF THE
                                NIGHTS_

                              VOLUME III.


                                   BY
                           RICHARD F. BURTON

[Illustration]

        PRINTED BY THE BURTON CLUB FOR PRIVATE SUBSCRIBERS ONLY

                            Shammar Edition

Limited to one thousand numbered sets, of which this is

                              Number _547_




                          PRINTED IN U. S. A.




                        Inscribed to the Memory

                                   OF

                                A FRIEND

                                  WHO

                DURING A FRIENDSHIP OF TWENTY-SIX YEARS

                        EVER SHOWED ME THE MOST

                           UNWEARIED KINDNESS

                        Richard Monckton Milnes

                            Baron Houghton.




                     CONTENTS OF THE THIRD VOLUME.


                                                                  PAGE

 CONTINUATION OF THE TALE OF KING OMAR BIN AL-NU'UMAN AND HIS
   SONS SHARRKAN AND ZAU AL-MAKAN.

          _aa._ CONTINUATION OF THE TALE OF AZIZ AND AZIZAH          1

          _ab._ CONCLUSION OF THE TALE OF KING OMAR BIN             48
                  AL-NU'UMAN AND HIS SONS SHARRKAN AND ZAU
                  AL-MAKAN

     _b._ TALE OF THE HASHISH-EATER                                 91

     _c._ TALE OF HAMMAD THE BADAWI                                104


  1. THE BIRDS AND BEASTS AND THE CARPENTER                        114

 (_Lane, II. 52-59. The Fable of the Peacock and Peahen, the Duck, the
 Young Lion, the Ass, the Horse, the Camel, and the Carpenter, etc._)


  2. THE HERMITS                                                   125


  3. THE WATER-FOWL AND THE TORTOISE                               129


  4. THE WOLF AND THE FOX                                          132

        (_Lane, II. 59-69. The Fable of the Fox and the Wolf._)

     _a._ TALE OF THE FALCON AND THE PARTRIDGE                     138


  5. THE MOUSE AND THE ICHNEUMON                                   147


  6. THE CAT AND THE CROW                                          149


  7. THE FOX AND THE CROW                                          150

     _a._ THE FLEA AND THE MOUSE                                   151

     _b._ THE SAKER AND THE BIRDS                                  154

     _c._ THE SPARROW AND THE EAGLE                                155


  8. THE HEDGEHOG AND THE WOOD PIGEONS                             156

     _a._ THE MERCHANT AND THE TWO SHARPERS                        158


  9. THE THIEF AND HIS MONKEY                                      159

          THE FOOLISH WEAVER                                      _ib._


 10. THE SPARROW AND THE PEACOCK                                   161


 11. ALI BIN BAKKAR AND SHAMS AL-NAHAR                             162

   (_Lane, Vol. II., Chapt. ix. Story of Alee the Son of Bakkar, and
                        Shams en-Nahár, p. 1._)


 12. TALE OF KAMAR AL-ZAMAN                                        212

 (_Lane, Chapt. x. Story of the Prince Kamar ez-Zeman and the Princess
                    Budur, p. 78 and ibid. p. 149._

      _Story of the Two Princes El-Amjad and El-As'ad, p. 149._)




          CONTINUATION OF THE TALE OF KING OMAR BIN AL-NU'UMAN
                AND HIS SONS SHARRKAN AND ZAU AL-MAKAN.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night,

Shahrazad continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Aziz
pursued to Taj al-Muluk:—Then I entered the flower-garden and made for
the pavilion, where I found the daughter of Dalilah, the Wily One,
sitting with head on knee and hand to cheek. Her colour was changed and
her eyes were sunken; but, when she saw me, she exclaimed, "Praised be
Allah for thy safety!" And she was minded to rise but fell down for joy.
I was abashed before her and hung my head; presently, however, I went up
to her and kissed her and asked, "How knewest thou that I should come to
thee this very night?" She answered, "I knew it not! By Allah, this
whole year past I have not tasted the taste of sleep, but have watched
through every night, expecting thee; and such hath been my case since
the day thou wentest out from me and I gave thee the new suit of
clothes, and thou promisedst me to go to the Hammam and to come back! So
I sat awaiting thee that night and a second night and a third night; but
thou camest not till after so great delay, and I ever expecting thy
coming; for this is lovers' way. And now I would have thee tell me what
hath been the cause of thine absence from me the past year long?" So I
told her. And when she knew that I was married, her colour waxed yellow,
and I added, "I have come to thee this night but I must leave thee
before day." Quoth she, "Doth it not suffice her that she tricked thee
into marrying her and kept thee prisoner with her a whole year, but she
must also make thee swear by the oath of divorce, that thou wilt return
to her on the same night before morning, and not allow thee to divert
thyself with thy mother or me, nor suffer thee to pass one night with
either of us, away from her? How then must it be with one from whom thou
hast been absent a full year, and I knew thee before she did? But Allah
have mercy on thy cousin Azizah, for there befel her what never befel
any and she bore what none other ever bore and she died by thy
ill-usage; yet 'twas she who protected thee against me. Indeed, I
thought thou didst love me, so I let thee take thine own way; else had I
not suffered thee to go safe in a sound skin, when I had it in my power
to clap thee in jail and even to slay thee." Then she wept with sore
weeping and waxed wroth and shuddered in my face with skin bristling[1]
and looked at me with furious eyes. When I saw her in this case I was
terrified at her and my side-muscles trembled and quivered, for she was
like a dreadful she-Ghul, an ogress in ire, and I like a bean over the
fire. Then said she, "Thou art of no use to me, now thou art married and
hast a child; nor art thou any longer fit for my company; I care only
for bachelors and not for married men:[2] these profit us nothing. Thou
hast sold me for yonder stinking armful; but, by Allah, I will make the
whore's heart ache for thee, and thou shalt not live either for me or
for her!" Then she cried a loud cry and, ere I could think, up came the
slave-girls and threw me on the ground; and when I was helpless under
their hands she rose and, taking a knife, said, "I will cut thy throat
as they slaughter he-goats; and that will be less than thy desert, for
thy doings to me and the daughter of thy uncle before me. When I looked
to my life and found myself at the mercy of her slave-women, with my
cheeks dust-soiled, and saw her sharpen the knife, I made sure of
death"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir Dandan
thus continued his tale to Zau al-Makan:—Then quoth the youth Aziz to
Taj al-Muluk, Now when I found my life at the mercy of her slave-women
with my cheeks dust-soiled, and I saw her sharpen the knife, I made sure
of death and cried out to her for mercy. But she only redoubled in
ferocity and ordered the slave-girls to pinion my hands behind me, which
they did; and, throwing me on my back, she seated herself on my middle
and held down my head. Then two of them came up and squatted on my
shin-bones, whilst other two grasped my hands and arms; and she summoned
a third pair and bade them beat me. So they beat me till I fainted and
my voice failed. When I revived, I said to myself, "'Twere easier and
better for me to have my gullet slit than to be beaten on this wise!"
And I remembered the words of my cousin, and how she used to say to me,
"Allah, keep thee from her mischief!"; and I shrieked and wept till my
voice failed and I remained without power to breathe or to move. Then
she again whetted the knife and said to the slave-girls, "Uncover him."
Upon this the Lord inspired me to repeat to her the two phrases my
cousin had taught me, and had bequeathed to me, and I said, "O my lady,
dost thou not know that Faith is fair, Unfaith is foul?" When she heard
this, she cried out and said, "Allah pity thee, Azizah, and give thee
Paradise in exchange for thy wasted youth! By Allah, of a truth she
served thee in her lifetime and after her death, and now she hath saved
thee alive out of my hands with these two saws. Nevertheless, I cannot
by any means leave thee thus, but needs must I set my mark on thee, to
spite yonder brazen-faced piece, who hath kept thee from me." Thereupon
she called out to the slave-women and bade them bind my feet with cords
and then said to them, "Take seat on him!" They did her bidding, upon
which she arose and fetched a pan of copper and hung it over the brazier
and poured into it oil of sesame, in which she fried cheese.[3] Then she
came up to me (and I still insensible) and, unfastening my bag-trousers,
tied a cord round my testicles and, giving it to two of her women, bade
them hawl at it. They did so, and I swooned away and was for excess of
pain in a world other than this. Then she came with a razor of steel and
cut off my member masculine,[4] so that I remained like a woman: after
which she seared the wound with the boiling oil and rubbed it with a
powder, and I the while unconscious. Now when I came to myself, the
blood had stopped; so she bade the slave-girls unbind me and made me
drink a cup of wine. Then said she to me, "Go now to her whom thou hast
married and who grudged me a single night, and the mercy of Allah be on
thy cousin Azizah, who saved thy life and never told her secret love!
Indeed, haddest thou not repeated those words to me, I had surely slit
thy weasand. Go forth this instant to whom thou wilt, for I needed
naught of thee save what I have just cut off; and now I have no part in
thee, nor have I any further want of thee or care for thee. So begone
about thy business and rub thy head[5] and implore mercy for the
daughter of thine uncle!" Thereupon she kicked me with her foot and I
rose, hardly able to walk; and I went, little by little, till I came to
the door of our house. I saw it was open, so I threw myself within it
and fell down in a fainting-fit; whereupon my wife came out and lifting
me up, carried me into the saloon and assured herself that I had become
like a woman. Then I fell into a sleep and a deep sleep; and when I
awoke, I found myself thrown down at the garden gate,——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir Dandan
pursued to King Zau al-Makan, The youth Aziz thus continued his story to
Taj al-Muluk:—When I awoke and found myself thrown down at the
garden-gate, I rose, groaning for pain and misery, and made my way to
our home and entering, I came upon my mother weeping for me, and saying,
"Would I knew, O my son, in what land art thou!" So I drew near and
threw myself upon her, and when she looked at me and felt me, she knew
that I was ill; for my face was coloured black and tan. Then I thought
of my cousin and all the kind offices she had been wont to do me, and I
learned when too late that she had truly loved me; so I wept for her and
my mother wept also. Presently she said to me, "O my son, thy sire is
dead." At this my fury against Fate redoubled, and I cried till I fell
into a fit. When I came to myself, I looked at the place where my cousin
Azizah had been used to sit and shed tears anew, till I all but fainted
once more for excess of weeping; and I ceased not to cry and sob and
wail till midnight, when my mother said to me, "Thy father hath been
dead these ten days." "I shall never think of any one but my cousin
Azizah," replied I; "and indeed I deserve all that hath befallen me, for
that I neglected her who loved me with love so dear." Asked she, "What
hath befallen thee?" So I told her all that had happened and she wept
awhile, then she rose and set some matter of meat and drink before me. I
ate a little and drank, after which I repeated my story to her, and told
her the whole occurrence; whereupon she exclaimed, "Praised be Allah,
that she did but this to thee and forbore to slaughter thee!" Then she
nursed me and medicined me till I regained my health; and, when my
recovery was complete, she said to me, "O my son, I will now bring out
to thee that which thy cousin committed to me in trust for thee; for it
is thine. She swore me not to give it thee, till I should see thee
recalling her to mind and weeping over her and thy connection severed
from other than herself; and now I know that these conditions are
fulfilled in thee." So she arose, and opening a chest, took out this
piece of linen, with the figures of gazelles worked thereon, which I had
given to Azizah in time past; and taking it I found written therein
these couplets:—

 Lady of beauty, say, who taught thee hard and harsh design, ✿ To slay
    with longing Love's excess this hapless lover thine?
 An thou fain disremember me beyond our parting day, ✿ Allah will know,
    that thee and thee my memory never shall tyne.
 Thou blamest me with bitter speech yet sweetest 'tis to me; ✿ Wilt
    generous be and deign one day to show of love a sign?
 I had not reckoned Love contained so much of pine and pain; ✿ And soul
    distress until I came for thee to pain and pine;
 Never my heart knew weariness, until that eve I fell ✿ In love wi' thee,
    and prostrate fell before those glancing eyne!
 My very foes have mercy on my case and moan therefor; ✿ But thou, O
    heart of Indian steel, all mercy dost decline.
 No, never will I be consoled, by Allah, an I die, ✿ Nor yet forget the
    love of thee though life in ruins lie!

When I read these couplets, I wept with sore weeping and buffeted my
face; then I unfolded the scroll, and there fell from it another paper.
I opened it and behold, I found written therein, "Know, O son of my
uncle, that I acquit thee of my blood and I beseech Allah to make accord
between thee and her whom thou lovest; but if aught befal thee through
the daughter of Dalilah the Wily, return thou not to her neither resort
to any other woman and patiently bear thine affliction, for were not thy
fated life-tide a long life, thou hadst perished long ago; but praised
be Allah who hath appointed my death-day before thine! My peace be upon
thee; preserve this cloth with the gazelles herein figured and let it
not leave thee, for it was my companion when thou was absent from
me;"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir Dandan
pursued to King Zau al-Makan, And the youth Aziz continued to Taj
al-Muluk:—So I read what my cousin had written and the charge to me
which was, "Preserve this cloth with the gazelles and let it not leave
thee, for it was my companion when thou wast absent from me and, Allah
upon thee! if thou chance to fall in with her who worked these gazelles,
hold aloof from her and do not let her approach thee nor marry her; and
if thou happen not on her and find no way to her, look thou consort not
with any of her sex. Know that she who wrought these gazelles worketh
every year a gazelle-cloth and despatcheth it to far countries, that her
report and the beauty of her broidery, which none in the world can
match, may be bruited abroad. As for thy beloved, the daughter of
Dalilah the Wily, this cloth came to her hand, and she used to ensnare
folk with it, showing it to them and saying, I have a sister who wrought
this. But she lied in so saying, Allah rend her veil! This is my parting
counsel; and I have not charged thee with this charge, but because I
know[6] that after my death the world will be straitened on thee and,
haply, by reason of this, thou wilt leave thy native land and wander in
foreign parts, and hearing of her who wrought these figures, thou mayest
be minded to foregather with her. Then wilt thou remember me, when the
memory shall not avail thee; nor wilt thou know my worth till after my
death. And, lastly, learn that she who wrought the gazelles is the
daughter of the King of the Camphor Islands and a lady of the noblest."
Now when I had read that scroll and understood what was written therein,
I fell again to weeping, and my mother wept because I wept, and I ceased
not to gaze upon it and to shed tears till nightfall. I abode in this
condition a whole year, at the end of which the merchants, with whom I
am in this cafilah, prepared to set out from my native town; and my
mother counselled me to equip myself and journey with them, so haply I
might be consoled and my sorrow be dispelled, saying, "Take comfort and
put away from thee this mourning and travel for a year or two or three,
till the caravan return, when perhaps thy breast may be broadened and
thy heart heartened." And she ceased not to persuade me with endearing
words, till I provided myself with merchandise and set out with the
caravan. But all the time of my wayfaring, my tears have never dried;
no, never! and at every halting place where we halt, I open this piece
of linen and look on these gazelles and call to mind my cousin Azizah
and weep for her as thou hast seen; for indeed she loved me with dearest
love and died, oppressed by my unlove. I did her nought but ill and she
did me nought but good. When these merchants return from their journey,
I shall return with them, by which time I shall have been absent a whole
year: yet hath my sorrow waxed greater and my grief and affliction were
but increased by my visit to the Islands of Camphor and the Castle of
Crystal. Now these islands are seven in number and are ruled by a King,
by name Shahriman,[7] who hath a daughter called Dunyá;[8] and I was
told that it was she who wrought these gazelles and that this piece in
my possession was of her embroidery. When I knew this, my yearning
redoubled and I burnt with the slow fire of pining and was drowned in
the sea of sad thought; and I wept over myself for that I was become
even as a woman, without manly tool like other men, and there was no
help for it. From the day of my quitting the Camphor Islands, I have
been tearful-eyed and heavy-hearted, and such hath been my case for a
long while and I know not whether it will be given me to return to my
native land and die beside my mother or not; for I am sick from eating
too much of the world. Thereupon the young merchant wept and groaned and
complained and gazed upon the gazelles; whilst the tears rolled down his
cheeks in streams and he repeated these two couplets:—

 "Joy needs shall come," a prattler 'gan to prattle: ✿ "Needs cease thy
    blame!" I was commoved to rattle:
 "In time," quoth he: quoth I "'Tis marvellous! ✿ Who shall ensure my
    life, O cold of tattle!"[9]

And he repeated also these:—

 Well Allah weets that since our severance-day ✿ I've wept till forced to
    ask of tears a loan:
 "Patience! (the blamer cries): thou'lt have her yet!" ✿ Quoth I, "O
    blamer where may patience wone?"

Then said he, "This, O King! is my tale: hast thou ever heard one
stranger?" So Taj al-Muluk marvelled with great marvel at the young
merchant's story, and fire darted into his entrails on hearing the name
of the Lady Dunya and her loveliness. ——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir Dandan
continued to Zau al-Makan:—Now when Taj al-Muluk heard the story of the
young merchant, he marvelled with great marvel and fire darted into his
entrails on hearing the name of the Lady Dunya who, as he knew, had
embroidered the gazelles; and his love and longing hourly grew, so he
said to the youth, "By Allah, that hath befallen thee whose like never
befel any save thyself, but thou hast a life-term appointed, which thou
must fulfil; and now I would fain ask of thee a question." Quoth Aziz,
"And what is it?" Quoth he, "Wilt thou tell me how thou sawest the young
lady who wrought these gazelles?" Then he, "O my lord, I got me access
to her by a sleight and it was this. When I entered her city with the
caravan, I went forth and wandered about the garths till I came to a
flower-garden abounding in trees, whose keeper was a venerable old man,
a Shaykh stricken in years. I addressed him, saying, O ancient sir,
whose may be this garden? and he replied, It belongs to the King's
daughter, the Lady Dunya. We are now beneath her palace and, when she is
minded to amuse herself, she openeth the private wicket and walketh in
the garden and smelleth the fragrance of the flowers. So I said to him,
Favour me by allowing me to sit in this garden till she come; haply I
may enjoy a sight of her as she passeth. The Shaykh answered, There can
be no harm in that. Thereupon I gave him a dirham or so and said to him,
Buy us something to eat. He took the money gladly and opened the door
and, entering himself, admitted me into the garden, where we strolled
and ceased not strolling till we reached a pleasant spot in which he
bade me sit down and await his going and his returning. Then he brought
me somewhat of fruit and, leaving me, disappeared for an hour; but after
a while he returned to me bringing a roasted lamb, of which we ate till
we had eaten enough, my heart yearning the while for a sight of the
lady. Presently, as we sat, the postern opened and the keeper said to
me, Rise and hide thee. I did so; and behold, a black eunuch put his
head out through the garden-wicket and asked, O Shaykh, is there any one
with thee? No, answered he; and the eunuch said, Shut the garden gate.
So the keeper shut the gate, and lo! the Lady Dunya came in by the
private door. When I saw her, methought the moon had risen above the
horizon and was shining; so I looked at her a full hour and longed for
her as one athirst longeth for water. After a while she withdrew and
shut the door; whereupon I left the garden and sought my lodging,
knowing that I could not get at her and that I was no man for her, more
especially as I was become like a woman, having no manly tool: moreover
she was a King's daughter and I but a merchant man; so how could I have
access to the like of her or—to any other woman? Accordingly, when these
my companions made ready for the road, I also made preparation and set
out with them, and we journeyed towards this city till we arrived at the
place where we met with thee. Thou askest me and I have answered; and
these are my adventures and peace be with thee!" Now when Taj al-Muluk
heard that account, fires raged in his bosom and his heart and thought
were occupied with love for the Lady Dunya; and passion and longing were
sore upon him. Then he arose and mounted horse and, taking Aziz with
him, returned to his father's capital, where he settled him in a
separate house and supplied him with all he needed in the way of meat
and drink and dress. Then he left him and returned to his palace, with
the tears trickling down his cheeks, for hearing oftentimes standeth in
stead of seeing and knowing.[10] And he ceased not to be in this state
till his father came in to him and finding him wan-faced, lean of limb
and tearful-eyed, knew that something had occurred to chagrin him and
said, "O my son, acquaint me with thy case and tell me what hath
befallen thee, that thy colour is changed and thy body is wasted." So he
told him all that had passed and what tale he had heard of Aziz and the
account of the Princess Dunya; and how he had fallen in love of her on
hearsay, without having set eyes on her. Quoth his sire, "O my son, she
is the daughter of a King whose land is far from ours: so put away this
thought and go in to thy mother's palace"——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


            Now when it was the Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir Dandan
continued to Zau al-Makan:—And the father of Taj al-Muluk spake to him
on this wise, "O my son, her father is a King whose land is far from
ours: so put away this thought and go into thy mother's palace where are
five hundred maidens like moons, and whichsoever of them pleaseth thee,
take her; or else we will seek for thee in marriage some one of the
King's daughters, fairer than the Lady Dunya." Answered Taj al-Muluk, "O
my father, I desire none other, for she it is who wrought the gazelles
which I saw, and there is no help but that I have her; else I will flee
into the wold and the waste and I will slay myself for her sake." Then
said his father, "Have patience with me, till I send to her sire and
demand her in marriage, and win thee thy wish as I did for myself with
thy mother. Haply Allah will bring thee to thy desire; and, if her
parent will not consent, I will make his kingdom quake under him with an
army, whose rear shall be with me whilst its van shall be upon him."
Then he sent for the youth Aziz and asked him, "O my son, tell me dost
thou know the way to the Camphor Islands?" He answered "Yes"; and the
King said, "I desire of thee that thou fare with my Wazir thither."
Replied Aziz, "I hear and I obey, O King of the Age!"; whereupon the
King summoned his Minister and said to him, "Devise me some device,
whereby my son's affair may be rightly managed, and fare thou forth to
the Camphor Islands and demand of their King his daughter in marriage
for my son, Taj al-Muluk." The Wazir replied, "Hearkening and
obedience." Then Taj al-Muluk returned to his dwelling-place and his
love and longing redoubled and the delay seemed endless to him; and when
the night darkened around him, he wept and sighed and complained and
repeated this poetry:—

 Dark falls the night: my tears unaided rail ✿ And fiercest flames of
    love my heart assail:
 Ask thou the nights of me, and they shall tell ✿ An I find aught to do
    but weep and wail:
 Night-long awake, I watch the stars what while ✿ Pour down my cheeks the
    tears like dropping hail:
 And lone and lorn I'm grown with none to aid; ✿ For kith and kin the
    love-lost lover fail.

And when he had ended his reciting he swooned away and did not recover
his senses till the morning, at which time there came to him one of his
father's eunuchs and, standing at his head, summoned him to the King's
presence. So he went with him and his father, seeing that his pallor had
increased, exhorted him to patience and promised him union with her he
loved. Then he equipped Aziz and the Wazir and supplied them with
presents; and they set out and fared on day and night till they drew
near the Isles of Camphor, where they halted on the banks of a stream,
and the Minister despatched a messenger to acquaint the King of his
arrival. The messenger hurried forwards and had not been gone more than
an hour, before they saw the King's Chamberlains and Emirs advancing
towards them, to meet them at a parasang's distance from the city and
escort them into the royal presence. They laid their gifts before the
King and became his guests for three days. And on the fourth day the
Wazir rose and going in to the King, stood between his hands and
acquainted him with the object which induced his visit; whereat he was
perplexed for an answer inasmuch as his daughter misliked men and
disliked marriage. So he bowed his head groundwards awhile, then raised
it and calling one of his eunuchs, said to him, "Go to thy mistress, the
Lady Dunya, and repeat to her what thou hast heard and the purport of
this Wazir's coming." So the eunuch went forth and returning after a
time, said to the King, "O King of the Age, when I went in to the Lady
Dunya and told her what I had heard, she was wroth with exceeding wrath
and rose at me with a staff designing to break my head; so I fled from
her, and she said to me:—If my Father force me to wed him, whomsoever I
wed I will slay." Then said her sire to the Wazir and Aziz, "Ye have
heard, and now ye know all! So let your King wot of it and give him my
salutations and say that my daughter misliketh men and disliketh
marriage."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Shahriman
thus addressed the Wazir and Aziz, "Salute your King from me and inform
him of what ye have heard, namely that my daughter misliketh marriage."
So they turned away unsuccessful and ceased not faring on till they
rejoined the King and told him what had passed; whereupon he commanded
the chief officers to summon the troops and get them ready for marching
and campaigning. But the Wazir said to him, "O my liege Lord, do not
thus: the King is not at fault because, when his daughter learnt our
business, she sent a message saying, If my father force me to wed,
whomsoever I wed I will slay and myself after him. So the refusal cometh
from her." When the King heard his Minister's words he feared for Taj
al-Muluk and said, "Verily if I make war on the King of the Camphor
Islands and carry off his daughter, she will kill herself and it will
avail me naught." Then he told his son how the case stood, who hearing
it said, "O my father, I cannot live without her; so I will go to her
and contrive to get at her, even though I die in the attempt, and this
only will I do and nothing else." Asked his father, "How wilt thou go to
her?" and he answered, "I will go in the guise of a merchant."[11] Then
said the King, "If thou need must go and there is no help for it, take
with thee the Wazir and Aziz." Then he brought out money from his
treasuries and made ready for his son merchandise to the value of an
hundred thousand dinars. The two had settled upon this action; and when
the dark hours came Taj al-Muluk and Aziz went to Aziz's lodgings and
there passed that night, and the Prince was heart-smitten, taking no
pleasure in food or in sleep; for melancholy was heavy upon him and he
was agitated with longing for his beloved. So he besought the Creator
that he would vouchsafe to unite him with her and he wept and groaned
and wailed and began versifying:—

 Union, this severance ended, shall I see some day? ✿ Then shall my tears
    this love-lorn lot of me portray.
 While night all care forgets I only minded thee, ✿ And thou didst gar me
    wake while all forgetful lay.

And when his improvising came to an end, he wept with sore weeping and
Aziz wept with him, for that he remembered his cousin; and they both
ceased not to shed tears till morning dawned, whereupon Taj al-Muluk
rose and went to farewell his mother, in travelling dress. She asked him
of his case and he repeated the story to her; so she gave him fifty
thousand gold pieces and bade him adieu; and, as he fared forth, she put
up prayers for his safety and for his union with his lover and his
friends. Then he betook himself to his father and asked his leave to
depart. The King granted him permission and, presenting him with other
fifty thousand dinars, bade set up a tent for him without the city and
they pitched a pavilion wherein the travellers abode two days. Then all
set out on their journey. Now Taj al-Muluk delighted in the company of
Aziz and said to him, "O my brother, henceforth I can never part from
thee." Replied Aziz, "And I am of like mind and fain would I die under
thy feet: but, O my brother, my heart is concerned for my mother." "When
we shall have won our wish," said the Prince, "there will be naught save
what is well!" Now the Wazir continued charging Taj al-Muluk to be
patient, whilst Aziz entertained him every evening with talk and recited
poetry to him and diverted him with histories and anecdotes. And so they
fared on diligently night and day for two whole months, till the way
became tedious to Taj al-Muluk and the fire of desire redoubled on him;
and he broke out:—

 The road is longsome; grow my grief and need, ✿ While on my breast
    love-fires for ever feed:
 Goal of my hopes, sole object of my wish! ✿ By him who moulded man from
    drop o' seed,
 I bear such loads of longing for thy love, ✿ Dearest, as weight of
    al-Shumm Mounts exceed:
 O 'Lady of my World,'[12] Love does me die; ✿ No breath of life is left
    for life to plead;
 But for the union-hope that lends me strength, ✿ My weary limbs were
    weak this way to speed.

When he had finished his verses, he wept (and Aziz wept with him) from a
wounded heart, till the Minister was moved to pity by their tears and
said, "O my lord, be of good cheer and keep thine eyes clear of tears;
there will be naught save what is well!" Quoth Taj al-Muluk, "O Wazir,
indeed I am weary of the length of the way. Tell me how far we are yet
distant from the city." Quoth Aziz, "But a little way remaineth to us."
Then they continued their journey, cutting across river-vales and
plains, wolds and stony wastes, till one night, as Taj al-Muluk was
sleeping, he dreamt that his beloved was with him and that he embraced
her and pressed her to his bosom; and he awoke quivering, shivering with
pain, delirious with emotion, and improvised these verses:—

 Dear friend, my tears aye flow these cheeks adown, ✿ With longsome pain
    and pine, my sorrow's crown:
 I plain like keening woman child bereft, ✿ And as night falls like
    widow-dove I groan:
 An blow the breeze from land where thou dost wone, ✿ I find o'er
    sunburnt earth sweet coolness blown.
 Peace be wi' thee, my love, while zephyr breathes, ✿ And cushat flies
    and turtle makes her moan.

And when he had ended his versifying, the Wazir came to him and said,
"Rejoice; this is a good sign: so be of good cheer and keep thine eyes
cool and clear, for thou shalt surely compass thy desire." And Aziz also
came to him and exhorted him to patience and applied himself to divert
him, talking with him and telling him tales. So they pressed on,
marching day and night, other two months, till there appeared to them
one day at sunrise some white thing in the distance and Taj al-Muluk
said to Aziz, "What is yonder whiteness?" He replied, "O my lord! yonder
is the Castle of Crystal and that is the city thou seekest." At this the
Prince rejoiced, and they ceased not faring forwards till they drew near
the city and, as they approached it, Taj al-Muluk joyed with exceeding
joy, and his care ceased from him. They entered in trader guise, the
King's son being habited as a merchant of importance; and repaired to a
great Khan, known as the Merchants' Lodging. Quoth Taj al-Muluk to Aziz,
"Is this the resort of the merchants?"; and quoth he, "Yes; 'tis the
Khan wherein I lodged before." So they alighted there and making their
baggage-camels kneel, unloaded them and stored their goods in the
warehouses.[13] They abode four days for rest; when the Wazir advised
that they should hire a large house. To this they assented and they
found them a spacious house, fitted up for festivities, where they took
up their abode, and the Wazir and Aziz studied to devise some device for
Taj al-Muluk, who remained in a state of perplexity, knowing not what to
do. Now the Minister could think of nothing but that he should set up as
a merchant on 'Change and in the market of fine stuffs; so he turned to
the Prince and his companion and said to them, "Know ye that if we tarry
here on this wise, assuredly we shall not win our wish nor attain our
aim; but a something occurred to me whereby (if Allah please!) we shall
find our advantage." Replied Taj al-Muluk and Aziz, "Do what seemeth
good to thee, indeed there is a blessing on the grey-beard; more
specially on those who, like thyself, are conversant with the conduct of
affairs: so tell us what occurreth to thy mind." Rejoined the Wazir, "It
is my counsel that we hire thee a shop in the stuff-bazar, where thou
mayst sit to sell and buy. Every one, great and small, hath need of
silken stuffs and other cloths; so if thou patiently abide in thy shop,
thine affairs will prosper, Inshallah! more by token as thou art comely
of aspect. Make, however, Aziz thy factor and set him within the shop,
to hand thee the pieces of cloth and stuffs." When Taj al-Muluk heard
these words, he said, "This rede is right and a right pleasant recking."
So he took out a handsome suit of merchant's weed, and, putting it on,
set out for the bazar, followed by his servants, to one of whom he had
given a thousand dinars, wherewith to fit up the shop. They ceased not
walking till they came to the stuff-market, and when the merchants saw
Taj al-Muluk's beauty and grace, they were confounded and went about
saying, "Of a truth Rizwán[14] hath opened the gates of Paradise and
left them unguarded, so that this youth of passing comeliness hath come
forth." And others, "Peradventure this is one of the angels." Now when
they went in among the traders they asked for the shop of the Overseer
of the market and the merchants directed them thereto. So they delayed
not to repair thither and to salute him, and he and those who were with
him rose to them and seated them and made much of them, because of the
Wazir, whom they saw to be a man in years and of reverend aspect; and
viewing the youths Aziz and Taj al-Muluk in his company, they said to
one another, "Doubtless our Shaykh is the father of these two youths."
Then quoth the Wazir, "Who among you is the Overseer of the market?"
"This is he," replied they; and behold, he came forward and the Wazir
observed him narrowly and saw him to be an old man of grave and
dignified carriage, with eunuchs and servants and black slaves. The
Syndic greeted them with the greeting of friends and was lavish in his
attentions to them: then he seated them by his side and asked them,
"Have ye any business which we[15] may have the happiness of
transacting?" The Minister answered, "Yes; I am an old man, stricken in
years, and have with me these two youths, with whom I have travelled
through every town and country, entering no great city without tarrying
there a full year, that they might take their pleasure in viewing it and
come to know its citizens. Now I have visited your town intending to
sojourn here for a while; so I want of thee a handsome shop in the best
situation, wherein I may establish them, that they may traffic and learn
to buy and sell and give and take, whilst they divert themselves with
the sight of the place, and become familiar with the usages of its
people." Quoth the Overseer, "There is no harm in that;" and, looking at
the two youths, he was delighted with them and affected them with a warm
affection. Now he was a great connoisseur of bewitching glances,
preferring the love of boys to that of girls and inclining to the sour
rather than the sweet of love. So he said to himself, "This, indeed, is
fine game. Glory be to Him who created and fashioned them out of vile
water!"[16] and rising, stood before them like a servant to do them
honour. Then he went out and made ready for them a shop which was in the
very midst of the Exchange; nor was there any larger or better in the
bazar, for it was spacious and handsomely decorated and fitted with
shelves of ivory and ebony wood. After this he delivered the keys to the
Wazir, who was dressed as an old merchant, saying, "Take them, O my
lord, and Allah make it a blessed abiding-place to thy two sons!" The
Minister took the keys and the three returning to the Khan where they
had alighted, bade the servants transport to the shop all their goods
and stuffs.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Wazir
took the shop keys, he went accompanied by Taj al-Muluk and Aziz to the
Khan, and they bade the servants transport to the shop all their goods
and stuffs and valuables of which they had great store worth treasures
of money. And when all this was duly done, they went to the shop and
ordered their stock in trade and slept there that night. As soon as
morning morrowed the Wazir took the two young men to the Hammam-bath
where they washed them clean; and they donned rich dresses and scented
themselves with essences and enjoyed themselves to the utmost. Now each
of the youths was passing fair to look upon, and in the bath they were
even as saith the poet:—

 Luck to the Rubber, whose deft hand o'erflies ✿ A frame begotten twixt
    the lymph and light:[17]
 He shows the thaumaturgy of his craft, ✿ And gathers musk in form of
    camphor dight.[18]

After bathing they left; and, when the Overseer heard that they had gone
to the Hammam, he sat down to await the twain, and presently they came
up to him like two gazelles; their cheeks were reddened by the bath and
their eyes were darker than ever; their faces shone and they were as two
lustrous moons or two branches fruit-laden. Now when he saw them he rose
forthright and said to them, "O my sons, may your bath profit you
alway!"[19] Whereupon Taj al-Muluk replied, with the sweetest of speech,
"Allah be bountiful to thee, O my father; why didst thou not come with
us and bathe in our company?" Then they both bent over his right hand
and kissed it and walked before him to the shop, to entreat him
honourably and show their respect for him, for that he was Chief of the
Merchants and the market, and he had done them kindness in giving them
the shop. When he saw their hips quivering as they moved, desire and
longing redoubled on him; and he puffed and snorted and he devoured them
with his eyes, for he could not contain himself, repeating the while
these two couplets:—

 Here the heart reads a chapter of devotion pure; ✿ Nor reads dispute if
    Heaven in worship partner take:
 No wonder 'tis he trembles walking 'neath such weight! ✿ How much of
    movement that revolving sphere must make.[20]

Furthermore he said:—

 I saw two charmers treading humble earth. ✿ Two I must love an tread
    they on mine eyes.

When they heard this, they conjured him to enter the bath with them a
second time. He could hardly believe his ears and hastening thither,
went in with them. The Wazir had not yet left the bath; so when he heard
of the Overseer's coming, he came out and meeting him in the middle of
the bath-hall invited him to enter. He refused, whereupon Taj al-Muluk
taking him by the hand walked on one side and Aziz by the other, and
carried him into a cabinet; and that impure old man submitted to them,
whilst his emotion increased on him. He would have refused, albeit this
was what he desired; but the Minister said to him, "They are thy sons;
let them wash thee and cleanse thee." "Allah preserve them to thee!"
exclaimed the Overseer, "by Allah your coming and the coming of those
with you bring down blessing and good luck upon our city!" And he
repeated these two couplets:—

 Thou camest and green grew the hills anew; ✿ And sweetest bloom to the
    bridegroom threw,
 While aloud cried Earth and her earth-borns too ✿ 'Hail and welcome who
    comest with grace to endue.'

They thanked him for this, and Taj al-Muluk ceased not to wash him and
Aziz to pour water over him and he thought his soul in Paradise. When
they had made an end of his service, he blessed them and sat by the side
of the Wazir, talking but gazing the while on the youths. Presently, the
servants brought them towels, and they dried themselves and donned their
dress. Then they went out, and the Minister turned to the Syndic and
said to him, "O my lord! verily the bath is the Paradise[21] of this
world." Replied the Overseer, "Allah vouchsafe to thee such Paradise,
and health to thy sons and guard them from the evil eye! Do ye remember
aught that the eloquent have said in praise of the bath?" Quoth Taj
al-Muluk, "I will repeat for thee a pair of couplets;" and he recited:—

 The life of the bath is the joy of man's life,[22] ✿ Save that time is
    short for us there to bide:
 A Heaven, where irksome it were to stay; ✿ A Hell, delightful at
    entering-tide.

When he ended his recital, quoth Aziz, "And I also remember two couplets
in praise of the bath." The Overseer said, "Let me hear them;" so he
repeated the following:—

 A house where flowers from stones of granite grow, ✿ Seen at its best
    when hot with living lowe:
 Thou deem'st it Hell but here, forsooth, is Heaven, ✿ And some like suns
    and moons within it show.

And when he had ended his recital, his verses pleased the Overseer and
he wondered at his words and savoured their grace and facundity and said
to them, "By Allah, ye possess both beauty and eloquence. But now listen
to me, you twain!" And he began chanting, and recited in song the
following verses:—

 O joy of Hell and Heaven! whose tormentry ✿ Enquickens frame and soul
    with lively gree:
 I marvel so delightsome house to view, ✿ And most when 'neath it kindled
    fires I see:
 Sojourn of bliss to visitors, withal ✿ Pools on them pour down tears
    unceasingly.

Then his eye sight roamed and browsed on the gardens of their beauty and
he repeated these two couplets:—

 I went to the house of the keeper-man; ✿ He was out, but others to smile
    began:
 I entered his Heaven[23] and then his Hell;[24] ✿ And I said "Bless
    Málik[25] and bless Rizwán."[26]

When they heard these verses they were charmed, and the Overseer invited
them to his house; but they declined and returned to their own place, to
rest from the great heat of the bath. So they took their ease there and
ate and drank and passed that night in perfect solace and satisfaction,
till morning dawned, when they arose from sleep and making their lesser
ablution, prayed the dawn-prayer and drank the morning draught.[27] As
soon as the sun had risen and the shops and markets opened, they arose
and going forth from their place to the bazar opened their shop, which
their servants had already furnished, after the handsomest fashion, and
had spread with prayer-rugs and silken carpets and had placed on the
divans a pair of mattresses, each worth an hundred dinars. On every
mattress they had disposed a rug of skin fit for a King and edged with a
fringe of gold; and a-middlemost the shop stood a third seat still
richer, even as the place required. Then Taj al-Muluk sat down on one
divan, and Aziz on another, whilst the Wazir seated himself on that in
the centre, and the servants stood before them. The city people soon
heard of them and crowded about them, so that they sold some of their
goods and not a few of their stuffs; for Taj al-Muluk's beauty and
loveliness had become the talk of the town. Thus they passed a trifle of
time, and every day the people flocked to them and pressed upon them
more and more, till the Wazir, after exhorting Taj al-Muluk to keep his
secret, commended him to the care of Aziz and went home, that he might
commune with himself alone and cast about for some contrivance which
might profit them. Meanwhile, the two young men sat talking and Taj al
Muluk said to Aziz, "Haply some one will come from the Lady Dunya." So
he ceased not expecting this chance days and nights, but his heart was
troubled and he knew neither sleep nor rest; for desire had got the
mastery of him, and love and longing were sore upon him, so that he
renounced the solace of sleep and abstained from meat and drink; yet
ceased he not to be like the moon on the night of fullness. Now one day
as he sat in the shop, behold, there came up an ancient woman——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir Dandan
continued to Zau al-Makan:—Now one day as Taj al-Muluk sat in his shop,
behold, there appeared an ancient woman, who came up to him followed by
two slave girls. She ceased not advancing till she stood before the shop
of Taj al-Muluk and, observing his symmetry and beauty and loveliness,
marvelled at his charms and sweated in her petticoat trousers,
exclaiming, "Glory to Him who created thee out of vile water, and made
thee a temptation to all beholders!" And she fixed her eyes on him and
said, "This is not a mortal, he is none other than an angel deserving
the highest respect."[28] Then she drew near and saluted him, whereupon
he returned her salute and rose to his feet to receive her and smiled in
her face (all this by a hint from Aziz); after which he made her sit
down by his side and fanned her with a fan, till she was rested and
refreshed. Then she turned to Taj al-Muluk and said, "O my son! O thou
who art perfect in bodily gifts and spiritual graces; say me, art thou
of this country?" He replied, in voice the sweetest and in tone the
pleasantest, "By Allah, O my mistress, I was never in this land during
my life till this time, nor do I abide here save by way of diversion."
Rejoined she, "May the Granter grant thee all honour and prosperity! And
what stuffs hast thou brought with thee? Show me something passing fine;
for the beauteous should bring nothing but what is beautiful." When he
heard her words, his heart fluttered and he knew not their inner
meaning; but Aziz made a sign to him and he replied, "I have everything
thou canst desire and especially I have goods that besit none but Kings
and King's daughters; so tell me what stuff thou wantest and for whom,
that I may show thee what will be fitting for him." This he said, that
he might learn the meaning of her words; and she rejoined, "I want a
stuff fit for the Princess Dunya, daughter of King Shahriman." Now when
the Prince heard the name of his beloved, he joyed with great joy and
said to Aziz, "Give me such a parcel." So Aziz brought it and opened it
before Taj al-Muluk who said to the old woman, "Select what will suit
her; for these goods are to be found only with me." She chose stuffs
worth a thousand dinars and asked, "How much is this?"; and she ceased
not the while to talk with him and rub what was inside her thighs with
the palm of her hand. Answered Taj al-Muluk, "Shall I haggle with the
like of thee about this paltry price? Praised be Allah who hath
acquainted me with thee!" The old woman rejoined, "Allah's name be upon
thee! I commend thy beautiful face to the protection of the Lord of the
Daybreak.[29] Beautiful face and eloquent speech! Happy she who lieth in
thy bosom and claspeth thy waist in her arms and enjoyeth thy youth,
especially if she be beautiful and lovely like thyself!" At this, Taj
al-Muluk laughed till he fell on his back and said to himself, "O Thou
who fulfillest desires human by means of pimping old women! They are the
true fulfillers of desires!" Then she asked, "O my son, what is thy
name?" and he answered, "My name is Taj al-Muluk, the Crown of Kings."
Quoth she, "This is indeed a name of Kings and King's sons and thou art
clad in merchant's clothes." Quoth Aziz, "For the love his parents and
family bore him and for the value they set on him, they named him thus."
Replied the old woman, "Thou sayest sooth, Allah guard you both from the
evil eye and the envious, though hearts be broken by your charms!" Then
she took the stuffs and went her way; but she was amazed at his beauty
and stature and symmetry, and she ceased not going till she found the
Lady Dunya and said to her, "O my mistress! I have brought thee some
handsome stuffs." Quoth the Princess, "Show me that same"; and the old
woman, "O apple of my eye, here it is, turn it over and examine it." Now
when the Princess looked at it she was amazed and said, "O my nurse,
this is indeed handsome stuff: I have never seen its like in our city."
"O my lady," replied the old nurse, "he who sold it me is handsomer
still. It would seem as if Rizwan had left the gates of Paradise open in
his carelessness, and as if the youth who sold me this stuff had come
bodily out of Heaven. I would he might sleep this night with thee and
might lie between thy breasts.[30] He hath come to thy city with these
precious stuffs for amusement's sake, and he is a temptation to all who
set eyes on him." The Princess laughed at her words and said, "Allah
afflict thee, O pernicious old hag! Thou dotest and there is no sense
left in thee." Presently, she resumed, "Give me the stuff that I may
look at it anew." So she gave it her and she took it again and saw that
its size was small and its value great. It pleased her, for she had
never in her life seen its like, and she exclaimed, "By Allah, this is a
handsome stuff!" Answered the old woman, "O my lady, by Allah! if thou
sawest its owner thou wouldst know him for the handsomest man on the
face of the earth." Quoth the Lady Dunya, "Didst thou ask him if he had
any need, that he might tell us and we might satisfy it?" But the nurse
shook her head and said, "The Lord keep thy sagacity! By Allah, he hath
a want, may thy skill not fail thee. What! is any man free from wants?"
Rejoined the Princess, "Go back to him and salute him and say to
him:—Our land and town are honoured by thy visit and, if thou have any
need, we will fulfil it to thee, on our head and eyes." So the old woman
at once returned to Taj al-Muluk, and when he saw her his heart jumped
for joy and gladness and he rose to his feet before her and, taking her
hand, seated her by his side. As soon as she was rested, she told him
what Princess Dunya had said; and he on hearing it joyed with exceeding
joy; his breast dilated to the full; gladness entered his heart and he
said to himself, "Verily, I have my need." Then he asked the old woman,
"Haply thou wilt take her a message from me and bring me her answer?";
and she answered, "I hear and I obey." So he said to Aziz, "Bring me
ink-case and paper and a brazen pen." And when Aziz brought him what he
sought, he hent the pen in hand and wrote these lines of poetry:—

 I write to thee, O fondest hope! a writ ✿ Of grief that severance on my
    soul doth lay:
 Saith its first line, "Within my heart is lowe!" ✿ Its second, "Love and
    longing on me prey!"
 Its third, "My patience waste is, fades my life!" ✿ Its fourth, "Naught
    shall my pain and pine allay!"
 Its fifth, "When shall mine eyes enjoy thy sight?" ✿ Its sixth, "Say,
    when shall dawn our meeting-day?"

And, lastly, by way of subscription he wrote these words. "This letter
is from the captive of captivation ✿ prisoned in the hold of longing
expectation ✿ wherefrom is no emancipation ✿ but in anticipation and
intercourse and in unification ✿ after absence and separation. ✿ For
from the severance of friends he loveth so fain ✿ he suffereth
love-pangs and pining pain. ✿" Then his tears rushed out, and he indited
these two couplets:—

 I write thee, love, the while my tears pour down; ✿ Nor cease they ever
    pouring thick and fleet:
 Yet I despair not of my God, whose grace ✿ Haply some day will grant us
    twain to meet.

Then he folded the letter[31] and sealed it with his signet-ring and
gave it to the old woman, saying, "Carry it to the Lady Dunya." Quoth
she, "To hear is to obey;" whereupon he gave her a thousand dinars and
said to her, "O my mother! accept this gift from me as a token of my
affection." She took both from him and blessed him and went her way and
never stinted walking till she went in to the Lady Dunya. Now when the
Princess saw her she said to her, "O my nurse, what is it he asketh of
need that we may fulfil his wish to him?" Replied the old woman, "O my
lady, he sendeth thee this letter by me, and I know not what is in it;"
and handed it to her. Then the Princess took the letter and read it; and
when she understood it, she exclaimed, "Whence cometh and whither goeth
this merchant man that he durst address such a letter to me?" And she
slapt her face saying, "Whence are we that we should come to
shopkeeping? Awah! Awah! By the lord, but that I fear Almighty Allah I
had slain him;" and she added, "Yea, I had crucified[32] him over his
shop-door!" Asked the old woman, "What is in this letter to vex thy
heart and move thy wrath on this wise? Doth it contain a complaint of
oppression or demand for the price of the stuff?" Answered the Princess,
"Woe to thee! There is none of this in it, naught but words of love and
endearment. This is all through thee: otherwise whence should this
Satan[33] know me?" Rejoined the old woman, "O my lady, thou sittest in
thy high palace and none may have access to thee; no, not even the birds
of the air. Allah keep thee, and keep thy youth from blame and reproach!
Thou needest not care for the barking of dogs, for thou art a Princess,
the daughter of a King. Be not wroth with me that I brought thee this
letter, knowing not what was in it; but I opine that thou send him an
answer and threaten him with death and forbid him this foolish talk;
surely he will abstain and not do the like again." Quoth the Lady Dunya,
"I fear that, if I write to him, he will desire me the more." The old
woman returned, "When he heareth thy threats and promise of punishment,
he will desist from his persistence." She cried, "Here with the ink-case
and paper and brazen pen;" and when they brought them she wrote these
couplets:—

 O thou who for thy wakeful nights wouldst claim my love to boon, ✿ For
    what of pining thou must feel and tribulation!
 Dost thou, fond fool and proud of sprite, seek meeting with the Moon? ✿
    Say, did man ever win his wish to take in arms the Moon?
 I counsel thee, from soul cast out the wish that dwells therein, ✿ And
    cut that short which threatens thee with sore risk oversoon:
 An to such talk thou dare return, I bid thee to expect ✿ Fro' me such
    awful penalty as suiteth froward loon:
 I swear by Him who moulded man from gout of clotted blood,[34] ✿ Who lit
    the Sun to shine by day and lit for night the moon,
 An thou return to mention that thou spakest in thy pride, ✿ Upon a cross
    of tree for boon I'll have thee crucified!

Then she folded the letter and handing it to the old woman said, "Give
him this and say him:—Cease from this talk!" "Hearkening and obedience"
replied she, and taking the letter with joy, returned to her own house,
where she passed the night; and when morning dawned she betook herself
to the shop of Taj al-Muluk whom she found expecting her. When he saw
her, he was ready to fly[35] for delight, and when she came up to him,
he stood to her on his feet and seated her by his side. Then she brought
out the letter and gave it to him, saying, "Read what is in this;"
adding "When Princess Dunya read thy letter she was angry; but I coaxed
her and jested with her till I made her laugh, and she had pity on thee
and she hath returned thee an answer." He thanked her for her kindness
and bade Aziz give her a thousand gold pieces: then he perused the
letter and understanding it fell to weeping a weeping so sore that the
old woman's heart was moved to ruth for him, and his tears and
complaints were grievous to her. Presently she asked him, "O my son,
what is there in this letter to make thee weep?" Answered he, "She hath
threatened me with death and crucifixion and she forbiddeth me to write
to her, but if I write not my death were better than my life. So take
thou my answer to her letter and let her work her will." Rejoined the
old woman, "By the life of thy youth, needs must I risk my existence for
thee, that I may bring thee to thy desire and help thee to win what thou
hast at heart!" And Taj al-Muluk said, "Whatever thou dost, I will
requite thee for it and do thou weigh it in the scales of thy judgement,
for thou art experienced in managing matters, and skilled in reading the
chapters of the book of intrigue: all hard matters to thee are easy
doings; and Allah can bring about everything." Then he took a sheet of
paper and wrote thereon these improvised couplets:—

 Yestre'en my love with slaughter menaced me, ✿ But sweet were slaughter
    and Death's foreordainèd:
 Yes, Death is sweet for lover doomed to bear ✿ Long life, rejected,
    injured and constrainèd:
 By Allah! deign to visit friendless friend! ✿ Thy thrall am I and like a
    thrall I'm chainèd:
 Mercy, O lady mine, for loving thee! ✿ Who loveth noble soul should be
    assainèd.

Then he sighed heavy sighs and wept till the old woman wept also; and
presently taking the letter she said to him, "Be of good cheer and cool
eyes and clear; for needs must I bring thee to thy wish."——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Taj al-Muluk
wept the old woman said to him, "Be of good cheer and cool eyes and
clear; for needs must I bring thee to thy wish." Then she rose and left
him on coals of fire; and returned to Princess Dunya, whom she found
still showing on her changed face rage at Taj al-Muluk's letter. So she
gave her his second letter, whereat her wrath redoubled and she said,
"Did I not say he would desire us the more?" Replied the old woman,
"What thing is this dog that he should aspire to thee?" Quoth the
Princess, "Go back to him and tell him that, if he write me after this,
I will cut off his head." Quoth the nurse, "Write these words in a
letter and I will take it to him that his fear may be the greater." So
she took a sheet of paper and wrote thereon these couplets:—

 Ho thou, who past and bygone risks regardest with uncare! ✿ Thou who to
    win thy meeting-prize dost overslowly fare!
 In pride of spirit thinkest thou to win the star Soha[36]? ✿ Albe thou
    may not reach the Moon which shines through upper air?
 How darest thou expect to win my favours, hope to clip ✿ Upon a lover's
    burning breast my lance like shape and rare?
 Leave this thy purpose lest my wrath come down on thee some day, ✿ A day
    of wrath shall hoary turn the partings of thy hair!

Then she folded the letter and gave it to the old woman, who took it and
repaired to Taj al-Muluk. And when he saw her, he rose to his feet and
exclaimed, "May Allah never bereave me of the blessing of thy coming!"
Quoth she, "Take the answer to thy letter." He took it and reading it,
wept with sore weeping and said, "I long for some one to slay me at this
moment and send me to my rest, for indeed death were easier to me than
this my state!" Then he took ink-case and pen and paper and wrote a
letter containing these two couplets:—

 O hope of me! pursue me not with rigour and disdain: ✿ Deign thou to
    visit lover-wight in love of thee is drowned;
 Deem not a life so deeply wronged I longer will endure; ✿ My soul for
    severance from my friend divorced this frame unsound.

Lastly he folded the letter and handed it to the old woman, saying, "Be
not angry with me, though I have wearied thee to no purpose." And he
bade Aziz give her other thousand ducats, saying, "O my mother, needs
must this letter result in perfect union or utter severance." Replied
she, "O my son, by Allah, I desire nought but thy weal; and it is my
object that she be thine, for indeed thou art the shining moon, and she
the rising sun.[37] If I do not bring you together, there is no profit
in my existence; and I have lived my life till I have reached the age of
ninety years in the practice of wile and intrigue; so how should I fail
to unite two lovers, though in defiance of right and law?" Then she took
leave of him having comforted his heart, and ceased not walking till she
went in to the Lady Dunya. Now she had hidden the letter in her hair: so
when she sat down by the Princess she rubbed her head and said, "O my
lady, maybe thou wilt untwist my hair-knot, for it is a time since I
went to the Hammam." The King's daughter bared her arms to the elbows
and, letting down the old woman's locks, began to loose the knot of back
hair; when out dropped the letter and the Lady Dunya seeing it, asked,
"What is this paper?" Quoth the nurse, "As I sat in the merchant's shop,
this paper must have stuck to me: give it to me that I may return it to
him; possibly it containeth some account whereof he hath need." But the
Princess opened it and read it and, when she understood it, she cried
out, "This is one of thy manifold tricks, and hadst thou not reared me,
I would lay violent hands on thee this moment! Verily Allah hath
afflicted me with this merchant: but all that hath befallen me with him
is on thy head. I know not from what country this one can have come: no
man but he would venture to affront me thus, and I fear lest this my
case get abroad, more by token as it concerneth one who is neither of my
kin nor of my peers." Rejoined the old woman, "None would dare speak of
this for fear of thy wrath and for awe of thy sire; so there can be no
harm in sending him an answer." Quoth the Princess, "O my nurse, verily
this one is a perfect Satan! How durst he use such language to me and
not dread the Sultan's rage. Indeed, I am perplexed about his case: if I
order him to be put to death, it were unjust; and if I leave him alive
his boldness will increase." Quoth the old woman, "Come, write him a
letter; it may be he will desist in dread." So she called for paper and
ink-case and pen and wrote these couplets:—

 Thy folly drives thee on though long I chid, ✿ Writing in verse: how
    long shall I forbid?
 For all forbiddal thou persistest more, ✿ And my sole grace it is to
    keep it hid;
 Then hide thy love nor ever dare reveal; ✿ For an thou speak, of thee
    I'll soon be rid;
 If to thy silly speech thou turn anew, ✿ Ravens shall croak for thee the
    wold amid:

 And Death shall come and beat thee down ere long, ✿ Put out of sight and
    bury 'neath an earthen lid:
 Thy folk, fond fool! thou'lt leave for thee to mourn, ✿ And through
    their lives to sorrow all forlorn.

Then she folded the letter and committed it to the old woman, who took
it and returning to Taj al-Muluk, gave it to him. When he read it, he
knew that the Princess was hard-hearted and that he should not win
access to her; so he complained of his case to the Wazir and besought
his counsel. Quoth the Minister, "Know thou that naught will profit thee
save that thou write to her and invoke the retribution of Heaven upon
her." And quoth the Prince, "O my brother, O Aziz, do thou write to her
as if my tongue spake, according to thy knowledge." So Aziz took a paper
and wrote these couplets:—

 By the Five Shayks,[38] O Lord, I pray deliver me; ✿ Let her for whom I
    suffer bear like misery:
 Thou knowest how I fry in flaming lowe of love, ✿ While she I love hath
    naught of ruth or clemency:
 How long shall I, despite my pain, her feelings spare? ✿ How long shall
    she wreak tyranny o'er weakling me?
 In pains of never-ceasing death I ever grieve: ✿ O Lord, deign aid; none
    other helping hand I see.
 How fain would I forget her and forget her love! ✿ But how forget when
    Love garred Patience death to dree?
 O thou who hinderest Love to 'joy fair meeting-tide ✿ Say! art thou safe
    from Time and Fortune's jealousy?
 Art thou not glad and blest with happy life, while I ✿ From folk and
    country for thy love am doomèd flee?

Then Aziz folded the letter and gave it to Taj al-Muluk, who read it and
was pleased with it. So he handed it to the old woman, who took it and
went in with it to Princess Dunya. But when she read it and mastered the
meaning thereof, she was enraged with great rage and said, "All that
hath befallen me cometh by means of this ill-omened old woman!" Then she
cried out to the damsels and eunuchs, saying, "Seize this old hag, this
accursed trickstress and beat her with your slippers!" So they came down
upon her till she swooned away; and, when she came to herself, the
Princess said to her, "By the Lord! O wicked old woman, did I not fear
Almighty Allah, I would slay thee." Then quoth she to them, "Beat her
again" and they did so till she fainted a second time, whereupon she
bade them drag her forth and throw her outside the palace-door. So they
dragged her along on her face and threw her down before the gate; but as
soon as she revived she got up from the ground and, walking and sitting
by turns, made her way home. There she passed the night till morning,
when she arose and went to Taj al-Muluk and told them all that had
occurred. He was distressed at this grievous news and said, "O my
mother, hard indeed to us is that which hath befallen thee, but all
things are according to fate and man's lot." Replied she, "Be of good
cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear, for I will not give over
striving till I have brought thee and her together, and made thee enjoy
this wanton who hath burnt my skin with beating." Asked the Prince,
"Tell me what caused her to hate men;" and the old woman answered, "It
arose from what she saw in a dream." "And what was this dream?" "'Twas
this: one night, as she lay asleep, she saw a fowler spread his net upon
the ground and scatter wheat grain round it. Then he sat down hard by,
and not a bird in the neighbourhood but flocked to his toils. Amongst
the rest she beheld a pair of pigeons, male and female; and, whilst she
was watching the net, behold, the male bird's foot caught in the meshes
and he began to struggle; whereupon all the other birds took fright and
flew away. But presently his mate came back and hovered over him, then
alighted on the toils unobserved by the fowler, and fell to pecking with
her beak and pulling at the mesh in which the male bird's foot was
tangled, till she released the toes and they flew away together. Then
the fowler came up, mended his net and seated himself afar off. After an
hour or so the birds flew back and the female pigeon was caught in the
net; whereupon all the other birds took fright and scurried away; and
the male pigeon fled with the rest and did not return to his mate, but
the fowler came up and took the female pigeon and cut her throat. The
Princess awoke, troubled by her dream, and said:—All males are like this
pigeon, worthless creatures: and men in general lack grace and goodness
to women." When the old woman had ended her story, the Prince said to
her, "O my mother, I desire to have one look at her, though it be my
death; so do thou contrive me some contrivance for seeing her." She
replied, "Know then that she hath under her palace windows a garden
wherein she taketh her pleasure; and thither she resorteth once in every
month by the private door. After ten days, the time of her thus going
forth to divert herself will arrive; so when she is about to visit the
garden, I will come and tell thee, that thou mayst go thither and meet
her. And look thou leave not the garden, for haply, an she see thy
beauty and loveliness, her heart will be taken with love of thee, and
love is the most potent means of union." He said, "I hear and obey;"
whereupon he and Aziz arose and left the shop and, taking the old woman
with them, showed her the place where they lodged. Then said Taj
al-Muluk to Aziz, "O my brother, I have no need of the shop now, having
fulfilled my purpose of it; so I give it to thee with all that is in it;
for that thou hast come abroad with me and hast left thy native land for
my sake." Aziz accepted his gift and then they sat conversing, while the
Prince questioned him of the strange adventures which had befallen him,
and his companion acquainted him with the particulars thereof.
Presently, they went to the Wazir and, reporting to him Taj al-Muluk's
purpose, asked him, "What is to be done?" "Let us go to the garden,"
answered he. So each and every donned richest clothes and went forth,
followed by three white slaves to the garden, which they found thick
with thickets and railing its rills. When they saw the keeper sitting at
the gate, they saluted him with the Salam and he returned their salute.
Then the Wazir gave him an hundred gold pieces, saying, "Prithee, take
this small sum and fetch us somewhat to eat; for we are strangers and I
have with me these two lads whom I wish to divert."[39] The Gardener
took the sequins and said to them, "Enter and amuse yourselves in the
garden, for it is all yours; and sit down till I bring you what food you
require." So he went to the market while the Wazir and Taj al-Muluk and
Aziz entered the garden. And shortly after leaving for the bazar the
Gardener returned with a roasted lamb and cotton-white bread, which he
placed before them, and they ate and drank; thereupon he served up
sweetmeats, and they ate of them, and washed their hands and sat
talking. Presently the Wazir said to the garth-keeper, "Tell me about
this garden: is it thine or dost thou rent it?" The Shaykh replied, "It
doth not belong to me, but to our King's daughter, the Princess Dunya."
"What be thy monthly wages?" asked the Wazir and he answered, "One dinar
and no more." Then the Minister looked round about the garden and,
seeing in its midst a pavilion tall and grand but old and disused, said
to the keeper, "O elder, I am minded to do here a good work, by which
thou shalt remember me." Replied the other, "O my lord, what is the good
work thou wouldest do?" "Take these three hundred dinars," rejoined the
Wazir. When the Keeper heard speak of the gold, he said, "O my lord,
whatso thou wilt, do!" So the Wazir gave him the monies, saying,
"Inshallah, we will make a good work in this place!" Then they left him
and returned to their lodging, where they passed the night; and when it
was the next day, the Minister sent for a plasterer and a painter and a
skilful goldsmith and, furnishing them with all the tools they wanted,
carried them to the garden, where he bade them whitewash the walls of
the pavilion and decorate it with various kinds of paintings. Moreover
he sent for gold and lapis lazuli[40] and said to the painter, "Figure
me on the wall, at the upper end of this hall, a man-fowler with his
nets spread and birds falling into them and a female pigeon entangled in
the meshes by her bill." And when the painter had finished his picture
on one side, the Wazir said, "Figure me on the other side a similar
figure and represent the she-pigeon alone in the snare and the fowler
seizing her and setting the knife to her neck; and draw on the third
side-wall, a great raptor clutching the male pigeon, her mate, and
digging talons into him." The artist did his bidding, and when he and
the others had finished the designs, they received their hire and went
away. Then the Wazir and his companions took leave of the Gardener and
returned to their place, where they sat down to converse. And Taj
al-Muluk said to Aziz, "O my brother, recite me some verses: perchance
it may broaden my breast and dispel my dolours and quench the fire
flaming in my heart." So Aziz chanted with sweet modulation these
couplets:—

 Whate'er they say of grief to lovers came, ✿ I, weakling I, can
    single-handed claim:
 An seek thou watering-spot,[41] my streaming eyes ✿ Pour floods that
    thirst would quench howe'er it flame:
 Or wouldest view what ruin Love has wrought ✿ With ruthless hands, then
    see this wasted frame.

And his eyes ran over with tears and he repeated these couplets also:-

 Who loves not swan-neck and gazelle-like eyes, ✿ Yet claims to know
    Life's joys, I say he lies:
 In Love is mystery, none avail to learn ✿ Save he who loveth in pure
    loving wise.
 Allah my heart ne'er lighten of this love, ✿ Nor rob the wakefulness
    these eyelids prize.

Then he changed the mode of song and sang these couplets:—

 Ibn Síná[42] in his Canon doth opine ✿ Lovers' best cure is found in
    merry song:
 In meeting lover of a like degree, ✿ Dessert in garden, wine-draughts
    long and strong:
 I chose another who of thee might cure ✿ While Force and Fortune aided
    well and long;
 But ah! I learnt Love's mortal ill, wherein ✿ Ibn Sina's recipe is fond
    and wrong.

After hearing them to the end, Taj al-Muluk was pleased with his verses
and wondered at his eloquence and the excellence of his recitation,
saying, "Indeed, thou hast done away with somewhat of my sorrow." Then
quoth the Wazir, "Of a truth, there occurred to those of old what
astoundeth those who hear it told." Quoth the Prince, "If thou canst
recall aught of this kind, prithee let us hear thy subtle lines and keep
up the talk." So the Minister chanted in modulated song these couplets:—

 Indeed I deemed thy favours might be bought ✿ By gifts of gold and
    things that joy the sprite;
 And ignorantly thought thee light-o'-love, ✿ When can thy love lay low
    the highmost might;
 Until I saw thee choosing one, that one ✿ Loved with all favour, crowned
    with all delight:
 Then wot I thou by sleight canst ne'er be won ✿ And under wing my head I
    hid from sight;
 And in this nest of passion made my wone, ✿ Wherein I nestle morning,
    noon and night.

So far concerning them; but as regards the old woman she remained shut
up from the world in her house, till it befel that the King's daughter
was taken with a desire to divert herself in the garden. Now she had
never been wont so to do save in company with her nurse; accordingly she
sent for her and made friends with her and soothed her sorrow, saying,
"I wish to go forth to the garden, that I may divert myself with the
sight of its trees and fruits, and broaden my breast with the scent of
its flowers." Replied the old woman, "I hear and obey; but first I would
go to my house, and soon I will be with thee." The Princess rejoined,
"Go home, but be not long absent from me." So the old woman left her
and, repairing to Taj al-Muluk, said to him, "Get thee ready and don thy
richest dress and go to the garden and find out the Gardener and salute
him and then hide thyself therein." "To hear is to obey" answered he;
and she agreed with him upon a signal, after which she returned to the
Lady Dunya. As soon as she was gone, the Wazir and Aziz rose and robed
Taj al-Muluk in a splendid suit of royal raiment worth five thousand
dinars, and girt his middle with a girdle of gold set with gems and
precious metals. Then they repaired to the garden and found seated at
the gate the Keeper who, as soon as he saw the Prince, sprang to his
feet and received him with all respect and reverence, and opening the
gate, said, "Enter and take thy pleasure in looking at the garden." Now
the Gardener knew not that the King's daughter was to visit the place
that day; but when Taj al-Muluk had been a little while there, he heard
a hubbub and ere he could think, out issued the eunuchs and damsels by
the private wicket. The Gardener seeing this came up to the Prince,
informed him of her approach and said to him, "O my lord, what is to be
done? The Princess Dunya, the King's daughter, is here." Replied the
Prince, "Fear not, no harm shall befal thee; for I will hide me
somewhere about the garden." So the Keeper exhorted him to the utmost
prudence and went away. Presently the Princess entered the garden with
her damsels and with the old woman, who said to herself, "If these
eunuchs stay with us, we shall not attain our end." So quoth she to the
King's daughter, "O my lady, I have somewhat to tell thee which shall
ease thy heart." Quoth the Princess, "Say what thou hast to say." "O my
lady," rejoined the old woman, "thou hast no need of these eunuchs at a
time like the present; nor wilt thou be able to divert thyself at thine
ease, whilst they are with us; so send them away;" and the Lady Dunya
replied, "Thou speakest sooth." Accordingly she dismissed them and
presently began to walk about, whilst Taj al-Muluk looked upon her and
fed his eyes on her beauty and loveliness (but she knew it not); and
every time he gazed at her he fainted by reason of her passing
charms.[43] The old woman drew her on by converse till they reached the
pavilion which the Wazir had bidden be decorated, when the Princess
entered and cast a glance round and perceived the picture of the birds,
the fowler and the pigeon; whereupon she cried, "Exalted be Allah! This
is the very counterfeit presentment of what I saw in my dream." She
continued to gaze at the figures of the birds and the fowler with his
net, admiring the work, and presently she said, "O my nurse, I have been
wont to blame and hate men, but look now at the fowler how he hath
slaughtered the she-bird and set free her mate; who was minded to return
to her and aid her to escape when the bird of prey met him and tore him
to pieces." Now the old woman feigned ignorance to her and ceased not to
occupy her in converse, till they drew near the place where Taj al-Muluk
lay hidden. Thereupon she signed to him to come out and walk under the
windows of the pavilion; and, as the Lady Dunya stood looking from the
casement, behold, her glance fell that way and she saw him and noting
his beauty of face and form, said to the old woman, "O my nurse, whence
cometh yonder handsome youth?" Replied the old woman, "I know nothing of
him save that I think he must be some great King's son, for he attaineth
comeliness in excess and extreme loveliness." And the Lady Dunya fell in
love with him to distraction; the spells which bound her were loosed and
her reason was overcome by his beauty and grace; and his fine stature
and proportions strongly excited her desires sexual. So she said, "O my
nurse! this is indeed a handsome youth;" and the old woman replied,
"Thou sayest sooth, O my lady," and signed to Taj al-Muluk to go home.
And though desire and longing flamed in him and he was distraught for
love, yet he went away and took leave of the Gardener and returned to
his place, obeying the old woman and not daring to cross her. When he
told the Wazir and Aziz that she had signed him to depart, they exhorted
him to patience, saying, "Did not the ancient dame know that there was
an object to be gained by thy departure, she had not signalled thee to
return home." Such was the case with Taj al-Muluk, the Wazir and Aziz;
but as regards the King's daughter, the Lady Dunya, desire and passion
redoubled upon her; she was overcome with love and longing and she said
to her nurse, "I know not how I shall manage a meeting with this youth,
but through thee." Exclaimed the old woman, "I take refuge with Allah
from Satan the stoned! Thou who art averse from men! How cometh it then
that thou art thus afflicted with hope and fear of this young man? Yet,
by Allah, none is worthy of thy youth but he." Quoth the Lady Dunya, "O
my nurse, further my cause and help me to foregather with him, and thou
shalt have of me a thousand dinars and a dress of honour worth as much
more: but if thou aid me not to come at him, I am a dead woman in very
sooth." Replied the ancient dame, "Go to thy palace and leave me to
devise means for bringing you twain together. I will throw away my life
to content you both!" So the Lady Dunya returned to her palace, and the
old woman betook herself to Taj al-Muluk who, when he saw her, rose to
receive her and entreated her with respect and reverence making her sit
by his side. Then she said, "The trick hath succeeded," and told him all
that had passed between herself and the Princess. He asked her, "When is
our meeting to be?"; and she answered, "To-morrow." So he gave her a
thousand dinars and a dress of like value, and she took them and stinted
not walking till she returned to her mistress, who said to her, "O my
nurse! what news of the beloved?" Replied she, "I have learnt where he
liveth and will bring him to thee to-morrow." At this the Princess was
glad and gave her a thousand dinars and a dress worth as much more, and
she took them and returned to her own place, where she passed the night
till morning. Then she went to Taj al-Muluk and dressing him in woman's
clothes, said to him, "Follow me and sway from side to side[44] as thou
steppest, and hasten not thy pace nor take heed of any who speaketh to
thee." And after thus charging him she went out, and the Prince followed
her in woman's attire and she continued to charge and encourage him by
the way, that he might not be afraid; nor ceased they walking till they
came to the Palace-gate. She entered and the Prince after her, and she
led him on, passing through doors and vestibules, till they had passed
seven doors.[45] As they approached the seventh, she said to him,
"Hearten thy heart and when I call out to thee and say:—O damsel pass
on! do not slacken thy pace, but advance as if about to run. When thou
art in the vestibule, look to thy left and thou wilt see a saloon with
doors: count five doors and enter the sixth, for therein is thy desire."
Asked Taj al-Muluk, "And whither wilt thou go?"; and she answered,
"Nowhere shall I go except that perhaps I may drop behind thee, and the
Chief Eunuch may detain me to chat with him." She walked on (and he
behind her) till she reached the door where the Chief Eunuch was
stationed and he, seeing Taj al-Muluk with her dressed as a slave-girl,
said to the old woman, "What business hath this girl with thee?" Replied
she, "This is a slave-girl of whom the Lady Dunya hath heard that she is
skilled in different kinds of work and she hath a mind to buy her."
Rejoined the Eunuch, "I know neither slave-girls nor anyone else; and
none shall enter here without my searching according to the King's
commands."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Chamberlain
Eunuch cried to the old woman, "I know neither slave-girl nor anyone
else; and none shall enter here without my searching him according to
the King's commands." Then quoth she, feigning to be angry, "I thought
thee a man of sense and good breeding; but, if thou be changed, I will
let the Princess know of it and tell her how thou hinderest her
slave-girl;" and she cried out to Taj al-Muluk, saying, "Pass on, O
damsel!" So he passed on into the vestibule as she bade him, whilst the
Eunuch was silent and said no more. The Prince counted five doors and
entered the sixth where he found the Princess Dunya standing and
awaiting him. As soon as she saw him, she knew him and clasped him to
her breast, and he clasped her to his bosom. Presently the old woman
came in to them, having made a pretext to dismiss the Princess's
slave-girls for fear of disgrace; and the Lady Dunya said to her, "Be
thou our door-keeper!" So she and Taj al-Muluk abode alone together and
ceased not kissing and embracing and twining leg with leg till dawn.[46]
When day drew near, she left him and, shutting the door upon him, passed
into another chamber, where she sat down as was her wont, whilst her
slave-women came in to her, and she attended to their affairs and
conversed with them. Then she said to them, "Go forth from me now, for I
wish to amuse myself in privacy." So they withdrew and she betook
herself to Taj al-Muluk, and the old woman brought them food, of which
they ate and returned to amorous dalliance till dawn. Then the door was
locked upon him as on the day before; and they ceased not to do thus for
a whole month. This is how it fared with Taj al-Muluk and the Lady
Dunya; but as regards the Wazir and Aziz when they found that the Prince
had gone to the Palace of the King's daughter and there delayed all the
while, they concluded that he would never return from it and that he was
lost for ever; and Aziz said to the Wazir, "O my father, what shall we
do?" He replied, "O my son, this is a difficult matter, and except we
return to his sire and tell him, he will blame us therefor." So they
made ready at once and forthright set out for the Green Land and the
Country of the Two Columns, and sought Sulayman Shah's capital. And they
traversed the valleys night and day till they went in to the King, and
acquainted him with what had befallen his son and how from the time he
entered the Princess's Palace they had heard no news of him. At this the
King was as though the Day of Doom had dawned for him and regret was
sore upon him, and he proclaimed a Holy War[47] throughout his realm.
After which he sent forth his host without the town and pitched tents
for them and took up his abode in his pavilion, whilst the levies came
from all parts of the kingdom; for his subjects loved him by reason of
his great justice and beneficence. Then he marched with an army walling
the horizon, and departed in quest of his son. Thus far concerning them;
but as regards Taj al-Muluk and the Lady Dunya the two remained as they
were half a year's time, whilst every day they redoubled in mutual
affection; and love and longing and passion and desire so pressed upon
Taj al-Muluk, that at last he opened his mind and said to her, "Know, O
beloved of my heart and vitals, that the longer I abide with thee, the
more love and longing and passion and desire increase on me, for that I
have not yet fulfilled the whole of my wish." Asked she, "What then
wouldst thou have, O light of my eyes and fruit of my vitals? If thou
desire aught beside kissing and embracing and entwining of legs with
legs, do what pleaseth thee; for, by Allah, no partner hath any part in
us."[48] But he answered: "It is not that I wish: I would fain acquaint
thee with my true story. Know, then, that I am no merchant, nay, I am a
King, the son of a King, and my father's name is the supreme King
Sulayman Shah, who sent his Wazir ambassador to thy father, to demand
thee in marriage for me, but when the news came to thee thou wouldst not
consent." Then he told her his past from first to last, nor is there any
avail in a twice-told tale, and he added, "And now I wish to return to
my father, that he may send an ambassador to thy sire, to demand thee in
wedlock for me, so we may be at ease." When she heard these words, she
joyed with great joy because it suited with her own wishes, and they
passed the night on this understanding. But it so befel by the decree of
Destiny that sleep overcame them that night above all nights and they
remained till the sun had risen. Now at this hour, King Shahriman was
sitting on his cushion of estate, with his Emirs and Grandees before
him, when the Syndic of the goldsmiths presented himself between his
hands, carrying a large box. And he advanced and opening it in presence
of the King, brought out therefrom a casket of fine work worth an
hundred thousand dinars, for that which was therein of precious stones,
rubies and emeralds beyond the competence of any sovereign on earth to
procure. When the King saw this, he marvelled at its beauty; and,
turning to the Chief Eunuch (him with whom the old woman had had to do),
said to him, "O Kafur,[49] take this casket and wend with it to the
Princess Dunya." The Castrato took the casket and repairing to the
apartment of the King's daughter found the door shut and the old woman
lying asleep on the threshold; whereupon said he, "What! sleeping at
this hour?" When the old woman heard the Eunuch's voice she started from
sleep and was terrified and said to him, "Wait till I fetch the key."
Then she went forth and fled for her life. Such was her case; but as
regards the Epicene he, seeing her alarm, lifted the door off its
hinge-pins,[50] and entering found the Lady Dunya with her arms round
the neck of Taj al-Muluk and both fast asleep. At this sight he was
confounded and was preparing to return to the King, when the Princess
awoke, and seeing him, was terrified and changed colour and waxed pale,
and said to him, "O Kafur, veil thou what Allah hath veiled!"[51] But he
replied, "I cannot conceal aught from the King"; and, locking the door
on them, returned to Shahriman, who asked him, "Hast thou given the
casket to the Princess?" Answered the Eunuch, "Take the casket, here it
is for I cannot conceal aught from thee. Know that I found a handsome
young man by the side of the Princess and they two asleep in one bed and
in mutual embrace." The King commanded them to be brought into the
presence and said to them, "What manner of thing is this?" and, being
violently enraged, seized a dagger and was about to strike Taj al-Muluk
with it, when the Lady Dunya threw herself upon him and said to her
father, "Slay me before thou slayest him." The King reviled her and
commanded her to be taken back to her chamber: then he turned to Taj
al-Muluk and said to him, "Woe to thee! Whence art thou? Who is thy
father and what hath emboldened thee to debauch my daughter?" Replied
the Prince, "Know, O King, that if thou put me to death, thou art a lost
man, and thou and all in thy dominions will repent the deed." Quoth the
King, "How so?"; and quoth Taj al-Muluk, "Know that I am the son of King
Sulayman Shah, and ere thou knowest it, he will be upon thee with his
horse and foot." When King Shahriman heard these words he would have
deferred killing Taj al-Muluk and would rather have put him in prison,
till he should look into the truth of his words; but his Wazir said to
him, "O King of the Age, it is my opinion that thou make haste to slay
this gallows-bird who dares debauch the daughters of Kings." So the King
cried to the headsman, "Strike off his head; for he is a traitor."
Accordingly, the headsman took him and bound him fast and raised his
hand to the Emirs, signing to consult them, a first and a second signal,
thinking thereby to gain time in this matter;[52] but the King cried in
anger to him, "How long wilt thou consult others? If thou consult them
again I will strike off thine own head." So the headsman raised his hand
till the hair of his armpit showed, and was about to smite his neck——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

[Illustration]


          Now when it was the Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the headsman
raised his hand to smite off his head when behold, loud cries arose and
the folk closed their shops; whereupon the King said to the headsman,
"Wait awhile," and despatched one to learn the news. The messenger fared
forth and presently returned and reported, "I saw an army like the
dashing sea with its clashing surge: and their horses curvetting till
earth trembleth with the tramp; and I know no more of them." When the
King heard this, he was confounded and feared for his realm lest it
should be torn from him; so he turned to his Minister and said, "Have
not any of our army gone forth to meet this army?" But ere he had done
speaking, his Chamberlains entered with messengers from the King who was
approaching, and amongst them the Wazir who had accompanied Taj
al-Muluk. They began by saluting the King, who rose to receive them and
bade them draw near, and asked the cause of their coming; whereupon the
Minister came forward from amongst them and stood before him and said,
"Know that he who hath come down upon thy realm is no King like unto the
Kings of yore and the Sultans that went before." "And who is he?" asked
Shahriman, and the Wazir answered, "He is the Lord of justice and
loyalty, the bruit of whose magnanimity the caravans have blazed abroad,
the Sultan Sulayman Shah, Lord of the Green Land and the Two Columns and
the Mountains of Ispahan; he who loveth justice and equity, and hateth
oppression and iniquity. And he saith to thee that his son is with thee
and in thy city; his son, his heart's very core and the fruit of his
loins, and if he find him in safety, his aim is won and thou shalt have
thanks and praise; but if he have been lost from thy realm or if aught
of evil have befallen him, look thou for ruin and the wasting of thy
reign! for this thy city shall become a wold wherein the raven shall
croak. Thus have I done my errand to thee and peace be with thee!" Now
when King Shahriman heard from the messenger these words, his heart was
troubled and he feared for his kingdom: so he cried out for his Grandees
and Ministers, Chamberlains and Lieutenants; and, when they appeared, he
said to them, "Woe to you! Go down and search for the youth." Now the
Prince was still under the headsman's hands, but he was changed by the
fright he had undergone. Presently, the Wazir, chancing to glance
around, saw the Prince on the rug of blood and recognised him; so he
arose and threw himself upon him, and so did the other envoys. Then they
proceeded to loose his bonds and they kissed his hands and feet,
whereupon Taj al-Muluk opened his eyes and, recognising his father's
Wazir and his friend Aziz, fell down a-fainting for excess of delight in
them. When King Shahriman made sure that the coming of this army was
indeed because of this youth, he was confounded and feared with great
fear; so he went up to Taj al-Muluk and, kissing his head, said to him,
"O my son, be not wroth with me, neither blame the sinner for his sin:
but have compassion on my grey hairs, and waste not my realm." Whereupon
Taj al-Muluk drew near unto him and kissing his hand, replied, "No harm
shall come to thee, for indeed thou art to me as my father; but look
that nought befal my beloved, the Lady Dunya!" Rejoined the King, "O my
lord! fear not for her; naught but joy shall betide her;" and he went on
to excuse himself and made his peace with Sulayman Shah's Wazir, to whom
he promised much money, if he would conceal from the King what he had
seen. Then he bade his chief Officers take the Prince with them and
repair to the Hammam and clothe him in one of the best of his own suits
and bring him back speedily. So they obeyed his bidding and bore him to
the bath and clad him in the clothes which King Shahriman had set apart
for him, and brought him back to the presence-chamber. When he entered
the King rose to receive him and made all his Grandees stand in
attendance on him. Then Taj al-Muluk sat down to converse with his
father's Wazir and with Aziz, and he acquainted them with what had
befallen him; after which they said to him, "During that delay we
returned to thy father and gave him to know that thou didst enter the
Palace of the Princess and didst not return therefrom; and thy case
seemed doubtful to us. But when thy sire heard of this he mustered his
forces; then we came to this land and indeed our coming hath brought to
thee relief in extreme case and to us great joy." Quoth he, "Good
fortune hath attended your every action, first and last." While this was
doing King Shahriman went in to his daughter, Princess Dunya, and found
her wailing and weeping for Taj al-Muluk. Moreover, she had taken a
sword and fixed the hilt in the ground and had set the point to the
middle of her heart between her breasts; and she bent over the blade
saying, "Needs must I slay myself and not survive my beloved." When her
father entered and saw her in this case, he cried out to her, saying, "O
Princess of kings' daughters, hold thy hand and have ruth on thy sire
and the folk of thy realm!" Then he came up to her and continued, "Let
it not be that an ill thing befal thy father for thy sake!" And he told
her the whole tale that her lover was the son of King Sulayman Shah and
sought her to wife and he added, "The marriage waiteth only for thy
consent," Thereat she smiled and said, "Did I not tell thee that he was
the son of a Sultan? By Allah, there is no help for it but that I let
him crucify thee on a bit of wood worth two pieces of silver!" Replied
the King, "O my daughter, have mercy on me, so Allah have mercy on
thee!" Rejoined she, "Up with you and make haste and go bring him to me
without delay." Quoth the King, "On my head and eyes be it!"; and he
left her and, going in hastily to Taj al-Muluk, repeated her words in
his ear.[53] So he arose and accompanied the King to the Princess, and
when she caught sight of her lover, she took hold of him and embraced
him in her father's presence and hung upon him and kissed him, saying,
"Thou hast desolated me by thine absence!" Then she turned to her father
and said, "Sawest thou ever any that could do hurt to the like of this
beautiful being, who is moreover a King, the son of a King, and of the
free-born,[54] guarded against ignoble deeds?" Thereupon King Shahriman
went out shutting the door on them with his own hand; and he returned to
the Wazir and to the other envoys of Sulayman Shah and bade them inform
their King that his son was in health and gladness and enjoying all
delight of life with his beloved. So they returned to King Sulayman and
acquainted him with this; whereupon King Shahriman ordered largesse of
money and vivers to the troops of King Sulayman Shah; and, when they had
conveyed all he had commanded, he bade be brought out an hundred
coursers and an hundred dromedaries and an hundred white slaves and an
hundred concubines and an hundred black slaves and an hundred female
slaves; all of which he forwarded to the King as a present. Then he took
horse, with his Grandees and Chief Officers, and rode out of the city in
the direction of the King's camp. As soon as Sultan Sulayman Shah knew
of his approach, he rose and advanced many paces to meet him. Now the
Wazir and Aziz had told him all the tidings, whereat he rejoiced and
cried, "Praise be to Allah who hath granted the dearest wish of my son!"
Then King Sulayman took King Shahriman in his arms and seated him beside
himself on the royal couch, where they conversed awhile and had pleasure
in each other's conversation. Presently food was set before them, and
they ate till they were satisfied; and sweetmeats and dried fruits were
brought, and they enjoyed their dessert. And after a while came to them
Taj al-Muluk, richly dressed and adorned, and when his father saw him,
he stood up and embraced him and kissed him. Then all who were sitting
rose to do him honour; and the two Kings seated him between them and
they sat conversing a while, after which quoth King Sulayman Shah to
King Shahriman, "I desire to have the marriage-contract between my son
and thy daughter drawn up in the presence of witnesses, that the wedding
may be made public, even as is the custom of Kings." "I hear and I
obey," quoth King Shahriman and thereon summoned the Kazi and the
witnesses, who came and wrote out the marriage-contract between Taj
al-Muluk and the Lady Dunya. Then they gave bakhshish[55] of money and
sweetmeats; and lavished incense and essences; and indeed it was a day
of joy and gladness and all the grandees and soldiers rejoiced therein.
Then King Shahriman proceeded to dower and equip his daughter; and Taj
al-Muluk said to his sire, "Of a truth, this young man Aziz is of the
generous and hath done me a notable service, having borne weariness with
me; and he hath travelled with me and hath brought me to my desire. He
ceased never to show sufferance with me and exhort me to patience till I
accomplished my intent; and now he hath abided with us two whole years,
and he cut off from his native land. So now I purpose to equip him with
merchandise, that he may depart hence with a light heart; for his
country is nearhand." Replied his father, "Right is thy rede;" so they
made ready an hundred loads of the richest stuffs and the most costly,
and Taj al-Muluk presented them with great store of money to Aziz, and
farewelled him, saying, "O my brother and my true friend! take these
loads and accept them from me by way of gift and token of affection, and
go in peace to thine own country." Aziz accepted the presents and
kissing the ground between the hands of the Prince and his father bade
them adieu. Moreover, Taj al-Muluk mounted and accompanied him three
miles on his homeward way as a proof of amity, after which Aziz conjured
him to turn back, saying, "By Allah, O my master, were it not for my
mother, I never would part from thee! But, good my lord! leave me not
without news of thee." Replied Taj al-Muluk, "So be it!" Then the Prince
returned to the city and Aziz journeyed on till he came to his native
town; and he entered it and ceased not faring till he went in to his
mother and found that she had built him a monument in the midst of the
house and used to visit it continually. When he entered, he saw her with
hair dishevelled and dispread over the tomb, weeping and repeating these
lines:—

 Indeed I'm strong to bear whate'er befal; ✿ But weak to bear such
    parting's dire mischance:
 What heart estrangement of the friend can bear? ✿ What strength
    withstand assault of severance?

Then sobs burst from her breast, and she recited also these couplets:—

 What's this? I pass by tombs, and fondly greet ✿ My friends' last homes,
    but send they no reply:
 For saith each friend, "Reply how can I make ✿ When pledged to clay and
    pawned to stones I lie?
 Earth has consumed my charms and I forget ✿ Thy love, from kith and kin
    poor banisht I."

While she was thus, behold, Aziz came in to her and when she saw him,
she fell down, fainting for very joy. He sprinkled water on her face
till she revived and rising, took him in her arms and strained him to
her breast, whilst he in like manner embraced her. Then he greeted her
and she greeted him, and she asked the reason of his long absence,
whereupon he told her all that had befallen him from first to last and
informed her how Taj al-Muluk had given him an hundred loads of monies
and stuffs. At this she rejoiced, and Aziz abode with his mother in his
native town, weeping for what mishaps had happened to him with the
daughter of Dalilah the Wily One, even her who had castrated[56] him.
Such was the case with Aziz; but as regards Taj al-Muluk he went in unto
his beloved, the Princess Dunya, and abated her maidenhead. Then King
Shahriman proceeded to equip his daughter for her journey with her
husband and father in-law, and bade bring them provaunt and presents and
rarities. So they loaded their beasts and set forth, whilst King
Shahriman escorted them, by way of farewell, three days' journey on
their way, till King Shah Sulayman conjured him to return. So he took
leave of them and turned back, and Taj al-Muluk and his wife and father
fared forwards night and day, with their troops, till they drew near
their capital. As soon as the news of their coming spread abroad, the
folk decorated for them the city,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Shah Sulayman
drew near his capital, the folk decorated the city for him and for his
son. So they entered in state and the King, sitting on his throne with
his son by his side, gave alms and largesse and loosed all who were in
his jails. Then he held a second bridal for his son, and the sound of
the singing-women and players upon instruments was never silent for a
whole month, and the tirewomen stinted not to adorn the Lady Dunya and
display her in various dresses; and she tired not of the displaying nor
did the women weary of gazing on her. Then Taj al-Muluk, after having
foregathered awhile with his father and mother, took up his sojourn with
his wife, and they abode in all joyance of life and in fairest fortune,
till there came to them the Destroyer of all delights.[57] Now when the
Wazir Dandan had ended the tale of Taj al-Muluk and the Lady Dunya, Zau
al-Makan said to him, "Of a truth, it is the like of thee who lighten
the mourner's heart and who deserve to be the boon-companions of Kings
and to guide their policy in the right way." All this befel and they
were still besieging Constantinople, where they lay four whole years,
till they yearned after their native land; and the troops murmured,
being weary of vigil and besieging and the endurance of fray and foray
by night and by day. Then King Zau al-Makan summoned Rustam and Bahram
and Tarkash, and when they were in presence bespoke them thus, "Know
that we have lain here all these years and we have not won to our wish;
nay, we have but gained increase of care and concern; for indeed we
came, thinking to take our man-bote for King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and in
so doing my brother Sharrkan was slain; so is our sorrow grown to
sorrows twain and our affliction to afflictions twain. All this came of
the old woman Zat al-Dawahi, for it was she who slew the Sultan in his
kingdom and carried off his wife, the Queen Sophia; nor did this suffice
her, but she must put another cheat on us and cut the throat of my
brother Sharrkan: and indeed I have bound myself and sworn by the
solemnest oaths that there is no help but I take blood-wit from her.
What say ye? Ponder my address and answer me." Then they bowed their
heads and answered, "It is for the Wazir Dandan to opine." So the
Minister came forward and said, "Know O King of the Age! it booteth us
nought to tarry here; and 'tis my counsel that we strike camp and return
to our own country, there to abide for a certain time and after that we
should return for a razzia upon the worshippers of idols." Replied the
King, "This rede is right, for indeed the folk weary for a sight of
their families, and I am another who is also troubled with yearning
after my son Kanmakan and my brother's daughter Kuzia Fakan, for she is
in Damascus and I know not how is her case." When the troops heard this
report, they rejoiced and blessed the Wazir Dandan. Then the King bade
the crier call the retreat after three days. They fell to preparing for
the march, and, on the fourth day, they beat the big drums and unfurled
the banners and the army set forth, the Wazir Dandan in the van and the
King riding in the mid-battle, with the Grand Chamberlain by his side;
and all journeyed without ceasing, night and day, till they reached
Baghdad city. The folk rejoiced in their return, and care and fear
ceased from them whilst the stay-at-homes met the absentees and each
Emir betook him to his own house. As for Zau al-Makan he marched up to
the Palace and went in to his son Kanmakan, who had now reached the age
of seven; and who used to go down to the weapon-plain and ride. As soon
as the King was rested of his journey, he entered the Hammam with his
son, and returning, seated himself on his sofa of state, whilst the
Wazir Dandan took up his station before him and the Emirs and Lords of
the realm presented themselves and stood in attendance upon him. Then
Zau al-Makan called for his comrade, the Fireman, who had befriended him
in his wanderings; and, when he came into presence, the King rose to do
him honour and seated him by his side. Now he had acquainted the Wazir
with all the kindness and good turns which the Stoker had done him; and
he found that the wight had waxed fat and burly with rest and good fare,
so that his neck was like an elephant's throat and his face like a
dolphin's belly. Moreover, he was grown dull of wit, for that he had
never stirred from his place; so at first he knew not the King by his
aspect. But Zau al-Makan came up to him smiling in his face, and greeted
him after the friendliest fashion, saying, "How soon hast thou forgotten
me?" With this the Fireman roused himself and, looking steadfastly at
Zau al-Makan, made sure that he knew him; whereupon he sprang hastily to
his feet and exclaimed, "O my friend, who hath made thee Sultan?" Then
Zau al-Makan laughed at him and the Wazir, coming up to him expounded
the whole story to him and said, "In good sooth he was thy brother and
thy friend; and now he is King of the land and needs must thou get great
good of him. So I charge thee, if he say:—Ask a boon of me, ask not but
for some great thing; for thou art very dear to him." Quoth the Fireman,
"I fear lest, if I ask of him aught, he may not choose to give it or may
not be able to grant it." Quoth the Wazir, "Have no care; whatsoever
thou askest he will give thee." Rejoined the Stoker, "By Allah, I must
at once ask of him a thing that is in my thought: every night I dream of
it and implore Almighty Allah to vouchsafe it to me." Said the Wazir,
"Take heart; by Allah, if thou ask of him the government of Damascus, in
place of his brother, he would surely give it thee and make thee
Governor." With this the Stoker rose to his feet and Zau al-Makan signed
to him to sit; but he refused, saying, "Allah forfend! The days are gone
by of my sitting in thy presence." Answered the Sultan, "Not so, they
endure even now. Thou wast in very deed the cause that I am at present
alive and, by Allah, whatever thing most desired thou requirest of me, I
will give that same to thee. But ask thou first of Allah, and then of
me!" He said, "O my lord, I fear—" "Fear not," quoth the Sultan. He
continued, "I fear to ask aught and that thou shouldst refuse it to me
and it is only—" At this the King laughed and replied, "If thou require
of me the half of my kingdom I would share it with thee: so ask what
thou wilt and leave talking." Repeated the Fireman "I fear—" "Don't
fear," quoth the King. He went on, "I fear lest I ask a thing and thou
be not able to grant it." Upon this the Sultan waxed wroth and cried,
"Ask what thou wilt." Then said he, "I ask, first of Allah and then of
thee, that thou write me a patent of Syndicate over all the Firemen of
the baths in the Holy City, Jerusalem." The Sultan and all present
laughed and Zau al-Makan said, "Ask something more than this." He
replied, "O my lord, said I not I feared that thou wouldst not choose to
give me what I should ask or that thou be not able to grant it?"
Therewith the Wazir signed him with his foot once and twice and thrice,
and every time he began, "I ask of thee—" Quoth the Sultan, "Ask and be
speedy." So he said, "I ask thee to make me Chief of the Scavengers in
the Holy City of Jerusalem, or in Damascus town." Then all those who
were present fell on their backs with laughter and the Wazir beat him;
whereupon he turned to the Minister and said to him, "What art thou that
thou shouldest beat me? 'Tis no fault of mine: didst thou not thyself
bid me ask some important thing?" And he added, "Let me go to my own
land." With this, the Sultan knew that he was jesting and took patience
with him awhile; then turned to him and said, "O my brother, ask of me
some important thing, befitting our dignity." So the Stoker said, "O
King of the Age, I ask first of Allah and then of thee, that thou make
me Viceroy of Damascus in the place of thy brother;" and the King
replied, "Allah granteth thee this." Thereupon the Fireman kissed ground
before him and he bade set him a chair in his rank and vested him with a
viceroy's habit. Then he wrote him a patent and sealed it with his own
seal, and said to the Wazir Dandan, "None shall go with him but thou;
and when thou makest the return journey, do thou bring with thee my
brother's daughter, Kuzia Fakan." "Hearkening and obedience," answered
the Minister; and, taking the Fireman, went down with him and made ready
for the march. Then the King appointed for the Stoker servants and
suite, and gave him a new litter and a princely equipage and said to the
Emirs, "Whoso loveth me, let him honour this man and offer him a
handsome present." So each and every of the Emirs brought him his gift
according to his competence; and the King named him Zibl Khán,[58] and
conferred on him the honourable surname of al-Mujáhid.[59] As soon as
the gear was ready, he went up with the Wazir Dandan to the King, that
he might take leave of him and ask his permission to depart. The King
rose to him and embraced him, and charged him to do justice between his
subjects and bade him make ready for fight against the Infidels after
two years. Then they took leave of each other and the King,[60] the
Fighter for the Faith hight Zibl Khan, having been again exhorted by Zau
al-Makan to deal fairly with his subjects, set out on his journey, after
the Emirs had brought him Mamelukes and eunuchs, even to five thousand
in number, who rode after him. The Grand Chamberlain also took horse, as
did Bahram, captain of the Daylamites, and Rustam, captain of the
Persians, and Tarkash, captain of the Arabs, who attended to do him
service; and they ceased not riding with him three days' journey by way
of honour. Then, taking their leave of him, they returned to Baghdad and
the Sultan Zibl Khan and the Wazir Dandan fared on, with their suite and
troops, till they drew near Damascus. Now news was come, upon the wings
of birds, to the notables of Damascus, that King Zau al-Makan had made
Sultan over Damascus a King named Zibl Khan and surnamed Al-Mujahid; so
when he reached the city he found it dressed in his honour and everyone
in the place came out to gaze on him. The new Sultan entered Damascus in
a splendid progress and went up to the citadel, where he sat down upon
his chair of state, whilst the Wazir Dandan stood in attendance on him,
to acquaint him with the ranks of the Emirs and their stations. Then the
Grandees came in to him and kissed hands and called down blessings on
him. The new King, Zibl Khan, received them graciously and bestowed on
them dresses of honour and various presents and bounties; after which he
opened the treasuries and gave largesse to the troops, great and small.
Then he governed and did justice and proceeded to equip the Lady Kuzia
Fakan, daughter of King Sharrkan, appointing her a litter of silken
stuff. Moreover he furnished the Wazir Dandan equally well for the
return journey and offered him a gift of coin; but he refused, saying,
"Thou art near the time appointed by the King, and haply thou wilt have
need of money, or after this we may send to seek of thee funds for the
Holy War or what not." Now when the Wazir was ready to march, Sultan
al-Mujahid mounted to bid the Minister farewell and brought Kuzia Fakan
to him, and made her enter the litter and sent with her ten damsels to
do her service. Thereupon they set forward, whilst King "Fighter for the
Faith" returned to his government that he might order affairs and get
ready his munitions of war, awaiting such time as King Zau al-Makan
should send a requisition to him. Such was the case with Sultan Zibl
Khan, but as regards the Wazir Dandan, he ceased not faring forward and
finishing off the stages, in company with Kuzia Fakan till they came to
Ruhbah[61] after a month's travel and thence pushed on, till he drew
near Baghdad. Then he sent to announce his arrival to King Zau al-Makan
who, when he heard this, took horse and rode out to meet him. The Wazir
Dandan would have dismounted, but the King conjured him not to do so and
urged his steed till he came up to his side. Then he questioned him of
Zibl Khan hight Al-Mujahid, whereto the Wazir replied that he was well
and that he had brought with him Kuzia Fakan the daughter of his
brother. At this the King rejoiced and said to Dandan, "Down with thee
and rest thee from the fatigue of the journey for three days, after
which come to me again." Replied the Wazir, "With joy and gratitude,"
and betook himself to his own house, whilst the King rode up to his
Palace and went in to his brother's daughter, Kuzia Fakan, a girl of
eight years old. When he saw her, he rejoiced in her and sorrowed for
her sire; then he bade make for her clothes and gave her splendid
jewelry and ornaments, and ordered she be lodged with his son Kanmakan
in one place. So they both grew up the brightest of the people of their
time and the bravest; but Kuzia Fakan became a maiden of good sense and
understanding and knowledge of the issues of events, whilst Kanmakan
approved him a generous youth and freehanded, taking no care in the
issue of aught. And so they continued till each of them attained the age
of twelve. Now Kuzia Fakan used to ride a-horseback and fare forth with
her cousin into the open plain and push forward and range at large with
him in the wold; and they both learnt to smite with swords and spike
with spears. But when they had reached the age of twelve, King Zau
al-Makan, having completed his preparations and provisions and munitions
for Holy War, summoned the Wazir Dandan and said to him, "Know that I
have set mind on a thing, which I will discover to thee, and I want
thine opinion thereon; so do thou with speed return me a reply." Asked
the Wazir, "What is that, O King of the Age?"; and the other answered,
"I am resolved to make my son Kanmakan Sultan and rejoice in him in my
lifetime and do battle before him till death overtake me. What reckest
thou of this?" The Wazir kissed the ground before the King and replied,
"Know, O King and Sultan mine, Lord of the Age and the time! that which
is in thy mind is indeed good, save that it is now no tide to carry it
out, for two reasons; the first, that thy son Kanmakan is yet of tender
years; and the second, that it often befalleth him who maketh his son
King in his lifetime, to live but a little while there afterward.[62]
And this is my reply." Rejoined the King, "Know, O Wazir, that we will
make the Grand Chamberlain guardian over him, for he is now one of the
family and he married my sister, so that he is to me as a brother."
Quoth the Wazir, "Do what seemeth good to thee: we have only to obey
thine orders." Then the King sent for the Grand Chamberlain whom they
brought into the presence together with the Lords of the realm and he
said to them, "Ye know that this my son Kanmakan is the first cavalier
of the age, and that he hath no peer in striking with the sword and
lunging with the lance; and now I appoint him to be Sultan over you and
I make the Grand Chamberlain, his uncle, guardian over him." Replied the
Chamberlain, "I am but a tree which thy bounty hath planted"; and Zau
al-Makan said, "O Chamberlain, verily this my son Kanmakan and my niece
Kuzia Fakan are brothers' children; so I hereby marry her to him and I
call those present to witness thereof." Then he made over to his son
such treasures as no tongue can describe; and, going in to his sister,
Nuzhat al-Zaman, told her what he had done, whereat she was a glad woman
and said, "Verily the twain are my children: Allah preserve thee to them
and keep thy life for them many a year!" Replied he, "O my sister, I
have accomplished in this world all my heart desired and I have no fear
for my son! yet it were well thou have an eye on him, and an eye on his
mother." And he charged the Chamberlain and Nuzhat al-Zaman with the
care of his son and niece and wife, and this he continued to do nights
and days till he fell sick and deemed surely that he was about to drink
the cup of death; so he took to his bed, whilst the Chamberlain busied
himself with ordering the folk and realm. At the end of the year, the
King summoned his son Kanmakan and the Wazir Dandan and said, "O my son,
after my death this Wazir is thy sire; for know that I am about to leave
this house of life transitory for the house of eternity. And indeed I
have fulfilled my will of this world; yet there remaineth in my heart
one regret which may Allah dispel through and by thy hands." Asked his
son, "What regret is that, O my father?" Answered Zau al-Makan, "O my
son, the sole regret of me is that I die without having avenged thy
grandfather, Omar bin al-Nu'uman, and thine uncle, Sharrkan, on an old
woman whom they call Zat al-Dawahi; but, if Allah grant thee aid, sleep
not till thou take thy wreak on her, and so wipe out the shame we have
suffered at the Infidel's hands; and beware of the old hag's wile and do
what the Wazir Dandan shall advise thee; because he from old time hath
been the pillar of our realm." And his son assented to what he said.
Then the King's eyes ran over with tears and his sickness redoubled on
him; whereupon his brother-in-law, the Chamberlain, took charge over the
country and, being a capable man, he judged and bade and forbade for the
whole of that year; while Zau al-Makan was occupied with his malady. And
his sickness was sore upon him for four years, during which the Chief
Chamberlain sat in his stead and gave full satisfaction to the commons
and the nobles; and all the country blessed his rule. Such was the case
with Zau al-Makan and the Chamberlain; but as regards the King's son, he
busied himself only with riding and lunging with lance and shooting with
shaft, and thus also did the daughter of his uncle, Kuzia Fakan; for he
and she were wont to fare forth at the first of the day and return at
nightfall, when she would go in to her mother, and he would go in to his
mother whom he ever found sitting in tears by the head of his father's
couch. Then he would tend his father all night long till daybreak, when
he would go forth again with his cousin according to their wont. Now Zau
al-Makan's pains and sufferings were longsome upon him and he wept and
began versifying with these couplets:—

 Gone is my strength, told is my tale of days ✿ And, lookye! I am left as
    thou dost see:
 In honour's day most honoured wont to be, ✿ And win the race from all my
    company,
 Would Heaven before my death I might behold ✿ My son in seat of empire
    sit for me;
 And rush upon his foes, to take his wreak ✿ With sway of sword and lance
    lunged gallantly:
 In this world and the next I am undone, ✿ Except the Lord vouchsafe me
    clemency.

When he had ended repeating these verses, he laid his head on his pillow
and closed his eyes and slept. Then saw he in his sleep one who said to
him, "Rejoice, for thy son shall fill the lands with justest sway; and
he shall rule them and him shall the lieges obey." Then he awoke from
his dream gladdened by the good tidings he had seen, and after a few
days, Death smote him, and because of his dying great grief fell on the
people of Baghdad, and simple and gentle mourned for him. But Time
passed over him, as though he had never been[63] and Kanmakan's estate
was changed; for the people of Baghdad set him aside and put him and his
family in a place apart. Now when his mother saw this, she fell into the
sorriest of plights and said, "There is no help but that I go to the
Grand Chamberlain, and I must hope for the aidance of the Subtle, the
All-Wise!" Then she rose from her place and betook herself to the house
of the Chamberlain who was now become Sultan, and she found him sitting
upon his carpet. So she went in to his wife, Nuzhat al-Zaman, and wept
with sore weeping and said unto her, "Verily the dead hath no friend!
May Allah never bring you to want as long as your age and the years
endure, and may you cease not to rule justly over rich and poor. Thine
ears have heard and thine eyes have seen all that was ours of kingship
and honour and dignity and wealth and fair fortune of life and
condition; and now Time hath turned upon us, and fate and the world have
betrayed us and wrought in hostile way with us; wherefore I come to thee
craving thy favours, I from whom favours were craved: for when a man
dieth, women and maidens are brought to despisal." And she repeated
these couplets:—

 Suffice thee Death such marvels can enhance, ✿ And severed lives make
    lasting severance:
 Man's days are marvels, and their stations are ✿ But water-pits[64] of
    misery and mischance.
 Naught wrings my heart save loss of noble friends, ✿ Girt round by rings
    of hard, harsh circumstance.

When Nuzhat al-Zaman heard these words, she remembered her brother, Zau
al-Makan, and his son Kanmakan, and, making her draw near to her and
showing her honour, she said, "Verily at this moment, by Allah, I am
grown rich and thou art poor; now by the Lord! we did not cease to seek
thee out, but we feared to wound thy heart lest thou shouldest fancy our
gifts to thee an alms-gift. Withal, whatso weal we now enjoy is from
thee and thy husband; so our house is thy house and our place thy place,
and thine is all our wealth and what goods we have belong to thee." Then
she robed her in sumptuous robes and set apart for her a place in the
Palace adjoining her own; and they abode therein, she and her son, in
all delight of life. And Nuzhat al-Zaman clothed him also in Kings'
raiment and gave to them both especial handmaids for their service.
After a little, she related to her husband the sad case of the widow of
her brother, Zau al-Makan, whereat his eyes filled with tears and he
said, "Wouldest thou see the world after thee, look thou upon the world
after other than thyself. Then entreat her honourably and enrich her
poverty."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Nuzhat
al-Zaman related to her husband the sad case of the widow of her
brother, Zau al-Makan, the Chamberlain said, "Entreat her honourably and
enrich her poverty." Thus far concerning Nuzhat al-Zaman and her consort
and the relict of Zau al-Makan; but as regards Kanmakan and his cousin
Kuzia Fakan, they grew up and flourished till they waxed like unto two
fruit-laden boughs or two shining moons; and they reached the age of
fifteen. And she was indeed the fairest of maids who are modestly
veiled, lovely-faced with smooth cheeks graced, and slender waist on
heavy hips based; and her shape was the shaft's thin line and her lips
were sweeter than old wine and the nectar of her mouth as it were the
fountain Salsabíl[65]; even as saith the poet in these two couplets
describing one like her:—

 As though ptisane of wine on her lips honey-dew ✿ Dropt from the ripened
    grapes her mouth in clusters grew:
 And, when her frame thou doublest, and low bends her vine, ✿ Praise her
    Creator's might no creature ever knew.

Of a truth Allah had united in her every charm: her shape would shame
the branch of waving tree and the rose before her cheeks craved lenity;
and the honey-dew of her lips of wine made jeer, however old and clear,
and she gladdened heart and beholder with joyous cheer, even as saith of
her the poet:—

 Goodly of gifts is she, and charm those perfect eyes, ✿ With lashes
    shaming Kohl and all the fair ones Kohl'd[66]
 And from those eyne the glances pierce the lover's heart, ✿ Like sword
    in Mír al-Muminína Ali's hold.

And (the relator continueth) as for Kanmakan, he became unique in
loveliness and excelling in perfection no less; none could even him in
qualities as in seemliness and the sheen of valour between his eyes was
espied, testifying for him while against him it never testified. The
hardest hearts inclined to his side; his eyelids bore lashes black as by
Kohl; and he was of surpassing worth in body and soul. And when the down
of lips and cheeks began to sprout bards and poets sang for him far and
near:—

 Appeared not my excuse till hair had clothed his cheek, ✿ And gloom
    o'ercrept that side-face (sight to stagger!)
 A fawn, when eyes would batten on his charms, ✿ Each glance deals thrust
    like point of Khanjar-dagger.

And saith another:—

 His lovers' souls have drawn upon his cheek ✿ An ant that perfected its
    rosy light:
 I marvel at such martyrs Lazá-pent ✿ Who yet with greeny robes of Heaven
    are dight.[67]

Now it chanced one holiday, that Kuzia Fakan fared forth to make
festival with certain kindred of the court, and she went surrounded by
her handmaids. And indeed beauty encompassed her; the roses of her
cheeks dealt envy to their mole; from out her smiling lips leven flashed
white, gleaming like the chamomile[68]; and Kanmakan began to turn about
her and devour her with his sight, for she was the moon of resplendent
light. Then he took heart and giving his tongue a start began to
improvise:—

 When shall the disappointed heart be healed of severance, ✿ And lips of
    Union smile at ceasing of our hard mischance?
 Would Heaven I knew shall come some night, and with it surely bring ✿
    Meeting with friend who like myself endureth sufferance.[69]

When Kuzia Fakan heard these couplets, she showed vexation and
disapproval and, putting on a haughty and angry air, said to him, "Dost
thou name me in thy verse, to shame me amongst folk? By Allah, if thou
turn not from this talk, I will assuredly complain of thee to the Grand
Chamberlain, Sultan of Khorasan and Baghdad and lord of justice and
equity; that disgrace and punishment may befal thee!" Kanmakan made no
reply for anger but he returned to Baghdad; and Kuzia Fakan also
returned to her palace and complained of her cousin to her mother, who
said to her, "O my daughter, haply he meant thee no harm, and is he
aught but an orphan? Withal, he said nought of reproach to thee; so
beware thou tell none of this, lest perchance it come to the Sultan's
ears and he cut short his life and blot out his name and make it even as
yesterday, whose memory hath passed away." However, Kanmakan's love for
Kuzia Fakan spread abroad in Baghdad, so that the women talked of it.
Moreover, his breast became straitened and his patience waned and he
knew not what to do, yet he could not hide his condition from the world.
Then longed he to give vent to the pangs he endured, by reason of the
lowe of separation; but he feared her rebuke and her wrath; so he began
improvising:—

 Now is my dread to incur reproaches, which ✿ Disturb her temper and her
    mind obscure,
 Patient I'll bear them; e'en as generous youth ✿ Beareth the burn of
    brand his case to cure.[70]

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Grand
Chamberlain became Sultan they named him King Sásán; and after he had
assumed the throne he governed the people in righteous way. Now as he
was giving audience one day, Kanmakan's verses came to his knowledge.
Thereupon he repented him of the past and going in to his wife Nuzhat
al-Zaman, said to her, "Verily, to join Halfah-grass and fire,[71] is
the greatest of risks; and man may not be trusted with woman, so long as
eye glanceth and eyelid quivereth. Now thy brother's son, Kanmakan, is
come to man's estate and it behoveth us to forbid him access to the
rooms where anklets tinkle, and it is yet more needful to forbid thy
daughter the company of men, for the like of her should be kept in the
Harim." Replied she, "Thou sayest sooth, O wise King!" Next day came
Kanmakan according to his wont; and, going in to his aunt saluted her.
She returned his salutation and said to him, "O my son! I have somewhat
to say to thee which I would fain leave unsaid; yet I must tell it thee
despite my inclination." Quoth he, "Speak;" and quoth she, "Know then
that thy sire the Chamberlain, the father of Kuzia Fakan, hath heard of
the verses thou madest anent her, and hath ordered that she be kept in
the Harim and out of thy reach; if therefore, O my son, thou want
anything from us, I will send it to thee from behind the door; and thou
shalt not look upon Kuzia Fakan nor shalt thou return hither from this
day forth." When he heard this he arose and withdrew without speaking a
single word; and, betaking himself to his mother, related what his aunt
had said. She observed, "This all cometh of thine overtalking. Thou
knowest that the news of thy passion for Kuzia Fakan is noised abroad
and the tattle hath spread everywhere how thou eatest their food and
thereafter thou courtest their daughter." Rejoined he, "And who should
have her but I? She is the daughter of my father's brother and I have
the best of rights to her." Retorted his mother, "These are idle words.
Be silent, lest haply thy talk come to King Sasan's ears and it prove
the cause of thy losing her and the reason of thy ruin and increase of
thine affliction. They have not sent us any supper to-night and we shall
die an-hungered; and were we in any land but this, we were already dead
of famine or of shame for begging our bread." When Kanmakan heard these
words from his mother, his regrets redoubled; his eyes ran over with
tears and he complained and began improvising:—

 Minish this blame I ever bear from you: ✿ My heart loves her to whom all
    love is due:
 Ask not from me of patience jot or tittle, ✿ Divorce of Patience by
    God's House! I rue:
 What blamers preach of patience I unheed; ✿ Here am I, love-path firmly
    to pursue!
 Indeed they bar me access to my love; ✿ Here am I, by God's ruth no ill
    I sue!
 Good sooth my bones, whenas they hear thy name, ✿ Quail as birds quailed
    when Nisus o'er them flew:[72]
 Ah! say to them who blame my love that I ✿ Will love that face, fair
    cousin, till I die.

And when he had ended his verses he said to his mother, "I have no
longer a place in my aunt's house nor among these people, but I will go
forth from the palace and abide in the corners of the city." So he and
his mother left the court; and, having sought an abode in the
neighbourhood of the poorer sort, there settled; but she used to go from
time to time to King Sasan's palace and thence take daily bread for
herself and her son. As this went on Kuzia Fakan took her aside one day
and said to her, "Alas, O my naunty, how is it with thy son?" Replied
she, "O my daughter, sooth to say, he is tearful-eyed and heavy-hearted,
being fallen into the net of thy love." And she repeated to her the
couplets he had made; whereupon Kuzia Fakan wept and said, "By Allah! I
rebuked him not for his words, nor for ill-will to him, but because I
feared for him the malice of foes. Indeed my passion for him is double
that he feeleth for me; my tongue may not describe my yearning for him;
and were it not for the extravagant wilfulness of his words and the
wanderings of his wit, my father had not cut off from him favours that
besit, nor had decreed unto him exclusion and prohibition as fit.
However, man's days bring nought but change, and patience in all case is
most becoming; peradventure He who ordained our severance will vouchsafe
us reunion!" And she began versifying in these two couplets:—

 O son of mine uncle! same sorrow I bear, ✿ And suffer the like of thy
    cark and thy care;
 Yet hide I from man what I suffer for pine; ✿ Hide it too, and such
    secret to man never bare!

When his mother heard this from her, she thanked her and blessed her:
then she left her and acquainted her son with what she had said;
whereupon his desire for her increased and he took heart, being eased of
his despair and the turmoil of his love and care. And he said, "By
Allah, I desire none but her!"; and he began improvising:—

 Leave this blame, I will list to no flout of my foe! ✿ I divulged a
    secret was told me to keep:
 He is lost to my sight for whose union I yearn, ✿ And I watch all the
    while he can slumber and sleep.

So the days and nights went by whilst Kanmakan lay tossing upon coals of
fire,[73] till he reached the age of seventeen; and his beauty had waxt
perfect and his wits were at their brightest. One night, as he lay
awake, he communed with himself and said, "Why should I keep silence
till I waste away and see not my lover? Fault have I none save poverty;
so, by Allah, I am resolved to remove me from this region and wander
over the wild and the wold; for my position in this city is a torture
and I have no friend nor lover therein to comfort me; wherefore I am
determined to distract myself by absence from my native land till I die
and take my rest after this shame and tribulation." And he began to
improvise and recited these couplets:—

 Albeit my vitals quiver 'neath this ban; ✿ Before the foe myself I'll
    ne'er unman!
 So pardon me, my vitals are a writ ✿ Whose superscription are my tears
    that ran:
 Heigh-ho! my cousin seemeth Houri-may ✿ Come down to earth by reason of
    Rizwán:
 'Scapes not the dreadful sword-lunge of her look ✿ Who dares the
    glancing of those eyne to scan:
 O'er Allah's wide-spread world I'll roam and roam, ✿ And from such exile
    win what bread I can:
 Yes, o'er broad earth I'll roam and save my soul, ✿ All but her absence
    bearing like a man:
 With gladsome heart I'll haunt the field of fight, ✿ And meet the
    bravest Brave in battle-van!

So Kanmakan fared forth from the palace barefoot and he walked in a
short-sleeved gown, wearing on his head a skull cap of felt[74] seven
years old and carrying a scone three days stale, and in the deep glooms
of night betook himself to the portal al-Arij of Baghdad. Here he waited
for the gate being opened and when it was opened, he was the first to
pass through it; and he went out at random and wandered about the wastes
night and day. When the dark hours came, his mother sought him but found
him not; whereupon the world waxt strait upon her for all that it was
great and wide, and she took no delight in aught of weal it supplied.
She looked for him a first day and a second day and a third day till ten
days were past, but no news of him reached her. Then her breast became
contracted and she shrieked and shrilled, saying, "O my son! O my
darling! thou hast revived my regrets. Sufficed not what I endured, but
thou must depart from my home? After thee I care not for food nor joy in
sleep, and naught but tears and mourning are left me. O my son, from
what land shall I call thee? And what town hath given thee refuge?" Then
her sobs burst out, and she began repeating these couplets:—

 Well learnt we, since you left, our grief and sorrow to sustain, ✿ While
    bows of severance shot their shafts in many a railing rain:
 They left me, after girthing on their selles of corduwayne ✿ To fight
    the very pangs of death while spanned they sandy plain:
 Mysterious through the nightly gloom there came the moan of dove; ✿ A
    ringdove, and replied I, 'Cease thy plaint, how durst complain?'
 If, by my life, her heart, like mine, were full of pain and pine ✿ She
    had not deckt her neck with ring nor sole with ruddy stain.[75]
 Fled is mine own familiar friend, bequeathing me a store ✿ Of
    parting-pang and absence-ache to suffer evermore.

Then she abstained from food and drink and gave herself up to excessive
tear-shedding and lamentation. Her grief became public property far and
wide and all the people of the town and country side wept with her and
cried, "Where is thine eye, O Zau al-Makan?" And they bewailed the
rigours of Time, saying, "Would Heaven we knew what hath befallen
Kanmakan that he fled his native town, and chased himself from the place
where his father used to fill all in hungry case and do justice and
grace?" And his mother redoubled her weeping and wailing till the news
of Kanmakan's departure came to King Sasan.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


            Now when it was the Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that came to King Sasan
the tidings of the departure of Kanmakan, through the Chief Emirs who
said to him, "Verily he is the son of our Sovran and the seed of King
Omar bin al-Nu'uman and it hath reached us that he hath exiled himself
from the land." When King Sasan heard these words, he was wroth with
them and ordered one of them to be hanged by way of silencing him,
whereat the fear of him fell upon the hearts of all the other Grandees
and they dared not speak one word. Then he called to mind all the
kindness that Zau al-Makan had done him, and how he had charged him with
the care of his son; wherefore he grieved for Kanmakan and said, "Needs
must I have search made for him in all countries." So he summoned
Tarkash and bade him choose an hundred horse and wend with them in quest
of the Prince. Accordingly he went out and was absent ten days, after
which he returned and said, "I can learn no tidings of him and have hit
on no trace of him, nor can any tell me aught of him." Upon this King
Sasan repented him of that which he had done by the Prince; whilst his
mother abode in unrest continual nor would patience come at her call:
and thus passed over her twenty days in heaviness all. This is how it
fared with these; but as regards Kanmakan, when he left Baghdad, he went
forth perplexed about his case and knowing not whither he should go: so
he fared on alone through the desert for three days and saw neither
footman nor horseman; withal, his sleep fled and his wakefulness
redoubled, for he pined after his people and his homestead. He ate of
the herbs of the earth and drank of its flowing waters and siesta'd
under its trees at hours of noontide heats, till he turned from that
road to another way and, following it other three days, came on the
fourth to a land of green leas, dyed with the hues of plants and trees
and with sloping valley-sides made to please, abounding with the fruits
of the earth. It had drunken of the cups of the cloud, to the sound of
thunders rolling loud and the song of the turtle-dove gently sough'd,
till its hill-slopes were brightly verdant and its fields were sweetly
fragrant. Then Kanmakan recalled his father's city Baghdad, and for
excess of emotion he broke out into verse:—

 I roam, and roaming hope I to return; ✿ Yet of returning see not how or
    when:
 I went for love of one I could not win, ✿ Nor way of 'scaping ills that
    pressed could ken.

When he ended his recital he wept, but presently he wiped away his tears
and ate of the fruits of the earth enough for his present need. Then he
made the Wuzu-ablution and prayed the ordained prayers which he had
neglected all this time; and he sat resting in that place through the
livelong day. When night came he slept and ceased not sleeping till
midnight, when he awoke and heard a human voice declaiming these
couplets:—

 What's life to me, unless I see the pearly sheen ✿ Of teeth I love, and
    sight that glorious mien?
 Pray for her Bishops who in convents reign, ✿ Vying to bow before that
    heavenly queen.
 And Death is lighter than the loved one's wrath, ✿ Whose phantom haunts
    me, seen in every scene:
 O joy of cup-companions, when they meet, ✿ And loved and lover o'er each
    other lean!
 E'en more in time of spring, the lord of flowers, ✿ When fragrant is the
    world with bloom and green:
 Drainer of vine-juice! up wi' thee, for now ✿ Earth is a Heaven where
    sweet waters flow.[76]

When Kanmakan heard these distichs his sorrows surged up; his tears ran
down his cheeks like freshets and flames of fire darted into his heart.
So he rose to see who it was that spake these words, but saw none for
the thickness of the gloom; whereupon passion increased on him and he
was frightened and restlessness possessed him. He descended from his
place to the sole of the valley and walked along the banks of the
stream, till he heard the same voice sighing heavy sighs and reciting
these couplets:—

 Tho' 'tis thy wont to hide thy love perforce, ✿ Yet weep on day of
    parting and divorce!
 Twixt me and my dear love were plighted vows; ✿ Pledge of reunion,
    fonder intercourse:
 With joy inspires my heart and deals it rest ✿ Zephyr, whose coolness
    doth desire enforce.
 O Sa'adá,[77] thinks of me that anklet-wearer? ✿ Or parting broke she
    troth without remorse?
 And say! shall nights foregather us, and we ✿ Of suffered hardships tell
    in soft discourse?
 Quoth she, "Thou'rt daft for us and fey"; quoth I, ✿ "'Sain thee! how
    many a friend hast turned to corse!"
 If taste mine eyes sweet sleep while she's away, ✿ Allah with loss of
    her these eyne accurse.
 O wounds in vitals mine! for cure they lack ✿ Union and dewy lips' sweet
    theriack.[78]

When Kanmakan heard this verse again spoken by the same voice yet saw no
one, he knew that the speaker was a lover like unto himself, debarred
from union with her who loved him; and he said to himself, "'Twere
fitting that this man should lay his head to my head and become my
comrade in this my strangerhood."[79] Then he hailed the speaker and
cried out to him, saying, "O thou who farest in sombrest night, draw
near to me and tell me thy tale; haply thou shalt find me one who will
succour thee in thy sufferings." And when the owner of the voice heard
these words, he cried out, "O thou that respondest to my complaint and
wouldest hear my history, who art thou amongst the knights? Art thou
human or Jinni? Answer me speedily ere thy death draw near, for I have
wandered in this desert some twenty days and have seen no one nor heard
any voice but thy voice." At these words Kanmakan said to himself, "This
one's case is like my case, for I, even I, have wandered twenty days,
nor during my wayfare have I seen man or heard voice:" and he added, "I
will make him no answer till day arise." So he was silent, and the voice
again called out to him, saying, "O thou that callest, if thou be of the
Jinn fare in peace and, if thou be man, stay awhile till the day break
stark and the night flee with the dark." The speaker abode in his place
and Kanmakan did likewise and the twain in reciting verses never failed,
and wept tears that railed till the light of day began loom and the
night departed with its gloom. Then Kanmakan looked at the other and
found him to be of the Badawi Arabs, a youth in the flower of his age;
clad in worn clothes and bearing in baldrick a rusty sword which he kept
sheathed, and the signs of love-longing were apparent on him. He went up
to him and accosted him and saluted him, and the Badawi returned the
salute and greeted him with courteous wishes for his long life, but
somewhat despised him, seeing his tender years and his condition, which
was that of a pauper. So he said to him, "O youth, of what tribe art
thou and to whom art thou kin among the Arabs; and what is thy history
that thou goest by night, after the fashion of knights? Indeed thou
spakest to me in the dark words such as are spoken of none but doughty
cavaliers and lion-like warriors; and now I hold thy life in hand. But I
have compassion on thee by reason of thy green years; so I will make
thee my companion and thou shalt go with me, to do me service." When
Kanmakan heard him speak these unseemly words, after showing him such
skill in verse, he knew that he despised him and would presume with him;
therefore he answered him with soft and well-chosen speech, saying, "O
Chief of the Arabs, leave my tenderness of age and tell me why thou
wanderest by night in the desert reciting verses. Thou talkest, I see,
of my serving thee; who then art thou and what moved thee to talk this
wise?" Answered he, "Hark ye, boy! I am Sabbáh, son of Rammáh bin
Humám.[80] My people are of the Arabs of Syria and I have a cousin,
Najmah hight, who to all that look on her brings delight. And when my
father died I was brought up in the house of his brother, the father of
Najmah; but as soon I grew up and my uncle's daughter became a woman,
they secluded her from me and me from her, seeing that I was poor and
without money in pouch. Then the Chiefs of the Arabs and the heads of
the tribes rebuked her sire, and he was abashed before them and
consented to give me my cousin, but upon condition that I should bring
him as her dower fifty head of horses and fifty dromedaries which travel
ten days[81] without a halt and fifty camels laden with wheat and a like
number laden with barley, together with ten black slaves and ten
handmaids. Thus the weight he set upon me was beyond my power to bear;
for he exacted more than the marriage-settlement as by law established.
So here am I, travelling from Syria to Irak, and I have passed twenty
days without seeing other than thyself; yet I mean to go to Baghdad that
I may ascertain what merchant men of wealth and importance start thence.
Then will I fare forth in their track and loot their goods, and I will
slay their escort and drive off their camels with their loads. But what
manner of man art thou?" Replied Kanmakan, "Thy case is like unto my
case, save that my evil is more grievous than thine ill; for my cousin
is a King's daughter and the dowry of which thou hast spoken would not
content her people, nor would they be satisfied with the like of that
from me." Quoth Sabbah, "Surely thou art a fool or thy wits for excess
of passion are gathering wool! How can thy cousin be a King's daughter?
Thou hast no sign of royal rank on thee, for thou art but a mendicant."
Rejoined Kanmakan, "O Chief of the Arabs, let not this my case seem
strange to thee; for what happened, happened;[82] and if thou desire
proof of me, I am Kanmakan, son of King Zau al-Makan, son of King Omar
bin al-Nu'uman Lord of Baghdad and the realm Khorasan; and Fortune
banned me with her tyrant ban, for my father died and my Sultanate was
taken by King Sasan. So I fled forth from Baghdad secretly, lest I be
seen of any man, and have wandered twenty days without any but thyself
to scan. So now I have discovered to thee my case, and my story is as
thy story and my need as thy need." When Sabbah heard this, he cried
out, "O my joy, I have attained my desire! I will have no loot this day
but thyself; for since thou art of the seed of Kings and hast come out
in beggar's garb, there is no help but thy people will seek thee; and,
if they find thee in any one's power, they will ransom thee with monies
galore. So show me thy back, O my lad, and walk before me." Answered
Kanmakan, "O brother of the Arabs, act not on this wise, for my people
will not buy me with silver nor with gold, not even with a copper
dirham; and I am a poor man, having with me neither much nor little; so
cease then to be upon this track and take me to thy comrade. Fare we
forth for the land of Irak and wander over the world, so haply we may
win dower and marriage-portion, and we may seek and enjoy our cousins'
kisses and embraces when we come back." Hearing this, Sabbah waxed
angry; his arrogance and fury redoubled and he said, "Woe to thee! Dost
thou bandy words with me, O vilest of dogs that be? Turn thee thy back,
or I will come down on thee with clack!" Kanmakan smiled and answered,
"Why should I turn my back for thee? Is there no justice in thee? Dost
thou not fear to bring blame upon the Arab men by driving a man like
myself captive, in shame and disdain, before thou hast proved him on the
plain, to know if he be a warrior or of cowardly strain?" Upon this
Sabbah laughed and replied, "By Allah, a wonder! Thou art a boy in years
told, but in talk thou art old. These words should come from none but a
champion doughty and bold: what wantest thou of justice?" Quoth
Kanmakan, "If thou wilt have me thy captive, to wend with thee and serve
thee, throw down thine arms and put off thine outer gear and come on and
wrestle with me; and whichever of us throw his opponent shall have his
will of him and make him his boy." Then Sabbah laughed and said, "I
think this waste of breath denoteth the nearness of thy death." Then he
arose and threw down his weapon and, tucking up his skirt, drew near
unto Kanmakan who also drew near and they gripped each other. But the
Badawi found that the other had the better of him and weighed him down,
as the quintal downweighs the dinar; and he looked at his legs firmly
planted on the ground, and saw that they were as two minarets[83]
strongly based, or two tent-poles in earth encased, or two mountains
which may not be displaced. So he acknowledged himself to be a failure
and repented of having come to wrestle with him, saying in himself,
"Would I had slain him with my weapon!" Then Kanmakan took hold of him
and mastering him, shook him till the Badawi thought his bowels would
burst in his belly, and he broke out, "Hold thy hand, O boy!" He heeded
not his words, but shook him again and, lifting him from the ground,
made with him towards the stream, that he might throw him therein:
whereupon the Badawi roared out, saying, "O thou valiant man, what wilt
thou do with me?"[84] Quoth he, "I mean to throw thee into this stream:
it will bear to the Tigris. The Tigris will bring thee to the river Isa
and the Isa will carry thee to the Euphrates, and the Euphrates will
land thee in thine own country; so thy tribe shall see thee and know thy
manly cheer and how thy passion be sincere." Then Sabbah cried aloud and
said, "O Champion of the desert-lair, do not with me what deed the
wicked dare but let me go, by the life of thy cousin, the jewel of the
fair!" Hearing this, Kanmakan set him on the ground; but when he found
himself at liberty, he ran to his sword and targe and taking them up,
stood plotting in himself treachery and sudden assault on his
adversary.[85] The Prince kenned his intent in his eye and said to him,
"I con what is in thy heart, now thou hast hold of thy sword and thy
targe. Thou hast neither length of hand nor trick of wrestling, but thou
thinkest that, wert thou on thy mare and couldst wheel about the plain,
and ply me with thy skene, I had long ago been slain. But I will give
thee thy requite, so there may be left in thy heart no despite; now give
me the targe and fall on me with thy whinger; either thou shalt kill me
or I shall kill thee." "Here it is," answered Sabbah and, throwing him
the targe, bared his brand and rushed at him sword in hand; Kanmakan
hent the buckler in his right and began to fend himself with it, whilst
Sabbah struck at him, saying at each stroke, "This is the finishing
blow!" But it fell harmless enow, for Kanmakan took all on his buckler
and it was waste work, though he did not reply lacking the wherewithal
to strike and Sabbah ceased not to smite at him with his sabre, till his
arm was weary. When his opponent saw this, he rushed upon him and,
hugging him in his arms, shook him and threw him to the ground. Then he
turned him over on his face and pinioned his elbows behind him with the
baldrick of his sword, and began to drag him by the feet and to make for
the river. Thereupon cried Sabbah, "What wilt thou do with me, O youth,
and cavalier of the age and brave of the plain where battles rage?"
Answered he, "Did I not tell thee that it was my intent to send thee by
the river to thy kin and to thy tribe, that thy heart be not troubled
for them nor their hearts be troubled for thee, and lest thou miss thy
cousin's bride-feast!" At this Sabbah shrieked aloud and wept and
screaming said, "Do not thus, O champion of the time's braves! Let me go
and make me one of thy slaves!" And he wept and wailed and began
reciting these verses:—

 I'm estranged fro' my folk and estrangement's long: ✿ Shall I die amid
    strangers? Ah, would that I kenned!
 I die, nor my kinsmen shall know where I'm slain, ✿ Die in exile nor see
    the dear face of my friend!

Thereupon Kanmakan had compassion on him and said, "Make with me a
covenant true and swear me an oath to be a comrade as due and to bear me
company wheresoever I may go." "'Tis well," replied Sabbah and swore
accordingly. Then Kanmakan loosed him and he rose and would have kissed
the Prince's hand; but he forbade him that. Then the Badawi opened his
scrip and, taking out three barley scones, laid them before Kanmakan and
they both sat down on the bank of the stream to eat.[86] When they had
done eating together, they made the lesser ablution and prayed; after
which they sat talking of what had befallen each of them from his people
and from the shifts of Time. Presently said Kanmakan, "Whither dost thou
now intend?" Replied Sabbah, "I purpose to repair to Baghdad, thy native
town, and abide there, until Allah vouchsafe me the marriage portion."
Rejoined the other, "Up then and to the road! I tarry here." So the
Badawi farewelled him and took the way for Baghdad, whilst Kanmakan
remained behind, saying to himself, "O my soul, with what face shall I
return pauper-poor? Now by Allah, I will not go back empty-handed and,
if the Almighty please, I will assuredly work my deliverance." Then he
went to the stream and made the Wuzu-washing and when prostrating he
laid his brow in the dust and prayed to the Lord, saying, "O Allah! Thou
who sendest down the dew, and feedest the worm that homes in the stone,
I beseech Thee vouchsafe me my livelihood of Thine Omnipotence and the
Grace of Thy benevolence!" Then he pronounced the salutation which
closes prayer; yet every road appeared closed to him. And while he sat
turning right and left, behold, he espied a horseman making towards him
with bent back and reins slack. He sat upright and after a time reached
the Prince; and the stranger was at the last gasp and made sure of
death, for he was grievously wounded when he came up; the tears streamed
down his cheeks like water from the mouths of skins, and he said to
Kanmakan, "O chief of the Arabs, take me to thy friendship as long as I
live, for thou wilt not find my like; and give me a little water though
the drinking of water be harmful to one wounded, especially whilst the
blood is flowing and the life with it. And if I live, I will give thee
what shall heal thy penury and thy poverty: and if I die, mayst thou be
blessed for thy good intent." Now under that horseman was a stallion, so
noble a Rabite[87] the tongue fails to describe him; and as Kanmakan
looked at his legs like marble shafts, he was seized with a longing and
said to himself, "Verily the like of this stallion[88] is not to be
found in our time." Then he helped the rider to alight and entreated him
in friendly guise and gave him a little water to swallow; after which he
waited till he had taken rest and addressed him, saying, "Who hath dealt
thus with thee?" Quoth the rider, "I will tell thee the truth of the
case. I am a horse-thief and I have busied myself with lifting and
snatching horses all my life, night and day, and my name is Ghassán, the
plague of every stable and stallion. I heard tell of this horse, that he
was in the land of Roum, with King Afridun, where they had named him
Al-Katúl and surnamed him Al-Majnún.[89] So I journeyed to
Constantinople for his sake and watched my opportunity and whilst I was
thus waiting, there came out an old woman, one highly honoured among the
Greeks, and whose word with them is law, by name Zat al-Dawahi, a past
mistress in all manner of trickery. She had with her this steed and ten
slaves, no more, to attend on her and the horse; and she was bound for
Baghdad and Khorasan, there to seek King Sasan and to sue for peace and
pardon from ban. So I went out in their track, longing to get at the
horse,[90] and ceased not to follow them, but was unable to come by the
stallion, because of the strict guard kept by the slaves, till they
reached this country and I feared lest they enter the city of Baghdad.
As I was casting about to steal the stallion lo! a great cloud of dust
arose on them and walled the horizon. Presently it opened and disclosed
fifty horsemen, gathered together to waylay merchants on the highway,
and their captain, by name Kahrdásh, was a lion in daring and dash; a
furious lion who layeth knights flat as carpets in battle-crash."——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Hundred and Forty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the wounded rider
spake thus to Kanmakan, "Then came out the same Kahrdash, and fell on
the old woman and her men and bore down upon them bashing them, nor was
it long before they bound her and the ten slaves and bore off their
captives and the horse, rejoicing. When I saw this, I said to myself:—My
pains were in vain nor did I attain my gain. However, I waited to see
how the affair would fare, and when the old woman found herself in
bonds, she wept and said to the captain, Kahrdash:—O thou doughty
Champion and furious Knight, what wilt thou do with an old woman and
slaves, now that thou hast thy will of the horse? And she beguiled him
with soft words and she sware that she would send him horses and cattle,
till he released her and her slaves. Then he went his way, he and his
comrades, and I followed them till they reached this country; and I
watched them, till at last I found an opportunity of stealing the horse,
whereupon I mounted him and, drawing a whip from my wallet, struck him
with it. When the robbers heard this, they came out on me and surrounded
me on all sides and shot arrows and cast spears at me, whilst I stuck
fast on his back and he fended me with hoofs and forehand,[91] till at
last he bolted out with me from amongst them like unerring shaft or
shooting star. But in the stress and stowre I got sundry grievous wounds
and sore; and, since that time, I have passed on his back three days
without tasting food or sleeping aught, so that my strength is down
brought and the world is become to me as naught. But thou hast dealt
kindly with me and hast shown ruth on me; and I see thee naked stark and
sorrow hath set on thee its mark, yet are signs of wealth and gentle
breeding manifest on thee. So tell me, what and whence art thou and
whither art thou bound?" Answered the Prince, "My name is Kanmakan, son
of Zau al-Makan, son of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman. When my father died
and an orphan lot was my fate, a base man seized the throne and became
King over small and great." Then he told him all his past from first to
last; and the horse-thief said to him, for he pitied him, "By Allah,
thou art one of high degree and exceeding nobility, and thou shalt
surely attain estate sublime and become the first cavalier of thy time.
If thou can lift me on horseback and mount thee behind me and bring me
to my own land, thou shalt have honour in this world and a reward on the
day of band calling to band,[92] for I have no strength left to steady
myself; and if this be my last day, the steed is thine alway; for thou
art worthier of him than any other." Quoth Kanmakan, "By Allah, if I
could carry thee on my shoulders or share my days with thee, I would do
this deed without the steed! For I am of a breed that loveth to do good
and to succour those in need; and one kindly action in Almighty Allah's
honour averteth seventy calamities from its doer. So make ready to set
out and put thy trust in the Subtle, the All-Wise." And he would have
lifted him on to the horse and fared forward trusting in Allah, Aider of
those who seek aid, but the horse-thief said, "Wait for me awhile." Then
he closed his eyes and opening his hands, said, "I testify that there is
no god but _the_ God, and I testify that Mohammed is the Apostle of
God!" And he added, "O glorious One, pardon me my mortal sin, for none
can pardon mortal sins save the Immortal!" And he made ready for death
and recited these couplets:—

 I have wronged mankind, and have ranged like wind ✿ O'er the world, and
    in wine-cups my life has past:
 I've swum torrent-course to bear off the horse; ✿ And my guiles high
    places on plain have cast.
 Much I've tried to win and o'er much my sin; ✿ And Katul of my winnings
    is most and last:
 I had hoped of this steed to gain wish and need, ✿ But vain was the end
    of this journey vast.
 I have stolen through life, and my death in strife ✿ Was doomed by the
    Lord who doth all forecast;
 And I've toiled these toils to their fatal end ✿ For an orphan, a pauper
    sans kith or friend!

And when he had finished his verses he closed his eyes and opened his
mouth; then with a single death-rattling he left this world. Thereupon
Kanmakan rose and dug a grave and laid him in the dust; after which he
went up to the steed and kissed him and wiped his face and joyed with
exceeding joy, saying, "None hath the fellow of this stallion; no, not
even King Sasan." Such was the case with Kanmakan; but as regards King
Sasan, presently news came to him that the Wazir Dandan had thrown off
his allegiance, and with him half the army who swore that they would
have no King but Kanmakan: and the Minister had bound the troops by a
solemn covenant and had gone with them to the Islands of India and to
Berber-land and to Black-land;[93] where he had levied armies from far
and near, like unto the swollen sea for fear and none could tell the
host's van from its rear. And the Minister was resolved to make for
Baghdad and take the kingdom in ward and slay every soul who dare
retard, having sworn not to return the sword of war to its sheath, till
he had made Kanmakan King. When this news came to Sasan, he was drowned
in the sea of appal, knowing that the whole state had turned against
him, great and small; and his trouble redoubled and his care became
despair. So he opened his treasuries and distributed his monies among
his officers; and he prayed for Kanmakan's return, that he might draw
his heart to him with fair usage and bounty; and make him commander of
those troops which ceased not being faithful to him, so might he quench
the sparks ere they became a flame. Now when the news of this reached
Kanmakan by the merchants, he returned in haste to Baghdad on the back
of the aforesaid stallion, and as King Sasan sat perplexed upon his
throne he heard of the coming of Kanmakan; whereupon he despatched all
the troops and head-men of the city to meet him. So all who were in
Baghdad fared forth and met the Prince and escorted him to the palace
and kissed the thresholds, whilst the damsels and the eunuchs went in to
his mother and gave her the fair tidings of his return. She came to him
and kissed him between the eyes, but he said to her, "O mother mine, let
me go to my uncle King Sasan who hath overwhelmed me with weal and
boon." And while he so did, all the palace-people and head-men marvelled
at the beauty of the stallion and said, "No King is like unto this man."
So Kanmakan went in to King Sasan and saluted him as he rose to receive
him; and, kissing his hands and feet, offered him the horse as a
present. The King greeted him, saying, "Well come and welcome to my son
Kanmakan! By Allah, the world hath been straitened on me by reason of
thine absence, but praised be Allah for thy safety!" And Kanmakan called
down blessings on him. Then the King looked at the stallion, Al-Katul
hight, and knew him for the very horse he had seen in such and such a
year whilst beleaguering the Cross-worshippers of Constantinople with
Kanmakan's sire, Zau al-Makan, that time they slew his uncle Sharrkan.
So he said to the Prince, "If thy father could have come by this
courser, he would have bought it with a thousand blood horses: but now
let the honour return to the honourable. We accept the steed and we give
him back to thee as a gift, for to him thou hast more right than any
wight, being knightliest of knights." Then King Sasan bade bring forth
for him dresses of honour and led horses and appointed to him the chief
lodging in the palace, and showed him the utmost affection and honour,
because he feared the issue of the Wazir Dandan's doings. At this
Kanmakan rejoiced and shame and humiliation ceased from him. Then he
went to his house and, going to his mother, asked, "O my mother, how is
it with the daughter of my uncle?" Answered she, "By Allah, O my son, my
concern for thine absence hath distracted me from any other, even from
thy beloved; especially as she was the cause of thy strangerhood and thy
separation from me." Then he complained to her of his case, saying, "O
my mother, go to her and speak with her; haply she will vouchsafe me her
sight to see and dispel from me this despondency." Replied his mother,
"Idle desires abase men's necks; so put away from thee this thought that
can only vex; for I will not wend to her nor go in to her with such
message." Now when he heard his mother's words he told her what said the
horse-thief concerning Zat al-Dawahi, how the old woman was then in
their land purposing to make Baghdad, and added, "It was she who slew my
uncle and my grandfather, and needs must I avenge them with man-bote,
that our reproach be wiped out." Then he left her and repaired to an old
woman, a wicked, whorish, pernicious beldam by name Sa'adánah and
complained to her of his case and of what he suffered for love of his
cousin Kuzia Fakan and begged her to go to her and win her favour for
him. "I hear and I obey," answered the old hag and leaving him betook
herself to Kuzia Fakan's palace, that she might intercede with her in
his behalf. Then she returned to him and said, "Of a truth Kuzia Fakan
saluteth thee and promiseth to visit thee this night about
midnight."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Forty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the old woman
came to Kanmakan and said, "Of a truth the daughter of thine uncle
saluteth thee and she will visit thee this night about midnight;" he
rejoiced and sat down to await the fulfilment of his cousin's promise.
But before the hour of night she came to him, wrapped in a veil of black
silk, and she went in to him and aroused him from sleep, saying, "How
canst thou pretend to love me, when thou art sleeping heart-free and in
complete content?" So he awoke and said, "By Allah, O desire of my
heart, I slept not but in the hope that thine image might visit my
dreams!" Then she chid him with soft words and began versifying in these
couplets:—

 Hadst thou been leal in love's loyalty, ✿ Ne'er haddest suffered sleep
    to seal those eyne:
 O thou who claimest lover-loyalty, ✿ Treading the lover's path of pain
    and pine!
 By Allah, O my cousin, never yet ✿ Did eyes of lover sleep such sleep
    indign.

Now when he heard his cousin's words, he was abashed before her and rose
and excused himself. Then they embraced and complained to each other of
the anguish of separation; and they ceased not thus till dawn broke and
day dispersed itself over the horizon; when she rose preparing to
depart. Upon this Kanmakan wept and sighed and began improvising these
couplets:—

 O thou who deignest come at sorest syne, ✿ Whose lips those teeth like
    necklaced pearls enshrine!
 I kissed him[94] thousand times and clipt his waist, ✿ And spent the
    night with cheek to cheek close li'en,
 Till to depart us twain came dawning day, ✿ Like sword-edge drawn from
    sheath in radiant line.

And when he ended his poetry, Kuzia Fakan took leave of him and returned
to her palace. Now certain of her damsels became aware of her secret,
and one of these slave girls disclosed it to King Sasan, who went into
Kuzia Fakan and, drawing his sabre upon her, would have slain her: but
her mother Nuzhat al-Zaman entered and said to him, "By Allah, do her no
harm, for if thou hurt her, the report will be noised among the folk and
thou shalt become a reproach amongst the Kings of the age! Know thou
that Kanmakan is no son of adultery, but a man of honour and nobility,
who would not do aught that could shame him, and she was reared with
him. So be not hasty; for verily the report is spread abroad, among all
the palace-people and all the folk of Baghdad, how the Wazir Dandan hath
levied armies from all countries and is on his way hither to make
Kanmakan King." Quoth Sasan, "By Allah, needs must I cast him into such
calamity that neither earth shall support him nor sky shall shadow him!
I did but speak him fair and show him favour because of my lieges and my
lords, lest they incline to him; but right soon shalt thou see what
shall betide." Then he left her and went out to order the affairs of the
realm. Such, then, was the case with King Sasan; but as regards
Kanmakan, on the next day he came in to his mother and said, "O my
mother! I am resolved to ride forth a-raiding and a-looting: and I will
cut the road of caravans and lift horses and flocks, negroes and white
slaves and, as soon as I have collected great store and my case is
bettered galore, I will demand my cousin Kuzia Fakan in marriage of my
uncle Sasan." Replied she, "O my son, of a truth the goods of men are
not ready to hand like a scape-camel;[95] for on this side of them are
sword-strokes and lance-lungings and men that eat the wild beast and lay
countries waste and chase lynxes and hunt lions." Quoth he, "Heaven
forefend that I turn back from my resolve, till I have won to my will!"
Then he despatched the old woman to Kuzia Fakan, to tell her that he was
about to set out in quest of a marriage-settlement befitting her, saying
to the beldam, "Thou needs must pray her to send me an answer." "I hear
and I obey," replied the old woman and going forth, presently returned
with Kuzia Fakan's reply, which was, "She will come to thee at
midnight." So he abode awake till one half of the night was passed, when
restlessness gat hold on him, and before he was aware she came in to
him, saying, "My life be thy ransom from wakefulness!" and he sprang up
to receive her, exclaiming, "O desire of my heart, my life be thy
redemption from all ills and evils!" Then he acquainted her, with his
intent, and she wept: but he said, "Weep not, O daughter of my uncle;
for I beseech Him who decreed our separation to vouchsafe us reunion and
fair understanding." Then Kanmakan, having fixed a day for departure,
went in to his mother and took leave of her, after which came he down
from his palace and threw the baldrick of his sword over his shoulder
and donned turband and face-veil; and mounting his horse, Al-Katul, and
looking like the moon at its full, he threaded the streets of Baghdad,
till he reached the city gate. And behold, here he found Sabbah bin
Rammah coming out of town; and his comrade seeing him, ran to his
stirrup and saluted him. He returned his salutation, and Sabbah asked
him, "O my brother, how camest thou by this good steed and this sword
and clothes, whilst I up to present time have gotten nothing but my
sword and target?" Answered Kanmakan, "The hunter returneth not but with
quarry after the measure of his intention. A little after thy departure,
fortune came to me: so now say, wilt thou go with me and work thine
intent in my company and journey with me in this desert?" Replied
Sabbah, "By the Lord of the Ka'abah, from this time forth I will call
thee naught but 'my lord'!" Then he ran on before the horse, with his
sword hanging from his neck and his budget between his shoulder-blades,
and Kanmakan rode a little behind him; and they plunged into the desert,
for a space of four days, eating of the gazelles and drinking water of
the springs. On the fifth day they drew near a high hill, at whose foot
was a spring-encampment[96] and a deep running stream; and the knolls
and hollows were filled with camels and cattle and sheep and horses, and
little children played about the pens and folds. When Kanmakan saw this,
he rejoiced at the sight and his breast was filled with delight; so he
addressed himself to fight, that he might take the camels and the
cattle, and said to Sabbah, "Come, fall with us upon this loot, whose
owners have left it unguarded here, and do we battle for it with near
and far, so haply may fall to our lot of goods some share." Replied
Sabbah, "O my lord, verily they to whom these herds belong be many in
number; and among them are doughty horsemen and fighting footmen; and if
we venture lives in this derring-do we shall fall into danger great and
neither of us will return safe from this bate; but we shall both be cut
off by fate and leave our cousins desolate." Then Kanmakan laughed and
knew that he was a coward; so he left him and rode down the rise, intent
on rapine, with loud cries and chanting these couplets:—

 Oh a valiant race are the sons of Nu'umán, ✿ Braves whose blades shred
    heads of the foeman-clan![97]
 A tribe who, when tried in the tussle of war, ✿ Taketh prowest stand in
    the battle-van:
 In their tents safe close gaberlunzie's eyne, ✿ Nor his poverty's ugly
    features scan:
 And I for their aidance sue of Him ✿ Who is King of Kings and made soul
    of man.

Then he rushed upon the she-camels like a he-camel in rut and drove all
before him, sheep and cattle, horses and dromedaries. Therewith the
slaves ran at him with their blades so bright and their lances so long;
and at their head rode a Turkish horseman who was indeed a stout
champion, doughty in fray and in battle chance and skilled to wield the
nut-brown lance and the blade with bright glance. He drove at Kanmakan,
saying, "Woe to thee! Knewest thou to whom these herds belong thou hadst
not done this deed. Know that they are the goods of the band Grecian,
the champions of the ocean and the troop Circassian; and this troop
containeth none but valiant wights numbering an hundred knights, who
have cast off the allegiance of every Sultan. But there hath been stolen
from them a noble stallion, and they have vowed not to return hence
without him." Now when Kanmakan heard these words, he cried out, saying,
"O villain, this I bestride is the steed whereof ye speak and after
which ye seek, and ye would do battle with me for his sake! So come out
against me, all of you at once, and do you dourest for the nonce!" Then
he shouted between the ears of Al-Katul who ran at them like a Ghul;
whereupon Kanmakan let drive at the Turk[98] and ran him through the
body and threw him from his horse and let out his life; after which he
turned upon a second and a third and a fourth, and also of life bereft
them. When the slaves saw this, they were afraid of him, and he cried
out and said to them, "Ho, sons of whores, drive out the cattle and the
stud or I will dye my spear in your blood." So they untethered the
beasts and began to drive them out; and Sabbah came down to Kanmakan
with loud voicing and hugely rejoicing; when lo! there arose a cloud of
dust and grew till it walled the view, and there appeared under of it
riders an hundred, like lions an-hungered. Upon this Sabbah took flight,
and fled to the hill's topmost height, leaving the assailable site, and
enjoyed sight of the fight, saying, "I am no warrior; but in sport and
jest I delight."[99] Then the hundred cavaliers made towards Kanmakan
and surrounded him on all sides, and one of them accosted him, saying,
"Whither goest thou with this loot?" Quoth he, "I have made it my prize
and am carrying it away; and I forbid you from it, or come on to the
combat, for know ye that he who is before you is a terrible lion and an
honourable champion, and a sword that cutteth wherever it turneth!" When
the horseman heard these words, he looked at Kanmakan and saw that he
was a knight like a mane-clad lion in might, whilst his face was as the
full moon rising on its fourteenth night, and valour shone from between
his eyes. Now that horseman was the captain of the hundred horse, and
his name was Kahrdash; and when he saw in Kanmakan the perfection of
cavalarice with surpassing gifts of comeliness, his beauty reminded him
of a beautiful mistress of his whose name was Fátin.[100] Now she was
one of the fairest of women in face, for Allah had given her charms and
grace and noble qualities of all kinds, such as tongue faileth to
explain and which ravish the hearts of men. Moreover, the cavaliers of
the tribe feared her prowess and all the champions of that land stood in
awe of her high spirit; and she had sworn that she would not marry nor
let any possess her, except he should conquer her in combat (Kahrdash
being one of her suitors); and she said to her father, "None shall
approach me, save he be able to deal me overthrow in the field and stead
of war-thrust and blow. Now when this news reached Kahrdash, he scorned
to fight with a girl, fearing reproach; and one of his intimates said to
him, "Thou art complete in all conditions of beauty and goodliness; so
if thou contend with her, even though she be stronger than thou, thou
must needs overcome her; for when she seeth thy beauty and grace, she
will be discomfited before thee and yield thee the victory; for verily
women have a need of men e'en as thou heedest full plain. Nevertheless
Kahrdash refused and would not contend with her, and he ceased not to
abstain from her thus, till he met from Kanmakan that which hath been
set down. Now he took the Prince for his beloved Fatin and was afraid;
albeit indeed she loved him for what she had heard of his beauty and
valour; so he went up to him and said, "Woe to thee,[101] O Fatin! Thou
comest here to show me thy prowess; but now alight from thy steed, that
I may talk with thee, for I have lifted these cattle and have foiled my
friends and waylaid many a brave and man of knightly race, all for the
sake of thy beauty of form and face, which are without peer. So marry me
now, that Kings' daughters may serve thee and thou shalt become Queen of
these countries." When Kanmakan heard these words, the fires of wrath
flamed up in him and he cried out, "Woe to thee, O Persian dog! Leave
Fatin and thy trust and mistrust, and come to cut and thrust, for
eftsoon thou shalt lie in the dust;" and so saying, he began to wheel
about him and assail him and feel the way to prevail. But when Kahrdash
observed him closely he knew him for a doughty knight and a stalwart in
fight; and the error of his thought became manifest to him, whenas he
saw the green down on his cheeks dispread like myrtles springing from
the heart of a rose bright-red. And he feared his onslaught and quoth he
to those with him, "Woe to you! Let one of you charge down upon him and
show him the keen sword and the quivering spear; for know that when many
do battle with one man it is foul shame, even though he be a kemperly
wight and an invincible knight." Upon this, there ran at Kanmakan a
horseman like a lion in fight, mounted on a black horse with hoofs
snow-white and a star on his forehead, the bigness of a dirham,
astounding wit and sight, as he were Abjar, which was Antar's destrier,
even as saith of him the poet:—

 The courser chargeth on battling foe, ✿ Mixing heaven on high with the
    earth down low:[102]
 As though the Morning had blazed his brow, ✿ And he rends her vitals as
    quid pro quo.

He rushed upon Kanmakan, and they wheeled about awhile, giving blows and
taking blows such as confound the sprite and dim the sight; but Kanmakan
was the first to smite the foe a swashing blow, that rove through
turband and iron skull-cap and reached his head, and he fell from his
steed with the fall of a camel when he rolleth over. Then a second came
out to him and offered battle, and in like guise a third, a fourth and a
fifth, and he did with them all as he had done with the first. Thereupon
the rest at once rushed upon him, for indeed they were roused by rage
and wild with wrath; but it was not long before he had pierced them all
with the point of his spear. When Kahrdash saw these feats of arms, he
feared death; for he knew that the youth was stoutest of heart and
concluded that he was unique among knights and braves; and he said to
Kanmakan, "I waive my claim to thy blood and I pardon thee the blood of
my comrades: so take what thou wilt of the cattle and wend thy ways, for
thy firmness in fight moveth my ruth and life is better for thee than
death." Replied Kanmakan, "Thou lackest not of the generosity of the
noble! but leave this talk and run for thy life and reck not of blame
nor think to get back the booty; but take the straight path for thine
own safety." Thereupon Kahrdash waxed exceeding wroth, and rage moved
him to the cause of his death; so he said to Kanmakan, "Woe to thee, an
thou knew who I be, thou wouldst not wield these words in the open
field. I am the lion to bash known as Kahrdash, he who spoileth great
Kings and waylayeth all travellings and seizeth the merchants'
preciousest things. And the steed under thee is that I am seeking; and I
call upon thee to tell me how thou camest by him and hast him in thy
keeping." Replied Kanmakan, "Know thou that this steed was being carried
to my uncle King Sasan, under the escort of an ancient dame high in rank
attended by ten slaves, when thou fellest upon her and tookest the horse
from her; and I have a debt of blood against this old woman for the sake
of my grandfather King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and my uncle King Sharrkan."
"Woe to thee!" quoth Kahrdash, "who is thy father, O thou that hast no
lawful mother?" Quoth he, "Know that I am Kanmakan, bin Zau al-Makan,
son of Omar bin al-Nu'uman." But when Kahrdash heard this address he
said, "Thy perfection cannot be denied, nor yet the union in thee of
knightly virtue and seemlihead," and he added, "Fare in peace, for thy
father showed us favour." Rejoined Kanmakan, "By Allah, I will not deign
to honour thee, O wretch I disdain, so far as to overcome thee in
battle-plain!" Upon this the Badawi waxed wroth and they drove at each
other, shouting aloud, whilst their horses pricked their ears and raised
their tails.[103] And they ceased not clashing together with such a
crash that it seemed to each as if the firmament were split in sunder,
and they continued to strive like two rams which butt, smiting and
exchanging with their spears thrust and cut. Presently Kahrdash foined
at Kanmakan; but he evaded it and rejoined upon him and so pierced him
through the breast that the spearhead issued from his back. Then he
collected the horses and the plunder, and he cried out to the slaves,
saying, "Up and be driving as hard as ye may!" Hearing this, down came
Sabbah and, accosting Kanmakan, said to him, "Right well hast thou
dight, O Knight of the age! Verily I prayed Allah for thee and the Lord
heard my prayer." Then he cut off Kahrdash's head and Kanmakan laughed
and said, "Woe to thee, O Sabbah! I thought thee a rider fain of fight."
Quoth the Badawi, "Forget not thy slave in the division of the spoil, so
haply therewith I may marry my cousin Najmah." Answered Kanmakan, "Thou
shalt assuredly share in it, but now keep watch over the booty and the
slaves." Then he set out for his home and he ceased not journeying night
and day till he drew near Baghdad city, and all the troops heard of
Kanmakan, and saw what was his of loot and cattle and the horse-thief's
head on the point of Sabbah's spear. Also (for he was a noted
highwayman) the merchants knew Kahrdash's head and rejoiced, saying,
"Allah hath rid mankind of him!"; and they marvelled at his being slain
and blessed his slayer. Thereupon all the people of Baghdad came to
Kanmakan, seeking to know what adventures had befallen him, and he told
them what had passed, whereupon all men were taken with awe of him and
the Knights and champions feared him. Then he drove his spoil under the
palace walls; and, planting the spear-heel, on whose point was
Kahrdash's head, over against the royal gate, gave largesse to the
people of Baghdad, distributing horses and camels, so that all loved him
and their hearts inclined to him. Presently he took Sabbah and lodged
him in a spacious dwelling and gave him a share of the loot; after which
he went in to his mother and told her all that had befallen him in his
last journey. Meanwhile the news of him reached the King, who rose from
his levee and, shutting himself up with his chief officers, said to
them, "Know ye that I desire to reveal to you my secret and acquaint you
with the hidden facts of my case. And further know that Kanmakan will be
the cause of our being uprooted from this kingdom, our birth-place; for
he hath slain Kahrdash, albeit he had with him the tribes of the Kurds
and the Turks, and our affair with him will end in our destruction,
seeing that the most part of our troops are his kinsmen and ye weet what
the Wazir Dandan hath done; how he disowneth me, after all I have shown
him of favours; and after being faithful he hath turned traitor. Indeed
it hath reached me that he hath levied an army in the provinces and hath
planned to make Kanmakan Sultan, for that the Sultanate was his father's
and his grandfather's; and assuredly he will slay me without mercy." Now
when the Lords of the Realm heard from him these words, they replied, "O
King, verily his man[104] is unequal to this, and did we not know him to
have been reared by thee, not one of us would approve of him. And know
thou that we are at thy commandment; if thou desire his death, we will
do him die; and if thou wilt remove him, we will remove him." Now when
King Sasan heard this, he said, "Verily, to slay him were wise; but
needs must ye swear an oath to it." So all sware to slay Kanmakan
without giving him a chance; to the end that, when the Wazir Dandan
should come and hear of his death, his force might be weakened and he
fail of his design. When they had made this compact and covenant with
him, the King honoured them with the highest honours and presently
retired to his own apartments. But the officers deserted him and the
troops refused their service and would neither mount nor dismount until
they should espy what might befal, for they saw that most of the army
was with the Wazir Dandan. Presently, the news of these things came to
Kuzia Fakan and caused her much concern; so that she sent for the old
woman who was wont to carry messages between her and her cousin, and
when she came, bade her go to him and warn him of the plot. Whereto he
replied, "Bear my salutation to the daughter of my uncle and say to
her:—Verily the earth is of Allah (to whom belong Might and Majesty!),
and He giveth it as heritage to whomsoever of His servants he willeth.
How excellent is the saying of the sayer:—

 Allah holds Kingship! Whoso seeks without Him victory ✿ Shall be cast
    out, with soul condemned to Hell of low degree:
 Had I or any other man a finger-breadth of land, ✿ The rule were changed
    and men a twain of partner-gods would see."

Then the old woman returned to Kuzia Fakan and told her his reply and
acquainted her that he abode in the city. Meanwhile, King Sasan awaited
his faring forth from Baghdad, that he might send after him some who
would slay him; till it befel one morning that Kanmakan went out to
course and chase, accompanied by Sabbah, who would not leave him night
or day. He caught ten gazelles and among them one that had tender black
eyes and turned right and left: so he let her go and Sabbah said to him,
"Why didst thou free this gazelle?" Kanmakan laughed and set the others
free also, saying, "It is only humane to release gazelles that have
young, and this one turned not from side to side, save to look for her
fawns: so I let her go and released the others in her honour." Quoth
Sabbah, "Do thou release me, that I may go to my people." At this
Kanmakan laughed and smote him with the spear-butt on the breast, and he
fell to the ground squirming like a snake. Whilst they were thus doing,
behold, they saw a dust-cloud spireing high and heard the tramp of
horses; and presently there appeared under it a plump of knights and
braves. Now the cause of their coming was this. Some of his followers
had acquainted King Sasan with Kanmakan's going out to the chase; so he
sent for an Emir of the Daylamites, called Jámi' and twenty of his
horsemen; and gave them money and bade them slay Kanmakan. So when they
drew near the Prince, they charged down upon him and he met them in
mid-charge and killed them all, to the last man. And behold, King Sasan
took horse and riding out to meet his people, found them all slain,
whereat he wondered and turned back; when lo! the people of the city
laid hands on him and bound him straitly. As for Kanmakan after that
adventure, he left the place behind him and rode onward with Sabbah the
Badawi. And the while he went, lo! he saw a youth sitting at the door of
a house on his road and saluted him. The youth returned his greeting
and, going into the house, brought out two platters, one full of soured
milk and the other of brewis swimming in clarified butter; and he set
the platter before Kanmakan, saying, "Favour us by eating of our
victual." But he refused and quoth the young man to him, "What aileth
thee, O man, that thou wilt not eat?" Quoth Kanmakan, "I have a vow upon
me." The youth asked, "What is the cause of thy vow?", and Kanmakan
answered, "Know that King Sasan seized upon my kingdom like a tyrant and
an enemy, although it was my father's and my grandfather's before me;
yet he became master of it by force after my father's death and took no
count of me, by reason of my tender years. So I have bound myself by a
vow to eat no man's victual till I have eased my heart of my foe."
Rejoined the youth, "Rejoice, for Allah hath fulfilled thy vow. Know
that he hath been prisoned in a certain place and methinks he will soon
die." Asked Kanmakan, "In what house is he confined?" "Under yon high
dome," answered the other. The Prince looked and saw the folk entering
and buffeting Sasan, who was suffering the agonies of the dying. So he
arose and went up to the pavilion and noted what was therein; after
which he returned to his place and, sitting down to the proferred
victual, ate what sufficed him and put the rest in his wallet. Then he
took seat in his own place and ceased not sitting till it was dark night
and the youth, whose guest he was slept; when he rose and repaired to
the pavilion wherein Sasan was confined. Now about it were dogs guarding
it, and one of them sprang at him; so he took out of his budget a bit of
meat and threw it to him. He ceased not casting flesh to the dogs till
he came to the pavilion and, making his way to where King Sasan was,
laid his hand upon his head; whereupon he said in a loud voice, "Who art
thou?" He replied, "I am Kanmakan whom thou strivest to kill; but Allah
made thee fall into thine evil device. Did it not suffice thee to take
my kingdom and the kingdom of my father, but thou must purpose to slay
me?"[105] And Sasan swore a false oath that he had not plotted his death
and that the bruit was untrue. So Kanmakan forgave him and said to him,
"Follow me." Quoth he, "I cannot walk a single step for weakness." Quoth
Kanmakan, "If the case be thus we will get us two horses and ride forth,
I and thou, and seek the open." So he did as he said, and he took horse
with Sasan and rode till daybreak, when they prayed the dawn-prayer and
fared on, and ceased not faring till they came to a garden, where they
sat down and talked. Then Kanmakan rose to Sasan and said, "Is aught
left to set thy heart against me?" "No, by Allah!" replied Sasan. So
they agreed to return to Baghdad and Sabbah the Badawi said, "I will go
before you, to give folk the fair tidings of your coming." Then he rode
on in advance, acquainting women and men with the good news; so all the
people came out to meet Kanmakan with tabrets and pipes; and Kuzia Fakan
also came out, like the full moon shining in all her splendour of light
through the thick darkness of the night. So Kanmakan met her, and soul
yearned to soul and body longed for body. There was no talk among the
people of the time but of Kanmakan; for the Knights bore witness of him
that he was the most valiant of the folk of the age and said, "It is not
right that other than Kanmakan should be our Sultan; but the throne of
his grandfather shall revert to him as it began." Meanwhile Sasan went
in to his wife, Nuzhat al-Zaman, who said to him, "I hear that the folk
talk of nothing but Kanmakan and attribute to him such qualities as
tongue never can." He replied, "Hearing of a man is not like seeing a
man. I have seen him, but have noted in him none of the attributes of
perfection. Not all that is heard is said; but folk ape one another in
extolling and cherishing him, and Allah maketh his praises to run on the
lips of men, so that there incline to him the hearts of the people of
Baghdad and of the Wazir Dandan, that perfidious and treacherous man;
who hath levied troops from all lands and taketh to himself the right of
naming a King of the country; and who chooseth that it shall be under
the hand of an orphan ruler whose worth is naught." Asked Nuzhat
al-Zaman, "What then is it that thou purposest to do?"; and the King
answered, "I mean to kill him, that the Wazir may be baulked of his
intent and return to his allegiance, seeing nothing for it but my
service." Quoth she, "In good sooth perfidy with strangers is a foul
thing and how much more with kith and kin! The righteous deed to do
would be to marry him to thy daughter Kuzia Fakan and give heed to what
was said of old time:—

 An Fate some person 'stablish o'er thy head, ✿ And thou being worthier
    her choice upbraid,
 Yet do him honour due to his estate; ✿ He'll bring thee weal though far
    or near thou vade:
 Nor speak thy thought of him, else shalt thou be ✿ Of those who self
    degrade from honour's grade:
 Many Haríms are lovelier than the Bride; ✿ But Time and Fortune lent the
    Bride their aid."

When Sasan heard these her words and comprehended what her verse
intended, he rose from her in anger and said, "Were it not that thy
death would bring on me dishonour and disgrace, I would take off thy
head with my blade and make an end of thy breath." Quoth she, "Why art
thou wroth with me? I did but jest with thee." Then she rose to him and
bussed his head and hands, saying, "Right is thy foresight, and I and
thou will cast about for some means to kill him forthright." When he
heard this, he was glad and said, "Make haste and contrive some deceit
to relieve me of my grieving: for in my sooth the door of device is
straitened upon me!" Replied she, "At once I will devise for thee to do
away his life." "How so?" asked he; and she answered, "By means of our
female slave the so-called Bákún." Now this Bakun was past mistress in
all kinds of knavery and was one of the most pestilent of old women, in
whose religion to abstain from wickedness was not lawful; she had
brought up Kuzia Fakan and Kanmakan who had her in so great affection
that he used to sleep at her feet. So when King Sasan heard his wife
name her, he said, "Right is this recking"; and, sending for the old
woman, told her what had passed and bade her cast about to kill
Kanmakan, promising her all good. Replied she, "Thy bidding shall be
obeyed; but I would have thee, O my lord, give me a dagger[106] which
hath been tempered in water of death, that I may despatch him the
speedilier for thee." Quoth Sasan, "And welcome to thee!"; and gave her
a hanger that would devance man's destiny. Now this slave-woman had
heard stories and verses and had learned by rote great store of strange
sayings and anecdotes: so she took the dagger and went out of the room,
considering how she could compass his doom. Then she repaired to
Kanmakan, who was sitting and awaiting news of tryst with the daughter
of his uncle, Kuzia Fakan; so that night his thought was taken up with
her and the fires of love for her raged in his heart. And while he was
thus, behold, the slave-woman, Bakun, went in to him and said, "Union
time is at hand and the days of disunion are over and gone." Now when he
heard this he asked, "How is it with Kuzia Fakan?"; and Bakun answered,
"Know that her time is wholly taken up with love of thee." At this he
rose and doffing his outer clothes put them on her and promised her all
good. Then said she, "Know that I mean to pass this night with thee,
that I may tell thee what talk I have heard and console thee with
stories of many passion-distraughts whom love hath made sick." "Nay,"
quoth he, "rather tell me a tale that will gladden my heart and gar my
cares depart." "With joy and good will," answered she; then she took
seat by his side (and that poniard under her dress) and began to
say:—Know thou that the pleasantest thing my ears ever heard was


                    _THE TALE OF THE HASHISH EATER._

A certain man loved fair women, and spent his substance on them, till he
became so poor that nothing remained to him; the world was straitened
upon him and he used to go about the market-streets begging his daily
bread. Once upon a time as he went along, behold, a bit of iron nail
pierced his finger and drew blood; so he sat down and wiping away the
blood, bound up his finger. Then he arose crying out, and fared forwards
till he came to a Hammam and entering took off his clothes, and when he
looked about him he found it clean and empty. So he sat him down by the
fountain-basin, and ceased not pouring water on his head, till he was
tired.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


           Now when it was the Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the man sat down
by the fountain-basin and ceased not pouring water on his head till he
was tired. Then he went out to the room in which was the cistern of cold
water; and seeing no one there, he found a quiet corner and taking out a
piece of Hashísh,[107] swallowed it. Presently the fumes mounted to his
brain and he rolled over on to the marble floor. Then the Hashish made
him fancy that a great lord was shampooing him and that two slaves stood
at his head, one bearing a bowl and the other washing gear and all the
requisites of the Hammam. When he saw this, he said in himself,
"Meseemeth these here be mistaken in me; or else they are of the company
of us Hashish-eaters."[108] Then he stretched out his legs and he
imagined that the bathman said to him, "O my master, the time of thy
going up to the Palace draweth near and it is to-day thy turn of
service." At this he laughed and said to himself, "As Allah
willeth,[109] O Hashish!" Then he sat and said nothing, whilst the
bathman arose and took him by the hand and girt his middle with a
waist-cloth of black silk, after which the two slaves followed him with
the bowls and gear; and they ceased not escorting him till they brought
him into a cabinet, wherein they set incense and perfumes a-burning. He
found the place full of various kinds of fruits and sweet-scented
flowers, and they sliced him a water-melon and seated him on a stool of
ebony, whilst the bathman stood to wash him and the slaves poured water
on him; after which they rubbed him down well and said, "O our lord, Sir
Wazir, health to thee for ever!" Then they went out and shut the door on
him; and in the vanity of phantasy he arose and removed the waist-cloth
from his middle, and laughed till he well nigh fainted. He gave not over
laughing for some time and at last quoth he to himself, "What aileth
them to address me as if I were a Minister and style me Master, and Sir?
Haply they are now blundering; but after an hour they will know me and
say, This fellow is a beggar; and take their fill of cuffing me on the
neck." Presently, feeling hot he opened the door, whereupon it seemed to
him that a little white slave and an eunuch came in to him carrying a
parcel. Then the slave opened it and brought out three kerchiefs of
silk, one of which he threw over his head, a second over his shoulders
and a third he tied round his waist. Moreover, the eunuch gave him a
pair of bath-clogs,[110] and he put them on; after which in came white
slaves and eunuchs and supported him (and he laughing the while) to the
outer hall, which he found hung and spread with magnificent furniture,
such as beseemeth none but kings; and the pages hastened up to him and
seated him on the divan. Then they fell to kneading him till sleep
overcame him; and he dreamt that he had a girl in his arms. So he kissed
her and set her between his thighs; then, sitting to her as a man
sitteth to a woman,[111] he took yard in hand and drew her towards him
and weighed down upon her, when lo! he heard one saying to him, "Awake,
thou ne'er-do-well! The noon-hour is come and thou art still asleep." He
opened his eyes and found himself lying on the marge of the cold-water
tank, amongst a crowd of people all laughing at him; for his prickle was
at point and the napkin had slipped from his middle. So he knew that all
this was but a confusion of dreams and an illusion of Hashish and he was
vexed and said to him who had aroused him, "Would thou hadst waited till
I had put it in!" Then said the folk, "Art thou not ashamed, O
Hashish-eater, to be sleeping stark naked with stiff-standing tool?" And
they cuffed him till his neck was red. Now he was starving, yet forsooth
had he savoured the flavour of pleasure in his dream. When Kanmakan
heard the bondwoman's tale, he laughed till he fell backward and said to
Bakun, "O my nurse, this is indeed a rare story and a delectable; I
never heard the like of this anecdote. Say me! hast more?" "Yes,"
replied she, and she ceased not to tell him merry adventures and
laughable absurdities, till sleep overcame him. Then she sat by his head
till the most part of the night was past, when she said to herself, "It
is time to profit by the occasion." So she sprang to her feet and
unsheathed the hanger and rushing up to Kanmakan, was about to cut his
throat when behold, his mother came in upon the twain. As soon as Bakun
saw her, she rose in respect and advanced to meet her, and fear gat hold
of her and she fell a-trembling, as if she had the ague. When his mother
looked at her she marvelled to see her thus and aroused her son, who
awoke and found her sitting at his head. Now the cause of her coming was
that Kuzia Fakan overheard the conversation and the concert to kill
Kanmakan, and she said to his mother, "O wife of my uncle, go to thy
son, ere that wicked whore Bakun murther him;" and she told her what had
passed from first to last. So she fared forth at once, and she thought
of naught and stayed not for aught till she went in to her son at the
very moment when Bakun was about to slay him in his sleep. When he
awoke, he said to his mother, "O my mother, indeed thou comest at a good
time, for nurse Bakun hath been with me this night." Then he turned to
Bakun and asked her, "By my life! knowest thou any story better than
those thou hast told me?" She answered, "And where is what I have told
thee compared with what I will tell thee?; but however better it be, it
must be told at another time." Then she rose to depart, hardly
believing, in her escape albeit he said, "Go in peace!" for she
perceived by her cunning that his mother knew what had occurred. So she
went her way; whereupon his mother said to him, "O my son, blessed be
this night, for that Almighty Allah hath delivered thee from this
accursed woman." "And how so?" enquired he, and she told him the story
from beginning to end. Quoth he, "O my mother, of a truth the live man
findeth no slayer, and though slain he shall not die; but now it were
wiser that we depart from amongst these enemies and let Allah work what
He will." So, when day dawned he left the city and joined the Wazir
Dandan, and after his departure, certain things befel between King Sasan
and Nuzhat al-Zaman, which compelled her also to quit the city and join
herself to them; and presently they were met by all the high officers of
King Sasan who inclined to their party. Then they sat in counsel
together devising what they should do, and at last all agreed upon a
razzia into the land of Roum there to take their revenge for the death
of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and his son Sharrkan. So they set out with
this intent and, after sundry adventures (which it were tedious to tell
as will appear from what follows), they fell into the hands of Rúmzán,
King of the Greeks. Next morning, King Rumzan caused Kanmakan and the
Wazir Dandan and their company to be brought before him and, when they
came, he seated them at his side, and bade spread the tables of food. So
they ate and drank and took heart of grace, after having made sure of
death, when they were summoned to the King's presence; and they had said
to one another, "He hath not sent for us but to slay us." And when they
were comforted the King said, "In truth I have had a dream, which I
related to the monks, and they said, 'None can expound it to thee save
the Wazir Dandan.'" Quoth the Minister, "Weal it was thou didst see in
thy dream, O King of the age!" Quoth the King, "O Wazir, I dreamt that I
was in a pit which seemed a black well where multitudes were tormenting
me; and I would have risen, but when springing up I fell on my feet and
could not get out of that same pit. Then I turned and saw therein a
girdle of gold and I stretched out my hand to take it; but when I raised
it from the ground, I saw it was two girdles. So I girt my middle with
them both and behold, the girdles became one girdle; and this, O Wazir,
is my dream and what I saw when my sleep was deepest." Said Dandan, "O
our Lord the Sultan! know that this thy dream denoteth thou hast a
brother or a brother's son or an uncle's son or other near kinsman of
thy flesh and blood whom thou knowest not; withal he is of the noblest
of you all." Now when the King heard these words he looked at Kanmakan
and Nuzhat al-Zaman and Kuzia Fakan and the Wazir Dandan and the rest of
the captives and said to himself, "If I smite these people's necks,
their troops will lose heart for the destruction of their chiefs and I
shall be able to return speedily to my realm, lest the Kingship pass out
of my hands." So having determined upon this he called the Sworder and
bade him strike off Kanmakan's head upon the spot and forthright, when
lo! up came Rumzan's nurse and said to him, "O auspicious King, what
purposest thou?" Quoth he, "I purpose slaughtering these prisoners who
are in my power; and after that I will throw their heads among their
men: then will I fall upon them, I and all my army in one body, and kill
all we can kill and rout the rest: so will this be the decisive action
of the war and I shall return speedily to my kingdom ere aught of
accident befal among my subjects." When the nurse heard these words, she
came up to him and said in the Frankish tongue, "How canst thou prevail
upon thyself to slay thine own brother's son, and thy sister, and thy
sister's daughter?" When he heard this language, he was wroth with
exceeding wrath and said to her, "O accursed woman, didst thou not tell
me that my mother was murthered and that my father died by poison? Didst
thou not give me a jewel and say to me:—Of a truth this jewel was thy
father's? Why didst thou not tell me the truth?" Replied she, "All that
I told thee is true, but my case and thy case are wonderful and my
history and thy history are marvellous. My name is Marjanah and thy
mother's name was Abrizah: and she was gifted with such beauty and
loveliness and valour that proverbs were made of her, and her prowess
was renowned among men of war. And thy father was King Omar bin
al-Nu'uman, Lord of Baghdad and Khorasan, without doubt or double
dealing or denial. He sent his son Sharrkan on a razzia in company with
this very Wazir Dandan; and they did all that men can. But Sharrkan, thy
brother, who had preceded the force, separated himself from the troops
and fell in with thy mother Queen Abrizah in her palace; and we happened
to have sought a place apart in order to wrestle, she and I and her
other damsels. He came upon us by chance while we were in such case, and
wrestled with thy mother, who overcame him by the power of her splendid
beauty and by her prowess. Then she entertained him five days in her
palace, till the news of this came to her father, by the old woman
Shawahi, surnamed Zat al-Dawahi, whereupon she embraced Al-Islam at the
hands of Sharrkan, and he took her and carried her by stealth to
Baghdad, and with her myself and Rayhánah and twenty other damsels, all
of us having, like her, followed the True Faith. When we came into the
presence of thy Father, the King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, and he saw thy
mother, Queen Abrizah, he fell in love with her and going in unto her
one night, had connection with her, and she conceived by him and became
with child of thee. Now thy mother had three jewels which she presented
to thy father; and he gave one of them to his daughter, Nuzhat al-Zaman,
another to thy brother, Zau al-Makan, and the third to thy brother
Sharrkan. This last thy mother took from Sharrkan and kept it for thee.
But as the time of her delivery drew near she yearned after her own
people and disclosed to me her secret; so I went to a black slave called
Al-Ghazban; and, privily telling him our case, bribed him to go with us.
Accordingly the negro took us and fled the city with us, thy mother
being near her time. But as we approached a desert place on the borders
of our own country, the pangs of labour came upon thy mother. Then the
slave proved himself a lustful villain and approaching her sought of her
a shameful thing; whereupon she cried out at him with a loud cry, and
was sore affrighted at him. In the excess of her fright she gave birth
to thee at once, and at that moment there arose, in the direction of our
country, a dust-cloud which towered and flew till it walled the view.
Thereupon the slave feared for his life; so he smote Queen Abrizah with
his sword and slew her in his fury; then mounting his horse he went his
way. Soon after his going, the dust lifted and discovered thy
grandfather, King Hardub, Lord of Græcia-land, who, seeing thy mother
(and his daughter) lying slain on the plain, was sorely troubled with a
distress that redoubled, and questioned me of the manner of her death
and the cause of her secretly quitting her father's realm. So I told him
all that had passed, first and last; and this is the cause of the feud
between the people of the land of the Greeks and the people of the city
of Baghdad. Then we bore off thy murthered mother and buried her; and I
took thee and reared thee, and hung about thy neck the jewel which was
with Queen Abrizah. But, when being grown up thou camest to man's
estate, I dared not acquaint thee with the truth of the matter, lest
such information stir up a war of blood-revenge between you. Moreover,
thy grandfather had enjoined me to secrecy, and I could not gainsay the
commandment of thy mother's father, Hardub, King of the Greeks. This,
then, is the cause of my concealment and the reason why I forbore to
inform thee that thy father was King Omar bin al-Nu'uman; but when thou
camest to the throne, I told thee what thou knowest; and I durst not
reveal to thee the rest till this moment, O King of the Age! So now I
have discovered to thee my secret and my proof, and I have acquainted
thee with all I know; and thou reckest best what is in thy mind." Now
all the captives had heard the slave-woman Marjanah, nurse to King
Rumzan, speaking as she spake; when Nuzhat al-Zaman, without stay or
delay, cried out, saying, "This King Rumzan is my brother by my father,
King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, and his mother was Queen Abrizah, daughter of
King Hardub, Lord of the Greeks; and I know this slave-woman Marjanah
right well." With this, trouble and perplexity got hold upon Rumzan and
he caused Nuzhat al-Zaman to be brought up to him forthright. When he
looked upon her, blood yearned to blood and he questioned her of his
history. She told him the tale and her story tallied with that of
Marjanah, his nurse; whereupon the King was assured that he was, indeed
and without a doubt, of the people of Irak; and that King Omar bin
al-Nu'uman was his father. So without losing time he caused his sister
to be unpinioned, and Nuzhat al-Zaman came up to him and kissed his
hands, whilst her eyes ran over with tears. The King wept also to see
her weeping, and brotherly love possessed him and his heart yearned to
his brother's son Sultan Kanmakan. So he sprang to his feet and, taking
the sword from the Sworder's hands (whereat the captives made sure of
death), he caused them to be set close to him and he cut their bonds
with the blade and said to his nurse Marjanah, "Explain the matter to
this company, even as thou hast explained it to me." Replied she, "O
King, know that this Shaykh is the Wazir Dandan and he is the best of
witnesses to my story, seeing that he knoweth the facts of the case."
Then she turned to the captives and repeated the whole story to them on
the spot and forthright, and in presence of the Kings of the Greeks and
the Kings of the Franks; whereupon Queen Nuzhat al-Zaman and the Wazir
Dandan and all who were prisoners with them confirmed her words. When
Marjanah, the bond-woman, had finished, chancing to look at Sultan
Kanmakan she saw on his neck the third jewel, fellow to the two which
were with Queen Abrizah; and, recognising it, she cried so loud a cry,
that the palace re-echoed it and said to the King, "O my son, Know that
now my certainty is still more assured, for this jewel that is about the
neck of yonder captive is the fellow to that I hung to thy neck; and,
these being the two, this captive is indeed thy brother's son,
Kanmakan." Then the slave-woman Marjanah turned to Kanmakan and said to
him, "Let me see that jewel, O King of the Age!"; so he took it from his
neck and handed it to her. Then she asked Nuzhat al-Zaman of the third
jewel and she gave it to her; and when the two were in her hand she
delivered them to King Rumzan, and the truth and proof were made
manifest to him; and he was assured that he was indeed Sultan Kanmakan's
uncle and that his father was King Omar bin al-Nu'uman. So he rose at
once and on the spot and, going up to the Wazir Dandan, threw his arms
round his neck; then he embraced King Kanmakan and the twain cried a
loud cry for excess of joy. The glad news was blazed abroad without
delay; and they beat the tabrets and cymbals, whilst the shawms sounded
and the people held high festival. The armies of Irak and Syria heard
the clamour of rejoicing among the Greeks; so they mounted to the last
man, and King Zibl Khan also took, horse saying to himself, "Would I
knew what can be the cause of this clamour and rejoicing in the army of
the Franks and the Greeks!" Then the army of Irak dight itself for fight
and advanced into the plain and place of cut and foin. Presently, King
Rumzan turned him round and saw the army deployed and in preparing for
battle employed, so he asked the cause thereof and was told the state of
the case. Thereupon he bade his niece and brother's daughter, Kuzia
Fakan, return at once and forthright to the troops of Syria and Irak and
acquaint them with the plight that had betided and how it was come to
light that King Rumzan was uncle to Sultan Kanmakan. She set out,
putting away from her sorrows and troubles and, coming to King Zibl
Khan,[112] saluted him and told him all that had passed of the good
accord, and how King Rumzan had proved to be her uncle and uncle of
Kanmakan. And when she went in to him she found him tearful-eyed, in
fear for the captive Emirs and Princes; but when he heard what had
passed, from first to last, the Moslem's sadness was abated and they
joyed with the more gladness. Then King Zibl Khan and all his officers
and his retinue took horse and followed Princess Kuzia Fakan till they
reached the pavilion of King Rumzan; and when entering they found him
sitting with his nephew, Sultan Kanmakan. Now he had taken counsel with
the Wazir Dandan concerning King Zibl Khan and had agreed to commit to
his charge the city of Damascus of Sham and leave him King over it as he
before had been while they themselves entered Irak. Accordingly, they
confirmed him in the vice-royalty of Damascus of Syria, and bade him set
out at once for his government; so he fared forth with his troops and
they rode with him a part of the way to bid him farewell. Then they
returned to their own places whereupon, the two armies foregathered and
gave orders for the march upon Irak; but the Kings said one to other,
"Our hearts will never be at rest nor our wrath cease to rage till we
have taken our wreak of the old woman Shawahi, surnamed Zat al-Dawahi,
and wiped away our shame and blot upon our honour." Thereupon King
Rumzan and his nephew set out, surrounded by their Nobles and Grandees;
and indeed Kanmakan rejoiced in his uncle, King Rumzan, and called down
blessings on nurse Marjanah who had made them known to each other. They
fared on and ceased not faring till they drew near their home Baghdad,
and when the Chief Chamberlain, Sasan, heard of their approach, he came
out to meet them and kissed the hand of King Rumzan who bestowed on him
a dress of honour. Then the King of Roum sat down on the throne and
seated by his side his nephew Sultan Kanmakan, who said to him, "O my
uncle, this Kingdom befitteth none but thee." Replied Rumzan, "Allah be
my refuge and the Lord forbid that I should supplant thee in thy
Kingdom!" Upon this the Wazir Dandan counselled them to share the throne
between the two, ruling each one day in turn; and with this they were
well satisfied.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the two Kings
agreed each to rule one day in turn: then made they feasts and offered
sacrifices of clean beasts and held high festival; and they abode thus
awhile, whilst Sultan Kanmakan spent his nights with his cousin Kuzia
Fakan. And after that period, as the two Kings sat rejoicing in their
condition and in the happy ending of their troubles, behold, they saw a
cloud of dust arise and tower till it walled the world from their eyes.
And out of it came a merchant shrieking and crying aloud for succour and
saying, "O Kings of the Age! how cometh it that I woned safely in the
land of the Infidels and I am plundered in your realm, though it be the
biding place of justice[113] and peace?" Then King Rumzan went up to him
and questioned him of his case and he replied, "I am a merchant and,
like other merchants, I have been long absent from my native land,
travelling in far countries for some twenty years; and I have a patent
of exemption from the city of Damascus which the Viceroy, King Sharrkan
(who hath found mercy) wrote me, for the cause that I had made him gift
of a slave-girl. Now as I was drawing near my home, having with me an
hundred loads of rarities of Hind, when I brought them near Baghdad,
which be the seat of your sovereignty and the place of your peace and
your justice, out there came upon me wild Arabs and Kurds[114] in band
gathered together from every land; and they slew my many and they robbed
my money and this is what they have done me." Then the trader wept in
presence of King Rumzan, saying that he was an old man and infirm; and
he bemoaned himself till the King felt for him and had compassion on
him; and likewise did King Kanmakan and they swore that they would sally
forth upon the thieves. So they set out amid an hundred horse, each
reckoned worth thousands of men, and the merchant went before them to
guide them in the right way; and they ceased not faring on all that day
and the livelong night till dawn-break, when they came to a valley
abounding in rills and shady with trees. Here they found the foray
dispersed about the valley, having divided that merchant's bales among
them; but there was yet some of the goods left. So the hundred horsemen
fell upon them and surrounded them on all sides, and King Rumzan shouted
his war cry, and thus also did his nephew Kanmakan, and ere long they
made prize of them all, to the number of near three hundred horsemen,
banded together of the refuse of rascality.[115] They took what they
could find of the merchant's goods and, binding them tightly, brought
them to Baghdad, where King Rumzan and his nephew, King Kanmakan, sat
down together on one throne and, passing the prisoners in review before
them, questioned them of their case and their chiefs. They said, "We
have no chiefs but these three men and it was they who gathered us
together from all corners and countries." The Kings said to them, "Point
out to us your head-men!"; and, when this was done, they bade lay hands
on the leaders and set their comrades free, after taking from them all
the goods in their possession and restoring them to the merchant, who
examined his stuffs and monies and found that a fourth of his stock was
missing. The Kings engaged to make good the whole of his loss, whereupon
the trader pulled out two letters, one in the handwriting of Sharrkan,
and the other in that of Nuzhat al-Zaman; for this was the very merchant
who had bought Nuzhat al-Zaman of the Badawi, when she was a virgin, and
had forwarded her to her brother Sharrkan; and that happened between
them which happened.[116] Hereupon King Kanmakan examined the letters
and recognised the handwriting of his uncle Sharrkan, and, having heard
the history of his aunt, Nuzhat al-Zaman, he went in to her with the
second letter written by her to the merchant who had lost through her
his monies; Kanmakan also told her what had befallen the trader from
first to last. She knew her own handwriting and, recognising the
merchant, despatched to him guest-gifts and commended him to her brother
and nephew, who ordered him largesse of money and black slaves and pages
to wait on him; besides which Nuzhat al-Zaman sent him an hundred
thousand dirhams in cash and fifty loads of merchandise and presented to
him other rich presents. Then she sent for him and when he came, she
went up to him and saluted him and told him that she was the daughter of
King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and that her brother was King Rumzan and that
King Kanmakan was her nephew. Thereupon the merchant rejoiced with great
joy, and congratulated her on her safety and on her reunion with her
brother, and kissed her hands thanking her for her bounty; and said to
her, "By Allah! a good deed is not lost upon thee!" Then she withdrew to
her own apartment and the trader sojourned with them three days, after
which he took leave of them and set out on his return march to the land
of Syria. Thereupon the two Kings sent for the three robber-chiefs who
were of the highwaymen, and questioned them of their case, when one of
them came forward and said, "Know ye that I am a Badawi who am wont to
lie in wait, by the way, to snatch small children[117] and virgin girls
and sell them to merchants; and this I did for many a year until these
latter days, when Satan incited me to join yon two gallows-birds in
gathering together all the riff-raff of the Arabs and other peoples,
that we might plunder merchandise and waylay merchants." Said the Kings,
"Tell us the rarest of the adventures that have befallen thee in
kidnapping children and maidens." Replied he, "O Kings of the Age, the
strangest thing that happened to me was that one day, two-and-twenty
years ago, I snatched a girl who belonged to the Holy City; she was
gifted with beauty and comeliness, despite that she was but a servant
and was clad in threadbare clothes, with a piece of camlet-cloth on her
head. So I entrapped her by guile as she came out of the caravanserai;
and at that very hour mounting her on a camel, made off with her,
thinking to carry her to my own people in the Desert and there set her
to pasture the camels and gather their droppings in the valley. But she
wept with so sore a weeping that after coming down upon her with blows,
I took her and carried her to Damascus city where a merchant saw her
with me and, being astounded at her beauty and marvelling at her
accomplishments, wished to buy her of me and kept on bidding me more and
more for her, till at last I sold her to him for an hundred thousand
dirhams. After selling her I heard her display prodigious eloquence; and
it reached me that the merchant clothed her in handsome gear and
presented her to the Viceroy of Damascus, who gave him three times the
price which he had paid to me, and this price, by my life! was but
little for such a damsel. This, O Kings of the Age, is the strangest
thing that ever befel me." When the two Kings heard her story they
wondered thereat, but when Nuzhat al-Zaman heard what the Badawi
related, the light became darkness before her face and she cried out and
said to her brother Rumzan, "Sure and sans doubt this is the very Badawi
who kidnapped me in the Holy City Jerusalem!" Then she told them all
that she had endured from him in her strangerhood of hardship, blows,
hunger, humiliation, contempt, adding, "And now it is lawful for me to
slay him." So saying she seized a sword and made at him to smite him;
and behold, he cried out and said, "O Kings of the Age, suffer her not
to slay me, till I shall have told you the rare adventures that have
betided me." And her nephew Kanmakan said to her, "O my aunt, let him
tell us his tale, and after that do with him as thou wilt." So she held
her hand and the Kings said to him, "Now let us hear thy history." Quoth
he, "O Kings of the Age, if I tell you a rare tale will ye pardon me?"
"Yes," answered they. Then the Badawi robber-chief began,


                     THE TALE OF HAMMAD THE BADAWI;

And he said:—Know ye that a short while ago, I was sore wakeful one
night and thought the morn would never dawn; so, as soon as it was break
of day I rose, without stay or delay; and, slinging over my shoulder my
sword, mounted horse and set my lance in rest. Then I rode out to sport
and hunt and, as I went along, a company of men accosted me and asked me
whither I was bound. I told them and they said, "We will keep thee
company." So we all fared on together, and, whilst we were faring, lo
and behold! up started an ostrich and we gave her chase, but she escaped
our pursuit and spreading wings ceased not to fly before us (and we
following by sight) till she lost us in a desert wherein there was
neither grass nor water, nor heard we aught therein save hiss of snake
and wail of Jinn and howl of Ghul; and when we reached that place the
ostrich disappeared nor could we tell whether she had flown up into the
sky or into the ground had gone down. Then we turned our horses' heads
and thought to return; but found that to retrace our steps at that time
of burning heat would be toilsome and dangerous; for the sultry air was
grievous to us, so that we thirsted with sore thirst and our steeds
stood still. We made sure of death; but while we were in this case we
suddenly espied from afar a spacious mead where gazelles were frisking.
Therein was a tent pitched and by the tent side a horse tethered and a
spear was planted with head glittering in the sun.[118] Upon this our
hearts revived after we had despaired, and we turned our horses' heads
towards that tent making for the meadow and the water which irrigated
it; and all my comrades fared for it and I at their head, and we ceased
not faring till we reached the mead. Then we alighted at the spring and
watered our beasts. But I was seized with a fever of foolish curiosity
and went up to the door of that tent, wherein I saw a young man, without
hair on his cheeks, who fellowed the new moon; and on his right hand was
a slender-waisted maid, as she were a willow-wand. No sooner did I set
eyes on her than love gat hold upon my heart and I saluted the youth,
who returned my greeting. Then said I, "O my brother, tell me who thou
art and what to thee is this damsel sitting by thy side?"[119] Thereupon
the youth bent his head groundwards awhile, then raised it and replied,
"Tell me first who thou art and what are these horsemen with thee?"
Answered I, "I am Hammad son of al-Fazári, the renowned knight, who is
reckoned among the Arabs as five hundred horse. We went forth from our
place this morning to sport and chase and were overcome by thirst; so I
came to the door of this tent, thinking haply to get of thee a draught
of water." When he heard these my words, he turned to the fair maiden
and said, "Bring this man water and what food there is ready." So she
arose trailing her skirts, whilst the golden bangles tinkled on her
ankles and her feet stumbled in her long locks, and she disappeared for
a little while. Presently she returned bearing in her right hand a
silver vessel full of cold water and in her left hand a bowl brimming
with milk and dates, together with some flesh of wild cattle. But I
could take of her nor meat nor drink for the excess of my passion, and I
applied to her these two couplets, saying:—

 It was as though the sable dye[120] upon her palms, ✿ Were raven
    perching on a swathe of freshest snow;
 Thou seest Sun and Moon conjoined in her face, ✿ While Sun fear-dimmed
    and Moon fright-pallid show.

After I had eaten and drunk I said to the youth, "Know thou, O Chief of
the Arabs, that I have told thee in all truth who and what I am, and now
I would fain have thee do the like by me and tell me the truth of thy
case." Replied the young man, "As for this damsel she is my sister."
Quoth I, "It is my desire that thou give me her to wife of thy free
will: else will I slay thee and take her by force." Upon this, he bowed
his head groundwards awhile, then he raised his eyes to me and answered,
"Thou sayest sooth in avouching thyself a renowned knight and famed in
fight and verily thou art the lion of the desert; but if ye all attack
me treacherously and slay me in your wrath and take my sister by force,
it will be a stain upon your honour. An you be, as ye aver, cavaliers
who are counted among the Champions and reck not the shock of foray and
fray, give me a little time to don my armour and sling on my sword and
set lance in rest and mount war-steed. Then will we go forth into the
field of fight, I and you; and, if I conquer you, I will kill you to the
last man; but if you overcome me and slay me, this damsel, my sister, is
yours." Hearing such words I replied, "This is only just, and we oppose
it not." Then I turned back my horse's head (for my love for the damsel
waxed hotter and hotter) and returned to my companions, to whom I set
forth her beauty and loveliness as also the comeliness of the young man
who was with her, together with his valour and strength of soul and how
he had avouched himself a match for a thousand horse. Moreover, I
described to my company the tent and all the riches and rarities therein
and said to them, "Know ye that this youth would not have cut himself
off from society and have taken up his abode alone in this place, were
he not a man of great prowess: so I propose that whoso slayeth the
younker shall take his sister." And they said, "This contenteth us."
Then my company armed themselves and mounting, rode to the tent, where
we found that the young man had donned his gear and backed his steed;
but his sister ran up to him (her veil being drenched with tears), and
took hold of his stirrup and cried out, saying, "Alas!" and, "Woe worth
the day!" in her fear for her brother, and recited these couplets:-

 To Allah will I make my moan of travail and of woe; ✿ Maybe Ilàh of
    Arsh[121] will smite their faces with affright:
 Fain would they slay thee, brother mine, with purpose felon-fell; ✿ Albe
    no cause of vengeance was, nor fault forewent the fight.
 Yet for a rider art thou known to those who back the steed, ✿ And twixt
    the East and West of knights thou art the prowest knight:
 Thy sister's honour thou shalt guard though little might be hers, ✿ For
    thou'rt her brother and for thee she sueth Allah's might:
 Then let not enemy possess my soul nor 'thrall my frame, ✿ And work on
    me their will and treat thy sister with despight.
 I'll ne'er abide, by Allah's truth, in any land or home ✿ Where thou art
    not, though dight it be with joyance and delight:
 For love and yearning after thee myself I fain will slay, ✿ And in the
    gloomy darksome tomb spread bed upon the clay.

But when her brother heard her verse he wept with sore weeping and
turned his horse's head towards his sister and made this answer to her
poetry:—

 Stand by and see the derring-do which I to-day will show, ✿ When meet we
    and I deal them blows that rend and cleave and split;
 E'en though rush out to seek a bout the lion of the war, ✿ The stoutest
    hearted brave of all and eke the best in wit;
 To him I'll deal without delay a Sa'alabiyan blow,[122] ✿ And dye my
    cane-spear's joint in blood by wound of foe bespit:
 If all I beat not off from thee, O sister, may this frame ✿ Be slain,
    and cast my corpse to birds, for so it would befit:
 Yes, for thy dearest sake I'll strike my blows with might and main, ✿
    And when we're gone shall this event in many a book be writ.

And when he had ended his verse, he said, "O my sister, give ear to what
I shall enjoin on thee"; whereto she replied, "Hearkening and
obedience." Quoth he, "If I fall, let none possess thy person;" and
thereupon she buffeted her face and said, "Allah forbid, O my brother,
that I should see thee laid low and yield myself to thy foe!" With this
the youth put out his hand to her and withdrew her veil from her face,
whereupon it shone forth as the sun shineth out from the white clouds.
Then he kissed her between the eyes and bade her farewell; after which
he turned to us and said, "Holla, Knights! Come ye as guests or crave ye
cuts and thrusts? If ye come to us as your hosts, rejoice ye in the
guest-rite; and, if ye covet the shining moon, come ye out against me,
knight by knight, into this plain and place of fight." Thereupon rushed
out to him a doughty rider and the young man said to him, "Tell me thy
name and thy father's name, for I am under an oath not to slay any whose
name tallies with mine and whose father's name is that of my father; and
if this be the case with thee, I will give thee up the maid." Quoth the
horseman, "My name is Bilál;"[123] and the young man answered him,
saying:—

 Thou liest when speaking of "benefits," while ✿ Thou comest to front
    with thine evillest will:
 An of prowess thou'rt prow, to my words give ear, ✿ I'm he who makes
    champions in battle-field reel
 With keen blade, like the horn of the cuspèd moon, ✿ So 'ware thrust
    that shall drill through the durest hill!

Then they charged down, each at each, and the youth thrust his adversary
in the breast so that the lance-head issued from his back. With this,
another came out, and the youth cried:—

 Ho thou hound, who art rotten with foulness in grain,[124] ✿ What high
    meed is there easy for warrior to gain?
 'Tis none save the lion of strain purest pure ✿ Who uncareth for life in
    the battle-plain!

Nor was it long before the youth left him drowned in his blood and cried
out, "Who will come forth to me?" So a third horseman rushed out upon
the youth and began saying:—

 To thee come I forth with my heart a-flame, ✿ And summon my friends and
    my comrades by name:
 When thou slewest the chief of the Arabs this day, ✿ This day thou
    remainest the pledge of my claim.

Now when the youth heard this he answered him in these words:—

 Thou liest, O foulest of Satans that are, ✿ And with leasings calumnious
    thou comest to war:
 This day thou shalt fall by a death-dealing point ✿ Where the lances
    lunge and the scymitars jar!

Then he so foined him in the breast that the spear-point issued from his
back and he cried out, saying, "Ho! will none come out?" So a fourth
fared forwards and the youth asked him his name and he answered, "My
name is Hilál, the New Moon." And the youth began repeating:—

 Thou hast failed who would sink me in ruin-sea, ✿ Thou who camest in
    malice with perfidy:
 I, whose verses hast heard from the mouth of me, ✿ Will ravish thy soul
    though unknown to thee.

Then they drave at each other and delivered two cuts, but the youth's
stroke devanced that of the rider his adversary and slew him: and thus
he went on to kill all who sallied out against him. Now when I saw my
comrades slain, I said to myself, "If I go down to fight with him, I
shall not be able to prevail against him; and, if I flee, I shall become
a byword of shame among the Arabs." But the youth gave me no time to
think, for he ran at me and dragged me from my saddle and hurled me to
the ground. I fainted at the fall and he raised his sword designing to
cut off my head; but I clung to his skirts, and he lifted me in his hand
as though I were a sparrow. When the maiden saw this, she rejoiced in
her brother's prowess and coming up to him, kissed him between the eyes.
Then he delivered me to her, saying, "Take him and look to him and
entreat him hospitably, for he is come under our rule." So she took hold
of the collar of my hauberk[125] and led me away by it as one would lead
a dog. Then she did off her brother's coat of mail and clad him in a
robe, and set for him a stool of ivory, on which he sat down; and she
said to him, "Allah whiten thy honour and prevent from thee the shifts
of fortune!" And he answered her with these couplets:—

 My sister said, as saw she how I stood ✿ In fight, when sun-rays lit my
    knightlihood,
 "Allah assain thee for a Brave of braves ✿ To whom in vale bow lions
    howso wood!"
 Quoth I, "Go ask the champions of my case, ✿ When feared the Lords of
    war my warrior-mood!
 My name is famed for fortune and for force, ✿ And soared my spirit to
    such altitude;"
 Ho thou, Hammád, a lion hast upstirred, ✿ Shall show thee speedy death
    like viper-brood!

Now when I heard his verse, I was perplexed as to my case and,
considering my condition and how I was become a captive, I was lowered
in my own esteem. Then I looked at the damsel, his sister, and seeing
her beauty I said to myself, "'Tis she who caused all this trouble; and
I fell a-marvelling at her loveliness till the tears streamed from my
eyes and I recited these couplets:—

 Dear friend! ah leave thy loud reproach and blame; ✿ Such blame but irks
    me yet may not alarm:
 I'm clean distraught for one whom saw I not ✿ Without her winning me by
    winsome charm:
 Yestreen her brother crossed me in her love, ✿ A Brave stout-hearted and
    right long of arm."

Then the maiden set food before her brother and he bade me eat with him,
whereat I rejoiced and felt assured that I should not be slain. And when
he had ended eating, she brought him a flagon of pure wine and he
applied him to it till the fumes of the drink mounted to his head and
his face flushed red. Then he turned to me and said, "Woe to thee, O
Hammad! dost thou know me or not?" Replied I, "By thy life, I am rich in
naught save ignorance!" Quoth he "O Hammad, I am 'Abbád bin Tamím bin
Sa'labah and indeed Allah giveth thee thy liberty and leadeth thee to a
happy bride and spareth thee confusion." Then he drank to my long life
and gave me a cup of wine and I drank it off; and presently he filled me
a second and a third and a fourth, and I drained them all; while he made
merry with me and swore me never to betray him. So I sware to him one
thousand five hundred oaths that I would never deal perfidiously with
him at any time, but that I would be a friend and a helper to him.
Thereupon he bade his sister bring me ten suits of silk; so she brought
them and laid them on my person, and this dress I have on my body is one
of them. Moreover, he made bring one of the best of his
she-dromedaries[126] carrying stuffs and provaunt, he bade her also
bring a sorrel horse, and when they were brought he gave the whole of
them to me. I abode with them three days, eating and drinking, and what
he gave me of gifts is with me to this present. At the end of the three
days he said to me, "O Hammad, O my brother, I would sleep awhile and
take my rest and verily I trust my life to thee; but, if thou see
horsemen making hither, fear not, for know that they are of the Banu
Sa'labah, seeking to wage war on me." Then he laid his sword under his
head-pillow and slept; and when he was drowned in slumber Iblis tempted
me to slay him; so I arose in haste, and drawing the sword from under
his head, dealt him a blow that made his head fall from his body. But
his sister knew what I had done, and rushing out from within the tent,
threw herself on his corpse, rending her raiment and repeating these
couplets:—

 To kith and kin bear thou sad tidings of our plight; ✿ From doom th'
    All-wise decreed shall none of men take flight:
 Low art thou laid, O brother! strewn upon the stones, ✿ With face that
    mirrors moon when shining brightest bright!
 Good sooth, it is a day accurst, thy slaughter-day ✿ Shivering thy spear
    that won the day in many a fight!
 Now thou be slain no rider shall delight in steed, ✿ Nor man-child shall
    the breeding woman bring to light.
 This morn Hammád uprose and foully murthered thee, ✿ Falsing his oath
    and troth with foulest perjury.

When she had ended her verse she said to me, "O thou of accursed
forefathers, wherefore didst thou play my brother false and slay him
when he purposed returning thee to thy native land with provisions; and
it was his intent also to marry thee to me at the first of the month?"
Then she drew a sword she had with her, and planting the hilt in the
earth, with the point set to her breast, she bent over it and threw
herself thereon till the blade issued from her back and she fell to the
ground, dead. I mourned for her and wept and repented when repentance
availed me naught. Then I arose in haste and went to the tent and,
taking whatever was light of load and weighty of worth, went my way; but
in my haste and horror I took no heed of my dead comrades, nor did I
bury the maiden and the youth. And this my tale is still more wondrous
than the story of the serving-girl I kidnapped from the Holy City,
Jerusalem. But when Nuzhat al-Zaman heard these words from the Badawi,
the light was changed in her eyes to night——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

[Illustration]

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Nuzhat
al-Zaman heard these words from the Badawi, the light was changed in her
eyes to night, and she rose and drawing the sword, smote Hammad the Arab
between the shoulder-blades so that the point issued from the apple of
his throat.[127] And when all present asked her, "Why hast thou made
haste to slay him;" she answered, "Praised be Allah who hath granted me
in my life-tide to avenge myself with mine own hand!" And she bade the
slaves drag the body out by the feet and cast it to the dogs. Thereupon
they turned to the two prisoners who remained of the three; and one of
them was a black slave, so they said to him, "What is thy name, fellow?
Tell us the truth of thy case." He replied, "As for me my name is
Al-Ghazbán," and acquainted them what had passed between himself and
Queen Abrizah, daughter of King Hardub, Lord of Greece, and how he had
slain her and fled. Hardly had the negro made an end of his story, when
King Rumzan struck off his head with his scymitar, saying, "Praise to
Allah who gave me life! I have avenged my mother with my own hand." Then
he repeated to them what his nurse Marjanah had told him of this same
slave whose name was Al-Ghazban; after which they turned to the third
prisoner. Now this was the very camel-driver[128] whom the people of the
Holy City, Jerusalem, hired to carry Zau al-Makan and lodge him in the
hospital at Damascus of Syria; but he threw him down on the ashes-midden
and went his way. And they said to him, "Acquaint us with thy case and
tell the truth." So he related to them all that had happened to him with
Sultan Zau al-Makan; how he had been carried from the Holy City, at the
time when he was sick, till they made Damascus and he had been thrown
into the hospital; how also the Jerusalem folk had paid the cameleer
money to transport the stranger to Damascus, and he had taken it and
fled after casting his charge upon the midden by the side of the
ash-heap of the Hammam. But when he ended his words, Sultan Kanmakan
took his sword forthright and cut off his head, saying, "Praised be
Allah who hath given me life, that I might requite this traitor what he
did with my father, for I have heard this very story from King Zau
al-Makan himself." Then the Kings said each to other, "It remaineth only
for us to wreak our revenge upon the old woman Shawahi, yclept Zat
al-Dawahi, because she is the prime cause of all these calamities and
cast us into adversity on this wise. Who will deliver her into our hands
that we may avenge ourselves upon her and wipe out our dishonour?" And
King Rumzan said, "Needs must we bring her hither." So without stay or
delay he wrote a letter to his grandmother, the aforesaid ancient woman,
giving her to know therein that he had subdued the kingdoms of Damascus
and Mosul and Irak, and had broken up the host of the Moslems and
captured their princes, adding, "I desire thee of all urgency to come to
me, bringing with thee Queen Sophia, daughter of King Afridun, and whom
thou wilt of the Nazarene chiefs, but no armies; for the country is
quiet and wholly under our hand." And when she read the letter and
recognised the writing of King Rumzan, she rejoiced with great joy and
forthright equipping herself and Queen Sophia, set out with their
attendants and journeyed, without stopping, till they drew near Baghdad.
Then she fore-sent a messenger to acquaint the King of her arrival,
whereupon quoth Rumzan, "We should do well to don the habit of the
Franks and fare forth to meet the old woman, to the intent that we may
be assured against her craft and perfidy." Whereto Kanmakan replied,
"Hearing is consenting." So they clad themselves in Frankish clothes
and, when Kuzia Fakan saw them, she exclaimed, "By the truth of the Lord
of Worship, did I not know you, I should take you to be indeed Franks!"
Then they sallied forth with a thousand horse, King Rumzan riding on
before them, to meet the old woman. As soon as his eyes fell on hers, he
dismounted and walked towards her and she, recognizing him, dismounted
also and embraced him; but he pressed her ribs with his hands, till he
well nigh broke them. Quoth she, "What is this, O my son?" But before
she had done speaking, up came Kanmakan and Dandan; and the horsemen
with them cried out at the women and slaves and took them all prisoners.
Then the two Kings returned to Baghdad, with their captives, and Rumzan
bade them decorate the city which they did for three days, at the end of
which they brought out the old woman Shawahi, hight Zat al-Dawahi, with
a peaked red turband of palm-leaves on her head, diademed with
asses'-dung and preceded by a herald proclaiming aloud, "This is the
reward of those who presume to lay hands on Kings and the sons of
Kings!" Then they crucified her on one of the gates of Baghdad; and,
when her companions saw what befel her, all embraced in a body the faith
of Al-Islam. As for Kanmakan and his uncle Rumzan and his aunt Nuzhat
al-Zaman and the Wazir Dandan, they marvelled at the wonderful events
that had betided them and bade the scribes chronicle them in books that
those who came after might read. Then they all abode for the remainder
of their days in the enjoyment of every solace and comfort of life, till
there overtook them the Destroyer of all delights and the Sunderer of
all societies. And this is the whole that hath come down to us of the
dealings of fortune with King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and his sons Sharrkan
and Zau al-Makan and his son's son Kanmakan and his daughter Nuzhat
al-Zaman and her daughter Kuzia Fakan. Thereupon quoth Shahryar to
Shahrazad, "I desire that thou tell me somewhat about birds;" and
hearing this Dunyazad said to her sister, "I have never seen the Sultan
light at heart all this while till the present night; and his pleasure
garreth me hope that the issue for thee with him may be a happy issue."
Then drowsiness overcame the Sultan, so he slept;[129]——And Shahrazad
perceived the approach of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

-----

Footnote 1:

  This "horripilation," for which we have the poetical term
  "gooseflesh," is often mentioned in Hindu as in Arab literature.

Footnote 2:

  How often we have heard this in England!

Footnote 3:

  As a styptic. The scene in the text has often been enacted in Egypt
  when a favourite feminine mode of murdering men is by beating and
  bruising the testicles. The Fellahs are exceedingly clever in
  inventing methods of manslaughter. For some years bodies were found
  that bore no outer mark of violence, and only Frankish inquisitiveness
  discovered that the barrel of a pistol had been passed up the anus and
  the weapon discharged internally. Murders of this description are
  known in English history; but never became popular practice.

Footnote 4:

  Arab. "Zakar," that which betokens masculinity. At the end of the tale
  we learn that she also gelded him; thus he was a "Sandali," a _rasé_.

Footnote 5:

  See vol. i. p. 104.

Footnote 6:

  The purity and intensity of her love had attained to a something of
  prophetic strain.

Footnote 7:

  Lane corrupts this Persian name to Sháh Zemán (i. 568).

Footnote 8:

  _i.e._, the world, which includes the ideas of Fate, Time, Chance.

Footnote 9:

  Arab. "Bárid," silly, noyous, contemptible; as in the proverb

                  Two things than ice are colder cold:—
                  An old man young, a young man old.

  A "cold-of-countenance" = a fool: "May Allah make cold thy face!" =
  may it show want and misery. "By Allah, a cold speech!" = a silly or
  abusive tirade (Pilgrimage, ii. 22).

Footnote 10:

  The popular form is, "often the ear loveth before the eye."

Footnote 11:

  Not the first time that royalty has played this prank, nor the last,
  perhaps.

Footnote 12:

  _i.e._ the Lady Dunya.

Footnote 13:

  These magazines are small strongly-built rooms on the ground floor,
  where robbery is almost impossible.

Footnote 14:

  Lit. "approbation," "benediction"; also the Angel who keeps the Gates
  of Paradise and who has allowed one of the Ghilmán (or Wuldán) the
  boys of supernatural beauty that wait upon the Faithful, to wander
  forth into this wicked world.

Footnote 15:

  In Europe this would be a _plurale majestatis_, used only by Royalty.
  In Arabic it has no such significance, and even the lower orders apply
  it to themselves; although it often has a _soupçon_ of "I and thou."

Footnote 16:

  Man being an "extract of despicable water" (Koran xxxii. 7) ex
  spermate genitali, which Mr. Rodwell renders "from germs of life,"
  "from sorry water."

Footnote 17:

  _i.e._ begotten by man's seed in the light of salvation (Núr al-Hudà).

Footnote 18:

  The rolls of white (camphor-like) scarf-skin and sordes which come off
  under the bath-man's glove become by miracle of Beauty, as brown musk.
  The Rubber or Shampooer is called in Egypt "Mukayyis" (vulgarly
  "Mukayyisáti") or "bagman," from his "Kís," a bag-glove of coarse
  woollen stuff. To "Johnny Raws" he never fails to show the little
  rolls which come off the body and prove to them how unclean they are;
  but the material is mostly dead scarf-skin.

Footnote 19:

  The normal phrase on such occasions (there is always a "dovetail" _de
  rigueur_) "Allah give thee profit!"

Footnote 20:

  _i.e._ We are forced to love him only, and ignore giving him a rival
  (referring to Koranic denunciations of "Shirk," or attributing a
  partner to Allah, the religion of plurality, syntheism not
  polytheism): see, he walks tottering under the weight of his back
  parts wriggling them whilst they are rounded like the revolving
  heavens.

Footnote 21:

  Jannat al-Na'ím (Garden of Delight); the fifth of the seven Paradises,
  made of white diamond; the gardens and the plurality being borrowed
  from the Talmud. Mohammed's Paradise, by the by, is not a greater
  failure than Dante's. Only ignorance or pious fraud asserts it to be
  wholly sensual; and a single verse is sufficient refutation: "Their
  prayer therein shall be 'Praise unto thee, O Allah!' and their
  salutation therein shall be 'Peace!' and the end of their prayer shall
  be, 'Praise unto God, the Lord of all creatures'" (Koran x. 10-11).
  See also lvi. 24-26. It will also be an intellectual condition wherein
  knowledge will greatly be increased (lxxxviii. 17-20). Moreover the
  Moslems, far more logical than Christians, admit into Paradise the
  so-called "lower animals."

Footnote 22:

  Sed vitam faciunt balnea, vina, Venus! The Hammam to Easterns is a
  luxury as well as a necessity; men sit there for hours talking chiefly
  of money and their prowess with the fair; and women pass half the day
  in it complaining of their husbands' over-amativeness and contrasting
  their own chaste and modest aversion to carnal congress.

Footnote 23:

  The frigidarium or cold room, coolness being delightful to the Arab.

Footnote 24:

  The calidarium or hot room of the bath.

Footnote 25:

  The Angel who acts door-keeper of Hell; others say he specially
  presides over the torments of the damned (Koran xliii. 78).

Footnote 26:

  The Door-keeper of Heaven before mentioned who, like the Guebre
  Zamiyád has charge of the heavenly lads and lasses, and who is often
  charged by poets with letting them slip.

Footnote 27:

  Lane (i. 616), says "of wine, milk, sherbet, or any other beverage."
  Here it is wine, a practice famed in Persian poetry, especially by
  Hafiz, but most distasteful to a European stomach. We find the Mu
  allakah of Imr al-Kays noticing "our morning draught." Nott (Hafiz)
  says a "cheerful cup of wine in the morning was a favourite indulgence
  with the more luxurious Persians. And it was not uncommon among the
  Easterns, to salute a friend by saying:—May your morning potation be
  agreeable to you!" In the present day this practice is confined to
  regular debauchees.

Footnote 28:

  Koran xii. 31. The words spoken by Zulaykhá's women friends and
  detractors whom she invited to see Beauty Joseph.

Footnote 29:

  A formula for averting fascination. Koran, chapt. cxiii. 1. "Falak"
  means "cleaving"; hence the breaking forth of light from darkness, a
  "wonderful instance of the Divine power."

Footnote 30:

  The usual delicate chaff.

Footnote 31:

  Such letters are generally written on a full-sized sheet of paper
  ("notes" are held slighting in the East) and folded till the breadth
  is reduced to about one inch. The edges are gummed; the ink, much like
  our Indian ink, is smeared with the finger upon the signet-ring; the
  place where it is to be applied is slightly wetted with the tongue and
  the seal is stamped across the line of junction to secure privacy. I
  have given a specimen of an original love-letter of the kind in
  "Scinde, or the Unhappy Valley," chapt. iv.

Footnote 32:

  Arab. "Salb" which may also mean hanging, but the usual term for the
  latter in The Nights is "shanak." Crucifixion, abolished by the
  superstitious Constantine, was practised as a servile punishment as
  late as the days of Mohammed Ali Pasha the Great. The malefactors were
  nailed and tied to the patibulum or cross-piece, without any
  suppedaneum or foot-rest and left to suffer tortures from flies and
  sun, thirst and hunger. They often lived three days and died of the
  wounds mortifying and the nervous exhaustion brought on by cramps and
  convulsions. In many cases the corpses were left to feed the kites and
  crows; and this added horror to the death. Moslems care little for
  mere hanging. Whenever a fanatical atrocity is to be punished, the
  malefactor should be hung in pig-skin, his body burnt and the ashes
  publicly thrown into a common cesspool.

Footnote 33:

  Arab. "Shaytán" the insolent or rebellious one is a common term of
  abuse. The word is Koranic, and borrowed as usual from the Jews.
  "Satan" occurs four times in the O. T. o£ which two are in Job, where,
  however, he is a subordinate angel.

Footnote 34:

  Arab. "Alak" from the Koran xxii. 5. "O men ... consider that we first
  created you of dust (Adam); afterwards of seed (Rodwell's "moist germs
  of life"); afterwards of a little coagulated (or clots of) blood." It
  refers to all mankind except Adam, Eve and Isa. Also chapt. xcvi. 2,
  which, as has been said was probably the first composed at Meccah. Mr.
  Rodwell (v. 10) translates by "Servant of God" what should be "Slave
  of Allah," alluding to Mohammed's original name Abdullah. See my
  learned friend Aloys Sprenger, Leben, etc., i. 155.

Footnote 35:

  The Hindus similarly exaggerate: "He was ready to leap out of his skin
  in his delight" (Katha, etc., p. 443).

Footnote 36:

  A star in the tail of the Great Bear, one of the "Banát al-Na'ash," or
  a star close to the second. Its principal use is to act foil to bright
  Sohayl (Canopus) as in the beginning of Jámi's Layla-Majnún:—

               To whom Thou'rt hid, day is darksome night:
               To whom shown, Sohá as Sohayl is bright.

  See also al-Hariri (xxxii. and xxxvi.). The saying, "I show her Soha
  and she shows me the moon" (A. P. i. 547) arose as follows. In the
  Ignorance a beautiful Amazon defied any man to take her maidenhead;
  and a certain Ibn al-Ghazz won the game by struggling with her till
  she was nearly senseless. He then asked her, "How is thine eye-sight:
  dost thou see Soha?" and she, in her confusion, pointed to the moon
  and said, "That is it!"

Footnote 37:

  The moon being masculine (lunus) and the sun feminine.

Footnote 38:

  The "five Shaykhs" must allude to that number of Saints whose names
  are doubtful; it would be vain to offer conjectures. Lane and his
  "Sheykh" (i. 617) have tried and failed.

Footnote 39:

  The beauties of nature seem always to provoke hunger in Orientals,
  especially Turks, as good news in Englishmen.

Footnote 40:

  Pers. "Lájuward": Arab. "Lázuward"; prob. the origin of our "azure,"
  through the Romaic λαζούριον and the Ital. azzurro; and, more
  evidently still, of lapis lazuli, for which do _not_ see the
  Dictionaries.

Footnote 41:

  Arab. "Maurid," the desert-wells where caravans drink; also the way to
  water-wells.

Footnote 42:

  The famous Avicenna, whom the Hebrews called Aben Sina. The early
  European Arabists, who seem to have learned Arabic through Hebrew,
  borrowed their corruption, and it long kept its place in Southern
  Europe.

Footnote 43:

  According to the Hindus there are ten stages of love-sickness: (1)
  Love of the eyes; (2) Attraction of the Manas or mind; (3) Birth of
  desire; (4) Loss of sleep; (5) Loss of flesh; (6) Indifference to
  objects of sense; (7) Loss of shame; (8) Distraction of thought; (9)
  Loss of consciousness; and (10) Death.

Footnote 44:

  We should call this walk of "Arab ladies" a waddle: I have never seen
  it in Europe except amongst the trading classes of Trieste, who have a
  "wriggle" of their own.

Footnote 45:

  In our idiom six doors.

Footnote 46:

  They refrained from the highest enjoyment, intending to marry.

Footnote 47:

  Arab. "Jihád," lit. fighting against something; Koranically, fighting
  against infidels _i.e._ non-believers in Al-Islam (chapt. lx. 1). But
  the "Mujáhidún" who wage such war are forbidden to act aggressively
  (ii. 186). Here it is a war to save a son.

Footnote 48:

  The lady proposing extreme measures is characteristic: Egyptians hold,
  and justly enough, that their women are more amorous than men.

Footnote 49:

  "O Camphor," an antiphrase before noticed. The vulgar also say "Yá
  Taljí" = O snowy (our snowball), the polite "Ya Abú Sumrah!" = O
  father of brownness.

Footnote 50:

  _i.e._ which fit into sockets in the threshold and lintel and act as
  hinges. These hinges have caused many disputes about how they were
  fixed, for instance in caverns without moveable lintel or threshold.
  But one may observe that the upper projections are longer than the
  lower and that the door never fits close above; so by lifting it up
  the inferior pins are taken out of the holes. It is the oldest form
  and the only form known to the Ancients. In Egyptian the hinge is
  called Akab = the heel, hence the proverb Wakaf' al-báb alá 'akabih;
  the door standeth on its heel; _i.e._ every thing in proper place.

Footnote 51:

  Hence the addresses to the Deity: Yá Sátir and Yá Sattár—O Thou who
  veilest the sins of Thy Servants! said _e.g._, when a woman is falling
  from her donkey, etc.

Footnote 52:

  A necessary precaution, for the headsman who would certainly lose his
  own head by overhaste.

Footnote 53:

  The passage has also been rendered, "and rejoiced him by what he said"
  (Lane i, 600).

Footnote 54:

  Arab. "Hurr" = noble, independent (opp. to 'Abd = a servile) often
  used to express animæ nobilitas as εἰγενὴς in Acts xvii. 11; where the
  Berœans were "more noble" than the Thessalonians. The Princess means
  that the Prince would not lie with her before marriage.

Footnote 55:

  The Persian word is now naturalized as Anglo-Egyptian.

Footnote 56:

  Arab. "khassat hu" = removed his testicles, gelded him.

Footnote 57:

  Here ends the compound tale of Taj al-Muluk cum Aziz plus Azizah, and
  we return to the history of King Omar's sons.

Footnote 58:

  "Zibl" popularly pronounced Zabal, means "dung." Khan is "Chief," as
  has been noticed; "Zabbál," which Torrens renders literally
  "dung-drawer," is one who feeds the Hammam with _bois-de-vache_, etc.

Footnote 59:

  _i.e._ one who fights the Jihád or "Holy War": it is equivalent to our
  "good knight."

Footnote 60:

  Arab. "Malik." Azud al-Daulah, a Sultan or regent under the Abbaside
  Caliph Al-Tá'í li 'llah (regn. A.H. 363-381) was the first to take the
  title of "Malik." The latter in poetry is still written Malík.

Footnote 61:

  A townlet on the Euphrates, in the "awwal Shám," or frontier of Syria.

Footnote 62:

  _i.e._, the son would look to that.

Footnote 63:

  A characteristic touch of Arab pathos, tender and true.

Footnote 64:

  Arab. "Mawarid" from "ward" = resorting to pool or water-pit (like
  those of "Gakdúl") for drinking, as opposed to "Sadr" = returning
  after having drunk at it. Hence the "Sádir" (part. act.) takes
  precedence of the "Wárid" in Al-Hariri (Ass. of the Badawi).

Footnote 65:

  One of the fountains of Paradise (Koran, chapt. lxxvi.): the word lit.
  means "water flowing pleasantly down the throat." The same chapter
  mentions "Zanjabíl," or the Ginger-fount, which to the Infidel mind
  unpleasantly suggests "ginger pop."

Footnote 66:

  Arab. "Takhíl" = adorning with Kohl.

Footnote 67:

  The allusions are far-fetched and obscure as in Scandinavian poetry.
  Mr. Payne (ii. 314) translates "Naml" by "net." I understand the ant
  (swarm) creeping up the cheeks, a common simile for a young beard. The
  lovers are in the Lazá (hell) of jealousy, etc., yet feel in the Na'ím
  (heaven) of love and robe in green, the hue of hope, each expecting to
  be the favoured one.

Footnote 68:

  Arab. "Ukhuwán," the classical term. There are two chamomiles; the
  white (Bábúnaj) and the yellow (Kaysún); these however are Syrian
  names and plants are differently called in almost every Province of
  Arabia.

Footnote 69:

  In nomadic life the parting of lovers happens so frequently that it
  becomes a stock topic in poetry and often, as here, the lover
  complains of parting when he is not parted. But the gravamen lies in
  the word "Wasl" which may mean union, meeting, reunion or coition. As
  Ka'ab ibn Zuhayr began his famous poem with "Su'ád hath departed," 900
  imitators (says Al-Siyuti) adopted the Násib or address to the beloved
  and Su'ad came to signify a cruel, capricious mistress.

Footnote 70:

  As might be expected from a nation of camel-breeders actual cautery
  which can cause only counter-irritation, is a favourite nostrum; and
  the Hadis or prophetic saying is "Akhir al-dawá (or al-tibb) al-Kayy"
  = cautery is the end of medicine-cure; and "Fire and sickness cannot
  cohabit." Most of the Badawi bear upon their bodies grisly marks of
  this heroic treatment, whose abuse not unfrequently brings on
  gangrene. The Hadis (Burckhardt, Proverbs, No. 30) also means "if
  nothing else avail, take violent measures."

Footnote 71:

  The Spaniards have the same expression: "Man is fire and woman is
  tinder."

Footnote 72:

  Arab. "Báshik" from Persian "Báshah" (_accipiter Nisus_) a fierce
  little species of sparrow-hawk which I have described in "Falconry in
  the Valley of the Indus" (p. 14, etc.)

Footnote 73:

  Lit. "Coals (fit) for frying-pan."

Footnote 74:

  Arab. "Libdah," the sign of a pauper or religious mendicant. He is
  addressed "Yá Abu libdah!" (O father of a felt calotte!)

Footnote 75:

  In times of mourning Moslem women do not use perfumes or dyes, like
  the Henna here alluded to in the pink legs and feet of the dove.

Footnote 76:

  Koran, chapt. ii. 23. The idea is repeated in some forty Koranic
  passages.

Footnote 77:

  A woman's name, often occurring. The "daughters of Sa'ada" are zebras,
  so called because "they resemble women in beauty and graceful
  agility."

Footnote 78:

  Arab. "Tiryák" from Gr. Θηριακόν φάρμακον a drug against venomous
  bites. It was compounded mainly of treacle, and that of Baghdad and
  Irák was long held sovereign. The European equivalent, "Venice
  treacle," (Theriaca Andromachi) is an electuary containing many
  elements. Badawin eat for counter-poison three heads of garlic in
  clarified butter for forty days. (Pilgrimage iii. 77.)

Footnote 79:

  Could Cervantes have read this? In Algiers he might easily have heard
  it recited by the tale-tellers. Kanmakan is the typical Arab Knight,
  gentle and valiant as Don Quixote; Sabbáh is the _Grazioso_, a
  "Beduin" Sancho Panza. In the "Romance of Antar" we have a similar
  contrast with Ocab who says: "Indeed I am no fighter: the sword in my
  hand-palm chases only pelicans;" and, "whenever you kill a satrap,
  I'll plunder him."

Footnote 80:

  _i.e._ The Comely, son of the Spearman, son of the Lion, or Hero.

Footnote 81:

  Arab. "Ushári." Old Purchas (vi., i. 9) says there are three kinds of
  camels (1) _Huguin_ (= Hejin) of tall stature and able to carry 1,000
  lbs. (2) _Bechete_ (= Bukhti) the two-humped Bactrian before mentioned
  and, (3) the _Raguahill_ (Rahíl) small dromedaries unfit for burden
  but able to cover a hundred miles in a day. The "King of Timbukhtu"
  (not "Bukhtu's well" pop. Timbuctoo) had camels which reach Segelmesse
  (Sijalmas) or Darha, nine hundred miles in eight days at most. Lyon
  makes the Maherry (also called El-Heirie = Mahri) trot nine miles an
  hour for a long time. Other travellers in North Africa report the
  _Sabayee_ (Saba'i = seven days wonder) as able to get over six hundred
  and thirty miles (or thirty-five caravan stages = each eighteen miles)
  in five to seven days. One of the dromedaries in the "hamlah" or
  caravan of Mr. Ensor (Journey through Nubia and Darfoor—a charming
  book) travelled one thousand one hundred and ten miles in twenty-seven
  days. He notes that his beasts were better with water every five to
  seven days, but in the cold season could do without drink for sixteen.
  I found in Al-Hijaz at the end of August that the camels suffered much
  after ninety hours without drink (Pilgrimage iii. 14). But these were
  "Júdi" fine-haired animals as opposed to "Khawár" (the Khowás of
  Chesney, p. 333), coarse-haired, heavy, slow brutes which will not
  stand great heat.

Footnote 82:

  _i.e._ Fortune so willed it (euphemistically).

Footnote 83:

  The "minaret" being feminine is usually compared with a fair young
  girl. The oldest minaret proper is supposed to have been built in
  Damascus by the Ommiade Caliph (No. X.) Al-Walid A.H. 86-96 (=
  705-715). According to Ainsworth (ii. 113) the second was at Kuch
  Hisar in Chaldea.

Footnote 84:

  None of the pure Badawi can swim for the best of reasons, want of
  waters.

Footnote 85:

  The baser sort of Badawi is never to be trusted: he is a traitor born,
  and looks upon fair play as folly or cowardice. Neither oath nor
  kindness can bind him: he unites the cruelty of the cat with the
  wildness of the wolf. How many Englishmen have lost their lives by not
  knowing these elementary truths! The race has not changed from the
  days of Mandeville (A.D. 1322) whose "Arabians, who are called
  Bedouins and Ascopards (?), are right felonious and foul, and of a
  cursed nature." In his day they "carried but one shield and one spear,
  without other arm:" now, unhappily for travellers, they have
  matchlocks and most tribes can manufacture a something called by
  courtesy gunpowder.

Footnote 86:

  Thus by Arab custom they become friends.

Footnote 87:

  Our classical term for a noble Arab horse.

Footnote 88:

  In Arab. "Khayl" is = horse; Husan, a stallion; Hudúd, a brood
  stallion; Faras, a mare (but sometimes used as a horse and meaning
  "that tears over the ground"); Jiyád a steed (noble); Kadísh, a nag
  (ignoble); Mohr a colt and Mohrah, a filly. There are dozens of other
  names but these suffice for conversation.

Footnote 89:

  Al-Katúl, the slayer; Al-Majnún, the mad; both high compliments in the
  style inverted.

Footnote 90:

  This was a highly honourable exploit, which would bring the doer fame
  as well as gain

Footnote 91:

  This is a true and life-like description of horse-stealing in the
  Desert: Antar and Burckhardt will confirm every word. A noble Arab
  stallion is supposed to fight for his rider and to wake him at night
  if he see any sign of danger. The owner generally sleeps under the
  belly of the beast which keeps eyes and ears alert till dawn.

Footnote 92:

  Arab. "Yaum al-tanádí," _i.e._ Resurrection-day.

Footnote 93:

  Arab. "Bilád al-Súdán" = the Land of the Blacks, negro-land, whence
  the slaves came, a word now fatally familiar to English ears. There
  are, however, two regions of the same name, the Eastern upon the Upper
  Nile and the Western which contains the Niger-Valley; and each
  considers itself _the_ Sudan. And the reader must not confound the
  Berber of the Upper Nile, the _Berberino_ who acts servant in Lower
  Egypt, with the Berber of Barbary: the former speaks an African
  language; the latter a "Semitic" (Arabic) tongue.

Footnote 94:

  "Him" for "her."

Footnote 95:

  Arab. "Sáibah," a she-camel freed from labour under certain conditions
  amongst the pagan Arabs; for which see Sale (Prel. Disc. sect. v.).

Footnote 96:

  Arab. "Marba'." In early spring the Badawi tribes leave the Rasm or
  wintering-place (the Turco-Persian "Kishlák") in the desert, where
  winter-rains supply them, and make for the Yaylák, or summer-quarters,
  where they find grass and water. Thus the great Ruwala tribe appears
  regularly every year on the eastern slopes of the Anti-Libanus
  (Unexplored Syria, i. 117), and hence the frequent "partings."

Footnote 97:

  This "renowning it" and boasting of one's tribe (and oneself) before
  battle is as natural as the war-cry: both are intended to frighten the
  foe and have often succeeded. Every classical reader knows that the
  former practice dates from the earliest ages. It is still customary in
  Arabia during the furious tribal fights, the duello on a magnificent
  scale, which often ends in half the combatants on either side being
  placed hors-de-combat. A fair specimen of "renowning it" is Amrú's
  Suspended Poem with its extravagant panegyric of the Taghlab tribe (p.
  64, "Arabian Poetry for English Readers," etc., by W. A. Clouston,
  Glasgow: privately printed MDCCCLXXXI.; and transcribed from Sir
  William Jones's translation).

Footnote 98:

  The "Turk" appeared soon amongst the Abbaside Caliphs. Mohammed was
  made to prophecy of them under the title Banú Kantúrah, the latter
  being a slave-girl of Abraham. The Imam Al-Shafi'i (A.H. 195 = A.D.
  810) is said to have foretold their rule in Egypt where an Ottoman
  defended him against a donkey-boy. (For details see Pilgrimage i.
  216.) The Caliph Al-Mu'atasim bi'llah (A.D. 833-842) had more than
  10,000 Turkish slaves and was the first to entrust them with high
  office; so his Arab subjects wrote of him:—

               A wretched Turk is thy heart's desire;
               And to them thou showest thee dam and sire.

  His successor Al-Wásik (Vathek, of the terrible eyes) was the first to
  appoint a Turk his Sultan or regent. After his reign they became
  prætorians and led to the downfall of the Abbasides.

Footnote 99:

  The Persian saying is "First at the feast and last at the fray."

Footnote 100:

  _i.e._ a tempter, a seducer.

Footnote 101:

  Arab. "Wayl-ak" here probably used in the sense of "Wayh-ak" an
  expression of affectionate concern.

Footnote 102:

  Firdausi, the Homer of Persia, affects the same magnificent
  exaggeration. The trampling of men and horses raises such a dust that
  it takes one layer (of the seven) from earth and adds it to the (seven
  of the) Heavens. The "blaze" on the stallion's forehead (Arab.
  "Ghurrah") is the white gleam of the morning.

Footnote 103:

  A noted sign of excitement in the Arab blood horse, when the tail
  looks like a panache covering the hind-quarter.

Footnote 104:

  _i.e._ Prince Kanmakan.

Footnote 105:

  The "quality of mercy" belongs to the noble Arab, whereas the ignoble
  and the Badawin are rancorous and revengeful as camels.

Footnote 106:

  Arab. "Khanjar," the poison was let into the grooves and hollows of
  the poniard.

Footnote 107:

  The Pers. "Bang"; Indian "Bhang"; Maroccan "Fasúkh" and S. African
  "Dakhá." (Pilgrimage i. 64). I heard of a "Hashish-orgie" in London
  which ended in half the experimentalists being on their sofas for a
  week. The drug is useful for stokers, having the curious property of
  making men insensible to heat. Easterns also use it for "Imsák"
  prolonging coition, of which I speak presently.

Footnote 108:

  Arab. "Hashsháshín;" whence De Sacy derived "Assassin." A notable
  effect of the Hashish preparation is wildly to excite the imagination,
  a kind of delirium imaginans sive phantasticum.

Footnote 109:

  Meaning "Well done!" Mashallah (Má sháa 'llah) is an exclamation of
  many uses, especially affected when praising man or beast for fear
  lest flattering words induce the evil eye.

Footnote 110:

  Arab. "Kabkáb" vulg. "Kubkáb." They are between three and ten inches
  high; and those using them for the first time in the slippery Hammam
  must be careful.

Footnote 111:

  Arab. "Majlis" = sitting. The postures of coition, ethnologically
  curious and interesting, are subjects so extensive that they require a
  volume rather than a note. Full information can be found in the
  Ananga-ranga, or Stage of the Bodiless One, a treatise in Sanskrit
  verse vulgarly known as Koka Pandit from the supposed author, a Wazir
  of the great Rajah Bhoj or, according to others, of the Maharajah of
  Kanoj. Under the title Lizzat al-Nisá (The Pleasures—or enjoying—of
  Women) it has been translated into all the languages of the Moslem
  East, from Hindustani to Arabic. It divides postures into five great
  divisions: (1) the woman lying supine, of which there are eleven
  subdivisions; (2) lying on her side, right or left, with three
  varieties; (3) sitting, which has ten; (4) standing, with three
  subdivisions, and (5) lying prone, with two. This total of
  twenty-nine, with three forms of "Purusháyit," when the man lies
  supine (see the Abbot in Boccaccio i. 4), becomes thirty-two,
  approaching the French _quarante façons_. The Upavishta, majlis, or
  sitting postures, when one or both "sit at squat" somewhat like birds,
  appear utterly impossible to Europeans who lack the pliability of the
  Eastern's limbs. Their object in congress is to avoid tension of the
  muscles which would shorten the period of enjoyment. In the text the
  woman lies supine and the man sits at squat between her legs: it is a
  favourite from Marocco to China. A literal translation of the
  Ananga-ranga appeared in 1873 under the name of Káma-Shástra; or the
  Hindoo Art of Love (Ars Amoris Indica); but of this only six copies
  were printed. It was re-issued (printed but not published) in 1885.
  The curious in such matters will consult the Index Librorum
  Prohibitorum (London, privately printed, 1879) by Pisanus Fraxi (H. S.
  Ashbee).

Footnote 112:

  _i.e._ _Le Roi Crotte._

Footnote 113:

  This seems to be a punning allusion to Baghdad, which in Persian would
  mean the Garden (bágh) of Justice (dád). See "Biographical Notices of
  Persian Poets" by Sir Gore Ouseley, London, Oriental Translation Fund,
  1846.

Footnote 114:

  The Kardoukhoi (Carduchi) of Xenophon; also called (Strabo xv.)
  "Kárdakís, from a Persian word signifying manliness," which would be
  "Kardak" = a doer (of derring-do). They also named the Montes Gordæi
  the original Ararat of Xisisthrus-Noah's Ark. The Kurds are of Persian
  race, speaking an old and barbarous Iranian tongue and often of the
  Shi'ah sect. They are born bandits, highwaymen, cattle-lifters; yet
  they have spread extensively over Syria and Egypt and have produced
  some glorious men, witness Sultan Saláh al-Din (Saladin) the Great.
  They claim affinity with the English in the East, because both races
  always inhabit the highest grounds they can find.

Footnote 115:

  These irregular bands who belong to no tribe are the most dangerous
  bandits in Arabia, especially upon the northern frontier. Burckhardt,
  who suffered from them, gives a long account of their treachery and
  utter absence of that Arab "pundonor" which is supposed to
  characterise Arab thieves.

Footnote 116:

  An euphemistic form to avoid mentioning the incestuous marriage.

Footnote 117:

  The Arab form of our "Kinchin lay."

Footnote 118:

  These are the signs of a Shaykh's tent.

Footnote 119:

  These questions, indiscreet in Europe, are the rule throughout Arabia,
  as they were in the United States of the last generation.

Footnote 120:

  Arab. "Khizáb" a paste of quicklime and lamp-black kneaded with
  linseed oil which turns the Henna to a dark olive. It is hideously
  ugly to unaccustomed eyes and held to be remarkably beautiful in
  Egypt.

Footnote 121:

  _i.e._ the God of the Empyrean.

Footnote 122:

  A blow worthy of the Sa'alabah tribe to which he belonged.

Footnote 123:

  _i.e._ "benefits"; also the name of Mohammed's Mu'ezzin, or crier to
  prayer, who is buried outside the Jábiah gate of Damascus. Hence
  amongst Moslems Abyssinians were preferred as mosque-criers in the
  early ages of Al-Islam. Egypt chose blind men because they were
  abundant and cheap; moreover they cannot take note of what is doing on
  the adjoining roof-terraces where women and children love to pass the
  cool hours that begin and end the day. Stories are told of men who
  counterfeited blindness for years in order to keep the employment. In
  Moslem cities the stranger required to be careful how he appeared at a
  window or on the gallery of a minaret: the people hate to be
  overlooked and the whizzing of a bullet was the warning to be off.
  Pilgrimage iii. 185.

Footnote 124:

  His instinct probably told him that this opponent was a low fellow;
  but such insults are common when "renowning it."

Footnote 125:

  Arab. "Dara'" or "Dira'," a habergeon, a coat of ring-mail, sometimes
  worn in pairs. During the wretched "Sudan" campaigns much naïve
  astonishment was expressed by the English Press to hear of warriors
  armed cap-à-pie in this armour like medieval knights. They did not
  know that every great tribe has preserved, possibly from Crusading
  times, a number of hauberks, even to hundreds. I have heard of only
  one English traveller who had a mail-jacket made by Wilkinson of Pall
  Mall, imitating in this point Napoleon III. and (according to the
  Banker-poet, Rogers) the Duke of Wellington. That of Napoleon is said
  to have been made of platinum-wire, the work of a Pole who received
  his money and an order to quit Paris. The late Sir Robert Clifton
  (they say) tried its value with a Colt after placing it upon one of
  his coat-models or mannequins. It is easy to make these hauberks
  arrow-proof or sword-proof, even bullet-proof if Arab gunpowder be
  used: but against a modern rifle-cone they are worse than worthless as
  the fragments would be carried into the wound. The British serjeant
  was right in saying that he would prefer to enter battle in his shirt:
  and he might even doff that to advantage and return to the primitive
  custom of man-gymnomachy.

Footnote 126:

  Arab. "Jamal" (by Badawin pronounced "Gamal" like the Hebrew) is the
  generic term for "Camel" through the Gr.κάμηλος: "Ibl" is also the
  camel-species but not so commonly used. "Hajín" is the dromedary (in
  Egypt, "Dalúl" in Arabia), not the one-humped camel of the zoologist
  (_C. dromedarius_) as opposed to the two-humped (_C. Bactrianus_), but
  a running _i.e._ a riding camel. The feminine is Nákah, for like mules
  females are preferred. "Bakr" (masc.) and "Bakrah" (fem.) are
  camel-colts. There are hosts of special names besides those which are
  general. Mr. Ensor is singular when he states (p. 40) "the male (of
  the camel) is much the safer animal to choose;" and the custom of the
  universal East disproves his assertion. Mr. McCoan ("Egypt as it is")
  tells his readers that the Egyptian camel has two humps; in fact, he
  describes the camel as it is not.

Footnote 127:

  So, in the Romance of Dalhamah (Zát al-Himmah, the heroine) the hero
  Al-Gundubah ("one locust-man") smites off the head of his mother's
  servile murderer and cries, "I have taken my blood-revenge upon this
  traitor slave!" (Lane, M. E. chapt. xxiii.).

Footnote 128:

  This gathering all the persons upon the stage before the curtain drops
  is highly artistic and improbable.

Footnote 129:

  He ought to have said his dawn prayers.


           Now when it was the Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,

Shahrazad began to relate, in these words,




                THE TALE OF THE BIRDS AND BEASTS AND THE
                            CARPENTER.[130]


Quoth she, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that in times of yore
and in ages long gone before, a peacock abode with his wife on the
sea-shore. Now the place was infested with lions and all manner wild
beasts, withal it abounded in trees and streams. So cock and hen were
wont to roost by night upon one of the trees, being in fear of the
beasts, and went forth by day questing food. And they ceased not thus to
do till their fear increased on them and they searched for some place
wherein to dwell other than their old dwelling-place; and in the course
of their search behold, they happened on an island abounding in streams
and trees. So they alighted there and ate of its fruits and drank of its
waters. But whilst they were thus engaged, lo! up came to them a duck in
a state of extreme terror, and stayed not faring forwards till she
reached the tree whereon were perched the two peafowl, when she seemed
re-assured in mind. The peacock doubted not but that she had some rare
story; so he asked her of her case and the cause of her concern, whereto
she answered, "I am sick for sorrow, and my horror of the son of
Adam:[131] so beware, and again I say beware of the sons of Adam!"
Rejoined the peacock, "Fear not now that thou hast won our protection."
Cried the duck, "Alhamdolillah! glory to God, who hath done away my cark
and care by means of you being near! For indeed I come of friendship
fain with you twain." And when she had ended her speech the peacock's
wife came down to her and said, "Well come and welcome and fair cheer!
No harm shall hurt thee: how can son of Adam come to us and we in this
isle which lieth a-middlemost of the sea? From the land he cannot reach
us neither can he come against us from the water. So be of good cheer
and tell us what hath betided thee from the child of Adam." Answered the
duck, "Know, then, O thou peahen, that of a truth I have dwelt all my
life in this island safely and peacefully, nor have I seen any
disquieting thing, till one night, as I was asleep, I sighted in my
dream the semblance of a son of Adam, who talked with me and I with him.
Then I heard a voice say to me:—O thou duck, beware of the son of Adam
and be not imposed on by his words nor by that he may suggest to thee;
for he aboundeth in wiles and guiles; so beware with all wariness of his
perfidy, for again I say, he is crafty and right cunning even as singeth
of him the poet:—

 He'll offer sweetmeats with his edgèd tongue, ✿ And fox thee with the
    foxy guile of fox."

[Illustration]

And know thou that the son of Adam circumventeth the fishes and draweth
them forth of the seas; and he shooteth the birds with a pellet of
clay,[132] and trappeth the elephant with his craft. None is safe from
his mischief and neither bird nor beast escapeth him; and on this wise
have I told thee what I have heard concerning the son of Adam. So I
awoke, fearful and trembling, and from that hour to this my heart hath
not known gladness, for dread of the son of Adam, lest he surprise me
unawares by his wile or trap me in his snares. By the time the end of
the day overtook me, my strength was grown weak and my spunk failed me;
so, desiring to eat and drink, I went forth walking, troubled in spirit
and with a heart ill at ease. Now when I reached yonder mountain I saw a
tawny lion-whelp at the door of a cave; and sighting me he joyed in me
with great joy, for my colour pleased him and my gracious shape; so he
cried out to me saying:—Draw nigh unto me. I went up to him and he asked
me, What is thy name, and what is thy nature? Answered I, My name is
Duck, and I am of the bird-kind; and I added, But thou, why tarriest
thou in this place till this time? Answered the whelp, My father the
lion hath for many a day warned me against the son of Adam, and it came
to pass this night that I saw in my sleep the semblance of a son of
Adam. And he went on to tell me the like of that I have told you. When I
heard these words, I said to him, O lion, I take asylum with thee, that
thou mayest kill the son of Adam and be steadfast in resolve to his
slaughter; verily I fear him for myself with extreme fear and to my
fright affright is added for that thou also dreadest the son of Adam,
albeit thou art Sultan of savage beasts. Then I ceased not, O my sister,
to bid the young lion beware of the son of Adam and urge him to slay
him, till he rose of a sudden and at once from his stead and went out
and he fared on, and I after him and I noted him lashing flanks with
tail. We advanced in the same order till we came to a place where the
roads forked and saw a cloud of dust arise which, presently clearing
away, discovered below it a runaway naked ass, now galloping and running
at speed and now rolling in the dust. When the lion saw the ass, he
cried out to him, and he came up to him in all humility. Then said the
lion:—Harkye, crack-brain brute! What is thy kind and what be the cause
of thy coming hither? He replied, O son of the Sultan! I am by kind an
ass—Asinus Caballus—and the cause of my coming to this place is that I
am fleeing from the son of Adam. Asked the lion-whelp, Dost thou fear
then that he will kill thee? Answered the ass, Not so, O son of the
Sultan, but I dread lest he put a cheat on me and mount upon me; for he
hath a thing called Pack-saddle, which he setteth on my back; also a
thing called Girths which he bindeth about my belly; and a thing called
Crupper which he putteth under my tail, and a thing called Bit which he
placeth in my mouth: and he fashioneth me a goad[133] and goadeth me
with it and maketh me run more than my strength. If I stumble he curseth
me, and if I bray, he revileth me;[134] and at last when I grow old and
can no longer run, he putteth on me a pannel[135] of wood and delivereth
me to the water-carriers, who load my back with water from the river in
skins and other vessels, such as jars, and I cease not to wone in misery
and abasement and fatigue till I die, when they cast me on the
rubbish-heaps to the dogs. So what grief can surpass this grief and what
calamities can be greater than these calamities? Now when I heard, O
peahen, the ass's words, my skin shuddered, and became as gooseflesh at
the son of Adam; and I said to the lion-whelp, O my lord, the ass of a
verity hath excuse and his words add terror to my terror. Then quoth the
young lion to the ass, Whither goest thou? Quoth he, Before sunrise I
espied the son of Adam afar off, and fled from him; and now I am minded
to flee forth and run without ceasing for the greatness of my fear of
him, so haply I may find me a place of shelter from the perfidious son
of Adam. Whilst the ass was thus discoursing with the lion-whelp,
seeking the while to take leave of us and go away, behold, appeared to
us another cloud of dust, whereat the ass brayed and cried out and
looked hard and let fly a loud fart.[136] After a while the dust lifted
and discovered a black steed finely dight with a blaze on the forehead
like a dirham round and bright;[137] handsomely marked about the hoof
with white and with firm strong legs pleasing to sight and he neighed
with affright. This horse ceased not running till he stood before the
whelp, the son of the lion who, when he saw him, marvelled and made much
of him and said, What is thy kind, O majestic wild beast and wherefore
fleest thou into this desert wide and vast? He replied, O lord of wild
beasts, I am a steed of the horse-kind, and the cause of my running is
that I am fleeing from the son of Adam. The lion-whelp wondered at the
horse's speech and cried to him:—Speak not such words for it is shame to
thee, seeing that thou art tall and stout. And how cometh it that thou
fearest the son of Adam, thou, with thy bulk of body and thy swiftness
of running, when I, for all my littleness of stature am resolved to
encounter the son of Adam and, rushing on him, eat his flesh, that I may
allay the affright of this poor duck and make her dwell in peace in her
own place? But now thou hast come here and thou hast wrung my heart with
thy talk and turned me back from what I had resolved to do, seeing that,
for all thy bulk, the son of Adam hath mastered thee and hath feared
neither thy height nor thy breadth, albeit, wert thou to kick him with
one hoof thou wouldst kill him, nor could he prevail against thee, but
thou wouldst make him drink the cup of death. The horse laughed when he
heard the whelp's words and replied, Far, far is it from my power to
overcome him, O Prince. Let not my length and my breadth nor yet my bulk
delude thee with respect to the son of Adam; for that he, of the excess
of his guile and his wiles, fashioneth me a thing called Hobble and
applieth to my four legs a pair of ropes made of palm-fibres bound with
felt, and gibbeteth me by the head to a high peg, so that I being tied
up remain standing and can neither sit nor lie down. And when he is
minded to ride me, he bindeth on his feet a thing of iron called
Stirrup[138] and layeth on my back another thing called Saddle, which he
fasteneth by two Girths passed under my armpits. Then he setteth in my
mouth a thing of iron he calleth Bit, to which he tieth a thing of
leather called Rein; and, when he sitteth in the saddle on my back, he
taketh the rein in his hand and guideth me with it, goading my flanks
the while with the shovel-stirrups till he maketh them bleed. So do not
ask, O son of our Sultan, the hardships I endure from the son of Adam.
And when I grow old and lean and can no longer run swiftly, he selleth
me to the miller who maketh me turn in the mill, and I cease not from
turning night and day till I grow decrepit. Then he in turn vendeth me
to the knacker who cutteth my throat and flayeth off my hide and
plucketh out my tail, which he selleth to the sieve-maker; and he
melteth down my fat for tallow-candles. When the young lion heard the
horse's words, his rage and vexation redoubled and he said, When didst
thou leave the son of Adam? Replied the horse, At mid-day and he is upon
my track. Whilst the whelp was thus conversing with the horse lo! there
rose a cloud of dust and, presently opening out, discovered below it a
furious camel gurgling and pawing the earth with his feet and never
ceasing so to do till he came up with us. Now when the lion-whelp saw
how big and buxom he was, he took him to be the son of Adam and was
about to spring upon him when I said to him, O Prince, of a truth this
is not the son of Adam, this be a camel, and he seemeth to be fleeing
from the son of Adam. As I was thus conversing, O my sister, with the
lion-whelp, the camel came up and saluted him; whereupon he returned the
greeting and said:—What bringeth thee hither? Replied he, I came here
fleeing from the son of Adam. Quoth the whelp, And thou, with thy huge
frame and length and breadth, how cometh it that thou fearest the son of
Adam, seeing that with one kick of thy foot thou wouldst kill him? Quoth
the camel, O son of the Sultan, know that the son of Adam hath
subtleties and wiles, which none can withstand nor can any prevail
against him, save only Death; for he putteth into my nostrils a twine of
goat's hair he calleth Nose-ring,[139] and over my head a thing he
calleth Halter; then he delivereth me to the least of his little
children, and the youngling draweth me along by the nose-ring, my size
and strength notwithstanding. Then they load me with the heaviest of
burdens and go long journeys with me and put me to hard labour through
the hours of the night and the day. When I grow old and stricken in
years and disabled from working, my master keepeth me not with him, but
selleth me to the knacker who cutteth my throat and vendeth my hide to
the tanners and my flesh to the cooks: so do not ask the hardships I
suffer from the son of Adam. When didst thou leave the son of Adam?
asked the young lion; and he answered, At sundown, and I suppose that
coming to my place after my departure and not finding me there, he is
now in search of me: wherefore let me go, O son of the Sultan, that I
may flee into the wolds and the wilds. Said the whelp, Wait awhile, O
camel, till thou see how I will tear him, and give thee to eat of his
flesh, whilst I craunch his bones and drink his blood. Replied the
camel, O King's son, I fear for thee from the child of Adam, for he is
wily and guilefull. And he began repeating these verses:—

 When the tyrant enters the lieges' land, ✿ Naught remains for the lieges
    but quick remove!

Now whilst the camel was speaking with the lion-whelp, behold, there
rose a cloud of dust which, after a time, opened and showed an old man
scanty of stature and lean of limb; and he bore on his shoulder a basket
of carpenter's tools and on his head a branch of a tree and eight
planks. He led little children by the hand and came on at a trotting
pace,[140] never stopping till he drew near the whelp. When I saw him, O
my sister, I fell down for excess of fear; but the young lion rose and
walked forward to meet the carpenter and when he came up to him, the man
smiled in his face and said to him, with a glib tongue and in courtly
terms:—O King who defendeth from harm and lord of the long arm, Allah
prosper thine evening and thine endeavouring and increase thy valiancy
and strengthen thee! Protect me from that which hath distressed me and
with its mischief hath oppressed me, for I have found no helper save
only thyself. And the carpenter stood in his presence weeping and
wailing and complaining. When the whelp heard his sighing and his crying
he said, I will succour thee from that thou fearest. Who hath done thee
wrong and what art thou, O wild beast, whose like in my life I never
saw, nor ever espied one goodlier of form or more eloquent of tongue
than thou? What is thy case? Replied the man, O lord of wild beasts, as
to myself I am a carpenter; but as to who hath wronged me, verily he is
a son of Adam, and by break of dawn after this coming night[141] he will
be with thee in this place. When the lion-whelp heard these words of the
carpenter, the light was changed to night before his sight and he
snorted and roared with ire and his eyes cast forth sparks of fire. Then
he cried out saying, By Allah, I will assuredly watch through this
coming night till dawn, nor will I return to my father till I have won
my will. Then he turned to the carpenter and asked, Of a truth I see
thou art short of step and I would not hurt thy feelings for that I am
generous of heart; yet do I deem thee unable to keep pace with the wild
beasts: tell me then whither thou goest? Answered the carpenter, Know
that I am on my way to thy father's Wazir, the lynx; for when he heard
that the son of Adam had set foot in this country he feared greatly for
himself and sent one of the wild beasts on a message for me, to make him
a house wherein he should dwell, that it might shelter him and fend off
his enemy from him, so not one of the sons of Adam should come at him.
Accordingly I took up these planks and set forth to find him. Now when
the young lion heard these words he envied the lynx and said to the
carpenter, By my life there is no help for it but thou make me a house
with these planks ere thou make one for Sir Lynx! When thou hast done my
work, go to him and make him whatso he wisheth. The carpenter replied, O
lord of wild beasts, I cannot make thee aught till I have made the lynx
what he desireth: then will I return to thy service and build thee a
house as a fort to ward thee from thy foe. Exclaimed the lion-whelp, By
Allah, I will not let thee leave this place till thou build me a house
of planks. So saying he made for the carpenter and sprang upon him,
thinking to jest with him, and cuffed him with his paw, knocking the
basket off his shoulder; and threw him down in a fainting fit, whereupon
the young lion laughed at him and said, Woe to thee, O carpenter, of a
truth thou art feeble and hast no force; so it is excusable in thee to
fear the son of Adam. Now when the carpenter fell on his back, he waxed
exceeding wroth; but he dissembled his wrath for fear of the whelp and
sat up and smiled in his face, saying, Well, I will make for thee the
house. With this he took the planks he had brought and nailed together
the house, which he made in the form of a chest after the measure of the
young lion. And he left the door open, for he had cut in the box a large
aperture, to which he made a stout cover and bored many holes therein.
Then he took out some newly wrought nails and a hammer and said to the
young lion, Enter the house through this opening, that I may fit it to
thy measure. Thereat the whelp rejoiced and went up to the opening, but
saw that it was strait; and the carpenter said to him, Enter and crouch
down on thy legs and arms! So the whelp did thus and entered the chest,
but his tail remained outside. Then he would have drawn back and come
out; but the carpenter said to him, Wait patiently a while till I see if
there be room for thy tail with thee. The young lion did as he was bid
when the carpenter twisted up his tail and, stuffing it into the chest,
whipped the lid on to the opening and nailed it down; whereat the whelp
cried out and said, O carpenter, what is this narrow house thou hast
made me? Let me out, sirrah! But the carpenter answered, Far be it, far
be it from thy thought! Repentance for past avails naught, and indeed of
this place thou shalt not come out. He then laughed and resumed, Verily
thou art fallen into the trap and from thy duresse there is no escape, O
vilest of wild beasts! Rejoined the whelp, O my brother, what manner of
words are these thou addressest to me? The carpenter replied "Know, O
dog of the desert! that thou hast fallen into that which thou fearedst:
Fate hath upset thee, nor shall caution set thee up. When the whelp
heard these words, O my sister, he knew that this was indeed the very
son of Adam, against whom he had been warned by his sire in waking state
and by the mysterious Voice in sleeping while; and I also was certified
that this was indeed he without doubt; wherefore great fear of him for
myself seized me and I withdrew a little apart from him and waited to
see what he would do with the young lion. Then I saw, O my sister, the
son of Adam dig a pit in that place hard by the chest which held the
whelp and, throwing the box into the hole, heap dry wood upon it and
burn the young lion with fire. At this sight, O sister mine, my fear of
the son of Adam redoubled and in my affright I have been these two days
fleeing from him." But when the peahen heard from the duck this
story,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the peahen
heard from the duck this story, she wondered with exceeding wonder and
said to her, "O my sister, here thou art safe from the son of Adam, for
we are in one of the islands of the sea whither there is no way for the
son of Adam; so do thou take up thine abode with us till Allah make easy
thy case and our case." Quoth the duck, "I fear lest some calamity come
upon me by night, for no runaway can rid him of fate by flight."
Rejoined the peahen, "Abide with us, and be like unto us;" and ceased
not to persuade her, till she yielded, saying, "O my sister, thou
knowest how weak is my resistance; but verily had I not seen thee here,
I had not remained." Said the peahen, "That which is on our
foreheads[142] we must indeed fulfil, and when our doomed day draweth
near, who shall deliver us? But not a soul departeth except it have
accomplished its predestined livelihood and term." Now the while they
talked thus, a cloud of dust appeared and approached them, at sight of
which the duck shrieked aloud and ran down into the sea, crying out,
"Beware! beware! though flight there is not from Fate and Lot!"[143]
After awhile, the dust opened out and discovered under it an antelope;
whereat the duck and the peahen were re-assured and the peacock's wife
said to her companion, "O my sister, this thou seest and wouldst have me
beware of is an antelope, and here he is, making for us. He will do us
no hurt, for the antelope feedeth upon the herbs of the earth and, even
as thou art of the bird-kind, so is he of the beast-kind. Be therefore
of good cheer and cease care-taking; for care-taking wasteth the body."
Hardly had the peahen done speaking, when the antelope came up to them,
thinking to shelter him under the shade of the tree; and, sighting the
peahen and the duck, saluted them and said, "I came to this island
to-day and I have seen none richer in herbage nor pleasanter for
habitation." Then he besought them for company, and amity and, when they
saw his friendly behaviour to them, they welcomed him and gladly
accepted his offer. So they struck up a sincere friendship and sware
thereto; and they slept in one place and they ate and drank together;
nor did they cease dwelling in safety, eating and drinking their fill,
till one day there came thither a ship which had strayed from her course
in the sea. She cast anchor near them and the crew came forth and
dispersed about the island. They soon caught sight of the three friends,
antelope, peahen and duck, and made for them; whereupon the peahen flew
up into the tree and thence winged her way through air; and the antelope
fled into the desert, but the duck abode paralysed by fear. So they
chased her till they caught her and she cried out and said, "Caution
availed me naught against Fate and Lot!"; and they bore her off to the
ship. Now when the peahen saw what had betided the duck, she removed
from the island, saying, "I see that misfortunes lie in ambush for all.
But for yonder ship, parting had not befallen between me and this duck,
because she was one of the truest of friends." Then she flew off and
rejoined the antelope, who saluted her and gave her joy of her safety
and asked for the duck, to which she replied, "The enemy hath taken her,
and I loathe the sojourn of this island after her." Then she wept for
the loss of the duck and began repeating:—

 The day of parting cut my heart in twain: ✿ In twain may Allah cut the
    parting-day!

And she spake also this couplet:—

 I pray some day that we reunion gain, ✿ So may I tell him Parting's ugly
    way.

The antelope sorrowed with great sorrow, but dissuaded the peahen from
her resolve to remove from the island. So they abode there together with
him, eating and drinking, in peace and safety, except that they ceased
not to mourn for the loss of the duck; and the antelope said to the
peahen, "O my sister, thou seest how the folk who came forth of the ship
were the cause of our severance from the duck and of her destruction; so
do thou beware of them and guard thyself from them and from the wile of
the son of Adam and his guile." But the peahen replied, "I am assured
that nought caused her death save her neglecting to say Subhán' Allah,
glory to God; indeed I often said to her:—Exclaim thou, Praised be
Allah, and verily I fear for thee, because thou neglectest to laud the
Almighty; for all things created by Allah glorify Him on this wise, and
whoso neglecteth the formula of praise[144] him destruction waylays."
When the antelope heard the peahen's words he exclaimed, "Allah make
fair thy face!" and betook himself to repeating the formula of praise,
and ceased not therefrom a single hour. And it is said that his form of
adoration was as follows:—"Praise be to the Requiter of every good and
evil thing, the Lord of Majesty and of Kings the King!" And a tale is
also told on this wise of

-----

Footnote 130:

  Here begins what I hold to be the oldest subject-matter in The Nights,
  the apologues or fables proper; but I reserve further remarks for the
  terminal Essay. Lane has most objectionably thrown this and sundry of
  the following stories into a note (vol. ii., pp. 53-69).

Footnote 131:

  In beast stories generally when man appears he shows to disadvantage.

Footnote 132:

  Shakespeare's "stone bow" not Lane's "cross-bow" (ii. 53).

Footnote 133:

  The goad still used by the rascally Egyptian donkey-boy is a sharp
  nail at the end of a stick; and claims the special attention of
  societies for the protection of animals.

Footnote 134:

  "The most ungrateful of all voices surely is the voice of asses"
  (Koran xxxi. 18); and hence the "braying of hell" (Koran lxvii. 7).
  The vulgar still believe that the donkey brays when seeing the Devil.
  "The last animal which entered the Ark with Noah was the Ass to whose
  tail Iblis was clinging. At the threshold the ass seemed troubled and
  could enter no further when Noah said to him:—Fie upon thee! come in.
  But as the ass was still troubled and did not advance Noah cried:—Come
  in, though the Devil be with thee!; so the ass entered and with him
  Iblis. Thereupon Noah asked:—O enemy of Allah who brought thee into
  the Ark?; and Iblis answered:—Thou art the man, for thou saidest to
  the ass, come in though the Devil be with thee!" (Kitáb al-Unwán fi
  Makáid al-Niswán quoted by Lane ii. 54).

Footnote 135:

  Arab. "Rihl," a wooden saddle stuffed with straw and matting. In
  Europe the ass might complain that his latter end is the sausage. In
  England they say no man sees a dead donkey: I have seen dozens and,
  unfortunately, my own.

Footnote 136:

  The English reader will not forget Sterne's old mare. Even Al-Hariri,
  the prince of Arab rhetoricians, does not disdain to use "pepedit,"
  the effect being put for the cause—terror. But Mr. Preston (p. 285)
  and polite men translate by "fled in haste" the Arabic "farted for
  fear."

Footnote 137:

  This is one of the lucky signs and adds to the value of the beast.
  There are some fifty of these marks, some of them (like a spiral of
  hair in the breast which denotes that the rider is a cuckold) so
  ill-omened that the animal can be bought for almost nothing. Of course
  great attention is paid to colours, the best being the dark rich bay
  ("red" of Arabs) with black points, or the flea-bitten grey (termed
  Azrak = blue or Akhzar = green) which whitens with age. The worst are
  dun, cream coloured, piebald and black, which last are very rare. Yet
  according to the Mishkát al-Masábih (Lane 2, 54) Mohammed said, "The
  best horses are black (dark brown?) with white blazes (Arab.
  "Ghurrah") and upper lips; next, black with blaze and three white legs
  (bad, because white-hoofs are brittle): next, bay with white blaze and
  white fore and hind legs." He also said, "Prosperity is with sorrel
  horses;" and praised a sorrel with white forehead and legs; but he
  dispraised the "Shikál" which has white stockings (Arab. "Muhajjil")
  on alternate hoofs (_e.g._ right hind and left fore). The curious
  reader will consult Lady Anne Blunt's "Bedouin Tribes of the
  Euphrates, with some Account of the Arabs and their Horses" (1879);
  but he must remember that it treats of the frontier tribes. The late
  Major Upton also left a book, "Gleanings from the Desert of Arabia"
  (1881); but it is a marvellous production deriving _e.g._ Khayl (a
  horse generically) from Kohl or antimony (p. 275). What the Editor was
  dreaming of I cannot imagine. I have given some details concerning the
  Arab horse especially in Al-Yaman, among the Zú Mohammed, the Zú
  Husayn and the Banu Yam in Pilgrimage iii. 270. As late as Marco
  Polo's day they supplied the Indian market _viâ_ Aden; but the "Eye of
  Al-Yaman" has totally lost the habit of exporting horses.

Footnote 138:

  The shovel-iron which is the only form of spur.

Footnote 139:

  Used for the dromedary: the baggage-camel is haltered.

Footnote 140:

  Arab. "Harwalah," the _pas gymnastique_ affected when circumambulating
  the Ka'abah (Pilgrimage iii. 208).

Footnote 141:

  "This night" would be our "last night": the Arabs, I repeat, say
  "night and day," not "day and night."

Footnote 142:

  The vulgar belief is that man's fate is written upon his skull, the
  sutures being the writing.

Footnote 143:

  Koran ii. 191.

Footnote 144:

  Arab "Tasbíh" = saying, "Subhán' Allah." It also means a rosary
  (Egypt. Sebhah for Subhah) a string of 99 beads divided by a longer
  item into sets of three and much fingered by the would-appear pious.
  The professional devotee carries a string of wooden balls the size of
  pigeons' eggs.




                              THE HERMITS.


A certain hermit worshipped on a certain mountain, whither resorted a
pair of pigeons; and the worshipper was wont to make two parts of his
daily bread,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the worshipper was
wont to make two parts of his daily bread, eating one half himself and
giving the other to the pigeon pair. He also prayed for them both that
they might be blest with issue: so they increased and multiplied
greatly. Now they resorted only to that mountain where the hermit was,
and the reason of their foregathering with the holy man was their
assiduity in repeating "Praised be Allah!" for it is recounted that the
pigeon[145] sayeth in praise, "Praised be the Creator of all Creatures,
the Distributor of daily bread, the Builder of the heavens and
Dispreader of the earths!" And that couple ceased not to dwell together
in the happiest of life, they and their brood till the holy man died,
when the company of the pigeons was broken up and they dispersed among
the towns and villages and mountains. Now it is told that on a certain
other mountain there dwelt a shepherd, a man of piety and good sense and
chastity; and he had flocks of sheep which he tended, and he made his
living by their milk and wool. The mountain which gave him a home
abounded in trees and pasturage and also in wild beasts, but these had
no power over his flocks; so he ceased not to dwell upon that highland
in full security, taking no thought to the things of the world, by
reason of his beatitude and his assiduity in prayer and devotion, till
Allah ordained that he should fall sick with exceeding sickness.
Thereupon he betook himself to a cavern in the mountain and his sheep
used to go out in the morning to the pasturage and take refuge at night
in the cave. But Allah Almighty, being minded to try him and prove his
patience and his obedience, sent him one of His angels, who came in to
him in the semblance of a fair woman and sat down before him. When the
shepherd saw that woman seated before him, his flesh shuddered at her
with horripilation[146] and he said to her, "O thou woman, what was it
invited thee to this my retreat? I have no need of thee, nor is there
aught betwixt me and thee which calleth for thy coming in to me." Quoth
she, "O man, dost thou not behold my beauty and loveliness and the
fragrance of my breath; and knowest thou not the need women have of men
and men of women? So who shall forbid thee from me when I have chosen to
be near thee and desire to enjoy thy company? Indeed, I come to thee
willingly and do not withhold myself from thee, and near us there is
none whom we need fear; and I wish to abide with thee as long as thou
sojournest in this mountain, and be thy companion and thy true friend. I
offer myself to thee, for thou needest the service of woman: and if thou
have carnal connection with me and know me, thy sickness shall be turned
from thee and health return to thee; and thou wilt repent thee of the
past for having foresworn the company of women during the days that are
now no more. In very sooth, I give thee good advice: so incline to my
counsel and approach me." Quoth the shepherd, "Go out from me, O woman
deceitful and perfidious! I will not incline to thee nor approach thee.
I want not thy company nor wish for union with thee; he who coveteth the
coming life renounceth thee, for thou seducest mankind, those of past
time and those of present time. Allah the Most High lieth in wait for
His servants and woe unto him who is cursed with thy company!" Answered
she, "O thou that errest from the truth and wanderest from the way of
reason, turn thy face to me and look upon my charms and take thy full of
my nearness, as did the wise who have gone before thee. Indeed, they
were richer than thou in experience and sharper of wit; withal they
rejected not, as thou rejectest, the enjoyment of women; nay, they took
their pleasure of them and their company even as thou renouncest them,
and it did them no hurt in things temporal or things spiritual.
Wherefore do thou recede from thy resolve and thou shalt praise the
issue of thy case." Rejoined the shepherd, "All thou sayest I deny and
abhor, and all thou offerest I reject: for thou art cunning and
perfidious and there is no honesty in thee nor is there honour. How much
of foulness hidest thou under thy beauty, and how many a pious man hast
thou seduced from his duty and made his end penitence and perdition?
Avaunt from me, O thou who devotest thyself to corrupt others!"
Thereupon, he threw his goat's-hair cloak over his head that he might
not see her face, and betook himself to calling upon the name of his
Lord. And when the angel saw the excellence of his submission to the
Divine Will, he went out from him and ascended to heaven. Now hard by
the hermit's hill was a village wherein dwelt a pious man, who knew not
the other's station, till one night he heard in a dream a Voice saying
to him, "In such a place near to thee is a devout man: go thou to him
and be at his command!" So when morning dawned he set out to wend
thither, and what time the heat was grievous upon him, he came to a tree
which grew beside a spring of running water. So he sat down to rest in
the shadow of that tree and behold, he saw beasts and birds coming to
that fount to drink; but when they caught sight of the devotee sitting
there, they took fright and fled from before his face. Then said he,
"There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah! I rest not
here but to the hurt of these beasts and fowls." So he arose, blaming
himself and saying, "Verily my tarrying here this day hath wronged these
animals, and what excuse have I towards my Creator and the Creator of
these birds and beasts for that I was the cause of their flight from
their drink and their daily food and their place of pasturage? Alas for
my shame before my Lord on the day when He shall avenge the hornless
sheep on the sheep with horns!"[147] And he wept and began repeating
these couplets:—

 Now an, by Allah, unto man were fully known ✿ Why he is made, in
    careless sleep he ne'er would wone:
 First Death, then cometh Wake and dreadful Day of Doom ✿ Reproof with
    threats, sore terror, frightful malison.
 Bid we or else forbid we, all of us are like ✿ The Cave-companions[148]
    when at length their sleep was done.

Then he again wept for that he had driven the birds and beasts from the
spring by sitting down under the tree, and he fared on till he came to
the shepherd's dwelling and going in, saluted him. The shepherd returned
his salutation and embraced him, weeping and saying, "What hath brought
thee to this place where no man hath ever yet come to me." Quoth the
other devotee, "I saw in my sleep one who described to me this thy stead
and bade me repair to thee and salute thee: so I came, in obedience to
the commandment." The shepherd welcomed him, rejoicing in his company
and the twain abode upon that mountain, worshipping Allah with the best
of worship; and they ceased not serving their Lord in the cavern and
living upon the flesh and milk of their sheep, having clean put away
from them riches and children and what not, till the Certain, the
Inevitable became their lot. And this is the end of their story. Then
said King Shahyrar, "O Shahrazad, thou wouldst cause me to renounce my
kingdom and thou makest me repent of having slain so many women and
maidens. Hast thou any bird-stories?" "Yes," replied she, and began to
tell the

-----

Footnote 145:

  The pigeon is usually made to say, "Wahhidú Rabba-kumu 'llazi
  khalaka-kum, yaghfiru lakum zamba-kum" = "Unify (Assert the
  Unity of) your Lord who created you; so shall He forgive your
  sin!" As might be expected this "language" is differently
  interpreted. Pigeon-superstitions are found in all religions and
  I have noted (Pilgrimage iii. 218) how the Hindu deity of
  Destruction-reproduction, the third Person of their Triad, Shiva
  and his Spouse (or active Energy), are supposed to have dwelt at
  Meccah under the titles of Kapoteshwara (Pigeon-god) and
  Kapoteshí (Pigeon-goddess).

Footnote 146:

  I have seen this absolute horror of women amongst the Monks of the
  Coptic Convents.

Footnote 147:

  After the Day of Doom, when men's actions are registered, that of
  mutual retaliation will follow and all creatures (brutes included)
  will take vengeance on one another.

Footnote 148:

  The Comrades of the Cave, famous in the Middle Ages of Christianity
  (Gibbon chapt. xxxiii.), is an article of faith with Moslems, being
  part subject of chapter xviii., the Koranic Surah termed the Cave.
  These Ripp Van Winkle-tales begin with Endymion so famous amongst the
  Classics and Epimenides of Crete who slept fifty-seven years; and they
  extend to modern days as La Belle au Bois dormant. The Seven Sleepers
  are as many youths of Ephesus (six royal councillors and a shepherd,
  whose names are given on the authority of Ali); and, accompanied by
  their dog, they fled the persecutions of Dakianús (the Emperor Decius)
  to a cave near Tarsús in Natolia where they slept for centuries. The
  Caliph Mu'awiyah when passing the cave sent into it some explorers who
  were all killed by a burning wind. The number of the sleepers remains
  uncertain, according to the Koran (ibid. v. 21) three, five or seven;
  and their sleep lasted either three hundred or three hundred and nine
  years. The dog (ibid. v. 17) slept at the cave-entrance with paws
  outstretched and, according to the general, was called "Katmir" or
  "Kitmir;" but Al-Rakím (v. 8) is also applied to it by some. Others
  hold this to be the name of the valley or mountain and others of a
  stone or leaden tablet on which their names were engraved by their
  countrymen who built a chapel on the spot (v. 20). Others again make
  the Men of Al-Rakím distinct from the Cave-men, and believe (with
  Bayzáwi) that they were three youths who were shut up in a grotto by a
  rock-slip. Each prayed for help through the merits of some good deed:
  when the first had adjured Allah the mountain cracked till light
  appeared; at the second petition it split so that they saw one another
  and after the third it opened. However that may be, Kitmir is one of
  the seven favoured animals; the others being the Hudhud (hoopoe) of
  Solomon (Koran xxii. 20); the she-camel of Sálih (chapt. lxxxvii.);
  the cow of Moses which named the Second Surah; the fish of Jonah; the
  serpent of Eve; and the peacock of Paradise. For Koranic revelations
  of the Cave see the late Thomas Chenery (p. 414 The Assemblies of
  Al-Hariri: Williams and Norgate, 1870) who borrows from the historian
  Tabari.




                TALE OF THE WATER-FOWL AND THE TORTOISE.


It is related by truthful men, O King, that a certain bird flew high up
firmament-wards and presently lit on a rock in the midst of water which
was running. And as he sat there, behold, the current carried to him the
carcass of a man, and lodged it against the rock, for being swollen it
floated. The bird, which was a water-fowl, drew near and examining it,
found that it was the dead body of a son of Adam and saw in it sign of
spear and stroke of sword. So he said to himself, "I presume that this
man who hath been slain was some evil-doer, and that a company banded
themselves together against him and put him to death and were at peace
from him and his evil-doing." And as he continued marvelling at this,
suddenly the vultures and kites came down upon the carcass from all
sides and gat round it; which when the water-fowl saw, he feared with
sore affright and said, "I cannot abide here any longer." So he flew
away in quest of a place where he might wone, till that carcass should
come to an end and the birds of prey leave it; and he stayed not in his
flight, till he found a river with a tree in its midst. So he alighted
on the tree, troubled and distraught and sore grieved for departing from
his birth-place, and said to himself, "Verily sorrows cease not to
follow me: I was at my ease when I saw that carcass, and rejoiced
therein with much joy, saying, "This is a gift of daily bread which
Allah hath dealt to me: but my joy became annoy and my gladness turned
to sadness, for the ravenous birds, which are like lions, seized upon it
and tare it to pieces and came between me and my prize. So how can I
hope to be secure from misfortune in this world; or put any trust
therein? Indeed, the proverb saith:—The world is the dwelling of him who
hath no dwelling: he who hath no wits is cozened by it and entrusteth it
with his wealth and his child and his family and his folk; and whoso is
cozened ceaseth not to rely upon it, pacing proudly upon earth until he
is laid under earth and the dust is cast over his corpse by him who of
all men was dearest to him and nearest. But naught is better for
generous youth than patience under its cares and miseries. I have left
my native place and it is abhorrent to me to quit my brethren and
friends and loved ones." Now whilst he was thus musing lo! a
male-tortoise descended into the river and, approaching the water-fowl,
saluted him, saying, "O my lord, what hath exiled thee and driven thee
so far from thy place?" Replied the water-fowl, "The descent of enemies
thereon; for the wise brooketh not the neighbourhood of his foe; and how
well saith the poet:—

 Whenas on any land the oppressor doth alight, ✿ There's nothing left for
    those, that dwell therein, but flight.[149]

Quoth the tortoise, "If the matter be as thou sayest and the case as
thou describest, I will not leave thee nor cease to stand before thee,
that I may do thy need and fulfil thy service; for it is said that there
is no sorer desolation than that of him who is an exile, cut off from
friends and home; and it is also said that no calamity equalleth that of
severance from the good; but the best solace for men of understanding is
to seek companionship in strangerhood and be patient under sorrows and
adversity. Wherefore I hope that thou wilt approve of my company, for I
will be to thee a servant and a helper." Now when the water-fowl heard
the tortoise's words he answered, "Verily, thou art right in what thou
sayest for, by my life, I have found grief and pain in separation, what
while I have been parted from my place and sundered from my brethren and
friends; seeing that in severance is an admonition to him who will be
admonished and matter of thought for him who will take thought. If the
generous youth find not a companion to console him, weal is for ever cut
off from him and ill is eternally established with him; and there is
nothing for the sage but to solace himself in every event with brethren
and be constant in patience and endurance: indeed these two are
praiseworthy qualities, and both uphold one under calamities and
vicissitudes of the world and ward off startling sorrows and harrowing
cares, come what will." Rejoined the tortoise, "Beware of sorrow, for it
will spoil thy life and waste thy manliness." And the two gave not over
conversing till the bird said, "Never shall I cease fearing the shifts
of time and vicissitudes of events." When the tortoise heard this, he
came up to him and, kissing him between the eyes, said to him, "Never
may the company of the birds cease to be blest in thee and through thee,
and find wisdom in thy good counsel! How shalt thou be burdened with
care and harm?" And he went on to comfort the water-fowl and soothe his
terrors till he became re-assured. Then he flew to the place where the
carcass was and found on arriving there the birds of prey gone, and they
had left nothing of the body but bones; whereupon he returned to the
tortoise and acquainted him with the fact that the foe had disappeared
from his place, saying, "Know that of a truth I long for return
homewards to enjoy the society of my friends; for the sage cannot endure
separation from his native place." So they both went thither and found
naught to affright them; whereupon the water-fowl began repeating:—

 And haply whenas strait descends on lot of generous youth ✿ Right sore,
    with Allah only lies his issue from annoy:
 He's straitened, but full oft when rings and meshes straitest clip, ✿ He
    'scapes his strait and joyance finds, albe I see no joy.

So the twain abode in that island; and while the water-fowl was enjoying
a life of peace and gladness, suddenly Fate led thither a hungry falcon,
which drove its talons into the bird's belly and killed him, nor did
caution avail him when his term of life was ended. Now the cause of his
death was that he neglected to use the formula of praise, and it is said
that his form of adoration was as follows, "Praised be our Lord in that
He ordereth and ordaineth; and praised be our Lord in that He enricheth
and impoverisheth!" Such was the water-fowl's end and the tale of the
ravenous birds. And when it was finished quoth the Sultan, "O Shahrazad,
verily thou overwhelmest me with admonitions and salutary instances.
Hast thou any stories of beasts?" "Yes," answered she; and began to tell
the

-----

Footnote 149:

  These lines have occurred in Night cxlvi.: I quote Mr. Payne by way of
  variety.




                   TALE OF THE WOLF AND THE FOX.[150]


Know, O King, that a fox and a wolf once cohabited in the same den,
harbouring therein together by day and resorting thither by night; but
the wolf was cruel and oppressive to the fox. They abode thus awhile,
till it so befel that the fox exhorted the wolf to use gentle dealing
and leave off his ill deeds, saying, "If thou persist in thine
arrogance, belike Allah will give the Son of Adam power over thee, for
he is past master in guile and wile; and by his artifice he bringeth
down the birds from the firmament and he haleth the mighty fish forth of
the flood-waters: and he cutteth the mountain and transporteth it from
place to place. All this is of his craft and wiliness: wherefore do thou
betake thyself to equity and fair dealing and leave frowardness and
tyranny; and thou shalt fare all the better for it." But the wolf would
not accept his counsel and answered him roughly, saying, "What right
hast thou to speak of matters of weight and importance?" And he dealt
the fox a cuff that laid him senseless; but, when he revived, he smiled
in the wolf's face and, excusing himself for his unseemly speech,
repeated these two couplets:—

 If any sin I sinned, or did I aught ✿ In love of you, which hateful
    mischief wrought;
 My sin I sore repent and pardon sue; ✿ So give the sinner gift of pardon
    sought.

The wolf accepted his excuse and held his hand from further
ill-treatment, saying, "Speak not of whatso concerneth thee not, lest
thou hear what will please thee not." Answered the fox, "To hear is to
obey!"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


           Now when it was the Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the wolf to
the fox, "Speak not of whatso concerneth thee not, lest thou hear what
will please thee not!" Answered the fox, "To hear is to obey! I will
abstain henceforth from what pleaseth thee not; for the sage saith:—Have
a care that thou speak not of that whereof thou art not asked; leave
that which concerneth thee not for that which concerneth thee, and by no
means lavish good counsel on the wrongous, for they will repay it to
thee with wrong." And reflecting on the words of the wolf he smiled in
his face, but in his heart he meditated treachery against him and
privily said, "There is no help but that I compass the destruction of
this wolf." So he bore with his injurious usage, saying to himself,
"Verily insolence and evil-speaking are causes of perdition and cast
into confusion, and it is said:—The insolent is shent and the ignorant
doth repent; and whoso feareth, to him safety is sent: moderation
marketh the noble and gentle manners are of gains the grandest. It
behoveth me to dissemble with this tyrant and needs must he be cast
down." Then quoth he to the wolf, "Verily, the Lord pardoneth his erring
servant and relenteth towards him, if he confess his offences; and I am
a weak slave and have offended in presuming to counsel thee. If thou
knewest the pain that befel me by thy buffet, thou wouldst ken that even
the elephant could not stand against it nor endure it: but I complain
not of this blow's hurt, because of the joy and gladness that hath
betided me through it; for though it was to me exceeding sore yet was
its issue of the happiest. And with sooth saith the sage:—The blow of
the teacher is at first right hurtful, but the end of it is sweeter than
strained honey." Quoth the wolf, "I pardon thine offence and I cancel
thy fault; but beware of my force and avow thyself my thrall; for thou
hast learned my severity unto him who showeth his hostility!" Thereupon
the fox prostrated himself before the wolf, saying, "Allah lengthen thy
life and mayst thou never cease to overthrow thy foes!" And he stinted
not to fear the wolf and to wheedle him and dissemble with him. Now it
came to pass that one day, the fox went to a vineyard and saw a breach
in its walls; but he mistrusted it and said to himself, "Verily, for
this breach there must be some cause and the old saw saith:—Whoso seeth
a cleft in the earth and shunneth it not and is not wary in approaching
it, the same is self-deluded and exposeth himself to danger and
destruction. Indeed, it is well known that some folk make the figure of
a fox in their vineyards; nay, they even set before the semblance grapes
in plates, that foxes may see it and come to it and fall into perdition.
In very sooth I regard this breach as a snare and the proverb
saith:—Caution is one half of cleverness. Now prudence requireth that I
examine this breach and see if there be aught therein which may lead to
perdition; and coveting shall not make me cast myself into destruction."
So he went up to the hole and walked round it right warily, and lo! it
was a deep pit, which the owner of the vineyard had dug to trap therein
the wild beasts which laid waste his vines. Then he said to himself,
"Thou hast gained, for that thou hast refrained!"; and he looked and saw
that the hole was lightly covered with dust and matting. So he drew back
from it saying, "Praised be Allah that I was wary of it! I hope that my
enemy, the wolf, who maketh my life miserable, will fall into it; so
will the vineyard be left to me and I shall enjoy it alone and dwell
therein at peace." Saying thus, he shook his head and laughed a loud
laugh and began versifying:—

 Would Heaven I saw at this hour ✿ The Wolf fallen down in this well,
 He who anguisht my heart for so long, ✿ And garred me drain eisel and
    fell!
 Heaven grant after this I may live ✿ Free of Wolf for long fortunate
    spell,
 When I've rid grapes and vineyard of him, ✿ And in bunch-spoiling
    happily dwell.

His verse being finished he returned in haste to the wolf and said to
him, "Allah hath made plain for thee the way into the vineyard without
toil and moil. This is of thine auspicious fortune; so good luck to thee
and mayest thou enjoy the plentiful plunder and the profuse provaunt
which Allah hath opened up to thee without trouble!" Asked the wolf,
"What proof hast thou of what thou assertest?": and the fox answered, "I
went up to the vineyard and found that the owner was dead, having been
torn to pieces by wolves: so I entered the orchard and saw the fruit
shining upon the trees." The wolf doubted not the fox's report and his
gluttony gat hold of him; so he arose and repaired to the cleft, for
that greed blinded him; whilst the fox falling behind him lay as one
dead, quoting to the case the following couplet:—

 For Layla's[151] favour dost thou greed? But, bear in mind ✿ Greed is a
    yoke of harmful weight on neck of man.

And when the wolf had reached the breach the fox said, "Enter the
vineyard: thou art spared the trouble of climbing a ladder, for the
garden-wall is broken down, and with Allah it resteth to fulfil the
benefit." So the wolf went on walking and thought to enter the vineyard;
but when he came to the middle of the pit-covering he fell through;
whereupon the fox shook for joy and gladness; his care and concern left
him and he sang out for delight and improvised these couplets:—

 Fortune had mercy on the soul of me, ✿ And for my torments now shows
    clemency,
 Granting whatever gift my heart desired, ✿ And far removing what I
    feared to see:
 I will, good sooth, excuse her all her sins ✿ She sinned in days gone by
    and much sinned she:
 Yea, her injustice she hath shown in this, ✿ She whitened locks that
    were so black of blee:
 But now for this same wolf escape there's none, ✿ Of death and doom he
    hath full certainty.
 Then all the vineyard comes beneath my rule, ✿ I'll brook no partner
    who's so fond a fool.

Then the fox looked into the cleft and, seeing the wolf weeping in
repentance and sorrow for himself, wept with him; whereupon the wolf
raised his head to him and asked, "Is it of pity for me thou weepest, O
Father of the Fortlet[152]?" Answered the fox, "No, by Him who cast thee
into this pit! I weep for the length of thy past life and for regret
that thou didst not fall into the pit before this day; for hadst thou
done so before I foregathered with thee, I had rested and enjoyed
repose: but thou wast spared till the fulfilment of thine allotted term
and thy destined time." Then the wolf said to him as one jesting, "O
evil-doer, go to my mother and tell her what hath befallen me; haply she
may devise some device for my release." Replied the fox, "Of a truth
thou hast been brought to destruction by the excess of thy greed and
thine exceeding gluttony, since thou art fallen into a pit whence thou
wilt never escape. Knowest thou not the common proverb, O thou witless
wolf:—Whoso taketh no thought as to how things end, him shall Fate never
befriend nor shall be safe from perils wend." "O Reynard," quoth the
wolf, "thou wast wont to show me fondness and covet my friendliness and
fear the greatness of my strength. Hate me not rancorously because of
that I did with thee; for he who hath power and forgiveth, his reward
Allah giveth; even as saith the poet:—

 Sow kindness-seed in the unfittest stead; ✿ 'Twill not be wasted whereso
    thou shalt sow:
 For kindness albe buried long, yet none ✿ Shall reap the crop save sower
    who garred it grow."

Rejoined the fox, "O witlessest of beasts of prey and stupidest of the
wild brutes which the wolds over-stray! Hast thou forgotten thine
arrogance and insolence and tyranny, and thy disregarding the due of
good-fellowship and thy refusing to be advised by what the poet saith?—

 Wrong not thy neighbour e'en if thou have power; ✿ The wronger alway
    vengeance-harvest reaps:
 Thine eyes shall sleep, while bides the wronged on wake ✿ A-cursing
    thee; and Allah's eye ne'er sleeps."

"O Abu 'l-Hosayn," replied the wolf, "twit me not with my past sins; for
forgiveness is expected of the generous and doing kind deeds is the
truest of treasures. How well saith the poet:—

 Haste to do kindness while thou hast much power, ✿ For at all seasons
    thou hast not such power."

And he ceased not to humble himself before the fox and say, "Haply, thou
canst do somewhat to deliver me from destruction." Replied the fox, "O
thou wolf, thou witless, deluded, deceitful trickster! hope not for
deliverance, for this is but the just reward of thy foul dealing and its
due retaliation." Then he laughed with chops wide open and repeated
these two couplets:—

       No longer beguile me, ✿ Thou'lt fail of thy will!
       What can't be thou seekest; ✿ Thou hast sown so reap Ill!

Quoth the wolf, "O gentlest of ravenous beasts, I fain hold thee too
faithful to leave me in this pit." Then he wept and complained and, with
tears streaming from his eyes, recited these two couplets:—

 O thou whose favours have been out of compt, ✿ Whose gifts are more than
    may be numberèd!
 Never mischance befel me yet from time ✿ But that I found thy hand right
    fain to aid.

"O thou ninny foe," quoth the fox, "how art thou reduced to humiliation
and prostration and abjection and submission, after insolence and pride
and tyranny and arrogance! Verily, I kept company with thee only for
fear of thy fury and I cajoled thee without one hope of fair treatment
from thee: but now trembling is come upon thee and vengeance hath
overtaken thee." And he repeated these two couplets:—

 O thou who seekest innocence to 'guile, ✿ Thou'rt caught in trap of
    thine intentions vile:
 Now drain the draught of shamefullest mischance, ✿ And be with other
    wolves cut off, thou scroyle!

Replied the wolf, "O thou clement one, speak not with the tongue of
enemies nor look with their eyes; but fulfil the covenant of fellowship
with me, ere the time of applying remedy cease to be. Rise and make
ready to get me a rope and tie one end of it to a tree; then let the
other down to me, that I may lay hold of it, so haply I shall from this
my strait win free, and I will give thee all my hand possesseth of
wealth and fee." Quoth the fox, "Thou persistest in conversation
concerning what will not procure thy liberation. Hope not for this, for
thou shalt never, never get of me wherewithal to set thee at liberty;
but call to mind thy past misdeeds and the craft and perfidy thou didst
imagine against me and bethink thee how near thou art to being stoned to
death. For know that thy soul is about the world to quit and cease in it
and depart from it; so shalt thou to destruction hie and ill is the
abiding-place thou shalt aby!"[153] Rejoined the wolf, "O Father of the
Fortlet, hasten to return to amity and persist not in this rancorous
enmity. Know that whoso from ruin saveth a soul, is as if he had
quickened it and made it whole; and whoso saveth a soul alive, is as if
he had saved all mankind.[154] Follow not frowardness, for the wise
forbid it: and it were most manifest frowardness to leave me in this pit
draining the agony of death and dight to look upon mine own doom, whenas
it lieth in thy power to deliver me from my stowre. So do thy best to
release me and deal with me benevolently." Answered the fox, "O thou
base and barbarous wretch, I compare thee, because of the fairness of
thy professions and expressions, and the foulness of thy intentions and
thy inventions to the Falcon and the Partridge." Asked the wolf, "How
so?"; and the fox began to tell the


           _TALE OF THE FALCON[155] AND THE PARTRIDGE.[156]_

Once upon a time I entered a vineyard to eat of its grapes; and, whilst
so doing behold, I saw a falcon stoop upon a partridge and seize him;
but the partridge escaped from the seizer and, entering his nest, hid
himself there. The falcon followed apace and called out to him, saying,
"O imbecile, I saw thee an-hungered in the wold and took pity on thee;
so I picked up for thee some grain and took hold of thee that thou
mightest eat; but thou fleddest from me; and I wot not the cause of thy
flight, except it were to put upon me a slight. Come out, then, and take
the grain I have brought thee to eat and much good may it do thee, and
with thy health agree." When the partridge heard these words, he
believed and came out to him, whereupon the falcon struck his talons
into him and seized him. Cried the partridge, "Is this that which thou
toldest me thou hadst brought me from the wold, and whereof thou badest
me eat, saying:—Much good may it do thee, and with thy health agree?
Thou hast lied to me, and may Allah cause what thou eatest of my flesh
to be a killing poison in thy maw!" So when the falcon had eaten the
partridge, his feathers fell off and his strength failed and he died on
the spot. Know, then, O wolf! (pursued the fox), "that he who diggeth
for his brother a pit himself soon falleth into it, and thou first
deceivedst me in mode unfit." Quoth the wolf, "Spare me this discourse
nor saws and tales enforce, and remind me not of my former ill course,
for sufficeth me the sorry plight I endure perforce, seeing that I am
fallen into a place, in which even my foe would pity me, much more a
true friend. Rather find some trick to deliver me and be thou thereby my
saviour. If this cause thee trouble, remember that a true friend will
undertake the sorest travail for his true friend's sake and will risk
his life to deliver him from evil; and indeed it hath been said:—A leal
friend is better than a real brother. So if thou stir thyself to save me
and I be saved, I will forsure gather thee such store as shall be a
provision for thee against want however sore; and truly I will teach
thee rare tricks whereby to open whatso bounteous vineyards thou please
and strip the fruit-laden trees." Rejoined the fox, laughing, "How
excellent is what the learned say of him who aboundeth in ignorance like
unto thee!" Asked the wolf, "What do the wise men say?" And the fox
answered, "They have observed that the gross of body are gross of mind,
far from intelligence and nigh unto ignorance. As for thy saying, O thou
stupid, cunning idiot! that a true friend should undertake sore travail
for his true friend's sake, it is sooth as thou sayest, but tell me, of
thine ignorance and poverty of intelligence, how can I be a true friend
to thee, considering thy treachery. Dost thou count me thy true friend?
Nay, I am thy foe who joyeth in thy woe; and couldst thou trow it, this
word were sorer to thee than slaughter by shot of shaft. As for thy
promise to provide me a store against want however sore and teach me
tricks, to plunder whatso bounteous vineyards I please, and spoil
fruit-laden trees, how cometh it, O guileful traitor, that thou knowest
not a wile to save thyself from destruction? How far art thou from
profiting thyself and how far am I from accepting thy counsel! If thou
have any tricks, make shift for thyself to save thee from the risk,
wherefrom I pray Allah to make thine escape far distant! So look, O
fool, if there be any trick with thee; and therewith save thyself from
death ere thou lavish instruction upon thy neighbours. But thou art like
a certain man attacked by a disease, who went to another diseased with
the same disease, and said to him:—Shall I heal thee of thy disease?
Replied the sick man, Why dost thou not begin by healing thyself? So he
left him and went his way. And thou, O ignorant wolf, art like this; so
stay where thou art and under what hath befallen thee be of good heart!"
When the wolf heard what the fox said, he knew that from him he had no
hope of favour; so he wept for himself, saying, "Verily, I have been
heedless of my weal; but if Allah deliver me from this ill I will
assuredly repent of my arrogance towards those who are weaker than I,
and will wear woollens[157] and go upon the mountains, celebrating the
praises of Almighty Allah and fearing His punishment. And I will
withdraw from the company of other wild beasts and forsure will I feed
the poor fighters for the Faith." Then he wept and wailed, till the
heart of the fox softened when he heard his humble words and his
professions of penitence for his past insolence and arrogance. So he
took pity upon him and sprang up joyfully and, going to the brink of the
breach, squatted down on his hind quarters and let his tail hang in the
hole; whereupon the wolf arose and putting out his paw, pulled the fox's
tail, so that he fell down in the pit with him. Then said the wolf, "O
fox of little mercy, why didst thou exult in my misery, thou that wast
my companion and under my dominion? Now thou art fallen into the pit
with me and retribution hath soon overtaken thee. Verily, the sages have
said:—If one of you reproach his brother with sucking the dugs of a
bitch, he also shall suck her. And how well quoth the poet:—

 When Fortune weighs heavy on some of us, ✿ And makes camel kneel by some
    other one,[158]
 Say to those who rejoice in our ills:—Awake! ✿ The rejoicer shall suffer
    as we have done!

And death in company is the best of things;[159] wherefore I will
certainly and assuredly hasten to slay thee ere thou see me slain." Said
the fox to himself, "Ah! Ah! I am fallen into the snare with this
tyrant, and my case calleth for the use of craft and cunning; for indeed
it is said that a woman fashioneth her jewellery for the day of display,
and quoth the proverb:—I have not kept thee, O my tear, save for the
time when distress draweth near. And unless I make haste to circumvent
this prepotent beast I am lost without recourse; and how well saith the
poet:—

 Make thy game by guile, for thou'rt born in a Time ✿ Whose sons are
    lions in forest lain;
 And turn on the leat[160] of thy knavery ✿ That the mill of subsistence
    may grind thy grain;
 And pluck the fruits or, if out of reach, ✿ Why, cram thy maw with the
    gras on plain."

Then said the fox to the wolf, "Hasten not to slay me, for that is not
the way to pay me and thou wouldst repent it, O thou valiant wild beast,
lord of force and exceeding prowess! An thou accord delay and consider
what I shall say, thou wilt ken what purpose I proposed; but if thou
hasten to kill me it will profit thee naught and we shall both die in
this very place." Answered the wolf "O thou wily trickster, what garreth
thee hope to work my deliverance and thine own, that thou prayest me to
grant thee delay? Speak and propound to me thy purpose." Replied the
fox, "As for the purpose I proposed, it was one which deserveth that
thou guerdon me handsomely for it; for when I heard thy promises and thy
confessions of thy past misdeeds and regrets for not having earlier
repented and done good; and when I heard thee vowing, shouldst thou
escape from this strait, to leave harming thy fellows and others;
forswear the eating of grapes and of all manner fruits; devote thyself
to humility; cut thy claws and break thy dog-teeth; don woollens and
offer thyself as an offering to Almighty Allah, then indeed I had pity
upon thee, for true words are the best words. And although before I had
been anxious for thy destruction, whenas I heard thy repenting and thy
vows of amending should Allah vouchsafe to save thee, I felt bound to
free thee from this thy present plight. So I let down my tail, that thou
mightest grasp it and be saved. Yet wouldest thou not quit thy wonted
violence and habit of brutality; nor soughtest thou to save thyself by
fair means, but thou gavest me a tug which I thought would sever body
from soul, so that thou and I are fallen into the same place of distress
and death. And now there is but one thing can save us and, if thou
accept it of me, we shall both escape; and after it behoveth thee to
fulfil the vows thou hast made and I will be thy veritable friend."
Asked the wolf, "What is it thou proposest for mine acceptance?"
Answered the fox, "It is that thou stand up at full height till I come
nigh on a level with the surface of the earth. Then will I give a spring
and reach the ground; and, when out of the pit, I will bring thee what
thou mayst lay hold of, and thus shalt thou make thine escape." Rejoined
the wolf, "I have no faith in thy word, for sages have said:—Whoso
practiseth trust in the place of hate, erreth; and:—Whoso trusteth in
the untrustworthy is a dupe; he who re-trieth him who hath been tried
shall reap repentance and his days shall go waste; and he who cannot
distinguish between case and case, giving each its due, and assigneth
all the weight to one side, his luck shall be little and his miseries
shall be many. How well saith the poet:—

 Let thy thought be ill and none else but ill; ✿ For suspicion is best of
    the worldling's skill:
 Naught casteth a man into parlous place ✿ But good opinion and (worse)
    good-will!

And the saying of another:—

 Be sure all are villains and so bide safe; ✿ Who lives wide awake on few
    Ills shall light:
 Meet thy foe with smiles and a smooth fair brow, ✿ And in heart raise a
    host for the battle dight!

And that of yet another:[161]—

 He thou trusted most is thy worst unfriend; ✿ 'Ware all and take heed
    with whom thou wend:
 Fair opinion of Fortune is feeble sign; ✿ So believe her ill and her
    Ills perpend!"

Quoth the fox, "Verily mistrust and ill opinion of others are not to be
commended in every case; nay trust and confidence are the
characteristics of a noble nature and the issue thereof is freedom from
stress of fear. Now it behoveth thee, O thou wolf, to devise some device
for thy deliverance from this thou art in, and our escape will be better
to us both than our death: so quit thy distrust and rancour; for if thou
trust in me one of two things will happen; either I shall bring thee
something whereof to lay hold and escape from this case, or I shall
abandon thee to thy doom. But this thing may not be, for I am not safe
from falling into some such strait as this thou art in, which, indeed,
would be fitting punishment of perfidy. Of a truth the adage
saith:—Faith is fair and faithlessness is foul.[162] So it behoveth thee
to trust in me, for I am not ignorant of the haps and mishaps of the
world; and delay not to contrive some device for our deliverance, as the
case is too close to allow further talk." Replied the wolf, "For all my
want of confidence in thy fidelity, verily I knew what was in thy mind
and that thou wast moved to deliver me whenas thou heardest my
repentance, and I said to myself:—If what he asserteth be true, he will
have repaired the ill he did; and if false, it resteth with the Lord to
requite him. So, look'ee, I have accepted thy proposal and, if thou
betray me, may thy traitorous deed be the cause of thy destruction!"
Then the wolf stood bolt upright in the pit and, taking the fox upon his
shoulders, raised him to the level of the ground, whereupon Reynard gave
a spring from his back and lighted on the surface of the earth. When he
found himself safely out of the cleft he fell down senseless and the
wolf said to him, "O my friend! neglect not my case and delay not to
deliver me." The fox laughed with a loud haw-haw and replied, "O dupe,
naught threw me into thy hands save my laughing at thee and making mock
of thee; for in good sooth when I heard thee profess repentance, mirth
and gladness seized me and I frisked about and made merry and danced, so
that my tail hung low into the pit and thou caughtest hold of it and
draggedst me down with thee. And the end was that Allah Almighty
delivered me from thy power. Then why should I be other than a helper in
thy destruction, seeing that thou art of Satan's host? I dreamt
yesterday that I danced at thy wedding and I told my dream to an
interpreter who said to me:—Verily thou shalt fall into imminent deadly
danger and thou shalt escape therefrom. So now I know that my falling
into thy hand and my escape are the fulfilment of my dream, and thou, O
imbecile, knowest me for thy foe; so how couldest thou, of thine
ignorance and unintelligence, nurse desire of deliverance at my hands,
after all thou hast heard of harsh words from me; and wherefore should I
attempt thy salvation whenas the sages have said:—In the death of the
wicked is rest for mankind and a purge for the earth? But, were it not
that I fear to bear more affliction by keeping faith with thee than the
sufferings which follow perfidy, I had done mine endeavour to save
thee." When the wolf heard this, he bit his forehand for
repentance.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


            NOW WHEN IT WAS THE HUNDRED AND FIFTIETH NIGHT,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the wolf
heard the fox's words he bit his forehand for repentance. Then he gave
the fox fair words, but this availed naught and he was at his wits' end
for what to do; so he said to him in soft, low accents, "Verily, you
tribe of foxes are the most pleasant people in point of tongue and the
subtlest in jest, and this is but a joke of thine; but all times are not
good for funning and jesting." The fox replied, "O ignoramus, in good
sooth jesting hath a limit which the jester must not overpass; and deem
not that Allah will again give thee possession of me after having once
delivered me from thy hand." Quoth the wolf, "It behoveth thee to
compass my release, by reason of our brotherhood and good fellowship;
and, if thou release me, I will assuredly make fair thy recompense."
Quoth the fox, "Wise men say:—Take not to brother the wicked fool, for
he will disgrace thee in lieu of gracing thee; nor take to brother the
liar for, if thou do good, he will conceal it; and if thou do ill he
will reveal it. And again, the sages have said:—There is help for
everything but death: all may be warded off, except Fate. As for the
reward thou declarest to be my due from thee, I compare thee herein with
the serpent which fled from the charmer.[163] A man saw her affrighted
and said to her:—What aileth thee, O thou serpent? Replied she, I am
fleeing from the snake-charmer, for he seeketh to trap me and, if thou
wilt save me and hide me with thee, I will make fair thy reward and do
thee all manner of kindness. So he took her, incited thereto by lust for
the recompense and eager to find favour with Heaven, and set her in his
breast-pocket. Now when the charmer had passed and had wended his way
and the serpent had no longer any cause to fear, he said to her:—Where
is the reward thou didst promise me? Behold, I have saved thee from that
thou fearedest and soughtest to fly. Replied she:—Tell me in what limb
or in what place shall I strike thee with my fangs, for thou knowest we
exceed not that recompense. So saying, she gave him a bite whereof he
died. And I liken thee, O dullard, to the serpent in her dealings with
that man. Hast thou not heard what the poet saith?—

 Trust not to man when thou hast raised his spleen ✿ And wrath, nor that
    'twill cool do thou misween:
 Smooth feels the viper to the touch and glides ✿ With grace, yet hides
    she deadliest venene."

Quoth the wolf, "O thou glib of gab and fair of face, ignore not my case
and men's fear of me; and well thou weetest how I assault the strongly
walled place and uproot the vines from base. Wherefore, do as I bid
thee, and stand before me even as the thrall standeth before his lord."
Quoth the fox, "O stupid dullard who seekest a vain thing, I marvel at
thy folly and thy front of brass in that thou biddest me serve thee and
stand up before thee as I were a slave bought with thy silver; but soon
shalt thou see what is in store for thee, in the way of cracking thy
sconce with stones and knocking out thy traitorous dog-teeth." So saying
the fox clomb a hill overlooking the vineyard and standing there,
shouted out to the vintagers; nor did he give over shouting till he woke
them and they, seeing him, all came up to him in haste. He stood his
ground till they drew near him and close to the pit wherein was the
wolf; and then he turned and fled. So the folk looked into the cleft
and, spying the wolf, set to pelting him with heavy stones, and they
stinted not smiting him with stones and sticks, and stabbing him with
spears, till they killed him and went away. Thereupon the fox returned
to that cleft and, standing over the spot where his foe had been slain,
saw the wolf dead: so he wagged his head for very joyance and began to
recite these couplets:—

 Fate the Wolf's soul snatched up from worldly stead; ✿ Far be from bliss
    his soul that perishèd!
 Abú Sirhán![164] how sore thou sought'st my death; ✿ Thou, burnt this
    day in fire of sorrow dread:
 Thou'rt fallen into pit, where all who fall ✿ Are blown by Death-blast
    down among the dead.

Thenceforward the aforesaid fox abode alone in the vineyard unto the
hour of his death secure and fearing no hurt. And such are the
adventures of the wolf and the fox. But men also tell a

-----

Footnote 150:

  The wolf (truly enough to nature) is the wicked man without redeeming
  traits; the fox of Arab folk-lore is the cunning man who can do good
  on occasion. Here the latter is called "Sa'alab" which may, I have
  noted, mean the jackal; but further on "Father of a Fortlet" refers
  especially to the fox. Herodotus refers to the gregarious Canis Aureus
  when he describes Egyptian wolves as being "not much bigger than
  foxes" (ii. 67). Canon Rawlinson, in his unhappy version, does not
  perceive that the Halicarnassian means the jackal and blunders about
  the hyena.

Footnote 151:

  The older "Leila" or "Leyla": it is a common name and is here applied
  to woman in general. The root is evidently "layl" = nox, with,
  probably, the idea, "She walks in beauty like the night."

Footnote 152:

  Arab. Abu 'l-Hosayn; his hole being his fort (Unexplored Syria, ii.
  18).

Footnote 153:

  A Koranic phrase often occurring.

Footnote 154:

  Koran v. 35.

Footnote 155:

  Arab. "Bází," Pers. "Báz" (here Richardson is wrong _s. v._); a term
  to a certain extent generic, but specially used for the noble
  Peregrine (_F. Peregrinator_) whose tiercel is the Sháhín (or "Royal
  Bird"). It is sometimes applied to the goshawk (_Astur palumbarius_)
  whose proper title, however, is Shah-báz (King-hawk). The Peregrine
  extends from the Himalayas to Cape Comorin and the best come from the
  colder parts: in Iceland I found that the splendid white bird was
  sometimes trapped for sending to India. In Egypt "Bazi" is applied to
  the kite or buzzard and "Hidyah" (a kite) to the falcon (Burckhardt's
  Prov. 159, 581 and 602). Burckhardt translates "Hidáyah," the Egyptian
  corruption, by "an ash-grey falcon of the smaller species common
  throughout Egypt and Syria."

Footnote 156:

  Arab. "Hijl," the bird is not much prized in India because it feeds on
  the roads. For the Shinnár (caccabis) or magnificent partridge of
  Midian as large as a pheasant, see "Midian Revisited" ii. 18.

Footnote 157:

  Arab. "Súf;" hence "Súfi," = (etymologically) one who wears woollen
  garments, a devotee, a Santon; from σοφὸς = wise; from σαφής = pure,
  or from Safá = he was pure. This is not the place to enter upon such a
  subject as "Tasawwuf," or Sufism; that singular reaction from arid
  Moslem realism and materialism, that immense development of gnostic
  and Neo-platonic transcendentalism which is found only germinating in
  the Jewish and Christian creeds. The poetry of Omar-i-Khayyám, now
  familiar to English readers, is a fair specimen; and the student will
  consult the last chapter of the Dabistan "On the religion of the
  Sufiahs." The first Moslem Sufi was Abu Háshim of Kufah, ob. A. H. 150
  = 767, and the first Convent of Sufis called "Takiyah" (Pilgrimage i.
  124) was founded in Egypt by Saladin the Great.

Footnote 158:

  _i.e._ when she encamps with a favourite for the night.

Footnote 159:

  The Persian proverb is "Marg-i-amboh jashni dárad"—death in a crowd is
  as good as a feast.

Footnote 160:

  Arab. "Kanát," the subterranean water-course called in Persia
  "Kyáriz." Lane (ii. 66) translates it "brandish around the spear
  (Kanát is also a cane-lance) of artifice," thus making rank nonsense
  of the line. Al-Hariri uses the term in the Ass. of the Banu Haram
  where "Kanát" may be a pipe or bamboo laid underground.

Footnote 161:

  From Al-Tughrái, the author of the Lámiyat al-Ajam, the "Lay of the
  Outlander;" a Kasidah (Ode) rhyming in Lám (the letter "l" being the
  ráwi or binder). The student will find a new translation of it by Mr.
  J. W. Redhouse and Dr. Carlyle's old version (No. liii.) in Mr.
  Clouston's "Arabian Poetry." Muyid al-Din al-Hasan Abu Ismail (nat.
  Ispahan ob. Baghdad A.H. 182) derived his surname from the Tughrá,
  cypher or flourish (over the "Bismillah" in royal and official papers)
  containing the name of the prince. There is an older "Lamiyat al-Arab"
  a pre-Islamitic L-poem by the "brigand-poet" Shanfara, of whom Mr. W.
  G. Palgrave has given a most appreciative account in his "Essays on
  Eastern Questions," noting the indomitable self-reliance and the
  absolute individualism of a mind defying its age and all around it.
  Al-Hariri quotes from both.

Footnote 162:

  The words of the unfortunate Azízah, vol. ii., p. 323.

Footnote 163:

  Arab. "Háwí" = a juggler who plays tricks with snakes: he is mostly a
  Gypsy. The "recompense" the man expects is the golden treasure which
  the ensorcelled snake is supposed to guard. This idea is as old as the
  Dragon in the Garden of the Hesperides—and older.

Footnote 164:

  The "Father of going out (to prey) by morning"; for dawn is called
  Zanab Sirhán, the Persian Dum-i-gurg = wolf's tail, _i.e._ the first
  brush of light; the Zodiacal Light shown in morning. Sirhán is a
  nickname of the wolf—Gaunt Grim or Gaffer Grim, the German Isengrin or
  Eisengrinus (icy grim or iron grim) whose wife is Hersent, as Richent
  or Hermeline is Mrs. Fox. In French we have lopez, luppe, leu, _e.g._

                       Venant à la queue, leu, leu,

  _i.e._ going in Indian file. Hence the names D'Urfé and Saint-Loup. In
  Scandinavian, the elder sister of German, Ulf and in German (where the
  Jews were forced to adopt the name) Wolff whence "Guelph." He is also
  known to the Arabs as the "sire of a she-lamb," the figure metonymy
  called "Kunyat bi 'l-Zidd" (lucus a non lucendo), a patronymic or
  by-name given for opposition and another specimen of "inverted
  speech."




               TALE OF THE MOUSE AND THE ICHNEUMON.[165]


A mouse and an ichneumon once dwelt in the house of a peasant who was
very poor; and when one of his friends sickened, the doctor prescribed
him husked sesame. So the hind sought of one of his comrades sesame to
be husked by way of healing the sick man; and, when a measure thereof
was given to him, he carried it home to his wife and bade her dress it.
So she steeped it and husked it and spread it out to dry. Now when the
ichneumon saw the grain, she went up to it and fell to carrying it away
to her hole, and she toiled all day, till she had borne off the most of
it. Presently, in came the peasant's wife and, seeing much of the grain
gone, stood awhile wondering; after which she sat down to watch and find
out who might be the intruder and make him account for her loss. After a
while, out crept the ichneumon to carry off the grain as was her wont,
but spying the woman seated there, knew that she was on the watch for
her and said in her mind, "Verily, this affair is like to end blameably;
and sore I fear me this woman is on the look-out for me, and Fortune is
no friend to who attend not to issue and end: so there is no help for it
but that I do a fair deed, whereby I may manifest my innocence and wash
out all the ill-doings I have done." So saying, she began to take the
sesame out of her hole and carry it forth and lay it back upon the rest.
The woman stood by and, seeing the ichneumon do thus, said to herself,
"Verily this is not the cause of our loss, for she bringeth it back from
the hole of him who stole it and returneth it to its place; and of a
truth she hath done us a kindness in restoring us the sesame, and the
reward of those who do us good is that we do them the like good. It is
clear that it is not she who stole the grain; but I will not cease my
watching till he fall into my hands and I find out who is the thief."
The ichneumon guessed what was in her mind, so she went to the mouse and
said to her, "O my sister, there is no good in one who observeth not the
claims of neighbourship and who showeth no constancy in friendship." The
mouse replied, "Even so, O my friend, and I delight in thee and in thy
neighbourhood; but what be the motive of this speech?" Quoth the
ichneumon, "The house-master hath brought home sesame and hath eaten his
fill of it, he and his family, and hath left much; every living being
hath eaten of it and, if thou take of it in thy turn, thou art worthier
thereof than any other." This pleased the mouse and she squeaked for joy
and danced and frisked her ears and tail, and greed for the grain
deluded her; so she rose at once and issuing forth of her home, saw the
sesame husked and dry, shining with whiteness, and the woman sitting at
watch and ward. The mouse, taking no thought to the issue of the affair
(for the woman had armed herself with a cudgel), and unable to contain
herself, ran up to the sesame and began turning it over and eating of
it; whereupon the woman smote her with that club and cleft her head: so
the cause of her destruction were her greed and heedlessness of
consequences. Then said the Sultan, "O Shahrazad, by Allah! this be a
goodly parable! Say me, hast thou any story bearing upon the beauty of
true friendship and the observance of its duty in time of distress and
rescuing from destruction?" Answered she:—Yes, it hath reached me that
they tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 165:

  Arab. Bint 'Arús = daughter of the bridegroom, the Hindustani Mungus
  (vulg. Mongoose); a well-known weasel-like rodent often kept tame in
  the house to clear it of vermin. It is supposed to know an antidote
  against snake-poison, as the weasel eats rue before battle (Pliny x.
  84; xx. 13). In Modern Egypt this viverra is called "Kitt (or Katt)
  Far'aun" = Pharaoh's cat: so the Percnopter becomes Pharaoh's hen and
  the unfortunate (?) King has named a host of things, alive and dead.
  It was worshipped and mummified in parts of Ancient Egypt _e.g._
  Heracleopolis, on account of its antipathy to serpents and because it
  was supposed to destroy the crocodile, a feat which Ælian and others
  have overloaded with fable. It has also a distinct antipathy to cats.
  The ichneumon as a pet becomes too tame and will not leave its master:
  when enraged it emits an offensive stench. I brought home for the
  Zoological Gardens a Central African specimen prettily barred.
  Burckhardt (Prov. 455) quotes a line:—

                 Rakas 'Ibn Irsin wa zamzama 'l-Nimsu,
                 (Danceth Ibn Irs whileas Nims doth sing)

  and explains Nims by ichneumon and Ibn Irs as a "species of small
  weasel, or ferret, very common in Egypt: it comes into the houses,
  feeds upon meat, is of gentle disposition, although not domesticated
  and full of gambols and frolic."




                       THE CAT[166] AND THE CROW.


Once upon a time, a crow and a cat lived in brotherhood; and one day as
they were together under a tree, behold, they spied a leopard making
towards them, and they were not aware of his approach till he was close
upon them. The crow at once flew up to the tree-top; but the cat abode
confounded and said to the crow, "O my friend, hast thou no device to
save me, even as all my hope is in thee?" Replied the crow, "Of very
truth it behoveth brethren, in case of need, to cast about for a device
when peril overtaketh them, and how well saith the poet!—

 A friend in need is he who, ever true, ✿ For thy well-doing would
    himself undo:
 One who when Fortune gars us parting rue ✿ Victimeth self reunion to
    renew."

Now hard by that tree were shepherds with their dogs; so the crow flew
towards them and smote the face of the earth with his wings, cawing and
crying out. Furthermore he went up to one of the dogs and flapped his
wings in his face and flew up a little way, whilst the dog ran after him
thinking to catch him. Presently, one of the shepherds raised his head
and saw the bird flying near the ground and lighting alternately; so he
followed him, and the crow ceased not flying just high enough to save
himself and to throw out the dogs; and yet tempting them to follow for
the purpose of tearing him to pieces. But as soon as they came near him,
he would fly up a little; and so at last he brought them to the tree,
under which was the leopard. And when the dogs saw him they rushed upon
him and he turned and fled. Now the leopard thought to eat the cat who
was saved by the craft of his friend the crow. This story, O King,
showeth that the friendship of the Brothers of Purity[167] delivereth
and saveth from difficulties and from falling into mortal dangers. And
they also tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 166:

  Arab. "Sinnaur" (also meaning a prince). The common name is Kitt which
  is pronounced Katt or Gatt; and which Ibn Dorayd pronounces a foreign
  word (Syriac?). Hence, despite Freitag, Catus (which Isidore derives
  from catare, to look for) Κάττα or Τάτα, gatto, chat, cat, an animal
  unknown to the Classics of Europe who used the _mustela_ or _putorius
  vulgaris_ and different species of viverræ. The Egyptians, who kept
  the cat to destroy vermin, especially snakes, called it Mau, Mai, Miao
  (onomatopoetic): this descendant of the _Felis maniculata_ originated
  in Nubia; and we know from the mummy pits and Herodotus that it was
  the same in species as ours. The first portraits of the cat are on the
  monuments of "Beni Hasan," B.C. 2500. I have ventured to derive the
  familiar "Puss" from the Arab. "Biss" (fem. "Bissah"), which is a
  congener of Pasht (Diana), the cat-faced goddess of Bubastis
  (Pi-Pasht), now Zagázig. Lastly "tabby (brindled)-cat" is derived from
  the Attábi (Prince Attab's) quarter at Baghdad where watered silks
  were made. It is usually attributed to the Tibbie, Tibalt, Tybalt,
  Thibert or Tybert (who is also executioner), various forms of Theobald
  in the old Beast Epic; as opposed to Gilbert the gib-cat, either a
  tom-cat or a gibbed (castrated) cat.

Footnote 167:

  Arab. "Ikhwán al-Safá," a popular term for virtuous friends who
  perfectly love each other in all purity: it has also a mystic meaning.
  Some translate it "Brethren of Sincerity," and hold this brotherhood
  to be Moslem Freemasons, a mere fancy (see the Mesnevi of Mr.
  Redhouse, Trubner 1881). There is a well-known Hindustani book of this
  name printed by Prof. Forbes in Persian character and translated by
  Platts and Eastwick.




                         THE FOX AND THE CROW.


A Fox once dwelt in a cave of a certain mountain and, as often as a cub
was born to him and grew stout, he would eat the young one, for he had
died of hunger, had he instead of so doing left the cub alive and bred
it by his side and preserved and cherished his issue. Yet was this very
grievous to him. Now on the crest of the same mountain a crow had made
his nest, and the fox said to himself, "I have a mind to set up a
friendship with this crow and make a comrade of him, that he may help me
to my daily bread; for he can do in such matters what I cannot." So he
drew near the crow's home and, when he came within sound of speech, he
saluted him and said, "O my neighbour, verily a true-believer hath two
claims upon his true-believing neighbour, the right of neighbourliness
and the right of Al-Islam, our common faith; and know, O my friend, that
thou art my neighbour and thou hast a claim upon me which it behoveth me
to observe, the more that I have long been thy neighbour. Also, there be
implanted in my breast a store of love to thee, which biddeth me speak
thee fair and obligeth me to solicit thy brothership. What sayest thou
in reply?" Answered the crow, "Verily, the truest speech is the best
speech; and haply thou speakest with thy tongue that which is not in thy
heart; so I fear lest thy brotherhood be only of the tongue, outward,
and thy enmity be in the heart, inward; for that thou art the Eater and
I the Eaten, and faring apart were apter to us than friendship and
fellowship. What, then, maketh thee seek that which thou mayst not gain
and desire what may not be done, seeing that I be of the bird-kind and
thou be of the beast-kind? Verily, this thy proffered brotherhood[168]
may not be made, neither were it seemly to make it." Rejoined the fox,
"Of a truth whoso knoweth the abiding-place of excellent things, maketh
better choice in what he chooseth therefrom, so perchance he may
advantage his brethren; and indeed I should love to wone near thee and I
have sued for thine intimacy, to the end that we may help each other to
our several objects; and success shall surely wait upon our amity. I
have a many tales of the goodliness of true friendship, which I will
relate to thee if thou wish the relating." Answered the crow, "Thou hast
my leave to let me hear thy communication; so tell thy tale, and relate
it to me that I may hearken to it and weigh it and judge of thine intent
thereby." Rejoined the fox, "Hear then, O my friend, that which is told
of a flea and a mouse and which beareth out what I have said to thee."
Asked the crow, "How so?" and the fox answered:—They tell this tale of


                       _THE FLEA AND THE MOUSE_.

Once upon a time a mouse dwelt in the house of a merchant who owned much
merchandise and great store of monies. One night, a flea took shelter in
the merchant's carpet-bed and, finding his body soft, and being thirsty
drank of his blood. The merchant was awakened by the smart of the bite
and sitting up called to his slave-girls and serving men. So they
hastened to him and, tucking up their sleeves, fell to searching for the
flea; but as soon as the bloodsucker was aware of the search, he turned
to flee and coming on the mouse's home, entered it. When the mouse saw
him, she said to him, "What bringeth thee in to me, thou who art not of
my nature nor of my kind, and who canst not be assured of safety from
violence or of not being expelled with roughness and ill usage?"
Answered the flea, "Of a truth, I took refuge in thy dwelling to save me
from slaughter; and I have come to thee seeking thy protection and on
nowise coveting thy house; nor shall any mischief betide thee from me to
make thee leave thy home. Nay, I hope right soon to repay thy favours to
me with all good and then shalt thou see and praise the issue of my
words." And when the mouse heard the speech of the flea,——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Hundred and Fifty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the mouse
heard the words of the flea, she said, "If the case be as thou dost
relate and describe, then be at thine ease here; for naught shall befal
thee save the rain of peace and safety; nor shall aught betide thee but
what shall joy thee and shall not annoy thee, nor shall it annoy me. I
will lavish on thee my affections without stint; and do not thou regret
having lost the merchant's blood nor lament for thy subsistence from
him, but be content with what sustenance thou canst obtain; for indeed
that is the safer for thee. And I have heard, O flea, that one of the
gnomic poets saith as follows in these couplets:—

 I have fared content in my solitude ✿ With whate'er befel, and led life
    of ease,
 On a water-draught and a bite of bread, ✿ Coarse salt and a gown of
    tattered frieze:
 Allah might, an He pleased, give me easiest life, ✿ But with whatso
    pleaseth Him self I please."

Now when the flea heard these words of the mouse, he rejoined, "I
hearken to thy charge and I submit myself to obey thee, nor have I power
to gainsay thee, till life be fulfilled in this righteous intention."
Replied the mouse, "Pure intention sufficeth to sincere affection." So
the tie of love arose and was knitted between them twain and, after
this, the flea used to visit the merchant's bed by night and not exceed
in his diet, and house him by day in the hole of the mouse. Now it came
to pass one night, the merchant brought home great store of dinars and
began to turn them over. When the mouse heard the chink of the coin, she
put her head out of her hole and fell to gazing at it, till the merchant
laid it under his pillow and went to sleep, when she said to the flea,
"Seest thou not the proffered occasion and the great good fortune? Hast
thou any device to bring us to our desire of yonder dinars?" Quoth the
flea, "Verily, it is not good that one strive for aught, unless he be
able to win his will; because, if he lack ability thereto, he falleth
into that which he should avoid and he attaineth not his wish by reason
of his weakness, albeit he use all power of cunning, like the sparrow
which picketh up grain and falleth into the net and is caught by the
fowler. Thou hast no strength to take the dinars and to transport them
out of this house, nor have I force sufficient to do this; on the
contrary, I could not carry a single ducat of them; so what hast thou to
do with them?" Quoth the mouse, "I have made me for my house these
seventy openings, whence I may go out at my desire, and I have set apart
a place strong and safe, for things of price; and, if thou can contrive
to get the merchant out of the house, I doubt not of success, an so be
that Fate aid me." Answered the flea, "I will engage to get him out of
the house for thee;" and, going to the merchant's bed, bit him a fearful
bite, such as he had never before felt, then fled to a place of safety,
where he had no fear of the man. So the merchant awoke and sought for
the flea, but finding him not, lay down again on his other side. Then
the flea bit him a second time more painfully than before. So he lost
patience and, leaving his bed, went out and lay down on the bench before
his door and slept there and awoke not till the morning. Meanwhile the
mouse came out and fell to carrying the dinars into her hole, till she
left not a single one; and when day dawned the merchant began to suspect
the folk and fancy all manner of fancies. And (continued the fox) know
thou, O wise and experienced crow with the clear-seeing eyes, that I
tell thee this only to the intent that thou mayst reap the recompense of
thy kindness to me, even as the mouse reaped the reward of her kindness
to the flea; for see how he repaid her and requited her with the
goodliest of requitals. Said the crow, "It lies with the benefactor to
show benevolence or not to show it; nor is it incumbent on us to entreat
kindly one who seeketh a connection that entaileth separation from kith
and kin. If I show thee favour who art my foe by kind, I am the cause of
cutting myself off from the world; and thou, O fox, art full of wiles
and guiles. Now those whose characteristics are craft and cunning, must
not be trusted upon oath; and whoso is not to be trusted upon oath, in
him there is no good faith. The tidings lately reached me of thy
treacherous dealing with one of thy comrades, which was a wolf; and how
thou didst deceive him until thou leddest him into destruction by thy
perfidy and stratagems; and this thou diddest after he was of thine own
kind and thou hadst long consorted with him: yet didst thou not spare
him; and if thou couldst deal thus with thy fellow which was of thine
own kind, how can I have trust in thy truth and what would be thy
dealing with thy foe of other kind than thy kind? Nor can I compare thee
and me but with the saker and the birds." "How so?" asked the fox.
Answered the crow:—They relate this tale of


                    _THE SAKER[169] AND THE BIRDS._

There was once a saker who was a cruel tyrant——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Fifty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the crow pursued,
"They relate that there was once a saker who was a cruel tyrant in the
days of his youth, so that the raveners of the air and the scavengers of
the earth feared him, none being safe from his mischief; and many were
the haps and mishaps of his tyranny and his violence, for this saker was
ever in the habit of oppressing and injuring all the other birds. As the
years passed over him, he grew feeble and his force failed him, so that
he was often famished; but his cunning waxed stronger with the waning of
his strength and he redoubled in his endeavour and determined to be
present at the general assembly of the birds, that he might eat of their
orts and leavings; so in this manner he fed by fraud instead of feeding
by fierceness and force. And thou, O fox, art like this: if thy might
fail thee, thy sleight faileth thee not; and I doubt not that thy
seeking my society is a fraud to get thy food; but I am none of those
who fall to thee and put fist into thy fist;[170] for that Allah hath
vouchsafed force to my wings and caution to my mind and sharp sight to
my eyes; and I know that whoso apeth a stronger than he, wearieth
himself and haply cometh to ruin. Wherefore I fear for thee lest, if
thou ape a stronger than thyself, there befal thee what befel the
sparrow." Asked the fox, "What befel the sparrow? Allah upon thee, tell
me his tale." And the crow began to relate the story of


                      _THE SPARROW AND THE EAGLE._

I have heard that a sparrow was once flitting over a sheep-fold, when he
looked at it carefully and behold, he saw a great eagle swoop down upon
a newly yeaned lamb and carry it off in his claws and fly away.
Thereupon the sparrow clapped his wings and said, "I will do even as
this one did;" and he waxed proud in his own conceit and mimicked a
greater than he. So he flew down forthright and lighted on the back of a
fat ram with a thick fleece, that was become matted by his lying in his
dung and stale till it was like woollen felt. As soon as the sparrow
pounced upon the sheep's back he flapped his wings to fly away, but his
feet became tangled in the wool and, however hard he tried, he could not
set himself free. While all this was doing the shepherd was looking on,
having seen what happened first with the eagle and afterwards with the
sparrow; so he came up to the wee birdie in a rage and seized him. Then
he plucked out his wing-feathers and, tying his feet with a twine,
carried him to his children and threw him to them. "What is this?"
asked, one of them; and he answered, "This is he that aped a greater
than himself and came to grief." Now thou, O fox, art like this and I
would have thee beware of aping a greater than thou, lest thou perish.
This is all I have to say to thee; so fare from me in peace! When the
fox despaired of the crow's friendship, he turned away, groaning for
sorrow and gnashing teeth upon teeth in his disappointment; and the
crow, hearing the sound of weeping and seeing his grief and profound
melancholy, said to him, "O fox, what dole and dolour make thee gnash
thy canines?" Answered the fox, "I gnash my canines because I find thee
a greater rascal than myself;" and so saying he made off to his house
and ceased not to fare till he reached his home. Quoth the Sultan, "O
Shahrazad, how excellent are these thy stories, and how delightsome!
Hast thou more of such edifying tales?" Answered she:—They tell this
legend concerning

-----

Footnote 168:

  Among Eastern men there are especial forms for "making brotherhood."
  The "Munh-bolá-bhái" (mouth-named brother) of India is well-known. The
  intense "associativeness" of these races renders isolation terrible to
  them, and being defenceless in a wild state of society has special
  horrors. Hence the origin of Caste for which see Pilgrimage (i. 52).
  Moslems, however, cannot practise the African rite of drinking a few
  drops of each other's blood. This, by the by, was also affected in
  Europe, as we see in the Gesta Romanorum, Tale lxvii., of the wise and
  foolish knights who "drew blood (to drink) from the right arm."

Footnote 169:

  The F. Sacer in India is called "Laghar" and her tiercel "Jaghar." Mr.
  T. E. Jordan (catalogue of Indian Birds, 1839) says it is rare; but I
  found it the contrary. According to Mr. R. Thompson it is flown at
  kites and antelope; in Sind it is used upon night-heron (_nyctardea
  nycticorax_), floriken or Hobara (_Otis aurita_), quail, partridge,
  curlew and sometimes hare: it gives excellent sport with crows but
  requires to be defended. Indian sportsmen, like ourselves, divide
  hawks into two orders: the "Siyáh-chasm," or black-eyed birds,
  long-winged and noble; the "Gulábi-chasm" or yellow-eyed (like the
  goshawk) round-winged and ignoble.

Footnote 170:

  _i.e._ put themselves at thy mercy.




                   THE HEDGEHOG AND THE WOOD-PIGEONS.


A hedgehog once took up his abode by the side of a date-palm, whereon
roosted a wood-pigeon and his wife that had built their nest there and
lived a life of ease and enjoyment. So he said to himself, "This
pigeon-pair eateth of the fruit of the date-tree and I have no means of
getting at it; but needs must I find some fashion of tricking them."
Upon this he dug a hole at the foot of the palm-tree and took up his
lodging there, he and his wife; moreover, he built an oratory beside the
hole and went into retreat there and made a show of devotion and
edification and renunciation of the world. The male pigeon saw him
praying and worshipping, and his heart was softened towards him for his
excess of devoutness; so he said to him, "How many years hast thou been
thus?" Replied the hedgehog, "During the last thirty years." "What is
thy food?" "That which falleth from the palm-tree." "And what is thy
clothing?" "Prickles! and I profit by their roughness." "And why hast
thou chosen this for place rather than another?" "I chose it and
preferred it to all others that I might guide the erring into the right
way and teach the ignorant!" "I had fancied thy case," quoth the
wood-pigeon, "other than this, but now I yearn for that which is with
thee." Quoth the hedgehog,"I fear lest thy deed contradict thy word and
thou be even as the husbandman who, when the seed-season came, neglected
to sow, saying, Verily I dread lest the days bring me not to my desire,
and by making haste to sow I shall only waste my substance! When
harvest-time came and he saw the folk earing their crops, he repented
him of what he had lost by his tardiness and he died of chagrin and
vexation." Asked the wood-pigeon, "What then shall I do that I may be
freed from the bonds of the world and cut myself loose from all things
save the service of my Lord?" Answered the hedgehog, "Betake thee to
preparing for the next world and content thyself with a pittance of
provision." Quoth the pigeon, "How can I do this, I that am a bird and
unable to go beyond the date-tree whereon is my daily bread? And even
could I do so, I know of no other place wherein I may wone." Quoth the
hedgehog, "Thou canst shake down of the fruit of the date-tree what
shall suffice thee and thy wife for a year's provaunt; then do ye take
up your abode in a nest under the trunk, that ye may prayerfully seek to
be guided in the right way, and then turn thou to what thou hast shaken
down and transport it all to thy home and store it up against what time
the dates fail; and when the fruits are spent and the delay is longsome
upon you, address thyself to total abstinence." Exclaimed the pigeon,
"Allah requite thee with good for the righteous intention wherewith thou
hast reminded me of the world to come and hast directed me into the
right way!" Then he and his wife worked hard at knocking down the dates,
till nothing was left on the palm-tree, whilst the hedgehog, finding
whereof to eat, rejoiced and filled his den with the fruit, storing it
up for his subsistence and saying in his mind, "When the pigeon and his
wife have need of their provision, they will seek it of me and covet
what I have, relying upon my devoutness and abstinence; and, from what
they have heard of my counsels and admonitions, they will draw near unto
me. Then will I make them my prey and eat them, after which I shall have
the place and all that drops from the date-tree to suffice me."
Presently, having shaken down the fruits, the pigeon and his wife
descended from the tree-top and finding that the hedgehog had removed
all the dates to his own place, said to him, "O hedgehog! thou pious
preacher and of good counsel, we can find no sign of the dates and know
not on what else we shall feed." Replied the hedgehog, "Probably the
winds have carried them away; but the turning from the provisions to the
Provider is of the essence of salvation, and He who the mouth-corners
cleft, the mouth without victual hath never left." And he gave not over
improving the occasion to them on this wise, and making a show of piety
and cozening them with fine words and false till they put faith in him
and accepted him and entered his den and had no suspicion of his deceit.
Thereupon he sprang to the door and gnashed his teeth, and the
wood-pigeon, seeing his perfidy manifested, said to him, "What hath
to-night to do with yesternight? Knowest thou not that there is a Helper
for the oppressed? Beware of craft and treachery, lest that mishap befal
thee which befel the sharpers who plotted against the merchant." "What
was that?" asked the hedgehog. Answered the pigeon:—I have heard tell
this tale of


                  _THE MERCHANT AND THE TWO SHARPERS._

In a city called Sindah there was once a very wealthy merchant, who made
ready his camel-loads and equipped himself with goods and set out with
his outfit for such a city, purposing to sell it there. Now he was
followed by two sharpers, who had made up into bales what merchandise
they could get; and, giving out to the merchant that they also were
merchants, wended with him by the way. So halting at the first
halting-place they agreed to play him false and take all he had; but at
the same time, each inwardly plotted foul play to the other, saying in
his mind, "If I can cheat my comrade, times will go well with me and I
shall have all these goods to myself." So after planning this perfidy,
one of them took food and putting therein poison, brought it to his
fellow; the other did the same and they both ate of the poisoned mess
and they both died. Now they had been sitting with the merchant; so when
they left him and were long absent from him, he sought for tidings of
them and found the twain lying dead; whereby he knew that they were
sharpers who had plotted to play him foul, but their foul play had
recoiled upon themselves. So the merchant was preserved and took what
they had. Then quoth the Sultan, "O Shahrazad, verily thou hast aroused
me to all whereof I was negligent! So continue to edify me with these
fables." Quoth she:—It hath reached me, O King, that men tell this tale
of




                     THE THIEF AND HIS MONKEY.[171]


A certain man had a monkey and that man was a thief, who never entered
any of the street-markets of the city wherein he dwelt, but he made off
with great profit. Now it came to pass one day that he saw a man
offering for sale worn clothes, and he went calling them in the market,
but none bid for them and all to whom he showed them refused to buy of
him. Presently the thief who had the monkey saw the man with the ragged
clothes set them in a wrapper and sit down to rest for weariness; so he
made the ape sport before him to catch his eye and, whilst he was busy
gazing at it, stole the parcel from him. Then he took the ape and made
off to a lonely place, where he opened the wrapper and, taking out the
old clothes, folded them in a piece of costly stuff. This he carried to
another bazar and exposed for sale together with what was therein,
making it a condition that it should not be opened, and tempting the
folk with the lowness of the price he set on it. A certain man saw the
wrapper and its beauty pleased him; so he bought the parcel on these
terms and carried it home, doubting not that he had done well. When his
wife saw it she asked, "What is this?" and he answered, "It is costly
stuff, which I have bought at lowest price, meaning to sell it again and
take the profit." Rejoined she, "O dupe, would this stuff be sold under
its value, unless it had been stolen? Dost thou not know that whoso
buyeth aught without examining it, falleth into error, and becometh like
unto the weaver?" Quoth he, "And what is the story of the weaver?"; and
quoth she:—I have heard this tale of

-----

Footnote 171:

  I have remarked (Pilgrimage iii. 307) that all the popular ape-names
  in Arabic and Persian, Sa'adán, Maymún, Shádi, etc., express
  propitiousness—probably euphemistically applied to our "poor
  relation."


                         _THE FOOLISH WEAVER._

There was once in a certain village a weaver who worked hard but could
not earn his living save by overwork. Now it chanced that one of the
richards of the neighbourhood made a marriage feast and invited the folk
thereto: the weaver also was present and found the guests, who wore rich
gear, served with delicate viands and made much of by the house-master
for what he saw of their fine clothes. So he said in his mind, "If I
change this my craft for another craft easier to compass and better
considered and more highly paid, I shall amass great store of money and
I shall buy splendid attire, so I may rise in rank and be exalted in
men's eyes and become even with these." Presently, he beheld one of the
mountebanks, who was present at the feast, climbing up to the top of a
high and towering wall and throwing himself down to the ground and
alighting on his feet. Whereupon the weaver said to himself, "Needs must
I do as this one hath done, for surely I shall not fail of it. So he
arose and swarmed up the wall and casting himself down, broke his neck
against the ground and died forthright. Now I tell thee this that thou
mayst get thy living by what way thou knowest and thoroughly
understandest, lest peradventure greed enter into thee and thou lust
after what is not of thy condition." Quoth the woman's husband, "Not
every wise man is saved by his wisdom, nor is every fool lost by his
folly. I have seen it happen to a skilful charmer, well versed in the
ways of serpents, to be struck by the fangs of a snake[172] and killed,
and others prevail over serpents who had no skill in them and no
knowledge of their ways." And he went contrary to his wife and persisted
in buying stolen goods below their value till he fell under suspicion
and perished therefor: even as perished the sparrow in the tale of

-----

Footnote 172:

  The serpent does not "sting" nor does it "bite;" it strikes with the
  poison-teeth like a downward stab with a dagger. These fangs are
  always drawn by the jugglers but they grow again and thus many lives
  are lost. The popular way of extracting the crochets is to grasp the
  snake firmly behind the neck with one hand and with the other to
  tantalise it by offering and withdrawing a red rag. At last the animal
  is allowed to strike it and a sharp jerk tears out both eye-teeth as
  rustics used to do by slamming a door. The head is then held downwards
  and the venom drains from its bag in the shape of a few drops of
  slightly yellowish fluid which, as conjurers know, may be drunk
  without danger. The patient looks faint and dazed, but recovers after
  a few hours and feeds as if nothing had happened. In India I took
  lessons from a snake-charmer but soon gave up the practice as too
  dangerous.




                      THE SPARROW AND THE PEACOCK.


There was once upon a time a sparrow, that used every day to visit a
certain king of the birds and ceased not to wait upon him in the
mornings and not to leave him till the evenings, being the first to go
in and the last to go out. One day, a company of birds chanced to
assemble on a high mountain and one of them said to another, "Verily, we
are waxed many, and many are the differences between us, and there is no
help for it but we have a king to look into our affairs; so shall we all
be at one and our differences will disappear." Thereupon up came that
sparrow and counselled them to choose for King the peacock (that is, the
prince he used to visit). So they chose the peacock to their King and
he, become their sovereign, bestowed largesse on them and made the
sparrow his secretary and Prime Minister. Now the sparrow was wont
bytimes to quit his assiduous service in the presence and look into
matters in general. So one day he absented himself at the usual time,
whereat the peacock was sore troubled; and, while things stood thus, he
returned and the peacock said to him, "What hath delayed thee, and thou
the nearest to me of all my servants and the dearest of all my
dependents?" Replied the sparrow, "I have seen a thing which is doubtful
to me and whereat I am affrighted." Asked the peacock, "What was it thou
sawest?"; and the sparrow answered, "I saw a man set up a net, hard by
my nest, peg down its pegs, strew grain in its midst and withdraw afar
off. And I sat watching what he would do when behold, fate and fortune
drave thither a crane and his wife, which fell into the midst of the net
and began to cry out; whereupon the fowler rose up and took them. This
troubled me, and such is the reason of my absence from thee, O King of
the Age, but never again will I abide in that nest for fear of the net."
Rejoined the peacock, "Depart not thy dwelling, for against fate and lot
forethought will avail thee naught." And the sparrow obeyed his bidding
and said, "I will forthwith arm myself with patience and forbear to
depart in obedience to the King." So he ceased not taking care of
himself, and carrying food to his sovereign, who would eat what sufficed
him and after feeding drink his water and dismiss the sparrow. Now one
day as he was looking into matters, lo and behold! he saw two sparrows
fighting on the ground and said in his mind, "How can I, who am the
King's Wazir, look on and see sparrows fighting in my neighbourhood? By
Allah, I must make peace between them!" So he flew down to reconcile
them; but the fowler cast the net over the whole number and the sparrow
happened to be in their very midst. Then the fowler arose and took him
and gave him to his comrade, saying, "Take care of him, I never saw
fatter or finer." But the sparrow said to himself "I have fallen into
that which I feared and none but the peacock inspired me with false
confidence. It availed me naught to beware of the stroke of fate and
fortune, since even he who taketh precaution may never flee from
destiny. And how well said the poet in this poetry:—

 Whatso is not to be shall ne'er become; ✿ No wise! and that to be must
    come to pass;
 Yea, it shall come to pass at time ordained, ✿ And th' Ignoramus[173]
    aye shall cry 'Alas!'"

Whereupon quoth the King, "O Shahrazad, recount me other of these
tales!"; and quoth she, "I will do so during the coming night, if life
be granted to me by the King whom Allah bring to honour!"——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

-----

Footnote 173:

  Arab. "Akh al-Jahálah" = brother of ignorance, an Ignorantin; one
  "really and truly" ignorant; which is the value of "Akh" in such
  phrases as "a brother of poverty," or, "of purity."

Footnote 174:

  Lane (ii. I) writes "Abu-l-Hasan;" Payne (iii. 49) "Aboulhusn" which
  would mean "Father of Beauty (Husn)" and is not a Moslem name. Hasan
  (beautiful) and its dimin. Husayn, names now so common, were (it is
  said), unknown to the Arabs, although Hassán was that of a Tobba King,
  before the days of Mohammed who so called his two only grandsons. In
  Anglo-India they have become "Hobson and Jobson." The Bresl. Edit.
  (ii. 305) entitles this story "Tale of Abu 'l Hasan the Attár
  (druggist and perfumer) with Ali ibn Bakkár and what befel them with
  the handmaid (= járiyah) Shams al-Nahár."


           Now when it was the Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

She said:—I will relate the




             TALE OF ALI BIN BAKKAR AND OF SHAMS AL-NAHAR.


It hath reached me, O august King, that in days of yore and in times and
ages long gone before, during the Caliphate of Harun al-Rashid, there
was a merchant who named his son Abú al-Hasan[174] Ali bin Táhir; and
the same was great of goods and grace, while his son was fair of form
and face and held in favour by all folk. He used to enter the royal
palace without asking leave, for all the Caliph's concubines and
slave-girls loved him, and he was wont to be companion with Al-Rashid in
his cups and recite verses to him and tell him curious tales and witty.
Withal he sold and bought in the merchants' bazar, and there used to sit
in his shop a youth named Ali bin Bakkár, of the sons of the Persian
Kings[175] who was formous of form and symmetrical of shape and perfect
of figure, with cheeks red as roses and joined eyebrows; sweet of
speech, laughing-lipped and delighting in mirth and gaiety. Now it
chanced one day, as the two sat talking and laughing behold, there came
up ten damsels like moons, every one of them complete in beauty and
loveliness, and elegance and grace; and amongst them was a young lady
riding on a she-mule with a saddle of brocade and stirrups of gold. She
wore an outer veil of fine stuff, and her waist was girt with a girdle
of gold-embroidered silk; and she was even as saith the poet:—

 Silky her skin and silk that zonèd waist; ✿ Sweet voice; words not o'er
    many nor too few:
 Two eyes quoth Allah "Be," and they became; ✿ And work like wine on
    hearts they make to rue:
 O love I feel! grow greater every night: ✿ O solace! Doom-day bring our
    interview.

And when the cortège reached Abu al-Hasan's shop, she alighted from her
mule, and sitting down on the front board,[176] saluted him, and he
returned her salam. When Ali bin Bakkar saw her, she ravished his
understanding and he rose to go away; but she said to him, "Sit in thy
place. We came to thee and thou goest away: this is not fair!" Replied
he, "O my lady, by Allah, I flee from what I see; for the tongue of the
case saith:—

 She is a sun which towereth high a-sky; ✿ So ease thy heart with cure by
    Patience lent:
 Thou to her skyey height shalt fail to fly; ✿ Nor she from skyey height
    can make descent."

When she heard this, she smiled and asked Abu al-Hasan, "What is the
name of this young man?"; who answered, "He is a stranger;" and she
enquired, "What countryman is he?"; whereto the merchant replied, "He is
a descendant of the Persian Kings; his name is Ali son of Bakkar and the
stranger deserveth honour." Rejoined she, "When my damsel comes to thee,
come thou at once to us and bring him with thee, that we may entertain
him in our abode, lest he blame us and say:—There is no hospitality in
the people of Baghdad; for niggardliness is the worst fault a man can
have. Thou hearest what I say to thee and, if thou disobey me, thou wilt
incur my displeasure and I will never again visit thee or salute thee."
Quoth Abu al-Hasan, "On my head and my eyes: Allah preserve me from thy
displeasure, fair lady!" Then she rose and went her way. Such was her
case; but as regards Ali bin Bakkar he remained in a state of
bewilderment. Now after an hour the damsel came to Abu al-Hasan and said
to him, "Of a truth my lady Shams al-Nahár, the favourite of the
Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, biddeth thee to her, thee
and thy friend, my lord Ali bin Bakkar." So he rose and, taking Ali with
him, followed the girl to the Caliph's palace, where she carried them
into a chamber and made them sit down. They talked together awhile, when
behold, trays of food were set before them, and they ate and washed
their hands. Then she brought them wine, and they drank deep and made
merry; after which she bade them rise and carried them into another
chamber, vaulted upon four columns, furnished after the goodliest
fashion with various kinds of furniture, and adorned with decorations as
it were one of the pavilions of Paradise. They were amazed at the
rarities they saw; and, as they were enjoying a review of these marvels,
suddenly up came ten slave-girls, like moons, swaying and swimming in
beauty's pride, dazzling the sight and confounding the sprite; and they
ranged themselves in two ranks as if they were of the black-eyed Brides
of Paradise. And after a while in came other ten damsels, bearing in
their hands lutes and divers instruments of mirth and music; and these,
having saluted the two guests, sat down and fell to tuning their
lute-strings. Then they rose and standing before them, played and sang
and recited verses: and indeed each one of them was a seduction to the
servants of the Lord. Whilst they were thus busied there entered other
ten damsels like unto them, high-bosomed maids and of an equal age, with
black eyes and cheeks like the rose, joined eyebrows and looks
languorous; a very fascination to every faithful wight and to all who
looked upon them a delight; clad in various kinds of coloured silks,
with ornaments that amazed man's intelligence. They took up their
station at the door, and there succeeded them yet other ten damsels even
fairer than they, clad in gorgeous array, such as no tongue can say; and
they also stationed themselves by the doorway. Then in came a band of
twenty damsels and amongst them the lady, Shams al-Nahar hight, as she
were the moon among the stars swaying from side to side, with luring
gait and in beauty's pride. And she was veiled to the middle with the
luxuriance of her locks, and clad in a robe of azure blue and a mantilla
of silk embroidered with gold and gems of price; and her waist was girt
with a zone set with various kinds of precious stones. She ceased not to
advance with her graceful and coquettish swaying, till she came to the
couch that stood at the upper end of the chamber and seated herself
thereon. But when Ali bin Bakkar saw her, he versified with these
verses:—

 Source of mine evils, truly, she alone 's, ✿ Of long love-longing and my
    groans and moans;
 Near her I find my soul in melting mood, ✿ For love of her and wasting
    of my bones.

And finishing his poetry he said to Abu al-Hasan, "Hadst thou dealt more
kindly with me thou haddest forewarned me of these things ere I came
hither, that I might have made up my mind and taken patience to support
what hath befallen me." And he wept and groaned and complained. Replied
Abu al-Hasan, "O my brother, I meant thee naught but good; but I feared
to tell thee this, lest such transport should betide thee as might
hinder thee from foregathering with her, and be a stumbling-block
between thee and her. But be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and
clear;[177] for she to thee inclineth and to favour thee designeth."
Asked Ali bin Bakkar, "What is this young lady's name?" Answered Abu al
Hasan, "She is hight Shams al-Nahar, one of the favourites of the
Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, and this is the palace of
the Caliphate." Then Shams al-Nahar sat gazing upon the charms of Ali
bin Bakkar and he upon hers, till both were engrossed with love for each
other. Presently she commanded the damsels, one and all, to be seated,
each in her rank and place, and all sat on a couch before one of the
windows, and she bade them sing; whereupon one of them took up the lute
and began carolling:—

   Give thou my message twice ✿ Bring clear reply in trice!
   To thee, O Prince of Beau- ✿ ty[178] with complaint I rise:
   My lord, as heart-blood dear ✿ And Life's most precious prize!
   Give me one kiss in gift ✿ Or loan, if thou devise:
   And if thou crave for more ✿ Take all that satisfies.[179]
   Thou donn'st me sickness-dress ✿ Thee with health's weed I bless.

Her singing charmed Ali bin Bakkar, and he said to her, "Sing me more of
the like of these verses." So she struck the strings and began to chaunt
these lines:—

 By stress of parting, O beloved one, ✿ Thou mad'st these eyelids
    torrent-race to run:
 Oh gladness of my sight and dear desire, ✿ Goal of my wishes, my
    religion!
 Pity the youth whose eyne are drowned in tears ✿ Of lover gone
    distraught and clean undone.

When she had finished her verses, Shams al-Nahar said to another damsel,
"Let us hear something from thee!" So she played a lively measure and
began these couplets:—

 His[180] looks have made me drunken, not his wine; ✿ His grace of gait
    disgraced sleep to these eyne:
 Dazed me no cup, but cop with curly crop; ✿ His gifts overcame me not
    the gifts of vine:
 His winding locks my patience-clue unwound: ✿ His robèd beauties robbed
    all wits of mine.

When Shams Al-Nahar heard this recital from the damsel, she sighed
heavily and the song pleased her. Then she bade another damsel sing; so
she took the lute and began chanting:—

 Face that with Sol in Heaven lamping vies; ✿ Youth-tide's fair fountain
    which begins to rise;
 Whose curly side-beard writeth writ of love, ✿ And in each curl
    concealeth mysteries:
 Cried Beauty, "When I met this youth I knew ✿ 'Tis Allah's loom such
    gorgeous robe supplies."

When she had finished her song, Ali bin Bakkar said to the slave-maiden
nearest him, "Sing us somewhat, thou O damsel." So she took the lute and
began singing:—

 "Our trysting-time is all too short ✿ For this long coyish coquetry:
 How long this 'Nay, Nay!' and 'Wait, wait?' ✿ This is not old nobility!
 And now that Time deigns lend delight ✿ Profit of th' opportunity."

When she ended, Ali bin Bakkar followed up her song with flowing tears;
and, as Shams al-Nahar saw him weeping and groaning and complaining, she
burned with love-longing and desire; and passion and transport consumed
her. So she rose from the sofa and came to the door of the alcove, where
Ali met her and they embraced with arms round the neck, and fell down
fainting in the doorway; whereupon the damsels came to them and carrying
them into the alcove, sprinkled rose-water upon them both. When they
recovered, they found not Abu al-Hasan who had hidden himself by the
side of a couch, and the young lady said, "Where is Abu al-Hasan?" So he
showed himself to her from beside the couch and she saluted him, saying,
"I pray Allah to give me the means of requiting thee, O kindest of men!"
Then she turned to Ali bin Bakkar and said to him, "O my lord, passion
hath not reached this extreme pass with thee without my feeling the
like; but we have nothing to do save to bear patiently what calamity
hath befallen us." Replied he, "By Allah, O my lady, union with thee may
not content me nor gazing upon thee assuage the fire thou hast lighted,
nor shall leave me the love of thee which hath mastered my heart but
with the leaving of my life." So saying, he wept and the tears ran down
upon his cheeks like thridded pearls; and when Shams al-Nahar saw him
weep, she wept for his weeping. But Abu al-Hasan exclaimed, "By Allah, I
wonder at your case and am confounded at your condition; of a truth,
your affair is amazing and your chance dazing. What! this weeping while
ye are yet together: then how will it be what time ye are parted and far
separated?" And he continued, "Indeed, this is no tide for weeping and
wailing, but a season for meeting and merry-making; rejoice, therefore,
and take your pleasure and shed no more tears!" Then Shams al-Nahar
signed to a slave-girl, who arose and presently returned with handmaids
bearing a table, whose dishes of silver were full of various rich
viands. They set the table before the pair and Shams al-Nahar began to
eat[181] and to place tid-bits in the mouth of Ali bin Bakkar; and they
ceased not so doing till they were satisfied, when the table was removed
and they washed their hands. Then the waiting-women fetched censers with
all manner of incense, aloe-wood and ambergris and mixed scents; and
sprinkling-flasks full of rose-water were also brought and they were
fumigated and perfumed. After this the slaves set on vessels of graven
gold, containing all kinds of sherbets, besides fruits fresh and dried,
that heart can desire and eye delight in; and lastly one brought a
flagon of carnelion full of old wine. Then Shams al-Nahar chose out ten
handmaids to attend on them and ten singing women; and, dismissing the
rest to their apartments, bade some of those who remained strike the
lute. They did as she bade them and one of them began to sing:—

 My soul to him who smiled back my salute, ✿ In breast reviving hopes
    that were no mo'e:
 The hand o' Love my secret brought to light, ✿ And censor's tongues what
    lies my ribs below:[182]
 My tear-drops ever press twixt me and him, ✿ As though my tear-drops
    showing love would flow.

When she had finished her singing, Shams al-Nahar rose and, filling a
goblet, drank it off, then crowned it again and handed it to Ali bin
Bakkar;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shams al-Nahar
filled a goblet and handed it to Ali bin Bakkar; after which she bade
another damsel sing; and she began singing these couplets:—

 My tears thus flowing rival with my wine, ✿ Pouring the like of what
    fills cup to brink:[183]
 By Allah wot I not an run these eyne ✿ Wi' wine, or else it is of tears
    I drink.

And when she ended her recitation, Ali bin Bakkar drained his cup and
returned it to Shams al-Nahar. She filled it again and gave it to Abu
al-Hasan who tossed it off. Then she took the lute, saying, "None shall
sing over my cup save myself;" so she screwed up the strings and intoned
these verses:—

 The tears run down his cheeks in double row, ✿ And in his breast high
    flameth lover-lowe:
 He weeps when near, a-fearing to be far; ✿ And, whether far or near, his
    tear-drops flow.

And the words of another:—

 Our life to thee, O cup-boy Beauty-dight! ✿ From parted hair to calves;
    from black to white:
 Sol beameth from thy hands, and from thy lips ✿ Pleiads, and full Moon
    through thy collar's night,[184]
 Good sooth the cups, which made our heads fly round, ✿ Are those thine
    eyes pass round to daze the sight:
 No wonder lovers hail thee as full moon ✿ Waning to them, for self e'er
    waxing bright:
 Art thou a deity to kill and quicken, ✿ Bidding this fere, forbidding
    other wight?
 Allah from model of thy form made Beau- ✿ ty and the Zephyr scented with
    thy sprite.
 Thou art not of this order of human- ✿ ity but angel lent by Heaven to
    man.

When Ali bin Bakkar and Abu al-Hasan and those present heard Shams
al-Nahar's song, they were like to fly for joy, and sported and laughed;
but while they were thus enjoying themselves lo! up came a damsel,
trembling for fear and said, "O my lady, the Commander of the Faithful's
eunuchs are at the door, Afíf and Masrúr and Marján[185] and others whom
wot I not." When they heard this they were like to die with fright, but
Shams al-Nahar laughed and said, "Have no fear!" Then quoth she to the
damsel, "Keep answering them whilst we remove hence." And she caused the
doors of the alcove to be closed upon Ali and Abu al-Hasan, and let down
the curtains over the entrance (they being still within); after which
she shut the door of the saloon and went out by the privy wicket into
the flower-garden, where she seated herself on a couch she had there and
made one of the damsels knead her feet.[186] Then she dismissed the rest
of her women to their rooms and bade the portress admit those who were
at the door; whereupon Masrur entered, he and his company of twenty with
drawn swords. And when they saluted her, she asked, "Wherefore come
ye?"; whereto they answered, "The Commander of the Faithful saluteth
thee. Indeed he is desolated for want of thy sight; he letteth thee know
that this be to him a day of joy and great gladness and he wisheth to
seal his day and complete his pleasure with thy company at this very
hour. So say, wilt go to him or shall he come to thee?" Upon this she
rose and, kissing the earth, replied, "I hear and I obey the commandment
of the Prince of True Believers!" Then she summoned the women guards of
her household and other slave-damsels, who lost no time in attending
upon her and made a show of obeying the Caliph's orders. And albeit
everything about the place was in readiness, she said to the eunuchs,
"Go to the Commander of the Faithful and tell him that I await him after
a little space, that I may make ready for him a place with carpets and
other matters." So they returned in haste to the Caliph, whilst Shams
al-Nahar, doffing her outer gear, repaired to her lover, Ali bin Bakkar,
and drew him to her bosom and bade him farewell, whereat he wept sore
and said, "O my lady, this leave-taking will cause the ruin of my very
self and the loss of my very soul; but I pray Allah grant me patience to
support the passion wherewith he hath afflicted me!" Replied she, "By
Allah, none shall suffer perdition save I; for thou wilt fare forth to
the bazar and consort with those that shall divert thee, and thy life
will be sound and thy love hidden forsure; but I shall fall into trouble
and tristesse nor find any to console me, more by token that I have
given the Caliph a tryst, wherein haply great peril shall betide me by
reason of my love for thee and my longing for thee and my grief at being
parted from thee. For with what tongue shall I sing and with what heart
shall I present myself before the Caliph? and with what speech shall I
company the Commander of the Faithful in his cups? and with what eyes
shall I look upon a place where thou art absent? and with what taste
shall I drink wine of which thou drinkest not?" Quoth Abu al-Hasan, "Be
not troubled but take patience and be not remiss in entertaining the
Commander of the Faithful this night, neither show him any neglect, but
be of good heart." Now at this juncture, behold, up came a damsel, who
said to Shams al-Nahar, "O my lady, the Caliph's pages are come." So she
hastily rose to her feet and said to the maid, "Take Abu al-Hasan and
his friend and carry them to the upper balcony[187] giving upon the
garden and there leave them till darkness came on; when do thou contrive
to carry them forth." Accordingly the girl led them up to the balcony
and, locking the door upon them both, went her way. As they sat looking
on the garden lo! the Caliph appeared escorted by near an hundred
eunuchs, with drawn swords in hand and girt about with a score of
damsels, as they were moons, all clad in the richest of raiment and on
each one's head was a crown set with jewels and rubies; while each
carried a lighted flambeau. The Caliph walked in their midst, they
encompassing him about on all sides, and Masrur and Afíf and Wasíf[188]
went before him and he bore himself with a graceful gait. So Shams
al-Nahar and her maidens rose to receive him and, meeting him at the
garden-door, kissed ground between his hands; nor did they cease to go
before him till they brought him to the couch whereon he sat down,
whilst all the waiting-women who were in the garden and the eunuchs
stood before him and there came fair handmaids and concubines holding in
hand lighted candles and perfumes and incense and instruments of mirth
and music. Then the Sovereign bade the singers sit down, each in her
place, and Shams al-Nahar came up and, seating herself on a stool by the
side of the Caliph's couch, began to converse with him; all this
happening whilst Abu al-Hasan and Ali bin Bakkar looked on and listened,
unseen of the King. Presently the Caliph fell to jesting and toying with
Shams al-Nahar and both were in the highest spirits, glad and gay, when
he bade them throw open the garden pavilion. So they opened the doors
and windows and lighted the tapers till the place shone in the season of
darkness even as the day. Then the eunuchs removed thither the
wine-service and (quoth Abu al-Hasan) "I saw drinking-vessels and
rarities whose like mine eyes never beheld, vases of gold and silver and
all manner of noble metals and precious stones, such as no power of
description can describe, till indeed it seemed to me I was dreaming,
for excess of amazement at what I saw!" But as for Ali bin Bakkar, from
the moment Shams al-Nahar left him, he lay strown on the ground for
stress of love and desire; and, when he revived, he fell to gazing upon
these things that had not their like and saying to Abu al-Hasan, "O my
brother, I fear lest the Caliph see us or come to know of our case; but
the most of my fear is for thee. For myself, of a truth I know that I am
about to be lost past recourse, and the cause of my destruction is
naught but love and longing and excess of desire and distraction, and
disunion from my beloved after union with her; but I beseech Allah to
deliver us from this perilous predicament." And they ceased not to look
out of the balcony on the Caliph who was taking his pleasure, till the
banquet was spread before him, when he turned to one of the damsels and
said to her, "O Gharám,[189] let us hear some of thine enchanting
songs." So she took the lute and tuning it, began singing:—

 The longing of a Bedouin maid, whose folks are far away, ✿ Who yearns
    after the willow of the Hejaz and the bay,[190]—
 Whose tears, when she on travellers lights, might for their water serve
    ✿ And eke her her passion, with its heat, their bivouc-fire purvey,—
 Is not more fierce nor ardent than my longing for my love, ✿ Who deems
    that I commit a crime in loving him alway.[191]

Now when Shams al-Nahar heard these verses she slipped off the stool
whereon she sat and fell to the earth fainting and became insensible to
the world around her; upon which the damsels came and lifted her up. And
when Ali Bin Bakkar saw this from the balcony he also slipped down
senseless, and Abu al-Hasan said, "Verily Fate hath divided love-desire
equally upon you twain!"[192] As he spoke lo! in came the damsel who had
led them up to the balcony and said to him, "O Abu al-Hasan, arise thou
and thy friend and come down, for of a truth the world hath waxed strait
upon us and I fear lest our case be discovered or the Caliph become
aware of you; unless you descend at once we are dead ones." Quoth he,
"And how shall this youth descend with me seeing that he hath no
strength to rise?" Thereupon the damsel began sprinkling rose-water on
Ali bin Bakkar till he came to his senses, when Abu al-Hasan lifted him
up and the damsel made him lean upon her. So they went down from the
balcony and walked on awhile till the damsel opened a little iron door,
and made the two friends pass through it, and they came upon a bench by
the Tigris' bank. Thereupon the slave-girl clapped her hands[193] and
there came up a man with a little boat to whom said she, "Take up these
two young men and land them on the opposite side." So both entered the
boat and, as the man rowed off with them and they left the garden behind
them, Ali bin Bakkar looked back towards the Caliph's palace and the
pavilion and the grounds; and bade them farewell with these two
couplets:—

 I offered _this_ weak hand as last farewell, ✿ While to heart-burning
    fire _that_ hand is guided:
 O let not this end union! Let not this ✿ Be last provision for long road
    provided!

Thereupon the damsel said to the boatman, "Make haste with them both."
So he plied his oars deftly (the slave-girl being still with them);——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawning day and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the boatman rowed
them towards the other bank till they reached it and landed, whereupon
she took leave of them, saying, "It were my wish not to abandon you, but
I can go no farther than this." Then she turned back, whilst Ali bin
Bakkar lay prostrate on the ground before Abu al-Hasan and by no manner
of means could he rise, till his friend said to him, "Indeed this place
is not sure and I fear lest we lose our lives in this very spot, by
reason of the lewd fellows who infest it and highwaymen and men of
lawlessness." Upon this Ali bin Bakkar arose and walked a little but
could not continue walking. Now Abu al-Hasan had friends in that
quarter; so he made search for one of them, in whom he trusted, and who
was of his intimates, and knocked at the door. The man came out quickly
and seeing them, bade them welcome and brought them into his house,
where he seated them and talked with them and asked them whence they
came. Quoth Abu al-Hasan, "We came out but now, being obliged thereto by
a person with whom I had dealings and who hath in his hands dirhams of
mine. And it reached me that he designed to flee into foreign parts with
my monies; so I fared forth to-night in quest of him, taking with me for
company this youth, Ali bin Bakkar; but, when we came hoping to see the
debtor, he hid from us and we could get no sight of him. Accordingly we
turned back, empty-handed without a doit, but it was irksome to us to
return home at this hour of the night; so weeting not whither to go, we
came to thee, well knowing thy kindness and wonted courtesy." "Ye are
welcome and well come!" answered the host, and studied to do them
honour; so the twain abode with him the rest of their night and as soon
as the daylight dawned, they left him and made their way back without
aught of delay to the city. When they came to the house of Abu al-Hasan,
he conjured his comrade to enter; so they went in and lying down on the
bed, slept awhile. As soon as they awoke, Abu al-Hasan bade his servants
spread the house with rich carpets, saying in his mind, "Needs must I
divert this youth and distract him from thinking of his affliction, for
I know his case better than another." Then he called for water for Ali
bin Bakkar who, when it was brought, rose up from his bed and making his
ablutions, prayed the obligatory prayers which he had omitted for the
past day and night[194]; after which he sat down and began to solace
himself by talking with his friend. When Abu al-Hasan saw this, he
turned to him and said, "O my lord, it were fitter for thy case that
thou abide with me this night, so thy breast may be broadened and the
distress of love-longing that is upon thee be dispelled and thou make
merry with us, so haply the fire of thy heart may thus be quenched." Ali
replied, "O my brother, do what seemeth good to thee; for I may not on
any wise escape from what calamity hath befallen me; so act as thou
wilt." Accordingly, Abu al-Hasan arose and bade his servants summon some
of the choicest of his friends and sent for singers and musicians who
came; and meanwhile he made ready meat and drink for them; so they sat
eating and drinking and making merry through the rest of the day till
nightfall. Then they lit the candles, and the cups of friendship and
good fellowship went round amongst them and the time passed pleasantly
with them. Presently, a singing-woman took the lute and began singing:—

 I've been shot by Fortune, and shaft of eye ✿ Down struck me and parted
    from fondest friend:
 Time has proved him foe and my patience failed, ✿ Yet I ever expected it
    thus would end.

When Ali bin Bakkar heard her words, he fell to the earth in a swoon and
ceased not lying in his fainting fit till daybreak; and Abu al-Hasan
despaired of him. But, with the dawning, he came to himself and sought
to go home; nor could his friend hinder him, for fear of the issue of
his affair. So he made his servants bring a she-mule and, mounting Ali
thereon, carried him to his lodgings, he and one of his men. When he was
safe at home; Abu al-Hasan thanked Allah for his deliverance from that
sore peril and sat awhile with him, comforting him; but Ali could not
contain himself, for the violence of his love and longing. So Abu
al-Hasan rose to take leave of him and return to his own place.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Abu al-Hasan
rose to take leave of him, Ali son of Bakkar exclaimed, "O my brother,
leave me not without news." "I hear and obey," replied the other; and
forthwith went away and, repairing to his shop, opened it and sat there
all day, expecting news of Shams al-Nahar. But none came. He passed the
night in his own house and, when dawned the day, he walked to Ali bin
Bakkar's lodging and went in and found him thrown on his bed, with his
friends about him and physicians around him prescribing something or
other, and the doctors feeling his pulse. When he saw Abu al-Hasan enter
he smiled, and the visitor, after saluting him, enquired how he did and
sat with him till the folk withdrew, when he said to him, "What plight
is this?" Quoth Ali bin Bakkar, "It was bruited abroad that I was ill
and my comrades heard the report; and I have no strength to rise and
walk so as to give him the lie who noised abroad my sickness, but
continue lying strown here as thou seest. So my friends came to visit
me; say, however, O my brother, hast thou seen the slave-girl or heard
any news of her?" He replied, "I have not seen her, since the day we
parted from her on Tigris' bank;" and he presently added, "O my brother,
beware thou of scandal and leave this weeping." Rejoined Ali, "O my
brother, indeed, I have no control over myself;" and he sighed and began
reciting:—

 She gives her woman's hand a force that fails the hand of me, ✿ And with
    red dye on wrist she gars my patience fail and flee:
 And for her hand she fears so sore what shafts her eyes discharge, ✿
    She's fain to clothe and guard her hand with mail-ring panoply:[195]
 The leach in ignorance felt my pulse the while to him I cried, ✿ "Sick
    is my heart, so quit my hand which hath no malady:"
 Quoth she to that fair nightly vision favoured me and fled, ✿ "By Allah
    picture him nor add nor 'bate in least degree!"
 Replied the Dream, "I leave him though he die of thirst," I cry, ✿
    "Stand off from water-pit and say why this persistency."
 Rained tear-pearls her Narcissus-eyes, and rose on cheek belit ✿ She
    made my sherbet, and the lote with bits of hail she bit.[196]

And when his recital was ended he said, "O Abu al-Hasan, I am smitten
with an affliction from which I deemed myself in perfect surety, and
there is no greater ease for me than death." Replied he, "Be patient,
haply Allah will heal thee!" Then he went out from him and repairing to
his shop opened it, nor had he sat long, when suddenly up came the
handmaid who saluted him. He returned her salam and looking at her, saw
that her heart was palpitating and that she was in sore trouble and
showed signs of great affliction: so he said to her, "Thou art welcome
and well come! How is it with Shams al-Nahar?" She answered, "I will
presently tell thee, but first let me know how doth Ali bin Bakkar." So
he told her all that had passed and how his case stood, whereat she
grieved and sighed and lamented and marvelled at his condition. Then
said she, "My lady's case is still stranger than this; for when you went
away and fared homewards, I turned back, my heart beating hard on your
account and hardly crediting your escape. On entering I found her lying
prostrate in the pavilion, speaking not nor answering any, whilst the
Commander of the Faithful sat by her head not knowing what ailed her and
finding none who could make known to him aught of her ailment. She
ceased not from her swoon till midnight, when she recovered and the
Prince of the Faithful said to her, What harm hath happened to thee, O
Shams al-Nahar, and what hath befallen thee this night? Now when she
heard the Caliph's words she kissed his feet and said, Allah make me thy
ransom, O Prince of True Believers! Verily a sourness of stomach lighted
a fire in my body, so that I lost my senses for excess of pain, and I
know no more of my condition. Asked the Caliph, What hast thou eaten
to-day?; and she answered, I broke my fast on something I had never
tasted before. Then she feigned to be recovered and calling for a
something of wine, drank it, and begged the Sovereign to resume his
diversion. So he sat down again on his couch in the pavilion and the
sitting was resumed; but when she saw me, she asked me how you fared. I
told her what I had done with you both and repeated to her the verses
which Ali bin Bakkar had composed at parting-tide, whereat she wept
secretly, but presently held her peace. After awhile, the Commander of
the Faithful ordered a damsel to sing, and she began reciting:—

 Life has no sweet for me since forth ye fared; ✿ Would Heaven I wot how
    fare ye who forsake:
 'Twere only fit my tears were tears of blood, ✿ Since you are weeping
    for mine absence sake.

But when my lady heard this verse she fell back on the sofa in a
swoon,"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the slave-girl
continued to Abu al-Hasan, "But when my lady heard this verse, she fell
back on the sofa in a swoon, and I seized her hand and sprinkled
rose-water on her face, till she revived, when I said to her:—O my lady,
expose not thyself and all thy palace containeth. By the life of thy
beloved, be thou patient! She replied:—Can aught befal me worse than
death which indeed I seek, for by Allah, my ease is therein?" Whilst we
were thus talking, another damsel sang these words of the poet:—

 Quoth they, "Maybe that Patience lend thee ease!" ✿ Quoth I, "Since
    fared he where is Patience' place?"
 Covenant he made 'twixt me and him, to cut ✿ The cords of Patience at
    our last embrace![197]

And as soon as she had finished her verse Shams al-Nahar swooned away
once more, which when the Caliph saw, he came to her in haste and
commanded the wine to be removed and each damsel to return to her
chamber. He abode with her the rest of the night, and when dawned the
day, he sent for chirurgeons and leaches and bade them medicine her,
knowing not that her sickness arose from love and longing. "I tarried
with her till I deemed her in a way of recovery, and this is what kept
me from thee. I have now left her with a number of her body-women, who
were greatly concerned for her, when she bade me go to you two and bring
her news of Ali bin Bakkar and return to her with the tidings." When Abu
al-Hasan heard her story, he marvelled and said, "By Allah, I have
acquainted thee with his whole case; so now return to thy mistress; and
salute her for me and diligently exhort her to have patience and say to
her:—Keep thy secret!; and tell her that I know all her case which is
indeed hard and one which calleth for nice conduct." She thanked him and
taking leave of him, returned to her mistress. So far concerning her;
but as regards Abu al-Hasan, he ceased not to abide in his shop till the
end of the day, when he arose and shut it and locked it and betaking
himself to Ali bin Bakkar's house knocked at the door. One of the
servants came out and admitted him; and when Ali saw him, he smiled and
congratulated himself on his coming, saying, "O Abu al-Hasan, thou hast
desolated me by thine absence this day; for indeed my soul is pledged to
thee during the rest of my time." Answered the other, "Leave this talk!
Were thy healing at the price of my hand, I would cut it off ere thou
couldst ask me; and, could I ransom thee with my life, I had already
laid it down for thee. Now this very day, Shams al-Nahar's handmaid hath
been with me and told me that what hindered her coming ere this was the
Caliph's sojourn with her mistress; and she acquainted me with
everything which had betided her." And he went on to repeat to him all
that the girl had told him of Shams al-Nahar; at which Ali bin Bakkar
lamented sore and wept and said to him, "Allah upon thee, O my brother,
help me in this affliction and teach me what course I shall take.
Moreover, I beg thee of thy grace to abide with me this night, that I
may have the solace of thy society." Abu al-Hasan agreed to this
request, replying that he would readily night there; so they talked
together till eventide darkened, when Ali bin Bakkar groaned aloud and
lamented and wept copious tears, reciting these couplets:—

 Thine image in these eyne, a-lip thy name, ✿ My heart thy home; how
    couldst thou disappear?
 How sore I grieve for life which comes to end, ✿ Nor see I boon of union
    far or near.

And these the words of another:—

 She split my casque of courage with eye-swords that sorely smite; ✿ She
    pierced my patience' ring-mail with her shape like cane-spear light:
 Patched by the musky mole on cheek was to our sight displayed ✿ Camphor
    set round with ambergris, light dawning through the night.[198]
 Her soul was sorrowed and she bit carnelion stone with pearls ✿ Whose
    unions in a sugred tank ever to lurk unite:[199]
 Restless she sighed and smote with palm the snows that clothe her
    breast, ✿ And left a mark whereon I looked and ne'er beheld such
    sight.
 Pens, fashioned of her coral nails with ambergris for ink, ✿ Five lines
    on crystal page of breast did cruelly indite:

 O swordsmen armed with trusty steel! I bid you all beware ✿ When she on
    you bends deadly glance which fascinates the sprite:
 And guard thyself, O thou of spear! whenas she draweth near ✿ To tilt
    with slender quivering shape, likest the nut-brown spear.

And when Ali bin Bakkar ended his verse, he cried out with a great cry
and fell down in a fit. Abu al-Hasan thought that his soul had fled his
body and he ceased not from his swoon till daybreak, when he came to
himself and talked with his friend, who continued to sit with him till
the forenoon. Then he left him and repaired to his shop; and hardly had
he opened it, when lo! the damsel came and stood by his side. As soon as
he saw her, she made him a sign of salutation which he returned; and she
delivered to him the greeting message of her mistress and asked, "How
doth Ali bin Bakkar?" Answered he, "O handmaid of good, ask me not of
his case nor what he suffereth for excess of love-longing; he sleepeth
not by night neither resteth he by day; wakefulness wasteth him and care
hath conquered him and his condition is a consternation to his friend."
Quoth she, "My lady saluteth thee and him, and she hath written him a
letter, for indeed she is in worse case than he; and she entrusted the
same to me, saying:—Do not return save with the answer; and do thou obey
my bidding. Here now is the letter, so say, wilt thou wend with me to
him that we may get his reply?" "I hear and obey," answered Abu
al-Hasan, and locking his shop and taking with him the girl he went, by
a way different from that whereby he came, to Ali bin Bakkar's house,
where he left her standing at the door and walked in——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu al-Hasan went
with the girl to the house of Ali son of Bakkar, where he left her
standing at the door and walked in to his great joy. And Abu al-Hasan
said to him, "The reason of my coming is that such an one hath sent his
handmaid to thee with a letter, containing his greeting to thee and
mentioning therein that the cause of his not coming to thee was a matter
that hath betided him. The girl standeth even now at the door: shall she
have leave to enter?"; and he signed to him that it was Shams al-Nahar's
slave-girl. Ali understood his signal and answered, "Bring her in," and
when he saw her, he shook for joy and signed to her, "How doth thy
lord?; Allah grant him health and healing!" "He is well," answered she
and pulling out the letter gave it to him. He took it and kissing it,
opened and read it; after which he handed it to Abu al-Hasan, who found
these verses written therein:—

 This messenger shall give my news to thee; ✿ Patience what while my
    sight thou canst not see:
 A lover leav'st in love's insanity, ✿ Whose eyne abide on wake
    incessantly:
 I suffer patience-pangs in woes that none ✿ Of men can medicine;—such my
    destiny!
 Keep cool thine eyes; ne'er shall my heart forget, ✿ Nor without dream
    of thee one day shall be.
 Look what befel thy wasted frame, and thence ✿ Argue what I am doomed
    for love to dree!

"And afterwards[200]: Without fingers[201] I have written to thee, and
without tongue I have spoken to thee ✿ to resume my case, I have an eye
wherefrom sleeplessness departeth not ✿ and a heart whence sorrowful
thought stirreth not ✿ It is with me as though health I had never known
✿ nor in sadness ever ceased to wone ✿ nor spent an hour in pleasant
place ✿ but it is as if I were made up of pine and of the pain of
passion and chagrin ✿ Sickness unceasingly troubleth ✿ and my yearning
ever redoubleth ✿ desire still groweth ✿ and longing in my heart still
gloweth ✿ I pray Allah to hasten our union ✿ and dispel of my mind the
confusion ✿ And I would fain thou favour me ✿ with some words of thine ✿
that I may cheer my heart in pain and repine ✿ Moreover, I would have
thee put on a patience lief, until Allah vouchsafe relief ✿ And His
peace be with thee."[202] When Ali bin Bakkar had read this letter he
said in weak accents and feeble voice, "With what hand shall I write and
with what tongue shall I make moan and lament? Indeed she addeth
sickness to my sickness and draweth death upon my death!" Then he sat up
and taking in hand ink-case and paper, wrote the following reply:—"In
the name of Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate![203] Thy
letter hath reached me, O my lady, and hath given ease to a sprite worn
out with passion and love-longing, and hath brought healing to a wounded
heart cankered with languishment and sickness; for indeed I am become
even as saith the poet:—

 Straitenèd bosom; reveries dispread; ✿ Slumberless eyelids; body
    wearièd;
 Patience cut short; disunion longsomest; ✿ Reason deranged and heart
    whose life is fled!

And know that complaining is unavailing; but it easeth him whom
love-longing disordereth and separation destroyeth and, with
repeating:—Union, I keep myself comforted and how fine is the saying of
the poet who said:—

 Did not in love-plight joys and sorrows meet, ✿ How would the message or
    the writ be sweet?"

When he had made an end of this letter, he handed it to Abu al-Hasan,
saying, "Read it and give it to the damsel." So he took it and read it
and its words stirred his soul and its meaning wounded his vitals. Then
he committed it to the girl, and when she took it Ali bin Bakkar said to
her, "Salute thy lady for me and acquaint her with my love and longing
and how passion is blended with my flesh and my bones; and say to her
that in very deed I need a woman who shall snatch me from the sea of
destruction and save me from this dilemma; for of a truth Fortune
oppresseth me with her vicissitudes; and is there any helper to free me
from her turpitudes?" And he wept and the damsel wept for his weeping.
Then she took leave of him and went forth and Abu al-Hasan went out with
her and farewelled her. So she ganged her gait and he returned to his
shop, which he opened and sat down there, as was his wont;——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu al-Hasan
farewelled the slave-girl and returned to his shop which he opened and
sat down there according to his custom; but as he tarried, he found his
heart oppressed and his breast straitened, and he was perplexed about
his case. So he ceased not from melancholy the rest of that day and
night, and on the morrow he betook himself to Ali bin Bakkar, with whom
he sat till the folk withdrew, when he asked him how he did. Ali began
to complain of desire and to descant upon the longing and distraction
which possessed him, and repeated these words of the poet:—

 Men have 'plained of pining before my time, ✿ Live and dead by parting
    been terrified:
 But such feelings as those which my ribs immure ✿ I have never heard of
    nor ever espied.

And these of another poet:—

 I have borne for thy love what never bore ✿ For his fair, Kays the "Daft
    one"[204] hight of old:
 Yet I chase not the wildlings of wold and wild ✿ Like Kays, for madness
    is manifold.

Thereupon quoth Abu al-Hasan, "Never did I see or hear of one like unto
thee in thy love! When thou sufferest all this transport and sickness
and trouble being enamoured of one who returneth thy passion, how would
it be with thee if she whom thou lovest were contrary and contumelious,
and thy case were discovered through her perfidy?" And Ali the son of
Bakkar (says Abu al-Hasan) was pleased with my words and he relied upon
them and he thanked me for what I had said and done. I had a friend
(continued Abu al-Hasan), to whom I discovered my affair and that of Ali
and who knew that we were intimates; but none other than he was
acquainted with what was betwixt us. He was wont to come to me and
enquire how Ali did and after a little, he began to ask me about the
damsel; but I fenced him off, saying, "She invited him to her and there
was between him and her as much as can possibly take place, and this is
the end of their affair; but I have devised me a plan and an idea which
I would submit to thee." Asked his friend, "And what is that?" Answered
Abu al-Hasan, "I am a person well known to have much dealing among men
and women, and I fear, O my brother, lest the affair of these twain come
to light and this lead to my death and the seizure of my goods and the
rending of my repute and that of my family. Wherefore I have resolved to
get together my monies and make ready forthright and repair to the city
of Bassorah and there abide, till I see what cometh of their case, that
none may know of me; for love hath lorded over both and correspondence
passeth between them. At this present their go-between and confidante is
a slave-girl who hath till now kept their counsel, but I fear lest haply
anxiety get the better of her and she discover their secret to some one
and the matter, being bruited abroad, might bring me to great grief and
prove the cause of my ruin; for I have no excuse to offer my accusers."
Rejoined his friend, "Thou hast acquainted me with a parlous affair,
from the like of which the wise and understanding will shrink with fear.
Allah avert from thee the evil thou dreadest with such dread and save
thee from the consequences thou apprehendest! Assuredly thy recking is
aright." So Abu al-Hasan returned to his place and began ordering his
affairs and preparing for his travel; nor had three days passed ere he
made an end of his business and fared forth Bassorah-wards. His friend
came to visit him three days after but finding him not, asked of him
from the neighbours who answered, "He set out for Bassorah three days
ago, for he had dealings with its merchants and he is gone thither to
collect monies from his debtors; but he will soon return." The young man
was confounded at the news and knew not whither to wend; and he said in
his mind, "Would I had not parted from Abu al-Hasan!" Then he bethought
him of some plan whereby he should gain access to Ali bin Bakkar; so he
went to his lodging, and said to one of his servants, "Ask leave for me
of thy lord that I may go in and salute him." The servant entered and
told his master and presently returning, invited the man to walk in. So
he entered and found Ali bin Bakkar thrown back on the pillow and
saluted him. Ali returned his greeting and bade him welcome; whereupon
the young man began to excuse himself for having held aloof from him all
that while and added, "O my lord, between Abu al-Hasan and myself there
was close friendship, so that I used to trust him with my secrets and
could not sever myself from him an hour. Now it so chanced that I was
absent three days' space on certain business with a company of my
friends; and, when I came back and went to him, I found his shop locked
up; so I asked the neighbours about him and they replied:—He is gone to
Bassorah. Now I know he had no surer friend than thou; so, by Allah,
tell me what thou knowest of him." When Ali bin Bakkar heard this, his
colour changed and he was troubled and answered, "I never heard till
this day of his departure and, if the case be as thou sayest, weariness
is come upon me." And he began repeating:—

 For joys that are no more I wont to weep, ✿ While friends and lovers
    stood by me unscattered;
 This day when disunited me and them ✿ Fortune, I weep lost loves and
    friendship shattered.

Then he hung his head groundwards in thought awhile and presently
raising it and looking to one of his servants, said, "Go to Abu
al-Hasan's house and enquire anent him whether he be at home or
journeying abroad. If they say:—He is abroad; ask whither he be gone."
The servant went out and returning after a while said to his master,
"When I asked for Abu al-Hasan, his people told me that he was gone on a
journey to Bassorah; but I saw a damsel standing at the door who,
knowing me by sight, though I knew her not, said to me:—Art thou not
servant to Ali bin Bakkar? Even so, answered I; and she rejoined:—I bear
a message for him from one who is the dearest of all folk to him. So she
came with me and she is now standing at the door." Quoth Ali bin Bakkar,
"Bring her in." The servant went out to her and brought her in, and the
man who was with Ali looked at her and found her pretty. Then she
advanced to the son of Bakkar and saluted him——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


            Now when it was the Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
slave-girl came in to Ali bin Bakkar, she advanced to him and saluted
him and spake with him secretly; and from time to time during the
dialogue he exclaimed with an oath and swore that he had not talked and
tattled of it. Then she took leave of him and went away. Now Abu
al-Hasan's friend was a jeweller,[205] and when she was gone, he found a
place for speech and said to Ali bin Bakkar, "Doubtless and assuredly
the Caliph's household have some demand upon thee or thou hast dealings
therewith?" "Who told thee of this?" asked Ali; and the jeweller
answered, "I know it by yonder damsel who is Shams al-Nahar's
slave-girl; for she came to me a while since with a note wherein was
written that she wanted a necklace of jewels; and I sent her a costly
collar." But when Ali bin Bakkar heard this, he was greatly troubled, so
that the jeweller feared to see him give up the ghost, yet after a while
he recovered himself and said, "O my brother, I conjure thee by Allah to
tell me truly how thou knowest her." Replied he, "Do not press this
question upon me;" and Ali rejoined, "Indeed, I will not turn from thee
till thou tell me the whole truth." Quoth the jeweller, "I will tell
thee all, on condition that thou distrust me not, and that my words
cause thee no restraint; nor will I conceal aught from thee by way of
secret but will discover to thee the truth of the affair, provided that
thou acquaint me with the true state of thy case and the cause of thy
sickness." Then he told him all that had passed from first to last
between Abu al-Hasan and himself, adding, "I acted thus only out of
friendship for thee and of my desire to serve thee;" and assured him
that he would keep his secret and venture life and good in his service.
So Ali in turn told him his story and added, "By Allah, O my brother,
naught moved me to keep my case secret from thee and from others but my
fear lest folk should lift the veils of protection from certain
persons." Rejoined the jeweller, "And I desired not to foregather with
thee but of the great affection I bear thee and my zeal for thee in
every case, and my compassion for the anguish thy heart endureth from
severance. Haply I may be a comforter to thee in the room of my friend,
Abu al-Hasan, during the length of his absence: so be thou of good cheer
and keep thine eyes cool and clear." Thereupon Ali thanked him and
repeated these couplets:—

 "An say I:—Patient I can bear his faring, ✿ My tears and sighings give
    my say the lie;
 How can I hide these tears that course adown ✿ This plain, my cheek, for
    friend too fain to fly?"

Then he was silent awhile, and presently said to the jeweller "Knowest
thou what secret the girl whispered to me?" Answered he, "Not I, by
Allah, O my lord!" Quoth Ali, "She fancied that I directed Abu al-Hasan
to go to Bassorah and that I had devised this device to put a stop to
our correspondence and consorting. I swore to her that this was on
nowise so; but she would not credit me and went away to her mistress,
persisting in her injurious suspicions; for she inclined to Abu al-Hasan
and gave ear to his word." Answered the young jeweller, "O my brother, I
understood as much from the girl's manner; but I will win for thee thy
wish, Inshallah!" Rejoined Ali bin Bakkar, "Who can be with me in this
and how wilt thou do with her, when she shies and flies like a wildling
of the wold?" Cried the jeweller "By Allah, needs must I do my utmost to
help thee and contrive to scrape acquaintance with her without exposure
or mischief!" Then he asked leave to depart and Ali bin Bakkar said, "O
my brother, mind thou keep my counsel;" and he looked at him and wept.
The jeweller bade him good-bye and fared forth——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the jeweller bade
him good-bye and fared forth not knowing what he should do to win for
him his wishes; and he ceased not walking, while over-musing the matter,
till he spied a letter lying in the road. He took it up and looked at
its direction and superscription, then read it and behold, it ran:—"From
the least worthy of lovers to the most worthy of beloveds." So he opened
it and found these words written therein:—

 "A messenger from thee came bringing union-hope, ✿ But that he erred
    somehow with me the thought prevailed;
 So I rejoiced not; rather grew my grief still more; ✿ Weeting my
    messenger of wits and wit had failed.

"But afterwards: Know, O my lord! that I ken not the reason why our
correspondence between thee and me hath been broken off: but, if the
cruelty arise from thy part, I will requite it with fidelity, and if thy
love have departed, I will remain constant to my love of the parted, for
I am with thee even as says the poet:—

 Be proud; I'll crouch! Bully; I'll bear! Despise; I'll pray! ✿ Go; I
    will come! Speak; I will hear! Bid; I'll obey!"

As he was reading lo! up came the slave-girl, looking right and left,
and seeing the paper in the jeweller's hand, said to him, "O my master,
this letter is one I let fall." He made her no answer, but walked on,
and she walked behind him, till he came to his house, when he entered
and she after him, saying, "O my master, give me back this letter, for
it fell from me." Thereupon he turned to her and said, "O handmaid of
good, fear not neither grieve, for verily Allah the Protector loveth
those who protect; but tell me in truthful way thy case, as I am one who
keepeth counsel. I conjure thee by an oath not to hide from me aught of
thy lady's affairs; for haply Allah shall help me to further her wishes
and make easy by my hand that which is hard." When the slave-girl heard
these words she said, "O my lord, indeed a secret is not lost whereof
thou art the secretist; nor shall any affair come to naught for which
thou strivest. Know that my heart inclineth to thee and would interest
thee with my tidings, but do thou give me the letter." Then she told him
the whole story, adding, "Allah is witness to whatso I say." Quoth he,
"Thou hast spoken truly, for I am acquainted with the root of the
matter." Then he told her his tale of Ali bin Bakkar and how he had
learned his state of mind; and related to her all that had passed from
first to last, whereat she rejoiced; and they two agreed that she should
take the letter and carry it to Ali and return and acquaint the jeweller
with all that happened. So he gave her the letter and she took it and
sealed it up as it was before, saying, "My mistress Shams al-Nahar gave
it to me sealed; and when he hath read it and given me its reply, I will
bring it to thee." Then she took leave and repaired to Ali bin Bakkar,
whom she found waiting, and gave him the letter. He read it and writing
a paper by way of reply, gave it to her; and she carried it to the
jeweller, who tore asunder the seal[206] and read it and found written
therein these two couplets:—

 "The messenger, who kept our commerce hid, ✿ Hath failed, and showeth
    wrath without disguise;[207]
 Choose one more leal from your many friends ✿ Who, truth approving,
    disapproves of lies.

"To proceed: Verily, I have not entered upon perfidy ✿ nor have I
abandoned fidelity ✿ I have not used cruelty ✿ neither have I put off
lealty ✿ no covenant hath been broken by me ✿ nor hath love-tie been
severed by me ✿ I have not parted from penitence ✿ nor have I found
aught but misery and ruin after severance ✿ I know nothing of that thou
avouchest ✿ nor do I love aught but that which thou lovest ✿ By Him who
knoweth the secret of hidden things none discover ✿ I have no desire
save union with my lover ✿ and my one business is my passion to conceal
✿ albeit with sore sickness I ail ✿ This is the exposition of my case
and now all hail!" When the jeweller read this letter and learnt its
contents he wept with sore weeping, and the slave-girl said to him,
"Leave not this place till I return to thee; for he suspecteth me of
such and such things, in which he is excusable; so it is my desire to
bring about a meeting between thee and my mistress, Shams al-Nahar,
howsoever I may trick you to it. For the present I left her prostrate,
awaiting my return with the reply." Then she went away and the jeweller
passed the night with a troubled mind. And when day dawned he prayed his
dawn-prayer and sat expecting the girl's coming; and behold, she came in
to him rejoicing with much joy and he asked her, "What news, O damsel?"
She answered, "After leaving thee I went to my mistress and gave her the
letter written by Ali bin Bakkar; and, when she read it and understood
it, she was troubled and confounded; but I said to her:—O my lady, have
no fear of your affair being frustrated by Abu al-Hasan's disappearance,
for I have found one to take his place, better than he and more of worth
and a good man to keep secrets. Then I told her what was between thyself
and Abu al-Hasan and how thou camest by his confidence and that of Ali
bin Bakkar and how that note was dropped and thou camest by it; and I
also showed her how we arranged matters betwixt me and thee." The
jeweller marvelled with much wonder, when she resumed, "And now my
mistress would hear whatso thou sayest, that she may be assured by thy
speech of the covenants between thee and him; so get thee ready to go
with me to her forthwith." When the jeweller heard the slave-girl's
words, he saw that the proposed affair was grave and a great peril to
brave, not lightly to be undertaken or suddenly entered upon, and he
said to her, "O my sister, verily, I am of the ordinary and not like
unto Abu al-Hasan; for he being of high rank and of well-known repute,
was wont to frequent the Caliph's household, because of their need of
his merchandise. As for me, he used to talk with me and I trembled
before him the while. So, if thy mistress would speak with me, our
meeting must be in some place other than the Caliph's palace and far
from the abode of the Commander of the Faithful; for my common sense
will not let me consent to what thou proposest." On this wise he refused
to go with her and she went on to say that she would be surety for his
safety, adding, "Take heart and fear no harm!" and pressed him to
courage till he consented to accompany her; withal, his legs bent and
shivered and his hands quivered and he exclaimed, "Allah forbid that I
should go with thee! Indeed, I have not strength to do this thing!"
Replied she, "Hearten thy heart, if it be hard for thee to go to the
Caliph's palace and thou canst not muster up courage to accompany me, I
will make her come to thee; so budge not from thy place till I return to
thee with her." Then the slave-girl went away and was absent for a
while, but a short while, after which she returned to the jeweller and
said to him, "Take thou care that there be with thee none save thyself,
neither man-slave nor girl-slave." Quoth he, "I have but a negress, who
is in years and who waiteth on me."[208] So she arose and locked the
door between his negress and the jeweller and sent his manservants out
of the place; after which she fared forth and presently returned,
followed by a lady who, entering the house, filled it with the sweet
scent of her perfumes. When the jeweller saw her, he sprang up and set
her a couch and a cushion; and she sat down while he seated himself
before her. She abode awhile without speaking till she had rested
herself, when she unveiled her face and it seemed to the jeweller's
fancy as if the sun had risen in his home. Then she asked her
slave-girl, "Is this the man of whom thou spakest to me?" "Yes,"
answered she; whereupon the lady turned to the jeweller and said to him,
"How is it with thee?" Replied he, "Right well! I pray Allah for thy
preservation and that of the Commander of the Faithful." Quoth she,
"Thou hast moved us to come to thee and possess thee with what we hold
secret." Then she questioned him of his household and family; and he
disclosed to her all his circumstance and his condition and said to her,
"I have a house other than this; and I have set it apart for gathering
together my friends and brethren; and there is none there save the old
negress, of whom I spoke to thy handmaid." She asked him on what wise he
came first to know how the affair began and the matter of Abu al-Hasan
and the cause of his wayfaring: accordingly he told her all he knew and
how he had advised the journey. Thereupon she bewailed the loss of Abu
al-Hasan and said to the jeweller, "Know, O such an one,[209] that men's
souls are active in their lusts and that men are still men; and that
deeds are not done without words nor is end ever reached without
endeavour. Rest is won only by work"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shams al-Nahar
thus addressed the jeweller, "Rest is gained only by work and success is
gendered only by help of the generous. Now I have acquainted thee with
our affair and it is in thy hand to expose us or to shield us; I say no
more, because thy generosity requireth naught. Thou knowest that this my
handmaiden keepeth my counsel and therefore occupieth high place in my
favour; and I have selected her to transact my affairs of importance. So
let none be worthier in thy sight than she and acquaint her with thine
affair; and be of good cheer, for on her account thou art safe from all
fear, and there is no place shut upon thee but she shall open it to
thee. She shall bring thee my messages to Ali bin Bakkar and thou shalt
be our intermediary." So saying, she rose, scarcely able to rise, and
fared forth, the jeweller faring before her to the door of her house,
after which he returned and sat down again in his place, having seen of
her beauty and heard of her speech what dazzled him and dazed his wit,
and having witnessed of her grace and courtesy what bewitched his
sprite. He sat musing on her perfections till his mind waxed tranquil,
when he called for food and ate enough to keep soul and body together.
Then he changed his clothes and went out; and, repairing to the house of
the youth Ali bin Bakkar, knocked at the door. The servants hastened to
admit him and walked before him till they had brought him to their
master, whom he found strown upon his bed. Now when he saw the jeweller,
he said to him, "Thou hast tarried long from me, and that hath heaped
care upon my care." Then he dismissed his servants and bade the doors be
shut; after which he said to the jeweller, "By Allah, O my brother, I
have not closed my eyes since the day I saw thee last; for the
slave-girl came to me yesterday with a sealed letter from her mistress
Shams al-Nahar;" and went on to tell him all that had passed with her,
adding, "By the Lord, I am indeed perplexed concerning mine affair and
my patience faileth me: for Abu al-Hasan was a comforter who cheered me
because he knew the slave-girl." When the jeweller heard his words, he
laughed; and Ali said, "Why dost thou laugh at my words, thou on whose
coming I congratulated myself and to whom I looked for provision against
the shifts of fortune?" Then he sighed and wept and repeated these
couplets:[210]—

 Full many laugh at tears they see me shed ✿ Who had shed tears an bore
    they what I bore;
 None feeleth pity for th' afflicted's woe, ✿ Save one as anxious and in
    woe galore:
 My passion, yearning, sighing, thought, repine ✿ Are for me cornered in
    my heart's deep core:
 He made a home there which he never quits, ✿ Yet rare our meetings, not
    as heretofore:
 No friend to stablish in his place I see; ✿ No intimate but only he
    and——he.

Now when the jeweller heard these lines and understood their
significance, he wept also and told him all that had passed betwixt
himself and the slave-girl and her mistress since he left him. And Ali
bin Bakkar gave ear to his speech, and at every word he heard his colour
shifted from white to red and his body grew now stronger and then weaker
till the tale came to an end, when he wept and said, "O my brother, I am
a lost man in any case: would mine end were nigh, that I might be at
rest from all this! But I beg thee, of thy favour, to be my helper and
comforter in all my affairs till Allah fulfil whatso be His will; and I
will not gainsay thee with a single word." Quoth the jeweller, "Nothing
will quench thy fire save union with her whom thou lovest; and the
meeting must be in other than this perilous place. Better it were in a
house of mine where the girl and her mistress met me; which place she
chose for herself, to the intent that ye twain may there meet and
complain each to other of what you have suffered from the pangs of
love." Quoth Ali bin Bakkar, "O good Sir, do as thou wilt and with Allah
be thy reward!; and what thou deemest is right do it forthright: but be
not long in doing it, lest I perish of this anguish." So I abode with
him (said the jeweller) that night conversing with him till the morning
morrowed,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


           Now when it was the Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the jeweller
continued:—So I abode with him that night conversing with him till the
morning morrowed, when I prayed the dawn-prayers and, going out from
him, returned to my house. Hardly had I settled down when the damsel
came up and saluted me; and I returned her salutation and told her what
had passed between myself and Ali bin Bakkar, and she said, "Know that
the Caliph hath left us and there is no one in our place and it is safer
for us and better." Replied I, "Sooth thou sayest; yet is it not like my
other house which is both fitter and surer for us;" and the slave-girl
rejoined, "Be it as thou seest fit. I am now going to my lady and will
tell her what thou sayest and acquaint her with all thou hast
mentioned." So she went away and sought her mistress and laid the
project before her, and presently returned and said to me, "It is to be
as thou sayest: so make us ready the place and expect us." Then she took
out of her breast-pocket a purse of dinars and gave this message, "My
lady saluteth thee and saith to thee:—Take this and provide therewith
what the case requireth." But I swore that I would accept naught of it;
so she took the purse and returning to her mistress, told her, "He would
not receive the money, but gave it back to me." "No matter," answered
Shams al-Nahar. As soon as the slave-girl was gone (continued the
jeweller), I arose and betook myself to my other house and transported
thither all that was needful, by way of vessels and furniture and rich
carpets; and I did not forget china vases and cups of glass and gold and
silver; and I made ready meat and drink required for the occasion. When
the damsel came and saw what I had done, it pleased her and she bade me
fetch Ali bin Bakkar; but I said, "None shall bring him save thou."
Accordingly she went to him and brought him back perfectly dressed and
looking his best. I met him and greeted him and then seated him upon a
divan befitting his condition, and set before him sweet-scented flowers
in vases of china and vari-coloured glass.[211] Then I set on a tray of
many-tinted meats such as broaden the breast with their sight, and sat
talking with him and diverting him, whilst the slave-girl went away and
was absent till after sundown-prayers, when she returned with Shams
al-Nahar, attended by two maids and none else. Now as soon as she saw
Ali bin Bakkar and he saw her, he rose and embraced her, and she on her
side embraced him and both fell in a fit to the ground. They lay for a
whole hour insensible; then, coming to themselves, they began mutually
to complain of the pains of separation. Thereupon they drew near to each
other and sat talking charmingly, softly, tenderly; after which they
somewhat perfumed themselves and fell to thanking me for what I had done
for them. Quoth I, "Have ye a mind for food?" "Yes," quoth they. So I
set before them a small matter of food and they ate till they were
satisfied and then washed their hands; after which I led them to another
sitting-room and brought them wine. So they drank and drank deep and
inclined to each other; and presently Shams al-Nahar said to me, "O my
master, complete thy kindness by bringing us a lute or other instrument
of mirth and music that the measure of our joy may be fully filled." I
replied, "On my head and eyes!" and rising brought her a lute, which she
took and tuned; then laying it in her lap she touched it with a masterly
touch, at once exciting to sadness and changing sorrow to gladness;
after which she sang these two couplets:—

 My sleeplessness would show I love to bide on wake; ✿ And would my
    leanness prove that sickness is my make:
 And tear-floods course adown the cheeks they only scald; ✿ Would I knew
    union shall disunion overtake!

Then she went on to sing the choicest and most affecting poesy to many
and various modes, till our senses were bewitched and the very room
danced with excess of delight and surprise at her sweet singing; and
neither thought nor reason was left in us. When we had sat awhile and
the cup had gone round amongst us, the damsel took the lute and sang to
a lively measure these couplets:—

 My love a meeting promised me and kept it faithfully, ✿ One night as
    many I shall count in number and degree:
 O Night of joyance Fate vouchsafed to faithful lovers tway, ✿ Uncaring
    for the railer loon and all his company!
 My lover lay the Night with me and clipt me with his right, ✿ While I
    with left embraced him, a-faint for ecstasy;
 And hugged him to my breast and sucked the sweet wine of his lips, ✿
    Full savouring the honey-draught the honey-man sold to me.

Whilst we were thus drowned in the sea of gladness (continued the
jeweller) behold, there came in to us a little maid trembling and said,
"O my lady, look how you may go away for the folk have found you out and
have surrounded the house; and we know not the cause of this!" When I
heard her words, I arose startled and lo! in rushed a slave-girl who
cried, "Calamity hath come upon you." At the same moment the door was
burst open and there rushed in upon us ten men masked in kerchiefs with
hangers in their hands and swords by their sides, and as many more
behind them. When I saw this, the world was straitened on me for all its
wideness, and I looked to the door but saw no issue; so I sprang from
the terrace into the house of one of my neighbours and there hid myself.
Thence I found that folk had entered my lodgings and were making a
mighty hubbub; and I concluded that the Caliph had got wind of us and
had sent his Chief of the Watch to seize us and bring us before him. So
I abode confounded and ceased not remaining in my place, without any
possibility of quitting it till midnight. And presently the house-master
arose, for he had heard me moving, and he feared with exceeding great
fear of me; so he came forth from his room with drawn brand in hand and
made at me, saying, "Who is this in my house?" Quoth I, "I am thy
neighbour the jeweller;" and he knew me and retired. Then he fetched a
light and coming up to me, said, "O my brother, indeed that which hath
befallen thee this night is no light matter to me." I replied, "O my
brother, tell me who was in my house and entered it breaking in my door;
for I fled to thee not knowing what was to do." He answered, "Of a truth
the robbers who attacked our neighbours yesterday and slew such an one
and took his goods, saw thee on the same day bringing furniture into
this house; so they broke in upon thee and stole thy goods and slew thy
guests." Then we arose (pursued the jeweller), I and he, and repaired to
my house, which we found empty without a stick remaining in it; so I was
confounded at the case and said to myself, "As for the gear I care
naught about its loss, albeit I borrowed part of the stuff from my
friends and it hath come to grief; yet there is no harm in that, for
they know my excuse in the plunder of my property and the pillage of my
place. But as for Ali bin Bakkar and the Caliph's favourite concubine, I
fear lest their case get bruited abroad and this cause the loss of my
life." So I turned to my neighbour and said to him, "Thou art my brother
and my neighbour and wilt cover my nakedness; what then dost thou advise
me to do?" The man answered, "What I counsel thee to do is to keep quiet
and wait; for they who entered thy house and took thy goods have
murdered the best men of a party from the palace of the Caliphate and
have killed not a few of the watchmen: the government officers and
guards are now in quest of them on every road and haply they will hit
upon them, whereby thy wish will come about without effort of thine."
The jeweller hearing these words returned to his other house, that
wherein he dwelt,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the jeweller
heard these words he returned to his other house wherein he dwelt, and
said to himself, "Indeed this that hath befallen me is what Abu al-Hasan
feared and from which he fled to Bassorah. And now I have fallen into
it." Presently the pillage of his pleasure-house was noised abroad among
the folk, and they came to him from all sides and places, some exulting
in his misfortune and others excusing him and condoling with his sorrow;
whilst he bewailed himself to them and for grief neither ate meat nor
drank drink. And as he sat, repenting him of what he had done, behold
one of his servants came in to him and said, "There is a person at the
door who asketh for thee; and I know him not." The jeweller went forth
to him and saluted him who was a stranger; and the man whispered to him,
"I have somewhat to say between our two selves." Thereupon he brought
him in and asked him, "What hast thou to tell me?" Quoth the man, "Come
with me to thine other house;" and the jeweller enquired, "Dost thou
then know my other house?" Replied the other, "I know all about thee and
I know that also whereby Allah will dispel thy dolours." So I said to
myself (continued the jeweller) "I will go with him whither he will;"
and went out and walked on till we came to my second house; and when the
man saw it he said to me, "It is without door or door-keeper, and we
cannot possibly sit in it; so come thou with me to another place." Then
the man continued passing from stead to stead (and I with him) till
night overtook us. Yet I put no question to him of the matter in hand
and we ceased not to walk on, till we reached the open country. He kept
saying, "Follow me," and quickened his pace to a trot, whilst I trotted
after him heartening my heart to go on, until we reached the river,
where he took boat with me, and the boatman rowed us over to the other
bank. Then he landed from the boat and I landed after him; and he took
my hand and led me to a street which I had never entered in all my days,
nor do I know in what quarter it was. Presently the man stopped at the
door of a house, and opening it entered and made me enter with him;
after which he locked the door with an iron padlock,[212] and led me
along the vestibule, till he brought me in the presence of ten men who
were as though they were one and the same man; they being brothers. We
saluted them (continued the jeweller) and they returned our greeting and
bade us be seated; so we sat down. Now I was like to die for excess of
weariness; but they brought me rose-water and sprinkled it on my face;
after which they gave me a sherbet to drink and set before me food
whereof some of them ate with me. Quoth I to myself, "Were there aught
harmful in the food, they would not eat with me." So I ate, and when we
had washed our hands, each of us returned to his place. Then they asked
me, "Dost thou know us?" and I answered, "No! nor in my life have I ever
seen you; nay, I know not even him who brought me hither." Said they,
"Tell us thy tidings and lie not at all." Replied I, "Know then that my
case is wondrous and my affair marvellous; but wot ye anything about
me?" They rejoined, "Yes! it was we took thy goods yesternight and
carried off thy friend and her who was singing to him." Quoth I, "Allah
let down His veil over you! Where be my friend and she who was singing
to him?" They pointed with their hands to one side and replied, "Yonder,
but, by Allah, O our brother, the secret of their case is known to none
save to thee, for from the time we brought the twain hither up to this
day, we have not looked upon them nor questioned them of their
condition, seeing them to be persons of rank and dignity. Now this and
this only it was that hindered our killing them: so tell us the truth of
their case and thou shalt be assured of thy safety and of theirs." When
I heard this (continued the jeweller) I almost died of fright and
horror, and I said to them, "Know ye, O my brethren, that if generosity
were lost, it would not be found save with you; and had I a secret which
I feared to reveal, none but your breasts would conceal it." And I went
on exaggerating their praises in this fashion, till I saw that frankness
and readiness to speak out would profit me more than concealing facts;
so I told them all that had betided me to the very end of the tale. When
they heard it, they said, "And is this young man Ali Bakkar-son and this
lady Shams al-Nahar?" I replied "Yes." Now this was grievous to them and
they rose and made their excuses to the two and then they said to me,
"Of what we took from thy house part is spent, but here is what is left
of it." So speaking, they gave me back most of my goods and they engaged
to return them to their places in my house, and to restore me the rest
as soon as they could. My heart was set at ease till they split into two
parties, one with me and the other against me; and we fared forth from
that house and such was my case. But as regards Ali bin Bakkar and Shams
al-Nahar; they were well-nigh dying for excess of fear, when I went up
to them and saluting them, asked, "What happened to the damsel and the
two maids, and where be they gone?"; and they answered only, "We know
nothing of them." Then we walked on and stinted not till we came to the
river-bank where the barque lay; and we all boarded it, for it was the
same which had brought me over on the day before. The boatman rowed us
to the other side; but hardly had we landed and taken seat on the bank
to rest, when a troop of horse swooped down on us like eagles and
surrounded us on all sides and places, whereupon the robbers with us
sprang up in haste like vultures, and the boat put back for them and
took them in and the boatman pushed off into mid-stream, leaving us on
the river bank, unable to move or to stand still. Then the chief
horseman said to us, "Whence be ye!"; and we were perplexed for an
answer, but I said (continued the jeweller), "Those ye saw with us are
rogues; we know them not. As for us, we are singers, and they intended
taking us to sing for them, nor could we get free of them, save by
subtlety and soft words; so on this occasion they let us go, their works
being such as you have seen." But they looked at Shams al-Nahar and Ali
bin Bakkar and said to me, "Thou hast not spoken sooth but, if thy tale
be true, tell us who ye are and whence ye are; and what be your place
and in what quarter you dwell." I knew not what to answer them, but
Shams al-Nahar sprang up and approaching the Captain of the horsemen
spoke with him privily, whereupon he dismounted from his steed and,
setting her on horseback, took the bridle and began to lead his beast.
And two of his men did the like with the youth, Ali bin Bakkar, and it
was the same with myself. The Commandant of the troop ceased not faring
on with us, till they reached a certain part of the river bank, when he
sang out in some barbarous jargon[213] and there came to us a number of
men with two boats. Then the Captain embarked us in one of them (and he
with us) whilst the rest of his men put off in the other, and rowed on
with us till we arrived at the palace of the Caliphate where Shams
al-Nahar landed. And all the while we endured the agonies of death for
excess of fear, and they ceased not faring till they came to a place
whence there was a way to our quarter. Here we landed and walked on,
escorted by some of the horsemen, till we came to Ali bin Bakkar's
house; and when we entered it, our escort took leave of us and went
their way. We abode there, unable to stir from the place and not knowing
the difference between morning and evening; and in such case we
continued till the dawn of the next day. And when it was again
nightfall, I came to myself and saw Ali bin Bakkar and the women and men
of his household weeping over him, for he was stretched out without
sense or motion. Some of them came to me and thoroughly arousing me
said, "Tell us what hath befallen our son and say how came he in this
plight?" Replied I, "O folk, hearken to me"——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the jeweller
answered them, "O folk, hearken to my words and give me no trouble and
annoyance! but be patient and he will come to and tell you his tale for
himself." And I was hard upon them and made them afraid of a scandal
between me and them, but as we were thus, behold, Ali bin Bakkar moved
on his carpet-bed; whereat his friends rejoiced and the stranger folk
withdrew from him; but his people forbade me to go away. Then they
sprinkled rose-water on his face and he presently revived and sensed the
air; whereupon they questioned him of his case, and he essayed to answer
them but his tongue could not speak forthright and he signed to them to
let me go home. So they let me go, and I went forth hardly crediting my
escape and returned to my own house, supported by two men. When my
people saw me thus, they rose up and set to shrieking and slapping their
faces; but I signed to them with my hand to be silent and they were
silent. Then the two men went their way and I threw myself down on my
bed, where I lay the rest of the night and awoke not till the forenoon,
when I found my people gathered round me and saying, "What calamity
befel thee, and what evil with its mischief did fell thee?" Quoth I,
"Bring me somewhat to drink." So they brought me drink, and I drank of
it what I would and said to them, "What happened, happened." Thereupon
they went away and I made my excuses to my friends, and asked if any of
the goods that had been stolen from my other house had been returned.
They answered, "Yes! some of them have come back; by token that a man
entered and threw them down within the doorway and we saw him not." So I
comforted myself and abode in my place two days, unable to rise and
leave it; and presently I took courage and went to the bath, for I was
worn out with fatigue and troubled in mind for Ali bin Bakkar and Shams
al-Nahar, because I had no news of them all this time and could neither
get to Ali's house nor, out of fear for my life, take my rest in mine
own. And I repented to Almighty Allah of what I had done and praised Him
for my safety. Presently my fancy suggested to me to go to such and such
a place and see the folk and solace myself; so I went on foot to the
cloth-market and sat awhile with a friend of mine there. When I rose to
go, I saw a woman standing over against me; so I looked at her, and lo!
it was Shams al-Nahar's slave-girl. When I saw her, the world grew dark
in my eyes and I hurried on. She followed me, but I was seized with
affright and fled from her, and whenever I looked at her, a trembling
came upon me whilst she pursued me, saying, "Stop, that I may tell thee
somewhat!" But I heeded her not and never ceased walking till I reached
a mosque, and she entered after me. I prayed a two-bow prayer, after
which I turned to her and, sighing, said, "What dost thou want?" She
asked me how I did, and I told her all that had befallen myself and Ali
bin Bakkar and besought her for news of herself. She answered, "Know
that when I saw the robbers break open thy door and rush in, I was in
sore terror, for I doubted not but that they were the Caliph's officers
and would seize me and my mistress and we should perish forthwith: so we
fled over the roofs, I and the maids; and, casting ourselves down from a
high place, came upon some people with whom we took refuge; and they
received us and brought us to the palace of the Caliphate, where we
arrived in the sorriest of plights. We concealed our case and abode on
coals of fire till nightfall, when I opened the river-gate and, calling
the boatman who had carried us the night before, said to him:—I know not
what is become of my mistress; so take me in the boat, that we may go
seek her on the river: haply I shall chance on some news of her.
Accordingly he took me into the boat and went about with me and ceased
not wending till midnight, when I spied a barque making towards the
water gate, with one man rowing and another standing up and a woman
lying prostrate between them twain. And they rowed on till they reached
the shore when the woman landed, and I looked at her, and behold, it was
Shams al-Nahar. Thereupon I got out and joined her, dazed for joy to see
her after having lost all hopes of finding her alive."——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the slave-girl
went on telling the jeweller, "I was dazed for joy to see her, after
having lost all hopes of finding her alive. When I came up to her, she
bade me give the man who had brought her thither a thousand gold pieces;
and we carried her in, I and the two maids, and laid her on her bed;
where she passed that night in a sorely troubled state; and, when
morning dawned, I forbade the women and eunuchs to go in to her, or even
to draw near her for the whole of that day; but on the next she revived
and somewhat recovered and I found her as if she had come out of her
grave. I sprinkled rose-water upon her face and changed her clothes and
washed her hands and feet; nor did I cease to coax her, till I brought
her to eat a little and drink some wine, though she had no mind to any
such matter. As soon as she had breathed the fresh air and strength
began to return to her, I took to upbraiding her, saying:—O my lady,
consider and have pity on thyself; thou seest what hath betided us:
surely, enough and more than enough of evil hath befallen thee; for
indeed thou hast been nigh upon death. She said:—By Allah, O good
damsel, in sooth death were easier to me than what hath betided me; for
it seemed as though I should be slain and no power could save me. When
the robbers took us from the jeweller's house they asked me, Who mayst
thou be? and hearing my answer:—I am a singing girl, they believed me.
Then they turned to Ali bin Bakkar and made enquiries about him:—And who
art thou and what is thy condition?; whereto he replied:—I am of the
common kind. So they took us and carried us along, without our
resisting, to their abode; and we hurried on with them for excess of
fear; but when they had us set down with them in the house, they looked
hard at me and seeing the clothes I wore and my necklaces and jewellery,
believed not my account of myself and said to me:—Of a truth these
necklaces belong to no singing-girl; so be soothfast and tell us the
truth of thy case. I returned them no answer whatever, saying in my
mind:—Now will they slay me for the sake of my apparel and ornaments;
and I spoke not a word. Then the villains turned to Ali bin Bakkar,
asking:—And thou, who art thou and whence art thou? for thy semblance
seemeth not as that of the common kind. But he was silent and we ceased
not to keep our counsel and to weep, till Allah softened the rogues'
hearts to pity and they said to us:—Who is the owner of the house
wherein ye were? We answered:—Such an one, the jeweller; whereupon quoth
one of them:—I know him right well and I wot the other house where he
liveth and I will engage to bring him to you this very hour. Then they
agreed to set me in a place by myself and Ali bin Bakkar in a place by
himself, and said to us:—Be at rest ye twain and fear not lest your
secret be divulged; ye are safe from us. Meanwhile their comrade went
away and returned with the jeweller, who made known to them our case,
and we joined company with him; after which a man of the band fetched a
barque, wherein they embarked us all three and, rowing us over the
river, landed us with scant ceremony on the opposite bank and went their
ways. Thereupon up came a horse-patrol and asked us who we were; so I
spoke with the Captain of the watch and said to him:—I am Shams
al-Nahar, the Caliph's favourite; I had drunken strong wine and went out
to visit certain of my acquaintance of the wives of the Wazirs, when
yonder rogues came upon me and laid hold of me and brought me to this
place; but when they saw you, they fled as fast as they could. I met
these men with them; so do thou escort me and them to a place of safety
and I will requite thee as I am well able to do. When the Captain of the
watch heard my speech, he knew me and alighting, mounted me on his
horse; and in like manner did two of his men with Ali bin Bakkar. So I
spoke to her (continued the handmaid) and blamed her doings, and bade
her beware, and said to her:—O my lady, have some care for thy life! But
she was angered at my words and cried out at me; accordingly I left her
and came forth in quest of thee, but found thee not and dared not go to
the house of Ali bin Bakkar; so stood watching for thee, that I might
ask thee of him and wot how it goes with him. And I pray thee, of thy
favour, to take of me some money, for thou hast doubtless borrowed from
thy friends part of the gear and as it is lost, it behoveth thee to make
it good with folk." I replied, "To hear is to obey! go on;" and I walked
with her till we drew near my house, when she said to me, "Wait here
till I come back to thee."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after the
slave-girl had addressed the jeweller, "Wait here till I come back to
thee!" she went away and presently returned with the money, which she
put (continued the jeweller) into my hand, saying, "O my master, in what
place shall we meet?" Quoth I, "I will start and go to my house at once
and suffer hard things for thy sake and contrive how thou mayst win
access to him, for such access is difficult at this present." Said she,
"Let me know some spot, where I shall come to thee," and I answered, "In
my other house; I will go thither forthright and have the doors mended
and the place made safe again, and henceforth we will meet there." Then
she took leave of me and went her way, whilst I carried the money home,
and counting it, found it five thousand dinars. So I gave my people some
of it and to all who had lent me aught I made good their loss, after
which I arose and took my servants and repaired to my other house whence
the things had been stolen; and I brought builders and carpenters and
masons who restored it to its former state. Moreover, I placed my
negress-slave there and forgot the mishaps which had befallen me. Then I
fared forth and repaired to Ali bin Bakkar's house and, when I reached
it, his slave-servants accosted me, saying, "Our lord calleth for thee
night and day, and hath promised to free whichever of us bringeth thee
to him; so they have been wandering about in quest of thee everywhere
but knew not in what part to find thee. Our master is by way of
recovering strength, but at times he reviveth and at times he relapseth;
and whenever he reviveth he nameth thee, and saith:—Needs must ye bring
him to me, though but for the twinkling of an eye; and then he sinketh
back into his torpor." Accordingly (continued the jeweller) I
accompanied the slave and went in to Ali bin Bakkar; and, finding him
unable to speak, sat down at his head, whereupon he opened his eyes and
seeing me, wept and said, "Welcome and well come!" I raised him and
making him sit up, strained him to my bosom, and he said, "Know, O my
brother, that, from the hour I took to my bed, I have not sat up till
now: praise to Allah that I see thee again!" And I ceased not to prop
him and support him until I made him stand on his feet and walk a few
steps, after which I changed his clothes and he drank some wine: but all
this he did for my satisfaction. Then, seeing him somewhat restored, I
told him what had befallen me with the slave-girl (none else hearing
me), and said to him, "Take heart and be of good courage, I know what
thou sufferest." He smiled and I added, "Verily nothing shall betide
thee save what shall rejoice thee and medicine thee." Thereupon he
called for food, which being brought, he signed to his pages, and they
withdrew. Then quoth he to me, "O my brother, hast thou seen what hath
befallen me?"; and he made excuses to me and asked how I had fared all
that while. I told him everything that had befallen me, from beginning
to end, whereat he wondered and calling his servants, said, "Bring me
such and such things." They brought in fine carpets and hangings and,
besides that, vessels of gold and silver, more than I had lost, and he
gave them all to me; so I sent them to my house and abode with him that
night. When the day began to yellow, he said to me, "Know thou that as
to all things there is an end, so the end of love is either death or
accomplishment of desire. I am nearer unto death, would I had died ere
this befel!; and had not Allah favoured us, we had been found out and
put to shame. And now I know not what shall deliver me from this my
strait, and were it not that I fear Allah, I would hasten my own death;
for know, O my brother, that I am like bird in cage and that my life is
of a surety perished, choked by the distresses which have befallen me;
yet hath it a period stablished firm and an appointed term." And he wept
and groaned and began repeating:—

 Enough of tears hath shed the lover-wight, ✿ When grief outcast all
    patience from his sprite:
 He hid the secrets which united us, ✿ But now His eye parts what He did
    unite!

When he had finished his verses, the jeweller said to him, "O my lord, I
now intend returning to my house." He answered, "There be no harm in
that; go and come back to me with news as fast as possible, for thou
seest my case." So I took leave of him (continued the jeweller) and went
home, and hardly had I sat down, when up came the damsel, choked with
long weeping. I asked, "What is the matter?"; and she answered, "O my
lord, know then that what we feared hath befallen us; for, when I left
thee yesterday and returned to my lady, I found her in a fury with one
of the two maids who were with us the other night, and she ordered her
to be beaten. The girl was frightened and ran away; but, as she was
leaving the house, one of the door-porters and guards of the gate met
her and took her up and would have sent her back to her mistress.
However, she let fall some hints, which were a disclosure to him; so he
cajoled her and led her on to talk, and she tattled about our case and
let him know of all our doings. This affair came to the ears of the
Caliph, who bade remove my mistress, Shams al-Nahar, and all her gear to
the palace of the Caliphate; and set over her a guard of twenty eunuchs.
Since then to the present hour he hath not visited her nor hath given
her to know the reason of his action, but I suspect this to be the
cause; wherefore I am in fear for my life and am sore troubled, O my
lord, knowing not what I shall do, nor with what contrivance I shall
order my affair and hers; for she hath none by her more trusted or more
trustworthy than myself."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the slave-girl
thus addressed the jeweller, "And in very sooth my lady hath none by her
more trusted or more trustworthy in matter of secrecy than myself. So go
thou, O my master, and speed thee without delay to Ali bin Bakkar; and
acquaint him with this, that he may be on his guard and ward; and, if
the affair be discovered, we will cast about for some means whereby to
save our lives." On this (continued the jeweller), I was seized with
sore trouble and the world grew dark in my sight for the slave-girl's
words; and when she was about to wend, I said to her, "What reckest thou
and what is to be done?" Quoth she, "My counsel is that thou hasten to
Ali bin Bakkar, if thou be indeed his friend and desire to save him;
thine be it to carry him this news at once without aught of stay and
delay, or regard for far and near; and mine be it to sniff about for
further news." Then she took her leave of me and went away: so I rose
and followed her track and, betaking myself to Ali bin Bakkar, found him
flattering himself with impossible expectations. When he saw me
returning to him so soon, he said, "I see thou hast come back to me
forthwith and only too soon." I answered, "Patience, and cut short this
foolish connection and shake off the pre-occupation wherein thou art,
for there hath befallen that which may bring about the loss of thy life
and good." Now when he heard this, he was troubled and strongly moved;
and he said to me, "O my brother, tell me what hath happened." Replied
I, "O my lord, know that such and such things have happened and thou art
lost without recourse, if thou abide in this thy house till the end of
the day." At this, he was confounded and his soul well-nigh departed his
body, but he recovered himself and said to me, "What shall I do, O my
brother, and what counsel hast thou to offer?" Answered I, "My advice is
that thou take what thou canst of thy property and whom of thy slaves
thou trustest, and flee with us to a land other than this, ere this very
day come to an end." And he said, "I hear and I obey." So he rose,
confused and dazed like one in epilepsy, now walking and now falling,
and took what came under his hand. Then he made an excuse to his
household and gave them his last injunctions, after which he loaded
three camels and mounted his beast; and I did likewise. We went forth
privily in disguise and fared on and ceased not our wayfare the rest of
that day and all its night, till nigh upon morning, when we unloaded
and, hobbling our camels, lay down to sleep. But we were worn with
fatigue and we neglected to keep watch, so that there fell upon us
robbers, who stripped us of all we had and slew our slaves, when these
would have beaten them off, leaving us naked and in the sorriest of
plights, after they had taken our money and lifted our beasts and
disappeared. As soon as they were gone, we arose and walked on till
morning dawned, when we came to a village which we entered, and finding
a mosque took refuge therein for we were naked. So we sat in a corner
all that day and we passed the next night without meat or drink; and at
daybreak we prayed our dawn-prayer and sat down again. Presently behold,
a man entered and saluting us prayed a two-bow prayer, after which he
turned to us and said, "O folk, are ye strangers?" We replied, "Yes: the
bandits waylaid us and stripped us naked, and we came to this town but
know none here with whom we may shelter." Quoth he, "What say ye? will
you come home with me?" And (pursued the jeweller) I said to Ali bin
Bakkar, "Up and let us go with him, and we shall escape two evils; the
first, our fear lest some one who knoweth us enter this mosque and
recognise us, so that we come to disgrace; and the second, that we are
strangers and have no place wherein to lodge." And he answered
helplessly, "As thou wilt." Then the man said to us again, "O ye poor
folk, give ear unto me and come with me to my place," and I replied,
"Hearkening and obedience;" whereupon he pulled off a part of his own
clothes and covered us therewith and made his excuses to us and spoke
kindly to us. Then we arose and accompanied him to his house and he
knocked at the door, whereupon a little slave-boy came out and opened to
us. The host entered and we followed him;[214] when he called for a
bundle of clothes and muslins for turbands, and gave us each a suit and
a piece; so we dressed and turbanded ourselves and sat us down.
Presently, in came a damsel with a tray of food and set it before us,
saying, "Eat." We ate some small matter and she took away the tray:
after which we abode with our host till nightfall, when Ali bin Bakkar
sighed and said to me, "Know, O my brother, that I am a dying man past
hope of life and I would charge thee with a charge: it is that, when
thou seest me dead, thou go to my parent[215] and tell her of my decease
and bid her come hither that she may be here to receive the visits of
condolence and be present at the washing of my corpse; and do thou
exhort her to bear my loss with patience." Then he fell down in a
fainting fit and, when he recovered he heard a damsel singing afar off
and making verses as she sang. Thereupon he addressed himself to give
ear to her and hearken to her voice; and now he was insensible, absent
from the world, and now he came to himself; and anon he wept for grief
and mourning at the love which had befallen him. Presently, he heard the
damsel who was singing repeat these couplets:—

 Parting ran up to part from lover-twain ✿ Free converse, perfect
    concord, friendship fain:
 The Nights with shifting drifted us apart, ✿ Would heaven I wot if we
    shall meet again:
 How bitter after meeting 'tis to part, ✿ May lovers ne'er endure so
    bitter pain!
 Death-grip, death-choke, lasts for an hour and ends, ✿ But
    parting-tortures aye in heart remain:
 Could we but trace where Parting's house is placed, ✿ We would make
    Parting eke of parting taste!

When Ali son of Bakkar heard the damsel's song, he sobbed one sob and
his soul quitted his body. As soon as I saw that he was dead (continued
the jeweller), I committed his corpse to the care of the house-master
and said to him "Know thou, that I am going to Baghdad, to tell his
mother and kinsfolk, that they may come hither and conduct his burial."
So I betook myself to Baghdad and, going to my house, changed my
clothes; after which I repaired to Ali bin Bakkar's lodging. Now when
his servants saw me, they came to me and questioned me of him, and I
bade them ask permission for me to go in to his mother. She gave me
leave; so I entered and saluting her, said, "Verily Allah ordereth the
lives of all creatures by His commandment and when He decreeth aught,
there is no escaping its fulfilment; nor can any soul depart but by
leave of Allah, according to the Writ which affirmeth the appointed
term."[216] She guessed by these words that her son was dead and wept
with sore weeping, then she said to me, "Allah upon thee! tell me, is my
son dead?" I could not answer her for tears and excess of grief, and
when she saw me thus, she was choked with weeping and fell to the ground
in a fit. As soon as she came to herself she said to me, "Tell me how it
was with my son." I replied, "May Allah abundantly compensate thee for
his loss!" and I told her all that had befallen him from beginning to
end. She then asked, "Did he give thee any charge?"; and I answered,
"Yes," and told her what he had said, adding, "Hasten to perform his
funeral." When she heard these words, she swooned away again; and, when
she recovered, she addressed herself to do as I charged her. Then I
returned to my house; and as I went along musing sadly upon the fair
gifts of his youth, behold, a woman caught hold of my hand;——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the jeweller thus
continued:—A woman caught hold of my hand; and I looked at her and lo!
it was the slave-girl who used to come from Shams al-Nahar, and she
seemed broken by grief. When we knew each other we both wept and ceased
not weeping till we reached my house, and I said to her, "Knowest thou
the news of the youth, Ali bin Bakkar?" She replied, "No, by Allah!"; so
I told her the manner of his death and all that had passed, whilst we
both wept; after which quoth I to her, "How is it with thy mistress?"
Quoth she, "The Commander of the Faithful would not hear a single word
against her; but, for the great love he bore her, saw all her actions in
a favourable light, and said to her:—O Shams al-Nahar, thou art dear to
me and I will bear with thee and bring the noses of thy foes to the
grindstone. Then he bade them furnish her an apartment decorated with
gold and a handsome sleeping-chamber, and she abode with him in all ease
of life and high favour. Now it came to pass that one day, as he sat at
wine according to his custom, with his favourite concubines in presence,
he bade them be seated in their several ranks and made Shams al-Nahar
sit by his side. But her patience had failed and her disorder had
redoubled upon her. Then he bade one of the damsels sing: so she took a
lute and tuning it struck the chords, and began to sing these verses:—

 One craved my love and I gave all he craved of me, ✿ And tears on cheek
    betray how 'twas I came to yield:
 Tear-drops, meseemeth, are familiar with our case, ✿ Revealing what I
    hide, hiding what I revealed:
 How can I hope in secret to conceal my love, ✿ Which stress of passion
    ever showeth unconcealed:
 Death, since I lost my lover, is grown sweet to me; ✿ Would I knew what
    their joys when I shall quit the field!"

Now when Shams al-Nahar heard these verses sung by the slave-girl, she
could not keep her seat; but fell down in a fainting-fit whereupon the
Caliph cast the cup from his hand and drew her to him crying out; and
the damsels also cried out, and the Prince of True Believers turned her
over and shook her, and lo and behold! she was dead. The Caliph grieved
over her death with sore grief and bade break all the vessels and
dulcimers[217] and other instruments of mirth and music which were in
the room; then carrying her body to his closet, he abode with her the
rest of the night. When the day broke, he laid her out and commanded to
wash her and shroud her and bury her. And he mourned for her with sore
mourning, and questioned not of her case nor of what caused her
condition. And I beg thee in Allah's name (continued the damsel) to let
me know the day of the coming of Ali bin Bakkar's funeral procession
that I may be present at his burial." Quoth I, "For myself, where thou
wilt thou canst find me; but thou, where art thou to be found, and who
can come at thee where thou art?" She replied, "On the day of Shams
al-Nahar's death, the Commander of the Faithful freed all her women,
myself among the rest;[218] and I am one of those now abiding at the
tomb in such a place." So I rose and accompanied her to the
burial-ground and piously visited Shams al-Nahar's tomb; after which I
went my way and ceased not to await the coming of Ali bin Bakkar's
funeral. When it arrived, the people of Baghdad went forth to meet it
and I went forth with them; and I saw the damsel among the women and she
the loudest of them in lamentation, crying out and wailing with a voice
that rent the vitals and made the heart ache. Never was seen in Baghdad
a finer funeral than his; and we ceased not to follow in crowds till we
reached the cemetery and buried him to the mercy of Almighty Allah; nor
from that time to this have I ceased to visit the tombs of Ali son of
Bakkar and of Shams al-Nahar. This, then, is their story, and Allah
Almighty have mercy upon them!"[219] And yet is not their tale
(continued Shahrazad) more wonderful than that of King Shahrimán. The
King asked her "And what was his tale?"——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Hundred and Seventieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, as regards the

-----

Footnote 175:

  _i.e._ a descendant, not a Prince.

Footnote 176:

  The Arab shop is a kind of hole in the wall and buyers sit upon its
  outer edge. (Pilgrimage i. 99).

Footnote 177:

  By a similar image the chamæleon is called Abú Kurrat = Father of
  coolness; because it is said to have the "coldest" eye of all animals
  and insensible to heat and light, since it always looks at the sun.

Footnote 178:

  This dividing the hemistich words is characteristic of certain tales;
  so I have retained it although inevitably suggesting:—

                         I left Matilda at the U-
                         niversity of Gottingen.

Footnote 179:

  These naïve offers in Eastern tales mostly come from the true
  seducer—Eve. Europe, and England especially, still talks endless
  absurdity upon the subject. A man of the world may "seduce" an utterly
  innocent (which means an ignorant) girl. But to "seduce" a married
  woman! What a farce!

Footnote 180:

  Masculine again for feminine: the lines are as full of word-plays,
  vulgarly called puns, as Sanskrit verses.

Footnote 181:

  The Eastern heroine always has a good appetite and eats well. The
  sensible Oriental would infinitely despise that _maladive_ Parisienne
  in whom our neighbours delight, and whom I long to send to the
  Hospital.

Footnote 182:

  _i.e._ her rivals have discovered the secret of her heart.

Footnote 183:

  _i.e._ blood as red as wine.

Footnote 184:

  The wine-cup (sun-like) shines in thy hand; thy teeth are bright as
  the Pleiads and thy face rises like a moon from the darkness of thy
  dress-collar.

Footnote 185:

  The masculine of Marjánah (Morgiana) "the she coral-branch;" and like
  this a name generally given to negroes. We have seen white applied to
  a blackamoor by way of metonomy and red is also connected with black
  skins by way of fun. A Persian verse says:

              "If a black wear red, e'en an ass would grin."

Footnote 186:

  Suggesting that she had been sleeping.

Footnote 187:

  Arab. "Raushan," a window projecting and latticed: the word is orig.
  Persian: so Raushaná (splendour) = Roxana. It appears to me that this
  beautiful name gains beauty by being understood.

Footnote 188:

  The word means any servant, but here becomes a proper name. "Wasífah"
  usually = a concubine.

Footnote 189:

  _i.e._ eagerness, desire, love-longing.

Footnote 190:

  Arab. "Rind," which may mean willow (oriental), bay or aloes wood:
  Al-Asma'i denies that it ever signifies myrtle.

Footnote 191:

  These lines occur in Night cxiv: by way of variety I give (with
  permission) Mr. Payne's version (iii. 59).

Footnote 192:

  Referring to the proverb "Al-Khauf maksúm" = fear (cowardice) is
  equally apportioned: _i.e._ If I fear you, you fear me.

Footnote 193:

  The fingers of the right band are struck upon the palm of the left.

Footnote 194:

  There are intricate rules for "joining" the prayers; but this is
  hardly the place for a subject discussed in all religious treatises.
  (Pilgrimage iii. 239.)

Footnote 195:

  The hands being stained with Henna and perhaps indigo in stripes are
  like the ring-rows of chain armour. See Lane's illustration (Mod.
  Egypt, chapt. i.)

Footnote 196:

  She made rose-water of her cheeks for my drink and she bit with teeth
  like grains of hail those lips like the lotus-fruit, or jujube: Arab.
  "Unnab" or "Nabk," the plum of the Sidr or Zizyphus lotus.

Footnote 197:

  Meaning to let Patience run away like an untethered camel.

Footnote 198:

  _i.e._ her fair face shining through the black hair. "Camphor" is a
  favourite with Arab poets; the Persians hate it because connected in
  their minds with death; being used for purifying the corpse. We read
  in Burckhardt (Prov. 464) "Singing without siller is like a corpse
  without Hanút"—this being a mixture of camphor and rose-water
  sprinkled over the face of the dead before shrouded. Similarly
  Persians avoid speaking of coffee, because they drink it at funerals
  and use tea at other times.

Footnote 199:

  _i.e._ she is angry and bites her carnelion lips with pearly teeth.

Footnote 200:

  Arab. "Wa ba'ad;" the formula which follows "Bismillah"—In the name of
  Allah. The French translate it _or sus_, etc. I have noticed the
  legend about its having been first used by the eloquent Koss, Bishop
  of Najrán.

Footnote 201:

  _i.e._ Her mind is so troubled she cannot answer for what she writes.

Footnote 202:

  The Bul. Edit. (i. 329) and the Mac. Edit. (i. 780) give to Shams
  al-Nahar the greater part of Ali's answer, as is shown by the Calc.
  Edit. (230 _et seq._) and the Bresl. Edit. (ii. 366 _et seq._). Lane
  mentions this (ii. 74) but in his usual perfunctory way gives no
  paginal references to the Calc, or Bresl.; so that those who would
  verify the text may have the displeasure of hunting for it.

Footnote 203:

  Arab. "Bi'smi 'lláhi' r-Rahmáni'r-Rahím." This auspicatory formula was
  borrowed by Al-Islam not from the Jews but from the Guebre
  "Ba nám-i-Yezdán bakhsháishgar-i-dádár!" (in the name of
  Yezdan—God—All-generous, All-just!) The Jews have, "In the name of the
  Great God;" and the Christians, "In the name of the Father, etc." The
  so-called Sir John Mandeville begins his book, In the name of God,
  Glorious and Almighty. The sentence forms the first of the Koran and
  heads every chapter except only the ninth, an exception for which
  recondite reasons are adduced. Hence even in the present day it begins
  all books, letters and writings in general; and it would be a sign of
  Infidelity (_i.e._ non-Islamism) to omit it. The difference between
  "Rahmán" and "Rahím" is that the former represents an accidental
  (compassionating), the latter a constant quality (compassionate). Sale
  therefore renders it very imperfectly by "In the name of the most
  merciful God;" the Latinists better, "In nomine Dei misericordis,
  clementissimi" (Gottwaldt in Hamza Ispahanensis); Mr. Badger much
  better, "In the name of God, the Pitiful, the Compassionate"—whose
  only fault is not preserving the assonance: and Maracci best, "In
  nomine Dei miseratoris, misericordis."

Footnote 204:

  Arab. Majnún (_i.e._ one possessed by a Jinni) the well-known model
  lover of Layla, a fictitious personage for whom see D'Herbelot (_s.
  v._ Megnoun). She was celebrated by Abu Mohammed Nizam al-Din of
  Ganjah (ob. A.H. 597 = 1200) pop. known as Nizámi, the caustic and
  austere poet who wrote:—

               The weals of this world are the ass's meed!
               Would Nizámi were of the ass's breed.

  The series in the East begins chronologically with Yúsuf and Zulaykhá
  (Potiphar's wife) sung by Jámi (nat. A.H. 817 = 1414); the next in
  date is Khusraw and Shirin (also by Nizami); Farhad and Shirin; and
  Layla and Majnun (the Night-black maid and the Maniac-man) are the
  last. We are obliged to compare the lovers with "Romeo and Juliet,"
  having no corresponding instances in modern days: the classics of
  Europe supply a host as Hero and Leander, Theagenes and Charicleia,
  etc. etc.

Footnote 205:

  The jeweller of Eastern tales from Marocco to Calcutta, is almost
  invariably a rascal: here we have an exception.

Footnote 206:

  This must not be understood of sealing-wax, which, however, is of
  ancient date. The Egyptians (Herod. ii. 38) used "sealing earth" (γῆ
  σημαντρίς) probably clay, impressed with a signet (δακτὺλιον); the
  Greeks mud-clay (πηλός); and the Romans first cretula and then wax
  (Beckmann). Mediæval Europe had bees-wax tempered with Venice
  turpentine and coloured with cinnabar or similar material. The modern
  sealing-wax, whose distinctive is shell-lac, was brought by the Dutch
  from India to Europe; and the earliest seals date from about A.D.
  1560. They called it Ziegel-lak, whence the German Siegel-lack, the
  French preferring _cire-à-cacheter_, as distinguished from
  _cire-à-sceller_, the softer material. The use of sealing-wax in India
  dates from old times and the material, though coarse and unsightly, is
  still preferred by Anglo-Indians because it resists heat whereas the
  best English softens like pitch.

Footnote 207:

  Evidently referring to the runaway Abu al-Hasan, not to the
  she-Mercury.

Footnote 208:

  An unmarried man is not allowed to live in a respectable quarter of a
  Moslem city unless he takes such precaution. Lane (Mod. Egypt.
  _passim_) has much to say on this point; and my excellent friend the
  late Professor Spitta at Cairo found the native prejudice very
  troublesome.

Footnote 209:

  Arab. "Yá fulán" = O certain person (fulano in Span. and Port.) a
  somewhat contemptuous address.

Footnote 210:

  Mr. Payne remarks, "These verses apparently relate to Aboulhusn, but
  it is possible that they may be meant to refer to Shemsennehar." (iii.
  80.)

Footnote 211:

  Arab. and Pers. "Bulúr" (vulg. billaur) retaining the venerable
  tradition of the Belus-river. In Al-Hariri (Ass. of Halwán) it means
  crystal and there is no need of proposing to translate it by onyx or
  to identify it with the Greek βήρυλλος, the beryl.

Footnote 212:

  The door is usually shut with a wooden bolt.

Footnote 213:

  Arab. "Ritánah," from "Ratan," speaking any tongue not Arabic, the
  allusion being to foreign mercenaries, probably Turks. In later days
  Turkish was called Muwalla', a pied horse, from its mixture of
  languages.

Footnote 214:

  This is the rule; to guard against the _guet-apens_.

Footnote 215:

  Arab. "Wálidati," used when speaking to one not of the family in lieu
  of the familiar "Ummi" = my mother. So the father is Wálid = the
  begetter.

Footnote 216:

  This is one of the many euphemistic formulæ for such occasions: they
  usually begin "May thy head live," etc.

Footnote 217:

  Arab. "Kánún" Gr. κανὼν, an instrument not unlike the Austrian zither;
  it is illustrated in Lane (ii. 77).

Footnote 218:

  This is often done, the merit of the act being transferred to the soul
  of the deceased.

Footnote 219:

  The two amourists were martyrs; and their amours, which appear
  exaggerated to the Western mind, have many parallels in the East. The
  story is a hopeless affair of love; with only one moral (if any be
  wanted) viz., there may be too much of a good thing. It is given very
  concisely in the Bul. Edit. vol. i.; and more fully in the Mac. Edit.
  aided in places by the Bresl. (ii. 320) and the Calc. (ii. 230).




                        TALE OF KAMAR AL-ZAMAN,


That there was in times of yore and in ages long gone before a King
called Shahrimán,[220] who was lord of many troops and guards, and
officers, and who reigned over certain islands, known as the Khálidán
Islands,[221] on the borders of the land of the Persians. But he was
stricken in years and his bones were wasted, without having been blessed
with a son, albeit he had four wives, daughters of Kings, and threescore
concubines, with each of whom he was wont to lie one night in turn.[222]
This preyed upon his mind and disquieted him, so that he complained
thereof to one of his Wazirs, saying, "Verily I fear lest my kingdom be
lost when I die, for that I have no son to succeed me." The Minister
answered, "O King, peradventure Allah shall yet bring something to pass;
so rely upon the Almighty and be instant in prayer. It is also my
counsel that thou spread a banquet and invite to it the poor and needy,
and let them eat of thy food; and supplicate the Lord to vouchsafe thee
a son; for perchance there may be among thy guests a righteous soul
whose prayers find acceptance; and thereby thou shalt win thy wish." So
the King rose, made the lesser ablution, and prayed a two-bow
prayer,[223] then he cried upon Allah with pure intention; after which
he called his chief wife to bed and lay with her forthright. By grace of
God she conceived and, when her months were accomplished, she bore a
male child, like the moon on the night of fulness. The King named him
Kamar al-Zamán,[224] and rejoiced in him with extreme joy and bade the
city be dressed out in his honour; so they decorated the streets seven
days, whilst the drums beat and the messengers bore the glad tidings
abroad. Then wet and dry nurses were provided for the boy and he was
reared in splendour and delight, until he reached the age of fifteen. He
grew up of surpassing beauty and seemlihead and symmetry, and his father
loved him so dear that he could not brook to be parted from him day or
night. One day he complained to a certain of his Ministers anent the
excess of his love for his only child, saying, "O thou the Wazir, of a
truth I fear for my son, Kamar al-Zaman, the shifts and accidents which
befal man and fain would I marry him in my lifetime." Answered the
Wazir, "O King, know thou that marriage is one of the most honourable of
moral actions, and thou wouldst indeed do well and right to marry thy
son in thy lifetime, ere thou make him Sultan." On this quoth the King,
"Hither with my son Kamar al-Zaman;" so he came and bowed his head to
the ground in modesty before his sire. "O Kamar al-Zaman," said King
Shahriman, "of a truth I desire to marry thee and rejoice in thee during
my lifetime." Replied he, "O my father, know that I have no lust to
marry nor doth my soul incline to women; for that concerning their craft
and perfidy I have read many books and heard much talk, even as saith
the poet:—

 Now, an of women ask ye, I reply:— ✿ In their affairs I'm versed a
    doctor rare!
 When man's head grizzles and his money dwindles, ✿ In their affections
    he hath naught for share."

And another said:—

 Rebel against women and so shalt thou serve Allah the more; ✿ The youth
    who gives women the rein must forfeit all hope to soar.
 They'll baulk him when seeking the strange device, Excelsior, ✿ Tho'
    waste he a thousand of years in the study of science and lore.

And when he had ended his verses he continued, "O my father, wedlock is
a thing whereto I will never consent; no, not though I drink the cup of
death." When Sultan Shahriman heard these words from his son, light
became darkness in his sight and he grieved thereat with great
grief.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Seventy-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Shahriman heard these words from his son, the light became darkness in
his sight and he grieved over his son's lack of obedience to his
directions in the matter of marriage; yet, for the great love he bore
him, he was unwilling to repeat his wishes and was not wroth with him,
but caressed him and spake him fair and showed him all manner of
kindness such as tendeth to induce affection. All this, and Kamar
al-Zaman Increased daily in beauty and loveliness and amorous grace; and
the King bore with him for a whole year till he became perfect in
eloquence and elegant wit. All men were ravished with his charms; and
every breeze that blew bore the tidings of his gracious favour; his fair
sight was a seduction to the loving and a garden of delight to the
longing, for he was honey-sweet of speech and the sheen of his face
shamed the full moon; he was a model of symmetry and blandishment and
engaging ways; his shape was as the willow-wand or the rattan-cane and
his cheeks might take the place of rose or red anemone. He was, in fine
the pink of perfection, even as the poet hath said of him:—

 He came and cried they, "Now be Allah blest! ✿ Praise Him that clad that
    soul in so fair vest!"
 He's King of Beauty where the beauteous be; ✿ All are his Ryots,[225]
    all obey his hest:
 His lip-dew's sweeter than the virgin honey; ✿ His teeth are pearls in
    double row close prest:
 All charms are congregate in him alone, ✿ And deals his loveliness to
    man unrest.
 Beauty wrote on those cheeks for worlds to see ✿ "I testify there is
    none good but He."[226]

When the year came to an end, the King called his son to him and said,
"O my son, wilt thou not hearken to me?" Whereupon Kamar al-Zaman fell
down for respect and shame before his sire and replied, "O my father,
how should I not hearken to thee, seeing that Allah commandeth me to
obey thee and not gainsay thee?" Rejoined King Shahriman, "O my son,
know that I desire to marry thee and rejoice in thee whilst yet I live,
and make thee King over my realm, before my death." When the Prince
heard his sire pronounce these words he bowed his head awhile, then
raised it and said, "O my father, this is a thing which I will never do;
no, not though I drink the cup of death! I know of a surety that the
Almighty hath made obedience to thee a duty in religion; but, Allah upon
thee! press me not in this matter of marriage, nor fancy that I will
ever marry my life long; for that I have read the books both of the
ancients and the moderns, and have come to know all the mischiefs and
miseries which have befallen them through women and their endless
artifices. And how excellent is the saying of the poet:—

 He whom the randy motts entrap ✿ Shall never see deliverance!
 Though build he forts a thousand-fold, ✿ Whose mighty strength
    lead-plates enhance,[227]
 Their force shall be of no avail; ✿ These fortresses have not a chance!
 Women aye deal in treachery ✿ To far and near o'er earth's expanse;
 With fingers dipt in Henna-blood ✿ And locks in braids that mad the
    glance;
 And eyelids painted o'er with Kohl ✿ They gar us drink of dire
    mischance.

And how excellently saith another:—

 Women, for all the chastity they claim, ✿ Are offal cast by kites
    where'er they list:
 This night their talk and secret charms are thine; ✿ That night another
    joyeth calf and wrist:
 Like inn, whence after night thou far'st at dawn, ✿ And lodges other
    wight thou hast not wist."[228]

Now when King Shahriman heard these his son's words and learnt the
import of his verses and poetical quotations, he made no answer, of his
excessive love for him, but redoubled in graciousness and kindness to
him. He at once broke up the audience and, as soon as the seance was
over, he summoned his Minister and taking him apart, said to him, "O
thou the Wazir! tell me how I shall deal with my son in the matter of
marriage."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King summoned
his Minister; and, taking him apart, said to him, "O thou the Wazir,
tell me what I shall do with my son in the matter of marriage. Of a
truth I took counsel with thee thereon and thou didst counsel me to
marry him, before making him King. I have spoken with him of wedlock
time after time and he still gainsaid me; so do thou, O Wazir,
forthright advise me what to do." Answered the Minister, "O King, wait
another year and, if after that thou be minded to speak to him on the
matter of marriage, speak not to him privily, but address him on a day
of state, when all the Emirs and Wazirs are present with the whole of
the army standing before thee. And when all are in crowd then send for
thy son, Kamar al-Zaman, and summon him; and, when he cometh, broach to
him the matter of marriage before the Wazirs and Grandees and Officers
of state and Captains; for he will surely be bashful and daunted by
their presence and will not dare to oppose thy will." Now when King
Shahriman heard his Wazir's words, he rejoiced with exceeding joy,
seeing success in the project, and bestowed on him a splendid robe of
honour. Then he took patience with his son another year, whilst, with
every day that passed over him, Kamar al-Zaman increased in beauty and
loveliness, and elegance and perfect grace, till he was nigh twenty
years old. Indeed Allah had clad him in the cloak of comeliness and had
crowned him with the crown of completion: his eye-glance was more
bewitching than Hárút and Marút[229] and the play of his luring looks
more misleading than Tághút;[230] and his cheeks shone like the dawn
rosy-red and his eyelashes stormed the keen-edged blade: the whiteness
of his brow resembled the moon shining bright, and the blackness of his
locks was as the murky night; and his waist was more slender than the
gossamer[231] and his back parts than two sand-heaps bulkier, making a
Babel of the heart with their softness; but his waist complained of the
weight of his hips and loins; and his charms ravished all mankind, even
as one of the poets saith in these couplets:—

 "By his eyelash tendril curled, by his slender waist I swear,
 By the dart his witchery feathers, fatal hurtling through the air;
 By the just roundness of his shape, by his glances bright and keen,
 By the swart limning of his locks, and his fair forehead shining sheen;
 By his eyebrows which deny that she who looks on them should sleep,
 Which now commanding, now forbidding, o'er me high dominion keep;

 By the roses of his cheek, his face as fresh as myrtle wreath,
 His tulip lips, and those pure pearls that hold the places of his teeth;
 By his noble form, which rises featly turned in even swell
 To where upon his jutting chest two young pomegranates seem to dwell;
 By his supple moving hips, his taper waist, and silky skin,
 By all he robbed Perfection of, and holds enchained his form within;
 By his tongue of steadfastness, his nature true, and excellent,
 By the greatness of his rank, his noble birth, and high descent,
 Musk from my love her savour steals, who musk exhales from every limb
 And all the airs ambergris breathes are but the Zephyr's blow o'er him.
 The sun, methinks, the broad bright sun, as low before my love should
    quail
 As would my love himself transcend the paltry paring of his nail!"[232]

So King Shahriman, having accepted the counsel of his Wazir, waited for
another year and a great festival,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shahriman having
accepted the counsel of his Wazir, waited for another year and a great
festival, a day of state when the audience hall was filled with his
Emirs and Wazirs and Grandees of his reign and Officers of State and
Captains of might and main. Thereupon he sent for his son Kamar al-Zaman
who came, and kissing the ground before him three times, stood in
presence of his sire with his hands behind his back the right grasping
the left.[233] Then said the King to him, "Know O my son, that I have
not sent for thee on this occasion and summoned thee to appear before
this assembly and all these officers of estate here awaiting our orders
save and except that I may lay a commandment on thee, wherein do thou
not disobey me; and my commandment is that thou marry, for I am minded
to wed thee to a King's daughter and rejoice in thee ere I die." When
the Prince heard this much from his royal sire, he bowed his head
groundwards awhile, then raising it towards his father and being moved
thereto at that time by youthful folly and boyish ignorance, replied,
"But for myself I will never marry; no, not though I drink the cup of
death! As for thee, thou art great in age and small of wit: hast thou
not, twice ere this day and before this occasion, questioned me of the
matter of marriage, and I refused my consent? Indeed thou dotest and are
not fit to govern a flock of sheep!" So saying Kamar al-Zaman unclasped
his hands from behind his back and tucked up his sleeves above his
elbows before his father, being in a fit of fury; moreover, he added
many words to his sire, knowing not what he said in the trouble of his
spirits. The King was confounded and ashamed, for that this befel in the
presence of his grandees and soldier-officers assembled on a high
festival and a state occasion; but presently the majesty of Kingship
took him, and he cried out at his son and made him tremble. Then he
called to the guards standing before him and said, "Seize him!" So they
came forward and laid hands on him and, binding him, brought him before
his sire, who bade them pinion his elbows behind his back and in this
guise make him stand before the presence. And the Prince bowed down his
head for fear and apprehension, and his brow and face were beaded and
spangled with sweat; and shame and confusion troubled him sorely.
Thereupon his father abused him and reviled him and cried, "Woe to thee,
thou son of adultery and nursling of abomination![234] How durst thou
answer me on this wise before my captains and soldiers? But hitherto
none hath chastised thee."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Shahriman
cried out to his son Kamar al-Zaman, "How durst thou answer me on this
wise before my captains and soldiers? But hitherto none hath chastised
thee. Knowest thou not that this deed thou hast done were a disgrace to
him had it been done by the meanest of my subjects?" And the King
commanded his Mamelukes to loose his elbow bonds and imprison him in one
of the bastions of the citadel. So they took the Prince and thrust him
into an old tower, wherein there was a dilapidated saloon and in its
middle a ruined well, after having first swept it and cleansed its
floor-flags and set therein a couch on which they laid a mattress, a
leathern rug and a cushion; and then they brought a great lanthorn and a
wax candle, for that place was dark, even by day. And lastly the
Mamelukes led Kamar al-Zaman thither, and stationed an eunuch at the
door. And when all this was done, the Prince threw himself on the couch,
sad-spirited, and heavy-hearted; blaming himself and repenting of his
injurious conduct to his father, whenas repentance availed him naught,
and saying, "Allah curse marriage and marriageables and married women,
the traitresses all! Would I had hearkened to my father and accepted a
wife! Had I so done it had been better for me than this jail." This is
how it fared with him; but as regards King Shahriman, he remained seated
on his throne all through the day until sundown; then he took the
Minister apart and said to him, "Know thou, O Wazir, that thou and thou
only wast the cause of all this that hath come to pass between me and my
son by the advice thou wast pleased to devise; and so what dost thou
counsel me to do now?" Answered he, "O King, leave thy son in limbo for
the space of fifteen days: then summon him to thy presence and bid him
wed; and assuredly he shall not gainsay thee again."——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir said to
King Shahriman, "Leave thy son in limbo for the space of fifteen days;
then summon him to thy presence and bid him wed; and assuredly he shall
not gainsay thee again." The King accepted the Wazir's opinion and lay
down to sleep that night troubled at heart concerning his son; for he
loved him with dearest love because he had no other child but this; and
it was his wont every night not to sleep, save after placing his arm
under his son's neck. So he passed that night in trouble and unease on
the Prince's account, tossing from side to side, as he were laid on
coals of Artemisia-wood[235]; for he was overcome with doubts and fears
and sleep visited him not all that livelong night; but his eyes ran over
with tears and he began repeating:

 While slanderers slumber, longsome is my night; ✿ Suffice thee a heart
    so sad in parting-plight;
 I say, while night in care slow moments by, ✿ "What! no return for thee,
    fair morning light?"

And the saying of another:—

 When saw I Pleiad-stars his glance escape ✿ And Pole-star draught of
    sleep upon him pour;
 And the Bier-daughters[236] wend in mourning dight, ✿ I knew that
    morning was for him no more!

Such was the case with King Shahriman; but as regards Kamar al-Zaman,
when the night came upon him the eunuch set the lanthorn before him and
lighting the wax-candle, placed it in the candlestick; then brought him
somewhat of food. The Prince ate a little and continually reproached
himself for his unseemly treatment of his father, saying to himself, "O
my soul, knowest thou not that a son of Adam is the hostage of his
tongue, and that a man's tongue is what casteth him into deadly perils?"
Then his eyes ran over with tears and he bewailed that which he had
done, from anguished vitals and aching heart, repenting him with
exceeding repentance of the wrong wherewith he had wronged his father
and repeating:—

 Fair youth shall die by stumbling of the tongue: ✿ Stumble of foot works
    not man's life such wrong:
 The slip of lip shall oft smite off the head, ✿ While slip of foot shall
    never harm one long.

Now when he had made an end of eating, he asked for the wherewithal to
wash his hands and when the Mameluke had washed them clean of the
remnants of food, he arose and made the Wuzu-ablution and prayed the
prayers of sundown and nightfall, conjoining them in one; after which he
sat down.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Prince
Kamar al-Zaman had prayed (conjoining them in one) the prayers of
sundown and nightfall, he sat down on the well and began reciting the
Koran, and he repeated "The Cow," the "House of Imrán," and "Y. S.;" The
"Compassionate," "Blessed be the King," "Unity" and "The two
Talismans"[237]; and he ended with blessing and supplication and with
saying, "I seek refuge with Allah from Satan the stoned."[238] Then he
lay down upon his couch which was covered with a mattress of satin from
al-Ma'adin town, the same on both sides and stuffed with the raw silk of
Irak; and under his head was a pillow filled with ostrich-down. And when
ready for sleep, he doffed his outer clothes and drew off his
bag-trousers and lay down in a shirt of delicate stuff smooth as wax;
and he donned a head-kerchief of azure Marázi[239] cloth; and at such
time and on this guise Kamar al-Zaman was like the full-orbed moon, when
it riseth on its fourteenth night. Then, drawing over his head a
coverlet of silk, he fell asleep with the lanthorn burning at his feet
and the wax-candle over his head, and he ceased not sleeping through the
first third of the night, not knowing what lurked for him in the womb of
the Future, and what the Omniscient had decreed for him. Now, as Fate
and Fortune would have it, both tower and saloon were old and had been
many years deserted; and there was therein a Roman well inhabited by a
Jinníyah of the seed of Iblis[240] the Accursed, by name Maymúnah,
daughter of Al-Dimiryát, a renowned King of the Jánn.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

[Illustration]


         Now when it was the Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the name of the
Jinniyah in question was Maymunah, daughter of Al-Dimiryat; a renowned
King of the Jann. And as Kamar al-Zaman continued sleeping till the
first third of the night, Maymunah came up out of the Roman well and
made for the firmament, thinking to listen by stealth to the converse of
the angels; but when she reached the mouth of the well, she saw a light
shining in the tower, contrary to custom; and having dwelt there many
years without seeing the like, she said to herself "Never have I
witnessed aught like this"; and, marvelling much at the matter,
determined that there must be some cause therefor. So she made for the
light and found the eunuch sleeping within the door; and inside she saw
a couch spread, whereon was a human form with the wax-candle burning at
his head and the lanthorn at his feet, and she wondered to see the light
and stole towards it little by little. Then she folded her wings and
stood by the bed and, drawing back the coverlid, discovered Kamar
al-Zaman's face. She was motionless for a full hour in admiration and
wonderment; for the lustre of his visage outshone that of the candle;
his face beamed like a pearl with light; his eyelids were languorous
like those of the gazelle; the pupils of his eyes were intensely black
and brilliant[241]; his cheeks were rosy red; his eyebrows were arched
like bows and his breath exhaled a scent of musk, even as saith of him
the poet:—

 I kissed him: darker grew those pupils,[242] which ✿ Seduce my soul, and
    cheeks flushed rosier hue;
 O heart, if slanderers dare to deem there be ✿ His like in charms; Say
    "Bring him hither, you!"

Now when Maymunah saw him, she pronounced the formula of praise,[243]
and said, "Blessed be Allah, the best of Creators!"; for she was of the
true-believing Jinn; and she stood awhile gazing on his face, exclaiming
and envying the youth his beauty and loveliness. And she said in
herself, "By Allah! I will do no hurt to him nor let any harm him; nay,
from all of evil will I ransom him, for this fair face deserveth not but
that folk should gaze upon it and for it praise the Lord. Yet how could
his family find it in their hearts to leave him in such desert place
where, if one of our Márids came upon him at this hour, he would
assuredly slay him." Then the Ifritah Maymunah bent over him and kissed
him between the eyes, and presently drew back the sheet over his face
which she covered up; and after this she spread her wings and soaring
into the air, flew upwards. And after rising high from the circle of the
saloon she ceased not winging her way through air and ascending skywards
till she drew near the heaven of this world, the lowest of the heavens.
And behold, she heard the noisy flapping of wings cleaving the welkin
and, directing herself by the sound, she found when she drew near it
that the noise came from an Ifrit called Dahnash. So she swooped down on
him like a sparrow-hawk and, when he was aware of her and knew her to be
Maymunah, the daughter of the King of the Jinn, he feared her and his
side-muscles quivered; and he implored her forbearance, saying, "I
conjure thee by the Most Great and August Name and by the most noble
talisman graven upon the seal-ring of Solomon, entreat me kindly and
harm me not!" When she heard these words her heart inclined to him and
she said, "Verily, thou conjurest me, O accursed, with a mighty
conjuration. Nevertheless, I will not let thee go, till thou tell me
whence thou comest at this hour." He replied, "O Princess, Know that I
come from the uttermost end of China-land and from among the Islands,
and I will tell thee of a wonderful thing I have seen this night. If
thou find my words true, let me wend my way and write me a patent under
thy hand and with thy sign manual that I am thy freedman, so none of the
Jinn-hosts, whether of the upper who fly or of the lower who walk the
earth or of those who dive beneath the waters, do me let or hindrance."
Rejoined Maymunah, "And what is it thou hast seen this night, O liar, O
accursed! Tell me without leasing and think not to escape from my hand
with falses, for I swear to thee by the letters graven upon the bezel of
the seal-ring of Solomon David-son (on both of whom be peace!), except
thy speech be true, I will pluck out thy feathers with mine own hand and
strip off thy skin and break thy bones!" Quoth the Ifrit Dahnash son of
Shamhúrish[244] the Flyer, "I accept, O my lady, these conditions."——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Dahnash spoke thus
to Maymunah, "I accept, O my lady, these conditions." Then he resumed,
"Know, O my mistress, that I come to-night from the Islands of the
Inland Sea in the parts of China, which are the realms of King Ghayúr,
lord of the Islands and the Seas and the Seven Palaces. There I saw a
daughter of his, than whom Allah hath made none fairer in her time: I
cannot picture her to thee, for my tongue would fail to describe her
with her due of praise; but I will name to thee a somewhat of her charms
by way of approach. Now her hair is like the nights of disunion and
separation and her face like the days of union and delectation; and
right well hath the poet said when picturing her:—

 She dispread the locks from her head one night, ✿ Showing four-fold
    nights into one night run;
 And she turned her visage towards the moon, ✿ And two moons showèd at
    moment one.

She hath a nose like the edge of the burnished blade and cheeks like
purple wine or anemones blood-red: her lips as coral and cornelian shine
and the water of her mouth is sweeter than old wine; its taste would
quench Hell's fiery pain. Her tongue is moved by wit of high degree and
ready repartee: her breast is a seduction to all that see it (glory be
to Him who fashioned it and finished it!); and joined thereto are two
upper arms smooth and rounded; even as saith of her the poet
Al-Walahán:[245]—

 She hath wrists which, did her bangles not contain, ✿ Would run from out
    her sleeves in silvern rain.

She hath breasts like two globes of ivory, from whose brightness the
moons borrow light, and a stomach with little waves as it were a figured
cloth of the finest Egyptian linen made by the Copts, with creases like
folded scrolls, ending in a waist slender past all power of imagination;
based upon back parts like a hillock of blown sand, that force her to
sit when she would lief stand, and awaken her, when she fain would
sleep, even as saith of her and describeth her the poet:—

 She hath those hips conjoined by thread of waist, ✿ Hips that o'er me
    and her too tyrannise;
 My thoughts they daze whene'er I think of them, ✿ And weigh her down
    whene'er she would uprise.[246]

And those back parts are upborne by thighs smooth and round and by a
calf like a column of pearl, and all this reposeth upon two feet,
narrow, slender and pointed like spear-blades,[247] the handiwork of the
Protector and Requiter, I wonder how, of their littleness, they can
sustain what is above them. But I cut short my praises of her charms
fearing lest I be tedious."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Ifrit Dahnash
bin Shamhurish said to the Ifritah Maymunah, "Of a truth I cut short my
praises fearing lest I be tedious." Now when Maymunah heard the
description of that Princess and her beauty and loveliness, she stood
silent in astonishment; whereupon Dahnash resumed, "The father of this
fair maiden is a mighty King, a fierce knight, immersed night and day in
fray and fight; for whom death hath no fright and the escape of his foe
no dread, for that he is a tyrant masterful and a conqueror
irresistible, lord of troops and armies and continents and islands, and
cities and villages, and his name is King Ghayur, Lord of the Islands
and of the Seas and of the Seven Palaces. Now he loveth his daughter,
the young maiden whom I have described to thee, with dearest love and,
for affection of her, he hath heaped together the treasures of all the
kings and built her therewith seven palaces, each of a different
fashion; the first of crystal, the second of marble, the third of China
steel, the fourth of precious stones and gems of price, the fifth of
porcelain and many-hued onyxes and ring-bezels, the sixth of silver and
the seventh of gold. And he hath filled the seven palaces with all sorts
of sumptuous furniture, rich silken carpets and hangings and vessels of
gold and silver and all manner of gear that kings require; and hath
bidden his daughter to abide in each by turns for a certain season of
the year; and her name is the Princess Budur.[248] Now when her beauty
became known and her name and fame were bruited abroad in the
neighbouring countries, all the kings sent to her father to demand her
of him in marriage, and he consulted her on the matter, but she disliked
the very word wedlock with a manner of abhorrence and said, O my father,
I have no mind to marry; no, not at all; for I am a sovereign Lady and a
Queen suzerain ruling over men, and I have no desire for a man who shall
rule over me. And the more suits she refused, the more her suitors'
eagerness increased and all the Royalties of the Inner Islands of China
sent presents and rarities to her father with letters asking her in
marriage. So he pressed her again and again with advice on the matter of
espousals; but she ever opposed to him refusals, till at last she turned
upon him angrily and cried, O my father, if thou name matrimony to me
once more, I will go into my chamber and take a sword and, fixing its
hilt in the ground, will set its point to my waist; then will I press
upon it, till it come forth from my back, and so slay myself. Now when
the King heard these her words, the light became darkness in his sight
and his heart burned for her as with a flame of fire, because he feared
lest she should kill herself; and he was filled with perplexity
concerning her affair and the kings her suitors. So he said to her, If
thou be determined not to marry and there be no help for it: abstain
from going and coming in and out. Then he placed her in a house and shut
her up in a chamber, appointing ten old women as duennas to guard her,
and forbade her to go forth to the Seven Palaces; moreover, he made it
appear that he was incensed against her, and sent letters to all the
kings, giving them to know that she had been stricken with madness by
the Jinns; and it is now a year since she hath thus been secluded." Then
continued the Ifrit Dahnash, addressing the Ifritah Maymunah, "And I, O
my lady, go to her every night and take my fill of feeding my sight on
her face and I kiss her between the eyes: yet, of my love to her, I do
her no hurt neither mount her, for that her youth is fair and her grace
surpassing: every one who seeth her jealouseth himself for her. I
conjure thee, therefore, O my lady, to go back with me and look on her
beauty and loveliness and stature and perfection of proportion; and
after, if thou wilt, chastise me or enslave me; and win to thy will, for
it is thine to bid and to forbid." So saying, the Ifrit Dahnash bowed
his head towards the earth and drooped his wings downwards; but Maymunah
laughed at his words and spat in his face and answered, "What is this
girl of whom thou pratest but a potsherd wherewith to wipe after making
water?[249] Faugh! Faugh! By Allah, O accursed, I thought thou hadst
some wondrous tale to tell me or some marvellous news to give me. How
would it be if thou were to sight my beloved? Verily, this night I have
seen a young man, whom if thou saw though but in a dream, thou wouldst
be palsied with admiration and spittle would flow from thy mouth." Asked
the Ifrit, "And who and what is this youth?"; and she answered, "Know, O
Dahnash, that there hath befallen the young man the like of what thou
tellest me befel thy mistress; for his father pressed him again and
again to marry, but he refused, till at length his sire waxed wroth at
being opposed and imprisoned him in the tower where I dwell: and I came
up to-night and saw him." Said Dahnash, "O my lady, shew me this youth,
that I may see if he be indeed handsomer than my mistress, the Princess
Budur, or not; for I cannot believe that the like of her liveth in this
our age." Rejoined Maymunah, "Thou liest, O accursed, O most ill-omened
of Marids and vilest of Satans![250] Sure am I that the like of my
beloved is not in this world."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


            Now when it was the Hundred and Eightieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Ifritah
Maymunah spake thus to the Ifrit Dahnash, "Sure am I that the like of my
beloved is not in this world! Art thou mad to fellow thy beloved with my
beloved?" He said, "Allah upon thee, O my lady, go back with me and look
upon my mistress, and after I will return with thee and look upon thy
beloved." She answered, "It must needs be so, O accursed, for thou art a
knavish devil; but I will not go with thee nor shalt thou come with me,
save upon condition of a wager which is this. If the lover thou lovest
and of whom thou boastest so bravely, prove handsomer than mine whom I
mentioned and whom I love and of whom I boast, the bet shall be thine
against me; but if my beloved prove the handsomer the bet shall be mine
against thee." Quoth Dahnash the Ifrit, "O my lady, I accept this thy
wager and am satisfied thereat; so come with me to the Islands." Quoth
Maymunah; "No! for the abode of my beloved is nearer than the abode of
thine: here it is under us; so come down with me to see my beloved and
after we will go look upon thy mistress." "I hear and I obey," said
Dahnash. So they descended to earth and alighted in the saloon which the
tower contained; then Maymunah stationed Dahnash beside the bed and,
putting out her hand, drew back the silken coverlet from Kamar
al-Zaman's face, when it glittered and glistened and shimmered and shone
like the rising sun. She gazed at him for a moment, then turning sharply
round upon Dahnash said, "Look, O accursed, and be not the basest of
madmen; I am a maid, yet my heart he hath waylaid." So Dahnash looked at
the Prince and long continued gazing steadfastly on him then, shaking
his head, said to Maymunah, "By Allah, O my lady, thou art excusable;
but there is yet another thing to be considered, and this is, that the
estate female differeth from the male. By Allah's might, this thy
beloved is the likest of all created things to my mistress in beauty and
loveliness and grace and perfection; and it is as though they were both
cast alike in the mould of seemlihead." Now when Maymunah heard these
words, the light became darkness in her sight and she dealt him with her
wing so fierce a buffet on the head as well-nigh made an end of him.
Then quoth she to him, "I conjure thee, by the light of his glorious
countenance, go at once, O accursed, and bring hither thy mistress whom
thou lovest so fondly and foolishly, and return in haste that we may lay
the twain together and look on them both as they lie asleep side by
side; so shall it appear to us which be the goodlier and more beautiful
of the two. Except thou obey me this very moment, O accursed, I will
dart my sparks at thee with my fire and consume thee; yea, in pieces I
will rend thee and into the deserts cast thee, that to stay-at-home and
wayfarer an example thou be!" Quoth Dahnash, "O my lady, I will do thy
behests, for I know forsure that my mistress is the fairer and the
sweeter." So saying the Ifrit flew away and Maymunah flew with him to
guard him. They were absent awhile and presently returned, bearing the
young lady, who was clad in a shift of fine Venetian silk, with a double
edging of gold and purfled with the most exquisite of embroidery having
these couplets worked upon the ends of the sleeves:—

 Three matters hinder her from visiting us, in fear ✿ Of hate-full,
    slandering envier and his hirèd spies:
 The shining light of brow, the trinkets' tinkling voice, ✿ And scent of
    essences that tell whene'er she hies:
 Gi'en that she hide her brow with edge of sleeve, and leave ✿ At home
    her trinketry, how shall her scent disguise?[251]

And Dahnash and Maymunah stinted not bearing that young lady till they
had carried her into the saloon and had laid her beside the youth Kamar
al-Zaman.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Eighty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Ifrit Dahnash
and the Ifritah Maymunah stinted not bearing Princess Budur till they
descended and laid her on the couch beside Kamar al-Zaman. Then they
uncovered both their faces, and they were the likest of all folk, each
to other, as they were twins or an only brother and sister; and indeed
they were a seduction to the pious, even as saith of them the poet
Al-Mubín:—

 O heart! be not thy love confined to one, ✿ Lest thou by doting or
    disdain be undone:
 Love all the fair, and thou shalt find with them ✿ If this be lost, to
    thee that shall be won.

And quoth another:—

 Mine eyes beheld two lying on the ground; ✿ Both had I loved if on these
    eyne they lay!

So Dahnash and Maymunah gazed on them awhile, and he said, "By Allah, O
my lady, it is good! My mistress is assuredly the fairer." She replied,
"Not so, my beloved is the fairer; woe to thee, O Dahnash! Art blind of
eye and heart that lean from fat thou canst not depart? Wilt thou hide
the truth? Dost thou not see his beauty and loveliness and fine stature
and symmetry? Out on thee, hear what I purpose to say in praise of my
beloved and, if thou be a lover true to her thou dost love, do thou the
like for her thou lovest." Then she kissed Kamar al-Zaman again and
again between the eyes and improvised this ode:—

 How is this? Why should the blamer abuse thee in his pride?
 What shall console my heart for thee, that art but slender bough?

 A Nature-Kohl'd[252] eye thou hast that witcheth far and wide;
 From pure platonic love[253] of it deliverance none I trow!

 Those glances, fell as plundering Turk, to heart such havoc deal
 As never havocked scymitar made keenest at the curve.

 On me thou layest load of love the heaviest while I feel
 So feeble grown that under weight of chemisette I swerve.

 My love for thee as wottest well is habit, and my lowe
 Is nature; to all others false is all the love I tender:

 Now were my heart but like to thine I never would say No;
 Only my wasted form is like thy waist so gracious-slender:

 Out on him who in Beauty's robe for moon-like charms hath fame,
 And who is claimed by mouth of men as marvel of his tribe!

 "Of man what manner may he be" (ask they who flyte and blame)
 "For whom thy heart is so distressed?" I only cry "Describe!"


 Oh stone-entempered heart of him! learn of his yielding grace
 And bending form to show me grace and yielding to consent.

 Oh my Prince Beautiful, thou hast an Overseer in place[254]
 Who irketh me; and eke a Groom whose wrong doth ne'er relent.

 Indeed he lieth who hath said that all of loveliness
 Was pent in Joseph: in thy charms there's many and many a Joe!

 The Genii dread me when I stand and face to face address;
 But meeting thee my fluttering heart its shame and terror show.

 I take aversion semblance and I turn from thee in fright,
 But more aversion I assume, more love from me dost claim;

 That hair of jetty black! That brow e'er raying radiant light!
 Those eyne wherein white jostles black![255] That dearling dainty frame!

When Dahnash heard the poesy which Maymunah spake in praise of her
beloved, he joyed with exceeding joy and marvelled with excessive
wonderment.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Eighty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Ifrit
Dahnash heard the poesy which Maymunah spake in praise of her beloved,
he shook for exceeding joy and said, "Thou hast celebrated thy beloved
in song and thou hast indeed done well in praise of him whom thou
lovest! And there is no help for it but that I also in my turn do my
best to enfame my mistress, and recite somewhat in her honour." Then the
Ifrit went up to the lady Budur; and, kissing her between the eyes,
looked at Maymunah and at his beloved Princess and recited the following
verses, albeit he had no skill in poesy:—

 Love for my fair they chide in angry way; ✿ Unjust for ignorance, yea
    unjustest they!
 Ah lavish favours on the love-mad, whom ✿ Taste of thy wrath and parting
    woe shall slay:

 In sooth for love I'm wet with railing tears, ✿ That rail mine eyelids
    blood thou mightest say:
 No marvel what I bear for love, 'tis marvel ✿ That any know my "me"
    while thou'rt away:
 Unlawful were our union did I doubt ✿ Thy love, or heart incline to
    other May.

And eke these words:—

 I feed eyes on their stead by the valley's side, ✿ And I'm slain and my
    slayer[256] aside hath hied:
 Grief-wine have I drunken, and down my cheeks ✿ Dance tears to the song
    of the camel-guide:
 For union-blessing I strive though sure, ✿ In Budur and Su'ád all my
    bliss shall bide:[257]
 Wot I not which of three gave me most to 'plain, ✿ So hear them numbered
    ere thou decide:
 Those Sworders her eyne, that Lancer her fig- ✿ ure, or ring-mail'd
    Locks which her forehead hide.
 Quoth she (and I ask of her what so wights ✿ Or abide in towns or in
    desert ride[258])
 To me, "In thy heart I dwell; look there!" ✿ Quoth I, "Where's my heart,
    ah where? ah where?"

When Maymunah heard these lines from the Ifrit, she said, "Thou hast
done well, O Dahnash! But say thou which of the two is the handsomer?"
And he answered, "My mistress Budur is handsomer than thy beloved!"
Cried Maymunah, "Thou liest, O accursed. Nay, my beloved is more
beautiful than thine!" But Dahnash persisted, "Mine is the fairer." And
they ceased not to wrangle and challenge each other's words till
Maymunah cried out at Dahnash and would have laid violent hands on him;
but he humbled himself to her and, softening his speech, said, "Let not
the truth be a grief to thee, and cease we this talk, for all we say is
to testify in favour of our lovers; rather let each of us withdraw the
claim and seek we one who shall judge fairly between us which of the two
be fairer; and by his sentence we will abide." "I agree to this,"
answered she and smote the earth with her foot, whereupon there came out
of it an Ifrit blind of an eye, humpbacked and scurvy-skinned, with
eye-orbits slit up and down his face.[259] On his head were seven horns
and four locks of hair fell to his heels; his hands were pitchfork-like
and his legs mast-like and he had nails as the claws of a lion, and feet
as the hoofs of the wild ass.[260] When that Ifrit rose out of the earth
and sighted Maymunah, he kissed the ground before her and, standing with
his hands clasped behind him, said, "What is thy will, O my mistress, O
daughter of my King?"[261] She replied, "O Kashkash, I would have thee
judge between me and this accursed Dahnash." And she made known to him
the matter, from first to last, whereupon the Ifrit Kashkash looked at
the face of the youth and then at the face of the girl; and saw them
lying asleep, embraced, each with an arm under the other's neck, alike
in beauty and loveliness and equal in grace and goodliness. The Marid
gazed long upon them, marvelling at their seemlihead; and, after
carefully observing the twain, he turned to Maymunah and Dahnash, and
repeated these couplets:—

       Go, visit her thou lovest, and regard not
       The words detractors utter; envious churls
       Can never favour love. Oh! sure the Merciful
       Ne'er made a thing more fair to look upon,
       Than two fond lovers in each others' arms,
       Speaking their passion in a mute embrace.
       When heart has turned to heart, the fools would part them
       Strike idly on cold steel. So when thou 'st found
       One purely, wholly thine, accept her true heart,
       And live for her alone. Oh! thou that blamest
       The love-struck for their love, give o'er thy talk,
       How canst thou minister to a mind diseased?[262]

Then he turned again to Maymunah and Dahnash and said to them, "By
Allah, if you will have the truth, I tell you fairly the twain be equal
in beauty, and loveliness and perfect grace and goodliness, nor can I
make any difference between them on account of their being man and
woman. But I have another thought which is that we wake each of them in
turn, without the knowledge of the other, and whichever is the more
enamoured shall be held inferior in seemlihead and comeliness." Quoth
Maymunah, "Right is this recking," and quoth Dahnash, "I consent to
this." Then Dahnash changed himself to the form of a flea and bit Kamar
al-Zaman, whereupon he started from sleep in a fright——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Eighty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Dahnash changed
himself to the form of a flea and bit Kamar al-Zaman who started from
sleep in a fright and rubbed the bitten part, his neck, and scratched it
hard because of the smart. Then turning sideways, he found lying by him
something whose breath was sweeter than musk and whose skin was softer
than cream. Hereat marvelled he with great marvel and he sat up and
looked at what lay beside him; when he saw it to be a young lady like an
union pearl, or a shining sun, or a dome seen from afar on a well-built
wall; for she was five feet tall, with a shape like the letter[263] ا,
bosomed high and rosy-cheeked; even as saith of her the poet:—

 Four things which ne'er conjoin, unless it be ✿ To storm my vitals and
    to shed my blood:
 Brow white as day and tresses black as night ✿ Cheeks rosy red and lips
    which smiles o'erflood.

And also quoth another:—

 A Moon she rises, Willow-wand she waves, ✿ Breathes Ambergris, and
    gazes, a Gazelle:
 Meseems that sorrow wooes my heart and wins ✿ And, when she wendeth
    hastes therein to dwell!

And when Kamar al-Zaman saw the lady Budur, daughter of King Ghayur, and
her beauty and comeliness, she was sleeping clad in a shift of Venetian
silk, without her petticoat-trousers, and wore on her head a kerchief
embroidered with gold and set with stones of price: her ears were hung
with twin earrings which shone like constellations and round her neck
was a collar of union pearls, of size unique, past the competence of any
King. When he saw this, his reason was confounded and natural heat began
to stir in him; Allah awoke in him the desire of coition and he said to
himself, "Whatso Allah willeth, that shall be, and what He willeth not
shall never be!" So saying, he put out his hand and, turning her over,
loosed the collar of her chemise; then arose before his sight her bosom,
with its breasts like double globes of ivory; whereat his inclination
for her redoubled and he desired her with exceeding hot desire. He would
have awakened her but she would not awake, for Dahnash had made her
sleep heavy; so he shook her and moved her, saying, "O my beloved, awake
and look on me; I am Kamar al-Zaman." But she awoke not, neither moved
her head; whereupon he considered her case for a long hour and said to
himself, "If I guess aright, this is the damsel to whom my father would
have married me and these three years past I have refused her; but
Inshallah!—God willing—as soon as it is dawn, I will say to him:—Marry
me to her, that I may enjoy her."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say,


          Now when it was the Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-Zaman
said to himself, "By Allah, when I see dawn I will say to my sire:—Marry
me to her that I may enjoy her; nor will I let half the day pass ere I
possess her and take my fill of her beauty and loveliness." Then he bent
over Budur to buss her, whereat the Jinniyah Maymunah trembled and was
abashed and Dahnash, the Ifrit, was like to fly for joy. But, as Kamar
al-Zaman was about to kiss her upon the mouth, he was ashamed before
Allah and turned away his head and averted his face, saying to his
heart, "Have patience." Then he took thought awhile and said, "I will be
patient; haply my father when he was wroth with me and sent me to this
jail, may have brought my young lady and made her lie by my side to try
me with her, and may have charged her not to be readily awakened when I
would arouse her, and may have said to her:—Whatever thing Kamar
al-Zaman do to thee, make me ware thereof; or belike my sire standeth
hidden in some stead whence (being himself unseen) he can see all I do
with this young lady; and to-morrow he will scold me and cry:—How cometh
it that thou sayest, I have no mind to marry; and yet thou didst kiss
and embrace yonder damsel? So I will withhold myself lest I be ashamed
before my sire; and the right and proper thing to do is not to touch her
at this present, nor even to look upon her, except to take from her
somewhat which shall serve as a token to me and a memorial of her; that
some sign endure between me and her." Then Kamar al-Zaman raised the
young lady's hand and took from her little finger a seal-ring worth an
immense amount of money, for that its bezel was a precious jewel and
around it were graven these couplets:—

 Count not that I your promises forgot, ✿ Despite the length of your
    delinquencies:
 Be generous, O my lord, to me inclining; ✿ Haply your mouth and cheeks
    these lips may kiss:
 By Allah, ne'er will I relinquish you ✿ Albe you _will_ transgress
    love's boundaries.

Then Kamar al-Zaman took the seal-ring from the little finger of Queen
Budur and set it on his own; then, turning his back to her, went to
sleep.[264] When Maymunah the Jinniyah saw this, she was glad and said
to Dahnash and Kashkash, "Saw ye how my beloved Kamar al-Zaman bore
himself chastely towards this young lady? Verily, this was of the
perfection of his good gifts; for observe you twain how he looked on her
and noted her beauty and loveliness, and yet embraced her not neither
kissed her nor put his hand to her, but turned his back and slept."
Answered they, "Even so!" Thereupon Maymunah changed herself into a flea
and entering into the raiment of Budur, the loved of Dahnash, crept up
her calf and came upon her thigh and, reaching a place some four
carats[265] below her navel, there bit her. Thereupon she opened her
eyes and sitting up in bed, saw a youth lying beside her and breathing
heavily in his sleep, the loveliest of Almighty Allah's creatures, with
eyes that put to shame the fairest Houris of Heaven; and a mouth like
Solomon's seal, whose water was sweeter to the taste and more
efficacious than a theriack, and lips the colour of coral-stone, and
cheeks like the blood-red anemone, even as saith one, describing him in
these couplets:—

 My mind's withdrawn from Zaynab and Nawár[266] ✿ By rosy cheeks that
    growth of myrtle bear;
 I love a fawn, a tunic-vested boy, ✿ And leave the love of
    bracelet-wearing Fair:
 My mate in hall and closet is unlike ✿ Her that I play with, as at home
    we pair.
 Oh thou, who blam'st my flight from Hind and Zaynab, ✿ The cause is
    clear as dawn uplighting air!
 Would'st have me fare[267] a slave, the thrall of thrall, ✿ Cribbed,
    pent, confined behind the bar and wall?

Now when Princess Budur saw him, she was seized by a transport of
passion and yearning and love-longing,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Princess
Budur saw Kamar al-Zaman she was forthwith seized with a transport of
passion and yearning and love-longing, and she said to herself, "Alas,
my shame! This is a strange youth and I know him not. How cometh he to
be lying by my side on one bed?" Then she looked at him a second time
and noting his beauty and loveliness, said, "By Allah, he is indeed a
comely youth and my heart[268] is well-nigh torn in sunder with longing
for him! But alas, how am I shamed by him! By the Almighty, had I known
it was this youth who sought me in marriage of my father, I had not
rejected him, but had wived with him and enjoyed his loveliness!" Then
she gazed in his face and said, "O my lord and light of mine eyes, awake
from sleep and take thy pleasure in my beauty and grace." And she moved
him with her hand; but Maymunah the Jinniyah let down sleep upon him as
it were a curtain, and pressed heavily on his head with her wings so
that Kamar al-Zaman awoke not. Then Princess Budur shook him with her
hands and said, "My life on thee, hearken to me; awake and up from thy
sleep and look on the narcissus and the tender down thereon, and enjoy
the sight of naked waist and navel; and touzle me and tumble me from
this moment till break of day! Allah upon thee, O my lord, sit up and
prop thee against the pillow and slumber not!" Still Kamar al-Zaman made
her no reply but breathed hard in his sleep. Continued she, "Alas! Alas!
thou art insolent in thy beauty and comeliness and grace and loving
looks! But if thou art handsome, so am I handsome; what then is this
thou dost? Have they taught thee to flout me or hath my father, the
wretched old fellow,[269] made thee swear not to speak to me to-night?"
But Kamar al-Zaman opened not his mouth neither awoke, whereat her
passion for him redoubled and Allah inflamed her heart with love of him.
She stole one glance of eyes that cost her a thousand sighs: her heart
fluttered, and her vitals throbbed and her hands and feet quivered; and
she said to Kamar al-Zaman "Talk to me, O my lord! Speak to me, O my
friend! Answer me, O my beloved, and tell me thy name, for indeed thou
hast ravished my wit!" And during all this time he abode drowned in
sleep and answered her not a word, and Princess Budur sighed and said,
"Alas! Alas! why art thou so proud and self-satisfied?" Then she shook
him and turning his hand over, saw her seal-ring on his little finger,
whereat she cried a loud cry, and followed it with a sigh of passion and
said, "Alack! Alack! By Allah, thou art my beloved and thou lovest me!
Yet thou seemest to turn thee away from me out of coquetry, for all, O
my darling, thou camest to me, whilst I was asleep and knew not what
thou didst with me, and tookest my seal-ring; and yet I will not pull it
off thy finger." So saying, she opened the bosom of his shirt and bent
over him and kissed him and put forth her hand to him, seeking somewhat
that she might take as a token, but found nothing. Then she thrust her
hand into his breast and, because of the smoothness of his body, it
slipped down to his waist and thence to his navel and thence to his
yard, whereupon her heart ached and her vitals quivered and lust was
sore upon her, for that the desire of women is fiercer than the desire
of men,[270] and she was ashamed of her own shamelessness. Then she
plucked his seal-ring from his finger, and put it on her own instead of
the ring he had taken, and bussed his inner lips and hands, nor did she
leave any part of him unkissed; after which she took him to her breast
and embraced him and, laying one of her hands under his neck and the
other under his armpit, nestled close to him and fell asleep by his
side——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Princess
Budur fell asleep by the side of Kamar al-Zaman, after doing that which
she did, quoth Maymunah to Dahnash, "Sawst thou, O accursed, how proudly
and coquettishly my beloved bore himself, and how hotly and passionately
thy mistress showed herself to my dearling? There can be no doubt that
my beloved is handsomer than thine; nevertheless I pardon thee." Then
she wrote him a document of manumission and turned to Kashkash and said,
"Go, help Dahnash to take up his mistress and aid him to carry her back
to her own place, for the night waneth apace and there is but little
left of it." "I hear and I obey;" answered Kashkash. So the two Ifrits
went forward to Princess Budur and upraising her flew away with her;
then, bearing her back to her own place, they laid her on her bed,
whilst Maymunah abode alone with Kamar al-Zaman, gazing upon him as he
slept, till the night was all but spent, when she went her way. As soon
as morning morrowed, the Prince awoke from sleep and turned right and
left, but found not the maiden by him and said in his mind, "What is
this business? It is as if my father would incline me to marriage with
the damsel who was with me and have now taken her away by stealth, to
the intent that my desire for wedlock may redouble." Then he called out
to the eunuch who slept at the door, saying, "Woe to thee, O damned one,
arise at once!" So the eunuch rose, bemused with sleep, and brought him
basin and ewer, whereupon Kamar al-Zaman entered the water-closet and
did his need;[271] then, coming out made the Wuzu-ablution and prayed
the dawn-prayer, after which he sat telling on his beads the
ninety-and-nine names of Almighty Allah. Then he looked up and, seeing
the eunuch standing in service upon him, said, "Out on thee, O Sawáb!
Who was it came hither and took away the young lady from my side and I
still sleeping?" Asked the eunuch, "O my lord, what manner of young
lady?" "The young lady who lay with me last night," replied Kamar
al-Zaman. The eunuch was startled at his words and said to him, "By
Allah, there hath been with thee neither young lady nor other! How
should young lady have come in to thee, when I was sleeping in the
doorway and the door was locked? By Allah, O my lord, neither male nor
female hath come in to thee!" Exclaimed the Prince, "Thou liest, O
pestilent slave!: is it of thy competence also to hoodwink me and refuse
to tell me what is become of the young lady who lay with me last night
and decline to inform me who took her away?" Replied the eunuch (and he
was affrighted at him), "By Allah, O my lord, I have seen neither young
lady nor young lord!" His words only angered Kamar al-Zaman the more and
he said to him, "O accursed one, my father hath indeed taught thee
deceit! Come hither." So the eunuch came up to him, and the Prince took
him by the collar and dashed him to the ground; whereupon he let fly a
loud fart[272] and Kamar al-Zaman, kneeling upon him, kicked him and
throttled him till he fainted away. Then he dragged him forth and tied
him to the well-rope, and let him down like a bucket into the well and
plunged him into the water, then drew him up and lowered him down again.
Now it was hard winter weather, and Kamar al-Zaman ceased not to plunge
the eunuch into the water and pull him up again and douse him and haul
him whilst he screamed and called for help; and the Prince kept on
saying "By Allah, O damned one, I will not draw thee up out of this well
till thou tell me and fully acquaint me with the story of the young lady
and who it was took her away, whilst I slept."——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Hundred and Eighty-seventh Night,

She said it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-Zaman said
to the eunuch, "By Allah! I will not draw thee up out of this well until
thou tell me the story of the young lady and who it was took her away
whilst I slept." Answered the eunuch, after he had seen death staring
him in the face; "O my lord, let me go and I will relate to thee the
truth and the whole tale." So Kamar al-Zaman pulled him up out of the
well, all but dead for suffering, what with cold and the pain of dipping
and dousing, drubbing and dread of drowning. He shook like cane in
hurricane, his teeth were clenched as by cramp and his clothes were
drenched and his body befouled and torn by the rough sides of the well:
briefly he was in a sad pickle. Now when Kamar al-Zaman saw him in this
sorry plight, he was concerned for him; but, as soon as the eunuch found
himself on the floor, he said to him,"O my lord, let me go and doff my
clothes and wring them out and spread them in the sun to dry, and don
others; after which I will return to thee forthwith and tell thee the
truth of the matter." Answered the Prince, "O rascal slave! hadst thou
not seen death face to face, never hadst thou confessed to fact nor told
me a word; but go now and do thy will, and then come back to me at once
and tell me the truth." Thereupon the eunuch went out, hardly crediting
his escape, and ceased not running, stumbling and rising in his haste,
till he came in to King Shahriman, whom he found sitting at talk with
his Wazir of Kamar al-Zaman's case. The King was saying to the Minister,
"I slept not last night, for anxiety concerning my son, Kamar al-Zaman,
and indeed I fear lest some harm befal him in that old tower. What good
was there in imprisoning him?" Answered the Wazir, "Have no care for
him. By Allah, no harm will befal him! None at all! Leave him in prison
for a month till his temper yield and his spirit be broken and he return
to his senses." As the two spoke behold, up rushed the eunuch, in the
aforesaid plight, making the King who was troubled at sight of him; and
he cried "O our lord the Sultan! Verily, thy son's wits are fled and he
hath gone mad; he hath dealt with me thus and thus, so that I am become
as thou seest me, and he kept saying:—A young lady lay with me this
night and stole away secretly whilst I slept. Where is she? And he
insisteth on my letting him know where she is and on my telling him who
took her away. But I have seen neither girl nor boy: the door was locked
all through the night, for I slept before it with the key under my head,
and I opened to him in the morning with my own hand." When King
Shahriman heard this, he cried out, saying, "Alas, my son!;" and he was
enraged with sore rage against the Wazir, who had been the cause of all
this case and said to him, "Go up, bring me news of my son and see what
hath befallen his mind." So the Wazir rose and, stumbling over his long
skirts, in his fear of the King's wrath, hastened with the slave to the
tower. Now the sun had risen and when the Minister came in to Kamar
al-Zaman, he found him sitting on the couch reciting the Koran; so he
saluted him and seated himself by his side, and said to him, "O my lord,
this wretched eunuch brought us tidings which troubled and alarmed us
and which incensed the King." Asked Kamar al-Zaman, "And what hath he
told you of me to trouble my father? In good sooth he hath troubled none
but me." Answered the Wazir, "He came to us in fulsome state and told us
of thee a thing which Heaven forfend; and the slave added a lie which it
befitteth not to repeat, Allah preserve thy youth and sound sense and
tongue of eloquence, and forbid to come from thee aught of offence!"
Quoth the Prince,"O Wazir, and what thing did this pestilent slave say
of me?" The Minister replied, "He told us that thy wits had taken leave
of thee and thou wouldst have it that a young lady lay with thee last
night, and thou wast instant with him to tell thee whither she went and
thou diddest torture him to that end." But when Kamar al-Zaman heard
these words, he was enraged with sore rage and he said to the Wazir,
"'Tis manifest to me in very deed that you people taught the eunuch to
do as he did"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Eighty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Kamar
al-Zaman heard the words of the Wazir he was enraged with sore rage and
said to him, "'Tis manifest to me in very deed that you people taught
the eunuch to do as he did and forbade him to tell me what became of the
young lady who lay with me last night. But thou, O Wazir, art cleverer
than the eunuch; so do thou tell me without stay or delay, whither went
the young lady who slept on my bosom last night; for it was you who sent
her and bade her sleep in my embrace and we lay together till dawn; but,
when I awoke, I found her not. So where is she now?" Said the Wazir, "O
my lord Kamar al-Zaman, Allah's name encompass thee about! By the
Almighty, we sent none to thee last night, but thou layest alone, with
the door locked on thee and the eunuch sleeping behind it, nor did there
come to thee young lady or any other. Regain thy reason, O my lord, and
stablish thy senses and occupy not thy mind with vanities." Rejoined
Kamar al-Zaman who was incensed at his words, "O Wazir, the young lady
in question is my beloved, the fair one with the black eyes and rosy
cheeks, whom I held in my arms all last night." So the Minister wondered
at his words and asked him, "Didst thou see this damsel last night with
thine own eyes on wake or in sleep?" Answered Kamar al-Zaman, "O
ill-omened old man, dost thou fancy I saw her with my ears? Indeed, I
saw her with my very eyes and awake, and I touched her with my hand, and
I watched by her full half the night, feeding my vision on her beauty
and loveliness and grace and tempting looks. But you had schooled her
and charged her to speak no word to me; so she feigned sleep and I lay
by her side till dawn, when I awoke and found her gone." Rejoined the
Wazir, "O my lord Kamar al-Zaman, haply thou sawest this in thy sleep;
it must have been a delusion of dreams or a deception caused by eating
various kinds of food, or a suggestion of the accursed devils." Cried
the Prince, "O pestilent old man! wilt thou too make a mock of me and
tell me this was haply a delusion of dreams, when that eunuch confessed
to the young lady, saying:—At once I will return to thee and tell thee
all about her?" With these words, he sprang up and rushed at the Wazir
and gripped hold of his beard (which was long[273]) and, after gripping
it, he twisted his hand in it and haling him off the couch, threw him on
the floor. It seemed to the Minister as though his soul departed his
body for the violent plucking at his beard; and Kamar al-Zaman ceased
not kicking the Wazir and basting his breast and ribs and cuffing him
with open hand on the nape of his neck till he had well-nigh beaten him
to death. Then said the old man in his mind, "Just as the eunuch-slave
saved his life from this lunatic youth by telling him a lie, thus it is
even fitter that I do likewise; else he will destroy me. So now for my
lie to save myself, he being mad beyond a doubt." Then he turned to
Kamar al-Zaman and said, "O my lord, pardon me; for indeed thy father
charged me to conceal from thee this affair of the young lady; but now I
am weak and weary and wounded with tunding; for I am an old man and lack
strength and bottom to endure blows. Have, therefore, a little patience
with me and I will tell thee all and acquaint thee with the story of the
young woman." When the Prince heard this, he left off drubbing him and
said, "Wherefore couldst thou not tell me the tale until after shame and
blows? Rise now, unlucky old man that thou art, and tell me her story."
Quoth the Wazir, "Say, dost thou ask of the young lady with the fair
face and perfect form?" Quoth Kamar al-Zaman, "Even so! Tell me, O
Wazir, who it was that led her to me and laid her by my side, and who
was it that took her away from me by night; and let me know forthright
whither she is gone, that I myself may go to her at once. If my father
did this deed to me that he might try me by means of that beautiful
girl, with a view to our marriage, I consent to wed her and free myself
of this trouble; for he did all these dealings with me only because I
refused wedlock. But now I consent and I say again, I consent to
matrimony: so tell this to my father, O Wazir, and advise him to marry
me to that young lady; for I will have none other and my heart loveth
none save her alone. Now rise up at once and haste thee to my father and
counsel him to hurry on our wedding and bring me his answer within this
very hour." Rejoined the Wazir, "'Tis well!" and went forth from him,
hardly believing himself out of his hands. Then he set off from the
tower, walking and tripping up as he went, for excess of fright and
agitation, and he ceased not hurrying till he came in to King
Shahriman.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Eighty-ninth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir fared
forth from the tower, and ceased not running till he came in to King
Shahriman, who said to him as he sighted him, "O thou Wazir, what man
hath brought thee to grief and whose mischief hath treated thee in way
unlief; how happeneth it that I see thee dumb-foundered and coming to me
thus astounded?" Replied the Wazir, "O King! I bring thee good news."
"And what is it?" quoth Shariman, and quoth the Wazir, "Know that thy
son Kamar al-Zaman's wits are clean gone and that he hath become stark
mad." Now when the King heard these words of the Minister, light became
darkness in his sight and he said, "O Wazir, make clear to me the nature
of his madness." Answered the Wazir, "O my lord, I hear and I obey."
Then he told him that such and such had passed and acquainted him with
all that his son had done; whereupon the King said to him, "Hear, O
Wazir, the good tidings which I give thee in return for this thy fair
news of my son's insanity; and it shall be the cutting off of thy head
and the forfeiture of my favour, O most ill-omened of Wazirs and foulest
of Emirs! for I feel that thou hast caused my son's disorder by the
wicked advice and the sinister counsel thou hast given me first and
last. By Allah, if aught of mischief or madness have befallen my son I
will most assuredly nail thee upon the palace-dome and make thee drain
the bitterest draught of death!" Then he sprang up and, taking the Wazir
with him, fared straight for the tower and entered it. And when Kamar
al-Zaman saw the two, he rose to his father in haste from the couch
whereon he sat and kissing his hands drew back and hung down his head
and stood before him with his arms behind him, and thus remained for a
full hour. Then he raised his head towards his sire; the tears gushed
from his eyes and streamed down his cheeks and he began repeating:—

         "Forgive the sin 'neath which my limbs are trembling,
         For the slave seeks for mercy from his master;
         I've done a fault, which calls for free confession,
         Where shall it call for mercy, and forgiveness?"[274]

When the King heard this, he arose and embraced his son, and kissing him
between the eyes, made him sit by his side on the couch; then he turned
to the Wazir and, looking on him with eyes of wrath, said, "O dog of
Wazirs, how didst thou say of my son such and such things and make my
heart quake for him?" Then he turned to the Prince and said, "O my son,
what is to-day called?" He answered, "O my father, this day is the
Sabbath, and to-morrow is First day: then come Second day, Third,
Fourth, Fifth day and lastly Friday."[275] Exclaimed the King, "O my
son, O Kamar al-Zaman, praised be Allah for the preservation of thy
reason! What is the present month called in our Arabic?" "Zú'l-Ka'adah,"
answered Kamar al-Zaman, "and it is followed by Zú'l-hijjah; then cometh
Muharram, then Safar, then Rabí'a the First and Rabí'a the Second, the
two Jamádás, Rajab, Sha aban, Ramazán and Shawwál." At this the King
rejoiced exceedingly and spat in the Wazir's face, saying, "O wicked old
man, how canst thou say that my son is mad? And now none is mad but
thou." Hereupon the Minister shook his head and would have spoken, but
bethought himself to wait awhile and see what might next befal. Then the
King said to his child, "O my son, what words be these thou saidest to
the eunuch and the Wazir, declaring:—I was sleeping with a fair damsel
this night?[276] What damsel is this of whom thou speakest?" Then Kamar
al-Zaman laughed at his father's words and replied, "O my father, know
that I can bear no more jesting; so add me not another mock or even a
single word on the matter, for my temper hath waxed short by that you
have done with me. And know, O my father, with assured knowledge, that I
consent to marry, but on condition that thou give me to wife her who lay
by my side this night; for I am certain it was thou sentest her to me
and madest me in love with her and then despatchedst a message to her
before the dawn and tookest her away from beside me." Rejoined the King,
"The name of Allah encompass thee about, O my son, and be thy wit
preserved from witlessness!"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


            Now when it was the Hundred and Ninetieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth King
Shahriman to his son Kamar al-Zaman, "The name of Allah encompass thee
about, O my son, and be thy wit preserved from witlessness! What thing
be this young lady whom thou fanciest I sent to thee last night and then
again that I sent to withdraw her from thee before dawn? By the Lord, O
my son, I know nothing of this affair, and Allah upon thee, tell me if
it be a delusion of dreaming or a deception caused by indisposition. For
verily thou layest down to sleep last night with thy mind occupied anent
marriage and troubled with the talk of it (Allah damn marriage and the
hour when I spake of it and curse him who counselled it!); and without
doubt or diffidence I can say that being moved in mind by the mention of
wedlock thou dreamedst that a handsome young lady embraced thee and
didst fancy thou sawest her when awake. But all this, O my son, is but
an imbroglio of dreams." Replied Kamar al-Zaman, "Leave this talk and
swear to me by Allah, the All-creator, the Omniscient; the Humbler of
the tyrant Cæsars and the Destroyer of the Chosroes, that thou knowest
naught of the young lady nor of her woning-place." Quoth the King, "By
the Might of Allah Almighty, the God of Moses and Abraham, I know naught
of all this and never even heard of it; it is assuredly a delusion of
dreams thou hast seen in sleep." Then the Prince replied to his sire, "I
will give thee a self-evident proof that it happened to me when on
wake."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-Zaman
said to his sire, "I will give thee a self-evident proof that this
happened to me when on wake. Now let me ask thee, did it ever befal any
man to dream that he was battling a sore battle and after to awake from
sleep and find in his hand a sword-blade besmeared with blood? Answered
the King, "No, by Allah, O my son, this hath never been." Rejoined Kamar
al-Zaman, "I will tell thee what happened to me and it was this.
Meseemed I awoke from sleep in the middle of the past night and found a
girl lying by my side, whose form was like mine and whose favour was as
mine. I embraced her and turned her about with my hand and took her
seal-ring, which I put on my finger, and she pulled off my ring and put
it on hers. Then I went to sleep by her side, but refrained from her for
shame of thee, deeming that thou hadst sent her to me, intending to
tempt me with her and incline me to marriage, and suspecting thee to be
hidden somewhere whence thou couldst see what I did with her. And I was
ashamed even to kiss her on the mouth for thy account, thinking over
this temptation to wedlock; and, when I awoke at point of day, I found
no trace of her, nor could I come at any news of her, and there befel me
what thou knowest of with the eunuch and with the Wazir. How then can
this case have been a dream and a delusion, when the ring is a reality?
Save for her ring on my finger I should indeed have deemed it a dream;
but here is the ring on my little finger: look at it, O King, and see
what is its worth." So saying, he handed the ring to his father, who
examined it and turned it over, then looked to his son and said,
"Verily, there is in this ring some mighty mystery and some strange
secret. What befel thee last night with the girl is indeed a hard nut to
crack, and I know not how intruded upon us this intruder. None is the
cause of all this pother save the Wazir; but, Allah upon thee, O my son,
take patience, so haply the Lord may turn to gladness this thy grief and
to thy sadness bring complete relief: as quoth one of the poets:—

 Haply shall Fortune draw her rein, and bring ✿ Fair chance, for she is
    changeful, jealous, vain:
 Still I may woo my want and wishes win, ✿ And see on heels of care
    unfain, the fain.

And now, O my son, I am certified at this hour that thou art not mad;
but thy case is a strange one which none can clear up for thee save the
Almighty." Cried the Prince, "By Allah, O my father, deal kindly with me
and seek out this young lady and hasten her coming to me; else I shall
die of woe and of my death shall no one know." Then he betrayed the
ardour of his passion; and turned towards his father and repeated these
two couplets:—

 If your promise of personal call prove untrue, ✿ Deign in vision to
    grant me an interview:
 Quoth they, "How can phantom[277] appear to the sight ✿ Of a youth,
    whose sight is fordone, perdue?"

Then, after ending his poetry, Kamar al-Zaman again turned to his
father, with submission and despondency, and shedding tears in flood,
began repeating these lines——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Ninety-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Kamar
al-Zaman had repeated to his father these verses, he wept and complained
and groaned from a wounded heart; and added these lines:—

 Beware that eye-glance which hath magic might; ✿ Wherever turn those
    orbs it bars our flight:
 Nor be deceived by low sweet voice, that breeds ✿ A fever festering in
    the heart and sprite:
 So soft that silky skin, were rose to touch it ✿ She'd cry and
    tear-drops rain for pain and fright:
 Did Zephyr e'en in sleep pass o'er her land, ✿ Scented he'd choose to
    dwell in scented site:
 Her necklets vie with tinkling of her belt; ✿ Her wrists strike either
    wristlet dumb with spite:
 When would her bangles buss those rings in ear, ✿ Upon the lover's eyne
    high mysteries 'light:
 I'm blamed for love of her, nor pardon claim; ✿ Eyes are not profiting
    which lack foresight:
 Heaven strip thee, blamer mine! unjust art thou; ✿ Before this fawn must
    every eye low bow.[278]

After which he said, "By Allah, O my father, I cannot endure to be
parted from her even for an hour." The King smote hand upon hand and
exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great! No cunning contrivance can profit us in this
affair." Then he took his son by the hand and carried him to the palace,
where Kamar al-Zaman lay down on the bed of languor and the King sat at
his head, weeping and mourning over him and leaving him not, night or
day, till at last the Wazir came in to him and said, "O King of the age
and the time, how long wilt thou remain shut up with thy son and hide
thyself from thy troops? Haply, the order of thy realm may be deranged,
by reason of thine absence from thy Grandees and Officers of State. It
behoveth the man of understanding, if he have various wounds in his
body, to apply him first to medicine the most dangerous; so it is my
counsel to thee that thou remove thy son from this place to the pavilion
which is in the palace overlooking the sea; and shut thyself up with him
there, setting apart in every week two days, Thursday and Monday, for
state receptions and progresses and reviews. On these days let thine
Emirs and Wazirs and Chamberlains and Viceroys and high Officials and
Grandees of the realm and the rest of the levies and the lieges have
access to thee and submit their affairs to thee; and do thou their needs
and judge among them and give and take with them and bid and forbid. And
the rest of the week thou shalt pass with thy son, Kamar al-Zaman, and
cease not thus doing till Allah shall vouchsafe relief to you twain.
Think not, O King, that thou art safe from the shifts of Time and the
strokes of Change which come like a traveller in the night; for the wise
man is ever on his guard and how well saith the poet:—

 Thou deemedst well of Time when days went well, ✿ And fearedst not what
    ills might bring thee Fate:
 The Nights so fair and restful cozened thee, ✿ For peaceful Nights bring
    woes of heavy weight.
 Oh children of mankind whom Time befriends, ✿ Beware of Time's deceits
    or soon or late!"[279]

When the Sultan heard his Wazir's words he saw that they were right and
deemed his counsel wise, and it had effect upon him for he feared lest
the order of the state be deranged; so he rose at once and bade
transport his son from his sick room to the pavilion in the palace
overlooking the sea. Now this palace was girt round by the waters and
was approached by a causeway twenty cubits wide. It had windows on all
sides commanding an ocean-view; its floor was paved with parti-coloured
marbles and its ceiling was painted in the richest pigments and figured
with gold and lapis-lazuli. They furnished it for Kamar al-Zaman with
splendid upholstery, embroidered rugs and carpets of the richest silk;
and they clothed the walls with choice brocades and hung curtains
bespangled with gems of price. In the midst they set him a couch of
juniper[280]-wood inlaid with pearls and jewels, and Kamar al-Zaman sat
down thereon, but the excess of his concern and passion for the young
lady had wasted his charms and emaciated his body; he could neither eat
nor drink nor sleep; and he was like a man who had been sick twenty
years of sore sickness. His father seated himself at his head, grieving
for him with the deepest grief, and every Monday and Thursday he gave
his Wazirs and Emirs and Chamberlains and Viceroys and Lords of the
realm and levies and the rest of his lieges leave to come up to him in
that pavilion. So they entered and did their several service and duties
and abode with him till the end of the day, when they went their ways
and the King returned to his son in the pavilion whom he left not night
nor day; and he ceased not doing on this wise for many days and nights.
Such was the case with Kamar al-Zaman, son of King Shahriman; but as
regards Princess Budur, daughter of King Ghayur, Lord of the Isles and
the Seven Palaces, when the two Jinns bore her up and laid her on her
bed, she slept till daybreak, when she awoke and sitting upright looked
right and left, but saw not the youth who had lain in her bosom. At this
her vitals fluttered, her reason fled and she shrieked a loud shriek
which awoke all her slave-girls and nurses and duennas. They flocked in
to her; and the chief of them came forward and asked, "What aileth thee,
O my lady?" Answered the Princess, "O wretched old woman, where is my
beloved, the handsome youth who lay last night in my bosom? Tell me
whither he is gone." Now when the duenna heard this, the light starkened
in her sight and she feared from her mischief with sore affright, and
said to her, "O my Lady Budur, what unseemly words are these?" Cried the
Princess, "Woe to thee, pestilent crone that thou art! I ask thee again
where is my beloved, the goodly youth with the shining face and the
slender form, the jetty eyes and the joined eyebrows, who lay with me
last night from supper-tide until near daybreak?" She rejoined, "By
Allah, O my lady, I have seen no young man nor any other. I conjure
thee, carry not this unseemly jest too far lest we all lose our lives;
for perhaps the joke may come to thy father's ears and who shall then
deliver us from his hand?"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Ninety-third Night,

She said, "It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the duenna
bespake the Lady Budur in these words, 'Allah upon thee, O my lady!
carry not this unseemly jest too far; for perhaps it may come to thy
father's ears, and who shall then deliver us from his hand?'" The
Princess rejoined, "In very sooth a youth lay with me last night, one of
the fairest-faced of men." Exclaimed the duenna, "Heaven preserve thy
reason! indeed no one lay with thee last night." Thereupon the Princess
looked at her hand and, finding Kamar al-Zaman's seal-ring on her finger
in stead of her own, said to her, "Woe to thee, thou accursed! thou
traitress! wilt thou lie to me and tell me that none lay with me last
night and swear to me a falsehood in the name of the Lord?" Replied the
duenna, "By Allah, I do not lie to thee nor have I sworn falsely." Then
the Princess was incensed by her words and, drawing a sword she had by
her, she smote the old woman with it and slew her;[281] whereupon the
eunuch and the waiting-women and the concubines cried out at her, and
ran to her father and, without stay or delay, acquainted him with her
case. So the King went to her, and asked her, "O my daughter, what
aileth thee?"; and she answered, "O my father, where is the youth who
lay with me last night?" Then her reason fled from her head and she cast
her eyes right and left and rent her raiment even to the skirt. When her
sire saw this, he bade the women lay hands on her; so they seized her
and manacled her, then putting a chain of iron about her neck, made her
fast to one of the palace-windows and there left her.[282] Thus far
concerning Princess Budur; but as regards her father, King Ghayur, the
world was straitened upon him when he saw what had befallen his
daughter, for that he loved her and her case was not a little grievous
to him. So he summoned on it the doctors and astrologers and men skilled
in talisman-writing and said to them, "Whoso healeth my daughter of what
ill she hath, I will marry him to her and give him half of my kingdom;
but whoso cometh to her and cureth her not, I will strike off his head
and hang it over her palace-gate." Accordingly, all who went in to her,
but failed to heal her, he beheaded and hung their heads over the
palace-gates, till he had beheaded on her account forty doctors and
crucified forty astrologers; wherefor the general held aloof from her,
all the physicians having failed to medicine her malady; and her case
was a puzzle to the men of science and the adepts in cabalistic
characters. And as her longing and passion redoubled and love and
distraction were sore upon her, she poured forth tears and repeated
these couplets:—

 My fondness, O my moon, for thee my foeman is, ✿ And to thy comradeship
    the nights my thought compel:
 In gloom I bide with fire that flames below my ribs, ✿ Whose lowe I make
    comparison with heat of Hell:
 I'm plagued with sorest stress of pine and ecstasy; ✿ Nor clearest
    noontide can that horrid pain dispel.

Then she sighed and repeated these also:—

 Salams fro' me to friends in every stead; ✿ Indeed to all dear friends
    do I incline:
 Salams, but not salams that bid adieu; ✿ Salams that growth of good for
    you design:
 I love you dear, indeed, nor less your land, ✿ But bide I far from every
    need of mine!

And when the lady Budur ceased repeating her poetry, she wept till her
eyes waxed sore and her cheeks changed form and hue, and in this
condition she continued three years. Now she had a foster-brother, by
name Marzawán,[283] who was travelling in far lands and absent from her
the whole of this time. He loved her with an exceeding love, passing the
love of brothers; so when he came back he went in to his mother and
asked for his sister, the Princess Budur. She answered him, "O my son,
thy sister hath been smitten with madness and hath passed these three
years with a chain of iron about her neck; and all the physicians and
men of science have failed of healing her." When Marzawan heard these
words he said, "I must needs go in to her; peradventure I may discover
what she hath, and be able to medicine her;" and his mother replied,
"Needs must thou visit her, but wait till to-morrow, that I may contrive
some thing to suit thy case." Then she went a-foot to the palace of the
Lady Budur and, accosting the eunuch in charge of the gates, made him a
present and said to him, "I have a daughter, who was brought up with thy
mistress and since then I married her; and, when that befel the Princess
which befel her, she became troubled and sore concerned, and I desire of
thy favour that my daughter may go in to her for an hour and look on
her; and then return whence she came, so shall none know of it." Quoth
the eunuch, "This may not be except by night, after the King hath
visited his child and gone away; then come thou and thy daughter." So
she kissed the eunuch's hand and, returning home, waited till the morrow
at nightfall; and when it was time she arose and sought her son Marzawan
and attired him in woman's apparel; then, taking his hand in hers, led
him towards the palace, and ceased not walking with him till she came
upon the eunuch after the Sultan had ended his visit to the Princess.
Now when the eunuch saw her, he rose to her, and said, "Enter, but do
not prolong thy stay!" So they went in and when Marzawan beheld the Lady
Budur in the aforesaid plight, he saluted her, after his mother had
doffed his woman's garb: then he took out of their satchel books he had
brought with him; and, lighting a wax-candle, he began to recite certain
conjurations. Thereupon the Princess looked at him and recognising him,
said, "O my brother, thou hast been absent on thy travels, and thy news
have been cut off from us." He replied, "True! but Allah hath brought me
back safe and sound, I am now minded to set out again nor hath aught
delayed me but the news I hear of thee; wherefore my heart burned for
thee and I came to thee, so haply I may free thee of thy malady." She
rejoined, "O my brother, thinkest thou it is madness aileth me?" "Yes,"
answered he, and she said, "Not so, by Allah! 'tis even as saith the
poet:—

 Quoth they "Thou rav'st on him thou lov'st:" quoth I, ✿ "The sweets of
    love are only for th' insane!"
 Love never maketh Time his friend befriend; ✿ Only the Jinn-struck wight
    such boon can gain:
 Well! yes, I'm mad: bring him who madded me ✿ And, if he cure my
    madness, blame restrain!"

Then she let Marzawan know that she was love-daft and he said, "Tell me
concerning thy tale and what befel thee: haply there may be in my hand
something which shall be a means of deliverance for thee."——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Ninety-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Marzawan thus
addressed Princess Budur, "Tell me concerning thy tale and what befel
thee: haply Allah may inspire me with a means of deliverance for thee."
Quoth she, "O my brother, hear my story which is this. One night I awoke
from sleep, in the last third of the night[284] and, sitting up, saw by
my side the handsomest of youths that be, and tongue faileth to describe
him, for he was as a willow-wand or an Indian rattan-cane. So methought
it was my father who had done on this wise in order thereby to try me,
for that he had consulted me concerning wedlock, when the Kings sought
me of him to wife, and I had refused. It was this thought withheld me
from arousing him, for I feared that, if I did aught or embraced him, he
would peradventure inform my father of my doings. But in the morning, I
found on my finger his seal-ring, in place of my own which he had taken.
And, O my brother, my heart was seized with love of him at first sight;
and, for the violence of my passion and longing, I have never savoured
the taste of sleep and have no occupation save weeping alway and
repeating verses night and day. And this, O my brother, is my story and
the cause of my madness." Then she poured forth tears and repeated these
couplets:—

 "Now Love hast banished all that bred delight; ✿ With that
    heart-nibbling fawn my joys took flight:
 Lightest of trifles lover's blood to him ✿ Who wastes the vitals of the
    hapless wight!
 For him I'm jealous of my sight and thought; ✿ My heart acts spy upon my
    thought and sight:
 Those long-lashed eyelids rain on me their shafts ✿ Guileful, destroying
    hearts where'er they light:
 Now, while my portion in the world endures, ✿ Shall I behold him ere I
    quit world-site?
 What bear I for his sake I'd hide, but tears ✿ Betray my feelings to the
    spy's despight.
 When near, our union seemeth ever far; ✿ When far, my thoughts to him
    aye nearest are."

And presently she continued, "See then, O my brother, how thou mayest
aid me in mine affliction." So Marzawan bowed his head groundwards
awhile, wondering and not knowing what to do, then he raised it and said
to her, "All thou hast spoken to me I hold to be true, though the case
of the young man pass my understanding: but I will go round about all
lands and will seek for what may heal thee; haply Allah shall appoint
thy healing to be at my hand. Meanwhile, take patience and be not
disquieted." Thereupon Marzawan farewelled her, praying that she might
be constant and left her repeating these couplets:—

 Thine image ever companies my sprite, ✿ For all thou'rt distant from
    then pilgrim's sight;
 But my heart-wishes e'er attract thee near: ✿ What is the lightning's
    speed to Thought's swift flight?
 Then go not thou, my very light of eyes ✿ Which, when thou'rt gone, lack
    all the Kohl of light.

Then Marzawan returned to his mother's house, where he passed the night.
And when the morrow dawned, having equipped himself for his journey, he
fared forth and ceased not faring from city to city and from island to
island for a whole month, till he came to a town named Al-Tayrab.[285]
Here he went about scenting news of the townsfolk, so haply he might
light on a cure for the Princess's malady, for in every capital he
entered or passed by, it was reported that Queen Budur, daughter of King
Ghayur, had lost her wits. But arriving at Al-Tayrab city, he heard that
Kamar al-Zaman, son of King Shahriman, was fallen sick and afflicted
with melancholy madness. So Marzawan asked the name of the Prince's
capital and they said to him, "It is on the Islands of Khalidan and it
lieth distant from our city a whole month's journey by sea, but by land
it is six months' march." So he went down to the sea in a ship which was
bound for the Khalidan Isles, and she sailed with a favouring breeze for
a whole month, till they came in sight of the capital; and there
remained for them but to make the land when, behold, there came out on
them a tempestuous wind which carried away the masts and rent the
canvas, so that the sails fell into the sea and the ship capsized, with
all on board,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the ship
capsized with all on board, each sought his own safety; and as for
Marzawan the set of the sea carried him under the King's palace, wherein
was Kamar al-Zaman. And by the decree of destiny it so happened that
this was the day on which King Shahriman gave audience to his Grandees
and high officers, and he was sitting, with his son's head on his lap,
whilst an eunuch fanned away the flies; and the Prince had not spoken
neither had he eaten nor drunk for two days, and he was grown thinner
than a spindle.[286] Now the Wazir was standing respectfully a-foot near
the latticed window giving on the sea and, raising his eyes, saw
Marzawan being beaten by the billows and at his last gasp; whereupon his
heart was moved to pity for him, so he drew near to the King and moving
his head towards him said, "I crave thy leave, O King, to go down to the
court of the pavilion and open the water-gate that I may rescue a man
who is at the point of drowning in the sea and bring him forth of danger
into deliverance; peradventure, on this account Allah may free thy son
from what he hath!" The King replied, "O thou Wazir, enough is that
which hath befallen my son through thee and on thine account. Haply, if
thou rescue this drowning man, he will come to know our affairs, and
look on my son who is in this state and exult over me; but I swear by
Allah, that if this half-drowned wretch come hither and learn our
condition and look upon my son and then fare forth and speak of our
secrets to any, I will assuredly strike off thy head before his; for
thou, O my Minister, art the cause of all that hath betided us, first
and last. Now do as thou wilt." Thereupon the Wazir sprang up and,
opening the private postern which gave upon the sea, descended to the
causeway; then walked on twenty steps and came to the water where he saw
Marzawan nigh unto death. So he put out his hand to him and, catching
him by his hair, drew him ashore in a state of insensibility, with belly
full of water and eyes half out of his head. The Wazir waited till he
came to himself, when he pulled off his wet clothes and clad him in a
fresh suit, covering his head with one of his servants' turbands; after
which he said to him, "Know that I have been the means of saving thee
from drowning: do not thou requite me by causing my death and thine
own."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Wazir did
to Marzawan what he did, he thus addressed him, "Know that I have been
the cause of saving thee from drowning, so requite me not by causing my
death and thine own." Asked Marzawan, "And how so?"; and the Wazir
answered, "Thou art at this hour about to go up and pass among Emirs and
Wazirs, all of them silent and none speaking, because of Kamar al-Zaman,
the son of the Sultan." Now when Marzawan heard the name of Kamar
al-Zaman, he knew that this was he whom he had heard spoken of in sundry
cities and of whom he came in search, but he feigned ignorance and asked
the Wazir, "And who is Kamar al-Zaman?" Answered the Minister, "He is
the son of Sultan Shahriman and he is sore sick and lieth strown on his
couch restless alway, eating not nor drinking neither sleeping night or
day; indeed he is nigh upon death and we have lost hope of his living
and are certain that he is dying. Beware lest thou look too long on him,
or thou look on any place other than that where thou settest thy feet:
else thou art a lost man, and I also." He replied, "Allah upon thee, O
Wazir, I implore thee, of thy favour, acquaint me touching this youth
thou describest, what is the cause of the condition in which he is." The
Wazir replied, "I know none, save that, three years ago, his father
required him to wed, but he refused; whereat the King was wroth and
imprisoned him. And when he awoke on the morrow, he fancied that during
the night he had been roused from sleep and had seen by his side a young
lady of passing loveliness, whose charms tongue can never express; and
he assured us that he had plucked off her seal-ring from her finger and
had put it on his own and that she had done likewise; but we know not
the secret of all this business. So by Allah, O my son, when thou comest
up with me into the palace, look not on the Prince, but go thy way; for
the Sultan's heart is full of wrath against me." So said Marzawan to
himself, "By Allah; this is the one I sought!" Then he followed the
Wazir up to the palace, where the Minister seated himself at the
Prince's feet; but Marzawan found forsooth nothing to do but go up to
Kamar al-Zaman and stand before him at gaze. Upon this the Wazir died of
affright in his skin, and kept looking at Marzawan and signalling him to
wend his way; but he feigned not to see him and gave not over gazing
upon Kamar al-Zaman, till he was well assured that it was indeed he whom
he was seeking,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Marzawan
looked upon Kamar al-Zaman and knew that it was indeed he whom he was
seeking, he cried, "Exalted be Allah, Who hath made his shape even as
her shape and his complexion as her complexion and his cheek as her
cheek!" Upon this Kamar al-Zaman opened his eyes and gave earnest ear to
his speech; and, when Marzawan saw him inclining to hear, he repeated
these couplets[287]:—

  I see thee full of song and plaint and love's own ecstasy;
  Delighting in describing all the charms of loveliness:

  Art smit by stroke of Love or hath shaft-shot wounded thee?
  None save the wounded ever show such signals of distress!

  Ho thou! crown the wine-cup and sing me singular
  Praises to Sulaymá, Al-Rabáb, Tan'oum addrest;[288]

  Go round the grape-vine sun[289] which for mansion hath a jar;
  Whose East the cup-boy is, and here my mouth that opes for West.

  I'm jealous of the very clothes that dare her sides enroll
  When she veils her dainty body of the delicatest grace:

  I envy every goblet of her lips that taketh toll,
  When she sets the kissing-cup on that sweetest kissing-place.

  But deem not by the keen-edged scymitar I'm slain—
  The hurts and harms I dree are from arrows of her eyes.

  I found her finger-tips, as I met her once again,
  Deep-reddened with the juice of the wood that ruddy dyes;[290]

  And cried, "Thy palms thou stainedst when far away was I
  And this is how thou payest one distracted by his pine!"

  Quoth she (enkindling in my heart a flame that burnèd high
  Speaking as one who cannot hide of longing love the sign),

  "By thy life, this is no dye used for dyeing; so forbear
  Thy blame, nor in charging me with falsing Love persist!"

  "But when upon our parting-day I saw thee haste to fare,
  The while were bared my hand and my elbow and my wrist;"

  "I shed a flood of blood-red tears and with fingers brushed away;
  Hence blood-reddened were the tips and still blood-red they remain."

  Had I wept before she wept, to my longing-love a prey,
  Before repentance came, I had quit my soul of pain;

  But she wept before I wept and I wept to see her care
  And I said, "All the merit appertains to precedent;"[291]

  Blame me not for loving her; now on self of Love I swear
  For her sake, for her only, these pains my soul torment.

  She hath all the lere of Lukmán[292] and Yúsuf's beauty lief;
  Sweet singer David's voice and Maryam's chastity:

  While I've all Jacob's mourning and Jonah's prison-grief,
  And the sufferings of Job and old Adam's history:

  Yet kill her not, albeit of my love for her I die;
  But ask her why my blood to her was lawful, ask her why?

When Marzawan recited this ode, the words fell upon Kamar al-Zaman's
heart as freshness after fever and returning health; and he sighed and,
turning his tongue in his mouth, said to his sire, "O my father, let
this youth come and sit by my side."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Ninety-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-Zaman
said to his sire, "O my father, allow this youth to come and sit by my
side." Now when the King heard these words from his son, he rejoiced
with exceeding joy, though at the first his heart had been set against
Marzawan and he had determined that the stranger's head needs must be
stricken off: but when he heard Kamar al-Zaman speak, his anger left him
and he arose and drawing Marzawan to him, seated him by his son and
turning to him said, "Praised be Allah for thy safety!" He replied,
"Allah preserve thee! and preserve thy son to thee!" and called down
blessings on the King. Then the King asked, "From what country art
thou?"; and he answered, "From the Islands of the Inland Sea, the
kingdom of King Ghayur, Lord of the Isles and the Seas and the Seven
Palaces." Quoth King Shahriman, "Maybe thy coming shall be blessed to my
son and Allah vouchsafe to heal what is in him." Quoth Marzawan,
"Inshallah, naught shall be save what shall be well!" Then turning to
Kamar al-Zaman, he said to him in his ear unheard of the King and his
court, "O my lord! be of good cheer, and hearten thy heart and let thine
eyes be cool and clear and, with respect to her for whose sake thou art
thus, ask not of her case on thine account. But thou keptest thy secret
and fellest sick, while she told her secret and they said she had gone
mad; so she is now in prison, with an iron chain about her neck, in most
piteous plight; but, Allah willing, the healing of both of you shall
come from my hand." Now when Kamar al-Zaman heard these words, his life
returned to him and he took heart and felt a thrill of joy and signed to
his father to help him sit up; and the King was like to fly for gladness
and rose hastily and lifted him up. Presently, of his fear for his son,
he shook the kerchief of dismissal[293]; and all the Emirs and Wazirs
withdrew; then he set two pillows for his son to lean upon, after which
he bade them perfume the palace with saffron and decorate the city,
saying to Marzawan, "By Allah, O my son, of a truth thine aspect be a
lucky and a blessed!" And he made as much of him as he might and called
for food, and when they brought it, Marzawan came up to the Prince and
said, "Rise, eat with me." So he obeyed him and ate with him, and all
the while the King invoked blessings on Marzawan and said, "How
auspicious is thy coming, O my son!" And when the father saw his boy
eat, his joy and gladness redoubled, and he went out and told the
Prince's mother and all the household. Then he spread throughout the
palace the good news of the Prince's recovery and the King commanded the
decoration of the city and it was a day of high festival. Marzawan
passed that night with Kamar al-Zaman, and the King also slept with them
in joy and delight for his son's recovery.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Shahriman
also passed that night with them in the excess of his joy for his son's
recovery. And when the next morning dawned, and the King had gone away
and the two young men were left alone, Kamar al-Zaman told his story
from beginning to end to Marzawan who said, "In very sooth I know her
with whom thou didst foregather; her name is the Princess Budur and she
is daughter to King Ghayur." Then he related to him all that had passed
with the Princess from first to last and acquainted him with the
excessive love she bore him, saying, "All that befel thee with thy
father hath befallen her with hers, and thou art without doubt her
beloved, even as she is thine; so brace up thy resolution and take
heart, for I will bring thee to her and unite you both anon and deal
with you even as saith the poet:—

 Albe to lover adverse be his love, ✿ And show aversion howso may he
    care;
 Yet will I manage that their persons[294] meet, ✿ E'en as the pivot of a
    scissor-pair."

And he ceased not to comfort and solace and encourage Kamar al-Zaman and
urge him to eat and drink till he ate food and drank wine, and life
returned to him and he was saved from his ill case; and Marzawan cheered
him and diverted him with talk and songs and stories, and in good time
he became free of his disorder and stood up and sought to go to the
Hammam.[295] So Marzawan took him by the hand and both went to the bath,
where they washed their bodies and made them clean.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Two Hundredth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Kamar
al-Zaman, son of King Shahriman, went to the Hammam, his father in his
joy at this event freed the prisoners, and presented splendid dresses to
his grandees and bestowed large alm-gifts upon the poor and bade
decorate the city seven days. Then quoth Marzawan to Kamar al-Zaman,
"Know, O my lord, that I came not from the Lady Budur save for this
purpose, and the object of my journey was to deliver her from her
present case; and it remaineth for us only to devise how we may get to
her, since thy father cannot brook the thought of parting from thee. So
it is my counsel that to-morrow thou ask his leave to go abroad hunting.
Then do thou take with thee a pair of saddle-bags full of money and
mount a swift steed, and lead a spare horse, and I will do the like, and
say to thy sire:—I have a mind to divert myself with hunting the desert
and to see the open country and there to pass one night. Suffer not any
servant to follow us, for as soon as we reach the open country, we will
go our ways." Kamar al-Zaman rejoiced in this plan with great joy and
cried, "It is good." Then he stiffened his back and, going in to his
father, sought his leave and spoke as he had been taught, and the King
consented to his going forth a-hunting and said, "O my son, blessed be
the day that restoreth thee to health! I will not gainsay thee in this;
but pass not more than one night in the desert and return to me on the
morrow; for thou knowest that life is not good to me without thee, and
indeed I can hardly believe thee to be wholly recovered from what thou
hadst,[296] because thou art to me as he of whom quoth the poet:—

 Albe by me I had through day and night ✿ Solomon's carpet and the
    Chosroes' might,
 Both were in value less than wing of gnat, ✿ Unless these eyne could
    hold thee aye in sight."[297]

Then the King equipped his son Kamar al-Zaman and Marzawan for the
excursion, bidding make ready for them four horses, together with a
dromedary to carry the money and a camel to bear the water and
belly-timber; and Kamar al-Zaman forbade any of his attendants to follow
him. His father farewelled him and pressed him to his breast and kissed
him, saying, "I ask thee in the name of Allah, be not absent from me
more than one night, wherein sleep will be unlawful to me, for I am even
as saith the poet:—

 Thou present, in the Heaven of heavens I dwell; ✿ Bearing thine absence
    is of hells my Hell:
 Pledged be for thee my soul! If love for thee ✿ Be crime, my crime is of
    the fellest fell.
 Does love-lowe burn thy heart as burns it mine, ✿ Doomed night and day
    Gehenna-fire to smell?"

Answered Kamar al-Zaman, "O my father, Inshallah, I will lie abroad but
one night!" Then he took leave of him, and he and Marzawan mounted and
leading the spare horses, the dromedary with the money and the camel
with the water and victual, turned their faces towards the open
country;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawning day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


            Now when it was the Two Hundred and First Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-Zaman and
Marzawan fared forth and turned their faces towards the open country;
and they travelled from the first of the day till nightfall, when they
halted and ate and drank and fed their beasts and rested awhile; after
which they again took horse and ceased not journeying for three days,
and on the fourth they came to a spacious tract wherein was a thicket.
They alighted in it and Marzawan, taking the camel and one of the
horses, slaughtered them and cut off their flesh and stripped their
bones. Then he doffed from Kamar al-Zaman his shirt and trousers which
he smeared with the horse's blood and he took the Prince's coat which he
tore to shreds and befouled with gore; and he cast them down in the fork
of the road. Then they ate and drank and mounting set forward again;
and, when Kamar al-Zaman asked why this was done, and said, "What is
this O my brother, and how shall it profit us?"; Marzawan replied, "Know
that thy father, when we have outstayed the second night after the night
for which we had his leave, and yet we return not, will mount and follow
in our track till he come hither; and, when he happeneth upon this blood
which I have spilt and he seeth thy shirt and trousers rent and
gore-fouled, he will fancy that some accident befel thee from bandits or
wild-beasts; so he will give up hope of thee and return to his city, and
by this device we shall win our wishes." Quoth Kamar al-Zaman, "By
Allah, this be indeed a rare device! Thou hast done right well."[298]
Then the two fared on days and nights and all that while Kamar al-Zaman
did naught but complain when he found himself alone, and he ceased not
weeping till they drew near their journey's end, when he rejoiced and
repeated these verses:—

 Wilt tyrant play with truest friend who thinks of thee each hour, ✿ And
    after showing love-desire betray indifference?
 May I forfeit every favour if in love I falsed thee, ✿ If thee I left,
    abandon me by way of recompense:
 But I've been guilty of no crime such harshness to deserve, ✿ And if I
    aught offended thee I bring my penitence;
 Of Fortune's wonders one it is thou hast abandoned me; ✿ But Fortune
    never wearieth of showing wonderments.

When he had made an end of his verses, Marzawan said to him, "Look!
these be King Ghayur's Islands;" whereat Kamar al-Zaman joyed with
exceeding joy and thanked him for what he had done, and kissed him
between the eyes and strained him——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Two Hundred and Second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Marzawan said
"Look! these be the Islands of King Ghayur;" Kamar al-Zaman joyed with
exceeding joy and thanked him for what he had done and kissed him
between the eyes and strained him to his bosom. And after reaching the
Islands and entering the city they took up their lodging in a khan,
where they rested three days from the fatigues of their wayfare; after
which Marzawan carried Kamar al-Zaman to the bath and, clothing him in
merchant's gear, provided him with a geomantic tablet of gold,[299] with
a set of astrological instruments and with an astrolabe of silver,
plated with gold. Then he said to him, "Arise, O my lord, and take thy
stand under the walls of the King's palace and cry out:—I am the ready
Reckoner; I am the Scrivener; I am he who weeteth the Sought and the
Seeker; I am the finished man of Science; I am the Astrologer
accomplished in experience! Where then is he that seeketh? As soon as
the King heareth this, he will send after thee and carry thee in to his
daughter the Princess Budur, thy lover; but when about going in to her
do thou say to him:—Grant me three days' delay, and if she recover, give
her to me to wife; and if not, deal with me as thou dealtest with those
who forewent me. He will assuredly agree to this, so as soon as thou art
alone with her, discover thyself to her; and when she seeth thee, she
will recover strength and her madness will cease from her and she will
be made whole in one night. Then do thou give her to eat and drink, and
her father, rejoicing in her recovery, will marry thee to her and share
his kingdom with thee; for he hath imposed on himself this condition and
so peace be upon thee." Now when Kamar al-Zaman heard these words he
exclaimed, "May I never lack thy benefits!", and, taking the set of
instruments aforesaid, sallied forth from the caravanserai in the dress
of his order. He walked on till he stood under the walls of King
Ghayur's palace, where he began to cry out, saying, "I am the Scribe, I
am the ready Reckoner, I am he who knoweth the Sought and the Seeker; I
am he who openeth the Volume and summeth up the Sums;[300] who Dreams
can expound whereby the sought is found! Where then is the seeker?" Now
when the city people heard this, they flocked to him, for it was long
since they had seen Scribe or Astrologer, and they stood round him and,
looking upon him, they saw one in the prime of beauty and grace and
perfect elegance, and they marvelled at his loveliness, and his fine
stature and symmetry. Presently one of them accosted him and said,
"Allah upon thee, O thou fair and young, with the eloquent tongue! incur
not this affray; nor throw thy life away in thine ambition to marry the
Princess Budur. Only cast thine eyes upon yonder heads hung up; all
their owners have lost their lives in this same venture." Yet Kamar
al-Zaman paid no heed to them, but cried out at the top of his voice,
saying, "I am the Doctor, the Scrivener! I am the Astrologer, the
Calculator!" And all the townsfolk forbade him from this, but he
regarded them not at all, saying in his mind, "None knoweth desire save
whoso suffereth it." Then he began again to cry his loudest, shouting,
"I am the Scrivener, I am the Astrologer!"——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


            Now when it was the Two Hundred and Third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-Zaman in
no wise heeded the words of the citizens, but continued to cry out, "I
am the Calculator! I am the Astrologer!" Thereupon all the townsfolk
were wroth with him and said to him, "Thou art nothing but an imbecile,
silly, self-willed lad! Have pity on thine own youth and tender years
and beauty and loveliness." But he cried all the more, "I am the
Astrologer, I am the Calculator! Is there any one that seeketh?" As he
was thus crying and the people forbidding him, behold, King Ghayur heard
his voice and the clamour of the lieges and said to his Wazir, "Go down
and bring me yon Astrologer." So the Wazir went down in haste, and
taking Kamar al-Zaman from the midst of the crowd led him up to the
King; and when in the presence he kissed the ground and began
versifying:—

 Eight glories meet, all, all conjoined in thee, ✿ Whereby may Fortune
    aye thy servant be:
 Lere, lordliness, grace, generosity; ✿ Plain words, deep meaning,
    honour, victory!

When the King looked upon him, he seated him by his side and said to
him, "By Allah, O my son, an thou be not an astrologer, venture not thy
life nor comply with my condition; for I have bound myself that whoso
goeth in to my daughter and healeth her not of that which hath befallen
her I will strike off his head; but whoso healeth her him I will marry
to her. So let not thy beauty and loveliness delude thee: for, by Allah!
and again, by Allah! if thou cure her not, I will assuredly cut off thy
head." And Kamar al-Zaman replied, "This is thy right; and I consent,
for I wot of this ere came I hither." Then King Ghayur took the Kazis to
witness against him and delivered him to the eunuch, saying, "Carry this
one to the Lady Budur." So the eunuch took him by the hand and led him
along the passage; but Kamar al-Zaman outstripped him and pushed on
before, whilst the eunuch ran after him, saying, "Woe to thee! Hasten
not to thine own ruin: never yet saw I astrologer so eager for his
proper destruction; but thou weetest not what calamities are before
thee." Thereupon Kamar al-Zaman turned away his face from the
eunuch——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


           Now when it was the Two Hundred and Fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the eunuch
thus addressed Kamar al-Zaman, "Patience, and no indecent hurry!"; the
Prince turned away his face and began repeating these couplets:—

 A Sage, I feel a fool before thy charms; ✿ Distraught, I wot not what
    the words I say:
 If say I "Sun," away thou dost not pass ✿ From eyes of me, while suns go
    down with day:
 Thou hast completed Beauty, in whose praise ✿ Speech-makers fail, and
    talkers lose their way.

Then the eunuch stationed Kamar al-Zaman behind the curtain of the
Princess's door and the Prince said to him, "Which of the two ways will
please thee more; treat and cure thy lady from here or go in and heal
her within the curtain?" The eunuch marvelled at his words and answered,
"An thou heal her from here it were better proof of thy skill." Upon
this Kamar al-Zaman sat down behind the curtain and, taking out
ink-case, pen and paper, wrote the following: "This is the writ of one
whom passion swayeth. ✿ and whom longing waylayeth ✿ and wakeful misery
slayeth ✿ one who despaireth of living ✿ and looketh for naught but
dying ✿ with whose mourning heart ✿ nor comforter nor helper taketh part
✿ One whose sleepless eyes ✿ none succoureth from anxieties ✿ whose day
is passed in fire ✿ and his night in torturing desire ✿ whose body is
wasted for much emaciation ✿ and no messenger from his beloved bringeth
him consolation." And after this he indited the following couplets:—

 I write with heart devoted to thy thought, ✿ And eyelids chafed by tears
    of blood they bled;
 And body clad, by loving pine and pain, ✿ In shirt of leanness, and worn
    down to thread,
 To thee complain I of Love's tormentry, ✿ Which ousted hapless Patience
    from her stead:
 _A toi!_ show favour and some mercy deign, ✿ For Passion's cruel hands
    my vitals shred.

And beneath his lines he wrote these cadenced sentences, "The heart's
pain is removed ✿ by union with the beloved ✿ and whomso his lover
paineth ✿ only Allah assaineth! ✿ If we or you have wrought deceit ✿ may
the deceiver win defeat! ✿ There is naught goodlier than a lover who
keeps faith ✿ with the beloved who works him scathe." Then, by way of
subscription, he wrote, "From the distracted and despairing man ✿ whom
love and longing trepan ✿ from the lover under passion's ban ✿ the
prisoner of transport and distraction ✿ from this Kamar al-Zaman ✿ son
of Shahriman ✿ to the peerless one ✿ of the fair Houris the pearl-union
✿ to the Lady Budur ✿ daughter of King Al-Ghayur ✿ Know thou that by
night I am sleepless ✿ and by day in distress ✿ consumed with increasing
wasting and pain ✿ and longing and love unfain ✿ abounding in sighs ✿
with tear-flooded eyes ✿ by passion captive ta'en ✿ of Desire the slain
✿ with heart seared by the parting of us twain ✿ the debtor of
longing-bane, of sickness cup-companion ✿ I am the sleepless one, who
never closeth eye ✿ the slave of love, whose tears run never dry ✿ for
the fire of my heart is still burning ✿ and never hidden is the flame of
my yearning." Then on the margin Kamar al-Zaman wrote this admired
verse:—

 Salam from graces hoarded by my Lord ✿ To her, who holds my heart and
    soul in hoard!

And also these:—

 Pray'ee grant me some words from your lips, belike ✿ Such mercy may
    comfort and cool these eyne:
 From the stress of my love and my pine for you, ✿ I make light of what
    makes me despised, indign:
 Allah guard a folk whose abode was far, ✿ And whose secret I kept in the
    holiest shrine:
 Now Fortune in kindness hath favoured me ✿ Thrown on threshold dust of
    this love o' mine:
 By me bedded I looked on Budúr, whose sun ✿ The moon of my fortunes hath
    made to shine.

Then, having affixed his seal-ring to the missive, he wrote these
couplets in the place of address:—

 Ask of my writ what wrote my pen in dole, ✿ And hear my tale of misery
    from this scroll;
 My hand is writing while my tears down flow, ✿ And to the paper 'plains
    my longing soul:
 My tears cease not to roll upon this sheet, ✿ And if they stopped I'd
    cause blood-gouts to roll.

And at the end he added this other verse:—

 I've sent the ring from off thy finger bore ✿ I when we met, now deign
    my ring restore!

Then Kamar al-Zaman set the Lady Budur's ring inside the letter and
sealed it and gave it to the eunuch, who took it and went in with it to
his mistress.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


            Now when it was the Two Hundred and Fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-Zaman,
after setting the seal-ring inside the epistle, gave it to the eunuch
who took it and went in with it to his mistress; and, when the Lady
Budur opened it, she found therein her own very ring. Then she read the
paper and when she understood its purport and knew that it was from her
beloved, and that he in person stood behind the curtain, her reason
began to fly and her breast swelled for joy and rose high; and she
repeated these couplets:—

 Long, long have I bewailed the sev'rance of our loves, ✿ With tears that
    from my lids streamed down like burning rain;
 And vowed that, if the days deign reunite us two, ✿ My lips should never
    speak of severance again:
 Joy hath o'erwhelmed me so that, for the very stress ✿ Of that which
    gladdens me to weeping I am fain.
 Tears are become to you a habit, O my eyes, ✿ So that ye weep as well
    for gladness as for pain.[301]

And having finished her verse, the Lady Budur stood up forthwith and,
firmly setting her feet to the wall, strained with all her might upon
the collar of iron, till she brake it from her neck and snapped the
chains. Then going forth from behind the curtain she threw herself on
Kamar al-Zaman and kissed him on the mouth, like a pigeon feeding its
young.[302] And she embraced him with all the stress of her love and
longing and said to him, "O my lord, do I wake or sleep and hath the
Almighty indeed vouchsafed us reunion after disunion? Laud be to Allah
who hath our loves repaired, even after we despaired!" Now when the
eunuch saw her in this case, he went off running to King Ghayur and,
kissing the ground before him, said, "O my lord, know that this
Astrologer is indeed the Shaykh of all astrologers, who are fools to
him, all of them; for verily he hath cured thy daughter while standing
behind the curtain and without going in to her." Quoth the King, "Look
well to it, is this news true?" Answered the Eunuch, "O my lord, rise
and come and see for thyself how she hath found strength to break the
iron chains and is come forth to the Astrologer, kissing and embracing
him." Thereupon the King arose and went in to his daughter who, when she
saw him, stood up in haste and covered her head,[303] and recited these
two couplets:—

 The tooth-stick love I not; for when I say, ✿ "Siwák,"[304] I miss thee,
    for it sounds "Siwá-ka":
 The caper-tree I love; for when I say, ✿ "Arák"[305] it sounds I look on
    thee, "Ará-ka."

Thereupon the King was so transported for joy at her recovery that he
felt like to fly and kissed her between the eyes, for he loved her with
dearest love; then, turning to Kamar al-Zaman, he asked him who he was,
and said, "What countryman art thou?" So the Prince told him his name
and rank, and informed him that he was the son of King Shahriman, and
presently related to him the whole story from beginning to end; and
acquainted him with what happened between himself and the Lady Budur;
and how he had taken her seal-ring from her finger and had placed it on
his own; whereat Ghayur marvelled and said, "Verily your story deserveth
in books to be chronicled, and when you are dead and gone age after age
be read." Then he summoned Kazis and witnesses forthright and married
the Lady Budur to Prince Kamar al-Zaman; after which he bade decorate
the city seven days long. So they spread the tables with all manner of
meats, whilst the drums beat and the criers announced the glad tidings,
and all the troops donned their richest clothes; and they illuminated
the city and held high festival. Then Kamar al-Zaman went in to the Lady
Budur and the King rejoiced in her recovery and in her marriage; and
praised Allah for that He had made her to fall in love with a goodly
youth of the sons of Kings. So they unveiled her and displayed the bride
before the bridegroom; and both were the living likeness of each other
in beauty and comeliness and grace and love-allurement. Then Kamar
al-Zaman lay with her that night and took his will of her, whilst she in
like manner fulfilled her desire of him and enjoyed his charms and
grace; and they slept in each other's arms till the morning. On the
morrow, the King made a wedding-feast to which he gathered all comers
from the Islands of the Inner and Outer Seas, and he spread the tables
with choicest viands nor ceased the banquetting for a whole month. Now
when Kamar al-Zaman had thus fulfilled his will and attained his inmost
desire, and whenas he had tarried awhile with the Princess Budur, he
bethought him of his father, King Shahriman, and saw him in a dream,
saying, "O my son, is it thus thou dealest with me?" and reciting in the
vision these two couplets:—

 Indeed to watch the darkness-moon he blighted me, ✿ And to star-gaze
    through longsome night he plighted me:
 Easy, my heart! for haply he'll unite with thee; ✿ And patience, Sprite!
    with whatso ills he dight to thee.

Now after seeing his father in the dream and hearing his reproaches,
Kamar al-Zaman awoke in the morning, afflicted and troubled, whereupon
the Lady Budur questioned him and he told her what he had seen——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


            Now when it was the Two Hundred and Sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Kamar
al-Zaman acquainted the Lady Budur with what he had seen in his dream,
she and he went in to her sire and, telling him what had passed,
besought his leave to travel. He gave the Prince the permission he
sought; but the Princess said, "O my father, I cannot bear to be parted
from him." Quoth Ghayur, her sire, "Then go thou with him," and gave her
leave to be absent a whole twelvemonth and afterwards to visit him in
every year once; so she kissed his hand and Kamar al-Zaman did the like.
Thereupon King Ghayur proceeded to equip his daughter and her bridegroom
for the journey, and furnished them with outfit and appointments for the
march; and brought out of his stables horses marked with his own brand,
blood-dromedaries[306] which can journey ten days without water, and
prepared a litter for his daughter, besides loading mules and camels
with victual; moreover, he gave them slaves and eunuchs to serve them
and all manner of travelling gear; and on the day of departure, when
King Ghayur took leave of Kamar al-Zaman, he bestowed on him ten
splendid suits of cloth of gold embroidered with stones of price,
together with ten riding horses and ten she-camels, and a treasury of
money;[307] and he charged him to love and cherish his daughter the Lady
Budur. Then the King accompanied them to the farthest limits of his
Islands where, going in to his daughter Budur in the litter, he kissed
her and strained her to his bosom, weeping and repeating:—

 O thou who wooest Severance, easy fare! ✿ For love-embrace belongs to
    lover-friend:
 Fare softly! Fortune's nature falsehood is, ✿ And parting shall love's
    every meeting end.

Then leaving his daughter, he went to her husband and bade him farewell
and kissed him; after which he parted from them and, giving the order
for the march he returned to his capital with his troops. The Prince and
Princess and their suite fared on without stopping through the first day
and the second and the third and the fourth; nor did they cease faring
for a whole month till they came to a spacious champaign, abounding in
pasturage, where they pitched their tents; and they ate and drank and
rested, and the Princess Budur lay down to sleep. Presently, Kamar
al-Zaman went in to her and found her lying asleep clad in a shift of
apricot-coloured silk that showed all and everything; and on her head
was a coif of gold-cloth embroidered with pearls and jewels. The breeze
raised her shift which laid bare her navel and showed her breasts and
displayed a stomach whiter than snow, each one of whose dimples would
contain an ounce of benzoin-oinment.[308] At this sight, his love and
longing redoubled, and he began reciting:—

 An were it asked me when by hell-fire burnt, ✿ When flames of heart my
    vitals hold and hem,
 "Which wouldst thou chose, say wouldst thou rather them, ✿ Or drink
    sweet cooling draught?" I'd answer, "Them!"

Then he put his hand to the band of her petticoat-trousers and drew it
and loosed it, for his soul lusted after her, when he saw a jewel, red
as dye-wood, made fast to the band. He untied it and examined it and,
seeing two lines of writing graven thereon, in a character not to be
read, marvelled and said in his mind, "Were not this bezel something to
her very dear she had not bound it to her trousers-band nor hidden it in
the most privy and precious place about her person, that she might not
be parted from it. Would I knew what she doth with this and what is the
secret that is in it." So saying, he took it and went outside the tent
to look at it in the light,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day,
and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Two Hundred and Seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when he took the
bezel to look at it in the light, the while he was holding it behold, a
bird swooped down on him and, snatching the same from his hand, flew off
with it and then lighted on the ground. Thereupon Kamar al-Zaman fearing
to lose the jewel, ran after the bird; but it flew on before him,
keeping just out of his reach, and ceased not to draw him on from dale
to dale and from hill to hill, till the night starkened and the
firmament darkened, when it roosted on a high tree. So Kamar al-Zaman
stopped under the tree confounded in thought and faint for famine and
fatigue, and giving himself up for lost, would have turned back, but
knew not the way whereby he came, for that darkness had overtaken him.
Then he exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great!"; and laying him down under the tree
(whereon was the bird) slept till the morning, when he awoke and saw the
bird also wake up and fly away. He arose and walked after it, and it
flew on little by little before him, after the measure of his faring; at
which he smiled and said, "By Allah, a strange thing! Yesterday, this
bird flew before me as fast as I could run, and to-day, knowing that I
have awoke tired and cannot run, he flieth after the measure of my
faring. By Allah, this is wonderful! But I must needs follow this bird
whether it lead me to death or to life; and I will go wherever it goeth,
for at all events it will not abide save in some inhabited land."[309]
So he continued to follow the bird which roosted every night upon a
tree; and he ceased not pursuing it for a space of ten days, feeding on
the fruits of the earth and drinking of its waters. At the end of this
time, he came in sight of an inhabited city, whereupon the bird darted
off like the glance of the eye and, entering the town, disappeared from
Kamar al-Zaman, who knew not what it meant or whither it was gone; so he
marvelled at this and exclaimed, "Praise be to Allah who hath brought me
in safety to this city!" Then he sat down by a stream and washed his
hands and feet and face and rested awhile; and, recalling his late easy
and pleasant life of union with his beloved and contrasting it with his
present plight of trouble and fatigue and distress and strangerhood and
famine and severance, the tears streamed from his eyes and he began
repeating these cinquains:—

 Fain had I hid thy handwork, but it showed, ✿ Changed sleep for wake,
    and wake with me abode:
 When thou didst spurn my heart I cried aloud ✿ Fate, hold thy hand and
    cease to gird and goad:
         In dole and danger aye my sprite I spy!

 An but the Lord of Love were just to me, ✿ Sleep fro' my eyelids ne'er
    were forced to flee.
 Pity, my lady, one for love o' thee ✿ From his tribe's darling brought
    to low degree:
         Love came and doomed Wealth beggar-death to die.

 The railers chide at thee: I ne'er gainsay, ✿ But stop my ears and
    dumbly sign them Nay:
 "Thou lov'st a slender may," say they; I say, ✿ "I've picked her out and
    cast the rest away:"
         Enough; when Fate descends she blinds man's eye![310]

And as soon as he had finished his poetry and had taken his rest, he
rose and walked on little by little, till he entered the city——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Two Hundred and Eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that as soon as Kamar
al-Zaman had finished his poetry and had taken his rest, he arose and
entered the city-gate[311] not knowing whither he should wend. He
crossed the city from end to end, entering by the land-gate, and ceased
not faring on till he came out at the sea-gate, for the city stood on
the sea-shore. Yet he met not a single one of its citizens. And after
issuing from the land-gate he fared forwards and ceased not faring till
he found himself among the orchards and gardens of the place; and,
passing among the trees presently came to a garden and stopped before
its door; whereupon the keeper came out to him and saluted him. The
Prince returned his greeting and the gardener bade him welcome, saying,
"Praised be Allah that thou hast come off safe from the dwellers of this
city! Quick, come into the garth, ere any of the townfolk see thee."
Thereupon Kamar al-Zaman entered that garden, wondering in mind, and
asked the keeper, "What may be the history of the people of this city
and who may they be?" The other answered, "Know that the people of this
city are all Magians: but Allah upon thee, tell me how thou camest to
this city and what caused thy coming to our capital." Accordingly Kamar
al-Zaman told the gardener all that had befallen him from beginning to
end, whereat he marvelled with great marvel and said, "Know, O my son,
that the cities of Al-Islam lie far from us; and between us and them is
a four months' voyage by sea and a whole twelve months' journey by land.
We have a ship which saileth every year with merchandise to the nearest
Moslem country and which entereth the seas of the Ebony Islands and
thence maketh the Khalidan Islands, the dominions of King Shahriman."
Thereupon Kamar al-Zaman considered awhile and concluded that he could
not do better than abide in the garden with the gardener and become his
assistant, receiving for pay one fourth of the produce. So he said to
him, "Wilt thou take me into thy service, to help thee in this garden?"
Answered the gardener, "To hear is to consent;" and began teaching him
to lead the water to the roots of the trees. So Kamar al-Zaman abode
with him, watering the trees and hoeing up the weeds and wearing a short
blue frock which reached to his knees. And he wept floods of tears; for
he had no rest day or night, by reason of his strangerhood and he ceased
not to repeat verses upon his beloved, amongst others the following
couplets:—

 Ye promised us and will ye not keep plight? ✿ Ye said a say and shall
    not deed be dight?
 We wake for passion while ye slumber and sleep; ✿ Watchers and wakers
    claim not equal right:
 We vowed to keep our loves in secrecy, ✿ But spake the meddler and you
    spoke forthright:
 O friend in pain and pleasure, joy and grief, ✿ In all case you, you
    only, claim my sprite!
 'Mid folk is one who holds my prisoned heart; ✿ Would he but show some
    ruth for me to sight.
 Not every eye like mine is wounded sore, ✿ Not every heart like mine
    love-pinings blight:
 Ye wronged me saying, Love is wrongous aye ✿ Yea! ye were right, events
    have proved that quite.
 Forget they one love-thralled, whose faith the world ✿ Robs not, though
    burn the fires in heart alight:
 If an my foeman shall become my judge, ✿ Whom shall I sue to remedy his
    despight?
 Had not I need of love nor love had sought, ✿ My heart forsure were not
    thus love-distraught.

Such was the case with Kamar al-Zaman; but as regards his wife, the Lady
Budur, when she awoke she sought her husband and found him not: then she
saw her petticoat-trousers undone, for the band had been loosed and the
bezel lost, whereupon she said to herself, "By Allah, this is strange!
Where is my husband? It would seem as if he had taken the talisman and
gone away, knowing not the secret which is in it. Would to Heaven I knew
whither can he have wended! But it must needs have been some
extraordinary matter that drew him away, for he cannot brook to leave me
a moment. Allah curse the stone and damn its hour!" Then she considered
awhile and said in her mind, "If I go out and tell the varlets and let
them learn that my husband is lost, they will lust after me: there is no
help for it but that I use a stratagem." So she rose and donned some of
her husband's clothes and riding-boots, and a turband like his, drawing
one corner of it across her face for a mouth-veil.[312] Then, setting a
slave-girl in her litter, she went forth from the tent and called to the
pages who brought her Kamar al-Zaman's steed; and she mounted and bade
them load the beasts and resume the march. So they bound on the burdens
and departed; and she concealed her trick, none doubting but she was
Kamar al-Zaman, for she favoured him in face and form; nor did she cease
journeying, she and her suite, days and nights, till they came in sight
of a city overlooking the Salt Sea, where they pitched their tents
without the walls and halted to rest. The Princess asked the name of the
town and was told, "It is called the City of Ebony; its King is named
Armanús, and he hath a daughter Hayát al-Nufús[313] hight,"——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


            Now when it was the Two Hundred and Ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Lady
Budur halted within sight of the Ebony City to take her rest, King
Armanus sent a messenger, to learn what King it was who had encamped
without his capital; so the messenger, coming to the tents, made enquiry
anent their King, and was told that she was a King's son who had lost
the way being bound for the Khalidan Islands; whereupon he returned to
King Armanus with the tidings; and, when the King heard them, he
straightway rode out with the lords of his land to greet the stranger on
arrival. As he drew near the tents the Lady Budur came to meet him on
foot, whereupon the King alighted and they saluted each other. Then he
took her to the city and, bringing her up to the palace, bade them
spread the tables and trays of food and commanded them to transport her
company and baggage to the guest-house. So they abode there three days;
at the end of which time the King came in to the Lady Budur. Now she had
that day gone to the Hammam and her face shone as the moon at its full,
a seduction to the world and a rending of the veil of shame to mankind;
and Armanus found her clad in a suit of silk, embroidered with gold and
jewels; so he said to her, "O my son, know that I am a very old man,
decrepit withal, and Allah hath blessed me with no child save one
daughter, who resembleth thee in beauty and grace; and I am now waxed
unfit for the conduct of the state. She is thine, O my son; and, if this
my land please thee and thou be willing to abide and make thy home here,
I will marry thee to her and give thee my kingdom and so be at rest."
When Princess Budur heard this, she bowed her head and her forehead
sweated for shame, and she said to herself, "How shall I do, and I a
woman? If I refuse and depart from him, I cannot be safe but that haply
he send after me troops to slay me; and if I consent, belike I shall be
put to shame. I have lost my beloved Kamar al-Zaman and know not what is
become of him; nor can I escape from this scrape save by holding my
peace and consenting and abiding here, till Allah bring about what is to
be." So she raised her head and made submission to King Armanus, saying,
"Hearkening and obedience!"; whereat he rejoiced and bade the herald
make proclamation throughout the Ebony Islands to hold high festival and
decorate the houses. Then he assembled his Chamberlains and Nabobs, and
Emirs and Wazirs and his officers of state and the Kazis of the city;
and, formally abdicating his Sultanate, endowed Budur therewith and
invested her in all the vestments of royalty. The Emirs and Grandees
went in to her and did her homage, nothing doubting but that she was a
young man, and all who looked on her bepissed their bag-trousers, for
the excess of her beauty and loveliness. Then, after the lady Budur had
been made Sultan and the drums had been beaten in announcement of the
glad event, and she had been ceremoniously enthroned, King Armanus
proceeded to equip his daughter Hayat al-Nufus for marriage, and in a
few days, they brought the Lady Budur in to her, when they seemed as it
were two moons risen at one time or two suns in conjunction. So they
entered the bridal-chamber and the doors were shut and the curtains let
down upon them, after the attendants had lighted the wax-candles and
spread for them the carpet-bed. When Budur found herself alone with the
Princess Hayat al-Nufus, she called to mind her beloved Kamar al-Zaman
and grief was sore upon her. So she wept for his absence, and
estrangement and she began repeating:—

 O ye who fled and left my heart in pain low li'en, ✿ No breath of life
    is found within this frame of mine:
 I have an eye which e'er complains of wake, but lo! ✿ Tears occupy it;
    would that wake content these eyne!
 After ye marchèd forth the lover 'bode behind; ✿ Question of him what
    pains your absence could design!
 But for the floods of tears mine eyelids rail and rain, ✿ My fires would
    flame on high and every land calcine.
 To Allah make I moan of loved ones lost for aye, ✿ Who for my pine and
    pain no more shall pain and pine:
 I never wronged them save that over-love I nurst: ✿ But Love departs us
    lovers into blest and curst.

And when she had finished her repeating, the Lady Budur sat down beside
the Princess Hayat al-Nufus and kissed her on the mouth; after which
rising abruptly, she made the minor ablution and betook herself to her
devotions; nor did she leave praying till Hayat al-Nufus fell asleep,
when she slipt into bed and lay with her back to her till morning. And
when day had broke the King and Queen came in to their daughter and
asked her how she did, whereupon she told them what she had seen, and
repeated to them the verses she had heard. Thus far concerning Hayat
al-Nufus and her father; but as regards Queen Budur she went forth and
seated herself upon the royal throne and all the Emirs and Captains and
Officers of state came up to her and wished her joy of the kingship,
kissing the earth before her and calling down blessings upon her. And
she accosted them with smiling face and clad them in robes of honour,
augmenting the fiefs of the high officials and giving largesse to the
levies; wherefore all the people loved her and offered up prayers for
the long endurance of her reign, doubting not but that she was a man.
And she ceased not sitting all day in the hall of audience, bidding and
forbidding; dispensing justice, releasing prisoners and remitting the
customs-dues, till nightfall, when she withdrew to the apartment
prepared for her. Here she found Hayat al-Nufus seated; so she sat down
by her side and, clapping her on the back, coaxed and caressed her and
kissed her between the eyes, and fell to versifying in these couplets:—

 What secret kept I these my tears have told, ✿ And my waste body must my
    love unfold:
 Though hid my pine, my plight on parting-day ✿ To every envious eye my
    secret sold:

 O ye who broke up camp, you've left behind ✿ My spirit wearied and my
    heart a-cold:
 In my heart's core ye dwell, and now these eyne ✿ Roll blood-drops with
    the tears they whilome rolled:
 The absent will I ransom with my soul; ✿ All can my yearning for their
    sight behold:
 I have an eye whose babe,[314] for love of thee, ✿ Rejected sleep nor
    hath its tears controlled.
 The foeman bids me patient bear his loss, ✿ Ne'er may mine ears accept
    the ruth he doled!
 I trickt their deme of me, and won my wish ✿ Of Kamar al-Zaman's joys
    manifold:
 He joins all perfect gifts like none before; ✿ Boasted such might and
    main no King of old:
 Seeing his gifts, Bin Zá'ïdah's[315] largesse ✿ Forget we, and Mu'áwiyah
    mildest-soul'd:[316]
 Were verse not feeble and o'er short the time ✿ I had in laud of him
    used all of rhyme.

Then Queen Budur stood up and wiped away her tears and, making the
lesser ablution,[317] applied her to pray: nor did she give over praying
till drowsiness overcame the Lady Hayat al-Nufus and she slept,
whereupon the Lady Budur came and lay by her till the morning. At
daybreak, she arose and prayed the dawn-prayer; and presently seated
herself on the royal throne and passed the day in ordering and
counterordering and giving laws and administering justice. This is how
it fared with her; but as regards King Armanus he went in to his
daughter and asked her how she did; so she told him all that had
befallen her and repeated to him the verses which Queen Budur had
recited, adding, "O my father, never saw I one more abounding in sound
sense and modesty than my husband, save that he doth nothing but weep
and sigh." He answered, "O my daughter, have patience with him yet this
third night, and if he go not in unto thee and do away thy maidenhead,
we shall know how to proceed with him and oust him from the throne and
banish him the country." And on this wise he agreed with his daughter
what course he would take——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


            Now when it was the Two Hundred and Tenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King Armanus
had agreed with his daughter on this wise and had determined what course
he would take and night came on, Queen Budur arose from the throne of
her kingdom and betaking herself to the palace, entered the apartment
prepared for her. There she found the wax-candles lighted and the
Princess Hayat al-Nufus seated and awaiting her; whereupon she bethought
her of her husband and what had betided them both of sorrow and
severance in so short a space; she wept and sighed and groaned groan
upon groan, and began improvising these couplets:—

 News of my love fill all the land, I swear, ✿ As suns on Ghazá[318]-wold
    rain heat and glare:
 Speaketh his geste but hard its sense to say; ✿ Thus never cease to grow
    my cark and care:
 I hate fair Patience since I lovèd thee; ✿ E'er sawest lover hate for
    love to bear?
 A glance that dealt love-sickness dealt me death, ✿ Glances are
    deadliest things with torments rare:
 He shook his love-locks down and bared his chin, ✿ Whereby I spied his
    beauties dark and fair:
 My care, my cure are in his hands; and he ✿ Who caused their dolour can
    their dole repair:
 His belt went daft for softness of his waist; ✿ His hips, for envy, to
    uprise forbear:
 His brow curl-diademed is murky night; ✿ Unveil't and lo! bright Morn
    shows brightest light.

When she had finished her versifying, she would have risen to pray, but,
lo and behold! Hayat al-Nufus caught her by the skirt and clung to her
saying, "O my lord, art thou not ashamed before my father, after all his
favour, to neglect me at such a time as this?" When Queen Budur heard
her words, she sat down in the same place and said, "O my beloved, what
is this thou sayest?" She replied, "What I say is that I never saw any
so proud of himself as thou. Is every fair one so disdainful? I say not
this to incline thee to me; I say it only of my fear for thee from King
Armanus; because he purposeth, unless thou go in unto me this very
night, and do away my maidenhead, to strip thee of the kingship on the
morrow and banish thee his kingdom; and peradventure his excessive anger
may lead him to slay thee. But I, O my lord, have ruth on thee and give
thee fair warning; and it is thy right to reck."[319] Now when Queen
Budur heard her speak these words, she bowed her head groundwards awhile
in sore perplexity and said in herself, "If I refuse I'm lost; and if I
obey I'm shamed. But I am now Queen of all the Ebony Islands and they
are under my rule, nor shall I ever again meet my Kamar al-Zaman save in
this place; for there is no way for him to his native land but through
the Ebony Islands. Verily, I know not what to do in my present case, but
I commit my care to Allah who directeth all for the best, for I am no
man that I should arise and open this virgin girl." Then quoth Queen
Budur to Hayat al-Nufus, "O my beloved, that I have neglected thee and
abstained from thee is in my own despite." And she told her her whole
story from beginning to end and showed her person to her, saying, "I
conjure thee by Allah to keep my counsel, for I have concealed my case
only that Allah may reunite me with my beloved Kamar al-Zaman and then
come what may."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Two Hundred and Eleventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Lady
Budur acquainted Hayat al-Nufus with her history and bade her keep it
secret, the Princess heard her with extreme wonderment and was moved to
pity and prayed Allah to reunite her with her beloved, saying, "Fear
nothing, O my sister; but have patience till Allah bring to pass that
which must come to pass:" and she began repeating:—

         None but the men of worth a secret keep;
         With worthy men a secret's hidden deep;
         As in a room, so secrets lie with me,
         Whose door is sealed, lock shot and lost the key.[320]

And when Hayat al-Nufus had ended her verses, she said, "O my sister,
verily the breasts of the noble and brave are of secrets the grave; and
I will not discover thine." Then they toyed and embraced and kissed and
slept till near the Mu'ezzin's call to dawn-prayer, when Hayat al-Nufus
arose and took a pigeon-poult,[321] and cut its throat over her smock
and besmeared herself with its blood. Then she pulled off her
petticoat-trousers and cried aloud, whereupon her people hastened to her
and raised the usual lullilooing and outcries of joy and gladness.
Presently her mother came in to her and asked her how she did and busied
herself about her and abode with her till evening; whilst the Lady Budur
arose with the dawn, and repaired to the bath and, after washing herself
pure, proceeded to the hall of audience, where she sat down on her
throne and dispensed justice among the folk. Now when King Armanus heard
the loud cries of joy, he asked what was the matter and was informed of
the consummation of his daughter's marriage; whereat he rejoiced and his
breast swelled with gladness and he made a great marriage-feast whereof
the merry-making lasted a long time. Such was their case: but as regards
King Shahriman it was on this wise. After his son had fared forth to the
chase accompanied by Marzawan, as before related, he tarried patiently
awaiting their return at nightfall; but when his son did not appear, he
passed a sleepless night and the dark hours were longsome upon him; his
restlessness was excessive, his excitement grew upon him and he thought
the morning would never dawn. And when day broke he sat expecting his
son and waited till noon, but he came not; whereat his heart forebode
separation and was fired with fears for Kamar al-Zaman; and he cried,
"Alas! my son!" and he wept till his clothes were drenched with tears,
and repeated with a beating heart:—

 Love's votaries I ceased not to oppose, ✿ Till doomed to taste Love's
    bitter and Love's sweet:
 I drained his rigour-cup to very dregs, ✿ Self-humbled at its slaves'
    and freemen's feet:
 Fortune had sworn to part the loves of us; ✿ She kept her word how
    truly, well I weet!

And when he ended his verse, he wiped away his tears and bade his troops
make ready for a march and prepare for a long expedition. So they all
mounted and set forth, headed by the Sultan, whose heart burnt with
grief and was fired with anxiety for his son Kamar al-Zaman; and they
advanced by forced marches. Now the King divided his host into six
divisions, a right wing and a left wing, a vanguard and a
rear-guard;[322] and bade them rendezvous for the morrow at the
cross-roads. Accordingly they separated and scoured the country all the
rest of that day till night, and they marched through the night and at
noon of the ensuing day they joined company at the place where four
roads met. But they knew not which the Prince followed, till they saw
the sign of torn clothes and sighted shreds of flesh and beheld blood
still sprinkled by the way and they noted every piece of the clothes and
fragment of mangled flesh scattered on all sides. Now when King
Shahriman saw this, he cried from his heart-core a loud cry, saying,
"Alas, my son!"; and buffetted his face and pluckt his beard and rent
his raiment, doubting not but his son was dead. Then he gave himself up
to excessive weeping and wailing, and the troops also wept for his
weeping, all being assured that Prince Kamar al-Zaman had perished. They
threw dust on their heads, and the night surprised them shedding tears
and lamenting till they were like to die. Then the King with a heart on
fire and with burning sighs spake these couplets:—

 Chide not the mourner for bemourning woe; ✿ Enough is yearning every Ill
    to show:
 He weeps for stress of sorrow and of pain, ✿ And these to thee best
    evidence his lowe:
 Happy![323] of whom Love-sickness swore that ne'er ✿ Should cease his
    eyelids loving tears to flow:
 He mourns the loss of fairest, fullest Moon, ✿ Shining o'er all his
    peers in glorious glow:
 But death made drink a brimming cup, what day ✿ He fared from natal
    country fain to go:
 His home left he and went from us to grief; ✿ Nor to his brethren could
    he say adieu:
 Yea, his loss wounded me with parting pangs, ✿ And separation cost me
    many a throe:
 He fared farewelling, as he fared, our eyes; ✿ Whenas his Lord
    vouchsafed him Paradise.

And when King Shahriman had ended his verses, he returned with the
troops to his capital,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Two Hundred and Twelfth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Shahriman had ended his verses, he returned with the troops to his
capital, giving up his son for lost, and deeming that wild beasts or
banditti had set upon him and torn him to pieces; and made proclamation
that all in the Khalidan Islands should don black in mourning for him.
Moreover, he built, in his memory, a pavilion, naming it House of
Lamentations; and on Mondays and Thursdays he devoted himself to the
business of the state and ordering the affairs of his levies and lieges;
and the rest of the week he was wont to spend in the House of
Lamentations, mourning for his son and bewailing him with elegiac
verses,[324] of which the following are some:—

 My day of bliss is that when thou appearest; ✿ My day of bale[325] is
    that whereon thou farest:
 Though through the night I quake in dread of death; ✿ Union wi' thee is
    of all bliss the dearest.

And again he said:—

 My soul be sacrifice for one, whose going ✿ Afflicted hearts with
    sufferings sore and dread:
 Let joy her widowed term[326] fulfil, for I ✿ Divorcèd joy with the
    divorce thrice-said.[327]

Such was the case with King Shahriman; but as regards Queen Budur
daughter of King Ghayur, she abode as ruler in the Ebony Islands, whilst
the folk would point to her with their fingers, and say, "Yonder is the
son-in-law of King Armanus." And every night she lay with Hayat
al-Nufus, to whom she lamented her desolate state and longing for her
husband Kamar al-Zaman, weeping and describing to her his beauty and
loveliness, and yearning to enjoy him though but in a dream: And at
times she would repeat:—

 Well Allah wots that since my severance from thee, ✿ I wept till forced
    to borrow tears at usury:
 "Patience!" my blamer cried, "Heartsease right soon shalt see!" ✿ Quoth
    I, "Say, blamer, where may home of Patience be?"

This is how it fared with Queen Budur; but as regards Kamar al-Zaman, he
abode with the gardener in the garden for no short time, weeping night
and day and repeating verses bewailing the past time of enjoyment and
delight; whilst the gardener kept comforting him and assuring him that
the ship would set sail for the land of the Moslems at the end of the
year. And in this condition he continued till one day he saw the folk
crowding together and wondered at this; but the gardener came in to him
and said, "O my son, give over work for this day nor lead water to the
trees; for it is a festival day, whereon folk visit one another. So take
thy rest and only keep thine eye on the garden, whilst I go look after
the ship for thee; for yet but a little while and I send thee to the
land of the Moslems." Upon this, he went forth from the garden leaving
to himself Kamar al-Zaman, who fell to musing upon his case till his
heart was like to break and the tears streamed from his eyes. So he wept
with excessive weeping till he swooned away and, when he recovered, he
rose and walked about the garden, pondering what Time had done with him
and bewailing the long endurance of his estrangement and separation from
those he loved. As he was thus absorbed in melancholy thought, his foot
stumbled and he fell on his face, his forehead striking against the
projecting root of a tree; and the blow cut it open and his blood ran
down and mingled with his tears. Then he rose and, wiping away the
blood, dried his tears and bound his brow with a piece of rag; then
continued his walk about the garden engrossed by sad reverie. Presently,
he looked up at a tree and saw two birds quarrelling thereon, and one of
them rose up and smote the other with its beak on the neck and severed
from its body its head, wherewith it flew away, whilst the slain bird
fell to the ground before Kamar al-Zaman. As it lay, behold, two great
birds swooped down upon it alighting, one at the head and the other at
the tail, and both drooped their wings and bowed their bills over it
and, extending their necks towards it, wept. Kamar al-Zaman also wept
when seeing the birds thus bewail their mate, and called to mind his
wife and father,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
day her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Thirteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-Zaman
wept and lamented his separation from spouse and sire, when he beheld
those two birds weeping over their mate. Then he looked at the twain and
saw them dig a grave and therein bury the slain bird; after which they
flew away far into the firmament and disappeared for a while; but
presently they returned with the murtherer-bird and, alighting on the
grave of the murthered, stamped on the slayer till they had done him to
death. Then they rent his belly and tearing out his entrails, poured the
blood on the grave of the slain[328]: moreover, they stripped off his
skin and tare his flesh in pieces and, pulling out the rest of the
bowels, scattered them hither and thither. All this while Kamar al-Zaman
was watching them wonderingly; but presently, chancing to look at the
place where the two birds had slain the third, he saw therein something
gleaming. So he drew near to it and noted that it was the crop of the
dead bird. Whereupon he took it and opened it and found the talisman
which had been the cause of his separation from his wife. But when he
saw it and knew it, he fell to the ground a-fainting for joy; and, when
he revived, he said, "Praised be Allah! This is a foretaste of good and
a presage of reunion with my beloved." Then he examined the jewel and
passed it over his eyes[329]; after which he bound it to his forearm,
rejoicing in coming weal, and walked about till nightfall awaiting the
gardener's return; and when he came not, he lay down and slept in his
wonted place. At daybreak he rose to his work and, girding his middle
with a cord of palm-fibre, took hatchet and basket and walked down the
length of the garden, till he came to a carob-tree and struck the axe
into its roots. The blow rang and resounded; so he cleared away the soil
from the place and discovered a trap-door and raised it.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Fourteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Kamar
al-Zaman raised the trap-door, he found a winding stair, which he
descended and came to an ancient vault of the time of Ad and
Thamúd,[330] hewn out of the rock. Round the vault stood many brazen
vessels of the bigness of a great oil-jar which he found full of
gleaming red gold: whereupon he said to himself, "Verily sorrow is gone
and solace is come!" Then he mounted from the souterrain to the garden
and, replacing the trap-door as it was before, busied himself in
conducting water to the trees till the last of the day, when the
gardener came back and said to him, "O my son, rejoice at the good
tidings of a speedy return to thy native land: the merchants are ready
equipped for the voyage and the ship in three days' time will set sail
for the City of Ebony, which is the first of the cities of the Moslems;
and after making it, thou must travel by land a six months' march till
thou come to the Islands of Khalidan, the dominions of King Shahriman."
At this Kamar al-Zaman rejoiced and began repeating:—

 Part not from one whose wont is not to part from you; ✿ Nor with your
    cruel taunts an innocent mortify:
 Another so long-parted had ta'en heart from you, ✿ And had his whole
    condition changed,—but not so I.

Then he kissed the gardener's hand and said, "O my father, even as thou
hast brought me glad tidings, so I also have great good news for thee,"
and told him anent his discovery of the vault; whereat the gardener
rejoiced and said, "O my son, fourscore years have I dwelt in this
garden and have never hit on aught; whilst thou, who hast not sojourned
with me a year, hast discovered this thing; wherefore it is Heaven's
gift to thee, which shall end thy crosses and aid thee to rejoin thy
folk and foregather with her thou lovest." Quoth Kamar al-Zaman, "There
is no help but it must be shared between me and thee." Then he carried
him to the underground-chamber and showed him the gold, which was in
twenty jars: he took ten and the gardener ten, and the old man said to
him, "O my son, fill thyself leather bottles[331] with the
sparrow-olives[332] which grow in this garden, for they are not found
except in our land; and the merchants carry them to all parts. Lay the
gold in the bottles and strew it over with olives: then stop them and
cover them and take them with thee in the ship." So Kamar al-Zaman arose
without stay or delay and took fifty leather bottles and stored in each
somewhat of the gold, and closed each one after placing a layer of
olives over the gold; and at the bottom of one of the bottles he laid
the talisman. Then sat he down to talk with the gardener, confident of
speedy reunion with his own people and saying to himself, "When I come
to the Ebony Islands I will journey thence to my father's country and
enquire for my beloved Budur. Would to Heaven I knew whether she
returned to her own land or journeyed on to my father's country or
whether there befel her any accident by the way." And he began
versifying:—

 Love in my breast they lit and fared away, ✿ And far the land wherein my
    love is pent:
 Far lies the camp and those who camp therein; ✿ Far is her tent-shrine,
    where I ne'er shall tent.
 Patience far fled me when from me they fled; ✿ Sleep failed mine eyes,
    endurance was forspent:
 They left and with them left my every joy, ✿ Wending with them, nor find
    I peace that went:
 They made these eyes roll down love-tears in flood, ✿ And lacking them
    these eyne with tears are drent.
 When my triste spirit once again would see them, ✿ When pine and
    expectation but augment,
 In my heart's core their counterfeits I trace, ✿ With love and yearning
    to behold their grace.

Then, while he awaited the end of the term of days, he told the gardener
the tale of the birds and what had passed between them; whereat the
hearer wondered; and they both lay down and slept till the morning. The
gardener awoke sick and abode thus two days; but on the third day, his
sickness increased on him, till they despaired of his life and Kamar
al-Zaman grieved with sore grief for him. Meanwhile behold, the Master
and his crew came and enquired for the gardener; and, when Kamar
al-Zaman told them that he was sick, they asked, "Where be the youth who
is minded to go with us to the Ebony Islands?" "He is your servant and
he standeth before you!" answered the Prince and bade them carry the
bottles of olives to the ship; so they transported them, saying, "Make
haste, thou, for the wind is fair;" and he replied, "I hear and obey."
Then he carried his provaunt on board and, returning to bid the gardener
farewell, found him in the agonies of death; so he sat down at his head
and closed his eyes, and his soul departed his body; whereupon he laid
him out and committed him to the earth unto the mercy of Allah Almighty.
Then he made for the ship but found that she had already weighed anchor
and set sail; nor did she cease to cleave the seas till she disappeared
from his sight. So he went back to whence he came heavy-hearted with
whirling head; and neither would he address a soul nor return a reply;
and reaching the garden and sitting down in cark and care he threw dust
on his head and buffeted his cheeks.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Two Hundred and Fifteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the ship sped
on her course, Kamar al-Zaman returned to the garden in cark and care;
but anon he rented the place of its owner and hired a man to help him in
irrigating the trees. Moreover, he repaired the trap-door and he went to
the underground chamber and bringing the rest of the gold to grass,
stowed it in other fifty bottles which he filled up with a layer of
olives. Then he enquired of the ship and they told him that it sailed
but once a year; at which his trouble of mind redoubled and he cried
sore for that which had betided him, above all for the loss of the
Princess Budur's talisman, and spent his nights and days weeping and
repeating verses. Such was his case; but as regards the ship she sailed
with a favouring wind till she reached the Ebony Islands. Now by decree
of destiny, Queen Budur was sitting at a lattice-window overlooking the
sea and saw the galley cast anchor upon the strand. At this sight, her
heart throbbed and she took horse with the Chamberlains and Nabobs and,
riding down to the shore, halted by the ship, whilst the sailors broke
bulk and bore the bales to the storehouses; after which she called the
captain to her presence and asked what he had with him. He answered "O
King, I have with me in this ship aromatic drugs and cosmetics and
healing powders and ointments and plasters and precious metals and rich
stuffs and rugs of Yemen leather, not to be borne of mule or camel, and
all manner of ottars and spices and perfumes, civet and ambergris and
camphor and Sumatra aloes-wood, and tamarinds[333] and sparrow-olives to
boot, such as are rare to find in this country." When she heard talk of
sparrow-olives her heart longed for them and she said to the
ship-master, "How much of olives hast thou?" He replied, "Fifty bottles
full, but their owner is not with us; so the King shall take what he
will of them." Quoth she, "Bring them ashore, that I may see them."
Thereupon he called to the sailors, who brought her the fifty bottles;
and she opened one and, looking at the olives, said to the captain, "I
will take the whole fifty and pay you their value, whatso it be." He
answered, "By Allah, O my lord, they have no value in our country;
moreover their shipper tarried behind us, and he is a poor man." Asked
she, "And what are they worth here?" and he answered "A thousand
dirhams." "I will take them at a thousand," she said and bade them carry
the fifty bottles to the palace. When it was night, she called for a
bottle of olives and opened it, there being none in the room but herself
and the Princess Hayat al-Nufus. Then, placing a dish before her she
turned into it the contents of the jar, when there fell out into the
dish with the olives a heap of red gold; and she said to the Lady Hayat
al-Nufus, "This is naught but gold!" So she sent for the rest of the
bottles and found them all full of precious metal and scarce enough
olives to fill a single jar. Moreover, she sought among the gold and
found therein the talisman, which she took and examined and behold, it
was that which Kamar al-Zaman had taken from off the band of her
petticoat trousers. Thereupon she cried out for joy and slipped down in
a swoon;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Two Hundred and Sixteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King Budur
saw the talisman she cried out for joy and slipped down in a swoon; and
when she recovered she said to herself, "Verily, this talisman was the
cause of my separation from my beloved Kamar al-Zaman; but now it is an
omen of good." Then she showed it to Hayat al-Nufus and said to her,
"This was the cause of disunion and now, please Allah, it shall be the
cause of reunion." As soon as day dawned she seated herself on the royal
throne and sent for the ship-master, who came into the presence and
kissed the ground before her. Quoth she, "Where didst thou leave the
owner of these olives?" Quoth he, "O King of the age, we left him in the
land of the Magians and he is a gardener there." She rejoined, "Except
thou bring him to me, thou knowest not the harm which awaiteth thee and
thy ship." Then she bade them seal up the magazines of the merchants and
said to them, "Verily the owner of these olives hath borrowed of me and
I have a claim upon him for debt and, unless ye bring him to me, I will
without fail do you all die and seize your goods." So they went to the
captain and promised him the hire of the ship, if he would go and return
a second time, saying, "Deliver us from this masterful tyrant."
Accordingly the skipper embarked and set sail and Allah decreed him a
prosperous voyage, till he came to the Island of the Magians and,
landing by night, went up to the garden. Now the night was long upon
Kamar al-Zaman, and he sat, bethinking him of his beloved, and bewailing
what had befallen him and versifying:—

 A night whose stars refused to run their course, ✿ A night of those
    which never seem outworn:
 Like Resurrection-day, of longsome length[334] ✿ To him that watched and
    waited for the morn.

Now at this moment, the captain knocked at the garden-gate, and Kamar
al-Zaman opened and went out to him, whereupon the crew seized him and
went down with him on board the ship and set sail forthright; and they
ceased not voyaging days and nights, whilst Kamar al-Zaman knew not why
they dealt thus with him; but when he questioned them they replied,
"Thou hast offended against the Lord of the Ebony Islands, the
son-in-law of King Armanus, and thou hast stolen his monies, miserable
that thou art!" Said he, "By Allah! I never entered that country nor do
I know where it is!" However, they fared on with him, till they made the
Ebony Islands and landing, carried him up to the Lady Budur, who knew
him at sight and said, "Leave him with the eunuchs, that they may take
him to the bath." Then she relieved the merchants of the embargo and
gave the captain a robe of honour worth ten thousand pieces of gold;
and, after returning to the palace, she went in that night to the
Princess Hayat al-Nufus and told her what had passed, saying, "Keep thou
my counsel, till I accomplish my purpose, and do a deed which shall be
recorded and shall be read by Kings and commoners after we be dead and
gone." And when she gave orders that they bear Kamar al-Zaman to the
bath, they did so and clad him in a royal habit so that, when he came
forth, he resembled a willow-bough or a star which shamed the greater
and lesser light[335] and its glow, and his life and soul returned to
his frame. Then he repaired to the palace and went in to the Princess
Budur; and when she saw him she schooled her heart to patience, till she
should have accomplished her purpose; and she bestowed on him Mamelukes
and eunuchs, camels and mules. Moreover, she gave him a treasury of
money and she ceased not advancing him from dignity to dignity, till she
made him Lord High Treasurer and committed to his charge all the
treasures of the state; and she admitted him to familiar favour and
acquainted the Emirs with his rank and dignity. And all loved him, for
Queen Budur did not cease day by day to increase his allowances. As for
Kamar al-Zaman, he was at a loss anent the reason of her thus honouring
him; and he gave gifts and largesse out of the abundance of the wealth;
and he devoted himself to the service of King Armanus; so that the King
and all the Emirs and people, great and small, adored him and were wont
to swear by his life. Nevertheless, he ever marvelled at the honour and
favour shown him by Queen Budur and said to himself, "By Allah, there
needs must be a reason for this affection! Peradventure, this King
favoureth me not with these immoderate favours save for some ill purpose
and, therefore, there is no help but that I crave leave of him to depart
his realm." So he went in to Queen Budur and said to her, "O King, thou
hast overwhelmed me with favours, but it will fulfil the measure of thy
bounties if thou take from me all thou hast been pleased to bestow upon
me, and permit me to depart." She smiled and asked, "What maketh thee
seek to depart and plunge into new perils, whenas thou art in the
enjoyment of the highest favour and greatest prosperity?" Answered Kamar
al-Zaman, "O King, verily this favour, if there be no reason for it, is
indeed a wonder of wonders, more by token that thou hast advanced me to
dignities such as befit men of age and experience, albeit I am as it
were a young child." And Queen Budur rejoined, "The reason is that I
love thee for thine exceeding loveliness and thy surpassing beauty; and
if thou wilt but grant me my desire of thy body, I will advance thee yet
farther in honour and favour and largesse; and I will make thee Wazir,
for all thy tender age, even as the folk made me Sultan over them and I
no older than thou; so that nowadays there is nothing strange when
children take the head and by Allah, he was a gifted man who said:—

 It seems as though of Lot's tribe were our days, ✿ And crave with love
    to advance the young in years."[336]

When Kamar al-Zaman heard these words, he was abashed and his cheeks
flushed till they seemed a-flame; and he said, "I need not these favours
which lead to the commission of sin; I will live poor in wealth but
wealthy in virtue and honour." Quoth she, "I am not to be duped by thy
scruples, arising from prudery and coquettish ways; and Allah bless him
who saith:—

 To him I spake of coupling, but he said to me, ✿ 'How long this noyous
    long persistency?'
 But when gold piece I showèd him, he cried, ✿ 'Who from the Almighty
    Sovereign e'er shall flee?'"

Now when Kamar al-Zaman, heard these words and understood her verses and
their import, he said, "O King, I have not the habit of these doings,
nor have I strength to bear these heavy burthens for which elder than I
have proved unable; then how will it be with my tender age?" But she
smiled at his speech and retorted, "Indeed, it is a matter right
marvellous how error springeth from the disorder of man's intendiment!
Since thou art a boy, why standest thou in fear of sin or the doing of
things forbidden, seeing that thou art not yet come to years of
canonical responsibility; and the offences of a child incur neither
punishment nor reproof? Verily, thou hast committed thyself to a quibble
for the sake of contention, and it is thy duty to bow before a proposal
of fruition, so henceforward cease from denial and coyness, for the
commandment of Allah is a decree foreordained:[337] indeed, I have more
reason than thou to fear falling and by sin to be misled; and
well-inspired was he who said:—

 My prickle is big and the little one said, ✿ Thrust boldly in vitals
    with lion-like stroke!
 Then I, 'Tis a sin!; and he, No sin to me! ✿ So I had him at once with a
    counterfeit poke."[338]

When Kamar al-Zaman heard these words, the light became darkness in his
sight and he said, "O King, thou hast in thy household fair women and
female slaves, who have not their like in this age: shall not these
suffice thee without me? Do thy will with them and let me go!" She
replied, "Thou sayest sooth, but it is not with them that one who loveth
thee can heal himself of torment and can abate his fever; for, when
tastes and inclinations are corrupted by vice, they hear and obey other
than good advice. So leave arguing and listen to what the poet saith:—

 Seest not the bazar with its fruit in rows? ✿ These men are for figs and
    for sycomore[339] those!"

And what another saith:—

 Many whose anklet-rings are dumb have tinkling belts, ✿ And this hath
    all content while that for want must wail:
 Thou bidd'st me be a fool and quit thee for her charms; ✿ Allah forfend
    I leave The Faith, turn Infidel!
 Nay, by thy rights of side-beard mocking all her curls, ✿ Nor mott nor
    maid[340] from thee my heart shall spell.

And yet another:—

 O beauty's Union! love for thee's my creed; ✿ Free choice of Faith and
    eke my best desire:
 Women I have forsworn for thee; so may ✿ Deem me all men this day a
    shaveling friar.[341]

And yet another:—

 Even not beardless one with girl, nor heed ✿ The spy who saith to thee
    "'Tis an amiss!"
 Far different is the girl whose feet one kisses ✿ And that gazelle whose
    feet the earth must kiss.

And yet another:—

                 A boy of twice ten is fit for a King!

And yet another:—

 The penis smooth and round was made with anus best to match it; ✿ Had it
    been made for cunnus' sake it had been formed like hatchet!

And yet another said:—

 My soul thy sacrifice! I chose thee out ✿ Who art not menstruous nor
    oviparous:
 Did I with woman mell, I should beget ✿ Brats till the wide wide world
    grew strait for us.

And yet another:—

 She saith (sore hurt in sense the most acute ✿ For she had proffered
    what did not besuit):—
 "Unless thou stroke as man should swive his wife ✿ Blame not when horns
    thy brow shall incornùte!"
 "Thy wand seems waxen, to a limpo grown, ✿ And more I palm it, softer
    grows the brute!"

And yet another:—

 Quoth she (for I to lie with her forbore), ✿ "O folly-following fool, O
    fool to core:

 If thou my coynte for Kiblah[342] to thy coigne ✿ Reject, we'll show
    thee what shall please thee more."[343]

And yet another:—

 She proffered me a tender coynte ✿ Quoth I "I will not roger thee!"
 She drew back, saying, "From the Faith ✿ He turns, who's turned by
    Heaven's decree!"[344]
 And front-wise futtering, in one day, ✿ "Is obsolete persistency!"
 Then swung she round and shining rump ✿ Like silvern lump she showèd me!
 I cried: "Well done, O mistress mine! ✿ No more am I in pain for thee;
 O thou of all that Allah oped[345] ✿ Showest me fairest victory!"

And yet another:—

 Men craving pardon will uplift their hands; ✿ Women pray pardon with
    their legs on high:
 Out on it for a pious, prayerful work! ✿ The Lord shall raise it in the
    depths to lie.[346]

When Kamar al-Zaman heard her quote this poetry, and was certified that
there was no escaping compliance with what willed she, he said, "O King
of the age, if thou must needs have it so, make covenant with me that
thou wilt do this thing with me but once, though it avail not to correct
thy depraved appetite; and that thou wilt never again require this thing
of me to the end of time; so perchance shall Allah purge me of the sin."
She replied, "I promise thee this same, hoping that Allah of His favour
will relent towards us and blot out our mortal offence; for the girdle
of heaven's forgiveness is not indeed so strait, but it may compass us
around and absolve us of the excess of our heinous sins and bring us to
the light of salvation out of the darkness of error; and indeed
excellently well saith the poet:—

 Of evil thing the folk suspect us twain; ✿ And to this thought their
    hearts and souls are bent:
 Come, dear! let's justify and free their souls ✿ That wrong us; one good
    bout and then—repent!"[347]

Thereupon she made with him an agreement and a covenant and swore a
solemn oath by Him who is Self-existent, that this thing should befal
betwixt them but once and never again for all time, and that the desire
of him was driving her to death and perdition. So he rose up with her,
on this condition, and went with her to her own boudoir, that she might
quench the lowe of her lust, saying, "There is no Majesty, and there is
no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! This is the fated
decree of the All-powerful, the All-wise!"; and he doffed his
bag-trousers, shamefull and abashed, with the tears running from his
eyes for stress of affright. Thereat she smiled and making him mount
upon a couch with her, said to him, "After this night, thou shalt see
naught that will offend thee." Then she turned to him bussing and
bosoming him and bending calf over calf, and said to him, "Put thy hand
between my thighs to the accustomed place; so haply it may stand up to
prayer after prostration." He wept and cried, "I am not good at aught of
this," but she said, "By my life, an thou do as I bid thee, it shall
profit thee!" So he put out his hand, with vitals a-fire for confusion,
and found her thighs cooler than cream and softer than silk. The
touching of them pleasured him and he moved his hand hither and thither,
till it came to a dome abounding in good gifts and movements and shifts,
and said in himself, "Perhaps this King is an hermaphrodite,[348]
neither man nor woman quite;" so he said to her, "O King, I cannot find
that thou hast a tool like the tools of men; what then moved thee to do
this deed?" Then loudly laughed Queen Budur till she fell on her
back,[349] and said, "O my dearling, how quickly thou hast forgotten the
nights we have lain together!" Then she made herself known to him, and
he knew her for his wife, the Lady Budur, daughter of King al-Ghayur,
Lord of the Isles and the Seas. So he embraced her and she embraced him,
and he kissed her and she kissed him; then they lay down on the bed of
pleasure voluptuous, repeating the words of the poet:—

 When his softly bending shape bid him close to my embrace ✿ Which clipt
    him all about like the tendrils of the vine,
 And shed a flood of softness on the hardness of his heart, ✿ He yielded;
    though at first he was minded to decline;
 And dreading lest the railer's eye should light upon his form, ✿ Came
    armourèd with caution to baffle his design:
 His waist makes moan of hinder cheeks that weigh upon his feet ✿ Like
    heavy load of merchandise upon young camel li'en;
 Girt with his glances' scymitar which seemed athirst for blood, ✿ And
    clad in mail of dusky curls that show the sheeniest shine,

 His fragrance wafted happy news of footstep coming nigh, ✿ And to him
    like a bird uncaged I flew in straightest line:
 I spread my cheek upon his path, beneath his sandal-shoon, ✿ And lo! the
    stibium[350] of their dust healed all my hurt of eyne.
 With one embrace again I bound the banner of our loves,[351] ✿ And
    loosed the knot of my delight that bound in bonds malign:
 Then bade I make high festival, and straight came flocking in ✿ Pure
    joys that know not grizzled age[352] nor aught of pain and pine:
 The full moon dotted with the stars the lips and pearly teeth ✿ That
    dance right joyously upon the bubbling face of wine:
 So in the prayer-niche of their joys I yielded me to what ✿ Would make
    the humblest penitent of sinner most indign.
 I swear by all the signs[353] of those glories in his face ✿ I'll ne'er
    forget the Chapter entituled Al-Ikhlas.[354]

Then Queen Budur told Kamar al-Zaman all that had befallen her from
beginning to end and he did likewise; after which he began to upbraid
her, saying, "What moved thee to deal with me as thou hast done this
night?" She replied, "Pardon me! for I did this by way of jest, and that
pleasure and gladness might be increased." And when dawned the morn and
day arose with its sheen and shone, she sent to King Armanus, sire of
the Lady Hayat al-Nufus, and acquainted him with the truth of the case
and that she was wife to Kamar al-Zaman. Moreover, she told him their
tale and the cause of their separation, and how his daughter was a
virgin, pure as when she was born. He marvelled at their story with
exceeding marvel and bade them chronicle it in letters of gold. Then he
turned to Kamar al-Zaman and said, "O King's son, art thou minded to
become my son-in-law by marrying my daughter?" Replied he, "I must
consult the Queen Budur, as she hath a claim upon me for benefits
without stint." And when he took counsel with her, she said, "Right is
thy recking; marry her and I will be her handmaid; for I am her debtor
for kindness and favour and good offices, and obligations manifold,
especially as we are here in her place and as the King her father hath
whelmed us with benefits."[355] Now when he saw that she inclined to
this and was not jealous of Hayat al-Nufus, he agreed with her upon this
matter——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Seventeenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-Zaman
agreed with his wife, Queen Budur, upon this matter and told King
Armanus what she had said; whereat he rejoiced with great joy. Then he
went out and, seating himself upon his chair of estate, assembled all
the Wazirs, Emirs, Chamberlains and Grandees, to whom he related the
whole story of Kamar al-Zaman and his wife, Queen Budur, from first to
last; and acquainted them with his desire to marry his daughter Hayat
al-Nufus to the Prince and make him King in the stead of Queen Budur.
Whereupon said they all, "Since he is the husband of Queen Budur, who
hath been our King till now, whilst we deemed her son-in-law to King
Armanus, we are all content to have him to Sultan over us; and we will
be his servants, nor will we swerve from his allegiance." So Armanus
rejoiced hereat and, summoning Kazis and witnesses and the chief
officers of state, bade draw up the contract of marriage between Kamar
al-Zaman and his daughter, the Princess Hayat al-Nufus. Then he held
high festival, giving sumptuous marriage-feasts and bestowing costly
dresses of honour upon all the Emirs and Captains of the host; moreover
he distributed alms to the poor and needy and set free all the
prisoners. The whole world rejoiced in the coming of Kamar al-Zaman to
the throne, blessing him and wishing him endurance of glory and
prosperity, renown and felicity; and, as soon as he became King, he
remitted the customs-dues and released all men who remained in gaol.
Thus he abode a long while, ordering himself worthily towards his
lieges; and he lived with his two wives in peace, happiness, constancy
and content, lying the night with each of them in turn. He ceased not
after this fashion during many years, for indeed all his troubles and
afflictions were blotted out from him and he forgot his father King
Shahriman and his former estate of honour and favour with him. After a
while Almighty Allah blessed him with two boy children, as they were two
shining moons, through his two wives; the elder whose name was Prince
Amjad,[356] by Queen Budur, and the younger whose name was Prince As'ad
by Queen Hayat al-Nufus; and this one was comelier than his brother.
They were reared in splendour and tender affection, in respectful
bearing and in the perfection of training; and they were instructed in
penmanship and science and the arts of government and horsemanship, till
they attained the extreme of accomplishments and the utmost limit of
beauty and loveliness; both men and women being ravished by their
charms. They grew up side by side till they reached the age of
seventeen, eating and drinking together and sleeping in one bed, nor
ever parting at any time or tide; wherefore all the people envied them.
Now when they came to man's estate and were endowed with every
perfection, their father was wont, as often as he went on a journey, to
make them sit in his stead by turns in the hall of judgement; and each
did justice among the folk one day at a time. But it came to pass, by
confirmed fate and determined lot, that love for As'ad (son of Queen
Hayat al-Nufus) rose in the heart of Queen Budur, and that affection for
Amjad (son of Queen Budur) rose in the heart of Queen Hayat
al-Nufus.[357] Hence it was that each of the women used to sport and
play with the son of her sister-wife, kissing him and straining him to
her bosom, whilst each mother thought that the other's behaviour arose
but from maternal affection. On this wise passion got the mastery of the
two women's hearts and they became madly in love with the two youths, so
that when the other's son came in to either of them, she would press him
to her breast and long for him never to be parted from her; till, at
last, when waiting grew longsome to them and they found no path to
enjoyment, they refused meat and drink and banished the solace of sleep.
Presently, the King fared forth to course and chase, bidding his two
sons sit to do justice in his stead, each one day in turn, as was their
wont.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Eighteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King fared
forth to sport and hunt, bidding his two sons sit to do justice in his
stead, each one day by turn, as was their wont. Now Prince Amjad sat in
judgement the first day, bidding and forbidding, appointing and
deposing, giving and refusing; and Queen Hayat al-Nufus, mother of
As'ad, wrote to him a letter suing for his favour and discovering to him
her passion and devotion; altogether putting off the mask and giving him
to know that she desired to enjoy him. So she took a scroll and thereon
indited these cadences:—From the love deranged ✿ the sorrowful and
estranged ✿ whose torment is prolonged for the longing of thee! ✿ Were I
to recount to thee the extent of my care ✿ and what of sadness I bear ✿
the passion which my heart doth tear ✿ and all that I endure for weeping
and unrest ✿ and the rending of my sorrowful breast ✿ my unremitting
grief ✿ and my woe without relief ✿ and all my suffering for severance
of thee ✿ and sadness and love's ardency ✿ no letter could contain it;
nor calculation could compass it ✿ Indeed earth and heaven upon me are
strait; and I have no hope and no trust but what from thee I await ✿
Upon death I am come nigh ✿ and the horrors of dissolution I aby ✿
Burning upon me is sore ✿ with parting pangs and estrangement galore ✿
Were I to set forth the yearnings that possess me more and more ✿ no
scrolls would suffice to hold such store ✿ and of the excess of my pain
and pine, I have made the following lines:—

 Were I to dwell on heart-consuming heat, ✿ Unease and transports in my
    spirit meet,
 Nothing were left of ink and reeden pen ✿ Nor aught of paper; no, not
    e'en a sheet.

Then Queen Hayat al-Nufus wrapped up her letter in a piece of costly
silk scented with musk and ambergris; and folded it up with her silken
hair-strings[358] whose cost swallowed down treasures; laid it in a
handkerchief and gave it to a eunuch bidding him bear it to Prince
Amjad.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Nineteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that she gave her
missive to the eunuch in waiting and bade him bear it to Prince Amjad.
And that eunuch went forth ignoring what the future hid for him (for the
Omniscient ordereth events even as He willeth); and, going in to the
Prince, kissed the ground between his hands and handed to him the
letter. On receiving the kerchief he opened it and, reading the epistle
and recognising its gist he was ware that his father's wife was
essentially an adulteress and a traitress at heart to her husband, King
Kamar al-Zaman. So he waxed wroth with exceeding wrath and railed at
women and their works, saying, "Allah curse women, the traitresses, the
imperfect in reason and religion!"[359] Then he drew his sword and said
to the eunuch, "Out on thee, thou wicked slave! Dost thou carry messages
of disloyalty for thy lord's wife? By Allah, there is no good in thee, O
black of hue and heart, O foul of face and Nature's forming!" So he
smote him on the neck and severed his head from his body; then, folding
the kerchief over its contents he thrust it into his breast-pocket and
went in to his own mother and told her what had passed, reviling and
reproaching her, and saying, "Each one of you is viler than the other;
and, by Allah the Great and Glorious, did I not fear ill-manneredly to
transgress against the rights of my father, Kamar al-Zaman, and my
brother, Prince As'ad, I would assuredly go in to her and cut off her
head, even as I cut off that of her eunuch!" Then he went forth from his
mother in a mighty rage; and when the news reached Queen Hayat al-Nufus
of what he had done with her eunuch, she abused him[360] and cursed him
and plotted perfidy against him. He passed the night, sick with rage,
wrath and concern; nor found he pleasure in meat, drink or sleep. And
when the next morning dawned Prince As'ad fared forth in his turn to
rule the folk in his father's stead, whilst his mother, Hayat al-Nufus,
awoke in feeble plight because of what she had heard from Prince Amjad
concerning the slaughter of her eunuch. So Prince As'ad sat in the
audience-chamber that day, judging and administering justice, appointing
and deposing, bidding and forbidding, giving and bestowing. And he
ceased not thus till near the time of afternoon-prayer, when Queen Budur
sent for a crafty old woman and, discovering to her what was in her
heart, wrote a letter to Prince As'ad, complaining of the excess of her
affection and desire for him in these cadenced lines:—"From her who
perisheth for passion and love-forlorn ✿ to him who in nature and
culture is goodliest born ✿ to him who is conceited of his own
loveliness ✿ and glories in his amorous grace ✿ who from those that seek
to enjoy him averteth his face ✿ and refuseth to show favour unto the
self abasing and base ✿ him who is cruel and of disdainful mood ✿ from
the lover despairing of good ✿ to Prince As'ad ✿ with passing beauty
endowed ✿ and of excelling grace proud ✿ of the face moon-bright ✿ and
the brow flower-white ✿ and dazzling splendid light ✿ This is my letter
to him whose love melteth my body ✿ and rendeth my skin and bones! ✿
Know that my patience faileth me quite ✿ and I am perplexed in my plight
✿ longing and restlessness weary me ✿ and sleep and patience deny
themselves to me ✿ but mourning and watching stick fast to me ✿ and
desire and passion torment me ✿ and the extremes of languor and sickness
have shent me ✿ Yet may my life be a ransom for thee ✿ albeit thy
pleasure be to slay her who loveth thee ✿ and Allah prolong the life of
thee ✿ and preserve thee from all infirmity!" And after these cadences
she wrote these couplets:—

 Fate hath commanded I become thy fere, ✿ O shining like full moon when
    clearest clear!
 All beauty dost embrace, all eloquence; ✿ Brighter than aught within our
    worldly sphere:
 Content am I my torturer thou be: ✿ Haply shalt alms me with one lovely
    leer!
 Happy her death who dieth for thy love! ✿ No good in her who holdeth
    thee undear!

And also the following couplets:—

 Unto thee, As'ad! I of passion-pangs complain; ✿ Have ruth on slave of
    love so burnt with flaming pain:
 How long, I ask, shall hands of Love disport with me, ✿ With longings,
    dolour, sleepliness and bale and bane?

 Anon I 'plain of sea in heart, anon of fire ✿ In vitals, O strange case,
    dear wish, my fainest fain!
 O blamer, cease thy blame, and seek thyself to fly ✿ From Love, which
    makes these eyne a rill of tears to rain.
 How oft I cry for absence and desire, Ah grief! ✿ But all my crying
    naught of gain for me shall gain:
 Thy rigours dealt me sickness passing power to bear, ✿ Thou art my only
    leach, assain me an thou deign!
 O chider, chide me not in caution, for I doubt ✿ That plaguey Love to
    thee shall also deal a bout.

Then Queen Budur perfumed the letter-paper with a profusion of
odoriferous musk and, winding it in her hair-strings which were of Iráki
silk, with pendants of oblong emeralds, set with pearls and stones of
price, delivered it to the old woman, bidding her carry it to Prince
As'ad.[361] She did so in order to pleasure her, and going in to the
Prince, straightway and without stay, found him in his own rooms and
delivered to him the letter in privacy; after which she stood waiting an
hour or so for the answer. When As'ad had read the paper and knew its
purport, he wrapped it up again in the ribbons and put it in his
bosom-pocket: then (for he was wroth beyond all measure of wrath) he
cursed false women and sprang up and drawing his sword, smote the old
trot on the neck and cut off her pate. Thereupon he went in to his
mother, Queen Hayat al-Nufus, whom he found lying on her bed in feeble
case, for that which had betided her with Prince Amjad, and railed at
her and cursed her; after which he left her and foregathered with his
brother, to whom he related all that had befallen him with Queen Budur,
adding, "By Allah, O my brother, but that I was ashamed before thee, I
had gone in to her forthright and had smitten her head off her
shoulders!" Replied Prince Amjad, "By Allah, O my brother, yesterday
when I was sitting upon the seat of judgement, the like of what hath
befallen thee this day befel me also with thy mother who sent me a
letter of similar purport." And he told him all that had passed, adding,
"By Allah, O my brother, naught but respect for thee withheld me from
going in to her and dealing with her even as I dealt with the eunuch!"
They passed the rest of the night conversing and cursing false
womankind, and agreed to keep the matter secret, lest their father
should hear of it and kill the two women. Yet they ceased not to suffer
trouble and foresee affliction. And when the morrow dawned, the King
returned with his suite from hunting and sat awhile in his chair of
estate; after which he sent the Emirs about their business and went up
to his palace, where he found his two wives lying a-bed and both
exceeding sick and weak. Now they had made a plot against their two sons
and concerted to do away their lives, for that they had exposed
themselves before them and feared to be at their mercy and dependent
upon their forbearance. When Kamar al-Zaman saw them on this wise, he
said to them, "What aileth you?" Whereupon they rose to him and kissing
his hands answered, perverting the case and saying, "Know, O King, that
thy two sons, who have been reared in thy bounty, have played thee false
and have dishonoured thee in the persons of thy wives." Now when he
heard this, the light became darkness in his sight, and he raged with
such wrath that his reason fled: then said he to them, "Explain me this
matter." Replied Queen Budur, "O King of the age, know that these many
days past thy son As'ad hath been in the persistent habit of sending me
letters and messages to solicit me to lewdness and adultery while I
still forbade him from this, but he would not be forbidden; and, when
thou wentest forth to hunt, he rushed in on me, drunk and with a drawn
sword in his hand, and smiting my eunuch, slew him. Then he mounted on
my breast, still holding the sword, and I feared lest he should slay me,
if I gainsaid him, even as he had slain my eunuch; so he took his wicked
will of me by force. And now if thou do me not justice on him, O King, I
will slay myself with my own hand, for I have no need of life in the
world after this foul deed." And Queen Hayat al-Nufus, choking with
tears, told him respecting Prince Amjad a story like that of her
sister-wife.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Two Hundred and Twentieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Queen Hayat
al-Nufus told her husband, King Kamar al-Zaman, a story like that of her
sister in wedlock, Budur, and, quoth she, "The same thing befel me with
thy son Amjad;" after which she took to weeping and wailing and said,
"Except thou do me justice on him I will tell my father, King Armanus."
Then both women wept with sore weeping before King Kamar al-Zaman who,
when he saw their tears and heard their words, concluded that their
story was true and, waxing wroth beyond measure of wrath, went forth
thinking to fall upon his two sons and put them to death. On his way he
met his father-in-law, King Armanus who, hearing of his return from the
chase, had come to salute him at that very hour; and, seeing him with
naked brand in hand and blood dripping from his nostrils, for excess of
rage, asked what ailed him. So Kamar al-Zaman told him all that his sons
Amjad and As'ad had done and added, "And here I am now going in to them
to slay them in the foulest way and make of them the most shameful of
examples." Quoth King Armanus (and indeed he too was wroth with them),
"Thou dost well, O my son, and may Allah not bless them nor any sons
that do such deed against their father's honour. But, O my son, the
sayer of the old saw saith:—Whoso looketh not to the end hath not
Fortune to friend. In any case, they are thy sons, and it befitteth not
that thou kill them with thine own hand, lest thou drink of their
death-agony,[362] and anon repent of having slain them whenas repentance
availeth thee naught. Rather do thou send them with one of thy Mamelukes
into the desert and let him kill them there out of thy sight, for, as
saith the adage:—Out of sight of my friend is better and
pleasanter."[363] And when Kamar al-Zaman heard his father-in-law's
words, he knew them to be just; so he sheathed his sword and turning
back, sat down upon the throne of his realm. There he summoned his
treasurer, a very old man, versed in affairs and in fortune's
vicissitudes, to whom he said, "Go in to my sons, Amjad and As'ad; bind
their hands behind them with strong bonds, lay them in two chests and
load them upon a mule. Then take horse thou and carry them into
mid-desert, where do thou kill them both and fill two vials with their
blood and bring the same to me in haste." Replied the treasurer, "I hear
and I obey," and he rose up hurriedly and went out forthright to seek
the Princes; and, on his road, he met them coming out of the
palace-vestibule, for they had donned their best clothes and their
richest; and they were on their way to salute their sire and give him
joy of his safe return from his going forth to hunt. Now when he saw
them, he laid hands on them, saying, "O my sons, know ye that I am but a
slave commanded, and that your father hath laid a commandment on me;
will ye obey his commandment?" They said, "Yes"; whereupon he went up to
them and, after pinioning their arms, laid them in the chests which he
loaded on the back of a mule he had taken from the city. And he ceased
not carrying them into the open country till near noon, when he halted
in a waste and desolate place and, dismounting from his mare, let down
the two chests from the mule's back. Then he opened them and took out
Amjad and As'ad; and when he looked upon them he wept sore for their
beauty and loveliness; then drawing his sword he said to them, "By
Allah, O my lords, indeed it is hard for me to deal so evilly by you;
but I am to be excused in this matter, being but a slave commanded, for
that your father King Kamar al-Zaman hath bidden me strike off your
heads." They replied, "O Emir, do the King's bidding, for we bear with
patience that which Allah (to Whom be Honour, Might and Glory!) hath
decreed to us; and thou art quit of our blood." Then they embraced and
bade each other farewell, and As'ad said to the treasurer, "Allah upon
thee, O uncle, spare me the sight of my brother's death-agony and make
me not drink of his anguish, but kill me first, for that were the easier
for me." And Amjad said the like and entreated the treasurer to kill him
before As'ad, saying, "My brother is younger than I; so make me not
taste of his anguish." And they both wept bitter tears whilst the
treasurer wept for their weeping;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the treasurer wept
for their weeping; then the two brothers embraced and bade farewell and
one said to the other, "All this cometh of the malice of those
traitresses, my mother and thy mother; and this is the reward of my
forbearance towards thy mother and of thy forbearance towards my mother!
But there is no Might and there is no Majesty save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great! Verily, we are Allah's and unto Him we are
returning."[364] And As'ad embraced his brother, sobbing and repeating
these couplets:—

 O Thou to whom sad trembling wights in fear complain! ✿ O ever ready
    whatso cometh to sustain!
 The sole resource for me is at Thy door to knock; ✿ At whose door knock
    an Thou to open wilt not deign?
 O Thou whose grace is treasured in the one word, Be![365] ✿ Favour me, I
    beseech, in Thee all weals contain.

Now when Amjad heard his brother's weeping he wept also and pressing him
to his bosom repeated these two couplets:—

 O Thou whose boons to me are more than one! ✿ Whose gifts and favours
    have nor count nor bound!
 No stroke of all Fate's strokes e'er fell on me, ✿ But Thee to take me
    by the hand I found.

Then said Amjad to the treasurer, "I conjure thee by the One,
Omnipotent, the Lord of Mercy, the Beneficent! slay me before my brother
As'ad, so haply shall the fire be quencht in my heart's core and in this
life burn no more." But As'ad wept and exclaimed, "Not so: I will die
first;" whereupon quoth Amjad, "It were best that I embrace thee and
thou embrace me, so the sword may fall upon us and slay us both at a
single stroke." Thereupon they embraced, face to face and clung to each
other straitly, whilst the treasurer tied up the twain and bound them
fast with cords, weeping the while. Then he drew his blade and said to
them, "By Allah, O my lords, it is indeed hard to me to slay you! But
have ye no last wishes that I may fulfil or charges which I may carry
out, or message which I may deliver?" Replied Amjad, "We have no wish;
and my only charge to thee is that thou set my brother below and me
above him, that the blow may fall on me first; and when thou hast killed
us and returnest to the King and he asketh thee:—What heardest thou from
them before their death?; do thou answer:—Verily thy sons salute thee
and say to thee, Thou knewest not if we were innocent or guilty, yet
hast thou put us to death and hast not certified thyself of our sin nor
looked into our case. Then do thou repeat to him these two couplets:—

 Women are Satans made for woe o' men; ✿ I fly to Allah from their
    devilish scathe:
 Source of whatever bale befel our kind, ✿ In worldly matters and in
    things of Faith."

Continued Amjad, "We desire of thee naught but that thou repeat to our
sire these two couplets"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me O auspicious King, that Amjad added,
speaking to the treasurer, "We desire of thee naught but that thou
repeat to our sire these two couplets which thou hast just now heard;
and I conjure thee by Allah to have patience with us, whilst I cite to
my brother this other pair of couplets." Then he wept with sore weeping
and began:—

 "The Kings who fared before us showed ✿ Of instances full many a show:
 Of great and small and high and low ✿ How many this one road have trod!"

Now when the treasurer heard these words from Amjad, he wept till his
beard was wet, whilst As'ad's eyes brimmed with tears and he in turn
repeated these couplets:—

 Fate frights us when the thing is past and gone; ✿ Weeping is not for
    form or face alone[366]:
 What ails the Nights?[367] Allah blot out our sin, ✿ And be the Nights
    by other hand undone!
 Ere this Zubayr-son[368] felt their spiteful hate, ✿ Who fled for refuge
    to the House and Stone:

 Would that when Khárijah was for Amru slain[369] ✿ They had ransomed Ali
    with all men they own.

Then, with cheeks stained by tears down railing he recited also these
verses:—

 In sooth the Nights and Days are charactered ✿ By traitor falsehood and
    as knaves they lie;
 The Desert-reek[370] recalls their teeth that shine; ✿ All horrid
    blackness is their Kohl of eye:
 My sin anent the world which I abhor ✿ Is sin of sword when sworders
    fighting hie.

Then his sobs waxed louder and he said:—

 O thou who woost a World[371] unworthy, learn ✿ 'Tis house of evils,
    'tis Perdition's net:
 A house where whoso laughs this day shall weep ✿ The next: then perish
    house of fume and fret!
 Endless its frays and forays, and its thralls ✿ Are ne'er redeemed,
    while endless risks beset.
 How many gloried in its pomps and pride, ✿ Till proud and pompous did
    all bounds forget,
 Then showing back of shield she made them swill[372] ✿ Full draught, and
    claimèd all her vengeance debt.
 For know her strokes fall swift and sure, altho' ✿ Long bide she and
    forslow the course of Fate:

 So look thou to thy days lest life go by ✿ Idly, and meet thou more than
    thou hast met;
 And cut all chains of world-love and desire ✿ And save thy soul and rise
    to secrets higher.

Now when As'ad made an end of these verses, he strained his brother
Amjad in his arms, till they twain were one body, and the treasurer,
drawing his sword, was about to strike them, when behold, his steed took
fright at the wind of his upraised hand, and breaking its tether, fled
into the desert. Now the horse had cost a thousand gold pieces and on
its back was a splendid saddle worth much money; so the treasurer threw
down his sword, and ran after his beast.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say,


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when his horse ran
away, the treasurer ran after it in huge concern, and ceased not running
to catch the runaway till it entered a thicket. He followed it whilst it
dashed through the wood, smiting the earth with its hoofs till it raised
a dust-cloud which towered high in air; and snorting and puffing and
neighing and waxing fierce and furious. Now there happened to be in this
thicket a lion of terrible might; hideous to sight, with eyes sparkling
light: his look was grim and his aspect struck fright into man's sprite.
Presently the treasurer turned and saw the lion making towards him; but
found no way of escape nor had he his sword with him. So he said in
himself, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great! This strait is come upon me for no other cause but
because of Amjad and As'ad; and indeed this journey was unblest from the
first!" Meanwhile the two Princes were grievously oppressed by the heat
and grew sore athirst, so that their tongues hung out and they cried for
succour, but none came to their relief and they said, "Would to Heaven
we had been slain and were at peace from this pain! But we know not
whither the horse hath fled, that the treasurer is gone and hath left us
thus pinioned. If he would but come back and do us die, it were easier
to us than this torture to aby." Said As'ad, "O my brother, be patient,
and the relief of Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) shall assuredly
come to us; for the horse started not away save of His favour towards
us, and naught irketh us but this thirst." Upon this he stretched and
shook himself and strained right and left, till he burst his
pinion-bonds; then he rose and unbound his brother and catching up the
Emir's sword, said, "By Allah, we will not go hence, till we look after
him and learn what is become of him." Then they took to following on the
trail till it led them to the thicket and they said to each other, "Of a
surety, the horse and the treasurer have not passed out of this wood."
Quoth As'ad, "Stay thou here, whilst I enter the thicket and search it;"
and Amjad replied, "I will not let thee go in alone: nor will we enter
it but together; so if we escape, we shall escape together and if we
perish, we shall perish together." Accordingly both entered and found
that the lion had sprang upon the treasurer, who lay like a sparrow in
his grip, calling upon Allah for aid and signing with his hands to
Heaven. Now when Amjad saw this, he took the sword and, rushing upon the
lion, smote him between the eyes and laid him dead on the ground. The
Emir sprang up, marvelling at this escape and seeing Amjad and As'ad,
his master's sons, standing there, cast himself at their feet and
exclaimed, "By Allah, O my lords, it were intolerable wrong in me to do
you to death. May the man never be who would kill you! Indeed, with my
very life, I will ransom you"——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the
treasurer to Amjad and As'ad, "With my life will I ransom you both!"
Then he hastily rose and, at once embracing them, enquired how they had
loosed their bonds and come thither; whereupon they told him how the
bonds of one of them had fallen loose and he had unbound the other,
whereto they were helped by the purity of their intentions, and how they
had tracked his trail till they came upon him. So he thanked them for
their deed and went with them forth of the thicket; and, when they were
in the open country, they said to him, "O uncle, do our father's
bidding." He replied, "Allah forbid that I should draw near to you with
hurt! But know ye that I mean to take your clothes and clothe you with
mine; then will I fill two vials with the lion's blood and go back to
the King and tell him I have put you to death. But as for you two, fare
ye forth into the lands, for Allah's earth is wide; and know, O my
lords, that it paineth me to part from you." At this, they all fell
a-weeping; then the two youths put off their clothes and the treasurer
habited them with his own. Moreover he made two parcels of their dress
and, filling two vials with the lion's blood, set the parcels before him
on his horse's back. Presently he took leave of them and, making his way
to the city, ceased not faring till he went in to King Kamar al-Zaman
and kissed the ground between his hands. The King saw him changed in
face and troubled (which arose from his adventure with the lion) and,
deeming this came of the slaughter of his two sons, rejoiced and said to
him, "Hast thou done the work?" "Yes, O our lord," replied the treasurer
and gave him the two parcels of clothes and the two vials full of blood.
Asked the King, "What didst thou observe in them; and did they give thee
any charge?" Answered the treasurer, "I found them patient and resigned
to what came down upon them and they said to me:—Verily, our father is
excusable; bear him our salutation and say to him, Thou art quit of our
killing. But we charge thee repeat to him these couplets:—

 Verily women are devils created for us. We seek refuge with God from the
    artifice of the devils.
 They are the source of all the misfortunes that have appeared among
    mankind in the affairs of the world and of religion."[373]

When the King heard these words of the treasurer, he bowed his head
earthwards, a long while and knew his sons' words to mean that they had
been wrongfully put to death. Then he bethought himself of the perfidy
of women and the calamities brought about by them; and he took the two
parcels and opened them and fell to turning over his sons' clothes and
weeping,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King Kamar
al-Zaman opened the two bundles and fell to turning over his sons'
clothes and weeping, it so came to pass that he found, in the pocket of
his son As'ad's raiment, a letter in the hand of his wife enclosing her
hair-strings; so he opened and read it and understanding the contents
knew that the Prince had been falsely accused and wrongously. Then he
searched Amjad's parcel of dress and found in his pocket a letter in the
handwriting of Queen Hayat al-Nufus enclosing also her hair-strings; so
he opened and read it and knew that Amjad too had been wronged;
whereupon he beat hand upon hand and exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and
there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! I have slain
my sons unjustly." And he buffeted his face, crying out, "Alas, my sons!
Alas, my long grief!" Then he bade them build two tombs in one house,
which he styled "House of Lamentations," and had graved thereon his
sons' names; and he threw himself on Amjad's tomb, weeping and groaning
and lamenting, and improvised these couplets:—

 O moon for ever set this earth below, ✿ Whose loss bewail the stars
    which stud the sky!
 O wand, which broken, ne'er with bend and wave ✿ Shall fascinate the
    ravisht gazer's eye;
 These eyne for jealousy I 'reft of thee, ✿ Nor shall they till next life
    thy sight descry:
 I'm drowned in sea of tears for insomny ✿ Wherefore, indeed in
    Sáhirah-stead[374] I lie.

Then he threw himself on As'ad's tomb, groaning and weeping and
lamenting and versifying with these couplets:—

 Indeed I longed to share unweal with thee, ✿ But Allah than my will
    willed otherwise:
 My grief all blackens 'twixt mine eyes and space, ✿ Yet whitens all the
    blackness from mine eyes:[375]
 Of tears they weep these eyne run never dry, ✿ And ulcerous flow in
    vitals never dries:
 Right sore it irks me seeing thee in stead[376] ✿ Where slave with
    sovran for once levelled lies.

And his weeping and wailing redoubled; and, after he had ended his
lamentations and his verse, he forsook his friends and intimates, and
denying himself to his women and his family, cut himself off from the
world in the House of Lamentations, where he passed his time in weeping
for his sons. Such was his case; but as regards Amjad and As'ad they
fared on into the desert eating of the fruits of the earth and drinking
of the remnants of the rain for a full month, till their travel brought
them to a mountain of black flint[377] whose further end was unknown;
and here the road forked, one line lying along the midway height and the
other leading to its head. They took the way trending to the top and
gave not over following it five days, but saw no end to it and were
overcome with weariness, being unused to walking upon the mountains or
elsewhere.[378] At last, despairing of coming to the last of the road,
they retraced their steps and, taking the other, that led over the
midway heights,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Princes Amjad and
As'ad returned from the path leading to the Mountain-head and took that
which ran along the midway heights, and walked through all that day till
nightfall, when As'ad, weary with much travel, said to Amjad, "O my
brother, I can walk no farther, for I am exceeding weak." Replied Amjad,
"O my brother, take courage! May be Allah will send us relief." So they
walked on part of the night, till the darkness closed in upon them, when
As'ad became weary beyond measure of weariness and cried out, "O my
brother, I am worn out and spent with walking," and threw himself upon
the ground and wept. Amjad took him in his arms and walked on with him,
bytimes sitting down to rest till break of day, when they came to the
mountain-top and found there a stream of running water and by it a
pomegranate-tree and a prayer-niche.[379] They could hardly believe
their eyes when they saw it; but, sitting down by that spring, drank of
its water and ate of the fruit of that granado-tree; after which they
lay on the ground and slept till sunrise, when they washed and bathed in
the spring and, eating of the pomegranates, slept again till the time of
mid-afternoon prayer. Then they thought to continue their journey, but
As'ad could not walk, for both his feet were swollen. So they abode
there three days till they were rested, after which they set out again
and fared on over the mountain days and nights, tortured by and like to
die of thirst, till they sighted a city gleaming afar off, at which they
rejoiced and made towards it. When they drew near it, they thanked Allah
(be His Name exalted!) and Amjad said to As'ad, "O my brother, sit here,
whilst I go to yonder city and see what it is and whose it is and where
we are in Allah's wide world, that we may know through what lands we
have passed in crossing this mountain, whose skirts had we followed, we
had not reached this city in a whole year. So praised be Allah for
safety!" Replied As'ad, "By Allah, O my brother, none shall go down into
that city save myself, and may I be thy ransom! If thou leave me alone,
be it only for an hour, I shall imagine a thousand things and be drowned
in a torrent of anxiety on thine account, for I cannot brook thine
absence from me." Amjad rejoined, "Go then and tarry not." So As'ad took
some gold pieces, and leaving his brother to await him, descended the
mountain and ceased not faring on till he entered the city. As he
threaded the streets he was met by an old man age-decrepit, whose beard
flowed down upon his breast and forked in twain;[380] he bore a
walking-staff in his hand and was richly clad, with a great red turband
on his head. When As'ad saw him, he wondered at his dress and his mien;
nevertheless, he went up to him and saluting him said, "Where be the way
to the market, O my master?" Hearing these words the Shaykh smiled in
his face and replied, "O my son, meseemeth thou art a stranger?" As'ad
rejoined, "Yes, I am a stranger."——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Two Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Shaykh who met
As'ad smiled in his face and said to him, "O my son, meseemeth thou art
a stranger?" and As'ad replied, "Yes, I am a stranger." Then rejoined
the old man, "Verily, thou gladdenest our country with thy presence, O
my son, and thou desolatest thine own land by reason of thine absence.
What wantest thou of the market?" Quoth As'ad, "O uncle, I have a
brother, with whom I have come from a far land and with whom I have
journeyed these three months; and, when we sighted this city, I left
him, who is my elder brother, upon the mountain and came hither,
purposing to buy victual and what else, and return therewith to him,
that we might feed thereon." Said the old man, "Rejoice in all good, O
my son, and know thou that to-day I give a marriage-feast, to which I
have bidden many guests, and I have made ready plenty of meats, the best
and most delicious that heart can desire. So if thou wilt come with me
to my place, I will give thee freely all thou lackest without asking
thee a price or aught else. Moreover I will teach thee the ways of this
city; and, praised be Allah, O my son, that I, and none other have
happened upon thee." "As thou wilt," answered As'ad, "do as thou art
disposed, but make haste, for indeed my brother awaiteth me and his
whole heart is with me." The old man took As'ad by the hand and carried
him to a narrow lane, smiling in his face and saying, "Glory be to Him
who hath delivered thee from the people of this city!" And he ceased not
walking till he entered a spacious house, wherein was a saloon and
behold, in the middle of it were forty old men, well stricken in years,
collected together and forming a single ring as they sat round about a
lighted fire, to which they were doing worship and prostrating
themselves.[381] When As'ad saw this, he was confounded and the hair of
his body stood on end though he knew not what they were; and the Shaykh
said to them, "O Elders of the Fire, how blessed is this day!" Then he
called aloud, saying, "Hallo, Ghazbán!" Whereupon there came out to him
a tall black slave of frightful aspect, grim-visaged and flat nosed as
an ape who, when the old man made a sign to him, bent As'ad's arms
behind his back and pinioned them; after which the Shaykh said to him,
"Let him down into the vault under the earth and there leave him and say
to my slave-girl Such-an-one:—Torture him night and day and give him a
cake of bread to eat morning and evening against the time come of the
voyage to the Blue Sea and the Mountain of Fire, whereon we will
slaughter him as a sacrifice." So the black carried him out at another
door and, raising a flag in the floor, discovered a flight of twenty
steps leading to a chamber[382] under the earth, into which he descended
with him and, laying his feet in irons, gave him over to the slave-girl
and went away. Meanwhile, the old men said to one another, "When the day
of the Festival of the Fire cometh, we will sacrifice him on the
mountain, as a propitiatory offering whereby we shall pleasure the
Fire." Presently the damsel went down to him and beat him a grievous
beating, till streams of blood flowed from his sides and he fainted;
after which she set at his head a scone of bread and a cruse of brackish
water and went away and left him. In the middle of the night, he revived
and found himself bound and beaten and sore with beating: so he wept
bitter tears; and recalling his former condition of honour and
prosperity, lordship and dominion, and his separation from his sire and
his exile from his native land——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

[Illustration]


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Twenty-eight Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when As'ad found
himself bound and beaten and sore with beating he recalled his whilome
condition of honour and prosperity and dominion and lordship, and he
wept and groaned aloud and recited these couplets:—

 Stand by the ruined stead and ask of us; ✿ Nor deem we dwell there as
    was state of us:
 The World, that parter, hath departed us; ✿ Yet soothes not hate-full
    hearts the fate of us:
 With whips a cursèd slave-girl scourges us, ✿ And teems her breast with
    rancorous hate of us:
 Allah shall haply deign to unpart our lives, ✿ Chastise our foes, and
    end this strait of us.

And when As'ad had spoken his poetry, he put out his hand towards his
head and finding there the crust and the cruse full of brackish water he
ate a bittock, just enough to keep life in him, and drank a little
water, but could get no sleep till morning for the swarms of bugs[383]
and lice. As soon as it was day, the slave-girl came down to him and
changed his clothes, which were drenched with blood and stuck to him, so
that his skin came off with the shirt; wherefor he shrieked aloud and
cried, "Alas!" and said, "O my God, if this be Thy pleasure, increase it
upon me! O Lord, verily Thou art not unmindful of him that oppresseth
me; do Thou then avenge me upon him!" And he groaned and repeated the
following verses:—

 Patient, O Allah! to Thy destiny ✿ I bow, suffice me what Thou deign
    decree:
 Patient to bear Thy will, O Lord of me, ✿ Patient to burn on coals of
    Ghazátree:
 They wrong me, visit me with hurt and harm; ✿ Haply Thy grace from them
    shall set me free:
 Far be't, O Lord, from thee to spare the wronger ✿ O Lord of Destiny my
    hope's in Thee!

And what another saith:—

 Bethink thee not of worldly state, ✿ Leave everything to course of Fate;
 For oft a thing that irketh thee ✿ Shall in content eventuate;
 And oft what strait is shall expand, ✿ And what expanded is wax strait.
 Allah will do what wills His will, ✿ So be not thou importunate!
 But 'joy the view of coming weal ✿ Shall make forget past bale and bate.

And when he had ended his verse, the slave-girl came down upon him with
blows till he fainted again; and, throwing him a flap of bread and a
gugglet of saltish water, went away and left him sad and lonely, bound
in chains of iron, with the blood streaming from his sides and far from
those he loved. So he wept and called to mind his brother and the
honours he erst enjoyed——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that As'ad called to
mind his brother and the honours he erst enjoyed; so he wept and groaned
and complained and poured forth tears in floods and improvised these
couplets:—

 Easy, O Fate! how long this wrong, this injury, ✿ Robbing each morn and
    eve my brotherhood fro' me?
 Is't not time now thou deem this length sufficiency ✿ Of woes and, O
    thou Heart of Rock, show clemency?
 My friends thou wrongedst when thou madst each enemy ✿ Mock and exult me
    for thy wrongs, thy tyranny:
 My foeman's heart is solaced by the things he saw ✿ In me, of
    strangerhood and lonely misery:
 Suffice thee not what came upon my head of dole, ✿ Friends lost for
    evermore, eyes wan and pale of blee?
 But must in prison cast so narrow there is naught ✿ Save hand to bite,
    with bitten hand for company;
 And tears that tempest down like goodly gift of cloud, ✿ And longing
    thirst whose fires weet no satiety.
 Regretful yearnings, singulfs and unceasing sighs, ✿ Repine, remembrance
    and pain's very ecstacy:
 Desire I suffer sore and melancholy deep, ✿ And I must bide a prey to
    endless phrenesy:
 I find me ne'er a friend who looks with piteous eye, ✿ And seeks my
    presence to allay my misery:
 Say, liveth any intimate with trusty love ✿ Who for mine ills will
    groan, my sleepless malady?
 To whom moan I can make and, peradventure, he ✿ Shall pity eyes that
    sight of sleep can never see?
 The flea and bug suck up my blood, as wight that drinks ✿ Wine from the
    proffering hand of fair virginity:
 Amid the lice my body aye remindeth me ✿ Of orphan's good in Kázi's claw
    of villainy:
 My home's a sepulchre that measures cubits three, ✿ Where pass I morn
    and eve in chainèd agony:
 My wines are tears, my clank of chains takes music's stead; ✿ Cares my
    dessert of fruit and sorrows are my bed.

And when he had versed his verse and had prosed his prose, he again
groaned and complained and remembered what he had been and how he had
been parted from his brother. Thus far concerning him; but as regards
his brother Amjad, he awaited As'ad till mid-day yet he returned not to
him: whereupon Amjad's vitals fluttered, the pangs of parting were sore
upon him and he poured forth abundant tears,——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Two Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Amjad awaited
his brother As'ad till mid-day and he returned not to him, Amjad's
vitals fluttered; the pangs of parting were sore upon him and he poured
forth abundant tears, exclaiming, "Alas, my brother! Alas, my friend!
Alas my grief! How I feared me we should be separated!" Then he
descended from the mountain-top with the tears running down his cheeks;
and, entering the city, ceased not walking till he made the market. He
asked the folk the name of the place and concerning its people and they
said, "This is called the City of the Magians, and its citizens are
mostly given to Fire-worshipping in lieu of the Omnipotent King." Then
he enquired of the City of Ebony and they answered, "Of a truth it is a
year's journey thither by land and six months by sea: it was governed
erst by a King called Armanus; but he took to son-in-law and made King
in his stead a Prince called Kamar al-Zaman distinguished for justice
and munificence, equity and benevolence." When Amjad heard tell of his
father, he groaned and wept and lamented and knew not whither to go.
However, he bought a something of food and carried it to a retired spot
where he sat down thinking to eat; but, recalling his brother, he fell
a-weeping and swallowed but a morsel to keep breath and body together,
and that against his will. Then he rose and walked about the city,
seeking news of his brother, till he saw a Moslem tailor sitting in his
shop; so he sat down by him and told him his story; whereupon quoth the
tailor, "If he have fallen into the hands of the Magians, thou shalt
hardly see him again: yet it may be Allah will reunite you twain. But
thou, O my brother," he continued, "wilt thou lodge with me?" Amjad
answered, "Yes"; and the tailor rejoiced at this. So he abode with him
many days, what while the tailor comforted him and exhorted him to
patience and taught him tailoring, till he became expert in the craft.
Now one day he went forth to the sea-shore and washed his clothes; after
which he entered the bath and put on clean raiment; then he walked about
the city, to divert himself with its sights and presently there met him
on the way a woman of passing beauty and loveliness, without peer for
grace and comeliness. When she saw him she raised her face-veil and
signed to him by moving her eyebrows and her eyes with luring glances,
and versified these couplets:—

 I drooped my glance when seen thee on the way ✿ As though, O slim-waist!
    felled by Sol's hot ray:
 Thou art the fairest fair that e'er appeared, ✿ Fairer to-day than fair
    of yesterday:[384]
 Were Beauty parted, a fifth part of it ✿ With Joseph or a part of fifth
    would stay;
 The rest would fly to thee, thine ownest own; ✿ Be every soul thy
    sacrifice, I pray!

When Amjad heard these her words, they gladdened his heart which
inclined to her and his bowels yearned towards her and the hands of love
sported with him; so he sighed to her in reply and spoke these
couplets:—

 Above the rose of cheek is thorn of lance;[385] ✿ Who dareth pluck it,
    rashest chevisance?
 Stretch not thy hand towards it, for night long ✿ Those lances marred
    because we snatched a glance!
 Say her, who tyrant is and tempter too ✿ (Though justice might her
    tempting power enhance):—
 Thy face would add to errors were it veiled; ✿ Unveiled I see its guard
    hath best of chance!
 Eye cannot look upon Sol's naked face; ✿ But can, when mist-cloud dims
    his countenance:
 The honey-hive is held by honey-bee;[386] ✿ Ask the tribe-guards what
    wants their vigilance?
 An they would slay me, let them end their ire ✿ Rancorous, and grant us
    freely to advance:
 They're not more murderous, an charge the whole ✿ Than charging glance
    of her who wears the mole.

And hearing these lines from Amjad she sighed with the deepest sighs
and, signing to him again, repeated these couplets:—

 'Tis thou hast trodden coyness-path not I: ✿ Grant me thy favours for
    the time draws nigh:
 O thou who makest morn with light of brow, ✿ And with loosed brow-locks
    night in lift to stye!
 Thine idol-aspect made of me thy slave, ✿ Tempting as temptedst me in
    days gone by:
 'Tis just my liver fry with hottest love: ✿ Who worship fire for God
    must fire aby:
 Thou sellest like of me for worthless price; ✿ If thou must sell, ask
    high of those who buy.

When Amjad heard these her words he said to her, "Wilt thou come to my
lodging or shall I go with thee to thine?" So she hung her head in shame
to the ground and repeated the words of Him whose Name be exalted, "Men
shall have the pre-eminence above women, because of those advantages
wherein Allah hath caused the one of them to excel the other."[387] Upon
this, Amjad took the hint——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Amjad took the
woman's hint and understood that she wished to go with him whither he
was going; he felt himself bounden to find a place wherein to receive
her, but was ashamed to carry her to the house of his host, the tailor.
So he walked on and she walked after him, and the two ceased not walking
from street to street and place to place, till she was tired and said to
him, "O my lord, where is thy house?" Answered he, "Before us a little
way." Then he turned aside into a handsome by-street, followed by the
young woman, and walked on till he came to the end, when he found it was
no thoroughfare and exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!" Then raising his eyes, he
saw, at the upper end of the lane a great door with two stone benches;
but it was locked. So Amjad sat down on one of the benches and she on
the other; and she said to him, "O my lord, wherefore waitest thou?" He
bowed his head awhile to the ground then raised it and answered, "I am
awaiting my Mameluke who hath the key; for I bade him make me ready meat
and drink and flowers, to deck the wine-service against my return from
the bath." But he said to himself, "Haply the time will be tedious to
her and she will go about her business, leaving me here, when I will
wend my own way." However, as soon as she was weary of long waiting, she
said, "O my lord, thy Mameluke delayeth; and here are we sitting in the
street;" and she arose and took a stone and went up to the lock. Said
Amjad, "Be not in haste, but have patience till the servant come."
However, she hearkened not to him, but smote the wooden bolt with the
stone and broke it in half, whereupon the door opened. Quoth he, "What
possessed thee to do this deed?" Quoth she, "Pooh, pooh, my lord! what
matter it? Is not the house thy house and thy place?" He said, "There
was no need to break the bolt." Then the damsel entered, to the
confusion of Amjad, who knew not what to do for fear of the people of
the house; but she said to him, "Why dost thou not enter, O light of
mine eyes and core of my heart?" Replied he, "I hear and obey; but my
servant tarrieth long and I know not if he have done aught of what I
bade him and specially enjoined upon him, or not." Hereupon he entered,
sore in fear of the people of the house, and found himself in a handsome
saloon with four daïs'd recesses, each facing other, and containing
closets and raised seats, all bespread with stuffs of silk and brocade;
and in the midst was a jetting fountain of costly fashion, on whose
margin rested a covered tray of meats, with a leather tablecloth hanging
up and gem-encrusted dishes, full of fruits and sweet-scented flowers.
Hard by stood drinking vessels and a candlestick with a single
wax-candle therein; and the place was full of precious stuffs and was
ranged with chests and stools, and on each seat lay a parcel of clothes
upon which was a purse full of monies, gold and silver. The floor was
paved with marble and the house bore witness in every part to its
owner's fortune. When Amjad saw all this, he was confounded at his case
and said to himself, "I am a lost man! Verily we are Allah's and to
Allah we are returning!" As for the damsel, when she sighted the place
she rejoiced indeed with a joy nothing could exceed, and said to him,
"By Allah, O my lord, thy servant hath not failed of his duty; for see,
he hath swept the place and cooked the meat and set on the fruit; and
indeed I come at the best of times." But he paid no heed to her, his
heart being taken up with fear of the house-folk; and she said, "Fie, O
my lord, O my heart! What aileth thee to stand thus?" Then she sighed;
and, giving him a buss which sounded like the cracking of a walnut,
said, "O my lord, an thou have made an appointment with other than with
me, I will gird my middle and serve her and thee." Amjad laughed from a
heart full of rage and wrath and came forwards and sat down, panting and
saying to himself, "Alack, mine ill death and doom when the owner of the
place shall return!" Then she seated herself by him and fell to toying
and laughing, whilst Amjad sat careful and frowning, thinking a thousand
thoughts and communing with himself, "Assuredly the master of the house
cannot but come, and then what shall I say to him? he needs must kill me
and my life will be lost thus foolishly." Presently she rose and,
tucking up her sleeves, took a tray of food on which she laid the cloth
and then set it before Amjad and began to eat, saying, "Eat, O my lord."
So he came forward and ate; but the food was not pleasant to him; on the
contrary he ceased not to look towards the door, till the damsel had
eaten her fill, when she took away the tray of the meats and, setting on
the dessert, fell to eating of the dried fruits. Then she brought the
wine-service and opening the jar, filled a cup and handed it to Amjad,
who took it from her hand saying to himself, "Ah, ah! and well-away,
when the master of the house cometh and seeth me!"; and he kept his eyes
fixed on the threshold, even with cup in hand. While he was in this
case, lo! in came the master of the house, who was a white slave, one of
the chief men of the city, being Master of the Horse[388] to the King.
He had fitted up this saloon for his pleasures, that he might make merry
therein and be private with whom he would, and he had that day bidden a
youth whom he loved and had made this entertainment for him. Now the
name of this slave was Bahádur,[389] and he was open of hand, generous,
munificent and fain of alms-giving and charitable works.——And Shahzarad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Bahadur, the
Master of the Horse and the owner of the house, came to the door of the
saloon and found it open, he entered slowly and softly and looking in,
with head advanced and outstretched neck, saw Amjad and the girl sitting
before the dish of fruit and the wine-jar in front of them. Now Amjad at
that moment had the cup in his hand and his face turned to the door; and
when his glance met Bahadur's eyes his hue turned pale yellow and his
side-muscles quivered, so seeing his trouble Bahadur signed to him with
his finger on his lips, as much as to say, "Be silent and come hither to
me." Whereupon he set down the cup and rose and the damsel cried,
"Whither away?" He shook his head and, signing to her that he wished to
make water, went out into the passage barefoot. Now when he saw Bahadur
he knew him for the master of the house; so he hastened to him and,
kissing his hands, said to him, "Allah upon thee, O my lord, ere thou do
me a hurt, hear what I have to say." Then he told him who he was from
first to last and acquainted him with what caused him to quit his native
land and royal state, and how he had not entered his house of his free
will, but that it was the girl who had broken the lock-bolt and done all
this.[390] When Bahadur heard his story and knew that he was a King's
son, he felt for him and, taking compassion on him, said, "Hearken to
me, O Amjad, and do what I bid thee and I will guarantee thy safety from
that thou fearest; but, if thou cross me, I will kill thee." Amjad
replied, "Command me as thou wilt: I will not gainsay thee in aught; no,
never, for I am the freedman of thy bounty." Rejoined Bahadur, "Then go
back forthwith into the saloon, sit down in thy place and be at peace
and at thine ease; I will presently come in to thee, and when thou seest
me (remember my name is Bahadur) do thou revile me and rail at me,
saying:—What made thee tarry till so late? And accept no excuse from me;
nay, so far from it, rise and beat me; and, if thou spare me, I will do
away thy life. Enter now and make merry and whatsoever thou seekest of
me at this time I will bring thee forthwith; and do thou spend this
night as thou wilt and on the morrow wend thy way. This I do in honour
of thy strangerhood, for I love the stranger and hold myself bounden to
do him devoir." So Amjad kissed his hand, and, returning to the saloon
with his face clad in its natural white and red, at once said to the
damsel, "O my mistress, thy presence hath gladdened this thine own place
and ours is indeed a blessed night." Quoth the girl, "Verily I see a
wonderful change in thee, that thou now welcomest me so cordially!" So
Amjad answered, "By Allah, O my lady, methought my servant Bahadur had
robbed me of some necklaces of jewels, worth ten thousand dinars each;
however, when I went out but now in concern for this, I sought for them
and found them in their place. I know not why the slave tarrieth so long
and needs must I punish him for it." She was satisfied with his answer,
and they sported and drank and made merry and ceased not to be so till
near sundown, when Bahadur came in to them, having changed his clothes
and girt his middle and put on shoes, such as are worn of Mamelukes. He
saluted and kissed the ground; then held his hands behind him and stood,
with his head hanging down, as one who confesseth to a fault. So Amjad
looked at him with angry eyes and asked, "Why hast thou tarried till
now, O most pestilent of slaves?" Answered Bahadur, "O my lord, I was
busy washing my clothes and knew not of thy being here; for our
appointed time was nightfall and not day-tide." But Amjad cried out at
him, saying, "Thou liest, O vilest of slaves! By Allah, I must needs
beat thee." So he rose and, throwing Bahadur prone on the ground, took a
stick and beat him gently; but the damsel sprang up and, snatching the
stick from his hand, came down upon Bahadur so lustily, that in extreme
pain the tears ran from his eyes and he ground his teeth together and
called out for succour; whilst Amjad cried out to the girl "Don't"; and
she cried out, "Let me satisfy my anger upon him!" till at last he
pulled the stick out of her hand and pushed her away. So Bahadur rose
and, wiping away his tears from his cheeks, waited upon them the while;
after which he swept the hall and lighted the lamps; but as often as he
went in and out, the lady abused him and cursed him till Amjad was wroth
with her and said, "For Almighty Allah's sake leave my Mameluke; he is
not used to this." Then they sat and ceased not eating and drinking (and
Bahadur waiting upon them) till midnight when, being weary with service
and beating, he fell asleep in the midst of the hall and snored and
snorted; whereupon the damsel, who was drunken with wine, said to Amjad,
"Arise, take the sword hanging yonder and cut me off this slave's head;
and, if thou do it not, I will be the death of thee!" "What possesseth
thee to slay my slave?" asked Amjad; and she answered, "Our joyaunce
will not be complete but by his death. If thou wilt not kill him, I will
do it myself." Quoth Amjad, "By Allah's rights to thee, do not this
thing!" Quoth she, "It must perforce be;" and, taking down the sword,
drew it and made at Badahur to kill him; but Amjad said in his mind,
"This man hath entreated us courteously and sheltered us and done us
kindness and made himself my slave: shall we requite him by slaughtering
him? This shall never be!" Then he said to the woman, "If my Mameluke
must be killed, better I should kill him than thou." So saying, he took
the sword from her and, raising his hand, smote her on the neck and made
her head fly from her body. It fell upon Bahadur who awoke and sat up
and opened his eyes, when he saw Amjad standing by him and in his hand
the sword dyed with blood, and the damsel lying dead. He enquired what
had passed, and Amjad told him all she had said, adding, "Nothing would
satisfy her but she must slay thee; and this is her reward." Then
Bahadur rose and, kissing the Prince's hand, said to him, "Would to
Heaven thou hadst spared her! but now there is nothing for it but to rid
us of her without stay or delay, before the day break." Then he girded
his loins and took the body, wrapped it in an Abá-cloak and, laying it
in a large basket of palm-leaves, he shouldered it saying, "Thou art a
stranger here and knowest no one: so sit thou in this place and await my
return till daybreak. If I come back to thee, I will assuredly do thee
great good service and use my endeavours to have news of thy brother;
but if by sunrise I return not, know that all is over with me; and peace
be on thee, and the house and all it containeth of stuffs and money are
thine." Then he fared forth from the saloon bearing the basket; and,
threading the streets, he made for the salt sea, thinking to throw it
therein: but as he drew near the shore, he turned and saw that the Chief
of Police and his officers had ranged themselves around him; and, on
recognising him, they wondered and opened the basket, wherein they found
the slain woman. So they seized him and laid him in bilboes all that
night till the morning, when they carried him and the basket, as it was,
to the King and reported the case. The King was sore enraged when he
looked upon the slain and said to Bahadur, "Woe to thee! Thou art always
so doing; thou killest folk and castest them into the sea and takest
their goods. How many murders hast thou done ere this?" Thereupon
Bahadur hung his head——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Bahadur hung down
his head groundwards before the King, who cried out at him, saying, "Woe
to thee! Who killed this girl?" He replied, "O my lord! I killed her,
and there is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great!"[391] So the King in his anger, commanded to hang
him; and the hangman went down with him by the King's commandment, and
the Chief of Police accompanied him with a crier who called upon all the
folk to witness the execution of Bahadur, the King's Master of the
Horse; and on this wise they paraded him through the main streets and
the market-streets. This is how it fared with Bahadur; but as regards
Amjad, he awaited his host's return till the day broke and the sun rose,
and when he saw that he came not, he exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and
there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! Would I knew
what is become of him?" And, as he sat musing behold, he heard the crier
proclaiming Bahadur's sentence and bidding the people to see the
spectacle of his hanging at mid-day; whereat he wept and exclaimed,
"Verily, we are Allah's and to Him we are returning! He meaneth to
sacrifice himself unjustly for my sake, when I it was who slew her. By
Allah, this shall never be!" Then he went from the saloon and, shutting
the door after him, hurriedly threaded the streets till he overtook
Bahadur, when he stood before the Chief of Police and said to him, "O my
lord, put not Bahadur to death, for he is innocent. By Allah, none
killed her but I." Now when the Captain of Police heard these words, he
took them both and, carrying them before the King, acquainted him with
what Amjad had said; whereupon he looked at the Prince and asked him,
"Didst thou kill the damsel?" He answered, "Yes" and the King said,
"Tell me why thou killedst her, and speak the truth." Replied Amjad, "O
King, it is indeed a marvellous event and a wondrous matter that hath
befallen me: were it graven with needles on the eye-corners, it would
serve as a warner to whoso would be warned!" Then he told him his whole
story and informed him of all that had befallen him and his brother,
first and last; whereat the King was much startled and surprised and
said to him, "Know that now I find thee to be excusable; but list, O
youth! Wilt thou be my Wazír?" "Hearkening and obedience," answered
Amjad; whereupon the King bestowed magnificent dresses of honour on him
and Bahadur and gave him a handsome house, with eunuchs and officers and
all things needful, appointing him stipends and allowances and bidding
him make search for his brother As'ad. So Amjad sat down in the seat of
the Wazirate and governed and did justice and invested and deposed and
took and gave. Moreover, he sent out a crier to cry his brother
throughout the city, and for many days made proclamation in the main
streets and market-streets, but heard no news of As'ad nor happened on
any trace of him. Such was his case; but as regards his brother, the
Magi ceased not to torture As'ad night and day and eve and morn for a
whole year's space, till their festival drew near, when the old man
Bahram[392] made ready for the voyage and fitted out a ship for
himself.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Bahram, the
Magian, having fitted out a ship for the voyage, took As'ad and put him
in a chest which he locked and had it transported on board. Now it so
came to pass that, at the very time of shipping it, Amjad was standing
to divert himself by looking upon the sea; and when he saw the men
carrying the gear and shipping it, his heart throbbed and he called to
his pages to bring him his beast. Then, mounting with a company of his
officers, he rode down to the sea-side and halted before the Magian's
ship, which he commanded his men to board and search. They did his
bidding, and boarded the vessel and rummaged in every part, but found
nothing; so they returned and told Amjad, who mounted again and rode
back. But he felt troubled in mind; and when he reached his place and
entered his palace, he cast his eyes on the wall and saw written thereon
two lines which were these couplets:——

 "My friends! if ye are banisht from mine eyes, ✿ From heart and mind ye
    ne'er go wandering:
 But ye have left me in my woe, and rob ✿ Rest from my eyelids while ye
    are slumbering."

And seeing them Amjad thought of his brother and wept. Such was his
case; but as for Bahram, the Magian, he embarked and shouted and bawled
to his crew to make sail in all haste. So they shook out the sails and
departed and ceased not to fare on many days and nights; and, every
other day, Bahram took out As'ad and gave him a bit of bread and made
him drink a sup of water, till they drew near the Mountain of Fire. Then
there came out on them a storm-wind and the sea rose against them, so
that the ship was driven out of her course till she took a wrong line
and fell into strange waters; and, at last they came in sight of a city
builded upon the shore, with a castle whose windows overlooked the main.
Now the ruler of this city was a Queen called Marjánah, and the captain
said to Bahram, "O my lord, we have strayed from our course and come to
the island of Queen Marjanah, who is a devout Moslemah; and, if she know
that we are Magians, she will take our ship and slay us to the last man.
Yet needs must we put in here to rest and refit." Quoth Bahram, "Right
is thy recking, and whatso thou seest fit that will I do!" Said the
ship-master, "If the Queen summon us and question us, how shall we
answer her?"; and Bahram replied, "Let us clothe this Moslem we have
with us in a Mameluke's habit and carry him ashore with us, so that when
the Queen sees him, she will suppose and say, This is a slave. As for me
I will tell her that I am a slave-dealer[393] who buys and sells white
slaves, and that I had with me many but have sold all save this one,
whom I retained to keep my accounts, for he can read and write." And the
captain said, "This device should serve." Presently they reached the
city and slackened sail and cast the anchors; and the ship lay still,
when behold, Queen Marjanah came down to them, attended by her guards
and, halting before the vessel, called out to the captain, who landed
and kissed the ground before her. Quoth she, "What is the lading of this
thy ship and whom hast thou with thee?" Quoth he, "O Queen of the Age, I
have with me a merchant who dealeth in slaves." And she said, "Hither
with him to me"; whereupon Bahram came ashore to her, with As'ad walking
behind him in a slave's habit, and kissed the earth before her. She
asked, "What is thy condition?"; and he answered, "I am a dealer in
chattels." Then she looked at As'ad and, taking him for a Mameluke,
asked him, "What is thy name, O youth?" He answered, "Dost thou ask my
present or my former name?" "Hast thou then two names?" enquired she,
and he replied (and indeed his voice was choked with tears), "Yes; my
name aforetime was Al-As'ad, the most happy, but now it is
Al-Mu'tarr—Miserrimus." Her heart inclined to him and she said, "Canst
thou write?" "Yes," answered he, and she gave him ink-case and reed-pen
and paper and said to him, "Write somewhat that I may see it." So he
wrote these two couplets:—

 What can the slave do when pursued by Fate, ✿ O justest Judge! whatever
    be his state?[394]
 Whom God throws hand-bound in the depths and says, ✿ Beware lest water
    should thy body wet?[395]

[Illustration:

  A. Lalauze Pinæ et Sc.
]

Now when she read these lines, she had ruth upon him and said to Bahram,
"Sell me this slave." He replied, "O my lady, I cannot sell him, for I
have parted with all the rest and none is left with me but he." Quoth
the Queen, "I must need have him of thee, either by sale or way of
gift." But quoth Bahram, "I will neither sell him nor give him." Whereat
she was wroth and, taking As'ad by the hand, carried him up to the
castle and sent to Bahram, saying, "Except thou set sail and depart our
city this very night, I will seize all thy goods and break up thy ship."
Now when the message reached the Magian, he grieved with sore grief and
cried, "Verily this voyage is on no wise to be commended." Then he arose
and made ready and took all he needed and awaited the coming of the
night to resume his voyage, saying to the sailors, "Provide yourselves
with your things and fill your water-skins, that we may set sail at the
last of the night." So the sailors did their business and awaited the
coming of darkness. Such was their case; but as regards Queen Marjanah,
when she had brought As'ad into the castle, she opened the casements
overlooking the sea and bade her handmaids bring food. They set food
before As'ad and herself and both ate, after which the Queen called for
wine——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Queen
Marjanah bade her handmaids bring wine and they set it before her, she
fell to drinking with As'ad. Now, Allah (be He extolled and exalted!)
filled her heart with love for the Prince and she kept filling his cup
and handing it to him till his reason fled; and presently he rose and
left the hall to satisfy a call of nature. As he passed out of the
saloon he saw an open door through which he went and walked on till his
walk brought him to a vast garden full of all manner fruits and flowers;
and, sitting down under a tree, he did his occasion. Then he rose and
went up to a jetting fountain in the garden and made the lesser ablution
and washed his hands and face, after which he would have risen to go
away; but the air smote him and he fell back, with his clothes undone
and slept, and night overcame him thus. So far concerning him; but as
concerns Bahram, the night being come, he cried out to his crew, saying,
"Set sail and let us away!"; and they answered, "We hear and obey, but
wait till we fill our water-skins and then we will set sail." So they
landed with their water-skins and went round about the castle, and found
nothing but garden-walls: whereupon they climbed over into the garden
and followed the track of feet, which led them to the fountain; and
there they found As'ad lying on his back. They knew him and were glad to
find him; and, after filling their water-skins, they bore him off and
climbed the wall again with him and carried him back in haste to Bahram
to whom they said, "Hear the good tidings of thy winning thy wish; and
gladden thy heart and beat thy drums and sound thy pipes; for thy
prisoner, whom Queen Marjanah took from thee by force, we have found and
brought back to thee"; and they threw As'ad down before him. When Bahram
saw him, his heart leapt for joy and his breast swelled with gladness.
Then he bestowed largesse on the sailors and bade them set sail in
haste. So they sailed forthright, intending to make the Mountain of Fire
and stayed not their course till the morning. This is how it fared with
them; but as regards Queen Marjanah, she abode awhile, after As'ad went
down from her, awaiting his return in vain for he came not; thereupon
she rose and sought him, yet found no trace of him. Then she bade her
women light flambeaux and look for him, whilst she went forth in person
and, seeing the garden-door open, knew that he had gone thither. So she
went out into the garden and finding his sandals lying by the fountain,
searched the place in every part, but came upon no sign of him; and yet
she gave not over the search till morning. Then she enquired for the
ship and they told her, "The vessel set sail in the first watch of the
night"; wherefor she knew that they had taken As'ad with them, and this
was grievous to her and she was sore angered. She bade equip ten great
ships forthwith and, making ready for fight, embarked in one of the ten
with her Mamelukes and slave-women and men-at-arms, all splendidly
accoutred and weaponed for war. They spread the sails and she said to
the captains, "If you overtake the Magian's ship, ye shall have of me
dresses of honour and largesse of money; but if you fail so to do, I
will slay you to the last man." Whereat fear and great hope animated the
crews and they sailed all that day and the night and the second day and
the third day till, on the fourth they sighted the ship of Bahram, the
Magian, and before evening fell the Queen's squadron had surrounded it
on all sides, just as Bahram had taken As'ad forth of the chest and was
beating and torturing him, whilst the Prince cried out for help and
deliverance, but found neither helper nor deliverer: and the grievous
bastinado sorely tormented him. Now while so occupied, Bahram chanced to
look up and, seeing himself encompassed by the Queen's ships, as the
white of the eye encompasseth the black, he gave himself up for lost and
groaned and said, "Woe to thee, O As'ad! This is all out of thy head."
Then taking him by the hand he bade his men throw him overboard and
cried, "By Allah I will slay thee before I die myself!" So they carried
him along by the hands and feet and cast him into the sea and he sank;
but Allah (be He extolled and exalted!) willed that his life be saved
and that his doom be deferred; so He caused him to sink and rise again
and he struck out with his hands and feet, till the Almighty gave him
relief, and sent him deliverance; and the waves bore him far from the
Magian's ship and threw him ashore. He landed, scarce crediting his
escape, and once more on land he doffed his clothes and wrung them and
spread them out to dry; whilst he sat naked and weeping over his
condition, and bewailing his calamities and mortal dangers, and
captivity and strangerhood. And presently he repeated these two
couplets:—

 Allah, my patience fails: I have no ward; ✿ My breast is straitened and
    clean cut my cord;
 To whom shall wretched slave of case complain, ✿ Save to his Lord? O
    thou of lords the Lord!

Then, having ended his verse, he rose and donned his clothes but he knew
not whither to go or whence to come; so he fed on the herbs of the earth
and the fruits of the trees and he drank of the streams, and fared on
night and day till he came in sight of a city; whereupon he rejoiced and
hastened his pace; but when he reached it——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when he reached
the city the shades of evening closed around him and the gates were
shut. Now by the decrees of Fate and man's lot this was the very city
wherein he had been a prisoner and to whose King his brother Amjad was
Minister. When As'ad saw the gate was locked, he turned back and made
for the burial-ground, where finding a tomb without a door, he entered
therein and lay down and fell asleep, with his face covered by his long
sleeve.[396] Meanwhile, Queen Marjanah, coming up with Bahram's ship,
questioned him of As'ad. Now the Magian, when Queen Marjanah overtook
him with her ships, baffled her by his artifice and gramarye; swearing
to her that he was not with him and that he knew nothing of him. She
searched the ship, but found no trace of her friend, so she took Bahram
and, carrying him back to her castle, would have put him to death, but
he ransomed himself from her with all his good and his ship; and she
released him and his men. They went forth from her hardly believing in
their deliverance, and fared on ten days' journey till they came to
their own city and found the gate shut, it being eventide. So they made
for the burial-ground, thinking to lie the night there and, going round
about the tombs, as Fate and Fortune would have it, saw the building
wherein As'ad lay wide open; whereat Bahram marvelled and said, "I must
look into this sepulchre." Then he entered and found As'ad lying in a
corner fast asleep, with his head covered by his sleeve; so he raised
his head, and looking in his face, knew him for the man on whose account
he had lost his goods and his ship, and cried, "What! art thou yet
alive?" Then he bound him and gagged him without further parley, and
carried him to his house, where he clapped heavy shackles on his feet
and lowered him into the underground dungeon aforesaid prepared for the
tormenting of Moslems, and he bade his daughter by name Bostán,[397]
torture him night and day, till the next year, when they would again
visit the Mountain of Fire and there offer him up as a sacrifice. Then
he beat him grievously and locking the dungeon door upon him, gave the
keys to his daughter. By and by, Bostan opened the door and went down to
beat him, but finding him a comely youth and a sweet-faced with arched
brows and eyes black with nature's Kohl,[398] she fell in love with him
and asked him, "What is thy name?" "My name is As'ad," answered he;
whereat she cried, "Mayst thou indeed be happy as thy name,[399] and
happy be thy days! Thou deservest not torture and blows, and I see thou
hast been injuriously entreated." And she comforted him with kind words
and loosed his bonds. Then she questioned him of the religion of
Al-Islam and he told her that it was the true and right Faith and that
our lord Mohammed had approved himself by surpassing miracles[400] and
signs manifest, and that fire-worship is harmful and not profitable; and
he went on to expound to her the tenets of Al-Islam till she was
persuaded and the love of the True Faith entered her heart. Then, as
Almighty Allah had mixed up with her being a fond affection for As'ad,
she pronounced the Two Testimonies[401] of the Faith and became of the
people of felicity. After this, she brought him meat and drink and
talked with him and they prayed together: moreover, she made him chicken
stews and fed him therewith, till he regained strength and his sickness
left him and he was restored to his former health. Such things befel him
with the daughter of Bahram, the Magian; and so it happened that one day
she left him and stood at the house-door when behold, she heard the
crier crying aloud and saying, "Whoso hath with him a handsome young
man, whose favour is thus and thus, and bringeth him forth, shall have
all he seeketh of money; but if any have him and deny it, he shall be
hanged over his own door and his property shall be plundered and his
blood go for naught." Now As'ad had acquainted Bostan bint Bahram with
his whole history: so, when she heard the crier, she knew that it was he
who was sought for and, going down to him, told him the news. Then he
fared forth and made for the mansion of the Wazir, whom, when As'ad saw,
he exclaimed, "By Allah, this Minister is my brother Amjad!" Then he
went up (and the damsel walking behind him) to the Palace, where he
again saw his brother, and threw himself upon him; whereupon Amjad also
knew him and fell upon his neck and they embraced each other, whilst the
Wazir's Mamelukes dismounted and stood round them. They lay awhile
insensible and, when they came to themselves, Amjad took his brother and
carried him to the Sultan, to whom he related the whole story, and the
Sultan charged him to plunder Bahram's house.——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Two Hundred and Thirty-Seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Sultan ordered
Amjad to plunder Bahram's house and to hang its owner. So Amjad
despatched thither for that purpose a company of men, who sacked the
house and took Bahram and brought his daughter to the Wazir by whom she
was received with all honour, for As'ad had told his brother the
torments he had suffered and the kindness she had done him. Thereupon
Amjad related in his turn to As'ad all that had passed between himself
and the damsel; and how he had escaped hanging and had become Wazir; and
they made moan, each to other, of the anguish they had suffered for
separation. Then the Sultan summoned Bahram and bade strike off his
head; but he said, "O most mighty King, art thou indeed resolved to put
me to death?" Replied the King, "Yes, except thou save thyself by
becoming a Moslem." Quoth Bahram, "O King, bear with me a little while!"
Then he bowed his head groundwards and presently raising it again, made
profession of The Faith and islamised at the hands of the Sultan. They
all rejoiced at his conversion and Amjad and As'ad told him all that had
befallen them, whereat he wondered and said, "O my lords, make ready for
the journey and I will depart with you and carry you back to your
father's court in a ship." At this they rejoiced and wept with sore
weeping; but he said, "O my lords, weep not for your departure, for it
shall reunite you with those you love, even as were Ni'amah and Naomi."
"And what befel Ni'amah and Naomi?" asked they. "They tell," replied
Bahram, (but Allah alone is All-knowing) the following tale of

-----

Footnote 220:

  Lane is in error (vol. ii. 78) when he corrects this to "Sháh Zemán";
  the name is fanciful and intended to be old Persian, on the "weight"
  of Kahramán. The Bul. Edit. has by misprint "Shahramán."

Footnote 221:

  The "topothesia" is worthy of Shakespeare's day. "Khálidán" is
  evidently a corruption of "Khálidatáni" (for Khálidát), the Eternal,
  as Ibn Wardi calls the Fortunate Islands, or Canaries, which owe both
  their modern names to the classics of Europe. Their present history
  dates from A.D. 1385, unless we accept the Dieppe-Rouen legend of
  Labat which would place the discovery in A.D. 1326. I for one
  thoroughly believe in the priority, on the West African Coast, of the
  gallant descendants of the Northmen.

Footnote 222:

  Four wives are allowed by Moslem law and for this reason. If you marry
  one wife she holds herself your equal, answers you and "gives herself
  airs"; two are always quarrelling and making a hell of the house;
  three are "no company" and two of them always combine against the
  nicest to make her hours bitter. Four _are_ company; they can quarrel
  and "make it up" amongst themselves, and the husband enjoys
  comparative peace. But the Moslem is bound by his law to deal equally
  with the four; each must have her dresses, her establishment and her
  night, like her sister wives. The number is taken from the Jews (Arbah
  Turim Ev. Hazaer, i.) "the wise men have given good advice that a man
  should not marry more than four wives." Europeans, knowing that Moslem
  women are cloistered and appear veiled in public, begin with believing
  them to be mere articles of luxury; and only after long residence they
  find out that nowhere has the sex so much real liberty and power as in
  the Moslem East. They can possess property and will it away without
  the husband's leave: they can absent themselves from the house for a
  month without his having a right to complain; and they assist in all
  his counsels for the best of reasons: a man can rely only on his wives
  and children, being surrounded by rivals who hope to rise by his ruin.
  As regards political matters the Circassian women of Constantinople
  really rule the Sultanate and there _soignez la femme!_ is the first
  lesson of getting on in the official world.

Footnote 223:

  This two-bow prayer is common on the bride-night; and at all times
  when issue is desired.

Footnote 224:

  The older Camaralzaman = "Moon of the age." Kamar is the moon between
  her third and twenty-sixth day: Hilál during the rest of the month:
  Badr (plur. Budúr, whence the name of the Princess) is the full moon.

Footnote 225:

  Arab. "Ra'áyá" plur. of "Ra'íyat" our Anglo-Indian Ryot, lit. a liege,
  a subject; secondarily a peasant, a Fellah.

Footnote 226:

  Another audacious parody of the Moslem "testification" to the one God,
  and to Mohammed the Apostle.

Footnote 227:

  Showing how long ago forts were armed with metal plates which we have
  applied to war-ships only of late years.

Footnote 228:

  The comparison is abominably true—in the East.

Footnote 229:

  Two fallen angels who taught men the art of magic. They are mentioned
  in the Koran (chapt. ii.); and the commentators have extensively
  embroidered the simple text. Popularly they are supposed to be hanging
  by their feet in a well in the territory of Babel hence the frequent
  allusions to "Babylonian sorcery" in Moslem writings; and those who
  would study the black art at head-quarters are supposed to go there.
  They are counterparts of the Egyptian Jamnes and Mambres, the Jannes
  and Jambres of St. Paul (2 Tim. iii. 8).

Footnote 230:

  An idol or idols of the Arabs (Allat and Ozza) before Mohammed (Koran
  chapt. ii. 256). Etymologically the word means "error" and the
  termination is rather Hebraic than Arabic.

Footnote 231:

  Arab. "Khayt hamayán" (wandering threads of vanity), or Mukhát
  al-Shaytan (Satan's snivel), = our "gossamer" = God's summer
  (Mutter-Gottes-Sommer) or God's cymar (P).

Footnote 232:

  These lines occur in Night xvii.; so I borrow from Torrens (p. 163) by
  way of variety.

Footnote 233:

  A posture of peculiar submission; contrasting strongly with the
  attitude afterwards assumed by Prince Charming.

Footnote 234:

  A mere term of vulgar abuse not reflecting on either parent: I have
  heard a mother call her own son, "Child of adultery."

Footnote 235:

  Arab. "Ghazá," the Artemisia (Euphorbia?) before noticed. If the word
  be a misprint for Ghadá it means a kind of Euphorbia which, with the
  Arák (wild caper-tree) and the Daum-palm (Crucifera thebiaca), is one
  of the three normal growths of the Arabian desert (Pilgrimage iii.
  22).

Footnote 236:

  Arab. "Banát al-Na'ash," usually translated daughters of the bier, the
  three stars which represent the horses in either Bear, "Charles'
  Wain," or Ursa Minor, the waggon being supposed to be a bier. "Banát"
  may be also sons, plur. of Ibn, as the word points to irrational
  objects. So Job (ix. 9 and xxxviii. 32) refers to U. Major as "Ash" or
  "Aysh" in the words, "Canst thou guide the bier with its sons?"
  (erroneously rendered "Arcturus with his sons"). In the text the lines
  are enigmatical, but apparently refer to a death-parting.

Footnote 237:

  The Chapters are: 2, 3, 36, 55, 67 and the two last ("Daybreak" cxiii.
  and "Men" cxiv.), which are called Al-Mu'izzatáni (vulgar
  Al-Mu'izzatayn), the "Two Refuge-takings or Preventives," because they
  obviate enchantment. I have translated the two latter as follows:—

  "Say:—Refuge I take with the Lord of the Daybreak ✿ from mischief of
  what He did make ✿ from mischief of moon eclipse-showing ✿ and from
  mischief of witches on cord-knots blowing ✿ and from mischief of
  envier when envying."

  "Say:—Refuge I take with the Lord of men ✿ the sovran of men ✿ the God
  of men ✿ from the Tempter, the Demon ✿ who tempteth in whisper the
  breasts of men ✿ and from Jinnis and (evil) men."

Footnote 238:

  The recitations were Náfilah, or superogatory, two short chapters only
  being required; and the taking refuge was because he slept in a ruin,
  a noted place in the East for Ghuls as in the West for ghosts.

Footnote 239:

  Lane (ii. 222) first read "Múroozee" and referred it to the Murúz
  tribe near Herat: he afterwards (iii. 748) corrected it to "Marwazee,"
  of the fabric of Marw (Margiana), the place now famed for
  "Mervousness." As a man of Rayy (Rhages) becomes Rází (_e.g._ Ibn
  Fáris al-Rází), so a man of Marw is Marázi, not Murúzi nor Márwazi.
  The "Mikna'" was a veil forming a kind of "respirator," defending from
  flies by day and from mosquitos, dews and draughts by night. Easterns
  are too sensible to sleep with bodies kept warm by bedding, and heads
  bared to catch every blast. Our grandfathers and grandmothers did well
  to wear bonnets-de-nuit, however ridiculous they may have looked.

Footnote 240:

  Iblis, meaning the Despairer, is called in the Koran (chapt. xviii.
  48) "One of the genii (Jinnis) who departed from the command of his
  Lord." Mr. Rodwell (_in loco_) notes that the Satans and Jinnis
  represent in the Koran (ii. 32, etc.) the evil-principle and finds an
  admixture of the Semitic Satans and demons with the "Genii from the
  Persian (Babylonian?) and Indian (Egyptian?) mythologies."

Footnote 241:

  Of course she could not see his eyes when they were shut; nor is this
  mere Eastern inconsequence. The writer means, "had she seen them, they
  would have showed," etc.

Footnote 242:

  The eyes are supposed to grow darker under the influence of wine and
  sexual passion.

Footnote 243:

  To keep off the evil eye.

Footnote 244:

  Like Dahnash this is a fanciful P. N., fit only for a Jinni. As a rule
  the appellatives of Moslem "genii" end in—ús (oos), as Tarnús,
  Húliyánus; the Jewish in—nas, as Jattunas; those of the Tarsá (the
  "funkers" _i.e._ Christians) in—dús, as Sidús; and the Hindus in—tús,
  as Naktús (who entered the service of the Prophet Shays, or Seth, and
  was converted to the Faith). The King of the Genii is Malik Katshán
  who inhabits Mount Kaf; and to the west of him lives his son-in-law,
  Abd al-Rahman with 33,000 domestics: these names were given by the
  Apostle Mohammed. "Baktanús" is lord of three Moslem troops of the
  wandering Jinns, which number a total of twelve bands and extend from
  Sind to Europe. The Jinns, Divs, Peris ("fairies") and other
  pre-Adamitic creatures were governed by seventy-two Sultans all known
  as Sulayman and the last I have said was Ján bin Ján. The angel Háris
  was sent from Heaven to chastise him, but in the pride of victory he
  also revolted with his followers the Jinns whilst the Peris held
  aloof. When he refused to bow down before Adam he and his chiefs were
  eternally imprisoned but the other Jinns are allowed to range over
  earth as a security for man's obedience. The text gives the three
  orders, flyers, walkers and divers.

Footnote 245:

  _i.e._ distracted (with love); the Lakab, or poetical name, of
  apparently a Spanish poet.

Footnote 246:

  Nothing is more "anti-pathetic" to Easterns than lean hips and flat
  hinder-cheeks in women and they are right in insisting upon the
  characteristic difference of the male and female figure. Our modern
  sculptors and painters, whose study of the nude is usually most
  perfunctory, have often scandalised me by the lank and greyhound-like
  fining off of the frame, which thus becomes rather simian than human.

Footnote 247:

  The small fine foot is a favourite with Easterns as well as Westerns.
  Ovid (A. A.) is not ashamed "ad teneros Oscula (not basia or suavia)
  ferre pedes." Ariosto ends the august person in

           Il breve, asciutto, e ritondetto piede,
           (The short-sized, clean-cut, roundly-moulded foot).

  And all the world over it is a sign of "blood," _i.e._ the fine
  nervous temperament.

Footnote 248:

  _i.e._ "full moons"; the French have corrupted it to "Badoure"; we to
  "Badoura," which is worse.

Footnote 249:

  As has been said a single drop of urine renders the clothes
  ceremoniously impure, hence a stone or a handful of earth must be used
  after the manner of the torche-cul. Scrupulous Moslems, when squatting
  to make water, will prod the ground before them with the point of
  stick or umbrella, so as to loosen it and prevent the spraying of the
  urine.

Footnote 250:

  It is not generally known to Christians that Satan has a wife called
  Awwá ("Hawwá" being the Moslem Eve) and, as Adam had three sons, the
  Tempter has nine, viz., Zu 'lbaysun who rules in bazars; Wassin who
  prevails in times of trouble; Awan who counsels kings; Haffan patron
  of wine-bibbers; Marrah of musicians and dancers; Masbut of
  newspreaders (and newspapers?); Dulhán who frequents places of worship
  and interferes with devotion; Dasim, lord of mansions and dinner
  tables, who prevents the Faithful saying "Bismillah" and "Inshallah,"
  as commanded in the Koran (xviii. 23), and Lakís, lord of
  Fire-worshippers (Herklots, chap. xxix. sect. 4).

Footnote 251:

  Strong perfumes, such as musk (which we Europeans dislike and
  suspect), are always insisted upon in Eastern poetry; and Mohammed's
  predilection for them is well known. Moreover the young and the
  beautiful are held (justly enough) to exhale a natural fragrance which
  is compared with that of the blessed in Paradise. Hence in the
  Mu'allakah of Imr al-Kays:—

  Breathes the scent of musk when they rise to rove, ✿ As the Zephyr's
     breath with the flavour o' clove.

  It is made evident by dogs and other fine-nosed animals that every
  human being has his, or her, peculiar scent which varies according to
  age and health. Hence animals often detect the approach of death.

Footnote 252:

  Arab. "Kahlá." This has been explained. Mohammed is said to have been
  born with "Kohl'd eyes."

Footnote 253:

  Hawá al-'uzrí, before noticed (Night cxiv.)

Footnote 254:

  These lines, with the Názir (eye or steward), the Hájib (Groom of the
  Chambers or Chamberlain) and Joseph, are also repeated from Night
  cxiv. For the Nazir see Al-Hatiri (Nos. xiii. and xxii.)

Footnote 255:

  The usual allusion to the Húr (Houris) from "Hawar," the white and
  black of the eye shining in contrast. The Persian Magi also placed in
  their Heaven (Bihisht or Minu) "Huran," or black-eyed nymphs, under
  the charge of the angel Zamiyád.

Footnote 256:

  In the first hemistich, "bi-shitt 'il wády" (by the wady-bank): in the
  second, "wa shatta 'l wády" ("and my slayer"—_i.e._ wády act. part. of
  wady, killing—"hath paced away").

Footnote 257:

  The _double entendre_ is from the proper names Budúr and Su'ád
  (Beatrice) also meaning "auspicious (or blessed) full moons."

Footnote 258:

  Arab. "Házir" (also Ahl al-hazar, townsmen) and Bádi, a Badawi, also
  called "Ahl al-Wabar," people of the camel's hair (tent) and A'aráb
  (Nomadic) as opposed to Arab (Arab settled or not). They still boast
  with Ibn Abbas, cousin of Mohammed, that they have kerchiefs (not
  turbands) for crowns, tents for houses, loops for walls, swords for
  scarves and poems for registers or written laws.

Footnote 259:

  This is a peculiarity of the Jinn tribe when wearing hideous forms. It
  is also found in the Hindu Rakshasa.

Footnote 260:

  Which, by the by, are small and beautifully shaped. The animal is very
  handy with them, as I learnt by experience when trying to "Rareyfy"
  one at Bayrut.

Footnote 261:

  She being daughter of Al-Dimiryát, King of the Jinns. Mr. W. F. Kirby
  has made him the subject of a pretty poem.

Footnote 262:

  These lines have occurred in Night xxii. I give Torrens's version (p.
  223) by way of variety.

Footnote 263:

  Arab. "Kámat Alfiyyah," like an Alif, the first of the Arabic
  alphabet, the Heb. Aleph. The Arabs, I have said, took the flag or
  water-leaf form and departed very far from the Egyptian original (we
  know from Plutarch that the hieroglyphic abecedarium began with "a"),
  which was chosen by other imitators, namely the bull's head; and which
  in the cursive form, especially the Phœnician, became a yoke. In
  numerals "Alif" denotes one or one thousand. It inherits the
  traditional honours of Alpha (as opposed to Omega), and in books,
  letters and writings generally it is placed as a monogram over the
  "Bismillah," an additional testimony to the Unity. (See vol. i. p. 1).
  In mediæval Christianity this place of honour was occupied by the
  cross: none save the wildest countries have preserved it, but our
  vocabulary still retains Criss' (Christ-)cross Row, for horn-book, on
  account of the old alphabet and nine digits disposed in the form of a
  Latin cross. Hence Tickell ("The Horn-book"):

                                 ——Mortals ne'er shall know
             More than contained of old the Chris'-cross Row.

Footnote 264:

  The young man must have been a demon of chastity.

Footnote 265:

  Arab. "Kirát" from κεράτιον, _i.e._ bean, the seed of the Abrus
  precatorius, in weight = two to three (English) grains; and in length
  = one finger-breadth here; 24 being the total. The Moslem system is
  evidently borrowed from the Roman "as" and "uncia."

Footnote 266:

  Names of women.

Footnote 267:

  Arab. "Amsa" (lit. he passed the evening) like "asbaha" (he rose in
  the morning) "Azhá" (he spent the forenoon) and "báta" (he spent the
  night), are idiomatically used for "to be in any state, to continue"
  without specification of time or season.

Footnote 268:

  Lit. "my liver;" which viscus, and not the heart, is held the seat of
  passion; a fancy dating from the oldest days. Theocritus says of
  Hercules, "In his liver Love had fixed a wound" (Idyl. xiii). In the
  Anthologia "Cease, Love, to wound my liver and my heart" (lib. vii.)
  So Horace (Odes, i. 2); his Latin Jecur and the Persian "Jigar" being
  evident congeners. The idea was long prevalent and we find in
  Shakespeare:—

                 Alas, then Love may be called appetite,
                 No motion of the liver but the palate.

Footnote 269:

  A marvellous touch of nature, love ousting affection; the same trait
  will appear in the lover and both illustrate the deep Italian saying,
  "Amor discende, non ascende." "The further it goes down the stronger
  it becomes as of grand-parent for grand-child and _vice versâ_."

Footnote 270:

  This tenet of the universal East is at once fact and unfact. As a
  generalism asserting that women's passion is ten times greater than
  man's (Pilgrimage, ii. 282), it is unfact. The world shows that while
  women have more philoprogenitiveness, men have more amativeness;
  otherwise the latter would not propose and would nurse the doll and
  baby. Fact, however, in low-lying lands, like Persian Mazanderan
  versus the Plateau; Indian Malabar compared with Marátha-land;
  California as opposed to Utah and especially Egypt contrasted with
  Arabia. In these hot-damp climates the venereal requirements and
  reproductive powers of the female greatly exceed those of the male;
  and hence the dissoluteness of morals would be phenomenal, were it not
  obviated by seclusion, the sabre and the revolver. In cold-dry or
  hot-dry mountainous lands the reverse is the case; hence polygamy
  there prevails whilst the low countries require polyandry in either
  form, legal or illegal (_i.e._ prostitution). I have discussed this
  curious point of "geographical morality" (for all morality is, like
  conscience, both geographical and chronological), a subject so
  interesting to the lawgiver, the student of ethics and the
  anthropologist, in "The City of the Saints." But strange and
  unpleasant truths progress slowly, especially in England.

Footnote 271:

  This morning evacuation is considered, in the East, a _sine quâ non_
  of health; and old Anglo-Indians are unanimous in their opinion of the
  "bari fajar" (as they mispronounce the dawn-clearance). The natives of
  India, Hindús (pagans) and Hindís (Moslems), unlike Europeans,
  accustom themselves to evacuate twice a day, evening as well as
  morning. This may, perhaps, partly account for their mildness and
  effeminacy; for:—

            C'est la constipation qui rend l'homme rigoureux.

  The English, since the first invasion of cholera, in October, 1831,
  are a different race from their costive grandparents who could not
  dine without a "dinner-pill." Curious to say the clyster is almost
  unknown to the people of Hindostan although the barbarous West
  Africans use it daily to "wash 'um belly," as the Bonney-men say. And,
  as Sonnini notes, to propose the process in Egypt under the Beys might
  have cost a Frankish medico his life.

Footnote 272:

  The Egyptian author cannot refrain from this characteristic
  _polissonnerie_; and reading it out is always followed by a roar of
  laughter. Even serious writers like Al-Hariri do not, as I have noted,
  despise the indecency.

Footnote 273:

  "Long beard and little wits," is a saying throughout the East where
  the Kausaj (= man with thin, short beard) is looked upon as cunning
  and tricksy. There is a venerable Joe Miller about a schoolmaster who,
  wishing to singe his long beard short, burnt it off and his face to
  boot:—which reminded him of the saying. A thick beard is defined as
  one which wholly conceals the skin; and in ceremonial ablution it must
  be combed out with the fingers till the water reach the roots. The
  Sunnat, or practice of the Prophet, was to wear the beard not longer
  than one hand and two fingers' breadth. In Persian "Kúseh"
  (thin-beard) is an insulting term opposed to "Khush-rísh," a
  well-bearded man. The Iranian growth is perhaps the finest in the
  world, often extending to the waist; but it gives infinite trouble,
  requiring, for instance, a bag when travelling. The Arab beard is
  often composed of two tufts on the chin-sides and straggling hairs
  upon the cheeks; and this is a severe mortification, especially to
  Shaykhs and elders, who not only look upon the beard as one of man's
  characteristics, but attach a religious importance to the appendage.
  Hence the enormity of Kamar al-Zaman's behaviour. The Persian festival
  of the vernal equinox was called Kuseh-nishín (Thin-beard sitting). An
  old man with one eye paraded the streets on an ass with a crow in one
  hand and a scourge and fan in the other, cooling himself, flogging the
  bystanders and crying heat! heat! (garmá! garmá!). For other
  particulars see Richardson (Dissertation, p. lii.). This is the
  Italian Giorno delle Vecchie, Thursday in Mid-Lent, March 12 (1885),
  celebrating the death of Winter and the birth of Spring.

Footnote 274:

  I quote Torrens (p. 400) as these lines have occurred in Night
  xxxviii.

Footnote 275:

  Moslems have only two names for week days, Friday, Al-Jum'ah or
  meeting-day, and Al-Sabt, Sabbath-day, that is Saturday. The others
  are known by numbers after Quaker fashion with us, the usage of
  Portugal and Scandinavia.

Footnote 276:

  Our last night.

Footnote 277:

  Arab. "Tayf" = phantom, the nearest approach to our "ghost," that
  queer remnant of Fetishism imbedded in Christianity; the phantasma,
  the shade (not the soul) of the dead. Hence the accurate Niebuhr
  declares, "apparitions (_i.e._, of the departed) are unknown in
  Arabia." Haunted houses are there tenanted by Ghuls, Jinns and a host
  of supernatural creatures; but not by ghosts proper; and a man may
  live years in Arabia before he ever hears of the "Tayf." With the
  Hindus it is otherwise (Pilgrimage iii. 144.) Yet the ghost, the
  embodied fear of the dead and of death is common, in a greater or less
  degree, to all peoples; and, as modern Spiritualism proves, that ghost
  is not yet laid.

Footnote 278:

  Mr. Payne (iii. 133,) omits the lines which are _à propos de rien_ and
  read much like "nonsense verses." I retain them simply because they
  are in the text.

Footnote 279:

  The first two couplets are the quatrain (or octave) in Night xxxv.

Footnote 280:

  Arab. "Ar'ar," the Heb. "Aroer," which Luther and the A. V. translate
  "heath." The modern Aramaic name is "Lizzáb" (Unexplored Syria, i.
  68).

Footnote 281:

  In the old version and the Bresl. Edit. (iii. 220) the Princess beats
  the "Kahramánah," but does not kill her.

Footnote 282:

  This is still the popular Eastern treatment of the insane.

Footnote 283:

  Pers. Marz-bán = Warden of the Marches, Margrave. The foster-brother
  in the East is held dear as, and often dearer than, kith and kin.

Footnote 284:

                                          —Quirinus
             Post mediam noctem visus, quum somnia vera.
                                     (Horace Sat. i. 10, 33.)

  The moderns believe most in the dawn-dream.

Footnote 285:

  The Bresl. Edit. (iii. 223) and Galland have "Torf:" Lane (ii. 115)
  "El-Tarf."

Footnote 286:

  Arab. "Maghzal;" a more favourite comparison is with a tooth-pick.
  Both are used by Nizami and Al-Hariri, the most "elegant" of Arab
  writers.

Footnote 287:

  These form a Kasídah, Ode or Elegy = rhymed couplets numbering more
  than thirteen: if shorter it is called a "Ghazal." I have not thought
  it necessary to preserve the monorhyme.

Footnote 288:

  Sulaymá dim. of Salmá = any beautiful woman: Rabáb = the viol mostly
  single-stringed: Tan'oum = she who is soft and gentle. These
  fictitious names are for his old flames.

Footnote 289:

  _i.e._ wine. The distich is highly fanciful and the conceits would
  hardly occur to a Western.

Footnote 290:

  Arab. "Andam," a term applied to Brazil-wood (also called "Bakkam")
  and to "dragon's blood," but not, I think, to tragacanth, the "goat's
  thorn," which does not dye. Andam is often mentioned in The Nights.

Footnote 291:

  The superior merit of the first (explorer, etc.) is a _lieu commun_
  with Arabs. So Al-Hariri in Preface quotes his predecessor:—

                   Justly of praise the price I pay;
                   The praise is his who leads the way.

Footnote 292:

  There were two Lukmans, of whom more in a future page.

Footnote 293:

  This symbolic action is repeatedly mentioned in The Nights.

Footnote 294:

  Arab. "Shakhs" = a person, primarily a dark spot. So "Sawád" =
  blackness, in Al-Hariri means a group of people who darken the ground
  by their shade.

Footnote 295:

  The first bath after sickness, I have said, is called "Ghusl
  al-Sihhah,"—the Washing of Health.

Footnote 296:

  The words "malady" and "disease" are mostly avoided during these
  dialogues as ill-omened words which may bring on a relapse.

Footnote 297:

  Solomon's carpet of green silk which carried him and all his host
  through the air is a Talmudic legend generally accepted in Al-Islam
  though not countenanced by the Koran, chapt. xxvii. When the "gnat's
  wing" is mentioned, the reference is to Nimrod who, for boasting that
  he was lord of all, was tortured during four hundred years by a gnat
  sent by Allah up his ear or nostril.

Footnote 298:

  The absolute want of morality and filial affection in the chaste young
  man are supposed to be caused by the violence of his passion, and he
  would be pardoned because he "loved much."

Footnote 299:

  I have noticed the geomantic process in my "History of Sindh" (chapt.
  vii.). It is called "Zarb al-Raml" (strike of sand, the French say
  "frapper le sable") because the rudest form is to make on the ground
  dots at haphazard, usually in four lines one above the other: these
  are counted and, if even-numbered, two are taken (* *); if odd one
  (*); and thus the four lines will form a scheme say

                                   * *
                                    *
                                    *
                                   * *

  This is repeated three times, producing the same number of figures;
  and then the combination is sought in an explanatory table or, if the
  practitioner be expert, he pronounces off-hand. The Nights speak of a
  "Takht Raml" or a board, like a schoolboy's slate, upon which the dots
  are inked instead of points in sand. The moderns use a "Kura'h," or
  oblong die, upon whose sides the dots, odd and even, are marked; and
  these dice are hand-thrown to form the figure. By way of complication
  Geomancy is mixed up with astrology and then it becomes a most
  complicated kind of ariolation and an endless study. "Napoleon's Book
  of Fate," a chap-book which appeared some years ago, was Geomancy in
  its simplest and most ignorant shape. For the rude African form see my
  Mission to Dahome, i. 332; and for that of Darfour, pp. 360-69 of
  Shaykh Mohammed's Voyage before quoted.

Footnote 300:

  Translators understand this of writing marriage contracts; I take it
  in a more general sense.

Footnote 301:

  These lines are repeated from Night lxxv.: with Mr. Payne's permission
  I give his rendering (iii. 153) by way of variety.

Footnote 302:

  The comparison is characteristically Arab.

Footnote 303:

  Not her "face": the head, and especially the back of the head, must
  always be kept covered, even before the father.

Footnote 304:

  Arab. "Siwák" = a tooth-stick; "Siwá-ka" = lit. other than thou.

Footnote 305:

  Arab. "Arák" = tooth-stick of the wild caper-tree; "Ará-ka" lit. = I
  see thee. The _capparis spinosa_ is a common desert-growth and the
  sticks about a span long (usually called Miswák), are sold in
  quantities at Meccah after being dipped in Zemzem water. In India many
  other woods are used, date-tree, Salvadora, Achyrantes, phyllanthus,
  etc. Amongst Arabs peculiar efficacy accompanies the tooth-stick of
  olive, "the tree springing from Mount Sinai" (Koran xxiii. 20); and
  Mohammed would use no other, because it prevents decay and scents the
  mouth. Hence Koran, chapt. xcv. 1. The "Miswák" is held with the
  unused end between the ring-finger and minimus, the two others grasp
  the middle and the thumb is pressed against the back close to the
  lips. These articles have long been sold at the Medical Hall near the
  "Egyptian Hall," Piccadilly. They are better than our unclean
  tooth-brushes because each tooth gets its own especial rubbing, not a
  general sweep; at the same time the operation is longer and more
  troublesome. In parts of Africa as well as Asia many men walk about
  with the tooth-stick hanging by a string from the neck.

Footnote 306:

  The "Mehari," of which the Algerine-French speak, are the dromedaries
  bred by the Mahrah tribe of Al-Yaman, the descendants of Mahrat ibn
  Haydán. They are covered by small wild camels (?) called Al-Húsh,
  found between Oman and Al-Shihr: others explain the word to mean
  "stallions of the Jinns," and term those savage and supernatural
  animals, "Najáib al-Mahriyah"—nobles of the Mahrah.

Footnote 307:

  Arab. "Khaznah" = a thousand purses; now about £5000. It denotes a
  large sum of money, like the "Badrah," a purse containing 10,000
  dirhams of silver (Al-Hariri), or 80,000 (Burckhardt Prov. 380);
  whereas the "Nisáb" is a moderate sum of money, gen. 20 gold dinars =
  200 silver dirhams.

Footnote 308:

  As The Nights show, Arabs admire slender forms; but the hips and
  hinder cheeks must be highly developed and the stomach fleshy rather
  than lean. The reasons are obvious. The Persians who exaggerate
  everything say _e.g._ (Husayn Váiz in the Anvár-i-Suhayli):—

               How paint her hips and waist? Who saw
               A mountain (Koh) dangling to a straw (káh)?

  In Antar his beloved Abla is a tamarisk (_T. Orientalis_). Others
  compare with the palm-tree (Solomon), the Cypress (Persian, esp. Hafiz
  and Firdausi) and the Arák or wild Capparis (Arab.).

Footnote 309:

  Ubi aves ibi angeli. All African travellers know that a few birds
  flying about the bush, and a few palm-trees waving in the wind, denote
  the neighbourhood of a village or a camp (where angels are scarce).
  The reason is not any friendship for man but because food, animal and
  vegetable, is more plentiful. Hence Albatrosses, Mother Carey's (Mater
  Cara, the Virgin) chickens, and Cape pigeons follow ships.

Footnote 310:

  The stanza is called Al-Mukhammas = cinquains; the quatrains and the
  "bob," or "burden," always preserve the same consonance. It ends with
  a Koranic _lieu commun_ of Moslem morality.

Footnote 311:

  Moslem port towns usually have (or had) only two gates. Such was the
  case with Bayrut, Tyre, Sidon and a host of others; the
  faubourg-growth of modern days has made these obselete. The portals
  much resemble the entrances of old Norman castles—Arques for instance.
  Pilgrimage, i. 185.

Footnote 312:

  Arab. "Lisám"; before explained.

Footnote 313:

  _i.e._ Life of Souls (persons, etc.).

Footnote 314:

  Arab. "Insánu-há" = her (_i.e._ their) man: _i.e._ the babes of the
  eyes: the Assyrian Ishon, dim. of Ish = Man; which the Hebrews call
  "Bábat" or "Bit" (the daughter); the Arabs "Bubu (or Hadakat) al-Ayn";
  the Persians "Mardumak-i-chashm" (mannikin of the eye); the Greeks
  κόρη and the Latins pupa, pupula, pupilla. I have noted this in the
  Lyricks of Camoens (p. 449).

Footnote 315:

  Ma'an bin Zá'idah, a soldier and statesman of the eighth century.

Footnote 316:

  The mildness of the Caliph Mu'áwiyah, the founder of the Ommiades,
  proverbial among the Arabs, much resembles the "meekness" of Moses the
  Lawgiver, which commentators seem to think has been foisted into
  Numbers xii. 3.

Footnote 317:

  Showing that there had been no consummation of the marriage which
  would have demanded "Ghusl", or total ablution, at home or in the
  Hammam.

Footnote 318:

  have noticed this notable desert-growth.

Footnote 319:

  The "situation" is admirable, solution appearing so difficult and
  catastrophe imminent.

Footnote 320:

  This quatrain occurs in Night ix.: I have borrowed from Torrens (p.
  79) by way of variety.

Footnote 321:

  The belief that young pigeon's blood resembles the virginal discharge
  is universal; but the blood most resembling man's is that of the pig
  which in other points is so very human. In our day Arabs and Hindus
  rarely submit to inspection the nuptial sheet as practised by the
  Israelites and Persians. The bride takes to bed a white kerchief with
  which she staunches the blood and next morning the stains are
  displayed in the Harem. In Darfour this is done by the bridegroom.
  "Prima Venus debet esse cruenta," say the Easterns with much truth,
  and they have no faith in our complaisant creed which allows the
  hymen-membrane to disappear by any but one accident.

Footnote 322:

  Not meaning the two central divisions commanded by the King and his
  Wazir.

Footnote 323:

  _Ironicè._

Footnote 324:

  Arab. "Rasy" = praising in a funeral sermon.

Footnote 325:

  Arab. "Manáyá," plur. of Maniyat = death. Mr. R. S. Poole (the
  Academy, April 26, 1879) reproaches Mr. Payne for confounding
  "Muniyat" (desire) with "Maniyat" (death); but both are written the
  same except when vowel-points are used.

Footnote 326:

  Arab. "Iddat," alluding to the months of celibacy which, according to
  Moslem law, must be passed by a divorced woman before she can
  re-marry.

Footnote 327:

  Arab. "Talák bi'l-Salásah" = a triple divorce which cannot be revoked;
  nor can the divorcer re-marry the same woman till after consummation
  with another husband. This subject will continually recur.

Footnote 328:

  An allusion to a custom of the pagan Arabs in the days of ignorant
  Heathenism. The blood or brain, soul or personality of the murdered
  man formed a bird called Sady or Hámah (not the Humá or Humái, usually
  translated "phœnix") which sprang from the head, where four of the
  five senses have their seat, and haunted his tomb, crying continually,
  "Uskúni!" = Give me drink (of the slayer's blood)! and which
  disappeared only when the vendetta was accomplished. Mohammed forbade
  the belief. Amongst the Southern Slavs the cuckoo is supposed to be
  the sister of a murdered man ever calling for vengeance.

Footnote 329:

  To obtain a blessing and show how he valued it.

Footnote 330:

  Well-known tribes of proto-historic Arabs who flourished before the
  time of Abraham: see Koran (chapt. xxvi. _et passim_). They will be
  repeatedly mentioned in The Nights and notes.

Footnote 331:

  Arab. "Amtár"; plur. of "Matr," a large vessel of leather or wood for
  water, etc.

Footnote 332:

  Arab. "Asáfírí," so called because they attract sparrows (asáfír) a
  bird very fond of the ripe oily fruit. In the Romance of "Antar"
  Asáfír camels are beasts that fly like birds in fleetness. The reader
  must not confound the olives of the text with the hard unripe berries
  ("little plums pickled in stale") which appear at English tables; nor
  wonder that bread and olives are the beef-steak and potatoes of many
  Mediterranean peoples. It is an excellent diet, the highly oleaginous
  fruit supplying the necessary carbon.

Footnote 333:

  Arab. "Tamar al-Hindi" = the "Indian-date," whence our word
  "Tamarind." A sherbet of the pods, being slightly laxative, is much
  drunk during the great heats; and the dried fruit, made into small
  round cakes, is sold in the bazars. The traveller is advised not to
  sleep under the tamarind's shade, which is infamous for causing ague
  and fever. In Sind I derided the "native nonsense," passed the night
  under an "Indian date-tree" and awoke with a fine specimen of ague
  which lasted me a week.

Footnote 334:

  Moslems are not agreed upon the length of the Day of Doom when all
  created things, marshalled by the angels, await final judgement; the
  different periods named are 40 years, 70, 300 and 50,000. Yet the
  trial itself will last no longer than while one may milk an ewe, or
  than "the space between two milkings of a she-camel." This is bringing
  down Heaven to Earth with a witness; but, after all, the Heaven of all
  faiths, including "Spiritualism," the latest development, is only an
  earth more or less glorified even as the Deity is humanity more or
  less perfected.

Footnote 335:

  Arab. "Al-Kamaráni," lit. "the two moons." Arab rhetoric prefers it to
  "Shamsáni," or "two suns," because lighter (akhaff), to pronounce. So,
  albeit Omar was less worthy than Abu-Bakr the two are called
  "Al-Omaráni," in vulgar parlance, Omarayn.

Footnote 336:

  Alluding to the angels who appeared to the Sodomites in the shape of
  beautiful youths (Koran xi).

Footnote 337:

  Koran xxxiii. 38.

Footnote 338:

  "Niktu-hu taklídan" _i.e._ not the real thing (with a woman). It may
  also mean "by his incitement of me." All this scene is written in the
  worst form of Persian-Egyptian blackguardism, and forms a curious
  anthropological study. The "black joke" of the true and modest wife is
  inimitable.

Footnote 339:

  Arab. "Jamíz" (in Egypt "Jammayz") = the fruit of the true sycomore
  (F. Sycomorus) a magnificent tree which produces a small tasteless
  fig, eaten by the poorer classes in Egypt and by monkeys. The "Tín" or
  real fig here is the woman's parts; the "mulberry-fig," the anus.
  Martial (i. 65) makes the following distinction:—

               Dicemus ficus, quas scimus in arbore nasci,
               Dicemus ficos, Cæciliane, tuos.

  And Modern Italian preserves a difference between _fico_ and _fica_.

Footnote 340:

  Arab. "Ghániyat Azárá" (plur. of Azrá = virgin): the former is
  properly a woman who despises ornaments and relies on "beauty
  unadorned" (_i.e._ in bed).

Footnote 341:

  "Nihil usitatius apud monachos, cardinales, sacrificulos," says
  _Johannes de la Casa Beneventius_ Episcopus, quoted by Burton Anat. of
  Mel. lib. iii. Sect. 2; and the famous epitaph on the Jesuit,

                 Ci-gît un Jesuite:
                 Passant, serre les fesses et passe vite!

Footnote 342:

  Arab. "Kiblah" = the fronting-place of prayer, Meccah for Moslems,
  Jerusalem for Jews and early Christians. See Pilgrimage (ii. 321) for
  the Moslem change from Jerusalem to Meccah and ibid. ii. 213 for the
  way in which the direction was shown.

Footnote 343:

  The Koran says (chapt. ii.): "Your wives are your tillage: go in
  therefore unto your tillage in what manner so ever ye will." Usually
  this is understood as meaning in any posture, standing or sitting,
  lying, backwards or forwards. Yet there is a popular saying about the
  man whom the woman rides (vulg. St. George, in France, le Postillon);
  "Cursed he who maketh woman Heaven and himself earth!" Some hold the
  Koranic passage to have been revealed in confutation of the Jews, who
  pretended that if a man lay with his wife backwards, he would beget a
  cleverer child. Others again understand it of preposterous venery,
  which is absurd: every ancient lawgiver framed his code to increase
  the true wealth of the people—population—and severely punished all
  processes, like onanism, which impeded it. The Persians utilise the
  hatred of women for such misuse when they would force a wife to demand
  a divorce and thus forfeit her claim to Mahr (dowry); they convert
  them into catamites till, after a month or so, they lose all patience
  and leave the house.

Footnote 344:

  Koran li. 9: "He will be turned aside from the Faith (or Truth) who
  shall be turned aside by the Divine decree;" alluding, in the text, to
  the preposterous venery her lover demands.

Footnote 345:

  Arab. "Futúh" meaning openings, and also victories, benefits. The
  lover congratulates her on her mortifying self in order to please him.

Footnote 346:

  "And the righteous work will be exalt": (Koran xxxv. 11) applied
  ironically.

Footnote 347:

  A prolepsis of Tommy Moore:—

              Your mother says, my little Venus,
              There's something not quite right between us,
                  And you're in fault as much as I,
              Now, on my soul, my little Venus,
              I swear 'twould not be right between us,
                  To let your mother tell a lie.

  But the Arab is more moral than Mr. Little, as he proposes to repent.

Footnote 348:

  Arab. "Khunsa" flexible or flaccid, from Khans = bending inwards,
  _i.e._ the mouth of a water-skin before drinking. Like Mukhannas, it
  is also used for an effeminate man, a passive sodomite and even for a
  eunuch. Easterns still believe in what Westerns know to be an
  impossibility, human beings with the parts and proportions of both
  sexes equally developed and capable of reproduction; and Al-Islam even
  provides special rules for them (Pilgrimage iii. 237). We hold them to
  be Buffon's fourth class of (duplicate) monsters, belonging
  essentially to one or the other sex, and related to its opposite only
  by some few characteristics. The old Greeks dreamed, after their
  fashion, a beautiful poetic dream of a human animal uniting the
  contradictory beauties of man and woman. The duality of the generative
  organs seems an old Egyptian tradition; at least we find it in Genesis
  (i. 27), where the image of the Deity is created male and female,
  before man was formed out of the dust of the ground (ii. 7). The old
  tradition found its way to India (if the Hindus did not borrow the
  idea from the Greeks); and one of the forms of Mahadeva, the third
  person of their triad, is entitled "Ardhanárí" = the Half-woman, which
  has suggested to them some charming pictures. Europeans, seeing the
  left breast conspicuously feminine, have indulged in silly surmises
  about the "Amazons."

Footnote 349:

  This is a mere phrase for our "dying of laughter": the queen _was_ on
  her back. And as Easterns sit on carpets, their falling back is very
  different from the same movement off a chair.

Footnote 350:

  Arab. "Ismid," the eye-powder before noticed.

Footnote 351:

  When the Caliph (_e.g._ Al-Tá'i li'llah) bound a banner to a spear and
  handed it to an officer, he thereby appointed him Sultan or
  Viceregent.

Footnote 352:

  Arab. "Sháib al-ingház" = lit. a gray beard who shakes head in
  disapproval.

Footnote 353:

  Arab. "Ayát" = the Hebr. "Ototh," signs, wonders or Koranic verses.

Footnote 354:

  The Chapter "Al-Ikhlás" _i.e._ clearing (oneself from any faith but
  that of Unity) is No. cxii. and runs thus:—

                    Say, He is the One God!
                    The sempiternal God,
                    He begetteth not, nor is He begot,
                    And unto Him the like is not.

  It is held to be equal in value to one-third of the Koran, and is
  daily used in prayer. Mr. Rodwell makes it the tenth.

Footnote 355:

  The Lady Budur shows her noble blood by not objecting to her friend
  becoming her Zarrat (sister-wife). This word is popularly derived from
  "Zarar" = injury; and is vulgarly pronounced in Egypt "Durrah"
  sounding like Durrah = a parrot (see Burckhardt's mistake in Prov.
  314). The native proverb says, "Ayshat al-durrah murrah," the
  sister-wife hath a bitter life. We have no English equivalent; so I
  translate indifferently co-wife, co-consort, sister-wife or sister in
  wedlock.

Footnote 356:

  Lane preserves the article "El-Amjad" and "El-As'ad;" which is as
  necessary as to say "the John" or "the James," because neo-Latins have
  "il Giovanni" or "il Giacomo." In this matter of the article, however,
  it is impossible to lay down a universal rule: in some cases it must
  be preserved and only practise in the language can teach its use. For
  instance, it is always present in Al-Bahrayn and al-Yaman; but not
  necessarily so with Irak and Najd.

Footnote 357:

  It is hard to say why this ugly episode was introduced. It is a mere
  false note in a tune pretty enough.

Footnote 358:

  The significance of this action will presently appear.

Footnote 359:

  An "Hadís."

Footnote 360:

  Arab. "Sabb" = using the lowest language of abuse, chiefly concerning
  women-relatives and their reproductive parts.

Footnote 361:

  The reader will note in the narration concerning the two Queens the
  parallelism of the Arab's style which recalls that of the Hebrew
  poets. Strings of black silk are plaited into the long locks (an
  "idiot-fringe" being worn over the brow) because a woman is cursed
  "who joineth her own hair to the hair of another" (especially human
  hair). Sending the bands is a sign of affectionate submission; and, in
  extremest cases the hair itself is sent.

Footnote 362:

  _i.e._, suffer similar pain at the spectacle, a phrase often
  occurring.

Footnote 363:

  _i.e._, when the eye sees not, the heart grieves not.

Footnote 364:

  _i.e._, unto Him we shall return, a sentence recurring in almost every
  longer chapter of the Koran.

Footnote 365:

  Arab. "Kun," the creative Word (which, by the by, proves the Koran to
  be an uncreated Logos); the full sentence being "Kun fa kána" = Be!
  and it became. The origin is evidently, "And God said, Let there be
  light: and there was light." (Gen. i. 3); a line grand in its
  simplicity and evidently borrowed from the Egyptians; even as Yahveh
  (Jehovah) from "Ankh" = He who lives (Brugsch Hist. ii. 34).

Footnote 366:

  _i.e._ but also for the life and the so-called "soul."

Footnote 367:

  Arab. "Layáli" = lit. nights which, I have said, is often applied to
  the whole twenty-four hours. Here it is used in the sense of "fortune"
  or "fate;" like "days" and "days and nights."

Footnote 368:

  Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr a nephew of Ayishah, who had rebuilt the
  Ka'abah in A.H. 64 (A.D. 683), revolted (A.D. 680) against Yezid and
  was proclaimed Caliph at Meccah. He was afterwards killed (A.D. 692)
  by the famous or infamous Hajjáj general of Abd al-Malik bin Marwan,
  the fifth Ommiade, surnamed "Sweat of a stone" (skin-flint) and
  "Father of Flies," from his foul breath. See my Pilgrimage, etc. iii.,
  192-194, where are explained the allusions to the Ka'abah and the holy
  Black Stone.

Footnote 369:

  These lines are part of an elegy on the downfall of one of the Moslem
  dynasties in Spain, composed in the twelfth century by Ibn Abdun
  al-Andalúsi. The allusion is to the famous conspiracy of the
  Khárijites (the first sectarians in Mohammedanism) to kill Ali,
  Mu'awiyah and Amru (so written but pronounced "Amr") al-As, in order
  to abate intestine feuds in Al-Islam. Ali was slain with a sword-cut
  by Ibn Muljam a name ever damnable amongst the Persians; Mu'awiyah
  escaped with a wound and Kharijah, the Chief of Police at Fustat or
  old Cairo was murdered by mistake for Amru. After this the sectarian
  wars began.

Footnote 370:

  Arab. "Saráb" = (Koran, chapt. xxiv.) the reek of the Desert, before
  explained. It is called "Lama," the shine, the loom, in Al-Hariri. The
  world is compared with the mirage, the painted eye and the sword that
  breaks in the sworder's hand.

Footnote 371:

  Arab. "Dunyá," with the common alliteration "dániyah" (= Pers. "dún"),
  in prose as well as poetry means the things or fortune of this life
  opp. to "Akhirah" = future life.

Footnote 372:

  Arab. "Walgh," a strong expression primarily denoting the lapping of
  dogs; here and elsewhere "to swill, _saufen_."

Footnote 373:

  The lines are repeated from Night ccxxi. I give Lane's version (ii.
  162) by way of contrast and—warning.

Footnote 374:

  "Sáhirah" is the place where human souls will be gathered on Doom-day:
  some understand by it the Hell Sa'ír (No. iv.) intended for the
  Sabians or the Devils generally.

Footnote 375:

  His eyes are faded like Jacob's which, after weeping for Joseph,
  "became white with mourning" (Koran, chapt. xxi.). It is a stock
  comparison.

Footnote 376:

  The grave.

Footnote 377:

  Arab. "Sawwán" (popularly pronounced Suwán) = "Syenite" from Syrene;
  generally applied to silex, granite or any hard stone.

Footnote 378:

  A proceeding fit only for thieves and paupers: "Alpinism" was then
  unknown. "You come from the mountain" (al-Jabal) means, "You are a
  clod-hopper"; and "I will sit upon the mountain" = turn anchorite or
  magician. (Pilgrimage i. 106).

Footnote 379:

  Corresponding with wayside chapels in Catholic countries. The Moslem
  form would be either a wall with a prayer-niche (Mihráb) fronting
  Meccah-wards or a small domed room. These little oratories are often
  found near fountains, streams or tree-clumps where travellers would be
  likely to alight. I have described one in Sind ("Scinde or the Unhappy
  Valley" i. 79); and have noted that scrawling on the walls is even
  more common in the East than in the West; witness the monuments of old
  Egypt bescribbled by the Greeks and Romans. Even the paws of the
  Sphinx are covered with such _graffiti_; and those of Ipsambul or Abu
  Simbal have proved treasures to epigraphists.

Footnote 380:

  In tales this characterises a Persian; and Hero Rustam is always so
  pictured.

Footnote 381:

  The Parsis, who are the representatives of the old Guebres, turn
  towards the sun and the fire as their Kiblah or point of prayer; all
  deny that they worship it. But, as in the case of saints' images,
  while the educated would pray before them for edification (Latria),
  the ignorant would adore them (Dulia); and would make scanty
  difference between the "reverence of a servant" and the "reverence of
  a slave." The human sacrifice was quite contrary to Guebre, although
  not to Hindu, custom; although hate and vengeance might prompt an
  occasional murder.

Footnote 382:

  These _oubliettes_ are common in old eastern houses as in the medieval
  Castles of Europe, and many a stranger has met his death in them. They
  are often so well concealed that even the modern inmates are not aware
  of their existence.

Footnote 383:

  Arab. "Bakk"; hence our "bug" whose derivation (like that of "cat"
  "dog" and "hog") is apparently unknown to the dictionaries, always
  excepting M. Littré's.

Footnote 384:

  _i.e._ thy beauty is ever increasing.

Footnote 385:

  Alluding, as usual, to the eyelashes, _e.g._

                  An eyelash arrow from an eyebrow bow.

Footnote 386:

  Lane (ii. 168) reads:—"The niggardly female is protected by her
  niggardness;" a change of "Nahílah" (bee-hive) into "Bakhílah" (she
  skin-flint).

Footnote 387:

  Koran iv. 38. The advantages are bodily strength, understanding and
  the high privilege of Holy War. Thus far, and thus far only, woman
  amongst Moslems is "lesser man."

Footnote 388:

  Arab. "Amír Yákhúr," a corruption of "Akhor" = stable (Persian).

Footnote 389:

  A servile name in Persian, meaning "the brave," and a title of honour
  at the Court of Delhi when following the name. Many English officers
  have made themselves ridiculous (myself amongst the number) by having
  it engraved on their seal-rings, _e.g._ Brown Sáhib Bahádur. To write
  the word "Behadir" or "Bahádir" is to adopt the wretched Turkish
  corruption.

Footnote 390:

  "Jerry Sneak" would be the English reader's comment; but in the East
  all charges are laid upon women.

Footnote 391:

  Here the formula means "I am sorry for it, but I couldn't help it."

Footnote 392:

  A noble name of the Persian Kings (meaning the planet Mars) corrupted
  in Europe to Varanes.

Footnote 393:

  Arab. "Jalláb," one of the three muharramát or forbiddens; the Hárik
  al-hajar (burner of stone), the Káti' al-shajar (cutter of trees,
  without reference to Hawarden N. B.) and the Báyi' al-bashar (seller
  of men, vulg. Jalláb). The two former worked, like the Italian
  Carbonari, in desert places where they had especial opportunities for
  crime. (Pilgrimage iii. 140). None of these things must be practised
  during Pilgrimage on the holy soil of Al-Hijaz—not including Jeddah.

Footnote 394:

  The verses contain the tenets of the Murjiy sect which attaches
  infinite importance to faith and little or none to works. Sale (sect.
  viii.) derives his "Morgians" from the "Jabrians" (Jabari), who are
  the direct opponents of the "Kadarians" (Kadari), denying free will
  and free agency to man and ascribing his actions wholly to Allah. Lane
  (ii. 243) gives the orthodox answer to the heretical question:—

  Water could wet him not if God please guard His own; ✿ Nor need man
     care though bound of hands in sea he's thrown:
  But if His Lord decree that he in sea be drowned; ✿ He'll drown albeit
     in the wild and wold he wone.

  It is the old quarrel between Predestination and Freewill which cannot
  be solved except by assuming a Law without a Lawgiver.

Footnote 395:

  Our proverb says: Give a man luck and throw him into the sea.

Footnote 396:

  As a rule Easterns, I repeat, cover head and face when sleeping
  especially in the open air and moonlight. Europeans find the practice
  difficult, and can learn it only by long habit.

Footnote 397:

  Pers. = a flower-garden. In Galland Bahram has two daughters, Bostama
  and Cavama. In the Bres. Edit. the daughter is "Bostan" and the
  slave-girl "Kawám."

Footnote 398:

  Arab. "Kahíl" = eyes which look as if darkened with antimony: hence
  the name of the noble Arab breed of horses "Kuhaylat" (Al-Ajuz, etc.).

Footnote 399:

  "As'ad" = more (or most) fortunate.

Footnote 400:

  This is the vulgar belief, although Mohammed expressly disclaimed the
  power in the Koran (chapt. xiii. 8), "Thou art commissioned to be a
  preacher only and not a worker of miracles." "Signs" (Arab. Ayát) may
  here also mean verses of the Koran, which the Apostle of Allah held to
  be his standing miracles. He despised the common miracula which in the
  East are of everyday occurrence and are held to be easy for any holy
  man. Hume does not believe in miracles because he never saw one. Had
  he travelled in the East he would have seen (and heard of) so many
  that his scepticism (more likely that testimony should be false than
  miracles be true) would have been based on a firmer foundation. It is
  one of the marvels of our age that whilst two-thirds of Christendom
  (the Catholics and the "Orthodox" Greeks) believe in "miracles"
  occurring not only in ancient but even in our present days, the
  influential and intelligent third (Protestant) absolutely "denies the
  fact."

Footnote 401:

  Arab. "Al-Shahádatáni"; testifying the Unity and the Apostleship.


                            END OF VOL. III.

[Illustration: والسلام]




                                 INDEX.


 'Abd = servile, 44

 Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan (Caliph), 319

 Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr, 318

 Abú Kurrat = father of coolness (Chameleon), 165

 Abu 'l-Hasan (not Husn), 162

 Abu 'l-Hosayn (father of the Fortlet) = fox, 132

 Abú Sirhán = father of (going out to pray by) morning, 146

 'Ad (pre-historic Arab tribe), 294

 Adultery (son of, to one's own child), 219

 Akh al-Jahálah = brother of ignorance, 162

 Al (the article with Proper Names), 309

 Alak = clotted blood, 26

 Ali (murder of), 319

 Alif (stature like), 236

 Allah (give thee profit), 17

 —— (unto, we are returning), 317

 Allusions (far-fetched, fanciful and obscure), 58, 169, 176, 263

 Alpinism (unknown), 324

 Amor discende non ascende, 240

 Amsa = he passed the evening, etc., 239

 Amtár, pl. of Matr, _q.v._, 295

 Andam = Brazil-wood, dragon's blood, 263

 Angels (appearing to Sodomites), 301

 Ape-names (expressing auspiciousness), 159

 Arab (pathos), 55

 —— (the noble merciful), 88

 —— (shop), 163

 Arák = (tooth-stick of the) wild caper-tree; Ará-ka = I see thee, 275

 Ar'ar = Juniper-tree, "heath," 254

 Ardhanárí = the half-woman, 306

 Army (divided into six divisions), 290

 As'ad = more (or most) fortunate, 346

 Asáfírí = sparrow-olives, 295

 Ass (goad), 116

 —— (voice "most ungrateful"), 117
 —— (the wild, "handy" with his hoof), 235

 Ayát = signs, Koranic verses, 307

 Ayshat al-durrah murrah = the sister-wife has a bitter life, 308

 Awwá (name of Satan's wife), 229


 Bábúnaj = white camomile, 58

 Bachelor not admitted in Arab quarters, 191

 Back-parts compared to revolving heavens, 18

 Badawi (cannot swim), 69

 —— (baser sort), 70

 —— (shifting camp in spring), _ib._

 —— (noble), 88

 Baghdad = Garden of Justice, 100

 Bahadur = the brave, 334

 Bahram (varanes) = planet Mars, 339

 Bakhshish naturalized as Anglo-Egyptian, 45

 Bakk = bug, 328

 Bulúr (Billaur) = crystal, etc., 194

 Banát al-Na'ash = the Great Bear, 28, 221

 Bands of bandits, 101

 Banner (bound to a spear, sign of investiture), 307

 Bárid (cold = silly, contemptible, foolish), 7

 Báshik (small sparrow-hawk), 61

 Bath (first after sickness), 266

 Bází (Pers. Báz) = _F. peregrinator_, hawk, falcon, 138

 Beard (long, and short wits), 247

 —— (forked, characteristic of a Persian), 325

 Beast-stories (oldest matter in The Nights), 114

 Beauties of nature provoke hunger in Orientals, 32

 Bhang (properties of the drug), 91

 Bilád al-Súdán = Land of the blacks (our Soudan), 75

 Bilál (benefits), name of Mohammed's Mu'ezzin, 106

 Bint 'arús = daughter of the bridegroom (Ichneumon), 147

 Birds denote the neighbourhood of a village, 280

 Bismillah (Bi 'Smi 'lláh = in the name of God, etc.), 182

 Blaze (_see_ Ghurrah), 118

 Boasting of one's tribe (_see_ Renowning it), 80

 Bostán (female Pr. N.) = flower-garden, 345

 Braying of the ass, 117

 Brothers of Purity, 150

 —— of ignorance = Ignoramus, 163

 Brotherhood (forms of making), 151

 Bruising the testicles a feminine mode of murdering men, 3

 Budúr (Badoura) = full moons, 228

 Bukhti (two-humped camel), 67


 Caliphs Tái li'llah, 51, 307

 —— Walíd (Al-), 69

 —— Mu'atasim bi 'llah, 81

 —— Wásik (Al-), _ib._

 —— Abd al-Malik bin Marwan, 319

 —— Ali, _ib._

 —— Mu'áwiyah, _ib._

 Camels (breeds of), 67, 110

 —— (names), 110

 —— (haltered, nose-ring used for dromedaries), 120

 —— (Mehari, Mahríyah), 277

 Camphor (simile for a fair face), 174

 Carat = Kirát, 239

 Carnelion stone bitten with pearls = lips with teeth in sign of anger,
    179

 Cat (puss, etc.), 149

 Cervantes and Arab Romance, 66

 Chaff, 23

 Chameleon (father of coolness), 165

 Cheese a styptic, 3

 Clapping hands to call servants, 173

 Clogs = Kubkáb, 92

 Coition (postures of), 93

 Cold-of-countenance = a fool, 7

 Cold speech = a silly or abusive tirade, _ib._

 Comrades of the Cave, 128

 Constipation (La) rend rigoureux, 242

 Copulation (postures of), 93

 Cowardice equally divided, 173

 Criss 'cross Row, 236


 Dalhamah (Romance of), 112

 Dara' (dira) = habergeon, coat of ring-mail, etc., 109

 Daughters of Sa'adah = zebras, 65

 —— of the bier = Ursa major, 28, 221

 Day of Doom (mutual retaliation), 128

 —— (length of), 299

 "Death in a crowd as good as a feast" (Persian proverb), 141

 Divorce (triple), 292

 Doors (usually shut with a wooden bolt), 198

 Double entendre, 234

 Dreams (true at later night), 258

 Drinking at dawn, 20

 —— their death agony = suffering similar pain, 315

 Dromedary (_see_ Camel).

 —— (guided by a nose-ring), 120

 Dunyá (P. N.) = world, 7, 319

 Durrah (vulg. for Zarrat _q.v._).


 Easterns sleep with covered heads, 345

 Eating together makes friends, 71

 Egyptian (= archi-) polissonnerie, 243

 Euphemy, 68, 102, 209, 267, 338

 Evacuation (and Constipation), 242

 Eve (the true seducer), 166

 Eye (darkening from wine or passion), 224

 —— (orbits slit up and down the face of a hideous Jinn), 235

 Eye (man of the = pupil), 286

 —— (white = blind), 323


 Fables proper (oldest part of The Nights), 114

 Fairer to-day than fair of yesterday = ever increasing in beauty, 331

 Falak (clearing) = breaking forth of light from darkness, 22

 Falcon (_see_ Hawk, Bází), 154

 Falling on the back with laughter, 306

 Farting for fear, 118

 Fátin = tempter, seducer, 82

 Firdausi, the Persian Homer, quoted, 83

 Fire and sickness cannot cohabit (_see_ Kayy), 59

 —— worshippers slandered, 326

 First at the feast and last at the fray, 81

 Fist (putting into fist = putting oneself at another's mercy), 155

 Flying for delight, 26

 Foot, smallness of, sign of "blood", 227

 Formula of praise pronounced to avert the evil eye, 224

 Fortune makes kneel her camel by some other one = encamps with a
    favourite, 141

 Foster-brother (dearer than kith and kin), 256

 Fox, cunning man (_see_ Wolf), 132

 Freeing slaves for the benefit of the souls of the departed, 211

 Fulán (fulano in Span. and Port.) = a certain person, 191

 Futúh = openings, victories, benefit, 304


 Gamin (faire le), _ib._

 Gates (two to port towns), 281

 Geography in its bearings on Morality, 241

 Geomantic process, 269

 Gharám (Pr. N.) = eagerness, desire, love-longing, 172

 Ghazá (Artemisia-shrub), 220

 Ghost (phantom = Tayf), 252

 Ghurrah = blaze on a horse's forehead, 118

 Ghusl al-Sihhah = washing of health, 266

 Give a man luck and throw him into the sea, 341

 Goad (of the donkey-boy), 116

 Gossamer (names for), 217

 Grave (levelling slave and sovereign), 323


 Hair-strings (of black silk), 311

 —— (significance of), 313

 Hájib = groom, chamberlain, 233

 Hajín (tall camel), 67

 Hámah (soul of a murdered man in form of a bird sprung from his head),
    293

 Hammam-bath a luxury as well as a necessity, 19

 Hands behind the back (posture of submission), 218

 —— stained in stripes like ring-rows of a chain-armour, 176

 Hárút and Marút (sorcerer-angels), 217

 Harwalah = pas gymnastique, 121

 Hashsháshín = assassins, 91

 Hashish, _see_ Bhang, _ib._

 —— orgie in London, _ib._

 Hawar = intensity of black and white in the eyes, 233

 Háwí = juggler playing tricks with snakes, 145

 Hawk, _see_ Báshik, Bazi, 61, 138

 Hayát al-Nufús = Life of Souls, 283

 Házir and Bádi = townsman and nomad, 234

 Head (must always be kept covered), 275

 Headsman delaying execution, 42

 Hemistichs divided, 166

 Hermaphrodites (Khunsa), 306

 Heroine of Eastern Romance eats well, 168

 Hijl = partridge, 138

 "Him" for "her", 78

 Hinges (of ancient doors), 41

 Hips, leanness of, "anti-pathetic" to Easterns, 226

 Hoof (of the wild ass), 235

 Horripilation = gooseflesh, 2

 Horse (names of the), 72

 —— stealing honourable, 73

 Host (enters first as safe-guard against guet-apens), 208

 Houris, 233

 Hudhud = hoopoe, 128

 Húr, _see_ Houris, 233

 Hurr = free, noble, independent opp. to 'Abd = servile, 44


 Iblis = the Despairer, 223

 Ibn Abdun al-Andalúsi (poet), 319

 Ibn Muljam (murderer of the Caliph Ali), 319

 Ibn Síná = Avicenna, 34

 Ichneumon (mongoose), 147

 Iddat = months of a woman's enforced celibacy after divorce, 292

 Ikhlás (Al-) = chapter of unity, 307

 Ikhwán al-Safá = Brethren of Purity, 150

 Ilàh al-Arsh = the God of the Empyrean, 106

 Ill is thy abiding place, 137

 Insane (treatment of the), 256

 Iron padlock (instead of the usual wooden bolt), 198

 Irony, 291

 Isengrin (wolf), 146

 Ismid = stibium (eye-powder), 307


 Jalláb = slave-dealer, 340

 Jamal (Gamal) = camel, _q.v._, 110

 Jamíz (Jammayz) = sycamore-fig, 302

 Jannat al-Na'ím = Garden of Delight, 19

 Jeweller (in Eastern tales generally a rascal), 186

 Jihád = fighting for the faith, 39

 Jinnis (names of), 225

 Joining prayers, 174


 Kahlil = whose eyes are kohl'd by nature, 346

 Kahlá = nature-kohl'd, 232

 Káma-Shástra (Ars Amoris Indica), 93

 Kamar al-Zamán (Camaralzaman = Moon of the Age), 213

 Kamaráni = the two moons for sun and moon, 300

 Kámat Alfiyyah = a shape like the letter Alif, 236

 Kanát = subterranean water-course, 141

 Kánún (dulcimer, "zither"), 211

 Kapoteshwara and Kapoteshí, 126

 Kasídah = Ode, elegy, 262

 Katúl (Al-) = the slayer, 72

 Kausaj = man with a thin, short beard, cunning, tricksy, 246

 Kaysún = yellow camomile, 58

 Kayy (Al-) = cautery, the end of medicine-cure, 59

 Kerchief of Dismissal, 295

 Khálidán (for Khálidát) = the Canaries, 212

 Khán (caravanserai) and its magazines, 14

 Khanjar = dagger, hanger (poisoned), 90

 Khassat-hu = she gelded him, 47

 Khauf (Al-) maksúm = fear (cowardice) is equally apportioned, 173

 Khayt hamayán = threads of vanity (gossamer), 217

 Khaznah = treasury of money (£5,000), 278

 Khizáb (dye used by women), 105

 Khunsa = flexible, flaccid (hermaphrodite), 306

 Kiblah = fronting-place of prayer

 Kissing (like a pigeon feeding its young), 275

 Kinchin lay (Arab form of), 102

 Kirát (weight = 2-3 grains; length = one finger-breadth), 239

 Kohl (applying of = takhíl), 57

 —— -eyed = Kahlá, f., 232

 Koka Pandit (Hindu ars Amandi), 93

 Koran quoted (x. 10-12; lvi. 24-26; lxxxviii. 17-20), 19

 —— (xii. 31), 21

 —— (cxiii. 1), 22

 —— (ii. 186; lx. 1), 39

 —— (lxxvi.), 57

 —— (ii. 23), 65

 —— (xxxi. 18; lxvii. 7), 117

 —— (ii. 191), 123

 —— (xviii.; xxii. 20; lxxxvii.), 128

 —— (ii. 96, 256), 217

 —— (ii.; iii.; xxxvi.; lv.; lxvii.; cxiii.; cxiv.), 222

 —— (ii. 32; xviii. 48), 223

 —— (xxiii. 20; xcv. 1), 276

 —— (xxvi.), 294

 —— (xi.), 301

 —— (xxiii. 38), 302

 —— (ii.; li. 9; xxxv. 11), 304

 —— (cxii.), 307

 —— (xxiv. 39), 319

 —— (xxi.), 323

 —— (iv. 38), 332

 Kubkáb = bath clogs, 92

 Kuhailat (breed of Arab horses), 346

 Kun = be, the creative word, 317

 Kurds (Xenophon's and Strabo's Carduchi), 100


 Lájuward, _see_ Lázuward, 33

 Lámiyat = poem rhyming in _L_, 143

 Layáli = nights, future, fate, 318

 Layla (female Pr. N.), 135

 —— (wa Majnún, love poem), 183

 Lázuward = lapis lazuli, azure, 33

 Letters and letter-writing, 24

 Libdah (skull-cap of felt) sign of a religious mendicant, 62

 Lisám = mouth-veil, 283

 Liver (for heart), 240

 Lizzat al-Nisá (erotic poem), 93

 Love (pure, becomes prophetical), 6

 —— (the ear conceiveth it before the eye), 9

 —— (ten stages of), 36

 —— (martyrs of), 211

 —— (platonic, _see_ vol. ii. 104), 232

 —— (ousting affection), 240

 Lovers in Lazá (hell) as well as Na'ím (heaven), 58

 —— (parting of, a stock-topic in poetry), 58

 Lukmán (two of the name), 264


 Ma'an bin Zá'idah, 236

 Mahríyah (Mehari) = blood-dromedary, 277

 Majlis = sitting (to a woman), 92

 Majnún (Al-) = the mad, 72

 Málik (door-keeper of Hell), 20

 Malik (king) taken as title, 51

 Man (extract of despicable water), 16

 —— (is fire, woman tinder), 59

 —— (shown to disadvantage in beast-stories), 115

 —— (his destiny written on his skull), 123

 —— (pre-eminence above women), 332

 Maniyat = death; muniyat = desire, 291

 Marba' = summer quarters, 79

 Marján = Coral-branch (slave-name), 169

 Marriage (if consummated demands Ghusl), 286

 Married men profit nothing, 2

 Martyrs of love, 211

 Márwazi = of Marw (Margiana), 222

 Marz-bán = Warden of the Marches, Margrave, 256

 Má sháa 'llah (as Allah willeth) = well done!, 92

 Matr = large vessel of leather or wood, 295

 Maurid = desert-well and road to such, 33

 Mercy (quality of the noble Arab), 88

 Minaret (simile for a fair young girl), 69

 Miracles (disclaimed by Mohammed but generally believed in), 346

 Mirage = Saráb, 319

 Mohammed ("born with Kohl'd eyes"), 232

 Moon masc., Sun fem., 28

 Moore (Thomas, anticipated), 305

 Morality (geographical and chronological), 241

 —— (want of, excused by passion), 269

 Morning-draught, 20

 Mountain, coming from the = being a clod-hopper, 324

 —— sit upon the = turn anchorite, _ib._

 Mourning, perfumes not used during, 63

 Mu'atasim (Al-) bi'llah (Caliph), 81

 Mu'áwiyah (his Moses-like "mildness"), 286

 Muharramát (the three forbidden things), 340

 Mujáhid (Al-) = fighter in Holy War, 51

 Mujáhidún = who wage war against infidels, 39

 Mukhammas = cinquains, 280

 Mulberry-fig (for anus), 302

 Murjiy (sect and tenets), 341


 Náfilah = supererogatory Koran-recitation, 222

 Na'ím (name for Heaven), 19

 Naml (ant) simile for a young beard, 58

 Názir = eye or steward, 233

 Night (and day, not day and night with the Arabs), 121

 —— cap, 222

 —— "this" = our "last", 249

 —— for day, 318

 Nizámi (Persian Poet), 183

 Nuptial sheet (inspection of the), 289

 Núr al-Hudá (Pr. N. = Light of Guidance), 17


 O Camphor (antiphrase = O snowball), 40

 Oftentimes the ear loveth before the eye, 9

 Oldest matter in The Nights the beast-stories, 114

 Oubliettes (in old Eastern houses), 327

 Out of sight of my friend is better and pleasanter, 315


 Paradise of Mohammed not wholly sensual, 19

 Parody of the Testification, 215

 Partridge = Hijl, 138

 Pathos (touch of), 55

 Patience (cutting the cords of), 178

 Payne quoted, 130, 172, 193, 252, 275

 Penis (as to anus and cunnus), 303

 Perfumes not used during mourning, 63

 —— (natural), 231

 Pigeon (language, etc.), 126

 —— (blood of the young), 289

 Pilgrimage quoted (ii. 22), 7

 —— (iii. 77), 65

 —— (iii. 14), 67

 —— (i. 216), 81

 —— (i. 64), 91

 —— (iii. 185), 107

 —— (iii. 270), 118

 —— (iii. 208), 121

 —— (iii. 218), 126

 —— (i. 52), 151

 —— (iii. 307), 159

 —— (i. 99), 163

 —— (iii. 239), 174

 —— (iii. 22), 220

 —— (ii. 282), 241

 —— (iii. 144), 252

 —— (ii. 213, 321), 304

 —— (iii. 192-194), 319

 —— (i. 106), 324

 Plates as armature, 216

 Plural of Majesty, 16

 Poke (counterfeit), 302

 Polissonnerie (characteristic), 243

 Polygamy and Polyandry in relation to climate, 241

 Postillon (Le), 304

 Postures of coition, 93

 Prayer (rules for joining in), 174

 —— (two-bow), 213

 —— niche = wayside chapel, 324

 Precedent (merit appertains to), 264

 Preposterous venery, 304

 Preventives (the two), 222

 Prima Venus debet esse cruenta, 289

 Purity of love attains a prophetic strain, 6


 Questions (indiscreet, the rule throughout Arabia), 105


 Ra'áyá (pl. of Ra'íyat) = Ryot, 215

 Rabite classical term for a noble Arab horse, 72

 Rahíl (small dromedary), 67

 Raising the tail sign of excitement in the Arab blood-horse, 84

 Rasy = praising in a funeral sermon, 291

 Ritánah = a jargon, 200

 Raushan = window, 171

 Raushaná (splendour) = Roxana, _ib._

 Ready to fly for delight, 26

 "Renowning it" (boasting of one's tribe), 80, 108

 Return unto Allah, 317

 Rihl = wooden saddle, 117

 Rind (rand) = willow, bay, aloes, wood, 172

 Rizwán (approbation) = key-keeper of Paradise, 15, 20

 Rosary, 123

 Royalty in the guise of merchants, 12

 Rubber, _see_ Shampooer, 17

 Ruhbah (townlet on the frontier of Syria), 52

 Ryot = liege, subject; Fellah, peasant, 215


 Sa'adah (female Pr. N.), 65

 Sa'alabah (name of a tribe), 107

 Sa'alab = fox, 132

 Sabb = low abuse, 311

 Sabbáh bin Rammáh bin Humám = the Comely, son of the Spearman, son of
    the Lion, 67

 Sadr = returning from the water (see Wárid), 56

 Sady = Hámah, _q.v._, 293

 Sáhirah = place for the gathering of souls on Doom-day, 323

 Sáibah = she-camel freed from labour, 78

 Salb = crucifying, 25

 Salsabíl (fountains of Paradise), 57

 Saráb = mirage, 319

 Sawwán = Syenite, 324

 Seal and Sealing-wax, 189

 Seduction (the truth about it), 166

 Serpent does not sting or bite, but strike, 160

 Seven Sleepers, 128

 Shahádatáni (Al-) = the two Testimonies, 346

 Shahriman not Shah Zemán, 7, 212

 Sháib al-Ingház = gray beard, shaking with disapproval, 307

 Shakespearean "topothesia" out-Shakespeared, 212

 Shakhs = a person, a black spot, 26

 Shampooer (rubber) = Mukayyis or bagman, 17

 Shanak = hanging, 25

 Shanfara (poet), 143

 Shaykhs (five, doubtful allusion), 30

 Shaytán (Satan) term of abuse, 25

 —— (his wife and nine sons), 229

 Shop (Arab, a "but" and a "ben"), 163

 Shovel-iron stirrup = spur, 119

 Signs (of a Shaykh's tent), 104

 —— (lucky in a horse), 118

 Sinnaur = cat; prince, 149

 Siwák = tooth-stick; Siwá-ka = other than thou, 275

 Slaves (O Camphor), 40

 —— (set free for the benefit of the dead), 211

 —— (dealer in = Jalláb), 349

 Sleeping (with covered head and face), 345

 Sleepers (the Seven of Ephesus), 128

 Solomon (his carpet), 267

 Sodomites (angels appear to), 301, 304

 Sodomy with women, _ib._

 Son of Persian Kings (not Prince but descendant), 163

 Spindle (thinner than a), 260

 St. George (posture), 304

 Stages (ten, of love-sickness), 36

 "Stone-bow" not "Cross-bow", 116

 Subhán a'llah pronounced to keep off the evil eye, 224

 Súdán = our Soudan, 75

 Súf (wool), Súfi (Gnostic), 140

 Suhá (Sohá) star in the Ursa Major, 28

 Sulaymá, dim. of Salmá = any beautiful woman, 263

 Superiority of man above woman, 332

 Sutures of the skull, 123

 Sycomore fig (for anus), 302


 Tághút (idol), 217

 Tá'í (Al-) li 'llah (Caliph), 51, 307

 Takhíl = adorning with Kohl, 57

 Talák bi'l-Salásah = triple divorce, 292

 Tamar al-Hindi (Tamarind) = the Indian date, 297

 Tasbíh = saying Subhán Allah; Rosary, 125

 Tayf = ghost, phantom, 252

 Tayrab (Al-) a city, 259

 Tears (pouring blood like red wine), 169

 Ten stages of love-sickness, 36

 Tent (signs of a Shaykh's), 104

 Testicles (beating and bruising of, female mode of killing a man), 3

 Thamúd (pre-historic Arab tribe), 294

 Thorn of lance = eyelash, 331

 Tín = fig, simile for a woman's parts, 302

 Tiryák = theriack, treacle (antidote), 65

 Torrens quoted, 218, 235, 249, 289

 Tossing upon coals of fire, 61

 Tughrái (Al-), poet, 143

 Turk (provoked to hunger by beauties of nature), 32

 —— (appears under the Abbasides), 81


 Ubi aves ibi angeli, 280

 Ukhuwán = camomile, 58

 Urine (pollutes), 229

 Urining (wiping after), _ib._

 Ushári = camel travelling ten days, 67


 Wa ba'ad (see Ammá ba'ad, vol. ii. 37) = and afterwards, 181

 Waddle of "Arab ladies", 37

 Wády = valley; slayer, 234

 Waist (slender, hips large), 278

 Walahán (Lakab of a poet = The distracted), 226

 Walgh = lapping of a dog, 319

 Walíd (Al-) Caliph, 69

 Wálidati = my mother, speaking to one not of the family, 208

 Wárid = resorting to the water, 56

 Wasíf = servant; fem. wasífah = concubine, 171

 Wásik (Al-), Caliph, 81

 Waters flowing in Heaven, 65

 Wayl-ak = Woe to thee, 82

 Week-days (only two names for), 249

 Weeping (not for form and face alone), 318

 Wives (why four, _see_ Women), 212

 —— (a man's tillage), 304

 What happened, happened = fortune so willed it, 68

 Wine (a sun with cup-bearer for East and the drinker's mouth for West),
    263

 Wolf (wicked man); fox (cunning man), 132

 Women (peculiar waddle), 37

 —— (proposing extreme measures), 39

 —— (are tinder, men fire), 59

 —— (monkish horror of), 126

 —— (Layla, name of), 135

 —— (true seducers), 166

 —— (Wálidati = my mother), 208

 —— (four wives, and why), 212

 —— (compared to an inn), 216

 —— (large hips and thighs), 226

 —— (small fine foot), 227

 —— (names of), 239, 263

 —— (more passionate than men), 241

 —— (head must always be kept covered), 275

 —— (slender-waisted but full of hips, etc.), 278

 —— (Sodomy with), 304

 —— (all charges laid upon them), 335

 Words (divided in a couplet), 166

 Writing without fingers = being unable to answer for what is written,
    181


 Yá Abú Libdah = O father of a felt calotte, 62

 Yá Abú Sumrah = O father of brownness, 40

 Yá fulán = O certain person, 191

 Yá Sátir, Yá Sattár = O veiler (of sins), 41

 Yá Taljí = O snowy one, 40

 Yaum al-tanádí = Resurrection Day, 74


 Zabbál = dung-drawer, etc., 51

 Zakar (penis) = that which betokens masculinity, 3

 Zamiyád = guardian angel of Bihisht, _see_ Rizwán, 20, 233

 Zanab Sirhán (wolf's tail) = early dawn, 146

 Zarrat (vulg. Durrah) = co-wife, sister-wife, 308

 Zebra (daughter of Sa'adah), 65

 Zibl = dung, 51

 Zibl Khán = Le Roi Crotte, 99

[Illustration]




                          TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES


 1. Inserted missing chapter heading on p. 1.
 2. Inserted missing footnote anchor on p. 216.
 3. Silently corrected simple spelling, grammar, and typographical
    errors.
 4. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
 5. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 6. Enclosed bold font in =equals=.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — VOLUME 03 (OF 10) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night — Volume 04 (of 10)
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night — Volume 04 (of 10)

Translator: Sir Richard Francis Burton


        
Release date: October 10, 2016 [eBook #53254]
                Most recently updated: May 22, 2025

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53254

Credits: Produced by Richard Tonsing, Richard Hulse and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — VOLUME 04 (OF 10) ***

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: لا لابرار كلّ شي تبر]

                   “TO THE PURE ALL THINGS ARE PURE.”
                           (Puris omnia pura)

                                                        —_Arab Proverb._

          “Niuna corrotta mente intese mai sanamente parole.”

                                            —“_Decameron_”—_conclusion_.

              “Erubuit, posuitque meum Lucretia librum
                  Sed coram Bruto. Brute! recede, leget.”

                                                             —_Martial._

            “Mieulx est de ris que de larmes escripre,
                Pour ce que rire est le propre des hommes.”

                                                              —RABELAIS.

“The pleasure we derive from perusing the Thousand-and-One Stories makes
us regret that we possess only a comparatively small part of these truly
enchanting fictions.”

                                      —CRICHTON’S “_History of Arabia_.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

_A PLAIN AND LITERAL TRANSLATION OF THE ARABIAN NIGHTS ENTERTAINMENTS.
NOW ENTITULED_




                           _THE BOOK OF THE_
                     =Thousand Nights and a Night=

              _WITH INTRODUCTION EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE
                MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF MOSLEM MEN AND A
                 TERMINAL ESSAY UPON THE HISTORY OF THE
                                NIGHTS_

                               VOLUME IV.


                                   BY
                           RICHARD F. BURTON

[Illustration]

        PRINTED BY THE BURTON CLUB FOR PRIVATE SUBSCRIBERS ONLY

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            Shammar Edition

Limited to one thousand numbered sets, of which this is

                              Number _547_




                          PRINTED IN U. S. A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                    TO FOSTER FITZGERALD ARBUTHNOT.


 MY DEAR ARBUTHNOT,

I have no fear that a friend, whose friendship has lasted nearly a third
of a century, will misunderstand my reasons for inscribing his name upon
these pages. You have lived long enough in the East and, as your
writings show, observantly enough to detect the pearl which lurks in the
kitchen-midden, and to note that its lustre is not dimmed nor its value
diminished by its unclean surroundings.

                                            Ever yours sincerely,

                                                      RICHARD F. BURTON.

 ATHENÆUM CLUB, _October 1, 1885_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                     CONTENTS OF THE FOURTH VOLUME.


                                                                  PAGE

 CONTINUATION OF THE TALE OF KAMAR AL-ZAMAN:—

     NI’AMAH BIN AL-RABI’A AND NAOMI HIS SLAVE-GIRL                  1

     _a._ CONCLUSION OF THE TALE OF KAMAR AL-ZAMAN                  23

       (_Lane II., Chapt. X. Story of Neameh and Noam: p. 186._)


 13. ALA AL-DIN ABU AL-SHAMAT                                       29

   (_Lane, Chapt. XI. Story of Ala ed-Deen Abu-sh-Shámát: p. 250._)


 14. HATIM OF THE TRIBE OF TAYY                                     94

   (_Lane, Notes to Chapt. XI. Liberality of Hatim el-Táee after his
                            Death: p. 333_)


 15. MA’AN THE SON OF ZAIDAH AND THE THREE GIRLS                    96

  (_Lane, Notes to Chapt. XI. Anecdote of Maan the Son of Záïdeh: p.
                                 335_)


 16. MA’AN SON OF ZAIDAH AND THE BADAWI                             97


 17. THE CITY OF LABTAYT                                            99


 18. THE CALIPH HISHAM AND THE ARAB YOUTH                          101


 19. IBRAHIM BIN AL-MAHDI AND THE BARBER-SURGEON                   103

     (_Lane, Notes to Chapt. XI. Adventures of Ibráheem the Son of
                         El-Mahdee: p. 336._)


 20. THE CITY OF MANY-COLUMNED IRAM AND ABDULLAH SON OF ABI        113
       KALABAH

   (_Lane, Notes to Chapt. XI. The Discovery and History of Irem Zát
   el-‘Emad, the Terrestrial Paradise of Sheddad the Son of ‘Ad: p.
                                342._)


 21. ISAAC OF MOSUL                                                119

 (_Lane, Note to Chapt. XI. Anecdote of Ishák el-Mósilee and Khadeejeh
                       and El-Ma-moon: p. 347._)


 22. THE SWEEP AND THE NOBLE LADY                                  125


 23. THE MOCK CALIPH                                               130

   (_Lane, Chapt. XIII. Story of Mohammad ‘Alee the Jeweller, or the
                      False Khaleefeh: p. 380._)


 24. ALI THE PERSIAN                                               149


 25. HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE SLAVE-GIRL AND THE IMAM ABU YUSUF     153


 26. THE LOVER WHO FEIGNED HIMSELF A THIEF                         155

  (_Lane, Note to Chapt. XIII. Anecdote of a Disinterested Lover: p.
                                400._)


 27. JA’AFAR THE BARMECIDE AND THE BEAN-SELLER                     159

    (_Lane, Note to Chapt. XIII. Anecdote of Jaafar el-Barmakee: p.
                                404._)


 28. ABU MOHAMMED HIGHT LAZYBONES                                  162

    (_Lane, Chapt. XIV. Story of Aboo Mohammad the Lazy: p. 406._)


 29. GENEROUS DEALING OF YAHYA BIN KHALID THE BARMECIDE WITH       179
       MANSUR

   (_Lane, Notes to Chapt. XIV. Anecdote of Yahya the Son of Khalid
                        el-Barmakee: p. 427._)


 30. GENEROUS DEALING OF YAHYA SON OF KHALID WITH A MAN WHO        181
       FORGED A LETTER IN HIS NAME

 (_Lane, Notes to Chapt. XIV. Another Anecdote of the Same: p. 429._)


 31. CALIPH AL-MAAMUN AND THE STRANGE SCHOLAR                      185

   (_Lane, Notes to Chapt. XIV. Anecdote of El-Ma-moon and a Learned
                            Man: p. 432._)


 32. ALI SHAR AND ZUMURRUD                                         187

     (_Lane, Chapt. XV. Story of ‘Ale Shér and Zumurrud: p. 434._)


 33. THE LOVES OF JUBAYR BIN UMAYR AND THE LADY BUDUR              228

    (_Lane, Chapt. XVI. Story of Ibn Mansoor and the Lady Budur and
           Jubeyr the Son of ‘Omeyr esh-Sheybánee: p. 477._)


 34. THE MAN OF AL-YAMAN AND HIS SIX SLAVE GIRLS                   245


 35. HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE DAMSEL AND ABU NOWAS                  261


 36. THE MAN WHO STOLE THE DISH OF GOLD WHEREIN THE DOG ATE        265

     (_Lane, Notes to Chapt. XVI. Instances of the Vicissitudes of
                          Fortune: p. 497._)


 37. THE SHARPER OF ALEXANDRIA AND THE CHIEF OF POLICE             269

 (_Lane, Notes to Chapt. XVI. Hosám ed-Deen the Wálee, and a Sharper:
                               p. 501._)


 38. AL-MALIK AL-NASIR AND THE THREE CHIEFS OF POLICE              271

       (_Lane, Notes to Chapt. XVI. The Three Wálees: p. 502._)

     _a._ STORY OF THE CHIEF OF THE NEW CAIRO POLICE              _ib._

     _b._ STORY OF THE CHIEF OF THE BULAK POLICE                   273

     _c._ STORY OF THE CHIEF OF THE OLD CAIRO POLICE               274


 39. THE THIEF AND THE SHROFF                                      275

  (_Lane, Notes to Chapt. XVI. The Money Changer and the Sharper: p.
                                505._)


 40. THE CHIEF OF THE KUS POLICE AND THE SHARPER                   276


 41. IBRAHIM BIN AL-MAHDI AND THE MERCHANT’S SISTER                278

     (_Lane, Notes to Chapt. XVI. Anecdote of Ibráheem the Son of
                         el-Mahdee: p. 506._)


 42. THE WOMAN WHOSE HANDS WERE CUT OFF FOR ALMS-GIVING            281

    (_Lane, Notes to Chapt. XVI. Anecdote of a Charitable Woman: p.
                                508._)


 43. THE DEVOUT ISRAELITE                                          283

  (_Lane, Notes to Chapt. XVI. Anecdote of a Charitable Israelite: p.
                                510._)


 44. ABU HASSAN AL-ZIYADI AND THE KHORASAN MAN                     285

 (_Lane, Notes to Chapt. XVI. Anecdote of Hassan ez-Ziyádee: p. 511._)


 45. THE POOR MAN AND HIS FRIEND IN NEED                           288

       (_Lane, Notes to Chapt. XVI. A Friend in Need: p. 513._)


 46. THE RUINED MAN WHO BECAME RICH AGAIN THROUGH A DREAM          289

            (_Lane, Notes to Chapt. XVI. A Dream: p. 514._)


 47. CALIPH AL-MUTAWAKKIL AND HIS CONCUBINE MAHBUBAH               291

  (_Lane, Notes to Chapt. XVI. El-Mutawekkil and Mahboobeh: p. 515._)


 48. WARDAN THE BUTCHER’S ADVENTURE WITH THE LADY AND THE BEAR     293


 49. THE KING’S DAUGHTER AND THE APE                               297




           _NI’AMAH BIN AL-RABI’A AND NAOMI HIS SLAVE-GIRL._


There lived once in the city of Cufa[1] a man called Al-Rabí’a bin
Hátim, who was one of the chief men of the town, a wealthy and a
healthy, and Heaven had vouchsafed him a son, whom he named Ni’amat
Allah.[2] One day, being in the slave-brokers’ mart, he saw a woman
exposed for sale with a little maid of wonderful beauty and grace on her
arm. So he beckoned to the broker and asked him, “How much for this
woman and her daughter?” He answered “Fifty dinars.” Quoth Al-Rabi’a
“Write the contract of sale and take the money and give it to her
owner.” Then he gave the broker the price and his brokerage and taking
the woman and her child, carried them to his house. Now when the
daughter of his uncle who was his wife saw the slave, she said to her
husband, “O my cousin, what is this damsel?” He replied, “Of a truth, I
bought her for the sake of the little one on her arm; for know that,
when she groweth up, there will not be her like for beauty, either in
the land of the Arabs or the Ajams.” His wife remarked, “Right was thy
rede”; and said to the woman, “What is thy name?” She replied, “O my
lady, my name is Taufík.[3]” “And what is thy daughter’s name?” asked
she. Answered the slave, “Sa’ad, the happy.” Rejoined her mistress,
“Thou sayst sooth, thou art indeed happy, and happy is he who hath
bought thee.” Then quoth she to her husband, “O my cousin, what wilt
thou call her?”; and quoth he, “Whatso thou choosest”; so she, “Then let
us call her Naomi;” and he rejoined, “Good is thy device.” The little
Naomi was reared with Al-Rabi’a’s son Ni’amat in one cradle, so to
speak, till the twain reached the age of ten and each grew handsomer
than the other; and the boy used to address her, “O my sister!” and she,
“O my brother!”, till they came to that age when Al-Rabi’a said to
Ni’amah, “O my son, Naomi is not thy sister but thy slave. I bought her
in thy name whilst thou wast yet in the cradle; so call her no more
sister from this day forth.” Quoth Ni’amah, “If that be so, I will take
her to wife.” Then he went to his mother and told her of this, and she
said to him, “O my son, she is thy handmaid.” So he wedded and went in
unto Naomi and loved her; and two[4] years passed over them whilst in
this condition, nor was there in all Cufa a fairer girl than Naomi, or a
sweeter or a more graceful. As she grew up she learnt the Koran and read
works of science and excelled in music and playing upon all kinds of
instruments; and in the beauty of her singing she surpassed all the folk
of her time. Now one day, as she sat with her husband in the
wine-chamber, she took the lute, tightened the strings, and sang these
two couplets:—

 While thou’rt my lord whose bounty’s my estate, ✿ A sword whereby my
    woes to annihilate,
 Recourse I never need to Amru or Zayd,[5] ✿ Nor aught save thee if way
    to me grow strait!

Ni’amah was charmed with these verses and said to her, “By my life, O
Naomi, sing to us with the tambourine and other instruments!” So she
sang these couplets to a lively measure:—

 By His life who holds my guiding-rein, I swear ✿ I’ll meet on
    love-ground parlous foe nor care:
 Good sooth I’ll vex revilers, thee obey ✿ And quit my slumbers and all
    joy forswear:
 And for thy love I’ll dig in vitals mine ✿ A grave, nor shall my vitals
    weet ‘tis there!

And Ni’amah exclaimed, “Heaven favoured art thou, O Naomi!” But whilst
they led thus the most joyous life, behold! Al-Hajjáj,[6] the Viceroy of
Cufa said to himself, “Needs must I contrive to take this girl named
Naomi and send her to the Commander of the Faithful, Abd al-Malik bin
Marwán, for he hath not in his palace her like for beauty and sweet
singing.” So he summoned an old woman of the duennas of his wives and
said to her, “Go to the house of Al-Rabi’a and foregather with the girl
Naomi and combine means to carry her off; for her like is not to be
found on the face of the earth.” She promised to do his bidding; so next
morning she donned the woollen clothes of a devotee and hung around her
neck a rosary of beads by the thousand; and, hending in hand a staff and
a leather water-bottle of Yamani manufacture,——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old woman
promised to do the bidding of Al-Hajjaj, and whenas it was morning she
donned the woollen clothes of a devotee[7] and hung around her neck a
rosary of beads by the thousand and hent in hand a staff and a leather
water-bottle of Yamani manufacture and fared forth crying, “Glory be to
Allah! Praised be Allah! There is no god but _the_ God! Allah is Most
Great! There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great!” Nor did she leave off her lauds and her groaning
in prayer whilst her heart was full of guile and wiles, till she came to
the house of Ni’amah bin al-Rabi’a at the hour of noon-prayer, and
knocked at the door. The doorkeeper opened and said to her, “What dost
thou want?” Quoth she, “I am a poor pious woman, whom the time of
noon-prayer hath overtaken, and lief would I pray in this blessed
place.” Answered the porter, “O old woman, this is no mosque nor
oratory, but the house of Ni’amah son of al-Rabi’a.” She replied, “I
know there is neither cathedral-mosque nor oratory like the house of
Ni’amah bin al-Rabi’a. I am a chamberwoman of the palace of the Prince
of True Believers and am come out for worship and the visitation of Holy
Places.” But the porter rejoined, “Thou canst not enter;” and many words
passed between them, till at last she caught hold and hung to him
saying, “Shall the like of me be denied admission to the house of
Ni’amah bin al-Rabi’a, I who have free access to the houses of Emirs and
Grandees?” Anon, out came Ni’amah and, hearing their loud language,
laughed and bade the old woman enter after him. So she followed him into
the presence of Naomi, whom she saluted after the godliest and goodliest
fashion, and, when she looked on her, she was confounded at her
exceeding seemlihead and said to her, “O my lady, I commend thee to the
safeguard of Allah, who made thee and thy lord fellows in beauty and
loveliness!” Then she stood up in the prayer-niche and betook herself to
inclination and prostration and prayer, till day departed and night
darkened and starkened, when Naomi said to her, “O my mother, rest thy
legs and feet awhile.” Replied the old woman, “O my lady, whoso seeketh
the world to come let him weary him in this world, and whoso wearieth
not himself in this world shall not attain the dwellings of the just in
the world to come.” Then Naomi brought her food and said to her, “Eat of
my bread and pray Heaven to accept my penitence and to have mercy on
me.” But she cried, “O my lady, I am fasting. As for thee, thou art but
a girl and it besitteth thee to eat and drink and make merry; Allah be
indulgent to thee!; for the Almighty saith:—All shall be punished except
him who shall repent and believe and shall work a righteous work.”[8] So
Naomi continued sitting with the old woman in talk and presently said to
Ni’amah, “O my lord, conjure this ancient dame to sojourn with us
awhile, for piety and devotion are imprinted on her countenance.” Quoth
he, “Set apart for her a chamber where she may say her prayers; and
suffer no one to go in to her: peradventure, Allah (extolled and exalted
be He!) shall prosper us by the blessing of her presence and never
separate us.” So the old woman passed her night in praying and reciting
the Koran; and when Allah caused the morn to dawn, she went in to
Ni’amah and Naomi and, giving them good morning, said to them, “I pray
Allah have you in His holy keeping!” Quoth Naomi, “Whither away, O my
mother? My lord hath bidden me set apart for thee a chamber, where thou
mayst seclude thee for thy devotions.” Replied the old woman, “Allah
give him long life, and continue His favour to you both! But I would
have you charge the doorkeeper not to stay my coming in to you; and,
Inshallah! I will go the round of the Holy Places and pray for you two
at the end of my devotions every day and night.” Then she went out
(whilst Naomi wept for parting with her knowing not the cause of her
coming), and returned to Al-Hajjaj who said to her, “An thou do my
bidding soon, thou shalt have of me abundant good.” Quoth she, “I ask of
thee a full month;” and quoth he “Take the month.” Thereupon the old hag
fell to daily visiting Ni’amah’s house and frequented his slave-wife,
Naomi;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old hag fell
to visiting daily Ni’amah’s house and frequenting his slave-wife, Naomi;
and both ceased not to honour her, and she used to go in to them morning
and evening and all in the house respected her till, one day, being
alone with Naomi, she said to her, “O my lady! by Allah, when I go to
the Holy Places, I will pray for thee; and I only wish thou wert with
me, that thou mightest look on the Elders of the Faith who resort
thither, and they should pray for thee, according to thy desire.” Naomi
cried, “I conjure thee by Allah take me with thee!”; and she replied,
“Ask leave of thy mother-in-law, and I will take thee.” So Naomi said to
her husband’s mother, “O my lady, ask my master to let us go forth, me
and thee, one day with this my old mother, to prayer and worship with
the Fakirs in the Holy Places.” Now when Ni’amah came in and sat down,
the old woman went up to him and would have kissed his hand, but he
forbade her; so she invoked blessings[9] on him and left the house. Next
day she came again, in the absence of Ni’amah, and she addressed Naomi,
saying, “We prayed for thee yesterday; but arise now and divert thyself
and return ere thy lord come home.” So Naomi said to her mother-in-law,
“I beseech thee, for Allah’s sake, give me leave to go with this pious
woman, that I may sight the saints of Allah in the Holy Places, and
return speedily ere my lord come back.” Quoth Ni’amah’s mother, “I fear
lest thy lord know;” but said the old woman, “By Allah, I will not let
her take seat on the floor; no, she shall look, standing on her feet,
and not tarry.” So she took the damsel by guile and, carrying her to
Al-Hajjaj’s palace, told him of her coming, after placing her in a
lonely chamber; whereupon he went in to her and, looking upon her, saw
her to be the loveliest of the people of the day, never had he beheld
her like. Now when Naomi caught sight of him she veiled her face from
him; but he left her not till he had called his Chamberlain, whom he
commanded to take fifty horsemen; and he bade him mount the damsel on a
swift dromedary, and bear her to Damascus and there deliver her to the
Commander of the Faithful, Abd al-Malik bin Marwan. Moreover, he gave
him a letter for the Caliph, saying, “Bear him this letter and bring me
his answer and hasten thy return to me.” So the Chamberlain, without
losing time, took the damsel (and she tearful for separation from her
lord) and, setting out with her on a dromedary, gave not over journeying
till he reached Damascus. There he sought audience of the Commander of
the Faithful and, when it was granted, the Chamberlain delivered the
damsel and reported the circumstance. The Caliph appointed her a
separate apartment and going into his Harim, said to his wife,
“Al-Hajjaj hath bought me a slave-girl of the daughters of the Kings of
Cufa[10] for ten thousand dinars, and hath sent me this letter.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Two Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Caliph
acquainted his wife with the story of the slave-girl, she said to him,
“Allah increase to thee His favour!” Then the Caliph’s sister went in to
the supposed slave-girl and, when she saw her, she said, “By Allah, not
unlucky is the man who hath thee in his house, were thy cost an hundred
thousand dinars!” And Naomi replied, “O fair of face, what King’s palace
is this, and what is the city?” She answered, “This is the city of
Damascus, and this is the palace of my brother, the Commander of the
Faithful, Abd al-Malik bin Marwan.[11]” Then she resumed, “Didst thou
not know all this?” Naomi said, “By Allah, O my lady, I had no knowledge
of it!”; when the other asked, “And he who sold thee and took thy price
did he not tell thee that the Caliph had bought thee?” Now when Naomi
heard these words, she shed tears and said to herself, “Verily, I have
been tricked and the trick hath succeeded,” adding to herself, “If I
speak, none will credit me; so I will hold my peace and take patience,
for I know that the relief of Allah is near.” Then she bent her head for
shame, and indeed her cheeks were tanned by the journey and the sun. So
the Caliph’s sister left her that day and returned to her on the morrow
with clothes and necklaces of jewels, and dressed her; after which the
Caliph came in to her and sat down by her side, and his sister said to
him, “Look on this handmaid in whom Allah hath conjoined every
perfection of beauty and loveliness.” So he said to Naomi, “Draw back
the veil from thy face;” but she would not unveil, and he beheld not her
face. However, he saw her wrists and love of her entered his heart; and
he said to his sister, “I will not go in unto her for three days, till
she be cheered by thy converse.” Then he arose and left her, but Naomi
ceased not to brood over her case and sigh for her separation from her
master, Ni’amah, till she fell sick of a fever during the night and ate
not nor drank; and her favour faded and her charms were changed. They
told the Caliph of this and her condition grieved him; so he visited her
with physicians and men of skill, but none could come at a cure for her.
This how it fared with her; but as regards Ni’amah, when he returned
home he sat down on his bed and cried, “Ho, Naomi!” But she answered
not; so he rose in haste and called out, yet none came to him, as all
the women in the house had hidden themselves for fear of him. Then he
went out to his mother, whom he found sitting with her cheek on her
hand, and said to her, “O my mother, where is Naomi?” She answered, “O
my son, she is with one who is worthier than I to be trusted with her,
namely, the devout old woman; she went forth with her to visit
devotionally the Fakirs and return.” Quoth Ni’amah, “Since when hath
this been her habit and at what hour went she forth?” Quoth his mother,
“She went out early in the morning.” He asked, “And how camest thou to
give her leave for this?”; and she answered, “O my son, ‘twas she
persuaded me?” “There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah,
the Glorious, the Great!” exclaimed Ni’amah and, going forth from his
home in a state of distraction, he repaired to the Captain of the Watch
to whom said he, “Dost thou play tricks upon me and steal my slave-girl
away from my house? I will assuredly complain of thee to the Commander
of the Faithful.” Said the Chief of Police, “Who hath taken her?” and
Ni’amah replied, “An old woman of such and such a mien, clad in woollen
raiment and carrying a rosary of beads numbered by thousands.” Rejoined
the other, “Find me the old woman and I will get thee back thy
slave-girl.” “And who knows the old woman?” retorted Ni’amah. “And who
knows the hidden things save Allah (may He be extolled and exalted!)?”
cried the Chief, who knew her for Al-Hajjaj’s procuress. Cried Ni’amah,
“I look to thee for my slave-girl, and Al-Hajjaj shall judge between
thee and me;” and the Master of Police answered, “Go to whom thou wilt.”
So Ni’amah went to the palace of Al-Hajjaj, for his father was one of
the chief men of Cufa; and, when he arrived there, the Chamberlain went
in to the Governor and told him the case; whereupon Al-Hajjaj said,
“Hither with him!” and when he stood before him enquired, “What be thy
business?” Said Ni’amah, “Such and such things have befallen me;” and
the Governor said, “Bring me the Chief of Police, and we will command
him to seek for the old woman.” Now he knew that the Chief of Police was
acquainted with her; so, when he came, he said to him, “I wish thee to
make search for the slave-girl of Ni’amah son of Al-Rabi’a.” And he
answered, “None knoweth the hidden things save Almighty Allah.” Rejoined
Al-Hajjaj, “There is no help for it but thou send out horsemen and look
for the damsel in all the roads, and seek for her in the towns.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Forty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Al-Hajjaj said to
the Captain of the watch, “There is no help for it but thou send out
horsemen, and look for the damsel on all the roads and seek for her in
the towns.” Then he turned to Ni’amah and said to him, “An thy
slave-girl return not, I will give thee ten slave-girls from my house
and ten from that of the Chief of Police.” And he again bade the Captain
of the Watch, “Go and seek for the girl.” So he went out, and Ni’amah
returned home full of trouble and despairing of life; for he had now
reached the age of fourteen and there was yet no hair on his
side-cheeks. So he wept and lamented and shut himself up from his
household; and ceased not to weep and lament, he and his mother, till
the morning, when his father came in to him and said, “O my son, of a
truth, Al-Hajjaj hath put a cheat upon the damsel and hath taken her;
but from hour to hour Allah giveth relief.” However grief redoubled on
Ni’amah, so that he knew not what he said nor knew he who came in to
him, and he fell sick for three months; his charms were changed, his
father despaired of him and the physicians visited him and said, “There
is no remedy for him save the damsel.” Now as his father was sitting one
day, behold, he heard tell of a skilful Persian physician, whom the folk
gave out for perfect in medicine and astrology and geomancy. So
Al-Rabi’a sent for him and, seating him by his side, entreated him with
honour and said to him, “Look into my son’s case.” Thereupon quoth he to
Ni’amah, “Give me thy hand.” The young man gave him his hand and he felt
his pulse and his joints and looked in his face; then he laughed and,
turning to his father, said, “Thy son’s sole ailment is one of the
heart.”[12] He replied, “Thou sayest sooth, O sage, but apply thy skill
to his state and case, and acquaint me with the whole thereof and hide
naught from me of his condition.” Quoth the Persian, “Of a truth he is
enamoured of a slave-girl and this slave-girl is either in Bassorah or
Damascus; and there is no remedy for him but reunion with her.” Said
Al-Rabi’a, “An thou bring them together, thou shalt live all thy life in
wealth and delight.” Answered the Persian, “In good sooth this be an
easy matter and soon brought about;” and he turned to Ni’amah and said
to him, “No hurt shall befal thee; so be of good cheer and keep thine
eyes cool and clear.” Then quoth he to Al-Rabi’a, “Bring me out four
thousand dinars of your money;” so he gave them to him, and he added, “I
wish to carry thy son with me to Damascus; and Almighty Allah willing, I
will not return thence but with the damsel.” Then he turned to the youth
and asked, “What is thy name?”; and he answered “Ni’amah.” Quoth the
Persian, “O Ni’amah, sit up and be of good heart, for Allah will reunite
thee with the damsel.” And when he sat up the leach continued, “Be of
good cheer for we set out for Damascus this very day: put thy trust in
the Lord, and eat and drink and be cheerful so as to fortify thyself for
travel.” Upon this the Persian began making preparation of all things
needed, such as presents and rarities; and he took of Al-Rabi’a in all
the sum of ten thousand dinars, together with horses and camels and
beasts of burden and other requisites. Then Ni’amah farewelled his
father and mother and journeyed with the physician to Aleppo. They could
find no news of Naomi there, so they fared on to Damascus, where they
abode three days, after which the Persian took a shop and he adorned
even the shelves with vessels of costly porcelain, with covers of
silver, and with gildings and stuffs of price. Moreover, he set before
himself vases and flagons of glass full of all manner of ointments and
syrups, and he surrounded them with cups of crystal and, placing
astrolabe and geomantic tablet facing him, he donned a physician’s habit
and took his seat in the shop. Then he set Ni’amah standing before him
clad in a shirt and gown of silk and, girding his middle with a silken
kerchief gold-embroidered, said to him, “O Ni’amah, henceforth thou art
my son; so call me naught but sire, and I will call thee naught but
son.” And he replied, “I hear and I obey.” Thereupon the people of
Damascus flocked to the Persian’s shop that they might gaze on the
youth’s goodliness and the beauty of the shop and its contents, whilst
the physician spoke to Ni’amah in Persian and he answered him in the
same tongue, for he knew the language, after the wont of the sons of the
notables. So that Persian doctor soon became known among the townsfolk
and they began to acquaint him with their ailments, and he to prescribe
for them remedies. Moreover, they brought him the water of the sick in
phials,[13] and he would test it and say, “He, whose water this is, is
suffering from such and such a disease,” and the patient would declare,
“Verily this physician sayeth sooth.” So he continued to do the
occasions of the folk and they to flock to him, till his fame spread
throughout the city and into the houses of the great. Now, one day as he
sat in his shop, behold, there came up an old woman riding on an ass
with a stuffed saddle of brocade embroidered with jewels; and, stopping
before the Persian’s shop, drew rein and beckoned him, saying, “Take my
hand.” He took her hand, and she alighted and asked him, “Art thou the
Persian physician from Irak?” “Yes,” answered he, and she said, “Know
that I have a sick daughter.” Then she brought out to him a phial and
the Persian looked at it and said to her, “O my mistress, tell me thy
daughter’s name, that I may calculate her horoscope and learn the hour
in which it will befit her to drink medicine.” She replied, “O my
brother the Persian,[14] her name is Naomi.”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Forty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Persian
heard the name of Naomi, he fell to calculating and writing on his hand
and presently said, “O my lady, I cannot prescribe a medicine for her
till I know what country woman she is, because of the difference of
climate: so tell me in what land she was brought up and what is her
age.” The old woman replied, “She is fourteen years old and she was
brought up in Cufa of Irak.” He asked, “And how long hath she sojourned
in this country?” “But a few months,” answered she. Now when Ni’amah
heard the old woman’s words and recognised the name of his slave-girl,
his heart fluttered and he was like to faint. Then said the Persian,
“Such and such medicines will suit her case;” and the old woman
rejoined, “Then make them up and give me what thou hast mentioned, with
the blessing of Almighty Allah.” So saying, she threw upon the
shop-board ten gold pieces; and he looked at Ni’amah and bade him
prepare the necessary drugs; whereupon she also looked at the youth and
exclaimed, “Allah have thee in his keeping, O my son! Verily, she
favoureth thee in age and mien.” Then said she to the physician, “O my
brother the Persian, is this thy slave or thy son?” “He is my son,”
answered he. So Ni’amah put up the medicine and, placing it in a little
box, took a piece of paper and wrote thereon these two couplets:[15]—

 If Naomi bless me with a single glance, ✿ Let Su’adá sue and Juml joy to
    pet:
 They said, “Forget her: twenty such thou’lt find.” ✿ But none is like
    her—I will _not_ forget!

He pressed the paper into the box and, sealing it up, wrote upon the
cover the following words in Cufic character, “I am Ni’amah son of
al-Rabi’a of Cufa.” Then he set it before the old woman who took it and
bade them farewell and returned to the Caliph’s palace; and when she
went up with the drugs to the damsel she placed the little box of
medicine at her feet, saying, “O my lady, know that there is lately come
to our town a Persian physician, than whom I never saw a more skilful
nor a better versed in matters of malady. I told him thy name, after
showing him the water-bottle, and forthwith he knew thine ailment and
prescribed a remedy. Then he bade his son make thee up this medicine;
and there is not in Damascus a comelier or a seemlier youth than this
lad of his, nor hath anyone a shop the like of his shop.” So Naomi took
the box and, seeing the names of her lord and his father written on the
cover, changed colour and said to herself, “Doubtless, the owner of this
shop is come in search of me.” So she said to the old woman, “Describe
to me this youth.” Answered the old woman, “His name is Ni’amah, he hath
a mole on his right eyebrow, is richly clad and is perfectly handsome.”
Cried Naomi, “Give me the medicine, whereon be the blessing and help of
Almighty Allah!” So she drank off the potion (and she laughing) and
said, “Indeed, it is a blessed medicine!” Then she sought in the box
and, finding the paper, opened it, read it, understood it and knew that
this was indeed her lord, whereat her heart was solaced and she
rejoiced. Now when the old woman saw her laughing, she exclaimed, “This
is indeed a blessed day!”; and Naomi said, “O nurse, I have a mind for
something to eat and drink.” The old woman said to the serving-women,
“Bring a tray of dainty viands for your mistress”; whereupon they set
food before her and she sat down to eat. And behold in came the Caliph
who, seeing her sitting at meat, rejoiced; and the old woman said to
him, “O Commander of the Faithful, I give thee joy of thy handmaid
Naomi’s recovery! And the cause is that there is lately come to this our
city a physician than whom I never saw a better versed in diseases and
their remedies. I fetched her medicine from him and she hath drunken of
it but once and is restored to health.” Quoth he, “Take a thousand
dinars and apply thyself to her treatment, till she be completely
recovered.” And he went away, rejoicing in the damsel’s recovery, whilst
the old woman betook herself to the Persian’s house and delivered the
thousand dinars, giving him to know that she was become the Caliph’s
slave and also handing him a letter which Naomi had written. He took it
and gave the letter to Ni’amah, who at first sight knew her hand and
fell down in a swoon. When he revived he opened the letter and found
these words written therein: “From the slave despoiled of her Ni’amah,
her delight; her whose reason hath been beguiled and who is parted from
the core of her heart. But afterwards. Of a truth thy letter hath
reached me and hath broadened my breast, and solaced my soul, even as
saith the poet:—

 Thy note came: long lost fingers wrote that note, ✿ Till drop they
    sweetest scents for what they wrote:
 ‘Twas Moses to his mother’s arms restored; ✿ ‘Twas Jacob’s eye-sight
    cured by Joseph’s coat!”[16]

When Ni’amah read these verses, his eyes ran over with tears and the old
woman said to him, “What maketh thee to weep, O my son? Allah never
cause thine eye to shed tears!” Cried the Persian, “O my lady, how
should my son not weep, seeing that this is his slave-girl and he her
lord, Ni’amah son of al-Rabi’a of Cufa; and her health dependeth on her
seeing him, for naught aileth her but loving him.”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Persian cried
out to the old woman, “How shall my son not weep, seeing that this is
his slave-girl and he her lord, Ni’amah son of al-Rabi’a of Cufa; and
the health of this damsel dependeth on her seeing him and naught aileth
her but loving him. So, do thou, O my lady, take these thousand dinars
to thyself and thou shalt have of me yet more than this; only look on us
with eyes of ruth; for we know not how to bring this affair to a happy
end save through thee.” Then she said to Ni’amah, “Say, art thou indeed
her lord?” He replied, “Yes,” and she rejoined, “Thou sayest sooth; for
she ceaseth not continually to name thee.” Then he told her all that had
passed from first to last, and she said, “O youth, thou shalt owe thy
reunion with her to none but myself.” So she mounted and, at once
returning to Naomi, looked in her face and laughed saying, “It is just,
O my daughter, that thou weep and fall sick for thy separation from thy
master, Ni’amah son of Al-Rabi’a of Cufa.” Quoth Naomi, “Verily, the
veil hath been withdrawn for thee and the truth revealed to thee.”
Rejoined the old woman, “Be of good cheer and take heart, for I will
assuredly bring you together, though it cost me my life.” Then she
returned to Ni’amah and said to him, “I went to thy slave-girl and
conversed with her, and I find that she longeth for thee yet more than
thou for her; for although the Commander of the Faithful is minded to
become intimate with her, she refuseth herself to him. But if thou be
stout of purpose and firm of heart, I will bring you together and
venture my life for you, and play some trick and make shift to carry
thee into the Caliph’s palace, where thou shalt meet her, for she cannot
come forth.” And Ni’amah answered, “Allah requite thee with good!” Then
she took leave of him and went back to Naomi and said, “Thy lord is
indeed dying of love for thee and would fain see thee and foregather
with thee. What sayest thou?” Naomi replied, “And I too am longing for
his sight and dying for his love.” Whereupon the old woman took a parcel
of women’s clothes and ornaments and, repairing to Ni’amah, said to him,
“Come with me into some place apart.” So he brought her into the room
behind the shop where she stained his hands and decked his wrists and
plaited his hair, after which she clad him in a slave-girl’s habit and
adorned him after the fairest fashion of woman’s adornment, till he was
as one of the Houris of the Garden of Heaven, and when she saw him thus
she exclaimed, “Blessed be Allah, best of Creators! By Allah, thou art
handsomer than the damsel.[17] Now, walk with thy left shoulder forwards
and thy right well behind, and sway thy hips from side to side.”[18] So
he walked before her, as she bade him; and, when she saw he had caught
the trick of woman’s gait, she said to him, “Expect me to-morrow night,
and Allah willing, I will take and carry thee to the palace. But when
thou seest the Chamberlains and the Eunuchs be bold, and bow thy head
and speak not with any, for I will prevent their speech; and with Allah
is success!” Accordingly, when the morning dawned, she returned and,
carrying him to the palace, entered before him and he after her step by
step. The Chamberlain would have stopped his entering, but the old woman
said to him, “O most ill-omened of slaves, this is the handmaid of
Naomi, the Caliph’s favourite. How durst thou stay her when she would
enter?” Then said she, “Come in, O damsel!”; and the old woman went in
and they ceased not faring on, till they drew near the door leading to
the inner piazza of the palace, when she said to him, “O Ni’amah,
hearten thyself and take courage and enter and turn to the left: then
count five doors and pass through the sixth, for it is that of the place
prepared for thee. Fear nothing, and if any speak to thee, answer not
neither stop.” Then she went up with him to the door, and the
Chamberlain there on guard accosted her, saying, “What damsel is
this?”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Chamberlain accosted the old woman, saying, “What damsel is this?”;
quoth the ancient dame, “Our lady hath a mind to buy her;” and he
rejoined, “None may enter save by leave of the Commander of the
Faithful; so do thou go back with her. I cannot let her pass for thus am
I commanded.” Replied the old woman, “O Chief Chamberlain, use thy
reason. Thou knowest that Naomi, the Caliph’s slave-girl, of whom he is
enamoured, is but now restored to health and the Commander of the
Faithful hardly yet crediteth her recovery. She is minded to buy this
handmaid; so oppose thou not her entrance, lest haply it come to Naomi’s
knowledge and she be wroth with thee and suffer a relapse and this cause
thy head to be cut off.” Then said she to Ni’amah, “Enter, O damsel; pay
no heed to what he saith and tell not the Queen-consort that her
Chamberlain opposed thine entrance.” So Ni’amah bowed his head and
entered the palace, and would have turned to the left, but mistook the
direction and walked to his right; and, meaning to count five doors and
enter the sixth, he counted six and entering the seventh, found himself
in a place whose floor was carpeted with brocade and whose walls were
hung with curtains of gold-embroidered silk. And therein stood censers
of aloes-wood and ambergris and strong-scented musk, and at the upper
end was a couch bespread with cloth of gold on which he seated himself,
marvelling at the magnificence he saw and knowing not what was written
for him in the Secret Purpose. As he sat musing on his case, the
Caliph’s sister, followed by her handmaid, came in upon him; and, seeing
the youth seated there took him for a slave-girl and accosted him and
said, “Who art thou O damsel? and what is thy case and who brought thee
hither?” He made no reply, and was silent, when she continued, “O
damsel! if thou be one of my brother’s concubines and he be wroth with
thee, I will intercede with him for thee and get thee grace.” But he
answered her not a word; so she said to her slave-girl, “Stand at the
door and let none enter.” Then she went up to Ni’amah and looking at him
was amazed at his beauty and said to him, “O lady, tell me who thou art
and what is thy name and how thou camest here; for I have never seen
thee in our palace.” Still he answered not, whereat she was angered and,
putting her hand to his bosom, found no breasts and would have unveiled
him, that she might know who he was; but he said to her, “O my lady, I
am thy slave and I cast myself on thy protection: do thou protect me.”
She said, “No harm shall come to thee, but tell me who thou art and who
brought thee into this my apartment.” Answered he, “O Princess, I am
known as Ni’amah bin al-Rabi’a of Cufa and I have ventured my life for
the sake of my slave-girl Naomi, whom Al-Hajjaj took by sleight and sent
hither.” Said she, “Fear not: no harm shall befal thee;” then, calling
her maid, she said to her, “Go to Naomi’s chamber and send her to me.”
Meanwhile the old woman went to Naomi’s bedroom and said to her, “Hath
thy lord come to thee?” “No, by Allah!” answered Naomi, and the other
said, “Belike he hath gone astray and entered some chamber other than
thine and lost himself.” So Naomi cried, “There is no Majesty and there
is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! Our last hour is
come and we are all lost.” And while they were sitting and sadly enough
pondering their case, in came the Princess’s handmaid and saluting Naomi
said to her, “My lady biddeth thee to her banquet.” “I hear and I obey,”
answered the damsel and the old woman said, “Belike thy lord is with the
Caliph’s sister and the veil of secrecy hath been rent.” So Naomi at
once sprang up and betook herself to the Princess, who said to her,
“Here is thy lord sitting with me; it seemeth he hath mistaken the
place; but, please Allah, neither thou nor he has any cause for fear.”
When Naomi heard these words, she took heart of grace and went up to
Ni’amah; and her lord when he saw her——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ni’amah saw
his handmaid Naomi, he rose to meet her and strained her to his bosom
and both fell to the ground fainting. As soon as they came to
themselves, the Caliph’s sister said to them, “Sit ye down and take we
counsel for your deliverance from this your strait.” And they answered,
“O our lady, we hear and obey; it is thine to command.” Quoth she, “By
Allah, no harm shall befal you from us!” Then she bade her handmaids
bring meat and drink which was done, and they sat down and ate till they
had enough, after which they sat drinking. Then the cup went round
amongst them and their cares ceased from them; but Ni’amah said, “Would
I knew how this will end.” The Princess asked, “O Ni’amah, dost thou
love thy slave Naomi?”; and he answered, “Of a truth it is my passion
for her which hath brought me to this state of peril for my life.” Then
said she to the damsel, “O Naomi, dost thou love thy lord Ni’amah?”; and
she replied, “O my lady, it is the love of him which hath wasted my body
and brought me to evil case.” Rejoined the Princess, “By Allah, since ye
love each other thus, may he not be who would part you! Be of good cheer
and keep your eyes cool and clear.” At this they both rejoiced and Naomi
called for a lute and, when they brought it, she took it and tuned it
and played a lively measure which enchanted the hearers, and after the
prelude sang these couplets:—

 When the slanderers cared but to part us twain, ✿ We owed no blood-debt
    could raise their ire;
 And they poured in our ears all the din of war, ✿ And aid failed and
    friends, when my want was dire:
 I fought them hard with mine eyes and tears; ✿ With breath and sword,
    with the stream and fire!

Then Naomi gave the lute to her master, Ni’amah, saying, “Sing thou to
us some verse.” So he took it and playing a lively measure, intoned
these couplets:—

 Full Moon if unfreckled would favour thee, ✿ And Sun uneclipsed would
    reflect thy blee:
 I wonder (but love is of wonders full ✿ And ardour and passion and
    ecstasy)
 How short the way to my love I fare, ✿ Which, from her faring, so long I
    see.

Now when he had made an end of his song, Naomi filled the cup and gave
it to him, and he took it and drank it off; then she filled again and
gave the cup to the Caliph’s sister who also emptied it; after which the
Princess in her turn took the lute and tightened the strings and tuned
it and sang these two couplets:—

 Grief, cark and care in my heart reside, ✿ And the fires of love in my
    breast abide;
 My wasted form to all eyes shows clear; ✿ For Desire my body hath
    mortified.

Then she filled the cup and gave it to Naomi, who drank it off and
taking the lute, sang these two couplets:—

 O to whom I gave soul which thou torturest, ✿ And in vain I’d recover
    from fair Unfaith,
 Do grant thy favours my care to cure ✿ Ere I die, for this be my latest
    breath.

And they ceased not to sing verses and drink to the sweet sound of the
strings, full of mirth and merriment and joy and jollity till behold, in
came the Commander of the Faithful. Now when they saw him, they rose and
kissed the ground before him; and he, seeing Naomi with the lute in her
hand, said to her, “O Naomi, praised be Allah who hath done away from
thee sickness and suffering!” Then he looked at Ni’amah (who was still
disguised as a woman), and said to the Princess, “O my sister, what
damsel is this by Naomi’s side?” She replied, “O Commander of the
Faithful, thou hast here a handmaid, one of thy concubines and the bosom
friend of Naomi who will neither eat nor drink without her.” And she
repeated the words of the poet:—

 Two contraries, and both concur in opposite charms, ✿ And charms so
    contraried by contrast lovelier show.

Quoth the Caliph, “By Allah Omnipotent, verily she is as handsome as
Naomi, and to-morrow I will appoint her a separate chamber beside that
of her friend and send her furniture and stuffs and all that befitteth
her, in honour of Naomi.” Then the Princess called for food and set it
before her brother, who ate and made himself at home in their place and
company. Then filling a cup he signed to Naomi to sing; so she took the
lute, after draining two of them and sang these two couplets:—

 Since my toper-friend in my hand hath given ✿ Three cups that brim and
    bubble, e’er since
 I’ve trailed my skirts throughout night for pride ✿ As tho’, Prince of
    the Faithful, I were thy Prince!

The Prince of True Believers was delighted and filling another cup, gave
it to Naomi and bade her sing again; so after draining the cup and
sweeping the strings, she sang as follows:—

 O most noble of men in this time and stound, ✿ Of whom none may boast he
    is equal found!
 O matchless in greatness of soul and gifts, ✿ O thou Chief, O thou King
    amongst all renowned:
 Lord, who dealest large boons to the Lords of Earth, ✿ Whom thou vexest
    not nor dost hold them bound;
 The Lord preserve thee, and spoil thy foes, ✿ And ne’er cease thy lot
    with good Fortune crowned!

Now when the Caliph heard these couplets, he exclaimed, “By Allah, good!
By Allah, excellent! Verily the Lord hath been copious[19] to thee, O
Naomi! How clever is thy tongue and how clear is thy speech!” And they
ceased not their mirth and good cheer till midnight, when the Caliph’s
sister said to him, “Give ear, O Commander of the Faithful to a tale I
have read in books of a certain man of rank.” “And what is this tale?”
quoth he. Quoth she “Know, O Prince of the Faithful that there lived
once in the city of Cufa a youth called Ni’amah, son of Al-Rabi’a, and
he had a slave-girl whom he loved and who loved him. They had been
reared in one bed; but when they grew up and mutual love gat hold of
them, Fortune smote them with her calamities and Time, the tyrant,
brought upon them his adversity and decreed separation unto them.
Thereupon designing and slanderous folk enticed her by sleight forth of
his house and, stealing her away from his home, sold her to one of the
Kings for ten thousand dinars. Now the girl loved her lord even as he
loved her; so he left kith and kin and house and home and the gifts of
fortune, and set out to search for her and when she was found he devised
means to gain access to her”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph’s
sister said, “And Ni’amah ceased not absenting himself from his kith and
kin and patrial stead, that he might gain access to his handmaid, and he
incurred every peril and lavished his life till he gained access to her,
and her name was Naomi, like this slave-girl. But the interview was
short; they had not been long in company when in came the King, who had
bought her of her kidnapper, and hastily ordered them to be slain,
without doing justice by his own soul and delaying to enquire into the
matter before the command was carried out. Now what sayest thou, O
Commander of the Faithful, of this King’s wrongous conduct?” Answered
the Caliph; “This was indeed a strange thing: it behoved that King to
pardon when he had the power to punish; and he ought to have regarded
three things in their favour. The first was that they loved each other;
the second that they were in his house and in his grasp; and the third
that it befitteth a King to be deliberate in judging and ordering
between folk, and how much more so in cases where he himself is
concerned! Wherefore this King thus did an unkingly deed.” Then said his
sister, “O my brother, by the King of the heavens and the earth, I
conjure thee, bid Naomi sing and hearken to that she shall sing!” So he
said, “O Naomi, sing to me;” whereupon she played a lively measure and
sang these couplets:—

 Beguiled us Fortune who her guile displays, ✿ Smiting the heart,
    bequeathing thoughts that craze,
 And parting lovers whom she made to meet, ✿ Till tears in torrent either
    cheek displays:
 They were and I was and my life was glad, ✿ While Fortune often joyed to
    join our ways;
 I _will_ pour tear-flood, _will_ rain gouts of blood, ✿ Thy loss
    bemoaning through the nights and days!

Now when the Commander of the Faithful heard this verse, he was moved to
great delight and his sister said to him, “O my brother, whoso decideth
in aught against himself, him it behoveth to abide by it and do
according to his word; and thou hast judged against thyself by this
judgement.” Then said she, “O Ni’amah, stand up and do thou likewise up
stand, O Naomi!” So they stood up and she continued, “O Prince of True
Believers, she who standeth before thee is Naomi the stolen, whom
Al-Hajjaj bin Yusuf al-Sakafi kidnapped and sent to thee, falsely
pretending in his letter to thee that he had bought her for ten thousand
gold pieces. And this other who standeth before thee is her lord,
Ni’amah, son of Al-Rabi’a; and I beseech thee, by the honour of thy
pious forebears and by Hamzah and Ukayl and Abbas,[20] to pardon them
both and overlook their offence and bestow them one on the other, that
thou mayst win rich reward in the next world of thy just dealing with
them; for they are under thy hand and verily they have eaten of thy meat
and drunken of thy drink; and behold, I make intercession for them and
beg of thee the boon of their blood.” Thereupon quoth the Caliph, “Thou
speakest sooth: I did indeed give judgement as thou sayst, and I am not
one to pass sentence and to revoke it.” Then said he, “O Naomi, say, be
this thy lord?” And she answered, “Even so, O Commander of the
Faithful.” Then quoth he, “No harm shall befal you, I give you each to
other;” adding to the young man, “O Ni’amah, who told thee where she was
and taught thee how to get at this place?” He replied, “O Commander of
the Faithful, hearken to my tale and give ear to my history; for, by the
virtue of thy pious forefathers, I will hide nothing from thee!” And he
told him all that had passed between himself and the Persian physician
and the old nurse, and how she had brought him into the palace and he
had mistaken the doors; whereat the Caliph wondered with exceeding
wonder and said, “Fetch me the Persian.” So they brought him into the
presence and he was made one of his chief officers. Moreover the King
bestowed on him robes of honour and ordered him a handsome present,
saying, “When a man hath shown like this man such artful management, it
behoveth us to make him one of our chief officers.” The Caliph also
loaded Ni’amah and Naomi with gifts and honours and rewarded the old
nurse; and they abode with him seven days in joy and content and all
delight of life, when Ni’amah craved leave to return to Cufa with his
slave-girl. The Caliph gave them permission and they departed and
arrived in due course at Cufa, where Ni’amah was restored to his father
and mother, and they abode in all the joys and jollities of life, till
there came to them the Destroyer of delights and the Sunderer of
societies. Now when Amjad and As’ad heard from Bahram this story, they
marvelled with extreme marvel and said, “By Allah, this is indeed a rare
tale!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Amjad and
As’ad heard this story from Bahram the Magian who had become a Moslem,
they marvelled with extreme marvel and thus passed that night; and when
the next morning dawned, they mounted and riding to the palace, sought
an audience of the King who granted it and received them with high
honour. Now as they were sitting together talking, of a sudden they
heard the townsfolk crying aloud and shouting to one another and calling
for help; and the Chamberlain came in to the King and said to him, “Some
King hath encamped before the city, he and his host, with arms and
weapons displayed, and we know not their object and aim.” The King took
counsel with his Wazir Amjad and his brother As’ad; and Amjad said, “I
will go out to him and learn the cause of his coming.” So he took horse
and, riding forth from the city, repaired to the stranger’s camp, where
he found the King and with him a mighty many and mounted Mamelukes. When
the guards saw him, they knew him for an envoy from the King of the
city; so they took him and brought him before their Sultan. Then Amjad
kissed the ground before him; but lo! the King was a Queen, who was
veiled with a mouth-veil, and she said to Amjad, “Know that I have no
design on this your city and that I am come hither only in quest of a
beardless slave of mine, whom if I find with you, I will do you no harm;
but if I find him not, then shall there befal sore onslaught between me
and you.” Asked Amjad, “O Queen, what like is thy slave and what is his
story and what may be his name?” Said she, “His name is As’ad and my
name is Marjanah, and this slave came to my town in company of Bahram, a
Magian, who refused to sell him to me; so I took him by force, but his
master fell upon him by night and bore him away by stealth and he is of
such and such a favour.” When Amjad heard that, he knew it was indeed
his brother As’ad whom she sought and said to her, “O Queen of the age,
Alhamdolillah, praised be Allah, who hath brought us relief! Verily this
slave whom thou seekest is my brother.” Then he told her their story and
all that had befallen them in the land of exile, and acquainted her with
the cause of their departure from the Islands of Ebony, whereat she
marvelled and rejoiced to have found As’ad. So she bestowed a dress of
honour upon Amjad, and he returned forthright to the King and told him
what had passed, at which they all rejoiced and the King went forth with
Amjad and As’ad to meet Queen Marjanah. When they were admitted to her
presence and sat down to converse with her and were thus pleasantly
engaged, behold, a dust-cloud rose and flew and grew, till it walled the
view. And after a while it lifted and showed beneath it an army dight
for victory, in numbers like the swelling sea, armed and armoured
cap-à-pie who, making for the city, encompassed it around as the ring
encompasseth the little finger;[21] and a bared brand was in every hand.
When Amjad and As’ad saw this, they exclaimed, “Verily to Allah we
belong and to Him we shall return! What is this mighty host? Doubtless,
these are enemies, and except we agree with this Queen Marjanah to fight
them, they will take the town from us and slay us. There is no resource
for us but to go out to them and see who they are.” So Amjad arose and
took horse and passed through the city-gate to Queen Marjanah’s camp;
but when he reached the approaching army he found it to be that of his
grandsire, King Ghayur, father of his mother Queen Budur.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Amjad reached
the approaching host, he found it to be that of his grandsire, Lord of
the Isles and the Seas and the Seven Castles; and when he went into the
presence, he kissed the ground between his hands and delivered to him
the message. Quoth the King, “My name is King Ghayur and I come
wayfaring in quest of my daughter Budur whom fortune hath taken from me;
for she left me and returned not to me, nor have I heard any tidings of
her or of her husband Kamar al-Zaman. Have ye any news of them?” When
Amjad heard this, he hung his head towards the ground for a while in
thought till he felt assured that this King was none other than his
grandfather, his mother’s father; whereupon he raised his head and,
kissing ground before him, told him that he was the son of his daughter
Budur; on hearing which Ghayur threw himself upon him and they both fell
a-weeping.[22] Then said Ghayur, “Praised be Allah, O my son, for
safety, since I have foregathered with thee,” and Amjad told him that
his daughter Budur was safe and sound, and her husband Kamar al-Zaman
likewise, and acquainted him that both abode in a city called the City
of Ebony. Moreover, he related to him how his father, being wroth with
him and his brother, had commanded that both be put to death, but that
his treasurer had taken pity on them and let them go with their lives.
Quoth King Ghayur, “I will go back with thee and thy brother to your
father and make your peace with him.” So Amjad kissed the ground before
him in huge delight and the King bestowed a dress of honour upon him,
after which he returned, smiling, to the King of the City of the Magians
and told him what he had learnt from King Ghayur, whereat he wondered
with exceeding wonder. Then he despatched guest-gifts of sheep and
horses and camels and forage and so forth to King Ghayur, and did the
like by Queen Marjanah; and both of them told her what chanced;
whereupon quoth she, “I too will accompany you with my troops and will
do my endeavour to make this peace.” Meanwhile behold, there arose
another dust-cloud and flew and grew till it walled the view and
blackened the day’s bright hue; and under it they heard shouts and cries
and neighing of steeds and beheld sword glance and the glint of levelled
lance. When this new host drew near the city and saw the two other
armies, they beat their drums and the King of the Magians exclaimed,
“This is indeed naught but a blessed day. Praised be Allah who hath made
us of accord with these two armies; and if it be His will, He shall give
us peace with yon other as well.” Then said he to Amjad and As’ad, “Fare
forth and fetch us news of these troops, for they are a mighty host,
never saw I a mightier.” So they opened the city gates, which the King
had shut for fear of the beleaguering armies, and Amjad and As’ad went
forth and, coming to the new host, found that it was indeed a mighty
many. But as soon as they came to it behold, they knew that it was the
army of the King of the Ebony Islands, wherein was their father, King
Kamar al-Zaman in person. Now when they looked upon him, they kissed
ground and wept; but, when he beheld them, he threw himself upon them
weeping, with sore weeping, and strained them to his breast for a full
hour. Then he excused himself to them and told them what desolation he
had suffered for their loss and exile; and they acquainted him with King
Ghayur’s arrival, whereupon he mounted with his chief officers and
taking with him his two sons, proceeded to that King’s camp. As they
drew near, one of the Princes rode forward and informed King Ghayur of
Kamar al-Zaman’s coming, whereupon he came out to meet him and they
joined company, marvelling at these things and how they had chanced to
foregather in that place. Then the townsfolk made them banquets of all
manner meats and sweetmeats and presented to them horses and camels and
fodder and other guest-gifts and all that the troops needed. And while
this was doing, behold, yet another cloud of dust arose and flew till it
walled the view, whilst earth trembled with the tramp of steed and
tabors sounded like stormy winds. After a while, the dust lifted and
discovered an army clad in coats of mail and armed cap-à-pie; but all
were in black garb, and in their midst rode a very old man whose beard
flowed down over his breast and he also was clad in black. When the King
in the city and the city-folk saw this great host, he said to the other
Kings, “Praised be Allah by whose omnipotent command ye are met here,
all in one day, and have proved all known one to the other! But what
vast and victorious army is this which hemmeth in the whole land like a
wall?” They answered, “Have no fear of them; we are three Kings, each
with a great army, and if they be enemies, we will join thee in doing
battle with them, were they three times as many as they now are.”
Meanwhile, up came an envoy from the approaching host, making for the
city. So they brought him before Kamar al-Zaman, King Ghayur, Queen
Marjanah and the King of the city; and he kissed the ground and said,
“My liege lord cometh from Persia-land; for many years ago he lost his
son and he is seeking him in all countries. If he find him with you,
well and good; but if he find him not, there will be war between him and
you and he will waste your city.” Rejoined Kamar al-Zaman, “It shall not
come to that; but how is thy master called in Aiam land?” Answered the
envoy, “He is called King Shahriman, lord of the Khalidan Islands; and
he hath levied these troops in the lands traversed by him, whilst
seeking his son.” Now when Kamar al-Zaman heard these words, he cried
out with a great cry and fell down in a fainting fit which lasted a long
while; and anon coming to himself he wept bitter tears and said to Amjad
and As’ad, “Go ye, O my sons, with the herald, salute your grandfather
and my father, King Shahriman, and give him glad tidings of me, for he
mourneth my loss and even to the present time he weareth black raiment
for my sake.” Then he told the other Kings all that had befallen him in
the days of his youth, at which they wondered and, going down with him
from the city, repaired to his father, whom he saluted, and they
embraced and fell to the ground senseless for excess of joy. And when
they revived after a while, Kamar al-Zaman acquainted his father with
all his adventures and the other Kings saluted Shahriman. Then, after
having married Marjanah to As’ad, they sent her back to her kingdom,
charging her not to cease correspondence with them; so she took leave
and went her way. Moreover they married Amjad to Bostan, Bahram’s
daughter, and they all set out for the City of Ebony. And when they
arrived there, Kamar al-Zaman went in to his father-in-law, King
Armanus, and told him all that had befallen him and how he had found his
sons; whereat Armanus rejoiced and gave him joy of his safe return. Then
King Ghayur went in to his daughter, Queen Budur,[23] and saluted her
and quenched his longing for her company, and they all abode a full
month’s space in the City of Ebony; after which the King and his
daughter returned to their own country.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Ghayur set
out with his daughter and his host for his own land, and they took with
them Amjad and returned home by easy marches. And when Ghayur was
settled again in his kingdom, he made his grandson King in his stead;
and as to Kamar al-Zaman he also made As’ad king in his room over the
capital of the Ebony Islands, with the consent of his grandfather, King
Armanus and set out himself, with his father, King Shahriman, till the
two made the Islands of Khalidan. Then the lieges decorated the city in
their honour and they ceased not to beat the drums for glad tidings a
whole month; nor did Kamar al-Zaman leave to govern in his father’s
place, till there overtook them the Destroyer of delights and the
Sunderer of societies; and Allah knoweth all things! Quoth King
Shahryar, “O Shahrazad, this is indeed a most wonderful tale!” And she
answered, “O King, it is not more wonderful than that of

-----

Footnote 1:

  The name is indifferently derived from the red sand about the town or
  the reeds and mud with which it was originally built. It was founded
  by the Caliph Omar, when the old Capital Madáin (Ctesiphon) opposite
  was held unwholesome, on the West bank of the Euphrates, four days’
  march from Baghdad and has now disappeared. Al-Saffáh, the first
  Abbaside, made it his Capital and it became a famous seat of Moslem
  learning; the Kufi school of Arab Grammarians being as renowned as
  their opponents, the Basri (of Bassorah). It gave a name to the
  “Cufic” characters which are, however, of much older date.

Footnote 2:

  “Ni’amat” = a blessing; and the word is perpetually occurring in
  Moslem conversation, “Ni’amatu ‘lláh” (as pronounced) is also a
  favourite P. N. and few Anglo-Indians of the Mutiny date will forget
  the scandalous disclosures of Munshi Ni’amatu ‘llah, who had been sent
  to England by Nana Sahib. Nu’m = prosperity, good fortune, and a P. N.
  like the Heb. “Naomi.”

Footnote 3:

  _i.e._ “causing to be prosperous”; the name, corrupted by the Turks to
  “Tevfik,” is given to either sex, _e.g._ Taufik Pasha of Egypt, to
  whose unprosperous rule and miserable career the signification
  certainly does not apply.

Footnote 4:

  Lane (ii. 187) alters the two to four years.

Footnote 5:

  _i.e._ “to Tom, Dick or Harry:” the names like John Doe and Richard
  Roe are used indefinitely in Arab. Grammar and Syntax. I have noted
  that Amru is written and pronounced Amr: hence Amru, the Conqueror of
  Egypt, when told by an astrologer that Jerusalem would be taken only
  by a _trium literarum homo_, with three letters in his name, sent for
  the Caliph Omar (Omr), to whom the so-called Holy City at once
  capitulated. Hence also most probably, the tale of Bhurtpore and the
  Lord Alligator (Kumbhir), who however did not change from Cotton to
  Combermore for some time after the successful siege.

Footnote 6:

  Bin Yúsuf al-Sakafi, a statesman and soldier of the seventh and eighth
  centuries (A.D.). He was Governor of Al-Hijaz and Al-Irak under the
  fifth and sixth Ommiades, and I have noticed his vigorous rule of the
  Moslems’ Holy Land in my Pilgrimage (iii. 194, etc.). He pulled down
  the Ka’abah and restored it to the condition in which it now is.
  Al-Siyuti (p. 219) accuses him of having suborned a man to murder Ibn
  Omar with a poisoned javelin, and of humiliating the Prophet’s
  companions by “sealing them in the necks and hands,” that is he tied a
  thong upon the neck of each and sealed the knot with lead. In Irak he
  showed himself equally masterful; but an iron hand was required by the
  revolutionists of Kufah and Basrah. He behaved like a good Knight in
  rescuing the Moslem women who called upon his name when taken
  prisoners by Dahir of Debal (Tathá in Sind). Al-Hajjaj was not the
  kind of man the Caliph would have chosen for a pander; but the Shi’ahs
  hated him and have given him a lasting bad name. In the East men
  respect manly measures, not the hysterical, philanthropic
  pseudo-humanitarianism of our modern government which is really the
  cruellest of all. When Ziyád bin Abihi was sent by Caliph Mu’awiyah to
  reform Bassorah, a den of thieves, he informed the lieges that he
  intended to rule by the sword and advised all evil-doers to quit the
  city. The people were forbidden, under pain of death, to walk the
  streets after prayers; on the first night two hundred suffered; on the
  second five and none afterwards. Compare this with our civilised rule
  in Egypt where even bands of brigands, a phenomenon perfectly new and
  unknown to this century, have started up, where crime has doubled in
  quantity and quality, and where “Christian rule” has thoroughly
  scandalised a Moslem land.

Footnote 7:

  The old bawd’s portrait is admirably drawn: all we dwellers in the
  East have known her well: she is so and so. Her dress and manners are
  the same amongst the Hindus (see the hypocritical female ascetic in
  the Katha p. 287) as amongst the Moslems; men of the world at once
  recognise her and the prudent keep out of her way. She is found in the
  cities of Southern Europe, ever pious, ever prayerful; and she seems
  to do her work not so much for profit as for pure or impure enjoyment.
  In the text her task was easy, as she had to do with a pair of
  innocents.

Footnote 8:

  Koran, xxv. 70. I give Sale’s version.

Footnote 9:

  Easterns, I have observed, have no way of saying “Thank you;” they
  express it by a blessing or a short prayer. They have a right to your
  surplus: daily bread is divided, they say and, eating yours, they
  consider it their own. I have discussed this matter in Pilgrimage i.
  75-77, in opposition to those who declare that “gratitude” is unknown
  to Moslems.

Footnote 10:

  Cufa (Kufah) being a modern place never had a “King,” but as the Hindu
  says, “Delhi is far”—it is a far cry to Loch Awe. Here we can hardly
  understand “Malik” as Governor or Viceroy: can it be syn. with Zú-mál
  (moneyed)?

Footnote 11:

  Abd al-Malik has been before mentioned as the “Sweat of a Stone,” etc.
  He died recommending Al-Hajjaj to his son, Al-Walid, and one of his
  sayings is still remembered. “He who desireth to take a female slave
  for carnal enjoyment, let him take a native of Barbary; if he need one
  for the sake of children, let him have a Persian; and whoso desireth
  one for service, let him take a Greek.” Moderns say, “If you want a
  brother (in arms) try a Nubian; one to get you wealth an Abyssinian
  and if you want an ass (for labour) a Sáwahíli, or Zanzibar negroid.”

Footnote 12:

  Probably suggested by the history of Antiochus and Stratonice, with an
  addition of Eastern mystery such as geomancy.

Footnote 13:

  Arab. “Kárúrah”: the “water-doctor” has always been an institution in
  the East and he has lately revived in Europe—especially at the German
  baths and in London.

Footnote 14:

  Lane makes this phrase “O brother of the Persians!” synonymous with “O
  Persian!” I think it means more, a Persian being generally considered
  “too clever by half.”

Footnote 15:

  The verses deal in untranslatable word-plays upon women’s names, Naomi
  (the blessing) Su’adá or Su’ád (the happy, which Mr. Redhouse, in
  Ka’ab’s Mantle-poem, happily renders Beatrice); and Juml (a sum or
  total) the two latter, moreover, being here fictitious.

Footnote 16:

  “And he (Jacob) turned from them, and said, ‘O how I am grieved for
  Joseph!’ And his eyes became white with mourning.... (Quoth Joseph to
  his brethren), ‘Take this my inner garment and throw it on my father’s
  face and he shall recover his sight....’ So, when the messenger of
  good tidings came (to Jacob) he threw it (the shirt) over his face and
  he recovered his eye-sight.”—Koran, xii. 84, 93, 96. The commentators,
  by way of improvement, assure us that the shirt was that worn by
  Abraham when thrown into the fire (Koran, chapt. xvi.) by Nimrod (!).
  We know little concerning “Jacob’s daughters” who named the only
  bridge spanning the upper Jordan, and who have a curious shrine-tomb
  near Jewish “Safed” (North of Tiberias), one of the four “Holy
  Cities.” The Jews ignore these “daughters of Jacob” and travellers
  neglect them.

Footnote 17:

  Easterns, I have remarked, mostly recognise the artistic truth that
  the animal man is handsomer than woman; and that “fair sex” is truly
  only of skin-colour. The same is the general rule throughout creation,
  for instance the stallion compared with the mare, the cock with the
  hen; while there are sundry exceptions such as the Falconidæ.

Footnote 18:

  The Badawi (who is nothing if not horsey) compares the gait of a woman
  who walks well (in Europe rarely seen out of Spain) with the slightly
  swinging walk of a thoroughbred mare, bending her graceful neck and
  looking from side to side at objects as she passes.

Footnote 19:

  Li ‘lláhi (darr’) al-káil, a characteristic idiom. “Darr” = giving
  (rich) milk copiously; and the phrase expresses admiration, “To Allah
  be ascribed (or Allah be praised for) his rich eloquence who said,”
  etc. Some Hebraists would render it, “Divinely (well) did he speak who
  said,” etc., holding “Allah” to express a superlative like “Yah” (Jah)
  in Gen. iv. 1; x. 9. Nimrod was a hunter to the person (or presence)
  of Yah, _i.e._ mighty hunter.

Footnote 20:

  Hamzah and Abbás were the famous uncles of Mohammed often noticed;
  Ukayl is not known; possibly it may be Akíl, a son of the fourth
  Caliph, Ali.

Footnote 21:

  The Eastern ring is rarely plain; and, its use being that of a signet,
  it is always in intaglio: the Egyptians invented engraving
  hieroglyphics on wooden stamps for marking bricks and applied the
  process to the ring. Moses B.C. 1491 (Exod. xxviii. 9) took two
  onyx-stones, and graved on them the names of the children of Israel.
  From this the signet ring was but a step. Herodotus mentions an
  emerald seal set in gold, that of Polycrates, the work of Theodorus
  son of Telecles the Samian (iii. 141). The Egyptians also were
  perfectly acquainted with working in cameo (anaglyph) and rilievo, as
  may be seen in the cavo rilievo of the finest of their hieroglyphs.
  The Greeks borrowed from them the cameo and applied it to gems (_e.g._
  Tryphon’s in the Marlborough collection), and they bequeathed the art
  to the Romans. We read in a modern book “Cameo means an onyx, and the
  most famous cameo in the world is the onyx containing the Apotheosis
  of Augustus.” The ring is given in marriage because it was a seal by
  which orders were signed (Gen. xxxviii. 18 and Esther iii. 10-12). I
  may note that the seal-ring of Cheops (Khufu), found in the Greatest
  Pyramid, was in the possession of my old friend, Doctor Abbott, of
  Auburn (U.S.), and was sold with his collection. It is the oldest ring
  in the world, and settles the Cheops-question.

Footnote 22:

  This habit of weeping when friends meet after long parting is
  customary, I have noted, amongst the American “Indians,” the Badawin
  of the New World; they shed tears thinking of the friends they have
  lost. Like most primitive people they are ever ready to weep as was
  Æneas or Shakespeare’s saline personage:—

             This would make a man, a man of salt
             To use his eyes for garden waterpots.

                                         (King Lear, iv. 6.)

Footnote 23:

  Here poetical justice is not done; in most Arab tales the two
  adulterous Queens would have been put to death.




                     ALA AL-DIN ABU AL-SHAMAT.”[24]


“What is that?” asked he, and she said, It hath reached me that there
lived, in times of yore and years and ages long gone before, a merchant
of Cairo[25] named Shams al-Din, who was of the best and truest-spoken
of the traders of the city; and he had eunuchs and servants and
negro-slaves and handmaids and Mamelukes and great store of money.
Moreover, he was Consul[26] of the Merchants of Cairo and owned a wife,
whom he loved and who loved him; except that he had lived with her forty
years, yet had not been blessed with a son or even a daughter. One day,
as he sat in his shop, he noted that the merchants, each and every, had
a son or two sons or more sitting in their shops like their sires. Now
the day being Friday; he entered the Hammam-bath and made the total
ablution: after which he came out and took the barber’s glass and looked
in it, saying, “I testify that there is no god but _the_ God and I
testify that Mohammed is the Messenger of God!” Then he considered his
beard and, seeing that the white hairs in it covered the black,
bethought himself that hoariness is the harbinger of death. Now his wife
knew the time of his coming home and had washed and made herself ready
for him, so when he came in to her, she said, “Good evening,” but he
replied “I see no good.” Then she called to the handmaid, “Spread the
supper-tray;” and when this was done quoth she to her husband, “Sup, O
my lord.” Quoth he, “I will eat nothing,” and pushing the tray away with
his foot, turned his back upon her. She asked, “Why dost thou thus? and
what hath vexed thee?”; and he answered, “Thou art the cause of my
vexation.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Two Hundred and Fiftieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shams al-Din said
to his wife, “Thou art the cause of my vexation.” She asked,
“Wherefore?” and he answered, “When I opened my shop this morning, I saw
that each and every of the merchants had with him a son or two sons or
more, sitting in their shops like their fathers; and I said to
myself:—He who took thy sire will not spare thee. Now the night I first
visited thee,[27] thou madest me swear that I would never take a second
wife over thee nor a concubine, Abyssinian or Greek or handmaid of other
race; nor would lie a single night away from thee: and behold, thou art
barren, and having thee is like boring into the rock.” Rejoined she,
“Allah is my witness that the fault lies with thee, for that thy seed is
thin.” He asked, “And what showeth the man whose semen is thin?” And she
answered, “He cannot get women with child, nor beget children.” Quoth
he, “What thickeneth the seed? tell me and I will buy it: haply, it will
thicken mine.” Quoth she, “Enquire for it of the druggists.” So he slept
with her that night and arose on the morrow, repenting of having spoken
angrily to her; and she also regretted her cross words. Then he went to
the market and, finding a druggist, saluted him; and when his salutation
was returned said to him, “Say, hast thou with thee a seed-thickener?”
He replied, “I had it, but am out of it: enquire thou of my neighbour.”
Then Shams al-Din made the round till he had asked every one, but they
all laughed at him, and presently he returned to his shop and sat down,
sore troubled. Now there was in the bazar a man who was Deputy Syndic of
the brokers and was given to the use of opium and electuary and green
hashísh.[28] He was called Shaykh Mohammed Samsam and being poor he used
to wish Shams al-Din good morrow every day. So he came to him according
to his custom and saluted him. The merchant returned his salute, but in
ill-temper, and the other, seeing him vexed, said, “O my lord, what hath
crossed thee?” Thereupon Shams al-Din told him all that occurred between
himself and his wife, adding, “These forty years have I been married to
her yet hath she borne me neither son nor daughter; and they say:—The
cause of thy failure to get her with child is the thinness of thy seed;
so I have been seeking a something wherewith to thicken my semen but
found it not.” Quoth Shaykh Mohammed, “O my lord, I have a
seed-thickener, but what wilt thou say to him who causeth thy wife to
conceive by thee after these forty years have passed?” Answered the
merchant, “If thou do this, I will work thy weal and reward thee.” “Then
give me a dinar,” rejoined the broker, and Shams al-Din said, “Take
these two dinars.” He took them and said, “Give me also yonder big bowl
of porcelain.” So he gave it to him and the broker betook himself to a
hashish-seller, of whom he bought two ounces of concentrated Roumi opium
and equal parts of Chinese cubebs, cinnamon, cloves, cardamoms, ginger,
white pepper and mountain skink[29]; and, pounding them all together,
boiled them in sweet olive-oil; after which he added three ounces of
male frankincense in fragments and a cupful of coriander-seed; and,
macerating the whole, made it into an electuary with Roumi bee-honey.
Then he put the confection in the bowl and carried it to the merchant,
to whom he delivered it, saying, “Here is the seed-thickener, and the
manner of using it is this. Take of my electuary with a spoon after
supping, and wash it down with a sherbet made of rose conserve; but
first sup off mutton and house-pigeon plentifully seasoned and hotly
spiced.” So the merchant bought all this and sent the meat and pigeons
to his wife, saying; “Dress them deftly and lay up the seed-thickener
until I want it and call for it.” She did his bidding and, when she
served up the meats, he ate the evening meal, after which he called for
the bowl and ate of the electuary. It pleased him well, so he ate the
rest and knew his wife. That very night she conceived by him and, after
three months, her courses ceased, no blood came from her and she knew
that she was with child. When the days of her pregnancy were
accomplished, the pangs of labour took her and they raised loud
lullilooings and cries of joy. The midwife delivered her with
difficulty, by pronouncing over the boy at his birth the names of
Mohammed and Ali, and said, “Allah is Most Great!”; and she called in
his ear the call to prayer. Then she wrapped him up and passed him to
his mother, who took him and gave him the breast; and he sucked and was
full and slept. The midwife abode with them three days, till they had
made the mothering-cakes of sugared bread and sweetmeats; and they
distributed them on the seventh day. Then they sprinkled salt against
the evil eye and the merchant, going in to his wife, gave her joy of her
safe delivery, and said, “Where is Allah’s deposit?” So they brought him
a babe of surpassing beauty, the handiwork of the Orderer who is ever
present and, though he was but seven days old, those who saw him would
have deemed him a yearling child. So the merchant looked on his face
and, seeing it like a shining full moon, with moles on either cheek,
said he to his wife, “What hast thou named him?” Answered she, “If it
were a girl I had named her; but this is a boy, so none shall name him
but thou.” Now the people of that time used to name their children by
omens; and, whilst the merchant and his wife were taking counsel of the
name, behold, one said to his friend, “Ho my lord, Ala al-Din!” So the
merchant said, “We will call him Ala al-Din Abú al-Shámát.”[30] Then he
committed the child to the nurse, and he drank milk two years, after
which they weaned him and he grew up and throve and walked upon the
floor. When he came to seven years old, they put him in a chamber under
a trap-door, for fear of the evil eye, and his father said, “He shall
not come out, till his beard grow.” So he gave him in charge to a
handmaid and a blackamoor; the girl dressed him his meals and the slave
carried them to him. Then his father circumcised him and made him a
great feast; after which he brought him a doctor of the law, who taught
him to write and read and repeat the Koran, and other arts and sciences,
till he became a good scholar and an accomplished. One day it so came to
pass that the slave, after bringing him the tray of food went away and
left the trap-door open: so Ala al-Din came forth from the vault and
went in to his mother, with whom was a company of women of rank. As they
sat talking, behold, in came upon them the youth as he were a white
slave drunken[31] for the excess of his beauty; and when they saw him,
they veiled their faces and said to his mother, “Allah requite thee, O
such an one! How canst thou let this strange Mameluke in upon us?
Knowest thou not that modesty is a point of the Faith?” She replied,
“Pronounce Allah’s name[32] and cry Bismillah! this is my son, the fruit
of my vitals and the heir of Consul Shams al-Din, the child of the nurse
and the collar and the crust and the crumb.”[33] Quoth they, “Never in
our days knew we that thou hadst a son”; and quoth she, “Verily his
father feared for him the evil eye and reared him in an under-ground
chamber;”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Fifty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ala-al-Din’s
mother said to her lady-friends, “Verily his father feared for him the
evil eye and reared him in an under-ground chamber; and haply the slave
forgot to shut the door and he fared forth; but we did not mean that he
should come out, before his beard was grown.” The women gave her joy of
him, and the youth went out from them into the court yard where he
seated himself in the open sitting-room; and behold, in came the slaves
with his father’s she-mule, and he said to them, “Whence cometh this
mule?” Quoth they, “We escorted thy father when riding her to the shop,
and we have brought her back.” He asked, “What may be my father’s
trade?”; and they answered, “Thy father is Consul of the merchants in
the land of Egypt and Sultan of the Sons of the Arabs.” Then he went in
to his mother and said to her, “O my mother, what is my father’s trade?”
Said she, “O my son, thy sire is a merchant and Consul of the merchants
in the land of Egypt and Sultan of the Sons of the Arabs. His slaves
consult him not in selling aught whose price is less than one thousand
gold pieces, but merchandise worth him an hundred and less they sell at
their own discretion; nor doth any merchandise whatever, little or
muchel, leave the country without passing through his hands and he
disposeth of it as he pleaseth; nor is a bale packed and sent abroad
amongst folk but what is under his disposal. And Almighty Allah, O my
son, hath given thy father monies past compt.” He rejoined, “O my
mother, praised be Allah, that I am son of the Sultan of the Sons of the
Arabs and that my father is Consul of the merchants! But why, O my
mother, do ye put me in the under-ground chamber and leave me prisoner
there?” Quoth she, “O my son, we imprisoned thee not save for fear of
folks’ eyes: ‘the evil eye is a truth,’[34] and most of those in their
long homes are its victims.” Quoth he, “O my mother, and where is a
refuge-place against Fate? Verily care never made Destiny forbear, nor
is there flight from what is written for every wight. He who took my
grandfather will not spare myself nor my father; for, though he live
to-day he shall not live to-morrow. And when my father dieth and I come
forth and say:—I am Ala al-Din, son of Shams al-Din the merchant, none
of the people will believe me, but men of years and standing will
say:—In our lives never saw we a son or a daughter of Shams al-Din. Then
the public Treasury will come down and take my father’s estate, and
Allah have mercy on him who said:—The noble dieth and his wealth passeth
away, and the meanest of men take his women. Therefore, O my mother,
speak thou to my father, that he carry me with him to the bazar and open
for me a shop; so may I sit there with my merchandise and teach me to
buy and sell and take and give.” Answered his mother, “O my son, as soon
as thy sire returneth I will tell him this.” So when the merchant came
home, he found his son Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat sitting with his mother
and said to her, “Why hast thou brought him forth of the under-ground
chamber?” She replied, “O son of my uncle, it was not I that brought him
out; but the servants forgot to shut the door and left it open; so, as I
sat with a company of women of rank, behold, he came forth and walked in
to me.” Then she went on to repeat to him his son’s words; so he said,
“O my son, to-morrow, Inshallah! I will take thee with me to the bazar;
but, my boy, sitting in markets and shops demandeth good manners and
courteous carriage in all conditions.” Ala al-Din passed the night
rejoicing in his father’s promise and, when the morrow came, the
merchant carried him to the Hammam and clad him in a suit worth a mint
of money. As soon as they had broken their fast and drunk their
sherbets, Shams al-Din mounted his she-mule and putting his son upon
another, rode to the market, followed by his boy. But when the
market-folk saw their Consul making towards them, foregoing a youth as
he were a slice of the full moon on the fourteenth night, they said, one
to other, “See thou yonder boy behind the Consul of the merchants;
verily, we thought well of him, but he is, like the leek, gray of head
and green at heart.”[35] And Shaykh Mohammed Samsam, Deputy Syndic of
the market, the man before mentioned, said to the dealers, “O merchants,
we will not keep the like of him for our Shaykh; no, never!” Now it was
the custom anent the Consul when he came from his house of a morning and
sat down in his shop, for the Deputy Syndic of the market to go and
recite to him and to all the merchants assembled around him the Fátihah
or opening chapter of the Koran,[36] after which they accosted him one
by one and wished him good morrow and went away, each to his
business-place. But when Shams al-Din seated himself in his shop that
day as usual, the traders came not to him as accustomed; so he called
the Deputy and said to him, “Why come not the merchants together as
usual?” Answered Mohammed Samsam, “I know not how to tell thee these
troubles, for they have agreed to depose thee from the Shaykh-ship of
the market and to recite the Fatihah to thee no more.” Asked Shams
al-Din, “What may be their reason?”; and asked the Deputy, “What boy is
this that sitteth by thy side and thou a man of years and chief of the
merchants? Is this lad a Mameluke or akin to thy wife? Verily, I think
thou lovest him and inclinest lewdly to the boy.” Thereupon the Consul
cried out at him, saying, “Silence, Allah curse thee, genus and species!
This is my son.” Rejoined the Deputy, “Never in our born days have we
seen thee with a son,” and Shams al-Din answered, “When thou gavest me
the seed-thickener, my wife conceived and bare this youth; but I reared
him in a souterrain for fear of the evil eye, nor was it my purpose that
he should come forth, till he could take his beard in his hand.[37]
However, his mother would not agree to this, and he on his part begged I
would stock him a shop and teach him to sell and buy.” So the Deputy
Syndic returned to the other traders and acquainted them with the truth
of the case, whereupon they all arose to accompany him; and, going in a
body to Shams al-Din’s shop, stood before him and recited the “Opener”
of the Koran; after which they gave him joy of his son and said to him,
“The Lord prosper root and branch! But even the poorest of us, when son
or daughter is born to him, needs must cook a pan-full of custard[38]
and bid his friends and kith and kin; yet hast thou not done this.”
Quoth he, “This I owe you; be our meeting in the garden.”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Fifty-second Night,

Her sister Dunyazad said to her, “Pray continue thy story for us, an
thou be awake and not inclined to sleep.” Quoth she:—With pleasure and
goodwill: it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Consul of the
merchants promised them a banquet and said “Be our meeting in the
garden.” So when morning dawned he despatched the carpet-layer to the
saloon of the garden-pavilion and bade him furnish the two. Moreover, he
sent thither all that was needful for cooking, such as sheep and
clarified butter and so forth, according to the requirements of the
case; and spread two tables, one in the pavilion and another in the
saloon. Then Shams al-Din and his boy girded themselves, and he said to
Ala al-Din “O my son, whenas a greybeard entereth, I will meet him and
seat him at the table in the pavilion; and do thou, in like manner,
receive the beardless youths and seat them at the table in the saloon.”
He asked, “O my father, why dost thou spread two tables, one for men and
another for youths?”; and he answered, “O my son, the beardless is
ashamed to eat with the bearded.” And his son thought this his answer
full and sufficient. So when the merchants arrived, Shams al-Din
received the men and seated them in the pavilion, whilst Ala al-Din
received the youths and seated them in the saloon. Then the food was set
on and the guests ate and drank and made merry and sat over their wine,
whilst the attendants perfumed them with the smoke of scented woods, and
the elders fell to conversing of matters of science and traditions of
the Prophet. Now there was amongst them a merchant called Mahmúd of
Balkh, a professing Moslem but at heart a Magian, a man of lewd and
mischievous life who loved boys. And when he saw Ala al-Din from whose
father he used to buy stuffs and merchandise, one sight of his face sent
him a thousand sighs and Satan dangled the jewel before his eyes, so
that he was taken with love-longing and desire and affection and his
heart was filled with mad passion for him. Presently he arose and made
for the youths, who stood up to receive him; and at this moment Ala
al-Din being taken with an urgent call of Nature, withdrew to make
water; whereupon Mahmud turned to the other youths and said to them, “If
ye will incline Ala al-Din’s mind to journeying with me, I will give
each of you a dress worth a power of money.” Then he returned from them
to the men’s party; and, as the youths were sitting, Ala al-Din suddenly
came back, when all rose to receive him and seated him in the place of
highest honour. Presently, one of them said to his neighbour, “O my lord
Hasan, tell me whence came to thee the capital whereon thou tradest.” He
replied, “When I grew up and came to man’s estate, I said to my sire:—O
my father, give me merchandise. Quoth he:—O my son, I have none by me;
but go thou to some merchant and take of him money and traffic with it;
and so learn to buy and sell, give and take. So I went to one of the
traders and borrowed of him a thousand dinars, wherewith I bought stuffs
and carrying them to Damascus, sold them there at a profit of two for
one. Then I bought Syrian stuffs and carrying them to Aleppo, made a
similar gain of them; after which I bought stuffs of Aleppo and repaired
with them to Baghdad, where I sold them with like result, two for one;
nor did I cease trading upon my capital till I was worth nigh ten
thousand ducats.” Then each of the others told his friend some such
tale, till it came to Ala al-Din’s turn to speak, when they said to him,
“And thou, O my lord Ala al-Din?” Quoth he, “I was brought up in a
chamber under-ground and came forth from it only this week; and I do but
go to the shop and return home from the shop.” They remarked, “Thou art
used to wone at home and wottest not the joys of travel, for travel is
for men only.” He replied, “I reck not of voyaging and wayfaring doth
not tempt me.” Whereupon quoth one to the other, “This one is like the
fish: when he leaveth the water he dieth.” Then they said to him, “O Ala
al-Din, the glory of the sons of the merchants is not but in travel for
the sake of gain.” Their talk angered him; so he left them weeping-eyed
and heavy-hearted and mounting his mule returned home. Now his mother
saw him in tears and in bad temper and asked him, “What hath made thee
weep, O my son?”; and he answered, “Of a truth, all the sons of the
merchants put me to shame and said:—Naught is more glorious for a
merchant’s son than travel for gain and to get him gold.”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ala al-Din said to
his mother, “Of a truth all the sons of the merchants put me to shame
and said:—Naught is more honourable for a merchant’s son than travel for
gain.” “O my son, hast thou a mind to travel?” “Even so!” “And whither
wilt thou go?” “To the city of Baghdad; for there folk make double the
cost price on their goods.” “O my son, thy father is a very rich man
and, if he provide thee not with merchandise, I will supply it out of my
own monies.” “The best favour is that which is soonest bestowed; if this
kindness is to be, now is the time.” So she called the slaves and sent
them for cloth-packers; then, opening a store-house, brought out ten
loads of stuffs, which they made up into bales for him. Such was his
case; but as regards his father, Shams al-Din, he looked about and
failed to find Ala al-Din in the garden and enquiring after him, was
told that he had mounted mule and gone home; so he too mounted and
followed him. Now when he entered the house, he saw the bales ready
bound and asked what they were; whereupon his wife told him what had
chanced between Ala al-Din and the sons of the merchants; and he cried,
“O my son, Allah’s malison on travel and stranger-hood! Verily Allah’s
Apostle (whom the Lord bless and preserve!) hath said:—It is of a man’s
happy fortune that he eat his daily bread in his own land; and it was
said of the ancients:—Leave travel, though but for a mile.” Then quoth
he to his son, “Say, art thou indeed resolved to travel and wilt thou
not turn back from it?” Quoth the other, “There is no help for it but
that I journey to Baghdad with merchandise, else will I doff clothes and
don dervish gear and fare a-wandering over the world.” Shams al-Din
rejoined, “I am no penniless pauper but have great plenty of wealth;”
then he showed him all he owned of monies and stuffs and stock-in-trade
and observed, “With me are stuffs and merchandise befitting every
country in the world.” Then he showed him among the rest, forty bales
ready bound, with the price, a thousand dinars, written on each, and
said, “O my son take these forty loads, together with the ten which thy
mother gave thee, and set out under the safeguard of Almighty Allah.
But, O my child, I fear for thee a certain wood in thy way, called the
Lion’s Copse,[39] and a valley hight the Vale of Dogs, for there lives
are lost without mercy.” He said, “How so, O my father?”; and he
replied, “Because of a Badawi bandit named Ajlán.” Quoth Ala al-Din,
“Such is Allah’s luck; if any share of it be mine, no harm shall hap to
me.” Then they rode to the cattle-bazar, where behold, a cameleer[40]
alighted from his she-mule and kissing the Consul’s hand, said to him,
“O my lord, it is long, by Allah, since thou hast employed us in the way
of business.” He replied, “Every time hath its fortune and its men,[41]
and Allah have ruth on him who said:—

 And the old man crept o’er the worldly ways ✿ So bowed, his beard o’er
    his knees down flow’th:
 Quoth I:—What gars thee so doubled go? ✿ Quoth he (as to me his hands he
    show’th)
 My youth is lost, in the dust it lieth; ✿ And see, I bend me to find my
    youth.”[42]

Now when he had ended his verses, he said, “O chief of the caravan, it
is not I who am minded to travel, but this my son.” Quoth the cameleer,
“Allah save him for thee.” Then the Consul made a contract between Ala
al-Din and the man, appointing that the youth should be to him as a son,
and gave him into his charge, saying, “Take these hundred gold pieces
for thy people.” Moreover he bought his son threescore mules and a lamp
and a tomb-covering for the Sayyid Abd al-Kadir of Gílán[43] and said to
him, “O my son, while I am absent, this is thy sire in my stead:
whatsoever he biddeth thee, do thou obey him.” So saying, he returned
home with the mules and servants and that night they made a Khitmah or
perlection of the Koran and held a festival in honour of the Shaykh Abd
al-Kadir al-Jiláni. And when the morrow dawned, the Consul gave his son
ten thousand dinars, saying, “O my son, when thou comest to Baghdad, if
thou find stuffs easy of sale, sell them; but if they be dull, spend of
these dinars.” Then they loaded the mules and, taking leave of one
another, all the wayfarers setting out on their journey, marched forth
from the city. Now Mahmud of Balkh had made ready his own venture for
Baghdad and had moved his bales and set up his tents without the walls,
saying in himself, “Thou shalt not enjoy this youth but in the desert,
where there is neither spy nor marplot to trouble thee.” It chanced that
he had in hand a thousand dinars which he owed to the youth’s father,
the balance of a business-transaction between them; so he went and bade
farewell to the Consul, who charged him, “Give the thousand dinars to my
son Ala al-Din;” and commended the lad to his care, saying, “He is as it
were thy son.” Accordingly, Ala al-Din joined company with Mahmud of
Balkh——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King that Ala al-Din joined
company with Mahmud of Balkh who, before beginning the march, charged
the youth’s cook to dress nothing for him, but himself provided him and
his company with meat and drink. Now he had four houses, one in Cairo,
another in Damascus, a third in Aleppo and a fourth in Baghdad. So they
set out and ceased not journeying over waste and wold till they drew
near Damascus, when Mahmud sent his slave to Ala al-Din, whom he found
sitting and reading. He went up to him and kissed his hands, and Ala
al-Din having asked him what he wanted, he answered, “My master saluteth
thee and craveth thy company to a banquet at his place.” Quoth the
youth, “Not till I consult my father Kamál al-Din, the captain of the
caravan.” So he asked advice of the Makaddam,[44] who said, “Do not go.”
Then they left Damascus and journeyed on till they came to Aleppo, where
Mahmud made a second entertainment and sent to invite Ala al-Din; but he
consulted the Chief Cameleer who again forbade him. Then they marched
from Aleppo and fared on, till there remained between them and Baghdad
only a single stage. Here Mahmud prepared a third feast and sent to bid
Ala al-Din to it: Kamal al-Din once more forbade his accepting it, but
he said, “I must needs go.” So he rose and, slinging a sword over his
shoulder, under his clothes, repaired to the tent of Mahmud of Balkh,
who came to meet him and saluted him. Then he set before him a sumptuous
repast and they ate and drank and washed hands. At last Mahmud bent
towards Ala al-Din to snatch a kiss from him, but the youth received the
kiss on the palm of his hand and said to him, “What wouldest thou be
at?” Quoth Mahmud, “In very sooth I brought thee hither that I might
take my pleasure with thee in this jousting-ground, and we will comment
upon the words of him who saith:—

 Say, canst not come to us one momentling, ✿ Like milk of ewekin or aught
    glistening,
 And eat what liketh thee of dainty cate, ✿ And take thy due of fee in
    silverling,
 And bear whatso thou wilt, without mislike, ✿ Of spanling, fistling or a
    spanlong thing?”

Then Mahmud of Balkh would have laid hands on Ala al-Din to ravish him;
but he rose and baring his brand, said to him, “Shame on thy gray hairs!
Hast thou no fear of Allah, and He of exceeding awe?[45] May He have
mercy on him who saith:—

 Preserve thy hoary hairs from soil and stain, ✿ For whitest colours are
    the easiest stained!”

And when he ended his verses he said to Mahmud of Balkh, “Verily this
merchandise[46] is a trust from Allah and may not be sold. If I sold
this property to other than thee for gold, I would sell it to thee for
silver; but by Allah, O filthy villain, I will never again company with
thee; no, never!” Then he returned to Kamal al-Din the guide and said to
him, “Yonder man is a lewd fellow, and I will no longer consort with him
nor suffer his company by the way.” He replied, “O my son, did I not say
to thee:—Go not near him? But if we part company with him, I fear
destruction for ourselves; so let us still make one caravan.” But Ala
al-Din cried, “It may not be that I ever again travel with him.” So he
loaded his beasts and journeyed onwards, he and his company, till they
came to a valley, where Ala al-Din would have halted, but the Cameleer
said to him, “Do not halt here; rather let us fare forwards and press
our pace, so haply we make Baghdad before the gates are closed, for they
open and shut them with the sun, in fear lest the Rejectors[47] should
take the city and throw the books of religious learning into the
Tigris.” But Ala al-Din replied to him, “O my father, I came not forth
from home with this merchandise, or travelled hither for the sake of
traffic, but to divert myself with the sight of foreign lands and
folks;” and he rejoined, “O my son, we fear for thee and for thy goods
from the wild Arabs.” Whereupon the youth answered, “Harkye, fellow, art
thou master or man? I will not enter Baghdad till the morning, that the
sons of the city may see my merchandise and know me.” “Do as thou wilt,”
said the other; “I have given thee the wisest advice, but thou art the
best judge of thine own case.” Then Ala al-Din bade them unload the
mules and pitch the tent; so they did his bidding and abode there till
the middle of the night, when he went out to obey a call of nature and
suddenly saw something gleaming afar off. So he said to Kamal al-Din, “O
captain, what is yonder glittering?” The Cameleer sat up and,
considering it straitly, knew it for the glint of spear-heads and the
steel of Badawi weapons and swords. And lo and behold! this was a troop
of wild Arabs under a chief called Ajlán Abú Náib, Shaykh of the Arabs,
and when they neared the camp and saw the bales and baggage, they said
one to another, “O night of loot!” Now when Kamal al-Din heard these
their words he cried, “Avaunt, O vilest of Arabs!” But Abu Naib so smote
him with his throw-spear in the breast, that the point came out gleaming
from his back, and he fell down dead at the tent-door. Then cried the
water-carrier,[48] “Avaunt, O foulest of Arabs!” and one of them smote
him with a sword upon the shoulder, that it issued shining from the
tendons of the throat, and he also fell down dead. (And all this while
Ala al-Din stood looking on.) Then the Badawin surrounded and charged
the caravan from every side and slew all Ala al-Din’s company without
sparing a man: after which they loaded the mules with the spoil and made
off. Quoth Ala al-Din to himself, “Nothing will slay thee save thy mule
and thy dress!”; so he arose and put off his gown and threw it over the
back of a mule, remaining in his shirt and bag-trousers only; after
which he looked towards the tent-door and, seeing there a pool of gore
flowing from the slaughtered, wallowed in it with his remaining clothes
till he was as a slain man drowned in his own blood. Thus it fared with
him; but as regards the Shaykh of the wild Arabs, Ajlan, he said to his
banditti, “O Arabs, was this caravan bound from Egypt for Baghdad or
from Baghdad for Egypt?”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

[Illustration]


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King that when the Badawi
asked his banditti, “O Arabs, was this caravan bound from Egypt for
Baghdad or from Baghdad for Egypt?”; they answered, “’Twas bound from
Egypt for Baghdad;” and he said, “Return ye to the slain, for methinks
the owner of this caravan is not dead.” So they turned back to the slain
and fell to prodding and slashing them with lance and sword till they
came to Ala al-Din, who had thrown himself down among the corpses. And
when they came to him, quoth they, “Thou dost but feign thyself dead,
but we will make an end of thee,” and one of the Badawin levelled his
javelin and would have plunged it into his breast when he cried out,
“Save me, O my lord Abd al-Kadir, O Saint of Gilan!” and behold, he saw
a hand turn the lance away from his breast to that of Kamal al-Din the
cameleer, so that it pierced him and spared himself.[49] Then the Arabs
made off; and, when Ala al-Din saw that the birds were flown with their
god-send, he sat up and finding no one, rose and set off running; but,
behold Abu Náib the Badawi looked back and said to his troop, “I see
somewhat moving afar off, O Arabs!” So one of the bandits turned back
and, spying Ala al-Din running, called out to him, saying, “Flight shall
not forward thee and we after thee;” and he smote his mare with his heel
and she hastened after him. Then Ala al-Din seeing before him a watering
tank and a cistern beside it, climbed up into a niche in the cistern
and, stretching himself at full length, feigned to be asleep and said,
“O gracious Protector, cover me with the veil of Thy protection which
may not be torn away!” And lo! the Badawi came up to the cistern and,
standing in his stirrup-irons put out his hand to lay hold of Ala
al-Din; but he said, “O my lady Nafísah[50]! Now is thy time!” And
behold, a scorpion stung the Badawi in the palm and he cried out,
saying, “Help, O Arabs! I am stung;” and he alighted from his mare’s
back. So his comrades came up to him and mounted him again, asking,
“What hath befallen thee?” whereto he answered, “A young scorpion[51]
stung me.” So they departed, with the caravan. Such was their case; but
as regards Ala al-Din, he tarried in the niche, and Mahmud of Balkh bade
load his beasts and fared forwards till he came to the Lion’s Copse
where he found Ala al-Din’s attendants all lying slain. At this he
rejoiced and went on till he reached the cistern and the reservoir. Now
his mule was athirst and turned aside to drink, but she saw Ala al-Din’s
shadow in the water and shied and started; whereupon Mahmud raised his
eyes and, seeing Ala al-Din lying in the niche, stripped to his shirt
and bag-trousers, said to him, “What man this deed to thee hath dight
and left thee in this evil plight?” Answered Ala al-Din, “The Arabs,”
and Mahmud said, “O my son, the mules and the baggage were thy ransom;
so do thou comfort thyself with his saying who said:—

 If thereby man can save his head from death, ✿ His good is worth him but
    a slice of nail!

But now, O my son, come down and fear no hurt.” Thereupon he descended
from the cistern-niche and Mahmud mounted him on a mule, and they fared
on till they reached Baghdad, where he brought him to his own house and
carried him to the bath, saying to him, “The goods and money were the
ransom of thy life, O my son; but, if thou wilt hearken to me, I will
give thee the worth of that thou hast lost, twice told.” When he came
out of the bath, Mahmud carried him into a saloon decorated with gold
with four raised floors, and bade them bring a tray with all manner of
meats. So they ate and drank and Mahmud bent towards Ala al-Din to
snatch a kiss from him; but he received it upon the palm of his hand and
said, “What, dost thou persist in thy evil designs upon me? Did I not
tell thee that, were I wont to sell this merchandise to other than thee
for gold, I would sell it thee for silver?” Quoth Mahmud, “I will give
thee neither merchandise nor mule nor clothes save at this price; for I
am gone mad for love of thee, and bless him who said:—

 Told us, ascribing to his Shaykhs, our Shaykh ✿ Abú Bilál, these words
    they wont to utter:[52]
 Unhealed the lover wones of love desire, ✿ By kiss and clip; his only
    cure’s to futter!”

Ala al-Din replied, “Of a truth this may never be, take back thy dress
and thy mule and open the door that I may go out.” So he opened the
door, and Ala al-Din fared forth and walked on, with the dogs barking at
his heels, and he went forwards through the dark when behold, he saw the
door of a mosque standing open and, entering the vestibule, there took
shelter and concealment; and suddenly a light approached him and on
examining it he saw that it came from a pair of lanthorns borne by two
slaves before two merchants. Now one was an old man of comely face and
the other a youth; and he heard the younger say to the elder, “O my
uncle, I conjure thee by Allah, give me back my cousin!” The old man
replied, “Did I not forbid thee, many a time, when the oath of divorce
was always in thy mouth, as it were Holy Writ?” Then he turned to his
right and, seeing Ala al-Din as he were a slice of the full moon, said
to him, “Peace be with thee! who art thou, O my son?” Quoth he,
returning the salutation of peace, “I am Ala al-Din, son of Shams
al-Din, Consul of the merchants for Egypt. I besought my father for
merchandise; so he packed me fifty loads of stuffs and goods,”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ala al-Din
continued, “So he packed me fifty loads of goods and gave me ten
thousand dinars, wherewith I set out for Baghdad; but when I reached the
Lion’s Copse, the wild Arabs came out against me and took all my goods
and monies. So I entered the city knowing not where to pass the night
and, seeing this place, I took shelter here.” Quoth the old man, “O my
son, what sayest thou to my giving thee a thousand dinars and a suit of
clothes and a mule worth other two thousand?” Ala al-Din asked, “To what
end wilt thou give me these things, O my uncle?” and the other answered,
“This young man who accompanieth me, is the son of my brother and an
only son; and I have a daughter called Zubaydah[53] the lutist, an only
child who is a model of beauty and loveliness, so I married her to him.
Now he loveth her, but she loatheth him; and when he chanced to take an
oath of triple divorcement and broke it, forthright she left him.
Whereupon he egged on all the folk to intercede with me to restore her
to him; but I told him that this could not lawfully be save by an
intermediate marriage, and we have agreed to make some stranger the
intermediary[54] in order that none may taunt and shame him with this
affair. So, as thou art a stranger, come with us and we will marry thee
to her; thou shalt lie with her to-night and on the morrow divorce her
and we will give thee what I said.” Quoth Ala al-Din to himself, “By
Allah, to bide the night with a bride on a bed in a house is far better
than sleeping in the streets and vestibules!” So he went with them to
the Kazi whose heart, as soon as he saw Ala al-Din, was moved to love
him, and who said to the old man, “What is your will?” He replied, “We
wish to make this young man an intermediary husband for my daughter; but
we will write a bond against him binding him to pay down by way of
marriage-settlement ten thousand gold pieces. Now if after passing the
night with her he divorce her in the morning, we will give him a mule
and dress each worth a thousand dinars, and a third thousand of ready
money; but if he divorce her not, he shall pay down the ten thousand
dinars according to contract.” So they agreed to the agreement and the
father of the bride to be received his bond for the marriage-settlement.
Then he took Ala al-Din and, clothing him anew, carried him to his
daughter’s house and there he left him standing at the door, whilst he
himself went in to the young lady and said, “Take the bond of thy
marriage-settlement, for I have wedded thee to a handsome youth by name
Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat: so do thou use him with the best of usage.”
Then he put the bond into her hands and left her and went to his own
lodging. Now the lady’s cousin had an old duenna who used to visit
Zubaydah, and he had done many a kindness to this woman, so he said to
her, “O my mother, if my cousin Zubaydah see this handsome young man,
she will never after accept my offer; so I would fain have thee contrive
some trick to keep her and him apart.” She answered, “By the life of thy
youth,[55] I will not suffer him to approach her!” Then she went to Ala
al-Din and said to him, “O my son, I have a word of advice to give thee,
for the love of Almighty Allah and do thou accept my counsel, as I fear
for thee from this young woman: better thou let her lie alone and feel
not her person nor draw thee near to her.” He asked, “Why so?”; and she
answered, “Because her body is full of leprosy and I dread lest she
infect thy fair and seemly youth.” Quoth he, “I have no need of her.”
Thereupon she went to the lady and said the like to her of Ala al-Din;
and she replied, “I have no need of him, but will let him lie alone, and
on the morrow he shall gang his gait.” Then she called a slave-girl and
said to her, “Take the tray of food and set it before him that he may
sup.” So the handmaid carried him the tray of food and set it before him
and he ate his fill: after which he sat down and raised his charming
voice and fell to reciting the chapter called Y. S.[56] The lady
listened to him and found his voice as melodious as the psalms of David
sung by David himself,[57] which when she heard, she exclaimed, “Allah
disappoint the old hag who told me that he was affected with leprosy!
Surely this is not the voice of one who hath such a disease; and all was
a lie against him.”[58] Then she took a lute of India-land workmanship
and, tuning the strings, sang to it in a voice so sweet its music would
stay the birds in the heart of heaven; and began these two couplets:—

 I love a fawn with gentle white-black eyes, ✿ Whose walk the willow-wand
    with envy kills:
 Forbidding me he bids for rival mine, ✿ Tis Allah’s grace who grants to
    whom He wills!

And when he heard her chant these lines he ended his recitation of the
chapter, and began also to sing and repeated the following couplet:—

 My Salám to the Fawn in the garments concealed, ✿ And to roses in
    gardens of cheek revealed.

The lady rose up when she heard this, and her inclination for him
redoubled and she lifted the curtain; and Ala al-Din, seeing her,
recited these two couplets:—

 She shineth forth, a moon, and bends, a willow-wand, ✿ And breathes out
    ambergris, and gazes, a gazelle.
 Meseems as if grief loved my heart and when from her ✿ Estrangement I
    abide possession to it fell.[59]

Thereupon she came forward, swinging her haunches and gracefully swaying
a shape the handiwork of Him whose boons are hidden; and each of them
stole one glance of the eyes that cost them a thousand sighs. And when
the shafts of the two regards which met rankled in his heart, he
repeated these two couplets:—

 She ‘spied the moon of Heaven, reminding me ✿ Of nights when met we in
    the meadows li’en:
 True, both saw moons, but sooth to say, it was ✿ Her very eyes I saw,
    and she my eyne.

And when she drew near him, and there remained but two paces between
them, he recited these two couplets:—

 She spread three tresses of unplaited hair ✿ One night, and showed me
    nights not one but four;
 And faced the moon of Heaven with her brow, ✿ And showed me two-fold
    moons in single hour.

And as she was hard by him he said to her, “Keep away from me, lest thou
infect me.” Whereupon she uncovered her wrist[60] to him, and he saw
that it was cleft, as it were in two halves, by its veins and sinews and
its whiteness was as the whiteness of virgin silver. Then said she,
“Keep away from me, thou! for thou art stricken with leprosy, and may be
thou wilt infect me.” He asked, “Who told thee I was a leper?” and she
answered, “The old woman so told me.” Quoth he, “’Twas she told me also
that thou wast afflicted with white scurvy;” and so saying, he bared his
forearms and showed her that his skin was also like virgin silver.
Thereupon she pressed him to her bosom and he pressed her to his bosom
and the twain embraced with closest embrace, then she took him and,
lying down on her back, let down her petticoat-trousers, and in an
instant that which his father had left him rose up in rebellion against
him and he said, “Go it, O Shaykh Zachary[61] of shaggery, O father of
veins!”; and putting both hands to her flanks, he set the
sugar-stick[62] to the mouth of the cleft and thrust on till he came to
the wicket called “Pecten.” His passage was by the Gate of Victories[63]
and therefrom he entered the Monday market, and those of Tuesday and
Wednesday and Thursday,[64] and, finding the carpet after the measure of
the daïs-floor,[65] he plied the box within its cover till he came to
the end of it. And when morning dawned he cried to her, “Alas for
delight which is not fulfilled! The raven[66] taketh it and flieth
away!” She asked, “What meaneth this saying?”; and he answered, “O my
lady, I have but this hour to abide with thee.” Quoth she, “Who saith
so?” and quoth he, “Thy father made me give him a written bond to pay
ten thousand dinars to thy wedding-settlement; and, except I pay it this
very day, they will imprison me for debt in the Kazi’s house; and now my
hand lacketh one half-dirham of the sum.” She asked, “O my lord, is the
marriage-bond in thy hand or in theirs?”; and he answered, “O my lady,
in mine, but I have nothing.” She rejoined, “The matter is easy; fear
thou nothing. Take these hundred dinars: an I had more, I would give
thee what thou lackest; but of a truth my father, of his love for my
cousin, hath transported all his goods, even to my jewellery, from my
lodging to his. But when they send thee a serjeant of the Ecclesiastical
Court,”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young lady
rejoined to Ala al-Din, “And when they send thee at an early hour a
serjeant of the Ecclesiastical Court, and the Kazi and my father bid
thee divorce me, do thou reply, By what law is it lawful and right that
I should marry at nightfall and divorce in the morning? Then kiss the
Kazi’s hand and give him a present, and in like manner kiss the
Assessors’ hands and give each of them ten gold pieces. So they will all
speak with thee, and if they ask thee, Why dost thou not divorce her and
take the thousand dinars and the mule and suit of clothes, according to
contract duly contracted? do thou answer, Every hair of her head is
worth a thousand ducats to me and I will never put her away, neither
will I take a suit of clothes nor aught else. And if the Kazi say to
thee, Then pay down the marriage settlement, do thou reply, I am short
of cash at this present; whereupon he and the Assessors will deal in
friendly fashion with thee and allow thee time to pay.” Now whilst they
were talking, behold, the Kazi’s officer knocked at the door; so Ala
al-Din went down and the man said to him, “Come, speak the Efendi,[67]
for thy father-in-law summoneth thee.” So Ala al-Din gave him five
dinars and said to him, “O Summoner, by what law am I bound to marry at
nightfall and divorce next morning?” The serjeant answered, “By no law
of ours at all, at all; and if thou be ignorant of the religious law, I
will act as thine advocate.” Then they went to the divorce-court and the
Kazi said to Ala al-Din, “Why dost thou not put away the woman and take
what falleth to thee by the contract?” Hearing this he went up to the
Kazi; and, kissing his hand, put fifty dinars in it and said, “O our
lord the Kazi, by what law is it lawful and right that I should marry at
nightfall and divorce in the morning in my own despite?” The Kazi
answered, “Divorce on compulsion and by force is sanctioned by no school
of the Moslems.” Then said the young lady’s father, “If thou wilt not
divorce, pay me the ten thousand dinars, her marriage-settlement.” Quoth
Ala al-Din, “Give me a delay of three days;” but the Kazi said, “Three
days is not time enough; he shall give thee ten.” So they agreed to this
and bound him after ten days either to pay the dowry or to divorce her.
And after consenting he left them and taking meat and rice and clarified
butter[68] and what else of food he needed, returned to the house and
told the young woman all that had passed; whereupon she said, “’Twixt
night and day, wonders may display; and Allah bless him for his say:—

 Be mild when rage shall come to afflict thy soul; ✿ Be patient when
    calamity breeds ire;
 Lookye, the Nights are big with child by Time, ✿ Whose pregnancy bears
    wondrous things and dire.”

Then she rose and made ready food and brought the tray, and they two ate
and drank and were merry and mirthful. Presently, Ala al-Din besought
her to let him hear a little music; so she took the lute and played a
melody that had made the hardest stone dance for glee, and the strings
cried out in present ecstacy, “O Loving One!”;[69] after which she
passed from the adagio into the presto and a livelier measure. As they
thus spent their leisure in joy and jollity and mirth and merriment,
behold, there came a knocking at the door and she said to him; “Go see
who is at the door.” So he went down and opened it and finding four
Dervishes standing without, said to them, “What want ye?” They replied,
“O my lord, we are foreign and wandering religious mendicants, the
viands of whose souls are music and dainty verse, and we would fain take
our pleasure with thee this night till morning doth appear, when we will
wend our way, and with Almighty Allah be thy reward; for we adore music
and there is not one of us but knoweth by heart store of odes and songs
and ritornellos.”[70] He answered, “There is one I must consult;” and he
returned and told Zubaydah who said, “Open the door to them.” So he
brought them up and made them sit down and welcomed them; then he
fetched them food, but they would not eat and said, “O our lord, our
meat is to repeat Allah’s name in our hearts and to hear music with our
ears: and bless him who saith:—

 Our aim is only converse to enjoy, ✿ And eating joyeth only
    cattle-kind.[71]

And just now we heard pleasant music in thy house, but when we entered,
it ceased; and fain would we know whether the player was a slave-girl,
white or black, or a maiden of good family.” He answered, “It was this
my wife,” and told them all that had befallen him, adding, “Verily my
father-in-law hath bound me to pay a marriage settlement of ten thousand
dinars for her, and they have given me ten days’ time.” Said one of the
Dervishes, “Have no care and think of naught but good; for I am Shaykh
of the Convent and have forty Dervishes under my orders. I will
presently collect from them the ten thousand dinars and thou shalt pay
thy father-in-law the wedding settlement. But now bid thy wife make us
music that we may be gladdened and pleasured; for to some folk music is
meat, to others medicine and to others refreshing as a fan.” Now these
four Dervishes were none other than the Caliph Harun al-Rashid, his
Wazir Ja’afar the Barmecide, Abu al-Nowás al-Hasan son of Háni[72] and
Masrur the sworder; and the reason of their coming to the house was that
the Caliph, being heavy at heart, had summoned his Minister and said, “O
Wazir! it is our will to go down to the city and pace its streets, for
my breast is sore straitened.” So they all four donned dervish-dress and
went down and walked about, till they came to that house where, hearing
music, they were minded to know the cause. They spent the night in
joyance and harmony and telling tale after tale until morning dawned,
when the Caliph laid an hundred gold pieces under the prayer-carpet and
all taking leave of Ala al-Din, went their way. Now when Zubaydah lifted
the carpet she found beneath it the hundred dinars and she said to her
husband, “Take these hundred dinars which I have found under the
prayer-carpet; assuredly the Dervishes when about to leave us laid them
there, without our knowledge.” So Ala al-Din took the money and,
repairing to the market, bought therewith meat and rice and clarified
butter and all they required. And when it was night, he lit the
wax-candles and said to his wife, “The mendicants, it is true, have not
brought the ten thousand dinars which they promised me; but indeed they
are poor men.” As they were talking, behold, the Dervishes knocked at
the door and she said, “Go down and open to them.” So he did her bidding
and bringing them up, said to them, “Have you brought me the ten
thousand dinars you promised me?” They answered, “We have not been able
to collect aught thereof as yet; but fear nothing: Inshallah, to-morrow
we will compound for thee some alchemical cookery. But now bid thy wife
play us her very best pieces and gladden our hearts for we love music.”
So she took her lute and made them such melody that had caused the
hardest rocks to dance with glee; and they passed the night in mirth and
merriment, converse and good cheer, till morn appeared with its sheen
and shone, when the Caliph laid an hundred gold pieces under the
prayer-carpet and all, after taking leave of Ala al-Din, went their way.
And they ceased not to visit him thus every night for nine nights; and
each morning the Caliph put an hundred dinars under the prayer-carpet,
till the tenth night, when they came not. Now the reason of their
failure to come was that the Caliph had sent to a great merchant, saying
to him, “Bring me fifty loads of stuffs, such as come from Cairo,”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Prince of True
Believers said to that merchant, “Bring me fifty loads of stuffs such as
come from Cairo, and let each one be worth a thousand dinars, and write
on each bale its price; and bring me also a male Abyssinian slave.” The
merchant did the bidding of the Caliph who committed to the slave a
basin and ewer of gold and other presents, together with the fifty
loads; and wrote a letter to Ala al-Din as from his father Shams al-Din
and said to him, “Take these bales and what else is with them, and go to
such and such a quarter wherein dwelleth the Provost of the merchants
and say:—Where be Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat? till folk direct thee to his
quarter and his house.” So the slave took the letter and the goods and
what else and fared forth on his errand. Such was his case; but as
regards Zubaydah’s cousin and first husband, he went to her father and
said to him, “Come let us go to Ala al-Din and make him divorce the
daughter of my uncle.” So they set out both together and, when they came
to the street in which the house stood, they found fifty he-mules laden
with bales of stuffs, and a blackamoor riding on a she-mule. So they
said to him, “Whose loads are these?” He replied, “They belong to my
lord Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat; for his father equipped him with
merchandise and sent him on a journey to Baghdad-city; but the wild
Arabs came forth against him and took his money and goods and all he
had. So when the ill news reached his father, he despatched me to him
with these loads, in lieu of those he had lost; besides a mule laden
with fifty thousand dinars, a parcel of clothes worth a power of money,
a robe of sables[73] and a basin and ewer of gold.” Whereupon the lady’s
father said, “He whom thou seekest is my son-in-law and I will show thee
his house.” Meanwhile Ala al-Din was sitting at home in huge concern,
when lo! one knocked, at the door and he said, “O Zubaydah, Allah is
all-knowing! but I fear thy father hath sent me an officer from the Kazi
or the Chief of Police.” Quoth she, “Go down and see what it is.” So he
went down; and, opening the door, found his father-in-law, the Provost
of the merchants with an Abyssinian slave, dusky-complexioned and
pleasant of favour, riding on a mule. When the slave saw him he
dismounted and kissed his hands; and Ala al-Din said, “What dost thou
want?” He replied, “I am the slave of my lord Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat,
son of Shams al-Din, Consul of the merchants for the land of Egypt, who
hath sent me to him with this charge.” Then he gave him the letter and
Ala al-Din opening it found written what followeth:[74]—

 Ho thou my letter! when my friend shall see thee, ✿ Kiss thou the ground
    and buss his sandal-shoon:
 Look thou hie softly and thou hasten not; ✿ My life and rest are in
    those hands so boon.

“After hearty salutions and congratulations and high estimation from
Shams al-Din to his son, Abu al-Shamat. Know, O my son, that news hath
reached me of the slaughter of thy men and the plunder of thy monies and
goods; so I send thee herewith fifty loads of Egyptian stuffs, together
with a suit of clothes and a robe of sables and a basin and ewer of
gold. Fear thou no evil and the goods thou hast lost were the ransom of
thy life; so regret them not and may no further grief befal thee. Thy
mother and the people of the house are doing well in health and
happiness and all greet thee with abundant greetings. Moreover, O my
son, it hath reached me that they have married thee, by way of
intermediary, to the lady Zubaydah the Lutist and they have imposed on
thee a marriage-settlement of ten thousand dinars; wherefore I send thee
also fifty thousand dinars by the slave Salím.”[75] Now when Ala al-Din
had made an end of reading the letter, he took possession of the loads
and, turning to the Provost, said to him, “O my father-in-law, take the
ten thousand dinars, the marriage-settlement of thy daughter Zubaydah,
and take also the loads of goods and dispose of them, and thine be the
profit; only return me the cost-price.” He answered, “Nay, by Allah, I
will take nothing; and, as for thy wife’s settlement, do thou settle the
matter with her.” Then, after the goods had been brought in, they went
to Zubaydah and she said to her sire, “O my father, whose loads be
these?” He said, “These belong to thy husband, Ala al-Din: his father
hath sent them to him instead of those whereof the wild Arabs spoiled
him. Moreover, he hath sent him fifty thousand dinars with a parcel of
clothes, a robe of sables, a she-mule for riding and a basin and ewer of
gold. As for the marriage-settlement that is for thy recking.” Thereupon
Ala al-Din rose and, opening the money-box, gave her her settlement and
the lady’s cousin said, “O my uncle, let him divorce to me my wife;” but
the old man replied, “This may never be now; for the marriage-tie is in
his hand.” Thereupon the young man went out, sore afflicted and sadly
vexed and, returning home, fell sick, for his heart had received its
death-blow; so he presently died. But as for Ala al-Din, after receiving
his goods he went to the bazar and buying what meats and drinks he
needed, made a banquet as usual against the night, saying to Zubaydah,
“See these lying Dervishes; they promised us and broke their promises.”
Quoth she, “Thou art the son of a Consul of the merchants, yet was thy
hand short of half a dirham; how then should it be with poor Dervishes?”
Quoth he, “Almighty Allah hath enabled us to do without them; but if
they come to us never again will I open the door to them.” She asked,
“Why so, whenas their coming footsteps brought us good luck; and,
moreover, they put an hundred dinars under the prayer-carpet for us
every night? Perforce must thou open the door to them an they come.” So
when day departed with its light and in gloom came night, they lighted
the wax candles and he said to her, “Rise, Zubaydah, make us music;” and
behold, at this moment some one knocked at the door, and she said, “Go
and look who is at the door.” So he went down and opened it and seeing
the Dervishes, said, “Oh, fair welcome to the liars! Come up.”
Accordingly they went up with him and he seated them and brought them
the tray of food; and they ate and drank and became merry and mirthful,
and presently said to him, “O my lord, our hearts have been troubled for
thee: what hath passed between thee and thy father-in-law?” He answered,
“Allah compensated us beyond and above our desire.” Rejoined they, “By
Allah, we were in fear for thee”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Dervishes thus
addressed Ala al-Din, “By Allah, we were in fear for thee and naught
kept us from thee but our lack of cash and coin.” Quoth he, “Speedy
relief hath come to me from my Lord; for my father hath sent me fifty
thousand dinars and fifty loads of stuffs, each load worth a thousand
dinars; besides a riding-mule, a robe of sables, an Abyssinian slave and
a basin and ewer of gold. Moreover, I have made my peace with my
father-in-law and my wife hath become my lawful wife by my paying her
settlement; so laud to Allah for that!” Presently the Caliph rose to do
a necessity; whereupon Ja’afar bent him towards Ala al-Din and said,
“Look to thy manners, for thou art in the presence of the Commander of
the Faithful.” Asked he, “How have I failed in good breeding before the
Commander of the Faithful, and which of you is he?” Quoth Ja’afar, “He
who went out but now to make water is the Commander of the Faithful,
Harun al-Rashid, and I am the Wazir Ja’afar; and this is Masrur the
executioner and this other is Abu Nowas Hasan bin Hani. And now, O Ala
al-Din, use thy reason and bethink thee how many days’ journey it is
between Cairo and Baghdad.” He replied, “Five-and-forty days’ journey;”
and Ja’afar rejoined, “Thy baggage was stolen only ten days ago; so how
could the news have reached thy father, and how could he pack thee up
other goods and send them to thee five-and-forty days’ journey in ten
days’ time?” Quoth Ala al-Din, “O my lord and whence then came they?”
“From the Commander of the Faithful,” replied Ja’afar, “of his great
affection for thee.” As they were speaking, lo! the Caliph entered and
Ala al-Din rising, kissed the ground before him and said, “Allah keep
thee, O Prince of the Faithful, and give thee long life; and may the
lieges never lack thy bounty and beneficence!” Replied the Caliph, “O
Ala al-Din, let Zubaydah play us an air, by way of house-warming[76] for
thy deliverance.” Thereupon she played him on the lute so rare a melody
that the very stones shook for glee, and the strings cried out for
present ecstasy, “O Loving One!” They spent the night after the merriest
fashion, and in the morning the Caliph said to Ala al-Din, “Come to the
Divan to-morrow.” He answered, “Hearkening and obedience, O Commander of
the Faithful; so Allah will and thou be well and in good case!” On the
morrow he took ten trays and, putting on each a costly present, went up
with them to the palace; and the Caliph was sitting on the throne when,
behold, Ala al-Din appeared at the door of the Divan, repeating these
two couplets:—

 Honour and Glory wait on thee each morn! ✿ Thine enviers’ noses in the
    dust be set!
 Ne’er cease thy days to be as white as snow; ✿ Thy foeman’s days to be
    as black as jet!

“Welcome, O Ala al-Din!” said the Caliph, and he replied, “O Commander
of the Faithful, the Prophet (whom Allah bless and assain!)[77] was wont
to accept presents; and these ten trays, with what is on them, are my
offering to thee.” The Caliph accepted his gift and, ordering him a robe
of honour, made him Provost of the merchants and gave him a seat in the
Divan. And as he was sitting behold, his father-in-law came in and,
seeing Ala al-Din seated in his place and clad in a robe of honour, said
to the Caliph, “O King of the age, why is this man sitting in my place
and wearing this robe of honour?” Quoth the Caliph, “I have made him
Provost of the merchants, for offices are by investiture and not in
perpetuity, and thou art deposed.” Answered the merchant, “Thou hast
done well, O Commander of the Faithful, for he is ours and one of us.
Allah make the best of us the managers of our affairs! How many a little
one hath become great!” Then the Caliph wrote Ala al-Din a Firman[78] of
investiture and gave it to the Governor who gave it to the crier,[79]
and the crier made proclamation in the Divan saying, “None is Provost of
the merchants but Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat, and his word is to be heard,
and he must be obeyed with due respect paid, and he meriteth homage and
honour and high degree!” Moreover, when the Divan broke up, the Governor
went down with the crier before Ala al-Din and the crier repeated the
proclamation and they carried Ala al-Din through the thoroughfares of
Baghdad, making proclamation of his dignity. Next day, Ala al-Din opened
a shop for his slave Salim and set him therein, to buy and sell, whilst
he himself rode to the palace and took his place in the Caliph’s
Divan.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Two Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ala al-Din rode to
the palace and took his place in the Caliph’s Divan. Now it came to pass
one day, when he sat in his stead as was his wont, behold, one said to
the Caliph, “O Commander of the Faithful, may thy head survive such an
one the cup-companion!; for he is gone to the mercy of Almighty Allah,
but be thy life prolonged!”[80] Quoth the Caliph, “Where is Ala al-Din
Abu al-Shamat?” So he went up to the Commander of the Faithful, who at
once clad him in a splendid dress of honour and made him his
boon-companion; appointing him a monthly pay and allowance of a thousand
dinars. He continued to keep him company till, one day, as he sat in the
Divan, according to his custom attending upon the Caliph, lo and behold!
an Emir came up with sword and shield in hand and said, “O Commander of
the Faithful, may thy head long outlive the Head of the Sixty, for he is
dead this day;” whereupon the Caliph ordered Ala al-Din a dress of
honour and made him Chief of the Sixty, in place of the other who had
neither wife nor son nor daughter. So Ala al-Din laid hands on his
estate and the Caliph said to him, “Bury him in the earth and take all
he hath left of wealth and slaves and handmaids.”[81] Then he shook the
handkerchief[82] and dismissed the Divan, whereupon Ala al-Din went
forth, attended by Ahmad al-Danaf, captain of the right, and Hasan
Shúmán, captain of the left, riding at his either stirrup, each with his
forty men.[83] Presently, he turned to Hasan Shuman and his men and said
to them, “Plead ye for me with the Captain Ahmad al-Danaf that he please
to accept me as his son by covenant before Allah.” And Ahmad assented,
saying, “I and my forty men will go before thee to the Divan every
morning.” Now after this Ala al-Din continued in the Caliph’s service
many days; till one day it chanced that he left the Divan and returning
home, dismissed Ahmad al-Danaf and his men and sat down with his wife
Zubaydah, the lute-player, who lighted the wax candles and went out of
the room upon an occasion. Suddenly he heard a loud shriek; so he rose
up and running in haste to see what was the matter, found that it was
his wife who had cried out. She was lying at full length on the ground
and, when he put his hand to her breast, he found her dead. Now her
father’s house faced that of Ala al-Din, and he, hearing the shriek,
came in and said, “What is the matter, O my lord Ala al-Din?” He
replied, “O my father, may thy head outlive thy daughter Zubaydah! But,
O my father, honour to the dead is burying them.” So when the morning
dawned, they buried her in the earth and her husband and father condoled
with and mutually consoled each other. Thus far concerning her; but as
regards Ala al-Din, he donned mourning dress and declined the Divan,
abiding tearful-eyed and heavy-hearted at home. After a while, the
Caliph said to Ja’afar, “O Wazir, what is the cause of Ala al-Din’s
absence from the Divan?” The Minister answered, “O Commander of the
Faithful, he is in mourning for his wife Zubaydah; and is occupied in
receiving those who come to console him;” and the Caliph said, “It
behoveth us to pay him a visit of condolence.” “I hear and I obey,”
replied Ja’afar. So they took horse, the Caliph and the Minister and a
few attendants, and rode to Ala al-Din’s house and, as he was sitting at
home, behold, the party came in upon him; whereupon he rose to receive
them and kissed the ground before the Caliph, who said to him, “Allah
make good thy loss to thee!” Answered Ala al-Din, “May Allah preserve
thee to us, O Commander of the Faithful!” Then said the Caliph, “O Ala
al-Din, why hast thou absented thyself from the Divan?” And he replied,
“Because of my mourning for my wife, Zubaydah, O Commander of the
Faithful.” The Caliph rejoined, “Put away grief from thee: verily she is
dead and gone to the mercy of Almighty Allah and mourning will avail
thee nothing; no, nothing.” But Ala al-Din said “O Commander of the
Faithful, I shall never leave mourning for her till I die and they bury
me by her side.” Quoth the Caliph, “In Allah is compensation for every
decease, and neither device nor riches can deliver from death; and
divinely gifted was he who said:—

 All sons of woman, albe long preserved, ✿ Are borne upon the bulging
    bier some day.[84]
 How then shall ‘joy man joy or taste delight, ✿ Upon whose cheeks shall
    rest the dust and clay?”

When the Caliph had made an end of condoling with him, he charged him
not to absent himself from the Divan and returned to his palace. And Ala
al-Din, after a last sorrowful night, mounted early in the morning and,
riding to the court, kissed the ground before the Commander of the
Faithful who made a movement as if rising from the throne,[85] to greet
and welcome him; and bade him take his appointed place in the Divan,
saying, “O Ala al-Din, thou art my guest to-night.” So presently he
carried him into his serraglio and calling a slave-girl named Kút
al-Kulúb, said to her, “Ala al-Din had a wife called Zubaydah, who used
to sing to him and solace him of cark and care; but she is gone to the
mercy of Almighty Allah, and now I would have thee play him an air upon
the lute,”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph said to
the damsel Kut al-Kulub, “I would have thee play him upon the lute an
air, of fashion sweet and rare, that he may be solaced of his cark and
care.” So she rose and made sweet music; and the Caliph said to Ala
al-Din, “What sayst thou of this damsel’s voice?” He replied, “Verily, O
Commander of the Faithful, Zubaydah’s voice was the finer; but she is
skilled in touching the lute cunningly and her playing would make a rock
dance with glee.” The Caliph asked, “Doth she please thee?” and he
answered, “She doth, O Commander of the Faithful;” whereupon the King
said, “By the life of my head and the tombs of my forefathers, she is a
gift from me to thee, she and her waiting-women!” Ala al-Din fancied
that the Caliph was jesting with him; but, on the morrow, the King went
in to Kut al-Kulub and said to her, “I have given thee to Ala al-Din;”
whereat she rejoiced, for she had seen and loved him. Then the Caliph
returned from his serraglio-palace to the Divan; and, calling porters,
said to them, “Set all the goods of Kut al-Kulub and her waiting-women
in a litter, and carry them to Ala al-Din’s home.” So they conducted her
to the house and showed her into the pavilion, whilst the Caliph sat in
the hall of audience till the close of day, when the Divan broke up and
he retired to his harem. Such was his case; but as regards Kut al-Kulub,
when she had taken up her lodging in Ala al-Din’s mansion, she and her
women, forty in all, besides the eunuchry, she called two of these
caponised slaves and said to them, “Sit ye on stools, one on the right
and another on the left hand of the door; and, when Ala al-Din cometh
home, both of you kiss his hands and say to him, “Our mistress Kut
al-Kulub requesteth thy presence in the pavilion, for the Caliph hath
given her to thee, her and her women.”” They answered, “We hear and
obey;” and did as she bade them. So, when Ala al-Din returned, he found
two of the Caliph’s eunuchs sitting at the door and was amazed at the
matter and said to himself, “Surely, this is not my own house; or else
what can have happened?” Now when the eunuchs saw him, they rose to him
and, kissing his hands, said to him, “We are of the Caliph’s household
and slaves to Kut al-Kulub, who saluteth thee giving thee to know that
the Caliph hath bestowed her on thee, her and her women, and requesteth
thy presence.” Quoth Ala al-Din, “Say ye to her:—Thou art welcome; but
so long as thou shalt abide with me, I will not enter the pavilion
wherein thou art, for what was the master’s should not become the man’s;
and furthermore ask her:—What was the sum of thy day’s expenditure in
the Caliph’s palace?” So they went in and did his errand to her, and she
answered, “An hundred dinars a day;” whereupon quoth he to himself,
“There was no need for the Caliph to give me Kut al-Kulub, that I should
be put to such expense for her; but there is no help for it.” So she
abode with him awhile and he assigned her daily an hundred dinars for
her maintenance; till, one day, he absented himself from the Divan and
the Caliph said to Ja’afar, “O Wazir, I gave not Kut al-Kulub unto Ala
al-Din but that she might console him for his wife; why, then, doth he
still hold aloof from us?” Answered Ja’afar, “O Commander of the
Faithful, he spake sooth who said:—Whoso findeth his fere, forgetteth
his friends.” Rejoined the Caliph, “Haply he hath not absented himself
without excuse, but we will pay him a visit.” Now some days before this,
Ala al-Din had said to Ja’afar, “I complained to the Caliph of my grief
and mourning for the loss of my wife Zubaydah and he gave me Kut
al-Kulub;” and the Minister replied, “Except he loved thee, he had not
given her to thee. Say hast thou gone in unto her, O Ala al-Din?” He
rejoined, “No, by Allah! I know not her length from her breadth.” He
asked “And why?” and he answered, “O Wazir, what befitteth the lord
befitteth not the liege.” Then the Caliph and Ja’afar disguised
themselves and went privily to visit Ala al-Din; but he knew them and
rising to them kissed the hands of the Caliph, who looked at him and saw
signs of sorrow in his face. So he said to him, “O Ala al-Din, whence
cometh this sorrow wherein I see thee? Hast thou not gone in unto Kut
al-Kulub?” He replied, “O Commander of the Faithful, what befitteth the
lord befitteth not the thrall. No, as yet I have not gone in to visit
her nor do I know her length from her breadth; so pray quit me of her.”
Quoth the Caliph, “I would fain see her and question her of her case;”
and quoth Ala al-Din, “I hear and I obey, O Commander of the Faithful.”
So the Caliph went in——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph went in
to Kut al-Kulub, who rose to him on sighting him and kissed the ground
between his hands; when he said to her, “Hath Ala al-Din gone in unto
thee?” and she answered, “No, O Commander of the Faithful, I sent to bid
him come, but he would not.” So the Caliph bade carry her back to the
Harim and saying to Ala al-Din, “Do not absent thyself from us,”
returned to his palace. Accordingly, next morning, Ala al-Din mounted
and rode to the Divan, where he took his seat as Chief of the Sixty.
Presently the Caliph ordered his treasurer to give the Wazir Ja’afar ten
thousand dinars and said when his order was obeyed, “I charge thee to go
down to the bazar where handmaidens are sold and buy Ala al-Din a
slave-girl with this sum.” So in obedience to the King Ja’afar took Ala
al-Din and went down with him to the bazar. Now as chance would have it,
that very day, the Emir Khálid, whom the Caliph had made Governor of
Baghdad, went down to the market to buy a slave-girl for his son and the
cause of his going was that his wife, Khátún by name, had borne him a
son called Habzalam Bazázah,[86] and the same was foul of favour and had
reached the age of twenty, without learning to mount horse; albeit his
father was brave and bold, a doughty rider ready to plunge into the Sea
of Darkness.[87] And it happened that on a certain night he had a dream
which caused nocturnal pollution, whereof he told his mother who
rejoiced and said to his father, “I want to find him a wife, as he is
now ripe for wedlock.” Quoth Khalid, “The fellow is so foul of favour
and withal so rank of odour, so sordid and beastly that no woman would
take him at a gift.” And she answered, “We will buy him a slave-girl.”
So it befel, for the accomplishing of what Allah Almighty had decreed,
that on the same day Ja’afar and Ala al-Din, the Governor Khalid and his
son went down to the market and behold, they saw in the hands of a
broker, a beautiful girl lovely-faced and of perfect shape, and the
Wazir said to him, “O broker, ask her owner if he will take a thousand
dinars for her.” And as the broker passed by the Governor with the
slave, Habzalam Bazazah cast at her one glance of the eyes which
entailed for himself one thousand sighs; and he fell in love with her
and passion got hold of him and he said, “O my father, buy me yonder
slave-girl.” So the Emir called the broker, who brought the girl to him,
and asked her her name. She replied, “My name is Jessamine;” and he said
to Habzalam Bazazah, “O my son, an she please thee, do thou bid higher
for her.” Then he asked the broker, “What hath been bidden for her?” and
he replied, “A thousand dinars.” Said the Governor’s son, “She is mine
for a thousand pieces of gold and one more;” and the broker passed on to
Ala al-Din who bid two thousand dinars for her; and as often as the
Emir’s son bid another dinar, Ala al-Din bid a thousand. The ugly youth
was vexed at this and said, “O broker! who is it that outbiddeth me for
the slave-girl?” Answered the broker, “It is the Wazir Ja’afar who is
minded to buy her for Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat.” And Ala al-Din
continued till he brought her price up to ten thousand dinars, and her
owner was satisfied to sell her for that sum. Then he took the girl and
said to her, “I give thee thy freedom for the love of Almighty Allah;”
and forthwith wrote his contract of marriage with her and carried her to
his house. Now when the broker returned, after having received his
brokerage, the Emir’s son summoned him and said to him, “Where is the
girl?” Quoth he, “She was bought for ten thousand dinars by Ala al-Din,
who hath set her free and married her.” At this the young man was
greatly vexed and cast down and, sighing many a sigh, returned home,
sick for love of the damsel; and he threw himself on his bed and refused
food, for love and longing were sore upon him. Now when his mother saw
him in this plight, she said to him, “Heaven assain thee, O my son! What
aileth thee?” And he answered, “Buy me Jessamine, O my mother.” Quoth
she, “When the flower-seller passeth I will buy thee a basketful of
jessamine.” Quoth he, “It is not the jessamine one smells, but a
slave-girl ‘named Jessamine, whom my father would not buy for me.” So
she said to her husband, “Why and wherefore didst thou not buy him the
girl?” and he replied, “What is fit for the lord is not fit for the
liege and I have no power to take her: no less a man bought her than Ala
al-Din, Chief of the Sixty.” Then the youth’s weakness redoubled upon
him, till he gave up sleeping and eating, and his mother bound her head
with the fillets of mourning. And while in her sadness she sat at home,
lamenting over her son, behold, came in to her an old woman, known as
the mother of Ahmad Kamákim[88] the arch-thief, a knave who would bore
through a middle wall and scale the tallest of the tall and steal the
very kohl off the eye-ball.[89] From his earliest years he had been
given to these malpractices, till they made him Captain of the Watch,
when he stole a sum of money; and the Chief of Police, coming upon him
in the act, carried him to the Caliph, who bade put him to death on the
common execution-ground.[90] But he implored protection of the Wazir
whose intercession the Caliph never rejected; so he pleaded for him with
the Commander of the Faithful who said, “How canst thou intercede for
this pest of the human race?” Ja’afar answered, “O Commander of the
Faithful, do thou imprison him; whoso built the first jail was a sage,
seeing that a jail is the grave of the living and a joy for the foe.” So
the Caliph bade lay him in bilboes and write thereon, “Appointed to
remain here until death and not to be loosed but on the corpse-washer’s
bench;” and they cast him fettered into limbo. Now his mother was a
frequent visitor to the house of the Emir Khalid, who was Governor and
Chief of Police; and she used to go in to her son in jail and say to
him, “Did I not warn thee to turn from thy wicked ways?”[91] And he
would always answer her, “Allah decreed this to me; but, O my mother,
when thou visitest the Emir’s wife make her intercede for me with her
husband.” So when the old woman came into the Lady Khatun, she found her
bound with the fillets of mourning and said to her, “Wherefore dost thou
mourn?” She replied, “For my son Habzalam Bazazah;” and the old woman
exclaimed, “Heaven assain thy son!; what hath befallen him?” So the
mother told her the whole story, and she said, “What wouldst thou say of
him who should achieve such a feat as would save thy son?” Asked the
lady, “And what feat wilt thou do?” Quoth the old woman, “I have a son
called Ahmad Kamakim, the arch-thief, who lieth chained in jail and on
his bilboes is written:—Appointed to remain till death; so do thou don
thy richest clothes and trick thee out with thy finest jewels and
present thyself to thy husband with an open face and smiling mien; and
when he seeketh of thee what men seek of women, put him off and baulk
him of his will and say:—By Allah, ‘tis a strange thing! When a man
desireth aught of his wife he dunneth her till she doeth it; but if a
wife desire aught of her husband, he will not grant it to her. Then he
will say:—What dost thou want?; and do thou answer:—First swear to grant
my request. If he swear to thee by his head or by Allah, say to
him:—Swear to me the oath of divorce, and do not yield to him, except he
do this. And whenas he hath sworn to thee the oath of divorce, say to
him:—Thou keepest in prison a man called Ahmad Kamakim, and he hath a
poor old mother, who hath set upon me and who urgeth me in the matter
and who saith, Let thy husband intercede for him with the Caliph, that
my son may repent and thou gain heavenly guerdon.” And the Lady Khatun
replied, “I hear and obey.” So when her husband came into her——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

[Illustration]

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Governor came
in to his wife, who spoke to him as she had been taught and made him
swear the divorce-oath before she would yield to his wishes. He lay with
her that night and, when morning dawned, after he had made the
Ghusl-ablution and prayed the dawn-prayer, he repaired to the prison and
said, “O Ahmad Kamakim, O thou arch-thief, dost thou repent of thy
works?”; whereto he replied, “I do indeed repent and turn to Allah and
say with heart and tongue:—I ask pardon of Allah.” So the Governor took
him out of jail and carried him to the Court (he being still in bilboes)
and, approaching the Caliph kissed ground before him. Quoth the King, “O
Emir Khalid, what seekest thou?”; whereupon he brought forward Ahmad
Kamakim, shuffling and tripping in his fetters, and the Caliph said to
him, “What! art thou yet alive, O Kamakim?” He replied, “O Commander of
the Faithful, the miserable are long-lived.” Quoth the Caliph to the
Emir, “Why hast thou brought him hither?”; and quoth he, “O Commander of
the Faithful, he hath a poor old mother cut off from the world who hath
none but this son and she hath had recourse to thy slave, imploring him
to intercede with thee to strike off his chains, for he repenteth of his
evil courses; and to make him Captain of the Watch as before.” The
Caliph asked Ahmad Kamakim, “Dost thou repent of thy sins?” “I do indeed
repent me to Allah, O Commander of the Faithful,” answered he; whereupon
the Caliph called for the blacksmith and made him strike off his irons
on the corpse-washer’s bench.[92] Moreover, he restored him to his
former office and charged him to walk in the ways of godliness and
righteousness. So he kissed the Caliph’s hands and, being invested with
the uniform of Captain of the Watch, he went forth, whilst they made
proclamation of his appointment. Now for a long time he abode in the
exercise of his office, till one day his mother went in to the
Governor’s wife, who said to her, “Praised be Allah who hath delivered
thy son from prison and restored him to health and safety! But why dost
thou not bid him contrive some trick to get the girl Jessamine for son
Habzalam Bazazah?” “That will I,” answered she and, going out from her,
repaired to her son. She found him drunk with wine and said to him, “O
my son, no one caused thy release from jail but the wife of the
Governor, and she would have thee find some means to slay Ala al-Din Abu
al-Shamat and get his slave-girl Jessamine for her son Habzalam
Bazazah.” He answered, “That will be the easiest of things; and I must
needs set about it this very night.” Now this was the first night of the
new month, and it was the custom of the Caliph to spend that night with
the Lady Zubaydah, for the setting free of a slave-girl or a Mameluke or
something of the sort. Moreover, on such occasions he used to doff his
royal habit, together with his rosary and dagger-sword and royal signet,
and set them all upon a chair in the sitting-saloon: and he had also a
golden lanthorn, adorned with three jewels strung on a wire of gold, by
which he set great store; and he would commit all these things to the
charge of the eunuchry, whilst he went into the Lady Zubaydah’s
apartment. So arch-thief Ahmad Kamakim waited till midnight, when
Canopus shone bright, and all creatures to sleep were dight whilst the
Creator veiled them with the veil of night. Then he took his drawn sword
in his right and his grappling-hook in his left and, repairing to the
Caliph’s sitting-saloon planted his scaling ladder and cast his grapnel
on to the side of the terrace-roof; then, raising the trap-door, let
himself down into the saloon, where he found the eunuchs asleep. He
drugged them with hemp-fumes;[93] and, taking the Caliph’s dress,
dagger, rosary, kerchief, signet-ring and the lanthorn whereupon were
the pearls, returned whence he came and betook himself to the house of
Ala al-Din, who had that night celebrated his wedding festivities with
Jessamine and had gone in unto her and gotten her with child. So
arch-thief Ahmad Kamakim climbed over into his saloon and, raising one
of the marble slabs from the sunken part of the floor,[94] dug a hole
under it and laid the stolen things therein, all save the lanthorn,
which he kept for himself. Then he plastered down the marble slab as it
before was, and returning whence he came, went back to his own house,
saying, “I will now tackle my drink and set this lanthorn before me and
quaff the cup to its light.”[95] Now as soon as it was dawn of day, the
Caliph went out into the sitting-chamber; and, seeing the eunuchs
drugged with hemp, aroused them. Then he put his hand to the chair and
found neither dress nor signet nor rosary nor dagger-sword nor kerchief
nor lanthorn; whereat he was exceeding wroth and donning the dress of
anger, which was a scarlet suit,[96] sat down in the Divan. So the Wazir
Ja’afar came forward and kissing the ground before him, said, “Allah
avert all evil from the Commander of the Faithful!” Answered the Caliph,
“O Wazir, the evil is passing great!” Ja’afar asked, “What has
happened?” so he told him what had occurred; and, behold, the Chief of
Police appeared with Ahmad Kamakim the robber at his stirrup, when he
found the Commander of the Faithful sore enraged. As soon as the Caliph
saw him, he said to him, “O Emir Khalid, how goes Baghdad?” And he
answered, “Safe and secure.” Cried he, “Thou liest!” “How so, O Prince
of True Believers?” asked the Emir. So he told him the case and added,
“I charge thee to bring me back all the stolen things.” Replied the
Emir, “O Commander of the Faithful, the vinegar worm is of and in the
vinegar, and no stranger can get at this place.”[97] But the Caliph
said, “Except thou bring me these things, I will put thee to death.”
Quoth he, “Ere thou slay me, slay Ahmad Kamakim, for none should know
the robber and the traitor but the Captain of the Watch.” Then came
forward Ahmad Kamakim and said to the Caliph, “Accept my intercession
for the Chief of Police, and I will be responsible to thee for the thief
and will track his trail till I find him; but give me two Kazis and two
Assessors for he who did this thing feareth thee not, nor doth he fear
the Governor nor any other.” Answered the Caliph, “Thou shalt have what
thou wantest; but let search be made first in my palace and then in
those of the Wazir and the Chief of the Sixty.” Rejoined Ahmad Kamakim,
“Thou sayest well, O Commander of the Faithful; belike the man that did
this ill-deed be one who hath been reared in the King’s houshold or in
that of one of his officers.” Cried the Caliph, “As my head liveth,
whosoever shall have done the deed I will assuredly put him to death, be
it mine own son!” Then Ahmad Kamakim received a written warrant to enter
and perforce search the houses;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ahmad Kamakim got
what he wanted, and received a written warrant to enter and perforce
search the houses; so he fared forth, taking in his hand a rod[98] made
of bronze and copper, iron and steel, of each three equal parts. He
first searched the palace of the Caliph, then that of the Wazir Ja’afar;
after which he went the round of the houses of the Chamberlains and the
Viceroys till he came to that of Ala al-Din. Now when the Chief of the
Sixty heard the clamour before his house, he left his wife Jessamine and
went down and, opening the door, found the Master of Police without in
the midst of a tumultuous crowd. So he said, “What is the matter, O Emir
Khalid?” Thereupon the Chief told him the case and Ala al-Din said,
“Enter my house and search it.” The Governor replied, “Pardon, O my
lord; thou art a man in whom trust is reposed and Allah forfend that the
trusty turn traitor!” Quoth Ala al-Din, “There is no help for it but
that my house be searched.” So the Chief of Police entered, attended by
the Kazi and his Assessors; whereupon Ahmad Kamakim went straight to the
depressed floor of the saloon and came to the slab, under which he had
buried the stolen goods and let the rod fall upon it with such violence
that the marble broke in sunder and behold something glittered
underneath. Then said he, “Bismillah; in the name of Allah! Mashallah;
whatso Allah willeth! By the blessing of our coming a hoard hath been
hit upon; wait while we go down into this hiding-place and see what is
therein.” So the Kazi and Assessors looked into the hole and finding
there the stolen goods, drew up a statement[99] of how they had
discovered them in Ala al-Din’s house, to which they set their seals.
Then, they bade seize upon Ala al-Din and took his turband from his
head, and officially registered all his monies and effects which were in
the mansion. Meanwhile, arch-thief Ahmad Kamakim laid hands on
Jessamine, who was with child by Ala al-Din, and committed her to his
mother, saying, “Deliver her to Khatun, the Governor’s lady:” so the old
woman took her and carried her to the wife of the Master of Police. Now
as soon as Habzalam Bazazah saw her, health and heart returned to him
and he arose without stay or delay and joyed with exceeding joy and
would have drawn near her; but she pluckt a dagger from her girdle and
said, “Keep off from me, or I will kill thee and kill myself after.”
Exclaimed his mother, “O strumpet, let my son have his will of thee!”
But Jessamine answered “O bitch, by what law is it lawful for a woman to
marry two men; and how shall the dog be admitted to the place of the
lion?” With this, the ugly youth’s love-longing redoubled and he
sickened for yearning and unfulfilled desire; and refusing food returned
to his pillow. Then said his mother to her, “O harlot, how canst thou
make me thus to sorrow for my son? Needs must I punish thee with
torture; and as for Ala al-Din, he will assuredly be hanged.” “And I
will die for love of him,” answered Jessamine. Then the Governor’s wife
arose and stripped her of her jewels and silken raiment and, clothing
her in petticoat-trousers of sack-cloth and a shift of hair-cloth, sent
her down into the kitchen and made her a scullery-wench, saying, “The
reward for thy constancy shall be to break up fire-wood and peel onions
and set fire under the cooking-pots.” Quoth she, “I am willing to suffer
all manner of hardships and servitude, but I will not suffer the sight
of thy son.” However, Allah inclined the hearts of the slave-girls to
her and they used to do her service in the kitchen. Such was the case
with Jessamine; but as regards Ala al-Din they carried him, together
with the stolen goods, to the Divan where the Caliph still sat upon his
throne. And behold, the King looked upon his effects and said, “Where
did ye find them?” They replied, “In the very middle of the house
belonging to Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat;” whereat the Caliph was filled
with wrath and took the things, but found not the lanthorn among them
and said, “O Ala al-Din, where is the lanthorn?” He answered “I stole it
not; I know naught of it; I never saw it; I can give no information
about it!” Said the Caliph, “O traitor, how cometh it that I brought
thee near unto me and thou hast cast me out afar, and I trusted in thee
and thou betrayest me?” And he commanded to hang him. So the Chief of
Police took him and went down with him into the city, whilst the crier
preceded them proclaiming aloud and saying, “This is the reward and the
least of the reward he shall receive who doth treason against the
Caliphs of True Belief!” And the folk flocked to the place where the
gallows stood. Thus far concerning him; but as regards Ahmad al-Danaf,
Ala al-Din’s adopted father, he was sitting making merry with his
followers in a garden, and carousing and pleasuring when lo! in came one
of the water-carriers of the Divan and, kissing the hand of Ahmad
al-Danaf, said to him, “O Captain Ahmad, O Danaf! thou sittest at thine
ease with water flowing at thy feet,[100] and thou knowest not what hath
happened.” Asked Ahmad, “What is it?” and the other answered, “They have
gone down to the gallows with thy son Ala al-Din, adopted by a covenant
before Allah!” Quoth Ahmad, “What is the remedy here, O Hasan Shuuman,
and what sayst thou of this?” He replied, “Assuredly Ala al-Din is
innocent and this blame hath come to him from some one enemy.”[101]
Quoth Ahmad, “What counsellest thou?” and Hasan said, “We must rescue
him, Inshallah!” Then he went to the jail and said to the gaolor, “Give
us some one who deserveth death.” So he gave him one that was likest of
men to Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat; and they covered his head and carried
him to the place of execution between Ahmad al-Danaf and Ali al-Zaybak
of Cairo.[102] Now they had brought Ala al-Din to the gibbet, to hang
him, but Ahmad al-Danaf came forward and set his foot on that of the
hangman, who said, “Give me room to do my duty.” He replied, “O
accursed, take this man and hang him in Ala al-Din’s stead; for he is
innocent and we will ransom him with this fellow, even as Abraham
ransomed Ishmael with the ram.”[103] So the hangman seized the man and
hanged him in lieu of Ala al-Din; whereupon Ahmad and Ali took Ala
al-Din and carried him to Ahmad’s quarters and, when there, Ala al-Din
turned to him and said, “O my sire and chief, Allah requite thee with
the best of good!” Quoth he, “O Ala al-Din”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Calamity Ahmad
cried, “O Ala al-Din, what is this deed thou hast done? The mercy of
Allah be on him who said:—Whoso trusteth thee betray him not, e’en if
thou be a traitor. Now the Caliph set thee in high place about him and
styled thee ‘Trusty’ and ‘Faithful’; how then couldst thou deal thus
with him and steal his goods?” “By the Most Great Name, O my father and
chief,” replied Ala al-Din, “I had no hand in this, nor did I such deed,
nor know I who did it.” Quoth Ahmad, “Of a surety none did this but a
manifest enemy and whoso doth aught shall be requited for his deed; but,
O Ala al-Din, thou canst sojourn no longer in Baghdad, for Kings, O my
son, may not pass from one thing to another, and when they go in quest
of a man, ah! longsome is his travail.” “Whither shall I go, O my
chief?” asked Ala al-Din; and he answered, “O my son, I will bring thee
to Alexandria, for it is a blessed place; its threshold is green and its
sojourn is agreeable.” And Ala al-Din rejoined, “I hear and I obey, O my
chief.” So Ahmad said to Hasan Shuuman, “Be mindful and, when the Caliph
asketh for me, say:—He is gone touring about the provinces.” Then,
taking Ala al-Din, he went forth of Baghdad and stayed not going till
they came to the outlying vineyards and gardens, where they met two Jews
of the Caliph’s tax-gatherers, riding on mules. Quoth Ahmad Al-Danaf to
these, “Give me the black-mail;”[104] and quoth they, “Why should we pay
thee black-mail?” whereto he replied, “Because I am the watchman of this
valley.” So they gave him each an hundred gold pieces, after which he
slew them and took their mules, one of which he mounted, whilst Ala
al-Din bestrode the other. Then they rode on till they came to the city
of Ayás[105] and put up their beasts for the night at the Khan. And when
morning dawned, Ala al-Din sold his own mule and committed that of Ahmad
to the charge of the doorkeeper of the caravanserai, after which they
took ship from Ayas port and sailed to Alexandria. Here they landed and
walked up to the bazar and behold, there was a broker crying a shop and
a chamber behind it for nine hundred and fifty dinars. Upon this Ala
al-Din bid a thousand which the broker accepted, for the premises
belonged to the Treasury; and the seller handed over to him the keys and
the buyer opened the shop and found the inner parlour furnished with
carpets and cushions. Moreover, he found there a store-room full of
sails and masts, cordage and seamen’s chests, bags of beads and
cowrie[106]-shells, stirrups, battle-axes, maces, knives, scissors and
such matters, for the last owner of the shop had been a dealer in
second-hand goods.[107] So he took his seat in the shop and Ahmad
al-Danaf said to him, “O my son, the shop and the room and that which is
therein are become thine; so tarry thou here and buy and sell; and
repine not at thy lot for Almighty Allah blesseth trade.” After this he
abode with him three days and on the fourth he took leave of him,
saying, “Abide here till I go back and bring thee the Caliph’s pardon
and learn who hath played thee this trick.” Then he shipped for Ayas,
where he took the mule from the inn and, returning to Baghdad met
Pestilence Hasan and his followers, to whom said he, “Hath the Caliph
asked after me?”; and he replied, “No, nor hast thou come to his
thought.” So he resumed his service about the Caliph’s person and set
himself to sniff about for news of Ala al-Din’s case, till one day he
heard the Caliph say to the Wazir, “See, O Ja’afar, how Ala al-Din dealt
with me!” Replied the Minister, “O Commander of the Faithful, thou hast
requited him with hanging and hath he not met with his reward?” Quoth
he, “O Wazir, I have a mind to go down and see him hanging;” and the
Wazir answered, “Do what thou wilt, O Commander of the Faithful.” So the
Caliph, accompanied by Ja’afar, went down to the place of execution and,
raising his eyes, saw the hanged man to be other than Ala al-Din Abu
al-Shamat, surnamed the Trusty, and said, “O Wazir, this is not Ala
al-Din!” “How knowest thou that it is not he?” asked the Minister, and
the Caliph answered, “Ala al-Din was short and this one is tall.” Quoth
Ja’afar, “Hanging stretcheth.” Quoth the Caliph, “Ala al-Din was fair
and this one’s face is black.” Said Ja’afar, “Knowest thou not, O
Commander of the Faithful, that death is followed by blackness?” Then
the Caliph bade take down the body from the gallows-tree and they found
the names of the two Shaykhs, Abu Bakr and Omar, written on its
heels;[108] whereupon cried the Caliph, “O Wazir, Ala al-Din was a
Sunnite, and this fellow is a Rejecter, a Shi’ah.” He answered, “Glory
be to Allah who knoweth the hidden things, while we know not whether
this was Ala al-Din or other than he.” Then the Caliph bade bury the
body and they buried it; and Ala al-Din was forgotten as though he never
had been. Such was his case; but as regards Habzalam Bazazah, the Emir
Khalid’s son, he ceased not to languish for love and longing till he
died and they joined him to the dust. And as for the young wife
Jessamine, she accomplished the months of her pregnancy and, being taken
with labour-pains, gave birth to a boy-child like unto the moon. And
when her fellow slave-girls said to her, “What wilt thou name him?” she
answered, “Were his father well he had named him; but now I will name
him Aslán.”[109] She gave him suck for two successive years, then weaned
him, and he crawled and walked. Now it so came to pass that one day,
whilst his mother was busied with the service of the kitchen, the boy
went out and, seeing the stairs, mounted to the guest-chamber.[110] And
the Emir Khalid who was sitting there took him upon his lap and
glorified his Lord for that which he had created and fashioned; then
closely eyeing his face, the Governor saw that he was the likest of all
creatures to Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat. Presently, his mother Jessamine
sought for him and finding him not, mounted to the guest-chamber, where
she saw the Emir seated, with the child playing in his lap, for Allah
had inclined his heart to the boy. And when the child espied his mother,
he would have thrown himself upon her; but the Emir held him tight to
his bosom and said to Jessamine, “Come hither, O damsel.” So she came to
him, when he said to her, “Whose son is this?”; and she replied, “He is
my son and the fruit of my vitals.” “And who is his father?” asked the
Emir; and she answered, “His father was Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat, but
now he is become thy son.” Quoth Khalid, “In very sooth Ala al-Din was a
traitor.” Quoth she, “Allah deliver him from treason! the Heavens
forfend and forbid that the ‘Trusty’ should be a traitor!” Then said he,
“When this boy shall grow up and reach man’s estate and say to thee:—Who
is my father? say to him:—Thou art the son of the Emir Khalid, Governor
and Chief of Police.” And she answered, “I hear and I obey.” Then he
circumcised the boy and reared him with the goodliest rearing, and
engaged for him a professor of law and religious science, and an expert
pensman who taught him to read and write; so he read the Koran twice and
learnt it by heart and he grew up, saying to the Emir, “O my father!”
Moreover, the Governor used to go down with him to the tilting-ground
and assemble horsemen and teach the lad the fashion of fight and fray,
and the place to plant lance-thrust and sabre-stroke; so that by the
time he was fourteen years old, he became a valiant wight and
accomplished knight and gained the rank of Emir. Now it chanced one day
that Aslan fell in with Ahmad Kamakim, the arch-thief, and accompanied
him as cup-companion to the tavern[111] and behold, Ahmad took out the
jewelled lanthorn he had stolen from the Caliph and, setting it before
him, pledged the wine cup to its light, till he became drunken. So Aslan
said to him, “O Captain, give me this lanthorn;” but he replied, “I
cannot give it to thee.” Asked Aslan, “Why not?”; and Ahmad answered,
“Because lives have been lost for it.” “Whose life?” enquired Aslan; and
Ahmad rejoined, “There came hither a man who was made Chief of the
Sixty; he was named Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat and he lost his life
through this lanthorn.” Quoth Aslan, “And what was that story, and what
brought about his death?” Quoth Ahmad Kamakim, “Thou hadst an elder
brother by name Habzalam Bazazah, and when he reached the age of sixteen
and was ripe for marriage, thy father would have bought him a slave-girl
named Jessamine.” And he went on to tell him the whole story from first
to last of Habzalam Bazazah’s illness and what befel Ala al-Din in his
innocence. When Aslan heard this, he said in thought, “Haply this
slave-girl was my mother Jessamine, and my father was none other than
Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat.” So the boy went out from him sorrowful, and
met Calamity Ahmad, who at sight of him exclaimed, “Glory be to Him unto
whom none is like!” Asked Hasan the Pestilence, “Whereat dost thou
marvel, O my chief?” and Ahmad the Calamity replied, “At the make of
yonder boy Aslan, for he is the likest of human creatures to Ala al-Din
Abu al Shamat.” Then he called the lad and said to him, “O Aslan what is
thy mother’s name?”; to which he replied, “She is called the damsel
Jessamine;” and the other said, “Harkye, Aslan, be of good cheer and
keep thine eyes cool and clear; for thy father was none other than Ala
al-Din Abu al-Shamat: but, O my son, go thou in to thy mother and
question her of thy father.” He said, “Hearkening and obedience,” and,
going in to his mother put the question; whereupon quoth she, “Thy sire
is the Emir Khalid!” “Not so,” rejoined he, “my father was none other
than Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat.” At this the mother wept and said, “Who
acquainted thee with this, O my son?” And he answered “Ahmad Al-Danaf,
Captain of the Guard.” So she told him the whole story, saying, “O my
son, the True hath prevailed and the False hath failed:[112] know that
Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat was indeed thy sire, but it was none save the
Emir Khalid who reared thee and adopted thee as his son. And now, O my
child, when thou seest Ahmad al-Danaf the captain, do thou say to him:—I
conjure thee, by Allah, O my chief, take my blood-revenge on the
murderer of my father Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat!” So he went out from his
mother——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Aslan went out
from his mother and, betaking himself to Calamity Ahmad, kissed his
hand. Quoth the captain, “What aileth thee, O Aslan?” and quoth he, “I
know now for certain that my father was Ali al-Din Abu al-Shamat and I
would have thee take my blood-revenge on his murderer.” He asked, “And
who was thy father’s murderer?” whereto Aslan answered, “Ahmad Kamakim
the Arch-thief.” “Who told thee this?” enquired he, and Aslan rejoined,
“I saw in his hand the jewelled lanthorn which was lost with the rest of
the Caliph’s gear, and I said to him:—Give me this lanthorn! but he
refused, saying, Lives have been lost on account of this; and told me it
was he who had broken into the palace and stolen the articles and
deposited them in my father’s house.” Then said Ahmad al-Danaf, “When
thou seest the Emir Khalid don his harness of war say to him:—Equip me
like thyself and take me with thee. Then do thou go forth and perform
some feat of prowess before the Commander of the Faithful, and he will
say to thee:—Ask a boon of me, O Aslan! And do thou make answer, I ask
of thee this boon, that thou take my blood-revenge on my father’s
murderer. If he say, Thy father is yet alive and is the Emir Khalid, the
Chief of the Police; answer thou:—My father was Ala al-Din Abu
al-Shamat, and the Emir Khalid hath a claim upon me only as the
foster-father who adopted me. Then tell him all that passed between thee
and Ahmad Kamakim and say:—O Prince of True Believers, order him to be
searched and I will bring the lanthorn forth from his bosom.” Thereupon
said Aslan to him, “I hear and obey;” and, returning to the Emir Khalid,
found him making ready to repair to the Caliph’s court and said to him,
“I would fain have thee arm and harness me like thyself and take me with
thee to the Divan.” So he equipped him and carried him thither. Then the
Caliph sallied forth of Baghdad with his troops and they pitched tents
and pavilions without the city; whereupon the host divided into two
parties and forming ranks fell to playing Polo, one striking the ball
with the mall, and another striking it back to him. Now there was among
the troops a spy, who had been hired to slay the Caliph; so he took the
ball and smiting it with the bat drove it straight at the Caliph’s face,
when behold, Aslan fended it off and catching it drove it back at him
who smote it, so that it struck him between the shoulders and he fell to
the ground. The Caliph exclaimed, “Allah bless thee, O Aslan!” and they
all dismounted and sat on chairs. Then the Caliph bade them bring the
smiter of the ball before him and said, “Who tempted thee to do this
thing and art thou friend or foe?” Quoth he, “I am thy foe and it was my
purpose to kill thee.” Asked the Caliph, “And wherefore? Art not a
Moslem?” Replied the spy; “No! I am a Rejecter.”[113] So the Caliph bade
them put him to death and said to Aslan, “Ask a boon of me.” Quoth he,
“I ask of thee this boon, that thou take my blood-revenge on my father’s
murderer.” He said, “Thy father is alive and there he stands on his two
feet.” “And who is he?” asked Aslan; and the Caliph answered, “He is the
Emir Khalid, Chief of Police.” Rejoined Aslan, “O Commander of the
Faithful, he is no father of mine, save by right of fosterage; my father
was none other than Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat.” “Then thy father was a
traitor,” cried the Caliph. “Allah forbid, O Commander of the Faithful,”
rejoined Aslan, “that the ‘Trusty’ should be a traitor! But how did he
betray thee?” Quoth the Caliph, “He stole my habit and what was
therewith.” Aslan retorted, “O Commander of the Faithful, Allah forfend
that my father should be a traitor! But, O my lord, when thy habit was
lost and found didst thou likewise recover the lanthorn which was stolen
from thee?” Answered the Caliph, “We never got it back;” and Aslan said,
“I saw it in the hands of Ahmad Kamakim and begged it of him; but he
refused to give it me, saying:—Lives have been lost on account of this.
Then he told me of the sickness of Habzalam Bazazah, son of the Emir
Khalid, by reason of his passion for the damsel Jessamine, and how he
himself was released from bonds and that it was he who stole the habit
and the lamp: so do thou, O Commander of the Faithful, take my
blood-revenge for my father on him who murdered him.” At once the Caliph
cried, “Seize ye Ahmad Kamakim!” and they seized him; whereupon he
asked, “Where be the Captain, Ahmad al-Danaf?” And when he was summoned
the Caliph bade him search Kamakim; so he put his hand into the thief’s
bosom and pulled out the lanthorn. Said the Caliph, “Come hither, thou
traitor: whence hadst thou this lanthorn?” and Kamakim replied, “I
bought it, O Commander of the Faithful!” The Caliph rejoined, “Where
didst thou buy it?” Then they beat him till he owned that he had stolen
the lanthorn, the habit and the rest, and the Caliph said “What moved
thee to do this thing O traitor, and ruin Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat, the
Trusty and Faithful?” Then he bade them lay hands on him and on the
Chief of Police, but the Chief said, “O Commander of the Faithful,
indeed I am unjustly treated; thou badest me hang him, and I had no
knowledge of this trick, for the plot was contrived between the old
woman and Ahmad Kamakim and my wife. I crave thine intercession,[114] O
Aslan.” So Aslan interceded for him with the Caliph, who said, “What
hath Allah done with this youngster’s mother?” Answered Khalid, “She is
with me,” and the Caliph continued, “I command that thou order thy wife
to dress her in her own clothes and ornaments and restore her to her
former degree, a lady of rank; and do thou remove the seals from Ala
al-Din’s house and give his son possession of his estate.” “I hear and
obey,” answered Khalid; and, going forth, gave the order to his wife who
clad Jessamine in her own apparel; whilst he himself removed the seals
from Ala al-Din’s house and gave Aslan the keys. Then said the Caliph,
“Ask a boon of me, O Aslan;” and he replied, “I beg of thee the boon to
unite me with my father.” Whereat the Caliph wept and said, “Most like
thy sire was he that was hanged and is dead; but by the life of my
forefathers, whoso bringeth me the glad news that he is yet in the
bondage of this life, I will give him all he seeketh!” Then came forward
Ahmad al-Danaf and, kissing the ground between his hands, said, “Grant
me indemnity, O Commander of the Faithful!” “Thou hast it,” answered the
Caliph; and Calamity Ahmad said, “I give thee the good news that Ala
al-Din Abu al-Shamat, the Trusty, the Faithful, is alive and well.”
Quoth the Caliph “What is this thou sayest?” Quoth Al-Danaf, “As thy
head liveth I say sooth; for I ransomed him with another, of those who
deserved death; and carried him to Alexandria, where I opened for him a
shop and set him up as dealer in second-hand goods.” Then said the
Prince of True Believers——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph ordered
Calamity Ahmad, saying, “I charge thee fetch him to me;” and the other
replied, “To hear is to obey;” whereupon the Caliph bade them give him
ten thousand gold pieces and he fared forth for Alexandria. On this wise
it happed with Aslan; but as regards his father, Ala al-Din Abu
al-Shamat, he sold in course of time all that was in his shop excepting
a few things and amongst them a long bag of leather. And happening to
shake the bag there fell out a jewel which filled the palm of the hand,
hanging to a chain of gold and having many facets but especially five,
whereon were names and talismanic characters, as they were ant-tracks.
So he rubbed each face; but none answered him[115] and he said to
himself, “Doubtless it is a piece of variegated onyx;” and then hung it
up in the shop. And behold, a Consul[116] passed along the street; and,
raising his eyes, saw the jewel hanging up; so he seated himself over
against the shop and said to Ala al-Din, “O my lord, is the jewel for
sale?” He answered, “All I have is for sale.” Thereupon the Frank said,
“Wilt thou sell me that same for eighty thousand dinars?” “Allah open!”
replied Ala al-Din. The Frank asked, “Wilt thou sell it for an hundred
thousand dinars?”; and he answered, “I sell it to thee for a hundred
thousand dinars; pay me down the monies.” Quoth the Consul, “I cannot
carry about such sum as its price, for there be robbers and sharpers in
Alexandria; but come with me to my ship and I will pay thee the price
and give thee to boot a bale of Angora wool, a bale of satin, a bale of
velvet and a bale of broadcloth.” So Ala al-Din rose and locked up his
shop, after giving the jewel to the Frank, and committed the keys to his
neighbour, saying, “Keep these keys in trust for me, whilst I go with
this Consul to his ship and return with the price of my jewel. If I be
long absent and there come to thee Ahmad al-Danaf, the Captain who
stablished in this shop, give him the keys and tell him where I am.”
Then he went with the Consul to his ship and no sooner had he boarded it
than the Frank set him a stool and, making him sit down, said to his
men, “Bring the money.” So they brought it and he paid him the price of
the jewel and gave him the four bales he had promised him and one over;
after which he said to him, “O my lord, honour me by accepting a bite or
a sup” And Ala al-Din answered, “If thou have any water, give me to
drink.” So the Frank called for sherbets and they brought drink drugged
with Bhang, of which no sooner had Ala al-Din drunk, than he fell over
on his back; whereupon they stowed away the chairs and shipped the
shoving-poles and made sail. Now the wind blew fair for them till it
drove them into blue water; and when they were beyond sight of land the
Kaptán[117] bade bring Ala al-Din up out of the hold and made him smell
the counter-drug of Bhang; whereupon he opened his eyes and said, “Where
am I?” He replied, “Thou art bound and in my power and if thou hadst
said, Allah open! to an hundred thousand dinars for the jewel, I would
have bidden thee more.” “What art thou?” asked Ala al-Din, and the other
answered, “I am a sea-captain and mean to carry thee to my sweetheart.”
Now as they were talking, behold, a ship hove in sight carrying forty
Moslem merchants; so the Frank captain attacked the vessel and made fast
to it with grappling-irons; then he boarded it with his men and took it
and plundered it; after which he sailed on with his prize, till he
reached the city of Genoa. There the Kaptan, who was carrying off Ala
al-Din, landed and repaired to a palace whose postern gave upon the sea,
and behold, there came down to him a damsel in a chin-veil who said,
“Hast thou brought the jewel and the owner?” “I have brought them both,”
answered he; and she said, “Then give me the jewel.” So he gave it to
her; and, returning to the port, fired his cannon to announce his safe
return; whereupon the King of the city, being notified of that Kaptan’s
arrival, came down to receive him and asked him, “How hath been this
voyage?” He answered, “A right prosperous one, and while voyaging I have
made prize of a ship with one-and forty Moslem merchants.” Said the
King, “Land them at the port:” so he landed the merchants in irons and
Ala al-Din among the rest; and the King and the Kaptan mounted and made
the captives walk before them till they reached the audience-chamber,
when the Franks seated themselves and caused the prisoners to pass in
parade order, one by one before the King who said to the first, “O
Moslem, whence comest thou?” He answered, “From Alexandria;” whereupon
the King said, “O headsman, put him to death.” So the sworder smote him
with the sword and cut off his head: and thus it fared with the second
and the third, till forty were dead and there remained but Ala al-Din,
who drank the cup of his comrades’ sighs and agony and said to himself,
“Allah have mercy on thee, O Ala al-Din. Thou art a dead man.” Then said
the King to him, “And thou, what countryman art thou?” He answered, “I
am of Alexandria,” and the King said, “O headsman, strike off his head.”
So the sworder raised arm and sword, and was about to strike, when
behold, an old woman of venerable aspect presented herself before the
King, who rose to do her honour, and said to him, “O King, did I not bid
thee remember, when the Captain came back with captives, to keep one or
two for the convent, to serve in the church?” The King replied, “O my
mother, would thou hadst come a while earlier! But take this one that is
left.” So she turned to Ala al-Din and said to him, “Say, wilt thou
serve in the church, or shall I let the King slay thee?” Quoth he, “I
will serve in the church.” So she took him and carried him forth of the
court and went to the church, where he said to her, “What service must I
do?” She replied, “Thou must rise with the dawn and take five mules and
go with them to the forest and there cut dry fire-wood and saw it short
and bring it to the convent-kitchen. Then must thou take up the carpets
and sweep and wipe the stone and marble pavements and lay the carpets
down again, as they were; after which thou must take two bushels and a
half of wheat and bolt it and grind it and knead it and make it into
cracknels[118] for the convent; and thou must take also a bushel of
lentils[119] and sift and crush and cook them. Then must thou fetch
water in barrels and fill the four fountains; after which thou must take
three hundred and threescore and six wooden bowls and crumble the
cracknels therein and pour of the lentil-pottage over each and carry
every monk and patriarch his bowl.” Said Ala al-Din,[120] “Take me back
to the King and let him kill me, it were easier to me than this
service.” Replied the old woman, “If thou do truly and rightly the
service that is due from thee thou shalt escape death; but, if thou do
it not, I will let the King kill thee.” And with these words Ala al-Din
was left sitting heavy at heart. Now there were in the church ten blind
cripples, and one of them said to him, “Bring me a pot.” So he brought
it him and he cacked and eased himself therein and said, “Throw away the
ordure.” He did so, and the blind man said, “The Messiah’s blessing be
upon thee, O servant of the church!” Presently behold, the old woman
came in and said to him, “Why hast thou not done thy service in the
church?” Answered he, “How many hands have I, that I should suffice for
all this work?” She rejoined, “Thou fool, I brought thee not hither
except to work;” and she added, “Take, O my son, this rod (which was of
copper capped with a cross) and go forth into the highway and, when thou
meetest the governor of the city, say to him:—I summon thee to the
service of the church, in the name of our Lord the Messiah. And he will
not disobey thee. Then make him take the wheat, sift, grind, bolt,
knead, and bake it into cracknels; and if any gainsay thee, beat him and
fear none.” “To hear is to obey,” answered he and did as she said, and
never ceased pressing great and small into his service; nor did he leave
to do thus for the space of seventeen years. Now one day as he sat in
church lo! the old woman came to him and said, “Go forth of the
convent.” He asked, “Whither shall I go?” and she answered, “Thou canst
pass the night in a tavern or with one of thy comrades.” Quoth he, “Why
dost thou send me forth of the church?” and quoth she, “The Princess
Husn Maryam, daughter of Yohanná,[121] King of this city, purposeth to
visit the church and it befitteth not that any abide in her way.” So he
made a show of obeying her orders and rose up and pretended that he was
leaving the church; but he said in his mind, “I wonder whether the
Princess is like our women or fairer than they! At any rate I will not
go till I have had a look at her.” So he hid himself in a closet with a
window looking into the church and, as he watched, behold, in came the
King’s daughter. He cast at her one glance of eyes that cost him a
thousand sighs, for he found her like the full moon when it cometh
swimming out of the clouds; and he saw with her a young lady——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ala al-Din
looked at the King’s daughter, he saw with her a young lady to whom he
heard her say, “Thy company hath cheered me, O Zubaydah.” So he looked
straitly at the damsel and found her to be none other than his dead
wife, Zubaydah the Lutist. Then the Princess said to Zubaydah, “Come,
play us an air on the lute.” But she answered, “I will make no music for
thee, till thou grant my wish and keep thy word to me.” Asked the
Princess, “And what did I promise thee?”; and Zubaydah answered, “That
thou wouldst reunite me with my husband Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat, the
Trusty, the Faithful.” Rejoined the Princess, “O Zubaydah, be of good
cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear; play us a piece as a
thank-offering and an ear-feast for reunion with thy husband Ala
al-Din.” “Where is he?” asked Zubaydah, and Maryam answered, “He is in
yonder closet listening to our words.” So Zubaydah played on the lute a
melody which had made a rock dance for glee; and when Ala al-Din heard
it, his bowels yearned towards her and he came forth from the closet
and, throwing himself upon his wife Zubaydah, strained her to his bosom.
She also knew him and the twain embraced and fell to the ground in a
swoon. Then came forward the Princess Husn Maryam and sprinkled
rose-water on them, till they revived when she said to them, “Allah hath
reunited you.” Replied Ala al-Din, “By thy kind offices, O lady.” Then,
turning to his wife, he said to her, “O Zubaydah, thou didst surely die
and we tombed thee in the tomb: how then returnedst thou to life and
camest thou to this place?” She answered, “O my lord, I did not die; but
an Aun[122] of the Jinn snatched me up and flew with me hither. She whom
thou buriedst was a Jinniyah, who shaped herself to my shape and feigned
herself dead; but when you entombed her she broke open the tomb and came
forth from it and returned to the service of this her mistress, the
Princess Husn Maryam. As for me I was possessed[123] and, when I opened
my eyes, I found myself with this Princess thou seest; so I said to
her:—Why hast thou brought me hither. Replied she:—I am predestined to
marry thy husband, Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat: wilt thou then, O Zubaydah,
accept me to co-consort, a night for me and a night for thee? Rejoined
I:—To hear is to obey, O my lady, but where is my husband? Quoth
she:—Upon his forehead is written what Allah hath decreed to him; as
soon as the writing which is there writ is fulfilled to him, there is no
help for it but he come hither, and we will beguile the time of our
separation from him with songs and playing upon instruments of music,
till it please Allah to unite us with him. So I abode all these days
with her till Allah brought us together in this church.” Then Husn
Maryam turned to him and said, “O my lord, Ala al-Din, wilt thou be to
me baron and I be to the femme?” Quoth he, “O my lady, I am a Moslem and
thou art a Nazarene; so how can I intermarry with thee?” Quoth she,
“Allah forbid that I should be an infidel! Nay, I am a Moslemah; for
these eighteen years I have held fast the Faith of Al-Islam and I am
pure of any creed other than that of the Islamite.” Then said he, “O my
lady, I desire a return to my native land;” and she replied, “Know that
I see written on thy forehead things which thou must needs accomplish,
and then thou shalt win to thy will. Moreover, be lief and fain, O Ala
al-Din, that there hath been born to thee a son named Aslan; who now
being arrived at age of discretion, sitteth in thy place with the
Caliph. Know also that Truth hath prevailed and that Falsehood naught
availed; and that the Lord hath withdrawn the curtain of secrecy from
him who stole the Caliph’s goods, that is, Ahmad Kamakim the arch-thief
and traitor; and he now lieth bound and in jail. And know further ‘twas
I who sent thee the jewel and had it put in the bag where thou foundest
it, and ‘twas I who sent the captain that brought thee and the jewel;
for thou must know that the man is enamoured of me and seeketh my
favours and would possess me; but I refused to yield to his wishes or
let him have his will of me; and I said to him:—Thou shalt never have me
till thou bring me the jewel and its owner. So I gave him an hundred
purses and despatched him to thee, in the habit of a merchant, whereas
he is a captain and a war-man; and when they led thee to thy death after
slaying the forty captives, I also sent thee this old woman to save thee
from slaughter.” Said he, “Allah requite thee for us with all good!
Indeed thou hast done well.” Then Husn Maryam renewed at his hands her
profession of Al-Islam; and, when he was assured of the truth of her
speech, he said to her, “O my lady, tell me what are the virtues of this
jewel and whence cometh it?” She answered, “This jewel came from an
enchanted hoard, and it hath five virtues which will profit us in time
of need. Now my lady grandmother, the mother of my father, was an
enchantress and skilled in solving secrets and finding hidden treasures
from one of the which came the jewel into her hands. And as I grew up
and reached the age of fourteen, I read the Evangel and other books and
I found the name of Mohammed (whom Allah bless and preserve!) in the
four books, namely the Evangel, the Pentateuch, the Psalms and the
Koran;[124] so I believed in Mohammed and became a Moslemah, being
certain and assured that none is worship-worth save Allah Almighty, and
that to the Lord of all mankind no faith is acceptable save that of
Al-Islam. Now when my lady-grandmother fell sick, she gave me this jewel
and taught me its five virtues. Moreover, before she died, my father
said to her:—Take thy tablets of geomancy and throw a figure, and tell
us the issue of my affair and what will befal me. And she foretold him
that the far-off one[125] should die, slain by the hand of a captive
from Alexandria. So he swore to kill every prisoner from that place and
told the Kaptan of this, saying:—There is no help for it but thou fall
on the ships of the Moslems and seize them and whomsoever thou findest
of Alexandria, kill him or bring him to me. The Captain did his bidding
until he had slain as many in number as the hairs of his head. Then my
grandmother died and I took a geomantic tablet, being minded and
determined to know the future, and I said to myself:—Let me see who will
wed me! Whereupon I threw a figure and found that none should be my
husband save one called Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat, the Trusty, the
Faithful. At this I marvelled and waited till the times were
accomplished and I foregathered with thee.” So Ala al-Din took her to
wife and said to her, “I desire to return to my own country.” Quoth she,
“If it be so, rise up and come with me.” Then she took him and, hiding
him in a closet of her palace, went in to her father, who said to her,
“O my daughter, my heart is exceeding heavy this day; sit down and let
us make merry with wine, I and thou.” So she sat down with him and he
called for a table of wine; and she plied him till he lost his wits,
when she drugged a cup with Bhang and he drank it off and fell upon his
back. Then she brought Ala al-Din out of the closet and said to him,
“Come; verily thine enemy lieth prostrate, for I made him drunk and
drugged him; so do thou with him as thou wilt.” Accordingly Ala al-Din
went to the King and, finding him lying drugged and helpless, pinioned
him fast and manacled and fettered him with chains. Then he gave him the
counter-drug and he came to himself——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

[Illustration]


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ala al-Din gave
the antidote of Bhang to King Yohanna, father of Husn Maryam, and he
came to himself and found Ala al-Din and his daughter sitting on his
breast. So he said to her, “O my daughter, dost thou deal thus with me?”
She answered “If I be indeed thy daughter, become a Moslem, even as I
became a Moslemah; for the truth was shown to me and I attested it; and
the false, and I deserted it. I have submitted myself unto Allah, The
Lord of the Three Worlds, and am pure of all faiths contrary to that of
Al-Islam in this world and in the next world. Wherefore, if thou wilt
become a Moslem, well and good; if not, thy death were better than thy
life.” Ala al-Din also exhorted him to embrace the True Faith; but he
refused and was contumacious; so Ala al-Din drew a dagger and cut his
throat from ear to ear.[126] Then he wrote a scroll, setting forth what
had happened and laid it on the brow of the dead; after which they took
what was light of load and weighty of worth and turned from the palace
and returned to the church. Here the Princess drew forth the jewel and,
placing her hand upon the facet where was figured a couch, rubbed it;
and behold, a couch appeared before her and she mounted upon it with Ala
al-Din and his wife, Zubaydah, the Lutist, saying, “I conjure thee by
the virtue of the names and talismans and characts engraven on this
jewel, rise up with us, O Couch!” And it rose with them into the air and
flew, till it came to a Wady wholly bare of growth, when the Princess
turned earthwards the facet on which the couch was figured, and it sank
with them to the ground. Then she turned up the face whereon was
fashioned a pavilion and tapping it said, “Let a pavilion be pitched in
this valley;” and there appeared a pavilion, wherein they seated
themselves. Now this Wady was a desert waste, without grass or water; so
she turned a third face of the jewel towards the sky, and said, “By the
virtue of the names of Allah, let trees upgrow here and a river flow
beside them!” And forthwith trees sprang up and by their side ran a
river plashing and dashing. They made the ablution and prayed and drank
of the stream; after which the Princess turned up the three other facets
till she came to the fourth, whereon was portrayed a table of food, and
said, “By the virtue of the names of Allah, let the table be spread!”
And behold, there appeared before them a table, spread with all manner
of rich meats, and they ate and drank and made merry and were full of
joy. Such was their case; but as regards Husn Maryam’s father, his son
went in to waken him and found him slain; and, seeing Ala al-Din’s
scroll, took it and read it, and readily understood it. Then he sought
his sister and finding her not, betook himself to the old woman in the
church, of whom he enquired for her, but she said, “Since yesterday I
have not seen her.” So he returned to the troops and cried out, saying,
“To horse, ye horsemen!” Then he told them what had happened, so they
mounted and rode after the fugitives, till they drew near the pavilion.
Presently Husn Maryam arose and looked up and saw a cloud of dust which
spread till it walled the view, then it lifted and flew, and lo! stood
disclosed her brother and his troops, crying aloud, “Whither will ye
fly, and we on your track!” Then said she to Ala al-Din, “Are thy feet
firm in fight?” He replied, “Even as the stake in bran, I know not war
nor battle, nor swords nor spears.” So she pulled out the jewel and
rubbed the fifth face, that on which were graven a horse and his rider,
and behold, straightway a cavalier appeared out of the desert and ceased
not to do battle with the pursuing host and smite them with the sword,
till he routed them and put them to flight. Then the Princess asked Ala
al-Din, “Wilt thou go to Cairo or to Alexandria?”; and he answered, “To
Alexandria.” So they mounted the couch and she pronounced over it the
conjuration, whereupon it set off with them and, in the twinkling of an
eye, brought them to Alexandria. They alighted without the city and Ala
al-Din hid the women in a cavern, whilst he went into Alexandria and
fetched them outer clothing, wherewith he covered them. Then he carried
them to his shop and, leaving them in the “ben”[127] walked forth to
fetch them the morning-meal, and behold, he met Calamity Ahmad who
chanced to be coming from Baghdad. He saw him in the street and received
him with open arms, saluting him and welcoming him. Whereupon Ahmad
al-Danaf gave him the good news of his son Aslan and how he was now come
to the age of twenty: and Ala al-Din, in his turn, told the Captain of
the Guard all that had befallen him from first to last, whereat he
marvelled with exceeding marvel. Then he brought him to his shop and
sitting-room where they passed the night; and next day he sold his place
of business and laid its price with other monies. Now Ahmad al-Danaf had
told him that the Caliph sought him; but he said, “I am bound first for
Cairo, to salute my father and mother and the people of my house.” So
they all mounted the couch and it carried them to Cairo the God-guarded;
and here they alighted in the street called Yellow,[128] where stood the
house of Shams al-Din. Then Ala al-Din knocked at the door, and his
mother said, “Who is at the door, now that we have lost our beloved for
evermore?” He replied, “’Tis I! Ala al-Din!” whereupon they came down
and embraced him. Then he sent his wives and baggage into the house and
entering himself with Ahmad al-Danaf, rested there three days, after
which he was minded to set out for Baghdad. His father said, “Abide with
me, O my son;” but he answered, “I cannot bear to be parted from my
child Aslan.” So he took his father and mother and fared forth for
Baghdad. Now when they came thither, Ahmad al-Danaf went in to the
Caliph and gave him the glad tidings of Ala al-Din’s arrival and told
him his story; whereupon the King went forth to greet him taking the
youth Aslan, and they met and embraced each other. Then the Commander of
the Faithful summoned the arch-thief Ahmad Kamakim and said to Ala
al-Din, “Up and at thy foe!” So he drew his sword and smote off Ahmad
Kamakim’s head. Then the Caliph held festival for Ala al-Din and,
summoning the Kazis and witnesses, wrote the contract and married him to
the Princess Husn Maryam; and he went in unto her and found her an
unpierced pearl. Moreover, the Caliph made Aslan Chief of the Sixty and
bestowed upon him and his father sumptuous dresses of honour; and they
abode in the enjoyment of all joys and joyance of life, till there came
to them the Destroyer of delights and the Sunderer of societies. But the
tales of generous men are manifold and amongst them is the story of

-----

Footnote 24:

  Pronounce Aladdin Abush-Shámát.

Footnote 25:

  Arab. “Misr” vulg. Masr: a close connection of Misraim—the “two
  Misrs,” Egypt, upper and lower.

Footnote 26:

  The Persians still call their Consuls “Shah-bandar,” lit. king of the
  Bandar or port.

Footnote 27:

  Arab. “Dukhúl,” the night of going in, of seeing the bride unveiled
  for the first time, etcætera.

Footnote 28:

  Arab. “Barsh” or “Bars,” the commonest kind. In India it is called
  Ma’jún (= electuary, generally): it is made of Ganja or young leaves,
  buds, capsules and florets of hemp (_C. sativa_), poppy-seed and
  flowers of the thorn-apple (_datura_) with milk and sugar-candy,
  nutmegs, cloves, mace and saffron, all boiled to the consistency of
  treacle which hardens when cold. Several recipes are given by Herklots
  (Glossary _s. v._ Majoon). These electuaries are usually prepared with
  “Charas,” or gum of hemp, collected by hand or by passing a blanket
  over the plant in early morning, and it is highly intoxicating.
  Another intoxicant is “Sabzi,” dried hemp-leaves, poppy-seed,
  cucumber-seed, black pepper and cardamoms rubbed down in a mortar with
  a wooden pestle, and made drinkable by adding milk, ice-cream, etc.
  The Hashish of Arabia is the Hindustani Bhang, usually drunk and made
  as follows. Take of hemp-leaves, well washed, 3 drams; black pepper 45
  grains and of cloves, nutmeg and mace (which add to the intoxication)
  each 12 grains. Triturate in 8 ounces of water or the juice of
  watermelon or cucumber, strain and drink. The Egyptian Zabíbah is a
  preparation of hemp-florets, opium and honey, much affected by the
  lower orders, whence the proverb: “Temper thy sorrow with Zabibah,.”
  In Al-Hijaz it is mixed with raisins (Zabíb) and smoked in the
  water-pipe. (Burckhardt No. 73). Besides these there is (1) “Post”
  poppy-seed prepared in various ways but especially in sugared
  sherbets; (2) Datura (_stramonium_) seed, the produce of the
  thorn-apple, bleached and put into sweetmeats by dishonest
  confectioners; it is a dangerous intoxicant, producing spectral
  visions, delirium tremens, etc.; and (3) various preparations of opium
  especially the “Madad,” pills made up with toasted betel-leaf and
  smoked. Opium, however, is usually drunk in the shape of “Kusumba,” a
  pill placed in wet cotton and squeezed in order to strain and clean it
  of the cowdung and other filth with which it is adulterated.

Footnote 29:

  Arab. “Sikankúr” (Gr. Σκίγκος, Lat. Scincus) a lizard (_S.
  officinalis_) which, held in the hand, still acts as an aphrodisiac in
  the East, and which in the Middle Ages was considered a universal
  medicine. In the “Adja’ib al-Hind” (Les Merveilles de l’Inde) we find
  a notice of a bald-headed old man who was compelled to know his wife
  twice a day and twice a night in consequence of having eaten a certain
  fish. (Chapt. lxxviii. of the translation by M. L. Marcel Devic, from
  a manuscript of the tenth century; Paris, Lemaire, 1878). Europeans
  deride these prescriptions, but Easterns know better: they affect the
  fancy, that is, the brain; and often succeed in temporarily relieving
  impotence. The recipes for this evil, which is incurable only when it
  comes from heart-affections, are innumerable in the East; and about
  half of every medical work is devoted to them. Many a quack has made
  his fortune with a few bottles of tincture of cantharides, and a man
  who could discover a specific would become a millionaire in India
  only. The curious reader will consult for specimens the Ananga-Ranga
  Shastra by Koka Pandit; or the “Rujú ‘al-Shaykh ila ‘l-Sabáh fi
  Kuwwati ‘l-Báh” (the Return of the Old Man to Youth in power of
  Procreation) by Ahmad bin Sulaymán known as Ibn Kamál Báshá in 139
  chapters lithographed at Cairo. Of these aphrodisiacs I shall have
  more to say.

Footnote 30:

  Alá al-Din (our old friend Aladdin) = Glory of the Faith, a name of
  which Mohammed, who preferred the simplest, like his own, would have
  highly disapproved. The most grateful names to Allah are Abdallah
  (Allah’s Slave) and Abd al-Rahmán (Slave of the Compassionate); the
  truest are Al-Hárith (the gainer, “bread-winner”) and Al-Hammám (the
  griever); and the hatefullest are Al-Harb (witch) and Al-Murrah
  (bitterness, Abu Murrah being a kunyat or by-name of the Devil). Abu
  al-Shámát (pronounced Abush-shámát) = Father of Moles, concerning
  which I have already given details. These names ending in -Din (faith)
  began with the Caliph Al-Muktadi bi-Amri ‘llah (regn. A.H. 467 =
  1075), who entitled his Wazir “Zahír al-Din” (Backer or Defender of
  the Faith) and this gave rise to the practice. It may be observed that
  the superstition of naming by omens is in no way obsolete.

Footnote 31:

  Meaning that he appeared intoxicated by the pride of his beauty as
  though it had been strong wine.

Footnote 32:

  _i.e._ against the evil eye.

Footnote 33:

  Meaning that he had been delicately reared.

Footnote 34:

  A traditional saying of Mohammed.

Footnote 35:

  So Boccaccio’s “Capo bianco” and “Coda verde.” (Day iv., Introduct.)

Footnote 36:

  The opening chapter is known as the “Mother of the Book,” (as opposed
  to Yá Sín, the “heart of the Koran”) the “Surat (chapter) of Praise,”
  and the “Surat of repetition,” (because twice revealed?) or
  thanksgiving, or laudation (Al-Masáni) and by a host of other names
  for which see Mr. Rodwell who, however, should not write “Fatthah” (p.
  xxv.) nor “Fathah” (xxvii.). The Fátihah, which is to Al-Islam much
  what the “Paternoster” is to Christendom, consists of seven verses, in
  the usual Saj’a or rhymed prose, and I have rendered it as follows:—

  In the name of the Compassionating, the Compassionate! ✿ Praise be to
  Allah who all the Worlds made ✿ The Compassionating, the Compassionate
  ✿ King of the Day of Faith! ✿ Thee only do we adore and of Thee only
  do we crave aid ✿ Guide us to the path which is straight ✿ The path of
  those for whom Thy love is great, not those on whom is hate, nor they
  that deviate ✿ Amen! O Lord of the World’s trine.

  My Pilgrimage (i. 285; ii. 78 and _passim_) will supply instances of
  its application; how it is recited with open hands to catch the
  blessing from Heaven and the palms are drawn down the face (Ibid. i.
  286), and other details.

Footnote 37:

  _i.e._ when the evil eye has less effect than upon children. Strangers
  in Cairo often wonder to see a woman richly dressed leading by the
  hand a filthy little boy (rarely a girl) in rags, which at home will
  be changed to cloth of gold.

Footnote 38:

  Arab. “Asídah” flour made consistent by boiling in water with the
  addition of “Samn” (clarified butter) and honey: more like pap than
  custard.

Footnote 39:

  Arab. “Ghábah” = I have explained as a low-lying place where the
  growth is thickest and consequently animals haunt it during the
  noon-heats.

Footnote 40:

  Arab. “Akkám,” one who loads camels and has charge of the luggage. He
  also corresponds with the modern Mukharrij or camel-hirer (Pilgrimage
  i. 339); and hence the word Moucre (Moucres) which, first used by La
  Brocquière (A.D. 1432), is still the only term known to the French.

Footnote 41:

  _i.e._ I am old and can no longer travel.

Footnote 42:

  Taken from Al-Asma’i, the “Romance of Antar,” and the episode of the
  Asafir Camels.

Footnote 43:

  A Mystic of the twelfth century A.D. who founded the Kádirí order (the
  oldest and chiefest of the four universally recognised), to which I
  have the honour to belong, teste my diploma (Pilgrimage, Appendix i.).
  Visitation is still made to his tomb at Baghdad. The Arabs (who have
  no hard g-letter) alter to “Jílán” the name of his birth-place
  “Gilan,” a tract between the Caspian and the Black Seas.

Footnote 44:

  The well-known Anglo-Indian “Mucuddum;” lit. “one placed before (or
  over) others;” an overseer.

Footnote 45:

  Koran xiii. 14.

Footnote 46:

  _i.e._ his chastity: this fashion of objecting to infamous proposals
  is very characteristic: ruder races would use their fists.

Footnote 47:

  Arab. “Ráfizí” = the Shi’ah (tribe, sect) or Persian schismatics who
  curse the first three Caliphs: the name is taken from their own saying
  “Inná rafizná-hum” = verily we have rejected them. The feeling between
  Sunni (the so-called orthodox) and Shi’ah is much like the Christian
  love between a Catholic of Cork and a Protestant from the Black North.
  As Al-Siyuti or any historian will show, this sect became exceedingly
  powerful under the later Abbaside Caliphs, many of whom conformed to
  it and adopted its practices and innovations (as in the Azan or
  prayer-call), greatly to the scandal of their co-religionists. Even in
  the present day the hatred between these representatives of Arab
  monotheism and Persian Guebrism continues unabated. I have given
  sundry instances in my Pilgrimage, _e.g._ how the Persians attempt to
  pollute the tombs of the Caliphs they abhor.

Footnote 48:

  Arab. “Sakká,” the Indian “Bihishtí” (man from Heaven): Each party in
  a caravan has one or more.

Footnote 49:

  These “Kirámát” or Saints’ miracles, which Spiritualists will readily
  accept, are recorded in vast numbers. Most men have half a dozen to
  tell, each of his “Pír” or patron, including the Istidráj or prodigy
  of chastisement (Dabistan, iii. 274).

Footnote 50:

  Great-grand-daughter of the Imam Hasan, buried in Cairo and famed for
  “Kirámát.” Her father, governor of Al-Medinah, was imprisoned by
  Al-Mansur and restored to power by Al-Mahdi. She was married to a son
  of the Imam Ja’afar al-Sadik and lived a life of devotion in Cairo,
  dying in A.H. 218 = 824. The corpse of the Imam al-Shafi’i was carried
  to her house, now her mosque and mausoleum: it stood in the Darb
  al-Sabúa which formerly divided Old from New Cairo and is now one of
  the latter’s suburbs. Lane (M. E. chapt. x.) gives her name but little
  more. The mention of her shows that the writer of the tale or the
  copyist was a Cairene: Abd al-Kadir is world-known: not so the “Sitt.”

Footnote 51:

  Arab. “Farkh akrab” for Ukayrib, a vulgarism.

Footnote 52:

  The usual Egyptian irreverence: he relates his abomination as if it
  were a Hadis or Tradition of the Prophet with due ascription.

Footnote 53:

  A popular name, dim. of Zubdah, cream, fresh butter, “creamkin.”

Footnote 54:

  Arab. “Mustahall,” “Mustahill” and vulg. “Muhallil” (= one who renders
  lawful). It means a man hired for the purpose who marries _pro formâ_
  and after wedding, and bedding with actual consummation, at once
  divorces the woman. He is held the reverse of respectable and no
  wonder. Hence, probably, Mandeville’s story of the Islanders who, on
  the marriage-night, “make another man to lie by their wives, to have
  their maidenhead, for which they give great hire and much thanks. And
  there are certain men in every town that serve for no other thing; and
  they call them cadeberiz, that is to say, the fools of despair,
  because they believe their occupation is a dangerous one.” Burckhardt
  gives the proverb (No. 79), “A thousand lovers rather than one
  Mustahall,” the latter being generally some ugly fellow picked up in
  the streets and disgusting to the wife who must permit his embraces.

Footnote 55:

  This is a woman’s oath, not used by men.

Footnote 56:

  Pronounced “Yá Sín” (chapt. xxxvi.) the “heart of the Koran” much used
  for edifying recitation. Some pious Moslems in Egypt repeat it as a
  Wazífah, or religious task, or as masses for the dead, and all
  educated men know its 83 versets by rote.

Footnote 57:

  Arab. “Ál Dáúd” = the family of David, _i.e._ David himself, a popular
  idiom. The prophet’s recitation of the “Mazámir” (Psalter) worked
  miracles.

Footnote 58:

  There is a peculiar thickening of the voice in leprosy which at once
  betrays the hideous disease.

Footnote 59:

  These lines have occurred in Night clxxxiii. I quote Mr. Payne (in
  loco) by way of variety.

Footnote 60:

  Where the “Juzám” (leprosy, elephantiasis, morbus sacrum, etc. etc.)
  is supposed first to show: the swelling would alter the shape. Lane
  (ii. 267) translates “her wrist which was bipartite.”

Footnote 61:

  Arab. “Zakariyá” (Zacharias): a play upon the term “Zakar” = the sign
  of “masculinity.” Zacharias mentioned in the Koran as the educator of
  the Virgin Mary (chapt. iii.) and repeatedly referred to (chapt. xix.
  etc.), is a well-known personage amongst Moslems and his church is now
  the great Cathedral-Mosque of Aleppo.

Footnote 62:

  Arab. “Ark al-Haláwat” = vein of sweetness.

Footnote 63:

  Arab. “Futúh,” which may also mean openings, has before occurred.

Footnote 64:

  _i.e._ four times without withdrawing.

Footnote 65:

  _i.e._ a correspondence of size, concerning which many rules are given
  in the Ananga-ranga Shastra which justly declares that discrepancy
  breeds matrimonial troubles.

Footnote 66:

  Arab. “Ghuráb al-_Bayn_” = raven of the waste or the parting: hence
  the bird of Odin symbolises separation (which is also called Al-bayn).
  The Raven (Ghurab = Heb. Oreb and Lat. Corvus, one of the prehistoric
  words) is supposed to be seen abroad earlier than any other bird; and
  it is entitled “Abu Zájir,” father of omens, because lucky when flying
  towards the right and _v.v._ It is opposed in poetry to the (white)
  pigeon, the emblem of union, peace and happiness. The vulgar declare
  that when Mohammed hid in the cave the crow kept calling to his
  pursuers, “Ghár! Ghár!” (cavern, cavern): hence the Prophet condemned
  him to wear eternal mourning and ever to repeat the traitorous words.
  This is the old tale of Coronis and Apollo (Ovid, lib. ii.)

                          ——who blacked the raven o’er
              And bid him prate in his white plumes no more.

Footnote 67:

  This use of a Turkish title, “Efendi” being = our esquire, and
  inferior to a Bey, is a rank anachronism, probably of the copyist.

Footnote 68:

  Arab. “Samn” = Hind. “Ghi;” butter melted, skimmed and allowed to
  cool.

Footnote 69:

  Arab. “Ya Wadúd;” a title of the Almighty: the Mac. Edit. has “O
  David!”

Footnote 70:

  Arab. “Muwashshahah;” a complicated stanza of which specimens have
  occurred. Mr. Payne calls it a “ballad,” which would be a “Kunyat
  al-Zidd.”

Footnote 71:

  Arab. “Baháim” (plur. of Bahímah = Heb. Behemoth), applied in Egypt
  especially to cattle. A friend of the “Oppenheim” house, a name the
  Arabs cannot pronounce, was known throughout Cairo as “Jack al-baháim”
  (of the cows.)

Footnote 72:

  Lit. “The father of side-locks,” a nickname of one of the Tobba Kings.
  This “Hasan of the ringlets” who wore two long pig-tails hanging to
  his shoulders was the Rochester or Piron of his age: his name is still
  famous for brilliant wit, extempore verse and the wildest debauchery.
  D’Herbelot’s sketch of his life is very meagre. “His poetry has
  survived to the present day and (unhappily) we shall hear more of Abu
  Nowás.” On the subject of these patronymics Lane (Mod. Egypt, chapt.
  iv.) has a strange remark that “Abu Dáúd is not the Father of Dáúd or
  Abu Ali the Father of Ali, but whose Father is (or was) Dáúd or Ali.”
  Here, however, he simply confounds Abu = father of (followed by a
  genitive), with Abu-h (for Abu-hu) = he, whose father.

Footnote 73:

  Arab. “Samúr,” applied in slang language to cats and dogs, hence the
  witty Egyptians converted Admiral Seymour (Lord Alcester) into
  “Samúr.”

Footnote 74:

  The home-student of Arabic may take this letter as a model even in the
  present day; somewhat stiff and old-fashioned, but gentlemanly and
  courteous.

Footnote 75:

  Arab. “Salím” (not Sé-lim) meaning the “Safe and sound.”

Footnote 76:

  Arab. “Haláwah” = sweetmeat; meaning an entertainment such as men give
  to their friends after sickness or a journey: it is technically called
  as above, “The Sweetmeat of Safety.”

Footnote 77:

  Arab. “Salát” which from Allah means mercy; from the Angels
  intercession and pardon; and from mankind blessing. Concerning the
  specific effects of blessing the Prophet, see Pilgrimage (ii. 70). The
  formula is often slurred over when a man is in hurry to speak: an
  interrupting friend will say “Bless the Prophet!” and he does so by
  ejaculating “Sa’am.”

Footnote 78:

  Persian, meaning originally a command: it is now applied to a Wazirial
  order as opposed to the “Irádah,” the Sultan’s order.

Footnote 79:

  Arab. “Mashá’ilí”: lit. the cresset-bearer who has before appeared as
  hangman.

Footnote 80:

  Another polite formula for announcing a death.

Footnote 81:

  As he died heirless the property lapsed to the Treasury.

Footnote 82:

  This shaking the kerchief is a signal to disperse and the action
  suggests its meaning. Thus it is used in an opposite sense to
  “throwing the kerchief,” a pseudo-Oriental practice whose significance
  is generally understood in Europe.

Footnote 83:

  The body-guard being of two divisions.

Footnote 84:

  Arab. “Hadbá,” lit. “hump-backed;” alluding to the Badawi bier; a pole
  to which the corpse is slung (Lane). It seems to denote the
  protuberance of the corpse when placed upon the bier which before was
  flat. The quotation is from Ka’ab’s Mantle-Poem (Burdah v. 37) “Every
  son of a female, long though his safety may be, is a day borne upon a
  _ridged implement_,” says Mr. Redhouse, explaining the latter as a
  “bier with a ridged lid.” Here we differ: the Janázah with a lid is
  not a Badawi article: the wildlings use the simplest stretcher; and I
  would translate the lines:—

                 The son of woman, whatso his career,
                 One day is borne upon the gibbous bier.

Footnote 85:

  This is a high honour to any courtier.

Footnote 86:

  “Khatun” in Turk. means any lady: mistress, etc., and follows the
  name, _e.g._ Fátimah Khatun. Habzalam Bazazah is supposed to be a
  fanciful compound, uncouth as the named; the first word consisting of
  “Habb” seed, grain; and “Zalam” of Zulm = seed of tyranny. Can it be a
  travesty of “Absalom” (Ab Salám, father of peace)? Lane (ii. 284) and
  Payne (iii. 286) prefer Habazlam and Hebezlem.

Footnote 87:

  Or night. A metaphor for rushing into peril.

Footnote 88:

  Plur. of kumkum, cucurbite, gourd-shaped vessel, jar.

Footnote 89:

  A popular exaggeration for a very expert thief.

Footnote 90:

  Arab. “Buka’at al-dam”: lit. the “low place of blood” (where it
  stagnates): so Al-Buká’ah = Cœlesyria.

Footnote 91:

  That common and very unpleasant phrase, full of egotism and
  self-esteem, “I told you so,” is even more common in the naïve East
  than in the West. In this case the son’s answer is far superior to the
  mother’s question.

Footnote 92:

  In order to keep his oath to the letter.

Footnote 93:

  “Tabannuj” literally “hemping” (drugging with hemp or henbane) is the
  equivalent in Arab medicine of our “anæsthetics.” These have been used
  in surgery throughout the East for centuries before ether and
  chloroform became the fashion in the civilised West.

Footnote 94:

  Arab. “Durká’ah,” the lower part of the floor, opposed to the “liwan”
  or daïs. Liwán = Al-Aywán (Arab. and Pers.) the hall (including the
  daïs and the sunken parts).

Footnote 95:

  _i.e._ he would toast it as he would a mistress.

Footnote 96:

  This till very late years was the custom in Persia; and Fath Ali Shah
  never appeared in scarlet without ordering some horrible cruelties. In
  Dar-For wearing a red cashmere turban was a sign of wrath and sending
  a blood-red dress to a subject meant that he would be slain.

Footnote 97:

  That is, this robbery was committed in the palace by some one
  belonging to it. References to vinegar are frequent; that of Egypt
  being famous in those days. “Optimum et laudatissimum acetum a Romanis
  habebatur Ægyptum” (Facciolati); and possibly it was sweetened: the
  Gesta (Tale xvii.) mentions “must and vinegar.” In Arab Proverbs, “One
  mind by vinegar and another by wine” = each mind goes its own way.
  (Arab. Prov. ii. 628); or, “with good and bad,” vinegar being spoilt
  wine.

Footnote 98:

  We have not heard the last of this old “dowsing rod”: the latest form
  of rhabdomancy is an electrical rod invented in the United States.

Footnote 99:

  This is the _procès verbal_ always drawn up on such occasions.

Footnote 100:

  The sight of running water makes a Persian long for strong drink as
  the sight of a fine view makes the Turk feel hungry.

Footnote 101:

  Arab. “Min wahid aduww” a peculiarly Egyptian or rather Cairene
  phrase.

Footnote 102:

  Al-Danaf = the Distressing Sickness: the title would be Ahmad the
  Calamity. Al-Zaybak (the Quicksilver) = Mercury Ali: Hasan “Shuuman” =
  a pestilent fellow. We shall meet all these worthies again and again:
  see the Adventures of Mercury Ali of Cairo, Night dccviii., a sequel
  to The Rogueries of Dalilah, Night dcxcviii.

Footnote 103:

  For the “Sacrifice-place of Ishmael” (not Isaac) see my Pilgrimage
  (iii. 306). According to all Arab ideas Ishmael, being the eldest son,
  was the chief of the family after his father. I have noted that this
  is the old old quarrel between the Arabs and their cousins the
  Hebrews.

Footnote 104:

  This black-mail was still paid to the Badawin of Ramlah (Alexandria)
  till the bombardment in 1881.

Footnote 105:

  The famous Issus of Cilicia, now a port-village on the Gulf of
  Scanderoon.

Footnote 106:

  Arab. “Wada’á” = the _concha veneris_, then used as small change.

Footnote 107:

  Arab. “Sakati” = a dealer in “castaway” articles, such as old metal,
  damaged goods, the pluck and feet of animals, etc.

Footnote 108:

  The popular tale of Burckhardt’s death in Cairo was that the names of
  the three first Caliphs were found written upon his slipper-soles and
  that he was put to death by decree of the Olema. It is the merest
  nonsense, as the great traveller died of dysentery in the house of my
  old friend John Thurburn and was buried outside the Bab al-Nasr of
  Cairo, where his tomb was restored by the late Rogers Bay (Pilgrimage
  i. 123).

Footnote 109:

  Prob. a mis-spelling for Arslán, in Turk, a lion, and in slang a
  piastre.

Footnote 110:

  Arab. “Maka’ad”; lit. = sitting-room.

Footnote 111:

  Arab. “Khammárah”; still the popular term throughout Egypt for a
  European Hotel. It is not always intended to be insulting but it is,
  meaning the place where Franks meet to drink forbidden drinks.

Footnote 112:

  A reminiscence of Mohammed who cleansed the Ka’abah of its 360 idols
  (of which 73 names are given by Freytag, Einleitung, etc. pp. 270,
  342-57) by touching them with his staff, whereupon all fell to the
  ground; and the Prophet cried (Koran xvii. 84), “Truth is come, and
  falsehood is vanished: verily, falsehood is a thing that vanisheth”
  (magna est veritas, etc.). Amongst the “idols” are said to have been a
  statue of Abraham and the horns of the ram sacrificed in lieu of
  Ishmael, which (if true) would prove conclusively that the Abrahamic
  legend at Meccah is of ancient date and not a fiction of Al-Islam.
  Hence, possibly, the respect of the Judaising Tobbas of Himyarland for
  the Ka’abah (Pilgrimage, iii. 295).

Footnote 113:

  This was evidently written by a Sunni as the Shí’ahs claim to be the
  only true Moslems. Lane tells an opposite story (ii. 329). It suggests
  the common question in the South of Europe, “Are you a Christian or a
  Protestant?”

Footnote 114:

  Arab. “Ana fí jírat-ak!” a phrase to be remembered as useful in time
  of danger.

Footnote 115:

  _i.e._ No Jinni, or Slave of the Jewel, was there to answer.

Footnote 116:

  Arab. “Kunsúl” (pron. “Gunsul”) which here means a well-to-do Frank,
  and shows the modern date of the tale as it stands.

Footnote 117:

  From the Ital. “Capitano.” The mention of cannon and other terms in
  this tale shows that either it was written during the last century or
  it has been mishandled by copyists.

Footnote 118:

  Arab. “Minínah”; a biscuit of flour and clarified butter.

Footnote 119:

  Arab. “Waybah;” the sixth part of the Ardabb = 6 to 7 English gallons.

Footnote 120:

  He speaks in half-jest _à la Fellah_; and reminds us of “Hangman,
  drive on the cart!”

Footnote 121:

  Yochanan (whom Jehovah has blessed) Jewish for John, is probably a
  copy of the Chaldean Euahanes, the Oannes of Berosus = Ea Khan, Hea
  the fish. The Greeks made it Joannes; the Arabs “Yohanná” (contracted
  to “Hanná,” Christian) and “Yáhyá” (Moslem). Prester (Priest) John is
  probably Ung Khan, the historian prince conquered and slain by Janghiz
  Khan in A.D. 1202. The modern history of “John” is very extensive:
  there may be a full hundred varieties and derivations of the name.
  “Husn Maryam” = the beauty (spiritual, etc.) of the B.V.

Footnote 122:

  Primarily being middle-aged; then aid, a patron, servant, etc. Also a
  tribe of the Jinn usually made synonymous with “Márid,” evil
  controuls, hostile to men: modern spiritualists would regard them as
  polluted souls not yet purged of their malignity. The text insinuates
  that they were at home amongst Christians and in Genoa.

Footnote 123:

  Arab. “Sar’a” = epilepsy, falling sickness, of old always confounded
  with “possession” (by evil spirits) or “obsession.”

Footnote 124:

  Again the true old charge of falsifying the so-called “Sacred books.”
  Here the Koran is called “Furkán.” Sale (sect. iii.) would assimilate
  this to the Hebr. Perek or Pirka, denoting a section or portion of
  Scripture; but Moslems understand it to be the “Book which
  distinguished (faraka, divided) the true from the false.” Thus Caliph
  Omar was entitled “Fárúk” = the Distinguisher (between right and
  wrong). Lastly, “Furkán,” meaning as in Syr. and Ethiop. deliverance,
  revelation, is applied alike to the Pentateuch and Koran.

Footnote 125:

  Euphemistic for “thou shalt die.”

Footnote 126:

  Lit. “From (jugular) vein to vein” (Arab. Waríd). Our old friend
  Lucretius again: “Tantane relligio,” etc.

Footnote 127:

  As opposed to the “but” or outer room.

Footnote 128:

  Arab. “Darb al-Asfar” in the old Jamalíyah or Northern part of Cairo.




                      HATIM OF THE TRIBE OF TAYY.


It is told of Hátim of the tribe of Tayy,[129] that when he died, they
buried him on the top of a mountain and set over his grave two troughs
hewn out of two rocks and stone girls with dishevelled hair. At the foot
of the hill was a stream of running water, and when wayfarers camped
there, they heard loud crying and keening in the night, from dark till
daybreak; but when they arose in the morning, they found nothing but the
girls carved in stone. Now when Zú ‘l-Kurá’a,[130] King of Himyar, going
forth of his tribe, came to that valley, he halted to pass the night
there——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


         Now when it was the Two Hundred and Seventieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Zu ‘l-Kura’a
passed by the valley he nighted there; and, when he drew near the
mountain, he heard the keening and said, “What lamenting is that on
yonder hill?” They answered him, saying, “Verily this be the tomb of
Hatim al-Táyyi over which are two troughs of stone and stone figures of
girls with dishevelled hair; and all who camp in this place by night
hear this crying and keening.” So he said jestingly, “O Hatim of Tayy!
we are thy guests this night, and we are lank with hunger.” Then sleep
overcame him, but presently he awoke in affright and cried out, saying,
“Help, O Arabs! Look to my beast!” So they came to him, and finding his
she-camel struggling and struck down, they stabbed her in the throat and
roasted her flesh and ate. Then they asked him what had happened and he
said, “When I closed my eyes, I saw in my sleep Hatim of Tayy who came
to me sword in hand and cried:—Thou comest to us and we have nothing by
us. Then he smote my she-camel with his sword, and she had surely died
even though ye had not come to her and slaughtered her.”[131] Now when
morning dawned the King mounted the beast of one of his companions and,
taking the owner up behind him, set out and fared on till midday, when
they saw a man coming towards them, mounted on a camel and leading
another, and said to him, “Who art thou?” He answered, “I am Adi,[132]
son of Hatim of Tayy; where is Zu ‘l-Kura’a, Emir of Himyar?” Replied
they, “This is he;” and he said to the prince, “Take this she-camel in
place of thy beast which my father slaughtered for thee.” Asked Zu
‘l-Kura’a, “Who told thee of this?” and Adi answered, “My father
appeared to me in a dream last night and said to me:—Harkye, Adi; Zu
‘l-Kura’a King of Himyar, sought the guest-rite of me and I, having
naught to give him, slaughtered his she-camel, that he might eat: so do
thou carry him a she-camel to ride, for I have nothing.” And Zu
‘l-Kura’a took her, marvelling at the generosity of Hatim of Tayy alive
and dead. And amongst instances of generosity is the

-----

Footnote 129:

  A noble tribe of Badawin that migrated from Al-Yaman and settled in
  Al-Najd. Their Chief, who died a few years before Mohammed’s birth,
  was Al-Halim (the “black crow”), a model of Arab manliness and
  munificence; and although born in the Ignorance he will enter Heaven
  with the Moslems. Hatim was buried on the hill called Owárid: I have
  already noted this favourite practice of the wilder Arabs and the
  affecting idea that the Dead may still look upon his kith and kin.
  There is not an Arab book nor, indeed, a book upon Arabia which does
  not contain the name of Hatim: he is mentioned as unpleasantly often
  as Aristides.

Footnote 130:

  Lord of “Cattle-feet,” this King’s name is unknown; but the Kámús
  mentions two Kings called Zu ‘l Kalá’a, the Greater and the Less.
  Lane’s Shaykh (ii. 333) opined that the man who demanded Hatim’s
  hospitality was one Abu ‘l-Khaybari.

Footnote 131:

  The camel’s throat, I repeat, is not cut as in the case of other
  animals; the muscles being too strong: it is slaughtered by the
  “nahr,” _i.e._ thrusting a knife into the hollow at the commissure of
  the chest. (Pilgrimage iii. 303.)

Footnote 132:

  Adi became a Moslem and was one of the companions of the Prophet.




                 TALE OF MA’AN THE SON OF ZAIDAH.[133]


It is told of Ma’an bin Záidah that, being out one day a-chasing and
a-hunting, he became athirst but his men had no water with them; and
while thus suffering behold, three damsels met him bearing three skins
of water;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


     Now when it was the Two Hundred and Seventy-first Night,[134]

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that three girls met
him bearing three skins of water; so he begged drink of them, and they
gave him to drink. Then he sought of his men somewhat to give the
damsels but they had no money; so he presented to each girl ten
golden-piled arrows from his quiver. Whereupon quoth one of them to her
friend, “Well-a-day! These fashions pertain to none but Ma’an bin
Zaidah! so let each one of us say somewhat of verse in his praise.” Then
quoth the first:—

 He heads his arrows with piles of gold, ✿ And while shooting his foes is
    his bounty doled:
 Affording the wounded a means of cure, ✿ And a sheet for the bider
    beneath the mould!

And quoth the second:—

 A warrior showing such open hand, ✿ His boons all friends and all foes
    enfold:
 The piles of his arrows of or are made, ✿ So that battle his bounty may
    not withhold!

And quoth the third:—

 From that liberal hand on his foes he rains ✿ Shafts aureate-headed and
    manifold:
 Wherewith the hurt shall chirurgeon pay, ✿ And for slain the shrouds
    round their corpses roll’d.[135]

And there is also told a tale of

-----

Footnote 133:

  A rival in generosity to Hatim: a Persian poet praising his patron’s
  generosity says that it buried that of Hatim and dimmed that of Ma’an
  (D’Herbelot). He was a high official under the last Ommiade, Marwán
  al-Himár (the “Ass,” or the “Century,” the duration of Ommiade rule)
  who was routed and slain in A.H. 132 = 750. Ma’an continued to serve
  under the Abbasides and was a favourite with Al-Mansúr. “More generous
  or bountiful than Ka’ab” is another saying (A. P., i. 325); Ka’ab ibn
  Mámah was a man who, somewhat like Sir Philip Sidney at Zutphen, gave
  his own portion of drink while he was dying of thirst to a man who
  looked wistfully at him, whence the saying “Give drink to thy brother
  the Námiri” (A. P., i. 608). Ka’ab could not mount, so they put
  garments over him to scare away the wild beasts and left him in the
  desert to die. “Scatterer of blessings” (Náshir al-Ni’am) was a title
  of King Malik of Al-Yaman, son of Sharhabil, eminent for his
  liberality. He set up the statue in the Western Desert, inscribed
  “Nothing behind me,” as a warner to others.

Footnote 134:

  Lane (ii. 352) here introduces, between Nights cclxxi and ccxc, a tale
  entitled in the Bresl. Edit. (iv. 134.) “The Sleeper and the Waker,”
  _i.e._ the sleeper awakened; and he calls it:—The Story of Abu-l-Hasan
  the Wag. It is interesting and founded upon historical fact; but it
  can hardly be introduced here without breaking the sequence of The
  Nights. I regret this the more as Mr. Alexander J. Cotheal of New York
  has most obligingly sent me an addition to the Breslau text (iv. 137)
  from his MS. But I hope eventually to make use of it.

Footnote 135:

  The first girl calls gold “Tibr” (pure, unalloyed metal); the second
  “Asjad” (gold generally) and the third “Ibríz” (virgin ore, the Greek
  ὄβρυζον). This is a law of Arab rhetoric never to repeat the word
  except for a purpose and, as the language _can_ produce 1,200,000 (to
  100,000 in English) the copiousness is somewhat painful to readers.




                  MA’AN SON OF ZAIDAH AND THE BADAWI.


Now Ma’an bin Záidah went forth one day to the chase with his company,
and they came upon a herd of gazelles; so they separated in pursuit and
Ma’an was left alone to chase one of them. When he had made prize of it
he alighted and slaughtered it; and as he was thus engaged, he espied a
person[136] coming forth out of the desert on an ass. So he remounted
and riding up to the new-comer, saluted him and asked him, “Whence
comest thou?” Quoth he, “I come from the land of Kuzá’ah, where we have
had a two years’ dearth; but this year it was a season of plenty and I
sowed early cucumbers.[137] They came up before their time, so I
gathered what seemed the best of them and set out to carry them to the
Emir Ma’an bin Zaidah, because of his well-known beneficence and
notorious munificence.” Asked Ma’an, “How much dost thou hope to get of
him?”; and the Badawi answered, “A thousand dinars.” Quoth the Emir,
“What if he say this is too much?” Said the Badawi, “Then I will ask
five hundred dinars.” “And if he say, Too much?” “Then three hundred!”
“And if he say yet, Too much?” “Then two hundred!” “And if he say yet,
Too much?” “Then one hundred!” “And if he say yet, Too much?” “Then,
fifty!” “And if he say yet, Too much?” “Then thirty!” “And if he say
still, Too much?” asked Ma’an bin Zaidah. Answered the Badawi, “I will
make my ass set his four feet in his Honour’s home[138] and return to my
people, disappointed and empty-handed.” So Ma’an laughed at him and
urged his steed till he came up with his suite and returned to his
place, when he said to his chamberlain, “An there come to thee a man
with cucumbers and riding on an ass admit him to me.” Presently up came
the Badawi and was admitted to Ma’an’s presence; but knew not the Emir
for the man he had met in the desert, by reason of the gravity and
majesty of his semblance and the multitude of his eunuchs and
attendants, for he was seated on his chair of estate with his officers
ranged in lines before him and on either side. So he saluted him and
Ma’an said to him “What bringeth thee, O brother of the Arabs?” Answered
the Badawi, “I hoped in the Emir, and have brought him curly cucumbers
out of season.” Asked Ma’an, “And how much dost thou expect of us?” “A
thousand dinars,” answered the Badawi. “This is far too much,” quoth
Ma’an. Quoth he, “Five hundred.” “Too much!” “Then three hundred.” “Too
much!” “Two hundred.” “Too much!” “One hundred.” “Too much!” “Fifty.”
“Too much!” At last the Badawi came down to thirty dinars; but Ma’an
still replied, “Too much!” So the Badawi cried, “By Allah, the man who
met me in the desert brought me bad luck! But I will not go lower than
thirty dinars.” The Emir laughed and said nothing; whereupon the wild
Arab knew that it was he whom he had met and said, “O my lord, except
thou bring the thirty dinars, see ye, there is the ass tied ready at the
door and here sits Ma’an, his honour, at home.” So Ma’an laughed, till
he fell on his back; and, calling his steward, said to him, “Give him a
thousand dinars and five hundred and three hundred and two hundred and
one hundred and fifty and thirty; and leave the ass tied up where he
is.” So the Arab to his amazement, received two thousand one hundred and
eighty dinars, and Allah have mercy on them both and on all generous
men! And I have also heard, O auspicious King, a tale of

-----

Footnote 136:

  Arab. “Shakhs” before noticed.

Footnote 137:

  Arab. “Kussá’á” = the curling cucumber: the vegetable is of the
  cheapest and the poorer classes eat it as “kitchen” with bread.

Footnote 138:

  Arab. “Haram-hu,” a double entendre. Here the Badawi means his Harem
  the inviolate part of the house; but afterwards he makes it mean the
  presence of His Honour.




                       THE CITY OF LABTAYT.[139]


There was once a royal city in the land of Roum, called the City of
Labtayt wherein stood a tower which was always shut. And whenever a King
died and another King of the Greeks took the Kingship after him, he set
on the tower a new and strong lock, till there were four-and-twenty
locks upon the gate, according to the number of the Kings. After this
time, there came to the throne a man who was not of the old royal house,
and he had a mind to open these locks, that he might see what was within
the tower. The grandees of his kingdom forbade him from this and pressed
him to desist and reproved him and blamed him; but he persisted saying,
“Needs must this place be opened.” Then they offered him all that their
hands possessed of monies and treasures and things of price, if he would
but refrain; still he would not be baulked——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Two Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the grandees
offered that King all their hands possessed of monies and treasures if
he would but refrain; still he would not be baulked and said, “There is
no help for it but I open this tower.” So he pulled off the locks and
entering, found within the tower figures of Arabs on their horses and
camels, habited in turbands[140] hanging down at the ends, with swords
in baldrick-belts thrown over their shoulders and bearing long lances in
their hands. He found there also a scroll which he greedily took and
read, and these words were written therein:—“Whenas this door is opened
will conquer this country a raid of the Arabs, after the likeness of the
figures here depicted; wherefore beware, and again beware of opening
it.” Now this city was in Andalusia; and that very year Tárik ibn Ziyád
conquered it, during the Caliphate of Al-Walíd son of Abd al-Malik[141]
of the sons of Umayyah; and slew this King after the sorriest fashion
and sacked the city and made prisoners of the women and boys therein and
got great loot. Moreover, he found there immense treasures; amongst the
rest more than an hundred and seventy crowns of pearls and jacinths and
other gems of price; and he found a saloon, wherein horsemen might throw
the spears, full of vessels of gold and silver, such as no description
can comprise. Moreover, he found there the table of food for the Prophet
of Allah, Solomon son of David (peace with both of them!), which is
extant even now in a city of the Greeks; it is told that it was of
grass-green emerald with vessels of gold and platters of jasper.
Likewise he found the Psalms written in the old Ionian[142] character on
leaves of gold bezel’d with jewels; together with a book setting forth
the properties of stones and herbs and minerals, as well as the use of
characts and talismans and the canons of the art of alchymy; and he
found a third volume which treated of the art of cutting and setting
rubies and other precious stones and of the preparation of poisons and
theriacks. There found he also a mappa mundi figuring the earth and the
seas and the different cities and countries and villages of the world;
and he found a vast saloon full of hermetic powder, one drachm of which
elixir would turn a thousand drachms of silver into fine gold; likewise
a marvellous mirror, great and round, of mixed metals, which had been
made for Solomon, son of David (on the twain be peace!) wherein whoso
looked might see the counterfeit presentment of the seven climates of
the world; and he beheld a chamber full of Brahmini[143] jacinths for
which no words can suffice. So he despatched all these things to Walid
bin Abd al-Malik, and the Arabs spread all over the cities of Andalusia
which is one of the finest of lands. This is the end of the story of the
City of Labtayt. And a tale is also told of

-----

Footnote 139:

  Toledo? this tale was probably known to Washington Irving. The “Land
  of Roum” here means simply Frank-land, as we are afterwards told that
  its name was Andalusia, the old Vandal-land, a term still applied by
  Arabs to the whole of the Iberian Peninsula.

Footnote 140:

  Arab. “Amáim” (plur. of Imámah) the common word for turband which I
  prefer to write in the old unclipt fashion. We got it through the
  Port. Turbante and the old French Tolliban from the (now obsolete)
  Persian term Dolband = a turband or a sash.

Footnote 141:

  Sixth Ommiade Caliph, A.D. 705-716; from “Tárik” we have “Gibraltar” =
  Jabal al-Tárik.

Footnote 142:

  Arab. “Yunán” = Ionia, applied to ancient Greece as “Roum” is to the
  Græco-Roman Empire.

Footnote 143:

  Arab. “Bahramáni;” prob. alluding to the well-known legend of the
  capture of Somanath (Somnauth) from the Hindus by Mahmud of Ghazni. In
  the Ajá’ib al-Hind (before quoted) the Brahmins are called Abrahamah.




                 THE CALIPH HISHAM AND THE ARAB YOUTH.


The Caliph Hishám bin Abd al-Malik bin Marwan, was hunting one day, when
he sighted an antelope and pursued it with his dogs. As he was following
the quarry, he saw an Arab youth pasturing sheep and said to him, “Ho
boy, up and after yonder antelope, for it escapeth me!” The youth raised
his head to him and replied, “O ignorant of what to the deserving is
due, thou lookest on me with disdain and speakest to me with contempt;
thy speaking is that of a tyrant true and thy doing what an ass would
do.” Quoth Hisham, “Woe to thee, dost thou not know me?” Rejoined the
youth, “Verily thine unmannerliness hath made thee known to me, in that
thou spakest to me, without beginning by the salutation.”[144] Repeated
the Caliph, “Fie upon thee! I am Hisham bin Abd al-Malik.” “May Allah
not favour thy dwelling-place,” replied the Arab, “nor guard thine
abiding place! How many are thy words and how few thy generous deeds!”
Hardly had he ended speaking, when up came the troop from all sides and
surrounded him as the white encircleth the black of the eye, all and
each saying, “Peace be with thee, O Commander of the Faithful!” Quoth
Hisham, “Cut short this talk and seize me yonder boy.” So they laid
hands on him; and when he saw the multitude of Chamberlains and Wazirs
and Lords of State, he was in nowise concerned and questioned not of
them, but let his chin drop on his breast and looked where his feet
fell, till they brought him to the Caliph[145] when he stood before him,
with head bowed groundwards and saluted him not and spoke him not. So
one of the eunuchs said to him, “O dog of the Arabs, what hindereth thy
saluting the Commander of the Faithful?” The youth turned to him angrily
and replied, “O packsaddle of an ass, it was the length of the way that
hindered me from this and the steepness of the steps and the profuseness
of my sweat.” Then said Hisham (and indeed he was exceeding wroth), “O
boy, verily thy days are come to their latest hour; thy hope is gone
from thee and thy life is past out of thee.” He answered, “By Allah, O
Hisham, verily an my life-term be prolonged and Fate ordain not its
cutting short, thy words irk me not, be they long or short.” Then said
the Chief Chamberlain to him, “Doth it befit thy degree, O vilest of the
Arabs, to bandy words with the Commander of the Faithful?” He answered
promptly, “Mayest thou meet with adversity and may woe and wailing never
leave thee! Hast thou not heard the saying of Almighty Allah?:—One day,
every soul shall come to defend itself.”[146] Hereupon Hisham rose, in
great wrath, and said, “O headsman, bring me the head of this lad; for
indeed he exceedeth in talk, such as passeth conception.” So the sworder
took him and, making him kneel on the carpet of blood, drew his sword
above him and said to the Caliph, “O Commander of the Faithful, this thy
slave is misguided and is on the way to his grave; shall I smite off his
head and be quit of his blood?” “Yes,” replied Hisham. He repeated his
question and the Caliph again answered in the affirmative. Then he asked
leave a third time; and the youth, knowing that, if the Caliph assented
yet once more, it would be the signal of his death, laughed till his
wisdom-teeth showed; whereupon Hisham’s wrath redoubled and he said to
him, “O boy, meseems thou art mad; seest thou not that thou art about to
depart the world? Why then dost thou laugh in mockery of thyself?” He
replied, “O Commander of the Faithful, if a larger life-term befel me,
none can hurt me, great or small; but I have bethought me of some
couplets, which do thou hear, for my death cannot escape thee.” Quoth
Hisham, “Say on and be brief;” so the Arab repeated these couplets:—

 It happed one day a hawk pounced on a bird, ✿ A wildling sparrow driven
    by destiny;
 And held in pounces spake the sparrow thus, ✿ E’en as the hawk rose
    ready home to hie:—
 “Scant flesh have I to fill the maw of thee ✿ And for thy lordly food
    poor morsel I.”
 Then smiled the hawk in flattered vanity ✿ And pride, so set the sparrow
    free to fly.

At this Hisham smiled and said, “By the truth of my kinship to the
Apostle of Allah (whom Allah bless and keep!), had he spoken this speech
at first and asked for aught except the Caliphate, verily I would have
given it to him. Stuff his mouth with jewels,[147] O eunuch and entreat
him courteously;” so they did as he bade them and the Arab went his way.
And amongst pleasant tales is that of

-----

Footnote 144:

  _i.e._ “Peace be with thee!”

Footnote 145:

  _i.e._ in the palace when the hunt was over. The bluntness and
  plain-speaking of the Badawi, which caused the revelation of the
  Koranic chapter “Inner Apartments” (No. xlix.) have always been
  favourite themes with Arab tale-tellers as a contrast with citizen
  suavity and servility. Moreover the Badawi, besides saying what he
  thinks, always tells the truth (unless corrupted by commerce with
  foreigners); and this is a startling contrast with the townsfolk. To
  ride out of Damascus and have a chat with the Ruwalá is much like
  being suddenly transferred from amongst the trickiest of Mediterranean
  people to the bluff society of the Scandinavian North. And the reason
  why the Turk will never govern the Arab in peace is that the former is
  always trying to finesse and to succeed by falsehood, when the truth,
  the whole truth and nothing but the truth is wanted.

Footnote 146:

  Koran, xvi. 112.

Footnote 147:

  A common and expressive way of rewarding the tongue which “spoke
  poetry.” The jewels are often pearls.




              IBRAHIM BIN AL-MAHDI AND THE BARBER-SURGEON.


They relate that Ibrahím, son of al-Mahdí,[148] brother of Harun
al-Rashid, when the Caliphate devolved to Al-Maamun, the son of his
brother Harun, refused to acknowledge his nephew and betook himself to
Rayy[149]; where he claimed the throne and abode thus a year and eleven
months and twelve days. Meanwhile his nephew, Al-Maamun, awaited his
return to allegiance and his accepting a dependent position till, at
last, despairing of this, he mounted with his horsemen and footmen and
repaired to Rayy in quest of him. Now when the news came to Ibrahim, he
found nothing for it but to flee to Baghdad and hide there, fearing for
his life; and Maamun set a price of an hundred thousand gold pieces upon
his head, to be paid to whoso might betray him. (Quoth Ibrahim) “When I
heard of this price I feared for my head”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ibrahim
continued:—Now when I heard of this price I feared for my head and knew
not what to do: so I went forth of my house in disguise at midday,
knowing not whither I should go. Presently I entered a broad street
which was no thoroughfare and said in my mind, “Verily, we are Allah’s
and unto Him we are returning! I have exposed my life to destruction. If
I retrace my steps, I shall arouse suspicion.” Then, being still in
disguise I espied, at the upper end of the street, a negro-slave
standing at his door; so I went up to him and said to him, “Hast thou a
place where I may abide for an hour of the day?” “Yes,” answered he, and
opening the door admitted me into a decent house, furnished with carpets
and mats and cushions of leather. Then he shut the door on me and went
away; and I misdoubted me he had heard of the reward offered for me, and
said to myself, “He hath gone to inform against me.” But, as I sat
pondering my case and boiling like cauldron over fire, behold, my host
came back, accompanied by a porter loaded with bread and meat and new
cooking-pots and gear and a new jar and new gugglets and other needfuls.
He made the porter set them down and, dismissing him, said to me, “I
offer my life for thy ransom! I am a barber-surgeon, and I know it would
disgust thee to eat with me, because of the way in which I get my
livelihood;[150] so do thou shift for thyself and do what thou please
with these things whereon no hand hath fallen.” (Quoth Ibrahim), Now I
was in sore need of food so I cooked me a pot of meat whose like I
remember not ever to have eaten; and, when I had satisfied my want, he
said to me, “O my lord, Allah make me thy ransom! Art thou for wine?;
for indeed it gladdeneth the soul and doeth away care.” “I have no
dislike to it,” replied I, being desirous of the barber’s company; so he
brought me new flagons of glass which no hand had touched and a jar of
excellent wine, and said to me, “Strain for thyself, to thy liking;”
whereupon I cleared the wine and mixed me a most delectable draught.
Then he brought me a new cup and fruits and flowers in new vessels of
earthenware; after which he said to me, “Wilt thou give me leave to sit
apart and drink of my own wine by myself, of my joy in thee and for
thee?” “Do so,” answered I. So I drank and he drank till the wine began
to take effect upon us, when the barber rose and, going to a closet,
took out a lute of polished wood and said to me, “O my lord, it is not
for the like of me to ask the like of thee to sing, but it behoveth
thine exceeding generosity to render my respect its due; so, if thou see
fit to honour thy slave, thine is the high decision.” Quoth I (and
indeed I thought not that he knew me), “How knowest thou that I excel in
song?” He replied, “Glory be to Allah, our lord is too well renowned for
that! Thou art my lord Ibrahim, son of Al-Mahdi, our Caliph of
yesterday, he on whose head Al-Maamun hath set a price of an hundred
thousand dinars to be paid to thy betrayer: but thou art in safety with
me.” (Quoth Ibrahim), When I heard him say this, he was magnified in my
eyes and his loyalty and noble nature were certified to me; so I
complied with his wish and took the lute and tuned it, and sang. Then I
bethought me of my severance from my children and my family and I began
to say:—

 Belike Who Yúsuf to his kin restored ✿ And honoured him in goal, a
    captive wight;
 May grant our prayer to reunite our lots; ✿ For Allah, Lord of Worlds,
    hath all of might.

When the barber heard this, exceeding joy took possession of him and he
was of great good cheer; for it is said that when Ibrahim’s neighbours
heard him only sing out, “Ho, boy, saddle the mule!” they were filled
with delight. Then, being overborne by mirth, he said to me, “O my lord,
wilt thou give me leave to say what is come to my mind, albeit I am not
of the folk of this craft?” I answered, “Do so; this is of thy great
courtesy and kindness.” So he took the lute and sang these verses:—

 To our beloveds we moaned our length of night; ✿ Quoth they, “How short
    the nights that us benight!”
 ‘Tis for that sleep like hood enveils _their_ eyes ✿ Right soon, but
    from _our_ eyes is fair of flight:
 When night falls, dread and drear to those who love, ✿ _We_ mourn;
    _they_ joy to see departing light:
 Had they but dree’d the weird, the bitter dole ✿ We dree, their beds
    like ours had bred them blight.

(Quoth Ibrahim), So I said to him, “By Allah, thou hast shown me a
kindness, O my friend, and hast done away from me the pangs of sorrow.
Let me hear more trifles of thy fashion.” So he sang these couplets:—

 When man keeps honour bright without a stain, ✿ Fair sits whatever robe
    to robe he’s fain!
 She jeered at me because so few we are; ✿ Quoth I:—“There’s ever dearth
    of noble men!”
 Naught irks us we are few, while neighbour tribes ✿ Count many;
    neighbours oft are base-born strain:
 We are a clan which holds not Death reproach, ✿ Which A’mir and
    Samúl[151] hold illest bane:
 Leads us our love of death to fated end; ✿ They hate that ending and
    delay would gain:
 We to our neighbours’ speech aye give the lie; ✿ But when we speak none
    dare give lie again.

(Quoth Ibrahim), When I heard these lines, I was filled with huge
delight and marvelled with exceeding marvel. Then I slept and awoke not
till past nightfall, when I washed my face, with a mind full of the high
worth of this barber-surgeon and his passing courtesy; after which I
wakened him and, taking out a purse I had by me containing a number of
gold pieces, threw it to him, saying, “I commend thee to Allah, for I am
about to go forth from thee, and pray thee to expend what is in this
purse on thine requirements; and thou shalt have an abounding reward of
me, when I am quit of my fear.” (Quoth Ibrahim), But he returned the bag
to me, saying, “O my lord, paupers like myself are of no value in thine
eyes; but how, with due respect to my own generosity, can I take a price
for the boon which fortune hath vouchsafed me of thy favour and thy
visit to my poor abode? Nay, if thou repeat thy words and throw the
purse to me again I will slay myself.” So I put in my sleeve[152] the
purse whose weight was irksome to me.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Two Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ibrahim son of
Al-Mahdi continued:—So I put in my sleeve the purse whose weight was
irksome to me; and turned to depart, but when I came to the house-door
he said, “O my lord, of a truth this is a safer hiding-place for thee
than any other, and thy keep is no burden to me; so do thou abide with
me, till Allah be pleased to grant thee relief.” Accordingly, I turned
back, saying, “On condition that thou spend of the money in this purse.”
He made me think that he consented to this arrangement, and I abode with
him some days in the utmost comfort; but, perceiving that he spent none
of the contents of the purse, I revolted at the idea of abiding at his
charge and thought it shame to be a burthen on him; so I left the house
disguised in women’s apparel, donning short yellow walking-boots[153]
and veil. Now as soon as I found myself in the street, I was seized with
excessive fear, and going to pass the bridge behold, I came to a place
sprinkled with water,[154] where a trooper, who had been in my service,
looked at me and knowing me, cried out, saying, “This is he whom
Al-Maamun wanteth.” Then he laid hold of me but the love of sweet life
lent me strength and I gave him and his horse a push which threw them
down in that slippery place, so that he became an example to those who
will take example; and the folk hastened to him. Meanwhile, I hurried my
pace over the bridge and entered a main street, where I saw the door of
a house open and a woman standing upon the threshold. So I said to her,
“O my lady, have pity on me and save my life; for I am a man in fear.”
Quoth she, “Enter and welcome;” and carried me into an upper
dining-room, where she spread me a bed and brought me food, saying,
“Calm thy fear, for not a soul shall know of thee.” As she spoke, lo!
there came a loud knocking at the door; so she went and opened, and
suddenly, my friend, whom I had thrown down on the bridge, appeared with
his head bound up, the blood running down upon his clothes and without
his horse. She asked, “O so and so, what accident hath befallen thee?”;
and he answered, “I made prize of the young man whom the Caliph seeketh
and he escaped from me;” whereupon he told her the whole story. So she
brought out tinder[155] and, putting it into a piece of rag bandaged his
head; after which she spread him a bed and he lay sick. Then she came up
to me and said, “Methinks thou art the man in question?” “Even so,”
answered I, and she said, “Fear not: no harm shall befal thee,” and
redoubled in kindness to me. So I tarried with her three days, at the
end of which time she said to me, “I am in fear for thee, lest yonder
man happen upon thee and betray thee to what thou dreadest; so save
thyself by flight.” I besought her to let me stay till nightfall, and
she said, “There is no harm in that.” So, when the night came, I put on
my woman’s gear and betook me to the house of a freed-woman who had once
been our slave. When she saw me she wept and made a show of affliction
and praised Almighty Allah for my safety. Then she went forth, as if she
would go to market intent on hospitable thoughts, and I fancied all was
right; but, ere long, suddenly I espied Ibrahim al-Mosili[156] making
for the house amongst his troopers and servants, and led by a woman on
foot; and looking narrowly at her behold, she was the freed-woman, the
mistress of the house, wherein I had taken refuge. So she delivered me
into their hands, and I saw death face to face. They carried me, in my
woman’s attire, to Al-Maamun who called a general council and had me
brought before him. When I entered I saluted him by the title of Caliph,
saying, “Peace be on thee, O Commander of the Faithful!” and he replied,
“Allah give thee neither peace nor long life.” I rejoined, “According to
thy good pleasure, O Commander of the Faithful!; it is for the claimant
of blood-revenge[157] to decree punishment or pardon; but mercy is
nigher to piety; and Allah hath set thy pardon above all other pardon,
even as He made my sin to excel all other sin. So, if thou punish, it is
of thine equity, and if thou pardon, it is of thy bounty.” And I
repeated these couplets:—

          My sin to thee is great, ✿ But greater thy degree:
          So take revenge, or else ✿ Remit in clemency:
          An I in deeds have not ✿ Been generous, generous be!

(Quoth Ibrahim), At this Al-Maamun raised his head to me an I hastened
to add these two couplets:—

        I’ve sinned enormous sin, ✿ But pardon in thee lies:
        If pardon thou, ‘tis grace; ✿ Justice an thou chastise!

Then Al-Maamun bowed his head and repeated:—

 I am (when friend would raise a rage that mote ✿ Make spittle choke me,
    sticking in my throat)
 His pardoner, and pardon his offence, ✿ Fearing lest I should live a
    friend without.

(Quoth Ibrahim), Now when I heard these words I scented mercy, knowing
his disposition to clemency.[158] Then he turned to his son Al-Abbas and
his brother Abu Ishak and all his chief officers there present and said
to them, “What deem ye of his case?” They all counselled him to do me
dead, but they differed as to the manner of my death. Then said he to
his Wazir Ahmad bin al-Khálid, “And what sayest thou, O Ahmad?” He
answered, “O Commander of the Faithful, an thou slay him, we find the
like of thee who hath slain the like of him; but an thou pardon him, we
find not the like of thee that hath pardoned the like of him.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Al-Maamun,
Prince of the Faithful, heard the words of Ahmad bin al-Khalid, he bowed
his head and began repeating:—

 My tribe have slain that brother mine, Umaym, ✿ Yet would shoot back
    what shafts at them I aim:
 If I deal pardon, noble pardon ‘tis; ✿ And if I shoot, my bones ‘twill
    only maim.[159]

And he also recited:—

 Be mild to brother mingling ✿ What is wrong with what is right:
 Kindness to him continue ✿ Whether good or graceless wight:
 Abstain from all reproaching, ✿ An he joy or vex thy sprite:
 Seest not that what thou lovest ✿ And what hatest go unite?
 That joys of longer life-tide ✿ Ever fade with hair turned white?
 That thorns on branches growing ✿ For the pluckt fruit catch thy sight?
 Who never hath done evil, ✿ Doing good for sole delight?
 When tried the sons of worldli- ✿ ness they mostly work unright.

(Quoth Ibrahim), Now when I heard these couplets, I withdrew my woman’s
veil from my head and cried out, with my loudest voice, “Allah is Most
Great! By Allah, the Commander of the Faithful pardoneth me!” Quoth he,
“No harm shall come to thee, O uncle;” and I rejoined, “O Commander of
the Faithful, my sin is too sore for me to excuse it and thy mercy is
too much for me to speak thanks for it.” And I chanted these couplets to
a lively motive:—

 Who made all graces all collected He ✿ In Adam’s loins, our Seventh
    Imam, for thee;[160]
 Thou hast the hearts of men with reverence filled, ✿ Enguarding all with
    heart-humility;
 Rebelled I never by delusion whelmed ✿ For object other than thy
    clemency;[161]
 And thou hast pardoned me whose like was ne’er ✿ Pardoned before, though
    no man pled my plea:
 Hast pitied little ones like Katá’s[162] young, ✿ And mother’s yearning
    heart a son to see.

Quoth Maamun, “I say, following our lord Joseph (on whom and on our
Prophet be blessing and peace!) let there be no reproach cast on you
this day. Allah forgiveth you; for He is the most merciful of those who
show mercy.[163] Indeed I pardon thee, and restore to thee thy goods and
lands, O uncle, and no harm shall befal thee.” So I offered up devout
prayers for him and repeated these couplets:—

 Thou hast restored my wealth sans greed, and ere ✿ So didst, thou
    deignèdest my blood to spare:
 Then if I shed my blood and wealth, to gain ✿ Thy grace, till even shoon
    from foot I tear,
 Twere but repaying what thou lentest me, ✿ And what unloaned no man to
    blame would care:
 Were I ungrateful for thy lavisht boons, ✿ Baser than thou’rt beneficent
    I were!

Then Al-Maamun showed me honour and favour and said to me, “O uncle, Abu
Ishak and Al-Abbas counselled me to put thee to death.” So I answered,
“And they both counselled thee right, O Commander of the Faithful, but
thou hast done after thine own nature and hast put away what I feared
with what I hoped.” Rejoined Al-Maamun, “O uncle, thou didst extinguish
my rancour with the modesty of thine excuse, and I have pardoned thee
without making thee drink the bitterness of obligation to intercessors.”
Then he prostrated himself in prayer a long while, after which he raised
his head and said to me, “O uncle, knowest thou why I prostrated
myself?” Answered I, “Haply thou didst this in thanksgiving to Allah,
for that He hath given thee the mastery over thine enemy.” He replied,
“Such was not my design, but rather to thank Allah for having inspired
me to pardon thee and for having cleared my mind towards thee. Now tell
me thy tale.” So I told him all that had befallen me with the barber,
the trooper and his wife and with my freed-woman who had betrayed me. So
he summoned the freed-woman, who was in her house, expecting the reward
to be sent for her, and when she came before him he said to her, “What
moved thee to deal thus with thy lord?” Quoth she, “Lust of money.”
Asked the Caliph. “Hast thou a child or a husband?”; and she answered
“No;” whereupon he bade them give her an hundred stripes with a whip and
imprisoned her for life. Then he sent for the trooper and his wife and
the barber-surgeon and asked the soldier what had moved him to do thus.
“Lust of money,” quoth he; whereupon quoth the Caliph, “It befitteth
thee to be a barber-cupper,”[164] and committed him to one whom he
charged to place him in a barber-cupper’s shop, where he might learn the
craft. But he showed honour to the trooper’s wife and lodged her in his
palace, saying, “This is a woman of sound sense and fit for matters of
moment.” Then said he to the barber-cupper, “Verily, thou hast shown
worth and generosity which call for extraordinary honour.” So he
commanded the trooper’s house and all that was therein to be given him
and bestowed on him a dress of honour and in addition fifteen thousand
dinars to be paid annually. And men tell the following tale concerning

-----

Footnote 148:

  Ibrahim Abu Ishák bin al-Mahdi, a pretender to the Caliphate of
  well-known wit and a famed musician surnamed from his corpulence
  “Al-Tannín” = the Dragon or, according to others (Lane ii. 336),
  Al-Tin = the fig. His adventurous history will be found in Ibn
  Khallikan, D’Herbelot and Al-Siyuti.

Footnote 149:

  The Ragha of the Zendavesta, and Rages of the Apocrypha (Tobit,
  Judith, etc.), the old capital of Media Proper, and seat of government
  of Daylam, now a ruin some miles south of Teheran which was built out
  of its remains. Rayy was founded by Hoshang, the primeval king who
  first sawed wood, made doors and dug metal. It is called Rayy
  al-Mahdiyyah because Al-Mahdi held his court there: Harun al-Rashíd
  was also born in it (A.H. 145). It is mentioned by a host of authors
  and names one of the Makamat of Al-Hariri.

Footnote 150:

  Human blood being especially impure.

Footnote 151:

  Jones, Brown and Robinson.

Footnote 152:

  Arab. “Kumm;” the Moslem sleeve is mostly (like his trousers) of ample
  dimensions and easily converted into a kind of carpet-bag by
  depositing small articles in the middle and gathering up the edge in
  the hand. In this way carried the weight would be less irksome than
  hanging to the waist. The English of Queen Anne’s day had regular
  sleeve-pockets for memoranda, etc., hence the saying, to have in one’s
  sleeve.

Footnote 153:

  Arab. “Khuff” worn under the “Bábúg” (a corruption of the Persian
  pá-push = feet-covers, papooshes, slippers). Lane M. E. chapt. i.

Footnote 154:

  Done in hot weather throughout the city, a dry line for camels being
  left in mid-street to prevent the awkward beasts slipping. The
  watering of the Cairo streets of late years has been excessive; they
  are now lines of mud in summer as well as in winter and the effluvia
  from the droppings of animals have, combined with other causes,
  seriously deteriorated the once charming climate. The only place in
  Lower Egypt, which has preserved the atmosphere of 1850, is Suez.

Footnote 155:

  Arab. “Hurák:” burnt rag, serving as tinder for flint and steel, is a
  common styptic.

Footnote 156:

  Of this worthy something has been said and there will be more in a
  future page.

Footnote 157:

  _i.e._ the person entitled to exact the blood-wit.

Footnote 158:

  Al-Maamum was a man of sense with all his fanaticism. One of his
  sayings is preserved, “Odious is contentiousness in Kings; more odious
  vexation in judges uncomprehending a case; yet more odious is
  shallowness of doctors in religions and most odious are avarice in the
  rich, idleness in youth, jesting in age and cowardice in the soldier.”

Footnote 159:

  The second couplet is not in the Mac. Edit. but Lane’s Shaykh has
  supplied it. (ii. 339)

Footnote 160:

  Adam’s loins, the “Day of Alast,” and the Imam (who stands _before_
  the people in prayer) have been explained. The “Seventh Imam” here is
  Al-Maamun, the seventh Abbaside—the Ommiades being, as usual, ignored.

Footnote 161:

  He sinned only for the pleasure of being pardoned, which is poetical
  and hardly practical or probable.

Footnote 162:

  The Katá (sand-grouse) always enters into Arab poetry because it is
  essentially a desert bird; and here the comparison is good because it
  lays its eggs in the waste far from water which it must drink morning
  and evening. Its cry is interpreted “man sakat, salam” (silent and
  safe), but it does not practice that precept, for it is usually
  betrayed by its piping Kata! Kata! Hence the proverb, “More veracious
  than the sand-grouse;” and “Speak not falsely, for the Kata sayeth
  sooth,” is Komayt’s saying. It is an emblem of swiftness: when the
  brigand-poet Shanfara boasts, “The ash-coloured Katas can drink only
  my leavings, after hastening all night to slake their thirst in the
  morning,” it is a hyperbole boasting of his speed. In Sind it is
  called the “rock pigeon” and it is not unlike a grey partridge when on
  the wing.

Footnote 163:

  Joseph to his brethren, Koran, xii. 92, when he gives them his “inner
  garment” to throw over his father’s face.

Footnote 164:

  Arab. “Hajjám” = a cupper who scarifies forehead and legs, a bleeder,
  a (blood-) sucker. The slang use of the term is to thrash, lick,
  wallop (Burckhardt, Prov. 34)




  THE CITY OF MANY-COLUMNED IRAM AND ABDULLAH SON OF ABI KILABAH.[165]


It is related that Abdullah bin Abi Kilábah went forth in quest of a
she-camel which had strayed from him; and, as he was wandering in the
deserts of Al-Yaman and the district of Sabá,[166] behold, he came upon
a great city girt by a vast castle around which were palaces and
pavilions that rose high into middle air. He made for the place thinking
to find there folk of whom he might ask concerning his she-camel; but,
when he reached it, he found it desolate, without a living soul in it.
So (quoth he) I alighted and, hobbling my dromedary,——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah bin Abi
Kilabah continued:—I dismounted and hobbling my dromedary, and composing
my mind, entered into the city. Now when I came to the castle, I found
it had two vast gates (never in the world was seen their like for size
and height) inlaid with all manner jewels and jacinths, white and red,
yellow and green. Beholding this I marvelled with great marvel and
thought the case mighty wondrous; then entering the citadel in a flutter
of fear and dazed with surprise and affright, I found it long and wide
about equalling Al-Medinah[167] in point of size; and therein were lofty
palaces laid out in pavilions all built of gold and silver and inlaid
with many-coloured jewels and jacinths and chrysolites and pearls. And
the door-leaves in the pavilions were like those of the castle for
beauty; and their floors were strewn with great pearls and balls, no
smaller than hazel-nuts, of musk and ambergris and saffron. Now when I
came within the heart of the city and saw therein no created beings of
the Sons of Adam I was near swooning and dying for fear. Moreover, I
looked down from the great roofs of the pavilion-chambers and their
balconies and saw rivers running under them; and in the main streets
were fruit-laden trees and tall palms; and the manner of their building
was one brick of gold and one of silver. So I said in myself, “Doubtless
this is the Paradise promised for the world to come.” Then I loaded me
with the jewels of its gravel and the musk of its dust as much as I
could carry and returned to my own country, where I told the folk what I
had seen. After a time the news reached Mu’áwiyah, son of Abu Sufyán,
who was then Caliph in Al-Hijaz; so he wrote to his lieutenant in San’á
of Al-Yaman to send for the teller of the story and question him of the
truth of the case. Accordingly the lieutenant summoned me and questioned
me of my adventure and of all appertaining to it; and I told him what I
had seen, whereupon he despatched me to Mu’awiyah, before whom I
repeated the story of the strange sights; but he would not credit it. So
I brought out to him some of the pearls and balls of musk and ambergris
and saffron, in which latter there was still some sweet savour; but the
pearls were grown yellow and had lost pearly colour.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Two Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah son of
Abu Kilabah continued:—But the pearls were grown yellow and had lost
pearly colour. Now Mu’awiyah wondered at this and, sending for Ka’ab
al-Ahbar[168] said to him, “O Ka’ab, I have sent for thee to ascertain
the truth of a certain matter and hope that thou wilt be able to certify
me thereof.” Asked Ka’ab, “What is it, O Commander of the Faithful?”;
and Mu’awiyah answered, “Wottest thou of any city founded by man which
is builded of gold and silver, the pillars whereof are of chrysolite and
rubies and its gravel pearls and balls of musk and ambergris and
saffron?” He replied, “Yes, O Commander of the Faithful, this is ‘Iram
with pillars decked and dight, the like of which was never made in the
lands,’[169] and the builder was Shaddad son of Ad the Greater.” Quoth
the Caliph, “Tell us something of its history,” and Ka’ab said:—Ad the
Greater had two sons, Shadíd and Shaddád who, when their father died,
ruled conjointly in his stead, and there was no King of the Kings of the
earth but was subject to them. After awhile Shadid died and his brother
Shaddad reigned over the earth alone. Now he was fond of reading in
antique books; and, happening upon the description of the world to come
and of Paradise, with its pavilions and galleries and trees and fruits
and so forth, his soul moved him to build the like thereof in this
world, after the fashion aforesaid. Now under his hand were an hundred
thousand Kings, each ruling over an hundred thousand chiefs.[170]
commanding each an hundred thousand warriors; so he called these all
before him and said to them, “I find in ancient books and annals a
description of Paradise, as it is to be in the next world, and I desire
to build me its like in this world. Go ye forth therefore to the
goodliest tract on earth and the most spacious and build me there a city
of gold and silver, whose gravel shall be chrysolite and rubies and
pearls; and for support of its vaults make pillars of jasper. Fill it
with palaces, whereon ye shall set galleries and balconies and plant its
lanes and thoroughfares with all manner trees bearing yellow-ripe fruits
and make rivers to run through it in channels of gold and silver.”
Whereat said one and all, “How are we able to do this thing thou hast
commanded, and whence shall we get the chrysolites and rubies and pearls
whereof thou speakest?” Quoth he, “What! weet ye not that the Kings of
the world are subject to me and under my hand and that none therein dare
gainsay my word?” Answered they, “Yes, we know that.”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Two Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the lieges
answered, “Yes, we know that;” whereupon the King rejoined, “Fare ye
then to the mines of chrysolites and rubies and pearls and gold and
silver and collect their produce and gather together all of value that
is in the world and spare no pains and leave naught; and take also for
me such of these things as be in men’s hands and let nothing escape you:
be diligent and beware of disobedience.” And thereupon he wrote letters
to all the Kings of the world and bade them gather together whatso of
these things was in their subjects’ hands, and get them to the mines of
precious stones and metals, and bring forth all that was therein, even
from the abysses of the seas. This they accomplished in the space of 20
years, for the number of rulers then reigning over the earth was three
hundred and sixty Kings; and Shaddad presently assembled from all lands
and countries architects and engineers and men of art and labourers and
handicraftsmen, who dispersed over the world and explored all the wastes
and wolds and tracts and holds. At last they came to an uninhabited
spot, a vast and fair open plain clear of sand-hills and mountains, with
founts flushing and rivers rushing, and they said, “This is the manner
of place the King commanded us to seek and ordered us to find.” So they
busied themselves in building the city even as bade them Shaddad, King
of the whole earth in its length and breadth; leading the fountains in
channels and laying the foundations after the prescribed fashion.
Moreover, all the Kings of earth’s several reigns sent thither jewels
and precious stones and pearls large and small and carnelian and refined
gold and virgin silver upon camels by land, and in great ships over the
waters, and there came to the builders’ hands of all these materials so
great a quantity as may neither be told nor counted nor conceived. So
they laboured at the work three hundred years; and, when they had
brought it to end, they went to King Shaddad and acquainted him
therewith. Then said he, “Depart and make thereon an impregnable castle,
rising and towering high in air, and build around it a thousand
pavilions, each upon a thousand columns of chrysolite and ruby and
vaulted with gold, that in each pavilion a Wazir may dwell.” So they
returned forthwith and did this in other twenty years; after which they
again presented themselves before King Shaddad and informed him of the
accomplishment of his will. Then he commanded his Wazirs, who were a
thousand in number, and his Chief Officers and such of his troops and
others as he put trust in, to prepare for departure and removal to
Many-columned Iram, in the suite and at the stirrup of Shaddad, son of
Ad, King of the world; and he bade also such as he would of his women
and his Harim and of his handmaids and eunuchs make them ready for the
journey. They spent twenty years in preparing for departure, at the end
of which time Shaddad set out with his host.——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shaddad bin Ad
fared forth, he and his host, rejoicing in the attainment of his desire
till there remained but one day’s journey between him and Iram of the
Pillars. Then Allah sent down on him and on the stubborn unbelievers
with him a mighty rushing sound from the Heavens of His power, which
destroyed them all with its vehement clamour, and neither Shaddad nor
any of his company set eyes on the city.[171] Moreover, Allah blotted
out the road which led to the city, and it stands in its stead unchanged
until the Resurrection Day and the Hour of Judgement. So Mu’awiyah
wondered greatly at Ka’ab al-Ahbar’s story and said to him, “Hath any
mortal ever made his way to that city?” He replied, “Yes; one of the
companions of Mohammed (on whom be blessing and peace!) reached it,
doubtless and forsure after the same fashion as this man here seated.”
And (quoth Al-Sha’abi[172]) it is related, on the authority of learned
men of Himyar in Al-Yaman that Shaddad, when destroyed with all his host
by the sound, was succeeded in his Kingship by his son Shaddad the Less,
whom he left viceregent in Hazramaut[173] and Saba, when he and his
marched upon Many-columned Iram. Now as soon as he heard of his father’s
death on the road, he caused his body to be brought back from the desert
to Hazramaut and bade them hew him out a tomb in a cave, where he laid
the body on a throne of gold and threw over the corpse threescore and
ten robes of cloth of gold, purfled with precious stones. Lastly at his
sire’s head he set up a tablet of gold whereon were graven these
verses:—

       Take warning O proud, ✿ And in length o’ life vain!
       I’m Shaddád son of Ad, ✿ Of the forts castellain;
       Lord of pillars and power, ✿ Lord of tried might and main,
       Whom all earth-sons obeyed ✿ For my mischief and bane;
       And who held East and West ✿ In mine awfullest reign.
       He preached me salvation ✿ Whom God did assain,[174]
       But we crossed him and asked ✿ “Can no refuge be ta’en?”
       When a Cry on us cried ✿ From th’ horizon plain,
       And we fell on the field ✿ Like the harvested grain,
       And the Fixt Day await ✿ We, in earth’s bosom lain!

Al-Sa’alibi also relateth:—It chanced that two men once entered this
cave and found steps at its upper end; so they descended and came to an
under-ground chamber, an hundred cubits long by forty wide and an
hundred high. In the midst stood a throne of gold, whereon lay a man of
huge bulk, filling the whole length and breadth of the throne. He was
covered with jewels and raiment gold-and-silver-wrought, and at his head
was a tablet of gold bearing an inscription. So they took the tablet and
carried it off, together with as many bars of gold and silver and so
forth as they could bear away. And men also relate the tale of

-----

Footnote 165:

  The Bresl. Edit. (vii. 171-174) entitles this tale, “Story of Shaddád
  bin Ad and the City of Iram the Columned;” but it relates chiefly the
  building by the King of the First Adites who, being promised a future
  Paradise by Prophet Húd, impiously said that he would lay out one in
  this world. It also quotes Ka’ab al-Ahbár as an authority for
  declaring that the tale is in the “Pentateuch of Moses.” Iram was in
  al-Yaman near Adan (our Aden) a square of ten parasangs (or leagues
  each = 18,000 feet) every way; the walls were of red (baked) brick 500
  cubits high and 20 broad, with four gates of corresponding grandeur.
  It contained 300,000 Kasr (palaces) each with a thousand pillars of
  gold-bound jasper, etc. (whence its title). The whole was finished in
  five hundred years; and, when Shaddad prepared to enter it, the “Cry
  of Wrath” from the Angel of Death slew him and all his many. It is
  mentioned in the Koran (chapt. lxxxix. 6-7) as “Irem adorned with
  lofty buildings (or pillars).” But Ibn Khaldun declares that
  commentators have embroidered the passage; Iram being the name of a
  powerful clan of the ancient Adites and “imád” being a tent-pole:
  hence “Iram with the numerous tents or tent-poles.” Al-Bayzawi tells
  the story of Abdullah ibn Kilabah (D’Herbelot’s Colabah). At Aden I
  met an Arab who had seen the mysterious city on the borders of
  Al-Ahkáf, the waste of deep sands, west of Hadramaut; and probably he
  had, the mirage or sun-reek taking its place. Compare with this tale
  “The City of Brass” (Night dlxv.).

Footnote 166:

  The biblical “Sheba,” named from the great-grandson of Joctan; whence
  the Queen (Bilkis) visited Solomon. It was destroyed by the Flood of
  Márib.

Footnote 167:

  The full title of the Holy City is “Madinat al-Nabi” = the City of the
  Prophet; of old Yasrib (Yathrib) the Iatrippa of the Greeks
  (Pilgrimage, ii. 119). The reader will remember that there are two
  “Yasribs;” that of lesser note being near Hujr in the
  Yamámah-province.

Footnote 168:

  “Ka’ab of the Scribes,” a well-known traditionist and religious poet
  who died (A.H. 32) in the Caliphate of Osman. He was a Jew who
  islamised; hence his name (Ahbár, plur. of Hibr, a Jewish scribe,
  doctor of science, etc. Jarrett’s El-Siyuti, p. 123). He must not be
  confounded with another Ka’ab al-Ahbár the Poet of the (first)
  Cloak-poem or “Burdah,” a noble Arab who was a distant cousin of
  Mohammed, and whose tomb at Hums (Emesa) is a place of pious
  visitation. According to the best authorities (no Christian being
  allowed to see them) the cloak given to the bard by Mohammed is still
  preserved together with the Khirkah or Sanjak Sherif (“Holy Coat” or
  Banner, the national oriflamme) at Stambul in the Upper Seraglio
  (Pilgrimage, i. 213). Many authors repeat this story of Mu’awiyah, the
  Caliph, and Ka’ab of the Burdah, but it is an evident anachronism, the
  poet having been dead nine years before the ruler’s accession (A.H.
  41).

Footnote 169:

  Koran, lxxxix. 6-7.

Footnote 170:

  Arab. “Kahramán” from Pers., braves, heroes.

Footnote 171:

  The Deity in the East, is as whimsical a despot as any of his
  “shadows” or “viceregents.” In the text Shaddád is killed for mere
  jealousy—a base passion utterly unworthy of a godhead; but one to
  which Allah was greatly addicted.

Footnote 172:

  Some traditionist; but whether Sha’abi, Shi’abi or Shu’abi we cannot
  decide.

Footnote 173:

  The Hazarmaveth of Genesis (x. 26) in South Eastern Arabia. Its people
  are the Adramitæ (mod. Hazrami) of Ptolemy who places in their land
  the Arabiæ Emporium, as Pliny does his Massola. They border upon the
  Homeritæ or men of Himyar, often mentioned in The Nights. Hazramaut is
  still practically unknown to us, despite the excursions of many
  travellers; and the hard nature of the people, the Swiss of Arabia,
  offers peculiar obstacles to exploration.

Footnote 174:

  _i.e._ the prophet Hud generally identified (?) with Heber. He was
  commissioned (Koran, chapt. vii.) to preach Al-Islam to his tribe the
  Adites who worshipped four goddesses, Sákiyah (the rain-giver),
  Rázikah (food-giver), Háfizah (the saviouress) and Sálimah (who healed
  sickness). As has been seen he failed, so it was useless to send him.




                            ISAAC OF MOSUL.


Quoth Isaac of Mosul:[175]—I went out one night from Al-Maamun’s
presence, on my way to my house; and, being taken with a pressing need
to make water, I turned aside into a by-street and stood in the middle
fearing lest something might hurt me, if I squatted against a wall.[176]
Presently, I espied something hanging down from one of the houses; so I
felt it to find out what it might be and found that it was a great
four-handled basket,[177] covered with brocade. Said I to myself, “There
must be some reason for this,” and knew not what to think; then
drunkenness led me to seat myself in the basket, and behold, the people
of the house pulled me up, thinking me to be the person they expected.
Now when I came to the top of the wall; lo! four damsels were there, who
said to me, “Descend and welcome and joy to thee!” Then one of them went
before me with a wax candle and brought me down into a mansion, wherein
were furnished sitting-chambers, whose like I had never seen save in the
palace of the Caliphate. So I sat down and after a while, the curtains
were suddenly drawn from one side of the room and, behold, in came
damsels walking in procession and hending in hand lighted flambeaux of
wax and censers full of Sumatran aloes-wood, and amongst them a young
lady as she were the rising full moon. So I stood up to her and she
said, “Welcome to thee for a visitor!” and then she made me sit down
again and asked me how I came thither. Quoth I, “I was returning home
from the house of an intimate friend and went astray in the dark; then,
being taken in the street with an urgent call to make water, I turned
aside into this lane, where I found a basket let down. The strong wine
which I had drunk led me to seat myself in it and it was drawn up with
me into this house, and this is my story.” She rejoined, “No harm shall
befal thee, and I hope thou wilt have cause to praise the issue of thine
adventure.” Then she added, “But what is thy condition?” I said, “A
merchant in the Baghdad bazar” and she, “Canst thou repeat any verses?”
“Some small matter,” quoth I. Quoth she “Then call a few to mind and let
us hear some of them.” But I said, “A visitor is bashful and timid; do
thou begin.” “True,” replied she and recited some verses of the poets,
past and present, choosing their choicest pieces; and I listened not
knowing whether more to marvel at her beauty and loveliness or at the
charm of her style of declamation. Then said she, “Is that bashfulness
of thine gone?” and I said, “Yes, by Allah!” so she rejoined, “Then, if
thou wilt, recite us somewhat.” So I repeated to her a number of poems
by old writers, and she applauded, saying, “By Allah, I did not think to
find such culture among the trade folk, the sons of the bazar!” Then she
called for food——Whereupon quoth Shahrazad’s sister Dunyazad, “How
pleasant is this tale and enjoyable and sweet to the ear and sound to
the sense!” But she answered, “And what is this story compared with that
which thou shalt hear on the morrow’s night, if I be alive and the King
deign spare me!” Then Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Two Hundred and Eightieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Isaac of Mosul
continued:—Then the damsel called for food and, when it was served to
her, she fell to eating it and setting it before me; and the
sitting-room was full of all manner sweet-scented flowers and rare
fruits, such as are never found save in Kings’ houses. Presently, she
called for wine and drank a cup, after which she filled another and gave
it to me, saying, “Now is the time for converse and story-telling.” So I
bethought myself and began to say, “It hath reached me that such and
such things happened; and there was a man who said so and so,” till I
had told her a number of pleasing tales and adventures with which she
was delighted and cried, “’Tis marvellous that a merchant should bear in
memory such store of stories like these, for they are fit for Kings.”
Quoth I, “I had a neighbour who used to consort with Kings and carouse
with them; so, when he was at leisure, I visited his house and he hath
often told me what thou hast heard.” Thereupon she exclaimed “By my
life, but thou hast a good memory!” So we continued to converse thus,
and as often as I was silent, she would begin, till in this way we
passed the most part of the night, whilst the burning aloes-wood
diffused its fragrance and I was in such case that if Al-Maamun had
suspected it, he would have flown like a bird with longing for it. Then
said she to me, “Verily, thou art one of the most pleasant of men,
polished, passing well bred and polite; but there lacketh one thing.”
“What is that?” asked I, and she answered, “If thou only knew how to
sing verses to the lute!” I answered, “I was passionately fond of this
art aforetime, but finding I had no taste for it, I abandoned it, though
at times my heart yearneth after it. Indeed, I should love to sing
somewhat well at this moment and fulfil my night’s enjoyment.” Then she,
“Meseemeth thou hintest a wish for the lute to be brought?” and I, “It
is thine to decide, if thou wilt so far favour me, and to thee be the
thanks.” So she called for a lute and sang a song in a voice whose like
I never heard, both for sweetness of tone and skill in playing, and
perfection of art. Then said she, “Knowest thou who composed this air
and whose are the words of this song?” “No,” answered I; and she said,
“The words are so and so’s and the air is Isaac’s.” I asked, “And hath
Isaac then (may I be thy sacrifice!) such a talent?” She replied,
“Bravo![178] Bravo, Isaac! indeed, he excelleth in this art.” I
rejoined, “Glory be to Allah who hath given this man what he hath
vouchsafed unto none other!” Then she said, “And how would it be, an
thou heard this song from himself?” This wise we went on till break of
day-dawn, when there came to her an old woman, as she were her nurse,
and said to her, “Verily, the time is come.” So she rose in haste and
said to me, “Keep what hath passed between us to thyself; for such
meetings are in confidence;”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Eighty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the damsel
whispered, “Keep what hath passed between us to thyself, for such
meetings are in confidence;” and I replied, “May I be thy ransom! I
needed no charge to this.” Then I took leave of her and she sent a
handmaid to show me the way and open the house door; so I went forth and
returned to my own place, where I prayed the morning prayer and slept.
Now after a time there came to me a messenger from Al-Maamun, so I went
to him and passed the day in his company. And when the night fell I
called to mind my yesternight’s pleasure, a thing from which none but an
ignoramus would abstain, and betook myself to the street, where I found
the basket, and seating myself therein, was drawn up to the place in
which I had passed the previous night. When the lady saw me, she said,
“Indeed, thou hast been assiduous;” and I answered, “Meseemeth rather
that I am neglectful.” Then we fell to discoursing and passed the night
as before in general conversation and reciting verses and telling rare
tales, each in turn, till daybreak, when I wended me home; and I prayed
the dawn-prayer and slept. Presently there came to me a messenger from
Al-Maamun; so I went to him and spent my day with him till nightfall,
when the Commander of the Faithful said to me, “I conjure thee to sit
here, whilst I go out for a want and come back.” As soon as the Caliph
was gone, and quite gone, my thoughts began to tempt and try me and,
calling to mind my late delight, I recked little what might befal me
from the Prince of True Believers. So I sprang up and turning my back
upon the sitting-room, ran to the street aforesaid, where I sat down in
the basket and was drawn up as before. When the lady saw me, she said,
“I begin to think thou art a sincere friend to us.” Quoth I, “Yea, by
Allah!” and quoth she, “Hast thou made our house thine abiding-place?” I
replied, “May I be thy ransom! A guest claimeth guest-right for three
days and if I return after this, ye are free to spill my blood.” Then we
passed the night as before; and when the time of departure drew near, I
bethought me that Al-Maamun would assuredly question me nor would ever
be content save with a full explanation: so I said to her, “I see thee
to be of those who delight in singing. Now I have a cousin, the son of
my father’s brother, who is fairer than I in face and higher of rank and
better of breeding; and he is the most intimate of Allah’s creatures
with Isaac.” Quoth she, “Art thou a parasite[179] and an importunate
one?” Quoth I, “It is for thee to decide in this matter;” and she, “If
thy cousin be as thou hast described him, it would not mislike us to
make acquaintance with him.” Then, as the time was come, I left her and
returned to my house, but hardly had I reached it, ere the Caliph’s
runners came down on me and carried me before him by main force and
roughly enough.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Eighty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Isaac of Mosul
continued:—And hardly had I reached my house ere the Caliph’s runners
came down upon me and carried me before him by main force and roughly
enough. I found him seated on a chair, wroth with me, and he said to me,
“O Isaac, art thou a traitor to thine allegiance?” replied I, “No, by
Allah, O Commander of the Faithful!” and he rejoined, “What hast thou
then to say? tell me the whole truth;” and I, “Yes, I will, but in
private.” So he signed to his attendants, who withdrew to a distance,
and I told him the case, adding, “I promised her to bring thee,” and he
said, “Thou didst well.” Then we spent the day in our usual pleasures,
but Al-Maamun’s heart was taken up with her, and hardly was the
appointed time come, when we set out. As we went along, I cautioned him,
saying, “Look that thou call me not by my name before her; and I will
demean myself like thine attendant.” And having agreed upon this, we
fared forth till we came to the place, where we found two baskets
hanging ready. So we sat down in them and were drawn up to the usual
place, where the damsel came forward and saluted us. Now when Al-Maamun
saw her, he was amazed at her beauty and loveliness; and she began to
entertain him with stories and verses. Presently, she called for wine
and we fell to drinking, she paying him special attention and he
repaying her in kind. Then she took the lute and sang these verses:—

 My lover came in at the close of night, ✿ I rose till he sat and
    remained upright;
 And said “Sweet heart, hast thou come this hour? ✿ Nor feared on the
    watch and ward to ‘light:”
 Quoth he “The lover _had_ cause to fear, ✿ But Love deprived him of wits
    and fright.”

And when she ended her song she said to me, “And is thy cousin also a
merchant?” I answered, “Yes,” and she said, “Indeed, ye resemble each
other nearly.” But when Al-Maamun had drunk three pints,[180] he grew
merry with wine and called out, saying, “Ho, Isaac!” And I replied,
“Labbayk’, Adsum, O Commander of the Faithful,” whereupon quoth he,
“Sing me this air.” Now when the young lady learned that he was the
Caliph, she withdrew to another place and disappeared; and, as I had
made an end of my song Al-Maamun said to me, “See who is the master of
this house”; whereupon an old woman hastened to make answer, saying, “It
belongs to Hasan bin Sahl.”[181] “Fetch him to me,” said the Caliph. So
she went away and after a while behold, in came Hasan, to whom said
Al-Maamun “Hast thou a daughter?” He said, “Yes, and her name is
Khadijah.” Asked the Caliph, “Is she married?” Answered Hasan, “No, by
Allah!” Said Al-Maamun, “Then I ask her of thee in marriage.” Replied
her father, “O Commander of the Faithful, she is thy handmaid and at thy
commandment.” Quoth Al-Maamun, “I take her to wife at a present
settlement of thirty thousand dinars, which thou shalt receive this very
morning; and, when the money has been paid thee, do thou bring her to us
this night.” And Hasan answered, “I hear and I obey.” Thereupon we went
forth and the Caliph said to me, “O Isaac, tell this story to no one.”
So I kept it secret till Al-Maamun’s death. Surely never did man’s life
gather such pleasures as were mine these four days’ time, whenas I
companied with Al-Maamun by day and Khadijah by night; and, by Allah,
never saw I among men the like of Al-Maamun nor among women have I ever
set eyes on the like of Khadijah; no, nor on any that came near her in
lively wit and pleasant speech! And Allah is All-knowing. But amongst
stories is that of

-----

Footnote 175:

  Son of Ibrahim al-Mosili, a musician poet and favourite with the
  Caliphs Harun al-Rashid and Al-Maamun. He made his name immortal by
  being the first who reduced Arab harmony to systematic rules; and he
  wrote a biography of musicians referred to by Al-Hariri in the Séance
  of Singar.

Footnote 176:

  This must not be confounded with the “pissing against the wall” of 1
  Kings, xiv. 10, where watering against a wall denotes a man as opposed
  to a woman.

Footnote 177:

  Arab. “Zambíl” or “Zimbíl,” a limp basket made of plaited palm-leaves
  and generally two handled. It is used for many purposes, from carrying
  poultry to carrying earth.

Footnote 178:

  Here we have again the Syriac “Bakhkh^{un} Bakhkh^{un}” = well done!
  It is the Pers. Áferín and means “all praise be to him.”

Footnote 179:

  Arab. “A Tufayli?” So the Arab. Prov. (ii. 838) “More intrusive than
  Tufayl” (prob. the P.N. of a notorious spunger). The Badawin call
  “Wárish” a man who sits down to meat unbidden and to drink Wághil; but
  townsfolk apply the latter to the “Wárish.”

Footnote 180:

  Arab. “Artál” = rotoli, pounds; and

                           A pint is a pound
                           All the world round;

  except in highly civilised lands where the pint has a curious power of
  shrinking.

Footnote 181:

  One of Al-Maamun’s Wazirs. The Caliph married his daughter whose true
  name was Búrán; but this tale of girl’s freak and courtship was
  invented (?) by Ishak. For the splendour of the wedding and the
  munificence of the Minister see Lane, ii. 350-352.




                     THE SWEEP AND THE NOBLE LADY.


During the season of the Meccan pilgrimage, whilst the people were
making circuit about the Holy House and the place of compassing was
crowded, behold, a man laid hold of the covering of the Ka’abah[182] and
cried out, from the bottom of his heart, saying, “I beseech thee, O
Allah, that she may once again be wroth with her husband and that I may
know her!” A company of the pilgrims heard him and seized him and
carried him to the Emir of the pilgrims, after a sufficiency of blows;
and, said they, “O Emir, we found this fellow in the Holy Places, saying
thus and thus.” So the Emir commanded to hang him; but he cried, “O
Emir, I conjure thee, by the virtue of the Apostle (whom Allah bless and
preserve!), hear my story and then do with me as thou wilt.” Quoth the
Emir, “Tell thy tale forthright.” Know then, O Emir, quoth the man, that
I am a sweep who works in the sheep-slaughterhouses and carries off the
blood and the offal to the rubbish-heaps outside the gates. And it came
to pass as I went along one day with my ass loaded, I saw the people
running away and one of them said to me, “Enter this alley, lest haply
they slay thee.” Quoth I, “What aileth the folk running away?” and one
of the eunuchs, who were passing, said to me, “This is the Harim[183] of
one of the notables and her eunuchs drive the people out of her way and
beat them all, without respect to persons.” So I turned aside with the
donkey——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Eighty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the man:—So
I turned aside with the donkey and stood still awaiting the dispersal of
the crowd; and I saw a number of eunuchs with staves in their hands,
followed by nigh thirty women slaves, and amongst them a lady as she
were a willow-wand or a thirsty gazelle, perfect in beauty and grace and
amorous languor, and all were attending upon her. Now when she came to
the mouth of the passage where I stood, she turned right and left and,
calling one of the Castratos, whispered in his ear; and behold, he came
up to me and laid hold of me, whilst another eunuch took my ass and made
off with it. And when the spectators fled, the first eunuch bound me
with a rope and dragged me after him till I knew not what to do; and the
people followed us and cried out, saying, “This is not allowed of Allah!
What hath this poor scavenger done that he should be bound with ropes?”
and praying the eunuchs, “Have pity on him and let him go, so Allah have
pity on you!” And I the while said in my mind, “Doubtless the eunuchry
seized me, because their mistress smelt the stink of the offal and it
sickened her. Belike she is with child or ailing; but there is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!”
So I continued walking on behind them, till they stopped at the door of
a great house; and, entering before me, brought me into a big hall—I
know not how I shall describe its magnificence—furnished with the finest
furniture. And the women also entered the hall; and I bound and held by
the eunuch and saying to myself, “Doubtless they will torture me here
till I die and none know of my death.” However, after a while, they
carried me into a neat bath-room leading out of the hall; and as I sat
there, behold, in came three slave-girls who seated themselves round me
and said to me, “Strip off thy rags and tatters.” So I pulled off my
threadbare clothes and one of them fell a-rubbing my legs and feet
whilst another scrubbed my head and a third shampooed my body. When they
had made an end of washing me, they brought me a parcel of clothes and
said to me, “Put these on”; and I answered, “By Allah, I know not how!”
So they came up to me and dressed me, laughing together at me the while;
after which they brought casting-bottles full of rose-water, and
sprinkled me therewith. Then I went out with them into another saloon;
by Allah, I know not how to praise its splendour for the wealth of
paintings and furniture therein; and entering it, I saw a person seated
on a couch of Indian rattan——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the sweep
continued:—When I entered that saloon I saw a person seated on a couch
of Indian rattan, with ivory feet and before her a number of damsels.
When she saw me she rose to me and called me; so I went up to her and
she seated me by her side. Then she bade her slave-girls bring food, and
they brought all manner of rich meats, such as I never saw in all my
life; I do not even know the names of the dishes, much less their
nature. So I ate my fill and when the dishes had been taken away and we
had washed our hands, she called for fruits which came without stay or
delay and ordered me eat of them; and when we had ended eating she bade
one of the waiting-women bring the wine furniture. So they set on
flagons of divers kinds of wine and burned perfumes in all the censers,
what while a damsel like the moon rose and served us with wine to the
sound of the smitten strings; and I drank, and the lady drank, till we
were seized with wine and the whole time I doubted not but that all this
was an illusion of sleep. Presently, she signed to one of the damsels to
spread us a bed in such a place, which being done, she rose and took me
by the hand and led me thither, and lay down and I lay with her till the
morning, and as often as I pressed her to my breast I smelt the
delicious fragrance of musk and other perfumes that exhaled from her and
could not think otherwise but that I was in Paradise or in the vain
phantasies of a dream. Now when it was day, she asked me where I lodged
and I told her, “In such a place;” whereupon she gave me leave to
depart, handing to me a kerchief worked with gold and silver and
containing somewhat tied in it, and took leave of me, saying, “Go to the
bath with this.” I rejoiced and said to myself, “If there be but five
coppers here, it will buy me this day my morning meal.” Then I left her,
as though I were leaving Paradise, and returned to my poor crib where I
opened the kerchief and found in it fifty miskals of gold. So I buried
them in the ground and, buying two farthings’ worth of bread and
“kitchen,”[184] seated me at the door and broke my fast; after which I
sat pondering my case and continued so doing till the time of
afternoon-prayer, when lo! a slave-girl accosted me saying, “My mistress
calleth for thee.” I followed her to the house aforesaid and, after
asking permission, she carried me into the lady, before whom I kissed
the ground, and she commanded me to sit and called for meat and wine as
on the previous day; after which I again lay with her all night. On the
morrow, she gave me a second kerchief, with other fifty dinars therein,
and I took it and going home, buried this also. In such pleasant
condition I continued eight days running, going in to her at the hour of
afternoon-prayer and leaving her at daybreak; but, on the eighth night,
as I lay with her, behold, one of her slave-girls came running in and
said to me, “Arise, go up into yonder closet.” So I rose and went into
the closet, which was over the gate, and presently I heard a great
clamour and tramp of horse; and, looking out of the window which gave on
the street in front of the house, I saw a young man as he were the
rising moon on the night of fulness come riding up attended by a number
of servants and soldiers who were about him on foot. He alighted at the
door and entering the saloon found the lady seated on the couch; so he
kissed the ground between her hands then came up to her and kissed her
hands; but she would not speak to him. However, he continued patiently
to humble himself, and soothe her and speak her fair, till he made his
peace with her, and they lay together that night.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the scavenger
continued:—Now when her husband had made his peace with the young lady,
he lay with her that night; and next morning, the soldiers came for him
and he mounted and rode away; whereupon she drew near to me and said,
“Sawst thou yonder man?” I answered, “Yes;” and she said, “He is my
husband, and I will tell thee what befel me with him. It came to pass
one day that we were sitting, he and I, in the garden within the house,
and behold, he rose from my side and was absent a long while, till I
grew tired of waiting and said to myself:—Most like, he is in the privy.
So I arose and went to the water-closet, but not finding him there, went
down to the kitchen, where I saw a slave-girl; and when I enquired for
him, she showed him to me lying with one of the cookmaids. Hereupon, I
swore a great oath that I assuredly would do adultery with the foulest
and filthiest man in Baghdad; and the day the eunuch laid hands on thee,
I had been four days going round about the city in quest of one who
should answer to this description, but found none fouler nor filthier
than thy good self. So I took thee and there passed between us that
which Allah fore-ordained to us; and now I am quit of my oath.” Then she
added, “If, however, my husband return yet again to the cookmaid and lie
with her, I will restore thee to thy lost place in my favours.” Now when
I heard these words from her lips, what while she pierced my heart with
the shafts of her glances, my tears streamed forth, till my eyelids were
chafed sore with weeping, and I repeated the saying of the poet:—

 Grant me the kiss of that left hand ten times; ✿ And learn it hath than
    right hand higher grade;[185]
 For ‘tis but little since that same left hand ✿ Washed off Sir Reverence
    when ablution made.

Then she made them give me other fifty dinars (making in all four
hundred gold pieces I had of her) and bade me depart. So I went out from
her and came hither, that I might pray Allah (extolled and exalted be
He!) to make her husband return to the cookmaid, that haply I might be
again admitted to her favours. When the Emir of the pilgrims heard the
man’s story, he set him free and said to the bystanders, “Allah upon
you, pray for him, for indeed he is excusable.” And men also tell the
tale of

-----

Footnote 182:

  I have described this scene, the wretch clinging to the curtain and
  sighing and crying as if his heart would break (Pilgrimage iii. 216
  and 220). The same is done at the place Al-Multazam, “the attached
  to;” (ibid. 156) and various spots called Al-Mustajáb, “where prayer
  is granted” (ibid. 162). At Jerusalem the “Wailing place of the Jews”
  shows queer scenes; the worshippers embrace the wall with a peculiar
  wriggle crying out in Hebrew, “O build Thy House, soon, without
  delay,” etc.

Footnote 183:

  _i.e._ The wife. The scene in the text was common at Cairo twenty
  years ago; and no one complained of the stick. See Pilgrimage i., 120.

Footnote 184:

  Arab. “Udm, Udum” (plur. of Idám) = “relish,” olives, cheese, pickled
  cucumbers, etc.

Footnote 185:

  I have noticed how the left hand is used in the East. In the second
  couplet we have “Istinjá” = washing the fundament after stool. The
  lines are highly appropriate for a nightman. Easterns have many foul
  but most emphatic expressions like those in the text: I have heard a
  mother say to her brat, “I would eat thy merde!” (_i.e._ how I love
  thee!)




                            THE MOCK CALIPH.


It is related that the Caliph Harun al-Rashid, was one night restless
with extreme restlessness, so he summoned his Wazir Ja’afar the
Barmecide, and said to him, “My breast is straitened and I have a desire
to divert myself to-night by walking about the streets of Baghdad and
looking into folks’ affairs; but with this precaution that we disguise
ourselves in merchants’ gear, so none shall know us.” He answered,
“Hearkening and obedience.” They rose at once and doffing the rich
raiment they wore, donned merchants’ habits and sallied forth three in
number, the Caliph, Ja’afar and Masrur the sworder. Then they walked
from place to place, till they came to the Tigris and saw an old man
sitting in a boat; so they went up to him and saluting him, said, “O
Shaykh, we desire thee of thy kindness and favour to carry us
a-pleasuring down the river, in this thy boat, and take this dinar to
thy hire.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when they said to
the old man, “We desire thee to carry us a-pleasuring in this thy boat
and take this dinar;” he answered, “Who may go a-pleasuring on the
Tigris? The Caliph Harun al-Rashid every night cometh down Tigris-stream
in his state-barge[186] and with him one crying aloud:—Ho, ye people
all, great and small, gentle and simple, men and boys, whoso is found in
a boat on the Tigris by night, I will strike off his head or hang him to
the mast of his craft! And ye had well nigh met him; for here cometh his
carrack.” But the Caliph and Ja’afar said, “O Shaykh, take these two
dinars, and run us under one of yonder arches, that we may hide there
till the Caliph’s barge have passed.” The old man replied, “Hand over
your gold and rely we on Allah, the Almighty!” So he took the two dinars
and embarked them in the boat; and he put off and rowed about with them
awhile, when behold, the barge came down the river in mid-stream, with
lighted flambeaux and cressets flaming therein. Quoth the old man, “Did
not I tell you that the Caliph passed along the river every night?”; and
ceased not muttering, “O Protector, remove not the veils of Thy
protection!” Then he ran the boat under an arch and threw a piece of
black cloth over the Caliph and his companions, who looked out from
under the covering and saw, in the bows of the barge, a man holding in
hand a cresset of red gold which he fed with Sumatran lign-aloes and the
figure was clad in a robe of red satin, with a narrow turband of Mosul
shape round on his head; and over one of his shoulders hung a sleeved
cloak[187] of cramoisy satin, and on the other was a green silk bag full
of the aloes-wood, with which he fed the cresset by way of fire-wood.
And they sighted in the stern another man, clad like the first and
bearing a like cresset, and in the barge were two hundred white slaves,
standing ranged to the right and left; and in the middle a throne of red
gold, whereon sat a handsome young man, like the moon, clad in a dress
of black, embroidered with yellow gold. Before him they beheld a man, as
he were the Wazir Ja’afar, and at his head stood an eunuch, as he were
Masrur, with a drawn sword in his hand; besides a score of
cup-companions. Now when the Caliph saw this, he turned and said, “O
Ja’afar,” and the Minister replied, “At thy service, O Prince of True
Believers.” Then quoth the Caliph, “Belike this is one of my sons,
Al-Amin or Al-Maamun.” Then he examined the young man who sat on the
throne and finding him perfect in beauty and loveliness and stature and
symmetric grace, said to Ja’afar, “Verily, this young man abateth nor
jot nor tittle of the state of the Caliphate! See, there standeth before
him one as he were thyself, O Ja’afar; yonder eunuch who standeth at his
head is as he were Masrur and those courtiers as they were my own. By
Allah, O Ja’afar, my reason is confounded and I am filled with amazement
at this matter!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Two Hundred and Eighty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Caliph
saw this spectacle his reason was confounded and he cried, “By Allah, I
am filled with amazement at this matter!” and Ja’afar replied, “And I
also, by Allah, O Commander of the Faithful.” Then the barge passed on
and disappeared from sight; whereupon the boatman pushed out again into
the stream, saying, “Praised be Allah for safety, since none hath fallen
in with us!” Quoth the Caliph, “O, old man, doth the Caliph come down
the Tigris-river every night?” The boatman answered, “Yes, O my lord;
and on such wise hath he done every night this year past.” “O Shaykh,”
rejoined Al-Rashid, “we wish thee of thy favour to await us here
to-morrow night and we will give thee five golden dinars, for we are
stranger folk, lodging in the quarter Al-Khandak, and we have a mind to
divert ourselves.” Said the oldster, “With joy and good will!” Then the
Caliph and Ja’afar and Masrur left the boatman and returned to the
palace, where they doffed their merchants’ habits and, donning their
apparel of state, sat down each in his several stead; and came the Emirs
and Wazirs and Chamberlains and Officers; and the Divan assembled and
was crowded as of custom. But when day ended and all the folk had
dispersed and wended each his own way, the Caliph said to his Wazir,
“Rise, O Ja’afar, let us go and amuse ourselves by looking on the second
Caliph.” At this, Ja’afar and Masrur laughed, and the three, donning
merchants’ habits, went forth by a secret postern and made their way
through the city, in great glee, till they came to the Tigris, where
they found the greybeard sitting and awaiting them. They embarked with
him in the boat and hardly had they sat down before up came the mock
Caliph’s barge; and, when they looked at it attentively, they saw
therein two hundred Mamelukes other than those of the previous night,
while the link-bearers cried aloud as of wont. Quoth the Caliph, “O
Wazir, had I heard tell of this, I had not believed it; but I have seen
it with my own sight.” Then said he to the boatman, “Take, O Shaykh,
these ten dinars and row us along abreast of them, for they are in the
light and we in the shade, and we can see them and amuse ourselves by
looking on them, but they cannot see us.” So the man took the money and
pushing off ran abreast of them in the shadow of the barge——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Eighty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King that the Caliph Harun
al-Rashid said to the old man, “Take these ten dinars and row us abreast
of them;” to which he replied, “I hear and I obey.” And he fared with
them and ceased not going in the blackness of the barge, till they came
amongst the gardens that lay alongside of them and sighted a large
walled enclosure; and presently, the barge cast anchor before a postern
door, where they saw servants standing with a she-mule saddled and
bridled. Here the mock Caliph landed and, mounting the mule, rode away
with his courtiers and his cup-companions preceded by the
cresset-bearers crying aloud, and followed by his household which busied
itself in his service. Then Harun al-Rashid, Ja’afar and Masrur landed
also and, making their way through the press of servants, walked on
before them. Presently, the cresset-bearers espied them and seeing three
persons in merchants’ habits, and strangers to the country, took offence
at them; so they pointed them out and brought them before the other
Caliph, who looked at them and asked, “How came ye to this place and who
brought you at this tide?” They answered, “O our lord, we are foreign
merchants and far from our homes, who arrived here this day and were out
a-walking to-night, and behold, ye came up and these men laid hands on
us and brought us to thy presence; and this is all our story.” Quoth the
mock Caliph, “Since ye be stranger folk no harm shall befal you; but had
ye been of Baghdad, I had struck off your heads.” Then he turned to his
Wazir and said to him, “Take these men with thee; for they are our
guests to-night.” “To hear is to obey, O our lord,” answered he; and
they companied him till they came to a lofty and splendid palace set
upon the firmest base; no Sultan possesseth such a place; rising from
the dusty mould and upon the marges of the clouds laying hold. Its door
was of Indian teak-wood inlaid with gold that glowed; and through it one
passed into a royal-hall in whose midst was a jetting fount girt by a
raised estrade. It was provided with carpets and cushions of brocade and
small pillows and long settees and hanging curtains; it was furnished
with a splendour that dazed the mind and dumbed the tongue, and upon the
door were written these two couplets:—

 A Palace whereon be blessings and praise! ✿ Which with all their beauty
    have robed the Days:
 Where marvels and miracle-sights abound, ✿ And to write its honours the
    pen affrays.

The false Caliph entered with his company, and sat down on a throne of
gold set with jewels and covered with a prayer-carpet of yellow silk;
whilst the boon-companions took their seats and the sword-bearer of high
works stood before him. Then the tables were laid and they ate; after
which the dishes were removed and they washed their hands and the
wine-service was set on with flagons and bowls in due order. The cup
went round till it came to the Caliph, Harun al-Rashid, who refused the
draught and the mock Caliph said to Ja’afar, “What mattereth thy friend
that he drinketh not?” He replied, “O my lord, indeed ‘tis a long while
he hath drunk naught of this.” Quoth the sham Caliph, “I have drink
other than this, a kind of apple-wine,[188] that will suit thy
companion.” So he bade them bring the cider which they did forthright
when the false Caliph, coming up to Harun al-Rashid, said to him, “As
often as it cometh to thy turn drink thou of this.” Then they continued
to drink and make merry and pass the cup till the wine rose to their
brains and mastered their wits;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Eighty-ninth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the false Caliph
and his co-sitters sat at their cups and gave not over drinking till the
wine rose to their brains and mastered their wits; and Harun al-Rashid
said to the Minister, “O Ja’afar, by Allah, we have no such vessels as
these. Would to Heaven I knew what manner of man this youth is!” But
while they were talking privily the young man cast a glance upon them
and seeing the Wazir whisper the Caliph said, “’Tis rude to whisper.” He
replied, “No rudeness was meant: this my friend did but say to
me:—Verily I have travelled in most countries and have caroused with the
greatest of Kings and I have companied with noble captains; yet never
saw I a goodlier ordering than this entertainment nor passed a more
delightful night; save that the people of Baghdad are wont to say, Wine
without music often leaves _you_ sick.” When the second Caliph heard
this, he smiled pleasantly and struck with a rod he had in his hand a
round gong;[189] and behold, a door opened and out came a eunuch,
bearing a chair of ivory, inlaid with gold glittering fiery red and
followed by a damsel of passing beauty and loveliness, symmetry and
grace. He set down the chair and the damsel seated herself on it, as she
were the sun shining sheen in a sky serene. In her hand she had a lute
of Hindu make, which she laid in her lap and bent down over it as a
mother bendeth over her little one, and sang to it, after a prelude in
four-and-twenty modes, amazing all wits. Then she returned to the first
mode and to a lively measure chanted these couplets:—

 Love’s tongue within my heart speaks plain to thee, ✿ Telling thee
    clearly I am fain of thee;
 Witness the fevers of a tortured heart, ✿ And ulcered eyelid tear-flood
    rains for thee;
 God’s fate o’ertaketh all created things! ✿ I knew not love till learnt
    Love’s pain of thee.

Now when the mock Caliph heard these lines sung by the damsel, he cried
with a great cry and rent his raiment to the very skirt, whereupon they
let down a curtain over him and brought him a fresh robe, handsomer than
the first. He put it on and sat as before, till the cup came round to
him, when he struck the gong a second time and lo! a door opened and out
of it came a eunuch with a chair of gold, followed by a damsel fairer
than the first, bearing a lute, such as would strike the envious mute.
She sat down on the chair and sang to her instrument these two
couplets:—

 How patient bide, with love in sprite of me, ✿ And tears in tempest[190]
    blinding sight of me?
 By Allah, life has no delight of me! ✿ How gladden heart whose core is
    blight of me?

No sooner had the youth heard this poetry than he cried out with a loud
cry and rent his raiment to the skirt: whereupon they let down the
curtain over him and brought him another suit of clothes. He put it on
and, sitting up as before, fell again to cheerful talk, till the cup
came round to him, when he smote once more upon the gong and out came a
eunuch with a chair, followed by a damsel fairer than she who forewent
her. So she sat down on the chair, with a lute in her hand, and sang
thereto these couplets:—

 Cease ye this farness; ‘bate this pride of you, ✿ To whom my heart
    clings, by life-tide of you!
 Have ruth on hapless, mourning, lover-wretch, ✿ Desire-full, pining,
    passion-tried of you:
 Sickness hath wasted him, whose ecstasy ✿ Prays Heaven it may be
    satisfied of you;
 Oh fullest moons[191] that dwell in deepest heart! ✿ How can I think of
    aught by side of you?

Now when the young man heard these couplets, he cried out with a great
cry and rent his raiment, whereupon they let fall the curtain over him
and brought him other robes. Then he returned to his former case with
his boon-companions and the bowl went round as before, till the cup came
to him, when he struck the gong a fourth time and the door opening, out
came a page-boy bearing a chair followed by a damsel. He set the chair
for her and she sat down thereon and taking the lute, tuned it and sang
to it these couplets:—

 When shall disunion and estrangement end? ✿ When shall my bygone joys
    again be kenned?
 Yesterday we were joined in same abode; ✿ Conversing heedless of each
    envious friend:[192]
 Trickt us that traitor Time, disjoined our lot ✿ And our waste home to
    desert fate condemned:
 Wouldst have me, Grumbler! from my dearling fly? ✿ I find my vitals
    blame will not perpend:
 Cease thou to censure; leave me to repine; ✿ My mind e’er findeth
    thoughts that pleasure lend.
 O Lords[193] of me who brake our troth and plight, ✿ Deem not to lose
    your hold of heart and sprite!

When the false Caliph heard the girl’s song, he cried out with a loud
outcry and rent his raiment——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Two Hundred and Ninetieth Night,

She said, When the false Caliph heard the girl’s song, he cried with a
loud outcry and rent his raiment and fell to the ground fainting;
whereupon they would have let down the curtain over him, as of custom;
but its cords stuck fast and Harun al-Rashid, after considering him
carefully, saw on his body the marks of beating with palm-rods and said
to Ja’afar, “By Allah, he is a handsome youth, but a foul thief!”
“Whence knowest thou that, O Commander of the Faithful?” asked Ja’afar,
and the Caliph answered, “Sawest thou not the whip-scars on his ribs?”
Then they let fall the curtain over him and brought him a fresh dress,
which he put on and sat up as before with his courtiers and
cup-companions. Presently he saw the Caliph and Ja’afar whispering
together and said to them, “What is the matter, fair sirs?” Quoth
Ja’afar, “O my lord, all is well,[194] save that this my comrade, who
(as is not unknown to thee) is of the merchant-company and hath visited
all the great cities and countries of the world and hath consorted with
kings and men of highest consideration, saith to me:—Verily, that which
our lord the Caliph hath done this night is beyond measure extravagant,
never saw I any do the like doings in any country; for he hath rent such
and such dresses, each worth a thousand dinars and this is surely
excessive unthriftiness.” Replied the second Caliph, “Ho thou, the money
is my money and the stuff my stuff, and this is by way of largesse to my
suite and servants; for each suit that is rent belongeth to one of my
cup-companions here present, and I assign to them with each suit of
clothes the sum of five hundred dinars.” The Wazir Ja’afar replied,
“Well is whatso thou doest, O our lord,” and recited these two
couplets:—

 Virtue in hand of thee hath built a house, ✿ And to mankind thou dost
    thy wealth expose:
 If an the virtues ever close their doors, ✿ That hand would be a key the
    lock to unclose.

Now when the young man heard these verses recited by the Minister
Ja’afar, he ordered him to be gifted with a thousand dinars and a dress
of honour. Then the cup went round among them and the wine was sweet to
them; but, after a while quoth the Caliph to Ja’afar, “Ask him of the
marks on his sides, that we may see what he will say by way of reply.”
Answered Ja’afar, “Softly, O my lord, be not hasty and soothe thy mind,
for patience is more becoming.” Rejoined the Caliph, “By the life of my
head and by the revered tomb of Al-Abbas,[195] except thou ask him, I
will assuredly stop thy breath!” With this the young man turned towards
the Minister and said to him, “What aileth thee and thy friend to be
whispering together? Tell me what is the matter with you.” “It is
nothing save good,” replied Ja’afar; but the mock Caliph rejoined, “I
conjure thee, by Allah, tell me what aileth you and hide from me nothing
of your case.” Answered the Wazir, “O my lord, verily this one here saw
on thy sides the marks of beating with whips and palm-fronds and
marvelled thereat with exceeding marvel, saying:—How came the Caliph to
be beaten?; and he would fain know the cause of this.” Now when the
youth heard this, he smiled and said, “Know ye that my story is wondrous
and my case marvellous; were it graven with needles on the eye-corners,
it would serve as a warner to whoso would be warned.” And he sighed and
repeated these couplets:—

 Strange is my story, passing prodigy; ✿ By Love I swear, my ways wax
    strait on me!
 An ye desire to hear me, listen, and ✿ Let all in this assembly silent
    be.
 Heed ye my words which are of meaning deep, ✿ Nor lies my speech; ‘tis
    truest verity.
 I’m slain[196] by longing and by ardent love; ✿ My slayer’s the pearl of
    fair virginity.
 She hath a jet black eye like Hindi blade, ✿ And bowèd eyebrows shoot
    her archery;
 My heart assures me our Imam is here, ✿ This age’s Caliph, old nobility:
 Your second, Ja’afar hight, is his Wazir; ✿ A Sáhib,[197] Sahib-son of
    high degree:
 The third is called Masrur who wields the sword: ✿ Now, if in words of
    mine some truth you see,
 I have won every wish by this event ✿ Which fills my heart with joy and
    gladdest gree.

When they heard these words Ja’afar swore to him an ambiguous oath that
they were not those he named, whereupon he laughed and said:—Know, O my
lords, that I am not the Commander of the Faithful and that I do but
style myself thus, to win my will of the sons of the city. My true name
is Mohammed Ali, son of Ali the Jeweller, and my father was one of the
notables of Baghdad, who left me great store of gold and silver and
pearls and coral and rubies and chrysolites and other jewels, besides
messuages and lands, Hammam-baths and brickeries, orchards and
flower-gardens. Now as I sat in my shop one day surrounded by my eunuchs
and dependents, behold, there came up a young lady, mounted on a
she-mule and attended by three damsels like moons. Riding up to my shop
she alighted and seated herself by my side and said, “Art thou Mohammed
the Jeweller?” Replied I, “Even so! I am he, thy Mameluke, thy chattel.”
She asked, “Hast thou a necklace of jewels fit for me?” and I answered,
“O my lady, I will show thee what I have; and lay all before thee and,
if any please thee, it will be of thy slave’s good luck; if they please
thee not, of his ill fortune.” Now I had by me an hundred necklaces and
showed them all to her; but none of them pleased her and she said, “I
want a better than those I have seen.” I had a small necklace which my
father had bought at an hundred thousand dinars and whose like was not
to be found with any of the great kings; so I said to her, “O my lady, I
have yet one necklace of fine stones fit for bezels, the like of which
none possesseth, great or small.” Said she, “Show it to me,” so I showed
it to her, and she said, “This is what I wanted and what I have wished
for all my life;” adding, “What is its price?” Quoth I, “It cost my
father an hundred thousand dinars;” and she said, “I will give thee five
thousand dinars to thy profit.” I answered, “O my lady, the necklace and
its owner are at thy service and I cannot gainsay thee.” But she
rejoined, “Needs must thou have the profit, and I am still most grateful
to thee.” Then she rose without stay or delay; and, mounting the mule in
haste, said to me, “O my lord, in Allah’s name, favour us with thy
company to receive the money; for this thy day with us is white as
milk.”[198] So I shut the shop and accompanied her, in all security,
till we came to a house, on which were manifest the signs of wealth and
rank; for its door was wrought with gold and silver and ultramarine, and
thereon were written these two couplets:—

 Hola, thou mansion! woe ne’er enter thee; ✿ Nor be thine owner e’er
    misused of Fate;
 Excellent mansion to all guests art thou, ✿ When other mansions to the
    guest are strait.

The young lady dismounted and entered the house, bidding me sit down on
the bench at the gate, till the money-changer should arrive. So I sat
awhile, when behold, a damsel came out to me and said, “O my lord, enter
the vestibule; for it is a dishonour that thou shouldst sit at the
gate.” Thereupon I arose and entered the vestibule and sat down on the
settle there; and, as I sat, lo! another damsel came out and said to me,
“O my lord, my mistress biddeth thee enter and sit down at the door of
the saloon, to receive thy money.” I entered and sat down, nor had I sat
a moment when behold, a curtain of silk which concealed a throne of gold
was drawn aside, and I saw seated thereon the lady who had made the
purchase; and round her neck she wore the necklace which looked pale and
wan by the side of a face as it were the rounded moon. At her sight, my
wit was troubled and my mind confounded, by reason of her exceeding
beauty and loveliness; but when she saw me she rose from her throne and
coming close up to me, said, “O light of mine eyes, is every handsome
one like thee pitiless to his mistress?” I answered, “O my lady, beauty,
all of it, is in thee and is but one of thy hidden charms.” And she
rejoined, “O Jeweller, know that I love thee and can hardly credit that
I have brought thee hither.” Then she bent towards me and I kissed her
and she kissed me and, as she caressed me, drew me towards her and to
her breast she pressed me.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Jeweller
continued:—Then she bent towards me and kissed and caressed me; and, as
she caressed me, drew me towards her and to her breast she pressed me.
Now she knew by my condition that I had a mind to enjoy her; so she said
to me, “O my lord, wouldst thou foregather with me unlawfully? By Allah,
may he not live who would do the like of this sin and who takes pleasure
in talk unclean! I am a maid, a virgin whom no man hath approached, nor
am I unknown in the city. Knowest thou who I am?” Quoth I, “No, by
Allah, O my lady!”; and quoth she, “I am the Lady Dunyá, daughter of
Yáhyá bin Khálid the Barmecide and sister of Ja’afar, Wazir to the
Caliph.” Now as I heard this, I drew back from her, saying, “O my lady,
it is no fault of mine if I have been over-bold with thee; it was thou
didst encourage me to aspire to thy love, by giving me access to thee.”
She answered, “No harm shall befal thee, and needs must thou attain thy
desire in the only way pleasing to Allah. I am my own mistress and the
Kazi shall act as my guardian in consenting to the marriage contract;
for it is my will that I be to thee wife and thou be to me man.” Then
she sent for the Kazi and the witnesses and busied herself with making
ready; and, when they came, she said to them, “Mohammed Ali, bin Ali the
Jeweller, seeketh me in wedlock and hath given me the necklace to my
marriage-settlement; and I accept and consent.” So they wrote out the
contract of marriage between us; and ere I went in to her the servants
brought the wine-furniture and the cups passed round after the fairest
fashion and the goodliest ordering; and, when the wine mounted to our
heads, she ordered a damsel, a lute-player,[199] to sing. So she took
the lute and sang to a pleasing and stirring motive these couplets:—

 He comes; and fawn and branch and moon delight these eyne ✿ Fie[200] on
    his heart who sleeps o’ nights without repine;
 Fair youth, for whom Heaven willed to quench in cheek one light, ✿ And
    left another light on other cheek bright li’en:
 I fain finesse my chiders when they mention him, ✿ As though the hearing
    of his name I would decline;
 And willing ear I lend when they of other speak; ✿ Yet would my soul
    within outflow in floods of brine:
 Beauty’s own prophet, he is all a miracle ✿ Of heavenly grace, and
    greatest shows his face for sign:[201]
 To prayer Bilál-like cries that Mole upon his cheek ✿ To ward from
    pearly brow all eyes of ill design:[202]
 The censors of their ignorance would my love dispel ✿ But after Faith I
    can’t at once turn Infidel.

We were ravished by the sweet music she made striking the strings, and
the beauty of the verses she sang; and the other damsels went on to sing
and to recite one after another, till ten had so done; when the Lady
Dunya took the lute and playing a lively measure, chanted these
couplets:—

 I swear by swayings of that form so fair, ✿ Aye from thy parting fiery
    pangs I bear:
 Pity a heart which burneth in thy love, ✿ O bright as fullest moon in
    blackest air!
 Vouchsafe thy boons to him who ne’er will cease ✿ In light of wine-cup
    all thy charms declare,
 Amid the roses which with varied hues ✿ Are to the myrtle-bush[203] a
    mere despair.

When she had finished her verse; I took the lute from her hands and,
playing a quaint and no vulgar prelude sang the following verses:—

 Laud to my Lord who gave thee all of loveliness; ✿ Myself amid thy
    thralls I willingly confess:
 O thou, whose eyes and glances captivate mankind, ✿ Pray that I ‘scape
    those arrows shot with all thy stress!
 Two hostile rivals water and enflaming fire ✿ Thy cheek hath married,
    which for marvel I profess:
 Thou art Sa’ír in heart of me and eke Na’ím;[204] ✿ Thou _agro-dolce_,
    eke heart’s sweetest bitterness.

When she heard this my song she rejoiced with exceeding joy; then,
dismissing her slave-women, she brought me to a most goodly place, where
they had spread us a bed of various colours. She did off her clothes and
I had a lover’s privacy of her and found her a pearl unpierced and a
filly unridden. So I rejoiced in her and never in my born days spent I a
more delicious night.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Ninety-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Mohammed bin Ali
the Jeweller continued:—So I went in unto the Lady Dunya, daughter of
Yahya bin Khalid the Barmecide, and I found her a pearl unthridden and a
filly unridden. So I rejoiced in her and repeated these couplets:—

 O Night here stay! I want no morning light; ✿ My lover’s face to me is
    lamp and light:[205]
 As ring of ring-dove round his neck’s my arm; ✿ And made my palm his
    mouth-veil; and, twas right.
 This be the crown of bliss, and ne’er we’ll cease ✿ To clip, nor care to
    be in other plight.

And I abode with her a whole month, forsaking shop and family and home,
till one day she said to me, “O light of my eyes, O my lord Mohammed, I
have determined to go to the Hammam to-day; so sit thou on this couch
and rise not from thy place, till I return to thee.” “I hear and I
obey,” answered I, and she made me swear to this; after which she took
her women and went off to the bath. But by Allah, O my brothers, she had
not reached the head of the street ere the door opened and in came an
old woman, who said to me, “O my lord Mohammed, the Lady Zubaydah
biddeth thee to her, for she hath heard of thy fine manners and
accomplishments and skill in singing.” I answered, “By Allah, I will not
rise from my place, till the Lady Dunya come back.” Rejoined the old
woman, “O my lord, do not anger the Lady Zubaydah with thee and vex her
so as to make her thy foe: nay, rise up and speak with her and return to
thy place.” So I rose at once and followed her into the presence of the
Lady Zubaydah and, when I entered her presence she said to me, “O light
of the eye, art thou the Lady Dunya’s beloved?” “I am thy Mameluke, thy
chattel,” replied I. Quoth she, “Sooth spake he who reported thee
possessed of beauty and grace and good breeding and every fine quality;
indeed, thou surpassest all praise and all report. But now sing to me,
that I may hear thee.” Quoth I, “Hearkening and obedience;” so she
brought me a lute, and I sang to it these couplets:—

 The hapless lover’s heart is of his wooing weary grown; ✿ And hand of
    sickness wasted him till naught but skin and bone:
 Who should be amid the riders which the haltered camels urge, ✿ But that
    same lover whose beloved doth in the litters wone:

 To Allah’s charge I leave that moon-like Beauty in your tents ✿ Whom my
    heart loves, albe my glance on her may ne’er be thrown.
 Now she is fain; then she is fierce: how sweet her coyness shows; ✿ Yea,
    sweet whatever doth or saith to lover lovèd one!

When I had finished my song she said to me, “Allah assain thy body and
thy voice! Verily, thou art perfect in beauty and good breeding and
singing. But now rise and return to thy place, ere the Lady Dunya come
back, lest she find thee not and be wroth with thee.” Then I kissed the
ground before her and the old woman forewent me till I reached the door
whence I came. So I entered and, going up to the couch, found that my
wife had come back from the bath and was lying asleep there. Seeing this
I sat down at her feet and rubbed them; whereupon she opened her eyes
and seeing me, drew up both her feet and gave me a kick that threw me
off the couch,[206] saying, “O traitor, thou hast been false to thine
oath and hast perjured thyself. Thou swarest to me that thou wouldst not
rise from thy place; yet didst thou break thy promise and go to the Lady
Zubaydah. By Allah, but that I fear public scandal, I would pull down
her palace over her head!” Then said she to her black slave, “O Sawáb,
arise and strike off this lying traitor’s head, for we have no further
need of him.” So the slave came up to me and, tearing a strip from his
skirt, bandaged with it my eyes[207] and would have struck off my
head;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Ninety-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Mohammed the
Jeweller continued:—So the slave came up to me and, tearing a strip from
his skirt, bandaged with it my eyes and would have struck off my head;
but all her women, great and small, rose and came up to her and said to
her, “O our lady, this is not the first who hath erred: indeed, he knew
not thy humour and hath done thee no offence deserving death.” Replied
she, “By Allah, I must needs set my mark on him.” And she bade them bash
me; so they beat me on my ribs and the marks ye saw are the scars of
that fustigation. Then she ordered them to cast me out, and they carried
me to a distance from the house and threw me down like a log. After a
time I rose and dragged myself little by little to my own place, where I
sent for a surgeon and showed him my hurts; and he comforted me and did
his best to cure me. As soon as I was recovered I went to the Hammam
and, as my pains and sickness had left me, I repaired to my shop and
took and sold all that was therein. With the proceeds, I bought me four
hundred white slaves, such as no King ever got together, and caused two
hundred of them to ride out with me every day. Then I made me yonder
barge whereon I spent five thousand gold pieces; and styled myself
Caliph and appointed each of my servants to the charge of some one of
the Caliph’s officers and clad him in official habit. Moreover, I made
proclamation, “Whoso goeth a-pleasuring on the Tigris by night, I will
strike off his head, without ruth or delay;” and on such wise have I
done this whole year past, during which time I have heard no news of the
lady neither happened upon any trace of her. Then wept he copiously and
repeated these couplets:—

 By Allah! while the days endure ne’er shall forget her I, ✿ Nor draw to
    any nigh save those who draw her to me nigh:
 Like to the fullest moon her form and favour show to me; ✿ Laud to her
    All-creating Lord, laud to the Lord on high!
 She left me full of mourning, sleepless, sick with pine and pain ✿ And
    ceaseth not my heart to yearn her mystery[208] to espy.

Now when Harun al-Rashid heard the young man’s story and knew the
passion and transport and love-lowe that afflicted him, he was moved to
compassion and wonder and said, “Glory be to Allah, who hath appointed
to every effect a cause!” Then they craved the young man’s permission to
depart; which being granted, they took leave of him, the Caliph
purposing to do him justice meet, and him with the utmost munificence
entreat; and they returned to the palace of the Caliphate, where they
changed clothes for others befitting their state and sat down, whilst
Masrur the Sworder of High Justice stood before them. After awhile,
quoth the Caliph to Ja’afar, “O Wazir, bring me the young man”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Ninety-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the Caliph
to his Minister, “Bring me the young man with whom we were last night.”
“I hear and obey,” answered Ja’afar and, going to the youth, saluted
him, saying, “Obey the summons of the Commander of the Faithful, the
Caliph Harun al-Rashid.” So he returned with him to the palace, in great
anxiety by reason of the summons; and, going in to the King, kissed
ground before him; and offered up a prayer for the endurance of his
glory and prosperity, for the accomplishment of his desires, for the
continuance of his beneficence and for the cessation of evil and
punishment; ordering his speech as best he might and ending by saying,
“Peace be on thee, O Prince of True Believers and Protector of the folk
of the Faith!” Then he repeated these two couplets:—

 Kiss thou his fingers which no fingers are; ✿ Keys of our daily bread
    those fingers ken:
 And praise his actions which no actions are; ✿ But precious necklaces
    round necks of men.

So the Caliph smiled in his face and returned his salute, looking on him
with the eye of favour; then he bade him draw near and sit down before
him and said to him, “O Mohammed Ali, I wish thee to tell me what befel
thee last night, for it was strange and passing strange.” Quoth the
youth, “Pardon, O Commander of the Faithful, give me the kerchief of
immunity, that my dread may be appeased and my heart eased.” Replied the
Caliph, “I promise thee safety from fear and woes.” So the young man
told him his story from first to last, whereby the Caliph knew him to be
a lover and severed from his beloved and said to him, “Desirest thou
that I restore her to thee?” “This were of the bounty of the Commander
of the Faithful,” answered the youth and repeated these two couplets:—

 Ne’er cease thy gate be Ka’abah to mankind; ✿ Long may its threshold
    dust man’s brow beseem!
 That o’er all countries it may be proclaimed, ✿ This is the Place and
    thou art Ibrahim.[209]

Thereupon the Caliph turned to his Minister and said to him, “O Ja’afar,
bring me thy sister, the Lady Dunya, daughter of the Wazir Yahya bin
Khalid!” “I hear and I obey,” answered he and fetched her without let or
delay. Now when she stood before the Caliph he said to her, “Dost thou
know who this is?”; and she replied, “O Commander of the Faithful, how
should women have knowledge of men?”[210] So the Caliph smiled and said,
“O Dunya, this is thy beloved, Mohammed bin Ali the Jeweller. We are
acquainted with his case, for we have heard the whole story from
beginning to end, and have apprehended its inward and its outward; and
it is no more hidden from me, for all it was kept in secrecy.” Replied
she, “O Commander of the Faithful, this was written in the Book of
Destiny; I crave the forgiveness of Almighty Allah for the wrong I have
wrought, and pray thee to pardon me of thy favour.” At this the Caliph
laughed and, summoning the Kazi and witnesses, renewed the
marriage-contract between the Lady Dunya and her husband, Mohammed Ali
son of the Jeweller whereby there betided them, both her and him the
utmost felicity, and to their enviers mortification and misery.
Moreover, he made Mohammed Ali one of his boon-companions, and they
abode in joy and cheer and gladness, till there came to them the
Destroyer of delights and the Sunderer of societies. And men also relate
the pleasant tale of

-----

Footnote 186:

  Arab. “Harrák,” whence probably our “Carack” and “Carrack” (large
  ship), in dictionaries derived from Carrus Marinus.

Footnote 187:

  Arab. “Gháshiyah” = lit. an étui, a cover; and often a saddle-cover
  carried by the groom.

Footnote 188:

  Arab. “Sharáb al-tuffáh” = melapio or cider.

Footnote 189:

  Arab. “Mudawwarah,” which generally means a small round cushion, of
  the Marocco-work well known in England. But one does not strike a
  cushion for a signal; so we must revert to the original sense of the
  word “something round,” as a circular plate of wood or metal, a gong,
  a “bell” like that of the Eastern Christians.

Footnote 190:

  Arab. “Túfán” (from the root tauf, going round) a storm, a circular
  gale, a cyclone; the term universally applied in Al-Islam to the
  “Deluge,” the “Flood” of Noah. The word is purely Arabic; with a
  quaint likeness to the Gr. τυφῶν, in Pliny typhon, whirlwind, a giant
  (Typhœus) whence “Typhon” applied to the great Egyptian god “Set.” The
  Arab word extended to China and was given to the hurricanes which the
  people call “Tae-foong,” great winds, a second whimsical resemblance.
  But Sir John Davis (ii. 383) is hardly correct when he says, “the name
  typhoon, in itself a corruption of the Chinese term, bears a singular
  (though we must suppose an accidental) resemblance to the Greek
  τυφῶν.”

Footnote 191:

  Plurale majestatis acting superlative; not as Lane supposes (ii. 224)
  “a number of full moons, not only one.” Eastern tongues abound in
  instances beginning with Genesis (i. 1), “Gods (he) created the
  heaven,” etc. It is still preserved in Badawi language and a wildling
  greatly to the astonishment of the citizens will address his friend
  “Yá Rijál” = O men!

Footnote 192:

  Arab. “Hásid” = an envier: in the fourth couplet “Azúl” (Azzál, etc.)
  = a chider, blamer; elsewhere “Lawwám” = accuser, censor, slanderer;
  “Wáshí” = whisperer, informer; “Rakib” = spying, envious rival;
  “Ghábit” = one emulous without envy; and “Shámit” = a “blue” (fierce)
  enemy who rejoices over another’s calamities. Arabic literature
  abounds in allusions to this unpleasant category of “damned
  ill-natured friends;” and Spanish and Portuguese letters, including
  Brazilian, have thoroughly caught the trick. In the Eastern mind the
  “blamer” would be aided by the “evil eye.”

Footnote 193:

  Another plural for a singular, “O my beloved!”

Footnote 194:

  Arab. “Khayr” = good news, a euphemistic reply even if the tidings be
  of the worst.

Footnote 195:

  Abbás (from ‘Abs, being austere; and meaning the “grim-faced”) son of
  Abd al-Muttalib; uncle to Mohammed and eponym of the Abbaside
  Khalifahs. A.D. 749 = 1258.

Footnote 196:

  Katíl = the Irish “kilt.”

Footnote 197:

  This has been explained as a wazirial title of the time.

Footnote 198:

  The phrase is intelligible in all tongues: in Arabic it is opposed to
  “dark as night,” “black as mud” and a host of unsavoury antitheses.

Footnote 199:

  Arab. “Awwádah,” the popular word; not Udíyyah as in Night cclvi. “Ud”
  liter. = wood and “Al-Ud” = the wood is, I have noted, the origin of
  our “lute.” The Span. “laud” is larger and deeper than the guitar, and
  its seven strings are played upon with a plectrum of buffalo-horn.

Footnote 200:

  Arab. “Tabban lahu!” = loss (or ruin) to him. So “bu’dan lahu” = away
  with him, abeat in malam rem; and “Suhkan lahu” = Allah and mercy be
  far from him, no hope for him!

Footnote 201:

  Arab. “Áyah” = Koranic verset, sign, miracle.

Footnote 202:

  The mole on cheek calls to prayers for his preservation; and it is
  black as Bilal the Abyssinian. Fajran may here mean either “A-morning”
  or “departing from grace.”

Footnote 203:

  _i.e._ the young beard (myrtle) can never hope to excel the beauties
  of his cheeks (roses).

Footnote 204:

  _i.e._ Hell and Heaven.

Footnote 205:

  The first couplet is not in the Mac. Edit. (ii. 171) which gives only
  a single couplet; but it is found in the Bres. Edit. which entitles
  this tale “Story of the lying (or false = kázib) Khalífah.” Lane (ii.
  392) of course does not translate it.

Footnote 206:

  In the East cloth of frieze that mates with cloth of gold must expect
  this treatment. Fath Ali Shah’s daughters always made their husbands
  enter the nuptial bed by the foot end.

Footnote 207:

  This is always done and for two reasons; the first humanity, that the
  blow may fall unawares; and, secondly, to prevent the sufferer
  wincing, which would throw out the headsman.

Footnote 208:

  Arab. “Ma’áni-há,” lit. her meanings, _i.e._ her inner woman opposed
  to the formal seen by every one.

Footnote 209:

  Described in my Pilgrimage (iii. 168, 174 and 175): it is the stone
  upon which the Patriarch stood when he built the Ka’abah and is said
  to show the impress of the feet; but unfortunately I could not afford
  five dollars entrance-fee. Caliph Omar placed the station where it now
  is; before his time it adjoined the Ka’abah. The meaning of the text
  is, Be thy court a place of pious visitation, etc. At the “Station of
  Abraham” prayer is especially blessed and expects to be granted. “This
  is the place where Abraham stood; and whoever entereth therein shall
  be safe” (Koran ii. 119). For the other fifteen places where petitions
  are favourably heard by Heaven see ibid. iii. 211-12.

Footnote 210:

  As in the West, so in the East, women answer an unpleasant question by
  a counter-question.




                            ALI THE PERSIAN.


It is said that the Caliph Harun al-Rashid, being restless one night,
sent for his Wazir and said to him, “O Ja’afar, I am sore wakeful and
heavy-hearted this night, and I desire of thee what may solace my spirit
and cause my breast to broaden with amusement.” Quoth Ja’afar, “O
Commander of the Faithful, I have a friend, by name Ali the Persian, who
hath store of tales and pleasant stories, such as lighten the heart and
make care depart.” Quoth the Caliph, “Fetch him to me,” and quoth
Ja’afar, “Hearkening and obedience;” and, going out from before him,
sent to seek Ali the Persian and when he came said to him, “Answer the
summons of the Commander of the Faithful.” “To hear is to obey,”
answered Ali;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Persian
replied, “To hear is to obey;” and at once followed the Wazir into the
presence of the Caliph who bade him be seated and said to him, “O Ali,
my heart is heavy within me this night and it hath come to my ear that
thou hast great store of tales and anecdotes; so I desire of thee that
thou let me hear what will relieve my despondency and brighten my
melancholy.” Said he, “O Commander of the Faithful, shall I tell thee
what I have seen with my eyes or what I have heard with my ears?” He
replied, “An thou have seen aught worth the telling, let me hear that.”
Replied Ali:—Hearkening and obedience. Know thou, O Commander of the
Faithful, that some years ago I left this my native city of Baghdad on a
journey, having with me a lad who carried a light leathern bag.
Presently we came to a certain city, where, as I was buying and selling
behold, a rascally Kurd fell on me and seized my wallet perforce,
saying, “This is my bag, and all which is in it is my property.”
Thereupon, I cried aloud “Ho Moslems,[211] one and all, deliver me from
the hand of the vilest of oppressors!” But the folk said, “Come, both of
you, to the Kazi and abide ye by his judgement with joint consent.” So I
agreed to submit myself to such decision and we both presented ourselves
before the Kazi, who said, “What bringeth you hither and what is your
case and your quarrel?” Quoth I, “We are men at difference, who appeal
to thee and make complaint and submit ourselves to thy judgement.” Asked
the Kazi, “Which of you is the complainant?”; so the Kurd came
forward[212] and said, “Allah preserve our lord the Kazi! Verily, this
bag is my bag and all that is in it is my swag. It was lost from me and
I found it with this man mine enemy.” The Kazi asked, “When didst thou
lose it?”; and the Kurd answered, “But yesterday, and I passed a
sleepless night by reason of its loss.” “And it be thy bag,” quoth the
Kazi, “tell me what is in it.” Quoth the Kurd, “There were in my bag two
silver styles for eye-powder and antimony for the eyes and a kerchief
for the hands, wherein I had laid two gilt cups and two candlesticks.
Moreover it contained two tents and two platters and two spoons and a
cushion and two leather rugs and two ewers and a brass tray and two
basins and a cooking-pot and two water-jars and a ladle and a
sacking-needle and a she-cat and two bitches and a wooden trencher and
two sacks and two saddles and a gown and two fur pelisses and a cow and
two calves and a she-goat and two sheep and an ewe and two lambs and two
green pavilions and a camel and two she-camels and a lioness and two
lions and a she-bear and two jackals and a mattrass and two sofas and an
upper chamber and two saloons and a portico and two sitting-rooms and a
kitchen with two doors and a company of Kurds who will bear witness that
the bag is my bag.” Then said the Kazi to me, “And thou, sirrah, what
sayest thou?” So I came forward, O commander of the Faithful (and indeed
the Kurd’s speech had bewildered me) and said, “Allah advance our lord
the Kazi! Verily, there was naught in this my wallet, save a little
ruined tenement and another without a door and a dog-house and a boys’
school and youths playing dice and tents and tent-ropes and the cities
of Bassorah and Baghdad and the palace of Shaddad bin Ad and an
ironsmith’s forge and a fishing-net and cudgels and pickets and girls
and boys and a thousand pimps who will testify that the bag is my bag.”
Now when the Kurd heard my words, he wept and wailed and said, “O my
lord the Kazi, this my bag is known and what is in it is a matter of
renown; for in this bag there be castles and citadels and cranes and
beasts of prey and men playing chess and draughts. Furthermore, in this
my bag is a brood-mare and two colts and a stallion and two blood-steeds
and two long lances; and it containeth eke a lion and two hares and a
city and two villages and a whore and two sharking panders and an
hermaphrodite and two gallows-birds and a blind man and two wights with
good sight and a limping cripple and two lameters and a Christian
ecclesiastic and two deacons and a patriarch and two monks and a Kazi
and two assessors, who will be evidence that the bag is my bag.” Quoth
the Kazi to me, “And what sayst thou, O Ali?” So, O Commander of the
Faithful, being filled with rage, I came forward and said, “Allah keep
our lord the Kazi!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Persian
continued:—So being filled with rage, O Commander of the Faithful, I
came forward and said, “Allah keep our lord the Kazi! I had in this my
wallet a coat of mail and a broadsword and armouries and a thousand
fighting rams and a sheep-fold with its pasturage and a thousand barking
dogs and gardens and vines and flowers and sweet smelling herbs and figs
and apples and statues and pictures and flagons and goblets and
fair-faced slave-girls and singing-women and marriage-feasts and tumult
and clamour and great tracts of land and brothers of success, which were
robbers, and a company of daybreak-raiders with swords and spears and
bows and arrows and true friends and dear ones and intimates and
comrades and men imprisoned for punishment and cup-companions and a drum
and flutes and flags and banners and boys and girls and brides (in all
their wedding bravery), and singing-girls and five Abyssinian women and
three Hindi maidens and four damsels of Al-Medinah and a score of Greek
girls and eighty Kurdish dames and seventy Georgian ladies and Tigris
and Euphrates and a fowling net and a flint and steel and many-columned
Iram and a thousand rogues and pimps and horse-courses and stables and
mosques and baths and a builder and a carpenter and a plank and a nail
and a black slave with his flageolet and a captain and a caravan-leader
and towns and cities and an hundred thousand dinars and Cufa and
Anbár[213] and twenty chests full of stuffs and twenty store-houses for
victual and Gaza and Askalon and from Damietta to Al-Sawán[214]; and the
palace of Kisra Anushirwán and the kingdom of Solomon and from Wadi
Nu’umán to the land of Khorasán and Balkh and Ispahán and from India to
the Sudán. Therein also (may Allah prolong the life of our lord the
Kazi!) are doublets and cloths and a thousand sharp razors to shave off
the Kazi’s beard, except he fear my resentment and adjudge the bag to be
my bag.” Now when the Kazi heard what I and the Kurd avouched, he was
confounded and said, “I see ye twain be none other than two pestilent
fellows, atheistical villains who make sport of Kazis and magistrates
and stand not in fear of reproach. Never did tongue tell nor ear hear
aught more extraordinary than that which ye pretend. By Allah, from
China to Shajarat Umm Ghaylán, nor from Fars to Sudan nor from Wadi
Nu’uman to Khorasan, was ever heard the like of what ye avouch or
credited the like of what ye affirm. Say, fellows, be this bag a
bottomless sea or the Day of Resurrection that shall gather together the
just and unjust?” Then the Kazi bade them open the bag; so I opened it
and behold, there was in it bread and a lemon and cheese and olives. So
I threw the bag down before the Kurd and ganged my gait. Now when the
Caliph heard this tale from Ali the Persian, he laughed till he fell on
his back and made him a handsome present.[215] And men also relate a

-----

Footnote 211:

  This “Cry of Haro” often occurs throughout The Nights. In real life it
  is sure to collect a crowd, especially if an Infidel (non-Moslem) be
  its cause.

Footnote 212:

  In the East a cunning fellow always makes himself the claimant or
  complainant.

Footnote 213:

  On the Euphrates some 40 miles west of Baghdad. The word is written
  “Anbár” and pronounced “Ambár” as usual with the “n” before “b”; the
  case of the Greek double Gamma.

Footnote 214:

  Syene on the Nile.

Footnote 215:

  The tale is in the richest Rabelaisian humour; and the requisitions of
  the “Saj’a” (rhymed prose) in places explain the grotesque
  combinations. It is difficult to divine why Lane omits it; probably he
  held a hearty laugh not respectable.




   TALE OF HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE SLAVE-GIRL AND THE IMAM ABU YUSUF.


It is said that Ja’afar the Barmecide was one night carousing with
Al-Rashid, who said, “O Ja’afar, it hath reached me that thou hast
bought such and such a slave-girl. Now I have long sought her for she is
passing fair; and my heart is taken up with love of her, so do thou sell
her to me.” He replied, “I will not sell her, O Commander of the
Faithful.” Quoth he, “Then give her to me.” Quoth the other, “Nor will I
give her.” Then Al-Rashid exclaimed, “Be Zubaydah triply divorced an
thou shall not either sell or give her to me!” Then Ja’afar, exclaimed,
“Be my wife triply divorced an I either sell or give her to thee!” After
awhile they recovered from their tipsiness and were aware of having
fallen into a grave dilemma, but knew not by what device to extricate
themselves. Then said Al-Rashid, “None can help us in this strait but
Abú Yúsuf.”[216] So they sent for him, and this was in the middle of the
night; and when the messenger reached him, he arose in alarm, saying to
himself, “I should not be sent for at this tide and time, save by reason
of some question of moment to Al-Islam.” So he went out in haste and
mounted his she-mule, saying to his servant, “Take the mule’s nose-bag
with thee; it may be she hath not finished her feed; and when we come to
the Caliph’s palace, put the bag on her, that she may eat what is left
of her fodder, during the last of the night.” And the man replied, “I
hear and obey.” Now when the Imam was admitted to the presence,
Al-Rashid rose to receive him and seated him on the couch beside himself
(where he was wont to seat none save the Kazi), and said to him, “We
have not sent for thee at this untimely time and tide save to advise us
upon a grave matter, which is such and such and wherewith we know not
how to deal.” And he expounded to him the case. Abu Yusuf answered, “O
Commander of the Faithful, this is the easiest of things.” Then he
turned to Ja’afar and said, “O Ja’afar, sell half of her to the
Commander of the Faithful and give him the other half; so shall ye both
be quit of your oaths.” The Caliph was delighted with this and both did
as he prescribed. Then said Al-Rashid, “Bring me the girl at once,”—
—And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say.


       Now when it was the Two Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph Harun
al-Rashid commanded, “Bring me the girl at once, for I long for her
exceedingly.” So they brought her and the Caliph said to Abu Yusuf, “I
have a mind to have her forthright; for I cannot bear to abstain from
her during the prescribed period of purification; now how is this to be
done?” Abu Yusuf replied, “Bring me one of thine own male slaves who
hath never been manumitted.” So they brought one and Abu Yusuf said,
“Give me leave to marry her to him; then let him divorce her before
consummation; and thus shall it be lawful for thee to lie with her
before purification.” This second expedient pleased the Caliph yet more
than the first; he sent for the Mameluke and, whenas he came, said to
the Kazi, “I authorise thee to marry her to him.” So the Imam proposed
the marriage to the slave, who accepted it and performed the ceremony;
after which he said to the slave, “Divorce her, and thou shalt have an
hundred dinars.” But he replied, “I won’t do this;” and the Imam went on
to increase his offer, and the slave to refuse till he bid him a
thousand dinars. Then the man asked him, “Doth it rest with me to
divorce her, or with thee or with the Commander of the Faithful?” He
answered, “It is in thy hand.” “Then by Allah,” quoth the slave, “I will
never do it; no, never!” Hearing these words the Caliph was exceeding
wroth and said to the Imam, “What is to be done, O Abu Yusuf?” Replied
he, “Be not concerned, O Commander of the Faithful; the thing is easy.
Make this slave the damsel’s chattel.” Quoth Al-Rashid, “I give him to
her;” and the Imam said to the girl, “Say:—I accept.” So she said, “I
accept;” whereon quoth Abu Yusuf, “I pronounce separation from bed and
board and divorce between them, for that he hath become her property,
and so the marriage is annulled.” With this, Al-Rashid rose to his feet
and exclaimed, “It is the like of thee that shall be Kazi in my time.”
Then he called for sundry trays of gold and emptied them before Abu
Yusuf, to whom he said, “Hast thou wherein to put this?” The Imam
bethought him of the mule’s nose-bag; so he sent for it and, filling it
with gold, took it and went home. And on the morrow, he said to his
friends, “There is no easier nor shorter road to the goods of this world
and the next, than that of religious learning; for, see, I have gotten
all this money by answering two or three questions.” So consider thou, O
polite reader,[217] the pleasantness of this anecdote, for it compriseth
divers goodly features, amongst which are the complaisance of Ja’afar to
Al-Rashid, and the wisdom of the Caliph who chose such a Kazi and the
excellent learning of Abu Yusuf, may Almighty Allah have mercy on their
souls one and all! And they also tell the

-----

Footnote 216:

  A lawyer of the eighth century, one of the chief pupils of the Imam
  Abu Hanifah, and Kazi of Baghdad under the third, fourth and fifth
  Abbasides. The tale is told in the quasi-historical Persian work
  “Nigáristán” (The Picture-gallery), and is repeated by Richardson,
  Diss. 7, xiii. None seem to have remarked that the distinguished
  legist, Abu Yusuf, was on this occasion a law-breaker; the Kazi’s duty
  being to carry out the code, not to break it by the tricks of a
  cunning attorney. In Harun’s day, however, some regard was paid to
  justice; not under his successors, one of whom, Al-Muktadir bi’lláh
  (A.H. 295 = 907), made the damsel Yamika President of the Diwán
  al-Mazálim (Court of the Wronged), a tribunal which took cognizance of
  tyranny and oppression in high places.

Footnote 217:

  Here the writer evidently forgets that Shahrazad is telling the story
  to the King, as Boccaccio (ii. 7) forgets that Pamfilo is speaking.
  Such inconsequences are common in Eastern story-books and a
  goody-goody sentiment is always heartily received as in an English
  theatre.




             TALE OF THE LOVER WHO FEIGNED HIMSELF A THIEF.


When Khálid ibn Abdallah al-Kasri[218] was Emir of Bassorah, there came
to him one day a company of men dragging a youth of exceeding beauty and
lofty bearing and perfumed attire; whose aspect expressed good breeding,
abundant wit and dignity of the gravest. They brought him before the
Governor, who asked what it was and they replied, “This fellow is a
thief, whom we caught last night in our dwelling-house.” Whereupon
Khalid looked at him and was pleased with his well-favouredness and
elegant aspect; so he said to the others, “Loose him,” and going up to
the young man, asked what he had to say for himself. He replied, “Verily
the folk have spoken truly and the case is as they have said.” Quoth
Khalid, “And what moved thee to this and thou so noble of port and
comely of mien?” Quoth the other “The lust after worldly good, and the
ordinance of Allah (extolled and exalted be He!).” Rejoined Khalid, “Be
thy mother bereaved of thee![219] Hadst thou not, in thy fair face and
sound sense and good breeding, what should restrain thee from thieving?”
Answered the young man, “O Emir, leave this talk and proceed to what
Almighty Allah hath ordained; this is what my hands have earned, and,
‘God is not unjust towards mankind.’”[220] So Khalid was silent awhile
considering the matter; then he bade the young man draw near him and
said, “Verily, thy confession before witnesses perplexeth me, for I
cannot believe thee to be a thief: haply thou hast some story that is
other than one of theft; and if so tell it me.” Replied the youth, “O
Emir, imagine naught other than what I have confessed to in thy
presence; for I have no tale to tell save that verily I entered these
folks’ house and stole what I could lay hands on, and they caught me and
took the stuff from me and carried me before thee.” Then Khalid bade
clap him in gaol and commanded a crier to cry throughout Bassorah, “O
yes! O yes! Whoso be minded to look upon the punishment of such an one,
the thief, and the cutting-off of his hand, let him be present to-morrow
morning at such a place!” Now when the young man found himself in
prison, with irons on his feet, he sighed heavily and with tears
streaming from his eyes extemporised these couplets:—

 When Khálid menaced off to strike my hand ✿ If I refuse to tell him of
    her case;
 Quoth I, “Far, far fro’ me that I should tell ✿ A love, which ever shall
    my heart engrace;
 Loss of my hand for sin I have confessed ✿ To me were easier than to
    shame her face.”

The warders heard him and went and told Khalid who, when it was dark
night, sent for the youth and conversed with him. He found him clever
and well-bred, intelligent, lively and a pleasant companion; so he
ordered him food and he ate. Then after an hour’s talk said Khalid, “I
know indeed thou hast a story to tell that is no thief’s; so when the
Kazi shall come to-morrow morning and shall question thee about this
robbery, do thou deny the charge of theft and avouch what may avert the
pain and penalty of cutting off thy hand; for the Apostle (whom Allah
bless and keep!) saith:—In cases of doubt, eschew punishment.” Then he
sent him back to prison——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Ninety-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Khalid, after
conversing with the youth, sent him back to prison, where he passed the
night. And when morning dawned the folk assembled to see his hand cut
off, nor was there a soul in Bassorah, man or woman, but was present to
look upon the punishment of that handsome youth. Then Khalid mounted in
company of the notables of the city and others; and, summoning all four
Kazis, sent for the young man, who came hobbling and stumbling in his
fetters. There was none saw him but wept over him and the women all
lifted up their voices in lamentation as for the dead. Then the Kazi
bade silence the women and said to the prisoner, “These folk avouch that
thou didst enter their dwelling-house and steal their goods: belike thou
stolest less than a quarter dinar[221]?” Replied he, “Nay, I stole that
and more.” “Peradventure,” rejoined the Kazi, “thou art partner with the
folk in some of the goods?” Quoth the young man; “Not so: it was all
theirs, and I had no right in it.” At this the Khalid was wroth and rose
and smote him on the face with his whip, applying to his own case this
couplet:—

 Man wills his wish to him accorded be; ✿ But Allah naught accords save
    what He wills.

Then he called for the butcher to do the work, who came and drew forth
his knife and taking the prisoner’s hand set the blade to it, when,
behold, a damsel pressed through the crowd of women clad in tattered
clothes,[222] and cried out and threw herself on the young man. Then she
unveiled and showed a face like the moon; whereupon the people raised a
mighty clamour and there was like to have been a riot amongst them and a
violent scene. But she cried out her loudest, saying, “I conjure thee,
by Allah, O Emir, hasten not to cut off this man’s hand, till thou have
read what is in this scroll!” So saying, she gave him a scroll, and
Khalid took it and opened it and read therein these couplets:—

 “Ah Khalid! this one is a slave of love distraught, ✿ And these bowed
    eyelashes sent shaft that caused his grief:
 Shot him an arrow sped by eyes of mine, for he, ✿ Wedded to burning
    love, of ills hath no relief:
 He hath avowed a deed he never did, the while ✿ Deeming this better than
    disgrace of lover lief:
 Bear then, I pray, with this distracted lover mine ✿ Whose noble nature
    falsely calls himself a thief!”

When Khalid had read these lines; he withdrew himself from the people
and summoned the girl and questioned her; and she told him that the
young man was her lover and she his mistress; and that thinking to visit
her he came to the dwelling of her people and threw a stone into the
house, to warn her of his coming. Her father and brothers heard the
noise of the stone and sallied out on him; but he, hearing them coming,
caught up all the household stuff and made himself appear a robber to
cover his mistress’s honour. “Now when they saw him they seized him
(continued she), crying:—A thief! and brought him before thee, whereupon
he confessed to the robbery and persisted in his confession, that he
might spare me disgrace; and this he did, making himself a thief, of the
exceeding nobility and generosity of his nature.” Khalid answered, “He
is indeed worthy to have his desire;” and, calling the young man to him,
kissed him between the eyes. Then he sent for the girl’s father and
bespoke him, saying, “O Shaykh, we thought to carry out the law of
mutilation in the case of this young man; but Allah (to whom be Honour
and Glory!) hath preserved us from this, and I now adjudge him the sum
of ten thousand dirhams, for that he would have given his hand for the
preservation of thine honour and that of thy daughter and for the
sparing of shame to you both. Moreover, I adjudge other ten thousand
dirhams to thy daughter, for that she made known to me the truth of the
case; and I ask thy leave to marry her to him.” Rejoined the old man, “O
Emir, thou hast my consent.” So Khalid praised Allah and thanked Him and
improved the occasion by preaching a goodly sermon and a prayerful;——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Two Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Khalid praised
Allah and thanked Him and improved the occasion by preaching a goodly
sermon and a prayerful; after which he said to the young man, “I give
thee to wife the damsel, such an one here present, with her own
permission and her father’s consent; and her wedding settlement shall be
this money, to wit, ten thousand dirhams.” “I accept this marriage at
thy hands,” replied the youth; and Khalid bade them carry the money on
brass trays in procession to the young man’s house, whilst the people
dispersed, fully satisfied. “And surely (quoth he who tells the
tale[223]) never saw I a rarer day than this, for that it began with
tears and annoy; and it ended with smiles and joy.” And in contrast of
this story is this piteous tale of

-----

Footnote 218:

  In the Mac. Edit. (ii. 182) “Al-Kushayri.” Al-Kasri was Governor of
  the two Iraks (_i.e._ Bassorah and Cufa) in the reign of Al-Hisham,
  tenth Ommiade (A.D. 723-741).

Footnote 219:

  Arab. “Thakalata-k Ummak!” This is not so much a curse as a playful
  phrase, like “Confound the fellow.” So “Kátala-k Allah” (Allah slay
  thee) and “Lá abá lak” (thou hast no father or mother). These words
  are even complimentary on occasions, as a good shot or a fine
  recitation, meaning that the praised far excels the rest of his tribe.

Footnote 220:

  Koran, iii. 178.

Footnote 221:

  Arab. “Al-Nisáb” = the minimum sum (about half-a-crown) for which
  mutilation of the hand is prescribed by religious law. The punishment
  was truly barbarous, it chastised a rogue by means which prevented
  hard honest labour for the rest of his life.

Footnote 222:

  To show her grief.

Footnote 223:

  Abú Sa’íd Abd al-Malik bin Kurayb, surnamed Al-Asma’i from his
  grandfather, flor. A.H. 122-306 (= 739-830) and wrote amongst a host
  of compositions the well-known Romance of Antar. See in D’Herbelot the
  right royal directions given to him by Harun al-Rashid.




               JA’AFAR THE BARMECIDE AND THE BEAN-SELLER.


When Harun al-Rashid crucified Ja’afar the Barmecide[224] he commanded
that all who wept or made moan for him should also be crucified; so the
folk abstained from that. Now it chanced that a wild Arab, who dwelt in
a distant wold, used every year to bring to the aforesaid Ja’afar an
ode[225] in his honour, for which he rewarded him with a thousand
dinars; and the Badawi took them and, returning to his own country,
lived upon them, he and his family, for the rest of the year.
Accordingly, he came with his ode at the wonted time and, finding that
Ja’afar had been crucified, betook himself to the place where his body
was hanging, and there made his camel kneel down and wept with sore
weeping and mourned with grievous mourning; and he recited his ode and
fell asleep. Presently Ja’afar the Barmecide appeared to him in a vision
and said, “Verily thou hast wearied thyself to come to us and findest us
as thou seest; but go to Bassorah and ask for a man there whose name is
such and such, one of the merchants of the town, and say to
him:—Ja’afar, the Barmecide, saluteth thee and biddeth thee give me a
thousand dinars, by the token of the bean.” Now when the wild Arab
awoke, he repaired to Bassorah, where he sought out the merchant and
found him and repeated to him what Ja’afar had said in the dream;
whereupon he wept with weeping so sore that he was like to depart the
world. Then he welcomed the Badawi and seated him by his side and made
his stay pleasant and entertained him three days as an honoured guest;
and when he was minded to depart he gave him a thousand and five hundred
dinars, saying, “The thousand are what is commanded to thee, and the
five hundred are a gift from me to thee; and every year thou shalt have
of me a thousand gold pieces.” Now when the Arab was about to take
leave, he said to the merchant, “Allah upon thee, tell me the story of
the bean, that I may know the origin of all this.” He answered:—In the
early part of my life I was poor and hawked hot beans[226] about the
streets of Baghdad to keep me alive. So I went out one raw and rainy
day, without clothes enough on my body to protect me from the weather;
now shivering for excess of cold and now stumbling into the pools of
rain-water, and altogether in so piteous a plight as would make me
shudder with goose-skin to look upon. But it chanced that Ja’afar that
day was seated with his officers and his concubines, in an upper chamber
overlooking the street when his eyes fell on me; so he took pity on my
case and, sending one of his dependents to fetch me to him, said as soon
as he saw me, “Sell thy beans to my people.” So I began to mete out the
beans with a measure I had by me; and each who took a measure of beans
filled the measure with gold pieces till all my store was gone and my
basket was clean empty. Then I gathered together the gold I had gotten,
and Ja’afar said to me, “Hast thou any beans left?” “I know not,”
answered I, and then sought in the basket, but found only one bean. So
Ja’afar took from me the single bean and, splitting it in twain, kept
one half himself and gave the other to one of his concubines, saying,
“For how much wilt thou buy this half bean?” She replied, “For the tale
of all this gold twice-told;” whereat I was confounded and said to
myself, “This is impossible.” But, as I stood wondering, behold, she
gave an order to one of her handmaids and the girl brought me the sum of
the collected monies twice-told. Then said Ja’afar, “And I will buy the
half I have by me for double the sum of the whole,” presently adding,
“Now take the price of thy bean.” And he gave an order to one of his
servants, who gathered together the whole of the money and laid it in my
basket; and I took it and went my ways. Then I betook myself to
Bassorah, where I traded with the monies and Allah prospered me amply,
to Him be the praise and the thanks! So, if I give thee every year a
thousand dinars of the bounty of Ja’afar, it will in no wise injure me.
Consider then the munificence of Ja’afar’s nature and how he was praised
both alive and dead, the mercy of Allah Almighty be upon him! And men
also recount the tale of

-----

Footnote 224:

  There are many accounts of his death; but it is generally held that he
  was first beheaded. The story in the text is also variously told and
  the Persian “Nigáristán” adds some unpleasant comments upon the House
  of Abbas. The Persians, for reasons which will be explained in the
  terminal Essay, show the greatest sympathy with the Barmecides; and
  abominate the Abbasides even more than the latter detested the
  Ommiades.

Footnote 225:

  Not written, as the European reader would suppose.

Footnote 226:

  Arab. “Fúl al-hárr” = beans like horsebeans soaked and boiled as
  opposed to the “Fúl Mudammas” (esp. of Egypt) = unshelled beans
  steamed and boiled all night and eaten with linseed oil as “kitchen”
  or relish. Lane (M. E., chapt. v.) calls them after the debased
  Cairene pronunciation, Mudemmes. A legend says that, before the days
  of Pharaoh (always he of Moses), the Egyptians lived on pistachios
  which made them a witty, lively race. But the tyrant remarking that
  the domestic ass, which eats beans, is degenerate from the wild ass,
  uprooted the pistachio-trees and compelled the lieges to feed on beans
  which made them a heavy, gross, cowardly people fit only for burdens.
  Badawis deride “bean-eaters” although they do not loathe the pulse
  like onions. The principal result of a bean diet is an extraordinary
  development of flatulence both in stomach and intestines: hence,
  possibly, Pythagoras who had studied ceremonial purity in Egypt,
  forbade the use, unless he referred to venery or political business. I
  was once sitting in the Greek quarter of Cairo dressed as a Moslem
  when arose a prodigious hubbub of lads and boys, surrounding a couple
  of Fellahs. These men had been working in the fields about a mile east
  of Cairo; and, when returning home, one had said to the other, “If
  thou wilt carry the hoes I will break wind once for every step we
  take.” He was as good as his word and when they were to part he cried,
  “And now for thy bakhshish!” which consisted of a volley of fifty,
  greatly to the delight of the boys.




                     ABU MOHAMMED HIGHT LAZYBONES.


It is told that Harun al-Rashid was sitting one day on the throne of the
Caliphate, when there came in to him a youth of his eunuchry, bearing a
crown of red gold, set with pearls and rubies and all manner of other
gems and jewels, such as money might not buy; and, bussing the ground
between his hands, said, “O Commander of the Faithful, the Lady Zubaydah
kisseth the earth before thee”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say. Whereupon quoth her sister
Dunyazad, “How pleasant is thy tale and profitable; and how sweet is thy
speech and how delectable!” “And where is this,” replied Shahrazad,
“compared with what I shall tell you next night an I live and the King
grant me leave!” Thereupon quoth the King to himself, “By Allah, I will
not slay her until I hear the end of her tale.”


               Now when it was the Three Hundredth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, “Favour us, O my sister, with thy tale,” and she
replied, “With joy and good will, if the King accord me leave;”
whereupon the King said, “Tell thy tale, O Shahrazad.” So she
pursued:—It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the youth said to
the Caliph, “The Lady Zubaydah kisseth the earth before thee and saith
to thee, Thou knowest she hath bidden make this crown, which lacketh a
great jewel for its dome-top; and she hath made search among her
treasures, but cannot find a jewel of size to suit her mind.” Quoth the
Caliph to his Chamberlains and Viceregents, “Make search for a great
jewel, such as Zubaydah desireth.” So they sought, but found nothing
befitting her and told the Caliph who, vexed and annoyed thereat,
exclaimed, “How am I Caliph and King of the Kings of the earth and
cannot find so small a matter as a jewel? Woe to you! Ask of the
merchants.” So they enquired of the traders, who replied, “Our lord the
Caliph will not find a jewel such as he requireth save with a man of
Bassorah, by name Abú Mohammed hight Lazybones.” Thereupon they
acquainted the Caliph with this and he bade his Wazir Ja’afar send a
note to the Emir Mohammed al-Zubaydí, Governor of Bassorah, commanding
him to equip Abu Mohammed Lazybones and bring him into the presence of
the Commander of the Faithful. The Minister accordingly wrote a note to
that effect and despatched it by Masrur, who set out forthright for the
city of Bassorah, and went in to the Emir Mohammed al-Zubaydi, who
rejoiced in him and treated him with the highmost honour. Then Masrur
read him the mandate of the Prince of True Believers, Harun al-Rashid,
to which he replied, “I hear and I obey,” and forthwith despatched him,
with a company of his followers, to Abu Mohammed’s house. When they
reached it, they knocked at the door, whereupon a page came out and
Masrur said to him, “Tell thy lord, The Commander of the Faithful
summoneth thee.” The servant went in and told his master, who came out
and found Masrur, the Caliph’s Chamberlain, and a company of the
Governor’s men at the door. So he kissed ground before Masrur and said,
“I hear and obey the summons of the Commander of the Faithful; but first
enter ye my house.” They replied, “We cannot do that, save in haste;
even as the Prince of True Believers commanded us, for he awaiteth thy
coming.” But he said, “Have patience with me a little, till I set my
affairs in order.” So after much pressure and abundant persuasion, they
entered the house with him and found the vestibule hung with curtains of
azure brocade, purfled with red gold, and Abu Mohammed Lazybones bade
one of his servants carry Masrur to the private Hammam. Now this bath
was in the house and Masrur found its walls and floors of rare and
precious marbles, wrought with gold and silver, and its waters mingled
with rose-water. Then the servants served Masrur and his company with
the perfection of service; and, on their going forth of the Hammam, clad
them in robes of honour, brocade-work interwoven with gold. And after
leaving the bath Masrur and his men went in to Abu Mohammed Lazybones
and found him seated in his upper chamber; and over his head hung
curtains of gold-brocade, wrought with pearls and jewels, and the
pavilion was spread with cushions, embroidered in red gold. Now the
owner was sitting softly upon a quilted cloth covering a settee inlaid
with stones of price; and, when he saw Masrur, he went forward to meet
him and bidding him welcome, seated him by his side. Then he called for
the food-trays; so they brought them, and when Masrur saw the tables, he
exclaimed, “By Allah, never did I behold the like of these appointments
in the palace of the Commander of the Faithful!” For indeed the trays
contained every manner of meat all served in dishes of gilded
porcelain.[227] So we ate and drank and made merry till the end of the
day (quoth Masrur) when the host gave to each and every of us five
thousand dinars; and on the morrow he clad us in dresses of honour of
green and gold and entreated us with the utmost worship. Then said
Masrur to him, “We can tarry no longer for fear of the Caliph’s
displeasure.” Answered Abu Mohammed Lazybones, “O my lord, have patience
with us till the morrow, that we may equip ourselves, and we will then
depart with you.” So they tarried with him that day and slept the night;
and next morning Abu Mohammed’s servants saddled him a she-mule with
selle and trappings of gold, set with all manner of pearls and stones of
price; whereupon quoth Masrur to himself, “I wonder when Abu Mohammed
shall present himself in such equipage, if the Caliph will ask him how
he came by all this wealth.” Thereupon they took leave of Al-Zubaydi
and, setting out from Bassorah, fared on, without ceasing to fare till
they reached Baghdad-city and presented themselves before the Caliph,
who bade Abu Mohammed be seated. He sat down and addressed the Caliph in
courtly phrase, saying, “O Commander of the Faithful, I have brought
with me an humble offering by way of homage: have I thy gracious
permission to produce it?” Al-Rashid replied, “There is no harm in
that,”[228] whereupon Abu Mohammed bade his men bring in a chest, from
which he took a number of rarities, and amongst the rest, trees of gold
with leaves of white emerald,[229] and fruits of pigeon-blood rubies and
topazes and new pearls and bright. And as the Caliph was struck with
admiration he fetched a second chest and brought out of it a tent of
brocade, crowned with pearls and jacinths and emeralds and jaspers and
other precious stones; its poles were of freshly-cut Hindi aloes-wood,
and its skirts were set with the greenest smaragds. Thereon were
depicted all manner of animals such as beasts and birds, spangled with
precious stones, rubies, emeralds, chrysolites and balasses and every
kind of precious metal. Now when Al-Rashid saw these things, he rejoiced
with exceeding joy and Abu Mohammed Lazybones said to him, “O Commander
of the Faithful, deem not that I have brought these to thee, fearing
aught or coveting anything; but I knew myself to be but a man of the
people and that such things befitted none save the Commander of the
Faithful. And now, with thy leave, I will show thee, for thy diversion,
something of what I can do.” Al-Rashid replied, “Do what thou wilt, that
we may see.” “To hear is to obey,” said Abu Mohammed and, moving his
lips, beckoned the palace battlements,[230] whereupon they inclined to
him; then he made another sign to them, and they returned to their
place. Presently he made a sign with his eye, and there appeared before
him closets with closed doors, to which he spoke, and lo! the voices of
birds answered him from within. The Caliph marvelled with passing marvel
at this and said to him, “How camest thou by all this, seeing that thou
art known only as Abu Mohammed Lazybones, and they tell me that thy
father was a cupper, serving in a public Hammam, who left thee nothing?”
Whereupon he answered, Listen to my story——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Three Hundred and First Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu Mohammed
Lazybones thus spake to the Caliph:—O Prince of True Believers, listen
to my story, for it is a marvellous and its particulars are wondrous;
were it graven with graver-needles upon the eye-corners it were a warner
to whoso would be warned. Quoth Al-Rashid, “Let us hear all thou hast to
say, O Abu Mohammed!” So he began:—Know then, O Commander of the
Faithful (Allah prolong to thee glory and dominion!), the report of the
folk, that I am known as the Lazybones and that my father left me
nothing, is true; for he was, as thou hast said, nothing but a
barber-cupper in a Hammam. And I throughout my youth was the idlest
wight on the face of the earth; indeed, so great was my sluggishness
that, if I lay at full length in the sultry season and the sun came
round upon me, I was too lazy to rise and remove from the sun to the
shade. And thus I abode till I reached my fifteenth year, when my father
deceased in the mercy of Allah Almighty and left me nothing. However, my
mother used to go out a-charing and feed me and give me to drink, whilst
I lay on my side. Now it came to pass that one day she came in to me
with five silver dirhams, and said to me, “O my son, I hear that Shaykh
Abú al-Muzaffar[231] is about to go a voyage to China.” (Now this Shaykh
was a good and charitable man who loved the poor.) “So come, O my son,
take these five silver bits; and let us both carry them to him and beg
him to buy thee therewith somewhat from the land of China; so haply thou
mayst make a profit of it by the bounty of Allah, whose name be
exalted!” I was too idle to move for her; but she swore by the Almighty
that, except I rose and went with her, she would bring me neither meat
nor drink nor come in to me, but would leave me to die of hunger and
thirst. Now when I heard her words, O Commander of the Faithful, I knew
she would do as she threatened for her knowledge of my sluggishness; so
I said to her, “Help me to sit up.” She did so, and I wept the while and
said to her, “Bring me my shoes.” Accordingly, she brought them and I
said, “Put them on my feet.” She put them on my feet and I said, “Lift
me up off the ground.” So she lifted me up and I said, “Support me, that
I may walk.” So she supported me and I continued to fare a-foot, at
times stumbling over my skirts, till we came to the river-bank, where we
saluted the Shaykh and I said to him, “O my uncle, art thou Abu
al-Muzaffar?” “At thy service,” answered he, and I, “Take these dirhams
and with them buy me somewhat from the land of China: haply Allah may
vouchsafe me a profit of it.” Quoth the Shaykh to his companions, “Do ye
know this youth?” They answered, “Yes, he is known as Abu Mohammed
Lazybones, and we never saw him stir from his house till this moment.”
Then said he to me, “O my son, give me the silver with the blessing of
Almighty Allah!” So he took the money, saying, “Bismillah—in the name of
Allah!”—and I returned home with my mother. Presently Shaykh Abu
al-Muzaffar set sail, with a company of merchants, and stayed not till
they reached the land of China, where he and his bought and sold; and,
having won what they wished, set out on their homeward voyage. When they
had been three days at sea, the Shaykh said to his company, “Stay the
vessel!” They asked, “What dost thou want?” and he answered, “Know that
I have forgotten the commission wherewith Abu Mohammed Lazybones charged
me; so let us turn back that we may lay out his money on somewhat
whereby he may profit.” They cried, “We conjure thee, by Allah Almighty
turn not back with us; for we have traversed a long distance and a sore,
and while so doing we have endured sad hardship and many terrors.” Quoth
he, “There is no help for it but we return;” and they said, “Take from
us double the profit of the five dirhams, and turn us not back.” He
agreed to this and they collected for him an ample sum of money.
Thereupon they sailed on, till they came to an island wherein was much
people; when they moored thereto and the merchants went ashore, to buy
thence a stock of precious metals and pearls and jewels and so forth.
Presently Abu al-Muzaffar saw a man seated, with many apes before him,
and amongst them one whose hair had been plucked off; and as often as
their owner’s attention was diverted from them, the other apes fell upon
the plucked one and beat him and threw him on their master; whereupon
the man rose and bashed them and bound them and punished them for this;
and all the apes were wroth with the plucked ape on this account and
tunded him the more. When Shaykh Abu al-Muzaffar saw this, he felt for
and took compassion upon the plucked ape and said to his master, “Wilt
thou sell me yonder monkey?” Replied the man, “Buy,” and Abu al-Muzaffar
rejoined, “I have with me five dirhams, belonging to an orphan lad. Wilt
thou sell it me for that sum?” Answered the monkey-merchant, “It is a
bargain; and Allah give thee a blessing of him!” So he made over the
beast and received his money; and the Shaykh’s slaves took the ape and
tied him up in the ship. Then they loosed sail and made for another
island, where they cast anchor; and there came down divers, who plunged
for precious stones, pearls and other gems; so the merchants hired them
to dive for money and they dived. Now when the ape saw them doing this,
he loosed himself from his bonds and, jumping off the ship’s side,
plunged with them, whereupon quoth Abu al-Muzaffar, “There is no Majesty
and there is no Might, save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! The
monkey is lost to us with the luck of the poor fellow for whom we bought
him.” And they despaired of him; but, after a while, the company of
divers rose to the surface, and behold, among them was the ape, with his
hands full of jewels of price, which he threw down before Abu
al-Muzaffar. The Shaykh marvelled at this and said, “There is much
mystery in this monkey!” Then they cast off and sailed till they came to
a third island, called the Isle of the Zunúj,[232] who are a people of
the blacks, which eat the flesh of the sons of Adam. When the blacks saw
them, they boarded them in dug-outs[233] and, taking all in the vessel,
pinioned them and carried them to their King, who bade slaughter certain
of the merchants. So they slaughtered them by cutting their throats and
ate their flesh; and the rest of the traders passed the night in bonds
and were in sore concern. But when it was midnight, the ape arose and
going up to Abu al-Muzaffar, loosed his bonds; and, as the others saw
him free, they said, “Allah grant our deliverance may be at thy hands, O
Abu al-Muzaffar!” But he replied, “Know, that he who delivered me, by
leave of Allah Almighty, was none other than this monkey”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Three Hundred and Second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu al-Muzaffar
declared, “None loosed me, by leave of Allah Almighty, save this monkey
and I buy my release of him at a thousand dinars;” whereupon the
merchants rejoined, “And we likewise, each and every, will pay him a
thousand dinars if he release us.” With this the ape arose and went up
to them and loosed their bonds one by one, till he had freed them all,
when they made for the vessel and boarding her, found all safe and
nothing missing from her. So they cast off and set sail; and presently
Abu al-Muzaffar said to them, “O merchants, fulfil your promise to the
monkey.” “We hear and we obey,” answered they; and each one paid him one
thousand dinars, whilst Abu al-Muzaffar brought out to him the like sum
of his own monies, so that a great heap of coin was collected for the
ape. Then they fared on till they reached Bassorah-city where their
friends came out to meet them; and when they had landed the Shaykh said,
“Where is Abu Mohammed Lazybones?” The news reached my mother, who came
to me as I lay asleep and said to me, “O my son, verily the Shaykh Abu
al-Muzaffar hath come back and is now in the city; so rise and go thou
to him and salute him and enquire what he hath brought thee; it may be
Allah Almighty have opened to thee the door of fortune with somewhat.”
Quoth I, “Lift me from the ground and prop me up, whilst I go forth and
walk to the river-bank.” After which I went out and walked on, stumbling
over my skirts, till I met the Shaykh, who exclaimed at sight of me,
“Welcome to him whose money hath been the means of my release and that
of these merchants, by the will of Almighty Allah.” Then he continued,
“Take this monkey I bought for thee and carry him home and wait till I
come to thee.” So I took the ape and went off, saying in my mind, “By
Allah, this is naught but rare merchandise!” and led it home, where I
said to my mother, “Whenever I lie down to sleep, thou biddest me rise
and trade; see now this merchandise with thine own eyes.” Then I sat me
down and as I sat, up came the slaves of Abu al-Muzaffar and said to me,
“Art thou Abu Mohammed Lazybones?” “Yes” answered I; and behold, Abu
al-Muzaffar appeared behind them. So I rose up to him and kissed his
hands: and he said, “Come with me to my home.” “Hearkening and
obedience,” answered I and accompanied him to his house, where he bade
his servants bring me what money the monkey had earned for me. So they
brought it and he said to me, “O my son, Allah hath blessed thee with
this wealth, by way of profit on thy five dirhams.” Then the slaves set
down the treasure in chests, which they had carried on their heads, and
Abu al-Muzaffar gave me the keys saying, “Go before the slaves to thy
house; for in sooth all this wealth is thine.” So I returned to my
mother, who rejoiced in this and said to me, “O my son, Allah hath
blessed thee with all these riches; so put off thy laziness and go down
to the bazar and sell and buy.” At once I shook off my dull sloth, and
opened a shop in the bazar, where the ape used to sit on the same divan
with me, eating with me when I ate and drinking when I drank. But, every
day, he was absent from dawn till noon, when he came back bringing with
him a purse of a thousand dinars, which he laid by my side, and sat
down; and he ceased not so doing for a great while, till I amassed much
wealth, wherewith, O Commander of the Faithful, I purchased houses and
lands, and I planted gardens and I bought me white slaves and negroes
and concubines. Now it came to pass one day, as I sat in my shop, with
the ape sitting at my side on the same carpet, behold, he began to turn
right and left, and I said to myself, “What aileth the beast?” Then
Allah made the ape speak with a ready tongue, and he said to me, “O Abu
Mohammed!” Now when I heard him speak, I was sore afraid; but he said to
me, “Fear not; I will tell thee my case. I am a Marid of the Jinn and
came to thee because of thy poor estate; but to-day thou knowest not the
amount of thy wealth; and now I have need of thee and if thou do my
will, it shall be well for thee.” I asked, “What is it?” and he
answered, “I have a mind to marry thee to a girl like the full moon.”
Quoth I, “How so?”; and quoth he, “To-morrow don thou thy richest dress
and mount thy mule, with the saddle of gold, and ride to the Haymarket.
There enquire for the shop of the Sharif[234] and sit down beside him
and say to him:—I come to thee as a suitor craving thy daughter’s hand.
If he say to thee:—Thou hast neither cash nor rank nor family; pull out
a thousand dinars and give them to him, and if he ask more, give him
more and tempt him with money.” Whereto I replied, “To hear is to obey;
I will do thy bidding, Inshallah!” So on the next morning I donned my
richest clothes, mounted my she-mule with trappings of gold and rode to
the Haymarket where I asked for the Sharif’s shop; and finding him there
seated, alighted and saluted him and seated myself beside him——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Three Hundred and Third Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu Mohammed
Lazybones continued:—So I alighted and, saluting him seated myself
beside him and my Mamelukes and negro-slaves stood before me. Said the
Sharif, “Haply, thou hast some business with us which we may have
pleasure of transacting?” Replied I, “Yes, I have business with thee.”
Asked he, “And what is it?”; and I answered, “I come to thee as a suitor
for thy daughter’s hand.” So he said, “Thou hast neither cash nor rank
nor family;” whereupon I pulled him out a purse of a thousand dinars,
red gold, and said to him, “This is my rank[235] and my family”; and he
(whom Allah bless and keep!) hath said:—The best of ranks is wealth. And
how well quoth the poet:—

 Whoso two dirhams hath, his lips have learnt ✿ Speech of all kinds with
    eloquence bedight:
 Draw near[236] his brethren and crave ear of him, ✿ And him thou seest
    haught in pride-full height:
 Were’t not for dirhams wherein glories he, ✿ Hadst found him ‘mid
    mankind in sorry plight.
 When richard errs in words they all reply, ✿ “Sooth thou hast spoken and
    hast said aright!.”
 When pauper speaketh truly all reply ✿ “Thou liest;” and they hold his
    sayings light.[237]
 “Verily dirhams in earth’s every stead ✿ Clothe men with rank and make
    them fair to sight;
 Gold is the very tongue of eloquence; ✿ Gold is the best of arms for
    wight who’d fight!”

Now when the Sharif heard these my words and understood my verse, he
bowed his head awhile groundwards then raising it, said, “If it must be
so, I will have of thee other three thousand gold pieces.” “I hear and I
obey,” answered I, and sent one of my Mamelukes home for the money. As
soon as he came back with it, I handed it to the Sharif who, when he saw
it in his hands, rose and bidding his servants shut his shop, invited
his brother merchants of the bazar to the wedding; after which he
carried me to his house and wrote out my contract of marriage with his
daughter saying to me, “After ten days, I will bring thee to pay her the
first visit.” So I went home rejoicing and, shutting myself up with the
ape, told him what had passed; and he said “Thou hast done well.” Now
when the time appointed by the Sharif drew near, the ape said to me,
“There is a thing I would have thee do for me; and thou shalt have of me
(when it is done) whatso thou wilt.” I asked, “What is that?” and he
answered, “At the upper end of the chamber wherein thou shalt meet thy
bride, the Sharif’s daughter, stands a cabinet, on whose door is a
ring-padlock of copper and the keys under it. Take the keys and open the
cabinet in which thou shalt find a coffer of iron with four flags, which
are talismans, at its corners; and in its midst stands a brazen basin
full of money, wherein is tied a white cock with a cleft comb; while on
one side of the coffer are eleven serpents and on the other a knife.
Take the knife and slaughter the cock; cut away the flags and upset the
chest, then go back to the bride and do away her maidenhead. This is
what I have to ask of thee.” “Hearkening and obedience,” answered I, and
betook myself to the house of the Sharif. So as soon as I entered the
bride-chamber, I looked for the cabinet and found it even as the ape had
described it. Then I went in unto the bride and marvelled at her beauty
and loveliness and stature and symmetrical grace, for indeed they were
such as no tongue can set forth. I rejoiced in her with exceeding joy;
and in the middle of the night, when my bride slept, I rose and, taking
the keys, opened the cabinet. Then I seized the knife and slew the cock
and threw down the flags and upset the coffer, whereupon the girl awoke
and, seeing the closet open and the cock with cut throat, exclaimed,
“There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious,
the Great! The Marid hath got hold of me!” Hardly had she made an end of
speaking, when the Marid swooped down upon the house and, snatching up
the bride, flew away with her; whereupon there arose a mighty clamour
and behold, in came the Sharif, buffetting his face and crying, “O Abu
Mohammed, what is this deed thou hast done? Is it thus thou requitest
us? I made this talisman in the cabinet fearing for my daughter from
this accursed one who, for these six years, hath sought to steal away
the girl, but could not. But now there is no more abiding for thee with
us; so wend thy ways.” Thereupon I went forth and returned to my own
house, where I made search for the ape but could not find him nor any
trace of him; whereby I knew that it was he who was the Marid, and that
he had carried off my wife and had tricked me into destroying the
talisman and the cock, the two things which hindered him from taking
her, and I repented, rending my raiment and cuffing my face. And there
was no land but was straitened upon me; so I made for the desert
forthright and ceased not wandering on till night overtook me, for I
knew not whither I was going. And whilst I was deep in sad thought
behold, I met two serpents, one tawny and the other white, and they were
fighting to kill each other. So I took up a stone and with one cast slew
the tawny serpent, which was the aggressor; whereupon the white serpent
glided away and was absent for a while, but presently she returned
accompanied by ten other white serpents which glided up to the dead
serpent and tore her in pieces, so that only the head was left. Then
they went their ways and I fell prostrate for weariness on the ground
where I stood; but as I lay, pondering my case lo! I heard a Voice
though I saw no one and the Voice versified with these two couplets:—

 Let Fate with slackened bridle fare her pace, ✿ Nor pass the night with
    mind which cares an ace.
 Between eye-closing and its opening, ✿ Allah can foulest change to
    fairest case.

Now when I heard this, O Commander of the Faithful, great concern gat
hold of me and I was beyond measure troubled; and behold, I heard a
Voice from behind me extemporise these couplets:—

 O Moslem! thou whose guide is Alcorán, ✿ Joy in what brought safe peace
    to thee, O man.
 Fear not what Satan haply whispered thee, ✿ And in us see a
    Truth-believing clan.

Then said I, “I conjure thee, by the truth of Him thou worshippest, let
me know who thou art!” Thereupon the Invisible Speaker assumed the form
of a man and said, “Fear not; for the report of thy good deed hath
reached us, and we are a people of the true-believing Jinn. So, if thou
lack aught, let us know it, that we may have the pleasure of fulfilling
thy want.” Quoth I, “Indeed I am in sore need, for I am afflicted with a
grievous affliction and no one was ever afflicted as I am!” Quoth he,
“Perchance thou art Abu Mohammed Lazybones?” and I replied, “Yes.” He
rejoined, “I, O Abu Mohammed, am the brother of the white serpent, whose
foe thou slewest; we are four brothers by one father and mother, and we
are all indebted to thee for thy kindness. And know thou that he who
played this trick on thee in the likeness of an ape, is a Marid of the
Marids of the Jinn; and had he not used this artifice, he had never been
able to get the girl; for he hath loved her and had a mind to take her
this long while, but he was hindered of that talisman; and had it
remained as it was, he could never have found access to her. However,
fret not thyself for that; we will bring thee to her and kill the Marid;
for thy kindness is not lost upon us.” Then he cried out with a terrible
outcry——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Three Hundred and Fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Ifrit
continued, “Verily thy kindness is not lost upon us.” Then he cried out
with a terrible outcry in a horrible voice, and behold, there appeared a
troop of the Jinn, of whom he enquired concerning the ape; and one of
them said, “I know his abiding-place;” and the other asked “Where
abideth he?” Said the speaker “He is in the City of Brass whereon sun
riseth not.” Then said the first Jinni to me, “O Abu Mohammed, take one
of these our slaves, and he will carry thee on his back and teach thee
how thou shalt get back the girl; but know that this slave is a Marid of
the Marids and beware, whilst he is carrying thee, lest thou utter the
name of Allah, or he will flee from thee and thou wilt fall and be
destroyed.” “I hear and obey,” answered I and chose out one of the
slaves, who bent down and said to me, “Mount.” So I mounted on his back,
and he flew up with me into the firmament, till I lost sight of the
earth and saw the stars as they were the mountains of earth fixed and
firm[238] and heard the angels crying, “Praise be to Allah,” in heaven
while the Marid held me in converse, diverting me and hindering me from
pronouncing the name of Almighty Allah.[239] But, as we flew, behold,
One clad in green raiment,[240] with streaming tresses and radiant face,
holding in his hand a javelin whence flew sparks of fire, accosted me,
saying, “O Abu Mohammed, say:—There is no god but _the_ God and Mohammed
is the Apostle of God; or I will smite thee with this javelin.” Now
already I felt heart-broken by my forced silence as regards calling on
the name of Allah; so I said, “There is no god but _the_ God, and
Mohammed is the Apostle of God.” Whereupon the shining One smote the
Marid with his javelin and he melted away and became ashes; whilst I was
thrown from his back and fell headlong towards the earth, till I dropped
into the midst of a dashing sea, swollen with clashing surge. And
behold, I fell hard by a ship with five sailors therein, who seeing me,
made for me and took me up into the vessel; and they began to speak to
me in some speech I knew not; but I signed to them that I understood not
their speech. So they fared on till the last of the day, when they cast
out a net and caught a great fish and they broiled it and gave me to
eat; after which they ceased not sailing on till they reached their city
and carried me to their King and set me in his presence. So I kissed
ground before him, and he bestowed on me a dress of honour and said to
me in Arabic (which he knew well), “I appoint thee one of my officers.”
Thereupon I asked him the name of the city, and he replied, “It is
called Hanád[241] and is in the land of China.” Then he committed me to
his Wazir, bidding him show me the city, which was formerly peopled by
Infidels, till Almighty Allah turned them into stones; and there I abode
a month’s space, diverting myself with viewing the place, nor saw I ever
greater plenty of trees and fruits than there. And when this time had
past, one day, as I sat on the bank of a river, behold, there accosted
me a horseman, who said to me, “Art thou not Abu Mohammed Lazybones?”
“Yes,” answered I; whereupon, he said, “Fear not, for the report of thy
good deed hath reached us.” Asked I, “Who art thou?” and he answered, “I
am a brother of the white serpent, and thou art hard by the place where
is the damsel whom thou seekest.” So saying, he took off his clothes and
clad me therein, saying, “Fear not, for the slave who perished under
thee was one of our slaves.” Then the horseman took me up behind him and
rode on with me to a desert place, when he said, “Dismount now and walk
on between these two mountains, till thou seest the City of Brass;[242]
then halt afar off and enter it not, ere I return to thee and tell thee
how thou shalt do.” “To hear is to obey,” replied I and, dismounting
from behind him, walked on till I came to the city, the walls whereof I
found of brass. Then I began to pace round about it, hoping to find a
gate, but found none; and presently as I persevered behold, the
serpent’s brother rejoined me and gave me a charmed sword which should
hinder any from seeing me,[243] then went his way. Now he had been gone
but a little while, when lo! I heard a noise of cries and found myself
in the midst of a multitude of folk whose eyes were in their breasts;
and seeing me quoth they, “Who art thou, and what cast thee into this
place?” So I told them my story, and they said, “The girl thou seekest
is in this city with the Marid; but we know not what he hath done with
her. Now we are brethren of the white serpent,” adding, “Go thou to
yonder spring and note where the water entereth, and enter thou with it;
for it will bring thee into the city.” I did as they bade me, and
followed the water-course, till it brought me to a Sardáb, a vaulted
room under the earth, from which I ascended and found myself in the
midst of the city. Here I saw the damsel seated upon a throne of gold,
under a canopy of brocade, girt round by a garden full of trees of gold,
whose fruits were jewels of price, such as rubies and chrysolites,
pearls and coral. And the moment she saw me, she knew me and accosted me
with the Moslem salutation, saying, “O my lord, who guided thee hither?”
So I told her all that had passed, and she said, “Know, that the
accursed Marid, of the greatness of his love for me, hath told me what
bringeth him bane and what bringeth him gain; and that there is here a
talisman by means whereof he could, an he would, destroy the city and
all that are therein; and whoso possesseth it, the Ifrits will do his
commandment in everything. It standeth upon a pillar”—Whereat I asked
her, “And where is the pillar?” and she answered, “It is in such a
place.” “And what manner of thing may the talisman be?” said I: said
she, “It is in the semblance of a vulture[244] and upon it is a writing
which I cannot read. So go thou thither and seize it, and set it before
thee and, taking a chafing-dish, throw into it a little musk, whereupon
there will arise a smoke which will draw the Ifrits to thee, and they
will all present themselves before thee, nor shall one be absent; also
they shall be subject to thy word and, whatsoever thou biddest them,
that will they do. Arise therefore and fall to this thing, with the
blessing of Almighty Allah.” I answered, “Hearkening and obedience” and,
going to the column, did as she bade me, whereupon the Ifrits all
presented themselves before me saying, “Here are we, O our lord!
Whatsoever thou biddest us, that will we do.” Quoth I, “Bind the Marid
who brought the damsel hither from her home.” Quoth they, “We hear and
obey,” and off they flew and bound that Marid in straitest bonds and
returned after a while, saying, “We have done thy bidding.” Then I
dismissed them and, repairing to my wife, told her what had happened and
said to her, “O my bride, wilt thou go with me?” “Yes,” answered she. So
I carried her forth of the vaulted chamber whereby I had entered the
city and we fared on, till we fell in with the folk who had shown me the
way to find her.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Three Hundred and Fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that he continued on
this wise:—And we fared on till we fell in with the folk who had shown
me the way to her. So I said to them, “Point me out a path which shall
lead me to my home,” and they did accordingly, and brought us a-foot to
the sea-shore and set us aboard a vessel which sailed on before us with
a fair wind, till we reached Bassorah-city. And when we entered the
house of my father-in-law and her people saw my wife, they rejoiced with
exceeding joy. Then I fumigated the vulture with musk and lo! the Ifrits
flocked to me from all sides, saying, “At thy service; what wilt thou
have us do?” So I bade them transport all that was in the City of Brass
of monies and noble metals and stones of price to my house in Bassorah,
which they did; and I then ordered them to bring me the ape. They
brought him before me, abject and contemptible, and I said to him, “O
accursed, why hast thou dealt thus perfidiously with me?” Then I
commanded the Ifrits to shut him in a brazen vessel;[245] so they put
him in a brazen cucurbite and sealed it with lead. But I abode with my
wife in joy and delight; and now, O Commander of the Faithful, I have
under my hand precious things in such measure and rare jewels and other
treasure and monies on such wise as neither reckoning may express nor
may limits comprise; and, if thou lust after wealth or aught else, I
will command the Jinn at once to do thy desire. But all this is of the
bounty of Almighty Allah. Thereupon the Commander of the Faithful
wondered greatly and bestowed on him imperial gifts, in exchange for his
presents, and entreated him with the favour he deserved. And men also
tell the tale of the

-----

Footnote 227:

  No porcelain was ever, as far as we can discover, made in Egypt or
  Syria of the olden day; but, as has been said, there was a regular
  caravan-intercourse with China. At Damascus I dug into the huge
  rubbish-heaps and found quantities of pottery, but no China. The same
  has lately been done at Clysma, the artificial mound near Suez, and
  the glass and pottery prove it to have been a Roman work which
  defended the mouth of the old classical sweet-water canal.

Footnote 228:

  Arab. “Lá baas ba-zálik,” conversational for “Lá jaram” = there is no
  harm in it, no objection to it; and, sometimes, “it is a matter of
  course.”

Footnote 229:

  A white emerald is yet unknown; but this adds only to the Oriental
  extravagance of the picture. I do not think with Lane (ii. 426) that
  “abyaz” here can mean “bright.” Dr. Steingass suggests a clerical
  error for “khazar” (green).

Footnote 230:

  Arab. “Sharárif” plur. of Shurráfah = crenelles or battlements; mostly
  trefoil-shaped; _remparts coquets_ which a six-pounder would crumble.

Footnote 231:

  Pronounce Abul-Muzaffar = Father of the Conqueror.

Footnote 232:

  I have explained the word in my “Zanzibar, City, Island and Coast,”
  vol. i. chapt. v. There is still a tribe, the Wadoe, reputed cannibal
  on the opposite low East African shore. These blacks would hardly be
  held “sons of Adam.” “Zanj” corrupted to “Zinj” (plur. Zunúj) is the
  Persian “Zang” or “Zangi,” a black, altered by the Arabs, who ignore
  the hard _g_; and, with the suffixion of the Persian -bár (region, as
  in Malabar) we have Zang-bár which the Arabs have converted to
  “Zanjibar,” in poetry “Mulk al Zunúj” = Land of the Zang. The term is
  old; it is the Zingis or Zipgisa of Ptolemy and the Zingium of Cosmas
  Indicopleustes; and it shows the influence of Persian navigation in
  pre-Islamitic ages. For further details readers will consult “The Lake
  Regions of Central Africa” vol. i. chapt. ii.

Footnote 233:

  Arab. “Kawárib” plur. of “Kárib” prop. a dinghy, a small boat
  belonging to a ship. Here it refers to the canoe (a Carib word) pop.
  “dug-out” and classically “monoxyle,” a boat made of a single
  tree-trunk hollowed by fire and trimmed with axe and adze. Some of
  these rude craft which, when manned, remind one of saturnine Caliph
  Omar’s “worms floating on a log of wood,” measure 60 feet long and
  more.

Footnote 234:

  _i.e._ A descendant of Mohammed in general and especially through
  Husayn Ali-son. Here the text notes that the chief of the bazar was of
  this now innumerable stock, who inherit the title through the mother
  as well as through the father.

Footnote 235:

  Arab. “Hasab” (= quantity), the honour a man acquires for himself;
  opposed to “Nasab” (genealogy) honours inherited from ancestry: the
  Arabic well expresses my old motto (adopted by Chinese Gordon):—

                           Honour, not Honours.

Footnote 236:

  Note the difference between “Takaddum” (= standing in presence of,
  also superiority in excellence) and “Takádum” (priority in time).

Footnote 237:

  Lane (ii. 427) gives a pleasant Eastern illustration of this saying.

Footnote 238:

  A Koranic fancy; the mountains being the pegs which keep the earth in
  place. “And he hath thrown before the earth mountains firmly rooted,
  lest it should move with you.” (Koran, chapt. xvi.) The earth when
  first created was smooth and thereby liable to a circular motion, like
  the celestial orbs; and, when the Angels asked who could stand on so
  tottering a frame, Allah fixed it the next morning by throwing the
  mountains in it and pegging them down. A fair prolepsis of the
  Neptunian theory.

Footnote 239:

  Easy enough for an Englishman to avoid saying “by God,” but this
  common incident in Moslem folk-lore appeals to the peoples who are
  constantly using the word Allah Wallah, Billah, etc. The Koran
  expressly says, “Make not Allah the scope (object, lit. arrow-butt) of
  your oaths” (chapt. ii. 224); yet the command is broken every minute.

Footnote 240:

  This must be the ubiquitous Khizr, the Green Prophet; when Ali
  appears, as a rule he is on horseback.

Footnote 241:

  The name is apparently imaginary; and a little below we find that it
  was close to Jinn-land. China was very convenient for this purpose:
  the medieval Moslems, who settled in considerable numbers at Canton
  and elsewhere, knew just enough of it to know their own ignorance of
  the vast empire. Hence the Druzes of the Libanus still hold that part
  of their nation is in the depths of the Celestial Empire.

Footnote 242:

  I am unwilling to alter the old title to “City of Copper” as it should
  be; the pure metal having been technologically used long before the
  alloy of copper and zinc. But the Maroccan City (Night dlxvi. _et
  seq._) was of brass (not copper). The Hindus of Upper India have an
  Iram which they call Hari Chand’s city (Colonel Tod); and I need
  hardly mention the Fata Morgana, Island of Saint Borondon; Cape
  Fly-away; the Flying Dutchman, etc. etc., all the effect of “looming.”

Footnote 243:

  This sword which makes men invisible and which takes place of
  Siegfried’s Tarnkappe (invisible cloak) and of “Fortunatus’ cap” is
  common in Moslem folk-lore. The idea probably arose from the venerable
  practice of inscribing the blades with sentences, verses and magic
  figures.

Footnote 244:

  Arab. “’Ukáb,” in books an eagle (especially black) and P. N. of
  constellation but in pop. usage = a vulture. In Egypt it is the
  Neophron Percnopterus (Jerdon) or N. Gingianus (Latham), the Dijájat
  Far’aun or Pharaoh’s hen. This bird has been known to kill the Báshah
  sparrow-hawk (Jerdon i. 60); yet, curious to say, the reviewers of my
  “Falconry in the Valley of the Indus” questioned the fact, known to so
  many travellers, that the falcon is also killed by this “tiger of the
  air,” despite the latter’s feeble bill (pp. 35-38). I was faring badly
  at their hands when the late Mr. Burckhardt Barker came to the rescue.
  Falconicide is popularly attributed, not only to the vulture, but also
  to the crestless hawk-eagle (Nisætus Bonelli) which the Hindus call
  Morángá = peacock-slayer.

Footnote 245:

  Here I translate “Nahás” = brass; as the “kumkum” (cucurbite) is made
  of mixed metal, not of copper.

[Illustration]




    GENEROUS DEALING OF YAHYA BIN KHALID THE BARMECIDE WITH MANSUR.


It is told that Harun al-Rashid, in the days before he became jealous of
the Barmecides, sent once for one of his guards, Sálih by name, and said
to him, “O Salih, go to Mansúr[246] and say to him:—Thou owest us a
thousand thousand dirhams and we require of thee immediate payment of
this amount. And I command thee, O Salih, unless he pay it between this
hour and sundown, sever his head from his body and bring it to me.” “To
hear is to obey,” answered Salih and, going to Mansur, acquainted him
with what the Caliph had said; whereupon quoth he, “I am a lost man, by
Allah; for all my estate and all my hand owneth, if sold for their
utmost value, would not fetch a price of more than an hundred thousand
dirhams. Whence then, O Salih, shall I get the other nine hundred
thousand?” Salih replied, “Contrive how thou mayst speedily acquit
thyself, else thou art a dead man; for I cannot grant thee an
eye-twinkling of delay after the time appointed me by the Caliph; nor
can I fail of aught which the Prince of True Believers hath enjoined on
me. Hasten, therefore, to devise some means of saving thyself ere the
time expire.” Quoth Mansur, “O Salih, I beg thee of thy favour to bring
me to my house, that I may take leave of my children and family and give
my kinsfolk my last injunctions.” Now Salih relateth:—So I went with him
to his house where he fell to bidding his family farewell, and the house
was filled with a clamour of weeping and lamentations and calling for
help on Almighty Allah. Thereupon I said to him, “I have bethought me
that Allah may haply vouchsafe thee relief at the hands of the
Barmecides. Come, let us go to the house of Yáhyá bin Khálid.” So we
went to Yahya’s house, and Mansur told him his case, whereat he was sore
concerned and bowed him groundwards for a while; then raising his head,
he called his treasurer and said to him, “How much have we in our
treasury?” “A matter of five thousand dirhams,” answered the treasurer,
and Yahya bade him bring them and sent a messenger to his son, Al-Fazl,
saying, “I am offered for sale a splendid estate which may never be laid
waste; so send me somewhat of money.” Al-Fazl sent him a thousand
thousand dirhams, and he despatched a messenger with a like message to
his son Ja’afar, saying, “We have a matter of much moment and for it we
want money;” whereupon Ja’afar at once sent him a thousand thousand
dirhams; nor did Yahya leave sending to his kinsmen of the Barmecides,
till he had collected from them a great sum of money for Mansur. But
Salih and the debtor knew not of this; and Mansur said to Yahya, “O my
lord, I have laid hold upon thy skirt, for I know not whither to look
for the money but to thee, in accordance with thy wonted generosity; so
discharge thou the rest of my debt for me and make me thy freed slave.”
Thereupon Yahya hung down his head and wept; then he said to a page,
“Harkye, boy, the Commander of the Faithful gave our slave-girl Danánír
a jewel of great price: go thou to her and bid her send it to us.” The
page went out and presently returned with the jewel, whereupon quoth
Yahya, “O Mansur, I bought this jewel of the merchant for the Commander
of the Faithful, at a price of two hundred thousand dinars,[247] and he
gave it to our slave-girl Dananir, the lute-player; and when he sees it
with thee, he will know it and spare thy blood and do thee honour for
our sake; and now, O Mansur, verily thy money is complete.” (Salih
continued) So I took the money and the jewel and carried them to
Al-Rashid together with Mansur, but on the way I heard him repeat this
couplet, applying it to his own case:—

 ‘Twas not of love that fared my feet to them; ✿ ‘Twas that I feared me
    lest they shoot their shafts!

Now when I heard this, I marvelled at his evil nature and his depravity
and mischief-making and his ignoble birth and provenance and, turning
upon him, I said, “There is none on the face of the earth better or more
righteous than the Barmecides, nor any baser nor more wrongous than
thou; for they bought thee off from death and delivered thee from
destruction, giving thee what should save thee; yet thou thankest them
not nor praisest them, neither acquittest thee after the manner of the
noble; nay, thou meetest their benevolence with this speech.” Then I
went to Al-Rashid and acquainted him with all that had passed——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Three Hundred and Sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Salih
continued:—So I acquainted the Commander of the Faithful with all that
passed and Al-Rashid marvelled at the generosity and benevolence of
Yahya and the vileness and ingratitude of Mansur and bade restore the
jewel to Yahya, saying, “Whatso we have given it befitteth us not to
take again.” After that Salih returned to Yahya, and acquainted him with
the tale of Mansur and his ill-conduct; whereupon replied he, “O Salih,
when a man is in want, sick at heart and sad of thought, he is not to be
blamed for aught that falleth from him; for it cometh not from the
heart;” and on this wise he took to seeking excuse for Mansur. But Salih
wept and exclaimed, “Never shall the revolving heavens bring forth into
being the like of thee, O Yahya! Alas, and well-away, that one of such
noble nature and generosity should be laid in the dust!” And he repeated
these two couplets:—

 Haste to do kindness thou dost intend; ✿ Thou canst not always on boons
    expend:
 How many from bounty themselves withheld, ✿ Till means of bounty had
    come to end!

And men tell another tale of the

-----

Footnote 246:

  Mansur al-Nimrí, a poet of the time and a protégé of Yahya’s son,
  Al-Fazl.

Footnote 247:

  This was at least four times Mansur’s debt.




 GENEROUS DEALING OF YAHYA SON OF KHALID WITH A MAN WHO FORGED A LETTER
                              IN HIS NAME.


There was between Yahyá bin Khálid and Abdullah bin Málik
al-Khuzá’i[248] an enmity which they kept secret; the reason of the
hatred being that Harun al-Rashid loved Abdullah with exceeding love, so
that Yahya and his sons were wont to say that he had bewitched the
Commander of the Faithful. And thus they abode a long while, with
rancour in their hearts, till it fell out that the Caliph invested
Abdullah with the government of Armenia[249] and despatched him thither.
Now soon after he had settled himself in his seat of government, there
came to him one of the people of Irak, a man of good breeding and
excellent parts and abundant cleverness; but he had lost his money and
wasted his wealth and his estate was come to ill case; so he forged a
letter to Abdullah bin Malik in the name of Yahya bin Khalid and set out
therewith for Armenia. Now when he came to the Governor’s gate, he gave
the letter to one of the Chamberlains, who took it and carried it to his
master. Abdullah opened it and read it and, considering it attentively,
knew it to be forged; so he sent for the man, who presented himself
before him and called down blessings upon him and praised him and those
of his court. Quoth Abdullah to him, “What moved thee to weary thyself
on this wise and bring me a forged letter? But be of good heart; for we
will not disappoint thy travail.” Replied the other, “Allah prolong the
life of our lord the Wazir! If my coming annoy thee, cast not about for
a pretext to repel me, for Allah’s earth is wide and He who giveth daily
bread still liveth. Indeed, the letter I bring thee from Yahya bin
Khalid is true and no forgery.” Quoth Abdullah, “I will write a letter
to my agent[250] at Baghdad and command him enquire concerning this same
letter. If it be true, as thou sayest, and genuine and not forged by
thee, I will bestow on thee the Emir-ship of one of my cities; or, if
thou prefer a present, I will give thee two hundred thousand dirhams,
besides horses and camels of price and a robe of honour. But, if the
letter prove a forgery, I will order thou be beaten with two hundred
blows of a stick and thy beard be shaven.” So Abdullah bade confine him
in a chamber and furnish him therein with all he needed, till his case
should be made manifest. Then he despatched a letter to his agent at
Baghdad, to the following effect:—“There is come to me a man with a
letter purporting to be from Yahya bin Khalid. Now I have my suspicions
of this letter: therefore delay thou not in the matter, but go thyself
and look carefully into the case and let me have an answer with all
speed, in order that we may know what is true and what is untrue.” When
the letter reached Baghdad, the agent mounted at once——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Three Hundred and Seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the agent of
Abdullah son of Malik al-Khuza’i, on receipt of the letter at Baghdad,
mounted at once and repaired to the house of Yahya bin Khalid, whom he
found sitting with his officers and boon-companions. After the usual
salute he gave him the letter and Yahya read it and said to the agent,
“Come back to me to-morrow for my written answer.” Now when the agent
had gone away, Yahya turned to his companions and said, “What doth he
deserve who forgeth a letter in my name and carrieth it to my foe?” They
answered all and each, saying this and that, and every one proposing
some kind of punishment; but Yahya said, “Ye err in that ye say and this
your counsel is of the baseness of your spirits and the meanness of your
minds. Ye all know the close favour of Abdullah with the Caliph and ye
weet of what is between him and us of anger and enmity; and now Almighty
Allah hath made this man the means of reconciliation between us; and
hath fitted him for such purpose and hath appointed him to quench the
fire of ire in our hearts, which hath been growing these twenty years;
and by his means our differences shall be adjusted. Wherefore it
behoveth me to requite such man by verifying his assertion and amending
his estate; so I will write him a letter to Abdullah son of Malik,
praying that he may use him with increase of honour and continue to him
his liberality.” Now when his companions heard what he said, they called
down blessings on him and marvelled at his generosity and the greatness
of his magnanimity. Then he called for paper and ink and wrote Abdullah
a letter in his own hand, to the following effect:—“In the name of
Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate! Of a truth thy letter
hath reached me (Allah give thee long life!) and I am glad to hear of
thy safety and am pleased to be assured of thine immunity and
prosperity. It was thy thought that a certain worthy man had forged a
letter in my name and that he was not the bearer of any message from the
same; but the case is not so, for the letter I myself wrote, and it was
no forgery; and I hope, of thy courtesy and consideration and the
nobility of thy nature, that thou wilt gratify this generous and
excellent man of his hope and wish, and honour him with the honour he
deserveth and bring him to his desire and make him the special object of
thy favour and munificence. Whatso thou dost with him, it is to me that
thou dost the kindness, and I am thankful to thee accordingly.” Then he
superscribed the letter and after sealing it, delivered it to the agent,
who despatched it to Abdullah. Now when the Governor read it, he was
charmed with its contents, and sending for the man, said to him,
“Whichever of the two promised boons is the more acceptable to thee that
will I give thee.” The man replied, “The money gift were more acceptable
to me than aught else,” whereupon Abdullah ordered him two hundred
thousand dirhams and ten Arab horses, five with housings of silk and
other five with richly ornamented saddles, used in state processions;
besides twenty chests of clothes and ten mounted white slaves and a
proportionate quantity of jewels of price. Moreover, he bestowed on him
a dress of honour and sent him to Baghdad in great splendour. So when he
came thither, he repaired to the door of Yahya’s house, before he went
to his own folk, and craved permission to enter and have audience. The
Chamberlain went in to Yahya and said to him, “O my lord, there is one
at the door who craveth speech of thee; and he is a man of apparent
wealth, courteous in manner, comely of aspect and attended by many
servants.” Then Yahya bade admit him; and, when he entered and kissed
the ground before him, Yahya asked him, “Who art thou?” He answered,
“Hear me, O my lord, I am he who was done dead by the tyranny of
fortune, but thou didst raise me to life again from the grave of
calamities and exalt me to the paradise of my desires. I am the man who
forged a letter in thy name and carried it to Abdullah bin Malik
al-Khuza’i.” Yahya asked, “How hath he dealt with thee and what did he
give thee?”; and the man answered, “He hath given me, thanks to thy hand
and thy great liberality and benevolence and to thy comprehensive
kindness and lofty magnanimity and thine all-embracing generosity, that
which hath made me a wealthy man and he hath distinguished me with his
gifts and favours. And now I have brought all that he gave me and here
it is at thy door; for it is thine to decide and the command is in thy
hand.” Rejoined Yahya, “Thou hast done me better service than I did thee
and I owe thee a heavy debt of gratitude and every gift the white
hand[251] can give, for that thou hast changed into love and amity the
hate and enmity that were between me and a man whom I respect and
esteem. Wherefore I will give thee the like of what Abdullah bin Malik
gave thee.” Then he ordered him money and horses and chests of apparel,
such as Abdullah had given him; and thus that man’s fortune was restored
to him by the munificence of these two generous ones. And folk also
relate the tale of the

-----

Footnote 248:

  Intendant of the Palace to Harun al-Rashid. The Bres. Edit. (vii. 254)
  begins, “They tell that there arose full enmity between Ja’afar
  Barmecide and a Sahib of Misr” (Wazir or Governor of Egypt). Lane (ii.
  429) quotes to this purpose amongst Arab historians Fakhr al-Dín (De
  Sacy’s Chrestomathie Arabe i., p. 26, edit. ii.).

Footnote 249:

  Arab. “Armaníyah” which Egyptians call after their mincing fashion
  “Irminiyeh:” hence “Ermine” (Mus Ponticus). Armaniyah was much more
  extensive than our Armenia, now degraded to a mere province of Turkey,
  and the term is understood to include the whole of the old Parthian
  Empire.

Footnote 250:

  Even now each Pasha-governor must keep a “Wakíl” in Constantinople to
  intrigue and bribe for him at head-quarters.

Footnote 251:

  The symbol of generosity, of unasked liberality, the “black hand”
  being that of niggardness.




                CALIPH AL-MAAMUN AND THE STRANGE SCHOLAR


It is said of Al-Maamun that, among the Caliphs of the house of Abbas,
there was none more accomplished in all branches of knowledge than he.
Now on two days in each week, he was wont to preside at conferences of
the learned, when the lawyers and theologians disputed in his presence,
each sitting in his several rank and room. One day as he sat thus, there
came into the assembly a stranger, clad in ragged white clothes, who
took seat in an obscure place behind the doctors of the law. Then the
assembly began to speak and debate difficult questions, it being the
custom that the various propositions should be submitted to each in
turn, and that whoso bethought him of some subtle addition or rare
conceit, should make mention of it. So the question went round till it
came to the strange man, who spake in his turn and made a goodlier
answer than any of the doctors’ replies; and the Caliph approved his
speech.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Three Hundred and Eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
Al-Maamun approved his speech and ordered him to come up from his low
place to a high stead. Now when the second question came to him, he made
a still more notable answer, and Al-Maamun ordered him to be preferred
to a yet higher seat; and when the third question reached him, he made
answer more justly and appropriately than on the two previous occasions,
and Al-Maamun bade him come up and sit near himself. Presently the
discussion ended when water was brought and they washed their hands;
after which food was set on and they ate; and the doctors arose and
withdrew; but Al-Maamun forbade the stranger to depart with them and,
calling him to himself, treated him with especial favour and promised
him honour and profit. Thereupon they made ready the séance of wassail;
the fair-faced cup-companions came and the pure wine[252] went round
amongst them, till the cup came to the stranger, who rose to his feet
and spake thus, “If the Commander of the Faithful permit me, I will say
one word.” Answered the Caliph, “Say what thou wilt.” Quoth the man,
“Verily the Exalted Intelligence (whose eminence Allah increase!)
knoweth that his slave was this day, in the august assembly, one of the
unknown folk and of the meanest of the company; and the Commander of the
Faithful raised his rank and brought him near to himself, little as were
the wit and wisdom he displayed, preferring him above the rest and
advancing him to a station and a degree whereto his thought aspired not.
But now he is minded to part him from that small portion of intellect
which raised him high from his lowness and made him great after his
littleness. Heaven forfend and forbid that the Commander of the Faithful
should envy his slave what little he hath of understanding and worth and
renown! Now, if his slave should drink wine, his reason would depart far
from him and ignorance draw near to him and steal away his good
breeding; so would he revert to that low and contemptible degree, whence
he sprang, and become ridiculous and despicable in the eyes of the folk.
I hope, therefore, that the August Intelligence, of his power and bounty
and royal generosity and magnanimity, will not despoil his slave of this
jewel.” When the Caliph Al-Maamun heard his speech, he praised him and
thanked him and making him sit down again in his place, showed him high
honour and ordered him a present of an hundred thousand silver pieces.
Moreover he mounted him upon a horse and gave him rich apparel; and in
every assembly he was wont to exalt him and show him favour over all the
other doctors of law and religion till he became the highest of them all
in rank. And Allah is All-knowing.[253] Men also tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 252:

  Arab. “Ráh” = pure (and old) wine. Arabs, like our classics, usually
  drank their wine tempered. So Imr al-Kays in his Mu’allakah says,
  “Bring the well-tempered wine, that seems to be saffron-tinctured;
  and, when water-mixed, o’erbrims the cup.” (v. 2).

Footnote 253:

  There is nothing that Orientals relish more than these “goody-goody”
  preachments; but they read and forget them as readily as Westerns.




                      ALI SHAR[254] AND ZUMURRUD.


There lived once in the days of yore and the good old times long gone
before, in the land of Khorasan, a merchant called Majd al-Dín, who had
great wealth and many slaves and servants, white and black, young and
old; but he had not been blessed with a child until he reached the age
of threescore, when Almighty Allah vouchsafed him a son, whom he named
Alí Shár. The boy grew up like the moon on the night of fulness; and
when he came to man’s estate and was endowed with all kinds of
perfections, his father fell sick of a death-malady and, calling his son
to him, said, “O my son, the fated hour of my decease is at hand, and I
desire to give thee my last injunctions.” He asked, “And what are they,
O my father?”; and he answered, “O my son, I charge thee, be not
over-familiar with any[255] and eschew what leadeth to evil and
mischief. Beware lest thou sit in company with the wicked; for he is
like the blacksmith; if his fire burn thee not, his smoke shall bother
thee: and how excellent is the saying of the poet:[256]—

                In thy whole world there is not one,
                Whose friendship thou may’st count upon,
                Nor plighted faith that will stand true,
                When times go hard, and hopes are few.
                Then live apart and dwell alone,
                Nor make a prop of any one,
                I’ve given a gift in that I’ve said,
                Will stand thy friend in every stead.”

And what another saith:—

    Men are a hidden malady; ✿ Rely not on the sham in them:
    For perfidy and treachery ✿ Thou’lt find, if thou examine them.

And yet a third saith:—

 Cònverse with men hath scanty weal, except ✿ To while away the time in
    chat and prate:
 Then shun their intimacy, save it be ✿ To win thee lore, or better thine
    estate.

And a fourth saith:—

 If a sharp-witted wight e’er tried mankind, ✿ I’ve eaten that which only
    tasted he:[257]
 Their amity proved naught but wile and guile, ✿ Their faith I found was
    but hypocrisy.

Quoth Ali, “O my father, I have heard thee and I will obey thee; what
more shall I do?” Quoth he, “Do good whenas thou art able; be ever kind
and courteous to men and regard as riches every occasion of doing a good
turn; for a design is not always easily carried out”; and how well saith
the poet:—

 ‘Tis not at every time and tide unstable, ✿ We can do kindly acts and
    charitable:
 When thou art able hasten thee to act, ✿ Lest thine endeavour prove anon
    unable!

Said Ali, “I have heard thee and I will obey thee.”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Three Hundred and Ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the youth replied,
“I have heard thee and I will obey thee; what more?” And his sire
continued, “Be thou, O my son, mindful of Allah, so shall He be mindful
of thee. Ward thy wealth and waste it not; for an thou do, thou wilt
come to want the least of mankind. Know that the measure of a man’s
worth is according to that which his right hand hendeth”: and how well
saith the poet:[258]—

 When fails my wealth no friend will deign befriend, ✿ And when it waxeth
    all men friendship show:
 How many a foe for wealth became my friend, ✿ Wealth lost, how many a
    friend became a foe!

Asked Ali, “What more?” And Majd al-Din answered, “O my son, take
counsel of those who are older than thou and hasten not to do thy
heart’s desire. Have compassion on those who are below thee, so shall
those who are above thee have compassion on thee; and oppress none, lest
Allah empower one who shall oppress thee. How well saith the poet:—

 Add other wit to thy wit, counsel craving, ✿ For man’s true course hides
    not from minds of two:
 Man is a mirror which but shows his face, ✿ And by two mirrors he his
    back shall view.

And as saith another:[259]—

                  Act on sure grounds, nor hurry fast,
                  To gain the purpose that thou hast
                  And be thou kindly to all men
                  So kindly thou’lt be called again;
                  For not a deed the hand can try,
                  Save ‘neath the hand of God on high,
                  Nor tyrant harsh work tyranny,
                  Uncrushed by tyrant harsh as he.

And as saith yet another:[260]—

 Tyrannize not, if thou hast the power to do so; for the tyrannical is in
    danger of revenges.
 Thine eye will sleep while the oppressed, wakeful, will call down curses
    on thee, and God’s eye sleepeth not.

Beware of wine-bibbing, for drink is the root of all evil: it doeth away
the reason and bringeth to contempt whoso useth it; and how well saith
the poet:—

 By Allah, wine shall not disturb me, while my soul ✿ Join body, nor
    while speech the words of me explain:
 No day will I be thralled to wine-skin cooled by breeze[261] ✿ Nor
    choose a friend save those who are of cups unfain.

This, then, is my charge to thee; bear it before thine eyes, and Allah
stand to thee in my stead.” Then he swooned away and kept silent awhile;
and, when he came to himself, he besought pardon of Allah and pronounced
the profession of the Faith, and was admitted to the mercy of the
Almighty. So his son wept and lamented for him and presently made proper
preparation for his burial; great and small walked in his funeral
procession and Koran-readers recited Holy Writ about his bier; nor did
Ali Shar omit aught of what was due to the dead. Then they prayed over
him and committed him to the dust and wrote these two couplets upon his
tomb:—

 Thou wast create of dust and cam’st to life, ✿ And learned’st in
    eloquence to place thy trust;
 Anon, to dust returning, thou becamest ✿ A corpse, as though ne’er taken
    from the dust.

Now his son Ali Shar grieved for him with sore grief and mourned him
with the ceremonies usual among men of note; nor did he cease to weep
the loss of his father till his mother died also, not long afterwards,
when he did with her as he had done with his sire. Then he sat in the
shop, selling and buying and consorting with none of Almighty Allah’s
creatures, in accordance with his father’s injunction. This wise he
continued to do for a year, at the end of which time there came in to
him by craft certain whoreson fellows and consorted with him, till he
turned after their example to lewdness and swerved from the way of
righteousness, drinking wine in flowing bowls and frequenting fair women
night and day; for he said to himself, “Of a truth my father amassed
this wealth for me, and if I spend it not, to whom shall I leave it? By
Allah, I will not do save as saith the poet:—

   An through the whole of life ✿ Thou gett’st and gain’st for self;
   Say, when shalt thou enjoy ✿ Thy gains and gotten pelf?”

And Ali Shar ceased not to waste his wealth all whiles of the day and
all watches of the night, till he had made away with the whole of his
riches and abode in pauper case and troubled at heart. So he sold his
shop and lands and so forth, and after this he sold the clothes off his
body, leaving himself but one suit; and, as drunkenness quitted him and
thoughtfulness came to him, he fell into grief and sore care. One day,
when he had sat from daybreak to mid-afternoon without breaking his
fast, he said in his mind, “I will go round to those on whom I spent my
monies: perchance one of them will feed me this day.” So he went the
round of them all; but, as often as he knocked at any one’s door of
them, the man denied himself and hid from him, till his stomach ached
with hunger. Then he betook himself to the bazar of the merchants——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Three Hundred and Tenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ali Shar feeling
his stomach ache with hunger, betook himself to the merchants’ bazar
where he found a crowd of people assembled in ring, and said to himself,
“I wonder what causeth these folk to crowd together thus? By Allah, I
will not budge hence till I see what is within yonder ring!” So he made
his way into the ring and found therein a damsel exposed for sale who
was five feet tall,[262] beautifully proportioned, rosy of cheek and
high of breast; and who surpassed all the people of her time in beauty
and loveliness and elegance and grace; even as saith one, describing
her:—

 As she willèd she was made, and in such a way that when ✿ She was cast
    in Nature’s mould neither short nor long was she:
 Beauty woke to fall in love with the beauties of her form, ✿ Where
    combine with all her coyness her pride and pudency:

 The full moon is her face[263] and the branchlet is her shape, ✿ And the
    musk-pod is her scent—what like her can there be?
 ‘Tis as though she were moulded from water of the pearl, ✿ And in every
    lovely limblet another moon we see!

And her name was Zumurrud—the Smaragdine. So when Ali Shar saw her, he
marvelled at her beauty and grace and said, “By Allah, I will not stir
hence till I see how much this girl fetcheth, and know who buyeth her!”
So he took standing-place amongst the merchants, and they thought he had
a mind to buy her, knowing the wealth he had inherited from his parents.
Then the broker stood at the damsel’s head and said, “Ho, merchants! Ho,
ye men of money! Who will open the gate of biddings for this damsel, the
mistress of moons, the union pearl, Zumurrud the curtain-maker, the
sought of the seeker and the delight of the desirous? Open the biddings’
door and on the opener be nor blame nor reproach for evermore.”
Thereupon quoth one merchant, “Mine for five hundred dinars;” “and ten,”
quoth another. “Six hundred,” cried an old man named Rashíd al-Din, blue
of eye[264] and foul of face. “And ten,” cried another. “I bid a
thousand,” rejoined Rashid al-Din; whereupon the rival merchants were
tongue-tied, and held their peace and the broker took counsel with the
girl’s owner, who said, “I have sworn not to sell her save to whom she
shall choose: so consult her.” Thereupon the broker went up to Zumurrud
and said to her, “O mistress of moons, this merchant hath a mind to buy
thee.” She looked at Rashid al-Din and finding him as we have said,
replied, “I will not be sold to a greybeard, whom decrepitude hath
brought to such evil plight. Allah inspired his saying who saith:—

 I craved of her a kiss one day; but soon as she beheld ✿ My hoary
 hairs, though I my luxuries and wealth display’d;

 She proudly turned away from me, showed shoulders, cried aloud:— ✿ ‘No!
    no! by Him, whose hest mankind from nothingness hath made,
 For hoary head and grizzled chin I’ve no especial love: ✿ What! stuff my
    mouth with cotton[265] ere in sepulchre I’m laid?’”

Now when the broker heard her words he said, “By Allah, thou art
excusable, and thy price is ten thousand gold pieces!” So he told her
owner that she would not accept of old man Rashid al-Din, and he said,
“Consult her concerning another.” Thereupon a second man came forward
and said, “Be she mine for what price was offered by the oldster she
would have none of;” but she looked at him and seeing that his beard was
dyed, said “What be this fashion lewd and base and the blackening of the
hoary face?” And she made a great show of wonderment and repeated these
couplets:—

 Showed me Sir Such-an-one a sight and what a frightful sight! ✿ A neck,
    by Allah, only made for slipper-sole to smite:[266]
 A beard the meetest racing-ground where gnats and lice contend, ✿ A brow
    fit only for the ropes thy temples chafe and bite.[267]
 O thou enravisht by my cheek and beauties of my form, ✿ Why so translate
    thyself to youth and think I deem it right?
 Dyeing disgracefully that white of reverend aged hairs, ✿ And hiding for
    foul purposes their venerable white!
 Thou goest with one beard and comest back with quite another, ✿ Like
    Punch-and-Judy man who works the Chinese shades by night.[268]

And how well saith another:—

 Quoth she, “I see thee dye thy hoariness:”[269] ✿ “To hide, O ears and
    eyes! from thee,” quoth I:
 She roared with laugh and said, “Right funny this; ✿ Thou art so lying
    e’en thy hair’s a lie!”

Now when the broker heard her verse he exclaimed, “By Allah thou hast
spoken sooth!” The merchant asked what she said: so the broker repeated
the verses to him; and he knew that she was in the right while he was
wrong and desisted from buying her. Then another came forward and said,
“Ask her if she will be mine at the same price;” but, when he did so,
she looked at him and seeing that he had but one eye, said, “This man is
one-eyed; and it is of such as he that the poet saith:[270]—

 Consort not with the Cyclops e’en a day; ✿ Beware his falsehood and his
    mischief fly:
 Had this monocular a jot of good, ✿ Allah had ne’er brought blindness to
    his eye!”

Then said the broker, pointing to another bidder, “Wilt thou be sold to
this man?” She looked at him and seeing that he was short of
stature[271] and had a beard that reached to his navel, cried, “This is
he of whom the poet speaketh:—

 I have a friend who hath a beard ✿ Allah to useless length unroll’d:
 ‘Tis like a certain[272] winter night, ✿ Longsome and darksome, drear
    and cold.”

Said the broker, “O my lady, look who pleaseth thee of these that are
present, and point him out, that I may sell thee to him.” So she looked
round the ring of merchants, examining one by one their physiognomies,
till her glance fell on Ali Shar,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Three Hundred and Eleventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the girl’s
glance fell on Ali Shar, she cast at him a look with longing eyes, which
cost her a thousand sighs, and her heart was taken with him; for that he
was of favour passing fair and pleasanter than zephyr or northern air;
and she said, “O broker, I will be sold to none but to this my lord,
owner of the handsome face and slender form whom the poet thus
describeth:—

      Displaying that fair face ✿ The tempted they assailed;
      Who, had they wished me safe ✿ That lovely face had veiled!”

For none shall own me but he, because his cheek is smooth and the water
of his mouth sweet as Salsabil;[273] his spittle is a cure for the sick
and his charms daze and dazzle poet and proser, even as saith one of
him:—

 His honey-dew of lips is wine; his breath ✿ Musk and those teeth, smile
    shown, are camphor’s hue:
 Rizwán[274] hath turned him out o’ doors, for fear ✿ The Houris lapse
    from virtue at the view;
 Men blame his bearing for its pride, but when ✿ In pride the full moon
    sails, excuse is due.

Lord of the curling locks and rose-red cheeks and ravishing look of whom
saith the poet:—

 The fawn-like one a meeting promised me ✿ And eye expectant waxed and
    heart upstirred:
 His eyelids bade me hold his word as true; ✿ But, in their
    languish,[275] can he keep his word?

And as saith another:—

 Quoth they, “Black letters on his cheek are writ! ✿ How canst thou love
    him and a side-beard see?”
 Quoth I, “Cease blame and cut your chiding short; ✿ If those be letters
    ‘tis a forgery:”
 Gather his charms all growths of Eden-garth ✿ Whereto those
    Kausar[276]-lips bear testimony.

When the broker heard the verses she repeated on the charms of Ali Shar,
he marvelled at her eloquence, no less than at the brightness of her
beauty; but her owner said to him, “Marvel not at her splendour which
shameth the noonday sun, nor that her memory is stored with the choicest
verses of the poets; for, besides this, she can repeat the glorious
Koran, according to the seven readings,[277] and the august Traditions,
after ascription and authentic transmission; and she writeth the seven
modes of handwriting[278] and she knoweth more learning and knowledge
than the most learned. Moreover, her hands are better than gold and
silver; for she maketh silken curtains and selleth them for fifty gold
pieces each; and it taketh her but eight days to make a curtain.”
Exclaimed the broker, “O happy the man who hath her in his house and
maketh her of his choicest treasures!”; and her owner said to him, “Sell
her to whom she will.” So the broker went up to Ali Shar and, kissing
his hands, said to him, “O my lord, buy thou this damsel, for she hath
made choice of thee.”[279] Then he set forth to him all her charms and
accomplishments, and added, “I give thee joy if thou buy her, for this
be a gift from Him who is no niggard of His giving.” Whereupon Ali bowed
his head groundwards awhile, laughing at himself and secretly saying,
“Up to this hour I have not broken my fast; yet I am ashamed before the
merchants to own that I have no money wherewith to buy her.” The damsel,
seeing him hang down his head, said to the broker, “Take my hand and
lead me to him, that I may show my beauty to him and tempt him to buy
me; for I will not be sold to any but to him.” So the broker took her
hand and stationed her before Ali Shar, saying, “What is thy good
pleasure, O my lord?” But he made him no answer, and the girl said to
him, “O my lord and darling of my heart, what aileth thee that thou wilt
not bid for me? Buy me for what thou wilt and I will bring thee good
fortune.” So he raised his eyes to her and said, “Is buying perforce?
Thou art dear at a thousand dinars.” Said she, “Then buy me, O my lord,
for nine hundred.” He cried, “No,” and she rejoined, “Then for eight
hundred;” and though he again said, “Nay,” she ceased not to abate the
price, till she came to an hundred dinars. Quoth he, “I have not by me a
full hundred.” So she laughed and asked, “How much dost thou lack of an
hundred?” He answered, “By Allah, I have neither an hundred dinars, nor
any other sum; for I own neither white coin nor red cash, neither dinar
nor dirham. So look out thou for another and a better customer.” And
when she knew that he had nothing, she said to him, “Take me by the hand
and carry me aside into a by-lane, as if thou wouldst examine me
privily.” He did so and she drew from her bosom a purse containing a
thousand dinars, which she gave him, saying, “Pay down nine hundred to
my price and let the hundred remain with thee by way of provision.” He
did as she bid him and, buying her for nine hundred dinars, paid down
the price from her own purse and carried her to his house. When she
entered it, she found a dreary desolate saloon without carpets or
vessels; so she gave him other thousand dinars, saying, “Go to the bazar
and buy three hundred dinars’ worth of furniture and vessels for the
house and three dinars’ worth of meat and drink.”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Three Hundred and Twelfth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the
slave-girl, “Bring us meat and drink for three dinars; furthermore a
piece of silk, the size of a curtain, and bring golden and silvern
thread and sewing-silk of seven colours.” Thus he did, and she furnished
the house and they sat down to eat and drink; after which they went to
bed and took their pleasure one of the other. And they lay the night
embraced behind the curtain and were even as saith the poet:[280]—

 Cleave fast to her thou lovest and let the envious rail amain; For
    calumny and envy ne’er to favour love were fain.
 Lo, whilst I slept, in dreams I saw thee lying by my side And, from thy
    lips the sweetest, sure, of limpid springs did drain.
 Yea, true and certain all I saw is, as I will avouch, And ‘spite the
    envier, thereto I surely will attain.
 There is no goodlier sight, indeed, for eyes to look upon. Than when one
    couch in its embrace enfoldeth lovers twain.
 Each to the other’s bosom clasped, clad in their twinned delight. Whilst
    hand with hand and arm with arm about their necks enchain,
 Lo, when two hearts are straitly knit in passion and desire, But on cold
    iron smite the folk who chide at them in vain.
 Thou, that for loving censurest the votaries of love, canst thou assain
    a heart diseased or heal a cankered brain?
 If in thy time thou find but one to love thee and be true, I rede thee
    cast the world away and with that one remain.

So they lay together till the morning and love for the other waxed
firmly fixed in the heart of each. And on rising, Zumurrud took the
curtain and embroidered it with coloured silks and purfled it with
silver and gold thread and she added thereto a border depicting round
about it all manner birds and beasts; nor is there in the world a feral
but she wrought his semblance. This she worked in eight days, till she
had made an end of it, when she trimmed it and glazed and ironed it and
gave it to her lord, saying, “Carry it to the bazar and sell it to one
of the merchants at fifty dinars; but beware lest thou sell it to a
passer-by, as this would cause a separation between me and thee, for we
have foes who are not unthoughtful of us.” “I hear and I obey,” answered
he and, repairing to the bazar, sold the curtain to a merchant, as she
bade him; after which he bought a piece of silk for another curtain and
gold and silver and silken thread as before and what they needed of
food, and brought all this to her, giving her the rest of the money. Now
every eight days she made a curtain, which he sold for fifty dinars, and
on this wise passed a whole year. At the end of that time, he went as
usual to the bazar with a curtain, which he gave to the broker; and
there came up to him a Nazarene who bid him sixty dinars for it; but he
refused, and the Christian continued bidding higher and higher, till he
came to an hundred dinars and bribed the broker with ten ducats. So the
man returned to Ali Shar and told him of the proffered price and urged
him to accept the offer and sell the article at the Nazarene’s
valuation, saying, “O my lord, be not afraid of this Christian for that
he can do thee no hurt.” The merchants also were urgent with him; so he
sold the curtain to the Christian, albeit his heart misgave him; and,
taking the money, set off to return home. Presently, as he walked, he
found the Christian walking behind him; so he said to him, “O
Nazarene,[281] why dost thou follow in my footsteps?” Answered the other
“O my lord, I want a something at the end of the street, Allah never
bring thee to want!”; but Ali Shar had barely reached his place before
the Christian overtook him; so he said to him, “O accursed, what aileth
thee to follow me wherever I go?” Replied the other, “O my lord, give me
a draught of water, for I am athirst; and with Allah be thy
reward!”[282] Quoth Ali Shar to himself, “Verily, this man is an Infidel
who payeth tribute and claimeth our protection[283] and he asketh me for
a draught of water; by Allah, I will not baulk him!”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Thirteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth Ali Shar to
himself, “This man is a tributary Unbeliever and he asked me for a
draught of water; by Allah, I will not baulk him!” So he entered the
house and took a gugglet of water; but the slave-girl Zumurrud saw him
and said to him, “O my love, hast thou sold the curtain?” He replied,
“Yes;” and she asked, “To a merchant or to a passer-by? for my heart
presageth a parting.” And he answered, “To whom but to a merchant?”
Thereupon she rejoined, “Tell me the truth of the case, that I may order
my affair; and why take the gugglet of water?” And he, “To give the
broker to drink,” upon which she exclaimed, “There is no Majesty and
there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!”; and she
repeated these two couplets:[284]—

 O thou who seekest separation, act leisurely, and let not the embrace of
    the beloved deceive thee!
 Act leisurely; for the nature of fortune is treacherous, and the end of
    every union is disjunction.

Then he took the gugglet and, going out, found the Christian within the
vestibule and said to him, “How comest thou here and how darest thou, O
dog, enter my house without my leave?” Answered he, “O my lord, there is
no difference between the door and the vestibule, and I never intended
to stir hence, save to go out; and my thanks are due to thee for thy
kindness and favour, thy bounty and generosity.” Then he took the mug
and emptying it, returned it to Ali Shar, who received it and waited for
him to rise up and to go; but he did not move. So Ali said to him, “Why
dost thou not rise and wend thy way?”; and he answered, “O my lord, be
not of those who do a kindness and then make it a reproach, nor of those
of whom saith the poet:[285]—

 They’re gone who when thou stoodest at their door ✿ Would for thy wants
    so generously cater:
 But stand at door of churls who followed them, ✿ They’d make high favour
    of a draught of water!”

And he continued, “O my lord, I have drunk, and now I would have thee
give me to eat of whatever is in the house, though it be but a bit of
bread or a biscuit with an onion.” Replied Ali Shar, “Begone, without
more chaffer and chatter; there is nothing in the house.” He persisted,
“O my lord, if there be nothing in the house, take these hundred dinars
and bring us something from the market, if but a single scone, that
bread and salt may pass between us.”[286] With this, quoth Ali Shar to
himself, “This Christian is surely mad; I will take his hundred dinars
and bring him somewhat worth a couple of dirhams and laugh at him.” And
the Nazarene added, “O my lord, I want but a small matter to stay my
hunger, were it but a dry scone and an onion; for the best food is that
which doeth away appetite, not rich viands”; and how well saith the
poet:—

 Hunger is sated with a bone-dry scone, ✿ How is it then[287] in woes of
    want I wone?
 Death is all-justest, lacking aught regard ✿ For Caliph-king and beggar
    woebegone.

Then quoth Ali Shar, “Wait here, while I lock the saloon and fetch thee
somewhat from the market;” and quoth the Christian, “To hear is to
obey.” So Ali Shar shut up the saloon and, locking the door with a
padlock, put the key in his pocket: after which he went to market and
bought fried cheese and virgin honey and bananas[288] and bread, with
which he returned to the house. Now when the Christian saw the
provision, he said, “O my lord, this is overmuch; ‘tis enough for half a
score of men and I am alone; but belike thou wilt eat with me.” Replied
Ali, “Eat by thyself, I am full;” and the Christian rejoined, “O my
lord, the wise say, Whoso eateth not with his guest is a son of a
whore.” Now when Ali Shar heard these words from the Nazarene, he sat
down and ate a little with him, after which he would have held his
hand;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Fourteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ali Shar sat down
and ate a little with him, after which he would have held his hand; but
the Nazarene privily took a banana and peeled it; then, splitting it in
twain, put into one half concentrated Bhang, mixed with opium, a drachm
whereof would overthrow an elephant; and he dipped it in the honey and
gave it to Ali Shar, saying, “O my lord, by the truth of thy religion, I
adjure thee to take this.” So Ali Shar, being ashamed to make him
forsworn, took it and swallowed it; but hardly had it settled well in
his stomach, when his head forwent both his feet and he was as though he
had been a year asleep. As soon as the Nazarene saw this, he rose to his
feet as he had been a scald wolf or a cat-o’-mount[289] at bay and,
taking the saloon key, left Ali Shar prostrate and ran off to rejoin his
brother. And the cause of his so doing was that the Nazarene’s brother
was the same decrepit old man who purposed to buy Zumurrud for a
thousand dinars, but she would none of him and jeered him in verse. He
was an Unbeliever inwardly, though a Moslem outwardly, and had called
himself Rashid al-Din;[290] and when Zumurrud mocked him and would not
accept of him, he complained to his brother, the aforesaid Christian who
played this sleight to take her from her master Ali Shar; whereupon his
brother, Barsúm by name, said to him, “Fret not thyself about the
business; for I will make shift to seize her for thee, without expending
either dinar or dirham.” Now he was a skilful wizard, crafty and wicked;
so he watched his time and ceased not his practices till he played Ali
Shar the trick before related; then, taking the key, he went to his
brother and acquainted him with what had passed. Thereupon Rashid al-Din
mounted his she-mule and repaired with his brother and his servants to
the house of Ali Shar, taking with him a purse of a thousand dinars,
wherewith to bribe the Chief of Police, should he meet him. He opened
the saloon-door, and the men who were with him rushed in upon Zumurrud
and forcibly seized her, threatening her with death, if she spoke; but
they left the place as it was and took nothing therefrom. Lastly, they
left Ali Shar lying in the vestibule after they had shut the door on him
and laid the saloon key by his side. Then the Christian carried the girl
to his own house and setting her amongst his handmaids and concubines,
said to her, “O strumpet, I am the old man whom thou didst reject and
lampoon; but now I have thee, without paying dinar or dirham.” Replied
she (and her eyes streamed with tears), “Allah requite thee, O wicked
old man, for sundering me and my lord!” He rejoined, “Wanton minx and
whore that thou art, thou shalt see how I will punish thee! By the truth
of the Messiah and the Virgin, except thou obey me and embrace my faith,
I will torture thee with all manner of torture!” She replied, “By Allah,
though thou cut my flesh to bits I will not forswear the faith of
Al-Islam! It may be Almighty Allah will bring me speedy relief, for He
doth even as He is lief, and the wise say:—Better body to scathe than a
flaw in faith.” Thereupon the old man called his eunuchs and women,
saying, “Throw her down!” So they threw her down and he ceased not to
beat her with grievous beating, whilst she cried for help and no help
came; then she no longer implored aid but fell to saying, “Allah is my
sufficiency, and He is indeed all-sufficient!” till her groans ceased
and her breath failed her and she fell into a fainting-fit. Now when his
heart was soothed by bashing her, he said to the eunuchs, “Drag her
forth by the feet and cast her down in the kitchen, and give her nothing
to eat.” And after quietly sleeping that night, on the morrow the
accursed old man sent for her and beat her again, after which he bade
the Castrato return her to her place. When the burning of the blows had
cooled, she said, “There is no God but _the_ God and Mohammed is the
Apostle of God! Allah is my sufficiency and excellent is my Guardian!”
And she called for succour upon our Lord Mohammed (whom Allah bless and
keep!)——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


         Now when it was the Three Hundred and Fifteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Zumurrud called
for succour upon our Lord Mohammed (whom Allah bless and keep!). Such
was her case; but as regards Ali Shar, he ceased not sleeping till next
day, when the Bhang quitted his brain and he opened his eyes, and cried
out, “O Zumurrud”; but no one answered him. So he entered the saloon and
found the empty air and the fane afar;[291] whereby he knew that it was
the Nazarene who had played him this trick. And he groaned and wept and
lamented and again shed tears, repeating these couplets:—

 O Love thou’rt instant in thy cruellest guise; ✿ Here is my heart ‘twixt
    fears and miseries:
 Pity, O lords, a thrall who, felled on way ✿ Of Love, erst wealthy now a
    beggar lies:
 What profits archer’s art if, when the foe ✿ Draw near, his bowstring
    snap ere arrow flies:
 And when griefs multiply on generous man ✿ And urge, what fort can fend
    from destinies?
 How much and much I warded parting, but ✿ ‘When Destiny descends she
    blinds our eyes?’

And when he had ended his verse, he sobbed with loud sobs and repeated
also these couplets:—

 Enrobes with honour sands of camp her foot-step wandering lone; ✿ Pines
    the poor mourner as she wins the stead where wont to wone:
 She turns to resting-place of tribe, and yearns thereon to view ✿ The
    spring-camp lying desolate with ruins overstrown:
 She stands and questions of the site, but with the tongue of case ✿ The
    mount replies, ‘There is no path that leads to union, none!
 ‘Tis as the lightning flash erewhile bright glittered o’er the camp ✿
    And died in darkling air no more to be for ever shown.’

And he repented when repentance availed him naught, and wept and rent
his raiment. Then he hent in hand two stones and went round about the
city, beating his breast with the stones and crying, “O Zumurrud!”
whilst the small boys flocked round him, calling out, “A madman! A
madman!” and all who knew him wept for him, saying, “This is such an
one: what evil hath befallen him?” Thus he continued doing all that day
and, when night darkened on him, he lay down in one of the city-lanes
and slept till morning. On the morrow, he went round about town with the
stones till eventide, when he returned to his saloon to pass therein the
night. Presently, one of his neighbours saw him, and this worthy old
woman said to him, “O my son, Heaven give thee healing! How long hast
thou been mad?” And he answered her with these two couplets:[292]—

 They said, Thou ravest upon the person thou lovest. And I replied, The
    sweets of life are only for the mad.
 Drop the subject of my madness, and bring her upon whom I rave. If she
    cure my madness do not blame me.

So his old neighbour knew him for a lover who had lost his beloved and
said, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might, save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great! O my son, I wish thou wouldest acquaint me with the
tale of thine affliction. Peradventure Allah may enable me to help thee
against it, if it so please Him.” So he told her all that had befallen
him with Barsum the Nazarene and his brother the wizard who had named
himself Rashid al-Din and, when she understood the whole case, she said,
“O my son, indeed thou hast excuse.” And her eyes railed tears and she
repeated these two couplets:—

 Enough for lovers in this world their ban and bane: ✿ By Allah, lover
    ne’er in fire of Sakar fries:
 For, sure, they died of love-desire they never told ✿ Chastely, and to
    this truth tradition testifies.[293]

And after she had finished her verse, she said, “O my son, rise at once
and buy me a crate, such as the jewel-pedlars carry; buy also bangles
and seal-rings and bracelets and ear-rings and other gew-gaws wherein
women delight and grudge not the cash. Put all the stock into the crate
and bring it to me and I will set it on my head and go round about, in
the guise of a huckstress and make search for her in all the houses,
till I happen on news of her—Inshallah!” So Ali Shar rejoiced in her
words and kissed her hands, then, going out, speedily brought her all
she required; whereupon she rose and donned a patched gown and threw
over her head a honey-yellow veil, and took staff in hand and, with the
basket on her head, began wandering about the passages and the houses.
She ceased not to go from house to house and street to street and
quarter to quarter, till Allah Almighty led her to the house of the
accursed Rashid al-Din the Nazarene where, hearing groans within, she
knocked at the door,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Three Hundred and Sixteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the old woman
heard groans within the house, she knocked at the door, whereupon a
slave-girl came down and opening to her, saluted her. Quoth the old
woman, “I have these trifles for sale: is there any one with you who
will buy aught of them?” “Yes,” answered the damsel and, carrying her
indoors, made her sit down; whereupon all the slave-girls came round her
and each bought something of her. And as the old woman spoke them fair
and was easy with them as to price, all rejoiced in her, because of her
kind ways and pleasant speech. Meanwhile, she looked narrowly at the ins
and outs of the place to see who it was she had heard groaning, till her
glance fell on Zumurrud, when she knew her and she began to show her
customers yet more kindness. At last she made sure that Zumurrud was
laid prostrate; so she wept and said to the girls, “O my children, how
cometh yonder young lady in this plight?” Then the slave-girls told her
all what had passed, adding, “Indeed this matter is not of our choice;
but our master commanded us to do thus, and he is now on a journey?” She
said, “O my children, I have a favour to ask of you, and it is that you
loose this unhappy damsel of her bonds, till you know of your lord’s
return, when do ye bind her again as she was; and you shall earn a
reward from the Lord of all creatures.” “We hear and obey,” answered
they and at once loosing Zumurrud, gave her to eat and drink. Thereupon
quoth the old woman, “Would my leg had been broken, ere I entered your
house!” And she went up to Zumurrud and said to her, “O my daughter,
Heaven keep thee safe; soon shall Allah bring thee relief.” Then she
privily told her that she came from her lord, Ali Shar, and agreed with
her to be on the watch for sounds that night, saying, “Thy lord will
come and stand by the pavilion-bench and whistle[294] to thee; and when
thou hearest him, do thou whistle back to him and let thyself down to
him by a rope from the window, and he will take thee and go away with
thee.” So Zumurrud thanked the old woman, who went forth and returned to
Ali Shar and told him what she had done, saying, “Go this night, at
midnight, to such a quarter, for the accursed carle’s house is there and
its fashion is thus and thus. Stand under the window of the upper
chamber and whistle; whereupon she will let herself down to thee; then
do thou take her and carry her whither thou wilt.” He thanked her for
her good offices and with flowing tears repeated these couplets:—

 Now with their says and saids[295] no more vex me the chiding race; ✿ My
    heart is weary and I’m worn to bone by their disgrace:
 And tears a truthful legend[296] with a long ascription-chain ✿ Of my
    desertion and distress the lineage can trace.
 O thou heart-whole and free from dole and dolours I endure, ✿ Cut short
    thy long persistency nor question of my case:
 A sweet-lipped one and soft of sides and cast in shapeliest mould ✿ Hath
    stormed my heart with honied lure and honied words of grace.
 No rest my heart hath known since thou art gone, nor ever close ✿ These
    eyes, nor patience-aloe scape the hopes I dare to trace:
 Ye have abandoned me to be the pawn of vain desire, ✿ In squalid state
    ‘twixt enviers and they who blame to face:
 As for forgetting you or love ‘tis thing I never knew; ✿ Nor in my
    thought shall ever pass a living thing but you.

And when he ended his verses, he sighed and shed tears and repeated also
these couplets:—

 Divinely were inspired his words who brought me news of you; ✿ For
    brought he unto me a gift was music in mine ear:
 Take he for gift, if him content, this worn-out threadbare robe, ✿ My
    heart, which was in pieces torn when parting from my fere.

He waited till night darkened and, when came the appointed time, he went
to the quarter she had described to him and saw and recognised the
Christian’s house; so he sat down on the bench under the gallery.
Presently drowsiness overcame him and he slept (Glory be to Him who
sleepeth not!), for it was long since he had tasted sleep, by reason of
the violence of his passion, and he became as one drunken with slumber.
And while he was on this wise——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Seventeenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that while he lay
asleep, behold, a certain thief, who had come out that night and prowled
about the skirts of the city to steal somewhat, happened by the decree
of Destiny, on the Nazarene’s house. He went round about it, but found
no way of climbing up into it, and presently on his circuit he came to
the bench, where he saw Ali Shar asleep and stole his turband; and, as
he was taking it, suddenly Zumurrud looked out and seeing the thief
standing in the darkness, took him for her lord; whereupon she let
herself down to him by the rope with a pair of saddle-bags full of gold.
Now when the robber saw that, he said to himself, “This is a wondrous
thing, and there must needs be some marvellous cause to it.” Then he
snatched up the saddle-bags, and threw Zumurrud over his shoulders and
made off with both like the blinding lightning. Quoth she, “Verily, the
old woman told me that thou wast weak with illness on my account; and
here thou art, stronger than a horse.” He made her no reply; so she put
her hand to his face and felt a beard like the broom of palm-frond used
for the Hammam,[297] as if he were a hog which had swallowed feathers
and they had come out of his gullet; whereat she took fright and said to
him, “What art thou?” “O strumpet,” answered he, “I am the sharper
Jawán[298] the Kurd, of the band of Ahmad al-Danaf; we are forty
sharpers, who will all piss our tallow into thy womb this night, from
dusk to dawn.” When she heard his words, she wept and beat her face,
knowing that Fate had gotten the better of her and that she had no
resource but resignation and to put her trust in Allah Almighty. So she
took patience and submitted herself to the ordinance of the Lord,
saying, “There is no god but _the_ God! As often as we escape from one
woe, we fall into a worse.” Now the cause of Jawan’s coming thither was
this: he had said to Calamity-Ahmad, “O Sharper-captain,[299] I have
been in this city before and know a cavern without the walls which will
hold forty souls; so I will go before you thither and set my mother
therein. Then will I return to the city and steal somewhat for the luck
of all of you and keep it till you come; so shall you be my guests and I
will show you hospitality this day.” Replied Ahmad al-Danaf, “Do what
thou wilt.” So Jawan went forth to the place before them and set his
mother in the cave; but, as he came out he found a trooper lying asleep,
with his horse picketed beside him; so he cut his throat and, taking his
clothes and his charger and his arms, hid them with his mother in the
cave, where also he tethered the horse. Then he betook himself to the
city and prowled about, till he happened on the Christian’s house and
did with Ali Shar’s turband and Zumurrud and her saddle-bags as we have
said. He ceased not to run, with Zumurrud on his back, till he came to
the cavern, where he gave her in charge of his mother, saying, “Keep
thou watch over her till I return to thee at first dawn of day,” and
went his ways.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Eighteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth Kurdish
Jawan to his mother, “Keep thou watch over her till I come back to thee
at first dawn of day,” and went his ways. Now Zumurrud said to herself,
“Why am I so heedless about saving my life and wherefore await till
these forty men come?: they will take their turns to board me, till they
make me like a water-logged ship at sea.” Then she turned to the old
woman, Jawan’s mother, and said to her, “O my aunt, wilt thou not rise
up and come without the cave, that I may louse thee in the sun?”[300]
Replied the old woman, “Ay, by Allah, O my daughter: this long time have
I been out of reach of the bath; for these hogs cease not to carry me
from place to place.” So they went without the cavern, and Zumurrud
combed out her head hair and killed the lice on her locks, till the
tickling soothed her and she fell asleep; whereupon Zumurrud arose and,
donning the clothes of the murthered trooper, girt her waist with his
sword and covered her head with his turband, so that she became as she
were a man. Then, mounting the horse, after she had taken the saddle
bags full of gold she breathed a prayer, “O good Protector, protect me I
adjure thee by the glory of Mohammed (whom Allah bless and preserve!),”
adding these words in thought, “If I return to the city belike one of
the trooper’s folk will see me, and no good will befal me.” So she
turned her back on the town and rode forth into the wild and the waste.
And she ceased not faring forth with her saddle-bags and the steed,
eating of the growth of the earth and drinking of its waters, she and
her horse, for ten days and, on the eleventh, she came in sight of a
city pleasant and secure from dread, and stablished in happy stead.
Winter had gone from it with his cold showers, and Prime had come to it
with his roses and orange-blossoms and varied flowers; and its blooms
were brightly blowing; its streams were merrily flowing and its birds
warbled coming and going. And she drew near the dwellings and would have
entered the gate when she saw the troops and Emirs and Grandees of the
place drawn up, whereat she marvelled seeing them in such unusual case
and said to herself, “The people of the city are all gathered at its
gate: needs must there be a reason for this.” Then she made towards
them; but, as she drew near, the soldiery dashed forward to meet her
and, dismounting all, kissed the ground between her hands and said, “Aid
thee Allah, O our lord the Sultan!” Then the notables and dignitaries
ranged themselves before her in double line, whilst the troops ordered
the people in, saying, “Allah aid thee and make thy coming a blessing to
the Moslems, O Sultan of all creatures! Allah establish thee, O King of
the time and union-pearl of the day and the tide!” Asked Zumurrud, “What
aileth you, O people of this city?” And the Head Chamberlain answered,
“Verily, He hath given to thee who is no niggard in His giving; and He
hath been bountiful to thee and hath made thee Sultan of this city and
ruler over the necks of all who are therein; for know thou it is the
custom of the citizens, when their King deceaseth leaving no son, that
the troops should sally forth to the suburbs and sojourn there three
days: and whoever cometh from the quarter whence thou hast come, him
they make King over them. So praised be Allah who hath sent us of the
sons of the Turks a well-favoured man; for had a lesser than thou
presented himself, he had been Sultan.” Now Zumurrud was clever and
well-advised in all she did: so she said, “Think not that I am of the
common folk of the Turks! nay, I am of the sons of the great, a man of
condition; but I was wroth with my family, so I went forth and left
them. See these saddle-bags full of gold which I have brought under me
that, by the way, I might give alms thereof to the poor and the needy.”
So they called down blessings upon her and rejoiced in her with
exceeding joy and she also joyed in them and said in herself, “Now that
I have attained to this”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Nineteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth Zumurrud to
herself, “Now that I have attained to this case, haply Allah will
reunite me with my lord in this place, for He can do whatso He willeth.”
Then the troops escorted her to the city and, all dismounting, walked
before her to the palace. Here she alighted and the Emirs and Grandees,
taking her under both armpits,[301] carried her into the palace and
seated her on the throne; after which they all kissed ground before her.
And when duly enthroned she bade them open the treasuries and gave
largesse to all the troops, who offered up prayers for the continuance
of her reign, and all the townsfolk accepted her rule and all the lieges
of the realm. Thus she abode awhile bidding and forbidding, and all the
people came to hold her in exceeding reverence and heartily to love her,
by reason of her continence and generosity; for taxes she remitted and
prisoners she released and grievances she redressed; but, as often as
she bethought her of her lord, she wept and besought Allah to reunite
her and him; and one night, as she chanced to be thinking of him and
calling to mind the days she had passed with him, her eyes ran over with
tears and she versified in these two couplets:—

 My yearning for thee though long is fresh, ✿ And the tears which chafe
 these eyelids increase:
 When I weep, I weep from the burn of love, ✿ For to lover severance is
 decease.[302]

And when she had ended her verse, she wiped away her tears and repairing
to the palace, betook herself to the Harim, where she appointed to the
slave-girls and concubines separate lodgings and assigned them pensions
and allowances, giving out that she was minded to live apart and devote
herself to works of piety. So she applied herself to fasting and
praying, till the Emirs said, “Verily, this Sultan is eminently devout;”
nor would she suffer any male attendants about her, save two little
eunuchs to serve her. And on this wise she held the throne a whole year,
during which time she heard no news of her lord, and failed to hit upon
his traces, which was exceeding grievous to her; so, when her distress
became excessive, she summoned her Wazirs and Chamberlains and bid them
fetch architects and builders and make her in front of the palace a
horse-course, one parasang long and the like broad. They hastened to do
her bidding, and lay out the place to her liking; and, when it was
completed, she went down into it and they pitched her there a great
pavilion, wherein the chairs of the Emirs were ranged in due order.
Moreover, she bade them spread on the racing-plain tables with all
manners of rich meats and when this was done she ordered the Grandees to
eat. So they ate and she said to them, “It is my will that, on seeing
the new moon of each month, ye do on this wise and proclaim in the city
that no man shall open his shop, but that all our lieges shall come and
eat of the King’s banquet, and that whoso disobeyeth shall be hanged
over his own door.”[303] So they did as she bade them, and ceased not so
to do till the first new moon of the second year appeared; when Zumurrud
went down into the horse-course and the crier proclaimed aloud, saying,
“Ho, ye lieges and people one and all, whoso openeth store or shop or
house shall straightway be hanged over his own door; for it behoveth you
to come in a body and eat of the King’s banquet.” And when the
proclamation became known, they laid the tables and the subjects came in
hosts; so she bade them sit down at the trays and eat their fill of all
the dishes. Accordingly they sat down and she took place on her chair of
state, watching them, whilst each who was at meat said to himself,
“Verily the King looketh at none save me.” Then they fell to eating and
the Emirs said to them, “Eat and be not ashamed; for this pleaseth the
King.” So they ate their fill and went away, blessing the Sovereign and
saying, one to the other, “Never in our days saw we a Sultan who loved
the poor as doth this Sultan.” And they wished him length of life. Upon
this Zumurrud returned to her palace,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

[Illustration]


         Now when it was the Three Hundred and Twentieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Queen Zumurrud
returned to her palace, rejoicing in her device and saying to herself,
“Inshallah, I shall surely by this means happen on news of my lord Ali
Shar.” When the first day of the second month came round, she did as
before and when they had spread the tables she came down from her palace
and took place on her throne and commanded the lieges to sit down and
fall to. Now as she sat on her throne, at the head of the tables,
watching the people take their places company by company and one by one,
behold her eye fell on Barsum, the Nazarene who had bought the curtain
of her lord; and she knew him and said in her mind, “This is the first
of my joy and the winning of my wish.” Then Barsum came up to the table
and, sitting down with the rest to eat, espied a dish of sweet rice,
sprinkled with sugar; but it was far from him, so he pushed up to it
through the crowd and, putting out his hand to it, seized it and set it
before himself. His next neighbour said to him, “Why dost thou not eat
of what is before thee? Is not this a disgrace to thee? How canst thou
reach over for a dish which is distant from thee? Art thou not ashamed?”
Quoth Barsum, “I will eat of none save this same.” Rejoined the other,
“Eat then, and Allah give thee no good of it!” But another man, a
Hashish-eater, said, “Let him eat of it, that I may eat with him.”
Replied his neighbour, “O unluckiest of Hashish-eaters, this is no meat
for thee; it is eating for Emirs. Let it be, that it may return to those
for whom it is meant and they eat it.” But Barsum heeded him not and
took a mouthful of the rice and put it in his mouth; and was about to
take a second mouthful when the Queen, who was watching him, cried out
to certain of her guards, saying, “Bring me yonder man with the dish of
sweet rice before him and let him not eat the mouthful he hath ready but
throw it from his hand.”[304] So four of the guards went up to Barsum
and haled him along on his face, after throwing the mouthful of rice
from his hand, and set him standing before Zumurrud, whilst all the
people left eating and said to one another, “By Allah, he did wrong in
not eating of the food meant for the likes of him.” Quoth one, “For me I
was content with this porridge[305] which is before me.” And the
Hashish-eater said, “Praised be Allah who hindered me from eating of the
dish of sugared rice for I expected it to stand before him and was
waiting only for him to have his enjoyment of it, to eat with him, when
there befel him what we see.” And the general said, one to other, “Wait
till we see what shall befal him.” Now as they brought him before Queen
Zumurrud she cried, “Woe to thee, O blue eyes! What is thy name and why
comest thou to our country?” But the accursed called himself out of his
name, having a white turband[306] on, and answered, “O King, my name is
Ali; I work as a weaver and I came hither to trade.” Quoth Zumurrud,
“Bring me a table of sand and a pen of brass,” and when they brought her
what she sought, she took the sand and the pen, and struck a geomantic
figure in the likeness of a baboon; then, raising her head, she looked
hard at Barsum for an hour or so and said to him, “O dog, how darest
thou lie to Kings? Art thou not a Nazarene, Barsum by name, and comest
thou not hither in quest of somewhat? Speak the truth, or by the glory
of the Godhead, I will strike off thy head!” At this Barsum was
confounded and the Emirs and bystanders said, “Verily, this King
understandeth geomancy: blessed be He who hath gifted him!” Then she
cried out upon the Christian and said, “Tell me the truth, or I will
make an end of thee!” Barsum replied, “Pardon, O King of the age; thou
art right as regards the table, for the far one[307] is indeed a
Nazarene”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Barsum replied,
“Pardon, O King of the age; thou art right as regards the table, for thy
slave is indeed a Nazarene.” Whereupon all present, gentle and simple,
wondered at the King’s skill in hitting upon the truth by geomancy, and
said, “Verily this King is a diviner, whose like there is not in the
world.” Thereupon Queen Zumurrud bade flay the Nazarene and stuff his
skin with straw and hang it over the gate of the race-course. Moreover,
she commanded to dig a pit without the city and burn therein his flesh
and bones and throw over his ashes offal and ordure. “We hear and obey,”
answered they, and did with him all she bade; and, when the folk saw
what had befallen the Christian, they said, “Serve him right; but what
an unlucky mouthful was that for him!” And another said, “Be the far
one’s wife divorced if this vow be broken: never again to the end of my
days will I eat of sugared rice!”; and the Hashish-eater cried “Praised
be Allah, who spared me this fellow’s fate by saving me from eating of
that same rice!” Then they all went out, holding it thenceforth unlawful
to sit over against the dish of sweet rice as the Nazarene had sat. Now
when the first day of the third month came, they laid the tables
according to custom, and covered them with dishes and chargers, and
Queen Zumurrud came down and sat on her throne, with her guards in
attendance, as of wont, in awe of her dignity and majesty. Then the
townsfolk entered as before and went round about the tables, looking for
the place of the dish of sweet rice, and quoth one to another, “Hark ye,
O Hájí[308] Khalaf!”; and the other answered, “At thy service, O Hájí
Khálid.” Said Khálid, “Avoid the dish of sweet rice and look thou eat
not thereof; for, if thou do, by early morning thou will be
hanged.”[309] Then they sat down to meat around the table; and, as they
were eating, Queen Zumurrud chanced to look from her throne and saw a
man come running in through the gate of the horse-course; and having
considered him attentively, she knew him for Jawan the Kurdish thief who
murdered the trooper. Now the cause of his coming was this: when he left
his mother, he went to his comrades and said to them, “I did good
business yesterday; for I slew a trooper and took his horse. Moreover
there fell to me last night a pair of saddle-bags, full of gold, and a
young lady worth more than the money in pouch; and I have left all that
with my mother in the cave.” At this they rejoiced and repaired to the
cavern at nightfall, whilst Jawan the Kurd walked in front and the rest
behind; he wishing to bring them the booty of which he had boasted. But
he found the place clean empty and questioned his mother, who told him
all that had befallen her; whereupon he bit his hands for regret and
exclaimed, “By Allah, I will assuredly make search for the harlot and
take her, wherever she is, though it be in the shell of a
pistachio-nut,[310] and quench my malice on her!” So he went forth in
quest of her and ceased not journeying from place to place, till he came
to Queen Zumurrud’s city. On entering he found the town deserted and,
enquiring of some women whom he saw looking from the windows, they told
him that it was the Sultan’s custom to make a banquet for the people on
the first of each month and that all the lieges were bound to go and eat
of it. Furthermore the women directed him to the racing-ground, where
the feast was spread. So he entered at a shuffling trot; and, finding no
place empty, save that before the dish of sweet rice already noticed,
took his seat right opposite it and stretched out his hand towards the
dish; whereupon the folk cried out to him, saying, “O our brother, what
wouldst thou do?” Quoth he, “I would eat my fill of this dish.” Rejoined
one of the people, “If thou eat of it thou wilt assuredly find thyself
hanged to-morrow morning.” But Jawan said, “Hold thy tongue and talk not
so unpleasantly.” Then he stretched out his hand to the dish and drew it
to him; but it so chanced that the Hashish-eater of whom we have spoken,
was sitting by him; and when he saw him take the dish, the fumes of the
Hashish left his head and he fled from his place and sat down afar off,
saying, “I will have nothing to do with yonder dish.” Then Jawan the
Kurd put out his hand (which was very like a raven’s claws),[311]
scooped up therewith half the dishful and drew out his neave as it were
a camel’s hoof——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Jawan the Kurd
drew his neave from the dish as it were a camel’s hoof and rolled the
lump of rice in the palm of his hand, till it was like a big orange, and
threw it ravenously into his mouth; and it rolled down his gullet, with
a rumble like thunder and the bottom of the deep dish appeared where
said mouthful had been. Thereupon quoth to him one sitting by his side,
“Praised be Allah for not making me meat between thy hands; for thou
hast cleared the dish at a single mouthful;” and quoth the
Hashish-eater, “Let him eat; methinks he hath a hanging face.” Then,
turning to Jawan he added, “Eat and Allah give thee small good of it.”
So Jawan put out his hand again and taking another mouthful, was rolling
it in his palm like the first, when behold, the Queen cried out to the
guards saying, “Bring me yonder man in haste and let him not eat the
mouthful in his hand.” So they ran and seizing him as he hung over the
dish, brought him to her, and set him in her presence, whilst the people
exulted over his mishap and said one to the other, “Serve him right, for
we warned him, but he would not take warning. Verily, this place is
bound to be the death of whoso sitteth therein, and yonder rice bringeth
doom to all who eat of it.” Then said Queen Zumurrud to Jawan, “What is
thy name and trade and wherefore comest thou to our city?” Answered he,
“O our lord the Sultan, my name is Othman; I work as a gardener and am
come hither in quest of somewhat I have lost.” Quoth Zumurrud, “Here
with a table of sand!” So they brought it, and she took the pen and
drawing a geomantic scheme, considered it awhile, then raising her head,
exclaimed, “Woe to thee, thou losel! How darest thou lie to Kings? This
sand telleth me that of a truth thy name is Jawan the Kurd and that thou
art by trade a robber, taking men’s goods in the way of unright and
slaying those whom Allah hath forbidden to slay save for just cause.”
And she cried out upon him, saying, “O hog, tell me the truth of thy
case or I will cut off thy head on the spot.” Now when he heard these
words, he turned yellow and his teeth chattered; then, deeming that he
might save himself by truth-telling, he replied, “O King, thou sayest
sooth; but I repent at thy hands henceforth and turn to Allah Almighty!”
She answered, “It were not lawful for me to leave a pest in the way of
Moslems;” and cried to her guards, “Take him and skin him and do with
him as last month ye did by his like.” They obeyed her commandment; and,
when the Hashish-eater saw the soldiers seize the man, he turned his
back upon the dish of rice, saying, “’Tis a sin to present my face to
thee!” And after they had made an end of eating, they dispersed to their
several homes and Zumurrud returned to her palace and dismissed her
attendants. Now when the fourth month came round, they went to the
race-course and made the banquet, according to custom, and the folk sat
awaiting leave to begin. Presently Queen Zumurrud entered; and, sitting
down on her throne, looked at the tables and saw that room for four
people was left void before the dish of rice, at which she wondered. Now
as she was looking around, behold, she saw a man come trotting in at the
gate of the horse-course; and he stayed not till he stood over the
food-trays; and, finding no room, save before the dish of rice, took his
seat there. She looked at him and knowing him for the accursed Christian
who called himself Rashid al-Din, said in her mind, “How blessed is this
device of the food,[312] into whose toils this infidel hath fallen!” Now
the cause of his coming was extraordinary, and it was on this wise. When
he returned from his travels——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the accursed,
who had called himself Rashid Al-Din, returned from travel, his
household informed him that Zumurrud was missing and with her a pair of
saddle-bags full of money; on hearing which ill tidings he rent his
raiment and buffetted his face and plucked out his beard. Then he
despatched his brother Barsum in quest of her to lands adjoining and,
when he was weary of awaiting news of him, he went forth himself, to
seek for him and for the girl, whenas fate led him to the city of
Zumurrud. He entered it on the first day of the month and finding the
streets deserted and the shops shut and women idling at the windows, he
asked them the reason why, and they told him that the King made a
banquet on the first of each month for the people, all of whom were
bound to attend it, nor might any abide in his house or shop that day;
and they directed him to the racing-plain. So he betook himself thither
and found the people crowding about the food, and there was never a
place for him save in front of the rice-dish now well-known. Here then
he sat and put forth his hand to eat thereof, whereupon Zumurrud cried
out to her guards, saying, “Bring me him who sitteth over against the
dish of rice.” So they knew him by what had before happened and laid
hands on him and brought him before Queen Zumurrud, who said to him,
“Out on thee! What is thy name and trade, and what bringeth thee to our
city?” Answered he, “O King of the age, my name is Rustam[313] and I
have no occupation, for I am a poor dervish.” Then said she to her
attendants, “Bring me table of sand and pen of brass.” So they brought
her what she sought, as of wont; and she took the pen and made the dots
which formed the figure and considered it awhile, then raising her head
to Rashid al-Din, she said, “O dog, how darest thou lie to Kings? Thy
name is Rashid al-Din the Nazarene, thou art outwardly a Moslem, but a
Christian at heart, and thine occupation is to lay snares for the
slave-girls of the Moslems and make them captives. Speak the truth, or I
will smite off thy head.” He hesitated and stammered, then replied,
“Thou sayest sooth, O King of the age!” Whereupon she commanded to throw
him down and give him an hundred blows with a stick on each sole and a
thousand stripes with a whip on his body; after which she bade flay him
and stuff his skin with hards of flax and dig a pit without the city,
wherein they should burn his corpse and cast on his ashes offal and
ordure. They did as she bade them and she gave the people leave to eat.
So they ate and when they had eaten their fill they went their ways,
while Queen Zumurrud returned to her palace, saying, “I thank Allah for
solacing my heart of those who wronged me.” Then she praised the Creator
of the earth and the heavens and repeated these couplets:—

 They ruled awhile and theirs was harsh tyrannic rule, ✿ But soon that
    rule went by as though it never were:
 If just they had won justice; but they sinned, and so ✿ The world
    collected all its bane for them to bear:
 So died they and their case’s tongue declares aloud ✿ This is for that;
    so of the world your blaming spare.

And when her verse was ended she called to mind her lord Ali Shar and
wept flowing tears; but presently recovered herself and said, “Haply
Allah, who hath given mine enemies into my hand, will vouchsafe me the
speedy return of my beloved;” and she begged forgiveness of Allah (be He
extolled and exalted!),——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Queen begged
forgiveness of Allah (be He extolled and exalted!), and said, “Haply He
will vouchsafe me speedy reunion with my beloved Ali Shar for He can do
what He willeth and to His servants showeth grace, ever mindful of their
case!” Then she praised Allah and again besought forgiveness of Him,
submitting herself to the decrees of destiny, assured that each
beginning hath his end, and repeating the saying of the poet:—

 Take all things easy; for all worldly things ✿ In Allah’s hand are ruled
    by Destiny:
 Ne’er shall befal thee aught of things forbidden, ✿ Nor what is bidden
    e’er shall fail to thee!

And what another saith:—

 Roll up thy days[314] and easy shall they roll ✿ Through life, nor haunt
    the house of grief and dole:
 Full many a thing, which is o’er hard to find, ✿ Next hour shall bring
    thee to delight thy soul.

And what a third saith[315]:—

 Be mild what time thou ‘rt ta’en with anger and despite ✿ And patient,
    if there fall misfortune on thy head.
 Indeed, the nights are quick and great with child by Time ✿ And of all
    wondrous things are hourly brought to bed.

And what a fourth saith:—

 Take patience which breeds good if patience thou can learn; ✿ Be
    calm-souled, scaping anguish-draughts that gripe and bren:
 Know, that if patience with good grace thou dare refuse, ✿ With
    ill-graced patience thou shalt bear what wrote the Pen.

After which she abode thus another whole month’s space, judging the folk
and bidding and forbidding by day, and by night weeping and bewailing
her separation from her lord Ali Shar. On the first day of the fifth
month, she bade them spread the banquet on the race-plain, according to
custom, and sat down at the head of the tables, whilst the lieges
awaited the signal to fail to, leaving the place before the dish of rice
vacant. She sat with eyes fixed upon the gate of the horse-course,
noting all who entered and saying in her soul, “O Thou who restoredest
Joseph to Jacob and diddest away the sorrows of Job,[316] vouchsafe of
Thy might and Thy majesty to restore me my lord Ali Shar; for Thou over
all things art Omnipotent, O Lord of the Worlds! O Guide of those who go
astray! O Hearer of those that cry! O Answerer of those who pray, answer
Thou my prayer, O Lord of all creatures.” Now hardly had she made an end
of her prayer and supplication when behold, she saw entering the gate of
the horse-plain a young man, in shape like a willow branch, the
comeliest of youths and the most accomplished, save that his face was
wan and his form wasted by weariness. Now as he entered and came up to
the tables, he found no seat vacant save that over against the dish of
sweet rice so he sat down there; and, when Zumurrud looked upon him, her
heart fluttered and, observing him narrowly, she knew him for her lord
Ali Shar, and was like to have cried out for joy, but restrained
herself, fearing disgrace before the folk; and, albeit her bowels
yearned over him and her heart beat wildly, she hid what she felt. Now
the cause of his coming thither was on this wise. After he fell asleep
upon the bench and Zumurrud let herself down to him and Jawan the Kurd
seized her, he presently awoke and found himself lying with his head
bare, so he knew that some one had come upon him and had robbed him of
his turband whilst he slept. So he spoke the saying which shall never
shame its sayer and, which is, “Verily, we are Allah’s and to Him are we
returning!” and, going back to the old woman’s house, knocked at the
door. She came out and he wept before her, till he fell down in a
fainting fit. Now when he came to himself, he told her all that had
passed, and she blamed him and chid him for his foolish doings saying,
“Verily thine affliction and calamity come from thyself.” And she gave
not over reproaching him, till the blood streamed from his nostrils and
he again fainted away. When he recovered from his swoon——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ali Shar
recovered from his swoon he saw the old woman bewailing his griefs and
weeping over him; so he complained of his hard lot and repeated these
two couplets:—

 How bitter to friends is a parting, ✿ And a meeting how sweet to the
    lover!
 Allah join all the lovers He parteth, ✿ And save me who of love ne’er
    recover.[317]

The old woman mourned over him and said to him, “Sit here, whilst I go
in quest of news for thee and return to thee in haste.” “To hear is to
obey,” answered he. So she left him on her good errand and was absent
till midday, when she returned and said to him, “O Ali, I fear me thou
must die in thy grief; thou wilt never see thy beloved again save on the
bridge Al-Sirát;[318] for the people of the Christian’s house, when they
arose in the morning, found the window giving on the garden torn from
its hinges and Zumurrud missing, and with her a pair of saddle-bags full
of the Christian’s money. And when I came thither, I saw the Chief of
Police standing at the door, he and his many, and there is no Majesty
and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!” Now, as
Ali Shar heard these words, the light in his sight was changed to the
darkness of night and he despaired of life and made sure of death; nor
did he leave weeping, till he lost his senses. When he revived, love and
longing were sore upon him; there befel him a grievous sickness and he
kept his house a whole year; during which the old woman ceased not to
bring him doctors and ply him with ptisanes and diet-drinks and make him
savoury broths till, after the twelve-month ended, his life returned to
him. Then he recalled what had passed and repeated these couplets:—

 Severance-grief nighmost, union done to death, ✿ Down-railing
    tear-drops, heart fire tortureth!
 Redoubleth pine in one that hath no peace ✿ For love and wake and woe he
    suffereth:
 O Lord, if there be thing to joy my soul ✿ Deign Thou bestow it while I
    breathe my breath.

When the second year began, the old woman said to him, “O my son, all
this thy weeping and wailing will not bring thee back thy mistress.
Rise, therefore, gird the loins of resolution and seek for her in the
lands: peradventure thou shalt light on some news of her.” And she
ceased not to exhort and hearten him, till he took courage and she
carried him to the Hammam. Then she made him drink strong wine and eat
white meats, and thus she did with him for a whole month, till he
regained strength; and setting out, journeyed without ceasing till he
arrived at Zumurrud’s city, where he went to the horse-course, and sat
down before the dish of sweet rice and put out his hand to eat of it.
Now when the folk saw this, they were concerned for him and said to him,
“O young man, eat not of that dish, for whoso eateth thereof, misfortune
befalleth him.” Answered he, “Leave me to eat of it, and let them do
with me what they will, so haply shall I be at rest from this wearying
life.” Accordingly he ate a first mouthful, and Zumurrud was minded to
have him brought before her; but then she bethought her that belike he
was anhungered and said to herself, “It were properer to let him eat his
fill.” So he went on eating, whilst the folk looked at him in
astonishment, waiting to see what would betide him; and, when he had
satisfied himself, Zumurrud said to certain of her eunuchry, “Go to
yonder youth who eateth of the rice and bring him to me in courteous
guise, saying:—Answer the summons of the King who would have a word with
thee on some slight matter.” They replied, “We hear and obey,” and going
straightways up to Ali Shar, said to him, “O my lord, be pleased to
answer the summons of the King and let thy heart be at ease.” Quoth he,
“Hearkening and obedience;” and followed the eunuchs,——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ali Shar rejoined,
“Hearkening and obedience;” and followed the eunuchs, whilst the people
said to one another, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great! I wonder what the King will do with
him!” And others said, “He will do him naught but good: for had he
intended to harm him, he had not suffered him to eat his fill.” Now when
the Castratos set him in presence of Zumurrud he saluted and kissed the
earth before her, whilst she returned his salutation and received him
with honour. Then she asked him, “What may be thy name and trade, and
what brought thee to our city?”; and he answered, “O King my name is Ali
Shar; I am of the sons of the merchants of Khorasan; and the cause of my
coming hither is to seek for a slave-girl whom I have lost for she was
dearer to me than my hearing and my seeing, and indeed my soul cleaveth
to her, since I lost her; and such is my tale.” So saying he wept, till
he swooned away; whereupon she bade them sprinkle rose-water on his
face, which they did till he revived, when she said, “Here with the
table of sand and the brass pen.” So they brought them and she took the
pen and struck a geomantic scheme which she considered awhile; and then
cried, “Thou hast spoken sooth, Allah will grant thee speedy reunion
with her; so be not troubled.” Upon this she commanded her
head-chamberlain to carry him to the bath and afterwards to clothe him
in a handsome suit of royal apparel, and mount him on one of the best of
the King’s horses and finally bring him to the palace at the last of the
day. So the Chamberlain, after saying “I hear and I obey,” took him
away; whilst the folk began to say to one another, “What maketh the King
deal thus courteously with yonder youth?” And quoth one, “Did I not tell
you that he would do him no hurt?; for he is fair of aspect; and this I
knew, ever since the King suffered him to eat his fill.” And each said
his say; after which they all dispersed and went their ways. As for
Zumurrud, she thought the night would never come, that she might be
alone with the beloved of her heart. As soon as it was dark, she
withdrew to her sleeping-chamber and made her attendants think her
overcome with sleep; and it was her wont to suffer none to pass the
night with her save those two little eunuchs who waited upon her. After
a while when she had composed herself, she sent for her dear Ali Shar
and sat down upon the bed, with candles burning over her head and feet,
and hanging lamps of gold lighting up the place like the rising sun.
When the people heard of her sending for Ali Shar, they marvelled
thereat and each man thought his thought and said his say; but one of
them declared, “At all events the King is in love with this young man,
and to-morrow he will make him generalissimo of the army.”[319] Now when
they brought him into her, he kissed the ground between her hands and
called down blessings on her, and she said in her mind, “There is no
help for it but that I jest with him awhile, before I make myself known
to him.”[320] Then she asked him, “O Ali, say me, hast thou been to the
Hammam?”[321] and he answered, “Yes, O my lord.” Quoth she, “Come, eat
of this chicken and meat, and drink of this wine and sherbet of sugar;
for thou art weary; and after that come thou hither.” “I hear and I
obey,” replied he, and did as she commanded him do. Now when he had made
an end of eating and drinking, she said to him, “Come up with me on the
couch and shampoo[322] my feet.” So he fell to rubbing feet and kneading
calves, and found them softer than silk. Then said she, “Go higher with
the massage;” and he, “Pardon me, O my lord, to the knee but no
farther!” Whereupon quoth she, “Durst thou disobey me?: it shall be an
ill-omened night for thee!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


      Now when it was the Three Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Zumurrud cried to
her lord, Ali Shar, “Durst thou disobey me?: it shall be an ill-omened
night for thee! Nay, but it behoveth thee to do my bidding and I will
make thee my minion and appoint thee one of my Emirs.” Asked Ali Shar,
“And in what must I do thy bidding, O King of the age?” and she
answered, “Doff thy trousers and lie down on thy face.” Quoth he, “That
is a thing in my life I never did; and if thou force me thereto, verily
I will accuse thee thereof before Allah on Resurrection-day. Take
everything thou hast given me and let me go from thy city.” And he wept
and lamented; but she said, “Doff thy trousers and lie down on thy face,
or I will strike off thy head.” So he did as she bade him and she
mounted upon his back; and he felt what was softer than silk and
smoother than cream and said in himself, “Of a truth, this King is nicer
than all the women!” Now for a time she abode on his back, then she
turned over on the bed, and he said to himself, “Praised be Allah! It
seemeth his yard is not standing.” Then said she, “O Ali, it is of the
wont of my prickle that it standeth not, except they rub it with their
hands; so, come, rub it with thy hand, till it be at stand, else will I
slay thee.” So saying, she lay down on her back and taking his hand, set
it to her parts, and he found these same parts softer than silk; white,
plumply-rounded, protuberant, resembling for heat the hot room of the
bath or the heart of a lover whom love-longing hath wasted. Quoth Ali in
himself, “Verily, our King hath a coynte; this is indeed a wonder of
wonders!” And lust gat hold on him and his yard rose and stood upright
to the utmost of its height; which when Zumurrud saw, she burst out
laughing and said to him, “O my lord, all this happeneth and yet thou
knowest me not!” He asked “And who art thou, O King?”; and she answered,
“I am thy slave-girl Zumurrud.” Now whenas he knew this and was
certified that she was indeed his very slave-girl, Zumurrud, he kissed
her and embraced her and threw himself upon her as the lion upon the
lamb. Then he sheathed his steel rod in her scabbard and ceased not to
play the porter at her door and the preacher in her pulpit and the
priest[323] at her prayer-niche, whilst she with him ceased not from
inclination and prostration and rising up and sitting down, accompanying
her ejaculations of praise and of “Glory to Allah!” with passionate
movements and wrigglings and claspings of his member[324] and other
amorous gestures, till the two little eunuchs heard the noise. So they
came and peeping from behind the curtains saw the King lying on his back
and upon him Ali Shar, thrusting and slashing whilst she puffed and blew
and wriggled. Quoth they, “Verily, this be no man’s wriggle: belike this
King is a woman.”[325] But they concealed their affair and discovered it
to none. And when the morrow came, Zumurrud summoned all the troops and
the lords of the realm and said to them, “I am minded to journey to this
man’s country; so choose you a viceroy, who shall rule over you till I
return to you.” And they answered, “We hear and we obey.” Then she
applied herself to making ready the wants of the way, to wit provaunt
and provender, monies and rarities for presents, camels and mules and so
forth; after which she set out from her city with Ali Shar, and they
ceased not faring on, till they arrived at his native place, where he
entered his house and gave many gifts to his friends and alms and
largesse to the poor. And Allah vouchsafed him children by her, and they
both lived the gladdest and happiest of lives, till there came to them
the Destroyer of delights and the Severer of societies and the Garnerer
of graves. And glorified be He the Eternal without cease, and praised be
He in every case! And amongst other tales they tell one of

-----

Footnote 254:

  Lane (ii. 435) ill-advisedly writes “Sher,” as “the word is evidently
  Persian signifying a Lion.” But this is only in the debased Indian
  dialect; a Persian, especially a Shirazi, pronounces “Shír.” And this
  is how it is written in the Bresl. Edit., vii. 262. “Shár” is
  evidently a fancy name, possibly suggested by the dynastic name of the
  Ghurjistan or Georgian Princes.

Footnote 255:

  Again old experience, which has learned at a heavy cost how many a
  goodly apple is rotten at the core.

Footnote 256:

  This couplet has occurred in Night xxi. I give Torrens (p. 206) by way
  of specimen.

Footnote 257:

  Arab. “Záka” = merely tasting a thing which may be sweet with a bitter
  after-flavour.

Footnote 258:

  This tetrastich was in Night xxx. with a difference.

Footnote 259:

  The lines have occurred in Night xxx. I quote Torrens, p. 311.

Footnote 260:

  This tetrastich is in Night clxix. I borrow from Lane (ii. 62).

Footnote 261:

  The rude but effective refrigerator of the desert Arab who hangs his
  water-skin to the branch of a tree and allows it to swing in the wind.

Footnote 262:

  Arab. “Khumásiyah” which Lane (ii. 438) renders “of quinary stature.”
  Usually it means five spans, but here five feet, showing that the girl
  was young and still growing. The invoice with a slave always notes her
  height in spans measured from ankle-bone to ear and above seven she
  loses value as being full grown. Hence Sudási (fem. Sudásiyah) is a
  slave six spans high, the Shibr or full span (9 inches) not the Fitr
  or short span from thumb to index. Faut is the interval between every
  finger; Ratab between index and medius, and Atab between medius and
  annularis.

Footnote 263:

  “Moon-faced” now sounds sufficiently absurd to us, but it was not
  always so. Solomon (Cant. vi. 10) does not disdain the image “fair as
  the moon, clear as the sun;” and those who have seen a moon in the sky
  of Arabia will thoroughly appreciate it. We find it amongst the
  Hindus, the Persians, the Afghans, the Turks and all the nations of
  Europe. We have, finally, the grand example of Spenser:—

           Her spacious forehead, like the clearest moon, etc.

Footnote 264:

  Blue eyes have a bad name in Arabia as in India: the witch Zarká of
  Al-Yamamah was noted for them; and “blue-eyed” often means
  “fierce-eyed,” alluding to the Greeks and Daylamites, mortal enemies
  to Ishmael. The Arabs say “ruddy of mustachio, blue of eye and black
  of heart.”

Footnote 265:

  Before explained as used with camphor to fill the dead man’s mouth.

Footnote 266:

  As has been seen, slapping on the neck is equivalent to our “boxing
  ears,” but much less barbarous and likely to injure the child. The
  most insulting blow is that with shoe, sandal or slipper because it
  brings foot in contact with head. Of this I have spoken before.

Footnote 267:

  Arab. “Hibál” (= ropes) alluding to the A’akál-fillet which binds the
  Kúfiyah-kerchief on the Badawi’s head (Pilgrimage, i. 346).

Footnote 268:

  Arab. “Khiyál”; afterwards called Kara Gyuz (= “black eyes,” from the
  celebrated Turkish Wazir). The _mise-en-scène_ was like that of Punch,
  but of transparent cloth, lamp-lit inside and showing silhouettes
  worked by hand. Nothing could be more Fescennine than Kara Gyuz, who
  appeared with a phallus longer than himself and made all the
  Consuls-General periodically complain of its abuse; while the
  dialogue, mostly in Turkish, was even more obscene. Most ingenious
  were Kara Gyuz’s little ways of driving on an obstinate donkey and of
  tackling a huge Anatolian pilgrim. He mounted the Neddy’s back, face
  to tail, and inserting his left thumb like a clyster, hammered it with
  his right, when the donkey started at speed. For the huge pilgrim he
  used a ladder. These shows, now obsolete, used to enliven the
  Ezbekiyah Gardens every evening and explain Ovid’s words.

                  Delicias videam, _Nile jocose_, tuas!

Footnote 269:

  Mohammed (Mishkát al-Masábih ii. 360-62) says, “Change the whiteness
  of your hair but not with anything black.” Abu Bakr, who was two years
  and some months older than the Prophet, used tincture of Henna and
  Katam. Old Turkish officers justify black dyes because these make them
  look younger and fiercer. Henna stains white hair orange red; and the
  Persians apply after it a paste of indigo leaves; the result is
  successively leek-green, emerald-green, bottle-green and lastly
  lamp-black. There is a stage in life (the youth of old age) when man
  uses dyes: presently he finds that the whole face wants dye; that the
  contrast between juvenile coloured hair and ancient skin is ridiculous
  and that it is time to wear white.

Footnote 270:

  This prejudice extends all over the East: the Sanskrit saying is
  “Kvachit káná bhaveta sádhus”—now and then a monocular is honest. The
  left eye is the worst and the popular idea is, I have said, that the
  damage will come by the injured member.

Footnote 271:

  The Arabs say like us, “Short and thick is never quick” and “Long and
  thin has little in.”

Footnote 272:

  Arab. “Ba’azu layáli,” some night when his mistress failed him.

Footnote 273:

  The fountain in Paradise before noticed.

Footnote 274:

  Before noticed as the Moslem St. Peter (as far as the keys go).

Footnote 275:

  Arab “Munkasir” = broken, frail, languishing—the only form of the
  _maladive_ allowed. Here again we have masculine for feminine: the
  eyelids show love-desire, but, etc.

Footnote 276:

  The river of Paradise.

Footnote 277:

  See Night xii, “The Second Kalandar’s Tale;” vol. i. 113.

Footnote 278:

  Lane (ii. 472) refers for specimens of calligraphy to Herbin’s
  “Développements, etc.” There are many more than seven styles of
  writing as I have shown in Night xiii.; vol. i. 129.

Footnote 279:

  Amongst good Moslems this would be a claim upon a man.

Footnote 280:

  These lines have occurred twice already: and first appear in Night
  xxii. I have borrowed from Mr. Payne (iv. 46).

Footnote 281:

  Arab. “Ya Nasráni”; the address is not intrinsically slighting but it
  may easily be made so. I have elsewhere noted that when Julian (is
  said to have) exclaimed “Vicisti Nazarene!” he was probably thinking
  in Eastern phrase “Nasarta, yá Nasráni!”

Footnote 282:

  Thirst is the strongest of all pleas to an Eastern, especially to a
  Persian who never forgets the sufferings of his Imam, Husayn, at
  Kerbela: he would hardly withhold it from the murderer of his father.
  There is also a Hadis, “Thou shalt not refuse water to him who
  thirsteth in the desert.”

Footnote 283:

  Arab. “Zimmi” which Lane (ii. 474) aptly translates a “tributary.” The
  Koran (chapt. ix.) orders Unbelievers to Islamize or to “pay tribute
  by right of subjection” (lit. an yadin = out of hand, an expression
  much debated). The least tribute is one dinar per annum which goes to
  the poor-rate; and for this the Kafir enjoys protection and _almost_
  all the civil rights of Moslems. As it is a question of “loaves and
  fishes” there is much to say on the subject; “loaves and fishes” being
  the main base and foundation of all religious establishments.

Footnote 284:

  This tetrastich has before occurred; so I quote Lane (ii. 444).

Footnote 285:

  In Night xxxv. the same occurs with a difference.

Footnote 286:

  The old rite, I repeat, has lost amongst all but the noblest of Arab
  tribes the whole of its significance; and the traveller must be
  careful how he trusts to the phrase “Nahnu málihin”—we are bound
  together by the salt.

Footnote 287:

  Arab. “Aláma” = Alá-má = upon what? wherefore?

Footnote 288:

  Arab. “Mauz”; hence the Linnean name Musa (paradisiaca, etc). The word
  is explained by Sale (Koran, chapt. xxxvii. 146) as “a small tree or
  shrub;” and he would identify it with Jonah’s gourd.

Footnote 289:

  Lane (ii. 446) “bald wolf or empowered fate,” reading (with Mac.) Kazá
  for Kattan (cat).

Footnote 290:

  _i.e._ “The Orthodox in the Faith.” Ráshid is a proper name; witness
  that scourge of Syria, Ráshid Pasha. Born in 1830, of the Haji Nazir
  Agha family, Darrah-Beys of Macedonian Draina, he was educated in
  Paris where he learned the usual hatred of Europeans: he entered the
  Egyptian service in 1851; and, presently exchanging it for the
  Turkish, became in due time Wali (Governor-General) of Syria which he
  plundered most shamelessly. Recalled in 1872, he eventually entered
  the Ministry and on June 15, 1876, he was shot down, with other
  villians like himself, by gallant Captain Hasan, the Circassian
  (Yarham-hu ‘lláh!).

Footnote 291:

  Quoted from a piece of verse, of which more presently.

Footnote 292:

  This tetrastich has occurred before (Night cxciii.). I quote Lane (ii.
  449), who quotes Dryden’s Spanish Friar:-

                  There is a pleasure sure in being mad
                  Which none but madmen know.

Footnote 293:

  Lane (ii. 449) gives a tradition of the Prophet, “Whoso is in love,
  and acteth chastely, and concealeth (his passion) and dieth, dieth a
  martyr.” Sakar is No. 5 Hell for Magi, Guebres, Parsis, etc.; it is
  used in the comic Persian curse, “Fi’n-nári wa Sakar al-jadd
  w’al-pidar”—In Hell and Sakar his grandfather and his father.

Footnote 294:

  Arab. “Sifr”: I have warned readers that whistling is considered a
  kind of devilish speech by the Arabs, especially the Badawin; and that
  the traveller must avoid it. It savours of idolatry: in the Koran we
  find (chapt. viii. 35), “Their prayer at the House of God (Ka’abah) is
  none other than whistling and hand-clapping;” and tradition says that
  they whistled through their fingers. Besides many of the Jinn have
  only round holes by way of mouths and their speech is whistling—a kind
  of bird-language like sibilant English.

Footnote 295:

  Arab. “Kíl wa kál” = lit. “it was said and he said;” a popular phrase
  for chit-chat, tittle-tattle, prattle and prate, etc.

Footnote 296:

  Arab. “Hadis,” comparing it with a tradition of the Prophet.

Footnote 297:

  Arab. “Mikashshah,” the thick part of a midrib of a palm-frond soaked
  for some days in water and beaten out till the fibres separate. It
  makes an exceedingly hard, although not a lasting broom.

Footnote 298:

  Persian, “the youth, the brave;” Sansk. Yuván; and Lat. Juvenis. The
  Kurd, in tales, is generally a sturdy thief; and in real life is
  little better.

Footnote 299:

  Arab. “Yá Shátir;” lit. O clever one (in a bad sense).

Footnote 300:

  Lane (ii. 453) has it, “that I may dress thy hair,” etc. This is
  Bowdlerising with a witness.

Footnote 301:

  The sign of respect when a personage dismounts (Pilgrimage i. 77).

Footnote 302:

  So the Hindus speak of “the defilement of separation” as if it were an
  impurity.

Footnote 303:

  Lane (i. 605) gives a long and instructive note on these public royal
  banquets which were expected from the lieges by Moslem subjects. The
  hanging-penalty is, perhaps, a little exaggerated; but we find the
  same excess in the priestly Gesta Romanorum.

Footnote 304:

  Had he eaten it he would have become her guest. Amongst the older
  Badawin it was sufficient to spit upon a man (in entreaty) to claim
  his protection: so the horse-thieves when caught were placed in a hole
  in the ground covered over with matting to prevent this happening.
  Similarly Saladin (Saláh al-Din) the chivalrous would not order a cup
  of water for the robber, Reynald de Châtillon, before putting him to
  death.

Footnote 305:

  Arab. “Kishk” properly “Kashk” = wheat-meal coarsely ground and eaten
  with milk or broth. It is _de rigueur_ with the Egyptian Copts on the
  “Friday of Sorrow” (Good Friday): and Lane gives the recipe for making
  it (M. E. chapt. xxvi).

Footnote 306:

  In those days distinctive of Moslems.

Footnote 307:

  The euphemism has before been noticed: the Moslem reader would not
  like to pronounce the words “I am a Nazarene.” The same formula occurs
  a little lower down to save the reciter or reader from saying “Be _my_
  wife divorced,” etc.

Footnote 308:

  Arab. “Hájj,” a favourite Egyptianism. We are wrong to write Hajji
  which an Eastern would pronounce Háj-jí.

Footnote 309:

  This is Cairene “chaff.”

Footnote 310:

  Whose shell fits very tight.

Footnote 311:

  His hand was like a raven’s because he ate with thumb and two fingers
  and it came up with the rice about it like a camel’s hoof in dirty
  ground. This refers to the proverb (Burckhardt, 756), “He comes down a
  crow-claw (small) and comes up a camel-hoof (huge and round).”

Footnote 312:

  Easterns have a superstitious belief in the powers of food: I knew a
  learned man who never sat down to eat without a ceremonious salam to
  his meat.

Footnote 313:

  Lane (ii. 464), uses the vile Turkish corruption “Rustum,” which, like
  its fellow “Rustem,” would make a Persian shudder.

Footnote 314:

  Arab. “Darrij” _i.e._ let them slide (_Americanicè_).

Footnote 315:

  This tetrastich has occurred before: so I quote Mr. Payne (_in loco_).

Footnote 316:

  Shaykh of Al-Butnah and Jábiyah, therefore a Syrian of the Hauran near
  Damascus and grandson to Isú (Esau). Arab mystics (unlike the vulgar
  who see only his patience) recognise that inflexible integrity which
  refuses to utter “words of wind” and which would not, against his
  conscience, confess to wrong-doing merely to pacify the Lord who was
  stronger than himself. The Classics taught this noble lesson in the
  case of Prometheus _versus_ Zeus. Many articles are called after Job
  _e.g._ Ra’ará’ Ayyub or Ghubayrá (_inula Arabica_ and _undulata_), a
  creeper with which he rubbed himself and got well:—the Copts do the
  same on “Job’s Wednesday,” _i.e._ that before Whit Sunday O.S. Job’s
  father is a nickname of the camel, etc. etc.

Footnote 317:

  Lane (_in loco_) renders “I am of their number.” But “fí al-siyák”
  means popularly “(driven) to the point of death.”

Footnote 318:

  Lit. = “pathway, road”; hence the bridge well known as “finer than a
  hair and sharper than a sword,” over which all (except Khadijah and a
  chosen few) must pass on the Day of Doom; a Persian apparatus bodily
  annexed by Al-Islam. The old Guebres called it Pul-i-Chinávar or
  Chinávad and the Jews borrowed it from them as they did all their
  fancies of a future life against which Moses had so gallantly fought.
  It is said that a bridge over the grisly “brook Kedron” was called
  Sirát (the road) and hence the idea, as that of hell-fire from
  Ge-Hinnom (Gehenna) where children were passed through the fire to
  Moloch. A doubtful Hadis says, “The Prophet declared Al-Sirát to be
  the name of a bridge over hell-fire, dividing Hell from Paradise” (pp.
  17, 122, Reynold’s trans. of Al-Siyuti’s Traditions, etc.). In Koran
  i. 5, “Sirát” is simply a path, from sarata, he swallowed, even as the
  way devours (makes a lakam or mouthful of) those who travel it. The
  word was orig. written with Sín but changed for easier articulation to
  Sád, one of the four Hurúf al-Mutabbakát (ط, ض, ص and ظ), “the
  flattened,” formed by the broadened tongue in contact with the palate.
  This Sad also by the figure Ishmám (= conversion) turns slightly to a
  Zá, the intermediate between Sin and Sad.

Footnote 319:

  The rule in Turkey where catamites rise to the highest rank: _C’est un
  homme de bonne famille_ (said a Turkish officer in Egypt) _il a été
  acheté_. Hence “Alfi” (one who costs a thousand) is a well-known
  cognomen. The Pasha of the Syrian caravan, with which I travelled, had
  been the slave of a slave and he was not a solitary instance
  (Pilgrimage i. 90).

Footnote 320:

  The device of the banquet is dainty enough for any old Italian
  _novella_; all that now comes is pure Egyptian polissonnerie speaking
  to the gallery and being answered by roars of laughter.

Footnote 321:

  _i.e._ art thou ceremonially pure and therefore fit for handling by a
  great man like myself?

Footnote 322:

  In past days before Egypt was “frankified” many overlanders used to
  wash away the traces of travel by a Turkish bath which mostly ended in
  the appearance of a rump-wriggling little lad who offered to shampoo
  them. Many accepted his offices without dreaming of his usual use or
  misuse.

Footnote 323:

  Arab. “Imám.” This is (to a Moslem) a most offensive comparison
  between prayer and car. cop.

Footnote 324:

  Arab “Fi zaman-hi,” alluding to a peculiarity highly prized by
  Egyptians; the use of the constrictor vaginæ muscles, the sphincter
  for which Abyssinian women are famous. The “Kabbázah” (= holder), as
  she is called, can sit astraddle upon a man and can provoke the
  venereal orgasm, not by wriggling and moving but by tightening and
  loosing the male member with the muscles of her privities, milking it
  as it were. Consequently the _casse-noisette_ costs treble the money
  of other concubines (Ananga-Ranga, p. 127).

Footnote 325:

  The little eunuchs had evidently studied the Harem.




           THE LOVES OF JUBAYR BIN UMAYR AND THE LADY BUDUR.


It is related that the Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid was
uneasy[326] one night and could not sleep; so that he ceased not to toss
from side to side for very restlessness, till, growing weary of this, he
called Masrur and said to him, “Ho, Masrur, find me some one who may
solace me in this my wakefulness.” He answered, “O Prince of True
Believers, wilt thou walk in the palace-garden and divert thyself with
the sight of its blooms and gaze upon the stars and constellations and
note the beauty of their ordinance and the moon among them rising in
sheen over the water?” Quoth the Caliph, “O Masrur, my heart inclineth
not to aught of this.” Quoth he, “O my lord, there are in thy palace
three hundred concubines, each of whom hath her separate chamber. Do
thou bid all and every retire into her own apartment and then do thou go
thy rounds and amuse thyself with gazing on them without their
knowledge.” The Caliph replied, “O Masrur, the palace is my palace and
the girls are my property: furthermore my soul inclineth not to aught of
this.” Then Masrur rejoined, “O my lord, summon the doctors of law and
religion and the sages of science and poets, and bid them contend before
thee in argument and disputation and recite to thee songs and verses and
tell thee tales and anecdotes.” Replied the Caliph, “My soul inclineth
not to aught of this;” and Masrur rejoined, “O my lord, bid pretty boys
and the wits and the cup-companions attend thee and solace thee with
witty sallies.” “O Masrur,” ejaculated the Caliph, “indeed my soul
inclineth not to aught of this.” “Then, O my lord,” cried Masrur,
“strike off my head;”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Masrur cried out
to the Caliph, “O my lord, strike off my head; haply that will dispel
thine unease and do away the restlessness that is upon thee.” So
Al-Rashid laughed at his saying and said, “See which of the
boon-companions is at the door.” Thereupon he went out and returning,
said, “O my lord, he who sits without is Ali bin Mansur of Damascus, the
Wag.”[327] “Bring him to me,” quoth Harun: and Masrur went out and
returned with Ibn Mansur, who said, on entering, “Peace be with thee, O
Commander of the Faithful!” The Caliph returned his salutation and said
to him, “O Ibn Mansur, tell us some of thy stories.” Said the other, “O
Commander of the Faithful, shall I tell thee what I have seen with my
eyes or what I have only heard tell?” Replied the Caliph, “If thou have
seen aught worth telling, let us hear it; for hearing is not like
seeing.” Said Ibn Mansur, “O Commander of the Faithful, lend me thine
ear and thy heart;” and he answered, “O Ibn Mansur, behold, I am
listening to thee with mine ears and looking at thee with mine eyes and
attending to thee with my heart.” So Ibn Mansur began:—Know then, O
Commander of the Faithful, that I receive a yearly allowance from
Mohammed bin Sulaymán al-Háshimi, Sultan of Bassorah; so I went to him,
once upon a time, as usual, and found him ready to ride out hunting and
birding. I saluted him and he returned my salute, and said, “O son of
Mansur, mount and come with us to the chase:” but I said, “O my lord, I
can no longer ride; so do thou station me in the guest-house and give
thy chamberlains and lieutenants charge over me.” And he did so and
departed for his sport. His people entreated me with the utmost honour
and entertained me with the greatest hospitality; but said I to myself,
“By Allah, it is a strange thing that for so long I have been in the
habit of coming from Baghdad to Bassorah, yet know no more of this town
than from palace to garden and from garden to palace; When shall I find
an occasion like this to view the different parts and quarters of
Bassorah? I will rise forthwith and walk forth alone and divert myself
and digest what I have eaten.” Accordingly I donned my richest dress and
went out a-walking about Bassorah. Now it is known to thee, O Commander
of the Faithful, that it hath seventy streets, each seventy leagues[328]
long, the measure of Irak; and I lost myself in its by-streets and
thirst overcame me. Presently, as I went along, O Prince of True
Believers, behold, I came to a great door, whereon were two rings of
brass,[329] with curtains of red brocade drawn before it. And on either
side of the door was a stone bench and over it was a trellis, covered
with a creeping vine that hung down and shaded the doorway. I stood
still to gaze upon the place, and presently heard a sorrowful voice,
proceeding from a heart which did not rejoice, singing melodiously and
chanting these cinquains:—

 My body bides the sad abode of grief and malady, ✿ Caused by a fawn
    whose land and home are in a far countrie:
 O ye two Zephyrs of the wold which caused such pain in me ✿ By Allah,
    Lord of you! to him my heart’s desire, go ye
         And chide him so perchance ye soften him I pray.


 And tell us all his words if he to hear your speech shall deign, ✿ And
    unto him the tidings bear of lovers ‘twixt you twain:
 And both vouchsafe to render me a service free and fain, ✿ And lay my
    case before him showing how I e’er complain:
         And say, “What ails thy bounden thrall this wise to drive away,

 Without a fault committed and without a sin to show; ✿ Or heart that
    leans to other wight or would thy love forego:
 Or treason to our plighted troth or causing thee a throe?” ✿ And if he
    smile then say ye twain in accents soft and slow,
         “An thou to him a meeting grant ‘twould be the kindest way!

 For he is gone distraught for thee, as well indeed, he might. ✿ His eyes
    are wakeful and he weeps and wails the livelong night:”
 If seem he satisfied by this why then ‘tis well and right, ✿ But if he
    show an angry face and treat ye with despite,
         Trick him and “Naught we know of him!” I beg you both to
            say.[330]

Quoth I to myself, “Verily, if the owner of this voice be fair, she
conjoineth beauty of person and eloquence and sweetness of voice.” Then
I drew near the door, and began raising the curtain little by little,
when lo! I beheld a damsel, white as a full moon when it mooneth on its
fourteenth night, with joined eyebrows twain and languorous lids of
eyne, breasts like pomegranates twin and dainty lips like double
carnelian, a mouth as it were the seal of Solomon, and teeth ranged in a
line that played with the reason of proser and rhymer, even as saith the
poet:—

 O pearly mouth of friend, who set those pretty pearls in line, ✿ And
    filled thee full of whitest chamomile and reddest wine?
 Who lent the morning-glory in thy smile to shimmer and shine ✿ Who with
    that ruby-padlock dared thy lips to seal and sign!
 Who looks on thee at early morn with stress of joy and bliss ✿ Goes mad
    for aye, what then of him who wins a kiss of thine?

And as saith another:—

         O pearl-set mouth of friend ✿ Pity poor Ruby’s cheek;
         Boast not o’er one who owns ✿ Thee, union and unique.

In brief she comprised all varieties of loveliness and was a seduction
to men and women, nor could the gazer satisfy himself with the sight of
her charms; for she was as the poet hath said of her:—

 When comes she, slays she; and when back she turns, ✿ She makes all men
    regard with loving eyes:
 A very sun! a very moon! but still ✿ From hurt and harmful ills her
    nature flies.
 Opes Eden’s garden when she shows herself; ✿ And full moon see we o’er
    her necklace rise.

Now as I was looking at her through an opening of the curtain, behold,
she turned; and, seeing me standing at the door, said to her handmaid,
“See who is at the door.” So the slave-girl came up to me and said, “O
Shaykh, hast thou no shame, or do impudent airs suit hoary hairs?” Quoth
I, “O my mistress, I confess to the hoary hairs, but as for impudent
airs, I think not to be guilty of unmannerliness.” Then the mistress
broke in, “And what can be more unmannerly than to intrude thyself upon
a house other than thy house and gaze on a Harim other than thy Harim?”
I pleaded, “O my lady, I have an excuse;” and when she asked, “And what
is thine excuse?” I answered, “I am a stranger and so thirsty that I am
well-nigh dead of thirst.” She rejoined, “We accept thine excuse,”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young lady
rejoined, “We accept thine excuse,” and calling one of her slave-maids,
said to her, “O Lutf,[331] give him to drink in the golden tankard.” So
she brought me a tankard of red gold, set with pearls and gems of price,
full of water mingled with virgin musk and covered with a napkin of
green silk; and I addressed myself to drink and was long about my
drinking, for I stole glances at her the while, till I could prolong my
stay no longer. Then I returned the tankard to the girl, but did not
offer to go; and she said to me, “O Shaykh, wend thy way.” But I said,
“O my lady, I am troubled in mind.” She asked me “For what?” and I
answered, “For the turns of Time and the change of things.” Replied she,
“Well mayst thou be troubled thereat for Time breedeth wonders. But what
hast thou seen of such surprises that thou shouldst muse upon them?”
Quoth I, “I was thinking of the whilom owner of this house, for he was
my intimate in his lifetime.” Asked she, “What was his name?”; and I
answered, “Mohammed bin Ali the Jeweller and he was a man of great
wealth. Tell me did he leave any children?” Said she, “Yes, he left a
daughter, Budur by name, who inherited all his wealth?.” Quoth I,
“Meseemeth thou art his daughter?” “Yes,” answered she, laughing; then
added, “O Shaykh, thou hast talked long enough; now wend thy ways.”
Replied I, “Needs must I go, but I see thy charms are changed by being
out of health; so tell me thy case; it may be Allah will give thee
comfort at my hands.” Rejoined she, “O Shaykh, if thou be a man of
discretion, I will discover to thee my secret; but first tell me who
thou art, that I may know whether thou art worthy of confidence or not;
for the poet saith:[332]—

 None keepeth a secret but a faithful person: with the best of mankind it
    remaineth concealed.
 I have kept my secret in a house with a lock, whose key is lost and
    whose door is sealed.”

Thereto I replied, “O my lady, an thou wouldest know who I am, I am Ali
bin Mansúr of Damascus, the Wag, cup-companion to the Commander of the
Faithful, Harun al-Rashid.” Now when she heard my name, she came down
from her seat and saluting me, said, “Welcome, O Ibn Mansur! Now will I
tell thee my case and entrust thee with my secret. I am a lover
separated from her beloved.” I answered, “O my lady, thou art fair and
shouldest be on love-terms with none but the fair. Whom then dost thou
love?” Quoth she, “I love Jubayr bin Umayr al-Shaybáni, Emir of the Banú
Shaybán;[333]” and she described to me a young man than whom there was
no prettier fellow in Bassorah. I asked, “O my lady, have interviews or
letters passed between you?” and she answered, “Yes, but our love was
tongue-love, not heart and soul-love; for he kept not his trust nor was
he faithful to his troth.” Said I, “O my lady, and what was the cause of
your separation?”; and she replied, “I was sitting one day whilst my
handmaid here combed my hair. When she had made an end of combing it,
she plaited my tresses, and my beauty and loveliness charmed her; so she
bent over me and kissed my cheek.[334] At that moment he came in
unawares, and, seeing the girl kiss my cheek, straightways turned away
in anger, vowing eternal separation and repeating these two couplets:—

 If another share in the thing I love, ✿ I abandon my love and live lorn
    of love.
 My beloved is worthless if aught she will, ✿ Save that which her lover
    doth most approve.

And from the time he left me to this present hour, O Ibn Mansur, he hath
neither written to me nor answered my letters.” Quoth I, “And what
purposest thou to do?” Quoth she, “I have a mind to send him a letter by
thee. If thou bring me back an answer, thou shalt have of me five
hundred gold pieces; and if not, then an hundred for thy trouble in
going and coming.” I answered, “Do what seemeth good to thee; I hear and
I obey thee.” Whereupon she called to one of her slave-girls, “Bring me
inkcase and paper,” and she wrote thereon these couplets:—

 Beloved, why this strangeness, why this hate? ✿ When shall thy pardon
    reunite us two?
 Why dost thou turn from me in severance? ✿ Thy face is not the face I am
    wont to know.
 Yes, slanderers falsed my words, and thou to them ✿ Inclining, madest
    spite and envy grow.
 An hast believed their tale, the Heavens forbid ✿ Now thou believe it
    when dost better trow!
 By thy life tell what hath reached thine ear; ✿ Thou know’st what said
    they and so justice show.
 An it be true I spoke the words, my words ✿ Admit interpreting and
    change allow:
 Given that the words of Allah were revealed, ✿ Folk changed the
    Torah[335] and still changing go:
 What slanders told they of mankind before! ✿ Jacob heard Joseph blamed
    by tongue of foe.
 Yea, for myself and slanderer and thee ✿ An awful day of reckoning there
    shall be.

Then she sealed the letter and gave it to me; and I took it and carried
it to the house of Jubayr bin Umayr, whom I found absent a-hunting. So I
sat down to wait for him; and behold, he returned from the chase; and
when I saw him, O Prince of True Believers, come riding up, my wit was
confounded by his beauty and grace. As soon as he sighted me sitting at
the house-door, he dismounted and coming up to me embraced me and
saluted me; and meseemed I embraced the world and all therein. Then he
carried me into his house and, seating me on his own couch, called for
food. They brought a table of Khalanj-wood of Khorasan with feet of
gold, whereon were all manners of meats, fried and roasted and the like.
So I seated myself at the table and examining it with care found these
couplets engraved upon it:[336]——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Three Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ali son of Mansur
continued:—So I seated myself at the table of Jubayr bin Umayr
al-Shaybani and, examining it with care, found these couplets engraven
upon it:—

                  On these which once were chicks,
                  Your mourning glances fix,
          Late dwellers in the mansion of the cup,
                  Now nearly eaten up!
                      Let tears bedew
                  The memory of that stew,
                  Those partridges, once roast,
                      Now lost!

          The daughters of the grouse in plaintive strain;
          Bemourn, and still bemourn, and mourn again!
                  The children of the fry,
                      We lately saw
                  Half smothered in pilau,
          With buttery mutton fritters smoking by!
                  Alas! my heart, the fish!
                      Who filled his dish,

          With flaky form in varying colours spread
          On the round pastry cake of household bread!
                  Heaven sent us that kabob!
                      For no one could
                  (Save heaven he should rob)
          Produce a thing so excellently good,
                  Or give us roasted meat
          With basting oil so savourily replete!

          But, oh! mine appetite, alas! for thee!
                  Who on that furmeaty
          So sharpset wast a little while ago—
          That furmeaty, which mashed by hands of snow,
                  A light reflection bore,
          Of the bright bracelets that those fair hands wore;
                  Again remembrance glads my sense
                  With visions of its excellence!

                  Again I see the cloth unrolled
                  Rich worked in many a varied fold!
                  Be patient, oh! my soul, they say
                  Fortune rules all that’s new and strange,
                  And though she pinches us to-day,
          To-morrow brings full rations, and a change![337]

Then said Jubayr, “Put forth thy hand to our food and ease our heart by
eating of our victual.” Answered I, “By Allah, I will not eat a
mouthful, till thou grant me my desire.” He asked, “What is thy
desire?”; so I brought out the letter and gave it to him; but, when he
had read it and mastered its contents, he tore it in pieces and throwing
it on the floor, said to me, “O Ibn Mansur, I will grant thee whatever
thou askest save thy desire which concerneth the writer of this letter,
for I have no answer to her.” At this I rose in anger; but he caught
hold of my skirts, saying, “O Ibn Mansur, I will tell thee what she said
to thee, albeit I was not present with you.” I asked, “And what did she
say to me?”; and he answered, “Did not the writer of this letter say to
thee, If thou bring me back an answer, thou shalt have of me five
hundred ducats; and if not, an hundred for thy pains?” “Yes,” replied I;
and he rejoined, “Abide with me this day and eat and drink and enjoy
thyself and make merry, and thou shalt have thy five hundred ducats.” So
I sat with him and ate and drank and made merry and enjoyed myself and
entertained him with talk deep into the night;[338] after which I said
to him, “O my master, is there no music in thy house.” He answered,
“Verily for many a day we have drunk without music.” Then he called out,
saying, “Ho, Shajarat al-Durr!” Whereupon a slave-girl answered him from
her chamber and came in to us, with a lute of Hindu make, wrapped in a
silken bag. And she sat down and, laying the lute in her lap, preluded
in one-and-twenty modes; then, returning to the first, she sang to a
lively measure these couplets:—

 Whoso ne’er tasted of Love’s sweets and bitter draught, ✿ No difference
    kens ‘twixt presence-bliss and absence-stress;
 And so, who hath declined from Love’s true road, ✿ No difference kens
    ‘twixt smooth and ruggedness:
 I ceased not to oppose the votaries of love, ✿ Till I had tried its
    sweets and bitters not the less:
 How many a night my pretty friend conversed with me ✿ And sipped I from
    his lips honey of love-liesse:
 Now have I drunk its cup of bitterness, until ✿ To bondman and to
    freedman I have proved me base.
 How short-aged was the night together we enjoyed, ✿ When seemed it day
    break came on nightfall’s heel to press!
 But Fate had vowed to disunite us lovers twain, ✿ And she too well hath
    kept her vow, that votaress.
 Fate so decreed it! None her sentence can withstand: ✿ Where is the
    wight who dares oppose his Lord’s command?

Hardly had she finished her verses, when her lord cried out with a great
cry and fell down in a fit; whereupon exclaimed the damsel, “May Allah
not punish thee, O old man! This long time have we drunk without music,
for fear the like of this falling sickness befal our lord. But now go
thou to yonder chamber and there sleep.” So I went to the chamber which
she showed me and slept till the morning, when behold, a page brought me
a purse of five hundred dinars and said to me, “This is what my master
promised thee; but return thou not to the damsel who sent thee, and let
it be as though neither thou nor we had ever heard of this matter.”
“Hearkening and obedience,” answered I and taking the purse, went my
way. Still I said to myself, “The lady must have expected me since
yesterday; and by Allah there is no help but I return to her and tell
her what passed between me and him: otherwise she will revile me and
revile all who come from my country.” So I went to her and found her
standing behind the door; and when she saw me she said, “O Ibn Mansur,
thou hast done nothing for me!” I asked, “Who told thee of this?”; and
she answered, “O Ibn Mansur, yet another thing hath been revealed to
me;[339] and it is that, when thou handedst him the letter, he tore it
in pieces and throwing it on the floor, said to thee:—O Ibn Mansur, I
will grant thee whatever thou askest save thy desire which concerneth
the writer of this letter; for I have no answer to her missive. Then
didst thou rise from beside him in anger; but he laid hold of thy
skirts, saying:—O son of Mansur, abide with me to-day, for thou art my
guest, and eat and drink and make merry; and thou shalt have thy five
hundred ducats. So thou didst sit with him, eating and drinking and
making merry, and entertainedst him with talk deep into the night and a
slave-girl sang such an air and such verses, whereupon he fell down in a
fit.” So, O Commander of the Faithful, I asked her “Wast thou then with
us?”; and she answered, “O Ibn Mansur, hast thou not heard the saying of
the poet:—

 The hearts of lovers have eyes I ken, ✿ Which see the unseen by vulgar
    men.

However, O Ibn Mansur, the night and day shift not upon anything but
they bring to it change.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the lady
exclaimed, “O Ibn Mansur, the night and the day shift not upon anything
but they bring to it change!” Then she raised her glance to heaven and
said, “O my God and my Leader and my Lord, like as Thou hast afflicted
me with love of Jubayr bin Umayr, even so do Thou afflict him with love
of me, and transfer the passion from my heart to his heart!”[340] Then
she gave me an hundred sequins for my trouble in going and coming and I
took it and returned to the palace, where I found the Sultan come home
from the chase; so I got my pension of him and fared back to Baghdad.
And when next year came, I repaired to Bassorah, as usual, to seek my
pension, and the Sultan paid it to me; but, as I was about to return to
Baghdad, I bethought me of the Lady Budur and said to myself, “By Allah,
I must needs go to her and see what hath befallen between her and her
lover!” So I went to her house and finding the street before her door
swept and sprinkled and eunuchs and servants and pages standing before
the entrance, said to myself, “Most like grief hath broken the lady’s
heart and she is dead, and some Emir or other hath taken up his abode in
her house.” So I left it and went on to the house of Jubayr, son of
Umayr the Shaybani, where I found the benches of the porch broken down
and ne’er a page at the door, as of wont, and said to myself, “Haply he
too is dead.” Then I stood still before the door of his house and with
my eyes running over with tears, bemoaned it in these couplets:—

 O Lords of me, who fared but whom my heart e’er followeth; ✿ Return; and
    so my festal days with you shall be renewed!
 I stand before the home of you, bewailing your abode; ✿ Quiver mine
    eyelids and my eyes with tears are ever dewed:
 I ask the house and its remains that seem to weep and wail, ✿ “Where is
    the man who whilom wont to lavish goods and good?”
 It saith, “Go, wend thy way; those friends like travellers have fared ✿
    From Springtide-camp, and buried lie of earth and worms the food!”
 Allah ne’er desolate us so we lose their virtues’ light ✿ In length and
    breadth, but ever be the light in spirit viewed!

As I, O Prince of True Believers, was thus keening over the folk of the
house,[341] behold, out came a black slave therefrom and said to me,
“Hold thy peace, O Shaykh! May thy mother be reft of thee! Why do I see
thee bemoaning the house on this wise?” Quoth I, “I frequented it of
yore, when it belonged to a good friend of mine.” Asked the slave, “What
was his name?”; and I answered, “Jubayr bin Umayr the Shaybani.”
Rejoined he, “And what hath befallen him? Praised be Allah, he is yet
here with us in the enjoyment of property and rank and prosperity,
except that Allah hath stricken him with love of a damsel called the
Lady Budur; and he is so whelmed by his love of her and his longing for
her, that he is like a great rock cumbering the ground. If he hunger, he
saith not, Give me meat; nor, if he thirst, doth he say, Give me drink.”
Quoth I, “Ask leave for me to go in to him.” Said the slave, “O my lord,
wilt thou go in to one who understandeth or to one who understandeth
not?”; and I said, “There is no help for it but I see him whatever be
the case.” Accordingly he went in to ask and presently returned with
permission for me to enter, whereupon I went in to Jubayr and found him
like a rock that cumbereth the ground, understanding neither sign nor
speech; and when I spoke to him he answered me not. Then said one of his
servants, “O my lord, if thou remember aught of verse, repeat it and
raise thy voice; and he will be aroused by this and speak with thee.” So
I versified in these two couplets:—

 Hast quit the love of Moons[342] or dost persist? ✿ Dost wake o’ nights
    or close in sleep thine eyes?
 If aye thy tears in torrents flow, then learn ✿ Eternal thou shalt dwell
    in Paradise.[342]

When he heard these verses he opened his eyes and said, “Welcome, O son
of Mansur! Verily, the jest is become earnest.” Quoth I, “O my lord, is
there aught thou wouldst have me do for thee?” Answered he, “Yes, I
would fain write her a letter and send it to her by thee. If thou bring
me back her answer, thou shalt have of me a thousand dinars; and if not,
two hundred for thy pains.” So I said, “Do what seemeth good to
thee;”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ibn Mansur
continued:—So I said, “Do what seemeth good to thee;” whereupon he
called to one of his slave-girls, “Bring me ink case and paper;” and
wrote these couplets:—

 I pray in Allah’s name, O Princess mine, be light ✿ On me, for Love hath
    robbed me of my reason’s sight!
 ‘Slaved me this longing and enthralled me love of you; ✿ And clad in
    sickness garb, a poor and abject wight.
 I wont ere this to think small things of Love and hold, ✿ O Princess
    mine, twas silly thing and over-slight.
 But when it showed me swelling surges of its sea, ✿ To Allah’s hest I
    bowed and pitied lovers’ plight.
 An will you, pity show and deign a meeting grant; ✿ An will you, kill me
    still forget not good requite.[343]

Then he sealed the letter and gave it to me. So I took it and, repairing
to Budur’s house, raised the door-curtain little by little, as before,
and looking in behold, I saw ten damsels, high-bosomed virgins, like
moons, and the Lady Budur as she were the full moon among the stars,
sitting in their midst, or the sun, when it is clear of clouds and mist;
nor was there on her any trace of pain or care. And as I looked and
marvelled at her case, she turned her glance upon me and, seeing me
standing at the door, said to me, “Well come, and welcome and all hail
to thee, O Ibn Mansur! Come in.” So I entered and saluting her gave her
the letter; and she read it and when she understood it, she said
laughingly to me, “O Ibn Mansur,” the poet lied not when he sang:—

 Indeed I’ll bear my love for thee with firmest soul, ✿ Until from thee
    to me shall come a messenger.

“Look’ye, O Ibn Mansur, I will write thee an answer, that he may give
thee what he promised thee.” And I answered, “Allah requite thee with
good!” So she called out to a handmaid, “Bring inkcase and paper,” and
wrote these couplets:—

 How comes it I fulfilled my vow the while that vow broke you? ✿ And,
    seen me lean to equity, iniquity wrought you?
 ‘Twas you initiated wrongous dealing and despite: ✿ You were the
    treachetour and treason came from only you!
 I never ceased to cherish mid the sons of men my troth; ✿ And keep your
    honour brightest bright and swear by name of you,
 Until I saw with eyes of me what evil you had done; ✿ Until I heard with
    ears of me what foul report spread you.

 Shall I bring low my proper worth while raising yours so high? ✿ By
    Allah, had you honoured me eke I had honoured you!
 But now uprooting severance I will fain console my heart, ✿ And wring my
    fingers clean of you for evermore to part!

Quoth I, “By Allah, O my lady, between him and death there is but the
reading of this letter!” So I tore it in pieces and said to her, “Write
him other than these lines.” “I hear and obey,” answered she and wrote
the following couplets—

 Indeed I am consolèd now and sleep without a tear, ✿ And all that
    happened slandering tongues have whispered in mine ear:
 My heart obeyed my hest and soon forgot thy memory, ✿ And learnt mine
    eyelids ‘twas the best to live in severance sheer:
 He lied who said that severance is a bitterer thing than gall: ✿ It
    never disappointed me; like wine I find it cheer:
 I learnt to hate all news of thee, e’en mention of thy name, ✿ And turn
    away and look thereon with loathing pure and mere:
 Lookye! I cast thee out of heart and far from vitals mine; ✿ Then let
    the slanderer wot this truth and see I am sincere.

Quoth I, “By Allah, O my lady, when he shall read these verses, his soul
will depart his body!” Quoth she, “O Ibn Mansur, is passion indeed come
to such a pass with him that thou sayest this saying?” Quoth I, “Had I
said more than this verily it were but the truth: but mercy is of the
nature of the noble.” Now when she heard this her eyes brimmed over with
tears and she wrote him a note, I swear by Allah, O Commander of the
Faithful, there is none in thy Chancery could write the like of it; and
therein were these couplets:—

 How long shall I thy coyness and thy great aversion see? ✿ Thou hast
    satisfied my censurers and pleased their enmity:
 I did amiss and wot it not; so deign to tell me now ✿ Whatso they told
    thee, haply ‘twas the merest calumny.
 I wish to welcome thee, dear love, even as welcome I ✿ Sleep to these
    eyes and eyelids in the place of sleep to be.
 And since ‘tis thou hast made me drain th’ unmixèd cup of love, ✿ If me
    thou see with wine bemused heap not thy blame on me!

And when she had written the missive,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Budur had
written the missive, she sealed it and gave it to me; and I said, “O
my lady, in good sooth this thy letter will make the sick man whole
and ease the thirsting soul.” Then I took it and went from her, when
she called me back and said to me, “O son of Mansur, say to him:—She
will be thy guest this night.” At this I joyed with exceeding great
joy and carried the letter to Jubayr, whom I found with his eyes fixed
intently on the door, expecting the reply and as soon as I gave him
the letter and he opened and read it and understood it, he uttered a
great cry and fell down in a fainting fit. When he came to himself, he
said to me, “O Ibn Mansur, did she indeed write this note with her
hand and feel it with her fingers?” Answered I, “O my lord, do folk
write with their feet?” And by Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, I
had not done speaking these words, when we heard the tinkle-tinkle of
her anklets in the vestibule and she entered. And seeing her he sprang
to his feet as though nothing pained or ailed him and embraced her
like the letter L embraceth the letter A;[344] and the infirmity, that
erst would not depart at once left him.[345] Then he sat down, but she
abode standing and I said to her, “O my lady, why dost thou not sit?”
Said she, “O Ibn Mansur, save on a condition that is between us, I
will not sit.” I asked, “And what is that?”; and she answered, “None
may know lovers’ secrets,” and putting her mouth to Jubayr’s ear
whispered to him; whereupon he replied, “I hear and I obey.” Then he
rose and said somewhat in a whisper to one of his slaves, who went out
and returned in a little while with a Kazi and two witnesses.
Thereupon Jubayr stood up and taking a bag containing an hundred
thousand dinars, said, “O Kazi, marry me to this young lady and write
this sum to her marriage-settlement.” Quoth the Kazi to her, “Say
thou, I consent to this.” “I consent to this,” quoth she, whereupon he
drew up the contract of marriage and she opened the bag; and, taking
out a handful of gold, gave it to the Kazi and the witnesses and
handed the rest to Jubayr. Thereupon the Kazi and the witnesses
withdrew, and I sat with them, in mirth and merriment, till the most
part of the night was past, when I said in my mind, “These are lovers
and they have been this long while separated. I will now arise and go
sleep in some place afar from them and leave them to their privacy,
one with other.” So I rose, but she caught hold of my skirts, saying,
“What thinkest thou to do?” “Nothing but so and so,” answered I; upon
which she rejoined, “Sit thee down; and when we would be rid of thee,
we will send thee away.” So I sat down with them till near daybreak,
when she said to me, “O Ibn Mansur, go to yonder chamber; for we have
furnished it for thee and it is thy sleeping-place.” Thereupon I arose
and went thither and slept till morning, when a page brought me basin
and ewer, and I made the ablution and prayed the dawn-prayer. Then I
sat down and presently, behold, Jubayr and his beloved came out of the
bath in the house, and I saw them both wringing their locks.[346] So I
wished them good morning and gave them joy of their safety and
reunion, saying to Jubayr, “That which began with constraint and
conditions hath ended in cordial contentment.” He answered, “Thou
sayest well, and indeed thou deservest thy honorarium;” and he called
his treasurer, and said, “Bring hither three thousand dinars.” So he
brought a purse containing the gold pieces and Jubayr gave it to me,
saying, “Favour us by accepting this.” But I replied, “I will not
accept it till thou tell me the manner of the transfer of love from
her to thee, after so huge an aversion.” Quoth he, “Hearkening and
obedience! Know that we have a festival called New Year’s day,[347]
when all the people fare forth and take boat and go a-pleasuring on
the river. So I went out with my comrades, and saw a skiff, wherein
were ten damsels like moons and amongst them, the Lady Budur lute in
hand.” She preluded in eleven modes, then, returning to the first,
sang these two couplets:—

 Fire is cooler than fires in my breast, ✿ Rock is softer than heart of
    my lord,
 Marvel I that he’s formèd to hold ✿ In water-soft frame heart rock-hard!

“Said I to her:—Repeat the couplets and the air! But she would
not;”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Jubayr continued,
“So cried I to her:—Repeat the couplets and the air! But she would not;
whereupon I bade the boatmen pelt her with oranges, and they pelted her
till we feared her boat would founder. Then she went her way, and this
is how the love was transferred from her heart to mine.” So I wished
them joy of their union; and, taking the purse with its contents, I
returned to Baghdad. Now when the Caliph heard Ibn Mansur’s story his
heart was lightened and the restlessness and oppression from which he
suffered forsook him. And they also tell the tale of

-----

Footnote 326:

  Lane (ii. 494) relates from Al-Makrizi, that when Khamárawayh,
  Governor of the Egypt (ninth century), suffered from insomnia his
  physician ordered a pool of quicksilver, 50 by 50 cubits, to be laid
  out in front of his palace, now the Rumaylah square. “At the corners
  of the pool were silver pegs to which were attached by silver rings,
  strong bands of silk, and a bed of skins, inflated with air, being
  thrown upon the pool and secured by the bands remained in a continual
  state of agreeable vacillation.” We are not told that the Prince was
  thereby salivated like the late Colonel Sykes when boiling his mercury
  for thermometric experiments.

Footnote 327:

  The name seems now unknown. “Al-Khalí’a” is somewhat stronger than
  “Wag,” meaning at least a “wicked wit.” Properly it is the Span.
  “perdido,” a youth cast off (Khala’) by his friends; though not so
  strong a term as “Harfúsh” = a blackguard.

Footnote 328:

  Arab. “Farsakh” = parasang.

Footnote 329:

  Arab. “Nahás asfar” = yellow copper, brass as opposed to Nahás ahmar =
  copper. The reader who cares to study the subject will find much about
  it in my “Book of The Sword,” chapt. iv.

Footnote 330:

  Lane (ii. 479) translates one stanza of this mukhammas (pentastich)
  and speaks of “five more,” which would make six.

Footnote 331:

  A servile name, Delicacy, Elegance.

Footnote 332:

  These verses have occurred twice: (Night ix. etc.) so I give Lane’s
  version (ii. 482).

Footnote 333:

  A Badawi tribe to which belonged the generous Ma’an bin Za’idah, often
  mentioned in The Nights.

Footnote 334:

  Wealthy harems, I have said, are hot-beds of Sapphism and Tribadism.
  Every woman past her first youth has a girl whom she calls her
  “Myrtle” (in Damascus). At Agbome, capital of Dahome, I found that a
  troop of women was kept for the use of the “Amazons” (Mission to
  Gelele, ii. 73). Amongst the wild Arabs, who ignore Socratic and
  Sapphic perversions, the lover is always more jealous of his beloved’s
  girl-friends than of men rivals. In England we content ourselves with
  saying that women corrupt women more than men do.

Footnote 335:

  The Hebrew Pentateuch; Roll of the Law.

Footnote 336:

  I need hardly notice the brass trays, platters and table-covers with
  inscriptions which are familiar to every reader: those made in the
  East for foreign markets mostly carry imitation inscriptions lest
  infidel eyes fall upon Holy Writ.

Footnote 337:

  These six distichs are in Night xiii. I borrow Torrens (p. 125) to
  show his peculiar treatment of spinning out 12 lines to 38.

Footnote 338:

  Arab. “Musámirah” = chatting at night. Easterns are inordinately fond
  of the practice and the wild Arabs often sit up till dawn, talking
  over the affairs of the tribe, indeed a Shaykh is expected to do so.
  “Early to bed and early to rise” is a civilised not a savage or a
  barbarous saying. Samír is a companion in night talk; Rafík of the
  road; Rahíb in riding horse or camel; Ká’id in sitting; Sharíb and
  Rafís at drink, and Nadím at table: Ahíd is an ally, and Sharík a
  partner—all on the model of “Fa’íl.”

Footnote 339:

  In both lover and beloved the excess of love gave them this
  clairvoyance.

Footnote 340:

  The prayer will be granted for the excess (not the purity) of her
  love.

Footnote 341:

  This wailing over the Past is one of the common-places of Badawi
  poetry. The traveller cannot fail, I repeat, to notice the chronic
  melancholy of peoples dwelling under the brightest skies.

Footnote 342:

  Moons = Budúr: in Paradise as a martyr.

Footnote 343:

  _i.e._ to intercede for me in Heaven; as if the young woman were the
  Prophet.

Footnote 344:

  The comparison is admirable as the two letters are thus written
  [Illustration] or لا. It occurs in Al-Hariri (Ass. of Ramlah)

             So I embraced him close as Lám cleaves to Alif;

  And again:—

            She laid aside reluctance and I embraced her close
            As if I were Lám and my love Alif.

  The Lomad-Olaph in Syraic is similarly colligated.

Footnote 345:

  Here is a double entendre “and the infirm letters (viz. a, w and y)
  not subject to accidence, left him.” The three make up the root “Awi”
  = pitying, condoling.

Footnote 346:

  Showing that consummation had taken place. It was a sign of good
  breeding to avoid all “indecent hurry” when going to bed. In some
  Moslem countries the bridegroom does not consummate the marriage for
  seven nights; out of respect for (1) father (2) mother (3) brother and
  so forth. If he hurry matters he will be hooted as an “impatient man”
  and the wise will quote, “Man is created of precipitation” (Koran
  chapt. xxi. 38), meaning hasty and inconsiderate. I remark with
  pleasure that the whole of this tale is told with commendable
  delicacy. O si sic omnia!

Footnote 347:

  Pers. Nauroz (= nau roz, new day): here used in the Arab. plur.
  “Nawáriz” as it lasted six days. There are only four universal
  festivals; the solstices and the equinoxes; and every successive
  religion takes them from the sun and perverts them to its own private
  purposes. Lane (ii. 496) derives the venerable Nauroz whose birth is
  hid in the outer glooms of antiquity from “the Jewish Passover” (!)




              THE MAN OF AL-YAMAN AND HIS SIX SLAVE-GIRLS.


The Caliph Al-Maamun was sitting one day in his palace, surrounded by
his Lords of the realm and Officers of state, and there were present
also before him all his poets and cup-companions, amongst the rest one
named Mohammed of Bassorah. Presently the Caliph turned and said to him,
“O Mohammed, I wish thee forthwith to tell me something that I have
never before heard.” He replied, “O Commander of the Faithful, dost thou
wish me to tell thee a thing I have heard with my ears or a thing I have
seen with my eyes?” Quoth Al-Maamun, “Tell me whichever is the rarer;”
so Mohammed Al-Basri began:—Know, then, O Commander of the Faithful,
that there lived once upon a time a wealthy man, who was a native of
Al-Yaman; but he emigrated from his native land and came to this city of
Baghdad, whose sojourn so pleased him that he transported hither his
family and possessions. Now he had six slave-girls, like moons one and
all; the first white, the second brown, the third fat, the fourth lean,
the fifth yellow and the sixth lamp-black; and all six were comely of
countenance and perfect in accomplishments and skilled in the arts of
singing and playing upon musical instruments. Now it so chanced that,
one day, he sent for the girls and called for meat and wine; and they
ate and drank and were mirthful and made merry. Then he filled the cup
and, taking it in his hand, said to the blonde girl, “O new-moon face,
let us hear somewhat of thy pleasant songs.” So she took the lute and
tuning it, made music thereon with such sweet melody that the place
danced with glee; after which she played a lively measure and sang these
couplets:—

 I have a friend, whose form is fixed within mine eyes,[348] ✿ Whose name
    deep buried in my very vitals lies:
 Whenas remembers him my mind all heart am I, ✿ And when on him my gaze
    is turned I am all eyes.
 My censor saith, “Forswear, forget, the love of him,” ✿ “Whatso is not
    to be, how shall’t be?” My reply is.
 Quoth I, “O Censor mine, go forth from me, avaunt! ✿ And make not light
    of that on humans heavy lies.”

Hereat their master rejoiced and, drinking off his cup, gave the damsels
to drink, after which he said to the berry-brown girl, “O
brasier-light[349] and joy of the sprite, let us hear thy lovely voice,
whereby all that hearken are ravished with delight.” So she took the
lute and thereon made harmony till the place was moved to glee; then,
captivating all hearts with her graceful swaying, she sang these
couplets:—

 I swear by that fair face’s life, I’ll love but thee ✿ Till death us
    part; nor other love but thine I’ll see;
 O full moon, with thy loveliness mantilla’d o’er, ✿ The loveliest of our
    earth beneath thy banner be:
 Thou, who surpassest all the fair in pleasantness ✿ May Allah, Lord of
    worlds, be everywhere with thee!

The master rejoiced and drank off his cup and gave the girls to drink;
after which he filled again; and, taking the goblet in his hand, signed
to the fat girl and bade her sing and play a different motive. So she
took the lute and striking a grief-dispelling measure, sang these
couplets:—

 An thou but deign consent, O wish to heart affied! ✿ I care not wrath
    and rage to all mankind betide.
 And if thou show that fairest face which gives me life, ✿ I reck not an
    diminished heads the Kings go hide.
 I seek thy favours only from this ‘versal world: ✿ O thou in whom all
    beauty doth firm-fixt abide!

The man rejoiced and, emptying his cup, gave the girls to drink. Then he
signed to the thin girl and said to her, “O Houri of Paradise, feed thou
our ears with sweet words and sounds.” So she took the lute; and, tuning
it, preluded and sang these two couplets:—

 Say me, on Allah’s path[350] hast death not dealt to me, ✿ Turning from
    me while I to thee turn patiently:
 Say me, is there no judge of Love to judge us twain, ✿ And do me justice
    wronged, mine enemy, by thee?

Their lord rejoiced and, emptying the cup, gave the girls to drink. Then
filling another he signed to the yellow girl and said to her, “O sun of
the day, let us hear some nice verses.” So she took the lute and,
preluding after the goodliest fashion, sang these couplets:—

 I have a lover and when drawing him, ✿ He draws on me a sword-blade
    glancing grim:
 Allah avenge some little of his wrongs, ✿ Who holds my heart yet wreaks
    o’erbearing whim:
 Oft though I say, “Renounce him, heart!” yet heart ✿ Will to none other
    turn excepting him.
 He is my wish and will of all men, but ✿ Fate’s envious hand to me’s aye
    grudging him.

The master rejoiced and drank and gave the girls to drink; then he
filled the cup and taking it in hand, signed to the black girl, saying,
“O pupil of the eye, let us have a taste of thy quality, though it be
but two words.” So she took the lute and tuning it and tightening the
strings, preluded in various modes, then returned to the first and sang
to a lively air these couplets:—

 Ho ye, mine eyes, let prodigal tears go free; ✿ This ecstasy would see
    my being unbe:[351]
 All ecstasies I dree for sake of friend ✿ I fondle, maugre enviers’
    jealousy:
 Censors forbid me from his rosy cheek, ✿ Yet e’er inclines my heart to
    rosery:
 Cups of pure wine, time was, went circuiting ✿ In joy, what time the
    lute sang melody,
 While kept his troth the friend who madded me, ✿ Yet made me rising star
    of bliss to see:
 But—with Time, turned he not by sin of mine; ✿ Than such a turn can
    aught more bitter be?
 Upon his cheek there grows and glows a rose, ✿ Nay two, whereof grant
    Allah one to me!
 An were prostration[352] by our law allowed ✿ To aught but Allah, at his
    feet I had bowed.

Thereupon rose the six girls and, kissing the ground before their lord,
said to him, “Do thou justice between us, O our lord!” So he looked at
their beauty and loveliness and the contrast of their colours and
praised Almighty Allah and glorified Him. Then said he, “There is none
of you but hath learnt the Koran by heart, and mastered the musical art
and is versed in the chronicles of yore and the doings of peoples which
have gone before; so it is my desire that each one of you rise and,
pointing finger at her opposite, praise herself and dispraise her
co-concubine; that is to say, let the blonde point to the brunette, the
plump to the slender and the yellow to the black girl; after which the
rivals, each in her turn, shall do the like with the former; and be this
illustrated with citations from Holy Writ and somewhat of anecdotes and
verse, so as to show forth your fine breeding and elegance of your
pleading.” And they answered him, “We hear and we obey!”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the handmaids
answered the man of Al-Yaman, “We hear and we obey!” Accordingly the
blonde rose first and, pointing at the black girl, said to her:—Out on
thee, blackamoor! It is told by tradition that whiteness saith:—I am the
shining light, I am the rising moon of the fourteenth night. My hue is
patent and my brow is resplendent and of my beauty quoth the poet:—

 White girl with softly rounded polished cheeks ✿ As if a pearl concealed
    by Beauty’s boon:
 Her stature Alif-like;[353] her smile like Mím[354] ✿ And o’er her eyes
    two brows that bend like Nún.[355]
 ‘Tis as her glance were arrow, and her brows ✿ Bows ever bent to shoot
    Death-dart eftsoon:
 If cheek and shape thou view, there shalt thou find ✿ Rose, myrtle,
    basil and Narcissus wone.
 Men wont in gardens plant and set the branch; ✿ How many garths thy
    stature-branch doth own!

So my colour is like the hale and healthy day and the newly-culled
orange-spray and the star of sparkling ray;[356] and indeed quoth
Almighty Allah, in His precious Book, to his prophet Moses (on whom be
peace!):—Put thy hand into thy bosom; it shall come forth white, without
hurt.[357] And again He saith:—But they whose faces shall become white,
shall be in the mercy of Allah; therein shall they remain for ever.[358]
My colour is a sign, a miracle, and my loveliness supreme and my beauty
a term extreme. It is on the like of me that raiment showeth fair and
fine and to the like of me that hearts incline. Moreover, in whiteness
are many excellences; for instance, the snow falleth white from heaven,
and it is traditional that the beautifullest of colours is white. The
Moslems also glory in white turbands; but I should be tedious, were I to
tell all that may be told in praise of white; little and enough is
better than too much of unfilling stuff. So now I will begin with thy
dispraise, O black, O colour of ink and blacksmith’s dust, thou whose
face is like the raven which bringeth about the parting of lovers.
Verily, the poet saith in praise of white and blame of black:—

 Seest not that pearls are prized for milky hue, ✿ But with a dirham buy
    we coals in load?
 And while white faces enter Paradise, ✿ Black faces crowd Gehenna’s
    black abode.

And indeed it is told in certain histories, related on the authority of
devout men, that Noah (on whom be peace!) was sleeping one day, with his
sons Cham and Shem seated at his head, when a wind sprang up and,
lifting his clothes, uncovered his nakedness; whereat Cham looked and
laughed and did not cover him: but Shem arose and covered him.
Presently, their sire awoke and learning, what had been done by his
sons, blessed Shem and cursed Cham. So Shem’s face was whitened and from
him sprang the prophets and the orthodox Caliphs and Kings; whilst
Cham’s face was blackened and he fled forth to the land of Abyssinia,
and of his lineage came the blacks.[359] All people are of one mind in
affirming the lack of understanding of the blacks, even as saith the
adage, “How shall one find a black with a mind?” Quoth her master, “Sit
thee down, thou hast given us sufficient and even excess.” Thereupon he
signed to the negress, who rose and, pointing her finger at the blonde,
said:—Dost thou not know that in the Koran sent down to His prophet and
apostle, is transmitted the saying of God the Most High, “By the night
when it covereth all things with darkness; by the day when it shineth
forth!”[360] If the night were not the more illustrious, verily Allah
had not sworn by it nor had given it precedence of the day. And indeed
all men of wit and wisdom accept this. Knowest thou not that black is
the ornament of youth and that, when hoariness descendeth upon the head,
delights pass away and the hour of death draweth in sight? Were not
black the most illustrious of things, Allah had not set it in the core
of the heart[361] and the pupil of the eye; and how excellent is the
saying of the poet:—

 I love not black girls but because they show ✿ Youth’s colour, tinct of
    eye and heart-core’s hue;
 Nor are in error who unlove the white, ✿ And hoary hairs and
    winding-sheet eschew.

And that said of another:—

  Black[362] girls, not white, are they ✿ All worthy love I see:
  Black girls wear dark-brown lips;[363] ✿ Whites, blotch of leprosy.

And of a third:—

 Black girls in acts are white, and ‘tis as though ✿ Like eyes, with
    purest shine and sheen they show;
 If I go daft for her, be not amazed; ✿ Black bile[364] drives
    melancholic-mad we know:
 ‘Tis as my colour were the noon of night; ✿ For all no moon it be, its
    splendours glow.

Moreover, is the foregathering of lovers good but in the night? Let this
quality and profit suffice thee. What protecteth lovers from spies and
censors like the blackness of night’s darkness; and what causeth to them
to fear discovery like the whiteness of the dawn’s brightness? So, how
many claims to honour are there not in blackness and how excellent is
the saying of the poet!—

 I visit them, and night-black lendeth aid to me ✿ Seconding love, but
    dawn-white is mine enemy.

And that of another:—

 How many a night I’ve passed with the beloved of me, ✿ While gloom with
    dusky tresses veilèd our desires:
 But when the morn-light showed it caused me sad affright; ✿ And I to
    Morning said, “Who worship light are liars!”[365]

And saith a third:—

 He came to see me, hiding neath the skirt of night, ✿ Hasting his steps
    as wended he in cautious plight.
 I rose and spread my cheek upon his path like rug, ✿ Abject, and trailed
    my skirt to hide it from his sight;
 But rose the crescent moon and strave its best to show ✿ The world our
    loves, like nail-slice raying radiant light:[366]
 Then what befel befel: I need not aught describe; ✿ But think thy best,
    and ask me naught of wrong or right.
 Meet not thy lover save at night for fear of slander ✿ The Sun’s a
    tittle-tattler and the Moon’s a pander.

And a fifth:—

 I love not white girls blown with fat who puff and pant; ✿ The maid for
    me is young brunette embonpoint-scant.
 I’d rather ride a colt that’s dark upon the day ✿ Of race, and set my
    friends upon the elephant.

And a sixth:—

 My lover came to me one night, ✿ And clipt we both with fond embrace;
 And lay together till we saw ✿ The morning come with swiftest pace.
 Now I pray Allah and my Lord ✿ To reunite us of His grace;
 And make night last me long as he ✿ Lies in the arms that tightly lace.

Were I to set forth all the praises of blackness, my tale would be
tedious; but little and enough is better than too much of unfilling
stuff. As for thee, O blonde, thy colour is that of leprosy and thine
embrace is suffocation,[367] and it is of report that hoar-frost and icy
cold[368] are in Gehenna for the torment of the wicked. Again, of things
black and excellent is ink, wherewith is written Allah’s word; and were
it not for black ambergris and black musk, there would be no perfumes to
carry to Kings. How many glories I may not mention dwell in blackness,
and how well saith the poet:—

 Seest not that musk, the nut-brown musk, e’er claims the highest price,
    ✿ Whilst for a load of whitest lime none more than dirham bids?
 And while white speck upon the eye deforms the loveliest youth, ✿ Black
    eyes discharge the sharpest shafts in lashes from their lids.

Quoth her master, “Sit thee down: this much sufficeth.” So she sat down
and he signed to the fat girl, who rose——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the man of
Al-Yaman, the master of the handmaids, signed to the fat girl who rose
and, pointing her finger at the slim girl, bared her calves and wrists
and uncovered her stomach, showing its dimples and the plump rondure of
her navel. Then she donned a shift of fine stuff, that exposed her whole
body, and said:—Praised be Allah who created me, for that He beautified
my face and made me fat and fair of the fattest and fairest; and likened
me to branches laden with fruit, and bestowed upon me abounding beauty
and brightness: and praised be He no less, for that He hath given me the
precedence and honoured me, when He mentioneth me in His holy Book!
Quoth the Most High, “And he brought a fatted calf.”[369] And He hath
made me like unto a vergier full of peaches and pomegranates. In very
sooth even as the townsfolk long for fat birds and eat of them and love
not lean birds, so do the sons of Adam desire fat meat and eat of it.
How many vauntful attributes are there not in fatness, and how well
saith the poet:—

 Farewell thy love, for see, the Cafilah’s[370] on the move: ✿ O man,
    canst bear to say adieu and leave thy love?
 ‘Tis as her going were to seek her neighbour’s tent, ✿ The gait of fat
    fair maid, whom hearts shall all approve.

Sawest thou ever one stand before a flesher’s stall but sought of him
fat flesh? The wise say, “Joyance is in three things, eating meat and
riding meat and putting meat into meat.”[371] As for thee, O thin one,
thy calves are like the shanks of sparrows or the pokers of furnaces;
and thou art a cruciform plank or a piece of flesh poor and rank; there
is naught in thee to gladden the heart; even as saith the poet:—

 With Allah take I refuge from whatever driveth me ✿ To bed with one like
    footrasp[372] or the roughest ropery:
 In every limb she hath a horn that butteth me whene’er ✿ I fain would
    rest, so morn and eve I wend me wearily.

Quoth her master, “Sit thee down: this much sufficeth.” So she sat down
and he signed to the slender girl, who rose, as she were a willow-wand,
or a rattan-frond or a stalk of sweet basil, and said:—Praised be Allah
who created me and beautified me and made my embraces the end of all
desire and likened me to the branch, whereto all hearts incline. If I
rise, I rise lightly; if I sit, I sit prettily; I am nimble-witted at a
jest and merrier-souled than mirth itself. Never heard I one describe
his mistress, saying, “My beloved is the bigness of an elephant or like
a mountain long and broad;” but rather, “My lady hath a slender waist
and a slim shape.”[373] Furthermore a little food filleth me and a
little water quencheth my thirst; my sport is agile and my habit active;
for I am sprightlier than the sparrow and lighter-skipping than the
starling. My favours are the longing of the lover and the delight of the
desirer; for I am goodly of shape, sweet of smile and graceful as the
bending willow-wand or the rattan-cane[374] or the stalk of the
basil-plant; nor is there any can compare with me in loveliness, even as
saith one of me:—

 Thy shape with willow branch I dare compare, ✿ And hold thy figure as my
    fortunes fair:
 I wake each morn distraught, and follow thee, ✿ And from the rival’s eye
    in fear I fare.

It is for the like of me that amourists run mad and that those who
desire me wax distracted. If my lover would draw me to him, I am drawn
to him; and if he would have me incline to him, I incline to him and not
against him. But now, as for thee, O fat of body, thine eating is the
feeding of an elephant, and neither much nor little filleth thee. When
thou liest with a man who is lean, he hath no ease of thee; nor can he
anyways take his pleasure of thee; for the bigness of thy belly holdeth
him off from going in unto thee and the fatness of thy thighs hindereth
him from coming at thy slit. What goodness is there in thy grossness,
and what courtesy or pleasantness in thy coarseness? Fat flesh is fit
for naught but the flesher, nor is there one point therein that pleadeth
for praise. If one joke with thee, thou art angry; if one sport with
thee, thou art sulky; if thou sleep, thou snorest; if thou walk, thou
lollest out thy tongue! if thou eat, thou art never filled. Thou art
heavier than mountains and fouler than corruption and crime. Thou hast
in thee nor agility nor benedicite nor thinkest thou of aught save meat
and sleep. When thou pissest thou swishest; if thou turd thou gruntest
like a bursten wine-skin or an elephant transmogrified. If thou go to
the water-closet, thou needest one to wash thy gap and pluck out the
hairs which overgrow it; and this is the extreme of sluggishness and the
sign, outward and visible, of stupidity.[375] In short, there is no good
thing about thee, and indeed the poet saith of thee:—

 Heavy and swollen like an urine-bladder blown, ✿ With hips and thighs
    like mountain propping piles of stone;
 Whene’er she walks in Western hemisphere, her tread ✿ Makes the far
    Eastern world with weight to moan and groan.

Quoth her master, “Sit thee down, this sufficeth;” so she sat down and
he signed to the yellow girl, who rose to her feet and praised Allah
Almighty and magnified His name, calling down peace and blessing on
Mohammed the best of His creatures; after which she pointed her finger
at the brunette and said to her,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


      Now when it was the Three Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the yellow
girl stood up and praised Almighty Allah and magnified His name; after
which she pointed her finger at the brown girl and said to her:—I am the
one praised in the Koran, and the Compassionate hath described my
complexion and its excellence over all other hues in His manifest Book,
where Allah saith, “A yellow, pure yellow, whose colour gladdeneth the
beholders.”[376] Wherefore my colour is a sign and portent and my grace
is supreme and my beauty a term extreme; for that my tint is the tint of
a ducat and the colour of the planets and moons and the hue of ripe
apples. My fashion is the fashion of the fair, and the dye of saffron
outvieth all other dyes; so my semblance is wondrous and my colour
marvellous. I am soft of body and of high price, comprising all
qualities of beauty. My colour is essentially precious as virgin gold,
and how many boasts and glories doth it not unfold! Of the like of me
quoth the poet:—

 Her golden yellow is the sheeny sun’s; ✿ And like gold sequins she
    delights the sight:
 Saffron small portion of her glance can show; ✿ Nay,[377] she outvies
    the moon when brightest bright.

And I shall at once begin in thy dispraise, O berry-brown girl! Thy
tincture is that of the buffalo, and all souls shudder at thy sight. If
thy colour be in any created thing, it is blamed; if it be in food, it
is poisoned; for thy hue is the hue of the dung-fly; it is a mark of
ugliness even in dogs; and among the colours it is one which strikes
with amazement and is of the signs of mourning. Never heard I of brown
gold or brown pearls or brown gems. If thou enter the privy, thy colour
changeth, and when thou comest out, thou addest ugliness to ugliness.
Thou art a non-descript; neither black, that thou mayst be recognised,
nor white, that thou mayst be described; and in thee there is no good
quality, even as saith the poet:—

 The hue of dusty motes is hers; that dull brown hue of hers ✿ Is mouldy,
    like the dust and mud by Cossid’s foot upthrown:[378]
 I never look upon her brow, e’en for eye-twinkling’s space, ✿ But in
    brown study fall I and my thoughts take browner tone.

Quoth her master, “Sit thee down; this much sufficeth;” so she sat down
and he signed to the brunette. Now she was a model of beauty and
loveliness and symmetry and perfect grace; soft of skin, slim of shape,
of stature rare, and coal-black hair; with cheeks rosy-pink, eyes
black-rimmed by nature’s hand, face fair, and eloquent tongue; moreover
slender-waisted and heavy-hipped. So she rose and said:—Praise be to
Allah who hath created me neither leper-white nor bile-yellow nor
charcoal-black, but hath made my colour to be beloved of men of wit and
wisdom; for all the poets extol berry-brown maids in every tongue and
exalt their colour over all other colours. To “brown of hue (they say)
praise is due;” and Allah bless him who singeth:—

 And in brunettes is mystery, could’st thou but read it right, ✿ Thy
    sight would never dwell on others, be they red or white:
 Free-flowing conversation, amorous coquettishness ✿ Would teach Hárut
    himself a mightier spell of magic might.

And saith another:—

 Give me brunettes, so limber, lissom, lithe of sway, ✿ Brunettes tall,
    slender, straight like Samhar’s nut-brown lance;[379]
 Languid of eyelids and with silky down on either cheek, ✿ Who fixed in
    lover’s heart work to his life mischance.

And yet another:—

 Now, by my life, brown hue hath point of comeliness ✿ Leaves whiteness
    nowhere and high o’er the Moon takes place;
 But an of whiteness aught it borrowed self to deck, ✿ ‘Twould change its
    graces and would pale for its disgrace:
 Not with his must[380] I’m drunken, but his locks of musk ✿ Are wine
    inebriating all of human race.
 His charms are jealous each of each, and all desire ✿ To be the down
    that creepeth up his lovely face.

And again another:—

 Why not incline me to that show of silky down, ✿ On cheeks of dark
    brunette, like bamboo spiring brown?
 Whenas high rank in beauty poets sing, they say ✿ Brown ant-like
    specklet worn by nenuphar in crown.
 And see I sundry lovers tear out others’ eyne ✿ For the brown mole
    beneath that jetty pupil shown,
 Then why do censors blame me for one all a mole? ✿ Allah I pray demolish
    each molesting clown![381]

My form is all grace and my shape is built on heavy base; Kings desire
my colour which all adore, rich and poor. I am pleasant, active,
handsome, elegant, soft of skin and prized for price: eke I am perfect
in seemlihead and breeding and eloquence; my aspect is comely and my
tongue witty; my temper is bright and my play a pretty sight. As for
thee, thou art like unto a mallow growing about the Lúk Gate;[382] in
hue sallow and streaked-yellow and made all of sulphur. Aroynt thee, O
copper-worth of jaundiced sorrel, O rust of brass-pot, O face of owl in
gloom, and fruit of the Hell-tree Zakkúm;[383] whose bedfellow, for
heart-break, is buried in the tomb. And there is no good thing in thee,
even as saith the poet of the like of thee:—

 Yellowness, tincturing her tho’ nowise sick or sorry, ✿ Straitens my
    hapless heart and makes my head sore ache;
 An thou repent not, Soul! I’ll punish thee with kissing[384] ✿ Her lower
    face that shall mine every grinder break!

And when she ended her lines, quoth her master, “Sit thee down, this
much sufficeth!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the yellow
girl ended her recitation, quoth her master, “Sit thee down; this much
sufficeth!” Then he made peace between them and clad them all in
sumptuous robes of honour and hanselled them with precious jewels of
land and sea. And never have I seen, O Commander of the Faithful, any
when or any where, aught fairer than these six damsels fair. Now when
Al-Maamun heard this story from Mohammed of Bassorah, he turned to him
and said, “O Mohammed, knowest thou the abiding-place of these damsels
and their master, and canst thou contrive to buy them of him for us?” He
answered, “O Commander of the Faithful, indeed I have heard that their
lord is wrapped up in them and cannot bear to be parted from them.”
Rejoined the Caliph, “Take thee ten thousand gold pieces for each girl,
that is sixty thousand for the whole purchase; and carry the coin to his
house and buy them of him.” So Mohammed of Bassorah took the money and,
betaking himself to the Man of Al-Yaman, acquainted him with the wish of
the Prince of True Believers. He consented to part with them at that
price to pleasure the Caliph; and despatched them to Al-Maamun, who
assigned them an elegant abode and therein used to sit with them as
cup-companions; marvelling at their beauty and loveliness, at their
varied colours and at the excellence of their conversation. Thus matters
stood for many a day; but, after awhile, when their former owner could
no longer bear to be parted from them, he sent a letter to the Commander
of the Faithful complaining to him of his own ardent love-longing for
them and containing, amongst other contents, these couplets:—

 Captured me six, all bright with youthful blee; ✿ Then on all six be
    best salams from me!
 They are my hearing, seeing, very life; ✿ My meat, my drink, my joy, my
    jollity:
 I’ll ne’er forget the favours erst so charmed ✿ Whose loss hath turned
    my sleep to insomny:
 Alack, O longsome pining and O tears! ✿ Would I had farewelled all
    humanity:
 Those eyes, with bowed and well arched eyebrows[385] dight, ✿ Like bows
    have struck me with their archery.

Now when the letter came to the hands of Al-Maamun, he robed the six
damsels in rich raiment; and, giving them threescore thousand dinars,
sent them back to their lord who joyed in them with exceeding joy,[386]
(more especially for the monies they brought him) and abode with them in
all the comfort and pleasance of life, till there came to them the
Destroyer of delights and the Severer of societies. And men also recount
the tale of

-----

Footnote 348:

  Again the “babes” of the eyes.

Footnote 349:

  _i.e._ whose glance is as the light of the glowing braise or (embers).
  The Arab. “Mikbás” = pan or pot full of small charcoal, is an article
  well known in Italy and Southern Europe. The word is apparently used
  here because it rhymes with “Anfás” (souls, spirits).

Footnote 350:

  _i.e._ martyrdom; a Koranic term “fi sabíli ‘llahi” = on the way of
  Allah.

Footnote 351:

  These rhymes in -y, -ee and -ie are purposely affected, to imitate the
  cadence of the Arabic.

Footnote 352:

  Arab. Sujúd, the ceremonial prostration, touching the ground with the
  forehead. So in the Old Testament “he bowed (or fell down) and
  worshipped” (Gen. xxiv., 26: Mat. ii., 11), of which our translation
  gives a wrong idea.

Footnote 353:

  Thus written ا hence as has been seen, a girl is called Alfiyyah =
  A-shaped.

Footnote 354:

  _i.e._ the medial form of m =

Footnote 355:

  _i.e._ the inverted n.

Footnote 356:

  It may also mean a “Sevigné of pearls.”

Footnote 357:

  Koran xxvii. 12. This was one of the nine “signs” to wicked “Pharaoh.”
  The “hand of Moses” is a symbol of power and ability (Koran vii. 105).
  The whiteness was supernatural beauty, not leprosy of the Jews (Exod.
  iv. 6); but brilliancy, after being born red or black: according to
  some commentators, Moses was a negro.

Footnote 358:

  Koran iii. 103; the other faces become black. This explains, I have
  noticed, the use of the phrases in blessing and cursing.

Footnote 359:

  Here we have the naked legend of the negro’s origin; one of those
  nursery tales in which the ignorant of Christendom still believe. But
  the deduction from the fable and the testimony to the negro’s lack of
  intelligence, though unpleasant to our ignorant negrophils, are
  factual and satisfactory.

Footnote 360:

  Koran, xcii. 1, 2: an oath of Allah to reward and punish with Heaven
  and Hell.

Footnote 361:

  Alluding to the “black drop” in the heart: it was taken from
  Mohammed’s by the Archangel Gabriel. The fable seems to have arisen
  from the verse “Have we not opened thy breast?” (Koran, chapt. xciv.
  1). The popular tale is that Halímah, the Badawi nurse of Mohammed, of
  the Banu Sa’ad tribe, once saw her son, also a child, running towards
  her and asked him what was the matter. He answered, “My little brother
  was seized by two men in white who stretched him on the ground and
  opened his belly!” For a full account and deductions see the Rev. Mr.
  Badger’s article, “Muhammed” (p. 959) in vol. iii. “Dictionary of
  Christian Biography.”

Footnote 362:

  Arab, “Sumr,” lit. brown (as it is afterwards used), but politely
  applied to a negro: “Yá Abu Sumrah!” O father of brownness.

Footnote 363:

  Arab. “Lumá” = dark hue of the inner lips admired by the Arabs and to
  us suggesting most unpleasant ideas. Mr. Chenery renders it “dark red”
  and “ruddy,” altogether missing the idea.

Footnote 364:

  Arab. “Saudá,” feminine of aswad (black), and meaning black bile
  (melancholia) as opposed to leucocholia.

Footnote 365:

  _i.e._ the Magians, Sabians, Zoroastrians.

Footnote 366:

  The “Unguinum fulgor” of the Latins who did not forget to celebrate
  the shining of the nails although they did not Henna them like
  Easterns. Some, however, have suggested that Ῥοδοδάκτυλος alludes to
  colouring matter.

Footnote 367:

  Women with white skins are supposed to be heating and unwholesome:
  hence the Hindu Rajahs slept with dark girls in the hot season.

Footnote 368:

  Moslems sensibly have a cold as well as a hot Hell, the former called
  Zamharir (lit. “intense cold”) or Al-Barahút, after a well in
  Hazramaut; as Gehenna (Arab. Jahannam) from the furnace-like ravine
  East of Jerusalem (Night cccxxv). The icy Hell is necessary _in
  terrorem_ for peoples who inhabit cold regions and who in a hot Hell
  only look forward to an eternity of “coals and candles” gratis. The
  sensible missionaries preached it in Iceland till foolishly forbidden
  by Papal Bull.

Footnote 369:

  Koran ii. 26; speaking of Abraham when he entertained the angels
  unawares.

Footnote 370:

  Arab “Rakb,” usually applied to a fast-going caravan of dromedary
  riders (Pilgrimage ii. 329). The “Cafilah” is Arab.: “Caravan” is a
  corruption of the Pers. Karwán.

Footnote 371:

  A popular saying. It is interesting to contrast this dispute between
  fat and thin with the Shakespearean humour of Falstaff and Prince
  Henry.

Footnote 372:

  Arab. “Dalak” vulg Hajar al-Hammam (Hammam-stone). The comparison is
  very apt: the rasps are of baked clay artificially roughened (see
  illustrations in Lane M. E. chapt. xvi.) The rope is called “Masad,” a
  bristling line of palm-fibre like the coir now familiarly known in
  England.

Footnote 373:

  Although the Arab’s ideal of beauty, as has been seen and said,
  corresponds with ours, the Egyptians (Modern) the Maroccans and other
  negrofied races like “walking tun-butts” as Clapperton called his
  amorous widow.

Footnote 374:

  Arab. “Khayzar” or “Khayzarán” the rattan-palm. Those who have seen
  this most graceful “palmijuncus” in its native forest will recognise
  the neatness of the simile.

Footnote 375:

  This is the popular idea of a bushy “veil of nature” in women: it is
  always removed by depilatories and vellication. When Bilkis Queen of
  Sheba discovered her legs by lifting her robe (Koran xxvii.), Solomon
  was minded to marry her, but would not do so till the devils had by a
  depilatory removed the hair. The popular preparation (called Núrah)
  consists of quicklime 7 parts, and Zirník or orpiment, 3 parts: it is
  applied in the Hammam to a perspiring skin, and it must be washed off
  immediately the hair is loosened or it burns and discolours. The rest
  of the body-pile (Sha’arat opp. to Sha’ar = hair) is eradicated by
  applying a mixture of boiled honey with turpentine or other gum, and
  rolling it with the hand till the hair comes off. Men I have said
  remove the pubes by shaving, and pluck the hair of the armpits, one of
  the vestages of pre-Adamite man. A good depilatory is still a
  desideratum, the best perfumers of London and Paris have none which
  they can recommend. The reason is plain: the hair-bulb can be
  eradicated only by destroying the skin.

Footnote 376:

  Koran, ii. 64: referring to the heifer which the Jews were ordered to
  sacrifice.

Footnote 377:

  Arab. “kallá,” a Koranic term possibly from Kull (all) and lá (not) =
  prorsus non—altogether not!

Footnote 378:

  “Habáb” or “Habá,” the fine particles of dust, which we call motes.
  The Cossid (Arab. Kásid) is the Anglo-Indian term for a running
  courier (mostly under Government), the Persian “Shátir” and the Guebre
  Rávand.

Footnote 379:

  Arab. “Samhari” a very long thin lance so called after Samhar, the
  maker, or the place of making. See vol. ii. p. 1. It is supposed to
  cast, when planted in the ground, a longer shadow in proportion to its
  height, than any other thing of the kind.

Footnote 380:

  Arab. “Suláfah;” properly _ptisane_ which flows from the grapes before
  pressure. The plur. “Sawálif” also means tresses of hair and past
  events: thus there is a “triple entendre.” And again “he” is used for
  “she.”

Footnote 381:

  There is a pun in the last line, “Khálun (a mole) khallauni” (rid me),
  etc.

Footnote 382:

  Of old Fustát, afterwards part of Southern Cairo, a proverbially
  miserable quarter, hence the saying, “They quoted Misr to Káhirah
  (Cairo), whereon Bab al-Luk rose with its grass,” in derision of
  nobodies who push themselves forward. Burckhardt, Prov. 276.

Footnote 383:

  Its fruits are the heads of devils; a true Dantesque fancy. Koran,
  chapt. xvii. 62, “the tree cursed in the Koran” and in chapt. xxxvii,
  60, “is this better entertainment, or the tree of Al-Zakkúm?”
  Commentators say that it is a thorn bearing a bitter almond which
  grows in the Tehamah and was therefore promoted to Hell.

Footnote 384:

  Arab. “Lasm” (lathm) as opposed to Bausah or boseh (a buss) and Kublah
  (a kiss, generic).

Footnote 385:

  Arab. “Jufún” (plur. of Jafn) which may mean eyebrows or eyelashes and
  only the context can determine which.

Footnote 386:

  Very characteristic of Egyptian manners is the man who loves six girls
  equally well, who lends them, as it were, to the Caliph; and who takes
  back the goods as if in no wise damaged by the loan.




             HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE DAMSEL AND ABU NOWAS.


The Caliph, Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, being one night
exceedingly restless and thoughtful with sad thought, rose from his
couch and walked about the by-ways of his palace, till he came to a
chamber, over whose doorway hung a curtain. He raised that curtain and
saw, at the upper end of the room, a bedstead whereon lay something
black, as it were a man asleep, with a wax taper on his right hand and
another on his left; and as the Caliph stood wondering at the sight,
behold, he remarked a flagon full of old wine whose mouth was covered by
the cup. The Caliph wondered even more at this, saying, “How came this
black by such wine-service?” Then, drawing near the bedstead, he found
that it was a girl lying asleep there, curtained by her hair; so he
uncovered her face and saw that it was like the moon, on the night of
his fulness.[387] So the Caliph filled himself a cup of wine and drank
it to the roses of her cheeks; and, feeling inclined to enjoy her,
kissed a mole on her face, whereupon she started up from sleep, and
cried out, “O Trusted of Allah,[388] what may this be?” Replied he, “A
guest who knocketh at thy door, hoping that thou wilt give him
hospitality till the dawn;” and she answered; “Even so! I will serve him
with my hearing and my sight.” So she brought forward the wine and they
drank together, after which she took the lute and tuning the strings,
preluded in one-and-twenty modes, then returning to the first, played a
lively measure and sang these couplets:—

 The tongue of love from heart bespeaks my sprite, ✿ Telling I love thee
    with love infinite:

 I have an eye bears witness to my pain, ✿ And fluttering heart sore hurt
    by parting-plight.
 I cannot hide the love that harms my life; ✿ Tears ever roll and growth
    of pine I sight:
 I knew not what love was ere loving thee; ✿ But Allah’s destiny to all
    is dight.

And when her verses were ended she said, “O Commander of the Faithful, I
have been wronged!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the damsel cried,
“O Commander of the Faithful, I have been wronged!” Quoth he, “How so,
and who hath wronged thee?” Quoth she “Thy son bought me awhile ago, for
ten thousand dirhams, meaning to give me to thee; but thy wife, the
daughter of thine uncle, sent him the said price and bade him shut me up
from thee in this chamber.” Whereupon said the Caliph. “Ask a boon of
me,” and she, “I ask thee to lie with me to-morrow night.” Replied the
Caliph, “Inshallah!” and leaving her, went away. Now as soon as it was
morning, he repaired to his sitting-room and called for Abu Nowás, but
found him not and sent his chamberlain to ask after him. The chamberlain
found him in a tavern, pawned and pledged for a score of a thousand
dirhams, which he had spent on a certain beardless youth, and questioned
him of his case. So he told him what had betided him with the comely boy
and how he had spent upon him a thousand silver pieces; whereupon quoth
the chamberlain, “Show him to me; and if he be worth this, thou art
excused.” He answered, “Patience, and thou shalt see him presently.” As
they were talking together, up came the lad, clad in a white tunic,
under which was another of red and under this yet another black. Now
when Abu Nowas saw him, he sighed a loud sigh and improvised these
couplets:—

 He showed himself in shirt of white, ✿ With eyes and eyelids
    languor-dight.
 Quoth I, “Dost pass and greet me not? ✿ Though were thy greeting a
    delight?
 Blest He who clothed in rose thy cheeks, ✿ Creates what wills He by His
    might!”
 Quoth he, “Leave prate, forsure my Lord ✿ Of works is wondrous infinite:
 My garment’s like my face and luck; ✿ All three are white on white on
    white.”

When the beardless one heard these words, he doffed the white tunic and
appeared in the red; and when Abu Nowas saw him he redoubled in
expressions of admiration and repeated these couplets:—

 He showed in garb anemone-red, ✿ A foeman “friend” entitulèd:
 Quoth I in marvel, “Thou’rt full moon ✿ Whose weed shames rose however
    red:
 Hath thy cheek stained it red, or hast ✿ Dyed it in blood by lovers
    bled?”
 Quoth he, “Sol gave me this for shirt ✿ When hasting down the West to
    bed:
 So garb and wine and hue of cheek ✿ All three are red on red on red.”

And when the verses came to an end, the beardless one doffed the red
tunic and stood in the black; and, when Abu Nowas saw him, he redoubled
in attention to him and versified in these couplets:—

 He came in sable-huèd sacque ✿ And shone in dark men’s heart to rack:
 Quoth I, “Dost pass and greet me not? ✿ Joying the hateful envious pack?
 Thy garment’s like thy locks and like ✿ My lot, three blacks on black on
    black.”

Seeing this state of things and understanding the case of Abu Nowas and
his love-longing, the Chamberlain returned to the Caliph and acquainted
him therewith; so he bade him pouch a thousand dirhams and go and take
him out of pawn. Thereupon the Chamberlain returned to Abu Nowas and,
paying his score, carried him to the Caliph, who said, “Make me some
verses containing the words, O Trusted of Allah, what may this be?”
Answered he, “I hear and I obey, O Commander of the Faithful.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Three Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu Nowas
answered, “I hear and I obey, O Commander of the Faithful!” and
forthwith he improvised these couplets:—

 Long was my night for sleepless misery; ✿ Weary of body and of thought
    ne’er free:
 I rose and in my palace walked awhile, ✿ Then wandered thro’ the halls
    of Haremry:

 Till chanced I on a blackness, which I found ✿ A white girl hid in hair
    for napery:
 Here to her for a moon of brightest sheen! ✿ Like willow-wand and veiled
    in pudency:
 I quaffed a cup to her; then drew I near, ✿ And kissed the beauty-spot
    on cheek had she:
 She woke astart, and in her sleep’s amaze, ✿ Swayed as the swaying
    branch in rain we see;
 Then rose and said to me, “O Trusted One ✿ Of Allah, O Amin, what may
    this be?”
 Quoth I, “A guest that cometh to thy tents ✿ And craves till morn thy
    hospitality.”
 She answered, “Gladly I, my lord, will grace ✿ And honour such a guest
    with ear and eye.”

Cried the Caliph, “Allah strike thee dead! it is as if thou hadst been
present with us.”[389] Then he took him by the hand and carried him to
the damsel and, when Abu Nowas saw her clad in a dress and veil of blue,
he expressed abundant admiration and improvised these couplets:—

 Say to the pretty one in veil of blue, ✿ “By Allah, O my life, have ruth
    on dole!
 For, when the fair entreats her lover foul, ✿ Sighs rend his bosom and
    bespeak his soul:
 By charms of thee and whitest cheek I swear thee, ✿ Pity a heart for
    love lost all control:
 Bend to him, be his stay ‘gainst stress of love, ✿ Nor aught accept what
    saith the ribald fool.”

Now when he ended his verse, the damsel set wine before the Caliph; and,
taking the lute, played a lively measure and sang these couplets:—

 Wilt thou be just to others in thy love, and do ✿ Unright, and put me
    off, and take new friend in lieu?
 Had lovers Kazi unto whom I might complain ✿ Of thee, he’d peradventure
    grant the due I sue:
 If thou forbid me pass your door, yet I afar ✿ Will stand, and viewing
    you waft my salams to you!

The Caliph bade her ply Abu Nowas with wine, till he lost his right
senses; thereupon he gave him a full cup, and he drank a draught of it
and held the cup in his hand till he slept. Then the Commander of the
Faithful bade the girl take the cup from his grasp and hide it; so she
took it and set it between her thighs; moreover he drew his scymitar
and, standing at the head of Abu Nowas, pricked him with the point;
whereupon he awoke and saw the drawn sword and the Caliph standing over
him. At this sight the fumes of the wine fled from his head and the
Caliph said to him, “Make me some verses and tell me therein what is
become of thy cup; or I will cut off thy head.” So he improvised these
couplets:—

 My tale, indeed, is tale unlief; ✿ ‘Twas yonder fawn who play’d the
    thief!
 She stole my cup of wine, before ✿ The sips and sups had dealt relief;
 And hid it in a certain place, ✿ My heart’s desire and longing grief.
 I name it not, for dread of him ✿ Who hath of it command-in-chief.

Quoth the Caliph, “Allah strike thee dead![390] How knewest thou that?
But we accept what thou sayst.” Then he ordered him a dress of honour
and a thousand dinars, and he went away rejoicing. And among tales they
tell is one of

-----

Footnote 387:

  The moon is masculine possibly by connection with the Assyrian
  Lune-god “Sin”; but I can find no cause for the Sun (Shams) being
  feminine.

Footnote 388:

  Arab. “Al-Amin,” a title of the Prophet. It is usually held that this
  proud name, “The honest man,” was applied by his fellow-citizens to
  Mohammed in early life; and that in his twenty-fifth year, when the
  Eighth Ka’abah was being built, it induced the tribes to make him
  their umpire concerning the distinction of placing in position the
  “Black Stone” which Gabriel had brought from Heaven to be set up as
  the starting-post for the seven circuitings. He distributed the honour
  amongst the clans and thus gave universal satisfaction. His Christian
  biographers mostly omit to record an anecdote which speaks so highly
  in Mohammed’s favour (Pilgrimage iii. 192.)

Footnote 389:

  The idea is that Abu Nowas was a thought-reader—such being the
  prerogative of inspired poets in the East. His drunkenness and
  debauchery only added to his power. I have already noticed that “Allah
  strike thee dead” (Kátala-k Allah) is like our phrase, “Confound the
  fellow, how clever he is.”

Footnote 390:

  Again said facetiously, “Devil take you!”




        THE MAN WHO STOLE THE DISH OF GOLD WHEREIN THE DOG ATE.


Some time erst there was a man, who had accumulated debts, and his case
was straitened upon him, so that he left his people and family and went
forth in distraction; and he ceased not wandering on at random till he
came after a time to a city tall of walls and firm of foundations. He
entered it in a state of despondency and despair, harried by hunger and
worn with the weariness of his way. As he passed through one of the main
streets, he saw a company of the great going along; so he followed them
till they reached a house like to a royal palace. He entered with them,
and they stayed not faring forwards till they came in presence of a
person seated at the upper end of a saloon, a man of the most dignified
and majestic aspect, surrounded by pages and eunuchs, as he were of the
sons of the Wazirs. When he saw the visitors, he rose to greet them and
received them with honour; but the poor man aforesaid was confounded at
his own boldness, when beholding——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Forty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the poor man
aforesaid was confounded at his own boldness, when beholding the
goodliness of the place and the crowd of servants and attendants; so
drawing back, in perplexity and fear for his life sat down apart in a
place afar off, where none should see him. Now it chanced that whilst he
was sitting, behold, in came a man with four sporting-dogs, whereon were
various kinds of raw silk and brocade[391] and wearing round their necks
collars of gold with chains of silver, and tied up each dog in a place
set privy for him; after which he went out and presently returned with
four dishes of gold, full of rich meats, which he set severally before
the dogs, one for each. Then he went away and left them, whilst the poor
man began to eye the food, for stress of hunger, and longed to go up to
one of the dogs and eat with him; but fear of them withheld him.
Presently, one of the dogs looked at him and Allah Almighty inspired the
dog with a knowledge of his case; so he drew back from the platter and
signed to the man, who came and ate till he was filled. Then he would
have withdrawn, but the dog again signed to him to take for himself the
dish and what food was left in it, and pushed it towards him with his
fore-paw. So the man took the dish and leaving the house, went his way,
and none followed him. Then he journeyed to another city where he sold
the dish and buying with the price a stock-in-trade, returned to his own
town. There he sold his goods and paid his debts; and he throve and
became affluent and rose to perfect prosperity. He abode in his own
land; but after some years had passed he said to himself, “Needs must I
repair to the city of the owner of the dish, and' carry him a fit and
handsome present and pay him the money-value of that which his dog
bestowed upon me.” So he took the price of the dish and a suitable gift;
and, setting out, journeyed day and night, till he came to that city; he
entered it and sought the place where the man lived; but he found there
naught save ruins mouldering in row and croak of crow, and house and
home desolate and all conditions in changed state. At this, his heart
and soul were troubled, and he repeated the saying of him who saith:—

 Void are the private rooms of treasury: ✿ As void were hearts of fear
    and piety:
 Changed is the Wady nor are its gazelles ✿ Those fawns, nor sand-hills
    those I wont to see.

And that of another:—

 In sleep came Su’adá’s[392] shade and wakened me ✿ Near dawn, when
    comrades all a-sleeping lay:
 But waking found I that the shade was fled, ✿ And saw air empty and
    shrine far away.

Now when the man saw these mouldering ruins and witnessed what the hand
of time had manifestly done with the place, leaving but traces of the
substantial things that erewhiles had been, a little reflection made it
needless for him to enquire of the case; so he turned away. Presently,
seeing a wretched man, in a plight which made him shudder and feel
goose-skin, and which would have moved the very rock to ruth, he said to
him, “Ho thou! What have time and fortune done with the lord of this
place? Where are his lovely faces, his shining full moons and splendid
stars; and what is the cause of the ruin that is come upon his abode, so
that nothing save the walls thereof remain?” Quoth the other, “He is the
miserable thou seest mourning that which hath left him naked.” But
knowest thou not the words of the Apostle (whom Allah bless and keep!),
wherein is a lesson to him who will learn by it and a warning to whoso
will be warned thereby and guided in the right way, “Verily it is the
way of Allah Almighty to raise up nothing of this world, except He cast
it down again?”[393] “If thou question of the cause of this accident,
indeed it is no wonder, considering the chances and changes of Fortune.
I was the lord of this place and I builded it and founded it and owned
it; and I was the proud possessor of its full moons lucent and its
circumstance resplendent and its damsels radiant and its garniture
magnificent, but Time turned and did away from me wealth and servants
and took from me what it had lent (not given); and brought upon me
calamities which it held in store hidden. But there must needs be some
reason for this thy question: so tell it me and leave wondering.”
Thereupon, the man who had waxed wealthy being sore concerned, told him
the whole story, and added, “I have brought thee a present, such as
souls desire, and the price of thy dish of gold which I took; for it was
the cause of my affluence after poverty, and of the replenishment of my
dwelling-place, after desolation, and of the dispersion of my trouble
and straitness.” But the man shook his head, and weeping and groaning
and complaining of his lot answered, “Ho thou! methinks thou art mad;
for this is not the way of a man of sense. How should a dog of mine make
generous gift to thee of a dish of gold and I meanly take back the price
of what a dog gave? This were indeed a strange thing! Were I in
extremest unease and misery, by Allah, I would not accept of thee aught;
no, not the worth of a nail-paring! So return whence thou camest in
health and safety.”[394] Whereupon the merchant kissed his feet and
taking leave of him, returned whence he came, praising him and reciting
this couplet:—

 Men and dogs together are all gone by; ✿ So peace be with all of them!
    dogs and men!

And Allah is All-knowing! Again men tell the tale of

-----

Footnote 391:

  In all hot-damp countries it is necessary to clothe dogs, morning and
  evening especially: otherwise they soon die of rheumatism and loin
  disease.

Footnote 392:

  = Beatrice. A fragment of these lines is in Night cccxv. See also
  Night dcclxxxi.

Footnote 393:

  The Moslems borrowed the horrible idea of a “jealous God” from their
  kinsmen, the Jews. Every race creates its own Deity after the fashion
  of itself: Jehovah is distinctly a Hebrew; the Christian Theos is
  originally a Judæo-Greek and Allah a half-Badawi Arab. In this tale
  Allah, despotic and unjust, brings a generous and noble-minded man to
  beggary, simply because he fed his dogs off gold plate. Wisdom and
  morality have their infancy and youth: the great value of such tales
  as these is to show and enable us to measure man’s development.

Footnote 394:

  In Trébutien (Lane ii. 501) the merchant says to ex-Dives, “Thou art
  wrong in charging Destiny with injustice. If thou art ignorant of the
  cause of thy ruin I will acquaint thee with it. Thou feddest the dogs
  in dishes of gold and leftest the poor to die of hunger.” A
  superstition, but intelligible.




           THE SHARPER OF ALEXANDRIA AND THE CHIEF OF POLICE.


There was once in the coast-fortress of Alexandria, a Chief of Police,
Husám al-Din hight, the sharp Scymitar of the Faith. Now one night as he
sat in his seat of office, behold, there came in to him a trooper-wight
who said, “Know, O my lord the Chief, that I entered your city this
night and alighted at such a khan and slept there till a third part of
the night was past, when I awoke and found my saddle-bags sliced open
and a purse of a thousand gold pieces stolen from them.” No sooner had
he done speaking than the Chief summoned his chief officials and bade
them lay hands on all in the khan and clap them in limbo till the
morning; and on the morrow, he caused bring the rods and whips used in
punishment; and, sending for the prisoners, was about to flog them till
they confessed in the presence of the owner of the stolen money when,
lo! a man broke through the crowd till he came up to the Chief of
Police,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Forty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Chief was
about to flog them when lo! a man broke through the crowd till he came
up to the Chief of Police and the trooper and said, “Ho! Emir, let these
folk go, for they are wrongously accused. It was I who robbed this
trooper, and see, here is the purse I stole from his saddle-bags.” So
saying, he pulled out the purse from his sleeve and laid it before
Husam' al-Din, who said to the soldier, “Take thy money and pouch it;
thou now hast no ground of complaint against the people of the khan.”
Thereupon these folk and all who were present fell to praising the thief
and blessing him; but he said, “Ho! Emir, the skill is not in that I
came to thee in person and brought thee the purse; the cleverness was in
taking it a second time from this trooper.” Asked the Chief, “And how
didst thou do to take it, O sharper?”; and the robber replied, “O Emir,
I was standing in the Shroff’s[395] bazar at Cairo, when I saw this
soldier receive the gold in change and put it in yonder purse; so I
followed him from by-street to by-street, but found no occasion of
stealing it. Then he travelled from Cairo and I followed him from town
to town, plotting and planning by the way to rob him, but without avail,
till he entered this city and I dogged him to the khan. I took up my
lodging beside him and watched him till he fell asleep and I heard him
sleeping; when I went up to him softly, softly; and I slit open his
saddle-bags with this knife, and took the purse in the way I am now
taking it.” So saying, he put out his hand and took the purse from
before the Chief of Police and the trooper both of whom, together with
the folk, drew back watching him and thinking he would show them how he
took the purse from the saddle-bags. But, behold! he suddenly broke into
a run and threw himself into a pool of standing water[396] hard by. So
the Chief of the Police shouted to his officers, “Stop thief!” and many
made after him; but before they could doff their clothes and descend the
steps, he had made off; and they sought for him, but found him not; for
that the by-streets and lanes of Alexandria all communicate. So they
came back without bringing the purse; and the Chief of Police said to
the trooper, “Thou hast no demand upon the folk; for thou foundest him
who robbed thee and receivedst back thy money, but didst not keep it.”
So the trooper went away, having lost his money, whilst the folk were
delivered from his hands and those of the Chief of Police; and all this
was of the favour of Almighty Allah.[397] And they also tell the tale of

-----

Footnote 395:

  Arab. “Sarráf” = a money-changer.

Footnote 396:

  Arab. “Birkah,” a common feature in the landscapes of Lower Egypt; it
  is either a natural pool left by the overflow of the Nile; or, as in
  the text, a built-up tank, like the “Táláb” for which India is famous.
  Sundry of these Birkahs are or were in Cairo itself; and some are
  mentioned in The Nights.

Footnote 397:

  This sneer at the “military” and the “police” might come from an
  English convict’s lips.




           AL-MALIK AL-NASIR AND THE THREE CHIEFS OF POLICE.


Once upon a time Al-Malik al-Násir[398] sent for the Wális or Chiefs of
Police of Cairo, Bulak, and Fostat[399] and said to them, “I desire each
of you to recount me the marvellousest thing that hath befallen him
during his term of office.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth Al-Malik
al-Nasir to the three Walis, “I desire each of you to recount me the
marvellousest thing which hath befallen him during his term of office.”
So they answered, “We hear and we obey.” Then said the Chief of the
Police of Cairo, “Know thou, O our lord the Sultan, the most wonderful
thing that befel me, during my term of office, was on this wise:” and he
began


              _THE STORY OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE OF CAIRO._

There were in this city two men of good repute fit to bear witness[400]
in matters of murder and wounds; but they were both secretly addicted to
intrigues with low women and to wine-bibbing and to dissolute doings,
nor could I succeed (do what I would) in bringing them to book; and I
began to despair of success. So I charged the taverners and
confectioners and fruiterers and candle-chandlers and the keepers of
brothels and bawdy houses to acquaint me of these two good men whenever
they should anywhere be engaged in drinking or other debauchery, or
together or apart; and ordered that, if they both or if either of them
bought at their shops aught for the purpose of wassail and carousal, the
vendors should not conceal it from me. And they replied, “We hear and
obey.” Presently it chanced that one night, a man came to me and said,
“O my master, know that the two just men, the two witnesses, are in such
a street in such a house, engaged in abominable wickedness.” So I
disguised myself, I and my body-servant, and ceased not trudging till I
came to the house and knocked at the door, whereupon a slave-girl came
out and opened to me, saying, “Who art thou?” I entered without
answering her and saw the two legal witnesses and the house-master
sitting, and lewd women by their side and before them great plenty of
wine. When they saw me, they rose to receive me, and made much of me,
seating me in the place of honour and saying to me, “Welcome for an
illustrious guest and well come for a pleasant cup-companion!” And on
this wise they met me without showing a sign of alarm or trouble.
Presently, the master of the house arose from amongst us and went out
and returned after a while with three hundred dinars, when the men said
to me, without the least fear, “Know, O our lord the Wali, it is in thy
power to do even more than disgrace and punish us; but this will bring
thee in return nothing but weariness: so we reck thou wouldest do better
to take this much money and protect us; for Almighty Allah is named the
Protector and loveth those of His servants who protect their Moslem
neighbours; and thou shalt have thy reward in this world and due
recompense in the world to come.” So I said to myself, “I will take the
money and protect them this once; but, if ever again I have them in my
power, I will take my wreak of them;” for, you see, the money had
tempted me. Thereupon I took it and went away thinking that no one would
know it; but, next day, on a sudden one of the Kazi’s messengers came to
me and said to me, “O Wali, be good enough to answer the summons of the
Kazi who wanteth thee.” So I arose and accompanied him, knowing not the
meaning of all this; and when I came into the judge’s presence, I saw
the two witnesses and the master of the house, who had given me the
money, sitting by his side. Thereupon this man rose and sued me for
three hundred dinars, nor was it in my power to deny the debt; for he
produced a written obligation and his two companions, the legal
witnesses, testified against me that I owed the amount. Their evidence
satisfied the Kazi and he ordered me to pay the sum; nor did I leave the
Court till they had of me the three hundred gold pieces. So I went away,
in the utmost wrath and shame, vowing mischief and vengeance against
them and repenting that I had not punished them. Such, then is the most
remarkable event which befel me during my term of office. Thereupon rose
the Chief of the Bulak Police and said, “As for me, O our lord the
Sultan, the most marvellous thing that happened to me, since I became
Wali, was as follows:” and he began


             _THE STORY OF THE CHIEF OF THE BULAK POLICE._

I was once in debt to the full amount of three hundred thousand gold
pieces;[401] and, being distressed thereby, I sold all that was behind
me and what was before me and all I hent in hand, but I could collect no
more than an hundred thousand dinars——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wali of Bulak
continued:—So I sold all that was behind and before me, but could
collect no more than an hundred thousand dinars and remained in great
perplexity. Now one night, as I sat at home in this state, behold, there
came a knocking; so I said to one of my servants, “See who is at the
door.” He went out and returned, wan of face, changed in countenance and
with his side-muscles a-quivering; so I asked him, “What aileth thee?”;
and he answered, “There is a man at the door; he is half naked, clad in
skins, with sword in hand and knife in girdle, and with him are a
company of the same fashion and he asketh for thee.” So I took my sword
and going out to see who these were, behold, I found them as the boy had
reported and said to them, “What is your business?” They replied, “Of a
truth we be thieves and have done fine work this night; so we appointed
the swag to thy use, that thou mayst pay therewith the debts which
sadden thee and deliver thee from thy distress.” Quoth I, “Where is the
plunder?”; and they brought me a great chest, full of vessels of gold
and silver; which when I saw, I rejoiced and said to myself, “Herewith I
will settle all claims upon me and there will remain as much again.” So
I took the money and going inside said in my mind, “It were ignoble to
let them fare away empty-handed.” Whereupon I brought out the hundred
thousand dinars I had by me and gave it to them, thanking them for their
kindness; and they pouched the monies and went their way, under cover of
the night so that none might know of them. But when morning dawned I
examined the contents of the chest, and found them copper and tin[402]
washed with gold worth five hundred dirhams at the most; and this was
grievous to me, for I had lost what monies I had and trouble was added
to my trouble. Such, then, is the most remarkable event which befel me
during my term of office. Then rose the Chief of the Police of Old Cairo
and said, “O our lord the Sultan, the most marvellous thing that
happened to me, since I became Wali, was on this wise;” and he began


           _THE STORY OF THE CHIEF OF THE OLD CAIRO POLICE._

I once hanged ten thieves each on his own gibbet, and especially charged
the guards to watch them and hinder the folk from taking any one of them
down. Next morning when I came to look at them, I found two bodies
hanging from one gallows and said to the guards, “Who did this, and
where is the tenth gibbet?” But they denied all knowledge of it, and I
was about to beat them till they owned the truth, when they said, “Know,
O Emir, that we fell asleep last night, and when we awoke, we found that
some one had stolen one of the bodies, gibbet and all; so we were
alarmed and feared thy wrath. But, behold, up came a peasant-fellow
driving his ass; whereupon we laid hands on him and killed him and
hanged his body upon this gallows, in the stead of the thief who had
been stolen.”[403] Now when I heard this, I marvelled and asked them,
“What had he with him?”; and they answered, “He had a pair of
saddle-bags on the ass.” Quoth I, “What was in them?”; quoth they, “We
know not.” So I said, “Bring them hither;” and when they brought them to
me I bade open them, behold, therein was the body of a murdered man, cut
in pieces. Now as soon as I saw this, I marvelled at the case and said
in myself, “Glory to God! The cause of the hanging of this peasant was
none other but his crime against this murdered man; and thy Lord is not
unjust towards His servants.”[404] And men also tell the tale of

-----

Footnote 398:

  Lit. “The conquering King;” a dynastic title assumed by Saláh al-Dín
  (Saladin) and sundry of the Ayyúbi (Eyoubite) sovereigns of Egypt,
  whom I would call the “Soldans.”

Footnote 399:

  “Káhirah” (_i.e._ City of Mars—the Planet) is our Cairo: Bulak is the
  port-suburb on the Nile, till 1858 wholly disjoined from the City; and
  Fostat is the outlier popularly called Old Cairo. The latter term is
  generally translated “town of leathern tents;” but in Arabic “fustát”
  is an abode of Sha’ar = hair, such as horse-hair, in fact any hair but
  “Wabar” = soft hair, as the camel’s. See Lane, Lex.

Footnote 400:

  Arab. “Adl” = just: a legal witness to whose character there is no
  tangible objection—a prime consideration in Moslem law. Here “Adl” is
  evidently used ironically for a hypocritical rascal.

Footnote 401:

  Lane (ii. 503) considers three thousand dinars (the figure in the
  Bres. Edit) “a more probable sum.” Possibly: but, I repeat,
  exaggeration is one of the many characteristics of The Nights.

Footnote 402:

  Calc. Edit. “Kazír”: the word is generally written “Kazdír,” Sansk.
  Kastira, both probably from the Greek κασσιτέρος.

Footnote 403:

  This would have passed for a peccadillo in the “good old days.” As
  late as 1840 the Arnaut soldiers used to “pot” any peasant who dared
  to ride (instead of walking) past their barracks. Life is cheap in hot
  countries.

Footnote 404:

  Koran, xli. 46—a passage expounding the doctrine of free will: “He who
  doth right, doth it to the advantage of his own soul; and he who doth
  evil, doth it against the same; for thy Lord,” etc.




                       THE THIEF AND THE SHROFF.


A certain Shroff, bearing a bag of gold pieces, once passed by a company
of thieves, and one of these sharpers said to the others, “I, and I
only, have the power to steal yonder purse.” So they asked, “How wilt
thou do it?”; and he answered, “Lookye all!”; and followed the
money-changer, till he entered his house, when he threw the bag on a
shelf[405] and, being affected with diabetes, went into the chapel of
ease to do his want, calling to the slave-girl, “Bring me an ewer of
water.” She took the ewer and followed him to the privy, leaving the
door open, whereupon the thief entered and, seizing the money-bag, made
off with it to his companions, to whom he told what had passed.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the thief took the
money-bag and made off with it to his companions to whom he told what
had passed. Said they, “By Allah, thou hast played a clever trick! ‘tis
not every one could do it; but, presently the money-changer will come
out of the privy; and, missing the bag of money, he will beat the
slave-girl and torture her with grievous torture. ‘Tis as though thou
hast at present done nothing worthy of praise; so, if thou be indeed a
sharper, return and save the girl from being beaten and questioned.”
Quoth he, “Inshallah! I will save both girl and purse.” Then the prig
went back to the Shroff’s house and found him punishing the girl because
of the purse; so he knocked at the door and the man said, “Who is
there?” Cried the thief, “I am the servant of thy neighbour in the
Exchange;” whereupon he came out to him and said, “What is thy
business?” The thief replied, “My master saluteth thee and saith to
thee:—Surely thou art deranged and thoroughly so, to cast the like of
this bag of money down at the door of thy shop and go away and leave it.
Had a stranger hit upon it he had made off with it and, except my master
had seen it and taken care of it, it had assuredly been lost to thee.”
So saying, he pulled out the purse and showed it to the Shroff who on
seeing it said, “That is my very purse,” and put out his hand to take
it; but the thief said, “By Allah, I will not give thee this same, till
thou write me a receipt declaring that thou hast received it! for indeed
I fear my master will not believe that thou hast recovered the purse,
unless I bring him thy writing to that effect, and sealed with thy
signet-seal.” The money-changer went in to write the paper required; and
in the meantime the thief made off with the bag of money and thus was
the slave-girl saved her beating. And men also tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 405:

  Arab. “Suffah”; whence our Sofa. In Egypt it is a raised shelf
  generally of stone, about four feet high and headed with one or more
  arches. It is an elaborate variety of the simple “Ták” or niche, a
  mere hollow in the thickness of the wall. Both are used for such
  articles as basin, ewer and soap; coffee-cups, water-bottles, etc.




              THE CHIEF OF THE KUS POLICE AND THE SHARPER.


It is related that Alá al-Dín, Chief of Police at Kús,[406] was sitting
one night in his house, when behold, a personage of handsome appearance
and dignified aspect came to the door, accompanied by a servant bearing
a chest upon his head and, standing there said to one of the Wali’s
young men, “Go in and tell the Emir that I would have audience of him on
some privy business.” So the servant went in and told his master, who
bade admit the visitor. When he entered, the Emir saw him to be a man of
handsome semblance and portly presence; so he received him with honour
and high distinction, seating him beside himself, and said to him, “What
is thy wish?” Replied the stranger, “I am a highwayman and am minded to
repent at thy hands and turn to Almighty Allah; but I would have thee
help me to this, for that I am in thy district and under thine
inspection. Now I have here a chest, wherein are matters worth some
forty thousand dinars; and none hath so good a right to it as thou; so
do thou take it and give me in exchange a thousand dinars, of thine own
monies lawfully gotten, that I may have a little capital, to aid me in
my repentance,[407] and save me from resorting to sin for my
subsistence; and with Allah Almighty be thy reward!” Speaking thus he
opened the chest and showed the Wali that it was full of trinkets and
jewels and bullion and ring-gems and pearls, whereat he was amazed and
rejoiced with great joy. So he cried out to his treasurer, saying,
“Bring hither a certain purse containing a thousand dinars,”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wali cried out
to his treasurer, saying, “Bring hither a certain purse containing a
thousand dinars”; and gave it to the highwayman, who took it and
thanking him, went his way under cover of the night. Now when it was the
morrow, the Emir sent for the chief of the goldsmiths and showed him the
chest and what was therein; but the goldsmith found it nothing but tin
and brass, and the jewels and bezel-stones and pearls all of glass;
whereat the Wali was sore chagrined and sent in quest of the highwayman;
but none could come at him. And men also tell the tale of

-----

Footnote 406:

  In Upper Egypt (Apollinopolis Parva) pronounced “Goos,” the Coptic
  Kos-Birbir, once an emporium of the Arabian trade.

Footnote 407:

  This would appeal strongly to a pious Moslem.




            IBRAHIM BIN AL-MAHDI AND THE MERCHANT’S SISTER.


The Caliph Al-Maamún once said to his uncle Ibrahim bin Al-Mahdí, “Tell
us the most remarkable thing that thou hast ever seen.” Answered he:—I
hear and obey, O Commander of the Faithful. Know that I rode out one
day, a-pleasuring, and my ride brought me to a place where I smelt the
reek of food. So my soul longed for it and I halted, O Prince of True
Believers, perplexed and unable either to go on or to go in. Presently,
I raised my eyes and lo! I espied a lattice-window and behind it a
wrist, than which I never beheld aught lovelier. The sight turned my
brain and I forgot the smell of the food and began to plan and plot how
I should get access to the house. After awhile, I observed a tailor hard
by and going up to him, saluted him. He returned my salam and I asked
him, “Whose house is that?” And he answered, “It belongeth to a merchant
called such an one, son of such an one, who consorteth with none save
merchants.” As we were talking, behold, up came two men, of comely
aspect with intelligent countenances, riding on horseback; and the
tailor told me that they were the merchant’s most intimate friends and
acquainted me with their names. So I urged my beast towards them and
said to them, “Be I your ransom! Abu Fulán[408] awaiteth you!”; and I
rode with them both to the gate, where I entered and they also. Now when
the master of the house saw me with them he doubted not but I was their
friend; so he welcomed me and seated me in the highest stead. Then they
brought the table of food and I said in myself, “Allah hath granted me
my desire of the food; and now there remain the hand and the wrist.”
After awhile, we removed for carousal to another room, which I found
tricked out with all manner of rarities; and the host paid me particular
attention, addressing his talk to me, for that he took me to be a guest
of his guests; whilst in like manner these two made much of me, taking
me for a friend of their friend the house-master. Thus I was the object
of politest attentions till we had drunk several cups of wine and there
came into us a damsel as she were a willow-wand of the utmost beauty and
elegance, who took a lute and playing a lively measure, sang these
couplets:—

 Is it not strange one house us two contain ✿ And still thou draw’st not
    near, or talk we twain?
 Only our eyes tell secrets of our souls, ✿ And broken hearts by lovers’
    fiery pain;
 Winks with the eyelids, signs the eyebrow knows; ✿ Languishing looks and
    hand saluting fain.

When I heard these words my vitals were stirred, O Commander of the
Faithful, and I was moved to delight, for her excessive loveliness and
the beauty of the verses she sang; and I envied her her skill and said,
“There lacketh somewhat to thee, O damsel!” Whereupon she threw the lute
from her hand in anger, and cried, “Since when are ye wont to bring
ill-mannered louts into your assemblies?” Then I repented of what I had
done, seeing the company vexed with me, and I said in my mind, “My hopes
are lost by me”; and I weeted no way of escaping blame but to call for a
lute, saying, “I will show you what escaped her in the air she played.”
Quoth the folk, “We hear and obey”; so they brought me a lute and I
tuned the strings and sang these verses:—

 This is thy friend perplexed for pain and pine, ✿ Th’ enamoured, down
    whose breast course drops of brine:
 He hath this hand to the Compassionate raised ✿ For winning wish, and
    that on hearts is lien:
 O thou who seest one love-perishing, ✿ His death is caused by those
    hands and eyne![409]

Whereupon the damsel sprang up and throwing herself at my feet, kissed
them and said, “It is thine to excuse, O my Master! By Allah, I knew not
thy quality nor heard I ever the like of this performance!” And all
began extolling me and making much of me, being beyond measure
delighted, and at last they besought me to sing again. So I sang a merry
air, whereupon they all became drunken with music and wine, their wits
left them and they were carried off to their homes, while I abode alone
with the host and the girl. He drank some cups with me and then said, “O
my lord, my life hath been lived in vain for that I have not known the
like of thee till the present. Now, by Allah, tell me who thou art, that
I may ken who is the cup-companion whom Allah hath bestowed on me this
night.” At first I returned him evasive answers and would not tell him
my name; but he conjured me till I told him who I was; whereupon he
sprang to his feet——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ibrahim son of
Al-Mahdi continued:—Now when the house-master heard my name he sprang to
his feet and said, “Indeed I wondered that such gifts should belong to
any but the like of thee; and Fortune hath done me a good turn for which
I cannot thank her too much. But, haply, this is a dream; for how could
I hope that one of the Caliphate house should visit my humble home and
carouse with me this night?” I conjured him to be seated; so he sat down
and began to question me as to the cause of my visit in the most
courteous terms. So I told him the whole affair, first and last, hiding
naught, and said to him, “Now as to the food I have had my will, but of
the hand and wrist I have still to win my wish.” Quoth he, “Thou shalt
have thy desire of the hand and wrist also, Inshallah!” Then said he to
the slave-girl, “Ho, such an one, bid such an one come down.” And he
called his slave-girls down, one by one and showed them to me; but I saw
not my mistress among them, and he said, “O my lord, there is none left
save my mother and sister; but, by Allah, I must needs have them also
down and show them to thee.” So I marvelled at his courtesy and
large-heartedness and said, “May I be thy sacrifice! Begin with the
sister;” and he answered, “With joy and goodwill.” So she came down and
he showed me her hand and behold, she was the owner of the hand and
wrist. Quoth I, “Allah make me thy ransom! this is the damsel whose hand
and wrist I saw at the lattice.” Then he sent his servants without stay
or delay for witnesses and bringing out two myriads[410] of gold pieces,
said to the witnesses, “This our lord and master, Ibrahim son of
Al-Mahdi, paternal uncle of the Commander of the Faithful, seeketh in
marriage my sister such an one; and I call you to witness that I give
her in wedlock to him and that he hath settled upon her ten thousand
dinars.” And he said to me, “I give thee my sister in marriage, at the
portion aforesaid.” “I consent,” answered I, “and am herewith content.”
Whereupon he gave one of the bags to her and the other to the witnesses,
and said to me, “O our lord, I desire to adorn a chamber for thee, where
thou mayst sleep with thy wife.” But I was abashed at his generosity and
was ashamed to lie with her in his house; so I said, “Equip her and send
her to my place.” “And by thy being, O Commander of the Faithful, he
sent me with her such an equipage that my house, for all its greatness,
was too strait to hold it! And I begot on her this boy that standeth in
thy presence.” Then Al-Maamun marvelled at the man’s generosity and
said, “Gifted of Allah is he! Never heard I of his like.” And he bade
Ibrahim bin al-Mahdi bring him to court, that he might see him. He
brought him and the Caliph conversed with him; and his wit and good
breeding so pleased him that he made him one of his chief officers. And
Allah is the Giver, the Bestower! Men also relate the tale of

-----

Footnote 408:

  _i.e._ “the father of a certain person”; here the merchant whose name
  may have been Abu’l Hasan, etc. The useful word (thingumbob, what d’ye
  call him, donchah, etc.) has been bodily transferred into Spanish and
  Portugese—Fulano. It is of old genealogy, found in the Heb. Fuluní
  which applies to a person only in Ruth iv. 1; but is constantly so
  employed by Rabbinic writers. The Greek use ὁ δεῖνα.

Footnote 409:

  Lit. “by his (_i.e._ her) hand,” etc. Hence Lane (ii. 507) makes
  nonsense of the line.

Footnote 410:

  Arab. “Badrah,” as has been said, is properly a weight of 10,000
  dirhams or drachmas; but popularly used for largesse thrown to the
  people at festivals.




    THE WOMAN WHOSE HANDS WERE CUT OFF FOR GIVING ALMS TO THE POOR.


A certain King once made proclamation to the people of his realm saying,
“If any of you give alms of aught, I will verily and assuredly cut off
his hand;” wherefore all the people abstained from alms-deed, and none
could give anything to any one. Now it chanced that one day a beggar
accosted a certain woman (and indeed hunger was sore upon him), and said
to her, “Give me an alms”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King that, quoth the beggar
to the woman, “Give me an alms however small.” But she answered him,
“How can I give thee aught, when the King cutteth off the hands of all
who give alms?” Then he said, “I conjure thee by Allah Almighty, give me
an alms;” so when he adjured her by the Holy Name of Allah, she had ruth
on him and gave him two scones. The King heard of this; whereupon he
called her before him and cut off her hands, after which she returned to
her house. Now it chanced after a while that the King said to his
mother, “I have a mind to take a wife; so do thou marry me to a fair
woman.” Quoth she, “There is among our female slaves one who is
unsurpassed in beauty; but she hath a grievous blemish.” The King asked,
“What is that?” and his mother answered, “She hath had both her hands
cut off.” Said he, “Let me see her.” So she brought her to him, and he
was ravished by her and married her and went in unto her; and begat upon
her a son. Now this was the woman who had given two scones as an alms to
the asker, and whose hands had been cut off therefor; and when the King
married her, her fellow-wives envied her and wrote to the common husband
that she was an unchaste, having just given birth to the boy; so he
wrote to his mother, bidding her carry the woman into the desert and
leave her there. The old Queen obeyed his commandment and abandoned the
woman and her son in the desert; whereupon she fell to weeping for that
which had befallen her and wailing with exceeding sore wail. As she went
along, she came to a river and knelt down to drink, being overcome with
excess of thirst, for fatigue of walking and for grief; but, as she bent
her head, the child which was at her neck fell into the water. Then she
sat weeping bitter tears for her child, and as she wept, behold came up
two men, who said to her, “What maketh thee weep?” Quoth she, “I had a
child at my neck, and he hath fallen into the water.” They asked, “Wilt
thou that we bring him out to thee?” and she answered, “Yes.” So they
prayed to Almighty Allah, and the child came forth of the water to her,
safe and sound. Then said they, “Wilt thou that Allah restore thee thy
hands as they were?” “Yes,” replied she: whereupon they prayed to Allah
(extolled and exalted be He!) and her hands were restored to her,
goodlier than before. Then said they, “Knowest thou who we are?” and she
replied, “Allah is all-knowing;”[411] and they said, “We are thy two
Scones of Bread, which thou gavest in alms to the asker and which were
the cause of the cutting off of thy hands.[412] So praise thou Allah
Almighty for that He hath restored to thee thy hands and thy child.”
Then she praised Almighty Allah and glorified Him. And men relate a tale
of

-----

Footnote 411:

  Arab. “Allaho A’alam”; (God knows!) here the popular phrase for our,
  “I know not;” when it would be rude to say bluntly “M’adri” = “don’t
  know.”

Footnote 412:

  There is a picturesque Moslem idea that good deeds become incarnate
  and assume human shapes to cheer the doer in his grave, to greet him
  when he enters Paradise and so forth. It was borrowed from the highly
  imaginative faith of the Guebre, the Zoroastrian. On Chinavad or
  Chanyud-pul (Sirát), the Judgement bridge 37 rods (_rasan_) long,
  straight and 37 fathoms broad for the good, and crooked and narrow as
  sword-edge for the bad, a nymph-like form will appear to the virtuous
  and say, “I am the personification of thy good deeds!” In Hell there
  will issue from a fetid gale a gloomy figure with head like a minaret,
  red eyeballs, hooked nose, teeth like pillars, spear-like fangs, snaky
  locks etc., and when asked who he is he will reply, “I am the
  personification of thine evil acts!” (Dabistan i. 285.) The Hindus
  also personify everything.




                         THE DEVOUT ISRAELITE.


There was once a devout man of the children of Israel,[413] whose family
span cotton-thread; and he used every day to sell the yarn and buy fresh
cotton, and with the profit he laid in daily bread for his household.
One morning he went out and sold the day’s yarn as wont, when there met
him one of his brethren, who complained to him of need; so he gave him
the price of the thread and returned, empty-handed, to his family, who
said to him, “Where is the cotton and the food?” Quoth he, “Such an one
met me and complained to me of want; whereupon I gave him the price of
the yarn.” And they said, “How shall we do? We have nothing to sell.”
Now they had a cracked trencher[414] and a jar; so he took them to the
bazar but none would buy them of him. However presently, as he stood in
the market, there passed by a man with a fish——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the man took the
trencher and jar to the bazar, but none would buy them of him. However
there presently passed by a man with a fish which was so stinking and so
swollen that no one would buy it of him, and he said to the Jew, “Wilt
thou sell me thine unsaleable ware for mine?” “Yes,” answered the Jew;
and, giving him the wooden trencher and jar, took the fish and carried
it home to his family, who said, “What shall we do with this fish?”
Quoth he, “We will broil it and eat it, till it please Allah to provide
bread for us.” So they took it and ripping open its belly, found therein
a great pearl and told the head of the household who said, “See ye if it
be pierced: if so, it belongeth to some one of the folk; if not, ‘tis a
provision of Allah for us.” So they examined it and found it unpierced.
Now when it was the morrow, the Jew carried it to one of his brethren
which was an expert in jewels, and the man asked, “O such an one! whence
haddest thou this pearl?”; whereto the Jew answered, “It was a gift of
Almighty Allah to us,” and the other said, “It is worth a thousand
dirhams and I will give thee that; but take it to such an one, for he
hath more money and skill than I.” So the Jew took it to the jeweller,
who said, “It is worth seventy thousand dirhams and no more.” Then he
paid him that sum and the Jew hired two porters to carry the money to
his house. As he came to his door, a beggar accosted him, saying, “Give
me of that which Allah hath given thee.” Quoth the Jew to the asker,
“But yesterday we were even as thou; take thee half this money:” so he
made two parts of it, and each took his half. Then said the beggar,
“Take back thy money and Allah bless and prosper thee in it; I am a
Messenger,[415] whom thy Lord hath sent to try thee.” Quoth the Jew, “To
Allah be the praise and the thanks!” and abode in all delight of life he
and his household till death. And men recount this story of

-----

Footnote 413:

  Arab. “Banú Israíl;” applied to the Jews when theirs was the True
  Faith _i.e._ “before the coming of Jesus, the Messiah, whose mission
  completed that of Moses and made it obsolete (Matrúk) even as the
  mission of Jesus was completed and abrogated by that of Mohammed.” The
  term “Yahúd” = Jew is applied scornfully to the Chosen People after
  they rejected the Messiah, but as I have said “Israelite” is used on
  certain occasions, Jew on others.

Footnote 414:

  Arab. “Kasa’ah,” a wooden bowl, a porringer; also applied to a saucer.

Footnote 415:

  Arab. “Rasúl” = one sent, an angel, an “apostle;” not to be
  translated, as by the vulgar, “prophet.” Moreover Rasul is higher than
  Nabí (prophet), such as Abraham Isaac, etc., depositaries of Al-Islam,
  but with a succession restricted to their own families. Nabi-mursil
  (Prophet-apostle) is the highest of all, one sent with a book: of
  these are now only four, Moses, David, Jesus and Mohammed, the
  writings of the rest having perished. In Al-Islam also angels rank
  below men, being only intermediaries (= ἄγγελοι, nuncii, messengers)
  between the Creator and the Created. This knowledge once did me a good
  turn at Harar, not a safe place in those days (First Footsteps in East
  Africa, p. 349).




               ABU HASSAN AL-ZIYADI AND THE KHORASAN MAN.


Quoth Abú Hassán al-Ziyádi[416]:—I was once in straitened case and so
needy that the grocer, the baker and other tradesmen dunned and
importuned me; and my misery became extreme, for I knew of no resource
nor what to do. Things being on this wise there came to me one day
certain of my servants and said to me, “At the door is a pilgrim wight,
who seeketh admission to thee.” Quoth I, “Admit him.” So he came in and
behold, he was a Khorasání. We exchanged salutations and he said to me,
“Tell me, art thou Abu Hassan al-Ziyadi?”; and I replied, “Yes, what is
thy wish?” Quoth he, “I am a stranger and am minded to make the
pilgrimage; but I have with me a great sum of money, which is burdensome
to bear: so I wish to deposit these ten thousand dirhams with thee
whilst I make my pilgrimage and return. If the caravan march back and
thou see me not, then know that I am dead, in which case the money is a
gift from me to thee; but if I come back, it shall be mine.” I answered,
“Be it as thou wilt, an thus please Allah Almighty.” So he brought out a
leather bag and I said to the servant, “Fetch the scales;” and when he
brought them the man weighed out the money and handed it to me, after
which he went his way. Then I called the purveyors and paid them my
liabilities——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say


         Now when it was the Three Hundred and Fiftieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth Abu Hassan
al-Ziyadi:—I called the purveyors and paid them my liabilities and spent
freely and amply, saying to myself, “By the time he returns, Allah will
have relieved me with one or other of the bounties He hath by Him.”
However, on the very next day. the servant came in to me and said, “Thy
friend the Khorasan man is at the door.” “Admit him,” answered I. So he
came in and said to me, “I had purposed to make the pilgrimage; but news
hath reached me of the decease of my father, and I have resolved to
return; so give me the monies I deposited with thee yesterday.” When I
heard this, I was troubled and perplexed beyond measure of perplexity
known to man and wotted not what reply to make him; for, if I denied it,
he would put me on my oath, and I should be disgraced in the world to
come; whilst, if I told him that I had spent the money, he would make an
outcry and dishonour me before men. So I said to him, “Allah give thee
health! This my house is no stronghold nor site of safe custody for this
money. When I received thy leather bag, I sent it to one with whom it
now is; so do thou return to us to-morrow and take thy money,
Inshallah!”[417] So he went away and I passed the night in great
concern, because of his return to me; sleep visited me not nor could I
close my eyes; so I rose and bade the boy saddle me the she-mule.
Answered he, “O my lord, it is yet but the first third of the night and
indeed we have hardly had time to rest.” I returned to my bed, but sleep
was forbidden to me and I ceased not to awaken the boy, and he to put me
off, till break of day, when he saddled me the mule, and I mounted and
rode out, not knowing whither to go. I threw the reins on the mule’s
shoulders and gave myself up to regrets and melancholy thoughts, whilst
she fared on with me to the eastward of Baghdad. Presently, as I went
along, behold, I saw a number of people approaching me and turned aside
into another path to avoid them; but seeing that I wore a turband in
preacher-fashion,[418] they followed me and hastening up to me, said,
“Knowest thou the lodging of Abu Hassan al-Ziyadi?” “I am he,” answered
I; and they rejoined, “Obey the summons of the Commander of the
Faithful.” Then they carried me before Al-Maamun, who said to me, “Who
art thou?” Quoth I, “An associate of the Kazi Abu Yúsuf and a doctor of
the law and traditions.” Asked the Caliph, “By what surname art thou
known?”[419] and I answered, “Abu Hassan al-Ziyadi;” whereupon quoth he,
“Expound to me thy case.” So I recounted to him my case and he wept sore
and said to me, “Out on thee!” The Apostle of Allah (whom Allah bless
and assain!) would not let me sleep this night, because of thee; for in
early darkness[420] he appeared to me and said, “Succour Abu Hassan
al-Ziyadi.” Whereupon I awoke and, knowing thee not, went to sleep
again; but he came to me a second time and said to me, “Woe to thee!
Succour Abu Hassan al-Ziyadi.” I awoke a second time, but knowing thee
not I went to sleep again; and he came to me a third time and still I
knew thee not and went to sleep again. Then he came to me once more and
said, “Out on thee! Succour Abu Hassan al-Ziyadi!” “After that I dared
not sleep any more, but watched the rest of the night and aroused my
people and sent them on all sides in quest of thee.” Then he gave me one
myriad of dirhams, saying, “This is for the Khorasani,” and other ten
thousand, saying, “Spend freely of this and amend thy case therewith,
and set thine affairs in order.” Moreover, he presented me with thirty
thousand dirhams, saying, “Furnish thyself with this, and when the
Procession-day[421] is being kept, come thou to me, that I may invest
thee with some office.” So I went forth from him with the money and
returned home, where I prayed the dawn-prayer; and behold, presently
came the Khorasani, so I carried him into the house and brought out to
him one myriad of dirhams, saying, “Here is thy money.” Quoth he, “It is
not my very money; how cometh this?” So I told him the whole story, and
he wept and said, “By Allah, haddest thou told me the fact at first, I
had not pressed thee!; and now, by Allah, I will not accept aught of
this money”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Fifty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the
Khorasani to Al-Ziyadi, “By Allah, haddest thou told me the fact at
first, I had not pressed thee!; and now, by Allah, I will not accept
aught of this money and thou art lawfully quit of it.” So saying, he
went away and I set my affairs in order and repaired on the
Procession-day to Al-Maamun’s Gate, where I found him seated. When he
saw me present myself he called me to him and, bringing forth to me a
paper from under his prayer-carpet, said to me, “This is a patent,
conferring on thee the office of Kazi of the western division of
Al-Medinah, the Holy City, from the Bab-al Salám[422] to the furthest
limit of the township; and I appoint thee such and such monthly
allowances. So fear Allah (to whom be honour and glory!) and be mindful
of the solicitude of His Apostle (whom may He bless and keep!) on thine
account.” Then the folk marvelled at the Caliph’s words and asked me
their meaning; whereupon I told them the story from beginning to end and
it spread abroad amongst the people. “And” (quoth he who telleth the
tale) “Abu Hassan al-Ziyadi ceased not to be Kazi of Al-Medinah, the
Holy City, till he died in the days of Al-Maamun—the mercy of Allah be
on him!” And among the tales men tell is one of

-----

Footnote 416:

  A doctor of law in the reign of Al-Maamun.

Footnote 417:

  Here the exclamation is = D.V.; and it may be assumed generally to
  have that sense.

Footnote 418:

  Arab. “Taylasán,” a turban worn hood-fashion by the “Khatib” or
  preacher. I have sketched it in my Pilgrimage and described it (iii.
  315). Some Orientalists derive Taylasan from Atlas = satin, which is
  peculiarly inappropriate. The word is apparently barbarous and
  possibly Persian like Kalansuwah, the Dervish-cap. “Thou son of a
  Taylasán” = a barbarian (De Sacy, Chrest. Arab. ii. 269).

Footnote 419:

  Arab. Kinyah vulg. “Kunyat” = patronymic or matronymic; a name
  beginning with “Abu” (father) or with “Umm” (mother). There are so few
  proper names in Al-Islam that such surnames, which, as will be seen,
  are of infinite variety, become necessary to distinguish individuals.
  Of these sobriquets I shall give specimens further on.

Footnote 420:

  “Whoso seeth me in his sleep, seeth me truly; for Satan cannot assume
  my semblance,” said (or is said to have said) Mohammed. Hence the
  vision is true although it comes in early night and not before dawn.
  See Lane M. E., chapt. ix.

Footnote 421:

  Arab. “Al-Maukab;” the day when the pilgrims march out of the city; it
  is a holiday for all, high and low.

Footnote 422:

  “The Gate of Salutation;” at the S. Western corner of the Mosque where
  Mohammed is buried (Pilgrimage ii. 60 and plan). Here “Visitation”
  (Ziyárah) begins.




                  THE POOR MAN AND HIS FRIEND IN NEED.


There was once a rich man who lost all he had and became destitute,
whereupon his wife advised him to ask aid and assistance of one of his
intimates. So he betook himself to a certain friend of his and
acquainted him with his necessities; and he lent him five hundred dinars
to trade withal. Now in early life he had been a jeweller; so he took
the gold and went to the jewel-bazar, where he opened a shop to buy and
sell. Presently, as he sat in his shop three men accosted him and asked
for his father, and when he told them that he was deceased, they said,
“Say, did he leave issue?” Quoth the jeweller, “He left the slave who is
before you.” They asked, “And who knoweth thee for his son?”; and he
answered, “The people of the bazar,” whereupon they said, “Call them
together, that they may testify to us that thou art his very son.” So he
called them and they bore witness of this; whereupon the three men
delivered to him a pair of saddle-bags, containing thirty thousand
dinars, besides jewels and bullion of high value, saying, “This was
deposited with us in trust by thy father.” Then they went away; and
presently there came to him a woman, who sought of him certain of the
jewels, worth five hundred dinars which she bought and paid him three
thousand for them. Upon this he arose and took five hundred dinars and
carrying them to his friend who had lent him the money, said to him,
“Take the five hundred dinars I borrowed of thee; for Allah hath opened
to me the gate of prosperity.” Quoth the other, “Nay; I gave them to
thee outright, for the love of Allah; so do thou keep them. And take
this paper, but read it not till thou be at home, and do according to
that which is therein.” So he took the money and the paper and returned
home, where he opened the scroll and found therein inscribed these
couplets:—

 Kinsmen of mine were those three men who came to thee; ✿ My sire and
    uncles twain and Sálih bin Ali
 So what for cash thou soldest, to my mother ‘twas ✿ Thou soldest it, and
    coin and gems were sent by me.
 Thus doing I desired not any harm to thee ✿ But in my presence spare
    thee and thy modesty.

And they also recount the story of




       THE RUINED MAN WHO BECAME RICH AGAIN THROUGH A DREAM.[423]


There lived once in Baghdad a wealthy man and made of money, who lost
all his substance and became so destitute that he could earn his living
only by hard labour. One night, he lay down to sleep, dejected and heavy
hearted, and saw in a dream a Speaker[424] who said to him, “Verily thy
fortune is in Cairo; go thither and seek it.” So he set out for Cairo;
but when he arrived there, evening overtook him and he lay down to sleep
in a mosque. Presently, by decree of Allah Almighty, a band of bandits
entered the mosque and made their way thence into an adjoining house;
but the owners, being aroused by the noise of the thieves, awoke and
cried out; whereupon the Chief of Police came to their aid with his
officers. The robbers made off; but the Wali entered the mosque and,
finding the man from Baghdad asleep there, laid hold of him and beat him
with palm-rods so grievous a beating that he was well-nigh dead. Then
they cast him into jail, where he abode three days; after which the
Chief of Police sent for him and asked him, “Whence art thou?”; and he
answered, “From Baghdad.” Quoth the Wali, “And what brought thee to
Cairo?”; and quoth the Baghdadi, “I saw in a dream One who said to me,
Thy fortune is in Cairo; go thither to it. But when I came to Cairo the
fortune which he promised me proved to be the palm-rods thou so
generously gavest to me.” The Wali laughed till he showed his
wisdom-teeth and said, “O man of little wit, thrice have I seen in a
dream one who said to me:—There is in Baghdad a house in such a district
and of such a fashion and its courtyard is laid out garden-wise, at the
lower end whereof is a jetting-fountain and under the same a great sum
of money lieth buried. Go thither and take it. Yet I went not; but thou,
of the briefness of thy wit, hast journeyed from place to place, on the
faith of a dream, which was but an idle galimatias of sleep.” Then he
gave him money saying, “Help thee back herewith to thine own
country;”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Fifty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wali gave the
Baghdad man some silvers, saying, “Help thee back herewith to thine own
country;” and he took the money and set out upon his homewards march.
Now the house the Wali had described was the man’s own house in Baghdad;
so the wayfarer returned thither and, digging underneath the fountain in
his garden, discovered a great treasure. And thus Allah gave him
abundant fortune; and a marvellous coincidence occurred. And a story is
also current of

-----

Footnote 423:

  The tale is told by Al-Isháki in the reign of Al-Maamun.

Footnote 424:

  The speaker in dreams is the Heb. “Waggid,” which the learned and
  angry Graetz (Geschichte, etc. vol. ix.) absurdly translates
  “Traum-souffleur.”




            CALIPH AL-MUTAWAKKIL AND HIS CONCUBINE MAHBUBAH.


There were in the palace of the Caliph Al-Mutawakkil ala’llah[425] four
thousand concubines, whereof two thousand were Greeks and other two
thousand slave-born Arabians[426] and Abyssinians; and ‘Obayd ibn
Táhir[427] had given him two hundred white girls and a like number of
Abyssinian and native girls. Among these slave-borns was a girl of
Bassorah, hight Mahbúbah, the Beloved, who was of surpassing beauty and
loveliness, elegance and voluptuous grace. Moreover, she played upon the
lute and was skilled in singing and making verses and wrote a beautiful
hand; so that Al-Mutawakkil fell passionately in love with her and could
not endure from her a single hour. But when she saw this affection, she
presumed upon his favour to use him arrogantly, wherefore he waxed
exceeding wroth with her and forsook her, forbidding the people of the
palace to speak with her. She abode on this wise some days, but the
Caliph still inclined to her; and he arose one morning and said to his
courtiers, “I dreamt, last night, that I was reconciled to Mahbubah.”
They answered, “Would Allah this might be on wake!”; and as they were
talking, behold, in came one of the Caliph’s maidservants and whispered
him; so he rose from his throne and entered the Serraglio; for the
whisper had said, “Of a truth we heard singing and lute-playing in
Mahbubah’s chamber and we knew not what this meant.” So he went straight
to her apartment, where he heard her playing upon the lute and singing
the following verses:—

 I wander through the palace, but I sight there not a soul ✿ To whom I
    may complain or will ‘change a word with me.
 It is as though I’d done so grievous rebel-deed ✿ Wherefrom can no
    contrition e’er avail to set me free.

 Have we no intercessor here to plead with King, who came ✿ In sleep to
    me and took me back to grace and amity;
 But when the break of day arose and showed itself again, ✿ Then he
    departing sent me back to dree my privacy?

Now when the Caliph heard her voice, he marvelled at the verse and yet
more at the strange coincidence of their dreams and entered the chamber.
As soon as she perceived him, she hastened to rise and throw herself at
his feet, and kissing them, said, “By Allah, O my lord, this hap is what
I dreamt last night; and, when I awoke, I made the couplets thou hast
heard.” Replied Al-Mutawakkil, “By Allah, I also dreamt the like!” Then
they embraced and made friends and he abode with her seven days with
their nights. Now Mahbubah had written upon her cheek, in musk, the
Caliph’s name, which was Ja’afar: and when he saw this, he improvised
the following:—

 One wrote upon her cheek with musk, his name was Ja’afar hight; ✿ My
    soul for hers who wrote upon her cheek the name I sight!
 If an her fingers have inscribed one line upon her cheek, ✿ Full many a
    line in heart of mine those fingers did indite:
 O thou, whom Ja’afar sole of men possesseth for himself, ✿ Allah fill
    Ja’afar[428] stream-full draught, the wine of thy delight!

When Al-Mutawakkil died, his host of women forgot him, all save
Mahbubah——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Al-Mutawakkil
died, his host of women forgot him all save Mahbubah who ceased not to
mourn for him, till she deceased and was buried by his side, the mercy
of Allah be on them both! And men also tell the tale of

-----

Footnote 425:

  Tenth Abbaside. A.D. 849-861.

Footnote 426:

  Arab. “Muwallad” (fem. “Muwalladah”); a rearling, a slave born in a
  Moslem land. The numbers may appear exaggerated, but even the petty
  King of Ashanti had, till the last war, 3333 “wives.”

Footnote 427:

  The Under-prefect of Baghdad.

Footnote 428:

  “Ja’afar,” our old Giaffar (which is painfully like “Gaffer,” _i.e._
  good father) means either a rushing river or a rivulet.




   WARDAN[429] THE BUTCHER HIS ADVENTURE WITH THE LADY AND THE BEAR.


There lived once in Cairo, in the days of the Caliph Al-Hákim bi´
Amri´llah, a butcher named Wardán, who dealt in sheep’s flesh; and there
came to him every day a lady and gave him a dinar, whose weight was nigh
two and a half Egyptian dinars, saying, “Give me a lamb.” So he took the
money and gave her the lamb, which she delivered to a porter she had
with her; and he put it in his crate and she went away with him to her
own place. Next day she came in the forenoon and this went on for a long
time, the butcher gaining a dinar by her every day, till at last he
began to be curious about her case and said to himself, “This woman
buyeth of me a ducat-worth of meat every morning, paying ready money,
and never misseth a single day. Verily, this is a strange thing!” So he
took an occasion of questioning the porter, in her absence, and asked
him, “Whither goest thou every day with yonder woman?”; and he answered,
“I know not what to make of her for surprise; inasmuch as every day,
after she hath taken the lamb of thee, she buyeth necessaries of the
table, fresh and dried fruits and wax-candles a dinar’s worth, and
taketh of a certain person, which is a Nazarene, two flagons of wine,
worth another dinar; and then she leadeth me with the whole and I go
with her to the Wazir’s Gardens, where she blindfoldeth me, so that I
cannot see on what part of earth I set my feet; and, taking me by the
hand, she leadeth me I know not whither. Presently, she sayeth, “Set
down here;” and when I have done so, she giveth me an empty crate she
hath ready and, taking my hand, leadeth me back to the Wazir’s Gardens,
the place where she bound my eyes, and there removeth the bandage and
giveth me ten silver bits.” “Allah be her helper!” quoth Wardan; but he
redoubled in curiosity about her case; disquietude increased upon him
and he passed the night in exceeding restlessness. And quoth the
butcher:—Next morning she came to me as of custom and taking the lamb,
for which she paid the dinar, delivered it to the porter and went away.
So I gave my shop in charge to a lad and followed her without her seeing
me;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Wardan the butcher
continued:—So I gave my shop in charge to a lad and followed her without
her seeing me; nor did I cease to keep her in sight, hiding behind her,
till she left Cairo and came to the Wazir’s Gardens. Then I hid myself
whilst she bandaged the porter’s eyes and followed her again from place
to place till she came to the mountain[430] and stopped at a spot where
there was a great stone. Here she made the porter set down his crate,
and I waited whilst she conducted him back to the Wazir’s Gardens, after
which she returned and, taking out the contents of the basket, instantly
disappeared. Then I went up to that stone and wrenching it up entered
the hole and found behind the stone an open trap-door of brass and a
flight of steps leading downwards. So I descended, little by little,
till I came to a long corridor, brilliantly lighted, and followed it,
till I made a closed door, as it were the door of a saloon. I looked
about the wall-sides near the doorway till I discovered a recess, with
steps therein; then climbed up and found a little niche with a bulls-eye
giving upon a saloon. Thence I looked inside and saw the lady cut off
the choicest parts of the lamb and laying them in a saucepan, throw the
rest to a great big bear, who ate it all to the last bite. Now when she
had made an end of cooking, she ate her fill, after which she set on the
fruits and confections and brought out the wine and fell to drinking a
cup herself and giving the bear to drink in a basin of gold. And as soon
as she was heated with wine, she put off her petticoat-trousers and lay
down on her back; whereupon the bear arose and came up to her and
stroked her, whilst she gave him the best of what belongeth to the sons
of Adam till he had made an end, when he sat down and rested. Presently,
he sprang upon her and rogered her again; and when he ended he again sat
down to rest; and he ceased not so doing till he had futtered her ten
times and they both fell to the ground in a fainting-fit and lay without
motion. Then quoth I to myself, “Now is my opportunity,” and taking a
knife I had with me, that would cut bones before flesh,[431] went down
to them and found them motionless, not a muscle of them moving for their
hard swinking and swiving. So I put my knife to the bear’s gullet and
pressed upon it, till I finished him by severing his head from his body,
and he gave a great snort like thunder, whereat the lady started up in
alarm; and, seeing the bear slain and me standing whittle in hand, she
shrieked so loud a shriek that I thought the soul had left her body.
Then she asked, “O Wardan, is this how thou requitest me my favours?”
And I answered, “O enemy of thine own soul, is there a famine of
men[432] that thou must do this damnable thing?” She made no answer but
bent down over the bear, and looked fondly upon him; then finding his
head divided from his body, said to me, “O Wardan, which of the two
courses wouldst thou take; either obey me in what I shall say and be the
means of thine own safety”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the lady, “O
Wardan, which of the two courses wouldst thou take; either obey me in
what I shall say and be the means of thine own safety and competency to
the end of thy days, or gainsay me and so cause thine own
destruction?”[433] Answered I, “I choose rather to hearken unto thee:
say what thou wilt.” Quoth she, “Then slay me, as thou hast slain this
bear, and take thy need of this hoard and wend thy ways.” Quoth I, “I am
better than this bear: so return thou to Allah Almighty and repent, and
I will marry thee, and we will live on this treasure the rest of our
lives.” She rejoined, “O Wardan, far be it from me! How shall I live
after him? By Allah, an thou slay me not I will assuredly do away thy
life! So leave bandying words with me, or thou art a lost man: this is
all I have to say to thee and peace be with thee!” Then said I, “I will
kill thee, and thou shalt go to the curse of Allah.” So saying, I caught
her by the hair and cut her throat; and she went to the curse of Allah
and of the angels and of all mankind. And after so doing I examined the
place and found there gold and bezel-stones and pearls, such as no one
king could bring together. So I filled the porter’s crate with as much
as I could carry and covered it with the clothes I had on me. Then I
shouldered it and, going up out of the under-ground treasure-chamber,
fared homewards and ceased not faring on, till I came to the gate of
Cairo, where behold, I fell in with ten of the body-guard of Al-Hakim
bi´ Amri´llah[434] followed by the Prince himself, who said to me, “Ho,
Wardan!” “At thy service, O King,” replied I; when he asked, “Hast thou
killed the bear and the lady?” and I answered, “Yes.” Quoth he, “Set
down the basket from thy head and fear naught, for all the treasure thou
hast with thee is thine, and none shall dispute it with thee.” So I set
down the crate before him, and he uncovered it and looked at it; then
said to me, “Tell me their case, albe I know it, as if I had been
present with you.” So I told him all that had passed and he said, “Thou
hast spoken the truth,” adding, “O Wardan, come now with me to the
treasure.” So I returned with him to the cavern, where he found the
trap-door closed and said to me, “O Wardan, lift it; none but thou can
open the treasure, for it is enchanted in thy name and nature.”[435]
Said I, “By Allah, I cannot open it;” but he said, “Go up to it,
trusting in the blessing of Allah.” So I called upon the name of
Almighty Allah and, advancing to the trap-door, put my hand to it;
whereupon it came up as it had been of the lightest. Then said the
Caliph, “Go down and bring hither what is there; for none but one of thy
name and semblance and nature hath gone down thither since the place was
made, and the slaying of the bear and the woman was appointed to be at
thy hand. This was chronicled with me and I was awaiting its
fulfilment.”[436] Accordingly (quoth Wardan) I went down and brought up
all the treasure, whereupon the Caliph sent for beasts of burden and
carried it away, after giving me my crate, with what was therein. So I
bore it home and opened me a shop in the market. “And” (saith he who
telleth the tale) “this market is still extant and is known as Wardan’s
Market.” And I have heard recount another story of

-----

Footnote 429:

  A regular Fellah’s name also that of a village (Pilgrimage i. 43)
  where a pleasant story is told about one Haykal.

Footnote 430:

  The “Mountain” means the rocky and uncultivated ground South of Cairo;
  such as Jabal al-Ahmar and the geological sea-coast flanked by the old
  Cairo-Suez highway.

Footnote 431:

  A popular phrase = our “sharp as a razor.”

Footnote 432:

  _i.e._ are men so few; a favourite Persian phrase.

Footnote 433:

  She is a woman of rank who would cause him to be assassinated.

Footnote 434:

  This is not Al-Hakim bi´ Amri´llah the famous or infamous founder of
  the Druze (Durúz) faith and held by them to be, not an incarnation of
  the Godhead, but the Godhead itself in propriâ personâ, who reigned
  A.D. 926-1021: our Hakim is the orthodox Abbaside Caliph of Egypt who
  dated from two centuries after him (A.D. 1261). Had the former been
  meant, it would have thrown back this part of The Nights to an earlier
  date than is generally accepted. But in a place still to come I shall
  again treat of the subject.

Footnote 435:

  For an account of a similar kind which was told to me during the last
  few years see “Midian Revisited,” i. 15. These hiding-places are
  innumerable in lands of venerable antiquity like Egypt; and, if there
  were any contrivance for detecting hidden treasure, it would make the
  discoverer many times a millionaire.

Footnote 436:

  _i.e._ it had been given to him or his in writing, like the book left
  to the old woman before quoted in “Midian,” etc.




                    THE KING’S DAUGHTER AND THE APE.


There was once a Sultan’s daughter, whose heart was taken with love of a
black slave: he abated her maidenhead and she became passionately
addicted to futtering, so that she could not do without it a single hour
and complained of her case to one of her body-women, who told her that
no thing poketh and stroketh more abundantly than the baboon.[437] Now
it so chanced one day, that an ape-leader passed under her lattice, with
a great ape; so she unveiled her face and looking upon the ape, signed
to him with her eyes, whereupon he broke his bonds and chain and climbed
up to the Princess, who hid him in a place with her, and night and day
he abode there, eating and drinking and copulating. Her father heard of
this and would have killed her;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Sultan
heard of this work he would have slain his daughter; but she smoked his
design; and, disguising herself in Mameluke’s dress, mounted horse after
loading a mule with gold and bullion, and precious stuffs past all
account; then carrying with her the ape, she fled to Cairo, where she
took up her abode in one of the houses without the city and upon the
verge of the Suez-desert. Now, every day, she used to buy meat of a
young man, a butcher, but she came not to him till after noonday; and
then she was so yellow and disordered in face that he said in his mind,
“There must indeed hang some mystery by this slave.” Accordingly (quoth
the butcher) one day when she came to me as usual, I went out after her
secretly, and ceased not to follow her from place to place, so as she
saw me not, till she came to her lodging on the edge of her waste and
entered; and I looked in upon her through a cranny, and saw her as soon
as she was at home, kindle a fire and cook the meat, of which she ate
enough and served up the rest to a baboon she had by her and he did the
same. Then she put off the slave’s habit and donned the richest of
women’s apparel; and so I knew that she was a lady. After this she set
on wine and drank and gave the ape to drink; and he stroked her nigh
half a score times without drawing till she swooned away, when he spread
over her a silken coverlet and returned to his place. Then I went down
in the midst of the place and the ape, becoming aware of me, would have
torn me in pieces; but I made haste to pull out my knife and slit his
paunch and his bowels fell out. The noise aroused the young lady, who
awoke terrified and trembling; and, when she saw the ape in this case,
she shrieked such a shriek that her soul well nigh fled her body. Then
she fell down in a fainting-fit and when she came to herself, she said
to me, “What moved thee to do thus? Now Allah upon thee, send me after
him!” But I spoke her fair for a while and pledged myself to stand in
the ape’s stead in the matter of much poking, till her trouble subsided
and I took her to wife. But when I came to perform my promise I proved a
failure and I fell short in this matter and could not endure such hard
labour: so I complained of my case and mentioned her exorbitant
requirements to a certain old woman who engaged to manage the affair and
said to me, “Needs must thou bring me a cooking-pot full of virgin
vinegar and a pound of the herb pellitory called wound-wort.”[438] So I
brought her what she sought, and she laid the pellitory in the pot with
the vinegar and set it on the fire, till it was thoroughly boiled. Then
she bade me futter the girl, and I futtered her till she fainted away,
when the old woman took her up (and she unconscious), and set her parts
to the mouth of the cooking-pot. The steam of the pot entered her slit
and there fell from it somewhat which I examined; and behold, it was two
small worms, one black and the other yellow. Quoth the old woman, “The
black was bred of the strokings of the negro and the yellow of stroking
with the baboon.” Now when she recovered from her swoon she abode with
me, in all delight and solace of life, and sought not swiving as before,
for Allah had done away from her this appetite; whereat I marvelled——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young man
continued:—In truth Allah had done away from her this appetite; whereat
I marvelled and acquainted her with the case. Thereupon I lived with her
and she took the old woman to be to her in the stead of her mother,
“and” (said he who told me the tale) “the old woman and the young man
and his wife abode in joy and cheer till there came to them the
Destroyer of delights and the Sunderer of societies; and glory be to the
Ever-living One, who dieth not and in whose hand is Dominion of the
world visible and invisible!”[439] And another tale they tell is that of

-----

Footnote 437:

  Arab. “Kird” (pron. in Egypt “Gird”). It is usually the hideous
  Abyssinian cynocephalus which is tamed by the ape-leader popularly
  called Kuraydati (Lane, M. E., chapt. xx.). The beast has a natural
  penchant for women; I heard of one which attempted to rape a girl in
  the public street and was prevented only by a sentinel’s bayonet. They
  are powerful animals and bite like greyhounds.

Footnote 438:

  Easterns, attribute many complaints (such as toothache) to worms,
  visible as well as microscopic; which may be held a fair prolepsis of
  the “germ-theory” the bacterium, the bacillus, the microbe.
  Nymphomania, the disease alluded to in these two tales is always
  attributed to worms in the vagina.

Footnote 439:

  Bestiality, very rare in Arabia is fatally common amongst those most
  debauched of debauched races, the Egyptian proper and the Sindis.
  Hence the Pentateuch, whose object was to breed a larger population of
  fighting men, made death the penalty for lying with a beast (Deut.
  xxvii. 21). C. S. Sonnini (Travels, English translation, p. 663) gives
  a curious account of Fellah lewdness. “The female crocodile during
  congress is turned upon her back (?) and cannot rise without
  difficulty. Will it be believed that there are men who take advantage
  of the helpless situation of the female, drive off the male, and
  supplant him in this frightful intercourse? Horrible embraces, the
  knowledge of which was wanting to complete the disgusting history of
  human perversity!” The French traveller forgets to add the
  superstitious explanation of this congress which is the sovereignest
  charm for rising to rank and riches. The Ajáib al-Hind tells a tale
  (chapt. xxxix.) of a certain Mohammed bin Bullishad who had issue by a
  she-ape: the young ones were hairless of body and wore quasi-human
  faces; and the father’s sight had become dim by his bestial practice.


                           END OF VOLUME IV.

[Illustration: والسلام]




                                 INDEX.


 Abbás = the grim-faced, 138

 Abd al-Kádir of Gilán (founder of the Kádiri order), 41

 Abd al-Malik bin Marwán (Caliph), 7

 Abdullah bin Abí Kilábah, 113

 Abdullah bin Málik al-Khuzá´i, 181

 Abraham (Place or stone of), 148

 Abu al-Muzaffir = Father of the Conqueror, 166

 Abu Nowas (Pr. N. = father of the side-locks), 55; 264

 Abu Hassán al-Ziyádi, 258

 Abu Yúsuf (the Lawyer), 153

 Adam’s loins, 111

 Adi (son of Hátim al-Táyyí), 95

 Adl = just (ironically), 271

 Adm (Udm) = any relish, 128

 Ahmad al-Danaf (Pr. N. = Calamity-Ahmad), 75

 Akkám = cameleer, caravan-manager, 40

 Alá al-Din (Aladdin) Glory of the Faith, 29; 33

 Aláma = alá-má = upon what? wherefore, 201

 Alast (day of), 111

 Al Dáud (David’s family), 50

 Alfi = one who costs a thousand, 225

 Ali al-Zabak (Pr. N. = Mercury Ali), 75

 Alif-like stature, 249

 Ali Shar (Pr. N.), 187

 Allah (His name pronounced against the evil eye), 34

 Allah (swearing by, forbidden), 175

 —— is all-knowing (= I don’t know), 283

 Amáim (pl. of Imámah) = turbands, 100

 Amín (Al-) = the Trusted of Allah, 261

 Amír and Samúl = Jones, Brown and Robinson, 106

 Amrú (pronounced Amr) and Zayd = Tom, Dick or Harry, 2

 Ana fí jírat-ak = I crave thy intercession (useful phrase), 83

 Anbár (pronounced Ambár), town on the Euphrates, 152

 Antar (Romance quoted), 41

 Antiochus and Stratonice, 10

 Apple(-wine), 134

 —— (many a goodly one rotten at the core), 187

 Ark al-Haláwat = vein of sweetness, sugar stick, for penis, 51

 Armaníyah (Armenia), 182

 Arm-pits (taking a dismounting person under the, a sign of respect), 24

 Artál (_see_ Rotl)

 Asídah (custard, pap), 37

 Aslán (Pr. N. probably for Arslán = lion), 78

 Asma´i (Al-), author of Antar, 159

 Aun (of Jinns, etc.), 88

 Awwádah = a lute-player, 142

 Ayat (Coranic verset, sign, miracle), _ib._

 Ayyás (Issus of Cilicia), 76


 Báb al Lúk (of Fustát), 259

 Báb al Salám (of the Al-Medínah Mosque), 288

 Babes of the eyes, 246

 Baboon (Kird), has a natural penchant for women, 297

 Badawi (bluntness and plain-speaking of), 102

 Badrah = 10,000 dirhams, 281

 Baháim (pl. of Bahímah = Behemoth) applied to cattle, 54

 Bahramáni = Brahman, 101

 Bakh Bakh! = well done!, 121

 Bandage eyes (before beheading), 145

 Banquets (royal), 212

 —— (daintily devised), 226

 Banú Isráíl, 283

 —— Shaybán (Badawi tribe), 233

 Barsh (Bars), commonest form of Bhang, 31

 Bath, coming out of, shows that consummation has taken place, 244

 Bawd (admirably portrayed), 4

 Bean-eating in Egypt, 160

 “Ben” of an Arab shop as opposed to the “but”, 93

 Bestiality (fatally common amongst Egyptians), 299

 Bhang (preparation of), 31

 —— (drugging with = tabannuj), 71

 Bier the (bulging = Hadbá), 63

 Birkah = pool of standing water, 270

 Black-mail (paid to the Badawin of Ramlah), 76

 Blue-eyed (frequently = fierce-eyed), 192

 Boccaccio quoted, 36

 Body-guard (consists of two divisions), 62

 Bread and Salt (to be taken now “cum grano salis”), 200

 Breeze (rude but effective refrigerator), 199

 “Brother of the Persians”, 12

 Brow (like Nún), 249

 Budúr = moons, 249

 Buka´at al-Dam = place of blood (where it stagnates), 68

 Burckhardt (fable anent his death), 78


 Cairo (_see_ Misr).

 —— (Chaff), 215

 —— (Slang), 75

 Calligraphy, 196

 Camel-slaughtering (Nahr), 95

 Capo bianco, Coda verde, 36

 Catamites (rising to highest rank in Turkey), 225

 —— (in Turkish baths), 226

 Chastity (merchandise in trust from Allah), 43

 Child of the nurse, etc. = delicately reared, 34

 China (kingdom), 175

 Chinese Shadows, 193

 Cider (Arab. Sharáb al-Tuffáh), 134

 City of Brass (Copper), 176

 Claimant of blood-revenge, 109

 —— and Defendant, 150

 Cloth of frieze and cloth of gold, 145

 Clothes (tattered, sign of grief), 158

 Consul (Shah-bandar), 29

 —— (Kunsul), 84

 Cowrie (shells, etc., for small change), 77

 Crenelles = Sharáríf, 165

 Crow-claw and Camel-hoof, 217

 Cutting bones before flesh = “sharp as a razor”, 295


 Dalak = footrasp, 254

 Danaf (Al-) = the Distressing Sickness, 75

 Darb al-Asfar = the Street called Yellow, 93

 Darr al-Káil = divinely he spoke who said, 20

 Darrij = Let them slide, 220

 Deity of the East despotic, 118

 —— after the fashion of each race, 267

 Depilation (Solomon and Bilkís), 256

 Dinghy (Kárib), 168

 Divining-rod (dowsing-rod), 73

 Dogs (clothed in hot-damp countries), 266

 Dream (Speaker in a), 239

 Dress (Scarlet of a King in anger), 72

 Drop (black, of the heart), 251

 Drunk (with one’s own beauty), 34

 Dukhúl = going in to the bride, 30

 Durká’ah = lower part of the floor (opposed to Liwán), 71


 Eating (gives rights of guestship), 214

 —— (superstitious belief in its power), 218

 Efendi (Turkish title = our esquire), 53

 Egyptian vulgarism, 107

 —— characteristic, 260

 Embracing (like the Lám embraceth the Alif), 243

 Emerald (white?), 164

 Eunuchs (driving the people out of a lady’s way), 126

 —— (who have studied the Harím), 228

 Euphemy (announcing death), 61

 —— (thou shalt die), 90

 —— (all is well), 138

 —— (the far one is a Nazarene), 215

 Exaggeration characteristic of The Nights, 273

 Eye (the Evil) on children, 37

 —— (babes of the), 246

 Eyes (bandaged before beheading), 145

 —— (blue), 192

 —— (one-eyed men), 194


 Faces (on the day of Judgment), 249

 Far off one (the, shall die), 90

 Farkh Akrab (vulgarism for Ukayrib) = a young scorpion, 46

 Farsakh = parasang, 230

 Fat and Thin (dispute between), 254

 Fátihah (the opening chapter of the Koran), 36

 Firmán = Wazirial order, 61

 Fí sabíli ´llahi = on Allah’s path (martyrdom), 247

 Flatulence produced by bean-eating, 160

 Food (partaken gives rights of protection), 214

 —— (superstitious belief in its power), 218

 Freewill (and the Korán), 275

 Friends weeping when they meet after long parting, 26

 —— (“damned ill-natured” ones), 137

 Fulán = Fulano, a certain person, 278

 Furkán = Koran, 90

 Futúh (openings, victories), 51


 Ghabah = a copse, 40

 Gháshiyah = étui, scabbard; sleeved cloak, 131

 Ghuráb al-Bayn = raven of parting, 52

 Gold (different names of, required by Arabic rhetoric), 97

 Goody goody preachments, 187

 Gong (Mudawwarah), 135


 Hábáb (Habá) = motes, 257

 Habzalam (Pr. N. = seed of tyranny; “Absalom”?), 66

 Hadbá (the bulging bier), 63

 Hadís = tradition of the Prophet, 207

 Hair-dyes (Mohammed), 194

 Hájj (or Háji, not Hajji), 215

 Hajjáj (Al-) bin Yúsuf, Governor, of Al-Hijáz and Al-Irák, 3

 Hajjám = barber-surgeon, cupper, bleeder, 112

 Haláwah = sweetmeat, 60

 Hákim (Al-) bi-Amri ´llah, 296

 Hand (left, how used), 129

 —— (white, symbol of generosity; black of niggardness), 185

 —— (his for her), 279

 Harím (double entendre = Harem and Honour), 98

 —— (= wife), 126

 —— (hot-bed of Sapphism and Tribadism), 234

 Harrák (ship = Carrack?), 130

 Hasan bin Sahl (Wazir of Al-Maamún), 124

 Hasab = quantity, opposed to Nasab = birth, 171

 Hásid = an envier, 137

 Hátim of Tayy (proverbial for Liberality), 94

 Hazramaut (Hazarmaveth), 118

 Heart (black drop in), 256

 Heaven (Na´ím), 143

 Hell (Sa´ír), _ib._

 —— (cold as well as hot), 253

 Hibál = ropes, 193

 Homme acheté = de bonne famille, 225

 Húd (prophet = Heber?), 118

 Hurák = tinder, 108

 Hurry (in a newly married couple indecent), 244

 Hurúf al-Mutabbakát = the flattened sounds, 223


 “I told you so” (even more common in East than West), 69

 Ibrahím bin al-Mahdi (Pretender to the Caliphate), 103

 Ibrahím al-Mosili, 108

 Imám (The Seventh = Caliph Al-Maamún), 111

 —— (the fugleman at the prayer-niche), 227

 Imámah = turband, 100

 Inconsequence (of the Author of The Nights), 155

 Infirmity (and infirm letters), 243

 Inscriptions (on trays, plates, etc.), 235

 Inshallah = D.V., 286

 Insomnia (curious treatment of), 229

 Irádah = Sultan’s order, 61

 Iram (the Many-columned), 113

 Irony, 271

 Irreverence (Egyptian), 47

 Isaac (Ishák) of Mosul, 119

 Ishmael (place of his sacrifice), 75

 Istinjá = washing the fundament after stool, 129


 Ja’afar the Barmecide (mode of his death), 159

 —— (river or rivulet), 292

 Jabal al-Tárik = Gibraltar, 100

 Jacob’s daughters, 14

 Jawán (Pr. N.; Pers. = youth, juvenis), 208

 Job (a Syrian), 221

 “Joyance is three things,” etc., 254

 Jufún = eyebrows or eyelashes, 260

 Jugular vein (from —— to ——), 92

 Justice (poetical, not done), 28

 Juzám = leprosy, 51


 Ka’ab al-Ahbár (of the Scribes, two of the name), 115

 Ka’abah (Pilgrim clinging to its curtain), 125

 Kabbázah = a “holding woman”, 227

 Kahirah = City of Mars (Cairo), 271

 Kahramán (Pers.) = braves, heroes, 115

 Kallá = prorsus non, 257

 Kaptán = Capitano, 85

 Kara Gyuz (_see_ Khiyál).

 Kárib (pl. Kawárib) = dinghy, 168

 Karúrah = bottle for urine, 11

 Kasa’ah = wooden bowl, porringer, 283

 Kasri (Al-) Governor of the two Iraks, 155

 Katá = sand-grouse, 111

 Kátala-k Allah = Allah strike thee dead (facetiously), 264; 265

 Katíl = the Irish “kilt”, 139

 Kausar (river of Paradise), 196

 Kawárib (_see_ Kárib).

 Kazdír = Skr. Kastíra (Tin), 274

 Kerchief (shaking and throwing the), 62

 Khalí’a = a wag, a wicked wit, 229

 Khammárah = wine-shop, tavern, “hotel”, 79

 Khátún (Turk. Lady), 66

 Khayr = good news by euphemy, 138

 Khayzarán = rattan-palm, 255

 Khizr (the Green Prophet), 175

 Khiyál (Chinese shadows), 193

 Khuff = walking-boot, 107

 Khumásiyah = five feet high, 191

 Kíl wa Kál = it was said and he said (chit-chat), 207

 King (dressing in scarlet when wroth), 72

 Kirámát = Saints’ miracles, 45

 Kird = baboon, 297

 Kishk (Kashk) = porridge, 214

 Kissing (names for), 259

 Kohl (he would steal it off the eye-ball = a very expert thief), 68

 Koran quoted (xxv. 70), 5

 —— (xii. 84, 93, 96; xvi.), 14

 —— (opening chapter), 36

 —— (xiii. 14), 43

 —— (chapter Yá Sín), 50

 —— (xvii. 84), 80

 —— (xlix., Inner Apartments), 102

 —— (xvi. 112), _ib._

 —— (xii. 92), 111

 —— (lxxxix. 6-7), 115

 —— (iii. 178), 156

 —— (xvi.), 174

 —— (ii. 224), 175

 —— (xxi. 38), 244

 —— (iii. 103; vii. 105; xxvii. 12), 249

 —— (cxiv. 1), 251

 —— (ii. 26), 254

 —— (ii. 64; xxvii.), 256

 —— (xvii. 62; xxxvii. 16), 259

 —— (xli. 46), 275

 Kúfah (Al-) founded by Omar, 1

 —— (revolutionary spirit of), 3

 Kumkum (cucurbite, gourd-shaped vessel), 68; 178

 Kumm = sleeve, used as a bag, 107

 Kunyat = patro- or matro-nymic, 287

 Kunsul = Consul, 84

 Kús (town in Upper Egypt), 276

 Kussá’a = curling cucumber, 98


 Lá baas bi-zálik = there is no harm in that, 164

 Labtayt (Pr. N. = Toledo), 99

 Lane quoted, 2; 55; 63; 66; 84; 95; 96; 107; 110; 124; 136; 160; 164;
    171; 181; 187; 189; 191; 196; 199; 200; 202; 204; 205; 209; 212;
    214; 219; 222; 228; 231; 233; 244; 254; 268; 271; 273; 279; 287;
    297.

 Lasm (Lathm) = kissing the lower face, 259

 Leprosy (thickens voice), 50

 —— (shows first at the wrist), 51

 Letter (model specimen), 57

 Liberality (men proverbial for their), 96

 Life (by the, of thy youth) oath of women, 49

 —— (cheap in hot countries), 275

 Light-worshipers (are liars), 252

 Li’lláhi darru-ka = the Lord has been copious to thee, 20

 Liwán = Al-Aywán, 71

 Love (martyrs of), 205

 —— (clairvoyance), 238

 —— (excess of), _ib._

 Lúk-Gate (proverb referring to), 259

 Lumà = dark hue of the inner lips, 251

 Lutf (servile name = elegance, delicacy), 232


 Maamun (Al-), Caliph, 109

 Ma’an bin Záidah (Pr. N. of a generous Arab), 96

 Ma’áni-há (her meanings = her inner woman), 146

 Madinát al-Nabi (Al-Medinah) = City of the Prophet, 114

 Madness (there is a pleasure in), 204

 Maka’ad = sitting-room, 78

 Malik (Al-) al-Násir = the conquering King, 271

 Man (handsomer than woman), 15

 Mansúr al-Nimri (poet), 179

 Martyrs (of love), 205

 Martyrdom, 247

 Mashá’ilí = cresset-bearer, for public crier, hangman, 61

 Maukab (Al-) = Procession-day, 287

 Mauz = Musa (Banana), 201

 “May thy life be prolonged”, 62

 Melancholy (chronic under the brightest skies), 239

 Men (is there a famine of) = are men so few?, 295

 Mikashshah = broom, 208

 Mikbas (pot of lighted charcoal), 246

 Military and Police sneered at, 270

 Milk, white as, opposed to black as mud, 140

 Mím-like mouth, 249

 Mind (one by vinegar, another by wine = each goes its own way), 72

 Minínah = biscuit, 86

 Misr (vulg. Masr) = Egypt, 29

 Mohammed (his uncles), 22

 —— (traditional saying of), 35

 —— (cleanses the Ka’abah of idols), 80

 —— (on dying the hair, etc.), 194

 —— (on lovers), 205

 —— (on his being seen in sleep), 287

 —— (places the “black stone”), 261

 Mole on cheek (black as Bilál), 142

 Monoculars (rascals), 194

 Moon-faced (not absurd), 192

 Moon (masculine), 261

 Mountain (the, at Cairo), 294

 Mountains (the pegs of the earth), 174

 Mudawwarah (a gong?), 135

 Muhallil (_see_ Mustahall).

 Mukaddam (Anglo-Indicè Mucuddum) = overseer, 42

 Munkasir (broken) = languid, 195

 Musámarah = chatting at night, 237

 Mustahall (Mustahill) = one who marries a thrice divorced woman and
    divorces her to make her lawful for her first husband, 48

 Mutawakkil (Al-), Caliph, 291

 Muwallad = a slave born in a Moslem land, 291

 Muwashshah (stanza), 54

 Myrtle-bush = young beard, 143


 Nafísah (great-grand-daughter of the Imám Hasan), 46

 Nahás = brass, 178

 —— (asfar = brass; ahmar = copper), 230

 Nahr = slaughtering a camel by stabbing, 95

 Na’ím = Heaven, 143

 Nauroz = new (year’s) day, 244

 Negro (Legend of his origin), 250

 Negrofied races like “walking tun-butts”, 255

 Ni’amat = a blessing, 1

 Nisáb (Al-), smallest sum for stealing which the hand is mutilated, 157

 Nún-like brow, 249

 Nymphomania (ascribed to worms in the vagina), 298


 Oath (kept to the letter), 70

 Obayd ibn Táhir (Under-Prefect of Baghdad), 291

 One-eyed men considered rascals, 194


 Pashas’ (agents for bribery in Constantinople), 183

 Payne quoted, 50; 66; 197; 221; 222

 Peccadillo in good old days (murder), 275

 Penis = Ark al-Haláwat, 51

 —— (correspondence of size), 52

 Person (Arabic Shakhs), 97

 Pharaoh (signs to), 249

 Pilgrimage quoted (i. 75-77), 6

 —— (i. 285; ii. 78), 36

 —— (iii. 306), 75

 —— (i. 123), 78

 —— (iii. 295), 80

 —— (iii. 303), 95

 —— (ii. 119), 114

 —— (i. 213), 115

 —— (iii. 156, 162, 216, 220), 125

 —— (iii. 168, 174, 175), 148

 —— (ii. 329), 254

 —— (iii. 192), 261

 —— (i. 43), 293

 Pistachio-nut (tight-fitting shell of), 216

 Plain-speaking of the Badawi, 102

 Plural of Majesty, 156

 Polissonnerie (Egyptian), 226

 Porcelain (not made in Egypt or Syria), 164

 Pride of beauty intoxicates, 34

 Procès verbal (customary with Moslems), 73

 Property (of the heirless lapses to the Treasury), 62

 Pun, 258


 Rabelaisian humour of the richest, 152

 Ráfizi = denier, Shí’ah, 44

 Rag (burnt, used as styptic), 108

 Ráh = pure old wine, 186

 Rakb = fast-going caravan, 254

 Ráshid (Pasha, etc.), 202

 Rasúl = one sent, “apostle,” not prophet, 284

 Raven of the waste or the parting, 52

 Rayy (old capital of Media), 104

 Red dress (sign of wrath), 72

 Repentance (a strong plea for granting aid with a Moslem), 277

 Rings in the East, 24

 Rizwán = Moslem St. Peter, 195

 Rod (divining or “dowsing”), 73

 Rotl (pl. Artál) = rotolo, pound-weight, 124

 Roum = Græco-Roman Empire, 100

 Rustam (not Rustum or Rustem), 219


 Sabá = Biblical Sheba, 113

 Sáhib (Wazirial title), 139

 Sa’ír = Hell, 143

 Sakatí = second-hand dealer, 77

 Sakká (Anglo-Indian Bihishti) = water-carrier, 44

 Salát (blessing, prayer), 60

 Salím (Pr. N. = the “Safe and Sound”), 58

 Salsabíl (fountain in Paradise), 195

 Samharí = lance of Samhar (place or maker), 258

 Samn = melted butter, Ghi, 53

 Samúr (applied to cats and dogs, also to Admiral Seymour), 57

 Sapphism (practised in wealthy Haríms), 234

 Sara’ (epilepsy, falling sickness, possession), 89

 Sarráf = money-changer (Shroff), 270

 Saudá = black bile, melancholia, 251

 Separation (spoken of as a defilement), 211

 Sévigné of pearls, 249

 Shah-bandar = lord of the port (Consul), 29

 Shár, Sher and Shír, 187

 Sharáb al-Tuffáh = cider, 134

 Sharáríf = trefoil-shaped crenelles, 165

 Sharíf = a descendant of Mohammed, 170

 “Short and thick is never quick”, 194

 Shuumán = a pestilent fellow, 75

 Sifr = whistling, 206

 Signet-rings, 24

 Signs (to Pharaoh), 249

 Sikankúr = Σκίγκος (_see_ Aphrodisiacs), 32

 Sinning (for the pleasure of being pardoned), 111

 Sirát (Al-), the bridge of Hell, 223

 Slapping on the nape of neck = “boxing the ears”, 193

 Sleeper and Waker (Tale of the), 96

 Sleeplessness (contrivance against), 228

 Smile (like Mím), 249

 Squatting against a wall, 119

 Stature (Alif-like), 249

 Street (the, called Yellow), 93

 —— (watering), 107

 Stuff his mouth with jewels (reward for poetry), 103

 —— a dead man’s mouth with cotton, 193

 Su’adá = Beatrice, 267

 Suffah = “sofa” (shelf), 275

 Sujúd = prostration, 248

 Suláfah = ptisane of wine, 258

 Sumr = brown, black, 251

 Sunní (versus Shí’ah, _see_ Ráfizí), 82

 Swearing (by Allah forbidden), 175

 Sweetmeat of Safety, 60

 Sword (making invisible), 176

 Syene (town on the Nile), 152


 Tabannuj = drugging with Bhang, 71

 Tabban lahu = perdition to him, 142

 Takaddum and Takádum (difference between), 171

 Tárik (Jabal al-) = Gibraltar, 100

 Taufík (P.N.) = causing to be prosperous, 1

 Taylasán (turband worn by a preacher), 286

 Tayy (noble Arab tribe), 94

 Thakilata-k Ummak = be thy mother bereaved of thee, 156

 Thank you (Eastern equivalent), 6

 Thirst (affecting plea; why?), 199

 Tin (Kazdír), 274

 Tinder (a styptic), 108

 Torrens quoted, 187; 189; 235; 236

 Treasures (enchanted in some one’s name and nature), 296

 Trébutien quoted, 268

 Tribadism, 234

 Truth prevailing, falsehood failing, 80

 Túfán (Typhoon, etc.), 156

 Tufayl (proverbial intruder), 123

 Turband (white, distinctive of Moslems), 214


 Udm (_see_ Adm)

 Ukáb = eagle, vulture, 177

 Ukayl (Akíl?), 22

 Unguium fulgor, 252


 Vellication, 256

 Voice (thickened by leprosy), 50


 Wada’a (_see_ Cowrie), 77

 Waggid (Hebr. speaker in a dream), 289

 Wailing over the past, 239

 Wakíl = agent (_see_ Pashas), 182

 Walid (Al-) bin Abd al-Malik, Caliph, 100

 Wardán (a Fellah name, also of a village), 293

 Waríd (jugular vein), 92

 Water (sight of running, makes a Persian long for strong drink), 75

 Watering the streets, 107

 Waybah = 6 to 7 English gallons, 86

 Whistling (Sifr), 206

 White as milk (opposed to black as mud, etc.), 140

 —— hand (symbol of generosity, etc.), 185

 —— turband (distinctive of Moslems), 214

 —— hand of Moses (sign to Pharaoh), 249

 —— and black faces on the day of Judgment, _ib._

 Woman (old bawd), 4

 —— (names), 12

 —— (less handsome than man), 15

 —— (walk and gait), 16

 —— (bride night), 30

 —— (oath of a), 49

 —— (insolence of princesses), 145

 —— (inner, her meanings), 146

 Woman (answering question by counter-question), 148

 —— (Abyssinian famous as “holders”), 227

 —— (slave name), 232

 —— (intercourse between), 234

 —— (white-skinned supposed to be heating and unwholesome), 253

 Writer of The Nights careless, 155

 Writing (styles of), 196


 Yá Ma’ashar al-Muslimín = Ho! Moslems, 149

 Yá Nasráni = O Nazarene, 199

 Yá Shátir = O clever one (in a bad sense), 209

 Yá Sín (heart of the Koran, chapt. xxxvi.), 50

 Yasrib (ancient name of Al-Medínah), 114

 Yá Wadúd = O loving one, 54

 Yohanná = John, 87

 Yunán = Ionia, ancient Greece, 100


 Záka = he tasted, 188

 Zakariyá and Zakar, 51

 Zakkúm (Al-) tree of Hell, 259

 Zanzibar (cannibals, etc.), 168

 Zaybak (Al-) = the quicksilver, 75

 Zimbíl (Zambíl) = limp basket of palm-leaves, 119

 Zimmí = a (Christian, Jewish or Majúsí) tributary, 199

 Zubaydah (Pr. N.) = creamkin, 48

 Zu ‘l-Kurá’a (Pr. N.) = Lord of cattle-feet, 95

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Changed bowels to bowls on p. 86.
 2. Added "to" on p. 107.
 3. Added missing footnote anchors on pp. 115, 231, 271, and 296.
 4. Changed An to And on p. 150.
 5. Changed an to am on p. 222.
 6. Changed phase to phrase on p. 264.
 7. Changed he to her on p. 297.
 8. Silently corrected simple spelling, grammar, and typographical
    errors.
 9. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
10. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
11. Enclosed bold font in =equals=.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — VOLUME 04 (OF 10) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night — Volume 05 (of 10)
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night — Volume 05 (of 10)

Translator: Sir Richard Francis Burton


        
Release date: February 28, 2017 [eBook #54257]
                Most recently updated: May 22, 2025

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/54257

Credits: Produced by Richard Tonsing, Richard Hulse and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — VOLUME 05 (OF 10) ***

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: لا لابرار كلّ شي تبر]

                   “TO THE PURE ALL THINGS ARE PURE.”
                           (Puris omnia pura)

                                                        —_Arab Proverb._

          “Niuna corrotta mente intese mai sanamente parole.”

                                            —“_Decameron_”—_conclusion_.

              “Erubuit, posuitque meum Lucretia librum
                  Sed coram Bruto. Brute! recede, leget.”

                                                             —_Martial._

            “Mieulx est de ris que de larmes escripre,
                Pour ce que rire est le propre des hommes.”

                                                              —RABELAIS.

“The pleasure we derive from perusing the Thousand-and-One Stories makes
us regret that we possess only a comparatively small part of these truly
enchanting fictions.”

                                      —CRICHTON’S “_History of Arabia_.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

_A PLAIN AND LITERAL TRANSLATION OF THE ARABIAN NIGHTS ENTERTAINMENTS.
NOW ENTITULED_




                           _THE BOOK OF THE_
                     =Thousand Nights and a Night=

              _WITH INTRODUCTION EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE
                MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF MOSLEM MEN AND A
                 TERMINAL ESSAY UPON THE HISTORY OF THE
                                NIGHTS_

                               VOLUME V.


                                   BY
                           RICHARD F. BURTON

[Illustration]

        PRINTED BY THE BURTON CLUB FOR PRIVATE SUBSCRIBERS ONLY

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            Shammar Edition

Limited to one thousand numbered sets, of which this is

                              Number _547_




                          PRINTED IN U. S. A.




                         TO DOCTOR GEORGE BIRD.


 MY DEAR BIRD,

This is not a strictly medical work, although in places treating of
subjects which may modestly be called hygienic. I inscribe it to you
because your knowledge of Egypt will enable you to appreciate its finer
touches; and for another and a yet more cogent reason, namely, that you
are one of my best and oldest friends.

                         Ever yours sincerely.

                                                      RICHARD F. BURTON.

 ATHENÆUM CLUB, _October 20, 1885_.




                     CONTENTS OF THE FIFTH VOLUME.


                                                                    PAGE

 THE EBONY HORSE                                                       1

 (_Lane, Vol. II., Chapt. XVII. Story of the Magic Horse: pp. 517–545._)

 UNS AL-WUJUD AND THE WAZIR’S DAUGHTER ROSE-IN-HOOD                   32

    (_Chapt. XVIII. Story of Uns el-Wujood and El-Ward fi’l-Akmam: p.
                                 549._)

 ABU NOWAS WITH THE THREE BOYS AND THE CALIPH HARUN AL-RASHID         64

 ABDALLAH BIN MA’AMAR WITH THE MAN OF BASSORAH AND HIS SLAVE-GIRL     69

            (_Anecdote of a Man and his Slave-Girl: p. 578._)

 THE LOVERS OF THE BANU OZRAH                                         70

              (_Anecdote of Two Victims of Love: p. 579._)

 THE WAZIR OF AL-YAMAN AND HIS YOUNG BROTHER                          71

 THE LOVES OF THE BOY AND GIRL AT SCHOOL                              73

                      (_Love in a School: p. 580._)

 AL-MUTALAMMIS AND HIS WIFE UMAYMAH                                   74

 HARUN AL-RASHID AND ZUBAYDAH IN THE BATH                             75

 HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE THREE POETS                                  77

 MUS’AB BIN AL-ZUBAYR AND AYISHAH HIS WIFE                            79

 ABU AL-ASWAD AND HIS SLAVE-GIRL                                      80

 HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE TWO SLAVE-GIRLS                              81

 HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE THREE SLAVE-GIRLS                            81

 THE MILLER AND HIS WIFE                                              82

        (_Lane, Vol. II. Anecdote of a Faithless Wife: p. 582._)

 THE SIMPLETON AND THE SHARPER                                        83

           (_Anecdote of a Simpleton and a Sharper: p. 582._)

 THE KAZI ABU YUSUF WITH HARUN AL-RASHID AND QUEEN ZUBAYDAH           85

 THE CALIPH AL HAKIM AND THE MERCHANT                                 86

 (_Anecdote of El-Hakim bi-amri-llah and a Merchant of Cairo: p. 583._)

 KING KISRA ANUSHIRWAN AND THE VILLAGE DAMSEL                         87

                  (_Anecdote of Anooshirwán: p. 884._)

 THE WATER-CARRIER AND THE GOLDSMITH’S WIFE                           89

 KHUSRAU AND SHIRIN AND THE FISHERMAN                                 91

      (_Anecdote of Khusrow and Sheereen and a Fisherman: p. 585._)

 YAHYA BIN KHALID AND THE POOR MAN                                    92

               (_Anecdote of Yahya el-Barmekee: p. 586._)

 MOHAMMED AL-AMIN AND THE SLAVE-GIRL                                  93

   (_Mohammad el-Emeen and the Slave-Girl El-Bedr el-Kebeer: p. 587._)

 THE SONS OF YAHYA BIN KHALID AND SAID BIN SALIM                      94

        (_Anecdote of El-Fadl and Ja’afar the Barmekee: p. 588._)

 THE WOMAN’S TRICK AGAINST HER HUSBAND                                96

                (_Anecdote of a Deceitful Wife: p. 589._)

 THE DEVOUT WOMAN AND THE TWO WICKED ELDERS                           97

 JA’AFAR THE BARMECIDE AND THE OLD BADAWI                             98

 OMAR BIN AL-KHATTAB AND THE YOUNG BADAWI                             99

                   (_Anecdote of a Homicide: p. 589._)

 AL-MAAMUN AND THE PYRAMIDS OF EGYPT                                 105

 THE THIEF AND THE MERCHANT                                          107

               (_Anecdote of an Impudent Thief: p. 592._)

 MASRUR THE EUNUCH AND IBN AL-KARIBI                                 109

           (_Compact of Mesroor with Ibn el-Karibee: p. 594._)

 THE DEVOTEE PRINCE                                                  111

   (_Lane, Vol. II. Anecdote of a Devotee Son of Harun er-Rasheed: p.
                                 595._)

 THE SCHOOLMASTER WHO FELL IN LOVE BY REPORT                         117

 THE FOOLISH DOMINIE                                                 118

 THE ILLITERATE WHO SET UP FOR A SCHOOLMASTER                        119

           (_Anecdote of an Illiterate Schoolmaster: p. 599._)

 THE KING AND THE VIRTUOUS WIFE                                      121

 ABD AL-RAHMAN THE MAGHRIBI’S STORY OF THE RUKH                      122

                          (_The Rukh: p. 600._)

 ADI BIN ZAYD AND THE PRINCESS HIND                                  124

 DI’IBIL AL-KHUZA’I WITH THE LADY AND MUSLIM BIN AL-WALID            127

 ISAAC OF MOSUL AND THE MERCHANT                                     129

 THE THREE UNFORTUNATE LOVERS                                        133

 HOW ABU HASAN BRAKE WIND                                            135

 THE LOVERS OF THE BANU TAYY                                         137

            (_Result of Restraint upon Two Lovers: p. 601._)

 THE MAD LOVER                                                       138

               (_Anecdote of a Distracted Lover: p. 602._)

 THE PRIOR WHO BECAME A MOSLEM                                       141

                    (_The Converted Prior: p. 603._)

 THE LOVES OF ABU ISA AND KURRAT AL-AYN                              145

                (_Aboo’Esa and Kurrat el-‘Eyn: p. 606._)

 AL-AMIN AND HIS UNCLE IBRAHIM BIN AL-MAHDI                          152

 AL-FATH BIN KHAKAN AND AL-MUTAWAKKIL                                153

 THE MAN’S DISPUTE WITH THE LEARNED WOMAN CONCERNING THE RELATIVE    154
   EXCELLENCE OF MALE AND FEMALE

 ABU SUWAYD AND THE PRETTY OLD WOMAN                                 163

 ALI BIN TAHIR AND THE GIRL MUUNIS                                   164

 THE WOMAN WHO HAD A BOY AND THE OTHER WHO HAD A MAN TO LOVER        165

 ALI THE CAIRENE AND THE HAUNTED HOUSE IN BAGHDAD                    166

    (_Lane, Vol. II., Chapt. XIX. Story of ‘Alee of Cairo: p. 609._)

 THE PILGRIM MAN AND THE OLD WOMAN                                   186

          (_Anecdote of a Townsman and a Bedaweeyeh: p. 635._)

 ABU AL-HUSN AND HIS SLAVE-GIRL TAWADDUD                             189

 THE ANGEL OF DEATH WITH THE PROUD KING AND THE DEVOUT MAN           246

 THE ANGEL OF DEATH AND THE RICH KING                                248

 THE ANGEL OF DEATH AND THE KING OF THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL           250

          (_A Tyrannical King and the Angel of Death: p. 636._)

 ISKANDAR ZU AL-KARNAYN AND A CERTAIN TRIBE OF POOR FOLK             252

 THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF KING ANUSHIRWAN                                254

 THE JEWISH KAZI AND HIS PIOUS WIFE                                  256

 THE SHIPWRECKED WOMAN AND HER CHILD                                 259

 THE PIOUS BLACK SLAVE                                               261

 THE DEVOUT TRAY-MAKER AND HIS WIFE                                  264

              (_Advantages of Piety and Industry: p. 637._)

 AL-HAJJAJ BIN YUSUF AND THE PIOUS MAN                               269

 THE BLACKSMITH WHO COULD HANDLE FIRE WITHOUT HURT                   271

 THE DEVOTEE TO WHOM ALLAH GAVE A CLOUD FOR SERVICE AND THE DEVOUT   274
   KING

 THE MOSLEM CHAMPION AND THE CHRISTIAN DAMSEL                        277

  (_Lane, Vol. II. Anecdote of a Moslem Warrior and a Christian Maiden:
                                p. 639._)

 THE CHRISTIAN KING’S DAUGHTER AND THE MOSLEM                        283

 THE PROPHET AND THE JUSTICE OF PROVIDENCE                           286

                 (_The Justice of Providence: p. 612._)

 THE FERRYMAN OF THE NILE AND THE HERMIT                             288

 THE ISLAND KING AND THE PIOUS ISRAELITE                             290

 ABU AL-HASAN AND ABU JA’AFAR THE LEPER                              294

 THE QUEEN OF THE SERPENTS                                           298

   _a._ THE ADVENTURES OF BULUKIYA                                   304

   _b._ THE STORY OF JANSHAH                                         329




                          THE EBONY HORSE.[1]


There was once in times of yore and ages long gone before, a great and
puissant King, of the Kings of the Persians, Sábúr by name, who was the
richest of all the Kings in store of wealth and dominion and surpassed
each and every in wit and wisdom. He was generous, open handed and
beneficent, and he gave to those who sought him and repelled not those
who resorted to him; and he comforted the broken-hearted and honourably
entreated those who fled to him for refuge. Moreover, he loved the poor
and was hospitable to strangers and did the oppressed justice upon the
oppressor. He had three daughters, like full moons of shining light or
flower-gardens blooming bright; and a son as he were the moon; and it
was his wont to keep two festivals in the twelvemonth, those of the
Nau-Roz, or New Year, and Mihrgán the Autumnal Equinox,[2] on which
occasions he threw open his palaces and gave largesse and made
proclamation of safety and security and promoted his chamberlains and
viceroys; and the people of his realm came in to him and saluted him and
gave him joy of the holy day, bringing him gifts and servants and
eunuchs. Now he loved science and geometry, and one festival-day as he
sat on his kingly throne there came in to him three wise men, cunning
artificers and past masters in all manner of craft and inventions,
skilled in making things curious and rare, such as confound the wit; and
versed in the knowledge of occult truths and perfect in mysteries and
subtleties. And they were of three different tongues and countries, the
first a Hindi or Indian,[3] the second a Roumi or Greek and the third a
Farsi or Persian. The Indian came forwards and, prostrating himself
before the King, wished him joy of the festival and laid before him a
present befitting his dignity; that is to say, a man of gold, set with
precious gems and jewels of price and hending in hand a golden trumpet.
When Sabur[4] saw this, he asked, “O sage, what is the virtue of this
figure?”; and the Indian answered, “O my lord, if this figure be set at
the gate of thy city, it will be a guardian over it; for, if an enemy
enter the place, it will blow this clarion against him and he will be
seized with a palsy and drop down dead.” Much the King marvelled at this
and cried, “By Allah, O sage, an this thy word be true, I will grant
thee thy wish and thy desire.” Then came forward the Greek and,
prostrating himself before the King, presented him with a basin of
silver, in whose midst was a peacock of gold, surrounded by
four-and-twenty chicks of the same metal. Sabur looked at them and
turning to the Greek, said to him, “O sage, what is the virtue of this
peacock?” “O my lord,” answered he, “as often as an hour of the day or
night passeth, it pecketh one of its young and crieth out and flappeth
its wings, till the four-and-twenty hours are accomplished; and when the
month cometh to an end, it will open its mouth and thou shalt see the
crescent therein.” And the King said, “An thou speak sooth, I will bring
thee to thy wish and thy desire.” Then came forward the Persian sage
and, prostrating himself before the King, presented him with a horse[5]
of the blackest ebony-wood inlaid with gold and jewels, and ready
harnessed with saddle, bridle and stirrups such as befit Kings; which
when Sabur saw, he marvelled with exceeding marvel and was confounded at
the beauty of its form and the ingenuity of its fashion. So he asked,
“What is the use of this horse of wood, and what is its virtue and what
the secret of its movement?”; and the Persian answered, “O my lord, the
virtue of this horse is that, if one mount him, it will carry him
whither he will and fare with its rider through the air and cover the
space of a year in a single day.” The King marvelled and was amazed at
these three wonders, following thus hard upon one another on the same
day, and turning to the sage, said to him, “By Allah the Omnipotent, and
our Lord the Beneficent, who created all creatures and feedeth them with
meat and drink, an thy speech be veritable and the virtue of thy
contrivance appear, I will assuredly give thee whatsoever thou lustest
for and will bring thee to thy desire and thy wish!”[6] Then he
entertained the sages three days, that he might make trial of their
gifts; after which they brought the figures before him and each took the
creature he had wroughten and showed him the mystery of its movement.
The trumpeter blew the trump; the peacock pecked its chicks and the
Persian sage mounted the ebony horse, whereupon it soared with him high
in air and descended again. When King Sabur saw all this, he was amazed
and perplexed and felt like to fly for joy and said to the three sages,
“Now I am certified of the truth of your words and it behoveth me to
quit me of my promise. Ask ye, therefore, what ye will, and I will give
you that same.” Now the report of the King’s daughters had reached the
sages, so they answered, “If the King be content with us and accept of
our gifts and allow us to prefer a request to him, we crave of him that
he give us his three daughters in marriage, that we may be his
sons-in-law; for that the stability of Kings may not be gainsaid.” Quoth
the King, “I grant you that which you wish and you desire,” and bade
summon the Kazi forthright, that he might marry each of the sages to one
of his daughters. Now it fortuned that the Princesses were behind a
curtain, looking on; and when they heard this, the youngest considered
her husband to be and behold, he was an old man,[7] an hundred years of
age, with hair frosted, forehead drooping, eyebrows mangy, ears slitten,
beard and mustachios stained and dyed; eyes red and goggle; cheeks
bleached and hollow; flabby nose like a brinjall, or egg-plant[8]; face
like a cobbler’s apron, teeth overlapping and lips like camel’s kidneys,
loose and pendulous; in brief a terror, a horror, a monster, for he was
of the folk of his time the unsightliest and of his age the
fright-fullest; sundry of his grinders had been knocked out and his
eye-teeth were like the tusks of the Jinni who frighteneth poultry in
hen-houses. Now the girl was the fairest and most graceful of her time,
more elegant than the gazelle however tender, than the gentlest zephyr
blander and brighter than the moon at her full; for amorous fray right
suitable; confounding in graceful sway the waving bough and outdoing in
swimming gait the pacing roe; in fine she was fairer and sweeter by far
than all her sisters. So, when she saw her suitor, she went to her
chamber and strewed dust on her head and tore her clothes and fell to
buffeting her face and weeping and wailing. Now the Prince, her brother,
Kamar al-Akmár, or the Moon of Moons hight, was then newly returned from
a journey and, hearing her weeping and crying came in to her (for he
loved her with fond affection, more than his other sisters) and asked
her, “What aileth thee? What hath befallen thee? Tell me and conceal
naught from me.” So she smote her breast and answered, “O my brother and
my dear one, I have nothing to hide. If the palace be straitened upon
thy father, I will go out; and if he be resolved upon a foul thing, I
will separate myself from him, though he consent not to make provision
for me; and my Lord will provide.” Quoth he, “Tell me what meaneth this
talk and what hath straitened thy breast and troubled thy temper.” “O my
brother and my dear one,” answered the Princess, “Know that my father
hath promised me in marriage to a wicked magician who brought him, as a
gift, a horse of black wood, and hath bewitched him with his craft and
his egromancy; but, as for me, I will none of him, and would, because of
him, I had never come into this world!” Her brother soothed her and
solaced her, then fared to his sire and said, “What be this wizard to
whom thou hast given my youngest sister in marriage, and what is this
present which he hath brought thee, so that thou hast killed[9] my
sister with chagrin? It is not right that this should be.” Now the
Persian was standing by and, when he heard the Prince’s words, he was
mortified and filled with fury and the King said, “O my son, an thou
sawest this horse, thy wit would be confounded and thou wouldst be
amated with amazement.” Then he bade the slaves bring the horse before
him and they did so; and, when the Prince saw it, it pleased him. So
(being an accomplished cavalier) he mounted it forthright and struck its
sides with the shovel-shaped stirrup-irons; but it stirred not and the
King said to the Sage, “Go show him its movement, that he also may help
thee to win thy wish.” Now the Persian bore the Prince a grudge because
he willed not he should have his sister; so he showed him the pin of
ascent on the right side of the horse and saying to him, “Trill this,”
left him. Thereupon the Prince trilled the pin and lo! the horse
forthwith soared with him high in ether, as it were a bird, and gave not
overflying till it disappeared from men’s espying, whereat the King was
troubled and perplexed about his case and said to the Persian, “O sage,
look how thou mayst make him descend.” But he replied, “O my lord, I can
do nothing, and thou wilt never see him again till Resurrection-day, for
he, of his ignorance and pride, asked me not of the pin of descent and I
forgot to acquaint him therewith.” When the King heard this, he was
enraged with sore rage; and bade bastinado the sorcerer and clap him in
jail, whilst he himself cast the crown from his head and beat his face
and smote his breast. Moreover, he shut the doors of his palaces and
gave himself up to weeping and keening, he and his wife and daughters
and all the folk of the city; and thus their joy was turned to annoy and
their gladness changed into sore affliction and sadness. Thus far
concerning them; but as regards the Prince, the horse gave not over
soaring with him till he drew near the sun, whereat he gave himself up
for lost and saw death in the skies, and was confounded at his case,
repenting him of having mounted the horse and saying to himself,
“Verily, this was a device of the Sage to destroy me on account of my
youngest sister; but there is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great! I am lost without recourse; but I
wonder, did not he who made the ascent-pin make also a descent-pin?” Now
he was a man of wit and knowledge and intelligence; so he fell to
feeling all the parts of the horse, but saw nothing save a screw, like a
cock’s head, on its right shoulder and the like on the left, when quoth
he to himself, “I see no sign save these things like buttons.” Presently
he turned the right-hand pin, whereupon the horse flew heavenwards with
increased speed. So he left it and looking at the sinister shoulder and
finding another pin, he wound it up and immediately the steed’s upwards
motion slowed and ceased and it began to descend, little by little,
towards the face of the earth, while the rider became yet more cautious
and careful of his life.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

[Illustration]


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Prince wound up the sinister screw, the steed’s upward motion slowed
and ceased, and it began to descend, little by little, towards the
earth while the rider became yet more cautious and careful of his
life. And when he saw this and knew the uses of the horse, his heart
was filled with joy and gladness and he thanked Almighty Allah for
that He had deigned deliver him from destruction. Then he began to
turn the horse’s head whithersoever he would, making it rise and
fall at pleasure, till he had gotten complete mastery over its every
movement. He ceased not to descend the whole of that day, for that
the steed’s ascending flight had borne him afar from the earth; and,
as he descended, he diverted himself with viewing the various cities
and countries over which he passed and which he knew not, never
having seen them in his life. Amongst the rest, he descried a city
ordered after the fairest fashion in the midst of a verdant and
riant land, rich in trees and streams, with gazelles pacing daintily
over the plains; whereat he fell a-musing and said to himself,
“Would I knew the name of yon town and in what land it is!” And he
took to circling about it and observing it right and left. By this
time, the day began to decline and the sun drew near to its downing;
and he said in his mind, “Verily I find no goodlier place to night
in than this city; so I will lodge here and early on the morrow I
will return to my kith and kin and my kingdom; and tell my father
and family what hath passed and acquaint him with what mine eyes
have seen.” Then he addressed himself to seeking a place wherein he
might safely bestow himself and his horse and where none should
descry him, and presently behold, he espied a-middle-most of the
city a palace rising high in upper air surrounded by a great wall
with lofty crenelles and battlements, guarded by forty black slaves,
clad in complete mail and armed with spears and swords, bows and
arrows. Quoth he, “This is a goodly place,” and turned the
descent-pin, whereupon the horse sank down with him like a weary
bird, and alighted gently on the terrace-roof of the palace. So the
Prince dismounted and ejaculating “Alhamdolillah”—praise be to
Allah[10]—he began to go round about the horse and examine it,
saying, “By Allah, he who fashioned thee with these perfections was
a cunning craftsman, and if the Almighty extend the term of my life
and restore me to my country and kinsfolk in safety and reunite me
with my father, I will assuredly bestow upon him all manner bounties
and benefit him with the utmost beneficence.” By this time night had
overtaken him and he sat on the roof till he was assured that all in
the palace slept; and indeed hunger and thirst were sore upon him,
for that he had not tasted food nor drunk water since he parted from
his sire. So he said within himself, “Surely the like of this palace
will not lack of victual;” and, leaving the horse above, went down
in search of somewhat to eat. Presently, he came to a staircase and
descending it to the bottom, found himself in a court paved with
white marble and alabaster, which shone in the light of the moon. He
marvelled at the place and the goodliness of its fashion, but sensed
no sound of speaker and saw no living soul and stood in perplexed
surprise, looking right and left and knowing not whither he should
wend. Then said he to himself, “I may not do better than return to
where I left my horse and pass the night by it; and as soon as day
shall dawn I will mount and ride away.”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the king’s
son to himself, “I may not do better than pass the night by my horse;
and as soon as day shall dawn I will mount and ride away.” However, as
he tarried talking to himself, he espied a light within the palace, and
making towards it, found that it came from a candle that stood before a
door of the Harim, at the head of a sleeping eunuch, as he were one of
the Ifrits of Solomon or a tribesman of the Jinn, longer than lumber and
broader than a bench. He lay before the door, with the pommel of his
sword gleaming in the flame of the candle, and at his head was a bag of
leather[11] hanging from a column of granite. When the Prince saw this,
he was affrighted and said, “I crave help from Allah the Supreme! O mine
Holy One, even as Thou hast already delivered me from destruction, so
vouchsafe me strength to quit myself of the adventure of this palace!”
So saying, he put out his hand to the budget and taking it, carried it
aside and opened it and found in it food of the best. He ate his fill
and refreshed himself and drank water, after which he hung up the
provision-bag in its place and drawing the eunuch’s sword from its
sheath, took it, whilst the slave slept on, knowing not whence destiny
should come to him. Then the Prince fared forwards into the palace and
ceased not till he came to a second door, with a curtain drawn before
it; so he raised the curtain and behold, on entering he saw a couch of
the whitest ivory, inlaid with pearls and jacinths and jewels, and four
slave-girls sleeping about it. He went up to the couch, to see what was
thereon, and found a young lady lying asleep, chemised with her hair[12]
as she were the full moon rising[13] over the Eastern horizon, with
flower-white brow and shining hair-parting and cheeks like blood-red
anemones and dainty moles thereon. He was amazed at her as she lay in
her beauty and loveliness, her symmetry and grace, and he recked no more
of death. So he went up to her, trembling in every nerve and, shuddering
with pleasure, kissed her on the right cheek; whereupon she awoke
forthright and opened her eyes, and seeing the Prince standing at her
head, said to him, “Who art thou and whence comest thou?” Quoth he, “I
am thy slave and thy lover.” Asked she, “And who brought thee hither?”
and he answered, “My Lord and my fortune.” Then said Shams al-Nahár[14]
(for such was her name), “Haply thou art he who demanded me yesterday of
my father in marriage and he rejected thee, pretending that thou wast
foul of favour. By Allah, my sire lied in his throat when he spoke this
thing, for thou art not other than beautiful.” Now the son of the King
of Hind had sought her in marriage, but her father had rejected him, for
that he was ugly and uncouth, and she thought the Prince was he. So,
when she saw his beauty and grace (for indeed he was like the radiant
moon) the syntheism[15] of love gat hold of her heart as it were a
flaming fire, and they fell to talk and converse. Suddenly, her
waiting-women awoke and, seeing the Prince with their mistress, said to
her, “Oh my lady, who is this with thee?” Quoth she, “I know not; I
found him sitting by me, when I woke up: haply ‘tis he who seeketh me in
marriage of my sire.” Quoth they, “O my lady, by Allah the All-Father,
this is not he who seeketh thee in marriage, for he is hideous and this
man is handsome and of high degree. Indeed, the other is not fit to be
his servant.”[16] Then the handmaidens went out to the eunuch, and
finding him slumbering awoke him, and he started up in alarm. Said they,
“How happeneth it that thou art on guard at the palace and yet men come
in to us, whilst we are asleep?” When the black heard this, he sprang in
haste to his sword, but found it not; and fear took him and trembling.
Then he went in, confounded, to his mistress and seeing the Prince
sitting at talk with her, said to him, “O my lord, art thou man or
Jinni?” Replied the Prince, “Woe to thee, O unluckiest of slaves: how
darest thou even the sons of the royal Chosroes[17] with one of the
unbelieving Satans?” And he was as a raging lion. Then he took the sword
in his hand and said to the slave, “I am the King’s son-in-law, and he
hath married me to his daughter and bidden me go in to her.” And when
the eunuch heard these words he replied, “O my lord, if thou be indeed
of kind a man as thou avouchest, she is fit for none but for thee, and
thou art worthier of her than any other.” Thereupon the eunuch ran to
the King, shrieking loud and rending his raiment and heaving dust upon
his head; and when the King heard his outcry, he said to him, “What hath
befallen thee?: speak quickly and be brief; for thou hast fluttered my
heart.” Answered the eunuch, “O King, come to thy daughter’s succour;
for a devil of the Jinn, in the likeness of a King’s son, hath got
possession of her; so up and at him!” When the King heard this, he
thought to kill him and said, “How camest thou to be careless of my
daughter and let this demon come at her?” Then he betook himself to the
Princess’s palace, where he found her slave-women standing to await him
and asked them, “What is come to my daughter?” “O King,” answered they,
“slumber overcame us and, when we awoke, we found a young man sitting
upon her couch in talk with her, as he were the full moon; never saw we
aught fairer of favour than he. So we questioned him of his case and he
declared that thou hadst given him thy daughter in marriage. More than
this we know not, nor do we know if he be a man or a Jinni; but he is
modest and well bred, and doth nothing unseemly or which leadeth to
disgrace.” Now when the King heard these words, his wrath cooled and he
raised the curtain little by little and looking in, saw sitting at talk
with his daughter a Prince of the goodliest with a face like the full
moon for sheen. At this sight he could not contain himself, of his
jealousy for his daughter’s honour; and, putting aside the curtain,
rushed in upon them drawn sword in hand like a furious Ghul. Now when
the Prince saw him he asked the Princess, “Is this thy sire?”; and she
answered, “Yes.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Three Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Prince
saw the King rushing in upon them, drawn sword in hand, like a furious
Ghul he asked the Princess, “Is this thy sire?”; and she answered,
“Yes.” Whereupon he sprang to his feet and, seizing his sword, cried out
at the King with so terrible a cry that he was confounded. Then the
youth would have fallen on him with the sword; but the King seeing that
the Prince was doughtier than he, sheathed his scymitar and stood till
the young man came up to him, when he accosted him courteously and said
to him, “O youth, art thou a man or a Jinni?” Quoth the Prince, “Did I
not respect thy right as mine host and thy daughter’s honour, I would
spill thy blood! How darest thou fellow me with devils, me that am a
Prince of the sons of the royal Chosroes who, had they wished to take
thy kingdom, could shake thee like an earthquake from thy glory and thy
dominions and spoil thee of all thy possessions?” Now when the King
heard his words, he was confounded with awe and bodily fear of him and
rejoined, “If thou indeed be of the sons of the Kings, as thou
pretendest, how cometh it that thou enterest my palace without my
permission, and smirchest mine honour, making thy way to my daughter and
feigning that thou art her husband and claiming that I have given her to
thee to wife, I that have slain Kings and King’s sons, who sought her of
me in marriage? And now who shall save thee from my might and majesty
when, if I cried out to my slaves and servants and bade them put thee to
the vilest of deaths they would slay thee forthright? Who shall deliver
thee out of my hand?” When the Prince heard this speech of the King he
answered, “Verily, I wonder at thee and at the shortness and denseness
of thy wit! Say me, canst covet for thy daughter a mate comelier than
myself, and hast ever seen a stouter hearted man or one better fitted
for a Sultan or a more glorious in rank and dominion than I?” Rejoined
the King, “Nay, by Allah! but I would have had thee, O youth, act after
the custom of Kings and demand her from me to wife before witnesses,
that I might have married her to thee publicly; and now, even were I to
marry her to thee privily, yet hast thou dishonoured me in her person.”
Rejoined the Prince, “Thou sayest sooth, O King, but if thou summon thy
slaves and thy soldiers and they fall upon me and slay me, as thou
pretendest, thou wouldst but publish thine own disgrace, and the folk
would be divided between belief in thee and disbelief in thee.
Wherefore, O King, thou wilt do well, meseemeth, to turn from this
thought to that which I shall counsel thee.” Quoth the King, “Let me
hear what thou hast to advise;” and quoth the Prince, “What I have to
propose to thee is this: either do thou meet me in combat singular, I
and thou; and he who slayeth his adversary shall be held the worthier
and having a better title to the kingdom; or else, let me be this night
and, whenas dawns the morn, draw out against me thy horsemen and footmen
and servants; but first tell me their number.” Said the King, “They are
forty thousand horse, besides my own slaves and their followers,[18] who
are the like of them in number.” Thereupon said the Prince, “When the
day shall break, do thou array them against me and say to them”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the
Prince, “When day shall break, do thou array them against me and say to
them:—This man is a suitor to me for my daughter’s hand, on condition
that he shall do battle single-handed against you all; for he pretendeth
that he will overcome you and put you to the rout, and indeed that ye
cannot prevail against him. After which, leave me to do battle with
them: if they slay me, then is thy secret the surer guarded and thine
honour the better warded; and if I overcome them and see their backs,
then is it the like of me a King should covet to his son-in-law.” So the
King approved of his opinion and accepted his proposition, despite his
awe at the boldness of his speech and amaze at the pretensions of the
Prince to meet in fight his whole host, such as he had described it to
him, being at heart assured that he would perish in the fray and so he
should be quit of him and freed from the fear of dishonour. Thereupon he
called the eunuch and bade him go to his Wazir without stay and delay
and command him to assemble the whole of the army and cause them don
their arms and armour and mount their steeds. So the eunuch carried the
King’s order to the Minister, who straightway summoned the Captains of
the host and the Lords of the realm and bade them don their harness of
derring-do and mount horse and sally forth in battle array. Such was
their case; but as regards the King, he sat a long while conversing with
the young Prince, being pleased with his wise speech and good sense and
fine breeding. And when it was daybreak he returned to his palace and,
seating himself on his throne, commanded his merry men to mount and bade
them saddle one of the best of the royal steeds with handsome selle and
housings and trappings and bring it to the Prince. But the youth said,
“O King, I will not mount horse, till I come in view of the troops and
review them.” “Be it as thou wilt,” replied the King. Then the two
repaired to the parade-ground, where the troops were drawn up, and the
young Prince looked upon them and noted their great number; after which
the King cried out to them, saying, “Ho, all ye men, there is come to me
a youth who seeketh my daughter in marriage; and in very sooth never
have I seen a goodlier than he; no, nor a stouter of heart nor a
doughtier of arm, for he pretendeth that he can overcome you,
single-handed, and force you to flight and that, were ye an hundred
thousand in number, yet for him would ye be but few. Now when he
chargeth down on you, do ye receive him upon point of pike and sharp of
sabre; for, indeed, he hath undertaken a mighty matter.” Then quoth the
King to the Prince, “Up, O my son, and do thy devoir on them.” Answered
he, “O King, thou dealest not justly and fairly by me: how shall I go
forth against them, seeing that I am afoot and the men be mounted?” The
King retorted, “I bade thee mount, and thou refusedst; but choose thou
which of my horses thou wilt.” Then he said, “Not one of thy horses
pleaseth me, and I will ride none but that on which I came.” Asked the
King, “And where is thy horse?” “Atop of thy palace.” “In what part of
my palace?” “On the roof.” Now when the King heard these words, he
cried, “Out on thee! this is the first sign thou hast given of madness.
How can the horse be on the roof? But we shall at once see if thou speak
truth or lies.” Then he turned to one of his chief officers and said to
him, “Go to my palace and bring me what thou findest on the roof.” So
all the people marvelled at the young Prince’s words, saying one to
other, “How can a horse come down the steps from the roof? Verily this
is a thing whose like we never heard.” In the mean time the King’s
messenger repaired to the palace and mounting to the roof, found the
horse standing there and never had he looked on a handsomer; but when he
drew near and examined it, he saw that it was made of ebony and ivory.
Now the officer was accompanied by other high officers, who also looked
on and they laughed to one another, saying, “Was it of the like of this
horse that the youth spake? We cannot deem him other than mad; however,
we shall soon see the truth of his case.”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the high
officials looked upon the horse, they laughed one to other and said,
“Was it of the like of this horse that the youth spake? We cannot deem
him other than mad; however, we shall soon see the truth of his case.
Peradventure herein is some mighty matter, and he is a man of high
degree.” Then they lifted up the horse bodily and, carrying it to the
King, set it down before him, and all the lieges flocked round to look
at it, marvelling at the beauty of its proportions and the richness of
its saddle and bridle. The King also admired it and wondered at it with
extreme wonder; and he asked the Prince, “O youth, is this thy horse?”
He answered, “Yes, O King, this is my horse, and thou shalt soon see the
marvel it showeth.” Rejoined the King, “Then take and mount it,” and the
Prince retorted, “I will not mount till the troops withdraw afar from
it.” So the King bade them retire a bowshot from the horse; whereupon
quoth its owner, “O King, see thou; I am about to mount my horse and
charge upon thy host and scatter them right and left and split their
hearts asunder.” Said the King, “Do as thou wilt; and spare not their
lives, for they will not spare thine.” Then the Prince mounted, whilst
the troops ranged themselves in ranks before him, and one said to
another, “When the youth cometh between the ranks, we will take him on
the points of our pikes and the sharps of our sabres.” Quoth another,
“By Allah, this is a mere misfortune: how shall we slay a youth so
comely of face and shapely of form?” And a third continued, “Ye will
have hard work to get the better of him; for the youth had not done
this, but for what he knew of his own prowess and pre-eminence of
valour.” Meanwhile, having settled himself in his saddle, the Prince
turned the pin of ascent; whilst all eyes were strained to see what he
would do, whereupon the horse began to heave and rock and sway to and
fro and make the strangest of movements steed ever made, till its belly
was filled with air and it took flight with its rider and soared high
into the sky. When the King saw this, he cried out to his men, saying,
“Woe to you! catch him, catch him, ere he ‘scape you!” But his Wazirs
and Viceroys said to him, “O King, can a man overtake the flying bird?
This is surely none but some mighty magician or Mar¡d of the Jinn or
devil, and Allah save thee from him. So praise thou the Almighty for
deliverance of thee and of all thy host from his hand.” Then the King
returned to his palace after seeing the feat of the Prince and, going in
to his daughter, acquainted her with what had befallen them both on the
parade-ground. He found her grievously afflicted for the Prince and
bewailing her separation from him; wherefore she fell sick with violent
sickness and took to her pillow. Now when her father saw her on this
wise, he pressed her to his breast and kissing her between the eyes,
said to her, “O my daughter, praise Allah Almighty and thank Him for
that He hath delivered us from this crafty enchanter, this villain, this
low fellow, this thief who thought only of seducing thee!” And he
repeated to her the story of the Prince and how he had disappeared in
the firmament; and he abused him and cursed him knowing not how dearly
his daughter loved him. But she paid no heed to his words and did but
redouble in her tears and wails, saying to herself, “By Allah, I will
neither eat meat nor drain drink, till Allah reunite me with him!” Her
father was greatly concerned for her case and mourned much over her
plight; but, for all he could do to soothe her, love-longing only
increased on her.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King mourned
much over his daughter’s plight but, for all he could do to soothe her,
love-longing only increased on her. Thus far concerning the King and
Princess Shams al-Nahár; but as regards Prince Kamar al-Akmar, when he
had risen high in air, he turned his horse’s head towards his native
land, and being alone mused upon the beauty of the Princess and her
loveliness. Now he had enquired of the King’s people the name of the
city and of its King and his daughter; and men had told him that it was
the city of Sana’á.[19] So he journeyed with all speed, till he drew
near his father’s capital and, making an airy circuit about the city,
alighted on the roof of the King’s palace, where he left his horse,
whilst he descended into the palace and seeing its threshold strewn with
ashes, thought that one of his family was dead. Then he entered, as of
wont, and found his father and mother and sisters clad in mourning
raiment of black, all pale of faces and lean of frames. When his sire
descried him and was assured that it was indeed his son, he cried out
with a great cry and fell down in a fit, but after a time coming to
himself, threw himself upon him and embraced him, clipping him to his
bosom and rejoicing in him with exceeding joy and extreme gladness. His
mother and sisters heard this; so they came in and seeing the Prince,
fell upon him, kissing him and weeping, and joying with exceeding
joyance. Then they questioned him of his case; so he told them all that
had past from first to last, and his father said to him, “Praised be
Allah for thy safety, O coolth of my eyes and core of my heart!” Then
the King bade hold high festival, and the glad tidings flew through the
city. So they beat drums and cymbals and, doffing the weed of mourning,
they donned the gay garb of gladness and decorated the streets and
markets; whilst the folk vied with one another who should be the first
to give the King joy, and the King proclaimed a general pardon and
opening the prisons, released those who were therein prisoned. Moreover,
he made banquets for the people, with great abundance of eating and
drinking, for seven days and nights and all creatures were gladsomest;
and he took horse with his son and rode out with him, that the folk
might see him and rejoice. After awhile the Prince asked about the maker
of the horse, saying, “O my father, what hath fortune done with him?”;
and the King answered, “Allah never bless him nor the hour wherein I set
eyes on him! For he was the cause of thy separation from us, O my son,
and he hath lain in gaol since the day of thy disappearance.” Then the
King bade release him from prison and, sending for him, invested him in
a dress of satisfaction and entreated him with the utmost favour and
munificence, save that he would not give him his daughter to wife;
whereat the Sage raged with sore rage and repented of that which he had
done, knowing that the Prince had secured the secret of the steed and
the manner of its motion. Moreover, the King said to his son, “I reck
thou wilt do well not to go near the horse henceforth and more
especially not to mount it after this day; for thou knowest not its
properties, and belike thou art in error about it.” Now the Prince had
told his father of his adventure with the King of Sana’a and his
daughter and he said, “Had the King intended to kill thee, he had done
so; but thine hour was not yet come.” When the rejoicings were at an
end, the people returned to their places and the King and his son to the
palace, where they sat down and fell to eating and drinking and making
merry. Now the King had a handsome handmaiden who was skilled in playing
the lute; so she took it and began to sweep the strings and sing thereto
before the King and his son of separation of lovers, and she chanted the
following verses:—

 Deem not that absence breeds in me aught of forgetfulness; ✿ What should
    remember I did you fro’ my remembrance wane?
 Time dies but never dies the fondest love for you we bear; ✿ And in your
    love I’ll die and in your love I’ll arise again.[20]

When the Prince heard these verses, the fires of longing flamed up in
his heart and pine and passion redoubled upon him. Grief and regret were
sore upon him and his bowels yearned in him for love of the King’s
daughter of Sana’a; so he rose forthright and, escaping his father’s
notice, went forth the palace to the horse and mounting it, turned the
pin of ascent, whereupon birdlike it flew with him high in air and
soared towards the upper regions of the sky. In early morning his father
missed him and, going up to the pinnacle of the palace, in great
concern, saw his son rising into the firmament; whereat he was sore
afflicted and repented in all penitence that he had not taken the horse
and hidden it; and he said to himself, “By Allah, if but my son return
to me, I will destroy the horse, that my heart may be at rest concerning
my son.” And he fell again to weeping and bewailing himself——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King that the King again fell
to weeping and bewailing himself for his son. Such was his case; but as
regards the Prince, he ceased not flying on through air till he came to
the city of Sana’a and alighted on the roof as before. Then he crept
down stealthily and, finding the eunuch asleep, as of wont, raised the
curtain and went on little by little, till he came to the door of the
Princess’s alcove[21]-chamber and stopped to listen; when lo! he heard
her shedding plenteous tears and reciting verses, whilst her women slept
round her. Presently, overhearing her weeping and wailing quoth they, “O
our mistress, why wilt thou mourn for one who mourneth not for thee?”
Quoth she, “O ye little of wit, is he for whom I mourn of those who
forget or who are forgotten?” And she fell again to wailing and weeping,
till sleep overcame her. Hereat the Prince’s heart melted for her and
his gall-bladder was like to burst, so he entered and, seeing her lying
asleep without covering,[22] touched her with his hand; whereupon she
opened her eyes and espied him standing by her. Said he, “Why all this
crying and mourning?” And when she knew him, she threw herself upon him,
and took him around the neck and kissed him and answered, “For thy sake
and because of my separation from thee.” Said he, “O my lady, I have
been made desolate by thee all this long time!” But she replied, “‘Tis
thou who hast desolated _me_; and hadst thou tarried longer, I had
surely died!” Rejoined he, “O my lady, what thinkest thou of my case
with thy father and how he dealt with me? Were it not for my love of
thee, O temptation and seduction of the Three Worlds, I had certainly
slain him and made him a warning to all beholders; but, even as I love
thee, so I love him for thy sake.” Quoth she, “How couldst thou leave
me: can my life be sweet to me after thee?” Quoth he, “Let what hath
happened suffice: I am now hungry, and thirsty.” So she bade her maidens
make ready meat and drink, and they sat eating and drinking and
conversing till night was well nigh ended; and when day broke he rose to
take leave of her and depart, ere the eunuch should awake. Shams
al-Nahar asked him, “Whither goest thou?”; and he answered, “To my
father’s house, and I plight thee my troth that I will come to thee once
in every week.” But she wept and said, “I conjure thee, by Allah the
Almighty, take me with thee whereso thou wendest and make me not taste
anew the bitter-gourd[23] of separation from thee.” Quoth he, “Wilt thou
indeed go with me?” and quoth she, “Yes.” “Then,” said he, “arise that
we depart.” So she rose forthright and going to a chest, arrayed herself
in what was richest and dearest to her of her trinkets of gold and
jewels of price, and she fared forth her handmaids recking naught. So he
carried her up to the roof of the palace and, mounting the ebony horse,
took her up behind him and made her fast to himself, binding her with
strong bonds; after which he turned the shoulder-pin of ascent, and the
horse rose with him high in air. When her slave-women saw this, they
shrieked aloud and told her father and mother, who in hot haste ran to
the palace-roof and looking up, saw the magical horse flying away with
the Prince and Princess. At this the King was troubled with
ever-increasing trouble and cried out, saying, “O King’s son, I conjure
thee, by Allah, have ruth on me and my wife and bereave us not of our
daughter!” The Prince made him no reply; but, thinking in himself that
the maiden repented of leaving father and mother, asked her, “O
ravishment of the age, say me, wilt thou that I restore thee to thy
mother and father?”: whereupon she answered, “By Allah, O my lord, that
is not my desire: my only wish is to be with thee, wherever thou art;
for I am distracted by the love of thee from all else, even from my
father and mother.” Hearing these words the Prince joyed with great joy,
and made the horse fly and fare softly with them, so as not to disquiet
her; nor did they stay their flight till they came in sight of a green
meadow, wherein was a spring of running water. Here they alighted and
ate and drank; after which the Prince took horse again and set her
behind him, binding her in his fear for her safety; after which they
fared on till they came in sight of his father’s capital. At this, the
Prince was filled with joy and bethought himself to show his beloved the
seat of his dominion and his father’s power and dignity and give her to
know that it was greater than that of her sire. So he set her down in
one of his father’s gardens without the city where his parent was wont
to take his pleasure; and, carrying her into a domed summer-house
prepared there for the King, left the ebony horse at the door and
charged the damsel keep watch over it, saying, “Sit here, till my
messenger come to thee; for I go now to my father, to make ready a
palace for thee and show thee my royal estate.” She was delighted when
she heard these words and said to him, “Do as thou wilt;”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the maiden was
delighted when she heard these words and said to him, “Do as thou wilt;”
for she thereby understood that she should not enter the city but with
due honour and worship, as became her rank. Then the Prince left her and
betook himself to the palace of the King his father, who rejoiced in his
return and met him and welcomed him; and the Prince said to him, “Know
that I have brought with me the King’s daughter of whom I told thee; and
have left her without the city in such a garden and come to tell thee,
that thou mayst make ready the procession of estate and go forth to meet
her and show her thy royal dignity and troops and guards.” Answered the
King, “With joy and gladness”; and straightway bade decorate the town
with the goodliest adornment. Then he took horse and rode out in all
magnificence and majesty, he and his host, high officers and household,
with drums and kettledrums, fifes and clarions and all manner
instruments; whilst the Prince drew forth of his treasuries jewellery
and apparel and what else of the things which Kings hoard and made a
rare display of wealth and splendour: moreover he got ready for the
Princess a canopied litter of brocades, green, red and yellow, wherein
he set Indian and Greek and Abyssinian slave-girls. Then he left the
litter and those who were therein and preceded them to the pavilion
where he had set her down; and searched but found naught, neither
Princess nor horse. When he saw this, he beat his face and rent his
raiment and began to wander round about the garden, as he had lost his
wits; after which he came to his senses and said to himself, “How could
she have come at the secret of this horse, seeing I told her nothing of
it? Maybe the Persian sage who made the horse hath chanced upon her and
stolen her away, in revenge for my father’s treatment of him.” Then he
sought the guardians of the garden and asked them if they had seen any
pass the precincts; and said, “Hath any one come in here? Tell me the
truth and the whole truth or I will at once strike off your heads.” They
were terrified by his threats; but they answered with one voice, “We
have seen no man enter save the Persian sage, who came to gather healing
herbs.” So the Prince was certified that it was indeed he that had taken
away the maiden——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Prince
heard their answer, he was certified that the Sage had taken away the
maiden and abode confounded and perplexed concerning his case. And he
was abashed before the folk and, turning to his sire, told him what had
happened and said to him, “Take the troops and march them back to the
city. As for me, I will never return till I have cleared up this
affair.” When the King heard this, he wept and beat his breast and said
to him, “O my son, calm thy choler and master thy chagrin and come home
with us and look what King’s daughter thou wouldst fain have, that I may
marry thee to her.” But the Prince paid no heed to his words and
farewelling him departed, whilst the King returned to the city and their
joy was changed into sore annoy. Now, as Destiny issued her decree, when
the Prince left the Princess in the garden-house and betook himself to
his father’s palace, for the ordering of his affair, the Persian entered
the garden to pluck certain simples and, scenting the sweet savour of
musk and perfumes that exhaled from the Princess and impregnated the
whole place, followed it till he came to the pavilion and saw standing
at the door the horse which he had made with his own hands. His heart
was filled with joy and gladness, for he had bemourned its loss much
since it had gone out of his hand: so he went up to it and, examining
its every part, found it whole and sound; whereupon he was about to
mount and ride away, when he bethought himself and said, “Needs must I
first look what the Prince hath brought and left here with the horse.”
So he entered the pavilion and, seeing the Princess sitting there, as
she were the sun shining sheen in the sky serene, knew her at the first
glance to be some high-born lady and doubted not but the Prince had
brought her thither on the horse and left her in the pavilion, whilst he
went to the city, to make ready for her entry in state procession with
all splendour. Then he went up to her and kissed the earth between her
hands, whereupon she raised her eyes to him and, finding him exceedingly
foul of face and favour, asked, “Who art thou?”; and he answered, “O my
lady, I am a messenger sent by the Prince who hath bidden me bring thee
to another pleasance nearer the city; for that my lady the Queen cannot
walk so far and is unwilling, of her joy in thee, that another should
forestall her with thee.” Quoth she, “Where is the Prince?”; and quoth
the Persian, “He is in the city, with his sire and forthwith he shall
come for thee in great state.” Said she, “O thou! say me, could he find
none handsomer to send to me?”; whereat loud laughed the Sage and said,
“Yea verily, he hath not a Mameluke as ugly as I am; but, O my lady, let
not the ill-favour of my face and the foulness of my form deceive thee.
Hadst thou profited of me as hath the Prince, verily thou wouldst praise
my affair. Indeed, he chose me as his messenger to thee, because of my
uncomeliness and loathsomeness in his jealous love of thee: else hath he
Mamelukes and negro slaves, pages, eunuchs and attendants out of number,
each goodlier than other.” Whenas she heard this, it commended itself to
her reason and she believed him; so she rose forthright——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Persian
sage acquainted the Princess with the case of the King’s son, she
believed him; so she rose forthright; and, putting her hand in his,
said, “O my father, what hast thou brought me to ride?” He replied, “O
my lady, thou shalt ride the horse thou camest on;” and she, “I cannot
ride it by myself.” Whereupon he smiled and knew that he was her master
and said, “I will ride with thee myself.” So he mounted and, taking her
up behind him bound her to himself with firm bonds, while she knew not
what he would with her. Then he turned the ascent-pin, whereupon the
belly of the horse became full of wind and it swayed to and fro like a
wave of the sea, and rose with them high in air nor slackened in its
flight, till it was out of sight of the city. Now when Shams al-Nahar
saw this, she asked him, “Ho thou! what is become of that thou toldest
me of my Prince, making me believe that he sent thee to me?” Answered
the Persian, “Allah damn the Prince! he is a mean and skin-flint knave.”
She cried, “Woe to thee! How darest thou disobey thy lord’s
commandment?” Whereto the Persian replied, “He is no lord of mine:
knowest thou who I am?” Rejoined the Princess, “I know nothing of thee
save what thou toldest me;” and retorted he, “What I told thee was a
trick of mine against thee and the King’s son: I have long lamented the
loss of this horse which is under us; for I constructed it and made
myself master of it. But now I have gotten firm hold of it and of thee
too, and I will burn his heart even as he hath burnt mine; nor shall he
ever have the horse again; no, never! So be of good cheer and keep thine
eyes cool and clear; for I can be of more use to thee than he; and I am
generous as I am wealthy; my servants and slaves shall obey thee as
their mistress; I will robe thee in finest raiment and thine every wish
shall be at thy will.” When she heard this, she buffeted her face and
cried out, saying, “Ah, well-away! I have not won my beloved and I have
lost my father and mother!” And she wept bitter tears over what had
befallen her, whilst the Sage fared on with her, without ceasing, till
he came to the land of the Greeks[24] and alighted in a verdant mead,
abounding in streams and trees. Now this meadow lay near a city wherein
was a King of high puissance, and it chanced that he went forth that day
to hunt and divert himself. As he passed by the meadow, he saw the
Persian standing there, with the damsel and the horse by his side; and,
before the Sage was ware, the King’s slaves fell upon him and carried
him and the lady and the horse to their master who, noting the foulness
of the man’s favour and his loathsomeness and the beauty of the girl and
her loveliness, said, “O my lady, what kin is this oldster to thee?” The
Persian made haste to reply, saying, “She is my wife and the daughter of
my father’s brother.” But the lady at once gave him the lie and said, “O
King, by Allah, I know him not, nor is he my husband; nay, he is a
wicked magician who hath stolen me away by force and fraud.” Thereupon
the King bade bastinado the Persian and they beat him till he was
well-nigh dead; after which the King commanded to carry him to the city
and cast him into jail; and, taking from him the damsel and the ebony
horse (though he knew not its properties nor the secret of its motion),
set the girl in his serraglio and the horse amongst his hoards. Such was
the case with the Sage and the lady; but as regards Prince Kamar
al-Akmar, he garbed himself in travelling gear and taking what he needed
of money, set out tracking their trail in very sorry plight; and
journeyed from country to country and city to city seeking the Princess
and enquiring after the ebony horse, whilst all who heard him marvelled
at him and deemed his talk extravagant. Thus he continued doing a long
while; but, for all his enquiry and quest, he could hit on no news of
her. At last he came to her father’s city of Sana’a and there asked for
her, but could get no tidings of her and found her father mourning her
loss. So he turned back and made for the land of the Greeks, continuing
to enquire concerning the twain as he went——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

[Illustration]


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King’s son
made for the land of the Greeks, continuing to enquire concerning the
two as he went along, till, as chance would have it, he alighted at a
certain Khan and saw a company of merchants sitting at talk. So he sat
down near them and heard one say, “O my friends, I lately witnessed a
wonder of wonders.” They asked, “What was that?” and he answered, “I was
visiting such a district in such a city (naming the city wherein was the
Princess), and I heard its people chatting of a strange thing which had
lately befallen. It was that their King went out one day hunting and
coursing with a company of his courtiers and the lords of his realm;
and, issuing from the city, they came to a green meadow where they
espied an old man standing, with a woman sitting hard by a horse of
ebony. The man was foulest-foul of face and loathly of form, but the
woman was a marvel of beauty and loveliness and elegance and perfect
grace; and as for the wooden horse, it was a miracle, never saw eyes
aught goodlier than it nor more gracious than its make.” Asked the
others, “And what did the King with them?”; and the merchant answered,
“As for the man the King seized him and questioned him of the damsel and
he pretended that she was his wife and the daughter of his paternal
uncle; but she gave him the lie forthright and declared that he was a
sorcerer and a villain. So the King took her from the old man and bade
beat him and cast him into the trunk-house. As for the ebony horse, I
know not what became of it.” When the Prince heard these words, he drew
near to the merchant and began questioning him discreetly and
courteously touching the name of the city and of its King; which when he
knew, he passed the night full of joy. And as soon as dawned the day he
set out and travelled sans surcease till he reached that city; but, when
he would have entered, the gatekeepers laid hands on him, that they
might bring him before the King to question him of his condition and the
craft in which he skilled and the cause of his coming thither—such being
the usage and custom of their ruler. Now it was supper-time when he
entered the city, and it was then impossible to go in to the King or
take counsel with him respecting the stranger. So the guards carried him
to the jail, thinking to lay him by the heels there for the night; but,
when the warders saw his beauty and loveliness, they could not find it
in their hearts to imprison him: they made him sit with them without the
walls; and, when food came to them, he ate with them what sufficed him.
As soon as they had made an end of eating, they turned to the Prince and
said, “What countryman art thou?” “I come from Fars,” answered he, “the
land of the Chosroës.” When they heard this they laughed and one of them
said, “O Chosroan,[25] I have heard the talk of men and their histories
and I have looked into their conditions; but never saw I or heard I a
bigger liar than the Chosroan which is with us in the jail.” Quoth
another, “And never did I see aught fouler than his favour or more
hideous than his visnomy.” Asked the Prince, “What have ye seen of his
lying?”; and they answered, “He pretendeth that he is one of the wise!
Now the King came upon him, as he went a-hunting, and found with him a
most beautiful woman and a horse of the blackest ebony, never saw I a
handsomer. As for the damsel, she is with the King, who is enamoured of
her and would fain marry her; but she is mad, and were this man a leach
as he claimeth to be, he would have healed her, for the King doth his
utmost to discover a cure for her case and a remedy for her disease, and
this whole year past hath he spent treasures upon physicians and
astrologers, on her account; but none can avail to cure her. As for the
horse, it is in the royal hoard-house, and the ugly man is here with us
in prison; and as soon as night falleth, he weepeth and bemoaneth
himself and will not let us sleep.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the warders
had recounted the case of the Persian egromancer they held in prison and
his weeping and wailing, the Prince at once devised a device whereby he
might compass his desire; and presently the guards of the gate, being
minded to sleep, led him into the jail and locked the door. So he
overheard the Persian weeping and bemoaning himself, in his own tongue,
and saying, “Alack, and alas for my sin, that I sinned against myself
and against the King’s son, in that which I did with the damsel; for I
neither left her nor won my will of her! All this cometh of my lack of
sense, in that I sought for myself that which I deserved not and which
befitted not the like of me; for whoso seeketh what suiteth him not at
all, falleth with the like of my fall.” Now when the King’s son heard
this, he accosted him in Persian, saying, “How long will this weeping
and wailing last? Say me, thinkest thou that hath befallen thee that
which never befel other than thou?” Now when the Persian heard this, he
made friends with him and began to complain to him of his case and
misfortunes. And as soon as the morning morrowed, the warders took the
Prince and carried him before their King, informing him that he had
entered the city on the previous night, at a time when audience was
impossible. Quoth the King to the Prince, “Whence comest thou and what
is thy name and trade and why hast thou travelled hither?” He replied,
“As to my name I am called in Persian Harjah;[26] as to my country I
come from the land of Fars; and I am of the men of art and especially of
the art of medicine and healing the sick and those whom the Jinns drive
mad. For this I go round about all countries and cities, to profit by
adding knowledge to my knowledge, and whenever I see a patient I heal
him and this is my craft.”[27] Now when the King heard this, he rejoiced
with exceeding joy and said, “O excellent Sage, thou hast indeed come to
us at a time when we need thee.” Then he acquainted him with the case of
the Princess, adding, “If thou cure her and recover her from her
madness, thou shalt have of me everything thou seekest.” Replied the
Prince, “Allah save and favour the King: describe to me all thou hast
seen of her insanity and tell me how long it is since the access
attacked her; also how thou camest by her and the horse and the Sage.”
So the King told him the whole story, from first to last, adding, “The
Sage is in gaol.” Quoth the Prince, “O auspicious King, and what hast
thou done with the horse?” Quoth the King, “O youth, it is with me yet,
laid up in one of my treasure-chambers,” whereupon said the Prince
within himself, “The best thing I can do is first to see the horse and
assure myself of its condition. If it be whole and sound, all will be
well and end well; but, if its motor-works be destroyed, I must find
some other way of delivering my beloved.” Thereupon he turned to the
King and said to him, “O King, I must see the horse in question: haply I
may find in it somewhat that will serve me for the recovery of the
damsel.” “With all my heart,” replied the King, and taking him by the
hand, showed him into the place where the horse was. The Prince went
round about it, examining its condition, and found it whole and sound,
whereat he rejoiced greatly and said to the King, “Allah save and exalt
the King! I would fain go in to the damsel, that I may see how it is
with her; for I hope in Allah to heal her by my healing hand through
means of the horse.” Then he bade them take care of the horse and the
King carried him to the Princess’s apartment, where her lover found her
wringing her hands and writhing and beating herself against the ground,
and tearing her garments to tatters as was her wont; but there was no
madness of Jinn in her, and she did this but that none might approach
her. When the Prince saw her thus, he said to her, “No harm shall betide
thee, O ravishment of the three worlds;” and went on to soothe her and
speak her fair, till he managed to whisper, “I am Kamar al-Akmar;”
whereupon she cried out with a loud cry and fell down fainting for
excess of joy; but the King thought this was epilepsy[28] brought on by
her fear of him, and by her suddenly being startled. Then the Prince put
his mouth to her ear and said to her, “O Shams al-Nahar, O seduction of
the universe, have a care for thy life and mine and be patient and
constant; for this our position needeth sufferance and skilful
contrivance to make shift for our delivery from this tyrannical King. My
first move will be now to go out to him and tell him that thou art
possessed of a Jinn and hence thy madness; but that I will engage to
heal thee and drive away the evil spirit, if he will at once unbind thy
bonds. So when he cometh in to thee, do thou speak him smooth words,
that he may think I have cured thee, and all will be done for us as we
desire.” Quoth she, “Hearkening and obedience;” and he went out to the
King in joy and gladness, and said to him, “O august King, I have, by
thy good fortune, discovered her disease and its remedy, and have cured
her for thee. So now do thou go in to her and speak her softly and treat
her kindly, and promise her what may please her; so shall all thou
desirest of her be accomplished to thee.”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Three Hundred and Seventieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Prince
feigned himself a leach and went in to the damsel and made himself known
to her and told her how he purposed to deliver her, she cried
“Hearkening and obedience!” He then fared forth from her and sought the
King and said, “Go thou in to her and speak her softly and promise her
what may please her; so shall all thou desirest of her be accomplished
to thee.” Thereupon the King went in to her and when she saw him, she
rose and kissing the ground before him, bade him welcome and said, “I
admire how thou hast come to visit thy handmaid this day;” whereat he
was ready to fly for joy and bade the waiting-women and the eunuchs
attend her and carry her to the Hammam and make ready for her dresses
and adornment. So they went in to her and saluted her, and she returned
their salams with the goodliest language and after the pleasantest
fashion; whereupon they clad her in royal apparel and, clasping a collar
of jewels about her neck, carried her to the bath and served her there.
Then they brought her forth, as she were the full moon; and, when she
came into the King’s presence, she saluted him and kissed ground before
him; whereupon he joyed in her with joy exceeding and said to the
Prince, “O Sage, O philosopher, all this is of thy blessing. Allah
increase to us the benefit of thy healing breath!”[29] The Prince
replied, “O King, for the completion of her cure it behoveth that thou
go forth, thou and all thy troops and guards, to the place where thou
foundest her, not forgetting the beast of black wood which was with her;
for therein is a devil; and, unless I exorcise him, he will return to
her and afflict her at the head of every month.” “With love and
gladness,” cried the King, “O thou Prince of all philosophers and most
learned of all who see the light of day.” Then he brought out the ebony
horse to the meadow in question and rode thither with all his troops and
the Princess, little weeting the purpose of the Prince. Now when they
came to the appointed place, the Prince, still habited as a leach, bade
them set the Princess and the steed as far as eye could reach from the
King and his troops, and said to him, “With thy leave, and at thy word,
I will now proceed to the fumigations and conjurations, and here
imprison the adversary of mankind, that he may never more return to her.
After this, I shall mount this wooden horse which seemeth to be made of
ebony, and take the damsel up behind me; whereupon it will shake and
sway to and fro and fare forwards, till it come to thee, when the affair
will be at an end; and after this thou mayst do with her as thou wilt.”
When the King heard his words, he rejoiced with extreme joy; so the
Prince mounted the horse, and, taking the damsel up behind him, whilst
the King and his troops watched him, bound her fast to him. Then he
turned the ascending-pin and the horse took flight and soared with them
high in air, till they disappeared from every eye. After this the King
abode half the day, expecting their return; but they returned not. So
when he despaired of them, repenting him greatly of that which he had
done and grieving sore for the loss of the damsel, he went back to the
city with his troops. He then sent for the Persian who was in prison and
said to him, “O thou traitor, O thou villain, why didst thou hide from
me the mystery of the ebony horse? And now a sharper hath come to me and
hath carried it off, together with a slave-girl whose ornaments are
worth a mint of money, and I shall never see anyone or anything of them
again!” So the Persian related to him all his past, first and last, and
the King was seized with a fit of fury which well-nigh ended his life.
He shut himself up in his palace for a while, mourning and afflicted;
but at last his Wazirs came in to him and applied themselves to comfort
him, saying, “Verily, he who took the damsel is an enchanter, and
praised be Allah who hath delivered thee from his craft and sorcery!”
And they ceased not from him, till he was comforted for her loss. Thus
far concerning the King; but as for the Prince, he continued his career
towards his father’s capital in joy and cheer, and stayed not till he
alighted on his own palace, where he set the lady in safety; after which
he went in to his father and mother and saluted them and acquainted them
with her coming, whereat they were filled with solace and gladness. Then
he spread great banquets for the towns-folk——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

[Illustration]


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King’s son
spread great banquets for the towns-folk and they held high festival a
whole month, at the end of which time he went in to the Princess and
they took their joy of each other with exceeding joy. But his father
brake the ebony horse in pieces and destroyed its mechanism for flight;
moreover the Prince wrote a letter to the Princess’s father, advising
him of all that had befallen her and informing him how she was now
married to him and in all health and happiness, and sent it by a
messenger, together with costly presents and curious rarities. And when
the messenger arrived at the city which was Sana’a and delivered the
letter and the presents to the King, he read the missive and rejoiced
greatly thereat and accepted the presents, honouring and rewarding the
bearer handsomely. Moreover, he forwarded rich gifts to his son-in-law
by the same messenger, who returned to his master and acquainted him
with what had passed; whereat he was much cheered. And after this the
Prince wrote a letter every year to his father-in-law and sent him
presents till, in course of time, his sire King Sabur deceased and he
reigned in his stead, ruling justly over his lieges and conducting
himself well and righteously towards them, so that the land submitted to
him and his subjects did him loyal service; and Kamar al-Akmar and his
wife Shams al-Nahar abode in the enjoyment of all satisfaction and
solace of life, till there came to them the Destroyer of delights and
Sunderer of societies; the Plunderer of palaces, the Caterer for
cemeteries and the Garnerer of graves. And now glory be to the Living
One who dieth not and in whose hand is the dominion of the worlds
visible and invisible! Moreover I have heard tell the tale of

-----

Footnote 1:

  This tale (one of those translated, by Galland) is best and fullest in
  the Bresl. Edit. iii. 329.

Footnote 2:

  Europe has degraded this autumnal festival, the Sun-fête Mihrgán
  (which balanced the vernal Nau-roz) into Michaelmas and its
  goose-massacre. It was so called because it began on the 16th of Mihr,
  the seventh month; and lasted six days, with feasts, festivities and
  great rejoicings in honour of the Sun, who now begins his
  southing-course to gladden the other half of the world.

Footnote 3:

  “Hindí” is an Indian Moslem as opposed to “Hindú,” a pagan, or Gentoo.

Footnote 4:

  The orig. Persian word is “Sháh·púr” = King’s son: the Greeks (who had
  no _sh_) (preferred Σαβὼρ); the Romans turned it into Sapor and the
  Arabs (who lack the _p_) into Sábúr. See p. x. Hamzæ Ispahanensis
  Annalium Libri x.: Gottwaldt, Lipsiæ mdcccxlviii.

Footnote 5:

  The magic horse may have originated with the Hindu tale of a wooden
  Garuda (the bird of Vishnu) built by a youth for the purpose of a
  vehicle. It came with the “Moors” to Spain and appears in “Le Cheval
  de Fust,” a French poem of the thirteenth Century. Thence it passed
  over to England as shown by Chaucer’s “Half-told tale of Cambuscan
  (Janghíz Khan?) bold,” as

                    The wondrous steed of brass
                    On which the Tartar King did ride;

  And Leland (Itinerary) derives “Rutlandshire” from “a man named Rutter
  who rode round it on a wooden horse constructed by art magic.” Lane
  (ii. 548) quotes the parallel story of Cleomades and Claremond which
  Mr. Keightley (Tales and Popular Fictions, chapt. ii) dates from our
  thirteenth century. See Vol. i., p. 160.

Footnote 6:

  All Moslems, except those of the Máliki school, hold that the maker of
  an image representing anything of life will be commanded on the
  Judgement Day to animate it, and failing will be duly sent to the
  Fire. This severity arose apparently from the necessity of putting
  down idol-worship and, perhaps, for the same reason the Greek Church
  admits pictures but not statues. Of course the command has been
  honoured with extensive breaching: for instance all the Sultans of
  Stambul have had their portraits drawn and painted.

Footnote 7:

  This description of ugly old age is written with true Arab _verve_.

Footnote 8:

  Arab. “Badinján”: Hind. Bengan: Pers. Bádingán or Badilján; the Mala
  insana (_Solanum pomiferum_ or _S. Melongena_) of the Romans, well
  known in Southern Europe. It is of two kinds, the red (_Solanum
  lycopersicum_) and the black (_S. Melongena_). The Spaniards know it
  as “berengeria” and when Sancho Panza (Part ii. chapt. 2) says, “The
  Moors are fond of egg-plants” he means more than appears. The
  vegetable is held to be exceedingly heating and thereby to breed
  melancholia and madness; hence one says to a man that has done
  something eccentric, “Thou hast been eating brinjalls.”

Footnote 9:

  Again to be understood _Hibernice_ “kilt.”

Footnote 10:

  _i.e._ for fear of the evil eye injuring the palace and, haply,
  himself.

Footnote 11:

  The “Sufrah” before explained as acting provision-bag and table-cloth.

Footnote 12:

  Eastern women in hot weather, lie mother-nude under a sheet here
  represented by the hair. The Greeks and Romans also slept stripped and
  in mediæval England the most modest women saw nothing indelicate in
  sleeping naked by their naked husbands. The “night-cap” and the
  “night-gown” are comparatively modern inventions.

Footnote 13:

  Hindu fable turns this simile into better poetry, “She was like a
  second and a more wondrous moon made by the Creator.”

Footnote 14:

  “Sun of the Day.”

Footnote 15:

  Arab. “Shirk” = worshipping more than one God. A theological term here
  most appropriately used.

Footnote 16:

  The Bul. Edit. as usual abridges (vol. i. 534). The Prince lands on
  the palace-roof where he leaves his horse, and finding no one in the
  building goes back to the terrace. Suddenly he sees a beautiful girl
  approaching him with a party of her women, suggesting to him these
  couplets:—

  She came without tryst in the darkest hour, ✿ Like full moon lighting
     horizon’s night:
  Slim-formed, there is not in the world her like ✿ For grace of form or
     for gifts of sprite:
  “Praise him who made her from semen-drop,” ✿ I cried, when her beauty
     first struck my sight:
  I guard her from eyes, seeking refuge with ✿ The Lord of mankind and
     of morning-light.

  The two then made acquaintance and “follows what follows.”

Footnote 17:

  Arab. “Akásirah,” explained (vol. i., 75) as the plur. of Kisrá.

Footnote 18:

  The dearest ambition of a slave is not liberty but to have a slave of
  his own. This was systematised by the servile rulers known in history
  as the Mameluke Beys and to the Egyptians as the Ghuzz. Each had his
  household of servile pages and squires, who looked forward to filling
  the master’s place as knight or baron.

Footnote 19:

  The well-known capital of Al-Yaman, a true Arabia Felix, a Paradise
  inhabited by demons in the shape of Turkish soldiery and Arab
  caterans. According to Moslem writers Sana’a was founded by Shem son
  of Noah who, wandering southward with his posterity after his father’s
  death, and finding the site delightful, dug a well and founded the
  citadel, Ghamdán, which afterwards contained a _Maison Carrée_
  rivalling (or attempting to rival) the Meccan Ka’abah. The builder was
  Surahbíl who, says M. C. de Perceval coloured its four faces red,
  white, golden and green; the central quadrangle had seven stories (the
  planets) each forty cubits high, and the lowest was a marble hall
  ceiling’d with a single slab. At the four corners stood hollow lions
  through whose mouths the winds roared. This palatial citadel-temple
  was destroyed by order of Caliph Omar. The city’s ancient name was
  Azal or Uzal whom some identify with one of the thirteen sons of
  Joktan (Genesis xi. 27): it took its present name from the Ethiopian
  conquerors (they say) who, seeing it for the first time, cried “Hazá
  Sana’ah!” meaning in their tongue, this is commodious, etc. I may note
  that the word is Kisawahili (Zanzibarian) _e.g._ “Yámbo _sáná_—is the
  state _good_?” Sana’a was the capital of the Tabábi’ah or Tobba Kings
  who judaized; and the Abyssinians with their Negush made it Christian
  while the Persians under Anushirwán converted it to Guebrism. It is
  now easily visited but to little purpose; excursions in the
  neighbourhood being deadly dangerous. Moreover the Turkish garrison
  would probably murder a stranger who sympathised with the Arabs, and
  the Arabs kill one who took part with their hated and hateful
  conquerors. The late Mr. Shapira of Jerusalem declared that he had
  visited it and Jews have great advantages in such travel. But his
  friends doubted him.

Footnote 20:

  The Bresl. Edit. (iii. 347) prints three vile errors in four lines.

Footnote 21:

  Alcove is a corruption of the Arab. Al-Kubbah (the dome) through Span.
  and Port.

Footnote 22:

  Easterns as a rule sleep with head and body covered by a sheet or in
  cold weather a blanket. The practice is doubtless hygienic, defending
  the body from draughts when the pores are open; but Europeans find it
  hard to adopt; it seems to stop their breathing. Another excellent
  practice in the East and, indeed amongst barbarians and savages
  generally, is training children to sleep with mouths shut: in after
  life they never snore and in malarious lands they do not require
  Outram’s “fever-guard,” a swathe of muslin over the mouth. Mr. Catlin
  thought so highly of the “shut mouth” that he made it the subject of a
  book.

Footnote 23:

  Arab. “Hanzal” = coloquintida, an article often mentioned by Arabs in
  verse and prose; the bright coloured little gourd attracts every eye
  by its golden glance when travelling through the brown-yellow waste of
  sand and clay. A favourite purgative (enough for a horse) is made by
  filling the inside with sour milk which is drunk after a night’s
  soaking: it is as active as the croton-nut of the Gold Coast.

Footnote 24:

  The Bresl. Edit. iii. 354 sends him to the “land of Sín” (China).

Footnote 25:

  Arab. “Yá Kisrawi!” = O subject of the Kisrá or Chosroë; the latter
  explained in vol. i., 75. “Fars” is the origin of “Persia”; and there
  is a hit at the prodigious lying of the modern race, whose forefathers
  were so famous as truth-tellers. “I am a Persian, but I am not lying
  now,” is a phrase familiar to every traveller.

Footnote 26:

  There is no such name: perhaps it is a clerical error for “Har jáh” =
  (a man of) any place. I know an Englishman who in Persian called
  himself “Mirza Abdullah-i-Híchmakáni” = Master Abdullah of Nowhere.

Footnote 27:

  The Bresl. Edit. (loc. cit.) gives a comical description of the Prince
  assuming the dress of an astrologer-doctor, clapping an old book under
  his arm, fumbling a rosary of beads, enlarging his turband,
  lengthening his sleeves and blackening his eyelids with antimony.
  Here, however, it would be out of place. Very comical also is the way
  in which he pretends to cure the maniac by “muttering unknown words,
  blowing in her face, biting her ear,” etc.

Footnote 28:

  Arab. “Sar’a” = falling sickness. Here again we have in all its
  simplicity the old nursery idea of “possession” by evil spirits.

Footnote 29:

  Arab. “Nafahát” = breathings, benefits, the Heb. Neshamah opp. to
  Nephesh (soul) and Ruach (spirit). Healing by the breath is a popular
  idea throughout the East and not unknown to Western Magnetists and
  Mesmerists. The miraculous cures of the Messiah were, according to
  Moslems, mostly performed by aspiration. They hold that in the days of
  Isa physic had reached its highest development, and thus his miracles
  were mostly miracles of medicine; whereas, in Mohammed’s time,
  eloquence had attained its climax and accordingly his miracles were
  those of eloquence, as shown in the Koran and Ahádís.




      UNS AL-WUJUD AND THE WAZIR’S DAUGHTER AL-WARD FI’L-AKMAM OR
                           ROSE-IN-HOOD.[30]


There was once, in days of yore and in ages and times long gone before,
a King of great power and lord of glory and dominion galore; who had a
Wazir Ibrahim hight, and this Wazir’s daughter was a damsel of
extraordinary beauty and loveliness, gifted with passing brilliancy and
the perfection of grace, possessed of abundant wit, and in all good
breeding complete. But she loved wassail and wine and the human face
divine and choice verses and rare stories; and the delicacy of her inner
gifts invited all hearts to love, even as saith the poet, describing
her:—

 Like moon she shines amid the starry sky, ✿ Robing in tresses blackest
    ink outvie.
 The morning-breezes give her boughs fair drink, ✿ And like a branch she
    sways with supple ply:
 She smiles in passing us. O thou that art ✿ Fairest in yellow robed, or
    cramoisie,
 Thou playest with my wit in love, as though ✿ Sparrow in hand of playful
    boy were I.[31]

Her name was Rose-in-Hood and she was so named for her young and tender
beauty and the freshness of her brilliancy; and the King loved her in
his cups because of her accomplishments and fine manners. Now it was the
King’s custom yearly to gather together all the nobles of his realm and
play with the ball.[32] So when the day came round whereon the folk
assembled for ball-play, the Minister’s daughter seated herself at her
lattice, to divert herself by looking on at the game; and, as they were
at play, her glance fell upon a youth among the guards than whom never
was seen a comelier face nor a goodlier form; for he was bright of
favour showing white teeth when he smiled, tall-statured and
broad-shouldered. She looked at him again and again and could not take
her fill of gazing; and presently said to her nurse, “What is the name
of yonder handsome young man among the troops?” Replied the nurse, “O my
daughter, the dear fellows are all handsome. Which of them dost thou
mean?” Said Rose-in-Hood, “Wait till he come past and I will point him
out to thee.” So she took an apple and as he rode by dropped it on him,
whereupon he raised his head, to see who did this, and espied the
Wazir’s daughter at the window, as she were the moon of fullest light in
the darkness of the night; nor did he withdraw his eyes, till his heart
was utterly lost to her, and he recited these lines:—

 Was’t archer shot me, or was’t thine eyes ✿ Ruined lover’s heart that
    thy charms espies?
 Was the notchèd shaft[33] from a host outshot, ✿ Or from latticed window
    in sudden guise?

When the game was at an end, and all had left the ground, she asked her
nurse, “What is the name of that youth I showed thee?”; and the good
woman answered, “His name is Uns al-Wujud;” whereat Rose-in-Hood shook
her head and lay down on her couch, with thoughts a-fire for love. Then,
sighing deeply, she improvised these couplets:—

 He missed not who dubbed thee, “World’s delight,” ✿ A world’s love
    conjoining to bounty’s light:[34]
 O thou, whose favour the full moon favours, ✿ Whose charms make life and
    the living bright!
 Thou hast none equal amongst mankind; ✿ Sultan of Beauty, and proof I’ll
    cite:

 Thine eyebrows are likest a well-formed Nún,[35] ✿ And thine eyes a
    Sád,[36] by His hand indite;
 Thy shape is the soft, green bough that gives ✿ When asked to all with
    all-gracious sprite:
 Thou excellest knights of the world in stowre, ✿ With delight and beauty
    and bounty dight.

When she had finished her verses, she wrote them on a sheet of paper,
which she folded in a piece of gold-embroidered silk and placed under
her pillow. Now one of her nurses had seen her; so she came up to her
and held her in talk till she slept, when she stole the scroll from
under her pillow; and, after reading it, knew that she had fallen in
love with Uns al-Wujud. Then she returned the scroll to its place and
when her mistress awoke, she said to her, “O my lady, indeed I am to
thee a true counsellor and am tenderly anxious on thy account. Know that
love is a tyrant and the hiding it melteth iron and entaileth sickness
and unease; nor for whoso confesseth it is there aught of reproach.”
Rejoined Rose-in-Hood, “And what is the medicine of passion, O nurse
mine?” Answered the nurse, “The medicine of passion is enjoyment.” Quoth
she, “And how may one come by enjoyment?” Quoth the other, “By letters
and messages, my lady; by whispered words of compliment and by greetings
before the world;[37] all this bringeth lovers together and makes hard
matters easy. So if thou have aught at heart, mistress mine, I am the
fittest to keep thy secret and do thy desires and carry thy letters.”
Now when the damsel heard this, her reason flew and fled for joy; but
she restrained herself from speech till she should see the issue of the
matter, saying within herself, “None knoweth this thing of me, nor will
I trust this one with my secret, till I have tried her.” Then said the
woman, “O my lady, I saw in my sleep as though a man came to me and
said:—Thy mistress and Uns al-Wujud love each other; so do thou serve
their case by carrying their messages and doing their desires and
keeping their secrets; and much good shall befal thee. So now I have
told thee my vision and it is thine to decide.” Quoth Rose-in-Hood,
after she heard of the dream,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


      Now when it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King that Rose-in-Hood asked
her nurse after hearing of the dream, “Tell me, canst thou keep a
secret, O my nurse?”; whereto she answered, “And how should I not keep
secrecy, I that am of the flower of the free?”[38] Then the maiden
pulled out the scroll, whereon she had written the verses and said,
“Carry me this my letter to Uns al-Wujud and bring me his reply.” The
nurse took the letter and, repairing to Uns al-Wujud, kissed his hands
and greeted him right courteously, then gave him the paper; and he read
it and, comprehending the contents, wrote on the back these couplets:—

 I soothe my heart and my love repel; ✿ But my state interprets my love
    too well:
 When tears flow I tell them mine eyes are ill, ✿ Lest the censor see and
    my case foretell,
 I was fancy-free and unknew I Love; ✿ But I fell in love and in madness
    fell.
 I show you my case and complain of pain, ✿ Pine and ecstasy that your
    ruth compel:
 I write you with tears of eyes, so belike ✿ They explain the love come
    my heart to quell;
 Allah guard a face that is veiled with charms, ✿ Whose thrall is Moon
    and the Stars as well:
 In her beauty I never beheld the like; ✿ From her sway the branches
    learn sway and swell:
 I beg you, an ‘tis not too much of pains, ✿ To call;[39] ‘twere boon
    without parallel.
 I give you a soul you will haply take. ✿ To which Union is Heaven,
    Disunion Hell.

Then he folded the letter and kissing it, gave it to the go-between and
said to her, “O nurse, incline thy lady’s heart to me.” “To hear is to
obey,” answered she and carried the script to her mistress, who kissed
it and laid it on her head, then she opened it and read it and
understood it and wrote at the foot of it these couplets:—

 O whose heart by our beauty is captive ta’en, ✿ Have patience and all
    thou shalt haply gain!
 When we knew that thy love was a true affect, ✿ And what pained our
    heart to thy heart gave pain,
 We had granted thee wished-for call and more; ✿ But hindered so doing
    the chamberlain.
 When the night grows dark, through our love’s excess ✿ Fire burns our
    vitals with might and main:
 And sleep from our beds is driven afar, ✿ And our bodies are tortured by
    passion-bane.
 “Hide Love!” in Love’s code is the first command; ✿ And from raising his
    veil thy hand restrain:
 I fell love-fulfillèd by yon gazelle: ✿ Would he never wander from where
    I dwell!

Then she folded the letter and gave it to the nurse, who took it and
went out from her mistress to seek the young man; but, as she would fare
forth, the chamberlain met her and said to her, “Whither away?” “To the
bath,” answered she; but in her fear and confusion, she dropped the
letter, without knowing it, and went off unrecking what she had done;
when one of the eunuchs, seeing it lying in the way, picked it up. When
the nurse came without the door, she sought for it, but found it not, so
turned back to her mistress and told her of this and what had befallen
her. Meanwhile, the Wazir came out of the Harim and seated himself on
his couch; whereupon behold, the eunuch, who had picked up the letter,
came in to him, hending it in hand and said, “O my lord, I found this
paper lying upon the floor and picked it up.” So the Minister took it
from his hand, folded as it was, and opening it, read the verses as
above set down. Then, after mastering the meaning, he examined the
writing and knew it for his daughter’s hand; whereupon he went to her
mother, weeping so abundant tears that his beard was wetted. His wife
asked him, “What maketh thee weep, O my lord?”; and he answered, “Take
this letter and see what is therein.” So she took it and found it to be
a love-letter from her daughter Rose-in-Hood to Uns al-Wujud: whereupon
the ready drops sprang to her eyes; but she composed her mind, and,
gulping down her tears, said to her husband, “O my lord, there is no
profit in weeping: the right course is to cast about for a means of
keeping thine honour and concealing the affair of thy daughter.” And she
went on to comfort him and lighten his trouble; but he said, “I am
fearful for my daughter by reason of this new passion. Knowest thou not
that the Sultan loveth Uns al-Wujud with exceeding love? And my fear
hath two causes. The first concerneth myself; it is, that she is my
daughter: the second is on account of the King; for that Uns al-Wujud is
a favourite with the Sultan and peradventure great troubles shall come
out of this affair. What deemest thou should be done?”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir, after
recounting the affair of his daughter, asked his wife, “What deemest
thou should be done?” And she answered, “Have patience whilst I pray the
prayer for right direction.” So she prayed a two-bow prayer according to
the prophetic[40] ordinance for seeking divine guidance; after which she
said to her husband, “In the midst of the Sea of Treasures[41] standeth
a mountain named the Mount of the Bereaved Mother (the cause of which
being so called shall presently follow in its place, Inshallah!); and
thither can none have access, save with pains and difficulty and
distress: do thou make that same her abiding-place.” Accordingly the
Minister and his wife agreed to build on that mountain a virgin castle
and lodge their daughter therein with the necessary provision to be
renewed year by year and attendants to cheer and to serve her.
Accordingly he collected carpenters, builders and architects, and
despatched them to the mountain, where they builded her an impregnable
castle, never saw eyes the like thereof. Then he made ready vivers and
carriage for the journey and, going in to his daughter by night, bade
her prepare to set out on a pleasure-excursion. Thereupon her heart
presaged the sorrows of separation and, when she went forth and saw the
preparations for the journey, she wept with sore weeping and wrote that
upon the door which might acquaint her lover with what had passed and
with the transports of passion and grief that were upon her, transports
such as would make the flesh to shiver and hair to stare, and melt the
hardest stone with care, and tear from every eye a tear. And what she
wrote were these couplets:—

 By Allah, O thou house, if my beloved a morn go by, ✿ And greet with
    signs and signals lover e’er is wont to fly,
 I pray thee give him our salams in pure and fragrant guise, ✿ For he
    indeed may never know where we this eve shall lie.
 I wot not whither they have fared, thus bearing us afar ✿ At speed, and
    lightly-quipt, the lighter from one love to fly:
 When starkens night, the birds in brake or branches snugly perched ✿
    Wail for our sorrow and announce our hapless destiny:
 The tongue of their condition saith, “Alas, alas for woe, ✿ And heavy
    brunt of parting-blow two lovers must aby”:
 When viewed I separation-cups were fillèd to the brim ✿ And us with
    merest sorrow-wine Fate came so fast to ply,
 I mixed them with becoming share of patience self to excuse, ✿ But
    Patience for the loss of you her solace doth refuse.

Now when she ended her lines, she mounted and they set forward with her
crossing and cutting over wold and wild and riant dale and rugged hill,
till they came to the shore of the Sea of Treasures here they pitched
their tents and built her a great ship, wherein they went down with her
and her suite and carried them over to the mountain. The Minister had
ordered them, on reaching the journey’s end, to set her in the castle
and to make their way back to the shore, where they were to break up the
vessel. So they did his bidding and returned home, weeping over what had
befallen. Such was their case; but as regards Uns al-Wujud, he arose
from sleep and prayed the dawn-prayer, after which he took horse and
rode forth to attend upon the Sultan. On his way, he passed by the
Wazir’s house, thinking perchance to see some of his followers as of
wont; but he saw no one and, looking upon the door, he read written
thereon the verses aforesaid. At this sight, his senses failed him; fire
was kindled in his vitals and he returned to his lodging, where he
passed the day in trouble and transports of grief, without finding ease
or patience, till night darkened upon him, when his yearning and
love-longing redoubled. Thereupon, by way of concealment, he disguised
himself in the ragged garb of a Fakir,[42] and set out wandering at
random through the glooms of night, distracted and knowing not whither
he went. So he wandered on all that night and next day, till the heat of
the sun waxed fierce and the mountains flamed like fire and thirst was
grievous upon him. Presently, he espied a tree, by whose side was a thin
thread of running water; so he made towards it and sitting down in the
shade, on the bank of the rivulet, essayed to drink, but found that the
water had no taste in his mouth;[43] and, indeed his colour had changed
and his face had yellowed, and his feet were swollen with travel and
travail. So he shed copious tears and repeated these couplets:—

 The lover is drunken with love of friend; ✿ On a longing that groweth
    his joys depend:
 Love-distracted, ardent, bewildered, lost ✿ From home, nor may food
    aught of pleasure lend:
 How can life be delightsome to one in love, ✿ And from lover parted,
    ‘twere strange, unkenned!
 I melt with the fire of my pine for them, ✿ And the tears down my cheek
    in a stream descend.
 Shall I see them, say me, or one that comes ✿ From the camp, who th’
    afflicted heart shall tend?

And after thus reciting he wept till he wetted the hard dry ground; but
anon without loss of time he rose and fared on again over waste and
wold, till there came out upon him a lion, with a neck buried in tangled
mane, a head the bigness of a dome, a mouth wider than the door thereof
and teeth like elephants’ tusks. Now when Uns al-Wujud saw him, he gave
himself up for lost and, turning[44] towards the Temple of Meccah,
pronounced the professions of the faith and prepared for death. He had
read in books that whoso will flatter the lion, beguileth him,[45] for
that he is readily duped by smooth speech and gentled by being
glorified; so he began and said, “O Lion of the forest! O Lord of the
waste! O terrible Leo! O father of fighters! O Sultan of wild beasts!
Behold, I am a lover in longing, whom passion and severance have been
wronging; since I parted from my dear, I have lost my reasoning gear;
wherefore, to my speech do thou give ear and have ruth on my passion and
hope and fear.” When the lion heard this, he drew back from him and
sitting down on his hind-quarters, raised his head to him and began to
frisk tail and paws; which when Uns al-Wujud saw, he recited these
couplets:—

 Lion of the wold wilt thou murther me, ✿ Ere I meet her who doomed me to
    slavery?
 I am not game and I bear no fat; ✿ For the loss of my love makes me
    sickness dree;
 And estrangement from her hath so worn me down ✿ I am like a shape in a
    shroud we see.
 O thou sire of spoils,[46] O thou lion of war, ✿ Give not my pains to
    the blamer’s gree.
 I burn with love, I am drowned in tears ✿ For a parting from lover, sore
    misery!
 And my thoughts of her in the murk of night ✿ For love hath made my
    being unbe.

As he had finished his lines the lion rose——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


      Now when it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that as Uns al-Wujud
ended his lines, the lion arose and stalked slowly up to him, with eyes
tear-railing and licked him with his tongue, then walked on before him,
signing to him as though saying, “Follow me.” So he followed him, and
the beast ceased not leading him on for a while till he brought him up a
mountain, and guided him to the farther side, where he came upon the
track of a caravan over the desert, and knew it to be that of
Rose-in-Hood and her company. Then he took the trail and, when the lion
saw that he knew the track for that of the party which escorted her, he
turned back and went his way; whilst Uns al-Wujud walked along the
foot-marks day and night, till they brought him to a dashing sea,
swollen with clashing surge. The trail led down to the sandy shore and
there broke off; whereby he knew that they had taken ship and had
continued their journey by water. So he lost hope of finding his lover
and with hot tears he repeated these couplets:—

 Far is the fane and patience faileth me; ✿ How can I seek them[47] o’er
    the abysmal sea;
 Or how be patient, when my vitals burn ✿ For love of them, and sleep
    waxed insomny?
 Since the sad day they left the home and fled, ✿ My heart’s consumèd by
    love’s ardency:
 Sayhun, Jayhun,[48] Euphrates-like my tears, ✿ Make flood no deluged
    rain its like can see:
 Mine eyelids chafed with running tears remain, ✿ My heart from fiery
    sparks is never free;
 The hosts of love and longing pressèd me ✿ And made the hosts of
    patience break and flee.
 I’ve risked my life too freely for their love; ✿ And risk of life the
    least of ills shall be.
 Allah ne’er punish eye that saw those charms ✿ Enshrined, and passing
    full moon’s brillancy!
 I found me felled by fair wide-opened eyes, ✿ Which pierced my heart
    with stringless archery:
 And soft, lithe, swaying shape enraptured me ✿ As sway the branches of
    the willow-tree:
 Wi’ them I covet union that I win, ✿ O’er love-pains cark and care, a
    mastery.
 For love of them aye, morn and eve I pine, ✿ And doubt all came to me
    from evil eyne.

And when his lines were ended he wept, till he swooned away, and abode
in his swoon a long while; but as soon as he came to himself, he looked
right and left and seeing no one in the desert, he became fearful of the
wild beasts; so he clomb to the top of a high mountain, where he heard
the voice of a son of Adam speaking within a cave. He listened and lo!
they were the accents of a devotee, who had forsworn the world and given
himself up to pious works and worship. He knocked thrice at the
cavern-door, but the hermit made him no answer, neither came forth to
him; wherefore he groaned aloud and recited these couplets:—

 What pathway find I my desire t’obtain, ✿ How ‘scape from care and cark
    and pain and bane?
 All terrors join to make me old and hoar ✿ Of head and heart, ere youth
    from me is ta’en:
 Nor find I any aid my passion, nor ✿ A friend to lighten load of bane
    and pain.
 How great and many troubles I’ve endured! ✿ Fortune hath turned her back
    I see unfain.
 Ah mercy, mercy on the lover’s heart, ✿ Doomed cup of parting and
    desertion drain!
 A fire is in his heart, his vitals waste, ✿ And severance made his
    reason vainest vain.
 How dread the day I came to her abode ✿ And saw the writ they wrote on
    doorway lain!
 I wept, till gave I earth to drink my grief; ✿ But still to near and
    far[49] I did but feign:
 Then strayed I till in waste a lion sprang ✿ On me, and but for
    flattering words had slain:
 I soothed him: so he spared me and lent me aid, ✿ He too might haply of
    love’s taste complain.
 O devotee, that idlest in thy cave, ✿ Meseems eke thou hast learned
    Love’s might and main;
 But if, at end of woes, with them I league, ✿ Straight I’ll forget all
    suffering and fatigue.

Hardly had he made an end of these verses when, behold! the door of the
cavern opened and he heard one say, “Alas, the pity of it!”[50] So he
entered and saluted the devotee, who returned his salam and asked him,
“What is thy name?” Answered the young man, “Uns al-Wujud.” “And what
caused thee to come hither?” quoth the hermit. So he told him his story
in its entirety, omitting naught of his misfortunes; whereat he wept and
said,

“O Uns al-Wujud, these twenty years have I passed in this place, but
never beheld I any man here, until yesterday, when I heard a noise of
weeping and lamentation and, looking forth in the direction of the
sound, saw many people and tents pitched on the sea-shore; and the party
at once proceeded to build a ship, in which certain of them embarked and
sailed over the waters. Then some of the crew returned with the ship and
breaking it up, went their way; and I suspect that those who embarked in
the ship and returned not, are they whom thou seekest. In that case, O
Uns al-Wujud, thy grief must needs be great and sore and thou art
excusable, though never yet was lover but suffered love-longing.” Then
he recited these couplets:—

 Uns al-Wujud, dost deem me fancy-free, ✿ When pine and longing slay and
    quicken me?
 I have known love and yearning from the years ✿ Since mother-milk I
    drank, nor e’er was free.
 Long struggled I with Love, till learnt his might; ✿ Ask thou of him,
    he’ll tell with willing gree.
 Love-sick and pining drank I passion-cup, ✿ And well-nigh perished in
    mine agony.
 Strong was I, but my strength to weakness turned, ✿ And eye-sword brake
    through Patience armoury:
 Hope not to win love-joys, without annoy; ✿ Contrary ever links with
    contrary.
 But fear not change from lover true; be true ✿ Unto thy wish, some day
    thine own ‘twill be.
 Love hath forbidden to his votaries ✿ Relinquishment as deadliest
    heresy.

The eremite, having ended his verse, rose and, coming up to Uns
al-Wujud, embraced him,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the eremite,
having ended his verse, rose and coming up to Uns al-Wujud embraced him,
and they wept together, till the hills rang with their cries and they
fell down fainting. When they revived, they swore brotherhood[51] in
Allah Almighty; after which said Uns al-Wujud, “This very night will I
pray to God and seek of Him direction[52] anent what thou shouldst do to
attain thy desire.” Thus it was with them; but as regards Rose-in-Hood,
when they brought her to the mountain and set her in the castle and she
beheld its ordering, she wept and exclaimed, “By Allah, thou art a
goodly place, save that thou lackest in thee the presence of the
beloved!”[53] Then seeing birds in the island, she bade her people set
snares for them and put all they caught in cages within the castle; and
they did so. But she sat at a lattice and bethought her of what had
passed, and desire and passion and distraction redoubled upon her, till
she burst into tears and repeated these couplets:—

 O to whom now, of my desire complaining sore, shall I ✿ Bewail my
    parting from my fere compellèd thus to fly?
 Flames rage within what underlies my ribs, yet hide them I ✿ In deepest
    secret dreading aye the jealous hostile spy:
 I am grown as lean, attenuate as any pick of tooth,[54] ✿ By sore
    estrangement, absence, ardour, ceaseless sob and sigh.
 Where is the eye of my beloved to see how I’m become ✿ Like tree
    stripped bare of leafage left to linger and to die.
 They tyrannisèd over me whom they confined in place ✿ Whereto the lover
    of my heart may never draw him nigh:
 I beg the Sun for me to give greetings a thousandfold, ✿ At time of
    rising and again when setting from the sky,
 To the belovèd one who shames a full moon’s loveliness, ✿ When shows
    that slender form that doth the willow-branch outvie.
 If Rose herself would even with his cheek, I say of her ✿ “Thou art not
    like it if to me my portion thou deny:”[55]

 His honey-dew of lips is like the grateful water draught ✿ Would cool me
    when a fire in heart upflameth fierce and high:
 How shall I give him up who is my heart and soul of me, ✿ My malady my
    wasting cause, my love, sole leach of me?

Then, as the glooms of night closed around her, her yearning increased
and she called to mind the past and recited also these couplets:—

 ‘Tis dark: my transport and unease now gather might and main, ✿ And
    love-desire provoketh me to wake my wonted pain:
 The pang of parting takes for ever place within my breast, ✿ And pining
    makes me desolate in destitution lain.
 Ecstasy sore maltreats my soul and yearning burns my sprite, ✿ And tears
    betray love’s secresy which I would lief contain:
 I weet no way, I know no case that can make light my load, ✿ Or heal my
    wasting body or cast out from me this bane.
 A hell of fire is in my heart upflames with lambent tongue ✿ And Lazá’s
    furnace-fires within my liver place have ta’en.
 O thou, exaggerating blame for what befel, enough ✿ I bear with patience
    whatsoe’er hath writ for me the Pen!
 I swear, by Allah, ne’er to find aught comfort for their loss; ✿ ‘Tis
    oath of passion’s children and their oaths are ne’er in vain.
 O Night! Salams of me to friends and let to them be known ✿ Of thee true
    knowledge how I wake and waking ever wone.

Meanwhile, the hermit said to Uns al-Wujud, “Go down to the palm-grove
in the valley and fetch some fibre.”[56] So he went and returned with
the palm-fibre, which the hermit took and, twisting into ropes, made
therewith a net,[57] such as is used for carrying straw; after which he
said, “O Uns al-Wujud, in the heart of the valley groweth a gourd, which
springeth up and drieth upon its roots. Go down there and fill this sack
therewith; then tie it together and, casting it into the water, embark
thereon and make for the midst of the sea, so haply thou shalt win thy
wish; for whoso never ventureth shall not have what he seeketh.” “I hear
and obey,” answered Uns al-Wujud. Then he bade the hermit farewell after
the holy man had prayed for him; and, betaking himself to the sole of
the valley, did as his adviser had counselled him; made the sack,
launched it upon the water, and pushed from shore. Then there arose a
wind, which drave him out to sea, till he was lost to the eremite’s
view; and he ceased not to float over the abysses of the ocean, one
billow tossing him up and another bearing him down (and he beholding the
while the dangers and marvels of the deep), for the space of three days.
At the end of that time Fate cast him upon the Mount of the Bereft
Mother, where he landed, giddy and tottering like a chick unfledged, and
at the last of his strength for hunger and thirst; but, finding there
streams flowing and birds on the branches cooing and fruit-laden trees
in clusters and singly growing, he ate of the fruits and drank of the
rills. Then he walked on till he saw some white thing afar off, and
making for it, found that it was a strongly fortified castle. So he went
up to the gate and seeing it locked, sat down by it; and there he sat
for three days when behold, the gate opened and an eunuch came out, who
finding Uns al-Wujud there seated, said to him, “Whence camest thou and
who brought thee hither?” Quoth he, “From Ispahan and I was voyaging
with merchandise when my ship was wrecked and the waves cast me upon the
farther side of this island.” Whereupon the eunuch wept and embraced
him, saying, “Allah preserve thee, O thou friendly face! Ispahan is mine
own country and I have there a cousin, the daughter of my father’s
brother, whom I loved from my childhood and cherished with fond
affection; but a people stronger than we fell upon us in foray and
taking me among other booty, cut off my yard[58] and sold me for a
castrato, whilst I was yet a lad; and this is how I came to be in such
case.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the eunuch who
came forth from the castle, where Rose-in-Hood was confined, told Uns
al-Wujud all his tale and said:—“The raiders who captured me cut off my
yard and sold me for a castrato; and this is how I came to be in such
case.”[59] And after saluting him and wishing him long life, the eunuch
carried him into the courtyard of the castle, where he saw a great tank
of water, surrounded by trees, on whose branches hung cages of silver,
with doors of gold, and therein birds were warbling and singing the
praises of the Requiting King. And when he came to the first cage he
looked in and lo! a turtle dove, on seeing him, raised her voice and
cried out, saying, “O Thou Bounty-fraught!” Whereat he fell down
fainting and after coming to himself, he sighed heavily and recited
these couplets:—

 O turtle dove, like me art thou distraught? ✿ Then pray the Lord and
    sing “O Bounty-fraught!”
 Would I knew an thy moan were sign of joy, ✿ Or cry of love-desire in
    heart inwrought,—
 An moan thou pining for a lover gone ✿ Who left thee woe begone to pine
    in thought,—
 Or if like me hast lost thy fondest friend, ✿ And severance long desire
    to memory brought?
 O Allah, guard a faithful lover’s lot ✿ I will not leave her though my
    bones go rot!

Then, after ending his verses, he fainted again; and, presently reviving
he went on to the second cage, wherein he found a ringdove. When it saw
him, it sang out, “O Eternal, I thank thee!” and he groaned and recited
these couplets:—

 I heard a ringdove chanting plaintively, ✿ “I thank Thee, O Eternal for
    this misery!”
 Haply, perchance, may Allah, of His grace, ✿ Send me by this long round
    my love to see.
 Full oft[60] she comes with honeyed lips dark red, ✿ And heaps up lowe
    upon love’s ardency.

 Quoth I (while longing fires flame high and fierce ✿ In heart, and
    wasting life’s vitality,
 And tears like gouts of blood go railing down ✿ In torrents over cheeks
    now pale of blee),
 “None e’er trod earth that was not born to woe, ✿ But I will patient
    dree mine agony,
 So help me Allah! till that happy day ✿ When with my mistress I unite
    shall be:
 Then will I spend my good on lover-wights, ✿ Who’re of my tribe and of
    the faith of me;
 And loose the very birds from jail set free, ✿ And change my grief for
    gladdest gree and glee!”

Then he went on to the third cage, wherein he found a mocking-bird[61]
which, when it saw him, set up a song, and he recited the following
couplets:—

 Pleaseth me yon Hazár of mocking strain ✿ Like voice of lover pained by
    love in vain.
 Woe’s me for lovers! Ah how many men ✿ By nights and pine and passion
    low are lain!
 As though by stress of love they had been made ✿ Morn-less and
    sleep-less by their pain and bane.
 When I went daft for him who conquered me ✿ And pined for him who proved
    of proudest strain,
 My tears in streams down trickled and I cried ✿ “These long-linkt tears
    bind like an adamant-chain:”
 Grew concupiscence, severance long, and I ✿ Lost Patience’ hoards and
    grief waxed sovereign:
 If Justice bide in world and me unite ✿ With him I love and Allah veil
    us deign,
 I’ll strip my clothes that he my form shall sight ✿ With parting,
    distance, grief, how poor of plight!

Then he went to the fourth cage, where he found a Bulbul[62] which, at
sight of him, began to sway to and fro and sing its plaintive descant;
and when he heard its complaint, he burst into tears and repeated these
couplets:—

 The Bulbul’s note, whenas dawn is nigh, ✿ Tells the lover from strains
    of strings to fly:
 Complaineth for passion Uns al-Wujud, ✿ For pine that would being to him
    deny.

 How many a strain do we hear, whose sound ✿ Softens stones and the rock
    can mollify:
 And the breeze of morning that sweetly speaks ✿ Of meadows in flowerèd
    greenery.
 And scents and sounds in the morning-tide ✿ Of birds and zephyrs in
    fragrance vie;
 But I think of one, of an absent friend, ✿ And tears rail like rain from
    a showery sky;
 And the flamy tongues in my breast uprise ✿ As sparks from gleed that in
    dark air fly.
 Allah deign vouchsafe to a lover distraught ✿ Someday the face of his
    dear to descry!
 For lovers, indeed, no excuse is clear, ✿ Save excuse of sight and
    excuse of eye.

Then he walked on a little and came to a goodly cage, than which was no
goodlier there, and in it a culver of the forest, that is to say, a
wood-pigeon,[63] the bird renowned among birds as the minstrel of
love-longing, with a collar of jewels about its neck marvellous fine and
fair. He considered it awhile and, seeing it absently brooding in its
cage, he shed tears and repeated these couplets:—

 O culver of copse,[64] with salams I greet; ✿ O brother of lovers who
    woe must weet!
 I love a gazelle who is slender-slim, ✿ Whose glances for keenness the
    scymitar beat:
 For her love are my heart and my vitals a-fire, ✿ And my frame consumes
    in love’s fever-heat.
 The sweet taste of food is unlawful for me, ✿ And forbidden is slumber,
    unlawfullest sweet.
 Endurance and solace have travelled from me, ✿ And love homes in my
    heart and grief takes firm seat:
 How shall life deal joy when they flee my sight ✿ Who are joy and
    gladness and life and sprite?

As soon as Uns al-Wujud had ended his verse——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


      Now when it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that as soon as Uns
al-Wujud had ended his verse, the wood-culver awoke from its brooding
and cooed a reply to his lines and shrilled and trilled with its
thrilling notes till it all but spake with human speech;[65] and the
tongue of the case talked for it and recited these couplets:—

 O lover, thou bringest to thought a tide ✿ When the strength of my youth
    first faded and died;
 And a friend of whose form I was ‘namourèd, ✿ Seductive and dight with
    beauty’s pride;
 Whose voice, as he sat on the sandhill-tree, ✿ From the Nay’s[66] sweet
    sound turned my heart aside;
 A fowler snared him in net, the while ✿ “O that man would leave me at
    large!” he cried:
 I had hoped he might somewhat of mercy show ✿ When a hapless lover he so
    espied;
 But Allah smite him who tore me away, ✿ In his hardness of heart, from
    my lover’s side;
 But aye my desire for him groweth more, ✿ And my heart with the fires of
    disjunction is fried:
 Allah guard a true lover, who strives with love, ✿ And hath borne the
    torments I still abide!
 And, seeing me bound in this cage, with mind ✿ Of ruth, release me my
    love to find.

Then Uns al-Wujud turned to his companion, the Ispahahi, and said, “What
palace is this? Who built it and who abideth in it?” Quoth the eunuch,
“The Wazir of a certain King built it to guard his daughter, fearing for
her the accidents of Time and the incidents of Fortune, and lodged her
herein, her and her attendants; nor do we open it save once in every
year, when their provision cometh to them.” And Uns al-Wujud said to
himself, “I have gained my end, though I may have long to wait.” Such
was his case; but as regards Rose-in-Hood, of a truth she took no
pleasure in eating or drinking, sitting or sleeping; but her desire and
passion and distraction redoubled on her, and she went wandering about
the castle-corners, but could find no issue; wherefore she shed tears
and recited these couplets:—

 They have cruelly ta’en me from him, my beloved, ✿ And made me taste
    anguish in prison ta’en:
 They have fired my heart with the flames of love, ✿ Barred all sight of
    him whom to see I’m fain:
 In a lofty palace they prisoned me ✿ On a mountain placed in the middle
    main.
 If they’d have me forget him, right vain’s their wish, ✿ For my love is
    grown of a stronger strain.
 How _can_ I forget him whose face was cause ✿ Of all I suffer, of all I
    ‘plain?
 The whole of my days in sorrow’s spent, ✿ And in thought of him through
    the night I’m lain.
 Remembrance of him cheers my solitude, ✿ While I lorn of his presence
    and lone remain.
 Would I knew if, after this all, my fate ✿ To oblige the desire of my
    heart will deign.

When her verses were ended, she ascended to the terrace-roof of the
castle after donning her richest clothes and trinkets and throwing a
necklace of jewels around her neck. Then binding together some dresses
of Ba’albak[67] stuff by way of rope, she tied them to the crenelles and
let herself down thereby to the ground. And she fared on over wastes and
waterless wilds, till she came to the shore, where she saw a fisherman
plying here and there over the sea, for the wind had driven him on to
the island. When he saw her, he was affrighted[68] and pushed off again,
flying from her; but she cried out and made pressing signs to him to
return, versifying with these couplets:—

 O fisherman no care hast thou to fear, ✿ I’m but an earth-born maid in
    mortal sphere;
 I pray thee linger and my prayer grant ✿ And to my true unhappy tale
    give ear:

 Pity (so Allah spare thee!) warmest love; ✿ Say, hast thou seen him—my
    beloved fere?
 I love a lovely youth whose face excels ✿ Sunlight, and passes moon when
    clearest clear:
 The fawn, that sees his glance, is fain to cry ✿ “I am his thrall” and
    own himself no peer:
 Beauty hath written, on his winsome cheek, ✿ Rare lines of pregnant
    sense for every seer;
 Who sights the light of love his soul is saved; ✿ Who strays is Infidel
    to Hell anear:
 An thou in mercy show his sight, O rare![69] ✿ Thou shalt have every
    wish, the dearest dear,
 Of rubies and what likest are to them ✿ Fresh pearls and unions new, the
    sea-shell’s tear:
 My friend, thou wilt forsure grant my desire ✿ Whose heart is melted in
    love’s hottest fire.

When the fisherman heard her words, he wept and made moan and lamented;
then, recalling what had betided himself in the days of his youth, when
love had the mastery over him and longing and desire and distraction
were sore upon him and the fires of passion consumed him, replied with
these couplets:—

 What fair excuse is this my pining plight, ✿ With wasted limbs and
    tears’ unceasing blight;
 And eyelids open in the nightly murk, ✿ And heart like fire-stick[70]
    ready fire to smite;
 Indeed love burdened us in early youth, ✿ And true from false coin soon
    we learned aright:
 Then did we sell our soul on way of love, ✿ And drunk of many a well[71]
    to win her sight;
 Venturing very life to gain her grace, ✿ And make high profit perilling
    a mite.
 ‘Tis Love’s religion whoso buys with life ✿ His lover’s grace, with
    highest gain is dight.

And when he ended his verse, he moored his boat to the beach and said to
her, “Embark, so may I carry thee whither thou wilt.” Thereupon she
embarked and he put off with her; but they had not gone far from land,
before there came out a stern-wind upon the boat and drove it swiftly
out of sight of shore. Now the fisherman knew not whither he went, and
the strong wind blew without ceasing three days, when it fell by leave
of Allah Almighty, and they sailed on and ceased not sailing till they
came in sight of a city sitting upon the sea-shore,——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


      Now when it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
fisherman’s craft, carrying Rose-in-Hood, made the city sitting upon the
sea shore, the man set about making fast to the land. Now the King of
the city was a Prince of pith and puissance named Dirbás, the Lion; and
he chanced at that moment to be seated, with his son, at a window in the
royal palace giving upon the sea; and happening to look out seawards,
they saw the fishing-boat make the land. They observed it narrowly and
espied therein a young lady, as she were the full moon overhanging the
horizon-edge, with pendants in her ears of costly balass-rubies and a
collar of precious stones about her throat. Hereby the King knew that
this must indeed be the daughter of some King or great noble and, going
forth of the sea-gate of the palace, went down to the boat, where he
found the lady asleep and the fisherman busied in making fast to shore.
So he went up to her and aroused her, whereupon she awoke, weeping; and
he asked her, “Whence comest thou and whose daughter art thou and what
be the cause of thy coming hither?”; and she answered, “I am the
daughter of Ibrahim, Wazir to King Shámikh; and the manner of my coming
hither is wondrous and the cause thereof marvellous.” And she told him
her whole story first and last, hiding naught from him; then she groaned
aloud and recited these couplets:—

 Tear-drops have chafed mine eyelids and rail down in wondrous wise, ✿
    For parting pain that fills my sprite and turns to springs mine eyes,
 For sake of friend who ever dwells within my vitals homed, ✿ And I may
    never win my wish of him in any guise.
 He hath a favour fair and bright, and brilliant is his face, ✿ Which
    every Turk and Arab wight in loveliness outvies:
 The Sun and fullest Moon lout low whenas his charms they sight, ✿ And
    lover-like they bend to him whene’er he deigneth rise.

 A wondrous spell of gramarye like Kohl bedecks his eyne, ✿ And shows
    thee bow with shaft on string made ready ere it flies:
 O thou, to whom I told my case expecting all excuse, ✿ Pity a
    lover-wight for whom Love-shafts such fate devise!
 Verily, Love hath cast me on your coast despite of me ✿ Of will now
    weak, and fain I trust mine honour thou wilt prize:
 For noble men, whenas perchance alight upon their bounds, ✿ Grace-worthy
    guests, confess their worth and raise to dignities.
 Then, O thou hope of me, to lovers’ folly veil afford ✿ And be to them
    reunion cause, thou only liefest lord!

And when she had ended her verses, she again told the King her sad tale
and shed plenteous tears and recited these couplets bearing on her
case:—

 We lived till saw we all the marvels Love can bear; ✿ Each month to thee
    we hope shall fair as Rajab[72] fare:
 Is it not wondrous, when I saw them march amorn ✿ That I with water o’
    eyes in heart lit flames that flare?
 That these mine eyelids rain fast dropping gouts of blood? ✿ That now my
    cheek grows gold where rose and lily were?
 As though the safflower hue, that overspread my cheeks, ✿ Were Joseph’s
    coat made stain of lying blood to wear.

Now when the King heard her words he was certified of her love and
longing and was moved to ruth for her; so he said to her, “Fear nothing
and be not troubled; thou hast come to the term of thy wishes; for there
is no help but that I win for thee thy will and bring thee to thy
desire.” And he improvised these couplets:—

 Daughter of nobles, who thine aim shalt gain; ✿ Hear gladdest news nor
    fear aught hurt or bane!
 This day I’ll pack up wealth, and send it on ✿ To Shámikh, guarded by a
    champion-train;
 Fresh pods of musk I’ll send him and brocades, ✿ And silver white and
    gold of yellow vein:
 Yes, and a letter shall inform him eke ✿ That I of kinship with that
    King am fain:

 And I this day will lend thee bestest aid, ✿ That all thou covetest thy
    soul assain.
 I, too, have tasted love and know its taste ✿ And can excuse whoso the
    same cup drain.[73]

Then, ending his verse, he went forth to his troops and summoned his
Wazir; and, causing him to pack up countless treasure, commanded him
carry it to King Shamikh and say to him, “Needs must thou send me a
person named Uns al-Wujud;” and say moreover “The King is minded to ally
himself with thee by marrying his daughter to Uns al-Wujud, thine
officer. So there is no help but thou despatch him to me, that the
marriage may be solemnized in her father’s kingdom.” And he wrote a
letter to King Shamikh to this effect, and gave it to the Minister,
charging him strictly to bring back Uns al-Wujud and warning him, “An
thou fail thou shalt be deposed and degraded.” Answered the Wazir, “I
hear and obey;” and, setting out forthright with the treasures, in due
course arrived at the court of King Shamikh whom he saluted in the name
of King Dirbas and delivered the letter and the presents. Now when King
Shamikh read the letter and saw the name of Uns al-Wujud, he burst into
tears and said to the Wazir “And where, oh where, is Uns al-Wujud?; he
went from us and we know not his place of abiding; only bring him to me,
and I will give thee double the presents thou hast brought me.” And he
wept and groaned and lamented, saying these couplets:—

       To me restore my dear; ✿ I want not wealth untold:
       Nor crave I gifts of pearls ✿ Or gems or store of gold:
       He was to us a moon ✿ In beauty’s heavenly fold.
       Passing in form and soul; ✿ With roe compare withhold!
       His form a willow-wand, ✿ His fruit, lures manifold;
       But willow lacketh power ✿ Men’s hearts to have and hold.
       I reared him from a babe ✿ On cot of coaxing roll’d;
       And now I mourn for him ✿ With woe in soul ensoul’d.

Then, turning to the Wazir who had brought the presents and the missive,
he said, “Go back to thy liege and acquaint him that Uns al-Wujud hath
been missing this year past, and his lord knoweth not whither he is gone
nor hath any tidings of him.” Answered the Minister of King Dirbas, “O
my lord, my master said to me:—An thou fail to bring him back, thou
shalt be degraded from the Wazirate and shalt not enter my city. How
then can I return without him?” So King Shamikh said to his Wazir
Ibrahim, “Take a company and go with him and make ye search for Uns
al-Wujud everywhere.” He replied, “Hearkening and obedience;” and,
taking a body of his own retainers, set out accompanied by the Wazir of
King Dirbas seeking Uns al-Wujud.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ibrahim, Wazir to
King Shamikh, took him a body of his retainers and, accompanied by the
Minister of King Dirbas, set out seeking Uns al-Wujud. And as often as
they fell in with wild Arabs or others they asked of the youth, saying,
“Tell us have ye seen a man whose name is so and so and his semblance
thus and thus?” But they all answered, “We know him not.” Still they
continued their quest enquiring in city and hamlet and seeking in
fertile plain and stony hall and in the wild and in the wold, till they
made the Mountain of the Bereaved Mother; and the Wazir of King Dirbas
said to Ibrahim, “Why is this mountain thus called?” He answered, “Once
of old time, here sojourned a Jinniyah, of the Jinn of China, who loved
a mortal with passionate love; and, being in fear of her life from her
own people, searched all the earth over for a place, where she might
hide him from them, till she happened on this mountain and, finding it
cut off from both men and Jinn, there being no access to it, carried off
her beloved and lodged him therein. There, when she could escape notice
of her kith and kin, she used privily to visit him, and continued so
doing till she had borne him a number of children; and the merchants,
sailing by the mountain, in their voyages over the main, heard the
weeping of the children, as it were the wailing of a woman bereft of her
babes, and said:—Is there here a mother bereaved of her children? For
which reason the place was named the Mountain of the Bereaved Mother.”
And the Wazir of King Dirbas marvelled at his words. Then they landed
and, making for the castle, knocked at the gate which was opened to them
by an eunuch, who knew the Wazir Ibrahim and kissed his hands. The
Minister entered and found in the courtyard, among the serving-men, a
Fakir, which was Uns al-Wujud, but he knew him not and said, “Whence
cometh yonder wight?” Quoth they, “He is a merchant, who hath lost his
goods, but saved himself; and he is an ecstatic.”[74] So the Wazir left
him and went on into the castle, where he found no trace of his daughter
and questioned her women, who answered, “We wot not how or whither she
went; this place misliked her and she tarried in it but a short time.”
Whereupon he wept sore and repeated these couplets:—

 Ho thou, the house, whose birds were singing gay, ✿ Whose sills their
    wealth and pride were wont display!
 Till came the lover wailing for his love, ✿ And found thy doors wide
    open to the way;
 Would Heaven I knew where is my soul that erst ✿ Was homed in house,
    whose owners fared away!
 ‘Twas stored with all things bright and beautiful, ✿ And showed its
    porters ranged in fair array:
 They clothed it with brocades a bride become;[75] ✿ Would I knew whither
    went its lords, ah, say!

After ending his verses he again shed tears, and groaned and bemoaned
himself, exclaiming, “There is no deliverance from the destiny decreed
by Allah; nor is there any escape from that which He hath predestined!”
Then he went up to the roof and found the strips of Ba’albak stuff tied
to the crenelles and hanging down to the ground, and thus it was he knew
that she had descended thence and had fled forth, as one distracted and
demented with desire and passion. Presently, he turned and seeing there
two birds, a gor-crow and an owl he justly deemed this an omen of ill;
so he groaned and recited these couplets:—

 I came to my dear friends’ door, of my hopes the goal, ✿ Whose sight
    mote assuage my sorrow and woes of soul:
 No friends found I there, nor was there another thing ✿ To find, save a
    corby-crow and an ill-omened owl.
 And the tongue o’ the case to me seemed to say, “Indeed ✿ This parting
    two lovers fond was cruel and foul!”
 “So taste thou the sorrow thou madest them taste and live ✿ In grief:
    wend thy ways and now in thy sorrow prowl!”

Then he descended from the castle-roof, weeping, and bade the servants
fare forth and search the mount for their mistress; so they sought for
her, but found her not. Such was their case; but as regards Uns
al-Wujud, when he was certified that Rose-in-Hood was indeed gone, he
cried with a great cry and fell down in a fainting-fit, nor came to
himself for a long time, whilst the folk deemed that his spirit had been
withdrawn by the Compassionating One; and that he was absorbed in
contemplation of the splendour, majesty and beauty of the Requiting One.
Then, despairing of finding Uns al-Wujud, and seeing that the Wazir
Ibrahim was distracted for the loss of his daughter, the Minister of
King Dirbas addressed himself to return to his own country, albeit he
had not attained the object of his journey, and while bidding his
companion adieu, said to him, “I have a mind to take the Fakir with me;
it may be Allah Almighty will incline the King’s heart to me by his
blessing, for that he is a holy man; and thereafter, I will send him to
Ispahan, which is near our country.” “Do as thou wilt,” answered
Ibrahim. So they took leave of each other and departed, each for his own
mother land, the Wazir of King Dirbas carrying with him Uns
al-Wujud——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


         Now when it was the Three Hundred and Eightieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir of King
Dirbas carried with him Uns al-Wujud who was still insensible. They bore
him with them on mule-back (he unknowing if he were carried or not) for
three days, when he came to himself and said, “Where am I?” “Thou art in
company with the Minister of King Dirbas,” replied they and went and
gave news of his recovering to the Wazir, who sent him rose-water and
sherbet of sugar, of which they gave him to drink and restored him. Then
they ceased not faring on till they drew near King Dirbas’s capital and
the King, being advised of his Wazir’s coming, wrote to him, saying, “If
Uns al-Wujud be not with thee, come not to me ever.” Now when the Wazir
read the royal mandate, it was grievous to him, for he knew not that
Rose-in-Wood was with the King, nor why he had been sent in quest of Uns
al-Wujud, nor the King’s reason for desiring the alliance; whilst Uns
al-Wujud also knew not whither they were bearing him or that the Wazir
had been sent in quest of him; nor did the Wazir know that the Fakir he
had with him was Uns al-Wujud himself. And when the Minister saw that
the sick man was whole, he said to him, “I was despatched by the King on
an errand, which I have not been able to accomplish. So, when he heard
of my return, he wrote to me, saying:—Except thou have fulfilled my need
enter not my city.” “And what is the King’s need?” asked Uns al-Wujud.
So the Wazir told him the whole tale, and he said, “Fear nothing, but go
boldly to the King and take me with thee; and I will be surety to thee
for the coming of Uns al-Wujud.” At this the Wazir rejoiced and cried,
“Is this true which thou sayest?” “Yes,” replied he; whereupon the Wazir
mounted and carried him to King Dirbas who, after receiving their
salutations said to him, “Where is Uns al-Wujud?” Answered the young
man, “O King, I know where he is.” So the King called him to him and
said, “Where?” Returned Uns al-Wujud, “He is nearhand and very near; but
tell me what thou wouldst with him, and I will fetch him into thy
presence.” The King replied, “With joy and good gree, but the case
calleth for privacy.” So he ordered the folk to withdraw and, carrying
Uns al-Wujud into his cabinet, told him the whole story; whereupon quoth
the youth, “Robe me in rich raiment, and I will forthright bring Uns
al-Wujud to thee.” So they brought him a sumptuous dress, and he donned
it and said, “I am Uns al-Wujud, the World’s Delight, and to the envious
a despite”; and presently he smote with his glances every sprite, and
began these couplets to recite:—

 My loved one’s name in cheerless solitude aye cheereth me ✿ And driveth
    off my desperance and long despondency:

 I have no helper[76] but my tears that ever flow in fount, ✿ And as they
    flow, they lighten woe and force my grief to flee.
 My longing is so violent naught like it ere was seen; ✿ My love-tale is
    a marvel and my love a sight to see:
 I spend the night with lids of eye that never close in sleep, ✿ And pass
    in passion twixt the Hells and Edens heavenly.
 I had of patience fairish store, but now no more have I; ✿ And love’s
    sole gift to me hath been aye-growing misery:
 My frame is wasted by the pain of parting from my own, ✿ And longing
    changed my shape and form and made me other be.
 Mine eyelids by my torrent tears are chafed, and ulcerate, ✿ The tears,
    whose flow to stay is mere impossibility.
 My manly strength is sore impaired for I have lost my heart; ✿ How many
    griefs upon my griefs have I been doomed to dree!
 My heart and head are like in age with similar hoariness ✿ By loss of
    Beauty’s lord,[77] of lords the galaxy:
 Despite our wills they parted us and doomed us parted wone, ✿ While they
    (our lords) desire no more than love in unity.
 Then ah, would Heaven that I wot if stress of parting done, ✿ The world
    will grant me sight of them in union fain and free—
 Roll up the scroll of severance which others would unroll— ✿ Efface my
    trouble by the grace of meeting’s jubilee!
 And shall I see them homed with me and in cup-company, ✿ And change my
    melancholic mood for joy and jollity?

And when he ended his verses the King cried aloud, “By Allah, ye are
indeed a pair of lovers true and fain and in Beauty’s heaven of shining
stars a twain: your story is wondrous and your case marvellous.” Then he
told him all that had befallen Rose-in-Hood; and Uns al-Wujud said,
“Where is she, O King of the age?” “She is with me now,” answered Dirbas
and, sending for the Kazi and the witnesses, drew up the contract of
marriage between her and him. Then he honoured Uns al-Wujud with favours
and bounties and sent to King Shamikh acquainting him with what had
befallen, whereat this King joyed with exceeding joy and wrote back to
the following purport. “Since the ceremony of contract hath been
performed at thy court, it behoveth that the marriage and its
consummation be at mine.” Then he made ready camels, horses and men and
sent them in quest of the pair; and when the embassy reached King
Dirbas, he gave the lovers much treasure and despatched them to King
Shamikh’s court with a company of his own troops. The day of their
arrival was a notable day, never was seen a grander; for the King
gathered together all the singing-women and players on instruments of
music and made wedding banquets and held high festival seven days; and
on each day he gave largesse to the folk and bestowed on them sumptuous
robes of honour. Then Uns al-Wujud went in to Rose-in-Hood and they
embraced and sat weeping for excess of joy and gladness, whilst she
recited these couplets:—

 Joyance is come, dispelling cark and care; ✿ We are united, enviers may
    despair.
 The breeze of union blows, enquickening ✿ Forms, hearts and vitals,
    fresh with fragrant air:
 The splendour of delight with scents appears, ✿ And round us[78] flags
    and drums show gladness rare.
 Deem not we’re weeping for our stress of grief; ✿ It is for joy our
    tears as torrents fare:
 How many fears we’ve seen that now are past! ✿ And bore we patient what
    was sore to bear:
 One hour of joyance made us both forget ✿ What from excess of terror
    grey’d our hair.

And when the verses were ended, they again embraced and ceased not from
their embrace, till they fell down in a swoon,——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Uns al-Wujud and
Rose-in-Hood embraced when they foregathered and ceased not from their
embrace, till they fell down in a swoon for the delight of reunion; and
when they came to themselves, Uns al-Wujud recited these couplets:—

 How joyously sweet are the nights that unite, ✿ When my dearling deigns
    keep me the troth she did plight;
 When union conjoins us in all that we have, ✿ And parting is severed and
    sundered from sight,

 To us comes the world with her favour so fair, ✿ After frown and
    aversion and mighty despight!
 Hath planted her banner Good Fortune for us, ✿ And we drink of her cup
    in the purest delight.
 We have met and complained of the pitiful Past, ✿ And of nights a full
    many that doomed us to blight.
 But now, O my lady, the Past is forgot; ✿ The Compassionate pardon the
    Past for unright!
 How sweet is existence, how glad is to be! ✿ This union my passion doth
    only incite.

And when he ended his verses they once more embraced, drowned in the sea
of passion; and lay down together in the private apartment carousing and
conversing and quoting verses and telling pleasant tales and anecdotes.
On this wise seven days passed over them whilst they knew not night from
day and it was to them, for very stress of gaiety and gladness, pleasure
and possession, as if the seven days were but one day with ne’er a
morrow. Nor did they know the seventh day,[79] but by the coming of the
singers and players on instruments of music; whereat Rose-in-Hood beyond
measure wondered and improvised these couplets:—

 In spite of enviers’ jealousy, at end ✿ We have won all we hoped of the
    friend:
 We’ve crowned our meeting with a close embrace ✿ On quilts where new
    brocades with sendal blend;
 On bed of perfumed leather, which the spoils ✿ Of downy birds
    luxuriously distend.
 But I abstain me from unneeded wine, ✿ When honey-dews of lips sweet
    must can lend:
 Now from the sweets of union we unknow ✿ Time near and far, if slow or
    fast it wend,
 The seventh night hath come and gone, O strange! ✿ How went the nights
    we never reckt or kenned;
 Till, on the seventh wishing joy they said, ✿ “Allah prolong the meet of
    friend with friend!”

When she had finished her song, Uns al-Wujud kissed her, more than an
hundred times, and recited these couplets:—

 O day of joys to either lover fain! ✿ The loved one came and freed from
    lonely pain:
 She blest me with all inner charms she hath; ✿ And companied with inner
    grace deep lain:
 She made me drain the wine of love till I, ✿ Was faint with joys her
    love had made me drain:
 We toyed and joyed and on each other lay; ✿ Then fell to wine and soft
    melodious strain:
 And for excess of joyance never knew, ✿ How went the day and how it came
    again.
 Fair fall each lover, may he union win ✿ And gain of joy like me the
    amplest gain;
 Nor weet the taste of severance’ bitter fruit ✿ And joys assain them as
    they us assain!

Then they went forth and distributed to the folk alms and presents of
money and raiment and rare gifts and other tokens of generosity; after
which Rose-in-Hood bade clear the bath for her[80] and, turning to Uns
al-Wujud said to him, “O coolth of my eyes, I have a mind to see thee in
the Hammam, and therein we will be alone together.” He joyfully
consented to this, and she let scent the Hammam with all sorts of
perfumed woods and essences, and light the wax-candles. Then of the
excess of her contentment she recited these couplets:—

 O who didst win my love in other date ✿ (And Present e’er must speak of
    past estate);
 And, oh! who art my sole sufficiency, ✿ Nor want I other friends with me
    to mate:
 Come to the Hammam, O my light of eyes, ✿ And enter Eden through
    Gehenna-gate!
 We’ll scent with ambergris and aloes-wood ✿ Till float the heavy clouds
    with fragrant freight;
 And to the World we’ll pardon all her sins ✿ And sue for mercy the
    Compassionate;
 And I will cry, when I descry thee there, ✿ “Good cheer, sweet love, all
    blessings on thee wait!”[81]

Whereupon they arose and fared to the bath and took their pleasure
therein; after which they returned to their palace and there abode in
the fulness of enjoyment, till there came to them the Destroyer of
delights and the Sunderer of societies; and glory be to Him who changeth
not neither ceaseth, and to whom everything returneth! And they also
tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 30:

  Lit. “The rose in the sleeves or calyces.” I take my English
  equivalent from Jeremy Taylor, “So I have seen a rose newly springing
  from the clefts of its hood,” etc.

Footnote 31:

  These lines are from the Bresl. Edit. (v. 35.) The four couplets in
  the Mac. Edit. are too irrelevant.

Footnote 32:

  Polo, which Lane calls “Goff.”

Footnote 33:

  Arab. “Muffawak” = well-notched, as its value depends upon the notch.
  At the end of the third hemistich Lane’s Shaykh very properly reads
  “baghtatan” (suddenly) for “burhatan” = during a long time.

Footnote 34:

  “Uns” (which the vulgar pronounce Anas) “al-Wujúd” = Delight of
  existing things, of being, of the world. Uns wa júd is the normal pun
  = love-intimacy and liberality; and the paronomasia (which cannot well
  be rendered in English) reappears again and again. The story is
  throughout one of love; hence the quantity of verse.

Footnote 35:

  The allusion to a “written N” suggests the elongated not the rounded
  form of the letter as in Night cccxxiv.

Footnote 36:

  The fourteenth Arabic letter in its medial form resembling an eye.

Footnote 37:

  This is done by the man passing his fingers over the brow as if to
  wipe off perspiration; the woman acknowledges it by adjusting her
  head-veil with both hands. As a rule in the Moslem East women make the
  first advances; and it is truly absurd to see a great bearded fellow
  blushing at being ogled. During the Crimean war the fair sex of
  Constantinople began by these allurements but found them so readily
  accepted by the Giaours that they were obliged to desist.

Footnote 38:

  The greatest of all explorers and discoverers of the world will be he
  who finds a woman confessing inability to keep a secret.

Footnote 39:

  The original is intensely prosaic—and so am I.

Footnote 40:

  Arab. “Sunnat,” the practice of the Prophet. For this prayer and other
  silly and superstitious means of discovering the “right direction”
  (which is often very wrongly directed) see Lane, M. E. chapt. xi.

Footnote 41:

  Arab. “Bahr” (sea or river) al-Kunúz: Lane (ii. 576) ingeniously
  identifies the site with the Upper Nile whose tribes, between Assouan
  (Syene) and Wady al-Subú’a are called the “Kunúz”—lit. meaning
  “treasures” or “hoards.” Philæ is still known as the “Islet of Anas
  (for Uns) al-Wujud;” and the learned and accurate Burckhardt (Travels
  in Nubia p. 5,) records the local legend that a mighty King called
  Al-Wujúd built the Osirian temples. I can give no information
  concerning Jabal al-Sakla, (Thaklá) the Mount of the woman bereft of
  children, beyond the legend contained in Night ccclxxix.

Footnote 42:

  A religious mendicant (lit. a pauper), of whom there are two great
  divisions. The Shara’í acts according to the faith: the others (Lá
  Shara’í, or irreligious) are bound by no such prejudices and are
  pretty specimen of scoundrels (Pilgrimage i. 22).

Footnote 43:

  Meaning his lips and palate were so swollen by drought.

Footnote 44:

  It is a pious act in time of mortal danger to face the Kiblah or
  Meccan temple, as if standing in prayer.

Footnote 45:

  Still the belief of the Badawi who tries to work upon the beast’s
  compassion: “O great King I am a poor man, with wife and family, so
  spare me that Allah spare thee!” and so forth. If not famished the
  lion will often stalk off looking behind him as he goes; but the man
  will never return by the same path; “for,” says he, “haply the Father
  of Roaring may repent him of a wasted opportunity.” These lion-tales
  are very common, witness that of Androcles at Rome and a host of
  others. Una and her lion is another phase. It remained for M. Jules
  Gérard, first the _chasseur_ and then the _tueur_, _du lion_, to
  assail the reputation of the lion and the honour of the lioness.

Footnote 46:

  Abú Háris = Father of spoils: one of the lion’s hundred titles.

Footnote 47:

  “They” again for “she.”

Footnote 48:

  Jaxartes and Oxus. The latter (Jayhun or Amu, Oxus or Bactros) is
  famous for dividing Iran from Turan, Persia from Tartaria. The lands
  to its north are known as Má wará al-Nahr (Mawerannahar) or “What is
  behind the stream,” = Transoxiana and their capitals were successively
  Samarcand and Bokhara.

Footnote 49:

  Arab. “Dání wa gharíb” = friend and foe. The lines are partly from the
  Mac. Edit. and partly from the Bresl. Edit., v. 55.

Footnote 50:

  Arab. “Wá Rahmatá-hu!” a form now used only in books

Footnote 51:

  Before noted. The relationship, like that of foster-brother, has its
  rights, duties and privileges.

Footnote 52:

  Arab. “Istikhárah,” before explained as praying for direction by omens
  of the rosary, opening the Koran and reading the first verse sighted,
  etc., etc. At Al-Medinah it is called Khírah and I have suggested
  (Pilgrimage, ii. 287) that it is a relic of the Azlam or Kidah
  (divining arrows) of paganism. But the superstition is not local: we
  have the Sortes Virgilianæ (Virgil being a magician) as well as
  Coranicæ.

Footnote 53:

  Arab. Wujúd al-Habíb, a pun, also meaning, “Wujúd my beloved.”

Footnote 54:

  Arab. “Khilál,” as an emblem of attenuation occurring in Al-Hariri
  (Ass. of Alexandria, etc.); also thin as a spindle (Maghzal), as a
  reed, and dry as a pair of shears. In the Ass. of Barka’id the
  toothpick is described as a beautiful girl. The use of this cleanly
  article was enjoined by Mohammed:—“Cleanse your mouths with
  toothpicks; for your mouths are the abode of the guardian angels;
  whose pens are the tongues, and whose ink is the spittle of men; and
  to whom naught is more unbearable than remains of food in the mouth.”
  A mighty apparatus for a small matter; but in very hot lands
  cleanliness must rank before godliness.

Footnote 55:

  The sense is ambiguous. Lane renders the verse:—“Thou resemblest it
  (rose) not of my portion” and gives two explanations “because _he_ is
  of my portion,” or, “because _his_ cheek cannot be rosy if _mine_ is
  not.” Mr. Payne boldly translates—

  If the rose ape his cheek, “Now God forfend,” I say, “That of my
     portion aught to pilfer thou shouldst try.”

Footnote 56:

  Arab. “líf” (not “fibres which grow at the top of the trunk,” Lane ii.
  577); but the fibre of the fronds worked like the cocoa-nut fibre
  which forms the now well-known Indian “coir.” This “líf” is also
  called “filfil” or “fulfil” which Dr. Jonathan Scott renders “pepper”
  (Lane i. 8) and it forms a clean succedaneum for one of the uncleanest
  articles of civilisation, the sponge. It is used in every Hammam and
  is (or should be) thrown away after use.

Footnote 57:

  Arab. “Shinf;” a coarse sack, a “gunny-bag;” a net compared with such
  article.

Footnote 58:

  The eunuch tells him that he is not a “Sandalí” = one whose penis and
  testes are removed; and consequently the highest valued. There are
  many ways of making the castrato; in some (as here) only the penis is
  removed, in others the testes are bruised or cut off; but in all cases
  the animal passion remains, for in man, unlike other animals, the
  _fons veneris_ is the brain. The story of Abelard proves this. Juvenal
  derided the idea of married eunuchs and yet almost all these neutrals
  have wives with whom they practise the manifold _plaisirs de la petite
  oie_ (masturbation, tribadism, irrumation, tête-bêche,
  feuille-de-rose, etc.), till they induce the venereal orgasm. Such was
  the account once given to me by a eunuch’s wife; and I need hardly say
  that she, like her confrerie was to be pitied. At the critical moment
  she held up a little pillow for her husband to bite who otherwise
  would have torn her cheeks or breasts.

Footnote 59:

  In real life the eunuch, as a rule, avoids all allusion to his
  misfortune, although the slave will often describe his being sold
  merrily enough.

Footnote 60:

  The visits are in dreamland. The ringdove thanks the Lord for her
  (his?) suffering in the holy martyrdom of love.

Footnote 61:

  Arab. “Hazár;” I have explained it as meaning “(the bird of) a
  thousand (songs).”

Footnote 62:

  The “Bulbul” had his day with us but he departed with Tommy Moore. We
  usually English the word by “nightingale;” but it is a kind of shrike
  or butcher-bird (_Lanius Boulboul._ Lath.)

Footnote 63:

  The “Hamám” is a _lieu commun_ in Arabic poetry. I have noticed the
  world-wide reverence for the pigeon and the incarnation of the Third
  Person of the Hindu Triad (Shiva), as “Kapoteshwara (Kapota-ishwara)”
  = pigeon or dove-god (Pilgrimage iii. 218.)

Footnote 64:

  Arab. “Hamám al-Ayk.” Mr. Payne’s rendering is so happy that we must
  either take it from him or do worse.

Footnote 65:

  All primitive peoples translate the songs of birds with human
  language; but, as I have noticed, the versions differ widely. The
  pigeon cries, “Allah! Allah!” The dove “Karim, Tawwá” (Bountiful,
  Pardoner!) the Katá or sand-grouse “Man sakat salam” (who is silent is
  safe) yet always betrays itself by its lay of “Kat-ta” and lastly the
  cock “Uzkurú ‘llah ya gháfilún” (Remember, or take the name of Allah,
  ye careless!)

Footnote 66:

  “Nay,” the Dervish’s reed pipe, symbol of the sighing absent lover
  (i.e. the soul parted from the Creator) so famed by the Mullah-i-Rúm
  and Sir William Jones.

Footnote 67:

  Ba’albak = Ba’al (the God)-city (bek in Coptic and ancient Egyptian).
  Such, at least, is the popular derivation which awaits a better. No
  cloth has been made there since the Kurd tribe of gallant robbers
  known as the “Harfúsh” (or blackguards) lorded it over old
  “Heliopolis.”

Footnote 68:

  Thinking her to be a Jinn or Ghul in the shape of a fair woman. This
  Arab is a strange contrast with the English fisherman, and yet he is
  drawn with truth.

Footnote 69:

  Arab. “Habbazá!” (good this!) or “Habba” (how good!): so “Habba bihi,”
  how dear he is to me.

Footnote 70:

  Arab. “Zind,” and Zindah the names of the two sticks, upper and lower,
  hard and soft, by which fire was kindled before flint and steel were
  known. We find it in Al-Hariri (Ass. of Banu Haram) “no one sought
  fire from my fire-stick (_i.e._ from me as a fire-stick) and failed.”
  See Night dccciii.

Footnote 71:

  Arab. “Názih” _i.e._ travelled far and wide.

Footnote 72:

  “Rajab,” lit. = “worshipping:” it is the seventh lunar month and still
  called “Shahr-ĭ-Khudá” (God’s month) by the Persians because in
  pre-Islamitic times it formed with Muharram (or in its stead Safar),
  Zu ‘l-ka’adah and Zu ‘l-Hijjah (Nos. 1 or 2; 7, 11 and 12) the yearly
  peace, during which a man might not kill his father’s murderer. The
  idea must have taken deep root, as Arab history records only six
  “impious (or sacrilegious) wars,” waged despite the law. Europeans
  compare it with the Treuga Dei (truce of God) a seven-years peace
  established about A.D. 1032, by a Bishop of Aquitaine; and followed in
  A.D. 1245 by the Pax Regis (Royal Peace) under Louis VIII. of France.
  This compelled the relations of a murdered man to keep the peace for
  forty days after the offence was committed.

Footnote 73:

  His Majesty wrote sad doggrel. He is better at finessing, and his
  message was a trick because Rose-in-Hood had told him that at home
  there were special obstacles to the marriage.

Footnote 74:

  Arab. “Majzub” = drawn, attracted (literally); the popular term for
  one absorbed in the contemplation of the Deity. During this process
  the soul is supposed to quit the body leaving the latter irresponsible
  for its actions. I remember a scandal being caused in a village near
  Tunis by one of these men who suddenly started up from his seat in a
  dusty corner and, in presence of a small crowd of people, had
  connection with a she-donkey. The supporters of the holy man declared
  that the deed was proof positive of his exceptional holiness; but
  there were lewd fellows, Moslems Voltaireans, who had their doubts and
  held that the reverend man had so acted “for the gallery.” A similar
  story is told with due reserve by the late Abbe Hamilton in his book
  on the Cyrenaic. There are three grand divisions of the Sufis; (1)
  Mukímán, the stationaries; (2) Sálikán, the travellers, or
  progressives, and (3) Wásilán, those who reach the desired end. And
  No. 2 has two classes: the Sálik-i-majzúb, one progressing in Divine
  Love; and the other, who has made greater progress, is the
  Majzúb-i-Sálik (Dabistan iii. 251).

Footnote 75:

  Arab. “Sundus,” a kind of brocade (low Lat. brocare, to figure cloth),
  silk worked in high relief with gold and silver. The idea is
  figurative meaning it was hung outside and inside with fine stuff,
  like the Ka’abah, the “Bride of Meccah.” The “lords” means simply the
  lost girl.

Footnote 76:

  Arab. “Ayn” lit. eye, also a fount, “the eye of the landscape” (a
  noble simile); and here a helper, guard, assistant.

Footnote 77:

  “Lord” for lady, _i.e._ she.

Footnote 78:

  Arab. “Fi’l-khawáfik” = in the four quarters or among the flappers
  (standards) or amid palpitations of heart. The bride alludes to a
  festal reception in a town, with burning incense, drums, flags, etc.,
  etc.

Footnote 79:

  In Egypt the shorter “honey-moon” lasts a week; and on the seventh day
  (pop. called Al-Subú’a) bride and bridegroom receive visits with all
  ceremony, of course in separate apartments. The seventh day (like the
  fortieth, the end of six months and the anniversary) is kept for
  births and deaths with Khatmahs (perlections) of the Koran, “Saylah”
  family gatherings and so forth. The fortieth day ends the real
  honey-moon. See Night dccxcii.

Footnote 80:

  I have noted the popular practice, amongst men as well as women, of
  hiring the Hammam for private parties and picnicking in it during the
  greater part of the day. In this tale the bath would belong to the
  public and it was a mere freak of the bride to bathe with her
  bridegroom. “Respectable” people do not.

Footnote 81:

  She speaks in the last line as the barber or the bathman.




   ABU NOWAS WITH THE THREE BOYS AND THE CALIPH HARUN AL-RASHID.[82]


Abu Nowas one day shut himself up and, making ready a richly-furnished
feast, collected for it meats of all kinds and of every colour that lips
and tongue can desire. Then he went forth, to seek a minion worthy of
such entertainment, saying, “Allah, my Lord and my Master, I beseech
Thee to send me one who befitteth this banquet and who is fit to carouse
with me this day!” Hardly had he made an end of speaking when he espied
three youths handsome and beardless, as they were of the boys of
Paradise,[83] differing in complexion but fellows in incomparable
beauty; and all hearts yearned with desire to the swaying of their
bending shapes, even to what saith the poet:—

 I passed a beardless pair without compare ✿ And cried, “I love you, both
    you ferly fair!”
 “Money’d?” quoth one: quoth I, “And lavish too;” ✿ Then said the fair
    pair, _Père, c’est notre affaire_.

Now Abu Nowas was given to these joys and loved to sport and make merry
with fair boys and cull the rose from every brightly blooming cheek,
even as saith the bard:—

 Full many a reverend Shaykh feels sting of flesh, ✿ Loves pretty faces,
    shows at Pleasure’s depot:
 Awakes in Mosul,[84] land of purity; ✿ And all the day dreams only of
    Aleppo.[85]

So he accosted them with the salutation, and they returned his greeting
with civility and all honour and would have gone their several ways, but
he stayed them, repeating these couplets:—

 Steer ye your steps to none but me ✿ Who hath a mine of luxury:—
 Old wine that shines with brightest blee ✿ Made by the monk in
    monastery;
 And mutton-meat the toothsomest ✿ And birds of all variety.
 Then eat of these and drink of those ✿ Old wines that bring you jollity:
 And have each other, turn by turn, ✿ Shampooing this my tool you
    see.[86]

Thereupon the youths were beguiled by his verses and consented to his
wishes——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Abu Nowas
beguiled the youths with his verse, they consented to his wishes,
saying, “We hear and obey;” and accompanied him to his lodging, where
they found all ready that he had set forth in his couplets. They sat
down and ate and drank and made merry awhile, after which they appealed
to Abu Nowas to decide which of them was handsomest of face and
shapeliest of form. So he pointed to one of them and, having kissed him
twice over, recited the following verses:—

 I’ll ransom that beauty-spot with my soul; ✿ Where’s it and where is a
    money-dole?[87]
 Praise Him who hairless hath made that cheek ✿ And bid Beauty bide in
    that mole, that mole!

Then he pointed to another and, kissing his lips, repeated these
couplets:—

 And loveling weareth on his cheek a mole ✿ Like musk, which virgin
    camphor ne’er lets off it:
 My peepers marvel such a contrast seeing; ✿ And cried the Mole to me,
    “Now bless the Prophet.”[88]

Then he pointed to the third and, after kissing him half a score times
repeated these couplets:—

 Melted pure gold in silvern bowl to drain ✿ The youth, whose fingers
    wore a winey stain:
 He with the drawers[89] served one cup of wine, ✿ And served his
    wandering eyes the other twain.
 A loveling, of the sons of Turks,[90] a fawn ✿ Whose waist conjoins the
    double Mounts Honayn.[91]
 Could Eve’s corrupting daughters[92] tempt my heart ✿ Content with
    two-fold lure ‘twould bear the bane.
 Unto Diyar-i-Bakr (“maid-land”[93]) this one lures; ✿ That lures to
    two-mosqued cities of the plain.[94]

Now each of the youths had drunk two cups, and when it came to the turn
of Abu Nowas, he took the goblet and repeated these couplets:—

 Drink not strong wine save at the slender dearling’s hand; ✿ Each like
    to other in all gifts the spirit grace:
 For wine can never gladden toper’s heart and soul, ✿ Unless the cup-boy
    show a bright and sparkling face.

Then he drank off his cup and the bowl went round, and when it came to
Abu Nowas again, joyance got the mastery of him and he repeated these
couplets:—

 For cup-friends cup succeeding cup assign, ✿ Brimming with grape-juice,
    brought in endless line,
 By hand of brown-lipped[95] Beauty who is sweet ✿ At wake as apple or
    musk finest fine.[96]
 Drink not the wine except from hand of fawn ✿ Whose cheek to kiss is
    sweeter than the wine.

Presently the drink got into his noddle, drunkenness mastered him and he
knew not hand from head, so that he lolled from side to side in joy and
inclined to the youths one and all, anon kissing them and anon embracing
them leg overlying leg. And he showed no sense of sin or shame, but
recited these couplets:—

 None wotteth best joyance but generous youth ✿ When the pretty ones
    deign with him company keep:
 This sings to him, sings to him that, when he wants ✿ A pick-me-up[97]
    lying there all of a heap:
 And when of a loveling he needeth a kiss, ✿ He takes from his lips or a
    draught or a nip;
 Heaven bless them! How sweetly my day with them sped; ✿ A wonderful
    harvest of pleasure I reap:
 Let us drink our good liquor both watered and pure, ✿ And agree to swive
    all who dare slumber and sleep.

While they were in this deboshed state behold, there came a knocking at
the door; so they bade him who knocked enter, and behold, it was the
Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid. When they saw him, they all
rose and kissed ground before him; and Abu Nowas threw off the fumes of
the wine for awe of the Caliph, who said to him, “Holla, Abu Nowas!” He
replied, “Adsum, at thy service, O Commander of the Faithful, whom Allah
preserve!” The Caliph asked, “What state is this?” and the poet
answered, “O Prince of True Believers, my state indubitably dispenseth
with questions.” Quoth the Caliph, “O Abu Nowas, I have sought direction
of Allah Almighty and have appointed thee Kazi of pimps and panders.”
Asked he, “Dost thou indeed invest me with that high office, O Commander
of the Faithful?” and the Caliph answered “I do;” whereupon Abu Nowas
rejoined, “O Commander of the Faithful, hast thou any suit to prefer to
me?” Hereat the Caliph was wroth and presently turned away and left
them, full of rage, and passed the night sore an-angered against Abu
Nowas, who amid the party he had invited spent the merriest of nights
and the jolliest and joyousest. And when daybreak dawned and the star of
morn appeared in sheen and shone, he broke up the sitting and,
dismissing the youths, donned his court-dress and leaving his house set
out for the palace of the Caliph. Now it was the custom of the Commander
of the Faithful, when the Divan broke up, to withdraw to his
sitting-saloon and summon thither his poets and cup-companions and
musicians, each having his own place, which he might not overpass. So it
happened that day, he retired to his saloon, and the friends and
familiars came and seated themselves, each in his rank and degree.
Presently, in walked Abu Nowas and was about to take his usual seat,
when the Caliph cried to Masrur, the sworder, and bade him strip the
poet of his clothes and bind an ass’s packsaddle on his back and a
halter about his head and a crupper under his rump and lead him round to
all the lodgings of the slave-girls,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
commanded Masrur, the sworder, to strip Abu Nowas of his court-suit and
bind an ass’s packsaddle on his back and a halter about his head, and a
crupper under his rump and lead him round to all the lodgings of the
slave-girls, and the chambers of the Harim, that the women might make
mock of him; then cut off his head and bring it to him. “Hearkening and
obedience,” replied Masrur and, doing with Abu Nowas as the Caliph had
bidden him, led him round all the chambers whose number equalled the
days of the year; but Abu Nowas was a funny fellow, so he made all the
girls laugh with his buffooneries and each gave him something whereby he
returned not save with a pocketful of money. And while this was going on
behold, Ja’afar the Barmecide, who had been absent on an important
business for the Commander of the Faithful, entered and recognising the
poet, albeit in this plight, said to him, “Holla, Abu Nowas!” He said,
“Here at thy service, O our lord.” Ja’afar asked, “What offence hast
thou committed to bring this punishment on thee?” Thereupon he answered,
“None whatsoever, except that I made our lord the Caliph a present of
the best of my poetry and he presented me, in return, with the best of
his raiment.” When the Prince of True Believers heard this, he laughed,
from a heart full of wrath,[98] and pardoned Abu Nowas, and also gave
him a myriad of money. And they also recount the tale of

-----

Footnote 82:

  Here the “Ana” begin; and they mostly date themselves. Of the
  following forty-nine, Lane (vol. ii. p. 578 et seq.) gives only
  twenty-two and transfers them to notes in chapt. xviii. He could
  hardly translate several of them in a work intended to be popular. Abu
  Nowás is a person carefully to be avoided; and all but anthropological
  students are advised to “skip” over anecdotes in which his name and
  abominations occur.

Footnote 83:

  Arab. “Ghilmán,” the counterpart, I have said, of the so-called
  “Houris.”

Footnote 84:

  Mosul boasts of never having been polluted with idolatrous worship, an
  exemption which it owes to being a comparatively modern place.

Footnote 85:

  The Aleppines were once noted for debauchery; and the saying is still
  “Halabi Shelebi” (for Chelebi) = the Aleppine is a fellow fine.

Footnote 86:

  Mr. Payne omits the last line. It refers to what Persian boys call, in
  half-Turkish phrase, “Alish Takish,” each acting woman after he has
  acted man. The best wine is still made in monasteries and the
  so-called Sinai convent is world-famous for its “Ráki” distilled from
  raisins.

Footnote 87:

  _i.e._ what a difference there is between them!

Footnote 88:

  Arab. “Salli ala ‘l-Nabi,” a common phrase; meaning not only praise
  him to avert the evil eye; but also used when one would impose silence
  upon a babbler. The latter will shuffle off by ejaculating “Al” and
  continue his chatter (Pilgrimage ii. 279).

Footnote 89:

  Arab. “Sukát” (plur. of Sáki, cupbearer, our old “skinker”): the pure
  gold (tibr) is the amber-coloured wine, like the Vino d’oro of the
  Libanus.

Footnote 90:

  That is, fair, white and red: Turkish slaves then abounded at Baghdad.

Footnote 91:

  A Wady near Meccah where one of Mohammed’s battles was fought. The
  line means his waist is a thread connected broad breast and large hind
  quarters.

Footnote 92:

  Arab. “Zaurá” which may mean crooked, alluding to the well-known rib.

Footnote 93:

  A pun. Bakr was the name of the eponymous chief and it also means
  virgin, as in Abu Bakr.

Footnote 94:

  Arab. “Jámi’ayn” = two cathedrals, any large (and consequently
  vicious) city.

Footnote 95:

  Arab. “Almá,” before noticed: I cannot translate “damask-lipped” to
  suit European taste.

Footnote 96:

  Sherbet flavoured with musk or apple to cool the mouth of “hot
  coppers.”

Footnote 97:

  Arab. “In’ásh” lit. raising from his bier. The whole tone is
  rollicking and slangy.

Footnote 98:

  _i.e._ In spite of himself: the phrase often occurs.




   ABDALLAH BIN MA’AMAR WITH THE MAN OF BASSORAH AND HIS SLAVE-GIRL.


A certain man of Bassorah once bought a slave-girl and reared and
educated her right well. Moreover, he loved her very dearly and spent
all his substance in pleasuring and merry-making with her, till he had
naught left and extreme poverty was sore upon him. So she said to him,
“O my master, sell me; for thou needest my price and it maketh my heart
ache to see thy sorry and want-full plight. If thou vend me and make use
of my value, ‘twill be better for thee than keeping me by thee, and
haply Almighty Allah will ample thee and amend thy fortune.” He agreed
to this for the straitness of his case, and carried her to the bazar,
where the broker offered her for sale to the Governor of Bassorah, by
name Abdallah bin Ma’amar al-Taymi, and she pleased him. So he bought
her, for five hundred dinars and paid the sum to her master; but when he
took the money and was about to go away, the girl burst into tears and
repeated these two couplets:—

 May coins thou gainest joy in heart instil; ✿ For me remaineth naught
    save saddest ill:
 I say unto my soul which sorely grieves, ✿ “Thy friend departeth an thou
    will or nill.”

And when her master heard this, he groaned and replied in these
couplets:—

 Albeit this thy case lack all resource, ✿ Nor findest aught but death’s
    doom, pardon still:
 Evening and morning, thoughts of thee will dole ✿ Comfort to heart all
    woes and griefs full fill:
 Peace be upon thee! meet we now no more ✿ Nor pair except at Ibn
    Ma’amar’s will.

Now when Abdullah bin Ma’amar heard these verses and saw their
affection, he exclaimed, “By Allah, I will not assist fate in separating
you; for it is evident to me that ye two indeed love each other. So take
the money and the damsel, O man, and Allah bless thee in both; for
verily parting be grievous to lovers.” So they kissed his hand and going
away, ceased not to dwell together, till death did them part; and glory
be to Him whom death over-taketh not! And amongst stories is that of




                   THE LOVERS OF THE BANU[99] OZRAH.


There was once, among the Banu ‘Ozrah, a handsome and accomplished man,
who was never a single day out of love, and it chanced that he became
enamoured of a beauty of his own tribe and sent her many messages; but
she ceased not to entreat him with cruelty and disdain; till, for stress
of love and longing and desire and distraction, he fell sick of a sore
sickness and took to his pillow and murdered sleep. His malady redoubled
on him and his torments increased and he was well nigh dead when his
case became known among the folk and his passion notorious——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the man took to
his pillow and murdered sleep. So his case became known among the folk
and his passion notorious; and his infirmity grew upon him and his pains
redoubled till he was well nigh dead. His family and hers were urgent
with her to visit him, but she refused, till he was at the point of
death when, being told of this, she relented towards him and vouchsafed
him a visit. As soon as he saw her, his eyes ran over with tears and he
repeated from a broken heart:—

 An, by thy life, pass thee my funeral train, ✿ A bier upborne upon the
    necks of four,
 Wilt thou not follow it, and greet the grave ✿ Where shall my corpse be
    graved for evermore?

Hearing this, she wept with sore weeping and said to him, “By Allah, I
suspected not that passion had come to such a pass with thee, as to cast
thee into the arms of death! Had I wist of this, I had been favourable
to thy wish, and thou shouldst have had thy will.” At this his tears
streamed down even as the clouds rail rain, and he repeated this verse:—

 She drew near whenas death was departing us, ✿ And deigned union grant
    when ‘twas useless all.

Then he groaned one groan and died. So she fell on him, kissing him and
weeping and ceased not weeping till she swooned away; and when she came
to herself, she charged her people to bury her in his grave and with
streaming eyes recited these two couplets:-

 We lived on earth a life of fair content; ✿ And tribe and house and home
    of us were proud;
 But Time in whirling flight departed us, ✿ To join us now in womb of
    earth and shroud.[100]

Then she fell again to weeping, nor gave over shedding tears and
lamenting till she fainted away; and she lay three days, senseless. Then
she died and was buried in his grave. This is one of the strange chances
of love.[101] And I have heard related a tale of the

-----

Footnote 99:

  Europeans usually write “Beni” for “Banu;” the oblique for the
  nominative. I prefer “Odhrah” or “Ozrah” to Udhrah; because the Ayn
  before the Zál takes in pronunciation the more open sound.

Footnote 100:

  Possibly meaning that they were shrouded together; this would be
  opposed to Moslem sense of decorum in modern days, but the ancient
  were not so squeamish. See Night cccxi.

Footnote 101:

  This phase of passion in the “varium et mutabile” is often treated of
  by Oriental story-tellers, and not unoften seen in real Eastern life.




                WAZIR OF AL-YAMAN AND HIS YOUNG BROTHER.


It is said that Badr al-Din, Wazir of Al-Yaman, had a young brother of
singular beauty and kept strait watch over him; so he applied himself to
seek a tutor for him and, coming upon a Shaykh of dignified and reverend
aspect, chaste and religious, lodged him in a house next his own. This
lasted a long time, and he used to come daily from his dwelling to that
of Sáhib[102] Badr al-Din and teach the young brother. After a while,
the old man’s heart was taken with love for the youth, and longing grew
upon him and his vitals were troubled, till one day, he bemoaned his
case to the boy, who said, “What can I do, seeing that I may not leave
my brother night or day? and thou thyself seest how careful he is over
me.” Quoth the Shaykh, “My lodging adjoineth thine; so there will be no
difficulty, when thy brother sleepeth, to rise and entering the privy,
feign thyself asleep. Then come to the parapet[103] of the terrace-roof
and I will receive thee on the other side of the wall; so shalt thou sit
with me an eye-twinkling and return without thy brother’s knowledge.” “I
hear and obey,” answered the lad; and the tutor began to prepare gifts
suitable to his degree. Now when a while of the night was past, he
entered the water-closet and waited till his brother lay down on his bed
and took patience till he was drowned in sleep, when he rose and going
to the parapet of the terrace-roof, found standing there to await him
the old man, who gave him his hand and carried him to the
sitting-chamber, where he had made ready various dainties for his
entertainment, and they sat down to carouse. Now it was the night of the
full moon and, as they sat with the wine-cup going round, her rays shone
upon them, and the governor fell to singing. But, whilst they were thus
in joy and jollity and mirth and merriment, such as confoundeth the wit
and the sight and defieth description, lo! the Wazir awoke and, missing
his brother, arose in affright and found the door open. So he went up to
the roof and hearing a noise of talk, climbed over the parapet to the
adjoining terrace and saw a light shining from the lodging. He looked in
from behind the wall, and espied his brother and his tutor sitting at
carouse: but the Shaykh became aware of him and sang cup in hand, to a
lively measure these couplets:—

 He made me drain his wine of honeyed lips, ✿ Toasting with cheeks which
    rose and myrtle smother:
 Then nighted in embrace, cheek to my cheek, ✿ A loveling midst mankind
    without another.
 When the full moon arose on us and shone ✿ Pray she traduce us not to
    the big brother.

And it proved the perfect politeness of the Wazir Badr al-Din that, when
he heard this, he said, “By Allah, I will not betray you!” And he went
away and left them to their diversions. They also tell a tale concerning

-----

Footnote 102:

  As has been said, “Sáhib” (preceding the name not following it as in
  India) is a Wazirial title in mediæval Islam.

Footnote 103:

  This parapet was rendered obligatory by Moses (Deut. xxii. 8) on
  account of the danger of leaving a flat roof without _garde-fou_.
  Eastern Christians neglect the precaution and often lose their
  children by the neglect.




                THE LOVES OF THE BOY AND GIRL AT SCHOOL.


A free boy and a slave-girl once learnt together in school, and the boy
fell passionately in love with the girl.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the lad fell
passionately in love with the slave-lass: so one day, when the other
boys were heedless, he took her tablet[104] and wrote on it these two
couplets:—

 What sayest thou of him by sickness waste, ✿ Until he’s clean distraught
    for love of thee?
 Who in the transport of his pain complains, ✿ Nor can bear load of heart
    in secrecy?

Now when the girl took her tablet, she read the verses written thereon
and understanding them, wept for ruth of him; then she wrote thereunder
these two couplets:—

 An if we behold a lover love-fordone ✿ Desiring us, our favours he shall
    see:
 Yea, what he wills of us he shall obtain, ✿ And so befal us what
    befalling be.

Now it chanced that the teacher came in on them and taking the tablet,
unnoticed, read what was written thereon. So he was moved to pity of
their case and wrote on the tablet beneath those already written these
two couplets addressed to the girl:—

 Console thy lover, fear no consequence; ✿ He is daft with loving lowe’s
    insanity;
 But for the teacher fear not aught from him; ✿ Love-pain he learnèd long
    before learnt ye.

Presently it so happened that the girl’s owner entered the school about
the same time and, finding the tablet, read the above verses indited by
the boy, the girl and the schoolmaster; and wrote under them these two
couplets:—

 May Allah never make you parting dree ✿ And be your censurer shamèd
    wearily!
 But for the teacher ne’er, by Allah, eye ✿ Of mine beheld a bigger pimp
    than he!

Then he sent for the Kazi and witnesses and married them on the spot.
Moreover, he made them a wedding-feast and treated them with exceeding
munificence; and they ceased not abiding together in joy and happiness,
till there came to them the Destroyer of delights and the Severer of
societies. And equally pleasant is the story of

-----

Footnote 104:

  Arab. “Lauh.” A bit of thin board washed white used for lessons as
  slates are amongst us, and as easily cleaned because the inks contain
  no minerals. It is a long parallelogram with triangular ears at the
  short sides; and the shape must date from ages immemorial as it is
  found, throughout Syria and its adjoinings, in the oldest rock
  inscriptions to which the form serves as a frame. Hence the “abacus”
  or counting table derives from the Gr. ἄβαζ a slab (or in Phenician
  “sand”), dust or sand in old days having been strewed on a table or
  tablet for schoolboys’ writings and mathematical diagrams.




                  AL-MUTALAMMIS AND HIS WIFE UMAYMAH.


It is related that Al-Mutalammis[105] once fled from Al-Nu’uman bin
Munzir[106] and was absent so long that folk deemed him dead. Now he had
a beautiful wife, Umaymah by name, and her family urged her to marry
again; but she refused, for that she loved her husband Al-Mutalammis
very dearly. However, they were urgent with her, because of the
multitude of her suitors, and importuned her till she at last consented,
albe reluctantly; and they espoused her to a man of her own tribe. Now
on the night of the wedding, Al-Mutalammis came back and, hearing in the
camp a noise of pipes and tabrets and seeing signs of a wedding
festival, asked some of the children what was the merry making, to which
they replied, “They have married Umaymah wife of Al-Mutalammis, to such
an one, and he goes in to her this night.” When he heard this, he
planned to enter the house amongst the mob of women and saw the twain
seated on the bridal couch.[107] By and by, the bridegroom came up to
her, whereupon she sighed heavily and weeping, recited this couplet:—

 Would Heaven I knew (but many are the shifts of joy and woe) ✿ In what
    far distant land thou art, my Mutalammis, oh!

Now Al-Mutalammis was a renowned poet; so he answered her saying:—

 Right near at hand, Umaymah mine! whene’er the caravan ✿ Halted, I never
    ceased for thee to pine, I would thou know.

When the bridegroom heard this, he guessed how the case stood and went
forth from among them in haste improvising:—

 I was in bestest luck, but now my luck goes contrary: ✿ A hospitable
    house and room contain your loves, you two!

And he returned not but left the twain to their privacy. So
Al-Mutalammis and his wife abode together in all comfort and solace of
life and in all its joys and jollities till death parted them. And glory
be to Him at whose command the earth and the heavens shall arise! And
among other tales is that of

-----

Footnote 105:

  A pre-Islamitic bard and friend of Tarafah the poet of the Suspended
  or “Prize Poem.” The tale is familiar to all the Moslem East.
  Tarafah’s Laura was one Khaulá.

Footnote 106:

  King of Hirah in Chaldæa, a drunken and bloodthirsty tyrant. When
  offended by the lampoons of the two poets he sent them with litteræ
  Bellerophontiæ to the Governor of Al-Bahrayn. Al-Mutalammis “smelt a
  rat” and destroyed his charge, but Tarafah was mutilated and buried
  alive, the victim of a trick which is old as (and older than) good
  King David and Uriah. Of course neither poet could read.

Footnote 107:

  On this occasion, and in presence of the women only, the groom first
  sees or is supposed to see the face of his wife. It is, I have said,
  the fashion for both to be greatly overcome and to appear as if about
  to faint: the groom looks especially ridiculous when so
  attitudinising.




       THE CALIPH HARUN AL-RASHID AND QUEEN ZUBAYDAH IN THE BATH.


The Caliph Harun al-Rashid loved the Lady Zubaydah with exceeding love
and laid out for her a pleasaunce, wherein he made a great tank and set
thereabouts a screen of trees and led thither water from all sides;
hence the trees grew and interlaced over the basin so densely, that one
could go in and wash, without being seen of any, for the thickness of
the leafage. It chanced, one day, that Queen Zubaydah entered the garden
and, coming to the swimming-bath,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Queen Zubaydah
entered the garden one day and, coming to the swimming-bath, gazed upon
its goodliness; and the sheen of the water and the overshading of the
trees pleased her. Now it was a day of exceeding heat; so she doffed her
clothes and, entering the tank, which was not deep enough to cover the
whole person, fell to pouring the water over herself from an ewer of
silver. It also happened that the Caliph heard she was in the pool; so
he left his palace and came down to spy upon her through the screen of
the foliage. He stood behind the trees and espied her mother-nude,
showing everything that is kept hidden. Presently, she became aware of
him and turning, saw him behind the trees and was ashamed that he should
see her naked. So she laid her hands on her parts, but the Mount of
Venus escaped from between them, by reason of its greatness and
plumpness; and the Caliph at once turned and went away, wondering and
reciting this couplet:—

    I looked on her with loving eyne ✿ And grew anew my old repine:

But he knew not what to say next; so he sent for Abu Nowas and said to
him, “Make me a piece of verse commencing with this line.” “I hear and
obey,” replied the poet and in an eye-twinkling extemporised these
couplets:—

 I looked on her with longing eyne ✿ And grew anew my old repine
 For the gazelle, who captured me ✿ Where the two lotus-trees incline:
 There was the water poured on it ✿ From ewer of the silvern mine;
 And seen me she had hidden it ✿ But ‘twas too plump for fingers fine.
 Would Heaven that I were on it, ✿ An hour, or better two hours,
    li’en.[108]

Thereupon the Commander of the Faithful smiled and made him a handsome
present and he went away rejoicing. And I have heard another story of

-----

Footnote 108:

  This leisurely operation of the “deed of kind” was sure to be noticed;
  but we do not find in The Nights any allusion to that systematic
  _prolongatio veneris_ which is so much cultivated by Moslems under the
  name Imsák = retention, withholding _i.e._ the semen. Yet Eastern
  books on domestic medicine consist mostly of two parts; the first of
  general prescriptions and the second of aphrodisiacs especially those
  _qui prolongent le plaisir_ as did the Gaul by thinking of _sa pauvre
  mère_. The Ananga-Ranga, by the Reverend Koka Pandit before quoted,
  gives a host of recipes which are used, either externally or
  internally, to hasten the paroxysm of the woman and delay the orgasm
  of the man (p. 27). Some of these are curious in the extreme. I heard
  of a Hindi who made a candle of frogs’ fat and fibre warranted to
  retain the seed till it burned out: it failed notably because, relying
  upon it, he worked too vigorously. The essence of the “retaining art”
  is to avoid over-tension of the muscles and to pre-occupy the brain:
  hence in coition Hindus will drink sherbet, chew betel-nut and even
  smoke. Europeans ignoring the science and practice, are contemptuously
  compared with village-cocks by Hindu women who cannot be satisfied,
  such is their natural coldness, increased doubtless by vegetable diet
  and unuse of stimulants, with less than twenty minutes. Hence too
  while thousands of Europeans have cohabited for years with and have
  had families by “native women,” they are never loved by them:—at least
  I never heard of a case.




                  HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE THREE POETS.


The Prince of True Believers, Caliph Harun al-Rashid, was exceeding
restless one night; so he rose and walked about his palace, till he
happened on a handmaid overcome with wine. Now he was prodigiously
enamoured of this damsel; so he played with her and pulled her to him,
whereupon her zone fell down and her petticoat-trousers were loosed and
he besought her of amorous favour. But she said to him, “O Commander of
the Faithful wait till to-morrow night, for I am unprepared for thee,
knowing not of thy coming.” So he left her and went away. But, when the
morrow showed its light and the sun shone bright, he sent a page to her
saying, “The Commander of the Faithful is about to visit thine
apartment;” but she replied, “Day doth away with the promise of night.”
So he said to his courtiers, make me somewhat of verse, introducing
these words, “The promise of Night is effaced by Day.” Answered they,
“We hear and obey,” and Al-Rakáshi[109] came forward and recited the
following couplets:—

 By Allah, couldst thou but feel my pain, ✿ Thy rest had turned and had
    fled away.

 Hath left me in sorrow and love distraught, ✿ Unseen and unseeing, that
    fairest may:
 She promised me grace, then jilted and said, ✿ “The promise of night is
    effaced by day!”

Then Abu Mus’ab came forward and recited these couplets:—

 When wilt thou be wise and love-heat allay ✿ That from food and sleeping
    so leads astray?
 Suffices thee not ever weeping eye, ✿ And vitals on fire when thy name
    they say?
 He must smile and laugh and in pride must cry ✿ “The promise of Night is
    effaced by Day.”

Last came Abu Nowas and recited the following couplets:—

 As love waxt longer less met we tway ✿ And fell out, but ended the
    useless fray;
 One night in the palace I found her fou’; ✿ Yet of modesty still there
    was some display:
 The veil from her shoulders had slipt; and showed ✿ Her loosened
    trousers Love’s seat and stay:
 And rattled the breezes her huge hind cheeks ✿ And the branch where two
    little pomegranates lay:
 Quoth I, “Give me tryst;” whereto quoth she ✿ “To-morrow the fane shall
    wear best array:”
 Next day I asked her, “Thy word?” Said she ✿ “The promise of Night is
    effaced by Day.”

The Caliph bade give a myriad of money each to Al-Rakashi and Abu
Mus’ab, but bade strike off the head of Abu Nowas, saying, “Thou wast
with us yesternight in the palace.” Said he, “By Allah, I slept not but
in my own house! I was directed to what I said by thine own words as to
the subject of the verse; and indeed quoth Almighty Allah (and He is the
truest of all speakers):—As for poets (devils pursue them!) dost thou
not see that they rove as bereft of their senses through every valley
and that they say that which they do not?”[110] So the Caliph forgave
him and gave him two myriads of money. And another tale is that of

-----

Footnote 109:

  Abu ‘l Abbas al-Rakáshi, a poet of the time. The saying became
  proverbial (Burckhardt’s A. Proverbs No. 561) and there are variants,
  _e.g._ The night’s promise is spread with butter that melteth when day
  ariseth.

Footnote 110:

  Koran xxvi. 5, 6 or “And those who err (Arab. Al-gháwún) follow the
  footsteps of the poets,” etc.




          MUS’AB BIN AL-ZUBAYR AND AYISHAH DAUGHTER OF TALHAH.


It is told of Mus’ab bin al-Zubayr[111] that he met in Al-Medinah Izzah,
who was one of the shrewdest of women, and said to her, “I have a mind
to marry Ayishah[112] daughter of Talhah, and I should like thee to go
her-wards and spy out for me how she is made.” So she went away and
returning to Mus’ab, said, “I have seen her, and her face is fairer than
health; she hath large and well-opened eyes and under them a nose
straight and smooth as a cane; oval cheeks and a mouth like a cleft
pomegranate, a neck as a silver ewer and below it a bosom with two
breasts like twin-pomegranates and further down a slim waist and a
slender stomach with a navel therein as it were a casket of ivory, and
back parts like a hummock of sand; and plumply rounded thighs and calves
like columns of alabaster; but I saw her feet to be large, and thou wilt
fall short with her in time of need.” Upon this report he married
her——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


      Now when it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Izzah this
wise reported of Ayishah bint Talhah, Mus’ab married her and went in to
her. And presently Izzah invited Ayishah and the women of the tribe
Kuraysh to her house, when Ayishah sang these two couplets with Mus’ab
standing by:—

 And the lips of girls, that are perfume sweet; ✿ So nice to kiss when
    with smiles they greet:
 Yet ne’er tasted I them, but in thought of him; ✿ And by thought the
    Ruler rules worldly seat.

The night of Mus’ab’s going in unto her, he departed not from her, till
after seven bouts; and on the morrow, a freedwoman of his met him and
said to him, “May I be thy sacrifice! Thou art perfect, even in this.”
And a certain woman said, “I was with Ayishah, when her husband came in
to her, and she lusted for him; so he fell upon her and she snarked and
snorted and made use of all manner of wondrous movements and marvellous
new inventions, and I the while within hearing.” So, when he came out
from her, I said to her, “How canst thou do thus with thy rank and
nobility and condition, and I in thy house?” Quoth she, “Verily a woman
should bring her husband all of which she is mistress, by way of
excitement and rare buckings and wrigglings and motitations.[113] What
dislikest thou of this?” And I answered “I would have this by nights.”
Rejoined she, “Thus is it by day and by night I do more than this; for
when he seeth me, desire stirreth him up and he falleth in heat; so he
putteth it out to me and I obey him, and it is as thou seest.” And there
also hath reached me an account of

-----

Footnote 111:

  Half-brother of Abdullah bin al-Zubayr, the celebrated pretender.

Footnote 112:

  Grand-daughter of the Caliph Abu Bakr and the most beautiful woman of
  her day.

Footnote 113:

  The Calc. Edit. by mistake reads “Izzah.” Torrens (notes i.-xi.)
  remarks “The word _Ghoonj_ is applied to this sort of blandishment”
  (_i.e._ an affected gait), and says Burckhardt (Prov. No. 685), “The
  women of Cairo flatter themselves that their _Ghoonj_ is superior to
  that of all other females in the Levant.” But Torrens did not
  understand and Burckhardt would not explain “Ghunj” except by “assumed
  airs” (see No. 714). It here means the art of moving in coition, which
  is especially affected, even by modest women, throughout the East and
  they have many books teaching the genial art. In China there are
  professors, mostly old women, who instruct young girls in this branch
  of the gymnastic.




                    ABU AL-ASWAD AND HIS SLAVE-GIRL.


Abu al-Aswad bought a native-born slave-girl, who was blind of an eye,
and she pleased him; but his people decried her to him; whereat he
wondered and, turning the palms of his hands upwards,[114] recited these
two couplets:—

 They find me fault with her where I default ne’er find, ✿ Save haply
    that a speck in either eye may show:
 But if her eyes have fault, of fault her form hath none, ✿ Slim-built
    above the waist and heavily made below.

And this is also told of

-----

Footnote 114:

  When reciting the Fátihah (opening Koranic chapter), the hands are
  held in this position as if to receive a blessing falling from Heaven;
  after which both palms are passed down the face to distribute it over
  the eyes and other organs of sense.




                HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE TWO SLAVE-GIRLS.


The Caliph Harun al-Rashid lay one night between two slave-girls, one
from Al-Medinah and the other from Cufa and the Cufite rubbed his hands,
whilst the Medinite rubbed his feet and made his concern[115] stand up.
Quoth the Cufite, “I see thou wouldst keep the whole of the
stock-in-trade to thyself; give me my share of it.” And the other
answered, “I have been told by Málik, on the authority of Hishám ibn
Orwah,[116] who had it of his (grand) father, that the Prophet said,
“Whoso quickeneth the dead, the dead belongeth to him and is his.”” But
the Cufite took her unawares and, pushing her away, seized it all in her
own hand and said, “Al-A’amash telleth us, on the authority of
Khaysamah, who had it of Abdallah bin Mas’úd, that the Prophet declared,
Game belongeth to him who taketh it, not to him who raiseth it.” And
this is also related of

-----

Footnote 115:

  The word used is “bizá’at” = capital or a share in a mercantile
  business.

Footnote 116:

  This and the following names are those of noted traditionists of the
  eighth century, who derive back to Abdallah bin Mas’úd, a “Companion
  of the Apostle.” The text shows the recognised formula of ascription
  for quoting a “Hadís” = saying of Mohammed; and sometimes it has to
  pass through half a dozen mouths.




         THE CALIPH HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE THREE SLAVE-GIRLS.


The Caliph Harun al-Rashid once slept with three slave-girls, a Meccan,
a Medinite and an Irakite. The Medinah girl put her hand to his yard and
handled it, whereupon it rose and the Meccan sprang up and drew it to
herself. Quoth the other, “What is this unjust aggression? A tradition
was related to me by Málik[117] after Al-Zuhri, after Abdallah ibn
Sálim, after Sa’íd bin Zayd, that the Apostle of Allah (whom Allah bless
and keep!) said:—Whoso enquickeneth a dead land, it is his.” And the
Meccan answered, “It is related to us by Sufyán, from Abu Zanád, from
Al-A’araj, from Abu Horayrah, that the Apostle of Allah said:—“The
quarry is his who catcheth it, not his who starteth it.”” But the Irak
girl pushed them both away and taking it to herself, said, “This is
mine, till your contention be decided.” And they tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 117:

  Traditionists of the seventh and eighth centuries who refer back to
  the “Father of the Kitten” (Abu Horayrah), an uncle of the Apostle.




                        THE MILLER AND HIS WIFE.


There was a miller, who had an ass to turn his mill; and he was married
to a wicked wife, whom he loved, while she hated him because she was
sweet upon a neighbour, who misliked her and held aloof from her. One
night, the miller saw, in his sleep, one who said to him, “Dig in such a
spot of the ass’s round in the mill, and thou shalt find a hoard.” When
he awoke, he told his wife the vision and bade her keep the secret; but
she told her neighbour——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the miller’s wife
told the secret to the neighbour whom she loved, thinking to win his
favour; and he agreed with her to come to her by night. So he came and
they dug in the mill and found the treasure and took it forth. Then he
asked her, “How shall we do with this?” and she answered; “We will
divide it into two halves and will share it equally between us, and do
thou leave thy wife and I will cast about to rid me of my husband. Then
shalt thou marry me and, when we are conjoined, we will join the two
halves of the treasure one to other, and all will be in our hands.”
Quoth he, “I fear lest Satan seduce thee and thou take some man other
than myself; for gold in the house is like the sun in the world. I reck,
therefore, it were right that the money be all in my hands, so thou give
thy whole mind to getting free of thy husband and coming to me.” Quoth
she, “I fear even as thou fearest, nor will I yield up my part to thee;
for it was I directed thee to it.” When he heard this, greed of gain
prompted him to kill her; so he slew her and threw her body into the
empty hoard-hole; but day overtook him and hindered him from covering it
up; he therefore took the money and went his way. Now after a while the
miller awoke and, missing his wife, went into the mill, where he
fastened the ass to the beam and shouted to it. It went on a little,
then stopped; whereupon he beat it grievously; but the more he bashed
it, the more it drew back; for it was affrighted at the dead woman and
could not go forward. Thereupon the Miller, unknowing what hindered the
donkey, took out a knife and goaded it again and again, but still it
would not budge. Then he was wroth with it, knowing not the cause of its
obstinacy, and drove the knife into its flanks, and it fell down dead.
But when the sun rose, he saw his donkey lying dead and likewise his
wife in the place of the treasure, and great was his rage and sore his
wrath for the loss of his hoard and the death of his wife and his ass.
All this came of his letting his wife into his secret and not keeping it
to himself.[118] And I have heard this tale of

-----

Footnote 118:

  Eastern story-books abound in these instances. Pilpay says in “Kalilah
  wa Dimnah,” “I am the slave of what I have spoken and the lord of what
  I keep hidden.” Sa’adi follows suit, “When thou speakest not a word,
  thou hast thy hand upon it; when it is once spoken it hath laid its
  hand on thee.” Caxton, in the “Dyctes, or Sayings of Philosophers”
  (printed in 1477) uses almost the same words.




                     THE SIMPLETON AND THE SHARPER.


A certain simpleton was once walking along, haling his ass after him by
the halter, when a pair of sharpers saw him and one said to his fellow,
“I will take that ass from yonder wight.” Asked the other, “How wilt
thou do that?” “Follow me and I will show thee how,” answered the first.
So the cony-catcher went up to the ass and, loosing it from the halter,
gave the beast to his fellow; then he haltered his own head and followed
Tom Fool till he knew the other had got clean off with the ass, when he
stood still. The oaf haled at the halter, but the rascal stirred not; so
he turned and seeing the halter on a man’s neck, said to him, “What art
thou?” Quoth the sharper, “I am thine ass and my story is a wondrous one
and ‘tis this. Know that I have a pious old mother and came in to her
one day, drunk; and she said to me:—O my son, repent to the Almighty of
these thy transgressions. But I took my staff and beat her, whereupon
she cursed me and Allah changed me into an ass and caused me fall into
thy hands, where I have remained till this moment. However, to-day, my
mother called me to mind and her heart yearned towards me; so she prayed
for me and the Lord restored me to my former shape amongst the sons of
Adam.” Cried the silly one, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might
save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! Allah upon thee, O my brother,
acquit me of what I have done with thee in the way of riding and so
forth.” Then he let the cony-catcher go and returned home, drunken with
chagrin and concern as with wine. His wife asked him, “What aileth thee
and where is the donkey?”; and he answered, “Thou knowest not what was
this ass; but I will tell thee.” So he told her the story, and she
exclaimed, “Alack and alas for the punishment we shall receive from
Almighty Allah! How could we have used a man as a beast of burden, all
this while?” And she gave alms by way of atonement and prayed pardon of
Heaven.[119] Then the man abode awhile at home, idle and feckless, till
she said to him, “How long wilt thou sit at home doing naught? Go to the
market and buy us an ass and ply thy work with it.” Accordingly, he went
to the market and stopped by the ass-stand, where behold, he saw his own
ass for sale. So he went up to it and clapping his mouth to its ear,
said to it, “Woe to thee, thou ne’er-do-well! Doubtless thou hast been
getting drunk again and beating thy mother! But, by Allah, I will never
buy thee more!”[120] And he left it and went away. And they tell a tale
concerning

-----

Footnote 119:

  _i.e._ for her husband’s and her sin in using a man like a beast.

Footnote 120:

  See the Second Lady’s story (tantôt Kadi, tantôt bandit), pp. 20–26 by
  my friend Yacoub Artin Pasha in the Bulletin before quoted, series ii.
  No. 4 of 1883. The sharpers’ trick is common in Eastern folk-lore, and
  the idea that underlies is always metempsychosis or metamorphosis. So,
  in the Kalilah was Dimnah (new Syriac), the three rogues persuade the
  ascetic that he is leading a dog not a sheep.




      THE KAZI ABU YUSUF WITH HARUN AL-RASHID AND QUEEN ZUBAYDAH.


The Caliph Harun al-Rashid went up one noontide to his couch, to lie
down; and mounting, found upon the bed-clothes semen freshly emitted;
whereat he was startled and troubled with sore trouble. So he called the
Lady Zubaydah and said to her, “What is that spilt on the bed?” She
looked at it and replied, “O Commander of the Faithful, it is semen.”
Quoth he, “Tell me truly what this meaneth or I will lay violent hands
on thee forthright.” Quoth she, “By Allah, O Commander of the Faithful,
indeed I know not how it came there and I am guiltless of that whereof
thou suspectest me.” So he sent for the Kazi Abú Yúsuf and acquainted
him of the case. The Judge raised his eyes to the ceiling and, seeing a
crack therein, said to the Caliph, “O Commander of the Faithful, in very
sooth the bat hath seed like that of a man,[121] and this is bat’s
semen.” Then he called for a spear and thrust it into the crevice,
whereupon down fell the bat. In this manner the Caliph’s suspicions were
dispelled——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Kazi Abu
Yusuf took the spear and thrust it into the crevice, down fell the bat,
and thus the Caliph’s suspicions were dispelled and the innocence of
Zubaydah was made manifest; whereat she gave loud and liberal vent to
her joy and promised Abu Yusuf a magnificent reward. Now there were with
her certain delicious fruits, out of their season, and she knew of
others in the garden; so she asked Abu Yusuf, “O Imam of the Faith,
which wouldest thou rather have of the two kinds of fruits, those that
are here or those that are not here?” And he answered, “Our code
forbiddeth us to pronounce judgment on the absent; wheneas they are
present, we will give our decision.” So she let bring the two kinds of
fruits before him; and he ate of both. Quoth she, “What is the
difference between them?” and quoth he, “As often as I think to praise
one kind, the adversary putteth in its claim.” The Caliph laughed at his
answer[122] and made him a rich present; and Zubaydah also gave him what
she had promised him, and he went away, rejoicing. See, then the virtues
of this Imám and how at his hands were manifest the truth and the
innocence of the Lady Zubaydah. And amongst other stories is that of

-----

Footnote 121:

  This is the popular prejudice and it has doubtless saved many a
  reputation. The bat is known to Moslems as the Bird of Jesus, a legend
  derived by the Koran from the Gospel of Infancy (I chapt. xv. Hone’s
  Apocryphal New Testament), in which the boy Jesus amuses himself with
  making birds of clay and commanding them to fly when (according to the
  Moslems) they became bats. These Apocryphal Gospels must be carefully
  read, if the student would understand a number of Moslem allusions to
  the Injíl which no Evangel contains.

Footnote 122:

  Because it quibbled a way out of every question, a truly diplomatic
  art.




               THE CALIPH AL-HAKIM[123] AND THE MERCHANT.


The Caliph Al-Hákim bi-Amri’llah was riding out in state procession one
day, when he passed along a garden, wherein he saw a man, surrounded by
negro-slaves and eunuchs. He asked him for a draught of water, and the
man gave him to drink, saying, “Belike, the Commander of the Faithful
will honour me by alighting in this my garden.” So the Caliph dismounted
and with his suite entered the garden; whereupon the said man brought
out to them an hundred rugs and an hundred leather mats and an hundred
cushions; and set before them an hundred dishes of fruits, an hundred
bowls of sweetmeats and an hundred jars of sugared sherbets; at which
the Caliph marvelled with much amaze and said to his host, “O man,
verily this thy case is wondrous: didst thou know of our coming and make
this preparation for us?” He replied, “No, by Allah, O Commander of the
Faithful, I knew not of thy coming and I am a merchant of the rest of
thy subjects; but I have an hundred concubines; so, when the Commander
of the Faithful honoured me by alighting with me, I sent to each of
them, bidding her send me her morning-meal in the garden. So they sent
me each of her furniture and the surplus of her meat and drink: and
every day each sendeth me a dish of meat and another of cooling
marinades, also a platter of fruits and a bowl of sweetmeats and a jar
of sherbet. This is my noonday dinner, nor have I added aught thereto
for thee.” Then the Commander of the Faithful, Al-Hakim bi-Amri’llah
prostrated himself in thanksgiving to the Almighty (extolled and exalted
be His name!) and said, “Praised be Allah, who hath been so bountiful to
one of our lieges, that he entertaineth the Caliph and his host, without
making ready for them; nay, he feedeth them with the surplusage of his
day’s provision!” Then he sent for all the dirhams in the treasury, that
had been struck that year (and they were in number three thousand and
seven hundred thousand); nor did he mount till the money came, when he
gave it to the merchant, saying, “Use this as thy state may require; and
thy generosity deserveth more than this.” Then he took horse and rode
away. And I have heard a story concerning

-----

Footnote 123:

  This Caliph, the orthodox Abbaside of Egypt (A.D. 1261) must not be
  confounded with the Druze-god, the heretical Fatimite (A.D. 996–1021).
  D’Herbelot (“Hakem”) gives details. Mr. S. L. Poole (The Academy,
  April 26, ‘79) is very severe on the slip of Mr. Payne.




           KING KISRA ANUSHIRWAN[124] AND THE VILLAGE DAMSEL.


The just King, Kisrà Anúshirwán one day rode forth to the chase and, in
pursuit of a deer, became separated from his suite. Presently, he caught
sight of a hamlet near hand and being sore athirst, he made for it and
presenting himself at the door of a house that lay by the wayside, asked
for a draught of water. So a damsel came out and looked at him; then,
going back into the house, pressed the juice from a single sugar-cane
into a bowl and mixed it with water; after which she strewed on the top
some scented stuff, as it were dust, and carried it to the King.
Thereupon he seeing in it what resembled dust, drank it, little by
little, till he came to the end; when said he to her, “O damsel, the
drink is good, and how sweet it had been but for this dust in it that
troubleth it.” Answered she, “O guest, I put in that powder for a
purpose;” and he asked, “And why didst thou thus?”; so she replied, “I
saw thee exceeding thirsty and feared that thou wouldst drain the whole
at one draught and that this would do thee mischief; and but for this
dust that troubled the drink so hadst thou done.” The Just King wondered
at her words, knowing that they came of her wit and good sense, and said
to her, “From how many sugar canes didst thou express this draught?”
“One,” answered she; whereat Anushirwan marvelled and, calling for the
register of the village taxes, saw that its assessment was but little
and bethought him to increase it, on his return to his palace, saying in
himself, “A village where they get this much juice out of one
sugar-cane, why is it so lightly taxed?” He then left the village and
pursued his chase; and, as he came back at the end of the day, he passed
alone by the same door and called again for drink; whereupon the same
damsel came out and, knowing him at a look, went in to fetch him water.
It was some time before she returned and Anushirwan wondered thereat and
said to her, “Why hast thou tarried?”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Three Hundred and Ninetieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Anushirwan
hurried the damsel and asked her, “Why hast thou tarried?” she answered,
“Because a single sugar-cane gave not enough for thy need; so I pressed
three; but they yielded not so much as did one before.” Rejoined he,
“What is the cause of that?”; and she replied, “The cause of it is that
when the Sultan’s[125] mind is changed against a folk, their prosperity
ceaseth and their good waxeth less.” So Anushirwan laughed and dismissed
from his mind that which he had purposed against the villagers.
Moreover, he took the damsel to wife then and there, being pleased with
her much wit and acuteness and the excellence of her speech. And they
tell another tale of the

-----

Footnote 124:

  The beautiful name is Persian “Anúshín-rawán” = Sweet of Soul; and the
  glorious title of this contemporary of Mohammed is “Al-Malik al-Adil”
  = the Just King. Kisra, _the_ Chosroë per excellentiam, is also
  applied to the godly Guebre of whom every Eastern dictionary gives
  details.

Footnote 125:

  “Sultan” is here an anachronism: I have noted that the title was first
  assumed independently by Mohammed of Ghazni after it had been
  conferred by the Caliph upon his father the Amír Al-Umará (Mayor of
  the Palace), Sabuktagin A.D. 974.




              WATER-CARRIER[126] AND THE GOLDSMITH’S WIFE.


There was once, in the city of Bokhara, a water-carrier, who used to
carry water to the house of a goldsmith and had done this thirty years.
Now that goldsmith had a wife of exceeding beauty and loveliness,
brilliancy and perfect grace; and she was withal renowned for piety,
chastity and modesty. One day the water-carrier came, as of custom, and
poured the water into the cisterns. Now the woman was standing in the
midst of the court; so he went close up to her and taking her hand,
stroked it and pressed it, then went away and left her. When her husband
came home from the bazar, she said to him, “I would have thee tell me
what thing thou hast done in the market this day, to anger Almighty
Allah.” Quoth he, “I have done nothing to offend the Lord.” “Nay,”
rejoined she, “but, by Allah, thou hast indeed done something to anger
Him; and, unless thou tell me the whole truth, I will not abide in thy
house, and thou shalt not see me, nor will I see thee.” So he confessed,
“I will tell thee the truth of what I did this day. It so chanced that,
as I was sitting in my shop, as of wont, a woman came up to me and bade
me make her a bracelet of gold. Then she went away and I wrought her a
bracelet and laid it aside. But when she returned and I brought her out
the bracelet, she put forth her hand and I clasped the bracelet on her
wrist; and I wondered at the whiteness of her hand and the beauty of her
wrist, which would captivate any beholder; and I recalled what the poet
saith:—

 Her fore-arms, dight with their bangles, show ✿ Like fire ablaze on the
    waves a-flow;
 As by purest gold were the water girt, ✿ And belted around by a living
    lowe.

So I took her hand and pressed it and squeezed it.” Said the woman,
“Great God! Why didst thou this ill thing? Know that the water-carrier,
who hath come to our house these thirty years, nor sawst thou ever any
treason in him, took my hand this day and pressed and squeezed it.” Said
her husband, “O woman, let us crave pardon of Allah! Verily, I repent of
what I did, and do thou ask forgiveness of the Lord for me.” She cried,
“Allah pardon me and thee, and receive us into his holy keeping.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the goldsmith’s
wife cried out, “Allah pardon me and thee, and receive us into his holy
keeping!” And on the next day, the water-carrier came in to the
jeweller’s wife and, throwing himself at her feet, grovelled in the dust
and besought pardon of her, saying, “O my lady, acquit me of that which
Satan deluded me to do; for it was he that seduced me and led me
astray.” She answered, “Go thy ways, the sin was not in thee, but in my
husband, for that he did what he did in his shop, and Allah hath
retaliated upon him in this world.” And it is related that the
goldsmith, when his wife told him how the water-carrier had used her,
said, “Tit for tat, and blow for blow!; had I done more the
water-carrier had done mo’e”;—which became a current byword among the
folk. Therefore it behoveth a wife to be both outward and inward with
her husband; contenting herself with little from him, if he cannot give
her much, and taking pattern by Ayishah the Truthful and Fatimah the
virgin mother (Allah Almighty accept of them twain!), that she may be of
the company of the righteous ancestry.[127] And I have heard the
following tale of

-----

Footnote 126:

  The “Sakká” or water-carrier race is peculiar in Egypt and famed for
  trickery and intrigue. Opportunity here as elsewhere makes the thief.

Footnote 127:

  A famous saying of Mohammed is recorded when an indiscretion of his
  young wife Ayishah was reported to him, “There be no adultress without
  an adulterer (of a husband).” Fatimah the Apostle’s daughter is
  supposed to have remained a virgin after bearing many children: this
  coarse symbolism of purity was known to the classics (Pausanias), who
  made Juno recover her virginity by bathing in a certain river every
  year. In the last phrase, “Al-Salaf” (ancestry) refers to Mohammed and
  his family.




                 KHUSRAU AND SHIRIN AND THE FISHERMAN.


King Khusrau[128] Shahinshah of Persia loved fish; and one day, as he
sat in his saloon, he and Shirin his wife, there came a fisherman, with
a great fish, and he laid it before the King, who was pleased and
ordered the man four thousand dirhams.[129] Thereupon Shirin said to the
King, “Thou hast done ill.” Asked he, “And why?”, and she answered,
“Because if, after this, thou give one of thy courtiers a like sum, he
will disdain it and say:—He hath but given me the like of what he gave
the fisherman. And if thou give him less, the same will say:—He
despiseth me and giveth me less than he gave the fisherman.” Rejoined
Khusrau, “Thou art right, but it would dishonour a king to go back on
his gift; and the thing is done.” Quoth Shirin, “If thou wilt, I will
contrive thee a means to get it back from him.” Quoth he, “How so?”; and
she said, “Call back, if thou so please, the fisherman and ask him if
the fish be male or female. If he say, Male, say thou, We want a female,
and if he say, Female, say, We want a male.” So the King sent for the
fisherman, who was a man of wit and acuteness, and said to him, “Is this
fish male or female?” whereupon the fisherman kissed the ground and
answered, “This fish is an hermaphrodite,[130] neither male nor female.”
Khusrau laughed at his clever reply and ordered him other four thousand
dirhams. So the fisherman went to the treasurer and, taking his eight
thousand dirhams, put them in a sack he had with him. Then, throwing it
over his shoulder, he was going away, when he dropped a dirham; so he
laid the bag off his back and stooped down to pick it up. Now the King
and Shirin were looking on, and the Queen said, “O King, didst thou note
the meanness of the man, in that he must needs stoop down to pick up the
one dirham, and could not bring himself to leave it for any of the
King’s servants?” When the King heard these words, he was exceeding
wroth with the fisherman and said, “Thou art right, O Shirin!” So he
called the man back and said to him, “Thou low-minded carle! Thou art no
man! How couldst thou put the bag with all this money off thy back and
bend thee groundwards to pick up the one dirham and grudge to leave it
where it fell?” Thereupon the fisherman kissed the earth before him and
answered, “May Allah prolong the King’s life! Indeed, I did not pick up
the dirham off the ground because of its value in my eyes; but I raised
it off the earth because on one of its faces is the likeness of the King
and on the other his name; and I feared lest any should unwittingly set
foot upon it, thus dishonouring the name and presentment of the King,
and I be blamed for this offence.” The King wondered at his words and
approved of his wit and shrewdness, and ordered him yet other four
thousand dirhams. Moreover, he bade cry abroad in his kingdom, saying,
“It behoveth none to be guided by women’s counsel; for whoso followeth
their advice, loseth, with his one dirham, other twain.”[131] And here
is the tale they tell of

-----

Footnote 128:

  Khusrau Parwiz, grandson of Anushirwan, the Guebre King who tore his
  kingdom by tearing Mohammed’s letter married the beautiful Maria or
  Irene (in Persian “Shírín” = the sweet) daughter of the Greek Emperor
  Maurice: their loves were sung by a host of poets; and likewise the
  passion of the sculptor Farhád for the same Shirin. Mr. Lyall writes
  “Parwêz” and holds “Parwíz” a modern form.

Footnote 129:

  He could afford it according to historians. His throne was supported
  by 40,000 silver pillars; and 1,000 globes, hung in the dome, formed
  an orrery, showing the motion of the heavenly bodies; 30,000 pieces of
  embroidered tapestry overhung the walls and below were vaults full of
  silver, gold and gems.

Footnote 130:

  Arab. “Khunsá,” meaning also a catamite as I have explained. Lane (ii.
  586). has it; “This fish is of a mixed kind” (!).

Footnote 131:

  So the model lovers became the ordinary married couple.




            YAHYA BIN KHALID THE BARMECIDE AND THE POOR MAN.


Yahya bin Khálid the Barmecide was returning home, one day, from the
Caliph’s palace, when he saw, at the gate of his mansion, a man who rose
as he drew near and saluted him, saying, “O Yahyá, I am in sore need of
that which is in thy hand, and I make Allah my intermediary with thee.”
So Yahya caused a place to be set apart for him in his house and bade
his treasurer carry him a thousand dirhams every day and ordered that
his diet be of the choicest of his own meat. The man abode in this case
a whole month, at the end of which time, having received in all thirty
thousand dirhams, and fearing lest Yahya should take the money from him,
because of the greatness of the sum, he departed by stealth——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the man, taking
with him the money, departed by stealth. But when they told Yahya of
this, he said, “By Allah, though he had tarried with me to the end of
his days, yet had I not stinted him of my largesse nor cut off from him
the bounties of my hospitality!” For, indeed, the excellences of the
Barmecides were past count nor can their virtues be committed to
description, especially those of Yahya bin Khalid, for he was an
Ocean[132] of noble qualities, even as saith the poet of him:—

 I asked of Bounty, “Art thou free?” Quoth she, ✿ “No, I am slave to
    Yahyá Khálid-son!”
 “Boughten?” asked I. “Allah forfend,” quoth she, ✿ “By heirship, sire to
    sire’s transmission!”

And the following is related of

-----

Footnote 132:

  Arab. “Jamm.” Heb. “Yamm.” Al-Haríri (Ass. of Sinjar and Sáwah) uses
  the rare form Yam for sea or ocean.




                  MOHAMMED AL-AMIN AND THE SLAVE-GIRL.


Ja’afar bin Musá al-Hádi[133] once had a slave-girl, a lutist, called
Al-Badr al-Kabír, than whom there was not in her time a fairer of face
nor shapelier of shape nor a more elegant of manners nor a more
accomplished in the art of singing and striking the strings; she was
indeed perfect in beauty and extreme in every charm. Now Mohammed
al-Amín,[134] son of Zubaydah, heard of her and was urgent with Ja’afar
to sell her to him; but he replied, “Thou knowest it beseemeth not one
of my rank to sell slave-girls nor set prices on concubines; but were
she not a rearling I would send her to thee, as a gift, nor grudge her
to thee.” And Mohammed al-Amin, some days after this went to Ja’afar’s
house, to make merry; and the host set before him that which it behoveth
to set before true friends and bade the damsel Al-Badr al-Kabir sing to
him and gladden him. So she tuned the lute and sang with a ravishing
melody; whilst Mohammed al-Amin fell to drinking and jollity and bade
the cupbearers ply Ja’afar with much wine, till they made him drunken,
when he took the damsel and carried her to his own house, but laid not a
finger on her. And when the morrow dawned he bade invite Ja’afar; and
when he came, he set wine before him and made the girl sing to him, from
behind the curtain. Ja’afar knew her voice and was angered at this, but,
of the nobleness of his nature and the magnanimity of his mind he showed
no change. Now when the carousal was at an end, Al-Amin commanded one of
his servants to fill the boat, wherein Ja’afar had come, with dirhams
and dinars and all manner of jewels and jacinths and rich raiment and
goods galore. So he laid therein a thousand myriads of money and a
thousand fine pearls, each worth twenty thousand dirhams; nor did he
give over loading the barge with all manner of things precious and rare,
till the boatmen cried out for help, saying, “The boat can’t hold any
more;” whereupon he bade them carry all this to Ja’afar’s palace. Such
are the exploits of the magnanimous, Allah have mercy on them! And a
tale is related of

-----

Footnote 133:

  Al-Hadi, immediate predecessor of Harun al-Rashid, called “Al-Atbik”:
  his upper lip was contracted and his father placed a slave over him
  when in childhood, with orders to say, “Musa! atbik!” (draw thy lips
  together) when he opened his mouth.

Footnote 134:

  Immediate successor of Harun al-Rashid. Al-Amin is an imposing
  physical figure, fair, tall, handsome and of immense strength;
  according to Al-Mas’údi, he killed a lion with his own hands; but his
  mind and judgment were weak. He was fond of fishing; and his reply to
  the courtier bringing important news, “Confound thee! leave me! for
  Kausar (an eunuch whom he loved) hath caught two fish and I none,”
  reminds one of royal frivolity in France.




      THE SONS OF YAHYA BIN KHALID AND SA’ID BIN SALIM AL-BAHILI.


(Quoth Sa’íd bin Sálim al-Báhilí[135]), I was once in very narrow case,
during the days of Harun al-Rashid, and debts accumulated upon me,
burdening my back, and these I had no means of discharging. I was at my
wits’ end what to do, for my doors were blocked up with creditors and I
was without cease importuned for payment by claimants, who dunned me in
crowds till at last I was sore perplexed and troubled. So I betook
myself to Abdallah bin Málik al-Khuza’í[136] and besought him to extend
the hand of aid with his judgment and direct me of his good counsel to
the door of relief; and he said, “None can save thee from this thy
strait and sorrowful state save the Barmecides.” Quoth I, “Who can brook
their pride and put up patiently with their arrogant pretensions?” and
quoth he, “Thou wilt put up with all this for the bettering of thy
case.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdallah ibn Malik
al-Khuza’i said to Sa’id bin Salim, “Thou wilt put up with all this for
the bettering of thy case.” So I left him suddenly (continued Sa’id) and
went straight to Al-Fazl and Ja’afar, sons of Yahyá bin Khálid, to whom
I related my circumstances; whereto they replied, “Allah give thee His
aid, and render thee by His bounties independent of His creatures and
vouchsafe thee abundant weal and bestow on thee what shall suffice thee,
without the need of any but Himself; for whatso He willeth that He can,
and He is gracious with His servants and knoweth their wants.” So I went
out from the twain and returned to Abdallah, with straitened breast and
mind perplexed and heavy of heart, and repeated to him what they had
said. Quoth he, “Thou wouldst do well to abide with us this day, that we
may see what Allah Almighty will decree.” So I sat with him awhile, when
lo! up came my servant, who said to me, “O my lord, there are at our
door many laden mules, and with them a man, who says he is the agent of
Al-Fazl and Ja’afar bin Yahya.” Quoth Abdallah, “I trust that relief is
come to thee: rise up and go see what is the matter.” So I left him and,
hastening to my house, found at the door a man who gave me a note
wherein was written the following:—“After thou hadst been with us and we
heard thy case, we betook ourselves to the Caliph and informed him that
ill condition had reduced thee to the humiliation of begging; whereupon
he ordered us to supply thee with a thousand thousand dirhams from the
Treasury. We represented to him: The debtor will spend this money in
paying off creditors and wiping off debt; whence then shall he provide
for his subsistence? So he ordered thee other three hundred thousand,
and each of us hath also sent thee, of his proper wealth, a thousand
thousand dirhams: so that thou hast now three thousand thousand and
three hundred thousand dirhams wherewithal to order and amend thine
estate.” See, then, the munificence of these magnificos: Almighty Allah
have mercy on them! And a tale is told of

-----

Footnote 135:

  Afterwards governor in Khorasan under Al-Maamun.

Footnote 136:

  Intendant of the palace under Harun al-Rashid.




                 THE WOMAN’S TRICK AGAINST HER HUSBAND.


A man brought his wife a fish one Friday and, bidding her cook it
against the end of the congregational prayers, went out to his craft and
business. Meanwhile in came her friend who bade her to a wedding at his
house; so she agreed and laying the fish in a jar of water, went off
with him and was absent a whole week till the Friday following;[137]
whilst her husband sought her from house to house and enquired after
her; but none could give him any tidings of her. Now on the next Friday
she came home and he fell foul of her; but she brought out to him the
fish alive from the jar and assembled the folk against him and told them
her tale.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the woman brought
out the fish alive from the water-jar and assembled the folk against her
husband, and told them her tale. He also told his; but they credited him
not and said, “It cannot be that the fish should have remained alive all
this while.” So they proved him mad and imprisoned him and mocked at
him, whereupon he shed tears in floods and recited these two couplets:—

 Old hag, of high degree in filthy life, ✿ Whose face her monstrous
    lewdness witnesses.
 When menstruous she bawds; when clean she whores; ✿ And all her time
    bawd or adulteress is.

And a tale is related of the

[Illustration]

-----

Footnote 137:

  Moslem women have this advantage over their Western sisterhood: they
  can always leave the house of father or husband and, without asking
  permission, pay a week or ten days’ visit to their friends. But they
  are not expected to meet their lovers.




              DEVOUT WOMAN AND THE TWO WICKED ELDERS.[138]


There was in times of yore and in ages long gone before, a virtuous
woman among the children of Israel, who was pious and devout and used
every day to go out to the place of prayer, first entering a garden,
which adjoined thereto, and there making the minor ablution. Now there
were in this garden two old men, its keepers, and both Shaykhs fell in
love with her and sought her favours; but she refused, whereupon said
they, “Unless thou yield thy body to us, we will bear witness against
thee of fornication.” Quoth she, “Allah will preserve me from your
frowardness!” Then they opened the garden-gate and cried out, and the
folk came to them from all places, saying “What aileth you?” Quoth they,
“We found this damsel in company with a youth who was doing lewdness
with her; but he escaped from our hands.” Now it was the wont of the
people of those days to expose adulterer and adulteress to public
reproach for three days, and after stone them. So they cried her name in
the public streets for three days, whilst the two elders came up to her
daily and, laying their hands on her head, said, “Praised be Allah who
hath sent down on thee His righteous indignation!” Now on the fourth
day, when they bore her away to stone her, they were followed by a lad
named Daniel, who was then only twelve years old, and this was to be the
first of his miracles (upon our Prophet and upon him be blessing and
peace!). And he ceased not following them to the place of execution,
till he came up with them and said to them, “Hasten not to stone her,
till I judge between them.” So they set him a chair and he sat down and
summoned the old men separately. (Now he was the first ever separated
witnesses.) Then said he to the first, “What sawest thou?”[139] So he
repeated to him his story, and Daniel asked, “In what part of the garden
did this befal?” and he answered, “On the eastern side, under a
pear-tree.” Then he called the other old man and asked him the same
question, and he replied, “On the western side of the garden, under an
apple-tree.” Meanwhile the damsel stood by, with her hands and eyes
raised heavenwards, imploring the Lord for deliverance. Then Allah
Almighty sent down His blasting leven-fire upon the elders and consumed
them, and on this wise the Lord made manifest the innocence of the
damsel. Such was the first of the miracles of the Prophet Daniel, on
whom be blessing and peace! And they relate a tale of

-----

Footnote 138:

  The tale of “Susannah and the Elders” in Moslem form. Dániyál is the
  Arab Daniel, supposed to have been buried at Alexandria (Pilgrimage,
  i. 16).

Footnote 139:

  According to Moslem law, laid down by Mohammed on a delicate occasion
  and evidently for a purpose, four credible witnesses are required to
  prove fornication, adultery, sodomy and so forth; and they must swear
  that they actually saw _rem in re_, the “Kohl-needle in the
  Kohl-étui,” as the Arabs have it. This practically prevents conviction
  and the sabre cuts the Gordian knot.




               JA’AFAR THE BARMECIDE AND THE OLD BADAWI.


The Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, went out one day, with
Abu Ya’Kúb the cup-companion[140] and Ja’afar the Barmecide and Abu
Nowas, into the desert, where they fell in with an old man, propt
against his ass. The Caliph bade Ja’afar learn of him whence he came; so
he asked him, “Whence comest thou?” and he answered, “From
Bassorah.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ja’afar asked
the man, “Whence comest thou?”; he answered “From Bassorah.” Quoth
Ja’afar, “And whither goest thou?” Quoth the other, “To Baghdad.” Then
Ja’afar enquired “And what wilt thou do there?” and the old man replied,
“I go to seek medicine for my eye.” Said the Caliph, “O Ja’afar, make
thou sport with him,” and answered Ja’afar, “I shall hear what I shall
exceedingly mislike.[141]” But Al-Rashid rejoined, “I charge thee on my
authority, jest with him.” Thereupon Ja’afar said to the Badawi, “If I
prescribe thee a medicine that shall profit thee, what wilt thou give me
in return?” Quoth the other, “Allah Almighty will requite the kindness
with what is better for thee than any requital of mine.” Continued
Ja’afar, “Now lend me an ear and I will give thee a prescription, which
I have given to none but thee.” “What is that?” asked the Badawi; and
Ja’afar answered, “Take three ounces of wind-breaths and the like of
sunbeams and the same of moonshine and as much of lamp-light; mix them
well together and let them lie in the wind three months. Then place them
three months in a mortar without a bottom and pound them to fine powder
and after trituration set them in a cleft platter, and let it stand in
the wind other three months; after which use of this medicine three
drachms every night in thy sleep, and, Inshallah! thou shalt be healed
and whole.” Now when the Badawi heard this, he stretched himself out to
full length on the donkey’s back and let fly a terrible loud fart[142]
and said to Ja’afar, “Take this fart in payment of thy prescription.
When I have followed it, if Allah grant me recovery, I will give thee a
slave-girl, who shall serve thee in thy lifetime a service, wherewith
Allah shall cut short thy term; and when thou diest and the Lord
hurrieth thy soul to hell-fire, she shall blacken thy face with her
skite, of her mourning for thee, and shall keen and beat her face,
saying:—O frosty-beard, what a fool thou wast[143]?” Thereupon Harun
al-Rashid laughed till he fell backward, and ordered the Badawi three
thousand silver pieces. And a tale is told of

-----

Footnote 140:

  Who, in such case, would represent our equerry.

Footnote 141:

  The Badawi not only always tells the truth, a perfect contrast with
  the towns-folk; he is blunt in speech addressing his Sultan “O Sa’id!”
  and he has a hard rough humour which we may fairly describe as “wut.”
  When you “chaff” him look out for falls.

Footnote 142:

  The answer is as old as the hills, _teste_ the tale of what happened
  when Amasis (who on horseback) raised his leg, “broke wind and bade
  the messenger carry it back to Apries.” Herod. ii. 162. But for the
  full significance of the Badawi’s most insulting reply see the Tale of
  Abu Hasan in Night ccccxi.

Footnote 143:

  Arab. “Yá sáki’ al-Dakan” meaning long bearded (foolish) as well as
  frosty bearded.




          THE CALIPH OMAR BIN AL-KHATTAB AND THE YOUNG BADAWI.


The Sharif Husayn bin Rayyán relateth that the Caliph Omar bin
Al-Khattáb was sitting one day judging the folk and doing justice
between his subjects, attended by the best and wisest of his
counsellors, when there came up to him a youth comely and cleanly
attired upon whom two very handsome youths had laid hold and were haling
by the collar till they set him in the presence. Whereupon the Commander
of the Faithful, Omar, looked at him and them and bade them loose him;
then, calling him near to himself, asked the twain, “What is your case
with him?” They answered, “O Prince of True Believers, we are two
brothers by one mother and as followers of verity known are we. We had a
father, a very old man of good counsel, honoured by the tribes, sound of
baseness and renowned for goodliness who reared us tenderly in
childhood, and loaded us with favours in manhood;”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the two youths
said to the Commander of the Faithful, Omar son of Al-Khattab, “Our
father was a man honoured by the tribes, sound of baseness and renowned
for goodliness, who reared us delicately in childhood, and loaded us
with favours in manhood; in fine, a sea of noble and illustrious
qualities, worthy of the poet’s praise:—

 ‘Is Abu’s-Sakr of Shaybán[144]?’ they asked; ✿ Quoth I, “Nay, by my
    life, of him’s Shaybán:
 How many a sire rose high by a noble son, ✿ As Allah’s Prophet glorified
    Adnan!”[145]

Now he went forth this day to his garden, to refresh himself amongst its
trees and pluck the ripe fruits, when this young man slew him wrongously
and swerved from the road of righteousness; wherefore we demand of thee
the retribution of his crime and call upon thee to pass judgment upon
him, according to the commandment of Allah.” Then Omar cast a terrible
look at the accused youth and said to him, “Verily thou hearest the
complaint these two young men prefer; what hast thou in reply to aver?”
But he was brave of heart and bold of speech, having doffed the robe of
pusillanimity and put off the garb of cowardry; so he smiled and spake
in the most eloquent and elegant words; and, after paying the usual
ceremonial compliment to the Caliph, said, “By Allah, O Commander of the
Faithful, I have indeed given ear to their complaint, and they have told
the truth in that which they tell, so far as they have set out what
befel; and the commandment of Allah is a decreed decree.[146] But I will
forthright state my case between thy hands, and it is for thee to give
commands. Know then, O Prince of the Faithful, that I am a very Arab of
the Arabies,[147] the noblest of those that are beneath the skies. I
grew up in the dwellings of the wold and fell, till evil times my tribe
befel, when I came to the outskirts of this town, with my family and
whatso goods I own: and as I went along one of the paths leading to its
gardens, orchards and garths, with my she-camels highly esteemed and by
me most precious deemed, and midst them a stallion of noble blood and
shape right good, a plenteous getter of brood, by whom the females
abundantly bore and who walked among them as though a kingly crown he
wore, one of the she-camels broke away; and, running to the garden of
these young men’s father, where the trees showed above the wall, put
forth her lips and began to feed as in stall. I ran to her, to drive her
away, when behold, there appeared, at a breach of the wall, an old man
and grey, whose eyes sparkled with angry ray, holding in his right a
stone to throw and swaying to and fro, with a swing like a lion ready
for a spring. He cast the stone at my stallion, and it killed him for it
struck a vital part. When I saw the stallion drop dead beside me, I felt
live coals of anger kindled in my heart; so I took up the very same
stone and throwing it at the old man, it was the cause of his bane and
ban: thus his own wrongful act returned to him anew, and the man was
slain of that wherewith he slew. When the stone struck him, he cried out
with a great cry and shrieked out a terrible shriek, whereupon I
hastened from the spot; but these two young men hurried after me and
laid hands on me and before thee carried me.” Quoth Omar (Almighty Allah
accept of him!), “Thou hast confessed what thou committedest, and of
acquittal there is no possible occasion; for urgent is the law of
retaliation and they cried for mercy but it was not a time to
escape.”[148] The youth answered, “I hear and obey the judgment of the
Imam, and I consent to all required by the law of Al-Islam; but I have a
young brother, whose old father, before his decease, appointed to him
wealth in great store and gold galore, and committed his affair to me
before Allah, saying:—I give this into thy hand for thy brother; keep it
for him with all thy might. So I took the money and buried it; nor doth
any know of it but I. Now, if thou adjudge me to be justiced forthright,
the money will be lost and thou shalt be the cause of its loss;
wherefore the child will sue thee for his due on the day when the
Creator shall judge between His creatures. But, if thou wilt grant me
three days’ delay, I will appoint some guardian to administer the
affairs of the boy and return to answer my debt; and I have one who will
be my surety for the fulfilment of this my promise.” So the Commander of
the Faithful bowed his head awhile, then raised it and looking round
upon those present, said, “Who will stand surety by me for his return to
this place?” And the youth looked at the faces of those who were in
company and pointing to Abu Zarr,[149] in preference to all present,
said, “This man shall answer for me and be my bail.”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


      Now when it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the youth
pointed to Abu Zarr and said, “This man shall answer for me and be my
bail,” Omar (Allah accept of him!) said, “O Abu Zarr, dost thou hear
these words and wilt thou be surety to me for the return of this youth?”
He answered, “Yes, O Commander of the Faithful, I will be surety for him
three days.” So the Caliph accepted his guarantee and let the young man
go. Now when the appointed time passed and the days of grace were nearly
or quite at end yet the youth came not, the Caliph took seat in his
council, with the Companions surrounding him, like the constellations
about the moon, Abu Zarr and the plaintiffs being also present; and the
avengers said, “Where is the defendant, O Abu Zarr, and how shall he
return, having once fled? But we will not stir from our places till thou
bring him to us, that we may take of him our blood-revenge.” Replied Abu
Zarr, “By the truth of the All-Wise King, if the three days of grace
expire and the young man return not, I will fulfil my warranty and
surrender my person to the Imam;” and added Omar (whom Allah accept!),
“By the Lord, if the young man appear not, I will assuredly execute on
Abu Zarr that which is prescribed by the law of Al-Islam!”[150]
Thereupon the eyes of the bystanders ran over with tears; those who
looked on groaned aloud and great was the clamour. Then the chiefs of
the Companions urged the plaintiffs to accept the blood-wit and deserve
the thanks of the folk; but they both refused and would accept nothing
save the talion. However, as the folk were swaying to and fro like waves
and loudly bemoaning Abu Zarr, behold, up came the young Badawi; and,
standing before the Imam, saluted him right courteously (with
sweat-beaded face and shining with the crescent’s grace) and said to
him, “I have given the lad in charge to his mother’s brothers and have
made them acquainted with all that pertaineth to his affairs and let
them into the secret of his monies; after which I braved the heats of
noon and have kept my word as a free-born man.” Thereupon the folk
marvelled, seeing his good faith and loyalty and his offering himself to
death with so stout a heart; and one said to him, “How noble a youth art
thou and how loyal to thy word of honour and thy devoir!” Rejoined he,
“Are ye not convinced that when death presenteth itself, none can escape
from it? And indeed, I have kept my word, that it be not said, Good
faith is gone from among mankind.” Said Abu Zarr, “By Allah, O Commander
of the Faithful, I became warrant for this young man, without knowing to
what tribe he belonged, nor had I seen him before that day; but, when he
turned away from all who were present and singled me out, saying:—This
man shall answer for me and be my bail, I thought it not right to refuse
him, and generosity forbade to disappoint his desire, there being no
harm in compliance therewith, that it be not bruited abroad, Benevolence
is gone from among mankind.” Then said the two young men, “O Commander
of the Faithful, we forgive this youth our father’s blood, seeing that
he hath changed desolation into cheerfulness; that it be not said,
Humanity is gone from among mankind.” So the Caliph rejoiced in the
acquittance of the youth and his truth and good faith; moreover, he
magnified the generosity of Abu Zarr, extolling it over all his
companions, and approved the resolve of the two young men for its
benevolence, giving them praise with thanks and applying to their case
the saying of the poet:—

 Who doth kindness to men shall be paid again; ✿ Ne’er is kindness lost
    betwixt God and men.

Then he offered to pay them, from the Treasury, the blood-wit for their
father; but they refused, saying, “We forgave him only of our desire
unto Allah,[151] the Bountiful, the Exalted; and he who is thus
intentioned followeth not his benefits with reproach or with
mischief.”[152] And amongst the tales they relate is that of

-----

Footnote 144:

  P. N. of the tribe, often mentioned in The Nights.

Footnote 145:

  Adnan, with whom Arab genealogy begins, is generally supposed to be
  the eighth (Al-Tabari says the fortieth) descendant from Ishmael and
  nine generations are placed between him and Fahr (Fihr) Kuraysh. The
  Prophet cut all disputes short by saying, “Beyond Adnan none save
  Allah wotteth and the genealogists lie” (Pilgrimage ii. 344). M. C. de
  Perceval dates Adnan about B.C. 130.

Footnote 146:

  Koran xxxiii., 38.

Footnote 147:

  Arab. “Arab al-Arabá,” as before noticed (vol. i. 12) the pure and
  genuine blood as opposed to the “Musta’aribah,” the “Muta’arribah,”
  the “Mosarabians” and other Araboids; the first springing from Kahtan
  (Yaktan?) and the others from Adnan. And note that “Arabi” = a man of
  pure Arab race, either of the Desert or of the city, while A’arábi
  applies only to the Desert man, the Badawi.

Footnote 148:

  Koran xxxviii. 2, speaking of the Unbelievers (_i.e._ non-Moslems) who
  are full of pride and contention.

Footnote 149:

  One of the Asháb, or Companions of the Apostle, that is them who knew
  him personally (Pilgrimage ii. 80, etc.). The Asháb al-Suffah
  (Companions of the bench or sofa) were certain houseless Believers
  lodged by the Prophet (Pilgrimage ii. 143).

Footnote 150:

  Hence Omar is entitled “Al-Adil” = the Just. Readers will remember
  that by Moslem law and usage murder and homicide are offences to be
  punished by the family, not by society or its delegates. This system
  reappears in civilisation under the denomination of “Lynch Law,” a
  process infinitely distasteful to lawyers (whom it abolishes) and most
  valuable when administered with due discretion.

Footnote 151:

  Lane translates (ii. 592) “from a desire of seeing the face of God;”
  but the general belief of Al-Islam is that the essence of Allah’s
  corporeal form is different from man’s. The orthodox expect to “see
  their Lord on Doom-day as they see the full moon” (a tradition). But
  the Mu’atazilites deny with the existence of matter the corporeity of
  Allah and hold that he will be seen only with the spiritual eyes,
  _i.e._ of reason.

Footnote 152:

  See Gesta Romanorum, Tale cviii., “of Constancy in adhering to
  Promises,” founded on Damon and Pythias or, perhaps, upon the Arabic.




          THE CALIPH AL-MAAMUN AND THE PYRAMIDS[153] OF EGYPT.


It is told that the Caliph-al-Maamun son of Harun al-Rashid, when he
entered the God-guarded city of Cairo, was minded to pull down the
Pyramids, that he might take what was therein; but, when he went about
to do this, he could not succeed, albeit his best was done. He expended
a mint of money in the attempt,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Al-Maamun
attempting to pull down the Pyramids, expended his mint of money, but
succeeded only in opening up a small tunnel in one of them, wherein it
is said he found treasure to the exact amount of the monies he had spent
in the works, neither more nor less; whereat he marvelled and taking
what he found there, desisted from his determination. Now the Pyramids
are three, and they are one of the Wonders of the World; nor is there on
the face of earth aught like them for height and fashion and
mysteries[154]; for they are built of huge rocks, and the builders
proceeded by piercing one block of stone and setting therein upright
rods of iron[155]; after which they pierced a second block of stone and
lowered it upon the first. Then they poured melted lead upon the clamps
and set the blocks in geometrical order, till the building was complete.
Now the height of each pyramid was an hundred cubits, of the normal
measure of the day, and it had four faces, each three hundred cubits
long from the base and thence battering upwards to a point. The ancients
say that, in the western Pyramid, are thirty chambers of parti-coloured
syenite, full of precious gems and treasures galore and rare images and
utensils and costly weapons which are anointed with egromantic unguents,
so that they may not rust till the day of Resurrection.[156] Therein,
also, are vessels of glass which bend and break not, containing various
kinds of compound drugs and sympathetic waters. In the second Pyramid
are the records of the priests, written on tablets of syenite, to each
priest his tablet, whereon are engraved the wonders of his craft and his
feats; and on the walls are human figures like idols, working with their
hands at all manner of mechanism and seated on stepped thrones.
Moreover, to each Pyramid there is a guardian treasurer who keepeth
watch over it and wardeth it, to all eternity, against the ravages of
time and the shifts of events; and indeed the marvels of these Pyramids
astound all who have sight and insight. Many are the poems that describe
them, thou shalt thereby profit no small matter, and among the rest,
quoth one of them:—

 If Kings would see their high emprize preserved, ✿ ‘Twill be by tongues
    of monuments they laid:
 Seest not the Pyramids? These two endure ✿ Despite what change Time and
    Chance have made.

And quoth another:—

 Look on the Pyramids, and hear the twain ✿ Recount their annals of the
    long-gone Past:
 Could they but speak, high marvels had they told ✿ Of what Time did to
    man from first to last.

And quoth a third:—

 My friend I prithee tell me, ‘neath the sky ✿ Is aught with Egypt’s
    Pyramids can compare?
 Buildings which frighten Time, albe what dwells ✿ On back of earth in
    fear of Time must fare:
 If on their marvels rest my sight no more, ✿ Yet these I ever shall in
    memory bear.

And quoth a fourth:—

 Where is the man who built the Pyramids? ✿ What was his tribe, what day
    and where his tomb?
 The monuments survive the men who built ✿ Awhile, till overthrown by
    touch of Doom.

And men also tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 153:

  Arab. “Al-Ahrám,” a word of unknown provenance. It has been suggested
  that the singular form (Haram), preceded by the Coptic article “Pi” (=
  the) suggested to the Greeks “Pyramis.” But this word is still _sub
  judice_ and every Egyptologist seems to propose his own derivation.
  Brugsch (Egypt i. 72) makes it Greek, the Egyptian being “Abumir,”
  while “pir-am-us” = the edge of the pyramid, the corners running from
  base to apex. The great Egyptologist proves also what the Ancients
  either ignored or forgot to mention, that each pyramid had its own
  name.

Footnote 154:

  Arab. “Ahkám,” in this matter supporting the “Pyramidologists.”

Footnote 155:

  All imaginative.

Footnote 156:

  It has always been my opinion founded upon considerations too long to
  detail, that the larger Pyramids contain many unopened chambers. Dr.
  Grant Bey of Cairo proposed boring through the blocks as Artesian
  wells are driven. I cannot divine why Lane (ii. 592) chose to omit
  this tale, which is founded on historic facts and interests us by
  suggesting a comparison between Mediæval Moslem superstitions and
  those of our xixth Century, which to our descendants will appear as
  wild, if not as picturesque, as those of The Nights. The “inspired
  British inch” and the building by Melchisedek (the Shaykh of some
  petty Syrian village) will compare not unaptly with the enchanted
  swords, flexible glass and guardian spirits. But the Pyramidennarren
  is a race which will not speedily die out: it is based on Nature, the
  Pyramids themselves.




                      THE THIEF AND THE MERCHANT.


There was once a thief who repented to Almighty Allah with sincere
penitence; so he opened himself a shop for the sale of stuffs, where he
continued to trade awhile. It so chanced one day that he locked his shop
and went home, and in the night there came to the bazar an artful thief
disguised in the habit of the merchant, and pulling out keys from his
sleeve, said to the watchman of the market, “Light me this wax-candle.”
The watchman took the taper and went to light it,——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the watchman took
the taper and went to light it, whilst the thief opened the shop and lit
another candle he had by him. When the watchman came back, he found him
seated in the shop, account-books in hand, and reckoning with his
fingers; nor did he cease to do thus till point of day, when he said to
the man, “Fetch me a camel-driver and his camel, to carry some goods for
me.” So the man fetched him a camel, and the thief took four bales[157]
of stuffs and gave them to the cameleer, who loaded them on his beast.
Then he gave the watchman two dirhams and went away after the
camel-driver, leaving the watchman believing him to be the owner of the
shop. Now when the morning dawned and day broke the merchant came and
the watchman began greeting him with blessings, because of the two
dirhams; but the shop-owner wondered at his words as one not knowing
what he meant. When he opened his shop, he saw the droppings of the wax
and the account book lying on the floor, and looking round, found four
bales of stuffs missing. So he asked the watchman what had happened and
he told him what had passed in the night and what had been said to the
cameleer, whereupon the merchant bade him fetch the man and asked him,
“Whither didst thou carry the stuffs this morning?” Answered the driver,
“To such a landing-place, and I stowed them on board such a vessel.”
Said the merchant, “Come with me thither;” so the camel-driver carried
him to the landing-place and said to him, “This be the barque and this
be her owner.” Quoth the merchant to the seaman, “Whither didst thou
carry the merchant and the stuff?” Answered the boat-master, “To such a
place, where he fetched a camel-driver and, setting the bales on the
camel, went his ways I know not whither.” “Fetch me the cameleer who
carried the goods,” said the merchant; so he fetched him and the
merchant said to him, “Whither didst thou carry the bales of stuffs from
the ship?” “To such a Khan,” answered he; and the merchant rejoined,
“Come thither with me and show it me.” So the camel-man went with him to
a place far distant from the shore and showed him the Khan where he had
set down the stuffs, and at the same time the false merchant’s magazine,
which he opened and found therein his four bales bound up as they had
been packed. The thief had laid his cloak over them; so the merchant
took the cloak as well as the bales and delivered them to the
camel-driver, who laid them on his camel; after which he locked the
magazine and went away with the cameleer. On the way, behold, he was
confronted by the thief who followed him, till he had shipped the bales,
when he said to him, “O my brother (Allah have thee in His holy
keeping!), thou hast indeed recovered thy goods and naught of them is
lost; so give me back my cloak.” The merchant laughed and, giving him
back his cloak, let him go unhindered; whereupon both went their ways.
And they tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 157:

  Arab. “Rizm;” hence, through the Italian Risma our ream (= 20 quires
  of paper, etc.), which our dictionaries derive from ἀριθμός (!) See
  “frail” in Night dcccxxxviii.




                  MASRUR THE EUNUCH AND IBN AL-KARIBI.


The Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, was exceedingly restless
one night; so he said to his Wazir Ja’afar, “I am sleep-less to-night
and my breast is straitened and I know not what to do.” Now his castrato
Masrúr was standing before him, and he laughed; whereupon the Caliph
said “At whom laughest thou? is it to make mock of me or hath madness
seized thee?” Answered Masrur, “Nay, by Allah, O Commander of the
Faithful,”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


               Now when it was the Four Hundredth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Harun al-Rashid
said to Masrur the Sworder, “Dost thou laugh to make mock of me or hath
madness seized thee?” Answered Masrur, “Nay, by Allah, O Commander of
the Faithful, I swear by thy kinship to the Prince of Apostles, I did it
not of my free will; but I went out yesterday to walk within sight of
the palace and, coming to the bank of the Tigris, saw there the folk
collected; so I stopped and found a man, Ibn al-Káribí hight, who was
making them laugh; but just now I recalled what he said, and laughter
got the better of me; and I crave pardon of thee, O Commander of the
Faithful!” Quoth the Caliph, “Bring him to me forthright;” so Masrur
repaired in all haste to Ibn al-Karibi and said to him, “Answer the
summons of the Commander of the Faithful,” whereto he replied, “I hear
and obey.” “But on condition,” added Masrur, “that, if he give thee
aught, thou shalt have a quarter and the rest shall be mine.” Replied
the droll, “Nay, thou shalt have half and I half.” Rejoined Masrur, “Not
so, I will have three-quarters.” Lastly said Ibn al-Karibi, “Thou shalt
have two-thirds and I the other third;” to which Masrur agreed, after
much higgling and haggling, and they returned to the palace together.
Now when Ibn al-Karibi came into the Caliph’s presence he saluted him as
men greet the Caliphate, and stood before him; whereupon said Al-Rashid
to him, “If thou do not make me laugh, I will give thee three blows with
this bag.” Quoth Ibn al-Karibi in his mind, “And a small matter were
blows with that bag, seeing that beating with whips hurteth me not;” for
he thought the bag was empty. Then he began to deal out his drolleries,
such as would make the dismallest jemmy guffaw, and gave vent to all
manner of buffooneries; but the Caliph laughed not neither smiled,
whereat Ibn al-Karibi marvelled and was chagrined and affrighted. Then
said the Commander of the Faithful, “Now hast thou earned the beating,”
and gave him a blow with the bag, wherein were four pebbles each two
rotols in weight. The blow fell on his neck and he gave a great cry,
then calling to mind his compact with Masrur, said, “Pardon, O Commander
of the Faithful! Hear two words from me.” Quoth the Caliph, “Say on,”
and quoth Ibn al-Karibi, “Masrur made it a condition with me and I a
covenant with him, that whatsoever largesse might come to me of the
bounties of the Commander of the Faithful, one-third thereof should be
mine and the rest his; nor did he agree to leave me so much as
one-third, save after much higgling and haggling. Now thou hast bestowed
on me nothing but beating; I have had my share and here standeth he,
ready to receive his portion; so pay him the two other blows.” Now when
the Caliph heard this, he laughed till he fell on his back; then calling
Masrur, he gave him a blow, whereat he cried out and said, “O Commander
of the Faithful, the one-third sufficeth me: give him the
two-thirds.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Four Hundred and First Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Masrur cried out,
“O Commander of the Faithful! the one-third sufficeth me; give him the
two-thirds.” So the Caliph laughed at them and ordered them a thousand
dinars each, and they went away, rejoicing at the largesse. And of the
tales they tell is one of




                          THE DEVOTEE PRINCE.


The Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, had a son who, from the
time he attained the age of sixteen, renounced the world and walked in
the way[158] of ascetics and devotees. He was wont to go out to the
grave-yards and say, “Ye once ruled the world, but that saved you not
from death, and now are ye come to your sepulchres! Would Heaven I knew
what ye said and what is said to you!”[159] And he wept as one weepeth
who is troubled with fear and apprehension, and repeated the words of
the poet:—

 Affright me funerals at every time; ✿ And wailing women grieve me to the
    soul!

Now it chanced one day, as he sat among the tombs, according to his
custom, his father passed by in all his state, surrounded by his Wazirs
and Lords of the realm and the Officers of his household, who seeing the
Caliph’s son with a gown of woollen stuff on his body and a twist of
wool on his head by way of turband, said to one another, “Verily this
youth dishonoureth the Commander of the Faithful among Kings: but, if he
reproved him, he would leave his present way of life.” The Caliph heard
these words; so quoth he to his son, “O my dear child, of a truth thou
disgracest me by thy present way of life.” The young man looked at him
and made no reply: then he beckoned to a bird perched on the battlements
of the palace, and said to it, “O thou bird, I conjure thee by Him who
created thee, alight upon my hand.” Whereupon straightway it swooped
down and perched on his finger. Then quoth he, “Return to thy place;”
and it did so. Presently he said, “Alight on the hand of the Commander
of the Faithful;” but it refused there to perch, and he cried to his
father, “It is thou that disgracest me amongst the Holy[160] Ones, by
the love of the world; and now I am resolved to part from thee, never to
return to thee, save in the world to come.” Then he went down to
Bassorah, where he took to working with those which wrought in
clay,[161] receiving, as his day’s hire, but a dirham and a dánik;[162]
and with the danik he fed himself and gave alms of the dirham. (Quoth
Abú Amir of Bassorah) There fell down a wall in my house: so I went
forth to the station of the artisans to find a man who should repair it
for me, and my eyes fell on a handsome youth of a radiant countenance.
So I saluted him and asked him, “O my friend, dost thou seek work?”
“Yes,” answered he; and I said, “Come with me and build a wall.” He
replied, “On certain conditions I will make with thee.” Quoth I “What
are they, O my friend?”; and quoth he, “My wage must be a dirham and a
danik, and again when the Mu’ezzin calleth to prayer, thou shalt let me
go pray with the congregation.” “It is well,” answered I and carried him
to my place, where he fell to work, such work as I never saw the like
of. Presently, I named to him the morning-meal; but he said, “No;” and I
knew that he was fasting.[163] When he heard the call to prayer, he said
to me, “Thou knowest the condition?” “Yes,” answered I. So he loosed his
girdle and, applying himself to the lesser ablution, made it after a
fashion than which I never saw a fairer;[164] then he went to the mosque
and prayed with the congregation and returned to his work. He did the
same upon the call to mid-afternoon prayer, and when I saw him fall to
work again thereafterward, I said to him, “O my friend, verily the hours
of labour are over; a workman’s day is but till the time of
afternoon-prayer.” But he replied, “Praise to the Lord, my service is
till the night.” And he ceased not to work till nightfall, when I gave
him two dirhams; whereupon he asked “What is this!”; and I answered, “By
Allah, this is but part of thy wage, because of thy diligence in my
service.” But he threw them back to me saying, “I will have no more than
was agreed upon between us twain.” I urged him to take them, but could
not prevail upon him; so I gave him the dirham and the danik, and he
went away. And when morning dawned, I went to the station but found him
not; so I enquired for him and was told, “He cometh thither only on
Sabbaths.” Accordingly, when Saturday came, I betook me to the market
and finding him there, said to him, “Bismillah, do me the favour to come
and work for me.” Said he, “Upon the conditions thou wottest;” and I
answered “Yes!” Then carrying him to my house I stood to watch him where
he could not see me; and he took a handful of puddled clay and laid it
on the wall, when, behold, the stones ranged themselves one upon other;
and I said, “On this wise are Allah’s holy ones.” He worked out his day
and did even more than before; and when it was night, I gave him his
hire, and he took it and walked away. Now when the third Saturday came
round, I went to the place of standing, but found him not; so I asked
after him and they told me, “He is sick and lying in the shanty of such
a woman.” Now this was an old wife, renowned for piety, who had a hovel
of reeds in the burial-ground. So I fared thither and found him
stretched on the floor which was bare, with a brick for a pillow and his
face beaming like the new moon with light. I saluted him and he returned
my salam; and I sat down at his head weeping over his fair young years
and absence from home and submission to the will of his Lord. Then said
I to him, “Hast thou any need?” “Yes,” answered he; and I said, “What is
it?” He replied, “Come hither to-morrow in the forenoon and thou wilt
find me dead. Wash me and dig my grave and tell none thereof: but shroud
me in this my gown, after thou hast unsewn it and taken out what thou
shalt find in the bosom-pocket, which keep with thee. Then, when thou
hast prayed over me and laid me in the dust, go to Baghdad and watch for
the Caliph Harun al-Rashid, till he come forth, when do thou give him
what thou shalt find in the breast of my gown and bear him my
salutation.” Then he ejaculated the profession of the Faith and
glorified his God in the most eloquent of words reciting these
couplets:—

 Carry the trust of him whom death awaits ✿ To Al-Rashid, and God reward
    thy care!
 And say, “An exile who desired thy sight ✿ Long loving, from afar sends
    greeting fair.
 Nor hate nor irk (No!) him from thee withdrew, ✿ Kissing thy right to
    Heaven brought him near.[165]
 But what estranged his soul, O sire, from thee ✿ Is that thy worldly
    joys it would not share!”

Then he betook himself to prayer, asking pardon of Allah——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Four Hundred and Second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the youth then
betook himself to asking pardon of Allah and to invoking prayer and
praise upon the Apostle and the Lord of the Just and repeating verses of
the Koran; after which he recited these couplets:—

 O sire, be not deceived by worldly joys; ✿ For life must pass, and joy
    must learn to mourn;
 When thou art told of folk in evil plight, ✿ Think thou must answer for
    all hearts forlorn;
 And when thou bear thy dead toward the tombs, ✿ Know thou wilt likewise
    on that way be borne.

(Continued Abu Amir the Basri) Now when the youth had ended his charge
and his verses I left him and went home. On the morrow, I returned, at
the appointed hour, and found him indeed dead, the mercy of Allah be
upon him! So I washed him and, unsewing his gown, found in the bosom a
ruby worth thousands of gold pieces and said to myself, “By Allah, this
youth was indeed weaned from worldly things!” After I had buried him, I
made my way to Baghdad and, going to the Caliph’s palace, waited till he
came forth, when I addressed him in one of the streets and gave him the
ruby, which when he saw, he knew and fell down in a fainting-fit. His
attendants laid hands on me, but he revived and said to them, “Release
him and bring him courteously to the palace.” They did his bidding, and
when he returned, he sent for me and carrying me into his chamber said
to me, “How doth the owner of this ruby?” Quoth I, “Verily he is dead;”
and told him what had passed; whereupon he fell a-weeping and said, “The
son hath gained; but the sire hath lost.” Then he called out, saying,
“Ho, such an one!”; and behold, there came out to him a lady who, when
she saw me, would have withdrawn; but he cried to her, “Come; and mind
him not.” So she entered and saluted, and he threw her the ruby, which
when she saw and she knew, she shrieked a great shriek and fell down in
a swoon. As soon as she came to herself, she said, “O Commander of the
Faithful, what hath Allah done with my son?”; and he said to me, “Do
thou tell her his case;” (as he could not speak for weeping).
Accordingly, I repeated the story to her, and she began to shed tears
and say in a faint and failing voice, “How I have longed for thy sight,
O solace of mine eyes![166] Would I might have given thee to drink, when
thou hadst none to slake thy thirst! Would I might have cheered thee,
whenas thou foundest never a cheerer!” And she poured forth tears and
recited these couplets:—

 I weep for one whose lot a lonely death befel; ✿ Without a friend to
    whom he might complain and moan:
 And after glory and glad union with his friends, ✿ He woke to
    desolation, friendless, lorn and lone:
 What Fortune hides a while she soon to men shall show; ✿ Death never
    spared a man; no, not a single one:
 O absent one, my Lord decreed thee strangerhood, ✿ Far from thy nearest
    friends and to long exile gone:
 Though Death forbid my hope of meeting here again, ✿ On Doom-day’s
    morrow we shall meet again, my son![167]

Quoth I, “O Commander of the Faithful, was he indeed thy son?” Quoth he,
“Yes, and indeed, before I succeeded to this office, he was wont to
visit the learned and company with the devout; but, when I became
Caliph, he grew estranged from me and withdrew himself apart.[168] Then
said I to his mother, Verily this thy son hath cut the world and devoted
his life to Almighty Allah, and it may be that hard times shall befal
him and he be smitten with trial of evil chance; wherefore do thou give
him this ruby, which he may find useful in hour of need. So she gave it
him, conjuring him to take it, and he obeyed her bidding. Then he left
to us the things of our world and removed himself from us; nor did he
cease to be absent from us, till he went to the presence of Allah (to
whom be Honour and Glory!), pious and pure.” Then said he, “Come, show
me his grave.” So, I travelled with him to Bassorah and showed him his
son’s grave; and when he saw it, he wept and lamented, till he fell down
in a swoon; after which he recovered and asked pardon of the Lord,
saying, “We are Allah’s and unto Him we are returning!”; and invoked
blessings on the dead. Then he asked me to become his companion, but I
said to him, “O Commander of the Faithful, verily, in thy son’s case is
for me the most momentous of admonitions!” And I recited these
couplets:—

 ‘Tis I am the stranger, visited by none; ✿ I am the stranger though in
    town my own:
 ‘Tis I am the stranger! lacking kith and son, ✿ And friend to whom I
    mote for aidance run.
 I house in mosques which are my only home; ✿ My heart there wones and
    shall for ever wone:
 Then laud ye Allah, Lord of Worlds, as long ✿ As soul and body dwell in
    union!

And a famous tale is told of

-----

Footnote 158:

  Arab. “Taríkah” = the path trodden by ascetics and mystics in order to
  attain true knowledge (Ma’rifat in Pers. Dánish). These are extensive
  subjects: for the present I must refer readers to the Dabistan, iii.
  35 and iii. 29, 36–7.

Footnote 159:

  Alluding to the Fishár or “Squeeze of the tomb.” This is the Jewish
  Hibbut hak-keber which all must endure, save those who lived in the
  Holy Land or died on the Sabbath-eve (Friday night). Then comes the
  questioning by the Angels Munkar and Nakir (vulgarly called Nákir and
  Nakír) for which see Lane (M. E. chapt. xviii.). In Egypt a “Mulakkin”
  (intelligencer) is hired to prompt and instruct the dead. Moslems are
  beginning to question these facts of their faith: a Persian
  acquaintance of mine filled his dead father’s mouth with flour and
  finding it _in loco_ on opening the grave, publicly derided the
  belief. But the Mullahs had him on the hip, after the fashion of
  reverends, declaring that the answers were made through the whole
  body, not only by the mouth. At last the Voltairean had to quit
  Shiraz.

Footnote 160:

  Arab. “Walí” = a saint, Santon (Ital. form) also a slave. See in
  Richardson (Dissert. iii.), an illustration of the difference between
  Wali and Wáli as exemplified by the Caliph al-Kádir and Mahmúd of
  Ghazni.

Footnote 161:

  Arab. “Tín” = the tenacious clay puddled with chaff which serves as
  mortar for walls built of Adobe or sundried brick. I made a mistake in
  my Pilgrimage (i. 10) translating Ras al-Tín the old Pharos of
  Alexandria, by “Headland of Figs.” It is Headland of Clay, so called
  from the argile there found and which supported an old pottery.

Footnote 162:

  The danik (Pers. Dang) is the sixth of a dirham. Mr. S. L. Poole (The
  Acad. April 26, ‘79) prefers his uncle’s translation “a sixth” (what
  of?) to Mr. Payne’s “farthing.” The latter at any rate is
  intelligible.

Footnote 163:

  The devotee was “Sáim al-dahr” _i.e._ he never ate nor drank from
  daylight to dark throughout the year.

Footnote 164:

  The ablution of a common man differs from that of an educated Moslem
  as much as the eating of a clown and a gentleman. Moreover there are
  important technical differences between the Wuzu of the Sunni and the
  Shi’ah.

Footnote 165:

  _i.e._ by honouring his father.

Footnote 166:

  This young saint was as selfish and unnatural a sinner as Saint
  Alexius of the Gesta Romanorum (Tale xv.), to whom my friend, the late
  Thomas Wright, administered just and due punishment.

Footnote 167:

  The verses are affecting enough, though by no means high poetry.

Footnote 168:

  The good young man cut his father for two reasons: secular power (an
  abomination to good Moslems) and defective title to the Caliphate. The
  latter is a trouble to Turkey in the present day and with time will
  prove worse.




          THE UNWISE SCHOOLMASTER WHO FELL IN LOVE BY REPORT.


(Quoth one of the learned) I passed once by a school, wherein a
schoolmaster was teaching children; so I entered, finding him a
good-looking man and a well-dressed; when he rose to me and made me sit
with him. Then I examined him in the Koran and in syntax and prosody and
lexicography; and behold, he was perfect in all required of him, so I
said to him, “Allah strengthen thy purpose! Thou art indeed versed in
all that is requisite.” Thereafter I frequented him a while, discovering
daily some new excellence in him, and quoth I to myself, “This is indeed
a wonder in any dominie; for the wise are agreed upon a lack of wit in
children’s teachers.” Then I separated myself from him and sought him
and visited him only every few days, till coming to see him one day as
of wont, I found the school shut and made enquiry of his neighbours, who
replied, “Some one is dead in his house.” So I said in my mind, “It
behoveth me to pay him a visit of condolence,” and going to his house,
knocked at the door, when a slave-girl came out to me and asked, “What
dost thou want?” and I answered, “I want thy master.” She replied, “He
is sitting alone, mourning;” and I rejoined, “Tell him that his friend
so and so seeketh to console him.” She went in and told him; and he
said, “Admit him.” So she brought me in to him, and I found him seated
alone and his head bound with mourning fillets. So I said to him, “Allah
requite thee amply! this is a path all must perforce tread, and it
behoveth thee to take patience;” adding, “But who is dead unto thee?” He
answered, “One who was dearest of the folk to me and best beloved.”
“Perhaps thy father?” “No!” “Thy brother?” “No!” “One of thy kindred?”
“No!” Then asked I, “What relation was the dead to thee?”; and he
answered, “My lover.” Quoth I to myself “This is the first proof to
swear by of his lack of wit.” So I said to him, “Assuredly there be
others than she and fairer;” and he made answer, “I never saw her, that
I might judge whether or no there be others fairer than she.” Quoth I to
myself, “This is another proof positive.” Then I said to him, “And how
couldst thou fall in love with one thou hast never seen?” He replied
“Know that I was sitting one day at the window, when lo! there passed by
a man, singing the following distich:—

 Umm Amr’,[169] thy boons Allah repay! ✿ Give back my heart be’t where it
    may!”

And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say.


           Now when it was the Four Hundred and Third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the schoolmaster
continued, “When I heard the man humming these words as he passed along
the street, I said to myself:—Except this Umm Amru were without equal in
the world, the poets had not celebrated her in ode and canzon. So I fell
in love with her; but, two days after, the same man passed, singing the
following couplet:—

 Ass and Umm Amr’ went their way; ✿ Nor she, nor ass returned for aye.

Thereupon I knew that she was dead and mourned for her. This was three
days ago, and I have been mourning ever since.” So I left him and fared
forth, having assured myself of the weakness of the gerund-grinder’s
wit. And they tell another and a similar tale of

-----

Footnote 169:

  Umm Amrí (written Amrú and pronounced Amr’) a matronymic, “mother of
  Amru.” This story and its terminal verse is a regular Joe Miller.




                       THE FOOLISH DOMINIE.[170]


Once upon a time, a schoolmaster was visited by a man of letters who
entered a school and, sitting down by the host’s side, entered into
discourse with him and found him an accomplished theologian, poet,
grammarian, philologist and poet; intelligent, well bred and pleasant
spoken; whereat he wondered, saying in himself, “It cannot be that a man
who teacheth children in a school, should have a perfect wit.” Now when
he was about to go away, the pedant said to him, “Thou art my guest
to-night;” and he consented to receive hospitality and accompanied him
to his house, where he made much of him and set food before him. They
ate and drank and sat talking, till a third part of the night was past
when the host spread his guest a bed and went up to his Harim. The
stranger lay down and addressed himself to sleep, when, behold, there
arose a great clamour in the women’s rooms. He asked what was the matter
and they said, “A terrible thing hath befallen the Shaykh and he is at
the last gasp.” Said he, “Take me up to him”; so they took him up to the
pedagogue whom he found lying insensible, with his blood streaming down.
He sprinkled water on his face and when he revived, he asked him “What
hath betided thee? When thou leftest me, thou wast in all good cheer and
whole of body;” and he answered, “O my brother, after I left thee, I sat
meditating on the creative works of Almighty Allah, and said to
myself:—In every thing the Lord hath created for man, there is an use;
for He (to Whom be glory!) made the hands to seize, the feet to walk,
the eyes to see, the ears to hear and the penis to increase and
multiply; and so on with all the members of the body, except these two
ballocks; there is no use in them. So I took a razor I had by me and cut
them off; and there befel me what thou seest.” So the guest left him and
went away, saying, “He was in the right who said:—Verily no schoolmaster
who teacheth children can have a perfect wit, though he know all the
sciences.” And they tell a pleasant tale of the

-----

Footnote 170:

  Abuse and derision of schoolmaster are staple subjects in the East as
  in the West, (Quem Dii oderunt pædagogum fecerunt). Anglo-Indians will
  remember:

             Miyán-ji ti-ti!
             Bachche-kí gánd men anguli kí thi!
             (Schoolmaster hum!
             Who fumbled and fingered the little boy’s bum?)




               ILLITERATE WHO SET UP FOR A SCHOOLMASTER.


There was once, among the menials[171] of a certain mosque, a man who
knew not how to write or even to read and who gained his bread by
gulling folk. One day, it occurred to him to open a school and teach
children; so he got together writing-tablets and written papers and hung
them up in a high place. Then he greatened his turband[172] and sat down
at the door of the school; and when the people, who passed by, saw his
huge head-gear and tablets and scrolls, they thought he must be a very
learned pedagogue; so they brought him their children; and he would say
to this, “Write,” and to that “Read”; and thus the little ones taught
one another. Now one day, as he sat as of wont, at the door of the
school, behold, up came a woman letter in hand, and he said in his mind,
“This woman doubtless seeketh me, that I may read her the missive she
hath in her hand: how shall I do with her, seeing I cannot read
writing?” And he would fain have gone down and fled from her; but,
before he could do this, she overtook him and said to him, “Whither
away?” Quoth he, “I purpose to pray the noon-prayer and return.” Quoth
she, “Noon is yet distant, so read me this letter.” He took the letter
and turning it upside down, fell to looking at it, now shaking his head
till his turband quivered, then dancing his eyebrows and anon showing
anger and concern. Now the letter came from the woman’s husband, who was
absent; and when she saw the dominie do on this wise, she said to
herself, “Doubtless my husband is dead, and this learned doctor of law
and religion is ashamed to tell me so.” So she said to him, “O my lord,
if he be dead, tell me;” but he shook his head and held his peace. Then
said she, “Shall I rend my raiment?” “Rend!” replied he. “Shall I beat
my face?” asked she; and he answered, “Beat!” So she took the letter
from his hand and returning home fell a-weeping, she and her children.
Presently, one of her neighbours heard her sobbing and asking what ailed
her, was answered, “Of a truth she hath gotten a letter, telling her
that her husband is dead.” Quoth the man, “This is a falsehood; for I
had a letter from him but yesterday, advising me that he is whole and in
good health and will be with her after ten days.” So he rose forthright
and going in to her, said, “Where is the letter which came to thee?” She
brought it to him, and he took it and read it; and lo! it ran as
follows, “After the usual salutations, I am well and in good health and
whole and will be with you all after ten days. Meanwhile, I send you a
quilt and an extinguisher.”[173] So she took the letter and, returning
with it to the schoolmaster, said to him, “What induced thee to deal
thus with me?” And she repeated to him what her neighbour had told her
of her husband’s well-being and of his having sent her a quilt and an
extinguisher. Answered he, “Thou art in the right, O good woman; for I
was, at the time”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the pedagogue
replied, “Verily I was at that time fashed and absent-minded and, seeing
the extinguisher wrapped up in the quilt, I thought that he was dead and
they had shrouded him.” The woman, not smoking the cheat, said, “Thou
art excused,” and taking the letter, went her ways.[174] And they relate
a story of

-----

Footnote 171:

  Arab. “Mujawirin” = the lower servants, sweepers etc. See Pilgrimage
  ii. 161 where it is also applied to certain “settlers” at Al-Medinah.
  Burckhardt (No. 480) notices another meaning “foreigners who attend
  mosque-lectures” and quotes the saying, “A. pilgrimaged:” quoth B.
  “yes! and for his villainies resideth (Mujáwir) at Meccah.”

Footnote 172:

  The custom (growing obsolete in Egypt) is preserved in Afghanistan
  where the learned wear turbans equal to the canoe-hats of the Spanish
  cardinals.

Footnote 173:

  Arab. “Makmarah,” a metal cover for the usual brasier or pan of
  charcoal which acts fire-place. Lane (ii. 600) does not translate the
  word and seems to think it means a belt or girdle, thus blunting the
  point of the dominie’s excuse.

Footnote 174:

  This story, a very old Joe Miller, was told to Lane as something new
  and he introduced it into his Modern Egyptians, end of chapt. ii.




                    THE KING AND THE VIRTUOUS WIFE.


A certain King once went forth in disguise, to look into the affairs of
his lieges. Presently, he came to a great village which he entered
unattended and being athirst, stopped at the door of a house and asked
for water. There came out to him a fair woman with a gugglet, which she
gave him, and he drank. When he looked at her, he was ravished with her
and besought her favours. Now she knew him; so she led him into the
house and, making him sit down, brought out a book and said to him,
“Look therein whilst I order my affair and return to thee.” So he looked
into the book, and behold, it treated of the Divine prohibition against
advoutry and of the punishments which Allah hath prepared for those who
commit adulterous sin. When he read this, his flesh quaked and his hair
bristled and he repented to Almighty Allah: then he called the woman
and, giving her the book, went away. Now her husband was absent and when
he returned, she told him what had passed, whereat he was confounded and
said in himself, “I fear lest the King’s desire have fallen upon her.”
And he dared not have to do with her and know her carnally after this.
When some time had past, the wife told her kinsfolk of her husband’s
conduct, and they complained of him to the King, saying, “Allah advance
the King! This man hired of us a piece of land for tillage, and tilled
it awhile; then left it fallow and neither tilled it nor forsook it,
that we might let it to one who would till it. Indeed, harm is come to
the field, and we fear its corruption, for such land as that, if it be
not sown, spoileth.” Quoth the King to the man, “What hindereth thee
from sowing thy land?” Answered he, “Allah advance the King! It reached
me that the lion entered the field, wherefor I stood in awe of him and
dared not draw near it, since knowing that I cannot cope with the lion,
I stand in fear of him.” The King understood the parable and rejoined,
saying, “O man, the lion trod and trampled not thy land, and it is good
for seed; so do thou till it and Allah prosper thee in it, for the lion
hath done it no hurt.” Then he bade give the man and his wife a handsome
present and sent them away.[175] And amongst the stories is that of

-----

Footnote 175:

  This tale is a mere abbreviation of “The King and his Wazir’s wife,”
  in the Book of Sindibad or the Malice of Women, Night dcxxviii., which
  see for annotations.




          ABD AL-RAHMAN THE MAGHRIBI’S STORY OF THE RUKH.[176]


There was once a man of the people of West Africa who had journeyed far
and wide and traversed many a desert and a tide. He was once cast upon
an island, where he abode a long while and, returning thence to his
native country, brought with him the quill of a wing-feather of a young
Rukh, whilst yet in egg and unhatched; and this quill was big enough to
hold a goat-skin’s of water, for it is said that the length of the
Rukh-chick’s wing, when he cometh forth of the egg, is a thousand
fathoms. The folk marvelled at this quill, when they saw it, and the man
who was called Abd al-Rahman the Moor (and he was known, to boot, as the
Chinaman, for his long sojourn in Cathay), related to them the following
adventure, one of many of his traveller’s tales of marvel. He was on a
voyage in the China seas,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abd al-Rahman, the
Moorman, the Chinaman, was wont to tell wondrous tales amongst which was
the following. He was on a voyage in the China seas with a company of
merchants, when they sighted an island from afar; so they steered for it
and, making fast thereto, saw that it was large and spacious. The ship’s
crew went ashore to get wood and water, taking with them hatchets and
ropes and waterskins (the travellers accompanying them), and presently
espied a great dome, white and gleaming, an hundred cubits long. So they
made towards it and drawing near, found that it was an egg of the Rukh
and fell on it with axes and stones and sticks till they uncovered the
young bird and found the chick as it were a firm-set hill. So they
plucked out one of the wing-feathers, but could not do so, save by
helping one another, for all the quills were not full grown; after which
they took what they could carry of the young bird’s flesh and cutting
the quill away from the vane, returned to the ship. Then they set sail
and putting out to sea, voyaged with a fair wind all that night, till
the sun rose; and while everything went well, they saw the Rukh come
flying after them, as he were a vast cloud, with a rock in his talons,
like a great heap bigger than the ship. As soon as he poised himself in
air over the vessel, he let fall the rock upon it; but the craft, having
great way on her, outwent the rock, which fell into the sea with a loud
crash and a horrible. So Allah decreed their deliverance and saved them
from doom; and they cooked the young bird’s flesh and ate it. Now there
were amongst them old white-bearded men; and when they awoke on the
morrow, they found that their beards had turned black, nor did any who
had eaten of the young Rukh grow gray ever after. Some said the cause of
the return of youth to them and the ceasing of hoariness from them was
that they had heated the pot with arrow-wood, whilst others would have
it that it came of eating the Rukh-chick’s flesh; and this is indeed a
wonder of wonders.[177] And a story is related of

-----

Footnote 176:

  The older “Roc” which may be written “Rukh” or “Rukhkh.” Colonel Yule,
  the learned translator of Marco Polo, has shown that “Roc’s” feathers
  were not uncommon curiosities in mediæval ages; and holds that they
  were mostly fronds of the palm Raphia vinifera, which has the largest
  leaf in the vegetable kingdom and which the Moslems of Zanzibar call
  “Satan’s date-tree.” I need hardly quote “Frate Cipolla and the Angel
  Gabriel’s Feather.” (Decameron vi. 10.)

Footnote 177:

  The tale is told in a bald, disjointed style and will be repeated in
  Sindbad the Seaman; where I shall again notice the “Roc.” See Night
  dxxxvii., etc.




                  ADI BIN ZAYD AND THE PRINCESS HIND.


Al-Nu’uman bin al-Munzir, King of the Arabs of Irak, had a daughter
named Hind, who went out one Pasch, which is a feast day of the
Nazarenes, to the White Church, to take the sacrament; she was eleven
years old and was the loveliest woman of her age and time; and it so
chanced that on the same day came to Hírah[178] a young man called ‘Adí
bin Zayd[179] with presents from the Chosroë to Al-Nu’uman, and he also
went to the White Church, to communicate. He was tall of stature and
fair of favour, with handsome eyes and smooth cheeks, and had with him a
company of his people. Now there was with Hind bint al-Nu’uman a
slave-girl named Máriyah, who was enamoured of Adi, but had not been
able to foregather with him. So, when she saw him in the church, she
said to Hind, “Look at yonder youth. By Allah, he is handsomer than all
thou seest!” Hind asked, “And who is he?” and Mariyah answered, “Adi bin
Zayd.” Quoth Al-Nu’uman’s daughter, “I fear lest he know me, if I draw
nearer to look on him.” Quoth Mariyah, “How should he know thee when he
hath never seen thee?” So she drew near him and found him jesting with
the youths his companions; and indeed he surpassed them all, not only in
his personal charms but in the excellence of his speech, the eloquence
of his tongue and the richness of his raiment. When the Princess saw
him, she was ravished with him, her reason was confounded and her colour
changed; and Mariyah, seeing her inclination to him, said to her, “Speak
to him.” So she spoke to him and went away. Now when he looked upon her
and heard her speech, he was captivated by her and his wit was dazed;
his heart fluttered, and his colour changed, so that his companions
suspected him, and he whispered one of them to follow her and find out
who she was. The young man went after her and returning informed him
that she was Princess Hind, daughter of Al-Nu’uman. So Adi left the
church, knowing not whither he went, for excess of love, and reciting
these two couplets:—

 O friends of me, one favour more I pray: ✿ Unto the convents[180] find
    once more your way:
 Turn me that so I face the land of Hind; ✿ Then go, and fairest
    greetings for me say.

Then he went to his lodging and lay that night, restless and without
appetite for the food of sleep.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Four Hundred and Sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Adi ended his
verses he went to his lodging and lay that night restless and without
appetite for the food of sleep. Now on the morrow Mariyah accosted him
and he received her kindly, though before he would not incline to her,
and said to her, “What is thy will?” Quoth she, “I have a want of thee;”
and quoth he, “Name it, for by Allah, thou shalt not ask me aught, but I
will give it thee!” So she told him that she loved him, and her want of
him was that he would grant her a lover’s privacy; and he agreed to do
her will, on condition that she would serve him with Hind and devise
some device to bring them together. Then he took her into a vintner’s
tavern in one of the by-streets of Hirah, and lay with her; after which
she returned to Hind and asked her, “Dost thou not long to see Adi?” She
answered, “How can this be? indeed my longing for him makes me restless,
and no repose is left me since yesterday.” Quoth Mariyah, “I will
appoint him to be in such a place, where thou canst look on him from the
palace.” Quoth Hind, “Do what thou wilt,” and agreed with her upon the
place. So Adi came, and the Princess looked out upon him; and, when she
saw him, she was like to topple down from the palace-top and said, “O
Mariyah, except thou bring him in to me this night, I shall die.” So
saying, she fell to the ground in a fainting-fit, and her serving-women
lifted her up and bore her into the palace; whilst Mariyah hastened to
Al-Nu’uman and discovered the whole matter to him with perfect truth,
telling him that indeed she was mad for the love of Adi; and except he
marry her to him, she must be put to shame and die of love for him,
which would disgrace her father among the Arabs, adding at the end,
“There is no cure for this but wedlock.” The King bowed his head awhile
in thought and exclaimed again and again, “Verily, we are Allah’s and
unto Him we are returning!” Then said he, “Woe to thee! How shall the
marriage be brought about, seeing I mislike to open the matter?” And she
said, “He is yet more ardently in love and yet more desireful of her
than she is of him; and I will so order the affair that he shall be
unaware of his case being known to thee; but do not betray thyself, O
King.” Then she went to Adi and, after acquainting him with everything
said, “Make a feast and bid the King thereto; and, when the wine hath
gotten the better of him, ask of him his daughter, for he will not
refuse thee.” Quoth Adi, “I fear lest this enrage him against me and be
the cause of enmity between us.” But quoth she, “I came not to thee,
till I had settled the whole affair with him.” Then she returned to
Al-Nu’uman and said to him, “Seek of Adi that he entertain thee in his
house.” Replied the King, “There is no harm in that;” and after three
days, besought Adi to give him and his lords the morning-meal in his
house. He consented and the King went to him; and when the wine had
taken effect on Al-Nu’uman, Adi rose and sought of him his daughter in
wedlock. He consented and married them and brought her to him after
three days; and they abode at Al-Nu’uman’s court, in all solace of life
and its delight——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Four Hundred and Seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Adi abode with
Hind bint Al-Nu’uman bin Munzir three years in all solace of life and
its delight, after which time the King was wroth with Adi and slew him.
Hind mourned for him with grievous mourning and built her an hermitage
outside the city, whither she retired and became a religious, weeping
and bewailing her husband till she died. And her hermitage is seen to
this day in the suburbs of Hirah. They also tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 178:

  Hírah in Mesopotamia was a Christian city and principality subject to
  the Persian monarchs; and a rival to the Roman kingdom of Ghassán. It
  has a long history, for which see D’Herbelot.

Footnote 179:

  A pre-Islamite poet.

Footnote 180:

  Arab. “Biká’a,” alluding to the pilgrimages made to monasteries and
  here equivalent to, “Address ye to the road,” etc.




       DI’IBIL AL-KHUZA’I WITH THE LADY AND MUSLIM BIN AL-WALID.


(Quoth Di’ibil al-Khuzá’i[181]), I was sitting one day at the gate of
Al-Karkh,[182] when a damsel came past, never saw I a fairer faced or
better formed than she, walking with a voluptuous swaying gait and
ravishing all beholders with her lithe and undulating pace. Now as my
eyes fell on her, I was captivated by her and my vitals trembled and
meseemed my heart flew forth of my breast; so I stood before her and I
accosted her with this verse:—

 The tears of these eyes find easy release; ✿ But sleep flies these
    eyelids without surcease.

Whereon she turned her face and looking at me, straightway made answer
with this distich:—

 A trifle this an his eyes be sore, ✿ When her eyes say “yes” to his
    love-caprice!

I was astounded at the readiness of her reply and the fluency of her
speech and rejoined with this verse:—

 Say, doth heart of my fair incline to him ✿ Whose tears like a swelling
    stream increase?

And she answered me without hesitation, thus:—

 If thou crave our love, know that love’s a loan; ✿ And a debt to be paid
    by us twain a-piece.

Never entered my ears aught sweeter than her speech nor ever saw I
brighter than her face: so I changed rhyme and rhythm to try her, in my
wonder at her words, and repeated this couplet:—

 Will Fate with joy of union ever bless our sight, ✿ And one desireful
    one with other one unite.

She smiled at this (never saw I fairer than her mouth nor sweeter than
her lips), and answered me, without stay or delay, in the following
distich:—

 Pray, tell me what hath Fate to do betwixt us twain? ✿ Thou’rt Fate: so
    bless our eyne with union and delight.

At this, I sprang up and fell to kissing her hands and cried, “I had not
thought that Fortune would vouchsafe me such occasion. Do thou follow
me, not of bidding or against thy will, but of the grace of thee and thy
favour to me.” Then I went on and she after me. Now at that time I had
no lodging I deemed fit for the like of her; but Muslim bin
al-Walíd[183] was my fast friend, and he had a handsome house. So I made
for his abode and knocked at the door, whereupon he came out, and I
saluted him, saying, “‘Tis for time like this that friends are treasured
up”; and he replied, “With love and gladness! Come in you twain.” So we
entered but found money scarce with him: however, he gave me a kerchief,
saying, “Carry it to the bazar and sell it and buy food and what else
thou needest.” I took the handkerchief, and hastening to the market,
sold it and bought what we required of victuals and other matters; but
when I returned, I found that Muslim had retired with her to an
underground chamber.[184] When he heard my step he hurried out and said
to me, “Allah requite thee the kindness thou hast done me, O Abu Ali and
reward thee in time to come and reckon it of thy good deeds on the Day
of Doom!” So saying, he took from me the food and wine and shut the door
in my face. His words enraged me and I knew not what to do; but he stood
behind the door, shaking for mirth; and, when he saw me thus, he said to
me, “I conjure thee on my life, O Abu Ali, tell who it was composed this
couplet?”—

 I lay in her arms all night, leaving him ✿ To sleep foul-hearted but
    clean of staff.

At this my rage redoubled, and I replied, “He who wrote this other
couplet”:—

 One, I wish him in belt a thousand horns, ✿ Exceeding in mighty height
    Manáf.[185]

Then I began to abuse him and reproach him with the foulness of his
action and his lack of honour; and he was silent never uttering a word.
But, when I had finished, he smiled and said, “Out on thee, O fool! Thou
hast entered my house and sold my kerchief and spent my silver: so, with
whom art thou wroth, O pimp?”[186] Then he left me and went away to her,
whilst I said, “By Allah, thou art right to twit me as nincompoop and
pander!” Then I left his door and went away in sore concern, and I feel
its trace in my heart to this very day; for I never had my will of her
nor, indeed, ever heard of her more. And amongst other tales is that
about

-----

Footnote 181:

  Whose by name was Abu Ali, a poet under the Abbasides (eighth and
  ninth centuries).

Footnote 182:

  A well-known quarter of Baghdad, often mentioned in The Nights.

Footnote 183:

  Another well-known poet of the time.

Footnote 184:

  Arab. “Sardáb”: noticed before.

Footnote 185:

  A gigantic idol in the Ka’abah, destroyed by Mohammed: it gave name to
  a tribe.

Footnote 186:

  Arab. “Ya Kawwád:” hence the Port. and Span. Alcoviteiro.




                    ISAAC OF MOSUL AND THE MERCHANT.


(Quoth Ishak bin Ibrahim al-Mausili), It so chanced that, one day
feeling weary of being on duty at the Palace and in attendance upon the
Caliph, I mounted horse and went forth, at break of dawn, having a mind
to ride out in the open country and take my pleasure. So I said to my
servants, “If there come a messenger from the Caliph or another, say
that I set out at daybreak, upon a pressing business, and that ye know
not whither I am gone.” Then I fared forth alone and went round about
the city, till the sun waxed hot, when I halted in a great thoroughfare
known as Al-Haram,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Four Hundred and Eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ishak bin Ibrahim
the Mausili continued:—When the sun waxed hot I halted in a great
thoroughfare known as Al-Haram, to take shelter in the shade and found
it in a spacious wing of a house which projected over the street. And I
stood there but a little while before there came up a black slave,
leading an ass bestridden by a damsel; and under her were housings set
with gems and pearls and upon her were the richest of clothes, richness
can go no farther; and I saw that she was elegant of make with
languorous look and graceful mien. I asked one of the passers-by who she
was, and he said, “She is a singer,” so I fell in love with her at first
sight: hardly could I keep my seat on horseback. She entered the house
at whose gate I stood; and, as I was planning a device to gain access to
her, there came up two men young and comely who asked admission and the
housemaster gave them leave to enter. So they alighted and I also and
they entered and I with them, they supposing that the master of the
house had invited me; and we sat awhile, till food was brought and we
ate. Then they set wine before us, and the damsel came out, with a lute
in her hand. She sang and we drank, till I rose to obey a call of
nature. Thereupon the host questioned the two others of me, and they
replied that they knew me not; whereupon quoth he, “This is a
parasite[187]; but he is a pleasant fellow, so treat him courteously.”
Then I came back and sat down in my place, whilst the damsel sang to a
pleasing air these two couplets:—

 Say to the she-gazelle, who’s no gazelle, ✿ And Kohl’d ariel who’s no
    ariel.[188]
 Who lies with male, and yet no female is, ✿ Whose gait is female most
    unlike the male.

She sang it right well, and the company drank and her song pleased them.
Then she carolled various pieces to rare measures, and amongst the rest
one of mine, which consisted of this distich:—

 Bare hills and camp-ground desolate ✿ And friends who all have ganged
    their gait.
 How severance after union leaves ✿ Me and their homes in saddest state!

Her singing this time was even better than the first; then she chanted
other rare pieces, old and new, and amongst them, another of mine with
the following two couplets:—

 Say to angry lover who turns away, ✿ And shows thee his side whatso thou
    say,
 “Thou wroughtest all that by thee was wrought, ✿ Albe ‘twas haply thy
    sport and play.”

I prayed her to repeat the song, that I might correct it for her;
whereupon one of the two men accosted me and said, “Never saw we a more
impudent lick-platter than thou. Art thou not content with spunging, but
thou must eke meddle and muddle? Of very sooth, in thee is the saying
made true, Parasite and pushing wight.” So I hung down my head for shame
and made him no answer, whilst his companion would have withheld him
from me; but he would not be restrained. Presently, they rose to pray,
but I lagged behind a little and, taking the lute, screwed up the sides
and brought it into perfect tune. Then I stood up in my place to pray
with the rest; and when we had ended praying, the same man fell again to
blaming me and reviling me and persisted in his rudeness, whilst I held
my peace. Thereupon the damsel took the lute and touching it, knew that
it had been altered, and said, “Who hath touched my lute?” Quoth they,
“None of us hath touched it.” Quoth she, “Nay, by Allah, some one hath
touched it, and he is an artist, a past master in the craft; for he hath
arranged the strings and tuned them like one who is a perfect
performer.” Said I, “It was I tuned it;” and said she, “Then, Allah upon
thee, take it and play on it!” So I took it; and, playing a piece so
difficult and so rare, that it went nigh to deaden the quick and quicken
the dead, I sang thereto these couplets:—

 I had a heart, and with it lived my life: ✿ ‘Twas seared with fire and
    burnt with loving-lowe:
 I never won the blessing of her love; ✿ God would not on His slave such
    boon bestow:
 If what I’ve tasted be the food of Love, ✿ Must taste it all men who
    Love-food would know.

And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say.


           Now when it was the Four Hundred and Ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ishak of Mosul
thus continued:—Now when I had finished my verse, there was not one of
the company but sprang from his place and sat down like schoolboys
before me, saying, “Allah upon thee, O our lord, sing us another song.”
“With pleasure” said I, and playing another measure in masterly fashion,
sang thereto these couplets:—

 Ho thou whose heart is melted down by force of Amor’s fire, ✿ And griefs
    from every side against thy happiness conspire:
 Unlawful is that he who pierced my vitals with his shaft, ✿ My blood
    between my midriff and my breast-bone[189] he desire,
 ‘Twas plain, upon our severance-day, that he had set his mind ✿ On an
    eternal parting, moved by tongue of envious liar:
 He sheds my blood he ne’er had shed except by wound of love; ✿ Will none
    demand my blood of him, my wreak of him require?

When I had made an end of this song, there was not one of them but rose
to his feet and threw himself upon the ground for excess of delight.
Then I cast the lute from my hand, but they said, “Allah upon thee, do
not on this wise, but let us hear another song, so Allah Almighty
increase thee of His bounty!” Replied I, “O folk, I will sing you
another song and another and another and will tell you who I am. I am
Ishak bin Ibrahim al-Mausili, and by Allah, I bear myself proudly to the
Caliph when he seeketh me. Ye have to-day made me hear abuse from an
unmannerly carle such as I loathe; and by Allah, I will not speak a word
nor sit with you, till ye put yonder quarrelsome churl out from among
you!” Quoth the fellow’s companion to him, “This is what I warned thee
against, fearing for thy good name.” So they hent him by the hand and
thrust him out; and I took the lute and sang over again the songs of my
own composing which the damsel had sung. Then I whispered the host that
she had taken my heart and that I had no patience to abstain from her.
Quoth he, “She is thine on one condition.” I asked, “What is that?” and
he answered, “It is that thou abide with me a month, when the damsel and
all belonging to her of raiment and jewellery shall be thine.” I
rejoined, “It is well, I will do this.” So I tarried with him a whole
month, whilst none knew where I was and the Caliph sought me everywhere,
but could come by no news of me; and at the end of this time, the
merchant delivered to me the damsel, together with all that pertained to
her of things of price and an eunuch to attend upon her. So I brought
all that to my lodging, feeling as I were lord of the whole world, for
exceeding delight in her; then I rode forthright to Al-Maamun. And when
I stood in the presence, he said, “Woe to thee, O Ishak, where hast thou
been?” So I acquainted him with the story and he said, “Bring me that
man at once.” Thereupon I told him where he lived and he sent and
fetched him and questioned him of the case; when he repeated the story
and the Caliph said to him, “Thou art a man of right generous mind, and
it is only fitting that thou be aided in thy generosity.” Then he
ordered him an hundred thousand dirhams and said to me, “O Ishak, bring
the damsel before me.” So I brought her to him, and she sang and
delighted him; and being greatly gladdened by her he said to me, “I
appoint her turn of service every Thursday, when she must come and sing
to me from behind the curtain.” And he ordered her fifty thousand
dirhams, so by Allah, I profited both myself and others by my ride. And
amongst the tales they tell is one of

-----

Footnote 187:

  Arab. “Tufayli,” a term before noticed; the class was as well known in
  Baghdad and Cairo as in ancient Rome.

Footnote 188:

  Arab. “Jauzar” = a bubalus (Antilope defessa), also called “Ayn” from
  the large black eyes. This bovine antelope is again termed Bakar
  al-Wahsh (wild cattle) or “Bos Sylvestris” (incerti generis, Forsk.).
  But Jauzar also signifies hart, so I render it by “Ariel” (the
  well-known antelope).

Footnote 189:

  Arab. “Taráib” plur. of taríbah. The allusion is to the heart, and
  “the little him’s a her.”




                     THE THREE UNFORTUNATE LOVERS.


(Quoth Al-‘Utbí,[190]) I was sitting one day with a company of educated
men, telling stories of the folk, when the talk turned upon legends of
lovers and each of us said his say thereanent. Now there was in our
company an old man, who remained silent, till all had spoken and had no
more to say, when quoth he, “Shall I tell you a thing, the like of which
you never heard; no, never?” “Yes,” quoth we; and he said, “Know, then,
that I had a daughter, who loved a youth, but we knew it not; while the
youth loved a singing-girl, who in her turn loved my daughter. One day,
I was present at an assembly, wherein were also the youth”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Four Hundred and Tenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Shaykh
continued:—One day, I was present at an assembly wherein were also the
youth and the singing-girl and she chanted to us these couplets:—

       Prove how Love bringeth low ✿ Lover those tears that run;
       Lowering him still the more ✿ When pity finds he none.

Cried the youth, “By Allah, thou hast said well, O my mistress! Dost
thou incite me to die?” Answered the girl from behind the curtain, “Yes,
if thou be a true lover.” So he laid his head on a cushion and closed
his eyes; and when the cup came round to him, we shook him and behold,
he was dead.[191] Therewith we all flocked to him, and our pleasure was
troubled and we grieved and broke up at once. When I came home, my
people took in bad part my returning before the appointed time, and I
told them what had befallen the youth, thinking that thereby I should
greatly surprise them. My daughter heard my words and rising, went from
the sitting-chamber into another, whither I followed her and found her
lying with her head on a cushion, even as I had told of the young man.
So I shook her and lo! she was dead. Then we laid her out and set forth
next morning to bury her, whilst the friends of the young man set forth
in like guise to bury him. As we were on the way to the burial-place, we
met a third funeral and asking whose it was, were told that it was that
of the singing-girl who, hearing of my daughter’s death, had done even
as she did and was dead. So we buried them all three on one day, and
this is the rarest tale that ever was heard of lovers. And they also
tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 190:

  A well-known poet of the ninth century (A.D.)

Footnote 191:

  These easy deaths for love are a _lieu commun_: See sundry of them in
  the Decameron (iv. 7, etc.); and, in the Heptameron (Nouv. lxx.), the
  widow who lay down and died of love and sorrow that her passion had
  become known. For the fainting of lovers see Nouvelle xix.




                       HOW ABU HASAN BRAKE WIND.


They recount that in the City Kaukabán of Al-Yaman there was a man of
the Fazlí tribe who had left Badawi life, and become a townsman for many
years and was a merchant of the most opulent merchants. His wife had
deceased when both were young; and his friends were instant with him to
marry again, ever quoting to him the words of the poet:—

            Go, gossip! re-wed thee, for Prime draweth near:
            A wife is an almanac—good for the year.

So being weary of contention, Abu Hasan entered into negotiations with
the old women who procure matches, and married a maid like Canopus when
he hangeth over the seas of Al-Hind. He made high festival therefor,
bidding to the wedding-banquet kith and kin, Olema and Fakirs; friends
and foes and all his acquaintances of that country-side. The whole house
was thrown open to feasting: there were rices of five several colours,
and sherbets of as many more; and kids stuffed with walnuts and almonds
and pistachios and a camel-colt[192] roasted whole. So they ate and
drank and made mirth and merriment; and the bride was displayed in her
seven dresses and one more, to the women, who could not take their eyes
off her. At last, the bridegroom was summoned to the chamber where she
sat enthroned; and he rose slowly and with dignity from his divan; but
in so doing, for that he was over full of meat and drink, lo and behold!
he let fly a fart, great and terrible. Thereupon each guest turned to
his neighbour and talked aloud and made as though he had heard nothing,
fearing for his life. But a consuming fire was lit in Abu Hasan’s heart;
so he pretended a call of nature; and, in lieu of seeking the
bride-chamber, he went down to the house-court and saddled his mare and
rode off, weeping bitterly, through the shadow of the night. In time he
reached Láhej where he found a ship ready to sail for India; so he
shipped on board and made Calicut of Malabar. Here he met with many
Arabs, especially Hazramís,[193] who recommended him to the King; and
this King (who was a Kafir) trusted him and advanced him to the
captain-ship of his body-guard. He remained ten years in all solace and
delight of life; at the end of which time he was seized with
home-sickness; and the longing to behold his native land was that of a
lover pining for his beloved; and he came near to die of yearning
desire. But his appointed day had not dawned; so, after taking the first
bath of health, he left the King without leave, and in due course landed
at Makallá of Hazramaut. Here he donned the rags of a religious; and,
keeping his name and case secret, fared for Kaukaban afoot; enduring a
thousand hardships of hunger, thirst and fatigue; and braving a thousand
dangers from the lion, the snake and the Ghul. But when he drew near his
old home, he looked down upon it from the hills with brimming eyes, and
said in himself, “Haply they might know thee; so I will wander about the
outskirts, and hearken to the folk. Allah grant that my case be not
remembered by them!” He listened carefully for seven nights and seven
days, till it so chanced that, as he was sitting at the door of a hut,
he heard the voice of a young girl saying, “O my mother, tell me the day
when I was born; for such an one of my companions is about to take an
omen[194] for me.” And the mother answered, “Thou was born, O my
daughter, on the very night when Abu Hasan farted.” Now the listener no
sooner heard these words than he rose up from the bench, and fled away
saying to himself, “Verily thy fart hath become a date, which shall last
for ever and ever; even as the poet said:”—

 As long as palms shall shift the flower; ✿ As long as palms shall sift
    the flour.[195]

And he ceased not travelling and voyaging and returned to India; and
there abode in self-exile till he died; and the mercy of Allah be upon
him![196] And they tell another story of

-----

Footnote 192:

  This is a favourite Badawi dish, but too expensive unless some
  accident happen to the animal. Old camel is much like bull-beef, but
  the young meat is excellent, although not relished by Europeans
  because, like strange fish, it has no recognised flavour. I have
  noticed it in my “First Footsteps” (p. 68, etc.). There is an old idea
  in Europe that the maniacal vengeance of the Arab is increased by
  eating this flesh; the beast is certainly vindictive enough; but a
  furious and frantic vengefulness characterises the North American
  Indian who never saw a camel. Mercy and pardon belong to the elect,
  not to the miserables who make up “humanity.”

Footnote 193:

  _i.e._, of the Province Hazramaut, the Biblical Hazarmaveth (Gen. x.
  26). The people are the Swiss of Arabia and noted for thrift and hard
  bargains; hence the saying, If you meet a serpent and a Hazrami, slay
  the Hazrami. To prove how ubiquitous they are it is related that a
  man, flying from their society, reached the uttermost parts of China
  where he thought himself safe. But, as he was about to pass the night
  in some ruin, he heard a voice hard by him exclaim, O ‘Imád al-Din!
  (the name of the patron-saint of Hazramaut). Thereupon he arose and
  fled and he is, they say, flying still.

Footnote 194:

  Arab. “Fál” alluding to the Sortes Coranicæ and other silly practices
  known to the English servant-girl when curious about her future and
  her _futur_.

Footnote 195:

  _i.e._, in Arab-land (where they eat dates) and Ajam, or lands
  non-Arab (where bread is the staff of life); that is, all the world
  over.

Footnote 196:

  This story is curious and ethnologically valuable. The Badawi who
  eructates as a civility, has a mortal hatred to a _crepitus ventris_;
  and were a by-stander to laugh at its accidental occurrence, he would
  at once be cut down as a “pundonor.” The same is the custom amongst
  the Highlanders of Afghanistan, and its artificial nature suggests
  direct derivation; for the two regions are separated by a host of
  tribes, Persians and Baloch, Sindis and Panjábis who utterly ignore
  the point of honour and behave like Europeans. The raids of the
  pre-Islamitic Arabs over the lands lying to the north-east of them are
  almost forgotten; still there are traces, and this may be one of them.




                      THE LOVERS OF THE BANU TAYY.


Kásim, son of Adi, was wont to relate that a man of the Banú Tamím spake
as follows. I went out one day in search of an estray and, coming to the
waters of the Banu Tayy, saw two companies of people near one another,
and behold, those of one company were disputing among themselves even as
the other. So I watched them and observed, in one of the companies, a
youth wasted with sickness, as he were a worn-out dried-up water-skin.
And as I looked on him, lo! he repeated these couplets:—

 What ails the Beauty she returneth not? ✿ Is’t Beauty’s irk or grudging
    to my lot?
 I sickened and my friends all came to call; ✿ What stayed thee calling
    with the friendly knot?
 Hadst thou been sick, I had come running fast ✿ To thee, nor threats had
    kept me from the spot:
 Mid them I miss thee, and I lie alone; ✿ Sweetheart, to lose thy love
    sad loss I wot!

His words were heard by a damsel in the other company who hastened
towards him, and when her people followed her, she fought them off. Then
the youth caught sight of her and sprang up and ran towards her, whilst
the people of his party ran after him and laid hold of him. However he
haled and freed himself from them, and she in like manner loosed
herself; and, when they were free, each ran to other and meeting between
the two parties, embraced and fell dead upon the ground.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Four Hundred and Eleventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young man and
the maid met between the two parties and embraced and both fell dead
upon the ground; whereat came there out an old man from one of the tents
and stood over them exclaiming, “Verily, we are Allah’s and unto Him we
are returning!” Then weeping sore he said, “Allah have ruth on you both!
by the Almighty, though you were not united in your lives, I will at
least unite you after your deaths.” And he bade lay them out: so they
washed them and shrouded them in one shroud and dug for them one grave
and prayed one prayer over them both and buried them in one tomb; nor
was there man or woman in the two parties but I saw weeping over them
and buffeting their faces. Then I questioned the Shaykh of them, and he
said, “She was my daughter and he my brother’s son; and love brought
them to the pass thou seest.” I exclaimed, “Allah amend thee! but why
didst thou not marry them to each other?” Quoth he, “I feared shame[197]
and dishonour; and now I am fallen into both.” And they tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 197:

  Arab. “Al-‘Ár.” The Badawi saying is “Al-nár wa lá ‘l-‘ár”
  (Hell-)fire, but not shame. The sentiment is noble. Hasan the
  Prophet’s grandson, a poor creature demoralised by over-marrying,
  chose the converse, “Shame is better than Hell-fire.” An old Arabic
  poem has:—

                The Fire and not shame be the Lord of thee
                And e’en to The Fire from shame go flee.

  Al-Hariri (Ass. of the Badawin) also has:—

               For rather would I die my death than shame,—
               On bier be borne than bear a caitiff’s name.




                             THE MAD LOVER.


Quoth Abu ‘l-Abbás al-Mubarrad,[198] I set out one day with a company to
Al-Bárid on an occasion and, coming to the monastery of Hirakl,[199] we
alighted in its shade. Presently a man came out to us and said, “There
are madmen in the monastery,[200] and amongst them one who speaketh
wisdom; if ye saw him, ye would marvel at his speech.” So we arose all
and went into the monastery, where we saw a man seated on a skin-mat in
one of the cells, with bare head and eyes intently fixed upon the wall.
We saluted him, and he returned our salam, without looking at us; and
one said to us, “Repeat some verses to him; for, when he heareth verse,
he speaketh.” So I repeated these two couplets:—

 O best of race to whom gave Hawwá[201] boon of birth, ✿ Except for thee
    the world were neither sweet nor fair!
 Thou’rt he, whose face, by Allah shown to man, ✿ Doth ward off death,
    decay and hoary hair.

When he heard from me this praise of the Apostle he turned towards us
and repeated these lines:—

 Well Allah wotteth I am sorely plagued: ✿ Nor can I show my pain to
    human sight.
 Two souls have I; one soul is here contained, ✿ While other woneth in
    another site
 Meseems the absent soul’s like present soul, ✿ And that she suffers what
    to me is dight.

Then he asked us, “Have I said well or said ill?” And we answered, “Thou
hast said the clean contrary of ill, well and right well.” Then he put
out his hand to a stone, that was by him and took it up; whereupon
thinking he would throw it at us we fled from him; but he fell to
beating upon his breast therewith violent blows and said to us, “Fear
not, but draw near and hear somewhat from me and receive it from me.” So
we came back, and he repeated these couplets:—

 When they made their camels yellow-white kneel down at dawning grey, ✿
    They mounted her on crupper and the camel went his way,
 Mine eye-balls through the prison-wall beheld them, and I cried ✿ With
    streaming eyelids and a heart that burnt in dire dismay,
 “O camel-driver turn thy beast that I farewell my love! ✿ In parting and
    farewelling her I see my doomèd day:
 I’m faithful to my vows of love which I have never broke; ✿ Would Heaven
    I kenned what they have done with vows that vowèd they!”

Then he looked at me and said, “Say me, dost thou know what they
did?”[202] Answered I, “Yes, they are dead; Almighty Allah have mercy on
them!” At this his face changed and he sprang to his feet and cried out,
“How knowest thou they be dead?;” and I replied, “Were they alive they
had not left thee thus.” Quoth he, “By Allah, thou art right, and I care
not to live after them.” Then his side-muscles quivered and he fell on
his face; and we ran up to him and shook him and found him dead, the
mercy of the Almighty be on him! At this we marvelled and mourned for
him and, sore mourning, laid him out and buried him.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Four Hundred and Twelfth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Al-Mubarrad thus
continued:—When the man fell we mourned over him with sore mourning and
laid him out and buried him. And when I returned to Baghdad and went in
to the Caliph Al Mutawakkil, he saw the trace of tears on my face and
said to me, “What is this?” So I told him what had passed and it was
grievous to him and he cried, “What moved thee to deal thus with
him?[203] By Allah, if I thought thou didst not repent it and regret him
I would punish thee therefor!” And he mourned for him the rest of the
day. And amongst the tales they tell is one of

-----

Footnote 198:

  A grammarian and rhetorician of ninth century.

Footnote 199:

  Once existing in Syrian Hamáh (the Biblical Hamath); and so called
  because here died the Emperor Heraclius called by the Arabs “Hirakl.”

Footnote 200:

  Till lately it was the custom to confine madmen in Syrian monasteries,
  hoping a cure from the patron Saint; and a terrible time they had of
  it. Every guide book relates the healing process as formerly pursued
  at the Maronite Convent Koshaya not far from Bayrut. The idiot or
  maniac was thrust headlong by the monks into a dismal cavern with a
  heavy chain round his neck, and was tied up within a span of the wall
  to await the arrival of Saint Anthony who especially affects this holy
  place. In very few weeks the patient was effectually cured or killed
  by cold, solitude and starvation.

Footnote 201:

  The Moslem Eve, much nearer the Hebrew “Hawah” = the “manifester,”
  because (Gen. iii. 20) she was (to be) the mother of all that live
  (“Kull hayy”).

Footnote 202:

  The mad lover says “they” for “she,” which would be too familiar in
  speaking to strangers.

Footnote 203:

  _i.e._ falsely to report the death.




                     THE PRIOR WHO BECAME A MOSLEM.


Quoth Abu Bakr Mohammed ibn Al-Anbári[204]:—I once left Anbár on a
journey to ‘Amúríyah,[205] where there came out to me the prior of the
monastery and superior of the monkery, Abd al-Masíh hight, and brought
me into the building. There I found forty religious, who entertained me
that night with fair guest-rite, and I left them after seeing among them
such diligence in adoration and devotion as I never beheld the like of
in any others. Next day I farewelled them and fared forth and, after
doing my business at ‘Amuriyah, I returned to my home at Anbar. And next
year I made pilgrimage to Meccah and as I was circumambulating the Holy
House I saw Abd al-Masih the monk also compassing the Ka’abah, and with
him five of his fellows, the shavelings. Now when I was sure that it was
indeed he, I accosted him, saying, “Art thou not Abd al-Masih, the
Religious?” and he replied, “Nay, I am Abdallah, the Desirous.”[206]
Therewith I fell to kissing his grey hairs and shedding tears; then,
taking him by the hand, I led him aside into a corner of the Temple and
said to him, “Tell me the cause of thy conversion to Al-Islam;” and he
made reply, “Verily, ‘twas a wonder of wonders, and befel thus. A
company of Moslem devotees came to the village wherein is our convent,
and sent a youth to buy them food. He saw, in the market, a Christian
damsel selling bread, who was of the fairest of women; and he was struck
at first sight with such love of her, that his senses failed him and he
fell on his face in a fainting-fit.” When he revived, he returned to his
companions and told them what had befallen him, saying, “Go ye about
your business; I may not go with you.” They chided him and exhorted him,
but he paid no heed to them; so they left him whilst he entered the
village and seated himself at the door of the woman’s booth.[207] She
asked him what he wanted, and he told her that he was in love with her,
whereupon she turned from him; but he abode in his place three days
without tasting food, keeping his eyes fixed on her face. Now whenas she
saw that he departed not from her, she went to her people and acquainted
them with his case, and they set on him the village boys, who stoned him
and bruised his ribs and broke his head; but, for all this, he would not
budge. Then the villagers took counsel together to slay him; but a man
of them came to me and told me of his case, and I went out to him and
found him lying prostrate on the ground. So I wiped the blood from his
face and carried him to the convent, and dressed his wounds; and there
he abode with me fourteen days. But as soon as he could walk, he left
the monastery——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Four Hundred and Thirteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdallah the
Religious continued:—So I carried him to the convent and dressed his
wounds, and he abode with me fourteen days. But as soon as he could
walk, he left the monastery and returned to the door of the woman’s
booth, where he sat gazing on her as before. When she saw him, she came
out to him and said, “By Allah, thou movest me to pity! wilt thou enter
my faith that I may marry thee?” He cried, “Allah forbid that I should
put off the faith of Unity and enter that of Plurality!”[208] Quoth she,
“Come in with me to my house and take thy will of me and wend thy ways
in peace.” Quoth he, “Not so, I will not waste the worship of twelve
years for the lust of an eye-twinkle.” Said she, “Then depart from me
forthwith;” and he said, “My heart will not suffer me to do that;”
whereupon she turned her countenance from him. Presently the boys found
him out and began to pelt him with stones; and he fell on his face,
saying, “Verily, Allah is my protector, who sent down the Book of the
Koran; and He protecteth the Righteous!”[209] At this I sallied forth
and driving away the boys, lifted his head from the ground and heard him
say, “Allah mine, unite me with her in Paradise!” Then I carried him to
the monastery; but he died, before I could reach it, and I bore him
without the village and I dug for him a grave and buried him. And next
night when half of it was spent, the damsel cried with a great cry (and
she in her bed); so the villagers flocked to her and questioned her of
her case. Quoth she, “As I slept, behold the Moslem man came in to me
and taking me by the hand, carried me to the gate of Paradise; but the
Guardian denied me entrance, saying:—’Tis forbidden to unbelievers. So I
embraced Al-Islam at his hands and, entering with him, beheld therein
pavilions and trees, such as I cannot describe to you. Moreover, he
brought me to a pavilion of jewels and said to me, Of a truth this is my
pavilion and thine, nor will I enter it save with thee; but, after five
nights thou shalt be with me therein, if it be the will of Allah
Almighty. Then he put forth his hand to a tree which grew at the door of
the pavilion and plucked therefrom two apples and gave them to me,
saying:—Eat this and keep the other, that the monks may see it. So I ate
one of them and never tasted I aught sweeter.——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fourteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the woman
continued:—So he plucked two apples and gave them to me, saying, “Eat
this and keep the other that the monks may see it.” So I ate one of them
and never tasted I aught sweeter. Then he took my hand and fared forth
and carried me back to my house; and, when I awoke, I found the taste of
the apple in my mouth and the other in my hand.” So saying she brought
out the apple, and in the darkness of the night it shone as it were a
sparkling star. So they carried her (and the apple with her) to the
monastery, where she repeated her vision and showed it to us; never saw
we its like among all the fruits of the world. Then I took a knife and
cut the apple into pieces according as we were folk in company; and
never knew we aught more delicious than its savour nor more delightsome
than its scent; but we said, “Haply this was a devil that appeared unto
her to seduce her from her faith.” Thereupon her people took her and
went away; but she abstained from eating and drinking and on the fifth
night she rose from her bed, and going forth the village to the grave of
her Moslem lover threw herself upon it and died, her family not knowing
what was come of her. But, on the morrow, there came to the village two
Moslem elders, clad in hair-cloth, and with them two women in like garb,
and said, “O people of the village, with you is a woman Saint, a Wáliyah
of the friends of Allah, who died a Moslemah; and we will take charge of
her in lieu of you.” So the villagers sought her and found her dead on
the Moslem’s grave; and they said, “This was one of us and she died in
our faith; so we will take charge of her.” Rejoined the two old men,
“Nay, she died a Moslemah and we claim her.” And the dispute waxed to a
quarrel between them, till one of the Shaykhs said, “Be this the test of
her faith: the forty monks of the monastery shall come and try to lift
her from the grave. If they succeed, then she died a Nazarene; if not,
one of us shall come and lift her up and if she be lifted by him, she
died a Moslemah.” The villagers agreed to this and fetched the forty
monks, who heartened one another, and came to her to lift her, but could
not. Then we tied a great rope round her middle and haled at it; but the
rope broke in sunder, and she stirred not; and the villagers came and
did the like, but could not move her from her place.[210] At last, when
all means failed, we said to one of the two Shaykhs, “Come thou and lift
her.” So he went up to the grave and, covering her with his mantle,
said, “In the name of Allah the Compassionating, the Compassionate, and
of the Faith of the Apostle of Allah, on whom be prayers and peace!”
Then he lifted her and, taking her in his bosom, betook himself with her
to a cave hard by, where they laid her, and the two women came and
washed her and shrouded her. Then the two elders bore her to her Moslem
lover’s grave and prayed over her and buried her by his side and went
their ways. Now we were eye-witnesses of all this; and, when we were
alone with one another, we said, “‘In sooth, the truth is most worthy to
be followed;’[211] and indeed the verity hath been made manifest to us,
nor is there a proof more patent of the truth of Al-Islam than that we
have seen this day with our eyes.” So I and all the monks became Moslems
and on like wise did the villagers; and we sent to the people of
Mesopotamia for a doctor of the law, to instruct us in the ordinances of
Al-Islam and the canons of the Faith. They sent us a learned man and a
pious, who taught us the rites of prayer and the tenets of the faith;
and we are now in ease abounding; so to Allah be the praise and the
thanks! And they also tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 204:

  A famous grammarian, etc., of the tenth century.

Footnote 205:

  The classical Amorium in Phrygia now Anatolia: Anbár is a town (before
  mentioned) on the Euphrates; by the rules of Arabic grammar the word
  is pronounced (though never written) Ambár.

Footnote 206:

  “Art thou not the slave of the Messiah, the Ráhib (monk)?” “No! I am
  the slave of Allah, the Rághib (desirous of mercy from the Almighty).”
  A fair specimen of the Saj’a or rhymed prose. Abdallah (properly
  “Abdu’llah”) is a kind of neutral name, neither Jewish, Moslem nor
  Christian; hence I adopted it (Pilgrimage i. 20).

Footnote 207:

  Arab. “Hanút,” prop. a tavern where liquors are sold; a term applied
  contemptuously to shops, inns, etc., kept by Christians.

Footnote 208:

  Arab. “Shirk” = syntheism of the “Mushrik” (one who makes other Gods
  partners with God), a word pronounced “Mushrit” by the Wahhabis and
  the Badawin.

Footnote 209:

  Koran vii. 195. The passage declaims against the idols of the Arabs,
  sun, moon, stars, etc.

Footnote 210:

  This minor miracle is commonly reported, and is not, I believe,
  unknown to modern “Spiritualism.” The dead Wali or Waliyah (Saintess)
  often impels the bier-bearers to the spot where he would be buried:
  hence in Cairo the tombs scattered about the city. Lane notices it,
  Mod. E. chapt. xxviii.

Footnote 211:

  Koran x. 36, speaking of being turned aside from the true worship.




                THE LOVES OF ABU ISA AND KURRAT AL-AYN.


Quoth Amrú bin Masa’dah:[212]—Abú Isá, son of Al-Rashíd and brother to
Al-Maamun, was enamoured of one Kurrat al-Ayn, a slave-girl belonging to
Ali bin Hishám,[213] and she also loved him; but he concealed his
passion, complaining of it to none neither discovering his secret to
anyone, of his pride and magnanimity; for he had used his utmost
endeavour to purchase her of her master, but he had failed. At last when
his patience was at an end and his passion was sore on him and he was
helpless in the matter, he went in to Al-Maamun, one day of state after
the folk had retired, and said to him, “O Commander of the Faithful, if
thou wilt this day make trial of thine Alcaydes by taking them unawares,
thou wilt know the generous from the mean and note each one’s place,
after the quality of his mind.” But, in saying this he purposed only to
sit with Kurrat al-Ayn in her lord’s house. Quoth Al-Maamun, “Right is
thy recking,” and bade make ready a barge, called ‘the Flyer,’ wherein
he embarked with Abu Isa and a party of his chief officers. The first
mansion he visited unexpectedly was that of Hamíd al-Tawíl of Tús, whom
he found seated——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fifteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Al-Maamun embarked
with his chief officers and fared on till they reached the mansion of
Hamíd al-Tawíl of Tús; and, unexpectedly entering, they found him seated
on a mat and before him singers and players, with lutes and flageolets
and other instruments of music in their hands. So Al-Maamun sat with him
awhile and presently he set before him dishes of nothing but fleshmeat,
with no birds among them. The Caliph would not taste thereof and Abu Isa
said to him, “O Commander of the Faithful, we have taken the owner of
this place unawares, and he knew not of thy coming; but now let us go to
another place which is prepared for thee and fitted for thee.” Thereupon
the Caliph arose and betook himself with his brother Abu Isa and his
suite, to the abode of Ali son of Hishám who, on hearing of their
approach, came out and received them with the goodliest of reception,
and kissed the earth before the King. Then he brought them into his
mansion and opened to them a saloon than which seer never saw a
goodlier. Its floors, pillars and walls were of many-coloured marbles,
adorned with Greek paintings: and it was spread with matting of
Sind[214] whereon were carpets and tapestry of Bassorah make, fitted to
the length and breadth of the room. So the Caliph sat awhile, examining
the house and its ceilings and walls, then said, “Give us somewhat to
eat.” So they brought him forthwith nearly an hundred dishes of poultry
besides other birds and brewises, fritters and cooling marinades. When
he had eaten, he said, “Give us something to drink, O Ali;” and the host
set before him, in vessels of gold and silver and crystal, raisin-wine
boiled down to one third with fruits and spices; and the cupbearers were
pages like moons, clad in garments of Alexandrian stuff interwoven with
gold and bearing on their breasts beakers of crystal, full of rose-water
mingled with musk. So Al-Maamun marvelled with exceeding marvel at all
he saw and said, “Ho thou, Abu al-Hasan!” Whereupon Ali sprang to the
Caliph’s carpet and kissing it, said, “At thy service, O Commander of
the Faithful!” and stood before him. Quoth Al-Maamun, “Let us hear some
pleasant and merry song.” Replied Ali, “I hear and obey, O Commander of
the Faithful,” and said to one of his eunuchs, “Fetch the
singing-women.” So the slave went out and presently returned, followed
by ten castratos, bearing ten stools of gold, which they set down in due
order; and after these came ten damsels, concubines of the master, as
they were shining full moons or gardens full of bloom, clad in black
brocade, with crowns of gold on their heads; and they passed along the
room till they sat down on the stools, when sang they sundry songs.
Al-Maamun looked at one of them; and, being captivated by her elegance
and fair favour, asked her, “What is thy name, O damsel?”; and she
answered, “My name is Sajáhí,[215] O Commander of the Faithful,” and he
said, “Sing to us, O Sajahi!” So she played a lively measure and sang
these couplets:—

 I walk, for fear of interview, the weakling’s walk ✿ Who sees two
    lion-whelps the fount draw nigh:
 My cloak acts sword, my heart’s perplext with fright, ✿ Lest jealous
    hostile eyes th’ approach descry:
 Till sudden hapt I on a delicate maid ✿ Like desert-doe that fails her
    fawns to espy.

Quoth the Caliph, “Thou hast done well, O damsel! whose are these
lines?” She answered, “Written by Amru bin Ma’di Karib al-Zubaydi,[216]
and the air is Ma’abid’s.”[217] Then the Caliph and Abu Isa and Ali
drank and the damsels went away and were succeeded by other ten, all
clad in flowered silk of Al-Yaman, brocaded with gold, who sat down on
the chairs and sang various songs. The Caliph looked at one of the
concubines, who was like a wild heifer of the waste, and said to her,
“What is thy name, O damsel?” She replied, “My name is Zabiyah,[218] O
Commander of the Faithful;” and he, “Sing to us, Zabiyah;” so she
warbled like a bird with many a trill and sang these two couplets:—

 Houris, and high-born Dames who feel no fear of men; ✿ Like Meccan game
    forbidden man to slam:[219]
 Their soft sweet voices make you deem them whores, ✿ But bars them from
    all whoring Al-Islam.

When she had finished, Al-Maamun cried, “Favoured of Allah art
thou!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


         Now when it was the Four Hundred and Sixteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
slave-girl finished her song, Al-Maamun cried, “Favoured of Allah art
thou! Whose is this verse?” and she answered, “Jarír’s[220] and the air
is by Ibn Surayj.” Then the Caliph and his company drank, whilst the
girls went away and there came forth yet other ten, as they were rubies,
robed in red brocade inwoven with gold and purfled with pearls and
jewels whilst all their heads were bare. They sat down on the stools and
sang various airs; so the Caliph looked at one of them, who was like the
sun of the day, and asked her, “What is thy name, O damsel?”; and she
answered, “O Commander of the Faithful, my name is Fátin.” “Sing to us,
O Fatin,” quoth he; whereat she played a lively measure and sang these
couplets:—

 Deign grant thy favours; since ‘tis time I were engraced; ✿ Enough of
    severance hath it been my lot to taste.
 Thou’rt he whose face doth every gift and charm unite; ✿ Yet is my
    patience spent for that ‘twas sore misplaced:
 I’ve wasted life in loving thee; and would high Heaven ✿ Grant me one
    meeting hour for all this wilful waste.

“Well sung, O Fatin!” exclaimed the Caliph; “whose verse is this?” And
she answered, “Adi bin Zayd’s, and the air is antique.” Then all three
drank, whilst the damsels retired and were succeeded by other ten
maidens, as they were sparkling stars, clad in flowered silk embroidered
with red gold and girt with jewelled zones. They sat down and sang
various motives; and the Caliph asked one of them, who was like a wand
of willow, “What is thy name, O damsel?”; and she answered, “My name is
Rashaa[221], O Commander of the Faithful.” “Sing to us, O Rashaa,” quoth
he; so she played a lively measure and sang these couplets:—

 And wand-like Houri, who can passion heal ✿ Like young gazelle that
    paceth o’er the plain:
 I drain this wine-cup on the toast, her cheek; ✿ Each cup disputing till
    she bends in twain,
 Then sleeps the night with me, the while I cry ✿ “This is the only gain
    my Soul would gain!”

Said the Caliph, “Well done, O damsel! Sing us something more.” So she
rose and kissing the ground before him, sang the following distich:—

 She came out to gaze on the bridal at ease ✿ In a shift that reekèd of
    ambergris.

The Caliph was highly pleased with this couplet and, when the slave-girl
saw how much it delighted him, she repeated it several times. Then said
Al-Maamun, “Bring up ‘the Flyer,’” being minded to embark and depart:
but Ali bin Hisham said to him, “O Commander of the Faithful, I have a
slave-girl, whom I bought for ten thousand dinars; she hath taken my
heart in whole and part, and I would fain display her to the Commander
of the Faithful. If she please him and he will accept of her, she is
his: and if not, let him hear something from her.” Said the Caliph,
“Bring her to me;” and forth came a damsel, as she were a branchlet of
willow, with seducing eyes and eyebrows set like twin bows; and on her
head she wore a crown of red gold crusted with pearls and jewelled,
under which was a fillet bearing this couplet wrought in letters of
chrysolite:—

 A Jinniyah this, with her Jinn, to show ✿ How to pierce man’s heart with
    a stringless bow!

The handmaiden walked, with the gait of a gazelle in flight and fit to
damn a devotee, till she came to a chair, whereon she seated
herself.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Seventeenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the handmaiden
walked with the gait of a gazelle in flight, fit to damn a devotee, till
she came to a chair whereon she seated herself. And Al-Maamun marvelled
at her beauty and loveliness; but, when Abu Isa saw her, his heart
throbbed with pain, his colour changed to pale and wan and he was in
evil case. Asked the Caliph, “O Abu Isa, what aileth thee to change
thus?;” and he answered, “O Commander of the Faithful, it is because of
a twitch that seizeth me bytimes.” Quoth the Caliph, “Hast thou known
yonder damsel before to-day?” Quoth he, “Yes, O Commander of the
Faithful, can the moon be concealed?” Then said Al-Maamun to her, “What
is thy name, O damsel?”; and she replied, “My name is Kurrat al-Ayn, O
Commander of the Faithful,” and he rejoined, “Sing to us, O Kurrat
al-Ayn.” So she sang these two couplets:—

 The loved ones left thee in middle night, ✿ And fared with the pilgrims
    when dawn shone bright:
 The tents of pride round the domes they pitched, ✿ And with broidered
    curtains were veiled fro’ sight.

Quoth the Caliph, “Favoured of Heaven art thou, O Kurrat al-Ayn! Whose
song is that?”; whereto she answered “The words are by Di’ibil
al-Khuza’i, and the air by Zurzúr al-Saghír.” Abu Isa looked at her and
his tears choked him; so that the company marvelled at him. Then she
turned to Al-Maamun and said to him, “O Commander of the Faithful, wilt
thou give me leave to change the words?” Said he, “Sing what thou wilt;”
so she played a merry measure and carolled these couplets:—

 If thou should please a friend who pleaseth thee ✿ Frankly, in public
    practise secrecy.
 And spurn the slanderer’s tale, who seldom[222] seeks ✿ Except the
    severance of true love to see.

 They say, when lover’s near, he tires of love, ✿ And absence is for love
    best remedy:
 Both cures we tried and yet we are not cured, ✿ Withal we judge that
    nearness easier be:
 Yet nearness is of no avail when he ✿ Thou lovest lends thee love
    unwillingly.

But when she had finished, Abu Isa said, “O Commander of the
Faithful,”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Four Hundred and Eighteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Kurrat al-Ayn
had finished her verse, Abu Isa said, “O Commander of the Faithful,
though we endure disgrace, we shall be at ease.[223] Dost thou give me
leave to reply to her?” Quoth the Caliph, “Yes, say what thou wilt to
her.” So he swallowed his tears and sang these two distichs:—

 Silent I woned and never owned my love; ✿ But from my heart I hid love’s
    blissful boon;
 Yet, if my eyes should manifest my love, ✿ ‘Tis for my nearness to the
    shining moon.

Then Kurrat al-Ayn took the lute and played a lively tune and rejoined
with these couplets:—

 An what thou claimest were the real truth, ✿ With only Hope content thou
    hadst not been;
 Nor couldest patient live without the girl ✿ So rare of inner grace and
    outward mien.
 But there is nothing in the claim of thee ✿ At all, save tongue and talk
    that little mean.

When Abu Isa heard this he fell to weeping and wailing and evidencing
his trouble and anguish. Then he raised his eyes to her and sighing,
repeated these couplets:—

 Under my raiment a waste body lies, ✿ And in my spirit all-comprising
    prize.
 I have a heart, whose pain shall aye endure, ✿ And tears like torrents
    pour these woeful eyes.

 Whene’er a wise man spies me, straight he chides ✿ Love, that misleads
    me thus in ways unwise:
 O Lord, I lack the power this dole to bear: ✿ Come sudden Death or joy
    in bestest guise!

When he had ended, Ali bin Hisham sprang up and kissing his feet, said,
“O my lord, Allah hearing thy secret hath answered thy prayer and
consenteth to thy taking her with all she hath of things rare and fair,
so the Commander of the Faithful have no mind to her.” Quoth Al-Maamun,
“Had we a mind to her, we would prefer Abu Isa before ourselves and help
him to his desire.” So saying, he rose and embarking, went away, whilst
Abu Isa tarried for Kurrat al-Ayn, whom he took and carried to his own
house, his breast swelling with joy. See then the generosity of Ali son
of Hisham! And they tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 212:

  One of the Wazirs of Al-Maamun; Kurrat al-Ayn = “coolness (_i.e._
  delight) of the eyes.” Ali bin Hishám surnamed Abu ‘l-Hasan, was
  prefect of Baghdad under the same reign.

Footnote 213:

  The Mac. Edit. (ii. 448) reads for Kawáid (plur. of Káid = Governors,
  Span. Alcayde) “Fawáid”; hence Lane (ii. 606) translates “try thy
  heart.”

Footnote 214:

  The mats of Sind were famous even in my day, but under English rule
  native industries are killed out by Manchester and Birmingham.

Footnote 215:

  Sajáh was the name of a famous female impostor, a contemporary of
  “Musaylimah the Liar.”

Footnote 216:

  A poet of Mohammed’s day.

Footnote 217:

  A singer and composer of the first century (A.H.)

Footnote 218:

  Arab. = a roe, a doe; also the Yoni (of women, mares and bitches). It
  is the Heb. Tabitha and the Greek Dorcas.

Footnote 219:

  Within the Hudúd al-Haram (bounds of the Holy Places), at Al-Medinah
  as well as Meccah, all “Muharramát” (forbidden sins) are doubly
  unlawful, such as drinking spirits, immoral life, etc. The Imam Malik
  forbids slaying animals without, however, specifying any penalty. The
  felling of trees is a disputed point; and no man can be put to death
  except invaders, infidels and desecraters (Pilgrimage ii. 167).

Footnote 220:

  A poet of the first century (A.H.)

Footnote 221:

  In Arab. = a fawn beginning to walk; also the 28th lunar mansion or
  station, usually known as Batn al-Hut or Whale’s belly. These mansions
  or houses, the constellations through which the moon passes in her
  course along her orbit, are much used in Moslem astrology and
  meteorology.

Footnote 222:

  Arab. Kalla-má = it is seldom (rare) that etc. used in books.

Footnote 223:

  Dishonoured by his love being made public. So Hafiz, Petrarch and
  Camoens.




      AL AMIN SON OF AL-RASHID AND HIS UNCLE IBRAHIM BIN AL-MAHDI.


Al-Amin[224], brother of Al-Maamun, once entered the house of his uncle
Ibrahim bin Al-Mahdi, where he saw a slave-girl playing upon the lute;
and, she being one of the fairest of women, his heart inclined to her.
Ibrahim, seeing how it was with him, sent the girl to him, with rich
raiment and precious ornaments. When he saw her, he thought that his
uncle had lain with her; so he was loath to have to do with her, because
of that, and accepting what came with her sent her back to Ibrahim. His
uncle learnt the cause of this from one of Al-Amin’s eunuchs; so he took
a shift of watered silk and worked upon its skirt, in letters of gold,
these two couplets:—

 No! I declare by Him to whom all bow, ✿ Of nothing ‘neath her petticoat
    I trow:
 Nor meddle with her mouth; nor aught did I ✿ But see and hear her, and
    it was enow!

Then he clad her in the shift and, giving her a lute, sent her back
again to his nephew. When she came into Al-Amin’s presence, she kissed
ground before him and tuning the lute, sang thereto these two couplets:—

 Thy breast thou baredst sending back the gift; ✿ Showing unlove for me
    withouten shift:
 An thou bear spite of Past, the Past forgive, ✿ And for the Caliphate
    cast the Past adrift.

When she had made an end of her verse, Al-Amin looked at her and, seeing
what was upon her skirt, could no longer control himself,——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Four Hundred and Nineteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Al-Amin
looked at the damsel and saw what was upon her skirt, he could no longer
control himself, but drew near unto her and kissed her and appointed her
a separate lodging in his palace. Moreover, he thanked his uncle for
this and bestowed on him the government of Rayy. And a tale is told of

-----

Footnote 224:

  Sixth Abbaside, A.D. 809–813.




            AL FATH BIN KHAKAN AND THE CALIPH AL-MUTAWAKKIL.


Al-Mutawakkil[225] was once taking medicine, and folk sent him by way of
solace all sorts of presents and rarities and things costly and
precious. Amongst others, Al-Fath bin Khákán[226] sent him a virgin
slave, high-breasted, of the fairest among women of her time, and with
her a vase of crystal, containing ruddy wine, and a goblet of red gold,
whereon were graven in black these couplets:—

 Since our Imam came forth from medicine, ✿ Which made him health and
    heartiness rewin,
 There is no healing draught more sovereign ✿ Than well-boiled wine this
    golden goblet in:
 Then let him break the seal for him secured; ✿ ‘Tis best prescription
    after medicine.[227]

Now when the damsel entered, the physician Yohanná[228] was with the
Caliph, and as he read the couplets, he smiled and said, “By Allah, O
Commander of the Faithful, Fath is better versed than I in the art of
healing: so let not the Prince of True Believers gainsay his
prescription.” Accordingly, the Caliph followed the recipe contained in
the poetry and was made whole by the blessing of Allah and won his every
wish. And among tales they tell is one of

-----

Footnote 225:

  Ala’llah, tenth Abbaside, A. H. 232–47 (847–61), grandson of Al-Rashid
  who succeeded Al-Wásik. He was a fanatic Sunni, much opposed to the
  Shi’ahs and he ordered the Christians to wear round their necks the
  Ghull (collar of wood, iron, or leather), to dress in yellow head-gear
  and girdles, use wooden stirrups and place figures of devils in front
  of their dwelling-houses. He also gave distinct dresses to their women
  and slaves. The Ghull, or collar, was also used for a punishment and
  vermin gathered under it when rivetted round the neck: hence Golius
  calls it “pediculosum columbar.”

Footnote 226:

  Wazir of the above, killed by Al-Muntasir Billah A.H. 247 (= 861).

Footnote 227:

  Easterns during purgation are most careful and deride the want of
  precaution in Europeans. They do not leave the house till all is
  passed off, and avoid baths, wine and women, which they afterwards
  resume with double zest. Here “breaking the seal” is taking the girl’s
  maidenhead.

Footnote 228:

  Johannes, a Greek favoured by Al-Mutawakkil and other Abbaside
  Caliphs.




    THE MAN’S DISPUTE WITH THE LEARNED WOMAN CONCERNING THE RELATIVE
                     EXCELLENCE OF MALE AND FEMALE.


Quoth a certain man of learning, I never saw amongst woman-kind one
wittier, and wiser, better read and by nature more generously bred; and
in manners and morals more perfected than a preacher of the people of
Baghdad, by name Sitt al-Mashá’ikh.[229] It chanced that she came to
Hamah-city in the year of the Flight five hundred and sixty and
one[230]; and there delivered salutary exhortations to the folk from the
professorial chair. Now there used to visit her house a number of
students of divinity and persons of learning and polite letters, who
would discuss with her questions of theology and dispute with her on
controversial points. I went to her one day, with a friend of mine, a
man of years and education; and when we had taken our seats, she set
before us a dish of fruit and seated herself behind a curtain. Now she
had a brother, a handsome youth, who stood behind us, to serve us. And
when we had eaten we fell to disputing upon points of divinity, and I
propounded to her a theological question bearing upon a difference
between the Imams, the Founders of the Four Schools. She proceeded to
speak in answer, whilst I listened; but all the while my friend fell to
looking upon her brother’s face and admiring his beauties without paying
any heed to what she discoursed. Now as she was watching him from behind
the curtain; when she had made an end of her speech, she turned to him
and said, “Methinks thou be of those who give men the preference over
women!” He replied, “Assuredly,” and she asked, “And why so?”; whereto
he answered, “For that Allah hath made the masculine worthier than the
feminine;”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Four Hundred and Twentieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Shaykh
replied, “For that Allah hath made the masculine worthier than the
feminine; and I like the excelling and mislike the excelled.” She
laughed and presently said, “Wilt thou deal fairly with me in debate, if
I battle the matter with thee?” and he rejoined, “Yes.” Then quoth she,
“What is the evidence of the superiority of the male to the female?”
Quoth he, “It is of two kinds, traditional and reasonable. The
authoritative part deriveth from the Koran and the Traditions of the
Apostle. As for the first we have the very words of Almighty Allah, ‘Men
shall have the pre-eminence above women because of those advantages
wherein Allah hath caused the one of them to excel the other;’[231] and
again, ‘If there be not two men, let there be one man and two
women;’[232] and again, when treating of inheritance, ‘If there be
brothers and sisters let a male have as much as the portion of two
females.’[233] Thus Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) hath in these
places preferred the male over the female and teacheth that a woman is
as the half of a man, for that he is worthier than she As for the
Sunnah-traditions, is it not reported of the Prophet (whom Allah save
and assain!) that he appointed the blood-money for a woman to be half
that of a man? And as for the evidence of reason, the male is the agent
and active and the female the patient and passive.”[234] Rejoined she,
“Thou hast said well, O my lord, but, by Allah, thou hast proved my
contention with thine own lips and hast advanced evidence which telleth
against thee, and not for thee. And thus it is: Allah (extolled and
exalted be He!) preferred the male above the female solely because of
the inherent condition and essential quality of masculinity; and in this
there is no dispute between us. Now this quality of male-hood is common
to the child, the boy, the youth, the adult and the old man; nor is
there any distinction between them in this. If, then, the superior
excellence of male masculant belong to him solely by virtue of manhood,
it behoveth that thy heart incline and thy soul delight in the
greybeard, equally with the boy; seeing that there is no distinction
between them, in point of male-hood. But the difference between thee and
me turneth upon the accident of qualities that are sought as
constituting the pleasure of intercourse and its enjoyment; and thou
hast adduced no proof of the superiority of the youth over the young
girl in this matter of non-essentials.” He made answer, “O reverend
lady, knowest thou not that which is peculiar to the youth of limber
shape and rosy cheeks and pleasant smile and sweetness of speech? Youths
are, in these respects superior to women; and the proof of this is what
they traditionally report of the Prophet (whom Allah bless and
preserve!) that he said, ‘Stay not thy gaze upon the beardless, for in
them is a momentary eye-glance at the black-eyed girls of Paradise.’ Nor
indeed is the superiority of the lad over the lass hidden to any of
mankind, and how well saith Abu Nowas:[235]—

 The least of him is the being free ✿ From monthly courses and pregnancy.

And the saying of another poet:—

 Quoth our Imam, Abu Nowas, who was ✿ For mad debauch and waggishness
    renowned:—
 ‘O tribe that loves the cheeks of boys, take fill ✿ Of joys in Paradise
    shall ne’er be found!’

So if any one enlarge in praise of a slave-girl and wish to enhance her
value by the mention of her beauties, he likeneth her to a youth,”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Shaykh
continued, “So if any one enlarge in praise of a slave-girl and wish to
enhance her value by the mention of her beauties, he likeneth her to a
youth, because of the illustrious qualities that belong to the male,
even as saith the poet:—

 Boy-like of backside, in the deed of kind, ✿ She sways, as sways the
    wand-like boughs a-wind.

An youths, then, were not better and fairer than girls, why should these
be likened to them? And know also (Almighty Allah preserve thee!) that a
youth is easy to be led, adapting himself to every rede, pleasant of
converse and manners, inclining to assent rather than dissent,
especially when his side-face is newly down’d and his upper lip is first
embrowned, and the purple lights of youth on his cheeks abound, so that
he is like the full moon sound; and how goodly is the saying of Abu
Tammám[236]:—

 The slanderers said There’s hair upon his cheeks; ✿ Quoth I, Exceed not;
    that’s no blemish there.
 When he could bear that haling of his hips ✿ And pearl-beads shaded by
    mustachio-hair;[237]
 And Rose swore solemn, holiest oath that is, ✿ From that fair cheek she
    nevermore would fare,
 I spoke with eyelids without need of speech, ✿ And they who answered me
    his eyebrows were.
 He’s even fairer than thou knewest him, ✿ And cheek-down guards from all
    would overdare.

 Brighter and sweeter now are grown his charms, ✿ Since down robes lip
    and cheek before were bare.
 And those who blame me for my love of him, ✿ When him they mention say
    of him, ‘Thy Fair’!

And quoth Al-Hariri[238] and quoth excellently well:—

 My censors say, What means this pine for him? ✿ Seest not the flowing
    hair on cheeks a-flowing?
 I say, By Allah, an ye deem I dote, ✿ Look at the truth in those fine
    eyes a-showing!
 But for the down that veils his cheek and chin, ✿ His brow had dazed all
    eyes no sight allowing:
 And whoso sojourns in a growthless land, ✿ How shall he move from land
    fair growths a-growing?

And quoth another:—

 My blamers say of me, ‘He is consoled,’ And lie! ✿ No consolation comes
    to those who pine and sigh.
 I had no solace when Rose bloomed alone on cheek, ✿ Now Basil blooms
    thereon and now consoled am I.

And again:—

 Slim-waisted one, whose looks with down of cheek ✿ In slaughtering
    mankind each other hurtle:
 With the Narcissus-blade he sheddeth blood, ✿ The baldrick of whose
    sheath is freshest myrtle.[239]

And again:—

 Not with his must I’m drunk, but verily ✿ Those curls turn manly heads
    like newest wine[240]:
 Each of his beauties envies each, and all ✿ Would be the silky down on
    side-face li’en.

Such are the excellencies of the youth which women do not own, and they
more than suffice to give those the preference over these.” She replied,
“Allah give thee health! verily, thou hast imposed the debate upon
thyself; and thou hast spoken and hast not stinted and hast brought
proofs to support every assertion. But, ‘Now is the truth become
manifest;’[241] so swerve thou not from the path thereof; and, if thou
be not content with a summary of evidence, I will set it before thee in
fullest detail. Allah upon thee, where is the youth beside the girl and
who shall compare kid and wild cow? The girl is soft of speech, fair of
form, like a branchlet of basil, with teeth like chamomile-petals and
hair like halters wherefrom to hang hearts. Her cheeks are like
blood-red anemones and her face like a pippin: she hath lips like wine
and breasts like pomegranates twain and a shape supple as a rattan-cane.
Her body is well-formed and with sloping shoulders dight; she hath a
nose like the edge of a sword shining bright and a forehead brilliant
white and eyebrows which unite and eyes stained by Nature’s hand black
as night. If she speak, fresh young pearls are scattered from her mouth
forthright and all hearts are ravished by the daintiness of her sprite;
when she smileth thou wouldst ween the moon shone out her lips between
and when she eyes thee, sword-blades flash from the babes of her eyes.
In her all beauties to conclusion come, and she is the centre of
attraction to traveller and stay-at-home. She hath two lips of cramoisy,
than cream smoother and of taste than honey sweeter,”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the preacher-woman
thus pursued her theme in the praise of fair maids, “She hath two lips
of cramoisy, than cream smoother and than honey sweeter;” adding, “And
she hath a bosom, as it were a way two hills between which are a pair of
breasts like globes of ivory sheen; likewise, a stomach right smooth,
flanks soft as the palm-spathe and creased with folds and dimples which
overlap one another, and liberal thighs, which like columns of pearl
arise, and back parts which billow and beat together like seas of glass
or mountains of glance, and two feet and hands of gracious mould like
unto ingots of virgin gold. So, O miserable! where are mortal men beside
the Jinn? Knowest thou not that puissant princes and potent Kings before
women ever humbly bend and on them for delight depend? Verily, they may
say;—We rule over necks and rob hearts. These women! how many a rich man
have they not paupered, how many a powerful man have they not prostrated
and how many a superior man have they not enslaved! Indeed, they seduce
the sage and send the saint to shame and bring the wealthy to want and
plunge the fortune-favoured into penury. Yet for all this, the wise but
redouble in affection of them and honour; nor do they count this
oppression or dishonour. How many a man for them hath offended his Maker
and called down on himself the wrath of his father and mother! And all
this because of the conquest of their love over hearts. Knowest thou
not, O wretched one, that for them are built pavilions, and slave-girls
are for sale;[242] that for them tear-floods rail and for them are
collected jewels of price and ambergris and musk odoriferous; and armies
are arrayed and pleasaunces made and wealth heaped up and smitten off is
many a head?” And indeed he spoke sooth in the words, ‘Whoso saith the
world meaneth woman.’ Now as for thy citation from the Holy Traditions,
it is an argument against thee and not for thee; in that the Prophet
(whom Allah bless and preserve!) compareth the beardless with the
black-eyed girls of Paradise. Now, doubtless, the subject of comparison
is worthier than the object therewith compared; so, unless women be the
worthier and the goodlier, wherefore should other than they be likened
to them? As for thy saying that girls are likened to boys, the case is
not so, but the contrary: boys are likened to girls; for folk say,
Yonder boy is like a girl. As for what proof thou quotest from the
poets, the verses were the product of a complexion unnatural in this
respect; and as for the habitual sodomites and catamites, offenders
against religion, Almighty Allah hath condemned them in His Holy
Book,[243] wherein He denounceth their filthy practices, saying, Do ye
approach unto the males among mankind[244] and leave your wives which
your Lord hath created for you? Surely ye are a people who transgress!
These it is that liken girls to boys, of their exceeding profligacy and
ungraciousness and inclination to follow the fiend and own lusts, so
that they say, She is apt for two tricks;[245] and these are all
wanderers from the way of right and the righteous. Quoth their chief Abu
Nowas:—

 Slim-waist and boyish wits delight ✿ Wencher, as well as Sodomite,[246]

As for what thou sayest of a youth’s first hair on cheek and lips and
how they add to his beauty and loveliness, by Allah, thou strayest from
the straight path of sooth and sayest that which is other than the
truth; for whiskers change the charms of the comely into ugliness;
(quoting these couplets):—

 That sprouting hair upon his face took wreak ✿ For lovers’ vengeance,
    all did vainly seek.
 I see not on his face a sign fuli- ✿ genous, except his curls are hue of
    reek.
 If so his paper[247] mostly be begrimed ✿ Where deemest thou the reed
    shall draw a streak?
 If any raise him other fairs above, ✿ This only proves the judge of wits
    is weak.

And when she ended her verse she resumed, “Laud be to Allah
Almighty,”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
preacher-woman ended her verse she resumed, addressing the man, “Laud to
Allah Almighty! how can it be hid from thee that the perfect pleasure is
in women and that abiding blessings are not to be found but with them,
seeing that Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) hath promised His
prophets and saints black-eyed damsels in Paradise and hath appointed
these for a recompense of their godly works. And had the Almighty known
that the joy supreme was in the possession of other than women, He had
rewarded them therewith and promised it to them. And quoth he (whom
Allah bless and preserve!), The things I hold dearest of the things of
your world are three: women and perfume and the solace of my eyes in
prayer. Verily Allah hath appointed boys to serve his prophets and
saints in Paradise, because Paradise is the abode of joy and delight,
which could not be complete without the service of youths; but, as to
the use of them for aught but service, it is Hell’s putridity[248] and
corruption and turpitude. How well saith the poet:”—

 Men’s turning unto bums of boys is bumptious; ✿ Whoso love noble women
    show their own noblesse.
 How many goodly wights have slept the night, enjoying ✿ Buttocks of
    boys, and woke at morn in foulest mess;
 Their garments stained by safflower, which is yellow merde ✿ Their shame
    proclaiming, showing colour of distress.
 Who can deny the charge, when so bewrayed are they ✿ That e’en by
    daylight shows the dung upon their dress?
 What contrast wi’ the man, who slept a gladsome night ✿ By Houri-maid
    for glance a mere enchantress,
 He rises off her borrowing wholesome bonny scent; ✿ That fills the house
    with whiffs of perfumed goodliness.
 No boy deserved place by side of her to hold; ✿ Canst even aloes-wood
    with what fills pool of cess![249]

Then said she, “O folk ye have made me to break the bounds of modesty
and the circle of free-born women and indulge in idle talk of chambering
and wantonness, which beseemeth not people of learning. But the breasts
of free-borns are the sepulchres of secrets, and such conversations are
in confidence. Moreover, actions are according to intentions,[250] and I
crave pardon of Allah for myself and you and all Moslems, seeing that He
is the Pardoner and the Compassionate.” Then she held her peace and
thereafter would answer us of naught; so we went our way, rejoicing in
that we had profited by her contention and yet sorrowing to part from
her. And among the tales they tell is one of

-----

Footnote 229:

  Lady of Shaykhs, elders in the faith and men of learning.

Footnote 230:

  = A.D. 1166.

Footnote 231:

  Koran iv. 38. I have before noted what the advantages are.

Footnote 232:

  Koran ii. 282, “of those whom ye shall choose for witnesses.”

Footnote 233:

  Koran iv. 175, “Whereas if there be two sisters, they inherit only
  two-thirds between them.”

Footnote 234:

  The secondary meaning is “Fá’il” = the active sodomite and Mafa’úl =
  the passive, a catamite: the former is not an insulting word, the
  latter is a most injurious expression. “Novimus et qui _te_!”

Footnote 235:

  It is an unpleasant fact that almost all the poetry of Háfiz is
  addressed to youths, as we see by the occasional introduction of
  Arabic (_e.g._, Afáka’lláh). Persian has no genders properly so
  called, hence the effect is less striking. Sa’di, the “Persian
  Moralist” begins one of the tales, “A certain learned man fell in love
  with a beautiful _son_ of a blacksmith,” which Gladwin, translating
  for the general, necessarily changed to “daughter.”

Footnote 236:

  The famous author of the Anthology called Al-Hamásah.

Footnote 237:

  _i.e._, teeth under the young mustachio.

Footnote 238:

  The “Silk-man” and the celebrated author of the Makámát, assemblies or
  seances, translated (or attempted) into all the languages of Europe.
  We have two in English, the first by Theodore Preston, M.A. (London,
  Madden, 1850); but it contains only twenty of the fifty pieces. The
  second by the late Mr. Chenery (before alluded to) ends with the
  twenty-sixth assembly: one volume in fact, the other never having been
  finished. English readers, therefore, are driven to the grand edition
  of the Makámát in folio by Baron Silvestre de Sacy.

Footnote 239:

  The sword of the eye has a Hamáil (baldrick worn over right shoulder,
  Pilgrimage i. 352) to support the “Ghimd” (vulg. Ghamad) or scabbard
  (of wood or leather): and this baldrick is the young whisker.

Footnote 240:

  The conceit of “Suláfat” (ptisane, grape juice allowed to drain on the
  slabs) and “Sawálif” (tresses, locks) has been explained. The newest
  wine is the most inebriating, a fact not much known in England, but
  familiar to the drinker of “Vino novo.”

Footnote 241:

  Koran xii. 51, this said by the nobleman’s (Potiphar’s) wife who adds,
  “I selected him to lie with me; and he (Joseph) is one of those who
  speak truth.”

Footnote 242:

  Here we have a specimen of the strained Saj’a or balanced prose:
  slave-girls (jawárí) are massed with flowing tears (dam’u jári) on
  account of the Káfiyah or rhyme.

Footnote 243:

  The detected sodomite is punished with death according to Moslem law,
  but again comes the difficulty of proof. At Shiraz I have heard of a
  pious Moslem publicly executing his son.

Footnote 244:

  Koran xxvi. 165 _et seq._ The Lord speaks to the “people of Lot”
  (Sodomites). Mr. Payne renders “Min al-álamína,” “from the four
  corners of the world.”

Footnote 245:

  Meaning before and behind, a Moslemah “Bet Balmanno.”

Footnote 246:

  Arab. “Lúti,” (plur. Lawáti), much used in Persian as a buffoon, a
  debauchee, a rascal. The orig. sig. is “One of (the people of) Lot.”
  The old English was Ingle or Yngle (a bardachio, a catamite, a boy
  kept for sodomy), which Minsheu says is, “Vox hispanica et significat
  Latinè Inguen” (the groin). Our vulgar modern word like the Italian
  bugiardo is pop. derived from Fr. Bougre, alias Bulgarus, a Bulgarian,
  a heretic: hence Boulgrin (Rabelais i. chapt. ii.) is popularly
  applied to the Albigeois (Albigenses, whose persecution began shortly
  after A.D. 1200) and the Lutherans. I cannot but think that “bougre”
  took its especial modern signification after the French became
  acquainted with the Brazil, where the Huguenots (in A.D. 1555) were
  founding a Nouvelle France, alias Equinoctiale, alias Antarctique, and
  whence the savages were carried as curiosities to Paris. Their generic
  name was “Bugre” (properly a tribe in Southern Brazil, but applied to
  all the redskins) and they were all born Sodomites. More of this in
  the terminal Essay.

Footnote 247:

  His paper is the whiteness of his skin. I have quoted the Persian
  saying of a young beard: “his cheeks don mourning for his beauty’s
  death.”

Footnote 248:

  Arab. “Khabál,” lit. the pus which flows from the bodies of the
  damned.

Footnote 249:

  Most characteristic of Egypt is all this scene. Her reverence, it is
  true, sits behind a curtain; but her virtue uses language which would
  shame the lowest European prostitute; and which is filthy almost as
  Dean Swift’s.

Footnote 250:

  Arab. “Niyat:” the Moslem’s idea of intentions quite runs with the
  Christian’s. There must be a “Niyat” or purpose of prayer or the
  devotion is valueless. Lane tells a pleasant tale of a thief in the
  Mosque, saying “I purpose (before prayer) to carry off this nice pair
  of new shoes!”




                  ABU SUWAYD AND THE PRETTY OLD WOMAN.


(Quoth Abu Suwayd) I and a company of my friends, entered a garden one
day to buy somewhat of fruit; and we saw in a corner an old woman, who
was bright of face, but her head-hair was white, and she was combing it
with an ivory comb. We stopped before her, yet she paid no heed to us
neither veiled her face: so I said, to her, “O old woman,[251] wert thou
to dye thy hair black, thou wouldst be handsomer than a girl: what
hindereth thee from this?” She raised her head towards me——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu Suwayd
continued:—When I spake these words to the ancient dame she raised her
head towards me and, opening wide her eyes, recited these two couplets:—

 I dyed what years have dyed, but this my staining ✿ Lasts not, while
    that of days is aye remaining:
 Days when beclad in gear of youth I fared, ✿ Raked fore and aft by men
    with joy unfeigning.

I cried:—By Allah, favoured art thou for an old woman! How sincere art
thou in thine after-pine for forbidden pleasures and how false is thy
pretence of repentance from frowardness! And another tale is that of

-----

Footnote 251:

  Arab. “Ya ‘l-Ajúz” (in Cairo “Agooz” pronounce “Ago-o-oz”): the
  address is now insulting and would elicit “The old woman in thine eye”
  (with fingers extended). In Egypt the polite address is “O lady
  (Sitt), O pilgrimess, O bride, and O daughter” (although she be the
  wrong side of fifty). In Arabia you may say “O woman (Imraah)” but in
  Egypt the reply would be “The woman shall see Allah cut out thy
  heart!” So in Southern Italy you address “bella fé” (fair one) and
  cause a quarrel by “vecchiarella.”




              THE EMIR ALI BIN TAHIR AND THE GIRL MUUNIS.


Once on a time was displayed for sale to Ali bin Mohammed bin Abdallah
bin Táhir[252] a slave-girl called Muunis who was superior to her
fellows in beauty and breeding, and to boot an accomplished poetess; and
he asked her of her name. Replied she, “Allah advance the Emir, my name
is Muunis.”[253] Now he knew this before; so he bowed his head awhile,
then raising his eyes to her, recited this verse:—

 What sayest of one by a sickness caught ✿ For the love of thy love till
    he waxed distraught?

Answered she, “Allah exalt the Emir!” and recited this verse in reply:—

 If we saw a lover who pains as he ought, ✿ Wi’ love we would grant him
    all favours he sought.

She pleased him: so he bought her for seventy thousand dirhams and begat
on her Obayd’ Allah bin Mohammed, afterwards minister of Police.[254]
And we are told by Abu al-Ayná[255] a tale of

-----

Footnote 252:

  Governor of Egypt, Khorasan, etc. under Al-Maamun.

Footnote 253:

  _i.e._ a companion, a solacer: it is also a man’s name (vol. i. xxiv.)

Footnote 254:

  At Baghdad; evidently written by a Baghdad or Mosul man.

Footnote 255:

  A blind traditionist of Bassorah (ninth century).




     THE WOMAN WHO HAD A BOY AND THE OTHER WHO HAD A MAN TO LOVER.


(Quoth Abu al-Ayná.) There were in our street two women, one of whom had
for lover a man and the other a beardless youth, and they foregathered
one night on the terrace-roof of a house adjoining mine, knowing not
that I was near. Quoth the boy’s lover to the other, “O my sister, how
canst thou bear with patience the harshness of thy lover’s beard as it
falleth on thy breast, when he busseth thee and his mustachios rub thy
cheek and lips?” Replied the other, “Silly that thou art, what decketh
the tree save its leaves and the cucumber but its warts?[256] Didst ever
see in the world aught uglier than a scald-head bald of his beard?
Knowest thou not that the beard is to men as the sidelocks to women; and
what is the difference between chin and cheek?[257] Knowest thou not
that Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) hath created an angel in
Heaven, who saith:—Glory be to Him who ornamenteth men with beards and
women with long hair? So, were not the beard even as the tresses in
comeliness, it had not been coupled with them, O silly! How shall I
spread-eagle myself under a boy, who will emit long before I can go off
and forestall me in limpness of penis and clitoris; and leave a man who,
when he taketh breath clippeth close and when he entereth goeth
leisurely, and when he hath done, repeateth, and when he pusheth poketh
hard, and as often as he withdraweth, returneth?” The boy’s leman was
edified by her speech and said, “I forswear my lover by the lord of the
Ka’abah!” And amongst tales is one of

-----

Footnote 256:

  Arab. “Zaghab” = the chick’s down; the warts on the cucumber which
  sometimes develop into projections.

Footnote 257:

  The Persian saying is, A kiss without moustachio is bread without
  salt.




           ALI THE CAIRENE AND THE HAUNTED HOUSE IN BAGHDAD.


There lived once, in the city of Cairo, a merchant who had great store
of monies and bullion, gems and jewels, and lands and houses beyond
count, and his name was Hasan the Jeweller, the Baghdad man. Furthermore
Allah had blessed him with a son of perfect beauty and brilliancy;
rosy-cheeked, fair of face and well-figured, whom he named Ali of Cairo
and had taught the Koran and science and elocution and the other
branches of polite education, till he became proficient in all manner of
knowledge. He was under his father’s hand in trade but, after a while,
Hasan fell sick and his sickness grew upon him, till he made sure of
death; so he called his son to him,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Jeweller,
the Baghdadi, fell sick and made sure of death, he called to him his
son, named Ali of Cairo, and said, “O my son, verily this world passeth
away; but the next world endureth for aye. Every soul shall taste of
death;[258] and now, O my son, my decease is at hand and I desire to
charge thee with a charge, which if thou observe, thou shalt abide in
safety and prosperity, till thou meet Almighty Allah; but if thou follow
it not, there shall befal thee much weariness and thou wilt repent of
having transgressed mine injunctions.” Replied Ali, “O my father, how
shall I do other than hearken to thy words and act according to thy
charge, seeing that I am bounden by the law of the Faith to obey thee
and give ear to thy command?” Rejoined his father, “O my son, I leave
thee lands and houses and goods and wealth past count; so that wert thou
each day to spend thereof five hundred dinars, thou wouldst miss naught
of it. But, O my son, look that thou live in the fear of Allah and
follow His Chosen One, Mustafa, (whom may He bless and preserve!) in
whatso he is reported to have bidden and forbidden in his traditional
law.[259] Be thou constant in alms-deeds and the practice of beneficence
and in consorting with men of worth and piety and learning; and look
that thou have a care for the poor and needy and shun avarice and
meanness and the conversation of the wicked or those of suspicious
character. Look thou kindly upon thy servants and family, and also upon
thy wife, for she is of the daughters of the great and is big with child
by thee; haply Allah will vouchsafe thee virtuous issue by her.” And he
ceased not to exhort him thus, weeping and saying, “O my son, I beseech
Allah the Bountiful, the Lord of the glorious Empyrean[260] to deliver
thee from all straits that may encompass thee and grant thee His ready
relief!” Thereupon his son wept with sore weeping and said, “O my
father, I am melted by thy words, for these are as the words of one that
saith farewell.” Replied the merchant, “Yes, O my son, I am aware of my
condition: forget thou not my charge.” Then he fell to repeating the two
professions of the Faith and to reciting verses of the Koran, until the
appointed hour arrived, when he said, “Draw near unto me, O my son.” So
Ali drew near and he kissed him; then he sighed and his soul departed
his body and he went to the mercy of Almighty Allah.[261] Therewith
great grief fell upon Ali; the clamour of keening arose in his house and
his father’s friends flocked to him. Then he betook himself to preparing
the body for burial and made him a splendid funeral. They bore his bier
to the place of prayer and prayed over him, then to the cemetery, where
they buried him and recited over him what suited of the sublime Koran;
after which they returned to the house and condoled with the dead man’s
son and wended each his own way. Moreover, Ali prayed the Friday prayer
for his father and had perlections of the Koran every day for the normal
forty, during which time he abode in the house and went not forth, save
to the place of prayer; and every Friday he visited his father’s tomb.
So he ceased not from his praying and reciting for some time, until his
fellows of the sons of the merchants came in to him one day and saluting
him, said, “How long this thy mourning and neglecting thy business and
the company of thy friends? Verily, this is a fashion which will bring
thee weariness, and thy body will suffer for it exceedingly.” Now when
they came in to him, Iblis the Accursed was with them, prompting them;
and they went on to recommend him to accompany them to the bazar, whilst
Iblis tempted him to consent to them, till he yielded,——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the sons of
the merchants went in to Ali the Cairene, son of Hasan the Jeweller,
they recommended him to accompany them to the bazar, till he yielded,
that the will of Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) might be fulfilled;
and he left the house of mourning with them. Presently they said, “Mount
thy she-mule and ride with us to such a garden, that we may solace us
there and that thy grief and despondency may depart from thee.” So he
mounted and taking his slave, went with them to the garden in question;
and when they entered one of them went and making ready the
morning-meal, brought it to them there. So they ate and were merry and
sat in talk, till the end of the day, when they mounted and returned
each to his own lodging, where they passed the night. As soon as the
morrow dawned, they again visited Ali and said, “Come with us.” Asked
he, “Whither?”; and they answered, “To such a garden; for it is finer
than the first and more pleasurable.” So he went with them to the
garden, and one of them, going away, made ready the morning-meal and
brought it to them, together with strong heady wine; and after eating
they brought out the wine, when quoth Ali, “What is this?” and quoth
they, “This is what dispelleth sadness and brighteneth gladness.” And
they ceased not to commend it to him, till they prevailed upon him and
he drank with them. Then they sat, drinking and talking, till the end of
the day, when each returned home. But as for Ali, the Cairene, he was
giddy with wine and in this plight went in to his wife, who said to him,
“What aileth thee that thou art so changed?” He said, “We were making
merry to-day, when one of my companions brought us liquor; so my friends
drank and I with them, and this giddiness came upon me.” And she
replied, “O my lord, say me, hast thou forgotten thy father’s injunction
and done that from which he forbade thee, in consorting with doubtful
folk?” Answered he, “These be of the sons of the merchants; they are no
suspicious folk, only lovers of mirth and good cheer.” And he continued
to lead this life with his friends, day after day, going from place to
place and feasting with them and drinking, till they said to him, “Our
turns are ended, and now it is thy turn.” “Well come, and welcome and
fair cheer!” cried he; so on the morrow, he made ready all that the case
called for of meat and drink, two-fold what they had provided, and
taking cooks and tent-pitchers and coffee-makers,[262] repaired with the
others to Al-Rauzah[263] and the Nilometer, where they abode a whole
month, eating and drinking and hearing music and making merry. At the
end of the month, Ali found that he had spent a great sum of money; but
Iblis the Accursed deluded him and said to him, “Though thou shouldst
spend every day a like sum yet wouldst thou not miss aught of it.” So he
took no account of money expenses and continued this way of life for
three years, whilst his wife remonstrated with him and reminded him of
his father’s charge; but he hearkened not to her words, till he had
spent all the ready monies he had, when he fell to selling his jewels
and spending their price, until they also were all gone. Then he sold
his houses, fields, farms and gardens, one after other, till they
likewise were all gone and he had nothing left but the tenement wherein
he lived. So he tore out the marble and wood-work and sold it and spent
of its price, till he had made an end of all this also, when he took
thought with himself and, finding that he had nothing left to expend,
sold the house itself and spent the purchase-money. After that, the man
who had bought the house came to him and said “Seek out for thyself a
lodging, as I have need of my house.” So he bethought himself and,
finding that he had no want of a house, except for his wife, who had
borne him a son and daughter (he had not a servant left), he hired a
large room in one of the mean courts[264] and there took up his abode,
after having lived in honour and luxury, with many eunuchs and much
wealth; and he soon came to want one day’s bread. Quoth his wife, “Of
this I warned thee and exhorted thee to obey thy father’s charge, and
thou wouldst not hearken to me; but there is no Majesty and there is no
Might, save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! Whence shall the little
ones eat? Arise then, go round to thy friends, the sons of the
merchants: belike they will give thee somewhat on which we may live this
day.” So he arose and went to his friends one by one; but they all hid
their faces from him and gave him injurious words revolting to hear, but
naught else; and he returned to his wife and said to her, “They have
given me nothing.” Thereupon she went forth to beg of her neighbours the
wherewithal to keep themselves alive——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the wife of Ali
the Cairene, seeing her husband return empty-handed, went forth to beg
of her neighbours the wherewithal to keep themselves alive and repaired
to a woman, whom she had known in former days. When she came in to her
and she saw her case, she rose and receiving her kindly, wept and said,
“What hath befallen you?” So she told her all that her husband had done,
and the other replied, “Well come and welcome and fair cheer!; whatever
thou needest, seek it of me, without price.” Quoth she, “Allah requite
thee abundantly!”[265] Then her friend gave her as much provision as
would suffice herself and her family a whole month, and she took it and
returned to her lodging. When her husband saw her, he wept and asked,
“Whence hadst thou that?”; and she answered, “I got it of such a woman;
for, when I told her what had befallen us, she failed me not in aught,
but said, Seek of me all thou needest.” Whereupon her husband rejoined,
“Since thou hast this much I will betake myself to a place I have in my
mind; peradventure Allah Almighty will bring us relief.”[266] With these
words he took leave of her and kissed his children and went out, not
knowing whither he should go, and he continued walking on till he came
to Bulák, where he saw a ship about to sail for Damietta.[267] Here he
met a man, between whom and his father there had been friendship, and he
saluted him and said to him, “Whither now?” Replied Ali, “To Damietta: I
have friends there, whom I would enquire after and visit them and then
return.” The man took him home and treated him honourably; then,
furnishing him with vivers for the voyage and giving him some gold
pieces, embarked him on board the vessel bound for Damietta. When they
reached it, Ali landed, not knowing whither to go; but as he was walking
along, a merchant saw him and had pity on him, and carried him to his
house. Here he abode awhile, after which he said in himself, “How long
this sojourning in other folk’s homes?” Then he left the merchant’s
place and walked to the wharf where, after enquiry, he found a ship
ready to sail for Syria. His hospitable host provided him with provision
and embarked him in the ship; and it set sail and Ali reached in due
season the Syrian shores where he disembarked and journeyed till he
entered Damascus. As he walked about the great thoroughfare behold, a
kindly man saw him and took him to his house, where he tarried for a
time till, one day, going abroad, he saw a caravan about to start for
Baghdad and bethought himself to journey thither with it. Thereupon he
returned to his host and taking leave of him, set out with the Cafilah.
Now Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) inclined to him the heart of one
of the merchants, so that he took him with him, and Ali ate and drank
with him, till they came within one day’s journey of Baghdad. Here,
however, a company of highwaymen fell upon the caravan and took all they
had and but few of the merchants escaped. These made each for a separate
place of refuge; but as for Ali the Cairene he fared for Baghdad, where
he arrived at sundown, as the gatekeepers were about to shut the gates,
and said to them, “Let me in with you.” They admitted him and asked him,
“Whence come, and whither wending?” and he answered, “I am a man from
Cairo-city and have with me mules laden with merchandise and slaves and
servants. I forewent them, to look me out a place wherein to deposit my
goods: but, as I rode along on my she-mule, there fell upon me a company
of banditti, who took my mule and gear; nor did I escape from them but
at my last gasp.” The gate-guard entreated him honourably and bade him
be of good cheer, saying, “Abide with us this night, and in the morning
we will look thee out a place befitting thee.” Then he sought in his
breast-pocket and, finding a dinar of those given to him by the merchant
at Bulak, handed it to one of the gatekeepers, saying, “Take this and
change it and bring us something to eat.” The man took it and went to
the market, where he changed it, and brought Ali bread and cooked meat:
so he ate, he and the gate-guards, and he lay the night with them. Now
on the morrow, one of the warders carried him to a certain of the
merchants of Baghdad, to whom he told the same story, and he believed
him, deeming that he was a merchant and had with him loads of
merchandise. Then he took him up into his shop and entreated him with
honour; moreover, he sent to his house for a splendid suit of his own
apparel for him and carried him to the Hammam. So, quoth Ali of Cairo:—I
went with him to the bath, and when we came out, he took me and brought
me to his house, where he set the morning-meal before us, and we ate and
made merry. Then said he to one of his black slaves, “Ho Mas’úd, take
this thy lord: show him the two houses standing in such a place, and
whichever pleaseth him, give him the key of it and come back.” So I went
with the slave, till we came to a street-road where stood three houses
side by side, newly built and yet shut up. He opened the first and I
looked at it; and we did the same to the second; after which he said to
me “Of which shall I give thee the key?” “To whom doth the big house
belong?” “To us!” “Open it, that I may view it.” “Thou hast no business
there.” “Wherefore?” “Because it is haunted, and none nighteth there but
in the morning he is a dead man; nor do we use to open the door, when
removing the corpse, but mount the terrace-roof of one of the other two
houses and take it up thence. For this reason my master hath abandoned
the house and saith:—I will never again give it to any one.” “Open it,”
I cried, “that I may view it;” and I said in my mind, “This is what I
seek; I will pass the night there and in the morning be a dead man and
be at peace from this my case.” So he opened it and I entered and found
it a splendid house, without its like; and I said to the slave, “I will
have none other than this house; give me its key.” But he rejoined, “I
will not give thee this key till I consult my master,”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the negro
(continued Ali of Cairo) rejoined, “I will not give thee its key till I
consult my master,” and going to him, reported, “The Egyptian trader
saith:—I will lodge in none but the big house.” Now when the merchant
heard this, he rose and coming to Ali, spake thus to him, “O my lord,
thou hast no need of this house.” But he answered, “I will lodge in none
other than this; for I care naught for this silly saying.” Quoth the
other, “Write me an acknowledgment that, if aught happen to thee, I am
not responsible.” Quoth Ali, “So be it;” whereupon the merchant fetched
an assessor from the Kazi’s court and, taking the prescribed
acknowledgment, delivered to him the key wherewith he entered the house.
The merchant sent him bedding by a blackamoor who spread it for him on
the built bench behind the door[268] and walked away. Presently Ali went
about and, seeing in the inner court a well with a bucket, let this down
and drew water, wherewith he made the lesser ablution and prayed the
obligatory prayers. Then he sat awhile, till the slave brought him the
evening meal from his master’s house, together with a lamp, a candle and
candlestick, a basin and ewer and a gugglet[269]; after which he left
him and returned home. Ali lighted the candle, supped at his ease and
prayed the night-prayer; and presently he said to himself, “Come, take
the bedding and go upstairs and sleep there; ‘twill be better than
here.” So he took the bed and carried it upstairs, where he found a
splendid saloon, with gilded ceiling and floor and walls cased with
coloured marbles. He spread his bed there and sitting down, began to
recite somewhat of the Sublime Koran, when (ere he was ware) he heard
one calling to him and asking, “O Ali, O son of Hasan, say me, shall I
send thee down the gold?” And he answered, “Where be the gold thou hast
to send?” But hardly had he spoken, when gold pieces began to rain down
on him, like stones from a catapult, nor ceased till the saloon was
full. Then, after the golden shower, said the Voice, “Set me free, that
I may go my way; for I have made an end of my service and have delivered
unto thee that which was entrusted to me for thee.” Quoth Ali, “I adjure
thee, by Allah the Almighty, to tell me the cause of this gold-rain.”
Replied the Voice, “This is a treasure that was talisman’d to thee of
old time, and to every one who entered the house, we used to come and
say:—O Ali, O son of Hasan, shall we send thee down the gold? Whereat he
would be affrighted and cry out, and we would come down to him and break
his neck and go away. But, when thou camest and we accosted thee by thy
name and that of thy father, saying, Shall we send thee down the gold?
and thou madest answer to us, And where be the gold? we knew thee for
the owner of it and sent it down. Moreover, there is yet another hoard
for thee in the land of Al-Yaman and thou wouldst do well to journey
thither and fetch it. And now I would fain have thee set me free, that I
may go my way.” Said Ali, “By Allah, I will not set thee free, till thou
bring me hither the treasure from the land of Al-Yaman!” Said the Voice,
“An I bring it to thee, wilt thou release me and eke the servant of the
other hoard?” “Yes,” replied Ali, and the Voice cried, “Swear to me.” So
he swore to him, and he was about to go away, when Ali said to him, “I
have one other need to ask of thee;” and he, “What is that?” Quoth Ali,
“I have a wife and children at Cairo in such a place; thou needs must
fetch them to me, at their ease and without their unease.” Quoth he, “I
will bring them to thee in a mule-litter[270] and much state, with a
train of eunuchs and servants, together with the treasure from Al-Yaman,
Inshallah!”[271] Then he took of him leave of absence for three days,
when all this should be with him, and vanished. As soon as it was
morning Ali went round about the saloon, seeking a place wherein to
store the gold, and saw on the edge of the dais a marble slab with a
turning-pin; so he turned the pin and the slab sank and showed a door
which he opened and entering, found a great closet, full of bags of
coarse stuff carefully sewn. So he began taking out the bags and fell to
filling them with gold and storing them in the closet, till he had
transported thither all the hoarded gold, whereupon he shut the door and
turning the pin, the slab returned to its place. Then he went down and
seated himself on the bench behind the door; and presently there came a
knock; so he opened and found the merchant’s slave who, seeing him
comfortably sitting, returned in haste to his master——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
house-owner’s black slave returned and knocked at the door, Ali the
Cairene, son of the merchant Hasan, opened it to him and the negro,
seeing him comfortably sitting, returned in haste to his master with the
good tidings, saying, “O my Lord, the merchant, who is lodged in the
house inhabited by the Jinn,[272] is alive and well and sitteth on the
bench behind the door.” Then the merchant rose joyfully and went to the
house, taking breakfast with him; and, when he saw Ali, he embraced him
and kissed him between the eyes, asking, “How hath Allah dealt with
thee?”; and Ali answered, “Right well, I slept upstairs in the marble
saloon.” Quoth the merchant, “Did aught come to thee or didst thou see
any thing?” and quoth Ali, “No, I recited some little of the Sublime
Koran and slept till morning, when I arose and, after making the minor
ablution and praying, seated myself on the bench behind the door.”
“Praised be Allah for safety!” exclaimed the merchant, then left him and
presently sent him black slaves and white Mamelukes and handmaidens with
household gear. They swept the house from top to bottom and furnished it
with magnificent furniture; after which three white slaves and three
blacks and four slave-girls remained with him, to serve him, while the
rest returned to their master’s house. Now when the merchants heard of
him, they sent him presents of all manner things of price, even to food
and drink and clothes, and took him with them to the market, asking,
“When will thy baggage arrive?” And he answered, “After three days it
will surely come.” When the term had elapsed, the servant of the first
hoard, the golden rain, came to him and said, “Go forth and meet the
treasure I have brought thee from Al-Yaman together with thy Harim; for
I bring part of the wealth in the semblance of costly merchandise; but
the eunuchs and Mamelukes and the mules and horses and camels are all of
the Jánn.” Now the Jinni, when he betook himself to Cairo, found Ali’s
wife and children in sore misery, naked and hungry; so he carried them
out of the city in a travelling-litter and clad them in sumptuous
raiment of the stuffs which were in the treasure of Al-Yaman. So when
Ali heard this, he arose and repairing to the merchants, said to them,
“Rise and go forth with us from the city, to meet the caravan bringing
my merchandise, and honour us with the presence of your Harims, to meet
my Harim.” “Hearkening and obedience,” answered they and, sending for
their Harims, went forth all together and took seat in one of the
city-gardens; and as they sat talking, behold, a dust-cloud arose out of
the heart of the desert, and they flocked forth to see what it was.
Presently it lifted and discovered mules and muleteers, tent-pitchers
and linkmen, who came on, singing and dancing, till they reached the
garden, when the chief of the muleteers walked up to Ali and kissing his
hand, said to him, “O my master, we have been long on the way, for we
purposed entering yesterday; but we were in fear of the bandits, so
abode in our station four days, till Almighty Allah rid us of them.”
Thereupon the merchants mounted their mules and rode forward with the
caravan, the Harims waiting behind, till Ali’s wife and children mounted
with them; and they all entered in splendid train. The merchants
marvelled at the number of mules laden with chests, whilst the women of
the merchants wondered at the richness of the apparel of his wife and
the fine raiment of her children; and kept saying each to other,
“Verily, the King of Baghdad hath no such gear; no, nor any other of the
kings or lords or merchants!” So they ceased not to fare forwards in
high great state, the men with Ali of Cairo and the Harims with his
Harim, till they came to the mansion,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Four Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that they ceased not to
fare forwards in high state, the men with Ali’s men and the women with
his wife, till they came to the mansion, where they alighted and brought
the mules and their burdens into the midst of the courtyard. Then they
unloaded them and warehoused the goods whilst the merchants’ wives went
up with Ali’s family to the saloon, which they found as it were a
luxuriant garden, spread with magnificent furniture. They sat in mirth
and good cheer till noon, when they brought them up the midday meal, all
manner meats and sweetmeats of the very best; and they ate and drank
costly sherbets and perfumed themselves thereafter with rose-water and
scented woods. Then they took leave and went home, men and women; and,
when the merchants returned to their places, they sent presents to the
husband according to their conditions; and their wives likewise sent
presents to the wife, so that there came to them great store of
handmaids and negroes and Mamelukes; and all kinds of goods, such as
grain, sugar and so forth, in abundance beyond account. As for the
Baghdad merchant, the landlord of the house, he abode with Ali and
quitted him not, but said to him, “Let the black slaves and servants
take the mules and the common cattle into one of my other houses, to
rest.” Quoth Ali, “They set out again to-night for such a place.” Then
he gave them leave to go forth and camp outside the city, that they
might start on their journey at night-come; whereupon, hardly believing
that they were dismissed, they took leave of him and departing to the
outliers of the city, flew off through the air to their several abodes.
So Ali and his house-owner sat together till a third of the night was
past, when their colloquy ended and the merchant returned to his own
house and Ali went up to his wife and children and after saluting them,
said, “What hath befallen you in my absence all this time?” So she told
him what they had suffered of hunger and nakedness and travail, and he
said, “Praised be Allah for safety! How did ye come?” Answered she, “O
my lord, I was asleep with my children yesternight, when suddenly and
unexpectedly one raised us from the ground and flew with us through the
firmament without doing us any hurt, nor did he leave flying with us,
till he set us down in a place as it were an Arab camping-ground, where
we saw laden mules and a travelling litter borne upon two great mules,
and around it servants, all boys and men. So I asked them:—Who are ye
and what are these loads and where are we?; and they answered:—We are
the servants of the merchant Ali of Cairo, son of the merchant-jeweller,
who hath sent us to fetch you to him at Baghdad. Quoth I, Tell me, is it
far or near, hence to Baghdad? They replied, Near: there lieth between
us and the city but the darkness of the night. Then they mounted us in
the litter and, when the morrow dawned, we found ourselves with thee,
without having suffered any hurt whatever.” Quoth he, “Who gave you
these dresses;” and quoth she, “The chief of the caravan opened one of
the boxes on the mules and taking out thereof these clothes, clad me and
thy children each in a suit; after which he locked the case and gave me
the key, saying, Take care of it, till thou give it to thy husband. And
here it is safe by me.” So saying, she gave him the key, and he said,
“Dost thou know the chest?” Said she, “Yes, I know it.” So he took her
down to the magazine and showed her the boxes, when she cried, “This is
the one whence the dresses were taken;” upon which he put the key in the
lock and opened the chest, wherein he found much raiment and the keys of
all the other cases. So he took them and fell to opening them, one after
another, and feasting his eyes upon the gems and precious ores they
contained, whose like was not found with any of the kings; after which
he locked them again, took the keys, and returned to the saloon, saying
to his wife, “This is of the bounty of Almighty Allah!” Then bringing
her to the secret slab he turned the pin and opened the door of the
closet, into which he entered with her and showed her the gold he had
laid up therein. Quoth she, “Whence came all this to thee?” “It came to
me by the grace of my Lord,” answered he:——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ali’s wife
had looked upon the gold she said to him, “Whence came all this to
thee?” “It came to me by the grace of my Lord,” answered he: “When I
left thee in my trouble, I shipped at Bulak for Damietta and met a
friend there who forwarded me to Damascus”: in brief he told her all
that had befallen him, from first to last. Said she, “O my lord, all
this cometh by boon of thy father’s blessing and orisons when he prayed
for thee, before his death, saying:—I beseech Allah to cast thee into no
straits except He grant thee ready relief! So praised be Allah Almighty
for that He hath brought thee deliverance and hath requited thee with
more than went from thee! But Allah upon thee, O my lord, return not to
thy practice of associating with doubtful folk; but look thou fear Allah
(whose name be exalted!) both in private and in public.” And as she went
on to admonish him, he said, “I accept thine admonition and beg the
Almighty to remove the froward from amongst us and stablish us in His
obedience and in the observance of the law and practice of His Prophet,
on whom be blessings and peace!” After that Ali and his wife and
children were in all solace of life and gladness; and he opened him a
shop in the merchants’ bazar and, stocking it with a somewhat of jewels
and bullion, sat therein with his children and white servants. Presently
he became the most considerable of the merchants of Baghdad, and his
report reached the King of that city,[273] who sent a messenger to
command his attendance, saying, “Answer the summons of the King who
requireth thee.” He replied, “I hear and obey,” and straightway prepared
his present and he took four trays of red gold and, filling them with
jewels and precious metals, such as no King possessed, went up to the
palace and presenting himself before the presence, kissed the ground
between his hands and wished him endurance of goods and glory in the
finest language he could command. Said the King, “O merchant, thou
cheerest our city with thy presence!” and Ali rejoined, “O King of the
age, thy slave hath brought thee a gift and hopeth for acceptance
thereof from thy favour.” Then he laid the four trays before the King,
who uncovered them and seeing that they contained gems, whose fellows he
possessed not and whose worth equalled treasuries of money, said, “Thy
present is accepted, O merchant, and Inshallah! we will requite thee
with its like.” And Ali kissed his hands and went away; whereupon the
King called his grandees and said to them, “How many of the Kings have
sought my daughter in marriage?” “Many,” answered they; and he asked,
“Hath any of them given me the like of this gift?”; whereto they
replied, “Not one, for that none of them hath its like;” and he said, “I
have consulted Allah Almighty by lot as to marrying my daughter to this
merchant. What say ye?” “Be it as thou reckest,” answered they. Then he
bade the eunuch carry the four trays into his serraglio and going in to
his wife, laid them before her. She uncovered them and seeing therein
that whose like she possessed not; no, nor a fraction thereof, said to
him, “From which of the Kings hadst thou these?: perchance of one of the
royalties that seek thy daughter in marriage?” Said he, “Not so, I had
them of an Egyptian merchant, who is lately come to this our city. Now
when I heard of his coming I sent to command him to us, thinking to make
his acquaintance, so haply we might find with him somewhat of jewels and
buy them of him for our daughter’s trousseau. He obeyed our summons and
brought us these four trays, as a present, and I saw him to be a
handsome youth of dignified aspect and intelligent as elegant, almost
such as should be the sons of Kings. Wherefore my heart inclined to him
at sight, and my heart rejoiced in him and I thought good to marry my
daughter to him. So I showed the gift to my grandees, who agreed with me
that none of the Kings hath the like of these and I told them my
project. But what sayst thou?”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King of
Baghdad, after showing the presents to his wife and highly praising Ali,
the merchant-jeweller, and informing her of the proposed marriage,
asked, “But what sayst thou?” She replied, “O King of the age, the
ordering this affair is in Allah’s hand, and thine, and whatso Allah
willeth shall come to pass.” Rejoined the King, “If it be His will, I
will marry her to none other than this young man.” He slept on this
resolve and on the morrow, he went out to his Divan and summoned Ali and
the rest of the merchants of Baghdad, and when all came bade them be
seated. Then said he, “Bring me the Kazi of the Divan” and they brought
him; whereupon the King said to him, “O Kazi, write the contract of
marriage between my daughter and the merchant Ali the Cairene.” But Ali
said, “Thy pardon, O our lord the Sultan! It befitteth not that a trader
such as I, be the King’s son-in-law.” Quoth the King, “It is my will to
bestow this favour upon thee, as well as the Wazirate;” and he invested
him forthwith in the Wazir’s office and ministerial robes. Then Ali sat
down in the chair of the Wazirate and said, “O King of the age, thou
hast bestowed on me this; and indeed I am honoured by thy bounties; but
hear one word I have to say to thee!” He replied, “Say on, and fear
not.” Quoth Ali, “Since it is thine august resolution to marry thy
daughter, thou wouldst do better to marry her to my son.” Quoth the
King, “Hast thou then a son?”; and Ali replied, “Yes.” “Send for him
forthwith,” said the King. Thereupon answered Ali, “Hearkening and
obedience!”, and despatched a servant to fetch his son, who came and
kissing the ground before the King, stood in an attitude of respect. The
King looked at him and seeing him to be yet comelier than his daughter
and goodlier than she in stature and proportion and brightness and
perfection, said to him, “What is thy name, O my son?” “My name is
Hasan, O our lord the Sultan,” replied the young man, who was then
fourteen years old. Then the Sultan said to the Kazi, “Write the
contract of marriage between my daughter Husn al-Wujúd and Hasan, son of
the merchant Ali the Cairene.” So he wrote the marriage-contract between
them, and the affair was ended in the goodliest fashion; after which all
in the Divan went their ways and the merchants followed the Wazir Ali,
escorting him to his house, where they gave him joy of his advancement
and departed. Then he went in to his wife, who seeing him clad in the
Wazir’s habit, exclaimed, “What is this?”; when he told her all that had
passed from first to last and she joyed therein with exceeding joy. So
sped the night and on the morrow, he went up to the Divan, where the
King received him with especial favour and seating him close by his
side, said, “O Wazir, we purpose to begin the wedding festivities and
bring thy son in to our daughter.” Replied Ali, “O our lord the Sultan,
whatso thou deemest good is good.” So the Sultan gave orders to
celebrate the festivities, and they decorated the city and held high
festival for thirty days, in all joy and gladness; at the end of which
time, Hasan, son of the Wazir Ali, went in to the Princess and enjoyed
her beauty and loveliness. When the Queen saw her daughter’s husband,
she conceived a warm affection for him, and in like manner she rejoiced
greatly in his mother. Then the King bade build for his son-in-law Hasan
Ali-son a palace beside his own; so they built him with all speed a
splendid palace in which he took up his abode; and his mother used to
tarry with him some days and then go down to her own house. After awhile
the Queen said to her husband, “O King of the age, Hasan’s lady-mother
cannot take up her abode with her son and leave the Wazir; neither can
she tarry with the Wazir and leave her son.” “Thou sayest sooth,”
replied the King, and bade edify a third palace beside that of Hasan,
which being done in a few days he caused remove thither the goods of the
Wazir, and the Minister and his wife took up their abode there. Now the
three palaces communicated with one another, so that when the King had a
mind to speak with the Wazir by night, he would go to him or send to
fetch him; and so with Hasan and his father and mother. On this wise
they dwelt in all solace and in the greatest happiness——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King and the
Wazir and his son ceased not to dwell in all solace and in the greatest
happiness awhile, till the King fell ill and his sickness grew on him.
So he summoned the lords of his realm and said to them, “There is come
upon me a sore malady, peradventure a mortal; and I have therefore
summoned you to consult you respecting a certain matter, on which I
would have you counsel me as you deem well.” They asked, “What is the
matter of which thou wouldst take counsel with us, O King?”; and he
answered, “I am old and sickly and I fear for the realm after me from
its enemies; so I would have you all agree upon some one, that I may
proclaim him King in my lifetime and so ye may be at ease.” Whereupon
quoth they with one voice, “We all approve of thy daughter’s husband
Hasan, son of the Wazir Ali; for we have seen his wit and perfect
understanding, and he knoweth the place of all, great and small.” Asked
the King, “Are ye indeed agreed upon this?” and they answered, “Yes.”
Rejoined he “Peradventure ye all say this to my face, of respect for me;
but behind my back ye will say otherwise.” However, they all replied,
“By Allah, our word is one and the same in public and in private, and we
accept him frankly and with heartiness of heart and breadth of breast.”
Quoth he, “Since the case is thus, bring the Kazi of the Holy Law and
all the Chamberlains and Viceroys and Officers of state before me
to-morrow, and we will order the affair after the goodliest fashion.”
“We hear and we obey,” answered they and withdrawing, notified all the
Olema,[274] the doctors of the law and the chief personages among the
Emirs. So when the morrow dawned, they came up to the Divan and having
craved and obtained permission to enter, they saluted the King, saying,
“Here are we all in thy presence.” Whereto he made reply, “O Emirs of
Baghdad, whom will ye have to be King over you after me, that I may
inaugurate him during my lifetime, before the presence of you all?”
Quoth they with one voice, “We are agreed upon thy daughter’s husband
Hasan, son of the Wazir Ali.” Quoth he, “If it be so, go all of you and
bring him before me.” So they all arose and, repairing to Hasan’s
palace, said to him, “Rise, come with us to the King.” “Wherefore?”
asked he, and they answered, “For a thing that will benefit both us and
thee.” So he went in with them to the King and kissed the ground before
his father-in-law who said to him, “Be seated, O my son!” He sat down
and the King continued, “O Hasan, all the Emirs have approved of thee
and agreed to make thee King over them after me; and it is my purpose to
proclaim thee, whilst I yet live, and so make an end of the business.”
But Hasan stood up and, kissing the ground once more before the King,
said to him, “O our lord the King, among the Emirs there be many who are
older than I and greater of worth; acquit me therefore of this thing.”
But all the Emirs cried out saying, “We consent not but that thou be
King over us.” Then said Hasan, “My father is older than I, and I and he
are one thing; and it befits not to advance me over him.” But Ali said,
“I will consent to nothing save whatso contenteth my brethren; and they
have all chosen and agreed upon thee; wherefore gainsay thou not the
King’s commandment and that of thy brethren.” And Hasan hung his head
abashed before the King and his father. Then said the King to the Emirs,
“Do ye all accept of him?” “We do,” answered they and recited thereupon
seven Fátihahs.[275] So the King said, “O Kazi, draw up a legal
instrument testifying of these Emirs that they are agreed to make King
over them my daughter’s husband Hasan.” The Kazi wrote the act and made
it binding on all men,[276] after they had sworn in a body the oath of
fealty to Hasan. Then the King did likewise and bade him take his seat
on the throne of kingship; whereupon they all arose and kissed King
Hasan’s hands and did homage to him, and swore lealty to him. And the
new King dispensed justice among the people that day in fashion right
royal, and invested the grandees of the realm in splendid robes of
honour. When the Divan broke up, he went in to and kissed the hands of
his father-in-law who spake thus to him, “O my son, look thou rule the
lieges in the fear of Allah;”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King Hasan
was quit of the Divan, he went in to and kissed the hands of his wife’s
father, who spake thus to him, “O my son, look thou rule the lieges in
the fear of Allah;” whereto he replied, “O my father, through thy
prayers for me, the grace and guidance of Allah will come to me.” Then
he entered his own palace and was met by his wife and her mother and
their attendants, who kissed his hands and gave him joy of his
advancement, saying, “Be this day blessed!” Next he went in to his
father and mother, who joyed with exceeding joy in that which Allah had
vouchsafed him of his advancement to the kingship, and his father
charged him to fear Allah and to deal mercifully with his subjects. He
passed the night in glee and gladness, and on the morrow, having prayed
the obligatory prayers ending with the usual short chapters[277] of the
Koran, he went up to the Divan, whither came all his officers and
dignitaries. He passed the day in dispensing justice among the folk,
bidding to graciousness and forbidding ungraciousness and appointing to
place and displacing, till day-end, when the Divan broke up, after the
goodliest fashion, and all the troops withdrew and each went his own
way. Then he arose and repaired to the palace, where he found his
father-in-law’s sickness grown heavy upon him and said to him, “May no
ill befal thee!” At this the old King opened his eyes and said, “O
Hasan!” and he replied, “At thy service, O my lord.” Quoth the old King,
“Mine appointed hour is at hand: be thou careful of thy wife and her
mother, and look thou fear Allah and honour thy parents; and bide in awe
of the majesty of the Requiting King and bear in mind that He commandeth
justice and good works.” And King Hasan replied, “I hear and obey.” Now
after this the old King lingered three days and then departed into the
mercy of Almighty Allah. So they laid him out and shrouded and buried
him and held over him readings and perlections of the Koran, to the end
of the customary forty days. And King Hasan, son of the Wazir, reigned
in his stead, and his subjects joyed in him and all his days were
gladness; moreover, his father ceased not to be his chief Wazir on his
right hand, and he took to himself another Wazir, to be at his left
hand. His reign was a prosperous and well ordered, and he lived a long
life as King of Baghdad; and Allah blessed him, by the old King’s
daughter, with three sons who inherited the kingdom after him; and they
abode in the solace of life and its pleasures till there came to them
the Destroyer of delights and the Severer of societies. And glory be to
Him who is eternal and in whose hand are annulling and confirming. And
of the tales they tell is one of

-----

Footnote 258:

  And We will prove you with evil, and with good, for a trial of you;
  and unto Us shall ye return (Koran xxi. 36). The saying is always in
  the Moslem’s mouth.

Footnote 259:

  Arab. “Sunnat,” lit. = a law, especially applied to the habit and
  practice of the Apostle in religious and semi-religious matters,
  completing the “Hadis,” or his spoken words. Anything unknown is
  entitled “Bida’ah” = innovation. Hence the strict Moslem is a model
  Conservative whose exemplar of life dates from the seventh century.
  This fact may be casuistically explained away; but is not less an
  obstacle to all progress and it will be one of the principal dangers
  threatening Al-Islam. Only fair to say that an “innovation” introduced
  by a perfect follower of the Prophet is held equal theoretically to a
  Sunnat; but vulgarly it is said, “The rabble will not take gold which
  is not coined.”

Footnote 260:

  Arab. “Arsh” = the ninth Heaven, the Throne of the Deity, above the
  Seven Heavens of the planets and the Primum Mobile which, in the
  Ptolemaic system, sets them all in motion.

Footnote 261:

  This description of a good Moslem’s death is at once concise, pathetic
  and picturesque.

Footnote 262:

  This is the first mention of coffee, apparently introduced by the
  scribe: the word rendered “coffee-makers” is “Kahwajiyah”; an Arab.
  plur. of a Turkish termination (-ji) to an Arab. word “Kahwah” (before
  noticed).

Footnote 263:

  Picnics are still made to Rauzah (Rodah) island: I have enjoyed many a
  one, but the ground is all private property.

Footnote 264:

  Arab. “Hosh,” plur. Híshán, the low courts surrounded by mean lodgings
  which in “native” Cairo still contrast so strongly with the
  “gingerbread” of the new buildings.

Footnote 265:

  This is the Moslem equivalent of “thank you.” He looks upon the donor
  as the channel through which Allah sends him what he wants and prays
  for more to come. Thus “May your shadow never be less” means, May you
  increase in prosperity so that I may gain thereby! And if a beggar is
  disposed to be insolent (a very common case), he will tell you his
  mind pretty freely on the subject, and make it evident to you that all
  you have is also his and that La propriété (when not shared) est le
  vol.

Footnote 266:

  I have noticed in my Pilgrimage (i. 51–53) the kindly care with which
  the stranger is treated by Moslems, a marvellous contrast to the ways
  of “civilization.”

Footnote 267:

  Arab. “Dimyat,” vulg. pronounced “Dumíyat.”

Footnote 268:

  Where the doorkeepers sit and receive their friends.

Footnote 269:

  This is a traveller’s “Kit” in the East.

Footnote 270:

  Arab. “Takht-rawán,” from Persian meaning “moveable throne.”

Footnote 271:

  The use of the expression proved the speaker to be a Moslem Jinní.

Footnote 272:

  The “haunted” house proper, known to the vulgar and to spiritualists
  becomes, I have said, amongst Moslems a place tenanted by Jinns.

Footnote 273:

  Needless to say there never was a Sultan or a King of Baghdad nor a
  Duke of Athens. This story would seem not to have been written by the
  author of “the Emir bin Tahir,” etc. Night ccccxxiv.

Footnote 274:

  Plur. of Álim = one learned in the law, a D.D. Mohammed did his best
  to abolish the priest and his craft by making each Moslem
  paterfamilias a pontifex in his own household and he severely
  condemned monkery and celibacy. But human nature was too much for him:
  even before his death ascetic associations began to crop up. Presently
  the Olema in Al-Islam formed themselves into a kind of clergy; with
  the single but highly important difference that they must (or ought
  to) live by some honest secular calling and not by the “cure of
  souls”; hence Mahomet IV. of Turkey was solemnly deposed. So far and
  no farther Mohammed was successful and his success has secured for him
  the lively and lasting hatred of the ecclesiastical caste which he so
  honestly and wisely attempted to abate. Even to the present day
  missionaries have a good word for the Guebre and the Buddhist, the
  Brahmanist and the Confucian, but none for the Moslem: Dr.
  Livingstone, for one instance of many, evidently preferred the
  Fetichist, whom he could convert, to the Unitarian Faithful whom he
  could not.

Footnote 275:

  _i.e._ they recited seven times (an unusual number), for greater
  solemnity, the opening Chapter of the Koran which does general duty on
  such occasions as making covenants and swearing fealty. This
  proclaiming a King by acclamation suggests the origin of the old and
  venerable Portuguese institution.

Footnote 276:

  By affixing his own seal and that of the King. This in later times was
  supplanted by the “Tughrá,” the imperial cypher or counter-mark (much
  like a writing master’s flourish), with which Europe has now been made
  familiar through the agency of Turkish tobacco.

Footnote 277:

  Arab. “Wird” = the twenty-five last chapters of the Koran which are
  repeated, one or more at a time, after the end of the “Farz,” or
  obligatory prayers and _ad libitum_ with the Sunnat or customary, and
  the Náfilah or supererogatory.




                   THE PILGRIM MAN AND THE OLD WOMAN.


A man of the pilgrims once slept a long sleep and awaking, found no
trace of the caravan. So he rose up and walked on, but lost his way and
presently came to a tent, where he saw an old woman standing at the
entrance and by her side a dog asleep. He went up to the tent and,
saluting the old woman, sought of her food, when she replied, “Go to
yonder Wady and catch thy sufficiency of serpents, that I may broil of
them for thee and give thee to eat.” Rejoined the pilgrim, “I dare not
catch serpents nor did I ever eat them.” Quoth the old woman, “I will go
with thee and catch some; fear not.” So she went with him, followed by
the dog, to the valley and, catching a sufficient number of serpents,
proceeded to broil them. He saw nothing for it (saith the story teller)
but to eat, in fear of hunger and exhaustion; so he ate of the
serpents.[278] Then he was athirst and asked for water to drink; and she
answered, “Go to the spring and drink.” Accordingly, he went to the
spring and found the water thereof bitter; yet needs must he drink of it
despite its bitterness, because of the violence of his thirst. Presently
he returned to the old woman and said to her, “I marvel, O ancient dame,
at thy choosing to sojourn in this place”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
palmer-man drank the bitter draught for stress of thirst, he returned
and said “I marvel, O ancient dame, at thy choosing to sojourn in this
place and thy putting up with such meat and drink!” She asked, “And how
is it then in thy country?”; whereto he answered, “In my country are
houses wide and spacious and fruits ripe and delicious and waters sweet
and viands savorous and of goodly use and meats fat and full of juice
and flocks innumerous and all things pleasant and all the goods of life,
the like whereof are not, save in the Paradise which Allah the
Omnipotent hath promised to His servants pious.” Replied she, “All this
have I heard: but tell me, have ye a Sultan who ruleth over you and is
tyrannical in his rule and under whose hand you are; one who, if any of
you commit an offence, taketh his goods and ruineth him and who, whenas
he will, turneth you out of house and home and uprooteth you, stock and
branch?” Replied the man, “Indeed that may be;” and she rejoined, “If
so, by Allah, these your delicious food and life of dainty-hood and
gifts however good, with tyranny and oppression, are but a searching
poison, while our coarse meat which in freedom and safety we eat is a
healthful medicine. Hast thou not heard that the best of boons, after
Al-Islam, the true Faith, are sanity and security?”[279] Now such boons
(quoth he who telleth the tale) may be by the just rule of the Sultan,
Vice-regent of Allah on His earth, and the goodness of his polity. The
Sultan of time past needed but little awfulness, for when the lieges saw
him, they feared him; but the Sultan of these days hath need of the most
accomplished polity and the utmost majesty, because men are not as men
of by-gone time and this our age is one of folk opprobrious, and is
greatly calamitous, noted for folly and hardness of heart and inclined
to hate and enmity. If, therefore, the Sultan (which Almighty Allah
forfend!) be weak or wanting in polity and majesty, this will be the
assured cause of his country’s ruin. Quoth the proverb, “An hundred
years of the Sultan’s tyranny, but not one year of the people’s tyranny
one over other.” When the lieges oppress one another, Allah setteth over
them a tyrannical Sultan and a terrible King. Thus it is told in history
that one day there was sent to Al-Hajjáj bin Yúsuf a slip of paper,
whereon was written, “Fear Allah and oppress not His servants with all
manner of oppression.” When he read this, he mounted the pulpit (for he
was eloquent and ever ready of speech), and said, “O folk, Allah
Almighty hath made me ruler over you, by reason of your
frowardness;”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hajjaj
Yusuf-son read the paper he mounted the pulpit and said, “O folk, Allah
Almighty hath made me ruler over you by reason of your frowardness; and
indeed, though I die yet will ye not be delivered from oppression, with
these your ill deeds; for the Almighty hath created like unto me many an
one. If it be not I, ‘twill be one more mischievous than I and a
mightier in oppression and a more merciless in his majesty; even as
saith the poet:[280]—

                  For not a deed the hand can try
                  Save ‘neath the hand of God on high,
                  Nor tyrant harsh work tyranny
                  Uncrushed by tyrant harsh as he.

Tyranny is feared: but justice is the best of all things. We beg Allah
to better our case!” And among tales is that of

-----

Footnote 278:

  The sensible creed of Al-Islam freely allows anthropophagy when it
  saves life; a contrast to the sentimentalism of the West which brings
  a “charge of cannibalism” against unfortunate expeditionists. I
  particularly allude to the scandalous pulings of the English Press
  over the gallant and unfortunate Greely voyage (The Academy, Sept. 25,
  1884).

Footnote 279:

  The story is mere Æsopic: the “Two dogs” contains it all. One
  of Mohammed’s sensible sayings is recorded and deserves
  repetition:—“Empire endureth with infidelity (idolatry, etc.), but not
  with tyranny.”

Footnote 280:

  This couplet occurs in Night xxi. (vol. i. 207); so I give Torrens (p.
  207) by way of variety.




             ABU AL-HUSN AND HIS SLAVE-GIRL TAWADDUD.[281]


There was once in Baghdad a man of consequence and rich in monies and
immoveables, who was one of the chiefs of the merchants; and Allah had
largely endowed him with worldly goods, but had not vouchsafed him what
he longed for of offspring; and there passed over him a long space of
time, without his being blessed with issue, male or female. His years
waxed great; his bones became wasted and his back bent; weakness and
weariness grew upon him, and he feared the loss of his wealth and
possessions, seeing he had no child whom he might make his heir and by
whom his name should be remembered. So he betook himself with
supplication to Almighty Allah, fasting by day and praying through the
night. Moreover, he vowed many vows to the Living, the Eternal; and
visited the pious and was constant in supplication to the Most Highest,
till He gave ear to him and accepted his prayer and took pity on his
straining and complaining; so that, before many days were past, he knew
carnally one of his women and she conceived by him the same night. In
due time she finished her months and, casting her burden, bore a male
child as he were a slice of the moon; whereupon the merchant fulfilled
his vows in his gratitude to Allah, (to whom be honour and glory!) and
gave alms and clothed the widow and the orphan. On the seventh night
after the boy’s birth, he named him Abu al-Husn,[282] and the wet-nurses
suckled him and the dry-nurses dandled him and the servants and the
slaves carried him and handled him, till he shot up and grew tall and
throve greatly and learnt the Sublime Koran and the ordinances of
Al-Islam and the canons of the True Faith; and calligraphy and poetry
and mathematics and archery. On this wise he became the union-pearl of
his age and the goodliest of the folk of his time and his day; fair of
face and of tongue fluent, carrying himself with a light and graceful
gait and glorying in his stature proportionate and amorous graces which
were to many a bait: and his cheeks were red and flower-white was his
forehead and his side face waxed brown with tender down, even as saith
one, describing him:—

 The spring of the down on cheeks right clearly shows: ✿ And how when the
    Spring is gone shall last the rose?
 Dost thou not see that the growth upon his cheek ✿ Is violet-bloom that
    from its leaves outgrows.

He abode awhile in ease and happiness with his father, who rejoiced and
delighted in him, till he came to man’s estate, when the merchant one
day made him sit down before him and said, “O my son, the appointed term
draweth near; my hour of death is at hand and it remaineth but to meet
Allah (to whom belong Majesty and Might!). I leave thee what shall
suffice thee, even to thy son’s son, of monies and mansions, farms and
gardens; wherefore, fear thou Almighty Allah, O my son, in dealing with
that which I bequeath to thee and follow none but those who will help
thee to the Divine favour.” Not long after, he sickened and died; so his
son ordered his funeral,[283] after the goodliest wise, and burying him,
returned to his house and sat mourning for him many days and nights. But
behold, certain of his friends came in to him and said to him, “Whoso
leaveth a son like thee is not dead; indeed, what is past is past and
fled and mourning beseemeth none but the young maid and the wife
cloistered.” And they ceased not from him till they wrought on him to
enter the Hammam and break off his mourning.——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Abu al-Husn
was visited by his friends and taken to the Hammam and persuaded to
break off his mourning, he presently forgot his father’s charge, and his
head was turned by his riches; he thought fortune would always wone with
him as it was, and that wealth would ever wax and never wane. So he ate
and drank and made merry and took his pleasure and gave gifts of gear
and coin and was profuse with gold and addrest himself up to eating
fowls and breaking the seals of wine-flasks and listening to the giggle
of the daughter of the vine, as she gurgled from the flagon and enjoying
the jingle of the singing-girls; nor did he give over this way of life,
till his wealth was wasted and the case worsened and all his goods went
from him and he bit his hands[284] in bitter penitence. For of a truth
he had nothing left, after that which he had squandered, but a
concubine, a slave-girl whom his father had bequeathed to him with the
rest of his estate: and she had no equal in beauty and loveliness and
brightness and liveliness and symmetric stature and perfect grace. She
was past mistress in every manner of arts and accomplishments and
endowed with many excellences, surpassing all the folk of her age and
time. She was grown more notorious than a way-mark,[285] for her
seductive genius, and outdid the fair both in theory and practice, and
she was noted for her swimming gait, flexile and delicate, albeit she
was full five feet in height and by all the boons of fortune deckt and
dight, with strait arched brows twain, as they were the crescent moon of
Sha’abán,[286] and eyes like gazelles’ eyne; and nose like the edge of
scymitar fine and cheeks like anemones of blood-red shine; and mouth
like Solomon’s seal and sign and teeth like necklaces of pearls in line;
and navel holding an ounce of oil of benzoin and waist more slender than
his body whom love hath wasted and whom concealment hath made sick with
pine and hind parts heavier than two hills of sand; briefly she was a
volume of charms after his saying who saith:—

 Her fair shape ravisheth, if face to face she did appear, ✿ And if she
    turn, for severance from her she slayeth sheer.
 Sun-like, full-moon-like, sapling-like, unto her character ✿
    Estrangement no wise appertains nor cruelty austere.
 Under the bosom of her shift the garths of Eden are ✿ And the full-moon
    revolveth still upon her neck-rings’ sphere.[287]

She seemed a full moon rising and a gazelle browsing, a girl of nine
plus five[288] shaming the moon and sun, even as saith of her the sayer
eloquent and ingenious:—

 Semblance of full-moon Heaven bore, ✿ When five and five are conjoined
    by four;
 ‘Tis not my sin if she made of me ✿ Its like when it riseth horizon
    o’er.[289]

Clean of skin, odoriferous of breath, it seemed as if she were of fire
fashioned and of crystal moulded; rose-red was the cheek of her and
perfect the shape and form of her; even as one saith of her, describing
her:—

 Scented with sandal[290] and musk, right proudly doth she go, ✿ With
    gold and rose and saffron-colour aglow.
 A flower in a garden she is, a pearl in an ouch of gold ✿ Or an image in
    chapel[291] set for worship of high and low.
 Slender and shapely she is; vivacity bids her arise, ✿ But the weight of
    her hips says, “Sit, or softly and slowly go.”
 Whenas her favours I seek and sue for my heart’s desire, ✿ “Be
    gracious,” her beauty says; but her coquetry answers, “No.”
 Glory to Him who made beauty her portion, and that ✿ Of her lover to be
    the prate of the censurers, heigho![292]

She captivated all who saw her, with the excellence of her beauty and
the sweetness of her smile,[293] and shot them down with the shafts she
launched from her eyes; and withal she was eloquent of speech and
excellently skilled in verse. Now when Abu al-Husn had squandered all
his gold, and his ill-plight all could behold, and there remained to him
naught save this slave-girl, he abode three days without tasting meat or
taking rest in sleep, and the handmaid said to him, “O my lord, carry me
to the Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid,”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the
slave-girl to her master, “O my lord, carry me to Harun al-Rashid, fifth
of the sons of Abbas, and seek of him to my price ten thousand dinars.
If he deem me dear, say to him:—O Prince of True Believers, my handmaid
is worth more than this: do but prove her, and her value will be
magnified in thine eyes; for this slave-girl hath not her equal, and she
were unfit to any but thou.” And she added, “Beware, O my lord, of
selling me at less than the sum I have named; indeed ‘tis but little for
the like of me.” Now her owner knew not her worth nor that she had no
equal in her day; but he carried her to the Caliph and set her in the
presence and repeated what she had bidden him say. The Caliph asked her,
“What is thy name?”; to which she answered, “My name is Tawaddud.”[294]
He then enquired, “O Tawaddud, in what branches of knowledge dost thou
excel?”; and she replied, “O my lord, I am versed in syntax and poetry
and jurisprudence and exegesis and philosophy; and I am skilled in music
and the knowledge of the Divine ordinances and in arithmetic and geodesy
and geometry and the fables of the ancients. I know the Sublime Koran by
heart and have read it according to the seven, the ten and the fourteen
modes. I know the number of its chapters and versets and sections and
words; and its halves and fourths and eighths and tenths; the number of
prostrations which occur in it and the sum total of its letters; and I
know what there is in it of abrogating and abrogated[295]; also what
parts of it were revealed at Al-Medinah and what at Meccah and the cause
of the different revelations. I know the Holy Traditions of the
Apostle’s sayings, historical and legendary, the established and those
whose ascription is doubtful; and I have studied the exact sciences,
geometry and philosophy and medicine and logic and rhetoric and
composition; and I have learnt many things by rote and am passionately
fond of poetry. I can play the lute and know its gamut and notes and
notation and the crescendo and diminuendo. If I sing and dance, I
seduce, and if I dress and scent myself, I slay. In fine, I have reached
a pitch of perfection such as can be estimated only by those of them who
are firmly rooted in knowledge.”[296] Now when the Caliph heard these
words spoken by one so young, he wondered at her eloquence, and turning
to Abu al-Husn, said, “I will summon those who shall discuss with her
all she claimeth to know; if she answer correctly, I will give thee the
price thou askest for her and more; and if not, thou art fitter to have
her than I.” “With gladness and goodly gree, O Commander of the
Faithful,” replied Abu al-Husn. So the Caliph wrote to the Viceroy of
Bassorah, to send him Ibrahim bin Siyyár the prosodist, who was the
first man of his day in argument and eloquence and poetry and logic, and
bade him bring with him readers of the Koran and learned doctors of the
law and physicians and astrologers and scientists and mathematicians and
philosophers; and Ibrahim was more learned than all. In a little while
they arrived at the palace of the Caliphate, knowing not what was to do,
and the Caliph sent for them to his sitting-chamber and ordered them to
be seated. So they sat down and he bade bring the damsel Tawaddud, who
came and unveiling, showed herself, as she were a sparkling star.[297]
The Caliph set her a stool of gold; and she saluted, and speaking with
an eloquent tongue, said, “O Commander of the Faithful, bid the Olema
and the doctors of law and leaches and astrologers and scientists and
mathematicians and all here present contend with me in argument.” So he
said to them, “I desire of you that ye dispute with this damsel on the
things of her faith, and stultify her argument in all she advanceth;”
and they answered, saying, “We hear and we obey Allah and thee, O
Commander of the Faithful.” Upon this Tawaddud bowed her head and said,
“Which of you is the doctor of the law, the scholar, versed in the
readings of the Koran and in the Traditions?” Quoth one of them, “I am
the man thou seekest.” Quoth she, “Then ask me of what thou wilt.” Said
the doctor, “Hast thou read the precious book of Allah and dost thou
know its cancelling and cancelled parts and hast thou meditated its
versets and its letters?” “Yes,” answered she. “Then,” said he, “I will
proceed to question thee of the obligations and the immutable
ordinances: so tell me of these, O damsel, and who is thy Lord, who thy
prophet, who thy Guide, what is thy point of fronting in prayer, and who
be thy brethren? Also what thy spiritual path and what thy highway?”
Whereto she replied, “Allah is my Lord, and Mohammed (whom Allah save
and assain!) my prophet, and the Koran is my guide and the Ka’abah my
fronting; and the True-believers are my brethren. The practice of good
is my path and the Sunnah my highway.” The Caliph again marvelled at her
words so eloquently spoken by one so young; and the doctor pursued, “O
damsel, with what do we know Almighty Allah?” Said she, “With the
understanding.” Said he, “And what is the understanding?” Quoth she, “It
is of two kinds, natural and acquired.”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the damsel
continued, “The understanding is of two kinds, natural and acquired. The
natural is that which Allah (to whom be honour and glory!) created for
the right direction of His servants after His will; and the acquired is
that which men accomplish by dint of study and fair knowledge.” He
rejoined, “Thou hast answered well. (¿) Where is the seat of the
understanding?”—Allah casteth it in the heart whence its lustrous beams
ascend to the brain and there become fixed. (¿) “How knowest thou the
Prophet of Allah?”—By the reading of Allah’s Holy Book and by signs and
proofs and portents and miracles! (¿) “What are the obligations and the
immutable ordinances?”—The obligations are five, (1) Testification that
there is no iláh[298] but Allah, no god but _the_ God alone and One,
which for partner hath none, and that Mohammed is His servant and His
apostle. (2) The standing in prayers.[299] (3) The payment of the
poor-rate. (4) Fasting Ramazan. (5) The Pilgrimage to Allah’s Holy House
for all to whom the journey is possible. The immutable ordinances are
four; to wit, night and day and sun and moon, the which build up life
and hope; nor any son of Adam wotteth if they will be destroyed on the
Day of Judgment. (¿) “What are the obligatory observances of the
Faith?”—They are five, prayer, almsgiving, fasting, pilgrimage, fighting
for the Faith and abstinence from the forbidden. (¿) “Why dost thou
stand up to pray?”—To express the devout intent of the slave
acknowledging the Deity. (¿) “What are the obligatory conditions which
precede standing in prayer?”—Purification, covering the shame, avoidance
of soiled clothes, standing on a clean place, fronting the Ka’abah, an
upright posture, the intent[300] and the pronouncing “Allaho Akbar” of
prohibition.[301] (¿) “With what shouldest thou go forth from thy house
to pray?”—With the intent of worship mentally pronounced. (¿) “With what
intent shouldest thou enter the mosque?”—With an intent of service. (¿)
“Why do we front the Kiblah[302]?”—In obedience to three Divine orders
and one Traditional ordinance. (¿) “What are the beginning, the
consecration and the end of prayer?”—Purification beginneth prayer,
saying the Allaho Akbar of prohibition consecrateth, and the salutation
endeth prayer. (¿) “What deserveth he who neglecteth prayer?”—It is
reported, among the authentic Traditions of the Prophet, that he said,
“Whoso neglecteth prayer wilfully and purposely hath no part in
Al-Islam.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after the damsel
had repeated the words of that Holy Tradition the doctor cried, “Thou
hast replied aright: now say me, what is prayer?”—Prayer is communion
between the slave and his lord, and in it are ten virtues; (1) it
illumineth the heart; (2) it maketh the face shine; (3) it pleaseth
the Compassionate One; (4) it angereth Satan; (5) it conjureth
calamity; (6) it wardeth off the mischief of enemies; (7) it
multiplieth mercy; (8) it forfendeth vengeance and punishment; (9) it
bringeth the slave nigh unto his lord; and (10) it restraineth from
lewdness and frowardness. Hence it is one of the absolute requisites
and obligatory ordinances and the pillar of the Faith. (¿) “What is
the key of prayer?”—Wuzú or the lesser ablution. (¿) “What is the key
to the lesser ablution?”—Intention and naming the Almighty. (¿) “What
is the key of naming the Almighty?”—Assured faith. (¿) “What is the
key of faith?”—Trust in the Lord. (¿) “What is the key of trust in the
Lord?”—Hope. (¿) “What is the key of hope?”—Obedience. (¿) “What is
the key of obedience?”—The confession of the Unity and the
acknowledgment of the divinity of Allah. (¿) “What are the Divine
ordinances of Wuzu, the minor ablution?”[303]—They are six, according
to the canon of the Imam al-Sháfi’í Mohammed bin Idris (of whom Allah
accept!); (1) intent while washing the face; (2) washing the face; (3)
washing the hands and fore-arms; (4) wiping part of the head; (5)
washing the feet and heels; and (6) observing due order.[304] And the
traditional statutes are ten, (1) nomination; (2) and washing the
hands before putting them into the water-pot; (3) and mouth-rinsing;
(4) and snuffing;[305] (5) and wiping the whole head; (6) and wetting
the ears within and without with fresh water; (7) and separating a
thick beard; (8) and separating the fingers and toes;[306] (9) and
washing the right foot before the left and (10) doing each of these
thrice and all in unbroken order. When the minor ablution is ended,
the worshipper should say, I testify that there is no god but _the_
God, the One, which for partner hath none, and I testify that Mohammed
is His servant and His apostle. O my Allah, make me of those who
repent and in purity are permanent! Glory to Thee, O my God, and in
Thy praise I bear witness, that there is no god save Thou! I crave
pardon of Thee and I repent to Thee! For it is reported, in the Holy
Traditions, that the Prophet (whom Allah bless and preserve!) said of
this prayer:—Whoso endeth every ablution with this prayer, the eight
gates of Paradise are open to him; he shall enter at which he
pleaseth. (¿) “When a man purposeth ablution, what betideth him from
the angels and the devils?”—When a man prepareth for ablution, the
angels come and stand on his right and the devils on his left
hand.[307] If he name Almighty Allah at the beginning of the ablution,
the devils flee from him and the angels hover over him with a pavilion
of light, having four ropes, to each an angel glorifying Allah and
craving pardon for him, so long as he remaineth silent or calleth upon
the name of Allah. But if he omit to begin washing with naming Allah
(to whom belong might and majesty!), neither remain silent, the devils
take command of him; and the angels depart from him and Satan
whispereth evil thoughts unto him, till he fall into doubt and come
short in his ablution. For (quoth he on whom be blessing and
peace!):—A perfect ablution driveth away Satan and assureth against
the tyranny of the Sultan; and again quoth he:—If calamity befal one
who is not pure by ablution; verily and assuredly let him blame none
but himself. (¿) “What should a man do when he awaketh from sleep?”—He
should wash his hands thrice, before putting them into the water
vessel. (¿) “What are the Koranic and traditional orders anent Ghusl,
the complete ablution[308]?”—The divine ordinances are intent and
‘crowning’[309] the whole body with water, that is, the liquid shall
come at every part of the hair and skin. Now the traditional
ordinances are the minor ablution as preliminary; rubbing the body;
separating the hair and deferring in words[310] the washing of the
feet till the end of the ablution.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Forty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the damsel
had recounted to the doctor what were the divine and traditional orders
anent Ghusl or total ablution, quoth he, “Thou hast replied aright: now
tell me what are the occasions for Tayammum, or making the ablution with
sand and dust; and what are the ordinances thereof, divine and
human?”—The reasons are seven, viz., want of water; fear lest water
lack; need thereto; going astray on a march; sickness; having broken
bones in splints and having open wounds.[311] As for its ordinances, the
divine number four, viz., intent, dust, clapping it to the face and
clapping it upon the hands; and the human number two, nomination and
preferring the right before the left hand. (¿) “What are the conditions,
the pillars or essentials, and the traditional statutes of prayer?”—The
conditions are five, (1) purification of the members; (2) covering of
the privy parts; (3) observing the proper hours, either of certainty or
to the best of one’s belief; (4) fronting the Kiblah; and (5) standing
on a clean place. The pillars or essentials number twelve, (1) intent;
(2) the Takbír or magnification of prohibition; (3) standing when able
to stand[312]; (4) repeating the Fatihah or opening chapter of the Koran
and saying, In the name of Allah, the Compassionating the Compassionate!
with a verse thereof according to the canon of the Imam Al-Shafi’i; (5)
bowing the body and keeping it bowed; (6) returning to the upright
posture and so remaining for the time requisite; (7) prostration and
permanence therein; (8) sitting between two prostrations and permanence
therein; (9) repeating the latter profession of the Faith and sitting up
therefor; (10) invoking benediction on the Prophet (whom Allah bless and
preserve!); (11) the first Salutation,[313] and (12) the intent of
making an end of prayer expressed in words. But the traditional statutes
are the call to prayer; the standing posture; raising the hands (to
either side of the face) whilst pronouncing the prohibition; uttering
the magnification before reciting the Fatihah; seeking refuge with
Allah[314]; saying, ‘Amen’; repeating the chapter of the Koran after the
Fatihah, repeating the magnifications during change of posture; saying,
May Allah hear him who praiseth Him! and O our Lord, to Thee be the
praise!; praying aloud in the proper place[315] and praying under the
breath prayers so prescribed; the first profession of unity and sitting
up thereto; blessing the Prophet therein; blessing his family in the
latter profession and the second Salutation. (¿) “On what is the Zakát
or obligatory poor-rate taxable?”—On gold and silver and camels and oxen
and sheep and wheat and barley and holcus and millet and beans and
vetches and rice and raisins and dates. (¿) “What is the Zakát or
poor-rate on gold?”—Below twenty miskals or dinars, nothing; but on that
amount half a dinar for every score and so on proportionally.[316] (¿)
“On silver?”—Under two hundred dirhams nothing, then five dirhams on
every two hundred and so forth. (¿) “On camels?”—For every five, an ewe,
or for every twenty-five a pregnant camel. (¿) “On sheep?”—An ewe for
every forty head. (¿) “What are the ordinances of the Ramazan Fast?”—The
Koranic are intent; abstinence from eating, drinking and carnal
copulation, and the stoppage of vomiting. It is incumbent on all who
submit to the Law, save women in their courses and forty days after
childbirth; and it becomes obligatory on sight of the new moon or on
news of its appearance, brought by a trustworthy person and commending
itself as truth to the hearer’s heart; and among its requisites is that
the intent be pronounced at nightfall. The traditional ordinances of
fasting are, hastening to break the fast at sundown; deferring the fore
dawn meal,[317] and abstaining from speech, save for good works and for
calling on the name of Allah and reciting the Koran. (¿) “What things
vitiate not the fast?”—The use of unguents and eye-powders and the dust
of the road and the undesigned swallowing of saliva and the emission of
seed in nocturnal pollution or at the sight of a strange woman and
blooding and cupping; none of these things vitiates the fast. (¿) “What
are the prayers of the two great annual Festivals?”—Two one-bow prayers,
which be a traditional ordinance, without call to prayer or standing up
to pronounce the call;[318] but let the Moslem say, Prayer is a
collector of all folk![319] and pronounce ‘Allaho Akbar’ seven times in
the first prayer, besides the Takbir of prohibition; and, in the second,
five times, besides the magnification of rising up (according to the
doctrine of the Imam Al-Shafi’i, on whom Allah have mercy!) and make the
profession of the Faith.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Forty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the damsel
had answered the doctor anent the Festival-prayers, quoth he, “Thou hast
replied aright: now tell me what are the prayers prescribed on the
occasion of an eclipse of the sun or moon?”—Two one-bow prayers without
call to prayer or standing thereto by the worshipper, who shall make in
each two-bow prayer double standing up and double inclinations and
two-fold prostrations, then sit and testify and salute. (¿) “What is the
ritual of prayer for rain?”—Two one-bow prayers without call to prayer
or standing thereto; then shall the Moslem make the profession and
salute. Moreover the Imam shall deliver an exhortation and ask pardon of
Allah, in place of the magnification, as in the two sermons of the
Festivals and turn his mantle upper edge downwards and pray and
supplicate. (¿) “What are the Witr, the additional or occasional
prayers?”—The least is a one-bow prayer and the most eleven. (¿) “What
is the forenoon prayer?”—At least, two one-bow prayers and at most,
twelve. (¿) “What hast thou to say of the I’itikáf or retreat[320]?”—It
is a matter of traditional ordinance. (¿) “What are its conditions?”—(1)
intent; (2) not leaving the mosque save of necessity; (3) not having to
do with a woman; (4) fasting; and (5) abstaining from speech. (¿) “Under
what conditions is the Hajj or Pilgrimage[321] obligatory?”—Manhood, and
understanding and being a Moslem and practicability; in which case it is
obligatory on all, once before death. (¿) “What are the Koranic statutes
of the Pilgrimage?”—(1) The Ihrám or pilgrim’s habit; (2) the standing
at Arafat; (3) circumambulating the Ka’abah; (4) running between Safá
and Marwah[322]; and (5) shaving or clipping the hair. (¿) “What are the
Koranic statutes of the ‘Umrah[323] or lesser pilgrimage?”—Assuming the
pilgrim’s habit and compassing and running. (¿) “What are the Koranic
ordinances of the assumption of the pilgrim’s habit?”[324]—Doffing sewn
garments, forswearing perfume and ceasing to shave the head or pare the
nails, and avoiding the killing of game, and eschewing carnal
copulation. (¿) “What are the traditional statutes of the
pilgrimage?”—(1) The crying out “Labbay’ka, Adsum, Here am I, O our
Lord, here am I!”;[325] (2) the Ka’abah-circuitings[326] of arrival and
departure; (3) the passing the night at the Mosque of Muzdalifah and in
the valley of Mina, and (4) the lapidation.[327] (¿) “What is the Jihád
or Holy War and its essentials?”—Its essentials are (1) the descent of
the Infidels upon us; (2) the presence of the Imam; (3) a state of
preparation and (4) firmness in meeting the foe. Its traditional
ordinance is incital to battle, in that the Most High hath said, “O thou
my Prophet, incite the faithful to fight!”[328] (¿) “What are the
ordinances of buying and selling?”—The Koranic are (1) offer and
acceptance and (2) if the thing sold be a white slave, by whom one
profiteth, all possible endeavour to convert him to Al-Islam; and (3) to
abstain from usury: the traditional are making void[329] and option
before not after separating, according to his saying (whom Allah bless
and preserve!), “The parties to a sale shall have the option of
cancelling or altering terms whilst they are yet unseparated.” (¿) “What
is it forbidden to sell for what?”—On this point I mind me of an
authentic tradition, reported by Náf’i[330] of the Apostle of Allah,
that he forbade the barter of dried dates for fresh and fresh figs for
dry and jerked for fresh meat and cream for clarified butter; in fine,
all eatables of one and the same kind, it is unlawful to buy or barter
some for other some.[331] Now when the doctor of law heard her words and
knew that she was wit-keen, penetrative, ingenious and learned in
jurisprudence and the Traditions and the interpretation of the Koran and
what not else, he said in his mind, “Needs must I manœuvre with her,
that I may overcome her in the assembly of the Commander of the
Faithful.” So he said to her, “O damsel, what is the lexicographical
meaning of Wuzú?” And she answered, “Philologically it signifieth
cleanliness and freedom from impurities.” (¿) “And of Salát or
prayer?”—An invocation of good. (¿) “And of Ghusl?”—Purification. (¿)
“And of Saum or fasting?”—Abstention. (¿) “And of Zakát?”—Increase. (¿)
“And of Hajj or pilgrimage?”—Visitation. (¿) “And of Jihád?”—Repelling.
With this the doctor’s arguments were cut off,——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the doctor’s
arguments were cut off, he rose to his feet and said, “Bear witness
against me, O Commander of the Faithful, that this damsel is more
learned in the Law than I am.” Quoth she, “I will ask thee somewhat,
which do thou answer me speedily, an thou be indeed a learned man.”
Quoth he, “Say on;” and she said, “What are the arrows of the Faith?”
Answered he, “They number ten, (1) Testification, that is, religion; (2)
Prayer, that is, the covenant; (3) Alms, that is, purification; (4)
Fasting, that is, defensive armour; (5) Pilgrimage, that is, the Law;
(6) Fighting for the Faith, that is, a general duty; (7) Bidding to
beneficence and (8) Forbidding from frowardness, both of which are a
man’s honour; (9) Commune,[332] that is, sociableness of the Faithful;
and (10) Seeking knowledge, that is, the praiseworthy path.” She
rejoined, “Thou hast replied aright and now remaineth but one question,
What be the roots or fundamentals of Al-Islam?” He said, “They are four,
sincerity of belief, truth of intent, observance of the lawful limit and
keeping the covenant.” Then said she, “I have one more question to ask
thee, which if thou answer, it is well; else, I will take thy clothes.”
Quoth he, “Speak, O damsel;” and she said, “What are the branches or
superstructure of Al-Islam?” But he was silent awhile and made no reply:
so she cried, “Doff thy clothes and I will expound them to thee.” Quoth
the Caliph “Expound them, and I will make him put off his clothes for
thee.” She said, “There are two-and-twenty branches; (1) holding fast to
the Book of Allah the Most Highest; (2) taking example by His Apostle
(whom Allah bless and preserve!); (3) abstaining from evil doing; (4)
eating what is lawful and (5) avoiding what is unlawful; (6) restitution
of things wrongfully taken; (7) repentance; (8) knowledge of the Law;
(9) love of the Friend,[333] (10) and of the followers of the true
Revelation; (11) belief in the apostles of Al-Islam; (12) fear of
apostacy; (13) preparation for departing this life; (14) force of
conviction; (15) mercy on all possible occasions; (16) strength in time
of weakness; (17) patience under trials; (18) knowledge of Allah
Almighty and (19) of what His Prophet hath made known to us; (20)
thwarting Iblis the accursed; (21) striving earnestly against the lusts
of the soul and warring them down, and (22) devotion to the one God.”
Now when the Commander of the Faithful heard her words, he bade the
professor put off his clothes and hooded turband; and so did that doctor
and went forth, beaten and confounded, from the Caliph’s presence.
Thereupon another man stood up and said to her, “O damsel, hear a few
questions from me.” Quoth she, “Say on;” and he asked, “What are the
conditions of purchase by advance?” whereto she answered, “That the
price be fixed, the kind be fixed and the period of delivery be fixed
and known.” (¿) “What are the Koranic and the traditional canons of
eating?”—The confession that Allah Almighty provideth the eater and
giveth him meat and drink, with thanksgiving to Him therefor. (¿) “What
is thanksgiving?”—The use by the creature of that which the Creator
vouchsafeth to him, according as it was created for the creature. (¿)
“What are the traditional canons of eating?”—The Bismillah[334] and
washing both hands; sitting on the left of the hind part; eating with
three fingers, and eating of that which hath been duly masticated.[335]
(¿) “What are good manners in eating?”—Taking small mouthfuls and
looking little at one’s table-companion.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the damsel
had answered concerning good manners in eating, the doctor who was
trying her, rejoined, “Thou hast replied aright. Now tell me what are
the stays of the heart and their supports?”[336]—The stays and supports
both number three; (1) holding fast to the Faith, the support whereof is
the shunning of infidelity; (2) holding fast to the Traditional Law, and
its support the shunning of innovation; and (3) holding fast to
obedience, and its support the shunning of disobedience. (¿) “What are
the conditions of Wuzu?”—(1) being a Moslem; (2) discernment of good and
evil; (3) purity of the water, and (4) absence of material or religious
impediments. (¿) “What is belief?”—It is divided into nine parts, (1)
belief in the One worshipped; (2) belief in the condition of slavery of
the worshipper; (3) belief in the personality of the Deity; (4) belief
in the Two Handfuls;[337] (5) belief in Providence which allotteth to
man his lot; (6) belief in the Abrogating and (7) in the Abrogated; (8)
belief in Allah, His angels and apostles; and (9) in fore-ordained Fate,
general and individual, its good and ill, its sweet and bitter. (¿)
“What three things do away other three?”—It is told of Sufyán
al-Saurí[338] that he said, “Three things do away with other three.
Making light of the pious doth away the future life, making light of
Kings doth away this life, and, making light of expenditure doth away
wealth.” (¿) “What are the keys of the heavens, and how many gates have
they?”—Quoth Almighty Allah, “And the heaven shall be opened and be full
of portals;”[339] and quoth he whom Allah bless and preserve!, “None
knoweth the number of the gates of heavens, save He who created the
heavens, and there is no son of Adam but hath two gates allotted to him
in the heavens, one whereby his daily bread descendeth and another
wherethrough his works ascend. The first gate is not closed, save when
his term of life cometh to an end, nor the gate of works, good and evil,
till his soul ascend for judgment.” (¿) “Tell me of a thing and a half
thing and a no-thing.”—The thing is the Moslem; the half thing the
hypocrite,[340] and the no-thing the miscreant. (¿) “Tell me of various
kinds of hearts.”—There is the whole heart, the sick heart, the contrite
heart, the vowed heart and the enlightened heart. Now the whole heart is
that of Abraham, the Friend of Allah; the sick heart is that of the
Unbeliever in Al-Islam; the contrite heart is that of the pious who fear
the Lord; the vowed heart is that of our Lord Mohammed (whom Allah bless
and keep!) and the illuminated heart is that of his followers.
Furthermore, the hearts of learned Olema are of three kinds, the heart
which is in love with this world; the heart which loveth the next world,
and the heart which loveth its Lord; and it is said that hearts are
three, the suspended, that of the infidel; the non-existent, that of the
hypocrite; and the constant, that of the True-believer. Moreover, it is
said that the firm heart is of three kinds, viz., the heart dilated with
light and faith, the heart wounded with fear of estrangement and the
heart which feareth to be forsaken of its Supreme Friend.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the second
doctor declared, “Thou hast said well,” quoth she to the Caliph, “O
Commander of the Faithful, he hath questioned me, till he is weary, and
now I will ask of him two questions. If he answer them both, it is well;
and if not, I will take his clothes and he shall wend in peace.” Quoth
the doctor, “Ask me what thou wilt,” and she said, “What sayest thou
religion is?” Answered he, “Religion is confession of Faith with the
tongue and conviction with the heart and correspondent action with the
members. He (upon whom be blessings and peace!) hath said:—The believer
is not perfect in belief, except he perfect himself in five qualities,
namely, trust in Allah,[341] committal of his affair to Allah,
submission to the commands of Allah, acquiescence in the decrees of
Allah; and that all he doth be done for sake of Allah; so is he of those
who are acceptable to the Deity, and who give to Him and withhold for
Him; and such man is perfect in belief.” Then said she, “What is the
Divine ordinance of ordinances and the ordinance which is the initiator
of all ordinances and that of which all others stand in need and that
which comprehendeth all others; and what is the traditional ordinance
that entereth into the Koranic, and the prophetic practice whereby the
Divine is completed?” But he was silent and made no reply; whereupon the
Caliph bade her expound and ordered him to doff his clothes and give
them to her. Said she, “O doctor, the Koranic ordinance of ordinances is
the knowledge of Almighty Allah; that, which is the initiative of all
others, is the testifying there is no god but _the_ God and Mohammed is
the Apostle of God; that, of which all others have need, is the
Wuzu-ablution; that, which compriseth all others, is the Ghusl-ablution
from defilement[342]: the Traditional ordinance that entereth into the
Koranic, is the separation of the fingers and the thick beard;[343] and
that, wherewith all Koranic ordinances are completed, is
circumcision.”[344] Therewith was made manifest the defeat of the
doctor, who rose to his feet and said, “I call Allah to witness, O
Commander of the Faithful, that this damsel is more learned than I in
theology and what pertaineth to the Law.” So saying, he put off his
clothes and went away ignominiously worsted. Then she turned to the rest
of the learned men present and said, “O masters, which of you is the
Koranist, the reader and reciter of the Koran, versed in the seven
readings and in syntax and in lexicography?” Thereupon a professor arose
and, seating himself before her, said, “Hast thou read the Book of
Almighty Allah and made thyself thoroughly acquainted with its signs,
that is its verses, and its abrogating parts and abrogated portions, its
unequivocal commands and its ambiguous; and the difference of its
revelations, Meccan and Medinan? Dost thou understand its interpretation
and hast thou studied it, according to the various traditions and
origins?” “Yes,” answered she; and he said, “What then is the number of
its chapters, how many are the decades and versets, how many words and
how many letters and how many acts of prostration and how many prophets
and how many chapters are Medinan and how many are Meccan and how many
birds are mentioned in it?” Replied she, “O my lord, its chapters are an
hundred and fourteen, whereof seventy were revealed at Meccah and
forty-four at Al-Medinah; and it containeth six hundred and twenty-one
decades; six thousand three hundred and thirty-six versets;[345]
seventy-nine thousand four hundred and thirty-nine words and three
hundred and twenty-three thousand and six hundred and seventy letters;
and to the reader thereof, for every letter, are given ten benefits. The
acts of prostration it compriseth are fourteen.”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now When it Was the Four Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the professor
of Koranic exegesis questioned the damsel, she continued, “As regards
the Prophets named in the Book there be five-and-twenty, to wit, Adam,
Noah,[346] Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Lot, Elisha, Jonah,
Salih,[347] or Heber, Húd,[348] Shua’yb or Jethro,[349] David, Solomon,
Zú’l-kafl or Joshua, Idrís, Elias, Yahyá or John the Baptist, Zacharias,
Job, Moses, Aaron, Jesus and Mohammed,[350] the peace of Allah and His
blessing be on them all! Moreover, nine flying things are mentioned in
the Koran, namely, the gnat, the bee, the fly, the ant, the hoopoe, the
crow, the locust, the swallow and the bird of Jesus[351] (on whom be
peace!), to wit, the bat.” (¿) “Which is the most excellent chapter of
the Koran?”—That of The Cow.[352] (¿) “Which is the most magnificent
verse?”—That of The Throne; it hath fifty words, bearing in each fifty
blessings. (¿) “What sign or verse hath in it nine signs or
wonders?”—That in which quoth Allah Almighty, “Verily, in the creation
of the Heaven and the Earth; and in the vicissitude of night, and day;
and in the ship which saileth through the sea laden with what is
profitable for mankind; and in the rain-water which God sendeth down
from Heaven, quickening thereby the dead ground and replenishing the
same with all sorts of cattle; and in the change of winds and in the
clouds that are compelled to do service between the Heaven and the
Earth;[353]—are signs to people of understanding.” (¿) “Which verse is
the most just?”—That in which Allah saith, “Verily, Allah enjoineth
justice and the doing of good, and the giving unto kindred what shall be
necessary; and He forbiddeth wickedness and iniquity and
oppression.”[354] (¿) “Which is the most greedy?”—That in which quoth
Allah, “Is it that every man of them greedeth to enter the Garden of
Delight?”[355] (¿) “Which is the most hopeful?”—That in which quoth
Almighty Allah, “Say: ‘O my servants who have transgressed against your
own souls, despair not of the mercy of Allah; seeing, that Allah
forgiveth all sins; aye Gracious, Merciful is He.’”[356] (¿) “By what
school of intonation dost thou read?”—By that of the people of Paradise,
to wit, the version of Náf’i. (¿) “In which verse doth Allah make
prophets lie?”[357]—In that wherein He saith, “They (the brothers of
Joseph) brought his inner garment stained with false blood.”[358] (¿)
“In which doth He make unbelievers speak the truth?”—In that wherein He
saith, “The Jews say, ‘The Christians are grounded on nothing,’ and the
Christians say, ‘The Jews are grounded on nothing’; and yet they both
read the Scriptures;”[359] and, so saying, all say sooth. (¿) “In which
doth God speak in his own person?”—In that in which he saith, “I have
not created Genii and men for any other end than that they should serve
me.”[360] (¿) “In which verse do the angels speak?”—In that which saith,
“But we celebrate Thy praise and extol Thy holiness.”[361] (¿) “What
sayest thou of the formula:—I seek refuge with Allah from Satan the
Stoned?”—It is obligatory by commandment of Allah on all before reading
the Koran, as appeareth by His saying, “When thou readest the Koran,
seek refuge with Allah from Satan the Stoned.”[362] (¿) “What signify
the words ‘seeking refuge’[363] and what are the variants of the
formula?”—Some say, “I take refuge with Allah the All-hearing and
All-knowing,” and others, “With Allah the Strong;” but the best is that
whereof the Sublime Koran speaketh and the Traditions perpetuate. And he
(whom Allah bless and keep!) was used to ejaculate, “I seek refuge with
Allah from Satan the Stoned.” And quoth a Tradition, reported by Naf’i
on the authority of his adopted father, “The apostle of Allah, was wont
when he rose in the night to pray, to say aloud, Allaho Akbar; God is
Most Great, with all Majesty! Praise be to Allah abundantly! Glory to
Allah morn and even be!” Then would he say, “I seek refuge with Allah
from Satan the Stoned and from the delusions of the Devils and their
evil suggestions.” And it is told of Ibn Abbas[364] (of whom Allah
accept!) that he said, “The first time Gabriel came down to the Prophet
with revelation he taught him the ‘seeking refuge,’ saying:—O Mohammed,
say, I seek refuge with Allah the All-hearing and All-knowing; then
say:—In the name of Allah the Compassionating, the Compassionate! Read,
in the name of thy Lord who created;—created man of blood-clots.”[365]
Now when the Koranist heard her words he marvelled at her expressions,
her eloquence, her learning, her excellence, and said, “O damsel, what
sayst thou of the verse “In the name of Allah, the Compassionating, the
Compassionate? Is it one of the verses of the Koran?””—Yes; it is a
verset of “The Ant”[366] occurring also at the head of the first and
between every two following chapters; and there is much difference of
opinion, respecting this, among the learned.——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now When it Was the Four Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the damsel
had told the professor concerning the difference of opinion among the
learned touching the ‘Basmalah,’ he said, “Thou hast replied aright: now
tell me why is not the formula written at the head of the chapter of
Immunity[367]?”; and she answered, “When this chapter was revealed from
on high for the dissolution of the alliance between the Prophet and the
idolaters, He (whom Allah bless and preserve!) sent Ali[368] ibn Abí
Tálib (whose face Allah honour!) therewith, and he read the chapter to
them, but did not read the Basmalah.”[369] (¿) “What of the excellence
of the formula and its blessing?”—It is told of the Prophet that he
said, “Never is the Basmalah pronounced over aught, but there is a
blessing in it;” and it is reported, on authority of Him (whom Allah
bless and preserve!) that the Lord of Glory swore by His glory that
never should the Basmalah be pronounced over a sick person, but he
should be healed of his sickness. Moreover, it is said that, when Allah
created the empyrean, it was agitated with an exceeding agitation; but
He wrote on it, ‘Bismillah’ and its agitation subsided. When the formula
first descended from heaven to the Prophet, he said, “I am safe from
three things, earthquake and metamorphosis and drowning;” and indeed its
boons are great and its blessings too many to enumerate. It is told of
Allah’s Apostle that he said, “There will be brought on the Judgment-day
a man with whom He shall reckon and finding no good deed to his account,
shall order him to the Fire; but the man will cry:—O my God, Thou hast
not dealt justly by me! Then shall Allah (to whom be honour and glory!)
say, How so? and the man shall answer, O Lord, for that Thou callest
Thyself the Compassionating, the Compassionate, yet wilt Thou punish me
with the Fire! And Allah (magnified be His Majesty!) shall reply, I did
indeed name myself the Compassionating, the Compassionate. Carry My
servant to Paradise, of My mercy, for I am the most Merciful of the
mercifuls!” (¿) “What was the origin of the use of the Basmalah?”—When
Allah sent down from Heaven the Koran, they wrote, “In Thy name, O my
God!”; when Allah revealed the words, “Say: Call upon Allah, or call
upon the Compassionating, what days ye pray, for hath He the most
excellent names,”[370] they wrote, “In the name of Allah, the
Compassionating, the Compassionate;” and, when He revealed the words,
“Your God is one God, there is no God but He, the Compassionating, the
Compassionate,”[371] they wrote, “In the name of Allah, the
Compassionating, the Compassionate!” Now when the Koranist heard her
reply, he hung down his head and said to himself, “This be a marvel of
marvels! How hath this slave-girl expounded the origin of the Basmalah?
But, by Allah, needs must I go about with her and haply defeat her.” So
he asked, “Did Allah reveal the Koran all at once or at times manifold?”
She answered, “Gabriel the Faithful (on whom be peace!) descended with
it from the Lord of the Worlds upon His Prophet Mohammed, Prince of the
Apostles and Seal of the Prophets, by detached versets; bidding and
forbidding, covenanting and comminating, and containing advices and
instances in the course of twenty years as occasion called for it.” (¿)
“Which chapter was first revealed?”—According to Ibn Abbas, that
entituled Congealed Blood:[372] and, according to Jábir bin
Abdillah,[373] that called ‘The Covered’ which preceded all others.[374]
(¿) “Which verset was the last revealed?”—That of Usury,[375] and it is
also said, the verse, “When there cometh Allah’s succour and
victory.”[376]——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the damsel
told the Koranist which was the last verse he said, “Thou hast replied
aright; now tell me the names of the Companions who collected the Koran,
in the lifetime of the Apostle of Allah.” And she answered, “They were
four, Ubay ibn Ka’ab, Zayd ibn Sábit, Abú Obaydah ‘Aamir bin Jarráh, and
Othmán bin Affán,[377] (Allah accept of them one and all!)” (¿) “Who are
the readers, from whom the accepted reading of the Koran is taken?”—They
number four, Abdallah bin Mas’úd, Ubay bin Ka’ab, Ma’az bin Jabal and
Sálim bin Abdillah. (¿) “What sayest thou of the words of the Most High,
‘That which is sacrificed to stones’”?[378]—The stones are idols, which
are set up and worshipped, instead of Allah the Most High, and from this
we seek refuge with Allah. (¿) “What sayest thou of the words of the
Most High, Thou knowest what is in my soul, and I know not what is in
Thy soul”?[379]—They mean, “Thou knowest the truth of me and what is in
me, and I know not what is in Thee; and the proof of this are His
words,[380] ‘Thou art He who wottest the hidden things’”; and it is
said, also, “Thou knowest my essence, but I know not Thine essence.” (¿)
“What sayst thou of the words of the Most High, ‘O true believers,
forbid not yourselves the good things which Allah hath allowed
you?’”[381]—My Shaykh (on whom Allah have mercy!) told me that the
Companion Al-Zahhák related:—There was a people of the True-believers
who said, “We will dock our members masculine and don sackcloth;”
whereupon this verse was revealed. But Al-Kutádah declareth that it was
revealed on account of sundry Companions of the Apostle of Allah,
namely, Ali ibn Abí Tálib and Othmán bin Musa’ab and others, who said,
“We will geld ourselves and don hair cloth and make us monks.” (¿) “What
sayest thou of the words of the Most Highest, ‘And Allah took Abraham
for His friend’”?[382]—The friend of Allah is the needy, the poor, and
(according to another saying) he is the lover, he who is detached from
the world in the love of Allah Almighty and in whose attachment there is
no falling away. Now when the Koranist[383] saw her pass on in speech
with the passage of the clouds and that she stayed not in reply, he rose
to his feet and said, “I take Allah to witness, O Commander of the
Faithful, that this damsel is more learned than I in Koranic exegesis
and what pertaineth thereto.” Then said she, “I will ask thee one
question, which if thou answer it is well; but if thou answer not, I
will strip off thy clothes.” Quoth the Commander of the Faithful, “Ask
on,” and she enquired, “Which verset of the Koran hath in it
three-and-twenty Káfs, which sixteen Míms, which an hundred and forty
‘Ayns[384] and which section[385] lacketh the formula, ‘To Whom belong
glory and glorification and majesty[386]?’” The Koranist could not
reply, and she said to him, “Put off thy clothes.” So he doffed them,
and she continued, “O Commander of the Faithful, the verset of the
sixteen Mims is in the chapter Húd and is the saying of the Most High,
‘It was said, O Noah, go down in peace from us, and blessing upon
thee!’;[387] that of the three-and-twenty Kafs is the verse called of
the Faith, in the chapter of The Cow; that of the hundred and forty Ayns
is in the chapter of Al-A’aráf,[388] where the Lord saith, ‘And Moses
chose seventy men of his tribe to attend our appointed time;[389] to
each man a pair of eyes.’[390] And the lesson, which lacketh the
formula, ‘To Whom be glory and glorification,’ is that which comprises
the chapters, The Hour draweth nigh and the Moon shall be cloven in
twain[391]; The Compassionate and The Event.”[392] Thereupon the
professor departed in confusion.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the damsel
defeated the Koranist and took off his clothes and sent him away
confused, then came forward the skilled physician and said to her, “We
are free of theology and come now to physiology. Tell me, therefore, how
is man made; how many veins, bones and vertebræ are there in his body;
which is the first and chief vein and why Adam was named Adam?” She
replied, “Adam was called Adam, because of his _udmah_, that is, the
wheaten colour of his complexion and also (it is said) because he was
created of the _adim_ of the earth, that is to say, of the surface-soil.
His breast was made of the earth of the Ka’abah, his head of earth from
the East and his legs of earth from the West. There were created for him
seven doors in his head, viz., the eyes, the ears, the nostrils and the
mouth, and two passages, before and behind. The eyes were made the seat
of the sight-sense, the ears the seat of the hearing-sense, the nostrils
the seat of the smell-sense, the mouth the seat of the taste-sense and
the tongue to utter what is in the heart of man.[393] Now Adam was made
of a compound of the four elements, which be water, earth, fire and air.
The yellow bile is the humour of fire, being hot-dry; the black bile
that of earth, being cold-dry; the phlegm that of water, being
cold-moist, and the blood that of air, being hot-moist.[394] There were
made in man three hundred and sixty veins, two hundred and forty-nine
bones, and three souls[395] or spirits, the animal, the rational and the
natural, to each of which is allotted its proper function. Moreover,
Allah made him a heart and spleen and lungs and six intestines and a
liver and two kidneys and buttocks and brain and bones and skin and five
senses; hearing, seeing, smell, taste, touch. The heart He set on the
left side of the breast and made the stomach the guide and governor
thereof. He appointed the lungs for a fan to the heart and stablished
the liver on the right side, opposite thereto. Moreover, He made,
besides this, the diaphragm and the viscera and set up the bones of the
breast and latticed them with the ribs.” (¿) “How many ventricles are
there in a man’s head?”—Three, which contain five faculties, styled the
intrinsic senses, to wit, common sense, imagination, the thinking
faculty, perception and memory. (¿) “Describe to me the configuration of
the bones.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fiftieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the physicist
said to her, “Describe to me the configuration of the bones,” she
replied, “Man’s frame consists of two hundred and forty bones, which are
divided into three parts, the head, the trunk and the extremities. The
head is divided into calvarium and face. The skull is constructed of
eight bones, and to it are attached the four osselets of the ear. The
face is furnished with an upper jaw of eleven bones and a lower jaw of
one; and to these are added the teeth two-and-thirty in number, and the
os hyoides.[396] The trunk is divided into spinal column, breast and
basin. The spinal column is made up of four-and-twenty bones, called
Fikár or vertebræ; the breast, of the breast-bone and the ribs, which
are four-and-twenty in number, twelve on each side; and the basin of the
hips, the sacrum[397] and the os coccygis. The extremities are divided
into upper and lower, arms and legs. The arms are again divided firstly
into shoulder, comprising shoulder blades and collar bone; secondly into
the upper arm which is one bone; thirdly into fore-arm, composed of two
bones, the radius and the ulna, and fourthly into the hand, consisting
of the wrist, the metacarpus of five and the fingers, which number five,
of three bones each, called the phalanges, except the thumb, which hath
but two. The lower extremities are divided, firstly into thigh, which is
one bone secondly into leg, composed of three bones, the tibia, the
fibula and the patella, and thirdly into the foot, divided, like the
hand, into tarsus, metatarsus and toes; and is composed of seven bones,
ranged in two rows, two in one and five in the other; and the metatarsus
is composed of five bones and the toes number five, each of three
phalanges except the big toe which hath only two.” (¿) “Which is the
root of the veins?”—The aorta, from which they ramify, and they are
many, none knoweth the tale of them save He who created them; but I
repeat, it is said that they number three hundred and sixty.[398]
Moreover, Allah hath appointed the tongue as interpreter for the
thought, the eyes to serve as lanterns, the nostrils to smell with, and
the hands for prehensors. The liver is the seat of pity, the spleen of
laughter[399] and the kidneys of craft; the lungs are ventilators, the
stomach the store-house and the heart the prop and pillar of the body.
When the heart is sound, the whole body is sound, and when the heart is
corrupt, the whole body is corrupt. (¿) “What are the outward signs and
symptoms evidencing disease in the members of the body, both external
and internal?”—A physician, who is a man of understanding, looketh into
the state of the body and is guided by the feel of the hands,[400]
according as they are firm or flabby, hot or cool, moist or dry.
Internal disorders are also indicated by external symptoms, such as
yellowness of the white of the eyes, which denoteth jaundice, and
bending of the back, which denoteth disease of the lungs.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the damsel
had described to the doctor the outer signs and symptoms quoth he, “Thou
hast replied aright! now what are the internal symptoms of disease?”—The
science of the diagnosis of disease by internal symptoms is founded upon
six canons, (1) the patient’s actions; (2) what is evacuated from his
body; (3) the nature of the pain and (4) the site thereof; (5) swelling
and (6) the effluvia given off his person. (¿) “How cometh hurt to the
head?”—By the ingestion of food upon food, before the first be digested,
and by fullness upon fullness; this it is that wasteth peoples. He who
would live long, let him be early with the morning-meal and not late
with the evening-meal; let him be sparing of commerce with women and
chary of such depletory measures as cupping and blood-letting; and let
him make of his belly three parts, one for food, one for drink and the
third for air; for that a man’s intestines are eighteen spans in length
and it befitteth that he appoint six for meat, six for drink, and six
for breath. If he walk, let him go gently; it will be wholesomer for him
and better for his body and more in accordance with the saying of the
Almighty, “Walk not proudly on the earth.”[401] (¿) “What are the
symptoms of yellow bile and what is to be feared therefrom?”—The
symptoms are sallow complexion and bitter taste in the mouth with
dryness; failure of the appetite, venereal and other, and rapid pulse;
and the patient hath to fear high fever and delirium and eruptions and
jaundice and tumour and ulcers of the bowels and excessive thirst. (¿)
“What are the symptoms of black bile and what hath the patient to fear
from it, an it get the mastery of the body?”—The symptoms are false
appetite and great mental disquiet and cark and care; and it behoveth
that it be evacuated, else it will generate melancholia[402] and leprosy
and cancer and disease of the spleen and ulceration of the bowels. (¿)
“Into how many branches is the art of medicine divided?”—Into two: the
art of diagnosing diseases and that of restoring the diseased body to
health. (¿) “When is the drinking of medicine more efficacious than
other-when?”—When the sap runs in the wood and the grape thickens in the
cluster and the two auspicious planets, Jupiter and Venus, are in the
ascendant; then setteth in the proper season for drinking of drugs and
doing away of disease. (¿) “What time is it, when, if a man drink water
from a new vessel, the drink is sweeter and lighter or more digestible
to him than at another time, and there ascendeth to him a pleasant
fragrance and a penetrating?”——When he waiteth awhile after eating, as
quoth the poet:—

 Drink not upon thy food in haste but wait awhile; ✿ Else thou with
    halter shalt thy frame to sickness lead:
 And patient bear a little thirst from food, then drink; ✿ And thus, O
    brother, haply thou shalt win thy need.[403]

(¿) “What food is it that giveth not rise to ailments?”—That which is
not eaten but after hunger, and when it is eaten, the ribs are not
filled with it, even as saith Jálínús or Galen the physician, “Whoso
will take in food, let him go slowly and he shall not go wrongly.” And
to conclude with His saying (on whom be blessing and peace!), “The
stomach is the house of disease, and diet is the head of healing; for
the origin of all sickness is indigestion, that is to say, corruption of
the meat”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel said to the doctor, “The stomach is the house of disease and diet
is the head of healing; for the origin of all sickness is indigestion,
that is to say, corruption of the meat in the stomach;” he rejoined,
“Thou hast replied aright! what sayest thou of the Hammam?”—Let not the
full man enter it. Quoth the Prophet, “The bath is the blessing of the
house, for that it cleanseth the body and calleth to mind the Fire.” (¿)
“What Hammams are best for bathing in?”—Those whose waters are sweet and
whose space is ample and which are kept well aired; their atmosphere
representing the four seasons—autumn and summer and winter and spring.
(¿) “What kind of food is the most profitable?”—That which women make
and which hath not cost overmuch trouble and which is readily digested.
The most excellent of food is brewis[404] or bread sopped in broth;
according to the saying of the Prophet, “Brewis excelleth other food,
even as Ayishah excelleth other women.” (¿) “What kind of kitchen, or
seasoning, is most profitable?”—“Flesh meat” (quoth the Prophet) “is the
most excellent of kitchen; for that it is the delight of this world and
the next world.” (¿) “What kind of meat is the most profitable?”—Mutton;
but jerked meat is to be avoided, for there is no profit in it. (¿)
“What of fruits?”—Eat them in their prime and quit them when their
season is past. (¿) “What sayest thou of drinking water?”—Drink it not
in large quantities nor swallow it by gulps, or it will give thee
head-ache and cause divers kinds of harm; neither drink it immediately
after leaving the Hammam nor after carnal copulation or eating (except
it be after the lapse of fifteen minutes for a young man and forty for
an old man), nor after waking from sleep. (¿) “What of drinking
fermented liquors?”—Doth not the prohibition suffice thee in the Book of
Almighty Allah, where He saith, “Verily, wine and lots and images, and
the divining arrows are an abomination, of Satan’s work; therefore avoid
them, that ye may prosper”?[405] And again, “They will ask thee
concerning wine and lots: Answer, ‘In both there is great sin and also
some things of use unto men: but their sinfulness is greater than their
use.’”[406] Hence quoth the poet:—

 O bibber of liquor, art not ashamed ✿ To drink what Allah forbade thee
    drain?
 Put it far from thee and approach it not; ✿ It holds what Allah forbade
    as bane.

And quoth another to the same purport:—

 I drank the sin till my reason fled: ✿ I’ll drink that reason to loss
    misled!

As for the advantages that be therein, it disperseth stone and gravel
from the kidneys and strengtheneth the viscera and banisheth care, and
moveth to generosity and preserveth health and digestion; it conserveth
the body, expelleth disease from the joints, purifieth the frame of
corrupt humours, engendereth cheerfulness, gladdeneth the heart of man
and keepeth up the natural heat: it contracteth the bladder, enforceth
the liver and removeth obstructions, reddeneth the cheeks, cleareth away
maggots from the brain and deferreth grey hairs. In short, had not Allah
(to whom be honour and glory!) forbidden it,[407] there were not on the
face of the earth aught fit to stand in its stead. As for gambling by
lots, it is a game of hazard such as dicing not of skill. (¿) “What wine
is best?”—That which is pressed from white grapes and kept eighty days
or more after fermentation: it resembleth not water and indeed there is
nothing on the surface of the earth like unto it. (¿) “What sayest thou
of cupping?”—It is for him who is over full of blood and who hath no
defect therein; and whoso would be cupped, let it be during the wane of
the moon, on a day without cloud, wind or rain and on the seventeenth of
the month. If it fall on a Tuesday, it will be the more efficacious, and
nothing is more salutary for the brain and eyes and for clearing the
intellect than cupping.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the damsel
enumerated the benefits of cupping, quoth the doctor, “What is the best
time for cupping?”—One should be cupped ‘on the spittle,’ that is, in
the morning before eating, for this fortifieth the wit and the memory.
It is reported of the Prophet that, when anyone complained to him of a
pain in the head or legs, he would bid him be cupped and after cupping
not eat salt food fasting, for it engendereth scurvy; neither eat sour
things as curded milk[408] immediately after cupping. (¿) “When is
cupping to be avoided?”—On Sabbaths or Saturdays and Wednesdays, and let
him who is cupped on these days blame none but himself. Moreover, one
should not be cupped in very hot weather nor in very cold weather; and
the best season for cupping is springtide. Quoth the doctor, “Now tell
me of carnal copulation.” Hereupon Tawaddud hung her head, for shame and
confusion before the Caliph’s majesty; then said, “By Allah, O Commander
of the Faithful, it is not that I am at fault, but that I am ashamed;
though, indeed, the answer is on the edge of my tongue.” Said the
Caliph; “Speak, O damsel,” whereupon said she, “Copulation hath in it
many and exceeding virtues and praiseworthy qualities, amongst which
are, that it lighteneth a body full of black bile and calmeth the heat
of love and induceth affection and dilateth the heart and dispelleth the
sadness of solitude; and the excess of it is more harmful in summer and
autumn than in spring and winter.” (¿) “What are its good effects?”—It
banisheth trouble and disquiet, calmeth love and wrath and is good for
ulcers, especially in a cold and dry humour; on the other hand excess of
it weakeneth the sight and engendereth pains in the legs and head and
back: and beware, beware of carnal connection with old women, for they
are deadly. Quoth the Imam Ali[409] (whose face Allah honour!), “Four
things kill and ruin the body: entering the Hammam on a full stomach;
eating salt food; copulation on a plethora of blood and lying with an
ailing woman; for she will weaken thy strength and infect thy frame with
sickness; and an old woman is deadly poison.” And quoth one of them,
“Beware of taking an old woman to wife, though she be richer in hoards
than Kárún.”[410] (¿) “What is the best copulation?”—If the woman be
tender of years, comely of shape, fair of face, swelling of breast and
of noble race, she will add to thee strength and health of body; and let
her be even as saith a certain poet describing her:—

 Seeing thy looks wots she what thou desir’st, ✿ By inspiration; wants
    nor word nor sign;
 And, when thou dost behold her rarest grace, ✿ The charms of every
    garden canst decline.

(¿) “At what time is copulation good?”—If by night, after food digested
and if by day, after the morning meal. (¿) “What are the most excellent
fruits?”—Pomegranate and citron. (¿) “Which is the most excellent of
vegetables?”—Endive.[411] (¿) “Which of sweet-scented flowers?”—Rose and
Violet. (¿) “How is the seed of man secreted?”—There is in man a vein
which feedeth all the other veins. Now water is collected from the three
hundred and sixty veins and, in the form of red blood, entereth the left
testicle, where it is decocted, by the heat of temperament inherent in
the son of Adam, into a thick, white liquid, whose odour is as that of
the palm-spathe. (¿) “What flying thing is it that emitteth seed and
menstruateth?”—The flitter-mouse,[412] that is the bat. (¿) “What is
that which, when confined and shut out from the air liveth, and when let
out to smell the air dieth?”—The fish. (¿) “What serpent layeth
eggs?”—The Su’ban or dragon.[413] With this the physician waxed weary
with much questioning, and held his peace, when Tawaddud said to the
Caliph, “O Commander of the Faithful, he hath questioned me till he is
tired out and now I will ask him one question, which if he answer not, I
will take his clothes as lawful prize.”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel said to the Commander of the Faithful, “Verily he hath questioned
me till he is tired out, and now I will ask him one question, which if
he answer not I will take his clothes as lawful prize,” the Caliph
cried, “Ask on.” So quoth she to the physician, “What is that thing
which resembleth the earth in roundness, whose resting-place and whose
spine are hidden from men’s eyes; little of price and estimation; narrow
of chest and shackled as to throat though it be nor runaway slave nor
pestilent thief; thrust through and through, though not in fray, and
wounded, though not in fight; time eateth its vigour and water wasteth
it away; now it is beaten without blemish, and then made to serve
without stint; united after separation; submissive, but not to him who
caresseth it; pregnant without child in belly; drooping, yet not leaning
on its side; becoming dirty yet purifying itself; cleaving to its fere,
yet changing; copulating without a yard, wrestling without arms: resting
and taking its ease; bitten, yet not crying out: now more complaisant
than a cup-companion and then more troublesome than summer-heat; leaving
its mate by night and embracing her by day and having its abode in the
corners of the mansions of the noble?” The physician was silent awhile
in perplexity and his colour changed and he bowed his head and made no
reply; whereupon she said to him, “Ho, sir doctor, speak or doff thy
dress.” At this, he rose and said, “O Commander of the Faithful, bear
witness against me that this damsel is more learned than I in medicine
and what else, and that I cannot cope with her.” And he put off his
clothes and fled forth. Quoth the Caliph to Tawaddud, “Ree us thy
riddle,” and she replied, “O Commander of the Faithful, it is the button
and the button-loop.[414]”—Then she undertook the astronomers and said,
“Let him of you who is an astronomer rise and come forward.” So the
astronomer advanced and sat down before her; and, when she saw him, she
laughed and said, “Art thou the astronomer, the mathematician, the
scribe?” “Yes,” answered he. Quoth she, “Ask of what thou wilt; success
resteth with Allah.” So he said, “Tell me of the sun and its rising and
setting?” And she replied:—Know that the sun riseth from the shadows in
the Eastern hemisphere and setteth in the shadows of the Western, and
each hemisphere compriseth one hundred and eighty degrees. Quoth Allah
Almighty, ‘I swear by the Lord of the East and of the West.’[415] And
again, ‘He it is who hath ordained the sun to shine by day, and the moon
for a light by night; and hath appointed her station that ye might know
the number of years and the computation of time.’[416] The moon is
Sultan of the night and the sun Sultan of the day, and they vie with
each other in their courses and follow without overtaking each other.
Quoth Almighty Allah, ‘It is not expedient that the sun overtake the
moon in her course; neither doth the night outstrip the day, but each of
these luminaries moveth in a peculiar orbit.’[417] (¿) “When the day
cometh, what becometh of the night; and what of the day, when the night
cometh?”—He causeth the night to enter in upon the day, and He causeth
the day to enter in upon the night.’[418] (¿) “Enumerate to me the
mansions of the moon?”[419]—They number eight-and-twenty, to wit,
Sharatán, Butayn, Surayá, Dabarán, Hak’ah, Han’ah, Zirá’a, Nasrah, Tarf,
Jabhah, Zubrah, Sarfah, ‘Awwá, Simák, Ghafar, Zubání, Iklíl, Kalb,
Shaulah, Na’am, Baldah, Sa’ad al-Zábih, Sa’ad al-Bul’a, Sa’ad al-Su’úd,
Sa’ad al-Akhbiyah, Fargh the Former and Fargh the Latter; and Risháa.
They are disposed in the order of the letters of the Abjad-hawwaz or
older alphabet,[420] according to their numerical power, and in them are
secret virtues which none knoweth save Allah (extolled and exalted be
He!) and the stablished in science. They are divided among the twelve
Signs of the Zodiac, two mansions and a third of a mansion to each Sign.
Thus Sharatan, Butayn and one-third of Suráyá, belong to Aries, the
other two-thirds of Suráyá, Dabaran and two-thirds of Hak’ah to Taurus,
the other third of Hak’ah, Han’ah and Zira’a to Gemini; Nasrah, Tarf and
a third of Jabhah to Cancer, the other two-thirds of Jabhah, Zubrah and
two-thirds of Sarfah to Leo; the other third of Sarfah, ‘Awwá and Simák
to Virgo; Ghafar, Zubáni and one-third of Iklíl to Libra; the other
two-thirds of Iklil, Kalb and two-thirds of Shaulah to Scorpio; the
other third of Shaulah, Na’áim and Baldah to Sagittarius; Sa’ad
al-Zábih, Sa’ad al-Bul’a and one-third of Sa’ad al-Su’ud to Capricorn,
the other two-thirds of Sa’ad al-Su’úd, Sa’ad al-Akhbiyah and two-thirds
of Fargh the Former to Aquarius, the other third of Fargh the Former,
Fargh the Latter and Risháa to Pisces.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the damsel
enumerated the Mansions and distributed them into their Signs, the
astronomer said, “Thou hast replied aright; now tell me of the planets
and their natures, also of their sojourn in the Zodiacal Signs, their
aspects, auspicious and sinister, their houses, ascendants and
descendants.” She answered, “The sitting is narrow for so large a
matter, but I will say as much as I can. Now the planets number seven;
which are, the Sun, the Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn. The
Sun, hot-dry, sinister in conjunction, favourable in opposition, abideth
thirty days in each Sign. The Moon, cold-moist and favourable of aspect,
tarrieth in each Sign two days and a third of another day. Mercury is of
a mixed nature, favourable in conjunction with the favourable, and
sinister in conjunction with the sinister aspects, and abideth in each
sign seventeen days and a half day. Venus, temperate and favourable,
abideth in each sign five-and-twenty days. Mars is sinister and woneth
in each sign ten months. Jupiter is auspicious and abideth in each sign
a year. Saturn, cold-dry and sinister, tarrieth in each sign thirty
months. The house of the Sun is Leo, her ascendant is Aries, and her
descendant Aquarius. The Moon’s house is Cancer, his ascendant Taurus,
his descendant Scorpio and his sinister aspect Capricorn. Saturn’s house
is Capricorn-Aquarius, his ascendant Libra, his descendant Aries and his
sinister aspects Cancer and Leo. Jupiter’s house is Pisces-Sagittarius,
his ascendant Cancer, his descendant Capricorn and his sinister aspects
Gemini and Leo. Venus’s house is Taurus, her ascendant Pisces, her
descendant Libra, and her sinister aspects Aries and Scorpio. Mercury’s
house is Gemini-Virgo, his ascendant Virgo, his descendant Pisces, and
his sinister aspect Taurus. Mars’s house is Aries-Scorpio, his ascendant
Capricorn, his descendant Cancer and his sinister aspect Libra.” Now
when the astronomer saw her acuteness and comprehensive learning and
heard her fair answers, he bethought him for a sleight to confound her
before the Commander of the Faithful, and said to her, “O damsel, tell
me, will rain fall this month?” At this she bowed her head and pondered
so long, that the Caliph thought her at a loss for an answer and the
astronomer said to her, “Why dost thou not speak?” Quoth she, “I will
not speak except the Commander of the Faithful give me leave.” So the
Caliph laughed and said, “How so?” Cried she, “I would have thee give me
a sword, that I may strike off his head, for he is an Infidel, an
Agnostic, an Atheist.[421]” At this, loud laughed the Caliph and those
about him laughed, and she continued, “O astronomer, there are five
things that none knoweth save Allah Almighty;” and she repeated the
verset; ‘Aye! Allah!—with Him is the knowledge of the hour and He
causeth the rain to descend at His own appointed time—and He knoweth
what is in the wombs of females—but no soul knoweth what it shall have
gotten on the morrow; neither wotteth any soul in what land it shall
die: Verily Allah is knowing, informed of all.’[422] Quoth the
astronomer, “Thou hast said well, and I, by Allah, thought only to try
thee.” Rejoined she, “Know that the almanack-makers have certain signs
and tokens, referring to the planets and constellations relative to the
coming in of the year; and folk have learned something by experience.”
(¿) “What be that?”—Each day hath a planet that ruleth it: so if the
first day in the year fall on First Day (Sunday) that day is the Sun’s
and this portendeth (though Allah alone is All-knowing!) oppression of
kings and sultans and governors and much miasma and lack of rain; and
that people will be in great tumult and the grain-crop will be good,
except lentils, which will perish, and the vines will rot and flax will
be dear and wheat cheap from the beginning of Túbah to the end of
Barmahát.[423] And, in this year there will be much fighting among
kings, and there shall be great plenty of good in this year, but Allah
is All-knowing! (¿) “What if the first day fall on Second Day
(Monday)?”—That day belongeth to the Moon and portendeth righteousness
in administrators and officials; and that it will be a year of much rain
and grain-crops will be good, but linseed will decay and wheat will be
cheap in the month Kiyáhk;[424] also the plague will rage and the sheep
and goats will die, grapes will be plentiful and honey scarce and cotton
cheap; and Allah is omniscient!——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the damsel
ended her notice of Second Day the astronomer said to her “Now tell me
what will occur if New Year’s day fall on Third Day (Tuesday).” She
replied, That is Mars’ day and portendeth death of great men and much
destruction and deluge of blood and dearness of grain; lack of rain and
scarcity of fish, which will anon be in excess and anon fail. Lentils
and honey in this year will be cheap and linseed dear and only barley
will thrive, to the exception of all other cereals: great will be the
fighting among kings and death will be in the blood and there will be
much mortality among asses. (¿) “What if it fall on Fourth Day?”—That is
Mercury’s day and portendeth great tumult among the folk and much enmity
and, though rains be moderate, rotting of some of the green crops; also
that there will be sore mortality among cattle and young children and
much fighting by sea; that wheat will be dear from Barmúdah to
Misra[425] and other grains cheap; thunder and lightning will abound and
honey will be dear, palm-trees will thrive and bear abundantly and flax
and cotton will be plentiful, while radishes and onions will be dear;
but Allah is All-knowing! (¿) “What if it fall on Fifth Day?”—That is
Jupiter’s day and portendeth equity in Wazirs and righteousness in Kazis
and Fakirs and the Ministers of religion; and that good will be
plentiful: rains and fruit and trees and grain will abound, and flax,
cotton, honey, grapes and fish be cheap; and Allah is Omniscient! (¿)
“What if it fall on Meeting Day or Friday?”—That day appertaineth to
Venus and portendeth oppression in the chiefs of the Jinn and talk of
forgery and back-biting; there will be much dew; the autumn crops will
be good in the land and there will be cheapness in one town and not in
another: ungraciousness will be rife by land and sea; linseed will be
dear, also wheat, in Hátúr, but cheap in Amshír; honey will be dear and
grapes and water-melons will rot; and Allah is Omniscient! (¿) “What if
it fall on the Sabbath (Saturday)?”—“That is Saturn’s day and portendeth
the preferment of slaves and Greeks and those in whom there is no good,
neither in their neighbourhood; there will be great drought and dearth;
clouds will abound and death will be rife among the sons of Adam and woe
to the people of Egypt and Syria from the oppression of the Sultan and
failure of blessing upon the green crops and rotting of grain; and Allah
is All-knowing!”[426] Now with this, the astronomer hung his head very
low, and she said to him, “O astronomer, I will ask thee one question,
which if thou answer not, I will take thy clothes.” “Ask,” replied he.
Quoth she, “Where is Saturn’s dwelling-place?”; and he answered, “In the
seventh heaven.” (¿) “And that of Jupiter?”—In the sixth heaven. (¿)
“And that of Mars?”—In the fifth heaven. (¿) “And that of the Sun?”—In
the fourth heaven. (¿) “And that of Venus?”—In the third heaven. (¿)
“And that of Mercury?”—In the second heaven. (¿) “And that of the
Moon?”—In the first heaven. Quoth she, “Well answered; but I have one
more question to ask thee;” and quoth he, “Ask!” Accordingly she said,
“Now tell me concerning the stars, into how many parts are they
divided.” But he was silent and answered nothing; and she cried to him,
“Put off thy clothes.” So he doffed them and she took them; after which
the Caliph said to her, “Tell us the answer to thy question.” She
replied:—O Commander of the Faithful, the stars are divided into three
parts, whereof one-third is hung in the sky of the earth,[427] as it
were lamps, to give light to the earth, and a part is used to shoot the
demons withal, when they draw near by stealth to listen to the talk in
heaven. Quoth Allah Almighty, ‘Verily, we have dight the sky of the
earth with the adornment of the stars; and have appointed them for
projectiles against every rebellious Satan.’[428] And the third part is
hung in air to illuminate the seas and give light to what is therein.
Quoth the astronomer, “I have one more question to ask, which if she
answer, I will avow myself beaten.” “Say on,” answered she.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
astronomer said, “Now tell me what four contraries are based upon other
four contraries?” Replied she, “The four qualities of Caloric and
Frigoric, Humidity and Siccity; for of heat Allah created fire, whose
nature is hot-dry; of dryness, earth, which is cold-dry; of cold, water,
which is cold-wet; of moisture, air, which is hot-wet. Moreover, He
created twelve Signs of the Zodiac, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo,
Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces; and
appointed them of the four humours; three fiery, Aries, Leo, and
Sagittarius; three earthy, Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn; three airy,
Gemini, Libra and Aquarius; and three watery, Cancer, Scorpio and
Pisces.” Hereupon the astronomer rose, and saying, “Bear witness against
me that she is more learned than I,” away he went beaten. Then quoth the
Caliph, “Where is the philosopher[429]?”; at which one rose hastily and
came forward and said to Tawaddud, “What is Time and what be its limits,
and its days, and what things bringeth it?” Replied she, “Time is a term
applied to the hours of the night and day, which are but the measures of
the courses of the sun and moon in their several heavens, even as Allah
Almighty telleth us when he saith, ‘A sign to them also is the Night,
from which we strip off the day, and lo! they are plunged in darkness,
and the Sun runneth to her place of rest; this is the ordinance of the
Sublime, the All-knowing.’”[430] (¿) “How cometh unbelief to the son of
Adam?”—It is reported of the Apostle (whom Allah bless and preserve!)
that he said, ‘Unbelief in a man runneth as the blood runneth in his
veins, when he revileth the world and Time and night and the Hour.’ And
again, ‘Let none of you revile Time, for Time is God;’ neither revile
the world, for she saith, May Allah not aid him who revileth me! neither
revile the hour, for, ‘The Hour is surely coming, there is no doubt
thereof’;[431] neither revile the earth, for it is a portent, according
to the saying of the Most High, ‘Out of the ground have we created you,
and into the same will we cause you to return, and we will bring you
forth yet thence another time.’[432] (¿) “What are the five that ate and
drank, yet came not out of loins nor womb?”—Adam and Simeon[433] and
Salih’s she-camel[434] and Ishmael’s ram and the bird that Abu Bakr the
Truth-teller saw in the cave.[435] (¿) “Tell me of five that are in
Paradise and are neither humans, Jinns nor angels?”—Jacob’s wolf and the
Seven Sleepers’ dog and Esdras’s ass and Salih’s camel and Duldul the
mule of the Prophet (upon whom be blessings and peace!). (¿) “What man
prayed a prayer neither on earth nor in heaven?”—Solomon, when he prayed
on his carpet, borne by the wind. (¿) “Ree me this riddle:—A man once
looked at a handmaid during dawn-prayer, and she was unlawful to him;
but, at noonday she became lawful to him: by mid-afternoon, she was
again unlawful, but at sundown, she was lawful to him: at supper time
she was a third time unlawful, but by daybreak, she became once more
lawful to him.”—This was a man who looked at another’s slave-girl in the
morning, and she was then unlawful to him; but at midday he bought her,
and she became lawful to him: at mid-afternoon he freed her, and she
became unlawful to him; but at sundown he married her and she was again
lawful to him. At nightfall he divorced her and she was then a third
time unlawful to him; but, next morning at daybreak, he took her back,
and she became once more lawful to him. (¿) “Tell me what tomb went
about with him that lay buried therein?”—Jonah’s whale, when it had
swallowed him. (¿) “What spot of lowland is it, upon which the sun shone
once, but will never again shine till Judgment-Day?”—The bottom of the
Red Sea, when Moses smote it with his staff, and the sea clave asunder
in twelve places, according to the number of the tribes;[436] then
the sun shone on the bottom and will do so nevermore until
Judgment-Day.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the philosopher
then addressed the damsel saying, “What was the first skirt that trailed
over the face of the earth?” She replied, “That of Hagar, out of shame
before Sarah; and it became a custom among the Arabs.” (¿) “What is that
which breatheth without life?”—Quoth Almighty Allah, ‘By the morning
when it breatheth!’[437] (¿) “Ree me this riddle:—A number of pigeons
came to a high tree and lighted, some on the tree and others under it.
Said those on the tree to those on the ground:—If one of you come up to
us, ye will be a third part of us all in number; and if one of us
descend to you, we shall be like unto you in number. How many pigeons
were there in all?”—Twelve: seven alighted on the tree and five beneath;
and, if one go up, those above would be eight to four; and, if one go
down, both would be six and Allah is all-knowing.[438] With this the
philosopher put off his clothes and fled: whereupon the next contest
took place, for she turned to the Olema present and said, “Which of you
is the rhetorician that can discourse of all arts and sciences?” There
came forward a sage hight Ibrahim bin Siyyár and said to her, “Think me
not like the rest.” Quoth she, “It is the more assured to me that thou
wilt be beaten, for that thou art a boaster; and Allah will help me to
victory over thee, that I may strip thee of thy clothes. So, if thou
sentest one to fetch thee wherewithal to cover thyself, ‘twould be well
for thee.” Cried he, “By Allah, I will assuredly conquer thee and make
thee a byword among the peoples, generation after generation!” Rejoined
she, “Do penance in advance for thy broken oath.” Then he asked, “What
five things did Allah create before he made man?”; and she answered,
“Water and earth and light and darkness and the fruits of the earth.”
(¿) “What did Allah create with the hand of omnipotence?”—The ‘Arsh,
throne of God or the empyreal heaven and the tree Túbá[439] and Adam and
the garden of Eden; these Allah created with the hand of His
omnipotence; but to all other created things He said, “Be,”—and they
were. (¿) “Who is thy father in Al-Islam?”—Mohammed, whom Allah bless
and preserve! (¿) “Who was the father in Al-Islam of Mohammed?”—Abraham,
the Friend of God. (¿) “What is the Faith of Al-Islam?”—The professing
that there is no God but _the_ God and that Mohammed is the apostle of
God. (¿) “What is thy first and thy last?”—My first is man’s seed in the
shape of foul water and my last filthy carrion: the first of me is dust
and the last of me is dust. Quoth the poet:—

 Of dust was I created, and man did I become, ✿ In question ever ready
    and aye fluent in reply,
 Then, I unto the dust return’d, became of it again, ✿ For that, in very
    deed, of dust at first create was I.

He continued, “What thing was it, whose first state was wood and its
last life?”—Moses’ staff,[440] when he cast it on the valley-ground and
it became, by permission of Allah, a writhing serpent. (¿) “What is the
meaning of the word of the Lord, ‘And I have other occasion for
it?’”[441]—He, Moses, was wont to plant his staff in the ground, and it
would flower and fruit and shade him from the heat and from the cold.
Moreover, it would carry him when he was weary, and whilst he slept
guard his sheep from lions and wild beasts. (¿) “What woman was born of
a man alone and what man of a woman alone?”—Eve of Adam and Jesus of
Mary.[442] (¿) “Tell me of the four fires, what fire eateth and
drinketh; what fire eateth but drinketh not; what fire drinketh but
eateth not and what other neither eateth nor drinketh?”—The fire of the
world eateth but drinketh not; the fire which eateth and drinketh is
Hell-fire; the fire of the sun drinketh but eateth not, and the fire of
the moon neither eateth nor drinketh. (¿) “Which is the open door and
which the shut?”—The Traditional Ordinances are the open door, the
Koranic the shut door. (¿) “Of what doth the poet speak, when he saith:—

 And dweller in the tomb whose food is at his head, ✿ When he eateth of
    that meat, of words he waxeth fain:

 He riseth and he walketh and he talketh without tongue; ✿ And returneth
    to the tomb where his kith and kin are lain.
 No living wight is he, yet in honour he abides; ✿ Nor dead yet he
    deserveth that Allah him assain.”

She replied, “The reed-pen.”[443] Quoth he, “What doth the poet refer to
in these verses:—

 Two vests in one; blood flowing easiest wise; ✿ Rosy red ears and mouth
    wide open lies;
 It hath a cock-like form, its belly pecks ✿ And, if you price it, half a
    dirham buys.”

She replied, “The ink-case.” Quoth he, “And in these:—

 Ho say to men of wisdom, wit and lore ✿ To sapient, reverend, clever
    counsellor:
 Tell me what was’t you saw that bird bring forth ✿ When wandering
    Arab-land and Ajam o’er?
 No flesh it beareth and it hath no blood, ✿ Nor down nor any feathers
    e’er it wore.
 ‘Tis eaten cooked and eke ‘tis eaten cold; ✿ ‘Tis eaten buried ‘neath
    the flames that roar:
 It showeth two-fold colours, silver white ✿ And yellow brighter than
    pure golden ore:
 ‘Tis not seen living or we count it dead: ✿ So ree my riddle rich in
    marvel-store!”

She replied, “Thou makest longsome the questioning anent an egg worth a
mite.” “And this?:”—

 I waved to and fro and he waved to and fro, ✿ With a motion so pleasant,
    now fast and now slow;
 And at last he sunk down on my bosom of snow; ✿ “Your lover friend?”

—“_No friend, my fan_;”[444] said she. (¿) “How many words did Allah
speak to Moses?”—It is related of the Apostle that he said, “God spoke
to Moses fifteen hundred and fifteen words.” (¿) “Tell me of fourteen
things that speak to the Lord of the Worlds?”—The seven heavens and
the seven earths, when they say, ‘We come obedient to Thy
command.’[445]——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the damsel
made the answer, the philosopher continued, “Tell me of Adam and how he
was first created?” and she said, “Allah created Adam of clay: the clay
He made of foam and the foam of the sea, the sea of darkness, darkness
of light, light of a fish, the fish of a rock, the rock of a ruby, the
ruby of water, and the water He created by His Omnipotence according to
His saying (exalted be His name!), ‘His commandment when He willeth
aught, is but to say, BE,—and IT IS.’”[446] (¿) “What is meant by the
poet in these verses:—

 And eater lacking mouth and even maw; ✿ Yet trees and beasts to it are
    daily bread:
 Well fed it thrives and shows a lively life, ✿ But give it water and you
    do it dead?”

“This,” quoth she, “is Fire.” “And in these;” he asked:—

 “Two lovers barred from every joy and bliss, ✿ Who through the livelong
    night embracing lie:
 They guard the folk from all calamities, ✿ But with the rising sun apart
    they fly?”

She answered, “The leaves of a door.” Quoth he, “Tell me of the gates of
Gehenna?” Quoth she, “They are seven in number and their names are
comprised in these two couplets:—

 Jahannam, next Lazá, and third Hatím; ✿ Then count Sa’ír and Sakar eke,
    five-fold,
 Sixth comes Jahím and Háwiyah the seventh; ✿ Here are seven Hells in
    four lines briefly told.”

Quoth he “To what doth the poet refer when he saith:—

 She wears a pair of ringlets long let down ✿ Behind her, as she comes
    and goes at speed,
 And eye that never tastes of sleep nor sheds ✿ A tear, for ne’er a drop
    it hath at need;
 That never all its life wore stitch of clothes; ✿ Yet robes mankind in
    every mode of weed?”

Quoth she, “A needle.” (¿) “What is the length and what the breadth of
the bridge Al-Sirát?”—Its length is three thousand years’ journey, a
thousand in descent and a thousand in ascent and a thousand level: it is
sharper than a sword and finer than a hair.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Four Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the damsel
had described to him Al-Sirat, the philosopher said, “Inform me how many
intercessions with Allah hath the Prophet for each soul?”[447]—Three.
(¿) “Was Abu Bakr the first who embraced Al-Islam?”—Yes. (¿) “Yet Ali
became a Moslem before him?”—Ali came to the Prophet, when he was a boy
of seven years old, for Allah vouchsafed him knowledge of the way of
salvation in his tender youth, so that he never prostrated himself to
idols. Quoth he, “Tell me which is the more excellent, Ali or Abbás?”
Now she knew that, in propounding this question, Ibrahim was laying a
trap for her; for if she said, “Ali is more excellent than Abbas,” she
would lack excuse with the Caliph for undervaluing his ancestor; so she
bowed her head awhile, now reddening, then paling, and lastly said,
“Thou askest me of two excellent men, each having his own excellence.
Let us return to what we were about.” When the Caliph Harun al-Rashid
heard her, he stood up and said, “Thou hast spoken well, by the Lord of
the Ka’abah, O Tawaddud!” Then quoth Ibrahim the rhetorician, “What
meaneth the poet when he saith:—

 Slim-wasted one, whose taste is sweetest-sweet, ✿ Likest a lance whereon
    no head we scan:
 And all the lieges find it work them weal, ✿ Eaten of afternoon in
    Ramazan.”

She answered, “The sugar-cane;” and he said, “Tell me of many things.”
Asked she, “What are they?” and he said, “What is sweeter than honey;
what is sharper than the sword; what is swifter than poison; what is the
delight of a moment and what the contentment of three days; what is the
pleasantest of days; what is the joy of a week; what is that debt the
worst debtor denieth not; what is the prison of the tomb; what is the
joy of the heart; what is the snare of the soul; what is death-in-life;
what is the disease that may not be healed; what is the shame that may
not be wiped off; what is the beast that woneth not in cultivated
fields, but lodgeth in waste places and hateth the sons of Adam and hath
in him somewhat of the make of seven strong and violent beasts?” Quoth
she, “Hear what I shall say in reply; then put off thy clothes, that I
may explain to thee;” and the Caliph said, “Expound, and he shall doff
his clothes.” So she said, “Now that, which is sweeter than honey, is
the love of pious children to their two parents; that, which is sharper
than the sword, is the tongue; that, which is swifter than poison, is
the Envier’s eye; the delight of a moment is carnal copulation and the
contentment of three days is the depilatory for women; the pleasantest
of days is that of profit on merchandise; the joy of a week is the
bride; the debt, which the worst debtor denieth not, is death; the
prison of the tomb is a bad son; the joy of the heart is a woman
obedient to her husband (and it is said also that, when fleshmeat
descendeth upon the heart, it rejoiceth therein); the snare of the soul
is a disobedient slave; death-in-life is poverty; the disease that may
not be healed is an ill-nature, and the shame that may not be wiped away
is an ill daughter; lastly, the beast that woneth not in cultivated
fields, but lodgeth in waste places and hateth the sons of Adam and hath
in him somewhat of the make of seven strong and violent beasts, is the
locust, whose head is as the head of a horse, its neck as the neck of
the bull, its wings as the wings of the vulture, its feet as the feet of
the camel, its tail as the tail of the serpent, its belly as the belly
of the scorpion and its horns as the horns of the gazelle.” The Caliph
was astounded at her quickness and understanding, and said to the
rhetorician, “Doff thy clothes.” So he rose up and cried, “I call all
who are present in this assembly to witness that she is more learned
than I and every other learned man.” And he put off his clothes and gave
them to her, saying, “Take them and may Allah not bless them to thee!”
So the Caliph ordered him fresh clothes and said, “O Tawaddud, there is
one thing left of that for which thou didst engage, namely, chess.” And
he sent for experts of chess and cards[448] and trictrac. The
chess-player sat down before her, and they set the pieces, and he moved
and she moved; but, every move he made she speedily countered,——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the damsel
was playing chess with the expert in presence of the Commander of the
Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, whatever move he made was speedily countered
by her, till she beat him and he found himself checkmated. Quoth he, “I
did but lead thee on, that thou mightest think thyself skilful: but set
up again, and thou shalt see.” So they placed the pieces a second time,
when he said in himself, “Open thine eyes or she will beat thee.” And he
fell to moving no piece, save after calculation, and ceased not to play,
till she said, “Thy King is dead!—Checkmate.” When he saw this he was
confounded at her quickness and understanding; but she laughed and said,
“O professor, I will make a wager with thee on this third game. I will
give thee the queen and the right-hand castle and the left-hand knight;
if thou beat me, take my clothes, and if I beat thee, I will take thy
clothes.” Replied he, “I agree to this;” and they replaced the pieces,
she removing queen, castle and knight.[449] Then said she, “Move, O
master.” So he moved, saying to himself, “I cannot but beat her, with
such odds,” and planned a combination; but, behold, she moved on, little
by little, till she made one of her pawns[450] a queen and pushing up to
him pawns and other pieces, to take off his attention, set one in his
way and tempted him to take it. Accordingly, he took it and she said to
him, “The measure is meted and the loads equally balanced.[451] Eat till
thou art over-full; naught shall be thy ruin, O son of Adam, save thy
greed. Knowest thou not that I did but tempt thee, that I might finesse
thee? See: this is check-mate!” adding, “So doff off thy clothes.” Quoth
he, “Leave me my bag-trousers, so Allah repay thee;” and he swore by
Allah that he would contend with none, so long as Tawaddud abode in the
realm of Baghdad. Then he stripped off his clothes and gave them to her
and went away. Thereupon came the backgammon-player, and she said to
him, “If I beat thee, this day, what wilt thou give me?” Quoth he, “I
will give thee ten suits of brocade of Constantinople, figured with
gold, and ten suits of velvet and a thousand gold pieces; and if I beat
thee, I ask nothing but that thou write me an acknowledgment of my
victory.” Quoth she, “To it, then, and do thy best.” So they played, and
he lost and went away, chattering in Frankish jargon and saying, “By the
bounty of the Commander of the Faithful, there is not her like in all
the regions of the world!” Then the Caliph summoned players on
instruments of music and asked her, “Dost thou know aught of music?”;
when she answered, “Even so!” He bade bring a worn lute, polished by
use, whose owner forlorn and lone was by parting trodden down; and of
which quoth one, describing it:—

 Allah watered a land, and upsprang a tree ✿ Struck root deep down, and
    raised head a-sky:
 The birds o’ersang it when green its wood; ✿ And the Fair o’ersing now
    the wood is dry.

So they brought the lute in a bag of red satin, with tassels of
saffron-coloured silk: and she opened the bag, and took it out and
behold on it was graven:—

 Oft hath a tender bough made lute for maid, ✿ Whose swift sweet lays at
    feast men’s hearts invade:
 She sings; it follows on her song, as though ✿ The Bulbuls[452] taught
    her all the modes she played.

She laid her lute in her lap and with bosom inclining over it, bent to
it with the bending of a mother who suckleth her child; then she
preluded in twelve different modes, till the whole assembly was agitated
with delight, like a waving sea, and she sang the following:—

 Cut short this strangeness, leave unruth of you; ✿ My heart shall love
    you aye, by youth of you!
 Have ruth on one who sighs and weeps and moans, ✿ Pining and yearning
    for the troth of you.

The Caliph was ravished and exclaimed, “Allah bless thee and be merciful
to him who taught thee!”: whereupon she rose and kissed the ground
before him. Then he sent for money and paid her master Abu al-Husn an
hundred thousand gold pieces to her price; after which he said to her,
“O Tawaddud, ask a boon of me!” Replied she, “I ask of thee that thou
restore me to my lord who sold me.” “‘Tis well,” answered the Caliph and
restored her to her master and gave her five thousand dinars for
herself. Moreover, he appointed Abu al-Husn one of his cup-companions
for a permanence,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph gave
the damsel five thousand dinars for herself and restored her to her
master whom he appointed one of his cup-companions for a permanence and
assigned him a monthly stipend of a thousand dinars so long as he should
live; and he abode with the damsel Tawaddud in all solace and delight of
life. Marvel then, O King, at the eloquence of this damsel and the
hugeness of her learning and understanding and her perfect excellence in
all branches of art and science; and consider the generosity of the
Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, in that he gave her master
this money and said to her, “Ask a boon of me;” and she besought him to
restore her to her lord. So he restored her to him and gave her five
thousand dinars for herself and made him one of his boon-companions.
Where is such generosity to be found after the Abbaside Caliphs?—May
Allah Almighty have mercy upon them, one and all! And they tell a tale
of

-----

Footnote 281:

  Lane (ii. 636) omits this tale, “as it would not only require a volume
  of commentary, but be extremely tiresome to most readers.” Quite true;
  but it is valuable to Oriental Students who are beginning their
  studies, as an excellent compendium of doctrine and practice according
  to the Shafi’í School.

Footnote 282:

  Pronounce Aboo’l-Husn = Father of Beauty, a fancy name.

Footnote 283:

  As in most hot climates so in Egypt the dead are buried at once
  despite the risk of vivisepulture. This seems an instinct with the
  Semitic (Arabian) race _teste_ Abraham, as with the Gypsy. Hence the
  Moslems have invoked religious aid. The Mishkát al-Masábih (i. 387)
  makes Mohammed say, “When any one of you dieth you may not keep him in
  the house but bear him quickly to his grave”; and again, “Be quick in
  raising up the bier: for if the dead have been a good man, it is good
  to bear him gravewards without delay; and if bad, it is frowardness ye
  put from your necks.”

Footnote 284:

  This biting of the hand in Al-Haríri expresses bitterness of
  repentance and he uses more than once the Koranic phrase (chapter
  vii., 148) “Sukita fí aydíhim,” lit. where it (the biting) was fallen
  upon their hands; _i.e._ when it repented them; “sukita” being here
  not a passive verb as it appears, but an impersonal form uncommon in
  Arabic. The action is instinctive, a survival of the days when man was
  a snarling and snapping animal (physically) armed only with claws and
  teeth.

Footnote 285:

  Arab. “‘Alam,” applied to many things, an “old man” of stones (Kákúr),
  a sign post with a rag on the top, etc.

Footnote 286:

  The moon of Ramazan was noticed in Night ix. That of Sha’aban (eighth
  month) begins the fighting month after the conclusion of the Treuga
  Dei in Rajab. See Night ccclxxviii.

Footnote 287:

  These lines have occurred in Night cccxix. I give Mr. Payne’s version
  for variety.

Footnote 288:

  _i.e._ in her prime, at fourteen to fifteen.

Footnote 289:

  _i.e._ pale and yellow.

Footnote 290:

  The word means the wood; but it alludes to a preparation made by
  levigating it on a stone called in India “Sandlásá.” The gruel-like
  stuff is applied with the right hand to the right side of the neck,
  drawing the open fingers from behind forwards so as to leave four
  distinct streaks, then down to the left side, and so on to other parts
  of the body.

Footnote 291:

  Arab. Haykal, the Heb. היכל which included the Porch, the Holy and the
  Holy of Holies. The word is used as νάος in a wider sense by Josephus
  A.J. v. v. 3. In Moslem writings it is applied to a Christian Church
  generally, on account of its images.

Footnote 292:

  These lines having occurred before, I here quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 293:

  Arab writers often mention the smile of beauty, but rarely, after
  European fashion, the laugh, which they look upon as undignified. A
  Moslem will say “Don’t guffaw (Kahkahah) in that way; leave giggling
  and grinning to monkeys and Christians.” The Spaniards, a grave
  people, remark that Christ never laughed. I would draw the reader’s
  attention to a theory of mine that the open-hearted laugh has the
  sound of the vowels _a_ and _o_; while _e_, _i_, and _u_ belong to
  what may be roughly classed as the rogue order.

Footnote 294:

  _i.e._ gaining the love of another, love.

Footnote 295:

  _i.e._ the abrogated passages and those by which they are abrogated.
  This division is necessary for “inspired volumes,” which always abound
  in contradictions. But the charge of “opportunism” brought against the
  Koran is truly absurd; as if “revelation” could possibly be aught save
  opportune.

Footnote 296:

  Koran iv. 160, the chapter “Women.”

Footnote 297:

  She unveiled being a slave-girl and for sale. If a free woman show her
  face to a Moslem, he breaks out into violent abuse, because the act is
  intended to let him know that he is looked upon as a small boy or an
  eunuch or a Christian—in fact not a man.

Footnote 298:

  Ilah = Heb. El, a most difficult root, meaning strength,
  interposition, God (Numen) “the” (article) “don’t” (do not), etc. etc.

Footnote 299:

  As far as I know Christians are the only worshippers who kneel as if
  their lower legs were cut off and who “join hands” like the captive
  offering his wrists to be bound (dare manus). The posture, however, is
  not so ignoble as that of the Moslem “Sijdah” (prostration) which made
  certain North African tribes reject Al-Islam, saying, “These men show
  their hind parts to heaven.”

Footnote 300:

  _i.e._ saying “I intend (purpose) to pray (for instance) the two-bow
  prayer (ruka’tayn) of the daybreak,” etc.

Footnote 301:

  So called because it prohibits speaking with others till the prayer is
  ended.

Footnote 302:

  Lit. “any thing opposite;” here used for the Ka’abah towards which men
  turn in prayer; as Guebres face the sun or fire and idolaters their
  images. “Al-Kiblatayn” (= the two Kiblahs) means Meccah and Jerusalem,
  which was faced by Moslems as well as Jews and Christians till
  Mohammed changed the direction. For the occasion of the change see my
  Pilgrimage, ii. 320.

Footnote 303:

  Which includes Tayammum or washing with sand. This is a very cleanly
  practice in a hot dry land and was adopted long before Mohammed.
  Cedrenus tells of baptism with sand being administered to a dying
  traveller in the African desert.

Footnote 304:

  The Koranic order for Wuzú is concise and as usual obscure, giving
  rise to a host of disputes and casuistical questions. Its text runs
  (chapt. v.), “O true believers, when you prepare to pray, wash (Ghusl)
  your faces, and your hands unto the elbows; and rub (Mas-h) your hands
  and your feet unto the ankles; and if ye be unclean by having lain
  with a woman, wash (Ghusl) yourselves all over.” The purifications and
  ceremonious ablutions of the Jews originated this command; and the
  early Christians did very unwisely in not making the bath obligatory.
  St. Paul (Heb. xi. 22) says, “Let us draw near with a true heart ...
  having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience and our bodies
  washed with clean (or pure) water.” But this did not suffice. Hence
  the Eastern Christian, in hot climates where cleanliness should rank
  before godliness, is distinguished by his dirt which as a holy or
  reverend man he makes still dirtier, and he offers an ugly comparison
  with the Moslem and especially the Hindu. The neglect of commands to
  wash and prohibitions to drink strong waters are the two grand
  physical objections of the Christian code of morality.

Footnote 305:

  Arab. “Istinshák” = snuffing up water from the palm of the right hand
  so as to clean thoroughly the nostrils. This “function” is
  unreasonably neglected in Europe, to the detriment of the mucous
  membrane and the olfactory nerves.

Footnote 306:

  So as to wash between them. The thick beard is combed out with the
  fingers.

Footnote 307:

  Poor human nature! How sad to compare its pretensions with its
  actualities.

Footnote 308:

  Complete ablution is rendered necessary chiefly by the emission of
  semen either in copulation or in nocturnal pollution. The water must
  be pure and not less than a certain quantity, and it must touch every
  part of the skin beginning with the right half of the person and
  ending with the left. Hence a plunge-bath is generally preferred.

Footnote 309:

  Arab. Ta’mím, lit. crowning with turband, or tiara, here = covering,
  _i.e._ wetting.

Footnote 310:

  This practice (saying “I purpose to defer the washing of the feet,”
  etc.) is now somewhat obsolete.

Footnote 311:

  Arabs have a prejudice against the hydropathic treatment of wounds,
  holding that water poisons them: and, as the native produce usually
  contains salt, soda and magnesia, they are justified by many cases. I
  once tried water-bandages in Arabia and failed dismally.

Footnote 312:

  The sick man says his prayers lying in bed, etc., and as he best can.

Footnote 313:

  _i.e._ saying, “And peace be on us and on the worshippers of Allah
  which be pious.”

Footnote 314:

  _i.e._ saying “I seek refuge with Allah from Satan the Stoned.”

Footnote 315:

  Certain parts should be recited aloud (jahr) and others sotto voce
  (with mussitation = Khafi). No mistake must be made in this matter
  where a Moslem cannot err.

Footnote 316:

  Hence an interest of two-and-a-half per cent. is not held to be “Ribá”
  or unlawful gain of money by money, usury.

Footnote 317:

  The meal must be finished before the faster can plainly distinguish
  the white thread from the black thread (Koran ii. 183); some
  understand this literally, others apply it to the dark and silvery
  streak of zodiacal light which appears over the Eastern horizon an
  hour or so before sunrise. The fast then begins and ends with the
  disappearance of the sun. I have noticed its pains and penalties in my
  Pilgrimage, i. 110, etc.

Footnote 318:

  For the “Azán” or call to prayer see Lane, M. E., chapt. xviii. The
  chant, however, differs in every country, and a practical ear will
  know the land by its call.

Footnote 319:

  Arab. “Hadís” or saying of the Apostle.

Footnote 320:

  “Al-I’itikaf” resembles the Christian “retreat;” but the worshipper
  generally retires to a mosque especially in Meccah. The Apostle
  practised it on Jabal Hira and other places.

Footnote 321:

  The word is the Heb. חג Hagg whose primary meaning is circularity of
  form or movement. Hence it applied to religious festivals in which
  dancing round the idol played a prime part; and Lucian of “saltation”
  says, dancing was from the beginning and coeval with the ancient god,
  Love. But man danced with joy before he worshipped, and, when he
  invented a systematic saltation, he made it represent two things, and
  only two things, love and war, in most primitive form, courtship and
  fighting.

Footnote 322:

  Two adjoining ground-waves _in_ Meccah. For these and for the places
  subsequently mentioned the curious will consult my Pilgrimage, iii.
  226, etc.

Footnote 323:

  The ‘Umrah or lesser Pilgrimage, I have noted, is the ceremony
  performed in Meccah at any time out of the pilgrim-season proper,
  _i.e._ between the eighth and tenth days of the twelfth lunar month Zu
  ‘l-Hijjah. It does not entitle the Moslem to be called Hájj (pilgrim)
  or Hájí as Persians and Indians corrupt the word.

Footnote 324:

  I need hardly note that Mohammed borrowed his pilgrimage-practices
  from the pagan Arabs who, centuries before his day, danced around the
  Meccan Ka’abah. Nor can he be blamed for having perpetuated a Gentile
  rite, if indeed it be true that the Ka’abah contained relics of
  Abraham and Ishmael.

Footnote 325:

  On first sighting Meccah. See Night xci.

Footnote 326:

  Arab. Tawáf: the place is called Matáf and the guide Mutawwif
  (Pilgrimage, iii. 193, 205). The seven courses are termed Ashwát.

Footnote 327:

  Stoning the Devil at Mina. Pilgrimage, iii. 282. Hence Satan’s title
  “the Stoned” (lapidated not castrated).

Footnote 328:

  Koran viii. 66; in the chapter entitled “Spoil,” and relating mainly
  to the “day of Al-Bedr.”

Footnote 329:

  Arab. Al-Ikálah = cancelling: Mr. Payne uses the technical term
  “resiliation.”

Footnote 330:

  Freedman of Abdallah, son of the Caliph Omar and noted as a
  traditionist.

Footnote 331:

  _i.e._ at a profit: the exchange must be equal—an ordinance intended
  to protect the poor. Arabs have strange prejudices in these matters;
  for instance it disgraces a Badawi to take money for milk.

Footnote 332:

  Arab. Jamá’ah, which in theology means the Heb. Edah (עדה) and the
  Greek ἐκκλησία our “Church,” the congregation of the Faithful under a
  lawful head. Hence the Sunnis call themselves “People of the Sunnat
  and Jamá’at.” In the text it is explained as “Ulfat” or intimacy.

Footnote 333:

  Arab. Al-Khalíl, _i.e._ of Allah = Abraham. Mohammed, following Jewish
  tradition, made Abraham rank second amongst the Prophets, inferior
  only to himself and superior to Hazrat Isa = Jesus. I have noted that
  Ishmael the elder son succeeded his father. He married Da’alah bint
  Muzáz bin Omar, a Jurhamite, and his progeny abandoning Hebrew began
  to speak Arabic (ta’arraba); hence called Muta’arribah or Arabised
  Arabs (Pilgrimage iii. 190). He died at Meccah and was buried with his
  mother in the space North of the Ka’abah called Al-Hijr which our
  writers continue to confuse with the city Al-Hijr (Ibid. 165–66).

Footnote 334:

  This ejaculation, “In the name of Allah” is, I have noted, equivalent
  to “saying grace.” If neglected it is a sin and entails a curse.

Footnote 335:

  The ceremonious posture is sitting upon the shin-bones, not
  tailor-fashion; and “bolting food” is a sign of boorishness.

Footnote 336:

  Arab. “Zidd,” the word is a fair specimen of Arabic ambiguity meaning
  primarily opposite or contrary (as virtue to vice), secondarily an
  enemy or a friend (as being opposite to an enemy).

Footnote 337:

  “The whole earth (shall be) but His handful on the Resurrection day
  and in His right hand shall the Heaven be rolled up (or folded
  together).”—Koran xxxix. 67.

Footnote 338:

  See Night lxxxi.

Footnote 339:

  Koran lxxviii. 19.

Footnote 340:

  Arab. Al-Munáfik, technically meaning one who outwardly professes
  Al-Islam while inwardly hating it. Thus the word is by no means
  synonymous with our “hypocrite,” hypocrisy being the homage vice pays
  to virtue; a homage, I may observe, nowhere rendered more fulsomely
  than among the so-called Anglo-Saxon race.

Footnote 341:

  Arab. “Tawakkul alá ‘llah”: in the imperative the phrase is vulgarly
  used = “Be off!”

Footnote 342:

  _i.e._ ceremonial impurity which is sui generis, a very different
  thing from general dirtiness.

Footnote 343:

  A thick beard is one which does not show the skin; otherwise the
  wearer is a “Kausaj;” in Pers. “Kúseh.” See vol. iii., 246.

Footnote 344:

  Arab. “Al-Khutnah.” Nowhere commanded in the Koran and being only a
  practice of the Prophet, the rite is not indispensable for converts,
  especially the aged and the sick. Our ideas upon the subject are very
  hazy for modern “niceness” allows a “Feast of the Circumcision,” but
  no discussion thereon. Moses (alias Osarsiph) borrowed the rite from
  the Egyptian hierophants who were all thus “purified”; the object
  being to counteract the over-sensibility of the “sixth sense” and to
  harden the _glans_ against abrasions and infection by exposure to air
  and friction against the dress. Almost all African tribes practise it
  but the modes vary and some are exceedingly curious: I shall notice a
  peculiarly barbarous fashion called Al-Salkh (the flaying) still
  practised in the Arabian province Al-Asír (Pilgrimage iii. 80). There
  is a difference too between the Hebrew and the Moslem rite. The Jewish
  operator, after snipping off the foreskin, rips up the prepuce with
  his sharp thumb-nails so that the external cutis does not retract far
  from the internal; and the wound, when healed, shows a narrow ring of
  cicatrice. This ripping is not done by Moslems. They use a stick as a
  probe passed round between glans and prepuce to ascertain the extent
  of the frenum and that there is no abnormal adhesion. The foreskin is
  then drawn forward and fixed by the forceps, a fork of two bamboo
  splints, five or six inches long by a quarter thick, or in some cases
  an iron like our compasses. This is tied tightly over the foreskin so
  as to exclude about an inch and a half of the prepuce above and three
  quarters below. A single stroke of the razor drawn directly downwards
  removes the skin. The slight bleeding is stopped by burnt rags or
  ashes and healed with cerates, pledgets and fumigations. Thus Moslem
  circumcision does not prevent the skin retracting.

Footnote 345:

  Of these 6336 versets only some 200 treat on law, civil and
  ceremonial, fiscal and political, devotional and ceremonial, canonical
  and ecclesiastical.

Footnote 346:

  The learned young woman omitted Ukhnúkh = Enoch, because not in Koran;
  and if she denoted him by “Idrís,” the latter is much out of place.

Footnote 347:

  Some say grandson of Shem (Koran vii. 71).

Footnote 348:

  Koran vii. 63, etc.

Footnote 349:

  Father-in-law of Moses (Koran vii. 83).

Footnote 350:

  Who is the last and greatest of the twenty-five.

Footnote 351:

  See Night ccccxxxviii.

Footnote 352:

  Koran ii., whose 256th Ayah is the far-famed and sublime Throne-verse
  which begins “Allah! there is no god but He, the Living, the Eternal
  One, whom nor slumber nor sleep seizeth on!” The trivial name is taken
  from the last line, “His _throne_ over-stretcheth Heaven and Earth and
  to Him their preservation is no burden for He is the most Highest, the
  Supreme.” The lines are often repeated in prayers and engraved on
  agates, etc., as portable talismans.

Footnote 353:

  Koran ii. 159.

Footnote 354:

  Koran xvi. 92. The verset ends with, “He warneth you, so haply ye may
  be mindful.”

Footnote 355:

  Koran lxx. 38.

Footnote 356:

  Koran xxxix. 54.

Footnote 357:

  The Sunnis hold that the “Anbiyá” (= prophets, or rather announcers of
  Allah’s judgments) were not sinless. But this dogma is branded as most
  irreverent and sinful by the Shi’ahs or Persian “followers of Ali,”
  who make capital out of this blasphemy and declare that if any prophet
  sinned he sinned only against himself.

Footnote 358:

  Koran xii. 18.

Footnote 359:

  Koran ii. 107.

Footnote 360:

  Koran li. 57. He (Allah) does not use the plurale majestatis.

Footnote 361:

  Koran ii. 28.

Footnote 362:

  Koran xvi. 100. Satan is stoned in the Miná or Muná basin (Night
  ccccxlii.) because he tempted Abraham to disobey the command of Allah
  by refusing to sacrifice Ishmael (Pilgrimage iii. 248).

Footnote 363:

  It may also mean “have recourse to God.”

Footnote 364:

  Abdallah ibn Abbas, before noticed, first cousin of Mohammed and the
  most learned of the Companions. See D’Herbelot.

Footnote 365:

  Koran xcvi., “Blood-clots,” 1 and 2. “Read” may mean “peruse the
  revelation” (it was the first Koranic chapter communicated to
  Mohammed), or “recite, preach.”

Footnote 366:

  Koran, xxvii. 30. Mr. Rodwell (p. 1) holds to the old idea that the
  “Basmalah” is of Jewish origin, taught to the Kuraysh by Omayyah, of
  Taif, the poet and Haníf (convert).

Footnote 367:

  Koran ix.: this was the last chapter revealed and the only one
  revealed entire except verse 110.

Footnote 368:

  Ali was despatched from Al-Medinah to Meccah by the Prophet on his own
  slit-eared camel to promulgate this chapter; and meeting the assembly
  at Al-‘Akabah he also acquainted them with four things; (1) No Infidel
  may approach the Meccah temple; (2) naked men must no longer circuit
  the Ka’abah; (3) only Moslems enter Paradise, and (4) public faith
  must be kept.

Footnote 369:

  Dictionaries give the word “Basmalah” (= saying Bismillah); but the
  common pronunciation is “Bismalah.”

Footnote 370:

  Koran xvii. 110, a passage revealed because the Infidels, hearing
  Mohammed calling upon The Compassionate, imagined that Al-Rahmán was
  other deity but Allah. The “names” have two grand divisions, Asmá
  Jalálí, the fiery or terrible attributes, and the Asmá Jamálí (airy,
  watery, earthy or) amiable. Together they form the Asmá al-Husna or
  glorious attributes, and do not include the Ism al-A’azam, the
  ineffable name which is known only to a few.

Footnote 371:

  Koran ii. 158.

Footnote 372:

  Koran xcvi. before noticed.

Footnote 373:

  A man of Al-Medinah, one of the first of Mohammed’s disciples.

Footnote 374:

  Koran lxxiv. 1, etc., supposed to have been addressed by Gabriel to
  Mohammed when in the cave of Hira or Jabal Núr. He returned to his
  wife Khadijah in sore terror at the vision of one sitting on a throne
  between heaven and earth, and bade her cover him up. Whereupon the
  Archangel descended with this text, supposed to be the first revealed.
  Mr. Rodwell (p. 3) renders it, “O thou enwrapped _in thy mantle_!” and
  makes it No. ii. after a Fatrah or silent interval of six months to
  three years.

Footnote 375:

  There are several versets on this subject (chapts. ii. and xxx).

Footnote 376:

  Koran cx. 1.

Footnote 377:

  The third Caliph; the “Writer of the Koran.”

Footnote 378:

  Koran, v. 4. Sale translates “idols.” Mr. Rodwell, “On the blocks (or
  shafts) of stone,” rude altars set by the pagan Arabs before their
  dwellings.

Footnote 379:

  Koran, v. 116. The words are put into the mouth of Jesus.

Footnote 380:

  The end of the same verse.

Footnote 381:

  Koran, v. 89. Supposed to have been revealed when certain Moslems
  purposed to practise Christian asceticism, fasting, watching,
  abstaining from women and sleeping on hard beds. I have said Mohammed
  would have “no monkery in Al-Islam,” but human nature willed
  otherwise. Mr. Rodwell prefers “Interdict the healthful viands.”

Footnote 382:

  Koran, iv. 124.

Footnote 383:

  Arab. “Mukri.” “Kári” is one who reads the Koran to pupils; the Mukri
  corrects them. “With the passage of the clouds” = without a moment’s
  hesitation.

Footnote 384:

  The twenty-first, twenty-fourth and eighteenth Arabic letters.

Footnote 385:

  Arab. “Hizb.” The Koran is divided into sixty portions, answering to
  “Lessons” for convenience of public worship.

Footnote 386:

  Arab. “Jalálah,” = saying Jalla Jalálu-hu = magnified be His Majesty!,
  or glorified be His Glory.

Footnote 387:

  Koran, xi. 50.

Footnote 388:

  The partition-wall between Heaven and Hell which others call Al-‘Urf
  (in the sing. from the verb meaning he separated or parted). The Jeus
  borrowed from the Guebres the idea of a partition between Heaven and
  Hell and made it so thin that the blessed and damned can speak
  together. There is much dispute about the population of Al-A’aráf, the
  general idea being that they are men who do not deserve reward in
  Heaven or punishment in Hell. But it is not a “Purgatory” or place of
  expiating sins.

Footnote 389:

  Koran, vii. 154.

Footnote 390:

  A play on the word ayn, which means “eye” or the eighteenth letter
  which in olden times had the form of a circle.

Footnote 391:

  From misreading these words comes the absurd popular belief of the
  moon passing up and down Mohammed’s sleeves. George B. Airy (The
  Athenæum, Nov. 29, 1884) justly objects to Sale’s translation “The
  hour of _judgment_ approacheth” and translates “The moon hath been
  dichotomised” a well-known astronomical term when the light portion of
  the moon is defined in a strait line: in other words when it is really
  a half-moon at the first and third quarters of each lunation. Others
  understand, The moon shall be split on the Last Day, the preterite for
  the future in prophetic style. “Koran Moslems” of course understand it
  literally.

Footnote 392:

  Chapters liv., lv. and lvi.

Footnote 393:

  We should say, _not_ to utter, etc.

Footnote 394:

  These well-known “humours of Hippocrates,” which reappear in the form
  of temperaments of European phrenology, are still the base of Eastern
  therapeutics.

Footnote 395:

  The doctrine of the three souls will be intelligible to Spiritualists.

Footnote 396:

  Arab. “Al-lámi” = the l-shaped, curved, forked.

Footnote 397:

  Arab. “Usus,” our os sacrum because, being incorruptible, the body
  will be built up thereon for Resurrection-time. Hence Hudibras sings
  (iii. 2).

               The learned Rabbis of the Jews
               Write there’s a bone which they call _leuz_,
               I’ the rump of man, etc.

  It is the Heb. “Uz,” whence older scholars derived _os_. Sale (sect.
  iv.) called it “El Ajb, os coccygis or rump-bone.”

Footnote 398:

  Arab physiologists had difficulties in procuring “subjects”; and
  usually practised dissection on the simiads. Their illustrated books
  are droll; the figures have been copied and recopied till they have
  lost all resemblance to the originals.

Footnote 399:

  The liver and spleen are held to be congealed blood. Hence the
  couplet:—

  We are allowed two carrions (_i.e._ with throats uncut) and two
     bloods,
  The fish and the locust, the liver and the spleen.

  (Pilgrimage iii. 92.)

Footnote 400:

  This is perfectly true and yet little known to the general.

Footnote 401:

  Koran xvii. 39.

Footnote 402:

  Arab. “Al-malikhulíya,” proving that the Greeks then pronounced the
  penultimate vowel according to the acute accent—ía; not as we slur it
  over. In old Hebrew we have the transliteration of four Greek words;
  in the languages of Hindostan many scores including names of places;
  and in Latin and Arabic as many hundreds. By a scholar-like comparison
  of these remains we should find little difficulty in establishing the
  true Greek pronunciation since the days of Alexander the Great; and we
  shall prove that it was pronounced according to accent and
  emphatically _not_ quantity. In the next century I presume English
  boys will be taught to pronounce Greek as the Greeks do.

Footnote 403:

  Educated Arabs can quote many a verse bearing upon domestic medicine
  and reminding us of the lines bequeathed to Europe by the School of
  Salerno. Such _e.g._ are:—

        After the noon-meal, sleep, although for moments twain;
        After the night-meal, walk, though but two steps be ta’en;
        And after swiving stale, though but two drops thou drain.

Footnote 404:

  Arab. Sarídah (Tharídah), also called “ghaut” = crumbled bread and
  hashed meat in broth; or bread, milk and meat. The Sarídah of Ghassán,
  cooked with eggs and marrow, was held a dainty dish: hence the
  Prophet’s dictum.

Footnote 405:

  Koran v. 92. “Lots” = games of chance and “images” = statues.

Footnote 406:

  Koran ii. 216. The word “Maysar” which I have rendered “gambling” or
  “gaming” (for such is the modern application of the word), originally
  meant what St. Jerome calls Βελομαντία and explains thereby the verse
  (Ezek. xxi. 22), “The King held in his hand the lot of Jerusalem”
  _i.e._ the arrow whereon the city-name was written. The Arabs use it
  for casting lots with ten azlam or headless arrows (for dice) three
  being blanks and the rest notched from one to seven. They were thrown
  by a “Zárib” or punter and the stake was generally a camel. Amongst so
  excitable a people as the Arabs, this game caused quarrels and
  bloodshed, hence its prohibition: and the theologians, who everywhere
  and at all times delight in burdening human nature, have extended the
  command, which is rather admonitory than prohibitive, to all games of
  chance. Tarafah is supposed to allude to this practice in his
  Mu’allakah.

Footnote 407:

  Liberal Moslems observe that the Koranic prohibition is not absolute,
  with threat of Hell for infraction. Yet Mohammed doubtless forbade all
  inebriatives and the occasion of his so doing is well known
  (Pilgrimage ii. 322).

Footnote 408:

  I have noticed this soured milk in Pilgrimage i. 362.

Footnote 409:

  He does not say the “Caliph” or successor of his uncle Mohammed.

Footnote 410:

  The Jewish Korah (Numbers xvi.) fabled by the Koran (xxviii. 76),
  following a Talmudic tradition, to have been a man of immense wealth.
  The notion that lying with an old woman, after the menses have ceased,
  is unwholesome, dates from great antiquity; and the benefits of the
  reverse process were well known to _good_ King David. The faces of
  children who sleep with their grandparents (a bad practice now waxing
  obsolete in England), of a young wife married to an old man and of a
  young man married to an old woman, show a peculiar wizened appearance,
  a look of age overlaying youth which cannot be mistaken.

Footnote 411:

  Arab. “Hindibá” (= endubium): the modern term is Shakuríyah =
  chicorée. I believe it to be very hurtful to the eyes.

Footnote 412:

  Arab. “Khuffásh” and “Watwát”: in Egypt a woman is called “Watwátíyah”
  when the hair of her privities has been removed by applying bats’
  blood. I have often heard of this; but cannot understand how such an
  application can act depilatory.

Footnote 413:

  Dictionaries render the word by “dragon, cockatrice.” The Badawin
  apply it to a variety of serpents mostly large and all considered
  venomous.

Footnote 414:

  Arab. “Zarr wa ‘urwah,” lit. = handle. The button-hole, I have said,
  is a modern invention; Urwah is also applied to the loop-shaped handle
  of the water-skin, for attachment of the Allákah or suspensory thong.

Footnote 415:

  Koran lxx. 40; see also the chapter following, v. 16.

Footnote 416:

  Koran x. 5; the “her” refers to the sun.

Footnote 417:

  Koran xxxvi. 40.

Footnote 418:

  Koran xxii. 60.

Footnote 419:

  Arab. “Manázil:” these are the Hindu Nakshatra; extensively used in
  meteorology even by Europeans unconsciously: thus they will speak of
  the Elephantina-storm without knowing anything of the lunar mansion so
  called. The names in the text are successively Sharatán = two horns of
  the Ram; (2) the Ram’s belly; (3) the Pleiades; (4) Aldebaran; (5)
  three stars in Orion’s head; (6) ditto in Orion’s shoulder; (7) two
  stars above the Twins; (8) Lion’s nose and first summer station; (9)
  Lion’s eye; (10) Lion’s forehead; (11) Lion’s mane; (12) Lion’s heart;
  (13) the Dog, two stars in Virgo; (14) Spica Virginis; (15) φ, ι and κ
  in foot of Virgo; (16) horns of Scorpio; (17) the Crown; (18) heart of
  Scorpio; (19) tail of Scorpio; (20) stars in Pegasus; (21) where no
  constellation appears; (22) the Slaughterer’s luck; (23) Glutton’s
  luck; (24) Luck of Lucks, stars in Aquarius; (25) Luck of Tents, stars
  in Aquarius; (26) the fore-lip or spout of Urn; (27) hind lip of Urn;
  and (28) in navel of Fish’s belly (Batn al-Hút); of these 28 to each
  of the four seasons 7 are allotted.

Footnote 420:

  The Hebrew absey, still used by Moslems in chronograms. For mnemonic
  purposes the 28 letters are distributed into eight words of which the
  first and second are Abjad and Hawwaz. The last six letters in two
  words (Thakhiz and Zuzigh) are Arabian, unknown to the Jews and not
  found in Syriac.

Footnote 421:

  Arab. “Zindík;” properly, one who believes in two gods (the old
  Persian dualism); in books an atheist, _i.e._ one who does not believe
  in a god or gods; and, popularly, a free-thinker who denies the
  existence of a Supreme Being, rejects revelation for the laws of
  Nature imprinted on the heart of man and for humanity in its widest
  sense. Hence he is accused of permitting incestuous marriages and
  other abominations. We should now call him (for want of something
  better) an Agnostic.

Footnote 422:

  Koran xxxi. 34. The words may still be applied to meteorologists
  especially of the scientific school. Even the experienced (as the
  followers of the late Mathieu de la Drôme) reckon far more failures
  than successes. The Koranic passage enumerates five things known only
  to Allah; Judgment-day; rain; sex of child in womb; what shall happen
  to-morrow and where a man shall die.

Footnote 423:

  The fifth and seventh months (January and March) of the Coptic year
  which, being solar, is still used by Arab and Egyptian meteorologists.
  Much information thereon will be found in the “Egyptian Calendar” by
  Mr. Mitchell, Alexandria 1876. It bears the appropriate motto “Anni
  certus modus apud solos semper Ægyptios fuit.” (Macrobius). See also
  Lane M.E., chapt. ix.

Footnote 424:

  Vulg. Kiyák; the fourth month, beginning 9th–10th December. The first
  month is Tút, commencing 10th–11th September.

Footnote 425:

  The 8th and 12th months partly corresponding with April and August:
  Hátúr is the 3rd (November) and Amshír the 6th (February).

Footnote 426:

  Moslems have been compelled to adopt infidel names for the months
  because Mohammed’s Koranic rejection of Nasy or intercalation makes
  their lunar months describe the whole circle of the seasons in a cycle
  of about thirty-three and a half years. Yet they have retained the
  terms which contain the original motive of the denomination. The first
  month is Muharram, the “Holy,” because war was forbidden; it was also
  known as Safar No. 1. The second Safar = “Emptiness,” because during
  the heats citizens left the towns and retired to Táif and other cool
  sites. Rabí’a (first and second) alluded to the spring-pasturages;
  Jumádá (first and second) to the “hardening” of the dry ground and,
  according to some, to the solidification, freezing, of the water in
  the highlands. Rajab (No. 7) = “worshipping,” especially by sacrifice,
  is also known as Al-Asamm the deaf; because being sacred, the rattle
  of arms was unheard. Sha’abán = “collecting,” dispersing, ruining,
  because the tribal wars recommenced: Ramazan (intensely hot) has been
  explained and Shawwál (No. 10.) derives from Shaul (elevating) when
  the he-camels raise their tails in rut. Zú’l-Ka’adah, the sedentary,
  is the rest time of the year, when fighting is forbidden and
  Zu’l-Hijjah explains itself as the pilgrimage-month.

Footnote 427:

  The lowest of the seven.

Footnote 428:

  Koran xxxvii. 5.

Footnote 429:

  Arab. “Faylasúf,” an evident corruption from the Greek. Amongst the
  vulgar it denotes a sceptic, an atheist; much the same a “Frammásún”
  or Freemason. The curious reader will consult the Dabistan, vol. iii.
  chapt. xi. p. 138 _et seq._ “On the Religion of the Wise”
  (philosophi), and, Beaconsfield’s theft from Shaftesbury.

Footnote 430:

  Koran xxxvi. 37–38.

Footnote 431:

  Koran xxii. 7. The Hour _i.e._ of Judgment.

Footnote 432:

  Koran xx. 58. The Midrasch Tanchumah on Exod. vii. gives a similar
  dialogue between Pharaoh and Moses (Rodwell, _in loco_).

Footnote 433:

  Arab. “Sham’ún” or “Shim’ún,” usually applied to Simon Peter (as in
  Acts xv. 14). But the text alludes to Saint Simeon (Luke ii. 25–35).
  See Gospel of Infancy (ii. 8) and especially the Gospel of Nicodemus
  (xii. 3) which makes him a High-priest.

Footnote 434:

  Sálih the Patriarch’s she-camel, miraculously produced from the rock
  in order to convert the Thamúd-tribe (Koran vii).

Footnote 435:

  When Abu Bakr was hiding with Mohammed in a cave on the Hill Al-Saur
  (Thaur or Thúr, Pilgrimage ii. 131) South of Meccah, which must not be
  confounded with the cave on Jabal Hirá now called Jabal Núr on the way
  to Arafat (Pilgrimage iii. 246), the fugitives were protected by a
  bird which built her nest at the entrance (according to another legend
  it was curtained by a spider’s web), whilst another bird (the crow of
  whom I shall presently speak) tried to betray them. The first bird is
  popularly supposed to have been a pigeon, and is referred to by
  Hudibras:—

                   Th’ apostles of this fierce religion
                   Like Mahomet, were ass and widgeon.

  The ass I presume alludes to the marvellous beast Al-Burák which the
  Greeks called Βράχθαν from Βραχ (Euthymius in Pocock, Spec. A.H. p.
  144) and which Indian Moslems picture with human face, ass’s ears,
  equine body and peacock’s wings and tail. The “widgeon” I presume to
  be a mistake or a misprint for pigeon.

Footnote 436:

  The Arabs are not satisfied with the comparative moderation of the
  Hebrew miracle, and have added all manner of absurdities (Pilgrimage
  ii. 288).

Footnote 437:

  Koran lxxxi. 18. Sale translates “by the morning when it appeareth;”
  and the word (tanaffus) will bear this meaning. Mr. Rodwell prefers,
  “By the dawn when it clears away the darkness by its breath.”

Footnote 438:

  As a rule Moslems are absurdly ignorant of arithmetic and
  apparently cannot master it. Hence in Egypt they used Copts for
  calculating-machines and further East Hindús. The mildest
  numerical puzzle, like the above, is sure of success.

Footnote 439:

  The paradisal tree which supplied every want. Mohammed borrowed it
  from the Christians (Rev. xxi. 10–21 and xxii. 1–2) who placed in
  their paradise the Tree of Life which bears twelve sorts of fruits and
  leaves of healing virtue. (See also the 3rd book of Hermas, his
  Similitudes.) The Hebrews borrowed it from the Persians. Amongst the
  Hindus it appears as “Kalpavriksha;” amongst the Scandinavians as
  Yggdrasil. The curious reader will consult Mr. James Fergusson’s
  learned work, “Tree and Serpent Worship,” etc. London, 1873.

Footnote 440:

  Aaron’s Rod becomes amongst Moslems (Koran vii. 110) Moses’ Staff; the
  size being that of a top-mast (Pilgrimage i. 300, 301). In Koran xx.
  18, 19, we find a notice of its uses; and during the Middle Ages it
  reappeared in the Staff of Wamba the Goth (A.D. 672–680): the witch’s
  broomstick was its latest development.

Footnote 441:

  Christ, say the Eutychians, had only one nature the divine; so he was
  crucified in effigy.

Footnote 442:

  Jesus is compared with Adam in the Koran (chapt. iii.): his titles are
  Kalámu ‘llah (word of God) because engendered without a father, and
  Rúhu ‘llah (breath of God) because conceived by Gabriel in the shape
  of a beautiful youth breathing into the Virgin’s vulva. Hence Moslems
  believe in a “miraculous conception” and consequently determine that
  one so conceived was, like Elias and Khizr, not subject to death; they
  also hold him born free from “original sin” (a most sinful
  superstition), a veil being placed before the Virgin and Child against
  the Evil One who could not touch them. He spoke when a babe in cradle;
  he performed miracles of physic; he was taken up to Heaven; he will
  appear as the forerunner of Mohammed on the White Tower of Damascus,
  and finally he will be buried at Al-Medinah. The Jews on the other
  hand speak of him as “that man:” they hold that he was begotten by
  Joseph during the menstrual period and therefore a born magician.
  Moreover he learned the Sham ha-maphrash or Nomen tetragrammaton,
  wrote it on parchment and placed it in an incision in his thigh, which
  closed up on the Name being mentioned (Buxtorf, Lex Talmud 25–41).
  Other details are given in the Toldoth Jesu (Historia Joshuæ
  Nazareni). This note should be read by the eminent English littérateur
  who discovered a fact, well known to Locke and Carlyle, that
  “Mohammedans are Christians.” So they are and something more.

Footnote 443:

  In the Kalamdán, or pen-case, is a little inkstand of metal occupying
  the top of the long, narrow box.

Footnote 444:

  A fair specimen of the riddle known as the “surprise.”

Footnote 445:

  Koran xli. 10.

Footnote 446:

  Koran xxxvi. 82.

Footnote 447:

  Here we enter upon a series of disputed points. The Wahhábis deny the
  intercession of the Apostle (Pilgrimage ii. 76–77). The Shi ahs place
  Ali next in dignity to Mohammed and there is a sect (Ali-Iláhi) which
  believes him to be an Avatar or incarnation of the Deity. For the
  latter the curious reader will consult the “Dabistan,” ii. 451. The
  Koran by its many contradictions seems to show that Mohammed never
  could make up his own mind on the subject, thinking himself at times
  an intercessor and then sharply denying all intercession.

Footnote 448:

  Arab. “Kanjifah” = a pack of cards; corrupted from the Persian
  “Ganjífah.” We know little concerning the date or origin of this game
  in the East, where the packs are quite unlike ours.

Footnote 449:

  It is interesting to compare this account with the pseudo Ovid and
  with Tale clxvi. in Gesta “Of the game of Schaci.” Its Schacarium is
  the chess-board. Rochus (roccus, etc.) is not from the Germ. Rock (a
  coat) but from Rukh (Pers. a hero, a knight-errant); Alphinus (Ital.
  Alfino) is Al-Firzán (Pers. science, wise).

Footnote 450:

  Arab. “Baydak” or “Bayzak”; a corruption of the Persian “Piyádah” = a
  footman, peon, pawn; and proving whence the Arabs derived the game.
  The Persians are the readiest backgammon-players known to me, better
  even than the Greeks; they throw the dice from the hand and continue
  foully abusing the fathers and mothers of the “bones” whilst the game
  lasts. It is often played in the intervals of dinner by the higher
  classes in Persia.

Footnote 451:

  Metaphor from loading camels and mules. To “eat” a piece is to take
  it.

Footnote 452:

  Arab. “Bilábil”; a plural of “Bulbul” with a double entendre balábil
  (plur. of ballalah) = heart’s troubles, and “balá, bul” = a calamity,
  nay, etc.




       THE ANGEL OF DEATH WITH THE PROUD KING AND THE DEVOUT MAN.


It is related, O auspicious King, that one of the olden monarchs was
once minded to ride out in state with the officers of his realm and the
Grandees of his retinue and display to the folk the marvels of his
magnificence. So he ordered his Lords and Emirs equip them therefor and
commanded his keeper of the wardrobe to bring him of the richest of
raiment, such as befitted the King in his state; and he bade them bring
his steeds[453] of the finest breeds and pedigrees every man heeds;
which being done, he chose out of the raiment what rejoiced him most and
of the horses that which he deemed best; and, donning the clothes,
together with a collar set with margarites and rubies and all manner
jewels, mounted and set forth in state, making his destrier prance and
curvet among his troops and glorying in his pride and despotic power.
And Iblis came to him and, laying his hand upon his nose, blew into his
nostrils the breath of hauteur and conceit, so that he magnified and
glorified himself and said in his heart, “Who among men is like unto
me?” And he became so puffed up with arrogance and self-sufficiency, and
so taken up with the thought of his own splendour and magnificence, that
he would not vouchsafe a glance to any man. Presently, there stood
before him one clad in tattered clothes and saluted him, but he returned
not his salam; whereupon the stranger laid hold of his horse’s bridle.
“Lift thy hand,” cried the King, “thou knowest not whose bridle-rein it
is whereof thou takest hold.” Quoth the other, “I have a need of thee.”
Quoth the King, “Wait till I alight and then name thy need.” Rejoined
the stranger, “It is a secret and I will not tell it but in thine ear.”
So the King bowed his head to him and he said, “I am the Angel of Death
and I purpose to take thy soul.” Replied the King, “Have patience with
me a little, whilst I return to my house and take leave of my people and
children and neighbours and wife.” “By no means so,” answered the Angel;
“thou shalt never return nor look on them again, for the fated term of
thy life is past.” So saying, he took the soul of the King (who fell off
his horse’s back dead) and departed thence. Presently the Death Angel
met a devout man, of whom Almighty Allah had accepted, and saluted him.
He returned the salute, and the Angel said to him, “O pious man, I have
a need of thee which must be kept secret.” “Tell it in my ear,” quoth
the devotee; and quoth the other, “I am the Angel of Death.” Replied the
man, “Welcome to thee! and praised be Allah for thy coming! I am aweary
of awaiting thine arrival; for indeed long hath been thine absence from
the lover which longeth for thee.” Said the Angel, “If thou have any
business, make an end of it;” but the other answered, saying, “There is
nothing so urgent to me as the meeting with my Lord, to whom be honour
and glory!” And the Angel said “How wouldst thou fain have me take thy
soul? I am bidden to take it as thou willest and choosest.” He replied,
“Tarry till I make the Wuzu-ablution and pray; and, when I prostrate
myself, then take my soul while my body is on the ground.”[454] Quoth
the Angel, “Verily, my Lord (be He extolled and exalted!) commanded me
not to take thy soul but with thy consent and as thou shouldst wish; so
I will do thy will.” Then the devout man made the minor ablution[455]
and prayed: and the Angel of Death took his soul in the act of
prostration and Almighty Allah transported it to the place of mercy and
acceptance and forgiveness. And they tell another tale of

-----

Footnote 453:

  The popular English idea of the Arab horse is founded upon utter
  unfact. Book after book tells us, “There are three distinct breeds of
  Arabians—the _Attechi_, a very superior breed; the _Kadishi_, mixed
  with these and of little value; and the _Kochlani_, highly prized and
  very difficult to procure.” “Attechi” may be At-Tází (the Arab horse,
  or hound) or some confusion with “At” (Turk.) a horse. “Kadish”
  (Gadish or Kidish) is a nag; a gelding, a hackney, a “pacer”
  (generally called “Rahwán”). “Kochlani” is evidently “Kohláni,” the
  Kohl-eyed, because the skin round the orbits is dark as if powdered.
  This is the true blue blood; and the bluest of all is “Kohláni
  al-Ajúz” (of the old woman) a name thus accounted for. An Arab mare
  dropped a filly when in flight; her rider perforce gallopped on and
  presently saw the foal appear in camp, when it was given to an old
  woman for nursing and grew up to be famous. The home of the Arab horse
  is the vast plateau of Al-Najd: the Tahámah or lower maritime regions
  of Arabia, like Malabar, will not breed good beasts. The pure blood
  all descends from five collateral lines called Al-Khamsah (the
  Cinque). Literary and pedantic Arabs derive them from the mares of
  Mohammed a native of the dry and rocky region, Al-Hijaz, whither
  horses are all imported. Others go back (with the Koran, chapt.
  xxviii.) to Solomon, possibly Salmán, a patriarch fourth in descent
  from Ishmael and some 600 years older than the Hebrew King. The Badawi
  derive the five from Rabí’at al-Faras (R. of the mare) fourth in
  descent from Adnán, the fount of Arab genealogy. But they differ about
  the names: those generally given are Kahilan (Kohaylat), Sakláwi
  (which the Badawin pronounce Sagláwi), Abayán, and Hamdáni; others
  substitute Manákhi (the long-maned), Tanís and Jalfún. These require
  no certificate amongst Arabs; for strangers a simple statement is
  considered enough. The Badawin despise all half-breeds (Arab sires and
  country mares), Syrian, Turkish, Kurdish and Egyptian. They call these
  (first mentioned in the reign of Ahmes, B.C. 1600) the “sons of
  horses”; as opposed to “sons of mares,” or thorough-breds. Nor do they
  believe in city-bred animals. I have great doubts concerning our old
  English sires, such as the Darley Arabian which looks like a Kurdish
  half-bred, the descendant of those Cappadocians so much prized by the
  Romans: in Syria I rode a “Harfúshí” (Kurd) the very image of it.
  There is no difficulty in buying Arab stallions except the price. Of
  course the tribe does not like to part with what may benefit the
  members generally; but offers of £500 to £1,000 would overcome men’s
  scruples. It is different with mares, which are almost always the
  joint property of several owners. The people too dislike to see a hat
  on a thorough-bred mare: “What hast thou done that thou art ridden by
  that ill-omened Kafir?” the Badawin used to mutter when they saw a
  highly respectable missionary at Damascus mounting a fine Ruwalá mare.
  The feeling easily explains the many wars about horses occurring in
  Arab annals, _e.g._ about Dáhis and Ghabrá. (C. de Perceval, _Essai_,
  vol. ii.)

Footnote 454:

  The stricter kind of Eastern Jew prefers to die on the floor not in
  bed, as was the case with the late Mr. Emmanuel Deutsch, who in his
  well-known article on the Talmud had the courage to speak of “Our
  Saviour.” But as a rule the Israelite, though he mostly appears as a
  Deist, a Unitarian, has a fund of fanatical feelings which crop up in
  old age and near death. The “converts” in Syria and elsewhere, whose
  Judaism is intensified by “conversion,” when offers are made to them
  by the missionaries repair to the Khákhám (scribe) and, after abundant
  wrangling determine upon a _modus vivendi_. They are to pay a
  proportion of their wages, to keep careful watch in the cause of
  Israel and to die orthodox. In Istria there is a legend of a Jew Prior
  in a convent who was not discovered till he announced himself most
  unpleasantly on his death-bed. For a contrary reason to Jewish
  humility the Roman Emperors preferred to die standing.

Footnote 455:

  He wished to die in a state of ceremonial purity; as has before been
  mentioned.




                 THE ANGEL OF DEATH AND THE RICH KING.


A certain King had heaped up coin beyond count and gathered store of all
precious things, which Allah the Most Highest hath created. So, in order
that he might take his pleasure whenas he should find leisure to enjoy
all this abounding wealth he had collected, he built him a palace wide
and lofty such as besitteth and beseemeth Kings; and set thereto strong
doors and appointed, for its service and its guard, servants and
soldiers and doorkeepers to watch and ward. One day, he bade the cooks
dress him somewhat of the goodliest of food and assembled his household
and retainers and boon-companions and servants to eat with him, and
partake of his bounty. Then he sat down upon the sofa of his kingship
and dominion; and, propping his elbow upon the cushion, addressed
himself, saying, “O soul, thou hast gathered together all the wealth of
the world; so now take thy leisure therein and eat of this good at thine
ease, in long life and prosperity ever rife!”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that hardly had the
King made an end of saying to himself, “Eat of this weal at thine ease,
in long life and prosperity ever rife!” when a man clad in tattered
raiment, with an asker’s wallet hanging at his neck, as he were one who
came to beg food, knocked with the door-ring a knock so loud and
terrible that the whole palace shook as with quake of earth and the
King’s throne trembled. The servants were affrighted and rushed to the
door, and when they saw the man who had knocked they cried out at him,
saying, “Woe to thee! what manner of unmannerly fashion be this? Wait
till the King eateth and we will then give thee of what is left.” Quoth
he, “Tell your lord to come out and speak with me, for I have of him a
pressing need and a matter to heed.” They cried, “Away, fool! who art
thou that we should bid our lord come forth to thee?” But he said, “Tell
him of this.” So they went in and told the King, who said, “Did ye not
rebuke him and draw upon him and threaten him!” Now as he spoke, behold,
there came another knock at the gate, louder than the first knock,
whereupon the servants sprang at the stranger with staves and weapons,
to fall upon him and slay him; but he shouted at them, saying, “Bide in
your steads, for I am the Angel of Death.” Hereat their hearts quaked
and their wits forsook them; their understandings were in confusion,
their side-muscles quivered in perturbation and their limbs lost the
power of motion. Then said the King to them, “Tell him to take a
substitute[456] in my place and one to relieve me in this case.” But the
Angel answered, saying, “I will take no substitute, and I come not but
on thine account, to cause separation between thee and the goods thou
hast gathered together and the riches thou hast heaped up and
entreasured.” When the King heard this, he wept and groaned, saying,
“Allah curse the treasure which hath deluded and undone me and diverted
me from the service of my Lord! I deemed it would profit me, but to-day
it is a regret for me and a calamity to me, and behold, I go forth,
empty-handed of it, and leave it to my foes.” Thereupon Allah caused the
Treasure to speak out and it said, “Wherefore cursest thou me?[457]
Curse thyself, for Allah created both me and eke thyself of the dust and
appointed me to be in thine hand, that thou mightest provide thee with
me a viaticum for the next world and give alms with me to the poor and
the needy and the sick; and build mosques and hospices and bridges and
aqueducts, so might I be an aidance unto thee in the world to come. But
thou didst garner me and hoard me up and on thine own vanities bestowest
me, neither gavest thou thanks for me, as was due, but wast ungrateful
to me; and now thou must leave me to thy foes and thou hast naught save
thy regretting and thy repenting. But what is my sin, that thou
shouldest revile me?” Then the Angel of Death took the King’s soul as he
sat on his throne before he ate of the food, and he fell down dead.
Quoth Allah Almighty, “While they were rejoicing for that which had been
given them, we suddenly laid hold on them; and, behold, they were seized
with despair.”[458] And they tell another tale of

-----

Footnote 456:

  Arab. “Badal”: in Sind (not to speak of other places) it was customary
  to hire a pauper “badal” to be hanged in stead of a rich man. Sir
  Charles Napier signed many a death-warrant before he ever heard of the
  practice.

Footnote 457:

  Arab. “La’an” = curse. The word is in every mouth though strongly
  forbidden by religion. Even of the enemies of Al-Islam the learned
  say, “Ila’an Yezíd wa lá tazíd” = curse Yezid but do not exceed
  (_i.e._ refrain from cursing the others). This, however, is in the
  Shafi’í school and the Hanafís do not allow it (Pilgrimage i. 198).
  Hence the Moslem when scrupulous uses na’al (shoe) for la’an (curse)
  as Ina’al abúk (for Ila’an abu’-k) or, _drat_ (instead of _damn_) your
  father. Men must hold Supreme Intelligence to be of feeble kind if put
  off by such miserable pretences.

Footnote 458:

  Koran vi. 44, speaking of the Infidels. It is a most unamiable
  chapter, with such assertions as “Allah leadeth into error whom He
  pleaseth,” etc.




       THE ANGEL OF DEATH AND THE KING OF THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL.


There was a puissant despot among the Kings of the Banú Isráíl, who sat
one day upon the throne of his kingship, when he saw come in to him, by
the gate of the hall, a man of forbidding aspect and horrible presence.
The King was affrighted at his sudden intrusion and his look terrified
him; so he sprang up before him and said, “Who art thou, O man? Who gave
thee leave to come in to me and who invited thee to enter my house?”
Quoth the stranger, “Verily the Lord of the House sent me to thee, nor
can any doorkeeper exclude me, nor need I leave to come in to Kings; for
I reck not of a Sultan’s majesty neither of the multitude of his guards.
I am he from whom no tyrant is at rest, nor can any man escape from my
grasp: I am the Destroyer of delights and the Sunderer of societies.”
Now when the King heard this a palsy crept over him[459] and he fell on
his face in a swoon; but presently coming to himself, he asked, “Art
thou then the Angel of Death?”; and the stranger answered, “Yes.” “I
conjure thee, by Allah,” quoth the King, “grant me one single day’s
respite, that I may pray pardon of my sins and ask absolution of my Lord
and restore to their rightful owners the monies which are in my
treasures, so I may not be burdened with the woe of a reckoning nor with
the misery of punishment therefor.” Replied the Angel, “Well-away!
well-away! this may be in no way.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the
Death-messenger to the King, “Well-away, well-away! this may be in no
way. How can I grant thee a reprieve when the days of thy life are
counted and thy breaths numbered and thy moments fixed and written?”
“Grant me an hour,” asked the King; but the Angel answered saying, “The
hour was in the account and hath sped, and thou unheeding aught; and
hath fled, and thou taking no thought: and now thy breathings are
accomplished, and there remaineth to thee but one breath.” Quoth the
King, “Who will be with me when I am transported to my tomb?” Quoth the
Angel, “Naught will be with thee but thy works good or evil.” “I have no
works,” said the King; and the Angel, “Doubtless thy long home will be
in hell-fire and thy doom the wrath of the Almighty.” Then he seized the
soul of the King, and he fell off his throne and dropped on the earth
dead. And there arose a mighty weeping and wailing and clamour of
keening for him among the people of his court, and had they known that
to which he went of the wrath of his Lord, their weeping for him had
been sorer and their wailing louder and more abounding. And a story is
told of

-----

Footnote 459:

  Alluding to the “formication” which accompanies a stroke of paralysis.




     ISKANDAR ZU AL-KARNAYN[460] AND A CERTAIN TRIBE OF POOR FOLK.


It is related that Iskandar Zu al-Karnayn[461] once came, in his
journeyings, upon a tribe of small folk, who owned naught of the weals
of the world and who dug their graves over against the doors of their
houses and were wont at all times to visit them and sweep the earth from
them and keep them clean and pray at them and worship Almighty Allah at
them; and they had no meat save grasses and the growth of the ground. So
Iskandar sent a man to summon their King, but he refused to come,
saying, “I have no need of him.” Thereupon Iskandar went to him and
said, “How is it with you and what manner of men are ye?; for I see with
you forsooth naught of gold or silver, nor find I with you aught of the
weals of the world.” Answered the King, “None hath his fill of the weals
of the world.” Iskandar then asked “Why do you dig your graves before
your house-doors?”; and the King answered, “That they may be the
prospective of our eye-glances; so we may look on them and ever renew
talk and thought of death, neither forget the world to come; and on this
wise the love of the world be banished from our hearts and we be not
thereby distracted from the service of our Lord, the Almighty.” Quoth
Iskandar, “Why do ye eat grasses?”; and the other replied, “Because we
abhor to make our bellies the tombs of animals and because the pleasure
of eating outstrippeth not the gullet.” Then putting forth his hand he
brought out a skull of a son of Adam and, laying it before Iskandar,
said, “O Zu al-Karnayn, Lord of the Two Horns, knowest thou who owned
this skull?” Quoth he, “Nay;” and quoth the other, “He who owned this
skull was a King of the Kings of the world, who dealt tyrannously with
his subjects, specially wronging the weak and wasting his time in
heaping up the rubbish of this world, till Allah took his sprite and
made the fire his abiding-site; and this is his head.” He then put forth
his hand and produced another skull and, laying it before Iskandar, said
to him, “Knowest thou this?” “No,” answered the conqueror; and the other
rejoined, “This is the skull of another King, who dealt justly by his
lieges and was kindly solicitous for the folk of his realm and his
dominions, till Allah took his soul and lodged him in His Garden and
made high his degree in Heaven.” Then laying his hands on Iskandar’s
head he said, “Would I knew which of these two art thou.” Whereupon
Iskandar wept with sore weeping and straining the King to his bosom
cried, “If thou be minded to company with me, I will commit to thee as
Wazir the government of my affairs and share with thee my kingdom.”
Cried the other, “Well-away, well-away! I have no mind to this.” “And
why so?” asked Iskandar, and the King answered, “Because all men are thy
foes by reason of the wealth and the worlds thou hast won: while all men
are my true friends, because of my contentment and pauperdom, for that I
possess nothing, neither covet aught of the goods of life; I have no
desire to them nor wish for them, neither reck I aught save
contentment.” So Iskandar pressed him to his breast and kissed him
between the eyes and went his way.[462] And among the tales they tell is
one concerning

-----

Footnote 460:

  Pronounce Zool Karnayn.

Footnote 461:

  _i.e._ the Koranic and our mediæval Alexander, Lord of the two Horns
  (East and West) much “Matagrobolized” and very different from him of
  Macedon. The title is variously explained, from two protuberances on
  his head or helm, from two long locks and, possibly, from the
  ram-horns of Jupiter Ammon. The anecdote in the text seems suggested
  by the famous interview (probably a _canard_) with Diogenes: see in
  the Gesta, Tale cxlvi. “The answer of Diomedes the Pirate to
  Alexander.” Iskandar was originally called Marzbán (Lord of the
  Marches), son of Marzabah; and, though descended from Yunán, son of
  Japhet, the eponymus of the Greeks, was born obscure, the son of an
  old woman. According to the Persians he was the son of the Elder Dáráb
  (Darius Codomannus of the Kayanian or Second dynasty), by a daughter
  of Philip of Macedon; and was brought up by his grandfather. When
  Abraham and Isaac had rebuilt the Ka’abah they foregathered with him
  and Allah sent him forth against the four quarters of the earth to
  convert men to the faith of the Friend or to cut their throats; thus
  he became one of the four world-conquerors with Nimrod, Solomon, Bukht
  al-Nasr (Nabochodonosor); and he lived down two generations of men.
  His Wazir was Aristú (the Greek Aristotle) and he carried a couple of
  flags, white and black, which made day and night for him and
  facilitated his conquests. At the end of Persia, where he was invited
  by the people, on account of the cruelty of his half brother Darab
  II., he came upon two huge mountains on the same line, behind which
  dwelt a host of abominable pygmies, two spans high, with curious eyes,
  ears which served as mattresses and coverlets, huge fanged mouths,
  lions’ claws and hairy hind quarters. They ate men, destroyed
  everything, copulated in public and had swarms of children. These were
  Yájúj and Májúj (Gog and Magog) descendants of Japhet. Sikandar built
  against them the famous wall with stones cemented and riveted by iron
  and copper. The “Great Wall” of China, the famous bulwark against the
  Tartars dates from B.C. 320; (Alexander of Macedon died B.C. 324) and
  as the Arabs knew Canton well before Mohammed’s day, they may have
  built their romance upon it. The Guebres consigned Sikandar to hell
  for burning the Nusks or sections of the Zendavesta.

Footnote 462:

  These terrific preachments to Eastern despots (who utterly ignore
  them) are a staple produce of Oriental tale-literature and form the
  chiaro-oscuro, as it were, of a picture whose lights are brilliant
  touches of profanity and indelicate humour. It certainly has the charm
  of contrast. Much of the above is taken from the Sikandar-nameh
  (Alexander Book) of the great Persian poet, Nizámi, who flourished
  A.H. 515–597, between the days of Firdausi (ob. A.D. 1021) and Sa’adi
  (ob. A.D. 1291). In that romance Sikandar builds, “where the sun goes
  down,” a castle of glittering stone which kills men by causing
  excessive laughter and surrounds it with yellow earth like gold. Hence
  the City of Brass. He also converts, instead of being converted by,
  the savages of the text. He finds a stone of special excellence which
  he calls Almás (diamond); and he obtains it from the Valley of
  Serpents by throwing down flesh to the eagles. Lastly he is
  accompanied by “Bilínás” or “Bilínús,” who is apparently Apollonius of
  Tyana.




               THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF KING ANUSHIRWAN.[463]


It is told of Anushirwan, the just King, that once upon a time he
feigned himself sick, and bade his stewards and intendants go round
about the provinces of his empire and the quarters of his dominion and
seek him out a mud-brick thrown away from some ruined village, that he
might use it as medicine, informing his intimates that the leaches had
prescribed this to him. So they went the round of the provinces of his
reign and of all the lands under his sway and said to him on return, “In
all the realm we have found nor ruined site nor castaway mud-brick.” At
this Anushirwan rejoiced and rendered thanks to the Lord, saying, “I was
but minded to try my kingdom and prove mine empire, that I might know if
any place therein remained ruined and deserted, so I might rebuild and
repeople it; but, since there be no place in it but is inhabited, the
affairs of the reign are best-conditioned and its ordinance is
excellent; and its populousness[464] hath reached the pitch of
perfection.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the high
officials returned and reported, “We have found in the empire nor ruined
site nor rotten brick,” the Just King thanked his God and said, “Verily
the affairs of the realm are best-conditioned and its ordinance is
excellent and its populousness hath reached the pink of perfection.” And
ken thou, O King, continued Shahrazad, that these olden Kings strave not
and toiled not for the peopling of their possessions, but because they
knew that the more populous a country is, the more abundant is that
which is desired therein; and because they wist the saying of the wise
and the learned to be true without other view, namely, “Religion
dependeth on the King, the King on the troops, the troops on the
treasury, the treasury on the populousness of the country and its
prosperity on the justice done to the lieges.” Wherefore they upheld no
one in tyranny or oppression; neither suffered their dependants and
suite to work injustice, knowing that kingdoms are not established upon
tyranny, but that cities and places fall into ruin when oppressors are
set as rulers over them, and their inhabitants disperse and flee to
other governments; whereby ruin falleth upon the realm, the imports
fail, the treasuries become empty and the pleasant lives of the subjects
are perturbed; for that they love not a tyrant and cease not to offer up
successive prayers against him; so that the King hath no ease of his
kingdom, and the vicissitudes of fortune speedily bring him to
destruction. And they tell a tale concerning

-----

Footnote 463:

  I have explained the beautiful name in Night cclxxxix: He is still
  famous for having introduced into Persia the fables of Pilpay
  (Bidyapati, the lord of lore) and a game which the genius of Persia
  developed into chess.

Footnote 464:

  Here we find an eternal truth, of which Malthusians ever want
  reminding; that the power of a nation simply consists in its numbers
  of fighting men and in their brute bodily force. The conquering race
  is that which raises most foot-pounds: hence the North conquers the
  South in the Northern hemisphere and _vice versâ_.




                  THE JEWISH KAZI AND HIS PIOUS WIFE.


Among the Children of Israel one of the Kazis had a wife of surpassing
beauty, constant in fasting and abounding in patience and
long-suffering; and he, being minded to make the pilgrimage to
Jerusalem, appointed his own brother Kazi in his stead, during his
absence, and commended his wife to his charge. Now this brother had
heard of her beauty and loveliness and had taken a fancy to her. So no
sooner was his brother gone than he went to her and sought her
love-favours; but she denied him and held fast to her chastity. The more
she repelled him, the more he pressed his suit upon her; till,
despairing of her and fearing lest she should acquaint his brother with
his misconduct whenas he should return, he suborned false witnesses to
testify against her of adultery; and cited her and carried her before
the King of the time who adjudged her to be stoned. So they dug a pit,
and seating her therein stoned her, till she was covered with stones,
and the man said, “Be this hole her grave!” But when it was dark a
passer-by, making for a neighbouring hamlet, heard her groaning in sore
pain; and, pulling her out of the pit, carried her home to his wife,
whom he bade dress her wounds. The peasant woman tended her till she
recovered and presently gave her her child to be nursed; and she used to
lodge with the child in another house by night. Now a certain thief saw
her and lusted after her. So he sent to her seeking her love-favours,
but she denied herself to him; wherefore he resolved to slay her and,
making his way into her lodging by night (and she sleeping), thought to
strike at her with a knife; but it smote the little one and killed it.
Now when he knew his misdeed, fear overtook him and he went forth the
house and Allah preserved from him her chastity. But as she awoke in the
morning, she found the child by her side with throat cut; and presently
the mother came and seeing her boy dead, said to the nurse, “‘Twas thou
didst murther him.” Therewith she beat her a grievous beating and
purposed to put her to death; but her husband interposed and delivered
the woman, saying, “By Allah, thou shalt not do on this wise.” So the
woman, who had somewhat of money with her, fled forth for her life,
knowing not whither she should wend. Presently, she came to a village,
where she saw a crowd of people about a man crucified to a tree-stump,
but still in the chains of life. “What hath he done?” she asked, and
they answered, “He hath committed a crime, which nothing can expiate but
death or the payment of such a fine by way of alms.” So she said to
them, “Take the money and let him go;” and, when they did so, he
repented at her hands and vowed to serve her, for the love of Almighty
Allah till death should release him. Then he built her a cell and lodged
her therein; after which he betook himself to woodcutting and brought
her daily her bread. As for her, she was constant in worship, so that
there came no sick man or demoniac to her, but she prayed for him and he
was straightway healed.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the woman’s
cell was visited by folk (and she constant in worship), it befel by
decree of the Almighty that He sent down upon her husband’s brother (the
same who had caused her to be stoned), a cancer in the face, and smote
the villager’s wife (the same who had beaten her) with leprosy, and
afflicted the thief (the same who had murthered the child) with palsy.
Now when the Kazi returned from his pilgrimage, he asked his brother of
his wife, and he told him that she was dead, whereat he mourned sore and
accounted her with her Maker. After awhile, very many folk heard of the
pious recluse and flocked to her cell from all parts of the length and
breadth of the earth; whereupon said the Kazi to his brother, “O my
brother, wilt thou not seek out yonder pious woman? Haply Allah shall
decree thee healing at her hands!” and he replied, “O my brother, carry
me to her.” Moreover, the husband of the leprous woman heard of the
pious devotee and carried his wife to her, as did also the people of the
paralytic thief; and they all met at the door of the hermitage. Now she
had a place wherefrom she could look out upon those who came to her,
without their seeing her; and they waited till her servant came, when
they begged admittance and obtained permission. Presently she saw them
all and recognized them; so she veiled and cloaked face and body and
went out and stood in the door, looking at her husband and his brother
and the thief and the peasant-woman; but they could not recognise her.
Then said she to them, “Ho folk, ye shall not be relieved of what is
with you till ye confess your sins; for, when the creature confesseth
his sins the Creator relenteth towards him and granteth him that
wherefore he resorteth to Him.” Quoth the Kazi to his brother, “O my
brother, repent to Allah and persist not in thy frowardness, for it will
be more helpful to thy relief.” And the tongue of the case spake this
speech:—

 This day oppressor and oppressèd meet, ✿ And Allah sheweth secrets we
    secrete:
 This is a place where sinners low are brought; ✿ And Allah raiseth saint
    to highest seat.
 Our Lord and Master shows the truth right clear, ✿ Though sinner froward
    be or own defeat:
 Alas[465] for those who rouse the Lord to wrath, ✿ As though of Allah’s
    wrath they nothing weet!
 O whoso seekest honours, know they are ✿ From Allah, and His fear with
    love entreat.

(Saith the relator), Then quoth the brother, “Now I will tell the truth:
I did thus and thus with thy wife;” and he confessed the whole matter,
adding, “And this is my offence.” Quoth the leprous woman, “As for me, I
had a woman with me and imputed to her that of which I knew her to be
guiltless, and beat her grievously; and this is my offence.” And quoth
the paralytic, “And I went in to a woman to kill her, after I had
tempted her to commit adultery and she had refused; and I slew a child
that lay by her side; and this is my offence.” Then said the pious
woman, “O my God, even as Thou hast made them feel the misery of revolt,
so show them now the excellence of submission, for Thou over all things
art Omnipotent!” And Allah (to whom belong Majesty and Might!) made them
whole. Then the Kazi fell to looking on her and considering her
straitly, till she asked him why he looked so hard and he said, “I had a
wife and were she not dead, I had said thou art she.” Hereupon, she made
herself known to him and both began praising Allah (to whom belong
Majesty and Might!) for that which He had vouchsafed them of the reunion
of their loves; but the brother and the thief and the villager’s wife
joined in imploring her forgiveness. So she forgave them one and all,
and they worshipped Allah in that place and rendered her due service,
till Death parted them. And one of the Sayyids[466] hath related this
tale of

-----

Footnote 465:

  Arab. “Wayha,” not so strong as “Woe to,” etc. Al-Hariri often uses it
  as formula of affectionate remonstrance.

Footnote 466:

  As a rule (much disputed) the Sayyid is a descendant from Mohammed
  through his grandchild Hasan, and is a man of the pen; whereas the
  Sharif derives from Husayn and is a man of the sword. The Najíb
  al-taraf is the son of a common Moslemah by a Sayyid, as opposed to
  the “Najib al-tarafayn,” when both parents are of Apostolic blood. The
  distinction is not noticed in Lane’s “Modern Egyptians.” The Sharif is
  a fanatic and often dangerous, as I have instanced in Pilgrimage iii.
  132.




                  THE SHIPWRECKED WOMAN AND HER CHILD.


I was circuiting the Ka’abah one dark night, when I heard a plaintive
voice, speaking from a contrite heart and saying, “O Bountiful One, Thy
past boon! Indeed, by my heart shall Thy covenant never be undone.”
Hearing this voice, my heart fluttered so that I was like to die; but I
followed the sound and behold, it came from a woman, to whom I said,
“Peace be with thee, O handmaid of Allah;” whereto she replied, “And
with thee be peace, and the mercy of Allah and His blessings!” Quoth I,
“I conjure thee, by Allah the Most Great, tell me what is the covenant
to which thy heart is constant.” Quoth she, “But that thou adjurest me
by the Omnipotent, I would not tell thee my secrets. See what is before
me.” So I looked and lo! there was a child lying asleep before her and
breathing heavily in his slumber. Said she, “Know, that I set forth,
being big with this boy, to make the pilgrimage to this House and took
passage in a ship; but the waves rose against us and the winds blew
contrary and the vessel broke up. I saved myself on a plank; and, on
that bit of wood, I gave birth to this child; and while he lay on my
bosom and the waves beating upon me,”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the woman
continued, “Now while the boy lay on my bosom and the waves beat upon
me, there swam up to me one of the sailors, who climbed on the plank and
said:—By Allah, I desired thee whilst thou wast yet in the ship, and now
I have come at thee: so yield thy body to me, or I will throw thee into
the sea. Said I:—Out on thee! hast thou no memory of that which thou
hast seen and is it no warning to thee? Quoth he:—I have seen the like
of this many a time and come off safe and care not. Quoth I:—O fellow,
we are now in a calamity, whence we hope to be delivered by obedience to
Allah and not by disobedience. But he persisted with me, and I feared
him and thought to put him off; so I said to him:—Wait till this babe
shall sleep; but he took the child off my lap and threw him into the
sea. Now when I saw this desperate deed, my heart sank and sorrow was
sore upon me; so I raised my eyes heavenwards and said:—O Thou that
interposest between a man and his heart, intervene between me and this
leonine brute; for Thou over all things art Omnipotent! And by Allah,
hardly had I spoken when a beast rose out of the sea and snatched him
off the plank. When I saw myself alone my sorrows redoubled and my grief
and longing for my child, and I recited:—

 My coolth of eyes, the darling child of me ✿ Is lost, and racked my
    heart with agony;
 My body wrecked, and red-hot coals of love ✿ Burning my liver with sore
    pangs, I see.
 In this my sorrow shows no gleam of joy; ✿ Save Thy high grace and my
    expectancy:
 Hast seen, O Lord, what unto me befel; ✿ My son aye lost and parting
    pangs I dree:
 Take ruth on us and make us meet again; ✿ For now my stay and only
    hope’s in Thee!

I abode in this condition a day and a night; and, when morning dawned, I
caught sight of the sails of a vessel shining afar off, nor did the
waves cease to drive me and the winds to waft me on, till I reached the
ship, whose sails I had sighted. The sailors took me up and I looked and
behold, my babe was amongst them: so I threw myself upon him and said:—O
folk, this is my child: how and whence came ye by him? Quoth
they:—Whilst we were sailing along the seas the ship suddenly stood
still and lo! that which stayed us was a beast, as it were a great city,
and this babe on its back, sucking his thumbs. So we took him up. Now
when I heard this, I told them my tale and all that had betided me and
returned thanks to my Lord for His goodness, and vowed to Him that
never, whilst I lived, would I stir from His House nor swerve from His
service; and since then I have never asked of Him aught but He hath
given it me.” Now when she had made an end of her story (quoth the
Sayyid), I put my hand to my alms-pouch and would have given to her, but
she exclaimed, “Away from me, thou idle man! Have I not told thee of His
mercies and the graciousness of His dealings and shall I take an alms
from other than His hand?” And I could not prevail with her to accept
aught of me: so I left her and went away, reciting these couplets:—

 How many boons conceals the Deity, ✿ Eluding human sight in mystery:
 How many graces come on heels of stresses, ✿ And fill the burning heart
    with jubilee:
 How many a sorrow in the morn appears, ✿ And turns at night-tide into
    gladdest gree:
 If things go hard with thee some day, yet trust ✿ Th’ Eterne, th’
    Almighty God of Unity:
 And pray the Prophet that he intercede; ✿ Through intercession every
    wish shalt see.

And she left not the service of her Lord, cleaving unto His House, till
death came to her. And a tale is also told, by Málik bin Dínár[467]
(Allah have mercy on him!) of

-----

Footnote 467:

  A theologian of Bassorah (eighth century): surnamed Abú Yahyá. The
  prayer for mercy denotes that he was dead when the tale was written.




                         THE PIOUS BLACK SLAVE.


We were once afflicted with drought at Bassorah and went forth sundry
times to pray for rain, but saw no sign of our prayers being accepted.
So I went, I and ‘Itaa al-Salamí and Sábit al-Banáni and Naja al-Bakáa
and Mohammed bin Wási’a and Ayyúb al-Sukhtiyáni and Habíb al-Farsi and
Hassán bin Abi Sinán and ‘Otbah al-Ghulám and Sálih al-Muzani,[468] till
we reached the oratory,[469] when the boys came out of the schools and
we prayed for rain, but saw no sign of acceptance. So about midday the
people went away and I and Sabit al-Banani tarried in the place of
prayer till nightfall, when we saw a black of comely face, slender of
shank[470] and big of belly, approach us, clad in a pair of woollen
drawers; if all he wore had been priced, it would not have fetched a
couple of dirhams. He brought water and made the minor ablution, then,
going up to the prayer-niche, prayed two inclinations deftly, his
standing and bowing and prostration being exactly similar in both. Then
he raised his glance heavenwards, and said, “O my God and my Lord and
Master, how long wilt Thou reject Thy servants in that which offereth no
hurt to Thy sovereignty? Is that which is with Thee wasted or are the
treasuries of Thy Kingdom annihilated? I conjure Thee, by Thy love to me
forthwith to pour out upon us Thy rain-clouds of grace!” He spake and
hardly had he made an end of speaking, when the heavens clouded over and
there came a rain, as if the mouths of waterskins had been opened; and
when we left the oratory, we were knee-deep in water,——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that hardly had he
spoken when the heavens clouded over and there came a rain, as if the
mouths of waterskins had been opened. And when we left the oratory we
were knee-deep in water, and we were lost in wonder at the black. So I
accosted him and said to him, “Woe to thee, O black, art thou not
ashamed of what thou saidst?” He turned to me and asked, “What said I?”;
and I, “Thy saying to Allah:—By Thy love of me; and what giveth thee to
know that He loveth thee?” Replied he, “Away from me, O thou distracted
by the world from the care of thine own soul. Where was I, when He gave
me strength to profess the unity of the Godhead and vouchsafed unto me
the knowledge of Him? How deemest thou that He aided me thus except of
His love to me?” adding, “Verily, His love to me is after the measure of
my love to Him.” Quoth I, “Tarry awhile with me, so may Allah have mercy
on thee!” But he said, “I am a chattel and the Book enjoineth me to obey
my lesser master.” So we followed him afar off, till we saw him enter
the house of a slave-broker. Now the first half of the night was past
and the last half was longsome upon us, so we went away; but next
morning, we repaired to the slave-dealer and said to him, “Hast thou a
lad to sell us for service?” He answered, “Yes, I have an hundred lads
or so and they are all for sale.” Then he showed us slave after slave,
till he had shown us some seventy; but my friend was not amongst them,
and the dealer said, “These are all I have.” But, as we were going out
from him we saw a ruinous hut behind his house and going in behold, we
found the black standing there. I cried, “‘Tis he, by the Lord of the
Ka’abah!” and turning to the dealer, said to him, “Sell me yonder
slave.” Replied he, “O Abu Yahya, this is a pestilent unprofitable
fellow, who hath no concern by night but weeping and by day but
repentance.” I rejoined, “It is for that I want him.” So the dealer
called him, and he came out, showing drowsiness. Quoth his master, “Take
him at thine own price, so thou hold me free of all his faults.” I
bought him for twenty dinars and asked “What is his name?” and the
dealer answered, “Maymún, the monkey;” and I took him by the hand and
went out with him, intending to go home; but he turned to me and said,
“O my lesser lord, why and wherefore didst thou buy me? By Allah, I am
not fit for the service of God’s creatures!” Replied I, “I bought thee
that I might serve thee myself; and on my head be it.” Asked he, “Why
so?” and I answered, “Wast thou not in company with us yesterday in the
place of prayer?” Quoth he, “And didst thou hear me?”; and quoth I, “It
was I accosted thee yesterday and spoke with thee.” Thereupon he
advanced till we came to a mosque, where he entered and prayed a two-bow
prayer; after which he said, “O my God and my Lord and Master, the
secret that was between me and Thee Thou hast discovered unto Thy
creatures and hast brought me to shame before the worldling. How then
shall life be sweet to me, now that other than Thou hath happened upon
that which is between Thee and me? I conjure Thee to take my soul to
Thee forthright.”[471] So saying, he prostrated himself, and I awaited
awhile without seeing him raise his head; so I shook him and behold, he
was indeed dead, the mercy of Almighty Allah be upon him! I laid him out
stretching his arms and legs and looked at him, and lo! he was smiling.
Moreover, whiteness had got the better of blackness on his brow, and his
face was radiant with light like a young moon. As we wondered at his
case, the door opened and a young man came in to us and said, “Peace be
with you! May Allah make great our reward and yours for our brother
Maymun! Here is his shroud: wrap him in it.” So saying, he gave us two
robes, never had we seen the like of them, and we shrouded him therein.
And now his tomb is a place whither men resort to pray for rain and ask
their requirements of Allah (be He extolled and exalted!); and how
excellently well saith the poet on this theme:

 The heart of Gnostic[472] homed in heavenly Garth ✿ Heaven decks, and
    Allah’s porters aid afford.
 Lo! here they drink old wine commingled with ✿ Tasním,[473] the wine of
    union with the Lord.
 Safe is the secret ‘twixt the Friend and them; ✿ Safe from all hearts
    but from that Heart adored.

And they recount another anecdote of

-----

Footnote 468:

  A theologian of Bassorah (eighth century).

Footnote 469:

  Arab. “Musallá”; lit. a place of prayer; an oratory, a chapel, opp. to
  “Jámi’” = a (cathedral) mosque.

Footnote 470:

  According to all races familiar with the negro, a calf like a shut
  fist planted close under the ham is, like the “cucumber shin” and
  “lark heel,” a good sign in a slave. Shapely calves and well made legs
  denote the idle and the ne’er-do-well. I have often found this true
  although the rule is utterly empirical. Possibly it was suggested by
  the contrast of the nervous and lymphatic temperaments.

Footnote 471:

  These devotees address Allah as a lover would his beloved. The curious
  reader will consult for instances the Dabistan on Tasawwuf (ii. 221;
  i., iii. end, and passim.)

Footnote 472:

  Arab. “Ma’rifat,” Pers. Dánish; the knowledge of the Truth. The seven
  steps are (1) Sharí’at, external law like night; (2) Taríkat,
  religious rule like the stars; (3) Hakíkat, reality, truth like the
  moon; (4) Ma’rifat like the sun; (5) Kurbat, proximity to Allah; (6)
  Wasílat, union with Allah, and (7) Suknat, dwelling in Allah (Dabistan
  iii. 29.)

Footnote 473:

  Name of a fountain of Paradise: See Night xlix., vol. ii., p. 100.




                  THE DEVOUT TRAY-MAKER AND HIS WIFE.


There was once, among the Children of Israel, a man of the worthiest,
who was strenuous in the service of his Lord and abstained from things
worldly and drave them away from his heart. He had a wife who was a
helpmate meet for him and who was at all times obedient to him. They
earned their living by making trays[474] and fans, whereat they wrought
all through the light hours; and, at nightfall, the man went out into
the streets and highways seeking a buyer for what they had made. They
were wont to fast continually by day[475] and one morning they arose,
fasting, and worked at their craft till the light failed them, when the
man went forth, according to custom, to find purchasers for his wares,
and fared on till he came to the door of the house of a certain man of
wealth, one of the sons of this world, high in rank and dignity. Now the
tray-maker was fair of face and comely of form, and the wife of the
master of the house saw him and fell in love with him and her heart
inclined to him with exceeding inclination; so, her husband being
absent, she called her handmaid and said to her, “Contrive to bring
yonder man to us.” Accordingly the maid went out to him and called him
and stopped him as though she would buy what he held in hand.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the maid-servant
went out to the man and asked him, “Come in; my lady hath a mind to buy
some of thy wares, after she hath tried them and looked at them.” The
man thought she spoke truly and, seeing no harm in this, entered and sat
down as she bade him; and she shut the door upon him. Whereupon her
mistress came out of her room and, taking him by the gaberdine,[476]
drew him within and said, “How long shall I seek union of thee? Verily
my patience is at an end on thine account. See now, the place is
perfumed and provision prepared and the householder is absent this
night, and I give to thee my person without reserve, I whose favours
kings and captains and men of fortune have sought this long while, but I
have regarded none of them.” And she went on talking thus to him, whilst
he raised not his eyes from the ground, for shame before Allah Almighty
and fear of the pains and penalties of His punishment; even as saith the
poet:—

 ‘Twixt me and riding many a noble dame, ✿ Was naught but shame which
    kept me chaste and pure:
 My shame was cure to her; but haply were ✿ Shame to depart, she ne’er
    had known a cure.

The man strove to free himself from her, but could not; so he said to
her, “I want one thing of thee.” She asked, “What is that?”: and he
answered, “I wish for pure water and that I may carry it to the highest
place of thy house and do somewhat therewith and cleanse myself of an
impurity, which I may not disclose to thee.” Quoth she, “The house is
large and hath closets and corners and privies at command.” But he
replied, “I want nothing but to be at a height.” So she said to her
slave-girl, “Carry him up to the belvedere on the house-terrace.”
Accordingly the maid took him up to the very top and, giving him a
vessel of water, went down and left him. Then he made the ablution and
prayed a two-bow prayer; after which he looked at the ground, thinking
to throw himself down, but seeing it afar off, feared to be dashed to
pieces by the fall.[477] Then he bethought him of his disobedience to
Allah, and the consequences of his sin; so it became a light matter to
him to offer up his life and shed his blood; and he said, “O my God and
my Lord, Thou seest that which is fallen on me; neither is my case
hidden from Thee. Thou indeed over all things art Omnipotent and the
tongue of my case reciteth and saith:”—

 I show my heart and thoughts to Thee, and Thou ✿ Alone my secret’s
    secrecy canst know.
 If I address Thee fain I cry aloud; ✿ Or, if I’m mute, my signs for
    speech I show.
 O Thou to whom no second be conjoined! ✿ A wretched lover seeks Thee in
    his woe.
 I have a hope my thoughts as true confirm; ✿ And heart that fainteth as
    right well canst trow.
 To lavish life is hardest thing that be, ✿ Yet easy an Thou bid me life
    forego;
 But, an it be Thy will to save from stowre, ✿ Thou, O my Hope, to work
    this work hast power!

Then the man cast himself down from the belvedere; but Allah sent an
angel who bore him up on his wings and brought him down to the ground,
whole and without hurt or harm. Now when he found himself safe on the
ground, he thanked and praised Allah (to whom belong Majesty and Might!)
for His merciful protection of his person and his chastity; and he went
straight to his wife who had long expected him, and he empty-handed.
Then seeing him, she asked him why he had tarried and what was come of
that he had taken with him and why he returned empty-handed; whereupon
he told her of the temptation which had befallen him, and she said,
“Alhamdolillah—praised be God—for delivering thee from seduction and
intervening between thee and such calamity!” Then she added, “O man, the
neighbours use to see us light our oven every night; and, if they see us
fireless this night, they will know that we are destitute. Now it
behoveth in gratitude to Allah, that we hide our destitution and conjoin
the fast of this night to that of the past and continue it for the sake
of Allah Almighty.” So she rose and, filling the oven with wood, lighted
it, to baffle the curiosity of her women-neighbours, reciting these
couplets:—

 Now I indeed will hide desire and all repine; ✿ And light up this my
    fire that neighbours see no sign:
 Accept I what befalls by order of my Lord; ✿ Haply He too accept this
    humble act of mine.

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


         Now when it was the Four Hundred and Seventieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after the goodwife
had lit the fire to baffle the curiosity of her women-neighbours, she
and her husband made the Wuzu-ablution and stood up to pray, when
behold, one of the neighbours’ wives came and asked leave to take a
fire-brand from the oven. “Do what thou wilt with the oven,” answered
they; but, when she came to the fire, she cried out, saying, “Ho, such
an one (to the tray-maker’s wife) take up thy bread ere it burn!” Quoth
the wife to her husband, “Hearest thou what she saith?” Quoth he, “Go
and look.” So she went up to the oven, and behold, it was full of fine
bread and white. She took up the scones and carried them to her husband,
thanking Allah (to whom belong Majesty and Might!) for His abounding
good and great bounty; and they ate of the bread and drank water and
praised the Almighty. Then said the woman to her husband, “Come let us
pray to Allah the Most Highest, so haply He may vouchsafe us what shall
enable us to dispense with the weariness of working for daily bread and
devote ourselves wholly to worshipping and obeying Him.” The man rose in
assent and prayed, whilst his wife said, “Amen,” to his prayer, when the
roof clove in sunder and down fell a ruby, which lit the house with its
light. Hereat, they redoubled in praise and thanksgiving to Allah
praying what the Almighty willed,[478] and rejoiced at the ruby with
great joy. And the night being far spent, they lay down to sleep and the
woman dreamt that she entered Paradise and saw therein many chairs
ranged and stools set in rows. She asked what the seats were and it was
answered her, “These are the chairs of the prophets and those are the
stools of the righteous and the pious.” Quoth she, “Which is the stool
of my husband such an one?”; and it was said to her, “It is this.” So
she looked and seeing a hole in its side asked, “What may be this
hole?”; and the reply came, “It is the place of the ruby that dropped
upon you from your house-roof.” Thereupon she awoke, weeping and
bemoaning the defect in her husband’s stool among the seats of the
Righteous; so she told him the dream and said to him, “Pray Allah, O
man, that this ruby return to its place; for endurance of hunger and
poverty during our few days here were easier than a hole in thy chair
among the just in Paradise.”[479] Accordingly, he prayed to his Lord,
and lo! the ruby flew up to the roof and away whilst they looked at it.
And they ceased not from their poverty and their piety, till they went
to the presence of Allah, to whom be Honour and Glory! And they also
tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 474:

  Arab. “Atbák”; these trays are made of rushes, and the fans of
  palm-leaves or tail-feathers.

Footnote 475:

  Except on the two great Festivals when fasting is forbidden. The only
  religion which has shown common sense in this matter is that of the
  Guebres or Parsis: they consider fasting neither meritorious nor
  lawful; and they honour Hormuzd by good living “because it keeps the
  soul stronger.” Yet even they have their food superstitions, _e.g._ in
  Gate No. xxiv.: “Beware of sin specially on the day thou eatest flesh,
  for flesh is the diet of Ahrimán.” And in India the Guebres have
  copied the Hindus in not slaughtering horned cattle for the table.

Footnote 476:

  Arab. “Jallábiyah,” a large-sleeved robe of coarse stuff worn by the
  poor.

Footnote 477:

  His fear was that his body might be mutilated by the fall.

Footnote 478:

  The phrase means “offering up many and many a prayer.”

Footnote 479:

  A saying of Mohammed is recorded “Al-fakru fakhrí” (poverty is my
  pride!), intelligible in a man who never wanted for anything. Here he
  is diametrically opposed to Ali who honestly abused poverty; and the
  Prophet seems to have borrowed from Christendom, whose “Lazarus and
  Dives” shows a man sent to Hell because he enjoyed a very modified
  Heaven in this life and which suggested that one of the man’s greatest
  miseries is an ecclesiastical virtue—“Holy Poverty”—represented in the
  Church as a bride young and lovely. If a “rich man can hardly enter
  the kingdom” what must it be with a poor man whose conditions are far
  more unfavourable? Going to the other extreme we may say that Poverty
  is the root of all evil and the more so as it curtails man’s power of
  benefiting others. Practically I observe that those who preach and
  praise it the most, practise it the least willingly: the ecclesiastic
  has always some special reasons, a church or a school is wanted; but
  not the less he wishes for more money. In Syria this Holy Poverty
  leads to strange abuses. At Bayrut I recognised in most impudent
  beggars well-to-do peasants from the Kasrawán district, and presently
  found out that whilst their fields were under snow they came down to
  the coast, enjoyed a genial climate and lived on alms. When I asked
  them if they were not ashamed to beg, they asked me if I was ashamed
  of following in the footsteps of the Saviour and Apostles. How much
  wiser was Zoroaster who found in the Supreme Paradise (Minuwán-minu)
  “many persons, rich in gold and silver who had worshipped the Lord and
  had been grateful to Him.” (Dabistan i. 265.)




                      AL-HAJJAJ AND THE PIOUS MAN.


Al-Hajjaj bin Yusuf al-Sakafi had been long in pursuit of a certain man
of the notables, and when at last he was brought before him, he said, “O
enemy of Allah, He hath delivered thee over to me;” and cried, “Hale him
to prison and lay him by the heels in heavy fetters and build a closet
over him, that he may not come forth of it nor any go into him.” So they
bore him to jail and summoned the blacksmith with the irons; and every
time the smith gave a stroke with his hammer, the prisoner raised his
eyes to heaven and said, “Is not the whole Creation and the Empire
thereof His?”[480] Then the gaolers built the cage[481] over him and
left him therein, lorn and lone, whereupon longing and consternation
entered into him and the tongue of his case recited in extempore verse:—

 O Wish of wistful men, for Thee I yearn; ✿ My heart seeks grace of one
    no heart shall spurn.
 Unhidden from thy sight is this my case; ✿ And for one glance of thee I
    pine and burn.
 They jailed and tortured me with sorest pains:✿ Alas for lone one can no
    aid discern’!

 But, albe lone, I find Thy name befriends ✿ And cheers, though sleep to
    eyes shall ne’er return:
 An thou accept of me, I care for naught; ✿ And only Thou what’s in my
    heart canst learn!

Now when night fell dark, the gaoler left his watchmen to guard him and
went to his house; and on the morrow, when he came to the prison, he
found the fetters lying on the ground and the prisoner gone; whereat he
was affrighted and made sure of death. So he returned to his place and
bade his family farewell, after which he took in his sleeve his shroud
and the sweet herbs for his corpse, and went in to Al-Hajjáj. And as he
stood before the presence, the Governor smelt the perfumes and asked,
“What is that?” when the gaoler answered, “O my lord, it is I who have
brought it.” “And what moved thee to that?” enquired the Governor;
whereupon he told him his case,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the gaoler
told his case to Al-Hajjaj, the Governor cried, “Woe to thee! Didst thou
hear him say aught?” Answered the gaoler, “Yes! whilst the blacksmith
was hammering his irons, he ceased not to look up heavenwards and
say:—Is not the whole Creation and the Empire thereof His?” Rejoined
Al-Hajjaj, “Dost thou not know that He, on whom he called in thy
presence, delivered him in thine absence?” And the tongue of the case
recited on this theme:—

 O Lord, how many a grief from me hast driven ✿ Nor can I sit or stand
    without Thy hold:
 How many many things I cannot count, ✿ Thou sav’st from many many and
    manifold!

And they also tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 480:

  Koran vii. 52.

Footnote 481:

  Arab. “Al-bayt” = the house. The Arabs had probably learned this
  pleasant mode of confinement from the Chinese whose _Kea_ or Cangue is
  well known. The Arabian form of it is “Ghull,” or portable pillory,
  which reprobates will wear on Judgment Day.




           THE BLACKSMITH WHO COULD HANDLE FIRE WITHOUT HURT.


It reached the ears of a certain pious man that there abode in such a
town a blacksmith, who could put his hand into the fire and pull out the
iron red-hot, without the flames doing him aught of hurt.[482] So he set
out for the town in question and asked for the blacksmith; and, when the
man was shown to him, he watched him at work and saw him do as had been
reported to him. He waited till he had made an end of his day’s work;
then, going up to him, saluted him with the salam and said, “I would be
thy guest this night.” Replied the smith, “With gladness and goodly
gree!” and carried him to his place, where they supped together and lay
down to sleep. The guest watched, but saw no sign in his host of praying
through the night or of special devoutness and said in his mind, “Haply
he hideth himself from me.” So he lodged with him a second and a third
night, but found that he did not exceed the devotions prescribed by the
law and custom of the Prophet and rose but little in the dark hours to
pray. At last he said to him, “O my brother, I have heard of the gift
with which Allah hath favoured thee and have seen the truth of it with
mine eyes. Moreover, I have taken note of thine assiduity in religious
exercises, but find in thee no such piety as distinguisheth those who
work saintly miracles: whence, then, cometh this to thee?” “I will tell
thee,” answered the smith:—Know that I was once passionately enamoured
of a slave-girl and ofttimes sued her for love-liesse, but could not
prevail upon her, because she still held fast by her chastity. Presently
there came a year of drought and hunger and hardship; food failed and
there befel a sore famine. As I was sitting one day at home, somebody
knocked at the door; so I went out and behold, she was standing there;
and she said to me, “O my brother, I am sorely anhungered and I lift
mine eyes to thee, beseeching thee to feed me for Allah’s sake!” Quoth
I, “Wottest thou not how I love thee and what I have suffered for thy
sake? Now I will not give thee one bittock of bread except thou yield
thy person to me.” Quoth she, “Death, but not disobedience to the Lord!”
Then she went away and returned after two days with the same prayer for
food as before. I made her a like answer, and she entered and sat down
in my house being nigh upon death. I set food before her, whereupon her
eyes brimmed with tears and she cried, “Give me meat for the love of
Allah, to whom belong Honour and Glory!” But I answered, “Not so, by
Allah, except thou yield thyself to me.” Quoth she, “Better is death to
me than the wrath and wreak of Allah the Most Highest;” and she rose and
left the food untouched——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the man set
food before her, the woman said, “Give me meat for the love of Allah, to
whom be Honour and Glory!” But I answered, “Not so, by Allah, except
thou yield to me thy person.” Quoth she, “Better is death than the wrath
and wreak of Allah;” and she rose and left the food untouched and went
away repeating these couplets:—

 O Thou, the One, whose grace doth all the world embrace; ✿ Thine ears
    have heard, Thine eyes have seen my case!
 Privation and distress have dealt me heavy blows; ✿ The woes that weary
    me no utterance can trace.
 I am like one athirst who eyes the landscape’s eye, ✿ Yet may not drink
    a draught of streams that rail and race.
 My flesh would tempt me by the sight of savoury food ✿ Whose joys shall
    pass away and pangs maintain their place.

She then disappeared for two days, when she again came and knocked at
the door; so I went out to her, and lo! hunger had taken away her voice;
but, after a rest she said, “O my brother, I am worn out with want and
know not what to do, for I cannot show my face to any man but to thee.
Say, wilt thou feed me for the love of Allah Almighty?” But I answered,
“Not so, except thou yield to me thy person.” And she entered my house
and sat down. Now I had no food ready; but, when the meat was dressed
and I laid it in a saucer, behold, the grace of Almighty Allah entered
into me and I said to myself, “Out on thee! This woman, weak of wit and
faith, hath refrained from food till she can no longer, for stress of
hunger; and, while she refuseth time after time, thou canst not forbear
from disobedience to the Lord!” And I said, “O my God, I repent to Thee
of that which my flesh purposed!” Then I took the food and carrying it
to her, said, “Eat, for no harm shall betide thee: this is for the love
of Allah, to whom belong Honour and Glory!” Then she raised her eyes to
heaven and said, “O my God, if this man say sooth, I pray Thee forbid
fire to harm him in this world and the next, for Thou over all things
art Omnipotent and Prevalent in answering the prayer of the penitent!”
Then I left her and went to put out the fire in the brasier.[483] Now
the season was winter and the weather cold, and a live coal fell on my
body: but by the decree of Allah (to whom be Honour and Glory!) I felt
no pain and it became my conviction that her prayer had been answered.
So I took the coal in my hand, and it burnt me not; and going in to her,
I said, “Be of good cheer, for Allah hath granted thy prayer!”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the blacksmith
continued:—So I went in to her and said, “Be of good cheer, for Allah
hath granted thy prayer!” Then she dropped the morsel from her hand and
said, “O my God, now that Thou hast shown me my desire of him and hast
granted me my prayer for him, take Thou my soul, for Thou over all
things art Almighty!” And straightway He took her soul to Him, the mercy
of Allah be upon her! And the tongue of the case extemporised and spake
on this theme:—

 She prayed: the Lord of grace her prayer obeyed; ✿ And spared the
    sinner, who for sin had prayed:
 He showed her all she prayed Him to grant; ✿ And Death (as prayed she)
    her portion made:

 Unto his door she came and prayed for food, ✿ And sued his ruth for what
    her misery made:
 He leant to error following his lusts, ✿ And hoped to enjoy her as her
    wants persuade;
 But he knew little of what Allah willed; ✿ Nor was Repentance, though
    unsought, denayed.
 Fate comes to him who flies from Fate, O Lord, ✿ And lot and daily bread
    by Thee are weighed.

And they also tell of

-----

Footnote 482:

  This commonest conjuring trick in the West becomes a miracle in the
  credulous East.

Footnote 483:

  Arab. “Kánún”; the usual term is Mankal (pron. Mangal) a pan of copper
  or brass. Some of these “chafing-dishes” stand four feet high and are
  works of art. Lane (M. E. chapt. iv) gives an illustration of the
  simpler kind, together with the “Azikí,” a smaller pan for heating
  coffee. See Night dxxxviii.




THE DEVOTEE TO WHOM ALLAH GAVE A CLOUD FOR SERVICE AND THE DEVOUT KING.


There was once, among the children of Israel, a man of the devout, for
piety acclaimed and for continence and asceticism en-famed, whose
prayers were ever granted and who by supplication obtained whatso he
wanted; and he was a wanderer in the mountains and was used to pass the
night in worship. Now Almighty Allah had subjected to him a cloud which
travelled with him wherever he went, and poured on him its
water-treasures in abundance that he might make his ablutions and drink.
After a long time when things were thus, his fervour somewhat abated,
whereupon Allah took the cloud away from him and ceased to answer his
prayers. On this account, great was his grief and long was his woe, and
he ceased not to regret the time of grace and the miracle vouchsafed to
him and to lament and bewail and bemoan himself, till he saw in a dream
one who said to him, “An thou wouldest have Allah restore to thee thy
cloud, seek out a certain King, in such a town, and beg him to pray for
thee: so will Allah (be He extolled and exalted!) give thee back thy
cloud and bespread it over thee by virtue of his pious prayers.” And he
began repeating these couplets:—

 Wend to that pious prayerful Emir, ✿ Who can with gladness thy condition
    cheer;
 An he pray Allah, thou shalt win thy wish; ✿ And heavy rain shall drop
    from welkin clear.
 He stands all Kings above in potent worth; ✿ Nor to compare with him
    doth aught appear:

 Near him thou soon shalt hap upon thy want, ✿ And see all joy and
    gladness draw thee near:
 Then cut the wolds and wilds unfounted till ✿ The goal thou goest for
    anigh shalt speer!

So the hermit set out for the town named to him in the dream; and,
coming thither after long travel, enquired for the King’s palace which
was duly shown to him. And behold, at the gate he found a slave-officer
sitting on a great chair and clad in gorgeous gear; so he stood to him
and saluted him; and he returned his salam and asked him, “What is thy
business?” Answered the devotee, “I am a wronged man, and come to submit
my case to the King.” Quoth the officer, “Thou hast no access to him
this day; for he hath appointed unto petitioners and enquirers one day
in every seven” (naming the day), “on which they may go in to him; so
wend thy ways in welfare till then.” The hermit was vexed with the King
for thus veiling himself from the folk and said in thought, “How shall
this man be a saint of the saints of Allah (to whom belong Majesty and
Might!) and he on this wise?” Then he went away and awaited the
appointed day. Now (quoth he) when it came, I repaired to the palace,
where I found a great number of folk at the gate, expecting admission;
and I stood with them, till there came out a Wazir robed in gorgeous
raiment and attended by guards and slaves, who said, “Let those, who
have petitions to present, enter.” So I entered with the rest and found
the King seated facing his officers and grandees who were ranged
according to their several ranks and degrees. The Wazir took up his post
and brought forward the petitioners, one by one, till it came to my
turn, when the King looked on me and said, “Welcome to the ‘Lord of the
Cloud’! Sit thee down till I make leisure for thee.” I was confounded at
his words and confessed his dignity and superiority; and, when the King
had answered the petitioners and had made an end with them, he rose and
dismissed his Wazirs and Grandees; then, taking my hand he led me to the
door of the private palace, where we found a black slave, splendidly
arrayed, with helm on head, and on his right hand and his left, bows and
coats of mail. He rose to the King; and, hastening to obey his orders
and forestall his wishes, opened the door. We went in, hand in hand,
till we came to a low wicket, which the King himself opened and led me
into a ruinous place of frightful desolation and thence passed into a
chamber, wherein was naught but a prayer-carpet, an ewer for ablution
and some mats of palm-leaves. Here the King doffed his royal robes and
donned a coarse gown of white wool and a conical bonnet of felt. Then he
sat down and making me sit, called out to his wife, “Ho, such an one!”
and she answered from within saying, “Here am I.” Quoth he, “Knowest
thou who is our guest to-day?” Replied she, “Yes, it is the ‘Lord of the
Cloud.’” The King said, “Come forth: it mattereth not for him.” And
behold, there entered a woman, as she were a vision, with a face that
beamed like the new moon; and she wore a gown and veil of wool.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the King
called to his wife, she came forth from the inner room; and her face
beamed like the new moon; and she wore a gown and a veil of wool. Then
said the King, “O my brother, dost thou desire to hear our story or that
we should pray for thee and dismiss thee?” Answered the hermit; “Nay, I
wish to hear the tale of you twain, for that to me were preferable.”
Said the King, “My forefathers handed down the throne, one to the other,
and it descended from great one to great one, in unbroken succession,
till the last died and it came to me. Now Allah had made this hateful to
me, for I would fain have gone awandering over earth and left the folk
to their own affairs; but I feared lest they should fall into confusion
and anarchy and misgovernment so as to swerve from divine law, and the
union of the Faith be broken up. Wherefore, abandoning my own plans, I
took the kingship and appointed to every head of them a regular stipend;
and donned the royal robes; and posted slave-officers at the doors, as a
terror to the dishonest and for the defence of honest folk and the
maintenance of law and limitations. Now when free of this, I entered
this place and, doffing my royal habit, donned these clothes thou seest;
and this my cousin, the daughter of my father’s brother, hath agreed
with me to renounce the world and helpeth me to serve the Lord. So we
are wont to weave these palm-leaves and earn, during the day, a
wherewithal to break our fast at nightfall; and we have lived on this
wise nigh upon forty years. Abide thou with us (so Allah have mercy on
thee!) till we sell our mats; and thou shalt sup and sleep with us this
night and on the morrow wend thy ways with that thou wishest,
Inshallah!” So he tarried with them till the end of the day, when there
came a boy five years old who took the mats they had made and carrying
them to the market, sold them for a carat;[484] and with this bought
bread and beans and returned with them to the King. The hermit broke his
fast and lay down to sleep with them; but in the middle of the night,
they both arose and fell to praying and weeping. When daybreak was near,
the King said, “O my God, this Thy servant beseecheth Thee to return him
his cloud; and to do this Thou art able; so, O my God, let him see his
prayer granted and restore him his cloud.” The Queen amen’d to his
orisons and behold, the cloud grew up in the sky; whereupon the King
gave the hermit joy and the man took leave of them and went away, the
cloud companying him as of old. And whatsoever he required of Allah
after this, in the names of the pious King and Queen, He granted it
without fail and the man made thereon these couplets:—

 My Lord hath servants fain of piety; ✿ Hearts in the Wisdom-garden
    ranging free:
 Their bodies’ lusts at peace, and motionless ✿ For breasts that bide in
    purest secresy.
 Thou seest all silent, awesome of their Lord, ✿ For hidden things unseen
    and seen they see.

And they tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 484:

  See vol. iii., p. 239. The system is that of the Roman As and Unciæ.
  Here it would be the twenty-fourth part of a dinar or miskal;
  something under 5d. I have already noted that all Moslem rulers are
  religiously bound to some handicraft, if it be only making toothpicks.
  Mohammed abolished kingship proper as well as priestcraft.




             THE MOSLEM CHAMPION AND THE CHRISTIAN DAMSEL.


The Commander of the Faithful, Omar bin al-Khattáb (whom Allah accept!),
once levied for holy war an army of Moslems, to encounter the foe before
Damascus, and they laid close siege to one of the Christians’
strongholds. Now there were amongst the Moslems two men, brothers, whom
Allah had gifted with fire and bold daring against the enemy; so that
the commander of the besieged fortress said to his chiefs and braves,
“Were but yonder two Moslems ta’en or slain, I would warrant you against
the rest of their strain.” Wherefore they left not to set for them all
manner of toils and snares and ceased not to manœuvre and lie in wait
and ambush for them, till they took one of them prisoner and slew the
other who died a martyr. They carried the captive to the Captain of the
fort, who looked at him and said, “Verily, to kill this man were indeed
a pity; but his return to the Moslem would be a calamity.”—And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the enemy
carried their Moslem captive before the Captain of the fort, the
Christian looked at him and said, “Verily to kill this man were a pity
indeed; but his return to the Moslem would be a calamity. Oh that he
might be brought to embrace the Nazarene Faith and be to us an aid and
an arm!” Quoth one of his Patrician Knights, “O Emir, I will tempt him
to abjure his faith and on this wise: we know that the Arabs are much
addicted to women, and I have a daughter, a perfect beauty, whom when he
sees, he will be seduced by her.” Quoth the Captain, “I give him into
thy charge.” So he carried him to his place and clad his daughter in
raiment, such as added to her beauty and loveliness. Then he brought the
Moslem into the room and set before him food and made the fair girl
stand in his presence, as she were a handmaid obedient to her lord and
awaiting his orders that she might do his bidding. When the Moslem saw
the evil sent down upon him, he commended himself to Allah Almighty and
closing his eyes, applied himself to worship and to reciting the Koran.
Now he had a pleasant voice and a piercing wit; and the Nazarene damsel
presently loved him with passionate love and pined for him with extreme
repine. This lasted seven days, at the end of which she said to herself,
“Would to Heaven he would admit me into the Faith of Al-Islam!” And the
tongue of her case recited these couplets:—

 Wilt turn thy face from heart that’s all thine own, ✿ This heart thy
    ransom and this soul thy wone?

 I’m ready home and kin to quit for aye, ✿ And every Faith for that of
    sword[485] disown:
 I testify that Allah hath no mate: ✿ This proof is stablished and this
    truth is known.
 Haply shall deign He union grant with one ✿ Averse, and hearten heart
    love-overthrown;
 For ofttimes door erst shut, is opened wide, ✿ And after evil case all
    good is shown.

At last her patience failed her and her breast was straitened and she
threw herself on the ground before him, saying, “I conjure thee by thy
Faith, that thou give ear to my words!” Asked he, “What are they?” and
she answered, “Expound unto me Al-Islam.” So he expounded to her the
tenets of the Faith, and she became a Moslemah, after which she was
circumcised[486] and he taught her to pray. Then said she to him, “O my
brother, I did but embrace Al-Islam for thy sake and to win thy
favours.” Quoth he, “The law of Al-Islam forbiddeth sexual commerce save
after a marriage before two legal witnesses, and a dowry and a guardian
are also requisite. Now I know not where to find witnesses or friend or
parapherne; but, an thou can contrive to bring us out of this place, I
may hope to make the land of Al-Islam, and pledge myself to thee that
none other than thou in all Al-Islam shall be wife to me.” Answered she,
“I will manage that”; and, calling her father and mother, said to them,
“Indeed this Moslem’s heart is softened and he longeth to enter the
faith, so I will grant him that which he desireth of my person; but he
saith:—It befitteth me not to do this in a town where my brother was
slain. Could I but get outside it my heart would be solaced and I would
do that which is wanted of me. Now there is no harm in letting me go
forth with him to another town, and I will be a surety to you both and
to the Emir for that which ye wish of him.” Therefore her father went to
their Captain and told him this, whereat he joyed with exceeding joy and
bade him carry them forth to a village that she named. So they went out
and made the village where they abode the rest of their day, and when
night fell, they got ready for the march and went their way, even as
saith the poet:—

 “The time of parting,” cry they, “draweth nigh”: ✿ “How oft this
    parting-threat?” I but reply:
 I’ve naught to do but cross the wild and wold ✿ And, mile by mile, o’er
    fount-less wastes to fly,
 If the belovèd seek another land ✿ Sons of the road, whereso they wend,
    wend I.
 I make desire direct me to their side, ✿ The guide to show me where the
    way doth lie.

And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the prisoner and
the lady abode in the village the rest of their day and, when night
fell, made ready for the march and went upon their way; and travelled
all night without stay or delay. The young Moslem, mounting a swift
blood-horse and taking up the maiden behind him, ceased not devouring
the ground till it was bright morning, when he turned aside with her
from the highway and, alighting, they made the Wuzu-ablution and prayed
the dawn-prayer. Now as they were thus engaged behold, they heard the
clank of swords and clink of bridles and men’s voices and tramp of
horse; whereupon he said to her, “Ho, such an one, the Nazarenes are
after us! What shall we do?: the horse is so jaded and broken down that
he cannot stir another step.” Exclaimed she, “Woe to thee! art thou then
afraid and affrighted?” “Yes,” answered he; and she said, “What didst
thou tell me of the power of thy Lord and His readiness to succour those
who succour seek? Come, let us humble ourselves before Him and beseech
Him: haply He shall grant us His succour and endue us with His grace,
extolled and exalted be He!” Quoth he, “By Allah, thou sayst well!” So
they began humbling themselves and supplicating Almighty Allah and he
recited these couplets:—

 Indeed I hourly need thy choicest aid, ✿ And should, though crown were
    placed upon my head:
 Thou art my chiefest want, and if my hand ✿ Won what it wisheth, all my
    wants were sped.
 Thou hast not anything withholdest Thou; ✿ Like pouring rain Thy grace
    is showerèd:
 I’m shut therefrom by sins of me, yet Thou, ✿ O Clement, deignest
    pardon-light to shed.
 O Care-Dispeller, deign dispel my grief! ✿ None can, save Thou, dispel a
    grief so dread.

Whilst he was praying and she was saying, “Amen,” and the thunder of
horse-tramp nearing them, lo! the brave heard the voice of his dead
brother, the martyr, speaking and saying, “O my brother, fear not, nor
grieve! for the host whose approach thou hearest is the host of Allah
and his Angels, whom He hath sent to serve as witnesses to your
marriage. Of a truth Allah hath made His Angels glorify you and He
bestoweth on you the meed of the meritorious and the martyrs; and He
hath rolled up the earth for you as it were a rug so that, by morning,
you will be in the mountains of Al-Medinah. And thou, when thou
foregatherest with Omar bin al-Khattab (of whom Allah accept!) give him
my salutation and say to him:—Allah abundantly requite thee for
Al-Islam, because thou hast counselled faithfully and hast striven
diligently.” Thereupon the Angels lifted up their voices in salutation
to him and his bride, saying, “Verily, Almighty Allah appointed her in
marriage to thee two thousand years before the creation of your father
Adam (with whom be peace evermore!).” Then joy and gladness and peace
and happiness came upon the twain; confidence was confirmed and
established was the guidance of the pious pair. So when dawn appeared,
they prayed the accustomed prayer and fared forward. Now it was the wont
of Omar son of Al-Khattab (Allah accept him!) to rise for morning-prayer
in the darkness before dawn and at times he would stand in the
prayer-niche with two men behind him, and begin reciting the Chapter
entitled “Cattle”[487] or that entitled Women;[488] whereupon the
sleeper awoke and he who was making his Wuzu-ablution accomplished it
and he who was afar came to prayer; nor had he made an end of the first
bow, ere the mosque was full of folk; then he would pray his second bow
quickly, repeating a short chapter. But, on that morning he hurried over
both first and second inclinations, repeating in each a short chapter;
then, after the concluding salutation, turning to his companions, he
said to them, “Come, let us fare forth to meet the bride and
bridegroom”; at which they wondered, not understanding his words. But he
went out and they followed him, till they came to the gate of the city,
where they met the young Moslem who, when the day broke and the
standards of Al-Medinah appeared to him, had pushed forward for the gate
closely followed by his bride. There he was met by Omar who bade make a
marriage-feast; and the Moslems came and ate. Then the young Moslem went
in unto his bride and Almighty Allah vouchsafed him children,——And
Shahrazad, perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted
say.


      Now when it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Omar (on whom be
peace!) bade make a marriage-feast; and the Moslems came and ate. Then
the young Moslem went in unto his bride and Almighty Allah vouchsafed
him children, who fought in the Lord’s way and preserved genealogies,
for they gloried therein. And how excellent is what is said on such
theme:—

 I saw thee weep before the gates and ‘plain, ✿ Whilst only curious wight
    reply would deign:
 Hath eye bewitcht thee, or hath evil lot ✿ ‘Twixt thee and door of
    friend set bar of bane?
 Wake up this day, O wretch, persist in prayer, ✿ Repent as wont repent
    departed men.
 Haply shall wash thy sins Forgiveness-showers; ✿ And on thine erring
    head some ruth shall rain:
 And prisoner shall escape despite his bonds; ✿ And slave from thraldom
    freedom shall attain.

And they ceased not to be in all solace and delight of life, till there
came to them the Destroyer of delights and the Sunderer of societies.
And a tale is told by Sídi Ibrahim bin Al-Khawwás[489] (on whom be the
mercy of Allah!) concerning himself and

-----

Footnote 485:

  Al-Islam, where salvation is found under the shade of the swords.

Footnote 486:

  Moslems like the Classics (Aristotle and others) hold the clitoris
  (_Zambúr_) to be the sedes et scaturigo veneris which, says Sonnini,
  is mere profanity. In the babe it protrudes beyond the labiæ and
  snipping off the head forms female circumcision. This rite is supposed
  by Moslems to have been invented by Sarah who so mutilated Hagar for
  jealousy and was afterwards ordered by Allah to have herself
  circumcised at the same time as Abraham. It is now (or should be)
  universal in Al-Islam and no Arab would marry a girl “unpurified” by
  it. Son of an “uncircumcised” mother (Ibn al-bazrá) is a sore insult.
  As regards the popular idea that Jewish women were circumcised till
  the days of Rabbi Gershom (A.D. 1000) who denounced it as a scandal to
  the Gentiles, the learned Prof. H. Graetz informs me, with some
  indignation, that the rite was never practised and that the great
  Rabbi contended only against polygamy. Female circumcision, however,
  is I believe the rule amongst some outlying tribes of Jews. The rite
  is the proper complement of male circumcision, evening the
  sensitiveness of the genitories by reducing it equally in both sexes:
  an uncircumcised woman has the venereal orgasm much sooner and oftener
  than a circumcised man, and frequent coitus would injure her health;
  hence I believe, despite the learned historian, that it is practised
  by some Eastern Jews. “Excision” is universal amongst the negroids of
  the Upper Nile (Werne), the Somál and other adjacent tribes. The
  operator, an old woman, takes up the instrument, a knife or
  razor-blade fixed into a wooden handle, and with three sweeps cuts off
  the labia and the head of the clitoris. The parts are then sewn up
  with a pack-needle and a thread of sheepskin; and in Dar-For a tin
  tube is inserted for the passage of urine. Before marriage the
  bridegroom trains himself for a month on beef, honey and milk; and, if
  he can open his bride with the natural weapon, he is a sworder to whom
  no woman in the tribe can deny herself. If he fail, he tries
  penetration with his fingers and by way of last resort whips out his
  whittle and cuts the parts open. The sufferings of the first few
  nights must be severe. The few Somáli prostitutes who practised at
  Aden always had the labiæ and clitoris excised and the skin showing
  the scars of coarse sewing. The moral effect of female circumcision is
  peculiar. While it diminishes the heat of passion it increases
  licentiousness, and breeds a debauchery of mind far worse than bodily
  unchastity, because accompanied by a peculiar cold cruelty and a taste
  for artificial stimulants to “luxury.” It is the sexlessness of a
  spayed canine imitated by the suggestive brain of humanity.

Footnote 487:

  Koran vi. so called because certain superstitions about Cattle are
  therein mentioned.

Footnote 488:

  Koran iv. So called because it treats of marriages, divorces, etc.

Footnote 489:

  Sídi (contracted from Sayyidí = my lord) is a title still applied to
  holy men in Marocco and the Maghrib; on the East African coast it is
  assumed by negro and negroid Moslems, _e.g._ Sidi Mubárak Bombay; and
  “Seedy boy” is the Anglo-Indian term for a Zanzibar-man. “Khawwás” is
  one who weaves palm-leaves (Khos) into baskets, mats, etc.: here,
  however, it may be an inherited name.




             THE CHRISTIAN KING’S DAUGHTER AND THE MOSLEM.


My spirit urged me, once upon a time, to go forth into the country of
the Infidels; and I strove with it and struggled to put away from me
this inclination; but it would not be rejected. So I fared forth and
journeyed about the land of the Unbelievers and traversed it in all its
parts; for divine grace enveloped me and heavenly protection encompassed
me, so that I met not a single Nazarene but he turned away his eyes and
drew off from me, till I came to a certain great city at whose gate I
found a gathering of black slaves, clad in armour and bearing iron maces
in their hands. When they saw me, they rose to their feet and asked me,
“Art thou a leach?”; and I answered, “Yes.” Quoth they, “Come speak to
our King,” and carried me before their ruler, who was a handsome
personage of majestic presence. When I stood before him, he looked at me
and said, “Art a physician, thou?” “Yes,” quoth I; and quoth he to his
officers, “Carry him to her, and acquaint him with the condition before
he enter.” So they took me out and said to me, “Know that the King hath
a daughter, and she is stricken with a sore disease, which no doctor
hath been able to cure: and no leach goeth in to her and treateth,
without healing her, but the King putteth him to death. So bethink thee
what thou seest fitting to do.” I replied, “The King drove me to her; so
carry me to her.” Thereupon they brought me to her door and knocked; and
behold, I heard her cry out from within, saying, “Admit to me the
physician, lord of the wondrous secret!” And she began reciting:

 Open the door! the leach now draweth near; ✿ And in my soul a wondrous
    secret speer:
 How many of the near far distant are![490] ✿ How many distant far are
    nearest near!
 I was in strangerhood amidst you all: ✿ But willed the Truth[491] my
    solace should appear.
 Joined us the potent bonds of Faith and Creed; ✿ We met as dearest fere
    greets dearest fere:
 He sued for interview whenas pursued ✿ The spy, and blamed us envy’s
    jibe and jeer:
 Then leave your chiding and from blame desist, ✿ For fie upon you! not a
    word I’ll hear.
 I care for naught that disappears and fleets; ✿ My care’s for Things nor
    fleet nor disappear.

And lo! a Shaykh, a very old man, opened the door in haste and said to
me, “Enter.” So I entered and found myself in a chamber strewn with
sweet-scented herbs and with a curtain drawn across one corner, from
behind which came a sound of groaning and grame, weak as from an
emaciated frame. I sat down before the curtain and was about to offer my
salam when I bethought me of his words (whom Allah save and assain!),
“Accost not a Jew nor a Christian with the salam salutation;[492] and,
when ye meet them in the way, constrain them to the straitest part
thereof.” So I withheld my salutation, but she cried out from behind the
curtain, saying, “Where is the salutation of Unity and Indivisibility, O
Khawwás?” I was astonished at her speech and asked, “How knowest thou
me?”; whereto she answered, “When the heart and thoughts are whole, the
tongue speaketh eloquently from the secret recesses of the soul. I
begged Him yesterday to send me one of His saints, at whose hands I
might have deliverance, and behold, it was cried to me from the dark
places of my house:—Grieve not; for we soon will send thee Ibrahim the
Basket-maker.” Then I asked her, “What of thee?” and she answered, “It
is now four years since there appeared to me the Manifest Truth, and He
is the Relator and the Ally, and the Uniter and the Sitter-by; whereupon
my folk looked askance upon me with an evil eye and taxed me with
insanity and suspected me of depravity, and there came not in to me
doctor but terrified me, nor visitor but confounded me.” Quoth I, “And
who led thee to the knowledge of what thou wottest?” Quoth she, “The
manifest signs and visible portents of Allah; and, when the path is
patent to thee, thou espiest with thine own eyes both proof and prover.”
Now whilst we were talking, behold, in came the old man appointed to
guard her and said, “What doth thy doctor?”; and she replied, “He
knoweth the hurt and hath hit upon the healing.”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Shaykh,
her guardian, went in to her he said, “What doth thy doctor?”; and she
replied, “He knoweth the hurt and hath hit upon the healing.” Hereupon
he manifested joy and gladness and accosted me with a cheerful
countenance, then went and told the King, who enjoined to treat me with
all honour and regard. So I visited her daily for seven days, at the end
of which time she said to me, “O Abú Ishák, when shall be our flight to
the land of Al-Islam?” “How canst thou go forth,” replied I, “and who
would dare to aid thee?” Rejoined she, “He who sent thee to me, driving
thee as it were;” and I observed, “Thou sayest sooth.” So when the
morrow dawned, we fared forth by the city-gate and all eyes were veiled
from us, by commandment of Him who when He desireth aught, saith to it,
“Be,” and it becometh;[493] so that I journeyed with her in safety to
Meccah, where she made a home hard by the Holy House of Allah and lived
seven years; till the appointed day of her death. The earth of Meccah
was her tomb, and never saw I any more steadfast in prayer and fasting
than she, Allah send down upon her His mercies and have compassion on
him who saith:—

 When they to me had brought the leach (and surely showed ✿ The signs of
    flowing tears and pining malady),
 The face-veil he withdrew from me, and ‘neath it naught ✿ Save breath of
    one unsouled, unbodied, could he see.
 Quoth he, “This be a sickness Love alone shall cure; ✿ Love hath a
    secret from all guess of man wide free.”
 Quoth they, “An folk ignore what here there be with him ✿ Nature of ill
    and eke its symptomology,”
 How then shall medicine work a cure? At this quoth I ✿ “Leave me alone;
    I have no guessing specialty.”

And they tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 490:

  _i.e._ in spirit; the “strangers yet” of poor dear Richard Monckton
  Milnes, Lord Houghton.

Footnote 491:

  Al-Hakk = the Truth, one of the ninety-nine names of Allah.

Footnote 492:

  The Moslem is still unwilling to address Salám (Peace be with you) to
  the Christian, as it is obligatory (Farz) to a Moslem (Koran, chapt.
  iv. and lxviii.). He usually evades the difficulty by saluting the
  nearest Moslem or by a change of words Allah Yahdí-k (Allah direct
  thee to the right way) or “Peace be upon us and the righteous
  worshippers of Allah” (not you) or Al-Samm (for Salam) alayka = poison
  to thee. The idea is old: Alexander of Alexandria in his circular
  letter describes the Arian heretics as “men whom it is not lawful to
  salute or to bid God-speed.”

Footnote 493:

  Koran xxxvi. 82. I have before noted that this famous phrase was
  borrowed from the Hebrews, who borrowed it from the Egyptians.




               THE PROPHET AND THE JUSTICE OF PROVIDENCE.


A certain Prophet[494] made his home for worship on a lofty mountain, at
whose foot was a spring of running water, and he was wont to sit by day
on the summit, that no man might see him, calling upon the name of Allah
the Most Highest and watching those who frequented the spring. One day,
as he sat looking upon the fountain, behold, he espied a horseman who
came up and dismounted thereby and taking a bag from his neck, set it
down beside him, after which he drank of the water and rested awhile,
then he rode away, leaving behind him the bag which contained gold
pieces. Presently up came another man to drink of the spring, who saw
the bag and finding it full of money took it up; then, after satisfying
his thirst, he made off with it in safety. A little after came a
wood-cutter wight with a heavy load of fuel on his back, and sat down by
the spring to drink, when lo! back came the first horseman in great
trouble and asked him, “Where is the bag which was here?” and when he
answered, “I know nothing of it,” the rider drew his sword and smote him
and slew him. Then he searched his clothes, but found naught; so he left
him and wended his ways. Now when the Prophet saw this, he said, “O
Lord, one man hath taken a thousand dinars and another man hath been
slain unjustly.” But Allah answered him, saying, “Busy thyself with thy
devotions, for the ordinance of the universe is none of thine affair.
The father of this horseman had violently despoiled of a thousand dinars
the father of the second horseman; so I gave the son possession of his
sire’s money. As for the wood-cutter, he had slain the horseman’s
father, wherefore I enabled the son to obtain retribution for himself.”
Then cried the Prophet, “There is none other god than Thou! Glory be to
Thee only! Verily, Thou art the Knower of Secrets.”[495]——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King that when the Prophet
was bidden by inspiration of Allah to busy himself with his devotions
and learned the truth of the case, he cried, “There is none other god
but Thou! Glory be to Thee only! Verily, Thou and Thou alone wottest
hidden things.” Furthermore, one of the poets hath made these verses on
the matter:—

 The Prophet saw whatever eyes could see, ✿ And fain of other things
    enquirèd he;
 And, when his eyes saw things misunderstood, ✿ Quoth he, “O Lord, this
    slain from sin was free.
 This one hath won him wealth withouten work; ✿ Albe appeared he garbed
    in penury.
 And that in joy of life was slain, although ✿ O man’s Creator free of
    sin he be.”
 God answered “‘Twas his father’s good thou saw’st ✿ Him take; by
    heirship not by roguery;

 Yon woodman too that horseman’s sire had slain; ✿ Whose son avenged him
    with just victory:
 Put off, O slave of Me, this thought for I ✿ In men have set mysterious
    secrecy!
 Bow to Our Law and humble thee, and learn ✿ For good and evil issues Our
    decree.”[496]

And a certain pious man hath told us the tale of

-----

Footnote 494:

  The story of Moses and Khizr has been noticed before. See Koran chapt.
  xviii. 64 _et seq._ It is also related, says Lane (ii. 642), by
  Al-Kazwíni in the Ajáib al-Makhlúkát. This must be “The Angel and the
  Hermit” in the Gesta Romanorum, Tale lxxx. which possibly gave rise to
  Parnell’s Hermit; and Tale cxxvii. “Of Justice and Equity.” The Editor
  says it “contains a beautiful lesson:” I can find only excellent
  excuses for “doing evil that good may come of it.”

Footnote 495:

  Koran chapt. v. 108.

Footnote 496:

  The doggrel is phenomenal.




                THE FERRYMAN OF THE NILE AND THE HERMIT.


I was once a ferryman on the Nile and used to ply between the eastern
and the western banks. Now one day, as I sat in my boat, there came up
to me an old man of a bright and beaming countenance, who saluted me and
I returned his greeting; and he said to me, “Wilt thou ferry me over for
the love of Allah Almighty?” I answered, “Yes,” and he continued, “Wilt
thou moreover give me food for Allah’s sake?”; to which again I
answered, “With all my heart.” So he entered the boat and I rowed him
over to the eastern side, remarking that he was clad in a patched gown
and carried a gourd-bottle and a staff. When he was about to land, he
said to me, “I desire to lay on thee a heavy trust.” Quoth I, “What is
it?” Quoth he, “It hath been revealed to me that my end is nearhand and
that to-morrow about noon thou wilt come and find me dead under yonder
tree. Wash me and wrap me in the shroud thou wilt see under my head and
after thou hast prayed over me, bury me in this sandy ground and take my
gown and gourd and staff, which do thou deliver to one who shall come
and demand them of thee.” I marvelled at his words, and I slept there.
On the morrow I awaited till noon the event he had announced, and then I
forgot what he had said till near the hour of afternoon-prayer, when I
remembered it and hastening to the appointed place, found him under the
tree, dead, with a new shroud under his head, exhaling a fragrance of
musk. So I washed him and shrouded him and prayed over him, then dug a
hole in the sand and buried him, after I had taken his ragged gown and
bottle and staff, with which I crossed the Nile to the western side and
there nighted. As soon as morning dawned and the city gate opened, I
sighted a young man known to me as a loose fellow, clad in fine clothes
and his hands stained with Henna, who said to me, “Art thou not such an
one?” “Yes,” answered I; and he said, “Give me the trust.” Quoth I,
“What is that?” Quoth he, “The gown, the gourd and the staff.” I asked
him, “Who told thee of them?” and he answered, “I know nothing save that
I spent yesternight at the wedding of one of my friends singing and
carousing till daylight, when I lay me down to sleep and take my rest;
and behold, there stood by me a personage who said, “Verily Allah
Almighty hath taken such a saint to Himself and hath appointed thee to
fill his place; so go thou to a certain person (naming the ferryman),
and take of him the dead man’s gown and bottle and staff, for he left
them with him for thee.”” So I brought them out and gave them to him;
whereupon he doffed his clothes and, donning the gown, went his way and
left me.[497] And when the glooms closed around me, I fell a-weeping;
but, that night, while sleeping I saw the Lord of Holiness (glorified
and exalted be He!) in a dream saying, “O my servant, is it grievous to
thee that I have granted to one of My servants to return to Me? Indeed,
this is of My bounty, that I vouchsafe to whom I will, for I over all
things am Almighty.” So I repeated these couplets:—

 Lover with lovèd[498] loseth will and aim; ✿ All choice (an couldst thou
    know) were sinful shame.
 Or grant He favour and with union grace, ✿ Or from thee turn away, He
    hath no blame.
 An from such turning thou no joy enjoy ✿ Depart! the place for thee no
    place became.
 Or canst His near discern not from His far? ✿ Then Love’s in vain and
    thou’rt a-rear and lame.
 If pine for Thee afflict my sprite, or men ✿ Hale me to death, the rein
    Thy hand shall claim!

 So turn Thee to or fro, to me ‘tis one; ✿ What Thou ordainest none shall
    dare defame:
 My love hath naught of aim but Thine approof ✿ And if Thou say we part I
    say the same.

And of the tales they tell is one concerning

-----

Footnote 497:

  He went in wonder and softened heart to see the miracle of saintly
  affection.

Footnote 498:

  In Sufistical parlance, the creature is the lover and the Creator the
  Beloved: worldly existence is Disunion, parting, severance; and the
  life to come is Reunion. The basis of the idea is the human soul being
  a divinæ particula auræ, a disjoined molecule from the Great Spirit,
  imprisoned in a jail of flesh; and it is so far valuable that it has
  produced a grand and pathetic poetry; but Common Sense asks, Where is
  the proof? And Reason wants to know, What does it all mean?




                THE ISLAND KING AND THE PIOUS ISRAELITE.


There was once a notable of the Children of Israel, a man of wealth who
had a pious and blessed son. When his last hour drew nigh, his son sat
down at his head and said to him, “O my lord, give me an injunction.”
Quoth the father, “O dear son, I charge thee, swear not by Allah or
truly or falsely.” Then he died and certain lewd fellows of the Children
of Israel heard of the charge he had laid on his son and began coming to
the latter and saying, “Thy father had such and such monies of mine, and
thou knowest it; so give me what was entrusted to him or else make oath
that there was no trust.” The good son would not disobey his sire’s
injunction, so gave them all they claimed; and they ceased not to deal
thus with him, till his wealth was spent and he fell into straitest
predicament. Now the young man had a pious and blessed wife, who had
borne him two little sons; so he said to her, “The folk have multiplied
their demands on me and, while I had the wherewithal to free myself of
debt, I rendered it freely; but naught is now left us, and if others
make demands upon me, we shall be in absolute distress, I and thou; our
best way were to save ourselves by fleeing to some place, where none
knoweth us, and earn our bread among the lower of the folk.”
Accordingly, he took ship with her and his two children, knowing not
whither he should wend; but, “When Allah judgeth, there is none to
reverse His judgment;”[499] and quoth the tongue of the case:—

 O flier from thy home when foes affright! ✿ Whom led to weal and
    happiness such flight,
 Grudge not this exile when he flees abroad ✿ Where he on wealth and
    welfare may alight.
 An pearls for ever did abide in shell, ✿ The kingly crown they ne’er had
    deckt and dight.

The ship was wrecked, yet the man saved himself on a plank and his wife
and children also saved themselves, but on other planks. The waves
separated them and the wife was cast up in one country and one of the
boys in another. The second son was picked up by a ship, and the surges
threw the father on a desert island, where he landed and made the
Wuzu-ablution. Then he called the prayer-call——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Four Hundred and Eightieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the man
landed upon the island, he made the Wuzu-ablution to free himself from
the impurities of the sea and called the call to prayer and stood up to
his devotions, when, behold, there came forth of the sea creatures of
various kinds and prayed with him. When he had finished, he went up to a
tree and stayed his hunger with its fruits; after which he found a
spring of water and drank thereof and praised Allah, to whom be honour
and glory! He abode thus three days and whenever he stood up to pray,
the sea-creatures came out and prayed in the same manner as he prayed.
Now after the third day, he heard a voice crying aloud and saying, “O
thou just man, and pious, who didst so honour thy father and revere the
decrees of thy Lord, grieve not, for Allah (be He extolled and exalted!)
shall restore to thee all which left thy hand. In this isle are hoards
and monies and things of price which the Almighty willeth thou shalt
inherit, and they are in such a part of this place. So bring thou them
to light; and verily, we will send ships unto thee; and do thou bestow
charity on the folk and bid them to thee.” So he sought out that place,
and the Lord discovered to him the treasures in question. Then ships
began resorting to him, and he gave abundant largesse to the crews,
saying to them, “Be sure ye direct the folk unto me and I will give them
such and such a thing and appoint to them this and that.” Accordingly,
there came folk from all parts and places, nor had ten years passed over
him ere the island was peopled and the man became its King.[500] No one
came to him but he entreated him with munificence, and his name was
noised abroad, throughout the length and breadth of the earth. Now his
elder son had fallen into the hands of a man who reared him and taught
him polite accomplishments; and, in like manner, the younger was adopted
by one who gave him a good education and brought him up in the ways of
merchants. The wife also happened upon a trader who entrusted to her his
property and made a covenant with her that he would not deal dishonestly
by her, but would aid her to obey Allah (to whom belong Majesty and
Might!); and he used to make her the companion of his voyages and his
travels. Now the elder son heard the report of the King and resolved to
visit him, without knowing what he was; so he went to him and was well
received by the King, who made him his secretary. Presently the other
son heard of the King’s piety and justice and was also taken into his
service as a steward. Then the brothers abode awhile, neither knowing
the other, till it chanced that the merchant, in whose home was their
mother, also hearing of the King’s righteous and generous dealing with
the lieges, freighted a ship with rich stuffs and other excellent
produce of the land, and taking the woman with him, set sail for the
island. He made it in due course and landing, presented himself with his
gift before the King; who rejoiced therein with exceeding joy and
ordered him a splendid return-present. Now, there were, among the gifts,
certain aromatic roots of which he would have the merchant acquaint him
with the names and uses; so he said to him, “Abide with us this
night.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the King
said, “Abide with us this night,” the merchant replied, “We have in the
ship one to whom I have promised to entrust the care of her to none save
myself; and the same is a holy woman whose prayers have brought me weal
and I have felt the blessing of her counsels.” Rejoined the King, “I
will send her some trusty men, who shall pass the night in the ship and
guard her and all that is with her.” The merchant agreed to this and
abode with the King, who called his secretary and steward and said to
them, “Go and pass the night in this man’s ship and keep it safe,
Inshallah!” So they went up into the ship and seating themselves, this
on the poop and that on the bow, passed a part of the night in repeating
the names of Allah (to whom belong Majesty and Might!). Then quoth one
to the other, “Ho, such an one! The King bade us keep watch and I fear
lest sleep overtake us; so, come, let us discourse of stories of fortune
and of the good we have seen and the trials of life.” Quoth the other,
“O my brother, as for my trials Fate parted me from my mother and a
brother of mine, whose name was even as thine; and the cause of our
parting was this. My father took ship with us from such a place, and the
winds rose against us and were contrary, so that the ship was wrecked
and Allah broke our fair companionship.” Hearing this the first asked,
“What was the name of thy mother, O my brother?”; and the second
answered, “So and so.” Said the elder, “And of thy father?”; said the
younger, “So and so.” Thereat brother threw himself upon brother saying,
“By Allah, thou art my very brother!” And each fell to telling the other
what had befallen him in his youth, whilst the mother heard all they
said, but held her peace and in patience possessed her soul. Now when it
was morning, one said to the other, “Come, brother, let us go to my
lodging and talk there;” and the other said, “‘Tis well.” So they went
away and presently, the merchant came back and finding the woman in
great trouble, said to her, “What hath befallen thee and why this
concern?” Quoth she, “Thou sentest to me yesternight men who tempted me
to evil, and I have been in sore annoy with them.” At this, he was wroth
and, repairing to the King, reported the conduct of his two trusty
wights. The King summoned the twain forthwith, as he loved them for
their fidelity and piety; and, sending for the woman, that he might hear
from her own lips what she had to say against them, thus bespake her, “O
woman, what hath betided thee from these two men in whom I trust?” She
replied, “O King, I conjure thee by the Almighty, the Bountiful One, the
Lord of the Empyrean, bid them repeat the words they spoke yesternight.”
So he said to them, “Say what ye said and conceal naught thereof.”
Accordingly, they repeated their talk, and lo! the King rising from his
throne, gave a great cry and threw himself upon them, embracing them and
saying, “By Allah, ye are my very sons!” Therewith the woman unveiled
her face and said, “And by Allah, I am their very mother.” So they were
united and abode in all solace of life and its delight till death parted
them; and so glory be to Him who delivereth His servant when he
resorteth to Him, and disappointeth not his hope in Him and his trust!
And how well saith the poet on the subject:—

 Each thing of things hath his appointed tide ✿ When ‘tis, O brother,
    granted or denied.
 Repine not an affliction hit thee hard; ✿ For woe and welfare aye
    conjoint abide:
 How oft shall woman see all griefs surround ✿ Yet feel a joyance thrill
    what lies inside!
 How many a wretch, on whom the eyes of folk ✿ Look down, shall grace
    exalt to pomp and pride!
 This man is one long suffering grief and woe; ✿ Whom change and chance
    of Time hath sorely tried:
 The World divided from what held he dearest, ✿ After long union
    scattered far and wide;
 But deigned his Lord unite them all again, ✿ And in the Lord is every
    good descried.
 Glory to Him whose Providence rules all ✿ Living, as surest proofs for
    us decide.
 Near is the Near One; but no wisdom clearer ✿ Shows him, nor distant
    way-fare brings Him nearer.

And this tale is told of

-----

Footnote 499:

  Koran xiii. 41.

Footnote 500:

  Robinson Crusoe, with a touch of Arab prayerfulness. Also the story of
  the Knight Placidus in the Gesta (cx.), Boccaccio, etc.




              ABU AL-HASAN AND ABU JA’AFAR THE LEPER.[501]


I had been many times to Meccah (Allah increase its honour!) and the
folk used to follow me for my knowledge of the road and remembrance of
the water-stations. It happened one year that I was minded to make the
pilgrimage to the Holy House and visitation of the tomb of His Prophet
(on whom be blessing and peace!), and I said in myself, “I well know the
way and will fare alone.” So I set out and journeyed till I came to
Al-Kadisíyah[502] and, entering the mosque there, saw a man suffering
from black leprosy seated in the prayer-niche. Quoth he on seeing me, “O
Abu al-Hasan, I crave thy company to Meccah.” Quoth I to myself, “I fled
from all my companions, and how shall I company with lepers?” So I said
to him, “I will bear no man company”; and he was silent at my words.
Next day I walked on alone, till I came to Al-Akabah,[503] where I
entered the mosque and found the leper seated in the prayer-niche. So I
said to myself, “Glory be to Allah! how hath this fellow preceded me
hither?” But he raised his head to me and said with a smile, “O Abu
al-Hasan, He doth for the weak that which surpriseth the strong!” I
passed that night confounded at what I had seen; and, as soon as morning
dawned, set out again by myself; but when I came to Arafat[504] and
entered the mosque, behold, there was the leper seated in the niche! So
I threw myself upon him and kissing his feet said, “O my lord, I crave
thy company.” But he answered, “This may in no way be.” Then I began
weeping and wailing at the loss of his converse, when he said, “Spare
thy tears which will avail thee naught!”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu al-Hasan
continued:—Now when I saw the leper-man seated in the prayer-niche, I
threw myself upon him and said, “O my lord, I crave thy company;” and
fell to kissing his feet. But he answered, “This may in no way be!” Then
I began weeping and wailing at the loss of his company when he said,
“Spare thy tears which will avail thee naught!”; and he recited these
couplets:—

 Why dost thou weep when I depart and thou didst parting claim; ✿ And
    cravest union when we ne’er shall reunite the same?
 Thou lookedest on nothing save my weakness and disease; ✿ And saidst
    “Nor goes nor comes, or night or day, this sickly frame.”

 Seest not how Allah (glorified His glory ever be!) ✿ Deigneth to grant
    His slave’s petition wherewithal he came.
 If I, to eyes of men be that and only that they see, ✿ And this my body
    show itself so full of grief and grame,
 And have I naught of food that shall supply me to the place ✿ Where
    crowds unto my Lord resort impelled by single aim,
 I have a high Creating Lord whose mercies aye are hid; ✿ A Lord who hath
    none equal and no fear is known to Him.
 So fare thee safe and leave me lone in strangerhood to wone ✿ For He,
    the only One, consoles my loneliness so lone.

Accordingly, I left him; but every station I came to, I found he had
foregone me, till I reached Al-Medinah, where I lost sight of him and
could hear no tidings of him. Here I met Abu Yazíd al-Bustámi and Abu
Bakr al-Shibli and a number of other Shaykhs and learned men, to whom
with many complaints, I told my case and they said, “Heaven forbid that
thou shouldst gain his company after this! He was Abu Ja’afar the leper,
in whose name folk at all times pray for rain and by whose
blessing-prayers their end attain.” When I heard their words, my desire
for his company redoubled and I implored the Almighty to reunite me with
him. Whilst I was standing on Arafat,[505] one pulled me from behind, so
I turned and behold, it was my man. At this sight I cried out with a
loud cry and fell down in a fainting fit; but, when I came to myself he
had disappeared from my sight. This increased my yearning for him and
the ceremonies were tedious to me and I prayed Almighty Allah to give me
sight of him; nor was it but a few days after, when lo! one pulled me
from behind, and I turned and it was he again. Thereupon he said, “Come,
I conjure thee and ask thy want of me.” So I begged him to pray for me
three prayers; first, that Allah would make me love poverty; secondly,
that I might never lie down at night upon provision assured to me; and
thirdly, that He would vouchsafe me to look upon His bountiful Face. So
he prayed for me as I wished, and departed from me. And indeed Allah
hath granted me what the devotee asked in prayer: to begin with He hath
made me so love poverty that, by the Almighty! there is naught in the
world dearer to me than it, and secondly since such a year, I have never
lain down to sleep upon assured provision; withal hath He never let me
lack aught. As for the third prayer, I trust that He will vouchsafe me
that also, even as He hath granted the two precedent for right Bountiful
and Beneficent is His Godhead, and Allah have mercy on him who
said:[506]—

          Garb of Fakir, renouncement, lowliness;
          His robe of tatters and of rags his dress;

          And pallor ornamenting brow as though
          ‘Twere wanness such as waning crescents show.

          Wasted him prayer a-through the long-lived night,
          And flooding tears ne’er cease to dim his sight.

          Memory of Him shall cheer his lonely room:
          Th’ Almighty nearest is in nightly gloom.

          The Refuge helpeth such Fakir in need;
          Help e’en the cattle and the wingèd breed:

          Allah for sake of him of wrath is fain,
          And for the grace of him shall fall the rain;

          And if he pray one day for plague to stay,
          ‘Twill stay, and ‘bate man’s wrong and tyrants slay.

          While folk are sad, afflicted one and each,
          He in his mercy’s rich, the generous leach:

          Bright shines his brow; an thou regard his face
          Thy heart illumined shines by light of grace.

          O thou who shunnest souls of worth innate,
          Departs thee (woe to thee!) of sins the weight.

          Thou thinkest to overtake them, while thou bearest
          Follies, which slay thee whatso way thou farest.

          Didst wot their worth thou hadst all honour showed,
          And tears in streamlets from thine eyes had flowed.

          To catarrh-troubled men flowers lack their smell;
          And brokers ken for how much clothes can sell;

          So haste and with thy Lord reunion sue,
          And haply Fate shall lend thee aidance due,

          Rest from rejection and estrangement-stress,
          And Joy thy wish and will shall choicely bless.

          His court wide open for the suer is dight:—
          One, very God, the Lord, th’ Almighty might.

And they also tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 501:

  Arabs note two kinds of leprosy, “Bahak” or “Baras” the common or
  white, and “Juzám” the black leprosy; the leprosy of the joints, mal
  rouge. Both are attributed to undue diet as eating fish and drinking
  milk; and both are treated with tonics, especially arsenic. Leprosy is
  regarded by Moslems as a Scriptural malady on account of its
  prevalence amongst the Israelites who, as Manetho tells us, were
  expelled from Egypt because they infected and polluted the population.
  In mediæval Christendom an idea prevailed that the Saviour was a
  leper; hence the term “morbus sacer”; the honours paid to the
  sufferers by certain Saints and the Papal address (Clement III. A.D.
  1189) dilectis filiis leprosis. (Farrar’s Life of Christ, i. 149.) For
  the “disgusting and impetuous lust” caused by leprosy, see Sonnini (p.
  560) who visited the lepers at Canea in Candia. He is one of many who
  describes this symptom; but in the Brazil, where the foul malady still
  prevails, I never heard of it.

Footnote 502:

  A city in Irak; famous for the three days’ battle which caused the
  death of Yezdegird, last Sassanian king.

Footnote 503:

  A mountain pass near Meccah famous for the “First Fealty of the Steep”
  (Pilgrimage ii. 126). The mosque was built to commemorate the event.

Footnote 504:

  To my surprise I read in Mr. Redhouse’s “Mesnevi” (Trübner, 1881),
  “Arafat, the mount where the victims are slaughtered by the pilgrims”
  (p. 60). This ignorance is phenomenal. Did Mr. Redhouse never read
  Burckhardt or Burton?

Footnote 505:

  _i.e._ listening to the sermon.

Footnote 506:

  It is sad doggrel.




                    THE QUEEN OF THE SERPENTS.[507]


There was once, in days of yore and in ages and times long gone before,
a Grecian sage called Daniel, who had disciples and scholars; and the
wise men of Greece were obedient to his bidding and relied upon his
learning. Withal had Allah denied him a man-child. One night, as he lay
musing and weeping over the lack of a son who might inherit his lore, he
bethought him that Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) heareth the
prayer of those who resort to Him and that there is no doorkeeper at the
door of His bounties and that He favoureth whom He will without compt
and sendeth no supplicant empty away; nay He filleth their hands with
favours and benefits. So he besought the Almighty, the Bountiful, to
vouchsafe him a son to succeed him, and to endow him abundantly with His
beneficence. Then he returned home and carnally knew his wife who
conceived by him the same night.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Grecian sage
returned home and knew his wife who conceived by him the same night. A
few days after this he took ship for a certain place, but the ship was
wrecked and he saved himself on one of her planks, while only five
leaves remained to him of all the books he had. When he returned home,
he laid the five leaves in a box and locking it, gave the key to his
wife (who then showed big with child), and said to her, “Know that my
decease is at hand and that the time draweth nigh for my translation
from this abode temporal to the home which is eternal. Now thou art with
child and after my death wilt haply bear a son: if this be so, name him
Hásib Karím al-Dín[508] and rear him with the best of rearing. When the
boy shall grow up and shall say to thee:—What inheritance did my father
leave me? give him these five leaves, which when he shall have read and
understood, he will be the most learned man of his time.” Then he
farewelled her and heaving one sigh, departed the world and all that is
therein—the mercy of Allah the Most Highest be upon Him! His family and
friends wept over him and washed him and bore him forth in great state
and buried him; after which they wended their ways home. But few days
passed ere his widow bare a handsome boy and named him Hasib Karim
al-Din, as her husband charged her; and immediately after his birth she
summoned the astrologers, who calculated his ascendants and drawing his
horoscope, said to her, “Know, O woman! that this birth will live many a
year; but that will be after a great peril in the early part of his
life, wherefrom an he escape, he will be given the knowledge of all the
exact sciences.” So saying they went their ways. She suckled him two
years,[509] then weaned him, and when he was five years old, she placed
him in a school to learn his book, but he would read nothing. So she
took him from school and set him to learn a trade; but he would not
master any craft and there came no work from his hands. The mother wept
over this and the folk said to her, “Marry him: haply he will take heart
for his wife and learn him a trade.” So she sought out a girl and
married him to her; but, despite marriage and the lapse of time, he
remained idle as before, and would do nothing. One day, some neighbours
of hers, who were woodcutters, came to her and said, “Buy thy son an ass
and cords and an axe and let him go with us to the mountain and we will
all of us cut wood for fuel. The price of the wood shall be his and
ours, and he shall provide thee and his wife with his share.” When she
heard this, she joyed with exceeding joy and bought her son an ass and
cords and hatchet; then, carrying him to the woodcutters, delivered him
into their hands and solemnly committed him to their care. Said they,
“Have no concern for the boy, our Lord will provide him: he is the son
of our Shaykh.” So they carried him to the mountain, where they cut
firewood and loaded their asses therewith; then returned to the city
and, selling what they had cut, spent the monies on their families. This
they did on the next day and the third and ceased not for some time,
till it chanced one day, a violent storm of rain broke over them, and
they took refuge in a great cave till the downfall should pass away. Now
Hasib Karim al-Din went apart from the rest into a corner of the cavern
and sitting down, fell to smiting the floor with his axe. Presently he
noted that the ground sounded hollow under the hatchet; so he dug there
awhile and came to a round flagstone with a ring in it. When he saw
this, he was glad and called his comrades the woodcutters,——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasib Karim
al-Din saw the flagstone with the ring, he was glad and called his
comrades the woodcutters, who came to him and, finding it was fact, soon
pulled up the stone and discovered under it a trap-door, which, being
opened, showed a cistern full of bees’ honey.[510] Then said they to one
another, “This is a large store and we have nothing for it but to return
to the city and fetch vessels wherein to carry away the honey, and sell
it and divide the price, whilst one of us stands by the cistern, to
guard it from outsiders.” Quoth Hasib, “I will stay and keep watch over
it till you bring your pots and pans.” So they left him on guard there
and, repairing to the city, fetched vessels, which they filled with
honey and loading their asses therewith, carried them to the streets and
sold the contents. They returned on the morrow and thus they did several
days in succession, sleeping in the town by night and drawing off the
stuff by day, whilst Hasib abode on guard by it till but little
remained, when they said one to other, “It was Hasib Karim al-Din found
the honey, and to-morrow he will come down to the city and complain
against us and claim the price of it, saying, ‘Twas I found it; nor is
there escape for us but that we let him down into the cistern, to bale
out the rest of the honey, and leave him there; so will he die of
hunger, and none shall know of him.” They all fell in with this plot as
they were making for the place; and, when they reached it, one said to
him, “O Hasib, go down into the pit and bale out for us the rest of the
honey.” So he went down and passed up to them what remained of the
honey, after which he said to them, “Draw me up, for there is nothing
left.” They made him no answer; but, loading their asses, went off to
the city and left him alone in the cistern. Thereupon he fell to weeping
and crying, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah,
the Glorious, the Great!” Such was his case; but as regards his
comrades, when they reached the city and sold the honey, they repaired
to Hasib’s mother, weeping, and said to her, “May thy head outlive thy
son Hasib!” She asked, “What brought about his death?” and they
answered, “We were cutting wood on the mountain-top, when there fell on
us a heavy downfall of rain and we took shelter from it in a cavern; and
suddenly thy son’s ass broke loose and fled into the valley, and he ran
after it, to turn it back, when there came out upon them a great wolf,
who tore thy son in pieces and ravined the ass.” When the mother heard
this, she beat her face and strewed dust on her head and fell to
mourning for her son; and she kept life and soul together only by the
meat and drink which they brought her every day. As for the woodcutters
they opened them shops and became merchants and spent their lives in
eating and drinking and laughing and frolicking. Meanwhile Hasib Karim
al-Din, who ceased not to weep and call for help, sat down upon the
cistern-edge when behold, a great scorpion fell down on him; so he rose
and killed it. Then he took thought and said, “The cistern was full of
honey; how came this scorpion here?” Accordingly he got up and examined
the well right and left, till he found a crevice from which the scorpion
had fallen and saw the light of day shining through it. So he took out
his woodman’s knife and enlarged the hole, till it was big as a window,
when he crept through it and, after walking for some time, came to a
vast gallery, which led him to a huge door of black iron bearing a
padlock of silver wherein was a key of gold. He stole up to the door
and, looking through the chink, saw a great light shining within; so he
took the key and, opening the door, went on for some time, till he came
to a large artificial lake, wherein he caught sight of something that
shimmered like silver. He walked up to it and at last he saw, hard by a
hillock of green jasper and on the hill-top, a golden throne studded
with all manner gems,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasib reached
the hillock he found it of green jasper surmounted by a golden throne
studded with all manner gems, round which were set many stools, some of
gold, some of silver and others of leek-green emerald. He clomb the
hillock and, counting the stools, found them twelve thousand in number;
then he mounted the throne which was set on the centre and, seating
himself thereon, fell to wondering at the lake and the stools, and he
marvelled till drowsiness overcame him and he dropt asleep. Presently,
he was aroused by a loud snorting and hissing and rustling, so he opened
his eyes; and, sitting up, saw each stool occupied by a huge serpent, an
hundred cubits in length. At this sight, great fear gat hold of him; his
spittle dried up for the excess of his dread and he despaired of life,
as all their eyes were blazing like live coals. Then he turned towards
the lake and saw that what he had taken for shimmering water was a
multitude of small snakes, none knoweth their compt save Allah the Most
High. After awhile, there came up to him a serpent as big as a mule,
bearing on its back a tray of gold, wherein lay another serpent which
shone like crystal and whose face was as that of a woman[511] and who
spake with human speech. And as soon as she was brought up to Hasib, she
saluted him and he returned the salutation. Thereupon, one of the
serpents seated on the stools came up and, lifting her off the tray, set
her on one of the seats and she cried out to the other serpents in their
language, whereupon they all fell down from their stools and did her
homage. But she signed to them to sit and they did so. Then she
addressed Hasib, saying, “Have no fear of us, O youth; for I am the
Queen of the Serpents and their Sultánah.” When he heard her speak on
this wise, he took heart and she bade the serpents bring him somewhat of
food.[512] So they brought apples and grapes and pomegranates and
pistachio-nuts and filberts and walnuts and almonds and bananas and set
them before him, and the Queen-serpent said, “Welcome, O youth! What is
thy name?” Answered he, “Hasib Karim al-Din;” and she rejoined, “O
Hasib, eat of these fruits, for we have no other meat and fear thou
nothing from us at all.” Hearing this, he ate his fill and praised Allah
Almighty; and presently they took away the trays from before him, and
the Queen said, “Tell me, O Hasib, whence thou art and how camest thou
hither and what hath befallen thee.” So he told her his story from first
to last, the death of his father; his birth; his being sent to school
where he learnt nothing; his becoming a wood-cutter; his finding the
honey-cistern; his being abandoned therein; his killing the scorpion;
his widening the crevice; his finding the iron door and his coming upon
the Queen, and he ended his long tale with saying, “These be my
adventures from beginning to end and only Allah wotteth what will betide
me after all this!” Quoth the Queen, after listening to his words,
“Nothing save good shall betide thee:”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

[Illustration]


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Serpent-queen had heard his story she said, “Nothing save good shall
betide thee: but I would have thee, O Hasib, abide with me some time,
that I may tell thee my history and acquaint thee with the wondrous
adventures which have happened to me.” “I hear and obey thy hest,”
answered he; and she began to tell in these words,


                     _THE ADVENTURES OF BULUKIYA._

Know thou, O Hasib, there was once in the city of Cairo a King of the
Banu Isra’íl, a wise and a pious, who was bent double by poring over
books of learning, and he had a son named Bulúkiyá. When he grew old and
weak and was nigh upon death, his Grandees and Officers of state came up
to salute him, and he said to them, “O folk, know that at hand is the
hour of my march from this world to the next, and I have no charge to
lay on you, save to commend to your care my son Bulukiya.” Then said he,
“I testify that there is no god save _the_ God;” and, heaving one sigh,
departed the world—the mercy of Allah be upon him! They laid him out and
washed him and buried him with a procession of great state. Then they
made his son Bulukiya Sultan in his stead; and he ruled the kingdom
justly and the people had peace in his time. Now it befel one day that
he entered his father’s treasuries, to look about him, and coming upon
an inner compartment and finding the semblance of a door opened it and
passed in. And lo! he found himself in a little closet, wherein stood a
column of white marble, on the top of which was a casket of ebony; he
opened this also and saw therein another casket of gold, containing a
book. He read the book and found in it an account of our lord Mohammed
(whom Allah bless and preserve!) and how he should be sent in the latter
days[513] and be the lord of the first Prophets and the last. On seeing
the personal description Bulukiya’s heart was taken with love of him, so
he at once assembled all the notables of the Children of Israel, the
Cohens or diviners, the scribes and the priests, and acquainted them
with the book, reading portions of it to them and, adding, “O folk,
needs must I bring my father out of his grave and burn him.” The lieges
asked, “Why wilt thou burn him?”; and he answered, “Because he hid this
book from me and imparted it not to me.” Now the old King had excerpted
it from the Torah or Pentateuch and the Books of Abraham; and had set it
in one of his treasuries and concealed it from all living. Rejoined
they, “O King, thy father is dead; his body is in the dust and his
affair is in the hands of his Lord; thou shalt not take him forth of his
tomb.” So he knew that they would not suffer him to do this thing by his
sire and leaving them he repaired to his mother, to whom said he, “O my
mother, I have found, in one of my father’s treasuries, a book
containing a description of Mohammed (whom Allah bless and keep!), a
prophet who shall be sent in the latter days; and my heart is captivated
with love of him. Wherefore am I resolved to wander over the earth, till
I foregather with him; else I shall die of longing for his love.” Then
he doffed his clothes and donned an Abá-gown of goat’s hair and coarse
sandals, saying, “O my mother, forget me not in thy prayers.” She wept
over him and said, “What will become of us after thee?”; but Bulukiya
answered, “I can endure no longer, and I commit my affair and thine to
Allah who is Almighty.” Then he set out on foot Syria-wards without the
knowledge of any of his folk, and coming to the sea-board found a vessel
whereon he shipped as one of the crew. They sailed till he made an
island, where Bulukiya landed with the crew, but straying away from the
rest he sat down under a tree and sleep got the better of him. When he
awoke, he sought the ship but found that she had set sail without him,
and in that island he saw serpents as big as camels and palm-trees,
which repeated the names of Allah (be He extolled and exalted!) and
blessed Mohammed (whom the Lord assain and save!), proclaiming the Unity
and glorifying the Glorious; whereat he wondered——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Bulukiya saw
the serpents glorifying God and proclaiming the Unity, he wondered with
extreme wonder. When they saw him, they flocked to him and one of them
said to him, “Who and whence art thou, and whither goest thou, and what
is thy name?” Quoth he, “My name is Bulukiya; I am of the Children of
Israel and, being distracted for love of Mohammed (whom Allah bless and
keep!), I come in quest of him. But who are ye, O noble creatures?”
Answered they, “We are of the dwellers in the Jahannam-hell; and
Almighty Allah created us for the punishment of Kafirs.” “And how came
ye hither?” asked he, and the Serpents answered, “Know, O Bulukiya, that
Hell[514] of the greatness of her boiling, breatheth twice a year,
expiring in the summer and inspiring in the winter, and hence the
summer-heat and winter-cold. When she exhaleth, she casteth us forth of
her maw, and we are drawn in again with her inhaled breath.” Quoth
Bulukiya, “Say me, are there greater serpents than you in Hell?”; and
they said, “Of a truth we are cast out with the expired breath but by
reason of our smallness; for in Hell every serpent is so great, that
were the biggest of us to pass over its nose it would not feel us.[515]”
Asked Bulukiya, “Ye sing the praises of Allah and invoke blessings on
Mohammed, whom the Almighty assain and save! Whence wot ye of
Mohammed?”; and they answered, “O Bulukiya, verily his name is written
on the gates of Paradise; and, but for him, Allah had not created the
worlds[516] nor Paradise, nor heaven nor hell nor earth, for He made all
things that be, solely on his account, and hath conjoined his name with
His own in every place; wherefore we love Mohammed, whom Allah bless and
preserve!” Now hearing the serpents’ converse did but inflame Bulukiya’s
love for Mohammed and yearning for his sight; so he took leave of them;
and, making his way to the sea-shore, found there a ship made fast to
the beach; he embarked therein as a seaman and sailed nor ceased sailing
till he came to another island. Here he landed and walking about awhile
found serpents great and small, none knoweth their number save Almighty
Allah, and amongst them a white Serpent, clearer than crystal, seated in
a golden tray borne on the back of another serpent as big as an
elephant. Now this, O Hasib, was the Serpent-queen, none other than
myself. Quoth Hasib, “And what answer didst thou make him?” Quoth she,
“Know, O Hasib, that when I saw Bulukiya, I saluted him with the salam,
and he returned my salutation,” and I said to him, “Who and what art
thou and what is thine errand and whence comest thou and whither goest
thou?” Answered he, “I am of the Children of Israel; my name is
Bulukiya, and I am a wanderer for the love of Mohammed, whose
description I have read in the revealed scriptures, and of whom I go in
search. But what art thou and what are these serpents about thee?” Quoth
I, “O Bulukiya, I am the Queen of the Serpents; and when thou shalt
foregather with Mohammed (whom Allah assain and save!) bear him my
salutation.” Then Bulukiya took leave of me and journeyed till he came
to the Holy City which is Jerusalem. Now there was in that stead a man
who was deeply versed in all sciences, more especially in geometry and
astronomy and mathematics, as well as in white magic[517] and
Spiritualism; and he had studied the Pentateuch and the Evangel and the
Psalms and the Books of Abraham. His name was Affán; and he had found in
certain of his books, that whoso should wear the seal-ring of our lord
Solomon, men and Jinn and birds and beasts and all created things would
be bound to obey him. Moreover, he had discovered that our lord Solomon
had been buried in a coffin which was miraculously transported beyond
the Seven Seas to the place of burial;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Affan had found in
certain books that none, mortal or spirit, could pluck the seal-ring
from the lord Solomon’s finger; and that no navigator could sail his
ship upon the Seven Seas over which the coffin had been carried.
Moreover, he had found out by reading that there was a herb of herbs and
that if one express its juice and anoint therewith his feet, he should
walk upon the surface of any sea that Allah Almighty had created without
wetting his soles; but none could obtain this herb, without he had with
him the Serpent-queen. When Bulukiya arrived at the Holy City, he at
once sat down to do his devotions and worship the Lord; and, whilst he
was so doing, Affan came up and saluted him as a True Believer. Then
seeing him reading the Pentateuch and adoring the Almighty, he accosted
him saying, “What is thy name, O man; and whence comest thou and whither
goest thou?” He answered, “My name is Bulukiya; I am from the city of
Cairo and am come forth wandering in quest of Mohammed, whom Allah bless
and preserve!” Quoth Affan, “Come with me to my lodging that I may
entertain thee.” “To hear is to obey,” replied Bulukiya. So the devotee
took him by the hand and carried him to his house where he entreated him
with the utmost honour and presently said to him, “Tell me thy history,
O my brother, and how thou camest by the knowledge of Mohammed (whom
Allah assain and save!) that thy heart hath been taken with love of him
and compelled thee to fare forth and seek him; and lastly tell me who it
was directed thee in this road.” So he related to him his tale in its
entirety; whereupon Affan, who well-nigh lost his wits for wonder, said
to him, “Make tryst for me with the Queen of the Serpents and I will
bring thee in company with Mohammed, albeit the date of his mission is
yet far distant. We have only to prevail upon the Queen and carry her in
a cage to a certain mountain where the herbs grow; and, as long as she
is with us, the plants as we pass them will parley with human speech and
discover their virtues by the ordinance of Allah the Most High. For I
have found in my books that there is a certain herb and all who express
its juice and anoint therewith their feet shall walk upon whatsoever sea
Almighty Allah hath made, without wetting sole. When we have found the
magical herb, we will let her go her way; and then will we anoint our
feet with the juice and cross the Seven Seas, till we come to the
burial-place of our lord Solomon. Then we will take the ring off his
finger and rule even as he ruled and win all our wishes; we will enter
the Main of Murks[518] and drink of the Water of Life, and so the
Almighty will let us tarry till the End of Time and we shall foregather
with Mohammed, whom Allah bless and preserve!” Hearing these words
Bulukiya replied, “O Affan, I will make tryst for thee with the
Serpent-queen and at once show thee her abiding place.” So Affan made
him a cage of iron; and, providing himself with two bowls, one full of
wine and the other of milk, took ship with Bulukiya and sailed till they
came to the island, where they landed and walked upon it. Then Affan set
up the cage, in which he laid a noose and withdrew after placing in it
the two bowls; when he and Bulukiya concealed themselves afar off.
Presently, up came the Queen of the Serpents (that is, myself) and
examined the cage. When she (that is I) smelt the savour of the milk,
she came down from the back of the snake which bore her tray and,
entering the cage, drank up the milk. Then she went to the bowl of wine
and drank of it, whereupon her head became giddy and she slept. When
Affan saw this, he ran up and locking the cage upon her, set it on his
head and made for the ship, he and Bulukiya. After awhile she awoke and
finding herself in a cage of iron on a man’s head and seeing Bulukiya
walking beside the bearer, said to him, “This is the reward of those who
do no hurt to the sons of Adam.” Answered he, “O Queen, have no fear of
us, for we will do thee no hurt at all. We wish thee only to show us the
herb which, when pounded and squeezed yieldeth a juice, and this rubbed
upon the feet conferreth the power of walking dryshod upon what sea
soever Almighty Allah hath created; and when we have found that we will
return thee to thy place and let thee wend thy way.” Then Affan and
Bulukiya fared on for the hills where grew the herbs; and, as they went
about with the Queen, each plant they passed began to speak and avouch
its virtues by permission of Allah the Most High. As they were thus
doing and the herbs speaking right and left behold, a plant spoke out
and said, “I am the herb ye seek, and all who gather and crush me and
anoint their feet with my juice, shall fare over what sea soever Allah
Almighty hath created and yet ne’er wet sole.” When Affan heard this, he
set down the cage from his head and, gathering what might suffice them
of the herb, crushed it and filling two vials with the juice kept them
for future use; and with what was left they anointed their feet. Then
they took up the Serpent-queen’s cage and journeyed days and nights,
till they reached the island, where they opened the cage and let out
her, that is me. When I found myself at liberty, I asked them what use
they would make of the juice; and they answered, “We design to anoint
our feet and to cross the Seven Seas to the burial-place of our lord
Solomon[519] and take the seal-ring from his finger.” Quoth I, “Far, far
is it from your power to possess yourselves of the ring!” They enquired,
“Wherefore?” and I replied, “Because Almighty Allah vouchsafed unto our
lord Solomon the gift of this ring and distinguished him thereby, for
that he said to Him:—O Lord, give me a kingdom which may not be obtained
after me; for Thou verily art the Giver of kingdoms.[520] So that ring
is not for you.” And I added, “Had ye twain taken the herb, whereof all
who eat shall not die until the First Blast,[521] it had better availed
you than this ye have gotten; for ye shall nowise come at your desire
thereby.” Now when they heard this, they repented them with exceeding
penitence and went their ways.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Bulukiya and
Affan heard these words, they repented them with exceeding penitence and
went their ways. Such was their case; but as regards myself (continued
the Serpent-queen) I went in quest of my host and found it fallen in
piteous case, the stronger of them having grown weak in my absence and
the weaker having died. When they saw me, they rejoiced and flocking
about me, asked, “What hath befallen thee, and where hast thou been?” So
I told them what had passed, after which I gathered my forces together
and repaired with them to the mountain Kaf, where I wont to winter,
summer-freshing in the place where thou now seest me, O Hasib Karim
al-Din. This, then, is my story and what befel me. Thereupon Hasib
marvelled at her words and said to her, “I beseech thee, of thy favour,
bid one of thy guards bear me forth to the surface of the earth, that I
may go to my people.” She replied, “O Hasib, thou shalt not have leave
to depart from us till winter come, and needs must thou go with us to
the Mountain Kaf and solace thyself with the sight of the hills and
sands and trees and birds magnifying the One God, the Victorious; and
look upon Marids and Ifrits and Jinn, whose number none knoweth save
Almighty Allah.” When Hasib heard this, he was sore chafed and
chagrined: then he said to her, “Tell me of Affan and Bulukiya; when
they departed from thee and went their way, did they cross the Seven
Seas and reach the burial-place of our lord Solomon or not; and if they
did had they power to take the ring or not?” Answered she, “Know, that
when they left me, they anointed their feet with the juice; and, walking
over the water, fared on from sea to sea, diverting themselves with the
wonders of the deep, nor ceased they faring till they had traversed the
Seven Seas and came in sight of a mountain, soaring high in air, whose
stones were emeralds and whose dust was musk; and in it was a stream of
running water. When they made it they rejoiced, saying each to
other:—Verily we have won our wish; and they entered the passes of the
mountain and walked on, till they saw from afar a cavern surmounted by a
great dome, shining with light. So they made for the cavern, and
entering it beheld therein a throne of gold studded with all manner
jewels, and about it stools whose number none knoweth save Allah
Almighty. And they saw lying at full length upon the throne our lord
Solomon, clad in robes of green silk inwoven with gold and broidered
with jewels and precious minerals: his right hand was passed over his
breast and on the middle finger was the seal-ring whose lustre outshone
that of all other gems in the place. Then Affan taught Bulukiya
adjurations and conjurations galore and said to him:—Repeat these
conjurations and cease not repeating until I take the ring. Then he went
up to the throne; but, as he drew near unto it lo! a mighty serpent came
forth from beneath it and cried out at him with so terrible a cry that
the whole place trembled and sparks flew from its mouth, saying, Begone,
or thou art a dead man! But Affan busied himself with his incantations
and suffered himself not to be startled thereby. Then the serpent blew
such a fiery blast at him, that the place was like to be set on fire,
and said to him, Woe to thee! Except thou turn back, I will consume
thee! Hearing these words Bulukiya left the cave, but Affan, who
suffered himself not to be troubled, went up to the Prophet: then he put
out his hand to the ring and touched it and strove to draw it off the
lord Solomon’s finger; and behold, the serpent blew on him once more and
he became a heap of ashes. Such was his case; but as regards Bulukiya he
fell down in a swoon.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Four Hundred and Ninetieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Queen
continued:—When Bulukiya saw Affan burnt up by the fire and become a
heap of ashes, he fell down in a swoon. Thereupon the Lord (magnified be
His Majesty!) bade Gabriel descend earthwards and save him ere the
serpent should blow on him. So Gabriel descended without delay and,
finding Affan reduced to ashes and Bulukiya in a fit, aroused him from
his trance and saluting him, asked, “How camest thou hither?” Bulukiya
related to him his history from first to last, adding, “Know that I came
not hither but for the love of Mohammed (whom Allah assain and save!),
of whom Affan informed me that his mission would take place at the End
of Time; moreover that none should foregather with him but those who
endured to the latter days by drinking of the Water of Life through
means of Solomon’s seal. So I companied him hither and there befel him
what befel; but I escaped the fire and now it is my desire that thou
inform me where Mohammed is to be found.” Quoth Gabriel, “O Bulukiya, go
thy ways, for the time of Mohammed’s coming is yet far distant.” Then he
ascended up to heaven forthright, and Bulukiya wept with sore weeping
and repented of that which he had done, calling to mind my words, whenas
I said to them, “Far is it from man’s power to possess himself of the
ring.” Then he descended from the mountain and returned in exceeding
confusion to the sea-shore and passed the night there, marvelling at the
mountains and seas and islands around him. When morning dawned, he
anointed his feet with the herb-juice and descending to the water, set
out and fared on over the surface of the seas days and nights, astonied
at the terrors of the main and the marvels and wonders of the deep, till
he came to an island as it were the Garden of Eden. So he landed and,
finding himself in a great and pleasant island, paced about it and saw
with admiration that its dust was saffron and its gravel carnelian and
precious minerals; its hedges were of jessamine, its vegetation was of
the goodliest of trees and of the brightest of odoriferous shrubs; its
brushwood was of Comorin and Sumatran aloes-wood and its reeds were
sugar-canes. Round about it were roses and narcissus and amaranths and
gilly-flowers and chamomiles and white lilies and violets, and other
flowers of all kinds and colours. Of a truth the island was the
goodliest place, abounding in space, rich in grace, a compendium of
beauty material and spiritual. The birds warbled on the boughs with
tones far sweeter than chaunt of Koran and their notes would console a
lover whom longings unman. And therein the gazelle frisked free and fain
and wild cattle roamed about the plain. Its trees were of tallest
height; its streams flowed bright; its springs welled with waters sweet
and light; and all therein was a delight to sight and sprite. Bulukiya
marvelled at the charms of the island but knew that he had strayed from
the way he had first taken in company with Affan. He wandered about the
place and solaced him with various spectacles until nightfall, when he
climbed into a tree to sleep; but as he sat there, musing over the
beauty of the site, behold, the sea became troubled and there rose up to
the surface a great beast, which cried out with a cry so terrible that
every living thing upon the isle trembled. As Bulukiya gazed upon him
from the tree and marvelled at the bigness of his bulk, he was presently
followed unexpectedly by a multitude of other sea-beasts in kind
manifold, each holding in his fore-paw a jewel which shone like a lamp,
so that the whole island became as light as day for the lustre of the
gems. After awhile, there appeared, from the heart of the island, wild
beasts of the land, none knoweth their number save Allah the Most High;
amongst which Bulukiya noted lions and panthers and lynxes and other
ferals; and these land-beasts flocked down to the shore; and,
foregathering with the sea-beasts, conversed with them till daybreak,
when they separated and each went his own way. Thereupon Bulukiya,
terrified by what he had seen, came down from the tree and, making the
sea-shore, anointed his feet with the magical juice, and set out once
more upon the surface of the water. He fared on days and nights over the
Second Sea, till he came to a great mountain skirting which ran a Wady
without end, the stones whereof were magnetic iron and its beasts lions
and hares and panthers. He landed on the mountain-foot and wandered from
place to place till nightfall, when he sat down sheltered by one of the
base-hills on the sea-side, to eat of the dried fish thrown up by the
sea. Presently, he turned from his meal and behold, a huge panther was
creeping up to rend and ravin him; so he anointed his feet in haste with
the juice and, descending to the surface of the water, fled walking over
the Third Sea, in the darkness; for the night was black and the wind
blew stark. Nor did he stay his course till he reached another island,
whereon he landed and found there trees bearing fruits both fresh and
dry.[522] So he took of these fruits and ate and praised Allah Almighty;
after which he walked for solace about the island till eventide.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

[Illustration]


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Bulukiya
(continued the Queen) walked for solace about the island till eventide,
when he lay down to sleep. As soon as day brake, he began to explore the
place and ceased not for ten days, after which he again made the shore
and anointed his feet and, setting out over the Fourth Sea, walked upon
it many nights and days, till he came to a third island of fine white
sand without sign of trees or grass. He walked about it awhile but,
finding its only inhabitants sakers which nested in the sand, he again
anointed his feet and trudged over the Fifth Sea, walking night and day
till he came to a little island, whose soil and hills were like crystal.
Therein were the veins wherefrom gold is worked; and therein also were
marvellous trees whose like he had never seen in his wanderings, for
their blossoms were in hue as gold. He landed and walked about for
diversion till it was nightfall, when the flowers began to shine through
the gloom like stars. Seeing this sight, he marvelled and said,
“Assuredly, the flowers of this island are of those which wither under
the sun and fall to the earth, where the winds smite them and they
gather under the rocks and become the Elixir,[523] which the folk
collect and thereof make gold.” He slept there all that night and at
sunrise he again anointed his feet and, descending to the shore, fared
on over the Sixth Sea nights and days, till he came to a fifth island.
Here he landed and found, after walking an hour or so, two mountains
covered with a multitude of trees, whose fruits were as men’s heads
hanging by the hair, and others whose fruits were green birds hanging by
the feet; also a third kind, whose fruits were like aloes, if a drop of
the juice fell on a man it burnt like fire; and others, whose fruits
wept and laughed, besides many other marvels which he saw there. Then he
returned to the sea-shore and, finding there a tall tree, sat down
beneath it till supper-time when he climbed up into the branches to
sleep. As he sat considering the wonderful works of Allah behold, the
waters became troubled, and there rose therefrom the daughters of the
sea, each mermaid holding in her hand a jewel which shone like the
morning. They came ashore and, foregathering under the trees, sat down
and danced and sported and made merry whilst Bulukiya amused himself
with watching and wondering at their gambols, which were prolonged till
the morning, when they returned to the sea and disappeared. Then he came
down and, anointing his feet, set out on the surface of the Seventh Sea,
over which he journeyed two whole months, without getting sight of
highland or island or broadland or lowland or shoreland, till he came to
the end thereof. And so doing he suffered exceeding hunger, so that he
was forced to snatch up fishes from the surface of the sea and devour
them raw, for stress of famine. In such case he pushed on till in early
forenoon he came to the sixth island, with trees a-growing and rills
a-flowing, where he landed and walked about, looking right and left,
till he came to an apple-tree and put forth his hand to pluck of the
fruit, when lo! one cried out to him from the tree, saying, “An thou
draw near to this tree and cut of it aught, I will cut thee in twain.”
So he looked and saw a giant forty cubits high, being the cubit of the
people of that day; whereat he feared with sore fear and refrained from
that tree. Then said he to the giant, “Why dost thou forbid me to eat of
this tree?” Replied the other, “Because thou art a son of Adam and thy
father Adam forgot the covenant of Allah and sinned against Him and ate
of the tree.” Quoth Bulukiya, “What thing art thou and to whom belongeth
this island, with its trees, and how art thou named?” Quoth the tall
one, “My name is Sharáhiyá and trees and island belong to King
Sakhr;[524] I am one of his guards and in charge of his dominion,”
presently adding, “But who art thou and whence comest thou hither?”
Bulukiya told him his story from beginning to end and Sharahiya said,
“Be of good cheer,” and brought him to eat. So he ate his fill and,
taking leave of the giant, set out again and ceased not faring on over
the mountains and sandy deserts for ten days; at the end of which time
he saw, in the distance, a dust-cloud hanging like a canopy in air; and,
making towards it, he heard a mighty clamour, cries and blows and sounds
of mellay. Presently he reached a great Wady, two months’ journey long;
and, looking whence the shouts came, he saw a multitude of horsemen
engaged in fierce fight and the blood running from them till it railed
like a river. Their voices were thunderous and they were armed with
lance and sword and iron mace and bow and arrow, and all fought with the
utmost fury. At this sight he felt sore affright——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Queen
continued:—When Bulukiya saw the host in fight, he felt sore affright
and was perplexed about his case; but whilst he hesitated, behold, they
caught sight of him and held their hands one from other and left
fighting. Then a troop of them came up to him, wondering at his make,
and one of the horsemen said to him, “What art thou and whence camest
thou hither and whither art wending; and who showed thee the way that
thou hast come to our country?” Quoth he, “I am of the sons of Adam and
am come out, distracted for the love of Mohammed (whom Allah bless and
preserve!); but I have wandered from my way.” Quoth the horseman, “Never
saw we a son of Adam till now, nor did any ever come to this land.” And
all marvelled at him and at his speech. “But what are ye, O creatures?”
asked Bulukiya; and the rider replied, “We are of the Jánn.” So he said,
“O Knight, what is the cause of the fighting amongst you and where is
your abiding-place and what is the name of this valley and this land?”
He replied, “Our abiding-place is the White Country; and, every year,
Allah Almighty commandeth us to come hither and wage war upon the
unbelieving Jann.” Asked Bulukiya, “And where is the White Country?” and
the horseman answered, “It is behind the mountain Kaf, and distant
seventy-five years journey from this place which is termed the Land of
Shaddád son of ‘Ád: we are here for Holy War; and we have no other
business, when we are not doing battle, than to glorify God and hallow
him. Moreover, we have a ruler, King Sakhr hight, and needs must thou go
with us to him, that he may look upon thee for his especial delight.”
Then they fared on (and he with them) till they came to their abiding
place; where he saw a multitude of magnificent tents of green silk, none
knoweth their number save Allah the Most High, and in their midst a
pavilion of red satin, some thousand cubits in compass, with cords of
blue silk and pegs of gold and silver. Bulukiya marvelled at the sight
and accompanied them as they fared on and behold, this was the royal
pavilion. So they carried him into the presence of King Sakhr, whom he
found seated upon a splendid throne of red gold, set with pearls and
studded with gems; the Kings and Princes of the Jann being on his right
hand, and on his left his Councillors and Emirs and Officers of state,
and a multitude of others. The King seeing him bade introduce him, which
they did; and Bulukiya went up to him and saluted him after kissing the
ground before him. The King returned his salute and said, “Draw near me,
O mortal!” and Bulukiya went close up to him. Hereupon the King,
commanding a chair to be set for him by his royal side, bade him sit
down and asked him “Who art thou?”; and Bulukiya answered, “I am a man,
and one of the Children of Israel.” “Tell me thy story,” cried King
Sakhr, “and acquaint me with all that hath befallen thee and how thou
camest to this my land.” So Bulukiya related to him all that had
occurred in his wanderings from beginning to end——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-third Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Queen
continued:—When Bulukiya related to Sakhr what befel him in his
wanderings, he marvelled thereat. Then he bade the servants bring food
and they spread the tables and set on one thousand and five hundred
platters of red gold and silver and copper, some containing twenty and
some fifty boiled camels, and others some fifty head of sheep; at which
Bulukiya marvelled with exceeding marvel. Then they ate and he ate with
them, till he was satisfied and returned thanks to Allah Almighty; after
which they cleared the tables and set on fruits, and they ate thereof,
glorifying the name of God and invoking blessings on His prophet
Mohammed (whom Allah bless and preserve!) When Bulukiya heard them make
mention of Mohammed, he wondered and said to King Sakhr, “I am minded to
ask thee some questions.” Rejoined the King, “Ask what thou wilt,” and
Bulukiya said, “O King, what are ye and what is your origin and how came
ye to know of Mohammed (whom Allah assain and save!) that ye draw near
to him and love him?” King Sakhr answered, “O Bulukiya, of very sooth
Allah created the fire in seven stages, one above the other, and each
distant a thousand years’ journey from its neighbour. The first stage he
named Jahannam[525] and appointed the same for the punishment of the
transgressors of the True-believers, who die unrepentant; the second he
named Lazá and appointed for Unbelievers: the name of the third is Jahím
and is appointed for Gog and Magog.[526] The fourth is called Sa’ír and
is appointed for the host of Iblis. The fifth is called Sakar and is
prepared for those who neglect prayer. The sixth is called Hatamah and
is appointed for Jews and Christians. The seventh is named Háwiyah and
is prepared for hypocrites. Such be the seven stages.” Quoth Bulukiya,
“Haply Jahannam hath least of torture for that it is the uppermost.”
“Yes,” quoth King Sakhr, “the most endurable of them all is Jahannam;
natheless in it are a thousand mountains of fire, in each mountain
seventy thousand cities of fire, in each city seventy thousand castles
of fire, in each castle seventy thousand houses of fire, in each house
seventy thousand couches of fire and in each couch seventy thousand
manners of torment. As for the other hells, O Bulukiya, none knoweth the
number of kinds of torment that be therein save Allah Most Highest.”
When Bulukiya heard this, he fell down in a fainting-fit, and when he
came to himself, he wept and said, “O King what will be my case?” Quoth
Sakhr, “Fear not, and know thou that whoso loveth Mohammed (whom Allah
bless and keep!) the fire shall not burn him, for he is made free
therefrom for his sake; and whoso belongeth to his Faith the fire shall
fly him. As for us, the Almighty Maker created us of the fire; for the
first that he made in Jahannam were two of His host, whom he called
Khalít and Malít. Now Khalít was fashioned in the likeness of a lion,
with a tail like a tortoise twenty years’ journey in length and ending
in a member masculine; while Malít was like a pied wolf whose tail was
furnished with a member feminine. Then Almighty Allah commanded the
tails to couple and copulate and do the deed of kind, and of them were
born serpents and scorpions, whose dwelling is in the fire, that Allah
may therewith torment those whom He casteth therein; and these increased
and multiplied. Then Allah commanded the tails of Khalit and Malit to
couple and copulate a second time, and the tail of Malit conceived by
the tail of Khalit and bore fourteen children, seven male and seven
female, who grew up and intermarried one with other. All were obedient
to their sire, save one who disobeyed him and was changed into a worm
which is Iblis (the curse of Allah be upon him!). Now Iblis was one of
the Cherubim, for he had served Allah till he was raised to the heavens
and cherished[527] by the especial favour of the Merciful One, who made
him chief of the Cherubim.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Queen
continued:—Iblis served God and became chief of Cherubim. When, however,
the Lord created Adam (with whom be peace!), He commanded Iblis to
prostrate himself to him, but he drew back; so Allah Almighty expelled
him from heaven and cursed him.[528] This Iblis had issue and of his
lineage are the devils; and as for the other six males, who were his
elders, they are the ancestors of the true-believing Jann, and we are
their descendants. Such, O Bulukiya is our provenance.[529] Bulukiya
marvelled at the King’s words and said, “O King, I pray thee bid one of
thy guards bear me back to my native land.” “Naught of this may we do,”
answered Sakhr, “save by commandment of Allah Almighty; however, an thou
desire to leave us and return home, I will mount thee on one of my mares
and cause her carry thee to the farthest frontiers of my dominions,
where thou wilt meet with the troops of another King, Barákhiyá hight,
who will recognize the mare at sight and take thee off her and send her
back to us; and this is all we can do for thee, and no more.” When
Bulukiya heard these words he wept and said, “Do whatso thou wilt.” So
King Sakhr caused bring the mare and, setting Bulukiya on her back, said
to him, “Beware lest thou alight from her or strike her or cry out in
her face; for if thou do so she will slay thee; but abide quietly riding
on her back till she stop with thee; then dismount and wend thy ways.”
Quoth Bulukiya, “I hear and I obey;” he then mounted and setting out,
rode on a long while between the rows of tents; and stinted not riding
till he came to the royal kitchens where he saw the great cauldrons,
each holding fifty camels, hung up over the fires which blazed fiercely
under them. So he stopped there and gazed with a marvel ever increasing
till King Sakhr thinking him to be anhungered, bade bring him two
roasted camels; and they carried them to him and bound them behind him
on the mare’s crupper. Then he took leave of them and fared on, till he
came to the end of King Sakhr’s dominions, where the mare stood still
and Bulukiya dismounted and began to shake the dust of the journey from
his raiment. And behold, there accosted him a party of men who,
recognising the mare, carried her and Bulukiya before their King
Barakhiya. So he saluted him, and the King returned his greeting and
seated him beside himself in a splendid pavilion, in the midst of his
troops and champions and vassal Princes of the Jann ranged to right and
left; after which he called for food and they ate their fill and
pronounced the Alhamdolillah. Then they set on fruits, and when they had
eaten thereof, King Barakhiya, whose estate was like that of King Sakhr,
asked his guest, “When didst thou leave King Sakhr?” And Bulukiya
answered, “Two days ago.” Quoth Barakhiya, “Dost thou know, how many
days’ journey thou hast come in these two days?” Quoth he, “No,” and the
King rejoined, “Thou hast come a journey of threescore and ten
months.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Queen
continued:—Barakhiya said to Bulukiya, “In two days thou hast come a
journey of threescore and ten months; moreover when thou mountest the
mare, she was affrighted at thee, knowing thee for a son of Adam, and
would have thrown thee; so they bound on her back these two camels by
way of weight to steady her.” When Bulukiya heard this, he marvelled and
thanked Allah Almighty for safety. Then said the King, “Tell me thy
adventures and what brought thee to this our land.” So he told him his
story from first to last, and the King marvelled at his words, and kept
Bulukiya with him two months. Upon this Hasib Karim al-Din after he had
marvelled at her story, again besought the Serpent-queen saying, “I pray
thee of thy goodness and graciousness command one of thy subjects
conduct me to the surface of the earth, that I may return to my family;”
but she answered, “O Hasib, I know that the first thing thou wilt do,
after seeing the face of the earth will be to greet thy family and then
repair to the Hammam-bath and bathe; and the moment thou endest thine
ablutions will see the last of me, for it will be the cause of my
death.” Quoth Hasib, “I swear that I will never again enter the
Hammam-bath so long as I live, but when washing is incumbent on me, I
will wash at home.” Rejoined the Queen, “I would not trust thee though
thou shouldst swear to me an hundred oaths; for such abstaining is not
possible; and I know thee to be a son of Adam for whom no oath is
sacred. Thy father Adam made a covenant with Allah the most High, who
kneaded the clay whereof He fashioned him forty mornings and made His
angels prostrate themselves to him; yet after all his promise did he
forget and his oath violate, disobeying the commandment of his Lord.”
When Hasib heard this, he held his peace and burst into tears; nor did
he leave weeping for the space of ten days, at the end of which time he
said to the Queen, “Prithee acquaint me with the rest of Bulukiya’s
adventures.” Accordingly, she began again as follows:—Know, O Hasib,
that Bulukiya, after abiding two months with King Barakhiya, farewelled
him and fared on over wastes and deserts nights and days, till he came
to a high mountain which he ascended. On the summit he beheld seated a
great Angel glorifying the names of God and invoking blessings on
Mohammed. Before him lay a tablet covered with characters, these white
and those black,[530] whereon his eyes were fixed, and his two wings
were outspread to the full, one to the western and the other to the
eastern horizon. Bulukiya approached and saluted the Angel, who returned
his salam adding, “Who art thou and whence comest thou and whither
wendest thou and what is thy story?” Accordingly, he repeated to him his
history, from first to last, and the Angel marvelled mightily thereat,
whereupon Bulukiya said to him, “I pray thee in return acquaint me with
the meaning of this table and what is writ thereon; and what may be
thine occupation and thy name.” Replied the Angel, “My name is Michael,
and I am charged with the shifts of night and day; and this is my
occupation till the Day of Doom.” Bulukiya wondered at his words and at
his aspect and the vastness of his stature and, taking leave of him,
fared onwards, night and day, till he came to a vast meadow over which
he walked observing that it was traversed by seven streams and abounded
in trees. He was struck by its beauty and in one corner thereof he saw a
great tree and under it four Angels. So he drew near to them and found
the first in the likeness of a man, the second in the likeness of a wild
beast, the third in the likeness of a bird and the fourth in the
likeness of a bull, engaged in glorifying Almighty Allah, and saying, “O
my God and my Master and my Lord, I conjure Thee, by Thy truth and by
the degree of Thy Prophet Mohammed (on whom be blessings and peace!) to
vouchsafe Thy mercy and grant Thy forgiveness to all things created in
my likeness; for Thou over all things art Almighty!” Bulukiya marvelled
at what he heard but continued his journey till he came to another
mountain and ascending it, found there a great Angel seated on the
summit, glorifying God and hallowing Him and invoking blessings on
Mohammed (whom Allah assain and save!); and he saw that Angel
continually opening and shutting his hands and bending and extending his
fingers. He accosted him and saluted him; whereupon the Angel returned
his salam and enquired who he was and how he came thither. So Bulukiya
acquainted him with his adventures including his having lost the way;
and besought him to tell him, in turn, who he was and what was his
function and what mountain was that. Quoth the Angel, “Know, O Bulukiya,
that this is the mountain Kaf, which encompasseth the world; and all the
countries the Creator hath made are in my grasp. When the Almighty is
minded to visit any land with earthquake or famine or plenty or
slaughter or prosperity, He biddeth me carry out His commands and I
carry them out without stirring from my place; for know thou that my
hands lay hold upon the roots of the earth,”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Queen
continued:—When the angel said, “And know thou that my hands lay hold
upon the roots of the earth,” he asked, “And hath Allah created other
worlds than this within the mountain Kaf?” The Angel answered, “Yes, He
hath made a world white as silver, whose vastness none knoweth save
Himself, and hath peopled it with Angels, whose meat and drink are His
praise and hallowing and continual blessings upon His Prophet Mohammed
(whom Allah bless and keep!). Every Thursday night[531] they repair to
this mountain and worship in congregation Allah until the morning, and
they assign the future recompense of their lauds and litanies to the
sinners of the Faith of Mohammed (whom Allah assain and save!) and to
all who make the Ghusl-ablution of Friday; and this is their function
until the Day of Resurrection.” Asked Bulukiya, “And hath Allah created
other mountains behind the mountain Kaf?”; whereto he answered, “Yes,
behind this mountain is a range of mountains five hundred years’ journey
long, of snow and ice, and this it is that wardeth off the heat of
Jahannam from the world, which verily would else be consumed thereby.
Moreover, behind the mountain Kaf are forty worlds, each one the bigness
of this world forty times told, some of gold and some of silver and
others of carnelian. Each of these worlds hath its own colour, and Allah
hath peopled them with angels, that know not Eve nor Adam nor night nor
day, and have no other business than to celebrate His praises and hallow
Him and make profession of His Unity and proclaim His Omnipotence and
supplicate Him on behalf of the followers of Mohammed (whom Allah bless
and keep!). And know, also, O Bulukiya, that the earths were made in
seven stages, one upon another, and that Allah hath created one of His
Angels, whose stature and attributes none knoweth but Himself and who
beareth the seven stages upon his shoulders. Under this Angel Almighty
Allah hath created a great rock, and under the rock a bull, and under
the bull a huge fish, and under the fish a mighty ocean.”[532] God once
told Isa (with whom be peace!) of this fish, and he said, “O Lord show
me the fish, that I may look upon it.” So the Almighty commanded an
angel to take Isa and show him the fish. Accordingly, he took him up and
carried him (with whom be peace!) to the sea, wherein the fish dwelt,
and said, “Look, O Isa, upon the fish.” He looked but at first saw
nothing, when, suddenly, the fish darted past like lightning. At this
sight Isa fell down a-swoon, and when he came to himself, Allah spake to
him by inspiration, saying, “O Isa, hast thou seen the fish and
comprehended its length and its breadth?” He replied, “By Thy honour and
glory, O Lord, I saw no fish; but there passed me by a great bull, whose
length was three days’ journey, and I know not what manner of thing this
bull is.” Quoth Allah, “O Isa, this that thou sawest and which was three
days in passing by thee, was but the head of the fish;[533] and know
that every day I create forty fishes like unto this.” And Isa hearing
this marvelled at the power of Allah the Almighty. Asked Bulukiya, “What
hath Allah made beneath this sea which containeth the fish?”; and the
Angel answered, “Under the sea the Lord created a vast abyss of air,
under the air fire, and under the fire a mighty serpent, by name Falak;
and were it not for fear of the Most Highest, this serpent would
assuredly swallow up all that is above it, air and fire and the Angel
and his burden, without sensing it.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the angel said to
Bulukiya when describing the serpent, “And were it not for fear of the
Most Highest, this serpent would assuredly swallow up all that is above
it, air, and fire, and the Angel and his burden, without sensing it.
When Allah created this serpent He said to it by inspiration:—I will
give thee somewhat to keep for me, so open thy mouth. The serpent
replied:—Do whatso Thou wilt; and opened his mouth and God placed Hell
into his maw, saying:—Keep it until the Day of Resurrection. When that
time comes, the Almighty will send His angels with chains to bring Hell
and bind it until the Day when all men shall meet; and the Lord will
order Hell to go open its gates and there will issue therefrom sparks
bigger than the mountains.” When Bulukiya heard these things he wept
with sore weeping and, taking leave of the Angel, fared on westwards,
till he came in sight of two creatures sitting before a great shut gate.
As he drew near, he saw that one of the gatekeepers had the semblance of
a lion and the other that of a bull; so he saluted them and they
returned his salam and enquired who and whence he was and whither he was
bound. Quoth he, “I am of the sons of Adam, a wanderer for the love of
Mohammed (whom Allah assain and save!) and I have strayed from my way.”
Then he asked them what they were and what was the gate before which
they sat, and they answered, “We are the guardians of this gate thou
seest and we have no other business than the praise and hallowing of
Allah and the invocation of blessings on Mohammed (whom may He bless and
keep!).” Bulukiya wondered and asked them, “What is within the gate?”;
and they answered, “We wot not.” Then quoth he, “I conjure you, by the
truth of your glorious Lord, open to me the gate, that I may see that
which is therein.” Quoth they, “We cannot, and none may open this gate,
of all created beings save Gabriel, the Faithful One, with whom be
peace!” Then Bulukiya lifted up his voice in supplication to Allah,
saying, “O Lord, send me thy messenger Gabriel, the Faithful One, to
open for me this gate that I may see what be therein;” and the Almighty
gave ear unto his prayer and commanded the Archangel to descend to earth
and open to him the gate of the Meeting-place of the Two Seas. So
Gabriel descended and, saluting Bulukiya, opened the gate to him,
saying, “Enter this door, for Allah commandeth me to open to thee.” So
he entered and Gabriel locked the gate behind him and flew back to
heaven. When Bulukiya found himself within the gate, he looked and
beheld a vast ocean, half salt and half fresh, bounded on every side by
mountain-ranges of red ruby whereon he saw angels singing the praises of
the Lord and hallowing Him. So he went up to them and saluted them and
having received a return of his salam, questioned them of the sea and
the mountains. Replied they, “This place is situate under the Arsh or
empyreal heaven; and this Ocean causeth the flux and flow of all the
seas of the world; and we are appointed to distribute them and drive
them to the various parts of the earth, the salt to the salt and the
fresh to the fresh,[534] and this is our employ until the Day of Doom.
As for the mountain-ranges they serve to limit and to contain the
waters. But thou, whence comest thou and whither art thou bound?” So he
told them his story and asked them of the road. They bade him traverse
the surface of the ocean which lay before him: so he anointed his feet
with the juice of the herb he had with him, and taking leave of the
angels, set out upon the face of the sea and sped on over the water
nights and days; and as he was faring, behold, he met a handsome youth
journeying along like himself, whereupon he greeted him and he returned
his greeting. After they parted he espied four great Angels wayfaring
over the face of the sea, and their going was like the blinding
lightning; so he stationed himself in their road, and when they came up
to him, he saluted them and said to them, “I ask you by the Almighty,
the Glorious, to tell me your names and whither are ye bound?” Replied
the first Angel, “My name is Gabriel and these my companions are called
Isráfíl and Míká’íl and Azrá’íl. There hath appeared in the East a
mighty dragon, which hath laid waste a thousand cities and devoured
their inhabitants; wherefore Allah Almighty hath commanded us to go to
him and seize him and cast him into Jahannam.” Bulukiya marvelled at the
vastness of their stature and fared on, as before, days and nights, till
he came to an island where he landed and walked about for a while,——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Bulukiya landed on
the island and walked about for a while, till he saw a comely young man
with light shining from his visage, sitting weeping and lamenting
between two built tombs. So he saluted him and he returned his
salutation, and Bulukiya said to him, “Who art thou and what are these
two built tombs between which thou sittest, and wherefore this wailing?”
He looked at him and wept with sore weeping, till he drenched his
clothes with his tears; then said, “Know thou, O my brother, mine is a
marvellous story and a wondrous; but I would have thee sit by me and
first tell me thy name and thine adventures and who thou art and what
brought thee hither; after which I will, in turn, relate to thee my
history.” So Bulukiya sat down by him and related to him all that had
befallen him from his father’s death,[535] adding, “Such is my history,
the whole of it, and Allah alone knoweth what will happen to me after
this.” When the youth heard his story, he sighed and said, “O thou
unhappy! How few things thou hast seen in thy life compared with mine!
Know, O Bulukiya, that unlike thyself I have looked upon our lord
Solomon, in his life, and have seen things past count or reckoning.
Indeed, my story is strange and my case out of range, and I would have
thee abide with me, till I tell thee my history and acquaint thee how I
come to be sitting here.” Hearing this much Hasib again interrupted the
Queen of the Serpents and said to her, “Allah upon thee, O Queen,
release me and command one of thy servants carry me forth to the surface
of the earth, and I will swear an oath to thee that I will never enter
the Hammam-bath as long as I live.” But she said, “This is a thing which
may not be nor will I believe thee upon thine oath.” When he heard this,
he wept and all the serpents wept on his account and took to interceding
for him with their Queen, saying, “We beseech thee, bid one of us carry
him forth to the surface of the earth, and he will swear thee an oath
never to enter the bath his life long.” Now when Yamlaykhá (for such was
the Queen’s name) heard their appeal, she turned to Hasib and made him
swear to her an oath; after which she bade a serpent carry him forth to
the surface of the earth. The serpent made ready, but as she was about
to go away with him, he turned to Queen Yamlaykha and said, “I would
fain have thee tell me the history of the youth whom Bulukiya saw
sitting between two tombs.” So she said:—Know, O Hasib, that when
Bulukiya sat down by the youth and told him his tale, from first to
last, in order that the other might also recount his adventures and
explain the cause of his sitting between the two tombs——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Queen
continued:—When Bulukiya ended his recount, the youth said, “How few
things of marvel hast thou seen in thy life, O unhappy! Now I have
looked upon our lord Solomon while he was yet living and I have
witnessed wonders beyond compt and conception.” And he began to relate


                      _THE STORY OF JANSHAH._[536]

Know, O my brother, that my sire was a King called Teghmús, who reigned
over the land of Kabul and the Banu Shahlán, ten thousand warlike
chiefs, each ruling over a hundred walled cities and a hundred citadels;
and he was suzerain also over seven vassal princes, and tribute was
brought to him from the broad lands between East and West. He was just
and equitable in his rule and Allah Almighty had given him all this and
had bestowed on him such mighty empire, yet had He not vouchsafed him a
son (though this was his dearest wish) to inherit the kingdom after his
decease. So one day it befel that he summoned the Olema and astrologers,
the mathematicians and almanac-makers, and said, “Draw me my horoscope
and look if Allah will grant me a son to succeed me.” Accordingly, they
consulted their books and calculated his dominant star and the aspects
thereof; after which they said to him, “Know, O King, that thou shalt be
blessed with a son, but by none other than the daughter of the King of
Khorásán.” Hearing this Teghmus joyed with exceeding joy and, bestowing
on the astrologers and wizards treasure beyond numbering or reckoning,
dismissed them. His chief Wazir was a renowned warrior, by name ‘Ayn
Zár, who was equal to a thousand cavaliers in battle; so him he summoned
and, repeating to him what the astrologers had predicted, he said, “O
Wazir, it is my will that thou equip thee for a march to Khorasan and
demand for me the hand of its King Bahrwán’s daughter.” Receiving these
orders the Wazir at once proceeded to get ready for the journey and
encamped without the town with his troops and braves and retinue, whilst
King Teghmus made ready as presents for the King of Khorasan fifteen
hundred loads of silks and precious stones, pearls and rubies and other
gems, besides gold and silver; and he also prepared a prodigious
quantity of all that goeth to the equipment of a bride; then, loading
them upon camels and mules, delivered them to Ayn Zar, with a letter to
the following purport. “After invoking the blessing of Heaven, King
Teghmus to King Bahrwan, greeting. Know that we have taken counsel with
the astrologers and sages and mathematicians, and they tell us that we
shall have boon of a boy-child, and that by none other than thy
daughter. Wherefore I have despatched unto thee my Wazir Ayn Zar, with
great store of bridal gear, and I have appointed him to stand in my
stead and to enter into the marriage-contract in my name. Furthermore I
desire that of thy favour thou wilt grant him his request without stay
or delay; for it is my own, and all graciousness thou showest him, I
take for myself; but beware of crossing me in this, for know, O King
Bahrwan, that Allah hath bestowed upon me the Kingdom of Kabul, and hath
given me dominion over the Banu Shahlan and vouchsafed me a mighty
empire; and if I marry thy daughter, we will be, I and thou, as one
thing in kingship; and I will send thee every year as much treasure as
will suffice thee. And this is my desire of thee.” Then King Teghmus
sealed the letter with his own ring and gave it to the Wazir, who
departed with a great company and journeyed till he drew near the
capital of Khorasan. When King Bahrwan heard of his approach, he
despatched his principal Emirs to meet him,[537] with a convoy of food
and drink and other requisites, including forage for the steeds. So they
fared forth with the train till they met the Wazir; then, alighting
without the city, they exchanged salutations and abode there, eating and
drinking, ten days; at the end of which time they mounted and rode on
into the town, where they were met by King Bahrwan, who came out to
greet the Wazir of King Teghmus and alighting, embraced him and carried
him to his citadel. Then Ayn Zar brought out the presents and laid them
before King Bahrwan, together with the letter of King Teghmus, which
when the King read and understood, he joyed with joy exceeding and
welcomed the Wazir, saying, “Rejoice in winning thy wish; and know that
if King Teghmus sought of me my life, verily I would give it to him.”
Then he went in forthright to his daughter and her mother and his
kinsfolk, and acquainting them with the King of Kabul’s demand, sought
counsel of them, and they said, “Do what seemeth good to thee.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


               Now when it was the Five Hundredth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Bahrwan
consulted his daughter and her mother and his kinsfolk and they said,
“Do what seemeth good to thee.” So he returned straightway to the
Minister Ayn Zar and notified to him that his desire had been fulfilled;
and the Wazir abode with him two months, at the end of which time he
said to him, “We beseech thee to bestow upon us that wherefore we came,
so we may depart to our own land.” “I hear and obey,” answered the King.
Then he prepared all the gear wanted for the wedding; and when this was
done he assembled his Wazirs and all his Emirs and the Grandees of his
realm and the monks and priests who tied the knot of marriage between
his daughter and King Teghmus by proxy. And King Bahrwan bade decorate
the city after the goodliest fashion and spread the streets with
carpets. Then he equipped his daughter for the journey and gave her all
manner of presents and rarities and precious metals, such as none may
describe; and Ayn Zar departed with the Princess to his own country.
When the news of their approach reached King Teghmus, he bade celebrate
the wedding festivities and adorn the city; after which he went in unto
the Princess and abated her maidenhead; nor was it long before she
conceived by him and, accomplishing her months, bare a man-child like
the moon on the night of its full. When King Teghmus knew that his wife
had given birth to a goodly son, he rejoiced with exceeding joy and,
summoning the sages and astrologers and mathematicians, said to them, “I
would that ye draw the horoscope of the new-born child with his
ascendant and its aspects and acquaint me what shall befal him in his
lifetime.” So they made their calculations and found them favourable;
but, that he would, in his fifteenth year, be exposed to perils and
hardships, and that if he survived, he would be happy and fortunate and
become a greater king than his father and a more powerful. The King
rejoiced greatly in this prediction and named the boy Janshah. Then he
delivered him to the nurses, wet and dry, who reared him excellently
well till he reached his fifth year, when his father taught him to read
the Evangel and instructed him in the art of arms and lunge of lance and
sway of sword, so that in less than seven years he was wont to ride
a-hunting, and a-chasing; he became a doughty champion, perfect in all
the science of the cavalarice and his father was delighted to hear of
his knightly prowess. It chanced one day that King Teghmus and his son
accompanied by the troops rode out for sport into the wolds and wilds
and hunted till mid-afternoon of the third day, when the Prince started
a gazelle of a rare colour, which fled before him. So he gave chase to
it, followed by seven of King Teghmus’s white slaves all mounted on
swift steeds, and rode at speed after the gazelle, which fled before
them till she brought them to the sea-shore. They all ran at her to take
her as their quarry, but she escaped from them and, throwing herself
into the waves,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Five Hundred and First Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Janshah and
the Mamelukes ran at the gazelle, to take her as their quarry, she
escaped from them and, throwing herself into the waves, swam out to a
fishing bark, that was moored near the shore, and sprang on board.
Janshah and his followers dismounted and, boarding the boat, made prize
of the gazelle and were minded to return to shore with her, when the
Prince espied a great island in the offing and said to his merry men, “I
have a longing to visit yonder island.” They answered, “We hear and
obey,” and sailed on till they came to the island, where they landed and
amused themselves with exploring the place. Then they again embarked and
taking with them the gazelle, set out to return homeward, but the murk
of evening overtook them and they missed their way on the main. Moreover
a strong wind arose and drave the boat into mid-ocean, so that when they
awoke in the morning, they found themselves lost at sea. Such was their
case; but as regards King Teghmus, when he missed his son, he commanded
his troops to make search for him in separate bodies; so they dispersed
on all sides and a company of them, coming to the sea-shore, found there
the Prince’s white slave whom he had left in charge of the horses. They
asked him what was come of his master and the other six, and he told
them what had passed; whereupon they took him with them and returned to
the King and acquainted him with what they had learnt. When Teghmus
heard their report, he wept with sore weeping and cast the crown from
his head, biting his hands for vexation. Then he rose forthright and
wrote letters and despatched them to all the islands of the sea.
Moreover he got together an hundred ships and filling them with troops,
sent them to sail about in quest of Janshah, while he himself withdrew
with his troops to his capital, where he abode in sore concern. As for
Janshah’s mother, when she heard of his loss she buffeted her face and
began the mourning ceremonies for her son making sure that he was dead.
Meanwhile, Janshah and his men ceased not driving before the wind and
those in search of them cruised about for ten days till, finding no
trace they returned and reported failure to the King. But a stiff gale
caught the Prince’s craft which went spooning till they made a second
island, where they landed and walked about. Presently they came upon a
spring of running water in the midst of the island and saw from afar a
man sitting hard by it. So they went up to him and saluted him, and he
returned their salam, speaking in a voice like the whistle[538] of
birds. Whilst Janshah stood marvelling at the man’s speech he looked
right and left and suddenly split himself in twain, and each half went a
different way.[539] Then there came down from the hills a multitude of
men of all kinds, beyond count and reckoning; and they no sooner reached
the spring, than each one divided into two halves and rushed on Janshah
and his Mamelukes to eat them. When the voyagers saw this, they turned
and fled seawards; but the cannibals pursued them and caught and ate
three of the slaves, leaving only three slaves who with Janshah reached
the boat in safety; then launching her made for the water and sailed
nights and days without knowing whither their ship went. They killed the
gazelle and lived on her flesh, till the winds drove them to a third
island which was full of trees and waters and flower-gardens and
orchards laden with all fashion of fruits: and streams strayed under the
tree-shade: brief, the place was a Garden of Eden. The island pleased
the Prince and he said to his companions, “Which of you will land and
explore.” Then said one of the slaves, “That will I do”; but he replied,
“This thing may not be; you must all land and explore the place while I
abide in the boat.” So he set them ashore,——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Five Hundred and Second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Prince set
them ashore, and they searched the island, East and West, but found no
one; then they fared on inland to the heart thereof, till they came to a
Castle compassed about with ramparts of white marble, within which was a
palace of the clearest crystal and, set in its centre a garden
containing all manner fruits beyond description, both fresh and dry, and
flowers of grateful odour and trees and birds singing upon the boughs.
Amiddlemost the garden was a vast basin of water, and beside it a great
open hall with a raised dais whereon stood a number of stools
surrounding a throne of red gold, studded with all kinds of jewels and
especially rubies. Seeing the beauty of the Castle and of the Garden
they entered and explored in all directions, but found no one there, so
after rummaging the Castle they returned to Janshah and told him what
they had seen. When he heard their report, he cried, “Needs must I
solace myself with a sight of it;” so he landed and accompanied them to
the palace, which he entered marvelling at the goodliness of the place.
They then visited every part of the gardens and ate of the fruits and
continued walking till it waxed dark, when they returned to the estrade
and sat down, Janshah on the throne in the centre and the three others
on the stools ranged to the right and left. Then the Prince, there
seated, called to mind his separation from his father’s throne-city[540]
and country and friends and kinsfolk; and fell a-weeping and lamenting
over their loss, whilst his men wept around him. And as they were thus
sorrowing behold, they heard a mighty clamour, that came from seaward,
and looking in the direction of the clamour saw a multitude of apes, as
they were swarming locusts. Now the castle and the island belonged to
these apes, who, finding the strangers’ boat moored to the strand, had
scuttled it and after repaired to the palace, where they came upon
Janshah and his men seated. Here the Serpent-queen again broke off her
recital saying, “All this, O Hasib, was told to Bulukiya by the young
man sitting between the two tombs.” Quoth Hasib, “And what did Janshah
with the apes?”; so the Queen resumed her tale:—He and his men were sore
affrighted at the appearance of the apes, but a company of them came up
to the throne whereon he sat and, kissing the earth before him, stood
awhile in his presence with their paws upon their breasts in posture of
respect. Then another troop brought to the castle gazelles which they
slaughtered and skinned; and roasting pieces of the flesh till fit for
food they laid them on platters of gold and silver and spreading the
table, made signs to Janshah and his men to eat. The Prince and his
followers came down from their seats and ate, and the apes ate with
them, till they were satisfied, when the apes took away the meat and set
on fruits of which they partook and praised Allah the most Highest. Then
Janshah asked the apes by signs what they were and to whom the palace
belonged, and they answered him by signals, “Know ye that this island
belonged of yore to our lord Solomon son of David (on both of whom be
peace!), and he used to come hither once every year for his
solace,”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


           Now when it was the Five Hundred and Third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Janshah asked
the apes by signs to whom the palace belonged, they answered him by
signals, “Of a truth this place belonged of yore to our lord Solomon son
of David (on both of whom be peace!), who used to come hither once every
year for his solace, and then wend his ways.” Presently the apes
continued, “And know, O King, that thou art become our Sultan and we are
thy servants; so eat and drink, and whatso thou ever bid us, that will
we do.” So saying, they severally kissed the earth between the hands of
Janshah and all took their departure. The Prince slept that night on the
throne and his men on the stools about him, and on the morrow, at
daybreak, the four Wazirs or Captains of the apes presented themselves
before him, attended by their troops, who ranged themselves about him,
rank after rank, until the place was crowded. Then the Wazirs approached
and exhorted him by signs to do justice amongst them and rule them
righteously; after which the apes cried out to one another and went
away, all save a small party which remained in presence to serve him.
After awhile, there came up a company of apes with huge dogs in the
semblance of horses, each wearing about his head a massive chain; and
signed to Janshah and his three followers to mount and go with them. So
they mounted, marvelling at the greatness of the dogs, and rode forth,
attended by the four Wazirs and a host of apes like swarming locusts,
some riding on dogs and others afoot till they came to the sea-shore.
Janshah looked for the boat which brought him and finding it scuttled
turned to the Wazirs and asked how this had happened to it; whereto they
answered, “Know, O King, that, when thou camest to our island, we kenned
that thou wouldst be Sultan over us and we feared lest ye all flee from
us, in our absence; and embark in the boat; so we sank it.” When Janshah
heard this, he turned to his Mamelukes and said to them, “We have no
means of escaping from these apes, and we must patiently await the
ordinance of the Almighty.” Then they fared on inland and ceased not
faring till they came to the banks of a river, on whose other side rose
a high mountain, whereon Janshah saw a multitude of Ghuls. So he turned
to the apes and asked them, “What are these Ghuls?” and they answered,
“Know, O King, that these Ghuls are our mortal foes and we come hither
to do battle with them.” Janshah marvelled to see them riding horses,
and was startled at the vastness of their bulk and the strangeness of
their semblance; for some of them had heads like bulls and others like
camels. As soon as the Ghuls espied the army of the apes, they charged
down to the river·bank and standing there, fell to pelting them with
stones as big as maces; and between them there befel a sore fight.
Presently, Janshah, seeing that the Ghuls were getting the better of the
apes, cried out to his men, saying, “Uncase your bows and arrows and
shoot at them your best shafts and keep them off from us.” They did so
and slew of the Ghuls much people, when there fell upon them sore dismay
and they turned to flee; but the apes, seeing Janshah’s prowess, forded
the river and headed by their Sultan chased the Ghuls, killing many of
them in the pursuit, till they reached the high mountain where they
disappeared. And while exploring the said mountain Janshah found a
tablet of alabaster, whereon was written, “O thou who enterest this
land, know that thou wilt become Sultan over these apes and that from
them there is no escape for thee, except by the passes that run east and
west through the mountains. If thou take the eastern pass, thou wilt
fare through a country swarming with Ghuls and wild beasts, Marids and
Ifrits, and thou wilt come, after three months’ journeying, to the ocean
which encompasseth the earth; but, if thou travel by the western pass,
it will bring thee, after four months’ journeying, to the head of the
Wady of Emmets.[541] When thou hast followed the road, that leads
through this mountain, ten days,”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Five Hundred and Fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Janshah read this
much upon the tablet and found, at the end of the inscription, “Then
thou wilt come to a great river, whose current is so swift that it
blindeth the eyes. Now this river drieth up every Sabbath,[542] and on
the opposite bank lies a city wholly inhabited by Jews, who the faith of
Mohammed refuse; there is not a Moslem among the band nor is there other
than this city in the land. Better therefore lord it over the apes, for
so long as thou shalt tarry amongst them they will be victorious over
the Ghuls. And know also that he who wrote this tablet was the lord
Solomon, son of David (on both be peace!).” When Janshah read these
words, he wept sore and repeated them to his men. Then they mounted
again and, surrounded by the army of the apes who were rejoicing in
their victory, returned to the castle. Here Janshah abode, Sultaning
over them, for a year and a half. And at the end of this time, he one
day commanded the ape-army to mount and go forth a-hunting with him, and
they rode out into the wolds and wilds, and fared on from place to
place, till they approached the Wady of Emmets, which Janshah knew by
the description of it upon the alabaster tablet. Here he bade them
dismount and they all abode there, eating and drinking a space of ten
days, after which Janshah took his men apart one night and said, “I
purpose we flee through the Valley of Emmets and make for the town of
the Jews; it may be Allah will deliver us from these apes and we will go
God’s ways.” They replied, “We hear and we obey:” so he waited till some
little of the night was spent, then, donning his armour and girding his
sword and dagger and such like weapons, and his men doing likewise, they
set out and fared on westwards till morning. When the apes awoke and
missed Janshah and his men, they knew that they had fled. So they
mounted and pursued them, some taking the eastern pass and others that
which led to the Wady of Emmets, nor was it long before the apes came in
sight of the fugitives, as they were about to enter the valley, and
hastened after them. When Janshah and his men saw them, they fled into
the Emmet-valley; but the apes soon overtook them and would have slain
them, when behold, there rose out of the earth a multitude of ants like
swarming locusts, as big as dogs, and charged home upon the apes. They
devoured many of their foes, and these also slew many of the ants; but
help came to the emmets: now an ant would go up to an ape and smite him
and cut him in twain, whilst ten apes could hardly master one ant and
bear him away and tear him in sunder. The sore battle lasted till the
evening but the emmets were victorious. In the gloaming Janshah and his
men took to flight and fled along the sole of the Wady——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Five Hundred and Fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that in the gloaming
Janshah and his men took to flight and fled along the sole of the Wady
till the morning. With the break of day, the apes were up and at them,
which when the Prince saw, he shouted to his men, “Smite with your
swords.” So they bared their blades and laid on load right and left,
till there ran at them an ape, with tusks like an elephant, and smote
one of the Mamelukes and cut him in sunder. Then the apes redoubled upon
Janshah and he fled with his followers into the lower levels of the
valley, where he saw a vast river and by its side a mighty many of ants.
When the emmets espied Janshah they pushed on and surrounded him, and
one of the slaves fell to smiting them with his sword and cutting them
in twain; whereupon the whole host set upon him and slew him. At this
pass, behold, up came the apes from over the mountain and fell in
numbers upon Janshah; but he tore off his clothes and, plunging into the
river, with his remaining servant, struck out for the middle of the
stream. Presently, he caught sight of a tree on the other bank; so he
swam up to it and laying hold of one of its branches, hung to it and
swung himself ashore, but as for the last Mameluke the current carried
him away and dashed him to pieces against the mountain. Thereupon
Janshah fell to wringing his clothes and spreading them in the sun to
dry, what while there befel a fierce fight between the apes and the
ants, until the apes gave up the pursuit and returned to their own land.
Meanwhile, Janshah, who abode alone on the river-bank, could do naught
but shed tears till nightfall, when he took refuge in a cavern and there
passed the dark hours, in great fear and feeling desolate for the loss
of his slaves. At daybreak awaking from his sleep he set out again and
fared on nights and days, eating of the herbs of the earth, till he came
to the mountain which burnt like fire, and thence he made the river
which dried up every Sabbath. Now it was a mighty stream and on the
opposite bank stood a great city, which was the capital of the Jews
mentioned in the tablet. Here he abode till the next Sabbath, when the
river dried up and he walked over to the other side and entered the Jew
city, but saw none in the streets. So he wandered about till he came to
the door of a homestead, which he opened and entering, espied within the
people of the house sitting in silence and speaking not a syllable.
Quoth he, “I am a stranger and anhungered;” and they signed to him, as
to say, “Eat and drink, but speak not.”[543] So he ate and drank and
slept that night and, when morning dawned, the master of the house
greeted him and bade him welcome and asked him, “Whence comest thou and
whither art thou bound?” At these words Janshah wept sore and told him
all that had befallen him and how his father was King of Kabul; whereat
the Jew marvelled and said, “Never heard we of that city, but we have
heard from the merchants of the caravans that in that direction lieth a
land called Al-Yaman.” “How far is that land from this place?” asked
Janshah, and the Jew answered, “The Cafilah merchants pretend that it is
a two years and three months’ march from their land hither.” Quoth
Janshah, “And when doth the caravan come?” Quoth the Jew, “Next year
‘twill come.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Five Hundred and Sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Jew was
questioned anent the coming of the caravan, he replied, “Next year
‘twill come.” At these words the Prince wept sore and fell a-sorrowing
for himself and his Mamelukes; and lamenting his separation from his
mother and father and all which had befallen him in his wanderings. Then
said the Jew, “O young man, do not weep, but sojourn with us till the
caravan shall come, when we will send thee with it to thine own
country.” So he tarried with the Jew two whole months and every day he
went out walking in the streets for his solace and diversion. Now it
chanced one day, whilst he paced about the main thoroughfares, as of
wont, and was bending his steps right and left, he heard a crier crying
aloud and saying, “Who will earn a thousand gold pieces and a slave-girl
of surpassing beauty and loveliness by working for me between morning
and noontide?” But no one answered him and Janshah said in his mind,
“Were not this work dangerous and difficult, he would not offer a
thousand dinars and a fair girl for half a day’s labour.” Then he
accosted the crier and said, “I will do the work;” so the man carried
him to a lofty mansion where they found one who was a Jew and a
merchant, seated on an ebony chair, to whom quoth the crier, standing
respectfully before him, “O merchant, I have cried every day these three
months, and none hath answered, save this young man.” Hearing his speech
the Jew welcomed Janshah, led him into a magnificent sitting-room and
signalled to bring food. So the servants spread the table and set
thereon all manner meats, of which the merchant and Janshah ate, and
washed their hands. Then wine was served up and they drank; after which
the Jew rose and bringing Janshah a purse of a thousand dinars and a
slave-girl of rare beauty, said to him, “Take maid and money to thy
hire.” Janshah took them and seated the girl by his side when the trader
resumed, “To-morrow to the work!”; and so saying he withdrew and Janshah
slept with the damsel that night. As soon as it was morning, the
merchant bade his slaves clothe him in a costly suit of silk whenas he
came out of the Hammam-bath. So they did as he bade them and brought him
back to the house, whereupon the merchant called for harp and lute and
wine and they drank and played and made merry till the half of the night
was past, when the Jew retired to his Harim and Janshah lay with his
slave-girl till the dawn. Then he went to the bath and on his return,
the merchant came to him and said, “Now I wish thee to do the work for
me.” “I hear and obey,” replied Janshah. So the merchant bade his slaves
bring two she-mules and set Janshah on one, mounting the other himself.
Then they rode forth from the city and fared on from morn till noon,
when they made a lofty mountain, to whose height was no limit. Here the
Jew dismounted, ordering Janshah to do the same; and when he obeyed the
merchant gave him a knife and a cord, saying, “I desire that thou
slaughter this mule.” So Janshah tucked up his sleeves and skirts and
going up to the mule, bound her legs with the cord, then threw her and
cut her throat; after which he skinned her and lopped off her head and
legs and she became a mere heap of flesh. Then said the Jew, “Slit open
the mule’s belly and enter it and I will sew it up on thee. There must
thou abide awhile and whatsoever thou seest in her belly, acquaint me
therewith.” So Janshah slit the mule’s belly and crept into it,
whereupon the merchant sewed it up on him and withdrew to a
distance,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Five Hundred and Seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the merchant sewed
up the mule’s belly on Janshah and, withdrawing to a distance, hid
himself in the skirts of the mountain. After a while a huge bird swooped
down on the dead mule and snatching it up, flew up with it to the top of
the mountain, where it set down the quarry and would have eaten it; but
Janshah, feeling the bird begin to feed, slit the mule’s belly and came
forth. When the bird saw him, it took fright at him and flew right away;
whereupon he stood up and looking right and left, saw nothing but the
carcasses of dead men, mummied by the sun, and exclaimed, “There is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!”
Then he looked down the precipice and espied the merchant standing at
the mountain-foot, looking for him. As soon as the Jew caught sight of
him, he called out to him, “Throw me down of the stones which are about
thee, that I may direct thee to a way whereby thou mayst descend.” So
Janshah threw him down some two hundred of the stones, which were all
rubies,[544] chrysolites and other gems of price; after which he called
out to him, saying, “Show me the way down and I will throw thee as many
more.” But the Jew gathered up the stones and, binding them on the back
of the mule, went his way without answering a word and left Janshah
alone on the mountain-top. When the Prince found himself deserted, he
began to weep and implore help of Heaven, and thus he abode three days;
after which he rose and fared on over the mountainous ground two month’s
space, feeding upon hill-herbs; and he ceased not faring till he came to
its skirts and espied afar off a Wady full of fruitful trees and birds
harmonious singing the praises of Allah, the One, the Victorious. At
this sight he joyed with great joy and stayed not his steps till, after
an hour or so, he came to a ravine in the rocks, through which the
rain-torrents fell into the valley. He made his way down the cleft till
he reached the Wady which he had seen from the mountain-top and walked
on therein, gazing right and left, nor ceased so doing until he came in
sight of a great castle, towering high in air. As he drew near the gates
he saw an old man of comely aspect and face shining with light standing
thereat with a staff of carnelian in his hand, and going up to him,
saluted him. The Shaykh returned his salam and bade him welcome, saying,
“Sit down, O my son.” So he sat down at the door of the castle and the
old man said to him, “How camest thou to this land, untrodden by son of
Adam before thee, and whither art thou bound?” When Janshah heard his
words he wept bitterly at the thought of all the hardships he had
suffered and his tears choked his speech. Quoth the Shaykh, “O my son,
leave weeping; for indeed thou makest my heart ache.” So saying, he rose
and set somewhat of food before him and said to him, “Eat.” He ate and
praised Allah Almighty; after which the old man besought him saying, “O
my son, I would have thee tell me thy tale and acquaint me with thine
adventures.” So Janshah related to him all that had befallen him, from
first to last, whereat the Shaykh marvelled with exceeding marvel. Then
said the Prince, “Prithee inform me who is the lord of this valley and
to whom doth this great castle belong?” Answered the old man, “Know, O
my son, this valley and all that is therein and this castle with all it
containeth belong to the lord Solomon, son of David (on both be peace!).
As for me, my name is Shaykh Nasr,[545] King of the Birds; for thou must
know that the lord Solomon committed this castle to my charge,”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Five Hundred and Eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shaykh Nasr
pursued, “Thou must know that the lord Solomon committed this castle to
my charge and taught me the language of birds and made me ruler over all
the fowls which be in the world; wherefore each and every come hither
once in the twelvemonth, and I pass them in review: then they depart;
and this is why I dwell here.” When Janshah heard this, he wept sore and
said to the Shaykh, “O my father, how shall I do to get back to my
native land?” Replied the old man, “Know, O my son, that thou art near
to the mountain Kaf, and there is no departing for thee from this place
till the birds come, when I will give thee in charge to one of them, and
he will bear thee to thy native country. Meanwhile tarry with me here
and eat and drink and divert thyself with viewing the apartments of this
castle.” So Janshah abode with Shaykh Nasr, taking his pleasure in the
Wady and eating of its fruits and laughing and making merry with the old
man, and leading a right joyous life till the day appointed for the
birds to pay their annual visit to their Governor. Thereupon the Shaykh
said to him, “O Janshah, take the keys of the castle and solace thyself
with exploring all its apartments and viewing whatever be therein, but
as regards such a room, beware and again beware of opening its door; and
if thou gainsay me and open it and enter therethrough nevermore shalt
thou know fair fortune.” He repeated this charge again and again with
much instance; then he went forth to meet the birds, which came up, kind
by kind, and kissed his hands. Such was his case; but as regards
Janshah, he went round about the castle, opening the various doors and
viewing the apartments into which they led, till he came to the room
which Shaykh Nasr had warned him not to open or enter. He looked at the
door and its fashion pleased him, for it had on it a padlock of gold,
and he said to himself, “This room must be goodlier than all the others;
would Heaven I wist what is within it, that Shaykh Nasr should forbid me
to open its door! There is no help but that I enter and see what is in
this apartment; for whatso is decreed unto the creature perforce he must
fulfil.” So he put out his hand and unlocked the door and entering,
found himself before a great basin; and hard by it stood a little
pavilion, builded all of gold and silver and crystal, with
lattice-windows of jacinth. The floor was paved with green beryl and
balass rubies and emeralds and other jewels, set in the ground-work
mosaic-fashion, and in the midmost of the pavilion was a jetting
fountain in a golden basin, full of water and girt about with figures of
beasts and birds, cunningly wrought of gold and silver and casting water
from their mouths. When the zephyr blew on them, it entered their ears
and therewith the figures sang out with birdlike song, each in its own
tongue. Beside the fountain was a great open saloon with a high daïs
whereon stood a vast throne of carnelian, inlaid with pearls and jewels,
over which was spread a tent of green silk fifty cubits in width and
embroidered with gems fit for seal-rings and purfled with precious
metals. Within this tent was a closet containing the carpet of the lord
Solomon (on whom be peace!); and the pavilion was compassed about with a
vast garden full of fruit-trees and streams; while near the palace were
beds of roses and basil and eglantine and all manner sweet-smelling
herbs and flowers. And the trees bore on the same boughs fruits fresh
and dry and the branches swayed gracefully to the wooing of the wind.
All this was in that one apartment and Janshah wondered thereat till he
was weary of wonderment; and he set out to solace himself in the palace
and the garden and to divert himself with the quaint and curious things
they contained. And first looking at the basin he saw that the gravels
of its bed were gems and jewels and noble metals; and many other strange
things were in that apartment.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Five Hundred and Ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Janshah saw many
strange things and admirable in that apartment. Then he entered the
pavilion and mounting the throne, fell asleep under the tent set up
thereover. He slept for a time and, presently awaking, walked forth and
sat down on a stool before the door. As he sat, marvelling at the
goodliness of that place, there flew up from mid-sky three birds, in
dove-form but big as eagles, and lighted on the brink of the basin,
where they sported awhile. Then they put off their feathers and became
three maidens,[546] as they were moons, that had not their like in the
whole world. They plunged into the basin and swam about and disported
themselves and laughed, while Janshah marvelled at their beauty and
loveliness and the grace and symmetry of their shapes. Presently, they
came up out of the water and began walking about and taking their solace
in the garden; and Janshah seeing them land was like to lose his wits.
He rose and followed them, and when he overtook them, he saluted them
and they returned his salam; after which quoth he, “Who are ye, O
illustrious Princesses, and whence come ye?” Replied the youngest
damsel, “We are from the invisible world of Almighty Allah and we come
hither to divert ourselves.” He marvelled at their beauty and said to
the youngest, “Have ruth on me and deign kindness to me and take pity on
my case and on all that hath befallen me in my life.” Rejoined she,
“Leave this talk and wend thy ways”; whereat the tears streamed from his
eyes, and he sighed heavily and repeated these couplets:—

 She shone out in the garden in garments all of green, ✿ With open vest
    and collars and flowing hair beseen:
 “What is thy name?” I asked her, and she replied, “I’m she ✿ Who roasts
    the hearts of lovers on coals of love and teen.”
 Of passion and its anguish to her I made my moan; ✿ “Upon a rock,” she
    answered, “thy plaints are wasted clean.”
 “Even if thy heart,” I told her, “be rock in very deed, ✿ Yet hath God
    made fair water well from the rock, I ween.”[547]

When the maidens heard his verses, they laughed and played and sang and
made merry. Then he brought them somewhat of fruit, and they ate and
drank and slept with him till the morning, when they donned their
feather-suits, and resuming dove shape flew off and went their way. But
as he saw them disappearing from sight, his reason well-nigh fled with
them, and he gave a great cry and fell down in a fainting fit and lay
a-swooning all that day. While he was in this case Shaykh Nasr returned
from the Parliament of the Fowls and sought for Janshah, that he might
send him with them to his native land, but found him not and knew that
he had entered the forbidden room. Now he had already said to the birds,
“With me is a young man, a mere youth, whom destiny brought hither from
a distant land; and I desire of you that ye take him up and carry him to
his own country.” And all answered, “We hear and we obey.” So he ceased
not searching for Janshah till he came to the forbidden door and seeing
it open he entered and found the Prince lying a-swoon under a tree. He
fetched scented waters and sprinkled them on his face, whereupon he
revived and turned——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Five Hundred and Tenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Shaykh Nasr
saw Janshah lying a-swoon under the tree he fetched him somewhat of
scented waters and sprinkled them on his face. Thereupon he revived and
turned right and left, but seeing none by him save the Shaykh, sighed
heavily and repeated these couplets:—

 “Like fullest moon she shines on happiest night, ✿ Soft-sided fair, with
    slender shape bedight.
 Her eye-babes charm the world with gramarye; ✿ Her lips remind of rose
    and ruby light.
 Her jetty locks make night upon her hips; ✿ Ware, lovers, ware ye of
    that curl’s despight!
 Yea, soft her sides are, but in love her heart ✿ Out-hardens flint,
    surpasses syenite:
 And bows of eyebrows shower glancey shafts ✿ Despite the distance never
    fail to smite.
 Then, ah, her beauty! all the fair it passes; ✿ Nor any rival her who
    see the light.”

When Shaykh Nasr heard these verses, he said, “O my son, did I not warn
thee not to open that door and enter that room? But now, O my son, tell
me what thou sawest therein and acquaint me with all that betided thee.”
So Janshah related to him all that had passed between him and the three
maidens, and Shaykh Nasr, who sat listening in silence said, “Know, O my
son, that these three maidens are of the daughters of the Jann and come
hither every year for a day, to divert themselves and make merry until
mid-afternoon, when they return to their own country.” Janshah asked,
“And where is their country?”; and the old man answered, “By Allah, O my
son, I wot not:” presently adding, “but now take heart and put away this
love from thee and come with me, that I may send thee to thine own land
with the birds.” When Janshah heard this, he gave a great cry and fell
down in a trance; and presently he came to himself, and said, “O my
father, indeed I care not to return to my native land: all I want is to
foregather with these maidens and know, O my father, that I will never
again name my people, though I die before thee.” Then he wept and cried,
“Enough for me that I look upon the face of her I love, although it be
only once in the year!” And he sighed deeply and repeated these
couplets:—

 Would Heaven the Phantom[548] spared the friend at night ✿ And would
    this love for man were ever dight!
 Were not my heart a-fire for love of you, ✿ Tears ne’er had stained my
    cheeks nor dimmed my sight.
 By night and day, I bid my heart to bear ✿ Its griefs, while fires of
    love my body blight.

Then he fell at Shaykh Nasr’s feet and kissed them and wept sore,
crying, “Have pity on me, so Allah take pity on thee and aid me in my
strait so Allah aid thee!” Replied the old man, “By Allah, O my son, I
know nothing of these maidens nor where may be their country; but, O my
son, if thy heart be indeed set on one of them, tarry with me till this
time next year for they will assuredly reappear; and, when the day of
their coming draweth near, hide thyself under a tree in the garden. As
soon as they have alighted and doffed their feather-robes and plunged
into the lake and are swimming about at a distance from their clothes,
seize the vest of her whom thy soul desireth. When they see thee, they
will come a-bank and she, whose coat thou hast taken, will accost thee
and say to thee with the sweetest of speech and the most witching of
smiles, “Give me my dress, O my brother, that I may don it and veil my
nakedness withal.” But if thou yield to her prayer and give her back the
vest thou wilt never win thy wish: nay, she will don it and fly away to
her folk and thou wilt nevermore see her again. Now when thou hast
gained the vest, clap it under thine armpit and hold it fast, till I
return from the Parliament of the Fowls, when I will make accord between
thee and her and send thee back to thy native land, and the maiden with
thee. And this, O my son, is all I can do for thee, nothing more.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Five Hundred and Eleventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth Shaykh Nasr
to Janshah, “Hold fast the feather-robe of her thy soul desireth and
give it not back to her till I return from the Parliament of the Fowls.
And this, O my son, is all I can do for thee, nothing more.” When
Janshah heard this, his heart was solaced and he abode with Shaykh Nasr
yet another year, counting the days as they passed until the day of the
coming of the birds. And when at last the appointed time arrived the old
man said to him, “Do as I enjoined thee and charged thee with the
maidens in the matter of the feather-dress, for I go to meet the birds;”
and Janshah replied, “I hear and I obey, O my father.” Then the Shaykh
departed whilst the Prince walked into the garden and hid himself under
a tree, where none could see him. Here he abode a first day and a second
and a third, but the maidens came not; whereat he was sore troubled and
wept and sighed from a heart hard tried; and he ceased not weeping and
wailing till he fainted away. When he came to himself, he fell to
looking now at the basin and now at the welkin, and anon at the earth
and anon at the open country, whilst his heart grieved for stress of
love-longing. As he was in this case, behold, the three doves appeared
in the firmament, eagle-sized as before, and flew till they reached the
garden and lighted down beside the basin. They turned right and left;
but saw no one, man or Jann; so they doffed their feather-suits and
became three maidens. Then they plunged into the basin and swam about,
laughing and frolicking; and all were mother-naked and fair as bars of
virgin silver. Quoth the eldest, “O my sister, I fear lest there be some
one lying ambushed for us in the pavilion.” Answered the second, “O
sister, since the days of King Solomon, none hath entered the pavilion,
be he man or Jann;” and the youngest added, laughing, “By Allah, O my
sisters, if there be any hidden there, he will assuredly take none but
me.” Then they continued sporting and laughing and Janshah’s heart kept
fluttering for stress of passion: but he hid behind the tree so that he
saw without being seen. Presently they swam out to the middle of the
basin leaving their clothes on the bank. Hereupon he sprang to his feet,
and running like the darting leven to the basin’s brink, snatched up the
feather-vest of the youngest damsel, her on whom his heart was set and
whose name was Shamsah the Sun-maiden. At this the girls turned and
seeing him, were affrighted and veiled their shame from him in the
water. Then they swam near shore and looking on his favour saw that he
was bright faced as the moon on the night of fullness and asked him,
“Who art thou and how camest thou hither and why hast thou taken the
clothes of the lady Shamsah?”; and he answered, “Come hither to me and I
will tell you my tale.” Quoth Shamsah, “What deed is this, and why hast
thou taken my clothes, rather than those of my sisters?” Quoth he, “O
light of mine eyes, come forth of the water, and I will recount thee my
case and acquaint thee why I chose thee out.” Quoth she, “O my lord and
coolth of my eyes and fruit of my heart, give me my clothes, that I may
put them on and cover my nakedness withal; then will I come forth to
thee.” But he replied, “O Princess of beautiful ones, how can I give
thee back thy clothes and slay myself for love-longing? Verily, I will
not give them to thee, till Shaykh Nasr, the king of the birds, shall
return.” Quoth she, “If thou wilt not give me my clothes withdraw a
little apart from us, that my sisters may land and dress themselves and
lend me somewhat wherewithal to cover my shame.” “I hear and obey,”
answered he, and walked away from them into the pavilion, whereupon the
three Princesses came out and the two elder, donning their dress, gave
Shamsah somewhat thereof, not enough to fly withal, and she put it on
and came forth of the water, and stood before him, as she were the
rising full-moon or a browsing gazelle. Then Shamsah entered the
pavilion, where Janshah was still sitting on the throne; so she saluted
him and taking seat near him, said, “O fair of face, thou hast undone
thyself and me; but tell us thy adventures that we may ken how it is
with thee.” At these words he wept till he drenched his dress with his
tears; and when she saw that he was distracted for love of her, she rose
and taking him by the hand, made him sit by her side and wiped away the
drops with her sleeve; and said she, “O fair of face, leave this weeping
and tell us thy tale.” So he related to her all that had befallen him
and described to her all he had seen,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Five Hundred and Twelfth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the lady
Shamsah said to Janshah, “Tell us thy tale;” so he related to her all
that had befallen him; and, after she had lent attentive ear she sighed
and said, “O my lord, since thou art so fondly in love with me, give me
my dress, that I may fly to my folk, I and my sisters, and tell them
what affection thou hast conceived for me, and after I will come back to
thee and carry thee to thine own country.” When he heard this, he wept
sore and replied, “Is it lawful to thee before Allah to slay me
wrongfully?” She asked, “O my lord, why should I do such wrongous
deed?”; and he answered, “If I give thee thy gear thou wilt fly away
from me, and I shall die forthright.” Princess Shamsah laughed at this
and so did her sisters; then said she to him, “Be of good cheer and keep
thine eyes cool and clear, for I must needs marry thee.” So saying, she
bent down to him and embraced him and pressing him to her breast kissed
him between the eyes and on his cheeks. They clipped and clasped each
other awhile, after which they drew apart and sat down on the throne.
Then the eldest Princess went out into the garden and, plucking somewhat
of fruits and flowers, brought them into the pavilion; and they ate and
drank and laughed and sported and made merry. Now Janshah was singular
in beauty and loveliness and slender shape and symmetry and grace, and
the Princess Shamsah said to him, “O my beloved, by Allah, I love thee
with exceeding love and will never leave thee!” When he heard her words,
his breast broadened and he laughed for joy till he showed his teeth;
and they abode thus awhile in mirth and gladness and frolic. And when
they were at the height of their pleasure and joyance, behold, Shaykh
Nasr returned from the Parliament of the Fowls and came in to them;
whereupon they all rose to him and saluted him and kissed his hands. He
gave them welcome and bade them be seated. So they sat down and he said
to Princess Shamsah, “Verily this youth loveth thee with exceeding love;
Allah upon thee, deal kindly with him, for he is of the great ones of
mankind and of the sons of the kings, and his father ruleth over the
land of Kabul and his reign compasseth a mighty empire.” Quoth she, “I
hear and I obey thy behest”; and, kissing the Shaykh’s hands, stood
before him in respect. Quoth he, “If thou say sooth, swear to me by
Allah that thou wilt never betray him, what while thou abidest in the
bonds of life.” So she swore a great oath that she would never betray
Janshah, but would assuredly marry him, and added, “Know, O Shaykh Nasr,
that I never will forsake him.” The Shaykh believed in her oath and said
to Janshah, “Thanks be to Allah, who hath made you arrive at this
understanding!” Hereupon the Prince rejoiced with exceeding joy, and he
and Shamsah abode three months with Shaykh Nasr, feasting and toying and
making merry.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Five Hundred and Thirteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that, Janshah and the
lady Shamsah abode three months with Shaykh Nasr, feasting and toying
and making merry. And at the end of that time she said to Janshah, “I
wish to go with thee to thy motherland, where thou shalt marry me and we
will abide there.” “To hear is to obey,” answered he and took counsel
with Shaykh Nasr, who said to him, “Go thou home, I commend her to thy
care.” Then said she, “O Shaykh Nasr, bid him render me my
feather-suit.” So the Shaykh bade Janshah give it to her, and he went
straightways into the pavilion and brought it out for her. Thereupon she
donned it and said to him, “Mount my back and shut thine eyes and stop
thine ears, so thou mayst not hear the roar of the revolving sphere; and
keep fast hold of my feathers, lest thou fall off.” He did as she bade
him and, as she stretched her wings to fly, Shaykh Nasr said, “Wait a
while till I describe to thee the land Kabul, lest you twain miss your
way.” So she delayed till he had said his say and had bidden them
farewell, commending the Prince to her care. She took leave of her
sisters and bade them return to her folk and tell them what had befallen
her with Janshah; then, rising into the air without stay or delay she
flew off, like the wafts of the wind or the lamping leven. Her sisters
also took flight and returning home delivered her message to their
people. And she stayed not her course from the forenoon till the hour of
mid-afternoon prayer (Janshah being still on her back), when she espied
afar off a Wady abounding in trees and streams and she said to Janshah,
“I am thinking to alight in this valley, that we may solace ourselves
amongst its trees and herbage and here rest for the night.” Quoth he,
“Do what seemeth meet to thee!” So she swooped down from the lift and
alighted in the Wady, when Janshah dismounted and kissing her between
the eyes,[549] sat with her awhile on the bank of a river there; then
they rose and wandered about the valley, taking their pleasure therein
and eating of the fruits of the trees, until nightfall, when they lay
down under a tree and slept till the morning dawned. As soon as it was
day, the Princess arose and, bidding Janshah mount, flew on with him
till noon, when she perceived by the appearance of the buildings which
Shaykh Nasr had described to her, that they were nearing the city Kabul.
So she swooped down from the welkin and alighted in a wide plain, a
blooming champaign, wherein were gazelles straying and springs playing
and rivers flowing and ripe fruits growing. So Janshah dismounted and
kissed her between the eyes; and she asked him, “O my beloved and coolth
of mine eyes, knowest thou how many days’ journey we have come since
yesterday?”; and he answered, “No,” when she said, “We have come thirty
months’ journey.” Quoth he, “Praised be Allah for safety!” Then they sat
down side by side and ate and drank and toyed and laughed. And whilst
they were thus pleasantly engaged, behold, there came up to them two of
the King’s Mamelukes of those who had been of the Prince’s company; one
of them was he whom he had left with the horses, when he embarked in the
fishing-boat and the other had been of his escort in the chase. As soon
as they saw Janshah, both knew him and saluted him; then said they,
“With thy leave, we will go to thy sire and bear him the glad tidings of
thy coming.” Replied the Prince, “Go ye to my father and acquaint him
with my case, and fetch us tents, for we will tarry here seven days to
rest ourselves till he make ready his retinue to meet us, that we may
enter in stateliest state.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Five Hundred and Fourteenth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Janshah said
to the two Mamelukes, “Go ye to my sire and acquaint him with my case
and fetch us tents, for we will abide here seven days to rest ourselves,
till he make ready his retinue to meet us, that we may enter in the
stateliest state.” So the officers hastened back to King Teghmus and
said to him, “Good news, O King of the age!” Asked he, “What good
tidings bring ye: is my son Janshah come back?”; and they answered,
“Yes, thy son Janshah hath returned from his strangerhood and is now
near at hand in the Kirání mead.” Now when the King heard this, he joyed
with great joy and fell down in a swoon for excess of gladness; then,
coming to himself, he bade his Wazir give each of the Mamelukes a
splendid suit of honour and a sum of money. The minister replied, “I
hear and obey,” and forthright did his bidding and said to them, “Take
this in turn for the good tidings ye bring, whether ye lie or say
sooth.” They replied, “Indeed we lie not, for but now we sat with him
and saluted him and kissed his hands and he bade us fetch him tents, for
that he would sojourn in the meadow seven days, till such time as the
Wazirs and Emirs and Grandees should come out to meet him.” Quoth the
King, “How is it with my son?” and quoth they, “He hath with him a
Houri, as he had brought her out of Paradise.” At this, King Teghmus
bade beat the kettledrums and sound the trumpets for gladness, and
despatched messengers to announce the good news to Janshah’s mother and
to the wives of the Emirs and Wazirs and Lords of the realm: so the
criers spread themselves about the city and acquainted the people with
the coming of Prince Janshah. Then the King made ready, and, setting out
for the Kirani meadow with his horsemen and footmen, came upon Janshah
who was sitting at rest with the lady Shamsah beside him and, behold,
all suddenly drew in sight. The Prince rose to his feet and walked
forward to meet them; and the troops knew him and dismounted, to salute
him and kiss his hands: after which he set out preceded by the men in
single file till he came to his sire, who, at sight of his son threw
himself from his horse’s back and clasped him to his bosom and wept
flooding tears of joy. Then they took horse again with the retinue
riding to the right and left and fared forward till they came to the
river-banks; when the troops alighted and pitched their tents and
pavilions and standards to the blare of trump and the piping of fife and
the dub-a-dub of drum and tom-tom. Moreover the King bade the
tent-pitchers set up a pavilion of red silk for the Princess Shamsah,
who put off her scanty raiment of feathers for fine robes and, entering
the pavilion, there took seat. And as she sat in her beauty, behold, the
King and his son Janshah came in to her, and when she saw Teghmus, she
rose and kissed ground before him. The King sat down and seating Janshah
on his right hand and Princess Shamsah on his left, bade her welcome and
said to his son, “Tell me all that hath befallen thee in this thy long
strangerhood.” So Janshah related to him the whole of his adventures
from first to last, whereat he marvelled with exceeding marvel and
turning to the Princess, said, “Laud to Allah for that He hath caused
thee to reunite me with my son! ‘Verily this is of His exceeding
bounty!’”[550]——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Five Hundred and Fifteenth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Teghmus
said to the lady Shamsah, “Laud to Allah for that He hath caused thee to
reunite me with my son! ‘Verily this is of His exceeding bounty.’ And
now I would have thee ask of me what thou wilt, that I may do it in
thine honour.” Quoth she, “I ask of thee that thou build me a palace in
the midst of a flower-garden, with water running under it.” And the King
answered, “I hear and obey.” And behold, up came Janshah’s mother,
attended by all the wives of the Wazirs and Emirs and nobles and city
notables. When her son had sight of her, he rose and leaving the tent,
went forth to meet her and they embraced a long while, whilst the Queen
wept for excess of joy and with tears trickling from her eyes repeated
the following verses:—

 Joy so o’ercometh me, for stress of joy ✿ In that which gladdeneth me I
    fain shed tears:—
 Tears are become your nature, O my eyes, ✿ Who weep for joyance as for
    griefs and fears.

And they complained to each other of all their hearts had suffered from
the long separation. Then the King departed to his pavilion and Janshah
carried his mother to his own tent, where they sat talking till there
came up some of the lady Shamsah’s attendants who said, “The Princess is
now walking hither in order to salute thee.” When the Queen heard this,
she rose and going to meet Shamsah, saluted her and seated her awhile by
her side. Presently the Queen and her retinue of noble women, the
spouses of the Emirs and Grandees, returned with Princess Shamsah to the
tent occupied by her daughter-in-law and sat there. Meanwhile, King
Teghmus gave great largesse to his levies and lieges and rejoiced in his
son with exceeding joy, and they tarried there ten days, feasting and
merry-making and living a most joyous life. At the end of this time, the
King commanded a march and they all returned to the capital, so he took
horse surrounded by all the troops with the Wazirs and Chamberlains to
his right and left: nor ceased they faring till they entered the city,
which was decorated after the goodliest fashion; for the folk had
adorned the houses with precious stuffs and jewellery and spread costly
brocades under the hoofs of the horses. The drums beat for glad tidings
and the Grandees of the kingdom rejoiced and brought rich gifts and the
lookers on were filled with amazement. Furthermore, they fed the
mendicants and Fakirs and held high festival for the space of ten days,
and the lady Shamsah joyed with exceeding joy whenas she saw this. Then
King Teghmus summoned architects and builders and men of art and bade
them build a palace in that garden. So they straightway proceeded to do
his bidding; and, when Janshah knew of his sire’s command, he caused the
artificers to fetch a block of white marble and carve it and hollow it
in the semblance of a chest; which being done, he took the feather-vest
of Princess Shamsah wherewith she had flown with him through the air:
then, sealing the cover with melted lead, he ordered them to bury the
box in the foundations and build over it the arches whereon the palace
was to rest. They did as he bade them, nor was it long before the palace
was finished: then they furnished it and it was a magnificent edifice,
standing in the midst of the garden, with streams flowing under its
walls.[551] Upon this the King caused Janshah’s wedding to be celebrated
with the greatest splendour and they brought the bride to the castle in
state procession and went their ways. When the lady Shamsah entered, she
smelt the scent of her feather-gear——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Five Hundred and Sixteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the lady
Shamsah entered the new palace, she smelt the scent of her flying
feather-gear and knew where it was and determined to take it. So she
waited till midnight, when Janshah was drowned in sleep; then she rose
and going straight to the place where the marble-coffer was buried under
the arches she hollowed the ground alongside till she came upon it; when
she removed the lead wherewith it was soldered and, taking out the
feather-suit, put it on. Then she flew high in air and perching on the
pinnacle of the palace, cried out to those who were therein, saying, “I
pray you fetch me Janshah, that I may bid him farewell.” So they told
him and he came out and, seeing her on the terrace-roof of the palace,
clad in her feather-raiment, asked her, “Why hast thou done this deed?”;
and she answered “O my beloved and coolth of mine eyes and fruit of my
heart, by Allah, I love thee passing dear and I rejoice with exceeding
joy in that I have restored thee to thy friends and country and thou
hast seen thy mother and father. And now, if thou love me as I love
thee, come to me at Takní, the Castle of Jewels.” So saying, she flew
away forthright to find her family and friends, and Janshah fell down
fainting, being well-nigh dead for despair. They carried the news to
King Teghmus, who mounted at once and riding to the palace, found his
son lying senseless on the ground; whereat he wept knowing that the
swoon was caused by the loss of his love, and sprinkled rose-water on
his face.[552] When the Prince came to himself and saw his sire sitting
at his head, he wept at the thought of losing his wife and the King
asked what had befallen him. So he replied, “Know, O my father, that the
lady Shamsah is of the daughters of the Jann and she hath done such and
such” (telling him all that had happened); and the King said, “O my son,
be not troubled and thus concerned, for I will assemble all the
merchants and wayfarers in the land and enquire of them anent that
castle. If we can find out where it is, we will journey thither and
demand the Princess Shamsah of her people; and we hope in Allah the
Almighty that He will give her back to thee and thou shalt consummate
thy marriage.” Then he went out and, calling his four Wazirs without
stay or delay, bade them assemble all the merchants and voyagers in the
city and question them of Takni, the Castle of Jewels, adding, “Whoso
knoweth it and can guide us thither, I will surely give him fifty
thousand gold pieces.” The Wazirs accordingly went forth at once and did
as the King bade them, but neither trader nor traveller could give them
news of Takni, the Castle of Jewels; so they returned and told the King.
Thereupon he bade bring beautiful slave-girls and concubines and singers
and players upon instruments of music, whose like are not found but with
the Kings: and sent them to Janshah, so haply they might divert him from
the love of the lady Shamsah. Moreover, he despatched couriers and spies
to all the lands and islands and climes, to enquire for Takni, the
Castle of Jewels, and they made quest for it two months long, but none
could give them news thereof. So they returned and told the King,
whereupon he wept bitter tears and going in to his son found Janshah
sitting amidst the concubines and singers and players on harp and zither
and so forth, not one of whom could console him for the lady Shamsah.
Quoth Teghmus, “O my son, I can find none who knoweth this Castle of
Jewels; but I will bring thee a fairer than she.” When Janshah heard
this, his eyes ran over with tears and he recited these two couplets:—

 Patience hath fled, but passion fareth not; ✿ And all my frame with pine
    is fever-hot:
 When will the days my lot with Shamsah join? ✿ Lo, all my bones with
    passion-lowe go rot!

Now there was a deadly feud between King Teghmus and a certain King of
Hind, by name Kafíd, who had great plenty of troops and warriors and
champions; and under his hand were a thousand puissant chieftains, each
ruling over a thousand tribes whereof every one could muster four
thousand cavaliers. He reigned over a thousand cities each guarded by a
thousand forts and he had four Wazirs and under him ruled Emirs, Princes
and Sovereigns; and indeed he was a King of great might and prowess
whose armies filled the whole earth. Now King Teghmus had made war upon
him and ravaged his reign and slain his men and of his treasures had
made gain. But when it came to King Kafid’s knowledge that King Teghmus
was occupied with the love of his son, so that he neglected the affairs
of the state and his troops were grown few and weak by reason of his
care and concern for his son’s state, he summoned his Wazirs and Emirs
and said to them, “Ye all know that whilom King Teghmus invaded our
dominions and plundered our possessions and slew my father and brethren,
nor indeed is there one of you, but he hath harried his lands and
carried off his goods and made prize of his wives and slain some kinsmen
of his. Now I have heard this day that he is absorbed in the love of his
son Janshah, and that his troops are grown few and weak; and this is the
time to take our blood-revenge on him. So make ready for the march and
don ye your harness of battle; and let nothing stay or delay you, and we
will go to him and fall upon him and slay him and his son, and possess
ourselves of his reign.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Seventeenth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kafid, King
of Hind, commanded his troops and armies to mount and make for the
dominions of King Teghmus, saying, “Get ye ready for the march and don
ye your harness of war; and let nothing stay or delay you; so we will go
to him and fall upon him and slay him and his son and possess ourselves
of his reign.” They all answered with one voice, saying, “We hear and
obey,” and fell at once to equipping themselves and levying troops; and
they ceased not their preparations for three months and, when all was in
readiness, they beat the drums and sounded the trumps and flew the flags
and banners: then King Kafid set out at the head of his host and they
fared on till they reached the frontiers of the land of Kabul, the
dominions of King Teghmus, where they began to harry the land and do
havoc among the folk, slaughtering the old and taking the young
prisoners. When the news reached King Teghmus, he was wroth with
exceeding wrath and assembling his Grandees and officers of state, said
to them, “Know that Kafid hath come to our land and hath entered the
realm we command and is resolved to fight us hand to hand; and he
leadeth troops and champions and warriors, whose number none knoweth
save Allah Almighty; what deme deem ye?” Replied they, “O King of the
age, let us go out to him and give him battle and drive him forth of our
country; and thus deem we.” So he bade them prepare for battle and
brought forth to them hauberks and cuirasses and helmets and swords and
all manner of warlike gear, such as lay low warriors and do to death the
champions of mankind. So the troops and braves and champions flocked
together and they set up the standards and beat the drums and sounded
the trumpets and clashed the cymbals and piped on the pipes; and King
Teghmus marched out at the head of his army, to meet the hosts of Hind.
And when he drew near the foe, he called a halt, and encamping with his
host in the Zahrán Valley,[553] hard by the frontier of Kabul despatched
to King Kafid by messenger the following letter:—“Know that what thou
hast done is of the doings of the villain rabble and wert thou indeed a
King, the son of a King, thou hadst not done thus, nor hadst thou
invaded my kingdom and slain my subjects and plundered their property
and wrought unright upon them. Knowest thou not that all this is the
fashion of a tyrant? Verily, had I known that thou durst harry my
dominions, I had come to thee before thy coming and had prevented thee
this long while since. Yet, even now, if thou wilt retire and leave
mischief between us and thee, well and good; but if thou return not,
meet me in the listed field and measure thyself with me in cut and
thrust.” Lastly he sealed his letter and committed to an officer of his
army and sent with him spies to spy him out news. The messenger fared
forth with the missive and, drawing near the enemy’s camp, he descried a
multitude of tents of silk and satin, with pennons of blue sendal, and
amongst them a great pavilion of red satin, surrounded by a host of
guards. He ceased not to advance till he made this tent and found on
asking that it was that of King Kafid whom he saw seated on a chair set
with jewels, in the midst of his Wazirs and Emirs and Grandees. So he
brought out the letter and straightway there came up to him a company of
guards, who took it from him and carried it to the King; and Kafid read
it and wrote a reply to this purport:—“After the usual invocations, We
let King Teghmus know that we mean to take our blood-revenge on thee and
wash out our stain and waste thy reign and rend the curtain in twain and
slay the old men and enslave the young men. But to-morrow, come thou
forth to combat in the open plain, and to show thee thrust and fight
will I deign.” Then he sealed the letter and delivered it to the
messenger, who carried it to King Teghmus——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Five Hundred and Eighteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Kafid
delivered the answering letter to the messenger who carried it to King
Teghmus and delivered it, after kissing the ground between his hands.
Then he reported all that he had seen, saying, “O King of the age, I
espied warriors and horsemen and footmen beyond count nor can I assist
thee to the amount.” When Teghmus read the reply and comprehended its
contents, he was with furious rage enraged and bade his Wazir Ayn Zar
take horse and fall upon the army of Kafid with a thousand cavaliers, in
the middle watch of the night when they would easily ride home and slay
all before them. Ayn Zar replied, “I hear and I obey,” and at once went
forth to do his bidding. Now King Kafid had a Wazir, Ghatrafán[554] by
name, whom he bade take five thousand horse and attack the host of King
Teghmus in like manner. So Ghatrafan did his bidding and set out on his
enterprise marching till midnight. Thus the two parties met halfway and
the Wazir Ghatrafan fell upon the Wazir Ayn Zar. Then man cried out
against man and there befel sore battle between them till break of day,
when Kafid’s men were routed and fled back to their King in confusion.
As Kafid saw this, he was wroth beyond measure and said to the
fugitives, “Woe to you! What hath befallen you, that ye have lost your
captains?” and they replied, “O King of the age, as the Wazir Ghatrafan
rode forth to fall upon King Teghmus, there appeared to us halfway and
when night was half over, the Wazir Ayn Zar, with cavaliers and
champions, and we met on the slopes of Wady Zahran; but ere we were ware
we found ourselves in the enemy’s midst, eye meeting eye; and we fought
a fierce fight with them from midnight till morning, many on either side
being slain. Then the Wazir and his men fell to shouting and smiting the
elephants on the face till they took fright at their furious blows, and
turning tail to flee, trampled down the horsemen, whilst none could see
other for the clouds of dust. The blood ran like a rain-torrent and had
we not fled, we had all been cut off to the last man.” When King Kafid
heard this, he exclaimed, “May the sun not bless you and may he be wroth
with you and sore be his wrath!” Meanwhile Ayn Zar, the Wazir, returned
to King Teghmus and told him what had happened. The King gave him joy of
his safety and rejoiced greatly and bade beat the drums and sound the
trumpets, in honour of the victory; after which he called the roll of
his troops and behold, two hundred of his stoutest champions had fallen.
Then King Kafid marched his army into the field and drew them out
ordered for battle in fifteen lines of ten thousand horse each, under
the command of three hundred captains, mounted on elephants and chosen
from amongst the doughtiest of his warriors and his champions. So he set
up his standards and banners and beat the drums and blew the trumpets
whilst the braves sallied forth, offering battle. As for King Teghmus,
he drew out his troops line after line and lo! there were ten of ten
thousand horse each, and with him were an hundred champions, riding on
his right hand and on his left. Then fared forward to the fight each
renowned knight, and the hosts clashed together in their might, whilst
the earth for all its wideness was straitened because of the multitude
of the cavaliers and ears were deafened by drums and cymbals beating and
pipes and hautboys sounding and trumpets blaring and by the thunder of
horse-tramp and the shouting of men. The dust arched in canopy over
their heads and they fought a sore fight from the first of the day till
the fall of darkness, when they separated and each army drew off to its
own camp.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


         Now when it was the Five Hundred and Nineteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that each army drew off
to its own camp. Then King Kafid called the roll of his troops and,
finding that he had lost five thousand men, raged with great rage; and
King Teghmus mustered his men and seeing that of them were slain three
thousand riders, the bravest of his braves, was wroth with exceeding
wrath. On the morrow King Kafid again pushed into the plain and did duty
as before, while each man strave his best to snatch victory for himself;
and Kafid cried out to his men, saying, “Is there any of you will sally
forth into the field and open us the chapter of fray and fight?” And
behold came out from the ranks a warrior named Barkayk, a mighty man of
war who, when he reached the King, alighted from his elephant and
kissing the earth before him, sought of him leave to challenge the foe
to combat singular. Then he mounted his elephant and driving into
mid-field, cried out, “Who is for duello, who is for derring-do, who is
for knightly devoir?” When King Teghmus heard this, he said to his
troops, “Which of you will do single battle with this sworder?” And
behold, a cavalier came out from the ranks, mounted on a charger, mighty
of make, and driving up to the King kissed the earth before him and
craved his permission to engage Barkayk. Then he mounted again and
charged at Barkayk, who said to him, “Who art thou and what art thou
called, that thou makest mock of me by coming out against me and
challenging me, alone?” “My name is Ghazanfar[555] son of Kamkhíl,”
replied the Kabul champion; and the other, “I have heard tell of thee in
my own country; so up and do battle between the ranks of the braves!”
Hearing these words Ghazanfar drew a mace of iron from under his thigh
and Barkayk took his good sword in hand, and they laid on load till
Barkayk smote Ghazanfar on the head with his blade, but the morion
turned the blow and no hurt befel him therefrom; whereupon Ghazanfar, in
his turn, dealt Barkayk so terrible a stroke on the head with his mace,
that he levelled him down to his elephant’s back and slew him. With this
out sallied another and crying to Ghazanfar, “Who be thou that thou
shouldst slay my brother?”; hurled a javelin at him with such force that
it pierced his thigh and nailed his coat of mail to his flesh. Then
Ghazanfar, feeling his hurt, hent his sword in hand and smote at
Barkayk’s brother and cut him in sunder, and he fell to the earth,
wallowing in his life-blood; whilst the challenger of Kabul galloped
back to King Teghmus. Now when Kafid saw the death of his champions, he
cried out to his troops, saying, “Down with you to the plain and strike
with might and main!” as also did King Teghmus, and the two armies
fought the fiercest of fights. Horse neighed against horse and man cried
out upon man and brands were bared, whilst the drums beat and the
trumpets blared; and horseman charged upon horseman and every brave of
renown pushed forward, whilst the faint-heart fled from the lunge of
lance and men heard nought but slogan-cry and the clash and clang of
armoury. Slain were the warriors that were slain[556] and they stayed
not from the mellay till the decline of the sun in the heavenly dome,
when the Kings drew off their armies and returned each to its own
camp.[557] Then King Teghmus took tally of his men and found that he had
lost five thousand, and four standards had been broken to bits, whereat
he was sore an-angered; whilst King Kafid in like manner counted his
troops and found that he had lost six hundred, the bravest of his
braves, and nine standards were wanting to the full tale. The two armies
ceased joining battle and rested on their arms three days’ space, after
which Kafid wrote a letter and sent it by messenger to a King called
Fákun al-Kalb (with whom he claimed kinship by the spindle side): and
this kinsman forthwith mustered his men and marched to meet the King of
Hind.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


         Now when it was the Five Hundred and Twentieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Fakun
mustered his men and marched to meet the King of Hind: and whileas King
Teghmus was sitting at his pleasance, there came one in to him and said,
“I see from afar a cloud of dust spireing high in air and overspreading
the lift.” So he commanded a company to fare forth and learn the meaning
of this; and, crying, “To hear is to obey,” they sallied out and
presently returned and said to him, “O King, when we drew near the cloud
of dust, the wind rent it and it lifted and showed seven standards and
under each standard three thousand horse, making for King Kafid’s camp.”
Then King Fakun joined himself to the King of Hind and saluting him,
asked, “How is it with thee, and what be this war in which thou
warrest?”; and Kafid answered, “Knowest thou not that King Teghmus is my
enemy and the murtherer of my father and brothers? Wherefore I am come
forth to do battle with him and take my blood-wreak on him.” Quoth
Fakun, “The blessing of the sun be upon thee!”; and the King of Hind
carried King Fakun al-Kalb to his tent and rejoiced in him with
exceeding joy. Such was the case of the two hostile Kings; but as
regards King Janshah, he abode two months shut up in his palace, without
seeing his father or allowing one of the damsels in his service to come
in to him; at the end of which time he grew troubled and restless and
said to his attendants, “What aileth my father that he cometh not to
visit me?” They told him that he had gone forth to do battle with King
Kafid, whereupon quoth Janshah, “Bring me my steed, that I may go to my
sire.” They replied, “We hear and obey,” and brought his horse; but he
said in himself, “I am taken up with the thought of myself and my love
and I deem well to mount and ride for the city of the Jews, where haply
Allah shall grant me the boon to meet the merchant who hired me for the
ruby-business and may be he will deal with me as he dealt before, for
none knoweth whence good cometh.” So he took with him a thousand horse
and set out, the folk saying, “At last Janshah hath fared forth to join
his father in the field, and to fight by his side;” and they stinted not
pushing on till dusk, when they halted for the night in a vast meadow.
As soon as he knew that all his men were asleep, the Prince rose privily
and girding his waist, mounted his horse and rode away intending to make
Baghdad, because he had heard from the Jews that a caravan came thence
to their city once in every two years and he made up his mind to journey
thither with the next Cafilah. When his men awoke and missed the Prince
and his horse, they mounted and sought him right and left but, finding
no trace of him, rejoined his father and told him what his son had done;
whereat he was wroth beyond measure and cast the crown from his head,
whilst the sparks were like to fly from his mouth, and he said “There is
no Majesty and there is no Might but in Allah! Verily I have lost my
son, and the enemy is still before me.” But his Wazirs and vassals said
to him, “Patience, O King of the age! Patience bringeth weal in wake.”
Meanwhile Janshah, parted from his lover and pained for his father, was
in sore sorrow and dismay, with heart seared and eyes tear-bleared and
unable to sleep night or day. But when his father heard the loss his
host had endured, he declined battle, and fled before King Kafid; and,
retiring to his city, closed the gates and strengthened the walls.
Thereupon King Kafid followed him and sat down before the town, offering
battle seven nights and eight days, after which he withdrew to his
tents, to tend his wounded while the citizens defended themselves as
they best could, fortifying the place and setting up mangonels and other
engines on the walls. Such was the condition of the two Kings, and war
raged between them for a space of seven years.——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kings Teghmus and
Kafid continued in this condition for seven years; but, as regards
Janshah, he rode through wild and wold and whenever he came to a town he
asked anent Takni, the Castle of Jewels, but none knew of it and all
answered, “Of a truth we never heard of such place, not even by name.”
At last he happened to enquire concerning the city of the Jews from a
merchant who told him that it was situate in the extreme Orient, adding,
“A caravan will start this very month for the city of Mizrakán in Hind;
whither do thou accompany us and we will fare on to Khorasan and thence
to the city of Shima’ún and Khwárazm, from which latter place the City
of the Jews is distant a year and three months’ journey.” So Janshah
waited till the departure of the caravan, when he joined himself thereto
and journeyed, till he reached the city of Mizrakan whence, after vainly
asking for Takni, the Castle of Jewels, he set out and enduring on the
way great hardships and perils galore and the extreme of hunger and
thirst, he arrived at the town of Shima’un. Here he made enquiry for the
City of the Jews, and they directed him to the road thither. So he fared
forth and journeyed days and nights till he came to the place where he
had given the apes the slip, and continued his journey thence to the
river, on the opposite bank of which stood the City of the Jews. He sat
down on the shore and waited till the Sabbath came round and the river
dried up by decree of Allah Almighty, when he crossed over to the
opposite bank and, entering the city, betook himself to the house
wherein he had lodged on his former journey. The Jew and his family
saluted him and rejoiced in his return and, setting meat and drink
before him, asked, “Where hast thou been during thine absence?”; and he
answered, “In the kingdom of Almighty Allah!”[558] He lay with them that
night and on the morrow he went out to solace himself with a walk about
the city and presently heard a crier crying aloud and saying, “O folk,
who will earn a thousand gold pieces and a fair slave-girl and do half a
day’s work for us?” So Janshah went up to him and said, “I will do this
work.”[559] Quoth the crier, “Follow me,” and carrying him to the house
of the Jew merchant, where he had been aforetime, said, “This young man
will do thy need.” The merchant not recognising him gave him welcome and
carried him into the Harim, where he set meat and drink before him, and
he ate and drank. Then he brought him the money and formally made over
to him the handsome slave-girl with whom he lay that night. As soon as
morning dawned, he took the dinars and the damsel and, committing them
to his Jew host with whom he had lodged aforetime, returned to the
merchant, who mounted and rode out with him, till they came to the foot
of the tall and towering mountain, where the merchant, bringing out a
knife and cords, said to Janshah, “Throw the mare.” So he threw her and
bound her four legs with the cords and slaughtered her and cut off her
head and four limbs and slit her belly, as ordered by the Jew; whereupon
quoth he, “Enter her belly, till I sew it up on thee; and whatsoever
thou seest therein, tell me of it, for this is the work whose wage thou
hast taken.” So Janshah entered the mare’s belly and the merchant sewed
it up on him; then, withdrawing to a fair distance, hid himself. And
after an hour a great bird swooped down from the lift and, snatching up
the carcass in his pounces soared high toward the sky. Then he perched
upon the mountain-peak and would have eaten the prey, but Janshah
sensing his intent took out his knife and slit the mare’s belly and came
forth. The bird was scared at his sight and flew away, and Janshah went
up to a place whence he could see below, and looking down, espied the
merchant standing at the foot of the mountain, as he were a sparrow. So
he cried out to him, “What is thy will, O merchant?” Replied the Jew,
“Throw me down of the stones that lie about thee, that I may direct thee
in the way down.” Quoth Janshah, “Thou art he who didst with me thus and
thus five years ago, and through thee I suffered hunger and thirst and
sore toil and much trouble; and now thou hast brought me hither once
more and thinkest to destroy me. By Allah, I will not throw thee aught!”
So saying, he turned from him and set out for where lived Shaykh Nasr,
the King of the Birds.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Janshah took the
way for where lived Shaykh Nasr, the King of the Birds. And he ceased
not faring on many days and nights, tearful-eyed and heavy-hearted;
eating, when he was anhungered, of the growth of the ground and
drinking, when he thirsted, of its streams, till he came in sight of the
Castle of the lord Solomon and saw Shaykh Nasr sitting at the gate. So
he hastened up to him and kissed his hands; and the Shaykh saluted him
and bade him welcome and said to him, “O my son, what aileth thee that
thou returnest to this place, after I sent thee home with the Princess
Shamsah, cool of eyes and broad of breast?” Janshah wept and told him
all that had befallen him and how she had flown away from him, saying,
“An thou love me, come to me in Takni, the Castle of Jewels;” at which
the old man marvelled and said, “By Allah, O my son, I know it not, nor,
by the virtue of our lord Solomon, have I ever in my life heard its
name!” Quoth Janshah, “What shall I do? I am dying of love and longing.”
Quoth Shaykh Nasr, “Take patience until the coming of the birds, when we
will enquire at them of Takni, the Castle of Jewels; haply one of them
shall wot thereof.” So Janshah’s heart was comforted and, entering the
Palace, he went straight to the chamber which gave upon the Lake in
which he had seen the three maidens. After this he abode with Shaykh
Nasr for a while and, one day as he was sitting with him, the Shaykh
said, “O my son, rejoice for the time of the birds’ coming draweth
nigh.” Janshah gladdened to hear the news; and after a few days the
birds began to come and Shaykh Nasr said to him, “O my son, learn these
names[560] and address thyself with me to meet the birds.” Presently,
the fowls came flying up and saluted Shaykh Nasr, kind after kind, and
he asked them of Takni, the Castle of Jewels, but they all made answer,
“Never heard we of such a place.” At these words Janshah wept and
lamented till he swooned away; whereupon Shaykh Nasr called a huge
volatile and said to him, “Carry this youth to the land of Kabul,” and
described to him the country and the way thither. Then he set Janshah on
the bird’s back, saying, “Be careful to sit straight and beware of
leaning to either side, else thou wilt be torn to pieces in the air; and
stop thine ears from the wind, lest thou be dazed by the noise of the
revolving sphere and the roaring of the seas.” Janshah resolved to do
his bidding and the bird took flight high in sky and flew with him a day
and a night, till he set him down by the King of the Beasts, whose name
was Sháh Badrí, and said to his rider, “We have gone astray from the way
directed by Shaykh Nasr.” And he would have taken him up again and flown
on with him; but Janshah said, “Go thy ways and leave me here; till I
die on this spot or I find Takni, the Castle of Jewels, I will not
return to my country.” So the fowl left him with Shah Badri, King of the
Beasts and flew away. The King thereupon said to him, “O my son, who art
thou and whence comest thou with yonder great bird?” So Janshah told him
his story from beginning to end, whereat Shah Badri marvelled and said,
“By the virtue of the lord Solomon, I know not of this castle; but if
any one of the beasts my subjects know it, we will reward him
bountifully and send thee by him thither.” Hereat Janshah wept bitterly
but presently he took patience and abode with Shah Badri, and after a
short time the King of the Beasts said to him, “O my son, take these
tablets and commit to memory that which is therein; and when the beasts
come, we will question them of the Castle of Jewels.”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King of
the Beasts said to Janshah, “Commit to memory what is in these tablets;
and whenas the beasts come, we will ask them anent that castle.” He did
as the King bade him, and before long, up came the beasts, kind after
kind, and saluted Shah Badri, who questioned them of Takni, the Castle
of Jewels; but they all replied, “We know not this castle, nor ever
heard we of it.” At this Janshah wept and lamented for that he had not
gone with the bird that brought him from Shaykh Nasr’s castle; but Shah
Badri said to him, “Grieve not, O my son, for I have a brother, King
Shimákh hight, who is older than I; he was once a prisoner to King
Solomon, for that he rebelled against him; nor is there among the Jinn
one elder than he and Shaykh Nasr. Belike he knoweth of this castle; at
any rate he ruleth over all the Jinn in this country side.” So saying he
set Janshah on the back of a beast and gave him a letter to his brother,
commending him to his care. The beast set off with the Prince forthwith
and fared on days and nights, till it came to King Shimakh’s abiding
place. And when it caught sight of the King it stood still afar off;
whereupon Janshah alighted and walked on, till he found himself in the
presence. Then he kissed hands and presented his brother’s letter. The
King read the missive and, having mastered the meaning, welcomed the
Prince, saying, “By Allah, O my son, in all my born days I never saw nor
heard of this castle!” adding (as Janshah burst into tears), “but tell
me thy story and who and whence thou art and whither thou art bound.” So
Janshah related to him his history from beginning to end, at which
Shimakh marvelled and said, “O my son, I do not believe that even the
lord Solomon ever saw this castle or heard thereof; but O my son,[561] I
know a monk in the mountains, who is exceeding old and whom all birds
and beasts and Jann obey; for he ceased not his conjurations against the
Kings of the Jann, till they submitted themselves to him in their own
despite, by reason of the might of his oaths and his magic; and now all
the birds and the beasts are his servants. I myself once rebelled
against King Solomon and he sent against me this monk, the only being
who could overcome me with his craft and his conjurations and his
gramarye; then he imprisoned me, and since that time I have been his
vassal. He hath travelled in all countries and quarters and knoweth all
ways and regions and places and castles and cities; nor do I think there
is any place hidden from his ken. So needs must I send thee to him,
haply he may direct thee to the Castle of Jewels; and, if he cannot do
this, none can; for all things obey him, birds and beasts and the very
mountains and come at his beck and call, by reason of his skill in
magic. Moreover, by the might of his egromancy he hath made a staff, in
three pieces, and this he planteth in the earth and conjureth over it;
whereupon flesh and blood issue from the first piece, sweet milk from
the second and wheat and barley from the third; then he withdraweth the
staff and returneth to his place which is hight the Hermitage of
Diamonds. And this magical monk is a cunning inventor and artificer of
all manner strange works; and he is a crafty warlock full of guiles and
wiles, an arch-deceiver of wondrous wickedness, who hath mastered every
kind of magic and witchcraft. His name is Yaghmús and to him I must
needs send thee on the back of a big bird with four wings”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shimakh said to
Janshah, “I must needs send thee to the monk Yaghmus on the back of a
big bird with four wings, each measuring thirty Háshimi[562] cubits in
length; and it hath feet like those of an elephant, but it flieth only
twice a year.” And there was with King Shimakh an officer, by name
Timshún, who used every day to carry off two Bactrian[563] camels from
the land of Irak and cut them up for the bird that it might eat them. So
King Shimakh bade the fowl take up Janshah and bear him to the cell of
the hermit Yaghmus; and it rose into the air and flew on days and
nights, till it came to the Mountain of the Citadels and the Hermitage
of Diamonds; where Janshah alighted and going up to the hermitage, found
Yaghmus the Monk at his devotions. So he entered the chapel and, kissing
the ground stood respectfully before the hermit. When Yaghmus saw him,
he said, “Welcome, O my son, O parted from thy home and garred ferforth
to roam! Tell me the cause of thy coming hither.” So Janshah wept and
acquainted him with all that had befallen him from beginning to end and
that he was in quest of the Castle of Jewels. The Monk marvelled greatly
at his story and said, “By Allah, O my son, never in my life heard I of
this castle, nor ever saw I one who had heard of it or had seen it, for
all I was alive in the days of Noah, Allah’s Prophet (on whom be
peace!),[564] and I have ruled the birds and beasts and Jinn ever since
his time; nor do I believe that Solomon David-son himself knew of it.
But wait till the birds and beasts and chiefs of the Jann come to do
their homage to me and I will question them of it; peradventure, some
one of them may be able to give us news of it and Allah Almighty shall
make all things easy to thee.” So Janshah homed with the hermit, until
the day of the assembly, when all the birds and beasts and Jann came to
swear fealty; and Yaghmus and his guest questioned them anent Takni, the
Castle of Jewels; but they all replied, “We never saw or heard of such a
place.” At this, Janshah fell a-weeping and lamenting and humbled
himself before the Most High; but, as he was thus engaged, behold, there
flew down from the heights of air another bird, big of bulk and black of
blee, which had tarried behind the rest, and kissed the hermit’s hands.
Yaghmus asked it of Takni, the Castle of Jewels, and it answered,
saying, “O Monk, when I and my brothers were small chicks we abode
behind the Mountain Kaf on a hill of crystal, in the midst of a great
desert; and our father and mother used to set out for it every morning
and in the evening come back with our food. They went out early one day,
and were absent from us a se’nnight and hunger was sore upon us; but on
the eighth day they returned, both weeping, and we asked them the reason
of their absence. Quoth they:—A Marid swooped down on us and carried us
off in his claws to Takni, the Castle of Jewels, and brought us before
King Shahlán, who would have slain us; but we told him that we had left
behind us a brood of fledgelings; so he spared our lives and let us go.
And were my parents yet in the bonds of life they would give thee news
of the castle.” When Janshah heard this, he wept bitter tears and said
to the hermit, “Prithee bid the bird carry me to his father and mother’s
nest on the crystal hill, behind the Mountain Kaf.” So the hermit said,
“O bird, I desire thee to obey this youth in whatsoever he may command
thee.” “I hear and obey thy bidding,” replied the fowl; and, taking
Janshah on its back, flew with him days and nights without ceasing till
it set him down on the Hill of Crystal and there alighted. And having
delayed there a resting while, it again set him on its back and flew off
and ceased not flying for two whole days till it reached the spot where
the nest was.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

[Illustration]


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the fowl ceased
not flying with Janshah two full days; till it reached the spot where
the nest was, and set him down there and said, “O Janshah, this is where
our nest was.” He wept sore and replied, “I pray thee bear me farther on
to where thy parents used to forage for food.” The bird consented; so it
took him up again and flew on with him seven nights and eight days, till
it set him down on the top of a high hill Karmús hight and left him
there saying, “I know of no land behind this hill.” Then it flew away
and Janshah sat down on the hill-top and fell asleep. When he awoke, he
saw a something gleaming afar off as it were lightning and filling the
firmament with its flashings; and he wondered what this sheen could be
without wotting that it was the Castle he sought. So he descended the
mountain and made towards the light, which came from Takni, the Castle
of Jewels, distant two months’ journey from Karmús, the hill whereon he
had alit and its foundations were fashioned of red rubies and its
buildings of yellow gold. Moreover, it had a thousand turrets builded of
precious metals, and stones of price studded and set in the minerals
brought from the Main of Murks, and on this account it was named the
Castle of Jewels, Takni. It was a vast great castle and the name of its
king was King Shahlan, the father of the lady Shamsah and her sisters.
Such was the case with Janshah; but as regards Princess Shamsah, when
she fled from Janshah, she made straight for the Castle of Jewels and
told her father and mother all that had passed between the Prince and
herself; how he had wandered the world and seen its marvels and wonders
and how fondly he loved her and how dearly she loved him. Quoth they,
“Thou hast not dealt righteously with him, as Allah would have thee
deal.” Moreover King Shahlan repeated the story to his guards and
officers of the Marids of the Jinn and bade them bring him every mortal
they should see. For the lady Shamsah had said to her parents, “Janshah
loveth me with passionate love and forsure he will follow me; for when
flying from his father’s roof I cried to him:—An thou love me, seek me
at Takni, the Castle of Jewels!” Now when Janshah beheld that sheen and
shine, he made straight for it wishing to find out what it might be. And
as chance would have it, Shamsah had that very day despatched a Marid on
an occasion in the direction of the hill Karmus, and on his way thither
he caught sight of a man, a mortal; so he hastened up to him and saluted
him. Janshah was terrified at his sight, but returned his salam, and the
Marid asked, “What is thy name?” and he answered, “My name is Janshah,
and I have fallen madly in love with a Jinniyah known as Princess
Shamsah, who captivated me by her beauty and loveliness; but despite my
dear love she fled from the palace wherein I placed her and behold, I am
here in quest of her.” Herewith he wept with bitter weeping. The Marid
looked at him and his heart burned with pity on hearing the sad tale,
and he said, “Weep not, for surely thou art come to thy desire. Know
that she loveth thee fondly and hath told her parents of thy love for
her, and all in yonder castle love thee for her sake; so be of good
cheer and keep thine eyes cool of tear.” Then he took him on his
shoulders and made off with him to the Castle of Jewels, Takni.
Thereupon the bearers of fair tidings hastened to report his coming and
when the news reached Shamsah and her father and mother, they all
rejoiced with exceeding joy, and King Shahlan took horse and rode out,
commanding all his guards and Ifrits and Marids honourably to meet the
Prince.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Shahlan
commanded all his guards and Ifrits and Marids to meet the Prince; and,
as soon as he came up with him, he dismounted and embraced him, and
Janshah kissed his hand. Then Shahlan bade put on him a robe of honour
of many-coloured silk, laced with gold and set with jewels, and a
coronet such as man never saw, and, mounting him on a splendid mare of
the steeds of the Kings of the Jinn, took horse himself and, with an
immense retinue riding on the right hand and the left, brought him in
great state to the Castle. Janshah marvelled at the splendour of this
edifice, with its walls builded of rubies and other jewels and its
pavement of crystal and jasper and emerald, and fell a-weeping at the
memory of his past miseries; but the King and Queen, Shamsah’s mother,
wiped away his tears and said, “Now no more weeping and be of good
cheer, for thou hast won to thy will.” Then Shahlan carried him into the
inner court of the Castle, where he was received by a multitude of
beautiful damsels and pages and black Jinn-slaves, who seated him in the
place of honour and stood to do him service, whilst he was lost in
amazement at the goodliness of the place, and its walls all edified of
precious metals and jewels of price. Presently King Shahlan repaired to
his hall of audience, where he sat down on his throne and, bidding the
slave-girls and the pages introduce the Prince, rose to receive him and
seated him by his side on the throne. Then he ordered the tables to be
spread and they ate and drank and washed their hands; after which in
came the Queen Shamsah’s mother, and saluting Janshah, bade him welcome
in these words, “Thou hast come to thy desire after weariness and thine
eyes shall now sleep after watching; so praised be Allah for thy
safety!” Thus saying, she went away and forthwith returned with the
Princess Shamsah, who saluted Janshah and kissed his hands, hanging her
head in shame and confusion before him and her parents; after which as
many of her sisters as were in the palace came up to him and greeted him
in like manner. Then quoth the Queen to him, “Welcome, O my son, our
daughter Shamsah hath indeed sinned against thee, but do thou pardon her
misdeed for our sakes.” When Janshah heard this, he cried out and fell
down fainting, whereat the King marvelled and they sprinkled on his face
rose-water mingled with musk and civet, till he came to himself and,
looking at Princess Shamsah, said, “Praised be Allah who hath brought me
to my desire and hath quenched the fire of my heart!” Replied she, “May
He preserve thee from the Fire!; but now tell me, O Janshah, what hath
befallen thee since our parting and how thou madest thy way to this
place; seeing that few even of the Jann ever heard of Takni, the Castle
of Jewels; and we are independent of all the Kings nor any wotteth the
road hither.” Thereupon he related to her every adventure and peril and
hardship he had suffered and how he had left his father at war with King
Kafid, ending with these words, “And all for thy sake, my lady Shamsah!”
Quoth the Queen, “Now hast thou thy heart’s desire, for the Princess is
thy handmaid, and we give her in free gift to thee.” Janshah joyed
exceedingly at these words and the Queen added, “Next month, if it be
the will of Almighty Allah, we will have a brave wedding and celebrate
the marriage festival and after the knot is tied we will send you both
back to thy native land, with an escort of a thousand Marids of our
body-guard, the least of whom, an thou bid him slay King Kafid and his
folk, would surely destroy them to the last man in the twinkling of an
eye. Furthermore if it please thee we will send thee, year after year, a
company of which each and every can so do with all thy foes.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the lady
Shamsah’s mother ended with saying, “And if it so please thee we will
send thee, year after year, a company of which each and every can
destroy thy foes to the last man.” Then King Shahlan sat down on his
throne and, summoning his grandees and officers of state, bade them make
ready for the marriage-festivities and decorate the city seven days and
nights. “We hear and we obey,” answered they and busied themselves two
months in the preparations, after which they celebrated the marriage of
the Prince and Princess and held a mighty festival, never was there its
like. Then they brought Janshah in to his bride and he abode with her in
all solace of life and delight for two years, at the end of which time
he said to her, “Thy father promised to send us to my native land, that
we might pass one year there and the next here.” Answered she, “I hear
and obey,” and going in to King Shahlan at nightfall told him what the
Prince had said. Quoth he, “I consent; but have patience with me till
the first of the month, that I may make ready for your departure.” She
repeated these words to her husband and they waited till the appointed
time, when the King bade his Marids bring out to them a great litter of
red gold, set with pearls and jewels and covered with a canopy of green
silk, purfled in a profusion of colours and embroidered with precious
stones, dazzling with its goodliness the eyes of every beholder. He
chose out four of his Marids to carry the litter in whichever of the
four quarters the riders might choose. Moreover, he gave his daughter
three hundred beautiful damsels to wait upon her and bestowed on Janshah
the like number of white slaves of the sons of the Jinn. Then the lady
Shamsah took formal leave of her mother and sisters and all her kith and
kin; and her father fared forth with them. So the four Marids took up
the litter, each by one corner, and rising under it like birds in air,
flew onward with it between earth and heaven till midday, when the King
bade them set it down and all alighted. Then they took leave of one
another and King Shahlan commended Shamsah to the Prince’s care, and
giving them in charge to the Marids, returned to the Castle of Jewels,
whilst the Prince and Princess remounted the litter, and the Marids
taking it up, flew on for ten whole days, in each of which they
accomplished thirty months’ journey, till they sighted the capital of
King Teghmus. Now one of them knew the land of Kabul; so when he saw the
city, he bade the others let down the litter at that populous place
which was the capital.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Marid-guards
let down the litter at the capital of King Teghmus who had been routed
and had fled from his foes into the city, where he was in sore straits,
King Kafid having laid close siege to him. He sought to save himself by
making peace with the King of Hind, but his enemy would give him no
quarter; so seeing himself without resource or means of relief, he
determined to strangle himself and to die and be at rest from this
trouble and misery. Accordingly he bade his Wazirs and Emirs farewell
and entered his house to take leave of his Harim; and the whole realm
was full of weeping and wailing and lamentation and woe. And whilst this
rout and hurly-burly was enacting, behold, the Marids descended with the
litter upon the palace that was in the citadel, and Janshah bade them
set it down in the midst of the Divan. They did his bidding and he
alighted with his company of handmaids and Mamelukes; and, seeing all
the folk of the city in straits and desolation and sore distress, said
to the Princess, “O love of my heart and coolth of mine eyes, look in
what a piteous plight is my sire!” Thereupon she bade the Marid-guard
fall upon the beleaguering host and slay them, saying, “Kill ye all,
even to the last man;” and Janshah commanded one of them, by name
Karátash,[565] who was exceeding strong and valiant, to bring King Kafid
to him in chains. So they set down the litter and covered it with the
canopy; then, having waited till midnight, they attacked the enemy’s
camp one of them being a match for ten; or at least for eight. And while
these smote the foes with iron maces, those mounted their magical
elephants and soared high in the lift, and then swooping down and
snatching up their opponents, tare them to pieces in mid-air. But
Karatash made straight for Kafid’s tent where he found him lying in a
couch; so he took him up, shrieking for fear, and flew with him to
Janshah, who bade the four Marids bind him on the litter and hang him
high in the air over his camp, that he might witness the slaughter of
his men. They did as the Prince commanded them and left Kafid, who had
swooned for fear, hanging between earth and air and buffetting his face
for grief. As for King Teghmus, when he saw his son, he well-nigh died
for excess of joy and, crying with a loud cry, fell down in a swoon.
They sprinkled rose-water on his face, till he came to himself, when he
and his son embraced and wept with sore weeping; for he knew not that
the Jinn-guard were battling with King Kafid’s men. Then Princess
Shamsah accosted the King and kissing his hand, said to him, “Sire, be
pleased to go up with me to the palace-roof and witness the slaughter of
thy foes by my father’s Marids.” So he went up to the terrace-roof and
sitting down there with his daughter-in-law, enjoyed watching the Marids
do havoc among the besiegers and break a way through the length and
breadth of them. For one of them smote with his iron mace upon the
elephants and their riders and pounded them till man was not to be
distinguished from beast; whilst another shouted in the faces of those
who fled, so that they fell down dead; and the third caught up a score
of horsemen, beasts and all; and, towering with them high in air, cast
them down on earth, so that they were torn in pieces. And this was high
enjoyment for Janshah and his father and the lady Shamsah.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

[Illustration]


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Teghmus and
his son and daughter-in-law went up to the terrace-roof and enjoyed a
prospect of the Jinn-guards battling with the beleaguering host. And
King Kafid (still hanging between heaven and earth) also saw the
slaughter of his troops and wept sore and buffetted his face; nor did
the carnage cease among the army of Hind for two whole days, till they
were cut off even to the last man. Then Janshah commanded a Marid, by
name Shimwál, chain up King Kafid with manacles and fetters, and
imprison him in a tower called the Black Bulwark. And when his bidding
was done, King Teghmus bade beat the drums and despatched messengers to
announce the glad news to Janshah’s mother, informing her of his
approach; whereupon she mounted in great joy and she no sooner espied
her son than she clasped him in her arms and swooned away for stress of
gladness. They sprinkled rose-water on her face, till she came to
herself, when she embraced him again and again wept for excess of joy.
And when the lady Shamsah knew of her coming, she came to her and
saluted her; and they embraced each other and after remaining embraced
for an hour sat down to converse. Then King Teghmus threw open the
city-gates and despatched couriers to all parts of the kingdom, to
spread the tidings of his happy deliverance; whereupon all his princely
Vassals and Emirs and the Grandees of the realm flocked to salute him
and give him joy of his victory and of the safe return of his son; and
they brought him great store of rich offerings and curious presents. The
visits and oblations continued for some time, after which the King made
a second and a more splendid bride-feast for the Princess Shamsah and
bade decorate the city and held high festival. Lastly they unveiled and
paraded the bride before Janshah, with apparel and ornaments of the
utmost magnificence, and when her bridegroom went in to her he presented
her with an hundred beautiful slave-girls to wait upon her. Some days
after this, the Princess repaired to the King and interceded with him
for Kafid, saying, “Suffer him return to his own land, and if
henceforward he be minded to do thee a hurt, I will bid one of the
Jinn-guard snatch him up and bring him to thee.” Replied Teghmus, “I
hear and I obey,” and bade Shimwal bring him the prisoner, who came
manacled and fettered and kissed earth between his hands. Then he
commanded to strike off his chains and, mounting him on a lame mare,
said to him, “Verily Princess Shamsah hath interceded for thee: so
begone to thy kingdom, but if thou fall again to thine old tricks, she
will send one of the Marids to seize thee and bring thee hither.”
Thereupon King Kafid set off homewards, in the sorriest of plights,——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Five Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Kafid set off
homewards in the sorriest of plights, whilst Janshah and his wife abode
in all solace and delight of life, making the most of its joyance and
happiness. All this recounted the youth sitting between the tombs unto
Bulukiya, ending with, “And behold, I am Janshah who witnessed all these
things, O my brother, O Bulukiya!” Then Bulukiya who was wandering the
world in his love for Mohammed (whom Allah bless and keep!) asked
Janshah, “O my brother, what be these two sepulchres and why sittest
thou between them and what causeth thy weeping?” He answered, “Know, O
Bulukiya, that we abode in all solace and delight of life, passing one
year at home and the next at Takni, the Castle of Jewels, whither we
betook not ourselves but in the litter borne by the Marids and flying
between heaven and earth.” Quoth Bulukiya, “O my brother, O Janshah,
what was the distance between the Castle and thy home?” Quoth he, “Every
day we accomplished a journey of thirty months and the time we took was
ten days. We abode on this wise a many of years till, one year we set
out for the Castle of Jewels, as was our wont, and on the way thither
alighted from the litter in this island to rest and take our pleasure
therein. We sat down on the river-bank and ate and drank; after which
the Lady Shamsah, having a mind to bathe, put off her clothes and
plunged into the water. Her women did likewise and they swam about
awhile, whilst I walked on along the bank of the stream leaving them to
swim about and play with one another. And behold, a huge shark of the
monsters of the deep seized the Princess by the leg, without touching
any of the girls; and she cried out and died forthright, whilst the
damsels fled out of the river to the pavilion, to escape from the shark.
But after awhile they returned and taking up her corpse carried her to
the litter. Now when I saw her dead, I fell down fainting and they
sprinkled water on my face, till I recovered and wept over her. Then I
despatched the Jinn-guards to her parents and family, announcing what
had befallen her; and in the shortest time they came to the spot and
washed her and shrouded her; after which they buried her by the
river-side and made mourning for her. They would have carried me with
them to their own country; but I said to King Shahlan, “I beseech thee
to dig me a grave beside her tomb, that, when I die, I may be buried by
her side in that grave.” Accordingly, the King commanded one of his
Marids to do as I wished, after which they departed and left me here to
weep and mourn for her till I die. And this is my story and the cause of
my sojourn between these two tombs.” And he repeated these two
couplets:[566]—

 “The house, sweet heart, is now no home to me ✿ Since thou art gone, nor
    neighbour neighbourly.
 The friend whilome I took to heart, no more ✿ Is friend, and brightest
    lights lose brilliancy.”

But when Bulukiya heard out Janshah’s tale he marvelled——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Bulukiya
heard out Janshah’s tale he wondered and exclaimed, “By Allah, methought
I had indeed wandered over the world and compassed it about; but now I
forget all I have seen after listening to these adventures of thine!” He
was silent a while and then resumed, “I beg thee, of thy favour and
courtesy, to direct me in the way of safety.” So Janshah directed him
into the right road, and Bulukiya farewelled him and went his ways. All
this the Serpent-queen related to Hasib Karim al-Din, and he asked her,
“But how knowest thou of these things?”; and she answered, “O Hasib,
thou must ken that I had occasion, some five-and-twenty years ago, to
send one of my largest serpents to Egypt and gave her a letter for
Bulukiya, saluting him.” So she went there willingly for she had a
daughter in the land called Bint Shumukh[567]; and after asking anent
Bulukiya she found him and gave him my missive. He read it and replied
to the messenger snake, “Thou comest from the Queen of the Serpents whom
I am minded to visit for I have an occasion to her.” She replied, “I
hear and obey.” Then she bore him to her daughter of whom she took leave
and said to her companion, “Close thine eyes.” So he closed them and
opening them again, behold, he found himself on the mountain where I now
am. Then his guide carried him to a great serpent, whom he saluted;
whereupon quoth she, “Didst thou deliver the missive to Bulukiya?”; and
she replied, “Even so; and he hath accompanied me and here he standeth.”
Presently Bulukiya asked after me, the Serpent-queen, and the great
serpent answered, “She hath gone to the mountain Kaf with all her host,
as is her wont in winter; but next summer she will come hither again. As
often as she goeth thither, she appointeth me to reign in her room,
during her absence; and if thou have any occasion to her, I will
accomplish it for thee.” Said he, “I beg thee to bring me the herb,
which whoso crusheth and drinketh the juice thereof, sickeneth not
neither groweth grey nor dieth.” “I will not bring it,” said the
serpent, “till thou tell me what befel thee since thou leftest the Queen
of the Serpents, to go with Affan in quest of King Solomon’s tomb.” So
he related to her all his travels and adventures, together with the
history of Janshah, and said at last, “Grant me my request, that I may
return to mine own country.” Replied the serpent, “By the virtue of the
lord Solomon, I know not where is to be found the herb whereof thou
speakest.” Then she bade the serpent which had brought him thither,
carry him back to Egypt: so the messenger obeyed her and said to him,
“Shut thine eyes!” He did so and, opening them again, found himself on
the mountain Mukattam.[568] “When I returned from the mountain Kaf”
(added the Queen) “the serpent, my deputy, informed me of Bulukiya’s
visit and gave me his salutations and repeated to me his story and his
meeting with Janshah. And this, O Hasib, is how I came to know the
adventures of Bulukiya and the history of Janshah.” Thereupon Hasib said
to her, “O Queen, deign recount to me what befel Bulukiya as regards his
return to Egypt.” She replied, “Know, O Hasib, that when he parted from
Janshah he fared on nights and days till he came to a great sea; so he
anointed his feet with the juice of the magical herb and, walking over
the face of the waters, sped onwards till he came to an island abounding
in trees and springs and fruits, as it were the Garden of Eden. He
landed and walked about, till he saw an immense tree, with leaves as big
as the sails of a ship. So he went up to the tree and found under it a
table spread with all manner meats, whilst on a branch of the branches
sat a great bird, whose body was of pearls and leek-green emeralds, its
feet of silver, its beak of red carnelian and its plumery of precious
metals; and it was engaged in singing the praises of Allah the Most High
and blessing Mohammed (on whom be benediction and peace!)”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Bulukiya
landed and walked about the island he found therein many marvels,
especially a bird whose body was of pearls and leek-green emeralds and
its plumery of precious metals; and it was engaged in singing the
praises of Allah the Most High and blessing Mohammed (upon whom be
benediction and peace!). Seeing this he said, “Who and what art thou?”
Quoth the bird, “I am one of the birds of Eden and followed Adam when
Allah Almighty cast him out thence. And know, O my brother, that Allah
also cast out with him four leaves of the trees of the garden, to cover
his nakedness withal, and they fell to the ground after awhile. One of
them was eaten by a worm, and of it came silk: the gazelles ate the
second and thence proceeded musk; the third was eaten by bees and gave
rise to honey, whilst the fourth fell in the land of Hind and from it
sprang all manner of spices. As for me, I wandered over the face of
earth till Allah deigned give me this island for a dwelling-place, and I
took up my abode here. And every Friday from night till morning the
Saints and Princes[569] of the Faith flock to this place and make pious
visitation and eat from this table spread by Allah Almighty; and after
they have eaten, the table is taken up again to Heaven: nor doth the
food ever waste or corrupt.” So Bulukiya ate his fill of the meats and
praised the Great Creator. And presently, behold, there came up
Al-Khizr[570] (with whom be peace!), at sight of whom Bulukiya rose and
saluting him, was about to withdraw, when the bird said to him, “Sit, O
Bulukiya, in the presence of Al-Khizr, on whom be peace!” So he sat down
again, and Al-Khizr said to him, “Let me know who thou art and tell me
thy tale.” Thereupon Bulukiya related to him all his adventures from
beginning to end and asked, “O my lord, how far is it hence to Cairo?”
“Five-and-ninety years’ journey,” replied the Prophet; whereupon
Bulukiya burst into tears; then, falling at Al-Khizr’s feet, kissed them
and said to him, “I beseech thee deliver me from this strangerhood and
thy reward be with Allah, for that I am nigh upon death and know not
what to do.” Quoth Al-Khizr, “Pray to Allah Almighty that He permit me
to carry thee to Cairo, ere thou perish.” So Bulukiya wept and humbled
himself before Allah who granted his prayer, and by inspiration bade
Al-Khizr bear him to his people. Then said the Prophet, “Lift thy head,
for Allah hath heard thy prayer and hath inspired me to do what thou
desirest; so take fast hold of me with both thy hands and shut thine
eyes.” The Prince did as he was bidden and Al-Khizr stepped a single
step forwards, then said to him, “Open thine eyes!” So Bulukiya opened
his eyes and found himself at the door of his palace at Cairo. He
turned, to take leave of Al-Khizr, but found no trace of him——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Bulukiya,
standing at the gate of his palace, turned to take leave of Al-Khizr, he
found no trace of him and entered the palace. When his mother saw him,
she cried with a loud cry and swooned away for excess of joy, and they
sprinkled water upon her face. After awhile she came to herself and
embraced her son and wept with sore weeping, whilst Bulukiya wept and
laughed by turns. Then all his friends and kindred came and gave him joy
of his safe return, and the news was noised abroad in the land and there
came to him presents from all parts. Moreover, they beat the drums and
blew the flutes and rejoiced mightily. Then Bulukiya related to them his
adventures ending with recounting how Al-Khizr had set him down at his
palace-door, whereat they marvelled exceedingly and wept, till all were
aweary of weeping. Hasib wondered at the Queen’s tale and shed many
tears over it; then he again besought her to let him return to his
family; but she said, “I fear me, O Hasib, that when thou gettest back
to thy country thou wilt fail of thy promise and prove traitor to thine
oath and enter the Hammam.” But he swore to her another solemn oath that
he would never again enter the baths as long as he lived; whereupon she
called a serpent and bade her carry him up to the surface of the earth.
So the serpent took him and led him from place to place, till she
brought him out on the platform-edge of an abandoned cistern and there
left him. Upon this he walked to the city and, coming to his house by
the last of the day, at the yellowing of the sun, knocked at the door.
His mother opened it and seeing her son screamed out and threw herself
upon him and wept for excess of joy. His wife heard her mother-in-law
weeping; so she came out to her and seeing her husband, saluted him and
kissed his hands; and each rejoiced in other with exceeding joy of all
three. Then they entered the house and sat down to converse; and
presently Hasib asked his mother of the woodcutters, who had left him to
perish in the cistern. Quoth she, “They came and told me that a wolf had
eaten thee in the Wady. As for them, they are become merchants and own
houses and shops, and the world is grown wide for them. But every day
they bring me meat and drink, and thus have they done until the present
time.” Quoth Hasib, “To-morrow do thou go to them and say:—My son Hasib
Karim al-Din hath returned from his travels; so come ye to meet him and
salute him.” Accordingly, when morning dawned, she repaired to the
woodcutters’ houses and delivered to them her son’s message, which when
they heard, they changed colour, and saying, “We hear and obey,” gave
her each a suit of silk, embroidered with gold, adding, “Present this to
thy good son[571] and tell him that we will be with him to-morrow.” She
assented and returning to Hasib gave him their presents and message.
Meanwhile, the woodcutters called together a number of merchants and,
acquainting them with all that had passed between themselves and Hasib,
took counsel with them what they should do. Quoth the merchants, “It
behoveth each one of you to give him half his monies and Mamelukes.” And
they all agreed to do this; so on the next day, each of them took half
his wealth and, going in to Hasib, saluted him and kissed his hands.
Then they laid before him what they had brought, saying, “This is of thy
bounties, and we are in thy hands.” He accepted their peace-offering and
said, “What is past is past: that which befel us was decreed of Allah,
and destiny doeth away with dexterity.” Quoth they, “Come, let us walk
about and take our solace in the city and visit the Hammam.” Quoth he,
“Not so: I have taken an oath never again to enter the baths, so long as
I live.” Rejoined they, “At least come to our homes that we may
entertain thee.” He agreed to this, and went to their houses and each of
them entertained him for a night and a day; nor did they cease to do
thus for a whole se’nnight, being seven in number. And now Hasib was
master of monies and houses and shops, and the merchants of the city
foregathered with him and he told them all that had befallen him. He
became one of the chiefs of the guild and abode on this wise awhile,
till it happened one day, as he was walking about the streets, that he
passed the door of a Hammam, whose keeper was one of his companions.
When the bathman, who was standing without, caught his eye he ran up to
him and saluted him and embraced him, saying, “Favour me by entering the
bath and there wash and be rubbed that I may show thee hospitality.”
Hasib refused, alleging that he had taken a solemn oath never again to
enter the Hammam; but the bathman was instant with him, saying, “Be my
three wives triply divorced, an thou enter not and be washed!” When
Hasib heard him thus conjure him, he was confounded and replied, “O my
brother, hast thou a mind to ruin my house and make my children orphans
and lay a load of sin upon my neck?” But his friend threw himself at his
feet and kissed them, saying, “My happiness dependeth upon thy entering,
and be the sin on the neck of me!” Then all the servants of the bath set
upon Hasib and dragging him in pulled off his clothes. But hardly had he
sat down against the wall and begun to pour water on his head when a
score of men accosted him, saying, “Rise, O man, and come with us to the
Sultan, for thou art his debtor.” Then they despatched one of them as
messenger to the Sultan’s Minister, who straightway took horse and rode,
attended by threescore Mamelukes, to the baths, where he alighted and
going in to Hasib, saluted him and said, “Welcome to thee!” Then he gave
the bathman an hundred dinars and, mounting Hasib on a horse he had
brought with him, returned with him and all his men to the Sultan’s
palace. Here he bade them aid Hasib to dismount and, after seating him
comfortably, set food before him; and when they had eaten and drunken
and washed their hands, the Wazir clad him in two dresses of honour each
worth five thousand dinars and said to him, “Know that Allah hath been
merciful to us in sending thee; for the Sultan is nigh upon death by
leprosy, and the books tell us that his life is in thy hands.” Then,
accompanied by a host of Grandees, he took him wondering withal and
carried him through the seven doorways of the palace, till they came to
the King’s chamber. Now the name of this King was Karazdán, King of
Persia and of the Seven Countries, and under his sway were an hundred
sovereign princes sitting on chairs of red gold, and ten thousand
valiant captains, under each one’s hand an hundred deputies and as many
headsmen armed with sword and axe. They found the King lying on his bed
with his face swathed in a napkin, and groaning for excess of pain. When
Hasib saw this ordinance, his wit was dazed for awe of the King; so he
kissed the ground before him, and prayed a blessing on him. Then the
Grand Wazir, whose name was Shamhúr, rose and welcoming Hasib, seated
him on a high chair at the King’s right hand;——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir Shamhur
rose to Hasib and seated him on a chair at the right hand of King
Karazdan; after which he called for food and the tables were laid. And
when they had eaten and drunken and washed their hands, Shamhur stood up
(while all present also stood to do him honour) and, approaching Hasib
said to him, “We are all thy servants and will give thee whatsoever thou
askest, even were it one half the kingdom, so thou wilt but cure the
King.” Saying this, he led him by the hand to the royal couch, and
Hasib, uncovering the King’s face, saw that he was at last fatal stage
of the disease; so he wondered at their hoping for a cure. But the Wazir
kissed his hand and repeated his offers and ended with saying, “All we
want of thee is to heal our King:” so he said to the Wazir, “True that I
am the son of Allah’s prophet, Daniel, but I know nothing of his art:
for they put me thirty days in the school of medicine and I learnt
nothing of the craft. I would well I knew somewhat thereof and might
heal the King.” Hearing this, the Grand Wazir said, “Do not multiply
words upon us; for though we should gather together to us physicians
from the East and from the West, none could cure the King save thou.”
Answered Hasib, “How can I make him whole, seeing I know neither his
case nor its cure?” Quoth the Minister, “His healing is in thy hands,”
and quoth Hasib, “If I knew the remedy of his sickness, I would heal
him.” Thereupon the Wazir rejoined, “Thou kennest a cure right well; the
remedy of his sickness is the Queen of the Serpents, and thou knowest
her abiding-place and hast been with her.” When Hasib heard this, he
knew that all this came of his entering the Baths, and repented whenas
repentance availed him naught; then said he, “What is the Queen of the
Serpents? I know her not nor ever in all my life heard I of this name.”
Retorted the Wazir, “Deny not the knowledge of her, for I have proof
that thou knowest her and hast passed two years with her.” Repeated
Hasib, “Verily, I never saw her nor even heard of her till this moment;”
upon which Shamhur opened a book and, after making sundry calculations,
raised his head and spake as follows. “The Queen of the Serpents shall
foregather with a man who shall abide with her two years; then shall he
return from her and come forth to the surface of the earth, and when he
entereth the Hammam-bath his belly will become black.” Then said he,
“Look at thy belly.” So Hasib looked at his own belly and behold, it was
black: but he persisted in his denial and said, “My belly was black from
the day my mother bare me.” Said the Wazir, “I had stationed three
Mamelukes at the door of every Hammam, bidding them note all who entered
and let me know when they found one whose belly was black: so, when thou
enteredst, they looked at thy belly and, finding it black, sent and told
me, after we had well-nigh lost hope of coming upon thee. All we want of
thee is to show us the place whence thou camest out and after go thy
ways; for we have those with us who will take the Queen of the Serpents
and fetch her to us.” Then all the other Wazirs and Emirs and Grandees
flocked about Hasib who sorely repented of his misdeed; and they
conjured him, till they were weary, to show them the abode of the Queen;
but he ceased not saying, “I never saw nor heard of the matter.” Then
the Grand Wazir called the hangman and bade him strip Hasib and beat him
a sore beating; and so they did till he saw death face to face, for
excess of pain, and the Wazir said, “We have proof that thou knowest the
abiding-place of the Queen of the Serpents: why wilt thou persist in
denial? Show us the place whence thou camest out and go from us; we have
with us one who will take her, and no harm shall befal thee.” Then he
raised him and bade give him a dress of honour of cloth of red gold,
embroidered with jewels, and spoke him fair till Hasib yielded and said,
“I will show you the place.” At this the Wazir rejoiced with great joy
and took horse with all his many and rode, guided by Hasib, and never
drew rein till they came to the mountain containing the cavern wherein
he had found the cistern full of honey. There all dismounted and
followed him as he entered, sighing and weeping, and showed them the
well whence he had issued; whereupon the Wazir sat down thereby and,
sprinkling perfumes upon a chafing-dish, began to mutter charms and
conjurations; for he was a crafty magician and diviner and skilled in
spiritual arts. He repeated three several formulas of conjuration and
between each threw fresh incense upon the fire, crying out and saying,
“Come forth, O Queen of the Serpents!;” when behold, the water of the
well sank down and a great door opened in the side, from which came a
mighty noise of crying like unto thunder, so terrible that they thought
the well had caved in and all present fell down fainting; nay, some even
died for fright. Presently, there issued from the well a serpent as big
as an elephant, casting out sparks, like red hot coals, from its eyes
and mouth and bearing on its back a charger of red gold, set with pearls
and jewels, in the midst whereof lay a serpent from whose body issued
such splendour that the place was illumined thereby; and her face was
fair and young and she spoke with most eloquent tongue. The
Serpent-queen turned right and left, till her eyes fell upon Hasib, to
whom said she, “Where is the covenant thou madest with me, and the oath
thou swarest to me, that thou wouldst never again enter the Hammam-bath?
But there is no fighting against Fate nor hath any ever fled from that
which is written on his forehead. Allah hath appointed the end of my
life for thy hand to hend, and it is His will that slain I be and King
Karazdan be healed of his malady.” So saying, she wept with sore weeping
and Hasib wept to see her weep. As for the abominable Wazir Shamhur; he
put out his hand to lay hold of her; but she said to him, “Hold thy
hand, O accursed, or I will blow upon thee and reduce thee to a heap of
black ashes.” Then she cried out to Hasib, saying, “Draw near me and
take me in thine hand and lay me in the dish that is with you: then set
it on thy head; for my death was fore-ordained, from Eternity without
beginning,[572] to be at thy hand, and thou hast no power to avert it.”
So he took her and laid her in the dish, and put it on his head, when
the well returned to its former state. Then they set out on their return
to the city, Hasib carrying the dish on his head, and when they were
halfway behold, the Queen of the Serpents said to him privily, “Hearken,
O Hasib, to my friendly counsel, for all thou hast broken faith with me
and been false to thine oath, and hast done this misdeed, but it was
fore-ordained from all eternity.” He replied “To hear is to obey,” and
she continued, “It is this: when thou comest to the Wazir’s house, he
will bid thee behead me and cut me in three; but do thou refuse,
saying:—I know not how to slaughter[573] and leave him to do it with his
own hand and to work his wicked will. When he hath cut my throat and
divided my body into three pieces there will come a messenger, to bid
him to the King, so he will lay my flesh in a cauldron of brass and set
it upon a brasier before going to the presence and he will say to
thee:—Keep up the fire under the cauldron till the scum rise; then skim
it off and pour it into a phial to cool. Wait till it cool and then
drink it, so shall naught of malady or pain be left in all thy body.
When the second scum riseth, skim it off and pour it into a phial
against my return from the King, that I may drink it for an ailment I
have in my loins. Then will he give thee the phials and go to the King,
and when he is gone, do thou light the fire and wait till the first scum
rise and set it in a phial; keep it by thee but beware of drinking it,
or no good will befal thee. When the second scum riseth, skim it off and
put it in a second phial and drink it down as soon as it cools. When the
Wazir returneth and asketh thee for the second phial, give him the first
and note what shall befal him;”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Serpent-queen
charged Hasib not to drink of the first scum and carefully to keep the
second, saying, “When the Wazir returneth from the King and asketh for
the second phial, give him the first and note what shall befal him; then
drink the contents of the second phial and thy heart will become the
home of wisdom. After this take up the flesh and, laying it in a brazen
platter, carry it to the King and give him to eat thereof. When he hath
eaten it and it hath settled in his stomach, veil his face with a
kerchief and wait by him till noontide, when he will have digested the
meat. Then give him somewhat of wine to drink and, by the decree of
Allah Almighty, he will be healed of his unhealth and be made whole as
he was. And give thou ear to the charge wherewith I charge thee; and
keep it in thy memory with carefullest keeping.” They ceased not faring
till they came to the Wazir’s house, and he said to Hasib, “Come in with
me!” So he went in and the troops dispersed and fared each his own way;
whereupon Hasib set down the platter and the Wazir bade him slay the
Queen of the Serpents; but he said, “I know not how to slaughter and
never in my born days killed I aught. An thou wilt have her throat cut,
do it with thine own hand.” So the Minister Shamhur took the Queen from
the platter and slew her, seeing which Hasib wept bitter tears and the
Wazir[574] laughed at him, saying, “O weak of wits, how canst thou weep
for the killing of a worm?” Then he cut her in three and, laying the
pieces in a brass cauldron, set it on the fire and sat down to await the
cooking of the flesh. And whilst he was sitting, lo! there came a slave
from the King, who said to him, “The King calls for thee without stay or
delay;” and he answered saying, “I hear and I obey.” So he gave Hasib
two phials and bade him drink the first scum and keep the second against
his return, even as the Queen of the Serpents had foretold; after which
he went away with repeated charges and injunctions; and Hasib tended the
fire under the cauldron till the first scum rose, when he skimmed it off
and, setting it in one of the phials, kept it by him. He then fed the
fire till the second scum rose; then he skimmed it off and, putting it
in the other phial, kept it for himself. And when the meat was done, he
took the cauldron off the fire and sat awaiting the Wazir who asked him
on return, “What hast thou done?;” and answered Hasib, “I did thy
bidding to the last word.” Quoth the Wazir, “What hast thou done with
the first phial?” “I drank its contents but now,” replied Hasib, and
Shamhur asked, “Thy body feeleth it no change?”; whereto Hasib answered,
“Verily, I feel as I were on fire from front to foot.” The villain Wazir
made no reply hiding the truth but said, “Hand me the second phial, that
I may drink what is therein, so haply I may be made whole of this ailing
in my loins.” So Hasib brought him the first phial and he drank it off,
thinking it contained the second scum; but hardly had he done drinking
when the phial fell from his hand and he swelled up and dropped down
dead; and thus was exemplified in him the saying; “Whoso for his brother
diggeth a pit, he shall be the first to fall into it.” Now when Hasib
saw this, he wondered and feared to drink of the second phial; but he
remembered the Serpent-queen’s injunction and bethought him that the
Wazir would not have reserved the second scum for himself, had there
been aught of hurt therein. So he said, “I put my trust in Allah,”[575]
and drank off the contents of the phial. No sooner had he done so, than
the Most Highest made the waters of wisdom to well up in his heart and
opened to him the fountains of knowledge, and joy and gladness overcame
him. Then he took the serpent’s flesh from the cauldron and, laying it
on a platter of brass, went forth from the Wazir’s house. On his way to
the palace he raised his eyes and saw the seven Heavens and all that
therein is, even to the Lote-tree, beyond which there is no
passing,[576] and the manner of the revolution of the spheres. Moreover,
Allah discovered to him the ordinance of the planets and the scheme of
their movements and the fixed stars; and he saw the contour of the land
and sea, whereby he became informed with geometry, astrology and
astronomy and mathematics and all that hangeth thereby; and he
understood the causes and consequences of eclipses of the sun and moon.
Then he looked at the earth and saw all minerals and vegetables that are
therein and thereon; and he learned their properties, and their virtues,
so that he became in an instant versed in medicine and chemistry and
natural magic and the art of making gold and silver. And he ceased not
carrying the flesh till he came to the palace, when he went in to King
Karazdan, and kissing the ground before him, said, “May thy head survive
thy Wazir Shamhur!” The King was mightily angered at the news of the
Grand Wazir’s death and wept for him, whilst his Emirs and his Grandees
and officers also wept. Then said Karazdan, “He was with me but now, in
all health, and went away to fetch me the flesh of the Queen of the
Serpents, if it should be cooked; what befel him that he is now dead,
and what accident hath betided him?” So Hasib told him the whole truth
how the Minister had drunk the contents of the phial and had forthwith
swelled out and died. The King mourned for his loss with mourning sore
and said to Hasib, “What shall I do without Shamhur?” and Hasib answered
“Grieve not, O King of the age; for I will cure thee within three days
and leave no whit of disease in thy body.” At this the King’s breast
waxed broad and he said, “I wish to be made whole of this affliction,
though after a long term of years.” So Hasib set the platter before the
King and made him eat a slice of the flesh of the Serpent-queen. Then he
covered him up and, spreading a kerchief over his face, bade him sleep
and sat down by his side. He slept from noonday till sundown, while his
stomach digested the piece of flesh, and presently he awoke. Hasib gave
him somewhat of wine to drink and bade him sleep again; so he slept till
the morning and when dawn appeared, Hasib repeated the treatment making
him eat another piece of the flesh; and thus he did with him three days
following, till he had eaten the whole, when his skin began to shrink
and scale off and he perspired, so that the sweat ran down from his head
to his heels. Therewith he became whole and there abode in him no trace
of the disease, which when Hasib saw, he said, “There is no help for it
but thou go to the Hammam.” So he carried him to the bath and washed his
body; and when he came forth, it was like a wand of silver and he was
restored to health, nay, sounder than he was before he fell ill.
Thereupon he donned his richest robes and, seating himself on his
throne, deigned make Hasib sit beside him. Then he bade the tables be
spread and they ate and washed their hands; after which he called for
the service of wine and both drank their fill. Upon this all his Wazirs
and Emirs and Captains and the Grandees of his realm and the notables of
the lieges came in to him and gave him joy of his recovery; and they
beat the drums and adorned the city in token of rejoicing. Then said the
King to the assembly, “O Wazirs and Emirs and Grandees, this is Hasib
Karim al-Din, who hath healed me of my sickness, and know all here
present that I make him my Chief Wazir in the stead of the Wazir
Shamhur.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth King
Karazdan to his Ministers and high lords, “He who healed me of my
sickness is none other than Hasib Karim al-Din here present. Therefore I
make him my Chief Wazir in the stead of the Wazir Shamhur; and whoso
loveth him loveth me, and whoso honoureth him honoureth me, and he who
obeyeth him obeyeth me.” “Hearkening and obedience,” answered they and
all rising flocked to kiss Hasib’s hand and salute him and give him joy
of the Wazirate. Then the King bestowed on him a splendid dress of gold
brocade, set with pearls and gems, the least of which was worth five
thousand gold pieces. Moreover, he presented to him three hundred male
white slaves and the like number of concubines, in loveliness like
moons, and three hundred Abyssinian[577] slave-girls, beside five
hundred mules laden with treasure and sheep and oxen and buffaloes and
bulls and other cattle beyond count; and he commanded all his Wazirs and
Emirs and Grandees and Notables and Mamelukes and his subjects in
general to bring him gifts. Presently Hasib took horse and rode,
followed by the Wazirs and Emirs and lords and all the troops, to the
house which the King had set apart for him, where he sat down on a
chair; and the Wazirs and Emirs came up to him and kissed hands and gave
him joy of his Ministership, vying with one another in suit and service.
When his mother and his household knew what had happened, they rejoiced
with exceeding joy and congratulated him on his good fortune; and his
quondam comrades the woodcutters also came and gave him joy. Then he
mounted again and, riding to the house of the late Wazir Shamhur, laid
hands on all that was therein and transported it to his own abode. On
this wise did Hasib, from a dunsical know-nothing, unskilled to read
writing, become, by the decree of Allah Almighty, an adept in every
science and versed in all manner of knowledge, so that the fame of his
learning was blazed abroad over the land and he became renowned as an
ocean of lore and skill in medicine and astronomy and geometry and
astrology and alchemy and natural magic and the Cabbala and Spiritualism
and all other arts and sciences. One day, he said to his mother, “My
father Daniel was exceeding wise and learned; tell me what he left by
way of books or what not!” So his mother brought him the chest and,
taking out the five leaves which had been saved when the library was
lost, gave them to him saying, “These five scrolls are all thy father
left thee.” So he read them and said to her, “O my mother, these leaves
are part of a book: where is the rest?” Quoth she, “Thy father made a
voyage taking with him all his library and, when he was shipwrecked,
every book was lost save only these five leaves. And when he was
returned to me by Almighty Allah he found me with child and said to
me:—Haply thou wilt bear a boy; so take these scrolls and keep them by
thee and whenas thy son shall grow up and ask what his father left him,
give these leaves to him and say, Thy father left these as thine only
heritance. And lo! here they are.” And Hasib, now the most learned of
his age, abode in all pleasure and solace and delight of life, till
there came to him the Destroyer of delights and the Severer of
societies.[578] And yet, O King, is not this tale of Bulukiya and
Janshah more wondrous than the adventures of

-----

Footnote 507:

  This long story, containing sundry episodes and occupying fifty-three
  Nights, is wholly omitted by Lane (ii. 643) because “it is a compound
  of the most extravagant absurdities.” He should have enabled his
  readers to form their own judgment.

Footnote 508:

  Called Jamasp (brother and minister of the ancient Persian King
  Gushtasp) in the translations of Trebutien and others from Von Hammer.

Footnote 509:

  The usual term of lactation in the East, prolonged to two years and
  a-half, which is considered the rule laid down by the Shara’ or
  precepts of the Prophet. But it is not unusual to see children of
  three and even four years hanging to their mothers’ breasts. During
  this period the mother does not cohabit with her husband; the
  separation beginning with her pregnancy. Such is the habit, not only
  of the “lower animals,” but of all ancient peoples, the Egyptians
  (from whom the Hebrews borrowed it), the Assyrians and the Chinese. I
  have discussed its bearing upon pregnancy in my “City of the Saints”:
  the Mormons insist upon this law of purity being observed; and the
  beauty, strength and good health of the younger generation are proofs
  of their wisdom.

Footnote 510:

  Thus distinguishing it from “Asal-kasab,” cane honey or sugar. See
  vol. i., 271.

Footnote 511:

  The student of Hinduism will remember the Nága-Kings and Queens
  (Melusines and Echidnæ) who guard the earth-treasures in Naga-land.
  The first appearance of the snake in literature is in Egyptian
  hieroglyphs, where he forms the letters f and t, and acts as a
  determinative in the shape of a Cobra di Capello (Coluber Naja) with
  expanded hood.

Footnote 512:

  In token that he was safe.

Footnote 513:

  “Akhir al-Zamán.” As old men praise past times, so prophets prefer to
  represent themselves as the last. The early Christians caused much
  scandal amongst the orderly law-loving Romans by their wild and
  mistaken predictions of the end of the world being at hand. The
  catastrophe is a fact for each man under the form of death; but the
  world has endured for untold ages and there is no apparent cause why
  it should not endure as many more. The “latter days,” as the religious
  dicta of most “revelations” assure us, will be richer in sinners than
  in sanctity: hence “End of Time” is a facetious Arab title for a
  villain of superior quality. My Somali escort applied it to one thus
  distinguished: in 1875, I heard at Aden that he ended life by the
  spear as we had all predicted.

Footnote 514:

  Jahannam and the other six Hells are personified as feminine; and
  (woman-like) they are somewhat addicted to prolix speechification.

Footnote 515:

  These puerile exaggerations are fondly intended to act as nurses
  frighten naughty children.

Footnote 516:

  Alluding to an oft-quoted saying “Lau lá-ka, etc. Without thee (O
  Mohammed) We (Allah) had not created the spheres,” which may have been
  suggested by “Before Abraham was, I am” (John viii. 58); and by Gate
  xci. of Zoroastrianism “O Zardusht, for thy sake I have created the
  world” (Dabistan i. 344). The sentiment is by no means “Shi’ah,” as my
  learned friend Prof. Aloys Springer supposes. In his Mohammed (p. 220)
  we find an extract from a sectarian poet, “For thee we dispread the
  earth; for thee we caused the waters to flow; for thee we vaulted the
  heavens.” As Baron Alfred von Kremer, another learned and experienced
  Orientalist, reminds me the “Shi’ahs” have always shown a decided
  tendency to this kind of apotheosis and have deified or quasi-deified
  Ali and the Imams. But the formula is first found in the highly
  orthodox Burdah-poem of Al-Busiri:—

  “But for him (Lau lá-hu) the world had never come out of nothingness.”

  Hence it has been widely diffused. See Les Aventures de Kamrup (pp.
  146–7) and Les Œuvres de Wali (pp. 51–52), by M. Garcin de Tassy and
  the Dabistan (vol. i. pp. 2–3).

Footnote 517:

  Arab. “Símiyá” from the Pers., a word apparently built on the model of
  “Kímiyá” = alchemy, and applied, I have said, to fascination, minor
  miracles and white magic generally like the Hindu “Indrajal.” The
  common term for Alchemy is Ilm al-Káf (the K-science) because it is
  not safe to speak of it openly as alchemy.

Footnote 518:

  Mare Tenebrarum = Sea of Darknesses; usually applied to the “mournful
  and misty Atlantic.”

Footnote 519:

  Some Moslems hold that Solomon and David were buried in Jerusalem;
  others on the shore of Lake Tiberias. Mohammed, according to the
  history of Al-Tabari (p. 56, vol. i. Duleux’s “Chronique de Tabari”)
  declares that the Jinni bore Solomon’s corpse to a palace hewn in the
  rock upon an island surrounded by a branch of the “Great Sea” and set
  him on a throne, with his ring still on his finger, under a guard of
  twelve Jinns. “None hath looked upon the tomb save only two, Affan who
  took Bulukiya as his companion: with extreme pains they arrived at the
  spot, and Affan was about to carry off the ring when a thunderbolt
  consumed him. So Bulukiya returned.”

Footnote 520:

  Koran xxxviii. 34; or, “art the liberal giver.”

Footnote 521:

  _i.e._ of the last trumpet blown by the Archangel Israfil: an idea
  borrowed from the Christians. Hence the title of certain churches—_ad
  Tubam_.

Footnote 522:

  This may mean that the fruits were fresh and dried like dates or
  tamarinds (a notable wonder), or soft and hard of skin like grapes and
  pomegranates.

Footnote 523:

  Arab. “Al-Iksír” meaning lit. an essence; also the philosopher’s
  stone.

Footnote 524:

  Name of the Jinni whom Solomon imprisoned in Lake Tiberias (See vol.
  i, 41).

Footnote 525:

  Vulgarly pronounced “Jahannum.” The second hell is usually assigned to
  Christians. As there are seven Heavens (the planetary orbits) so, to
  satisfy Moslem love of symmetry, there must be as many earths and
  hells under the earth. The Egyptians invented these grim abodes, and
  the marvellous Persian fancy worked them into poem.

Footnote 526:

  Arab. “Yájúj and Majuj,” first named in Gen. x. 2, which gives the
  ethnology of Asia Minor, circ. B.C. 800. “Gomer” is the Gimri or
  Cymmerians, “Magog” the original Magi, a division of the Medes;
  “Javan” the Ionian Greeks; “Meshesh” the Moschi; and “Tiras” the
  Turusha, or primitive Cymmerians. In subsequent times, “Magog” was
  applied to the Scythians, and modern Moslems determine from the Koran
  (chapt. xviii. and xxi.) that Yajuj and Majuj are the Russians, whom
  they call Moska or Moskoff from the Moskwa River.

Footnote 527:

  I attempt to preserve the original pun; “Mukarrabin” (those near
  Allah) being the Cherubim, and the Creator causing Iblis to draw near
  Him (karraba).

Footnote 528:

  A vulgar version of the Koran (chapt. vii.), which seems to have
  borrowed from the Gospel of Barnabas. Hence Adam becomes a manner of
  God-man.

Footnote 529:

  These wild fables are caricatures of Rabbinical legends which began
  with “Lilith,” the Spirit-wife of Adam: Nature and her counterpart,
  Physis and Antiphysis, supply a solid basis for folk-lore. Amongst the
  Hindus we have Brahma (the Creator) and Viswakarmá, the anti-Creator:
  the former makes a horse and a bull and the latter caricatures them
  with an ass and a buffalo, and so forth.

Footnote 530:

  This is the “Lauh al-Mahfúz,” the Preserved Tablet, upon which are
  written all Allah’s decrees and the actions of mankind good (white)
  and evil (black). This is the “perspicuous Book” of the _Koran_,
  chapt. vi. 59. The idea again is Guebre.

Footnote 531:

  _i.e._ the night before Friday which in Moslem parlance would be
  Friday night.

Footnote 532:

  Again Persian “Gáw-i-Zamín” = the Bull of the Earth. “The cosmogony of
  the world,” etc., as we read in the Vicar of Wakefield.

Footnote 533:

  The Calc. Edit. ii. 614, here reads by a clerical error “bull.”

Footnote 534:

  _i.e._ lakes and rivers.

Footnote 535:

  Here some abridgement is necessary, for we have another recital of
  what has been told more than once.

Footnote 536:

  This name, “King of Life” is Persian: “Tegh” or “Tigh” means a
  scymitar and “Bahrwán,” is, I conceive, a mistake for “Bihrún,” the
  Persian name of Alexander the Great.

Footnote 537:

  Arab. “Mulákát” or meeting the guest which, I have said, is an
  essential part of Eastern ceremony; the distance from the divan, room,
  house or town being proportioned to his rank or consideration.

Footnote 538:

  Arab. “Sifr”: whistling is held by the Badawi to be the speech of
  devils; and the excellent explorer Burckhardt got a bad name by the
  ugly habit.

Footnote 539:

  The Arabs call “Shikk” (split man) and the Persians “Nímchahrah”
  (half-face) a kind of demon like a man divided longitudinally: this
  gruesome creature runs with amazing speed and is very cruel and
  dangerous. For the celebrated soothsayers Shikk and Sátih see
  Chenery’s Al-Hariri, p. 371.

Footnote 540:

  Arab. “Takht” (Persian) = a throne or a capital.

Footnote 541:

  Arab. Wady al Naml; a reminiscence of the Koranic Wady (chapt.
  xxvii.), which some place in Syria and others in Táif.

Footnote 542:

  This is the old, old fable of the River Sabbation which Pliny (xxxi.
  18) reports as “drying up every Sabbath-day” (Saturday): and which
  Josephus reports as breaking the Sabbath by flowing only on the Day of
  Rest.

Footnote 543:

  They were keeping the Sabbath. When lodging with my Israelite friends
  Tiberias and Safet, I made a point of never speaking to them (after
  the morning salutation) till the Saturday was over.

Footnote 544:

  Arab. “La’al” and “Yákút,” the latter also applied to the garnet and
  to a variety of inferior stones. The ruby is supposed by Moslems to be
  a common mineral thoroughly “cooked” by the sun, and produced only on
  the summits of mountains inaccessible even to Alpinists. The idea may
  have originated from exaggerated legends of the Badakhshán country
  (supposed to be the home of the ruby) and its terrors of break-neck
  foot-paths, jagged peaks and horrid ravines: hence our “_balass_-ruby”
  through the Spanish corruption “Balaxe.” Epiphanius, archbishop of
  Salamis in Cyprus, who died A.D. 403, gives, in a little treatise (De
  duodecim gemmis rationalis summi sacerdotis Hebræorum Liber, opera
  Fogginii, Romæ, 1743, p. 30), a precisely similar description of the
  mode of finding jacinths in Scythia. “In a wilderness in the interior
  of Great Scythia,” he writes, “there is a valley begirt with stony
  mountains as with walls. It is inaccessible to man, and so excessively
  deep that the bottom of the valley is invisible from the top of the
  surrounding mountains. So great is the darkness that it has the effect
  of a kind of chaos. To this place certain criminals are condemned,
  whose task it is to throw down into the valley slaughtered lambs, from
  which the skin has been first taken off. The little stones adhere to
  these pieces of flesh. Thereupon the eagles, which live on the summits
  of the mountains, fly down following the scent of the flesh, and carry
  away the lambs with the stones adhering to them. They, then, who are
  condemned to this place, watch until the eagles have finished their
  meal, and run and take away the stones.” Epiphanius, who wrote this,
  is spoken of in terms of great respect by many ecclesiastical writers,
  and St. Jerome styles the treatise here quoted, “Egregium volumen,
  quod si legere volueris, plenissimam scientiam consequeris;” and,
  indeed, it is by no means improbable that it was from the account of
  Epiphanius that this story was first translated into Arabic. A similar
  account is given by Marco Polo and by Nicolò de Conti, as of a usage
  which they had heard was practised in India, and the position ascribed
  to the mountain by Conti, namely, fifteen days’ journey north of
  Vijanagar, renders it highly probable that Golconda was alluded to. He
  calls the mountain Albenigaras, and says that it was infested with
  serpents. Marco Polo also speaks of these serpents, and while his
  account agrees with that of Sindbad, inasmuch as the serpents, which
  are the prey of Sindbad’s Rukh, are devoured by the Venetian’s eagles,
  that of Conti makes the vultures and eagles fly away with the meat to
  places where they may be safe from the serpents. (Introd. p. xlii.,
  India in the Fifteenth Century, etc., R. H. Major, London, Hakluyt
  Soc. MDCCCLVII.)

Footnote 545:

  Elder Victory: “Nasr” is a favourite name with Moslems.

Footnote 546:

  These are the “Swan-maidens” of whom Europe in late years has heard
  more than enough. It appears to me that we go much too far for an
  explanation of the legend; a high-bred girl is so like a swan in many
  points that the idea readily suggests itself. And it is also aided by
  the old Egyptian (and Platonic) belief in pre-existence and by the
  Rabbinic and Buddhistic doctrine of ante-natal sin, to say nothing of
  metempsychosis (Joseph Ant. xvii. 153).

Footnote 547:

  The lines have occurred before. I quote Mr. Payne for variety.

Footnote 548:

  Arab. “Al-Khayál”: it is a synonym of “al-Tayf” and the nearest
  approach to our “ghost,” as has been explained. In poetry it is the
  figure of the beloved seen when dreaming.

Footnote 549:

  He does not kiss her mouth because he intends to marry her.

Footnote 550:

  It should be “manifest” excellence (Koran xxvii. 16).

Footnote 551:

  The phrase is Koranic used to describe Paradise, and Damascus is a
  familiar specimen of a city under which a river, the Baradah, passes,
  distributed into a multitude of canals.

Footnote 552:

  It maybe noted that rose-water is sprinkled on the faces of the
  “nobility and gentry,” common water being good enough for the
  commonalty. I have had to drink tea made in compliment with rose-water
  and did not enjoy it.

Footnote 553:

  The Valley Flowery: Zahrán is the name of a place near Al-Medinah.

Footnote 554:

  The Proud or Petulant.

Footnote 555:

  _i.e._ Lion, Son of (?).

Footnote 556:

  _i.e._ Many were slain.

Footnote 557:

  I venture to draw attention to this battle-picture which is at once
  simple and highly effective.

Footnote 558:

  Anglicè a quibble, evidently evasive.

Footnote 559:

  In text “Aná A’amil,” etc., a true Egypto-Syrian vulgarism.

Footnote 560:

  _i.e._ magical formulæ. The context is purposely left vague.

Footnote 561:

  The repetition is a condescension, a token of kindness.

Footnote 562:

  This is the common cubit of 18 inches: the modern vary from 22 to 26.

Footnote 563:

  I have noticed the two-humped Bactrian camel which the Syrians and
  Egyptians compare with an elephant. See p. 221 (the neo-Syrian) Book
  of Kalilah and Dimnah.

Footnote 564:

  The Noachian dispensation revived the Islam or true religion first
  revealed to Adam, and was itself revived and reformed by Moses.

Footnote 565:

  Probably a corruption of the Turkish “Kara Tásh” = black stone, in
  Arab. “Hájar Jahannam” (hell-stone), lava, basalt.

Footnote 566:

  A variant of lines in Night xx., vol. i., 211.

Footnote 567:

  _i.e._ Daughter of Pride: the proud.

Footnote 568:

  In the Calc. Edit. by misprint “Maktab.” Jabal Mukattam is the old
  sea-cliff where the Mediterranean once beat and upon whose North
  Western slopes Cairo is built.

Footnote 569:

  Arab. “Kutb”; lit. an axle, a pole; next a prince; a high order or
  doyen in Sainthood; especially amongst the Sufi-gnostics.

Footnote 570:

  Lit. “The Green” (Prophet), a mysterious personage confounded with
  Elijah, St. George and others. He was a Moslem, _i.e._ a true believer
  in the Islam of his day and Wazir to Kaykobad, founder of the Kayanian
  dynasty, sixth century B.C. We have before seen him as a contemporary
  of Moses. My learned friend Ch. Clermont-Ganneau traces him back, with
  a multitude of his similars (Proteus, Perseus, etc.), to the son of
  Osiris (p. 45, Horus et Saint Georges).

Footnote 571:

  Arab. “Walad,” more ceremonious than “ibn.” It is, by the by, the
  origin of our “valet” in its sense of boy or servant who is popularly
  addressed Yá walad. Hence I have seen in a French book of travels “un
  petit lavelet.”

Footnote 572:

  Arab. “Azal” = Eternity (without beginning); “Abad” = Infinity
  (eternity without end).

Footnote 573:

  The Moslem ritual for slaughtering (by cutting the throat) is not so
  strict as that of the Jews; but it requires some practice; and any
  failure in the conditions renders the meat impure, mere carrion
  (fatís).

Footnote 574:

  The Wazir repeats all the words spoken by the Queen—but “in iteration
  there is no recreation.”

Footnote 575:

  A phrase always in the Moslem’s mouth: the slang meaning of “we put
  our trust in Allah” is “let’s cut our stick.”

Footnote 576:

  Koran liii. 14. This “Sidrat al-Muntahá” (Zizyphus lotus) stands in
  the seventh heaven on the right hand of Allah’s throne: and even the
  angels may not pass beyond it.

Footnote 577:

  Arab. “Habash”: the word means more than “Abyssinia” as it includes
  the Dankali Country and the sea-board, a fact unknown to the late Lord
  Stratford de Redcliffe when he disputed with the Porte. I ventured to
  set him right and suffered accordingly.

Footnote 578:

  Here ends vol. ii. of the Mac. Edit.




                            END OF VOLUME V.

[Illustration: والسلام]




                                 INDEX.


 A’aráf (Al-) = partition-wall (chapter of the Koran), 217

 Aaron’s Rod (becomes with Moslems Moses’ Staff), 238

 A’amash (Al-), traditionist, 81

 A’araj (Al-), traditionist, _ib._

 Abdallah (a neutral name), 141

 Abdallah bin Mas’úd (traditionist), 81

 Abdallah bin Salim (traditionist), _ib._

 Abjad (Hebrew-Arabic alphabet), 229

 Ablution (difference of fashion in performing it), 112

 Abraham (the friend of God), 205

 Abrogating and abrogated (versets), 194

 Abú al-Abbás al-Mubarrad (grammarian), 138

 Abú al-Abbás al-Rakáshi (poet), 77

 Abú al-Ayná, 164

 Abu al-Husn = Father of Beauty (a fancy name), 189

 Abú Ali, _see_ Di’ibil al-Khuzá’i.

 Abu Bakr (Caliph), 235

 Abu Bakr Mohammed al-Anbári (grammarian), 141

 Abú Háris = Father of spoils (lion), 40

 Abú Horayrah (uncle of Mohammed), 81

 Abu Tammám (poet), 157

 Abú Zanád (traditionist), 81

 Abú Zarr (Companion of the Apostle), 102

 Adi bin Zayd (poet), 124

 Adil (Al-) = the Just (Caliph Omar), 103

 Adnán (Arab genealogy begins with), 100

 Adultery (etc. to be proved by four witnesses), 97

 Adulteress (none without an adulterer), 90

 Ahrám (Al-) = the Pyramids, 105

 Akabah (mountain pass near Meccah), 295

 Akásirah = sons of the royal Chosroës, 10

 Akhír al-Zamán = the latter days, 304

 Alam = way-mark, etc., 191

 Alcove (corruption of al-Kubbah), 18

 Aleppo (noted for debauchery), 64

 Ali bin Mohammed bin Abdallah bin Táhir (Governor), 163

 Ali ibn Abí Tálib, 213; 225

 Alish takish (acting woman and man alternately), 65

 Allah (desire unto), 164

 —— (corporeality of?), _ib._

 —— requite you abundantly =, 171

 —— (seeking refuge with), 200

 —— (names of), 214

 Allaho Akbar of prohibition, 196

 Alhamdolillah (pronounced to avert the evil eye), 7

 Almá = brown- (not “damask-”) lipped, 66

 Ambiguity, 44

 Amín (Al-), Caliph, 93; 152

 Amru bin Ma’di Karib (poet), 147

 Amru bin Masa’dah (Pr. N.), 145

 ‘Amúriyah = the classical Amorium, 141

 “Ana” (from Night ccclxxxi.-ccccxxiv.), 64

 Aná a’amil = I will do it (Egypto-Syrian vulgarism), 367

 Ant (chapter ix. of the Koran), 213

 Anthropophagy (allowed when it saves life), 186

 Anúshirwán = Anúshín-rawán = Sweet of Soul, 87

 ‘Ar (Al-) = shame, 138

 Arab al-Arabá = Arab of pure and genuine blood, 101

 Arab horses (breeds of), 246

 Arab-land and Ajam = all the world over, 136

 Arafat (mount where the victims are _not_ slaughtered), 295

 Arithmetic (not mastered by Moslems), 236

 Arsh = the ninth Heaven, 167

 Asháb al-Suffah, 102

 Atbák = trays, 264

 Ayishah bint Talhah (granddaughter of Abu Bakr), 79

 Ayn = eye, for helper, 60

 Ayns (verset of the 140), 217

 Azal = eternity without beginning (opposed to Abad = infinity), 390

 Azán = call to prayer, 201


 Ba’albak = Ba’al’s-city, 51

 Bactrian camel, 371

 Badal = substitute, 249

 Badawi (truth-telling and blunt in speech), 98

 Badinján = Solanum pomiferum, or S. Melongena, 4

 Bahak = white leprosy, 294

 Bahr al-Kunúz = Sea of Treasures, 37

 Bahrwán (Pr. N. for Bihrún?), 329

 Balábil, pl. of bulbul (nightingale) and ballalah (grief), 244

 Baldrick (Hamáil), 158

 Banú Ozrah (tribe renowned as lovers), 70

 Baras = white leprosy, 294

 Barmahát (seventh Coptic month), 231

 Barmúdah (eighth Coptic month), 232

 Basmalah = pronouncing the formula Bismillah, 206

 —— (commonly pronounced “Bismalah”), 213

 Bat (has seed like a man’s), 85

 —— (Arab. Khuffásh, Watwát), 226

 Baydak = pawn in chess, 243

 Bayt (Al-) = the house (cage), 269

 BE! and IT BECOMETH, 240; 286

 Beard combed by the fingers in the Wuzú, 198; 209

 Bida’ah = Innovation, 167

 Biká’a = convents (pilgrimages to), 125

 Bint Shumúkh (Pr. N. = daughter of pride), 382

 Bird (created by Jesus), 211

 —— (seen by Abu Bakr in the cave), 235

 Birds (songs and cries of), 50

 Bismilláh = in the name of Allah, 206

 Bizá’at = capital, business-concern, 81

 Blast (of the last trumpet), 310

 Brain (_fons veneris_ in man), 46

 Brasier (Kánún, Mankal), 273

 Breast-bone (Taráib), 132

 Breath (healing by the), 29

 Bridal couch (attitudinising thereon), 75

 Brotherhood (sworn in Allah Almighty), 43

 Bulbul (departed with Tommy Moore. Englished by “nightingale”), 48

 Bull (of the Earth = Gáw-i-Zamín), 324


 Caliphate (defective title to), 116

 Camel (-colts roasted whole), 135

 —— (feeding on and vindictiveness), 135

 —— (Bactrian), 371

 Carat = 1/24 of a dinar or miskal something under 5d., 277

 Chess, 243

 Circumcision (how practised), 209

 —— (female), 279

 Cities (two-mosqued for large and consequently vicious ones), 66

 Clitoris (Zambúr) and its excision, 279

 Coffee (first mention of), 169

 Coloquintida (Hanzal), 19

 Commune (Jamá’at), 205

 Covered (the, chapter of the Koran), 215

 Cow (chapter ii. of the Koran), 211

 Creation (is it and its Empire not His?), 266

 Crepitus ventris and Ethnology, 137

 Cubit (the Háshimi = 18 inches), 371


 Damon and Pythias, 104

 Dáni wa gharíb = friend and foe, 42

 Dánik = sixth part of a dirham, 112

 Dead (buried at once), 190

 Death (from love), 134

 —— (every soul shall taste of it), 166

 —— (of a good Moslem), 167

 Devil (stoned at Mina), 203, 212

 Devotees (address Allah as a lover would his beloved), 263

 Dí’ibil al-Khuzá’i (poet), 127

 Dimyat (vulg. Dumíyat) = Damietta, 171

 Dissection (practised on Simiads), 220

 Diyár-i-Bakr = maid-land, 66

 Doggrel (royal), 55

 —— (phenomenal), 288

 —— (sad), 297

 Door (behind it the door-keeper’s seat), 173

 Dreams (lovers meet in), 47


 Eatables (their exchange must be equal), 204

 Eating (how it should be done), 206

 Empire (endureth with infidelity but not with tyranny), 187

 Eunuchs (and their wives), 46

 —— (avoid allusion to their misfortune), 47

 Eve (Arab. Hawwá), 139

 Exaggerations, 306

 Eye (likened to the letter Sád, the brow to Nun), 34

 —— (Ayn, for helper), 60


 Fá’il = agent, active (Sodomite), 156

 Fakír = religious mendicant, 39

 Fakru (Al-) fakhrí = poverty is my pride (saying of Mohammed), 268

 Fál = omen, 126

 Fars = Persia, 26

 Fart (in return for chaff), 99

 —— (and Badawi “pundonor”), 137

 Fast (and its break), 201

 —— (when forbidden), 265

 Fátihah (position of the hands in reciting it), 80

 —— (recited seven times for greater solemnity), 134

 Faylasúf = philosopher, 234

 Fealty of the Steep, 295

 Fi’l-Khawáfik = among the flags, etc., 61

 Fingers and toes (separated to wash between them), 198

 “Fire (of Hell) but not shame”, 138

 Fire (handled without injury, a common conjuring trick), 271

 Fire-sticks (Zind, Zindah), 52

 Fishár = squeeze of the tomb, 111

 Fisherman (Arab contrasted with English), 51

 “Forbid not yourselves the good things which Allah hath allowed you”,
    216

 Formication (accompanying a paralytic stroke), 251

 Fruits (fresh and dry), 314


 Garden (with rivers flowing under it, Koranic phrase), 356

 Gáw-i-Zamín = the Bull of the Earth, 324

 Genealogy (Arab, begins with Adnan), 100

 Ghatrafán (Pr. N. = proud, petulant), 361

 Ghaut = Sarídah, _q.v._, 223

 Ghazanfar ibn Kamkhíl = Lion, son of (?), 363

 Ghilmán (counterpart of the Houris), 64

 Ghimd (Ghamad) = scabbard, 158

 Ghoonj (Ghunj) = art of moving in coition, 80

 Ghusl = complete ablution, 199

 Girl (of nine plus five = in her prime), 192

 Greetings before the world, 34


 Habash = Abyssinia and something more, 395

 Habbazá! = good this!, 52

 Hádi (Al-), Caliph, 93

 Hadís = saying of the Apostle, tradition, 201

 Hajar Jahannam = hell-stone, lava, basalt, 378

 Hajj = pilgrimage, 202

 Hákim (Al-) bi-Amri llah (Caliph, not to be confounded with the
    Fatimite), 86

 Hakk (Al-) = the Truth (Allah), 284

 Halabi Shelebi = the Aleppine is a fellow fine, 64

 Hamáil = baldrick, 158

 Hamám = wood-pigeon, 49

 —— (al-Ayk) = “culver of the copse”, _ib._

 Hammám (hired for private parties), 63

 Handfuls (the two), 207

 Hands (their feel guides the physician), 220

 Hands (how held in reciting the Fátihah), 80

 —— (bitten in repentance), 191

 Hanút = tavern, booth, etc., 142

 Hanzal = coloquintida, 19

 Haríri (Al-) = the silk-man (poet), 158

 Harjáh = (a man of) any place?, 27

 Hásib Karím al-Dín (Pr. N.), 298

 Háshimí cubit = 18 inches, 371

 “Haunted” = inhabited by Jinns, 175

 Hawwá = Eve, 139

 Haykal = temple, chapel, 192

 Hazár = (the bird of) a thousand (songs), 48

 Hazramaut (the Biblical Hazarmaveth), 136

 Heart (from a, full of wrath = in spite of himself), 68

 Hindí = Indian Moslem opposed to Hindú, 1

 Hindibá = Endive, 226

 Hírah (Christian city in Mesopotamia), 124

 Hirakl (monastery of), 138

 Hishám ibn Orwah (traditionist), 81

 Hizb = section of the Koran, 217

 Honayn (scene of one of Mohammed’s battles), 66

 Honey (bees’, as distinguished from cane honey), 300

 “Honey-moon” (lasts a week), 62

 Horses (Arab breeds), 246

 Hosh = mean courts at Cairo, 170

 Hour (of Judgment), 235

 House (haunted = inhabited by Jinns), 175

 Hudúd al-Haram = bounds of the Holy Places, 148

 Humours (of Hippocrates), 218

 Hydropathic treatment of wounds held dangerous, 200

 Hypocrite (Munáfik), 207


 Iblís (Cherubim cherished by Allah), 319

 —— (cursed and expelled), 320

 Ibn Abbás (Companion), 212

 I’itikáf (Al-) = retreat, 202

 Ikálah (Al-) = cancelling, “resiliation,” 204

 Iksir (Al-) = an essence (the philosopher’s “stone”), 315

 Iláh = God, 196

 Ilm al-Káf = K-science for Alchemy, 307

 Images (of living beings forbidden), 3

 —— = statues, 223

 Impurity (ceremonial different from dirtiness), 209

 Imsák = retention (prolongatio veneris), 76

 In’ásh =raising from the bier (a “pick-me-up”), 67

 Indrajál = white magic, 307

 Innovation (Arab. Bida’ah), 167

 Intention (of prayer, Niyat), 163; 196

 Intercession (disputed doctrine), 241

 Iskandar Zú al-Karnayn = Alexander Matagrobolized, 252

 Isráfíl (blows the last trumpet), 310

 Istikhárah = praying for direction by omens, etc., 44

 Istinshák = snuffing water through the nostrils, 198


 Ja’afar bin Musá al-Hádi (Caliph), 93

 Jabal Mukattam (sea-cliff upon which Cairo is built), 383

 Jabal Núr, 215

 Jabal al-Saklá (Thaklá) = mount of the women bereft of children, 37

 Jábir bin Abdallah (disciple of Mohammed), 215

 Jahannam = Hell, 306; 318

 Jalálah = saying “Jalla Jalálu-hu” = magnified be His Majesty, 217

 Calla = gaberdine, 265

 Jamá’at = community, 205

 Jámi’ = cathedral mosque, 261

 Jámi’ayn = two cathedrals, 66

 Jamm = ocean, 93

 Jánsháh (Pr. N. = King of Life), 326

 Jarír (poet), 148

 Jauzar = Bubalus (Ariel antelope), 130

 Jawári = slave-girls, rhyming with dam’u jári = flowing tears, 160

 Jesus (bird of), 211

 —— (crucified in effigy), 238

 —— (compared with Adam), _ib._

 Jew (prefers dying on the floor, not in bed), 248

 Judgment (hour of), 235

 Juzám = black leprosy, 294


 Kadisíyah (Al-), city in Irák, 294

 Káfs (verset of the three-and-twenty), 217

 Kahwajiyah = coffee-makers, 169

 Kalamdán = pen-case, 239

 Kalla-má = it is seldom, 150

 Kanjifah = pack of cards, 243

 Kánun = brasier, 272

 Kári = Koran-reader, 216

 Karkh (Al-), quarter of Baghdad, 127

 Kárun = Korah of the Bible, 225

 Kawáid (pl. of Káid = governor), 145

 Khabál = pus flowing from the damned, 162

 Khalíl (Al-) = the friend, _i.e._ of Allah = Abraham, 205

 Khayál (Al-) = phantom, “ghost,” dream-visitor, 348

 Khaysamah (traditionist), 81

 Khawwás (Al-) = basket-maker, 283

 Khilál = toothpick (emblem of emaciation), 44

 Khizr (Al-), the Green Prophet, 384

 Khuffásh = Bat, 226

 Khunsá = hermaphrodite (also catamite), 91

 Khusrau Parwíz and Shírín, _ib._

 —— (his wealth), _ib._

 Khutnah = circumcision, 209

 Kiblah (turning towards it in mortal danger), 39

 —— (anything opposite) applied to the Ka’abah, 196

 Kiblatayn = the two Kiblahs (Meccah and Jerusalem), _ib._

 Killed = Hibernicè “kilt”, 5

 King (the, and the Virtuous Wife), 122

 Kisrà = _the_ Chosroë (applied to Anushirwan), 87

 Kiss (without moustachio = bread without salt), 165

 Kit (of the traveller in the East), 174

 Kiyák (fourth Coptic month), 231

 Kneeling (in prayer exclusively Christian), 196

 Kohl-needle in the Kohl-case = res in re, 97

 Korah (Kárún), 225

 Koran quoted (xxvi. 5, 6), 78

 —— (xxxiii. 48), 101

 —— (xxxviii. 2), 102

 —— (vii. 195), 143

 —— quoted (x. 36), 145

 —— (iv. 38, 175; ii. 282), 155

 —— (xii. 51), 159

 —— (xxvi. 165), 161

 —— (xxi. 36), 166

 —— (vii. 148), 191

 —— (iv. 160), 194

 —— (viii. 66), 203

 —— (xxxix. 67; lxxviii. 19), 207

 —— (vii. 63, 71, 83), 210

 —— (chapt. of The Cow), 211

 —— (xvi. 92; xxxix. 54; lxx. 38), _ib._

 —— (ii. 28, 107; xii. 18; xvi. 100; li. 57), 212

 —— (ix.; xxvii. 30; xcvi. 1, 2), 213

 —— (ii. 158; xvii. 110), 214

 —— (v. 4; xxx.; lxxiv. 1; xcvi.; cx. 1), 215

 —— (iv. 124; v. 89, 116), 216

 —— (vii. 154; xi. 50), 217

 —— (xvii. 39), 221

 —— (ii. 216; v. 92), 223

 —— (x. 5; xxii. 60; xxxvi. 40; lxx. 40), 228

 —— (xxxi. 34), 231

 —— (xxxvii. 5), 233

 —— (xxxvi. 37, 38), 234

 —— (xx. 57; xxii. 7), 235

 —— (lxxxi. 18), 236

 —— (iii.; vii. 110), 238

 —— (xii. 10), 239

 —— (xxxvi. 82), 240

 —— (vi. 44), 250

 —— (vii. 52), 269

 —— (xxxvi. 82), 286

 —— (v. 108), 287

 —— (xiii. 41), 290

 —— (xxxviii. 34), 310

 —— (vii.), 320

 —— (xxvii.), 337

 —— (xxvii. 16), 355

 —— (liii. 14), 393

 —— (abrogating and abrogated passages), 194

 —— (most excellent chapter of), 211

 —— (eminent and curious verses of), _ib._

 Kubbat (Al-) = alcove, 18

 Kurrat al-Ayn (Pr. N. = coolness of the eye), 145

 Kutb = axle, pole; hence prince, doyen in sainthood, 384


 La’al = ruby, 342

 La’an = curse, 250

 Labbay’ka = here I am (pronounced on sighting Meccah), 203

 Lactation (term of), 299

 —— (no cohabitation during), _ib._

 Lámi (Al-) = the l-shaped, forked (os hyoïdes), 219

 Lane quoted, 32; 33; 37; 44; 45; 64; 104; 112; 120; 121; 145; 189; 201;
    286; 298

 Lauh = tablet used as slate, 73

 —— al-Mahfúz = the Preserved Tablet (of Allah’s decrees), 322

 Lau lá-ka = but for thee, for thy sake, 306

 Leprosy (white = bahak or baras, black = juzám), 294

 Líf = fibre of palm-fronds, 45

 Lion (beguiled by flattery), 40

 Liver and spleen (held to be congealed blood), 220

 Lord for Lady = she, 60

 —— (of the East and West), 228

 Lote-tree (beyond which there is no passing), 393

 Lots = games of chance, 223

 Love (strange chances of), 71

 —— (deaths from), 134

 —— (made public, disgraces), 151

 Lovers (buried together), 71

 —— (model ones, becoming an ordinary married couple), 92

 Lúti (of the people of Lot = Sodomite), 161

 Lynch-law (the modern form of Jus talionis), 103


 Ma’abid (singer and composer), 147

 Mafa’úl = patient, passive (Catamite), 156

 Magic Horse (history of the fable), 2

 Majzúb = drawn, attracted (Sufi term for an ecstatic), 57

 Málik (traditionist), 81

 —— al-Khuzá’i (intendant of the palace), 95

 Málik bin Dínár (theologian), 261

 Malikhulíya (Al-) = melancholy, 221

 Man (advantages of, above woman), 155

 —— (one’s evidence = two women’s), _ib._

 —— (one’s portion = two women’s), _ib._

 —— (created of congealed blood), 213

 Manáf (idol), 129

 Manázil (Stations of the Moon), 228

 Marwah (ground-wave in Meccah), 203

 Matáf = place of the Tawáf, _q.v._, 203

 Matting (of Sind famous), 146

 Maysar = game of arrows, 223

 Medicine (rules and verses bearing on domestic), 222

 Metempsychosis and sharpers’ tricks, 84

 Mihrgán = Sun-fête, degraded into Michaelmas, 1

 Mikmarah (Makmarah) = cover for a brasier, extinguisher, 120

 Milk (soured), 225

 Míms (verset of the sixteen), 217

 Mina (and the stoning of the Devil), 203

 Miracle (minor, known to Spiritualism), 144

 Mirza Abdullah-i-Hichmakáni = Master Abdullah of Nowhere, 27

 Misra (twelfth Coptic month), 232

 Modesty (behind a curtain), 162

 Mohammed (mentioned in the Koran), 210

 —— al-Amín (Caliph), 93

 Monasteries (best wine made in), 65

 —— (Arab. Biká’a), 125

 —— (places of confinement for madmen), 139

 Months (of peace), 54

 —— (Coptic names of), 221; 232

 —— (Arabic names explained), 233

 Moon (simile for female beauty), 8

 —— (shall be cloven in twain), 217

 —— (its stations), 28

 Mosul (exempted from idolatrous worship), 64

 Moustachio (salt to a kiss), 165

 Muffawak = well-notched (arrow), 33

 Muharramát = unlawful things, 148

 Mukarrabín = those near Allah, 319

 Mujáwirin = lower servants, sweepers, etc., 19

 Mukrí = Koranist, 216

 Mulákát = going to meet an approaching guest, 330

 Munáfik = hypocrite, 207

 Munkar and Nakír (the questioning Angels), 111

 Murder (to be punished by the family), 103

 Mus’ab bin al-Zubayr, 79

 Musallá = place of prayer, oratory, 261

 Musk (sherbet flavoured with), 66

 Muslim bin al-Walíd (poet), 128

 Mutalammis (Al-), the poet and his fatal letter, 74

 Mutawakkil (Al-), ala ‘llah (Caliph), 153

 Mutawwif = leader in the Tawáf, _q.v._, 203

 Muunis (Pr. N. = Companion), 164


 Nafahát = breathings, benefits, 29

 Náf’i (traditionist), 204

 Nága-kings (of Hinduism), 302

 Najíb (al-taraf = son of a common Moslemah by a Sayyid, _q.v._), 259

 —— (al-tarafayn = whose parents are both of Apostolic blood), _ib._

 Names (of God), 214

 —— (= magical formulæ), 369

 Nation (its power consists in its numbers of fighting men), 255

 Nay = reed-pipe, 50

 Názih = travelled far and wide, 52

 Night (its promise spread with butter that melteth with day-rise), 77

 Nímchahrah = half-face (Pers. a kind of demon), 333

 Niyat = intention, purpose of prayer, 163

 Noachian dispensation (revived al-Islám), 372

 Nún (simile for the eyebrow), 34

 Nu’uman (Al-) bin Munzir (tyrant of Hírah), 74


 Obayd’ Allah (Pr. N.), 164

 Ocean (Jamm), 93

 —— (of darkness), 309

 Old age (graphically described), 3

 Old woman (polite equivalents for), 163

 Olemá (pl. of Álim) = the learned in the law, 183

 Omar (Caliph) entitled al-Ádil, the Just, 103

 Omen (Fál), 136

 Othmán bin Affán (Kátib al-Koran), 215


 Palsy (creeps over him), 251

 Paper (his = the whiteness of his skin), 161

 Parapets (on terrace-roofs made obligatory by Moses), 72

 Parasite (Tufayli), 130

 Payne quoted, 44; 49; 65; 112; 161; 192; 204; 346

 Pearls shaded by hair = teeth under moustachio, 157

 Persian (“I am a, but not lying now”), 26

 —— (poets mostly addressing youths), 156

 Physiologists (practise on the simiads), 220

 Physis and Antiphysis, 320

 Picnics (on the Rauzah island), 169

 Pilgrimage quoted (i. 22), 39

 —— (ii. 287), 44

 —— (iii. 218), 49

 —— (i. 16), 97

 —— (ii. 344), 100

 —— (i. 10), 112

 —— (ii. 161), 119

 —— (i. 352), 158

 —— (ii. 320), 196

 —— (i. 110), 201

 —— (iii. 193, 205, 226, 282), 203

 —— (iii. 248), 212

 —— (iii. 92), 220

 —— (ii. 322), 224

 —— (i. 362), 225

 —— (ii. 288), 236

 Plaisirs de la petite oie (practised by eunuchs), 46

 Pleasure prolonged (en pensant à sa pauvre mère, etc.), 76

 Polo (“Goff”), 32

 Poverty (Holy), 269

 Prayer (without intention, Arab. Niyat is valueless), 163

 —— (offered standing or prostrating), 196

 —— (of a sick person said as he best can), 200

 —— (intonations of the voice in), _ib._

 —— (call to, Azán), 201

 —— (is a collector of all folk), _ib._

 Preachments (to Eastern despots), 254

 Prolongatio veneris (Imsák), 76

 Prophets (named in the Korán), 210

 Providence (and Justice), 286

 Purgation (Easterns most careful during), 154

 Pyramids (Al-Ahrám), 105

 —— (containing unopened chambers?), 106

 Pyramidennarren, _ib._


 Quibbling away a truly diplomatic art, 86


 Rajab = worshipping (7th Arab month), 54

 Rákí (distilled from raisins), 65

 Ras al-Tín = Headland of Clay (not Figs), 112

 Rashaa = fawn beginning to walk, 149

 Rauzah (Al-), at Cairo, 169

 Ream (Ital. risma, Arab. riyam), 108

 Red Sea (cleaves in twelve places), 236

 Reed-pipe (Nay), 50

 Repetition (of an address in token of kindness), 370

 Ribá = usury, 201

 Riddle “surprise” (specimen of), 239

 Riyam = bales (ream), 108

 Robinson Crusoe (with a touch of Arab prayerfulness), 291

 Rose-water (for “nobility and gentry” even in tea), 357

 Ruby (La’al, Yákút), 342

 Rukh (Roc) and “Roc’s” feathers, 122


 Sabbath (kept in silence), 339

 Sabbation (River), 337

 Sád (Letter, simile for the eye), 34

 Safá (ground-wave _in_ Meccah), 203

 Sáhib (Wazirial title), 71

 Sa’íd bin Zayd (traditionist), 81

 Sa’íd bin Sálim (governor of Khorasan), 94

 Sáim al-dahr = perennial faster, 112

 Saint, Santon (Wali), _ib._

 Saint and Sinner, 115

 Saj’a = balanced prose (instance), 160

 Sajáh (false prophetess), 147

 Sakhr (Jinni imprisoned by Solomon), 316

 Sakká = water-carrier, 89

 Salaf (Al-) = ancestry (referring to Mohammed), 90

 Sálih (grandson of Shem?), 210

 Sálih (his she-camel), 235

 Sálíh al-Muzani (theologian), 261

 Salli ala ‘l-Nabi = bless the prophet (imposing silence), 65

 Salutation (the first), 200

 —— (Salám, unwillingly addressed to a Christian), 284

 Sana’á (Capital of Al-Yaman), 16

 Sandal (scented with), 192

 Sandali (eunuch deprived of penis and testes), 46

 Sar’a = falling sickness, 28

 Sardáb = underground chamber, 128

 Sarídah (Tharídah) brewis, 223

 Sawálif = tresses, locks, 158

 Sayhún and Jayhún = Jaxartes and Oxus, 41

 Sayyid (descendant from Mohammed through Al-Hasan), 259

 Scabbard (Ar. Ghimd), 158

 Schoolmaster (derided in East and West), 118

 Seal (affixed to make an act binding), 184

 —— (breaking the = taking the maidenhead), 154

 Seas (fresh = lakes and rivers), 326

 Secrets (instances and sayings with regard to their keeping), 83

 Seeking refuge with Allah, 200

 Sha’abán (moon of), 191

 Sháh-púr = King’s son (Sábúr, Σαβὼρ, Sapor), 2

 Shakuríyah = chicorée, 226

 Shams al-Nahár (Pr. N. = Sun of the Day), 9

 Shaybán (Arab tribe), 100

 Shaykh Nasr (Pr. N. = Elder of victory), 343

 Shikk = split man (a kind of demon), 333

 Shinf = gunny-bag, 45

 Shirk (= syntheism) of love, 9

 —— of the Mushrik, 142

 Shroud (joined in one = shrouded together?), 71

 Shu’ayb = Jethro, 210

 Sídí (from Sayyidi = my lord), 283

 Sídi Ibrahím bin al-Khawwás (Pr. N.), 283

 Sifr = whistling, 333

 Sinai (convent famous for Rákí), 65

 Sind (matting of), 145

 Sitt al-Mashá’ikh = Lady of Shaykhs, 154

 Slain were those who were slain = many were slain, 364

 Slate (Lauh), 73

 Slaughtering (ritual for), 391

 Slaves (their ambition to have slaves of their own), 12

 Sleeping (naked), 8

 —— (with head and body covered by a sheet), 18

 Smile (and laughter), 193

 Sodomite (Lúti), 161

 —— (punished detected), 160

 Solomon and David (their burial-place), 310

 Sortes Virgilianæ, 44

 Soul (Thou knowest what is in mine and I know not what is in Thine),
    216

 —— (doctrine of the three), 218

 Squeeze of the tomb (Fishár), 111

 Stations of the Moon (Manázil), 228

 Stones (precious), 342

 Stoning (of the devil at Mina), 203

 Strangers (treated with kindly care), 171

 “Strangers yet” (Lord Houghton quoted), 284

 Sufis (stages of their Journey), 264

 —— (address Allah as a lover would his beloved), 263; 298

 Sufrah (provision-bag and table-cloth), 8

 Sufyán (traditionist), 81

 Sukát (pl. of Sáki = cupbearer), 66

 Sukita fí aydíhim = it repented them, 191

 Suláfat = must, new wine, 158

 Sultán (anachronistic use of the title), 88; 179

 Sun and Moon (Luminaries for day and night), 228

 —— (do not outstrip each other), _ib._

 Sundus = brocade, 57

 Sunnat = practice of the Prophet, etc., 36; 167

 Susannah and the Elders in Moslem form, 97

 Swan-maidens, 346


 Tablet (Lauh), 37

 —— (the preserved), 322

 Takht = throne, capital, 334

 Takht-rawán = moving throne (mule-litter), 175

 Ta’mím = crowning with turband or tiara; covering, wetting, 199

 Taráib = breast-bone, 132

 Taríkat = (mystic) path to knowledge, 111

 Tasním (fountain in Paradise), 264

 Tawáf = Ka’abah-circuiting, 203

 Tawakkul ala ‘llah = trust in Allah, 208

 Tayammum = washing with sand, 197

 Teeth (their cleansing enjoined by Mohammed), 44

 “Thank you” (Moslem equivalent for), 171

 “They” for “She”, 41; 140

 Throne-verse, 211

 Thursday night (in Moslem parlance = Friday night), 324

 Tín = clay puddled with chaff, 112

 Tongue (made to utter (?) what is in the heart of man), 218

 Tooth-pick (Khilál), 44

 Torrens quoted, 96; 188

 Tree of Paradise (Túbá), 237

 Tricks (two = before and behind), 161

 Truth (most worthy to be followed), 145

 —— (is become manifest), 159

 Tuba (tree of Paradise), 237

 Tubah (fifth Coptic month), 231

 Tufayli = parasite, 130

 Tughrá = imperial cypher, 184

 Turbands (worn large by the learned), 120

 Turks (fair boy-slaves, abounding in Baghdad), 66


 Ukhnúkh = Enoch (Idrís?), 210

 Umm Amrí (mother of Amr’) and the ass, 118

 ‘Umrah = lesser Pilgrimage, 205

 Uns al Wujúd (Pr. N. = Delight of existing things), 33

 Urwah = handle, button-hole, 227

 Usury (Ribá), 201

 —— (verset of), 215

 Usús = os sacrum, 219

 ‘Utbi (Al-), poet, 133


 Versets (number of the Koranic), 110

 Virgil (a magician), 44

 Visits in dreamland, 47

 Viswakarmá = anti-creator, 320


 Wády al-Naml = Valley of the Emmets, 337

 Wády Zahrán = Valley Flowery, 360

 Walad = son (more ceremonious than “ibn”), 386

 Wali = saint, Santon, 112

 Wá Rahmatá-hu = Alas, the pity of it, 42

 Ward (Al-) fí’l-Akmám (Pr. N. = Rose in Hood), 32

 Water (had no taste in his mouth), 39

 —— (carrier, Sakká), 89

 Watwát = Bat, 226

 Wayha = Alas!, 258

 Where is—and where? = what a difference is there between, etc., 65

 Whistling, (held to be the devil’s speech), 333

 Wine (its prohibition not held absolute), 224

 Wird = the twenty-five last chapters of the Koran, 185

 Witnesses (one man = two women), 155

 Women (sleep naked in hot weather), 8

 —— (making the first advances), 34

 —— (and secrets), 35; 83

 —— (wives of eunuchs), 46

 —— (visiting their lovers in a dream), 47

 —— (thought to be Jinn or Ghúl), 51

 —— (called Zaurá, the crooked), 66

 —— (allowed to absent themselves from the house of father or husband),
    96

 Women (instructed in “motitations”), 80

 —— (apt for two tricks), 161

 —— (old, polite equivalents for), 163

 —— (in their prime at fourteen to fifteen), 192

 —— (inferior to man), 155

 —— (unveiling to a man, if not slaves, insult him), 194

 Wuzú (Koranic order for), 198

 —— (angels and devils at the side of a man who prepares for it), _ib._


 Yá ‘Ajúz = O old woman (now insulting), 163

 Yájúj and Májúj, 318

 Yá Kawwád = O pímp, 129

 Yá Kisrawí = O subject of the Kisrá, 26

 Yákút = Ruby, garnet, etc., 342

 Yá Sáki’ al-Dakan = O frosty-beard, 99

 Yohanná (Greek Physician), 154


 Zabiyah (Pr. N. = roe, doe), 147

 Zaghab = the chick’s down, 165

 Zambúr = clitoris (the shutter), 279

 Zarr wa ‘urwah = button and button-hole, 227

 Zaurá = the crooked, for woman, 66

 Zidd = opposite, contrary, 206

 Zind and Zindah = fire-sticks, 52

 Zindík = Agnostic, atheist, 230

 Zuhri (Al-), traditionist, 81

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Added missing footnote numbers on pp. 5, 111, and 135.
 2. Changed ‘in goal’ to ‘in gaol’ on p. 28.
 3. Added missing footnote anchors on pp. 37, 105, 197, 298, and 392.
 4. Changed ‘commun is’ to ‘commun in’ on p. 49.
 5. Added ‘to’ between ‘Speak’ and ‘him’ on p. 124.
 6. Changed ‘knew were’ to ‘knew where’ on p. 133.
 7. Removed ‘a’ from ‘friends a’ on p. 339.
 8. Changed ‘streams ann’ to ‘streams and’ on p. 353.
 9. Changed ‘perceived he’ to ‘perceived the’ on p. 353.
10. Silently corrected simple spelling, grammar, and typographical
    errors.
11. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
12. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — VOLUME 05 (OF 10) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night — Volume 06 (of 10)
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night — Volume 06 (of 10)

Translator: Sir Richard Francis Burton


        
Release date: April 9, 2017 [eBook #54525]
                Most recently updated: May 22, 2025

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/54525

Credits: Produced by Richard Tonsing, Richard Hulse and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — VOLUME 06 (OF 10) ***

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: لا لابرار كلّ شي تبر]

                   “TO THE PURE ALL THINGS ARE PURE.”
                           (Puris omnia pura)

                                                        —_Arab Proverb._

          “Niuna corrotta mente intese mai sanamente parole.”

                                            —“_Decameron_”—_conclusion_.

              “Erubuit, posuitque meum Lucretia librum
                  Sed coram Bruto. Brute! recede, leget.”

                                                             —_Martial._

            “Mieulx est de ris que de larmes escripre,
                Pour ce que rire est le propre des hommes.”

                                                              —RABELAIS.

“The pleasure we derive from perusing the Thousand-and-One Stories makes
us regret that we possess only a comparatively small part of these truly
enchanting fictions.”

                                      —CRICHTON’S “_History of Arabia_.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

_A PLAIN AND LITERAL TRANSLATION OF THE ARABIAN NIGHTS ENTERTAINMENTS.
NOW ENTITULED_




                           _THE BOOK OF THE_
                      Thousand Nights and a Night

   _WITH INTRODUCTION EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF
    MOSLEM MEN AND A TERMINAL ESSAY UPON THE HISTORY OF THE NIGHTS_

                               VOLUME VI.


                                   BY
                           RICHARD F. BURTON

[Illustration]

        PRINTED BY THE BURTON CLUB FOR PRIVATE SUBSCRIBERS ONLY

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            Shammar Edition

Limited to one thousand numbered sets, of which this is

                              Number _547_




                          PRINTED IN U. S. A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                         I INSCRIBE THIS VOLUME

                  TO MY OLD AND VALUED CORRESPONDENT,

                        IN WHOSE DEBT I AM DEEP,

                        PROFESSOR ALOYS SPRENGER

                            (OF HEIDELBERG),

                    ARABIST, PHILOSOPHER AND FRIEND.

                                                           R. F. BURTON.




                     CONTENTS OF THE SIXTH VOLUME.


                                                                    PAGE

 SINDBAD THE SEAMAN AND SINDBAD THE LANDSMAN                           1

 (_Lane, Vol. III., Chapt. XXII., Story of Es Sindbad of the Sea and Es
                    Sindbad of the Land. pp. 1–78._)

     _a._ THE FIRST VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SEAMAN                       4

     _b._ THE SECOND VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SEAMAN                     14

     _c._ THE THIRD VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SEAMAN                      22

     _d._ THE FOURTH VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SEAMAN                     34

     _e._ THE FIFTH VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SEAMAN                      48

     _f._ THE SIXTH VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SEAMAN                      58

     _g._ THE SEVENTH VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SEAMAN                    68

          THE SEVENTH VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SEAMAN (_according to     78
            the version of the Calcutta Edition_)


 THE CITY OF BRASS                                                    83

    (_Lane, Vol. III., Chapt. XXIII. Story of the City of Brass. pp.
                               118–152._)


 THE CRAFT AND MALICE OF WOMAN                                       122

  (_Lane, Vol. III., Chapt. XXI., Abstract of the Story of the King and
      his Son and the Damsel and the Seven Wezeers. pp. 158–183._)

     _a._ THE KING AND HIS WAZIR’S WIFE                              129

     _b._ THE CONFECTIONER, HIS WIFE, AND THE PARROT                 132

     _c._ THE FULLER AND HIS SON                                     134

     _d._ THE RAKE’S TRICK AGAINST THE CHASTE WIFE                   135

     _e._ THE MISER AND THE LOAVES OF BREAD                          137

     _f._ THE LADY AND HER TWO LOVERS                                138

     _g._ THE KING’S SON AND THE OGRESS                              139

     _h._ THE DROP OF HONEY                                          142

     _i._ THE WOMAN WHO MADE HER HUSBAND SIFT DUST                   143

     _j._ THE ENCHANTED SPRING                                       145

     _k._ THE WAZIR’S SON AND THE HAMMAM-KEEPER’S WIFE               150

     _l._ THE WIFE’S DEVICE TO CHEAT HER HUSBAND                     152

     _m._ THE GOLDSMITH AND THE CASHMERE SINGING-GIRL                156

     _n._ THE MAN WHO NEVER LAUGHED DURING THE REST OF HIS DAYS      160

     _o._ THE KING’S SON AND THE MERCHANT’S WIFE                     167

     _p._ THE PAGE WHO FEIGNED TO KNOW THE SPEECH OF BIRDS           169

     _q._ THE LADY AND HER FIVE SUITORS                              172

     _r._ THE THREE WISHES, OR THE MAN WHO LONGED TO SEE THE NIGHT   180
            OF POWER

     _s._ THE STOLEN NECKLACE                                        182

     _t._ THE TWO PIGEONS                                            183

     _u._ PRINCE BEHRAM AND THE PRINCESS AL-DATMA                    184

     _v._ THE HOUSE WITH THE BELVEDERE                               188

     _w._ THE KING’S SON AND THE IFRIT’S MISTRESS                    199

     _x._ THE SANDAL-WOOD MERCHANT AND THE SHARPERS                  202

     _y._ THE DEBAUCHEE AND THE THREE-YEAR-OLD CHILD                 208

     _z._ THE STOLEN PURSE                                           209

     _aa._ THE FOX AND THE FOLK                                       211

 JUDAR AND HIS BRETHREN                                              213

     (_Lane, Vol. III, Chapt. XXII., Story of Joodar. pp. 183–233._)

 THE HISTORY OF GHARIB AND HIS BROTHER AJIB                          257




            SINDBAD THE SEAMAN[1] AND SINDBAD THE LANDSMAN.


There lived in the city of Baghdad, during the reign of the Commander of
the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, a man named Sindbád the Hammál,[2] one in
poor case who bore burdens on his head for hire. It happened to him one
day of great heat that whilst he was carrying a heavy load, he became
exceeding weary and sweated profusely, the heat and the weight alike
oppressing him. Presently, as he was passing the gate of a merchant’s
house, before which the ground was swept and watered, and there the air
was temperate, he sighted a broad bench beside the door; so he set his
load thereon, to take rest and smell the air,——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Hammal
set his load upon the bench to take rest and smell the air, there came
out upon him from the court-door a pleasant breeze and a delicious
fragrance. He sat down on the edge of the bench, and at once heard from
within the melodious sound of lutes and other stringed instruments, and
mirth-exciting voices singing and reciting, together with the song of
birds warbling and glorifying Almighty Allah in various tunes and
tongues; turtles, mocking-birds, merles, nightingales, cushats and
stone-curlews,[3] whereat he marvelled in himself and was moved to
mighty joy and solace. Then he went up to the gate and saw within a
great flower-garden wherein were pages and black slaves and such a train
of servants and attendants and so forth as is found only with Kings and
Sultans; and his nostrils were greeted with the savoury odours of all
manner meats rich and delicate, and delicious and generous wines. So he
raised his eyes heavenwards and said, “Glory to Thee, O Lord, O Creator
and Provider, who providest whomso Thou wilt without count or stint! O
mine Holy One, I cry Thee pardon for all sins and turn to Thee repenting
of all offences! O Lord, there is no gainsaying Thee in Thine ordinance
and Thy dominion, neither wilt Thou be questioned of that Thou dost, for
Thou indeed over all things art Almighty! Extolled be Thy perfection:
whom Thou wilt Thou makest poor and whom Thou wilt Thou makest rich!
Whom Thou wilt Thou exaltest and whom Thou wilt Thou abasest and there
is no god but Thou! How mighty is Thy majesty and how enduring Thy
dominion and how excellent Thy government! Verily, Thou favourest whom
Thou wilt of Thy servants, whereby the owner of this place abideth in
all joyance of life and delighteth himself with pleasant scents and
delicious meats and exquisite wines of all kinds. For indeed Thou
appointest unto Thy creatures that which Thou wilt and that which Thou
hast fore-ordained unto them; wherefore are some weary and others are at
rest and some enjoy fair fortune and affluence, whilst others suffer the
extreme of travail and misery, even as I do.” And he fell to reciting:—

 How many by my labours, that evermore endure, ✿ All goods of life enjoy
    and in cooly shade recline?
 Each morn that dawns I wake in travail and in woe, ✿ And strange is my
    condition and my burden gars me pine:
 Many others are in luck and from miseries are free, ✿ And Fortune never
    loads them with loads the like o’ mine:
 They live their happy days in all solace and delight; ✿ Eat, drink and
    dwell in honour ‘mid the noble and the digne:
 All living things were made of a little drop of sperm, ✿ Thine origin is
    mine and my provenance is thine;
 Yet the difference and distance ‘twixt the twain of us are far ✿ As the
    difference of savour ‘twixt vinegar and wine:
 But at Thee, O God All-wise! I venture not to rail ✿ Whose ordinance is
    just and whose justice cannot fail.

When Sindbad the Porter had made an end of reciting his verses, he bore
up his burden and was about to fare on, when there came forth to him
from the gate a little foot-page, fair of face and shapely of shape and
dainty of dress who caught him by the hand saying, “Come in and speak
with my lord, for he calleth for thee.” The Porter would have excused
himself to the page but the lad would take no refusal; so he left his
load with the doorkeeper in the vestibule and followed the boy into the
house, which he found to be a goodly mansion, radiant and full of
majesty, till he brought him to a grand sitting-room wherein he saw a
company of nobles and great lords, seated at tables garnished with all
manner of flowers and sweet-scented herbs, besides great plenty of
dainty viands and fruits dried and fresh and confections and wines of
the choicest vintages. There also were instruments of music and mirth
and lovely slave-girls playing and singing. All the company was ranged
according to rank; and in the highest place sat a man of worshipful and
noble aspect whose beard-sides hoariness had stricken; and he was
stately of stature and fair of favour, agreeable of aspect and full of
gravity and dignity and majesty. So Sindbad the Porter was confounded at
that which he beheld and said in himself, “By Allah, this must be either
a piece of Paradise or some King’s palace!” Then he saluted the company
with much respect praying for their prosperity, and kissing the ground
before them, stood with his head bowed down in humble attitude.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Porter, after kissing ground between their hands, stood with his head
bowed down in humble attitude. The master of the house bade him draw
near and be seated and bespoke him kindly, bidding him welcome. Then he
set before him various kinds of viands, rich and delicate and delicious,
and the Porter, after saying his Bismillah, fell to and ate his fill,
after which he exclaimed, “Praised be Allah whatso be our case![4]” and,
washing his hands, returned thanks to the company for his entertainment.
Quoth the host, “Thou art welcome and thy day is a blessed. But what is
thy name and calling?” Quoth the other, “O my lord, my name is Sindbad
the Hammal, and I carry folk’s goods on my head for hire.” The
house-master smiled and rejoined, “Know, O Porter that thy name is even
as mine, for I am Sindbad the Seaman; and now, O Porter, I would have
thee let me hear the couplets thou recitedst at the gate anon.” The
Porter was abashed and replied, “Allah upon thee! Excuse me, for toil
and travail and lack of luck when the hand is empty, teach a man ill
manners and boorish ways.” Said the host, “Be not ashamed; thou art
become my brother; but repeat to me the verses, for they pleased me
whenas I heard thee recite them at the gate.” Hereupon the Porter
repeated the couplets and they delighted the merchant, who said to
him:—Know, O Hammal, that my story is a wonderful one, and thou shalt
hear all that befel me and all I underwent ere I rose to this state of
prosperity and became the lord of this place wherein thou seest me; for
I came not to this high estate save after travail sore and perils
galore, and how much toil and trouble have I not suffered in days of
yore! I have made seven voyages, by each of which hangeth a marvellous
tale, such as confoundeth the reason, and all this came to pass by doom
of fortune and fate; for from what destiny doth write there is neither
refuge nor flight. Know, then, good my lords (continued he) that I am
about to relate the


             _FIRST VOYAGE OF SINDBAD HIGHT THE SEAMAN._[5]

My father was a merchant, one of the notables of my native place, a
monied man and ample of means, who died whilst I was yet a child,
leaving me much wealth in money and lands and farmhouses. When I grew
up, I laid hands on the whole and ate of the best and drank freely and
wore rich clothes and lived lavishly, companioning and consorting with
youths of my own age, and considering that this course of life would
continue for ever and ken no change. Thus did I for a long time, but at
last I awoke from my heedlessness and, returning to my senses, I found
my wealth had become unwealth and my condition ill-conditioned and all I
once hent had left my hand. And recovering my reason I was stricken with
dismay and confusion and bethought me of a saying of our lord Solomon,
son of David (on whom be peace!), which I had heard aforetime from my
father, “Three things are better than other three; the day of death is
better than the day of birth, a live dog is better than a dead lion and
the grave is better than want.”[6] Then I got together my remains of
estates and property and sold all, even my clothes, for three thousand
dirhams, with which I resolved to travel to foreign parts, remembering
the saying of the poet:—

 By means of toil man shall scale the height; ✿ Who to fame aspires
    mustn’t sleep o’ night:
 Who seeketh pearl in the deep must dive, ✿ Winning weal and wealth by
    his main and might:
 And who seeketh Fame without toil and strife ✿ Th’ impossible seeketh
    and wasteth life.

So taking heart I bought me goods, merchandise and all needed for a
voyage and, impatient to be at sea, I embarked, with a company of
merchants, on board a ship bound for Bassorah. There we again embarked
and sailed many days and nights, and we passed from isle to isle and sea
to sea and shore to shore, buying and selling and bartering everywhere
the ship touched, and continued our course till we came to an island as
it were a garth of the gardens of Paradise. Here the captain cast anchor
and making fast to the shore, put out the landing planks. So all on
board landed and made furnaces[7] and lighting fires therein, busied
themselves in various ways, some cooking and some washing, whilst other
some walked about the island for solace, and the crew fell to eating and
drinking and playing and sporting. I was one of the walkers but, as we
were thus engaged, behold the master who was standing on the gunwale
cried out to us at the top of his voice, saying, “Ho there! passengers,
run for your lives and hasten back to the ship and leave your gear and
save yourselves from destruction, Allah preserve you! For this island
whereon ye stand is no true island, but a great fish stationary
a-middlemost of the sea, whereon the sand hath settled and trees have
sprung up of old time, so that it is become like unto an island;[8] but,
when ye lighted fires on it, it felt the heat and moved; and in a moment
it will sink with you into the sea and ye will all be drowned. So leave
your gear and seek your safety ere ye die!”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
ship-master cried to the passengers, “Leave your gear and seek safety,
ere ye die;” all who heard him left gear and goods, clothes washed and
unwashed, fire pots and brass cooking-pots, and fled back to the ship
for their lives, and some reached it while others (amongst whom was I)
did not, for suddenly the island shook and sank into the abysses of the
deep, with all that were thereon, and the dashing sea surged over it
with clashing waves. I sank with the others down, down into the deep,
but Almighty Allah preserved me from drowning and threw in my way a
great wooden tub of those that had served the ship’s company for
tubbing. I gripped it for the sweetness of life and, bestriding it like
one riding, paddled with my feet like oars, whilst the waves tossed me
as in sport right and left. Meanwhile the captain made sail and departed
with those who had reached the ship, regardless of the drowning and the
drowned; and I ceased not following the vessel with my eyes, till she
was hid from sight and I made sure of death. Darkness closed in upon me
while in this plight and the winds and waves bore me on all that night
and the next day, till the tub brought to with me under the lee of a
lofty island, with trees overhanging the tide. I caught hold of a branch
and by its aid clambered up on to the land, after coming nigh upon
death; but when I reached the shore, I found my legs cramped and numbed
and my feet bore traces of the nibbling of fish upon their soles; withal
I had felt nothing for excess of anguish and fatigue. I threw myself
down on the island ground, like a dead man, and drowned in desolation
swooned away, nor did I return to my senses till next morning, when the
sun rose and revived me. But I found my feet swollen, so made shift to
move by shuffling on my breech and crawling on my knees, for in that
island were found store of fruits and springs of sweet water. I ate of
the fruits which strengthened me; and thus I abode days and nights, till
my life seemed to return and my spirits began to revive and I was better
able to move about. So, after due consideration, I fell to exploring the
island and diverting myself with gazing upon all things that Allah
Almighty had created there; and rested under the trees from one of which
I cut me a staff to lean upon. One day as I walked along the marge, I
caught sight of some object in the distance and thought it a wild beast
or one of the monster-creatures of the sea; but, as I drew near it,
looking hard the while, I saw that it was a noble mare, tethered on the
beach. Presently I went up to her, but she cried out against me with a
great cry, so that I trembled for fear and turned to go away, when there
came forth a man from under the earth and followed me, crying out and
saying, “Who and whence art thou, and what caused thee to come hither?”
“O my lord,” answered I, “I am in very sooth, a waif, a stranger, and
was left to drown with sundry others by the ship we voyaged in;[9] but
Allah graciously sent me a wooden tub; so I saved myself thereon and it
floated with me, till the waves cast me up on this island.” When he
heard this, he took my hand and saying, “Come with me,” carried me into
a great Sardáb, or underground chamber, which was spacious as a saloon.
He made me sit down at its upper end; then he brought me somewhat of
food and, being an-hungered, I ate till I was satisfied and refreshed;
and when he had put me at mine ease he questioned me of myself, and I
told him all that had befallen me from first to last; and, as he
wondered at my adventure, I said, “By Allah, O my lord, excuse me; I
have told thee the truth of my case and the accident which betided me;
and now I desire that thou tell me who thou art and why thou abidest
here under the earth and why thou hast tethered yonder mare on the brink
of the sea.” Answered he, “Know, that I am one of the several who are
stationed in different parts of this island, and we are of the grooms of
King Mihrján[10] and under our hand are all his horses. Every month,
about new-moon tide we bring hither our best mares which have never been
covered, and picket them on the sea-shore and hide ourselves in this
place under the ground, so that none may espy us. Presently, the
stallions of the sea scent the mares and come up out of the water and
seeing no one, leap the mares and do their will of them. When they have
covered them, they try to drag them away with them, but cannot, by
reason of the leg-ropes; so they cry out at them and butt at them and
kick them, which we hearing, know that the stallions have dismounted; so
we run out and shout at them, whereupon they are startled and return in
fear to the sea. Then the mares conceive by them and bear colts and
fillies worth a mint of money, nor is their like to be found on earth’s
face. This is the time of the coming forth of the sea-stallions; and
Inshallah! I will bear thee to King Mihrjan”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Five Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Syce[11]
said to Sindbad the Seaman, “I will bear thee to King Mihrjan and show
thee our country. And know that hadst thou not happened on us thou hadst
perished miserably and none had known of thee: but I will be the means
of the saving of thy life and of thy return to thine own land.” I called
down blessings on him and thanked him for his kindness and courtesy;
and, while we were yet talking, behold, the stallion came up out of the
sea; and, giving a great cry, sprang upon the mare and covered her. When
he had done his will of her, he dismounted and would have carried her
away with him, but could not by reason of the tether. She kicked and
cried out at him, whereupon the groom took a sword and target[12] and
ran out of the underground saloon, smiting the buckler with the blade
and calling to his company, who came up shouting and brandishing spears;
and the stallion took fright at them and plunging into the sea, like a
buffalo, disappeared under the waves.[13] After this we sat awhile, till
the rest of the grooms came up, each leading a mare, and seeing me with
their fellow-Syce, questioned me of my case and I repeated my story to
them. Thereupon they drew near me and spreading the table, ate and
invited me to eat; so I ate with them, after which they took horse and
mounting me on one of the mares, set out with me and fared on without
ceasing, till we came to the capital city of King Mihrjan, and going in
to him acquainted him with my story. Then he sent for me, and when they
set me before him and salams had been exchanged, he gave me a cordial
welcome and wishing me long life bade me tell him my tale. So I related
to him all that I had seen and all that had befallen me from first to
last, whereat he marvelled and said to me, “By Allah, O my son, thou
hast indeed been miraculously preserved! Were not the term of thy life a
long one, thou hadst not escaped from these straits; but praised be
Allah for safety!” Then he spoke cheerily to me and entreated me with
kindness and consideration: moreover, he made me his agent for the port
and registrar of all ships that entered the harbour. I attended him
regularly, to receive his commandments, and he favoured me and did me
all manner of kindness and invested me with costly and splendid robes.
Indeed, I was high in credit with him, as an intercessor for the folk
and an intermediary between them and him, when they wanted aught of him.
I abode thus a great while and, as often as I passed through the city to
the port, I questioned the merchants and travellers and sailors of the
city of Baghdad; so haply I might hear of an occasion to return to my
native land, but could find none who knew it or knew any who resorted
thither. At this I was chagrined, for I was weary of long strangerhood;
and my disappointment endured for a time till one day, going in to King
Mihrjan, I found with him a company of Indians. I saluted them and they
returned my salam; and politely welcomed me and asked me of my
country.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Forty-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman said:—When they asked me of my country I questioned them of
theirs and they told me that they were of various castes, some being
called Shakiriyah[14] who are the noblest of their castes and neither
oppress nor offer violence to any, and others Brahmans, a folk who
abstain from wine, but live in delight and solace and merriment and own
camels and horses and cattle. Moreover, they told me that the people of
India are divided into two-and-seventy castes, and I marvelled at this
with exceeding marvel. Amongst other things that I saw in King Mihrjan’s
dominions was an island called Kásil,[15] wherein all night is heard the
beating of drums and tabrets; but we were told by the neighbouring
islanders and by travellers that the inhabitants are people of diligence
and judgment.[16] In this sea I saw also a fish two hundred cubits long
and the fishermen fear it; so they strike together pieces of wood and
put it to flight.[17] I also saw another fish, with a head like that of
an owl, besides many other wonders and rarities, which it would be
tedious to recount. I occupied myself thus in visiting the islands till,
one day, as I stood in the port, with a staff in my hand, according to
my custom, behold, a great ship, wherein were many merchants, came
sailing for the harbour. When it reached the small inner port where
ships anchor under the city, the master furled his sails and making fast
to the shore, put out the landing-planks, whereupon the crew fell to
breaking bulk and landing cargo whilst I stood by, taking written note
of them. They were long in bringing the goods ashore so I asked the
master, “Is there aught left in thy ship?”; and he answered, “O my lord,
there are divers bales of merchandise in the hold, whose owner was
drowned from amongst us at one of the islands on our course; so his
goods remained in our charge by way of trust and we purpose to sell them
and note their price, that we may convey it to his people in the City of
Baghdad, the Home of Peace.” “What was the merchant’s name?” quoth I,
and quoth he, “Sindbad the Seaman;” whereupon I straitly considered him
and knowing him, cried out to him with a great cry, saying, “O captain,
I am that Sindbad the Seaman who travelled with other merchants; and
when the fish heaved and thou calledst to us some saved themselves and
others sank, I being one of them. But Allah Almighty threw in my way a
great tub of wood, of those the crew had used to wash withal, and the
winds and waves carried me to this island, where by Allah’s grace, I
fell in with King Mihrjan’s grooms and they brought me hither to the
King their master. When I told him my story, he entreated me with favour
and made me his harbour-master, and I have prospered in his service and
found acceptance with him. These bales, therefore are mine, the goods
which God hath given me.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Forty-second Night,

She continued, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Sindbad
the Seaman said to the captain, “These bales are mine, the goods which
Allah hath given me,” the other exclaimed, “There is no Majesty and
there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! Verily, there
is neither conscience nor good faith left among men!” said I, “O
Rais,[18] what mean these words, seeing that I have told thee my case?”
And he answered, “Because thou heardest me say that I had with me goods
whose owner was drowned, thou thinkest to take them without right; but
this is forbidden by law to thee, for we saw him drown before our eyes,
together with many other passengers, nor was one of them saved. So how
canst thou pretend that thou art the owner of the goods?” “O captain,”
said I, “listen to my story and give heed to my words, and my truth will
be manifest to thee; for lying and leasing are the letter-marks of the
hypocrites.” Then I recounted to him all that had befallen me since I
sailed from Baghdad with him to the time when we came to the fish-island
where we were nearly drowned; and I reminded him of certain matters
which had passed between us; whereupon both he and the merchants were
certified of the truth of my story and recognized me and gave me joy of
my deliverance, saying, “By Allah, we thought not that thou hadst
escaped drowning! But the Lord hath granted thee new life.” Then they
delivered my bales to me, and I found my name written thereon, nor was
aught thereof lacking. So I opened them and making up a present for King
Mihrjan of the finest and costliest of the contents, caused the sailors
carry it up to the palace, where I went in to the King and laid my
present at his feet, acquainting him with what had happened, especially
concerning the ship and my goods; whereat he wondered with exceeding
wonder and the truth of all that I had told him was made manifest to
him. His affection for me redoubled after that and he showed me
exceeding honour and bestowed on me a great present in return for mine.
Then I sold my bales and what other matters I owned making a great
profit on them, and bought me other goods and gear of the growth and
fashion of the island-city. When the merchants were about to start on
their homeward voyage, I embarked on board the ship all that I
possessed, and going in to the King, thanked him for all his favours and
friendship and craved his leave to return to my own land and friends. He
farewelled me and bestowed on me great store of the country-stuffs and
produce; and I took leave of him and embarked. Then we set sail and
fared on nights and days, by the permission of Allah Almighty; and
Fortune served us and Fate favoured us, so that we arrived in safety at
Bassorah-city where I landed rejoiced at my safe return to my natal
soil. After a short stay, I set out for Baghdad, the House of Peace,
with store of goods and commodities of great price. Reaching the city in
due time, I went straight to my own quarter and entered my house where
all my friends and kinsfolk came to greet me. Then I bought me eunuchs
and concubines, servants and negro slaves till I had a large
establishment, and I bought me houses, and lands and gardens, till I was
richer and in better case than before, and returned to enjoy the society
of my friends and familiars more assiduously than ever, forgetting all I
had suffered of fatigue and hardship and strangerhood and every peril of
travel; and I applied myself to all manner joys and solaces and
delights, eating the daintiest viands and drinking the deliciousest
wines; and my wealth allowed this state of things to endure. This, then,
is the story of my first voyage, and to-morrow, Inshallah! I will tell
you the tale of the second of my seven voyages. (Saith he who telleth
the tale), Then Sindbad the Seaman made Sindbad the Landsman sup with
him and bade him give an hundred gold pieces, saying, “Thou hast cheered
us with thy company this day.”[19] The Porter thanked him and, taking
the gift, went his way, pondering that which he had heard and marvelling
mightily at what things betide mankind. He passed the night in his own
place and with early morning repaired to the abode of Sindbad the
Seaman, who received him with honour and seated him by his side. As soon
as the rest of the company was assembled, he set meat and drink before
them and, when they had well eaten and drunken and were merry and in
cheerful case, he took up his discourse and recounted to them in these
words the narrative of


               _THE SECOND VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SEAMAN._

Know, O my brother, that I was living a most comfortable and enjoyable
life, in all solace and delight, as I told you yesterday,——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Sindbad
the Seaman’s guests were all gathered together he thus bespake them:—I
was living a most enjoyable life until one day my mind became possessed
with the thought of travelling about the world of men and seeing their
cities and islands; and a longing seized me to traffic and to make money
by trade. Upon this resolve I took a great store of cash and, buying
goods and gear fit for travel, bound them up in bales. Then I went down
to the river-bank, where I found a noble ship and brand-new about to
sail, equipped with sails of fine cloth and well manned and provided; so
I took passage in her, with a number of other merchants, and after
embarking our goods we weighed anchor the same day. Right fair was our
voyage and we sailed from place to place and from isle to isle; and
whenever we anchored we met a crowd of merchants and notables and
customers, and we took to buying and selling and bartering. At last
Destiny brought us to an island, fair and verdant, in trees abundant,
with yellow-ripe fruits luxuriant, and flowers fragrant and birds
warbling soft descant; and streams crystalline and radiant; but no sign
of man showed to the descrier, no, not a blower of the fire.[20] The
captain made fast with us to this island, and the merchants and sailors
landed and walked about, enjoying the shade of the trees and the song of
the birds, that chanted the praises of the One, the Victorious, and
marvelling at the works of the Omnipotent King.[21] I landed with the
rest; and, sitting down by a spring of sweet water that welled up among
the trees, took out some vivers I had with me and ate of that which
Allah Almighty had allotted unto me. And so sweet was the zephyr and so
fragrant were the flowers, that presently I waxed drowsy and, lying down
in that place, was soon drowned in sleep. When I awoke, I found myself
alone, for the ship had sailed and left me behind, nor had one of the
merchants or sailors bethought himself of me. I searched the island
right and left, but found neither man nor Jinn, whereat I was beyond
measure troubled and my gall was like to burst for stress of chagrin and
anguish and concern, because I was left quite alone, without aught of
worldly gear or meat or drink, weary and heart-broken. So I gave myself
up for lost and said, “Not always doth the crock escape the shock.” I
was saved the first time by finding one who brought me from the desert
island to an inhabited place, but now there is no hope for me. Then I
fell to weeping and wailing and gave myself up to an access of rage,
blaming myself for having again ventured upon the perils and hardships
of voyage, whenas I was at my ease in mine own house in mine own land,
taking my pleasure with good meat and good drink and good clothes and
lacking nothing, neither money nor goods. And I repented me of having
left Baghdad, and this the more after all the travails and dangers I had
undergone in my first voyage, wherein I had so narrowly escaped
destruction, and exclaimed “Verily we are Allah’s and unto Him we are
returning!” I was indeed even as one mad and Jinn-struck and presently I
rose and walked about the island, right and left and every whither,
unable for trouble to sit or tarry in any one place. Then I climbed a
tall tree and looked in all directions, but saw nothing save sky and sea
and trees and birds and isles and sands. However, after a while my eager
glances fell upon some great white thing, afar off in the interior of
the island; so I came down from the tree and made for that which I had
seen; and behold, it was a huge white dome rising high in air and of
vast compass. I walked all around it, but found no door thereto, nor
could I muster strength or nimbleness by reason of its exceeding
smoothness and slipperiness. So I marked the spot where I stood and went
round about the dome to measure its circumference which I found fifty
good paces. And as I stood, casting about how to gain an entrance the
day being near its fall and the sun being near the horizon, behold, the
sun was suddenly hidden from me and the air became dull and dark.
Methought a cloud had come over the sun, but it was the season of
summer; so I marvelled at this and lifting my head looked steadfastly at
the sky, when I saw that the cloud was none other than an enormous bird,
of gigantic girth and inordinately wide of wing which, as it flew
through the air, veiled the sun and hid it from the island. At this
sight my wonder redoubled and I remembered a story——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the Seaman
continued in these words:—My wonder redoubled and I remembered a story I
had heard aforetime of pilgrims and travellers, how in a certain island
dwelleth a huge bird, called the “Rukh”[22] which feedeth its young on
elephants; and I was certified that the dome which caught my sight was
none other than a Rukh’s egg. As I looked and wondered at the marvellous
works of the Almighty, the bird alighted on the dome and brooded over it
with its wings covering it and its legs stretched out behind it on the
ground, and in this posture it fell asleep, glory be to Him who sleepeth
not! When I saw this, I arose and, unwinding my turband from my head,
doubled it and twisted it into a rope, with which I girt my middle and
bound my waist fast to the legs of the Rukh, saying in myself,
“Peradventure, this bird may carry me to a land of cities and
inhabitants, and that will be better than abiding in this desert
island.” I passed the night watching and fearing to sleep, lest the bird
should fly away with me unawares; and, as soon as the dawn broke and
morn shone, the Rukh rose off its egg and spreading its wings with a
great cry flew up into the air dragging me with it; nor ceased it to
soar and to tower till I thought it had reached the limit of the
firmament; after which it descended, earthwards, little by little, till
it lighted on the top of a high hill. As soon as I found myself on the
hard ground, I made haste to unbind myself, quaking for fear of the
bird, though it took no heed of me nor even felt me; and, loosing my
turband from its feet, I made off with my best speed. Presently, I saw
it catch up in its huge claws something from the earth and rise with it
high in air, and observing it narrowly I saw it to be a serpent big of
bulk and gigantic of girth, wherewith it flew away clean out of sight. I
marvelled at this and faring forwards found myself on a peak overlooking
a valley, exceeding great and wide and deep, and bounded by vast
mountains that spired high in air: none could descry their summits, for
the excess of their height, nor was any able to climb up thereto. When I
saw this, I blamed myself for that which I had done and said, “Would
Heaven I had tarried in the island! It was better than this wild desert;
for there I had at least fruits to eat and water to drink, and here are
neither trees nor fruits nor streams. But there is no Majesty and there
is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! Verily, as often as
I am quit of one peril, I fall into a worse danger and a more grievous.”
However, I took courage and walking along the Wady found that its soil
was of diamond, the stone wherewith they pierce minerals and precious
stones and porcelain and the onyx, for that it is a dense stone and a
dure, whereon neither iron nor hardhead hath effect, neither can we cut
off aught therefrom nor break it, save by means of lead-stone.[23]
Moreover, the valley swarmed with snakes and vipers, each big as a palm
tree, that would have made but one gulp of an elephant; and they came
out by night, hiding during the day, lest the Rukhs and eagles pounce on
them and tear them to pieces, as was their wont, why I wot not. And I
repented of what I had done and said, “By Allah, I have made haste to
bring destruction upon myself!” The day began to wane as I went along
and I looked about for a place where I might pass the night, being in
fear of the serpents; and I took no thought of meat and drink in my
concern for my life. Presently, I caught sight of a cave nearhand, with
a narrow doorway; so I entered and seeing a great stone close to the
mouth. I rolled it up and stopped the entrance, saying to myself, “I am
safe here for the night; and as soon as it is day, I will go forth and
see what destiny will do.” Then I looked within the cave and saw at the
upper end a great serpent brooding on her eggs, at which my flesh quaked
and my hair stood on end; but I raised my eyes to Heaven and, committing
my case to fate and lot, abode all that night without sleep till
daybreak, when I rolled back the stone from the mouth of the cave and
went forth, staggering like a drunken man and giddy with watching and
fear and hunger. As in this sore case I walked along the valley, behold,
there fell down before me a slaughtered beast; but I saw no one, whereat
I marvelled with great marvel and presently remembered a story I had
heard aforetime of traders and pilgrims and travellers; how the
mountains where are the diamonds are full of perils and terrors, nor can
any fare through them; but the merchants who traffic in diamonds have a
device by which they obtain them, that is to say, they take a sheep and
slaughter and skin it and cut it in pieces and cast them down from the
mountain-tops into the valley-sole, where the meat being fresh and
sticky with blood, some of the gems cleave to it. There they leave it
till midday, when the eagles and vultures swoop down upon it and carry
it in their claws to the mountain-summits, whereupon the merchants come
and shout at them and scare them away from the meat. Then they come and,
taking the diamonds which they find sticking to it, go their ways with
them and leave the meat to the birds and beasts; nor can any come at the
diamonds but by this device——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the Seaman
continued his relation of what befel him in the Mountain of Diamonds,
and informed them that the merchants cannot come at the diamonds save by
the device aforesaid. So, when I saw the slaughtered beast fall (he
pursued) and bethought me of the story, I went up to it and filled my
pockets and shawl-girdle and turband and the folds of my clothes with
the choicest diamonds; and, as I was thus engaged, down fell before me
another great piece of meat. Then with my unrolled turband and lying on
my back, I set the bit on my breast so that I was hidden by the meat,
which was thus raised above the ground. Hardly had I gripped it, when an
eagle swooped down upon the flesh and, seizing it with his talons, flew
up with it high in air and me clinging thereto, and ceased not its
flight till it alighted on the head of one of the mountains where,
dropping the carcass he fell to rending it; but, behold, there arose
behind him a great noise of shouting and clattering of wood, whereat the
bird took fright and flew away. Then I loosed off myself the meat, with
clothes daubed with blood therefrom, and stood up by its side; whereupon
up came the merchant, who had cried out at the eagle, and seeing me
standing there, bespoke me not, but was affrighted at me and shook with
fear. However, he went up to the carcass and turning it over, found no
diamonds sticking to it, whereat he gave a great cry and exclaimed,
“Harrow, my disappointment! There is no Majesty and there is no Might
save in Allah with whom we seek refuge from Satan the stoned!” And he
bemoaned himself and beat hand upon hand, saying, “Alas, the pity of it!
How cometh this?” Then I went up to him and he said to me, “Who art thou
and what causeth thee to come hither?” And I, “Fear not, I am a man and
a good man and a merchant. My story is a wondrous and my adventures
marvellous and the manner of my coming hither is prodigious. So be of
good cheer, thou shalt receive of me what shall rejoice thee, for I have
with me great plenty of diamonds and I will give thee thereof what shall
suffice thee; for each is better than aught thou couldst get otherwise.
So fear nothing.” The man rejoiced thereat and thanked and blessed me;
then we talked together till the other merchants, hearing me in
discourse with their fellow, came up and saluted me; for each of them
had thrown down his piece of meat. And as I went off with them I told
them my whole story, how I had suffered hardships at sea and the fashion
of my reaching the valley. But I gave the owner of the meat a number of
the stones I had by me, so they all wished me joy of my escape, saying,
“By Allah a new life hath been decreed to thee, for none ever reached
yonder valley and came off thence alive before thee; but praised be
Allah for thy safety!” We passed the night together in a safe and
pleasant place, beyond measure rejoiced at my deliverance from the
Valley of Serpents and my arrival in an inhabited land; and on the
morrow we set out and journeyed over the mighty range of mountains,
seeing many serpents in the valley, till we came to a fair great island,
wherein was a garden of huge camphor trees under each of which an
hundred men might take shelter. When the folk have a mind to get
camphor, they bore into the upper part of the bole with a long iron;
whereupon the liquid camphor, which is the sap of the tree, floweth out
and they catch it in vessels, where it concreteth like gum; but, after
this, the tree dieth and becometh firewood.[24] Moreover, there is in
this island a kind of wild beast, called “Rhinoceros,”[25] that
pastureth as do steers and buffaloes with us; but it is a huge brute,
bigger of body than the camel and like it feedeth upon the leaves and
twigs of trees. It is a remarkable animal with a great and thick horn,
ten cubits long, amiddleward its head; wherein, when cleft in twain, is
the likeness of a man. Voyagers and pilgrims and travellers declare that
this beast called “Karkadan” will carry off a great elephant on its horn
and graze about the island and the sea-coast therewith and take no heed
of it, till the elephant dieth and its fat, melting in the sun, runneth
down into the rhinoceros’s eyes and blindeth him, so that he lieth down
on the shore. Then comes the bird Rukh and carrieth off both the
rhinoceros and that which is on its horn to feed its young withal.
Moreover, I saw in this island many kinds of oxen and buffaloes, whose
like are not found in our country. Here I sold some of the diamonds
which I had by me for gold dinars and silver dirhams and bartered others
for the produce of the country; and, loading them upon beasts of burden,
fared on with the merchants from valley to valley and town to town,
buying and selling and viewing foreign countries and the works and
creatures of Allah, till we came to Bassorah-city, where we abode a few
days, after which I continued my journey to Baghdad.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Sindbad the
Seaman returned from his travel to Baghdad, the House of Peace, he
arrived at home with great store of diamonds and money and goods.
(Continued he) “I foregathered with my friends and relations and gave
alms and largesse and bestowed curious gifts and made presents to all my
friends and companions. Then I betook myself to eating well and drinking
well and wearing fine clothes and making merry with my fellows, and
forgot all my sufferings in the pleasures of return to the solace and
delight of life, with light heart and broadened breast. And every one
who heard of my return came and questioned me of my adventures and of
foreign countries, and I related to them all that had befallen me, and
the much I had suffered, whereat they wondered and gave me joy of my
safe return. This, then, is the end of the story of my second voyage;
and to-morrow, Inshallah! I will tell you what befel me in my third
voyage.” The company marvelled at his story and supped with him; after
which he ordered an hundred dinars of gold to be given to the Porter,
who took the sum with many thanks and blessings (which he stinted not
even when he reached home) and went his way, wondering at what he had
heard. Next morning as soon as day came in its sheen and shone, he rose
and praying the dawn-prayer, repaired to the house of Sindbad the
Seaman, even as he had bidden him, and went in and gave him good-morrow.
The merchant welcomed him and made him sit with him, till the rest of
the company arrived; and when they had well eaten and drunken and were
merry with joy and jollity, their host began by saying:—Hearken, O my
brothers, to what I am about to tell you; for it is even more wondrous
than what you have already heard; but Allah alone kenneth what things
His Omniscience concealed from man! And listen to


               _THE THIRD VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SEAMAN_.

As I told you yesterday, I returned from my second voyage overjoyed at
my safety and with great increase of wealth, Allah having requited me
all that I had wasted and lost, and I abode awhile in Baghdad-city
savouring the utmost ease and prosperity and comfort and happiness, till
the carnal man was once more seized with longing for travel and
diversion and adventure, and yearned after traffic and lucre and
emolument, for that the human heart is naturally prone to evil. So
making up my mind I laid in great plenty of goods suitable for a
sea-voyage and repairing to Bassorah, went down to the shore and found
there a fine ship ready to sail, with a full crew and a numerous company
of merchants, men of worth and substance; faith, piety and
consideration. I embarked with them and we set sail on the blessing of
Allah Almighty and on His aidance and His favour to bring our voyage to
a safe and prosperous issue and already we congratulated one another on
our good fortune and boon voyage. We fared on from sea to sea and from
island to island and city to city, in all delight and contentment,
buying and selling wherever we touched, and taking our solace and our
pleasure, till one day when, as we sailed athwart the dashing sea,
swollen with clashing billows, behold, the master (who stood on the
gunwale examining the ocean in all directions) cried out with a great
cry, and buffeted his face and pluckt out his beard and rent his
raiment, and bade furl the sail and cast the anchors. So we said to him,
“O Rais, what is the matter?” “Know, O my brethren (Allah preserve
you!), that the wind hath gotten the better of us and hath driven us out
of our course into mid-ocean, and destiny, for our ill luck, hath
brought us to the Mountain of the Zughb, a hairy folk like apes,[26]
among whom no man ever fell and came forth alive; and my heart presageth
that we all be dead men.” Hardly had the master made an end of his
speech when the apes were upon us. They surrounded the ship on all sides
swarming like locusts and crowding the shore. They were the most
frightful of wild creatures, covered with black hair like felt, foul of
favour and small of stature, being but four spans high, yellow-eyed and
black-faced; none knoweth their language nor what they are, and they
shun the company of men. We feared to slay them or strike them or drive
them away, because of their inconceivable multitude; lest, if we hurt
one, the rest fall on us and slay us, for numbers prevail over courage;
so we let them do their will, albeit we feared they would plunder our
goods and gear. They swarmed up the cables and gnawed them asunder, and
on like wise they did with all the ropes of the ship, so that it fell
off from the wind and stranded upon their mountainous coast. Then they
laid hands on all the merchants and crew, and landing us on the island,
made off with the ship and its cargo and went their ways, we wot not
whither. We were thus left on the island, eating of its fruits and
pot-herbs and drinking of its streams till, one day, we espied in its
midst what seemed an inhabited house. So we made for it as fast as our
feet could carry us and behold, it was a castle strong and tall,
compassed about with a lofty wall, and having a two-leaved gate of
ebony-wood both of which leaves open stood. We entered and found within
a space wide and bare like a great square, round which stood many high
doors open thrown, and at the farther end a long bench of stone and
brasiers, with cooking gear hanging thereon and about it great plenty of
bones; but we saw no one and marvelled thereat with exceeding wonder.
Then we sat down in the courtyard a little while and presently falling
asleep, slept from the forenoon till sundown, when lo! the earth
trembled under our feet and the air rumbled with a terrible tone. Then
there came down upon us, from the top of the castle, a huge creature in
the likeness of a man, black of colour, tall and big of bulk, as he were
a great date-tree, with eyes like coals of fire and eye-teeth like
boar’s tusks and a vast big gape like the mouth of a well. Moreover, he
had long loose lips like camel’s, hanging down upon his breast, and ears
like two Jarms[27] falling over his shoulder-blades and the nails of his
hands were like the claws of a lion.[28] When we saw this frightful
giant, we were like to faint and every moment increased our fear and
terror; and we became as dead men for excess of horror and
affright.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the Seaman
continued:—When we saw this frightful giant we were struck with
exceeding terror and horror. And after trampling upon the earth, he sat
awhile on the bench; then he arose and coming to us seized me by the arm
choosing me out from among my comrades the merchants. He took me up in
his hand and turning me over felt me, as a butcher feeleth a sheep he is
about to slaughter, and I but a little mouthful in his hands; but
finding me lean and fleshless for stress of toil and trouble and
weariness, let me go and took up another, whom in like manner he turned
over and felt and let go; nor did he cease to feel and turn over the
rest of us, one after another, till he came to the master of the ship.
Now he was a sturdy, stout, broad-shouldered wight, fat and in full
vigour; so he pleased the giant, who seized him, as a butcher seizeth a
beast, and throwing him down, set his foot on his neck and brake it;
after which he fetched a long spit and thrusting it up his backside,
brought it forth of the crown of his head. Then, lighting a fierce fire,
he set over it the spit with the Rais thereon, and turned it over the
coals, till the flesh was roasted, when he took the spit off the fire
and set it like a Kabáb-stick before him. Then he tare the body, limb
from limb, as one jointeth a chicken and, rending the flesh with his
nails, fell to eating of it and gnawing the bones, till there was
nothing left but some of these, which he threw on one side of the wall.
This done, he sat for a while; then he lay down on the stone-bench and
fell asleep, snarking and snoring like the gurgling of a lamb or a cow
with its throat cut; nor did he awake till morning, when he rose and
fared forth and went his ways. As soon as we were certified that he was
gone, we began to talk with one another, weeping and bemoaning ourselves
for the risk we ran, and saying, “Would Heaven we had been drowned in
the sea or that the apes had eaten us! That were better than to be
roasted over the coals; by Allah, this is a vile, foul death! But whatso
the Lord willeth must come to pass and there is no Majesty and there is
no Might, save in Him, the Glorious, the Great! We shall assuredly
perish miserably and none will know of us; as there is no escape for us
from this place.” Then we arose and roamed about the island, hoping that
haply we might find a place to hide us in or a means of flight, for
indeed death was a light matter to us, provided we were not roasted over
the fire[29] and eaten. However, we could find no hiding-place and the
evening overtook us; so, of the excess of our terror, we returned to the
castle and sat down awhile. Presently, the earth trembled under our feet
and the black ogre came up to us and turning us over, felt one after
other, till he found a man to his liking, whom he took and served as he
had done the captain, killing and roasting and eating him: after which
he lay down on the bench[30] and slept all night, snarking and snoring
like a beast with its throat cut, till daybreak, when he arose and went
out as before. Then we drew together and conversed and said one to
other, “By Allah, we had better throw ourselves into the sea and be
drowned than die roasted; for this is an abominable death!” Quoth one of
us, “Hear ye my words! let us cast about to kill him, and be at peace
from the grief of him and rid the Moslems of his barbarity and tyranny.”
Then said I, “Hear me, O my brothers; if there is nothing for it but to
slay him, let us carry some of this firewood and planks down to the
sea-shore and make us a boat wherein, if we succeed in slaughtering him,
we may either embark and let the waters carry us whither Allah willeth,
or else abide here till some ship pass, when we will take passage in it.
If we fail to kill him, we will embark in the boat and put out to sea;
and if we be drowned, we shall at least escape being roasted over a
kitchen fire with sliced weasands; whilst, if we escape, we escape, and
if we be drowned, we die martyrs.” “By Allah,” said they all, “this rede
is a right;” and we agreed upon this, and set about carrying it out. So
we haled down to the beach the pieces of wood which lay about the bench;
and, making a boat, moored it to the strand, after which we stowed
therein somewhat of victual and returned to the castle. As soon as
evening fell the earth trembled under our feet and in came the
blackamoor upon us, snarling like a dog about to bite. He came up to us
and feeling us and turning us over one by one, took one of us and did
with him as he had done before and ate him, after which he lay down on
the bench and snored and snorted like thunder. As soon as we were
assured that he slept, we arose and taking two iron spits of those
standing there, heated them in the fiercest of the fire, till they were
red-hot, like burning coals, when we gripped fast hold of them and going
up to the giant, as he lay snoring on the bench, thrust them into his
eyes and pressed upon them, all of us, with our united might, so that
his eyeballs burst and he became stone blind. Thereupon he cried with a
great cry, whereat our hearts trembled, and springing up from the bench,
he fell a-groping after us, blind-fold. We fled from him right and left
and he saw us not, for his sight was altogether blent; but we were in
terrible fear of him and made sure we were dead men despairing of
escape. Then he found the door, feeling for it with his hands and went
out roaring aloud; and behold, the earth shook under us, for the noise
of his roaring, and we quaked for fear. As he quitted the castle we
followed him and betook ourselves to the place where we had moored our
boat, saying to one another, “If this accursed abide absent till the
going down of the sun and come not to the castle, we shall know that he
is dead; and if he come back, we will embark in the boat and paddle till
we escape, committing our affair to Allah.” But, as we spoke, behold, up
came the blackamoor with other two as they were Ghuls, fouler and more
frightful than he, with eyes like red-hot coals; which when we saw, we
hurried into the boat and casting off the moorings paddled away and
pushed out to sea.[31] As soon as the ogres caught sight of us, they
cried out at us and running down to the sea-shore, fell a-pelting us
with rocks, whereof some fell amongst us and others fell into the sea.
We paddled with all our might till we were beyond their reach, but the
most part of us were slain by the rock-throwing, and the winds and waves
sported with us and carried us into the midst of the dashing sea,
swollen with billows clashing. We knew not whither we went and my
fellows died one after another, till there remained but three, myself
and two others;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the Seaman
thus continued:—Most part of us were slain by the rock-throwing and only
three of us remained on board the boat for, as often as one died, we
threw him into the sea. We were sore exhausted for stress of hunger, but
we took courage and heartened one another and worked for dear life and
paddled with main and might, till the winds cast us upon an island, as
we were dead men for fatigue and fear and famine. We landed on the
island and walked about it for a while, finding that it abounded in
trees and streams and birds; and we ate of the fruits and rejoiced in
our escape from the black and our deliverance from the perils of the
sea; and thus we did till nightfall, when we lay down and fell asleep
for excess of fatigue. But we had hardly closed our eyes before we were
aroused by a hissing sound, like the sough of wind, and awaking, saw a
serpent like a dragon, a seld-seen sight, of monstrous make and belly of
enormous bulk which lay in a circle around us. Presently it reared its
head and, seizing one of my companions, swallowed him up to his
shoulders; then it gulped down the rest of him, and we heard his ribs
crack in its belly. Presently it went its way, and we abode in sore
amazement and grief for our comrade and mortal fear for ourselves,
saying, “By Allah, this is a marvellous thing! Each kind of death that
threateneth us is more terrible than the last. We were rejoicing in our
escape from the black ogre and our deliverance from the perils of the
sea; but now we have fallen into that which is worse. There is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah! By the Almighty, we have
escaped from the blackamoor and from drowning: but how shall we escape
from this abominable and viperish monster?” Then we walked about the
island, eating of its fruits and drinking of its streams till dusk, when
we climbed up into a high tree and went to sleep there, I being on the
topmost bough. As soon as it was dark night, up came the serpent,
looking right and left; and, making for the tree whereon we were,
climbed up to my comrade and swallowed him down to his shoulders. Then
it coiled about the bole[32] with him, whilst I, who could not take my
eyes off the sight, heard his bones crack in its belly, and it swallowed
him whole, after which it slid down from the tree. When the day broke
and the light showed me that the serpent was gone, I came down, as I
were a dead man for stress of fear and anguish, and thought to cast
myself into the sea and be at rest from the woes of the world; but could
not bring myself to this, for verily life is dear. So I took five pieces
of wood, broad and long, and bound one crosswise to the soles of my feet
and others in like fashion on my right and left sides and over my
breast; and the broadest and largest I bound across my head and made
them fast with ropes. Then I lay down on the ground on my back, so that
I was completely fenced in by the pieces of wood, which enclosed me like
a bier.[33] So as soon as it was dark, up came the serpent, as usual,
and made towards me, but could not get at me to swallow me for the wood
that fenced me in. So it wriggled round me on every side, whilst I
looked on, like one dead by reason of my terror; and every now and then
it would glide away and come back; but as often as it tried to come at
me, it was hindered by the pieces of wood wherewith I had bound myself
on every side. It ceased not to beset me thus from sundown till dawn,
but when the light of day shone upon the beast it made off, in the
utmost fury and extreme disappointment. Then I put out my hand and
unbound myself, well-nigh down among the dead men for fear and
suffering; and went down to the island-shore, whence a ship afar off in
the midst of the waves suddenly struck my sight. So I tore off a great
branch of a tree and made signs with it to the crew, shouting out the
while; which when the ship’s company saw they said to one another, “We
must stand in and see what this is; peradventure ‘tis a man.” So they
made for the island and presently heard my cries, whereupon they took me
on board and questioned me of my case. I told them all my adventures
from first to last, whereat they marvelled mightily and covered my
shame[34] with some of their clothes. Moreover, they set before me
somewhat of food and I ate my fill and I drank cold sweet water and was
mightily refreshed; and Allah Almighty quickened me after I was
virtually dead. So I praised the Most Highest and thanked Him for His
favours and exceeding mercies, and my heart revived in me after utter
despair, till meseemed as if all I had suffered were but a dream I had
dreamed. We sailed on with a fair wind the Almighty sent us till we came
to an Island, called Al-Saláhitah,[35] which aboundeth in sandal-wood
when the captain cast anchor,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the Seaman
continued:—And when we had cast anchor, the merchants and the sailors
landed with their goods to sell and to buy. Then the captain turned to
me and said, “Hark’ee, thou art a stranger and a pauper and tellest us
that thou hast undergone frightful hardships; wherefore I have a mind to
benefit thee with somewhat that may further thee to thy native land, so
thou wilt ever bless me and pray for me.” “So be it,” answered I; “thou
shalt have my prayers.” Quoth he, “Know then that there was with us a
man, a traveller, whom we lost, and we know not if he be alive or dead,
for we had no news of him; so I purpose to commit his bales of goods to
thy charge, that thou mayst sell them in this island. A part of the
proceeds we will give thee as an equivalent for thy pains and service,
and the rest we will keep till we return to Baghdad, where we will
enquire for his family and deliver it to them, together with the unsold
goods. Say me then, wilt thou undertake the charge and land and sell
them as other merchants do?” I replied, “Hearkening and obedience to
thee, O my lord; and great is thy kindness to me,” and thanked him;
whereupon he bade the sailors and porters bear the bales in question
ashore and commit them to my charge. The ship’s scribe asked him, “O
master, what bales are these and what merchant’s name shall I write upon
them?”; and he answered, “Write on them the name of Sindbad the Seaman,
him who was with us in the ship and whom we lost at the Rukh’s island,
and of whom we have no tidings; for we mean this stranger to sell them;
and we will give him a part of the price for his pains and keep the rest
till we return to Baghdad where, if we find the owner we will make it
over to him, and if not, to his family.” And the clerk said, “Thy words
are apposite and thy rede is right.” Now when I heard the captain give
orders for the bales to be inscribed with my name, I said to myself, “By
Allah, I am Sindbad the Seaman!” So I armed myself with courage and
patience and waited till all the merchants had landed and were gathered
together, talking and chaffering about buying and selling; then I went
up to the captain and asked him, “O my lord, knowest thou what manner of
man was this Sindbad, whose goods thou hast committed to me for sale?”;
and he answered, “I know of him naught save that he was a man from
Baghdad-city, Sindbad hight the Seaman, who was drowned with many others
when we lay anchored at such an island and I have heard nothing of him
since then.” At this I cried out with a great cry and said, “O captain,
whom Allah keep! know that I am that Sindbad the Seaman and that I was
not drowned, but when thou castest anchor at the island, I landed with
the rest of the merchants and crew; and I sat down in a pleasant place
by myself and ate somewhat of food I had with me and enjoyed myself till
I became drowsy and was drowned in sleep; and when I awoke, I found no
ship and none near me. These goods are my goods and these bales are my
bales; and all the merchants who fetch jewels from the Valley of
Diamonds saw me there and will bear me witness that I am the very
Sindbad the Seaman; for I related to them everything that had befallen
me and told them how you forgot me and left me sleeping on the island,
and that betided me which betided me.” When the passengers and crew
heard my words, they gathered about me and some of them believed me and
others disbelieved; but presently, behold, one of the merchants, hearing
me mention the Valley of Diamonds, came up to me and said to them, “Hear
what I say, good people! When I related to you the most wonderful thing
in my travels, and I told you that, at the time we cast down our
slaughtered animals into the Valley of Serpents (I casting with the rest
as was my wont), there came up a man hanging to mine, ye believed me not
and gave me the lie.” “Yes,” quoth they, “thou didst tell us some such
tale, but we had no call to credit thee.” He resumed, “Now this is the
very man, by token that he gave me diamonds of great value and high
price whose like are not to be found, requiting me more than would have
come up sticking to my quarter of meat; and I companied with him to
Bassorah-city, where he took leave of us and went on to his native
stead, whilst we returned to our own land. This is he; and he told us
his name, Sindbad the Seaman, and how the ship left him on the desert
island. And know ye that Allah hath sent him hither, so might the truth
of my story be made manifest to you. Moreover, these are his goods for,
when he first foregathered with us, he told us of them; and the truth of
his words is patent.” Hearing the merchant’s speech the captain came up
to me and considered me straitly awhile, after which he said, “What was
the mark on thy bales?” “Thus and thus,” answered I, and reminded him of
somewhat that had passed between him and me, when I shipped with him
from Bassorah. Thereupon he was convinced that I was indeed Sindbad the
Seaman and took me round the neck and gave me joy of my safety, saying,
“By Allah, O my lord, thy case is indeed wondrous and thy tale
marvellous; but lauded be Allah who hath brought thee and me together
again, and who hath restored to thee thy goods and gear!”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Five Hundred and Fiftieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the Seaman
thus continued:—“Alhamdolillah!” quoth the captain, “lauded be Allah who
hath restored unto thee thy goods and gear.” Then I disposed of my
merchandise to the best of my skill, and profited largely on them
whereat I rejoiced with exceeding joy and congratulated myself on my
safety and the recovery of my goods. We ceased not to buy and sell at
the several islands till we came to the land of Hind, where we bought
cloves and ginger and all manner spices; and thence we fared on to the
land of Sind, where also we bought and sold. In these Indian seas, I saw
wonders without number or count, amongst others a fish like a cow which
bringeth forth its young and suckleth them like human beings; and of its
skin bucklers are made.[36] There were eke fishes like asses and
camels[37] and tortoises twenty cubits wide.[38] And I saw also a bird
that cometh out of a sea-shell and layeth eggs and hatcheth her chicks
on the surface of the water, never coming up from the sea to the
land.[39] Then we set sail again with a fair wind and the blessing of
Almighty Allah; and, after a prosperous voyage, arrived safe and sound
at Bassorah. Here I abode a few days and presently returned to Baghdad
where I went at once to my quarter and my house and saluted my family
and familiars and friends. I had gained on this voyage what was beyond
count and reckoning, so I gave alms and largesse and clad the widow and
the orphan, by way of thanksgiving for my happy return, and fell to
feasting and making merry with my companions and intimates and forgot,
while eating well and drinking well and dressing well, everything that
had befallen me and all the perils and hardships I had suffered. These,
then, are the most admirable things I sighted on my third voyage, and
to-morrow, an it be the will of Allah, you shall come to me and I will
relate the adventures of my fourth voyage, which is still more wonderful
than those you have already heard. (Saith he who telleth the tale), Then
Sindbad the Seaman bade give Sindbad the Landsman an hundred golden
dinars as of wont and called for food. So they spread the tables and the
company ate the night-meal and went their ways, marvelling at the tale
they had heard. The Porter after taking his gold passed the night in his
own house, also wondering at what his namesake the Seaman had told him,
and as soon as day broke and the morning showed with its sheen and
shone, he rose and praying the dawn-prayer betook himself to Sindbad the
Seaman, who returned his salute and received him with an open breast and
cheerful favour and made him sit with him till the rest of the company
arrived, when he caused set on food and they ate and drank and made
merry. Then Sindbad the Seaman bespake them and related to them the
narrative of


               _THE FOURTH VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SEAMAN_.

Know, O my brethren that after my return from my third voyage and
foregathering with my friends, and forgetting all my perils and
hardships in the enjoyment of ease and comfort and repose, I was visited
one day by a company of merchants who sat down with me and talked of
foreign travel and traffic, till the old bad man within me yearned to go
with them and enjoy the sight of strange countries, and I longed for the
society of the various races of mankind and for traffic and profit. So I
resolved to travel with them and buying the necessaries for a long
voyage, and great store of costly goods, more than ever before,
transported them from Baghdad to Bassorah where I took ship with the
merchants in question, who were of the chief of the town. We set out,
trusting in the blessing of Almighty Allah; and with a favouring breeze
and the best conditions we sailed from island to island and sea to sea,
till, one day, there arose against us a contrary wind and the captain
cast out his anchors and brought the ship to a standstill, fearing lest
she should founder in mid-ocean. Then we all fell to prayer and humbling
ourselves before the Most High; but, as we were thus engaged there smote
us a furious squall which tore the sails to rags and tatters: the
anchor-cable parted and, the ship foundering, we were cast into the sea,
goods and all. I kept myself afloat by swimming half the day, till, when
I had given myself up for lost, the Almighty threw in my way one of the
planks of the ship, whereon I and some others of the merchants
scrambled.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the Seaman
continued as follows:—And when the ship foundered I scrambled on to a
plank with some others of the merchants and, mounting it as we would a
horse, paddled with our feet in the sea. We abode thus a day and a
night, the wind and waves helping us on, and on the second day shortly
before the mid-time between sunrise and noon[40] the breeze freshened
and the sea wrought and the rising waves cast us upon an island,
well-nigh dead bodies for weariness and want of sleep, cold and hunger
and fear and thirst. We walked about the shore and found abundance of
herbs, whereof we ate enough to keep breath in body and to stay our
failing spirits, then lay down and slept till morning hard by the sea.
And when morning came with its sheen and shone, we arose and walked
about the island to the right and left, till we came in sight of an
inhabited house afar off. So we made towards it, and ceased not walking
till we reached the door thereof when lo! a number of naked men issued
from it and without saluting us or a word said, laid hold of us
masterfully and carried us to their king, who signed us to sit. So we
sat down and they set food before us such as we knew not[41] and whose
like we had never seen in all our lives. My companions ate of it, for
stress of hunger, but my stomach revolted from it and I would not eat;
and my refraining from it was, by Allah’s favour, the cause of my being
alive till now: for no sooner had my comrades tasted of it than their
reason fled and their condition changed and they began to devour it like
madmen possessed of an evil spirit. Then the savages gave them to drink
of cocoa-nut oil and anointed them therewith; and straightway after
drinking thereof, their eyes turned into their heads and they fell to
eating greedily, against their wont. When I saw this, I was confounded
and concerned for them, nor was I less anxious about myself, for fear of
the naked folk. So I watched them narrowly, and it was not long before I
discovered them to be a tribe of Magian cannibals whose King was a
Ghul.[42] All who came to their country or whoso they caught in their
valleys or on their roads they brought to this King and fed them upon
that food and anointed them with that oil, whereupon their stomachs
dilated that they might eat largely, whilst their reason fled and they
lost the power of thought and became idiots. Then they stuffed them with
cocoa-nut oil and the aforesaid food, till they became fat and gross,
when they slaughtered them by cutting their throats and roasted them for
the King’s eating; but, as for the savages themselves, they ate human
flesh raw.[43] When I saw this, I was sore dismayed for myself and my
comrades, who were now become so stupefied that they knew not what was
done with them and the naked folk committed them to one who used every
day to lead them out and pasture them on the island like cattle. And
they wandered amongst the trees and rested at will, thus waxing very
fat. As for me, I wasted away and became sickly for fear and hunger and
my flesh shrivelled on my bones; which when the savages saw, they left
me alone and took no thought of me and so far forgot me that one day I
gave them the slip and walking out of their place made for the beach
which was distant and there espied a very old man seated on a high
place, girt by the waters. I looked at him and knew him for the
herdsman, who had charge of pasturing my fellows, and with him were many
others in like case. As soon as he saw me, he knew me to be in
possession of my reason and not afflicted like the rest whom he was
pasturing; so signed to me from afar, as who should say, “Turn back and
take the right-hand road, for that will lead thee into the King’s
highway.” So I turned back, as he bade me, and followed the right-hand
road, now running for fear and then walking leisurely to rest me, till I
was out of the old man’s sight. By this time, the sun had gone down and
the darkness set in; so I sat down to rest and would have slept, but
sleep came not to me that night, for stress of fear and famine and
fatigue. When the night was half spent, I rose and walked on, till the
day broke in all its beauty and the sun rose over the heads of the lofty
hills and athwart the low gravelly plains. Now I was weary and hungry
and thirsty; so I ate my fill of herbs and grasses that grew in the
island and kept life in body and stayed my stomach, after which I set
out again and fared on all that day and the next night, staying my greed
with roots and herbs; nor did I cease walking for seven days and their
nights, till the morn of the eighth day, when I caught sight of a faint
object in the distance. So I made towards it, though my heart quaked for
all I had suffered first and last, and behold it was a company of men
gathering pepper-grains.[44] As soon as they saw me, they hastened up to
me and surrounding me on all sides, said to me, “Who art thou and whence
come?” I replied, “Know, O folk, that I am a poor stranger,” and
acquainted them with my case and all the hardships and perils I had
suffered——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the Seaman
continued:—And the men gathering pepper in the island questioned me of
my case, when I acquainted them with all the hardships and perils I had
suffered and how I had fled from the savages; whereat they marvelled and
gave me joy of my safety, saying, “By Allah, this is wonderful! But how
didst thou escape from these blacks who swarm in the island and devour
all who fall in with them; nor is any safe from them, nor can any get
out of their clutches?” And after I had told them the fate of my
companions, they made me sit by them, till they got quit of their work;
and fetched me somewhat of good food, which I ate, for I was hungry, and
rested awhile, after which they took ship with me and carrying me to
their island-home brought me before their King, who returned my salute
and received me honourably and questioned me of my case. I told him all
that had befallen me, from the day of my leaving Baghdad-city, whereupon
he wondered with great wonder at my adventures, he and his courtiers,
and bade me sit by him; then he called for food and I ate with him what
sufficed me and washed my hands and returned thanks to Almighty Allah
for all His favours praising Him and glorifying Him. Then I left the
King and walked for solace about the city, which I found wealthy and
populous, abounding in market-streets well stocked with food and
merchandise and full of buyers and sellers. So I rejoiced at having
reached so pleasant a place and took my ease there after my fatigues;
and I made friends with the townsfolk, nor was it long before I became
more in honour and favour with them and their King than any of the chief
men of the realm. Now I saw that all the citizens, great and small, rode
fine horses, high-priced and thorough-bred, without saddles or housings,
whereat I wondered and said to the King, “Wherefore, O my lord, dost
thou not ride with a saddle? Therein is ease for the rider and increase
of power.” “What is a saddle?” asked he: “I never saw nor used such a
thing in all my life;” and I answered, “With thy permission I will make
thee a saddle, that thou mayest ride on it and see the comfort thereof.”
And quoth he, “Do so.” So quoth I to him, “Furnish me with some wood,”
which being brought, I sought me a clever carpenter and sitting by him
showed him how to make the saddle-tree, portraying for him the fashion
thereof in ink on the wood. Then I took wool and teased it and made felt
of it, and, covering the saddle-tree with leather, stuffed it and
polished it and attached the girth and stirrup leathers; after which I
fetched a blacksmith and described to him the fashion of the stirrups
and bridle-bit. So he forged a fine pair of stirrups and a bit, and
filed them smooth and tinned[45] them. Moreover, I made fast to them
fringes of silk and fitted bridle-leathers to the bit. Then I fetched
one of the best of the royal horses and saddling and bridling him, hung
the stirrups to the saddle and led him to the King. The thing took his
fancy and he thanked me; then he mounted and rejoiced greatly in the
saddle and rewarded me handsomely for my work. When the King’s Wazir saw
the saddle, he asked of me one like it and I made it for him.
Furthermore, all the grandees and officers of state came for saddles to
me; so I fell to making saddles (having taught the craft to the
carpenter and blacksmith), and selling them to all who sought, till I
amassed great wealth and became in high honour and great favour with the
King and his household and grandees. I abode thus till, one day, as I
was sitting with the King in all respect and contentment, he said to me,
“Know thou, O such an one, thou art become one of us, dear as a brother,
and we hold thee in such regard and affection that we cannot part with
thee nor suffer thee to leave our city; wherefore I desire of thee
obedience in a certain matter, and I will not have thee gainsay me.”
Answered I, “O King, what is it thou desirest of me? Far be it from me
to gainsay thee in aught, for I am indebted to thee for many favours and
bounties and much kindness, and (praised be Allah!) I am become one of
thy servants.” Quoth he, “I have a mind to marry thee to a fair, clever
and agreeable wife who is wealthy as she is beautiful; so thou mayst be
naturalised and domiciled with us: I will lodge thee with me in my
palace; wherefore oppose me not neither cross me in this.” When I heard
these words I was ashamed and held my peace nor could make him any
answer,[46] by reason of my much bashfulness before him. Asked he, “Why
dost thou not reply to me, O my son?”; and I answered, saying, “O my
master, it is thine to command, O King of the age!” So he summoned the
Kazi and the witnesses and married me straightway to a lady of a noble
tree and high pedigree; wealthy in moneys and means; the flower of an
ancient race; of surpassing beauty and grace, and the owner of farms and
estates and many a dwelling-place.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the Seaman
continued in these words:—Now after the King my master had married me to
this choice wife, he also gave me a great and goodly house standing
alone, together with slaves and officers, and assigned me pay and
allowances. So I became in all ease and contentment and delight and
forgot everything which had befallen me of weariness and trouble and
hardship; for I loved my wife with fondest love and she loved me no
less, and we were as one and abode in the utmost comfort of life and in
its happiness. And I said in myself, “When I return to my native land, I
will carry her with me.” But whatso is predestined to a man, that needs
must be, and none knoweth what shall befal him. We lived thus a great
while, till Almighty Allah bereft one of my neighbours of his wife. Now
he was a gossip of mine; so hearing the cry of the keeners I went in to
condole with him on his loss and found him in very ill plight, full of
trouble and weary of soul and mind. I condoled with him and comforted
him, saying, “Mourn not for thy wife who hath now found the mercy of
Allah; the Lord will surely give thee a better in her stead and thy name
shall be great and thy life shall be long in the land, Inshallah!”[47]
But he wept bitter tears and replied, “O my friend, how can I marry
another wife and how shall Allah replace her to me with a better than
she, whenas I have but one day left to live?” “O my brother,” said I,
“return to thy senses and announce not the glad tidings of thine own
death, for thou art well, sound and in good case.” “By thy life, O my
friend,” rejoined he, “to-morrow thou wilt lose me and wilt never see me
again till the Day of Resurrection.” I asked, “How so?” and he answered,
“This very day they bury my wife, and they bury me with her in one tomb;
for it is the custom with us, if the wife die first, to bury the husband
alive with her and in like manner the wife, if the husband die first; so
that neither may enjoy life after losing his or her mate.” “By Allah,”
cried I, “this is a most vile, lewd custom and not to be endured of
any!” Meanwhile, behold, the most part of the townsfolk came in and fell
to condoling with my gossip for his wife and for himself. Presently they
laid the dead woman out, as was their wont; and, setting her on a bier,
carried her and her husband without the city, till they came to a place
in the side of a mountain at the end of the island by the sea; and here
they raised a great rock and discovered the mouth of a stone-rivetted
pit or well,[48] leading down into a vast underground cavern that ran
beneath the mountain. Into this pit they threw the corpse, then tying a
rope of palm-fibres under the husband’s armpits, they let him down into
the cavern, and with him a great pitcher of fresh water and seven scones
by way of viaticum.[49] When he came to the bottom, he loosed himself
from the rope and they drew it up; and, stopping the mouth of the pit
with the great stone, they returned to the city, leaving my friend in
the cavern with his dead wife. When I saw this, I said to myself, “By
Allah, this fashion of death is more grievous than the first!” And I
went in to the King and said to him, “O my lord, why do ye bury the
quick with the dead?” Quoth he, “It hath been the custom, thou must
know, of our forbears and our olden Kings from time immemorial, if the
husband die first, to bury his wife with him, and the like with the
wife, so we may not sever them, alive or dead.” I asked, “O King of the
age, if the wife of a foreigner like myself die among you, deal ye with
him as with yonder man?”; and he answered, “Assuredly, we do with him
even as thou hast seen.” When I heard this, my gall-bladder was like to
burst, for the violence of my dismay and concern for myself: my wit
became dazed; I felt as if in a vile dungeon; and hated their society;
for I went about in fear lest my wife should die before me and they bury
me alive with her. However, after a while, I comforted myself, saying,
“Haply I shall predecease her, or shall have returned to my own land
before she die, for none knoweth which shall go first and which shall go
last.” Then I applied myself to diverting my mind from this thought with
various occupations; but it was not long before my wife sickened and
complained and took to her pillow and fared after a few days to the
mercy of Allah; and the King and the rest of the folk came, as was their
wont, to condole with me and her family and to console us for her loss
and not less to condole with me for myself. Then the women washed her
and arraying her in her richest raiment and golden ornaments, necklaces
and jewellery, laid her on the bier and bore her to the mountain
aforesaid, where they lifted the cover of the pit and cast her in; after
which all my intimates and acquaintances and my wife’s kith and kin came
round me, to farewell me in my lifetime and console me for my own death,
whilst I cried out among them, saying, “Almighty Allah never made it
lawful to bury the quick with the dead! I am a stranger, not one of your
kind; and I cannot abear your custom, and had I known it I never would
have wedded among you!” They heard me not and paid no heed to my words,
but laying hold of me, bound me by force and let me down into the
cavern, with a large gugglet of sweet water and seven cakes of bread,
according to their custom. When I came to the bottom, they called out to
me to cast myself loose from the cords, but I refused to do so; so they
threw them down on me and, closing the mouth of the pit with the stones
aforesaid, went their ways,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the Seaman
continued:—When they left me in the cavern with my dead wife and,
closing the mouth of the pit, went their ways, I looked about me and
found myself in a vast cave full of dead bodies, that exhaled a fulsome
and loathsome smell and the air was heavy with the groans of the dying.
Thereupon I fell to blaming myself for what I had done, saying, “By
Allah, I deserve all that hath befallen me and all that shall befal me!
What curse was upon me to take a wife in this city? There is no Majesty
and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! As often
as I say, I have escaped from one calamity, I fall into a worse. By
Allah, this is an abominable death to die! Would Heaven I had died a
decent death and been washed and shrouded like a man and a Moslem. Would
I had been drowned at sea or perished in the mountains! It were better
than to die this miserable death!” And on such wise I kept blaming my
own folly and greed of gain in that black hole, knowing not night from
day; and I ceased not to ban the Foul Fiend and to bless the Almighty
Friend. Then I threw myself down on the bones of the dead and lay there,
imploring Allah’s help and in the violence of my despair, invoking death
which came not to me, till the fire of hunger burned my stomach and
thirst set my throat aflame when I sat up and feeling for the bread, ate
a morsel and upon it swallowed a mouthful of water. After this, the
worst night I ever knew, I arose, and exploring the cavern, found that
it extended a long way with hollows in its sides; and its floor was
strewn with dead bodies and rotten bones, that had lain there from olden
time. So I made myself a place in a cavity of the cavern, afar from the
corpses lately thrown down and there slept. I abode thus a long while,
till my provision was like to give out; and yet I ate not save once
every day or second day; nor did I drink more than an occasional
draught, for fear my victual should fail me before my death; and I said
to myself, “Eat little and drink little; belike the Lord shall vouchsafe
deliverance to thee!” One day, as I sat thus, pondering my case and
bethinking me how I should do, when my bread and water should be
exhausted, behold, the stone that covered the opening was suddenly
rolled away and the light streamed down upon me. Quoth I, “I wonder what
is the matter: haply they have brought another corpse.” Then I espied
folk standing about the mouth of the pit, who presently let down a dead
man and a live woman, weeping and bemoaning herself, and with her an
ampler supply of bread and water than usual.[50] I saw her and she was a
beautiful woman; but she saw me not; and they closed up the opening and
went away. Then I took the leg-bone of a dead man and, going up to the
woman, smote her on the crown of the head; and she cried one cry and
fell down in a swoon. I smote her a second and a third time, till she
was dead, when I laid hands on her bread and water and found on her
great plenty of ornaments and rich apparel, necklaces, jewels and gold
trinkets;[51] for it was their custom to bury women in all their finery.
I carried the vivers to my sleeping place in the cavern-side and ate and
drank of them sparingly, no more than sufficed to keep the life in me,
lest the provaunt come speedily to an end and I perish of hunger and
thirst. Yet did I never wholly lose hope in Almighty Allah. I abode thus
a great while, killing all the live folk they let down into the cavern
and taking their provisions of meat and drink; till one day, as I slept,
I was awakened by something scratching and burrowing among the bodies in
a corner of the cave and said, “What can this be?” fearing wolves or
hyænas. So I sprang up and seizing the leg-bone aforesaid, made for the
noise. As soon as the thing was ware of me, it fled from me into the
inward of the cavern, and lo! it was a wild beast. However, I followed
it to the further end, till I saw afar off a point of light not bigger
than a star, now appearing and then disappearing. So I made for it, and
as I drew near, it grew larger and brighter, till I was certified that
it was a crevice in the rock, leading to the open country; and I said to
myself, “There must be some reason for this opening: either it is the
mouth of a second pit, such as that by which they let me down, or else
it is a natural fissure in the stonery.” So I bethought me awhile and
nearing the light, found that it came from a breach in the back side of
the mountain, which the wild beasts had enlarged by burrowing, that they
might enter and devour the dead and freely go to and fro. When I saw
this, my spirits revived and hope came back to me and I made sure of
life, after having died a death. So I went on, as in a dream, and making
shift to scramble through the breach found myself on the slope of a high
mountain, overlooking the salt sea and cutting off all access thereto
from the island, so that none could come at that part of the beach from
the city.[52] I praised my Lord and thanked Him, rejoicing greatly and
heartening myself with the prospect of deliverance; then I returned
through the crack to the cavern and brought out all the food and water I
had saved up and donned some of the dead folk’s clothes over my own;
after which I gathered together all the collars and necklaces of pearls
and jewels and trinkets of gold and silver set with precious stones and
other ornaments and valuables I could find upon the corpses; and, making
them into bundles with the grave clothes and raiment of the dead,
carried them out to the back of the mountain facing the sea-shore, where
I established myself, purposing to wait there till it should please
Almighty Allah to send me relief by means of some passing ship. I
visited the cavern daily and as often as I found folk buried alive
there, I killed them all indifferently, men and women, and took their
victual and valuables and transported them to my seat on the sea-shore.
Thus I abode a long while——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the Seaman
continued:—And after carrying all my victuals and valuables from the
cavern to the coast I abode a long while by the sea, pondering my case,
till one day I caught sight of a ship passing in the midst of the
clashing sea, swollen with dashing billows. So I took a piece of a white
shroud I had with me and, tying it to a staff, ran along the sea-shore,
making signals therewith and calling to the people in the ship, till
they espied me and hearing my shouts, sent a boat to fetch me off. When
it drew near, the crew called out to me, saying, “Who art thou and how
camest thou to be on this mountain, whereon never saw we any in our born
days?” I answered, “I am a gentleman[53] and a merchant, who hath been
wrecked and saved myself on one of the planks of the ship, with some of
my goods; and by the blessing of the Almighty and the decrees of Destiny
and my own strength and skill, after much toil and moil I have landed
with my gear in this place where I awaited some passing ship to take me
off.” So they took me in their boat together with the bundles I had made
of the jewels and valuables from the cavern, tied up in clothes and
shrouds, and rowed back with me to the ship, where the captain said to
me, “How camest thou, O man, to yonder place on yonder mountain behind
which lieth a great city? All my life I have sailed these seas and
passed to and fro hard by these heights; yet never saw I here any living
thing save wild beasts and birds.” I repeated to him the story I had
told the sailors,[54] but acquainted him with nothing of that which had
befallen me in the city and the cavern, lest there should be any of the
islandry in the ship. Then I took out some of the best pearls I had with
me and offered them to the captain, saying, “O my lord, thou hast been
the means of saving me off this mountain. I have no ready money; but
take this from me in requital of thy kindness and good offices.” But he
refused to accept it of me, saying, “When we find a shipwrecked man on
the sea-shore or on an island, we take him up and give him meat and
drink, and if he be naked we clothe him; nor take we aught from him;
nay, when we reach a port of safety, we set him ashore with a present of
our own money and entreat him kindly and charitably, for the love of
Allah the Most High.” So I prayed that his life be long in the land and
rejoiced in my escape, trusting to be delivered from my stress and to
forget my past mishaps; for every time I remembered being let down into
the cave with my dead wife I shuddered in horror. Then we pursued our
voyage and sailed from island to island and sea to sea, till we arrived
at the Island of the Bell, which containeth a city two days’ journey in
extent, whence after a six days’ run we reached the Island Kala, hard by
the land of Hind.[55] This place is governed by a potent and puissant
King and it produceth excellent camphor and an abundance of the Indian
rattan: here also is a lead mine. At last by the decree of Allah, we
arrived in safety at Bassorah-town where I tarried a few days, then went
on to Baghdad-city, and, finding my quarter, entered my house with
lively pleasure. There I foregathered with my family and friends, who
rejoiced in my happy return and gave me joy of my safety. I laid up in
my storehouses all the goods I had brought with me, and gave alms and
largesse to Fakirs and beggars and clothed the widow and the orphan.
Then I gave myself up to pleasure and enjoyment, returning to my old
merry mode of life. Such, then, be the most marvellous adventures of my
fourth voyage, but to-morrow if you will kindly come to me, I will tell
you that which befel me in my fifth voyage, which was yet rarer and more
marvellous than those which forewent it. And thou, O my brother Sindbad
the Landsman, shalt sup with me as thou art wont. (Saith he who telleth
the tale), When Sindbad the Seaman had made an end of his story, he
called for supper; so they spread the table and the guests ate the
evening meal; after which he gave the Porter an hundred dinars as usual,
and he and the rest of the company went their ways, glad at heart and
marvelling at the tales they had heard, for that each story was more
extraordinary than that which forewent it. The porter Sindbad passed the
night in his own house, in all joy and cheer and wonderment; and, as
soon as morning came with its sheen and shone, he prayed the dawn-prayer
and repaired to the house of Sindbad the Seaman, who welcomed him and
bade him sit with him till the rest of the company arrived, when they
ate and drank and made merry and the talk went round amongst them.
Presently, their host began the narrative of the fifth voyage——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the host began in
these words the narrative of


               _THE FIFTH VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SEAMAN_.

Know, O my brothers, that when I had been awhile on shore after my
fourth voyage; and when, in my comfort and pleasures and merry-makings
and in my rejoicing over my large gains and profits, I had forgotten all
I had endured of perils and sufferings, the carnal man was again seized
with the longing to travel and to see foreign countries and islands.[56]
Accordingly I bought costly merchandise suited to my purpose and, making
it up into bales, repaired to Bassorah, where I walked about the
river-quay till I found a fine tall ship, newly builded with gear unused
and fitted ready for sea. She pleased me; so I bought her and, embarking
my goods in her, hired a master and crew, over whom I set certain of my
slaves and servants as inspectors. A number of merchants also brought
their outfits and paid me freight and passage-money; then, after
reciting the Fatihah we set sail over Allah’s pool in all joy and cheer,
promising ourselves a prosperous voyage and much profit. We sailed from
city to city and from island to island and from sea to sea viewing the
cities and countries by which we passed, and selling and buying in not a
few till one day we came to a great uninhabited island, deserted and
desolate, whereon was a white dome of biggest bulk half buried in the
sands. The merchants landed to examine this dome, leaving me in the
ship; and when they drew near, behold, it was a huge Rukh’s egg. They
fell a-beating it with stones, knowing not what it was, and presently
broke it open, whereupon much water ran out of it and the young Rukh
appeared within. So they pulled it forth of the shell and cut its throat
and took of it great store of meat. Now I was in the ship and knew not
what they did; but presently one of the passengers came up to me and
said, “O my lord, come and look at the egg that we thought to be a
dome.” So I looked and seeing the merchants beating it with stones,
called out to them, “Stop, stop! do not meddle with that egg, or the
bird Rukh will come out and break our ship and destroy us.”[57] But they
paid no heed to me and gave not over smiting upon the egg, when behold,
the day grew dark and dun and the sun was hidden from us, as if some
great cloud had passed over the firmament.[58] So we raised our eyes and
saw that what we took for a cloud was the Rukh poised between us and the
sun, and it was his wings that darkened the day. When he came and saw
his egg broken, he cried a loud cry, whereupon his mate came flying up
and they both began circling about the ship, crying out at us with
voices louder than thunder. I called to the Rais and crew, “Put out to
sea and seek safety in flight, before we be all destroyed.” So the
merchants came on board and we cast off and made haste from the island
to gain the open sea. When the Rukhs saw this, they flew off and we
crowded all sail on the ship, thinking to get out of their country; but
presently the two re-appeared and flew after us and stood over us, each
carrying in its claws a huge boulder which it had brought from the
mountains. As soon as the he-Rukh came up with us, he let fall upon us
the rock he held in his pounces; but the master put about ship, so that
the rock missed her by some small matter and plunged into the waves with
such violence, that the ship pitched high and then sank into the trough
of the sea and the bottom of the ocean appeared to us. Then the she-Rukh
let fall her rock, which was bigger than that of her mate, and as
Destiny had decreed, it fell on the poop of the ship and crushed it, the
rudder flying into twenty pieces; whereupon the vessel foundered and all
and everything on board were cast into the main.[59] As for me I
struggled for sweet life, till Almighty Allah threw in my way one of the
planks of the ship, to which I clung and bestriding it, fell a-paddling
with my feet. Now the ship had gone down hard by an island in the midst
of the main and the winds and waves bore me on till, by permission of
the Most High, they cast me up on the shore of the island, at the last
gasp for toil and distress and half dead with hunger and thirst. So I
landed more like a corpse than a live man and throwing myself down on
the beach, lay there awhile, till I began to revive and recover spirits,
when I walked about the island and found it as it were one of the garths
and gardens of Paradise. Its trees, in abundance dight, bore ripe-yellow
fruit for freight; its streams ran clear and bright; its flowers were
fair to scent and to sight and its birds warbled with delight the
praises of Him to whom belong permanence and all-might. So I ate my fill
of the fruits and slaked my thirst with the water of the streams till I
could no more and I returned thanks to the Most High and glorified
Him;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the Seaman
continued:—So when I escaped drowning and reached the island which
afforded me fruit to eat and water to drink, I returned thanks to the
Most High and glorified Him; after which I sat till nightfall, hearing
no voice and seeing none inhabitant. Then I lay down, well-nigh dead for
travail and trouble and terror, and slept without surcease till morning,
when I arose and walked about under the trees, till I came to the
channel of a draw-well fed by a spring of running water, by which well
sat an old man of venerable aspect, girt about with a waist-cloth[60]
made of the fibre of palm-fronds.[61] Quoth I to myself, “Haply this
Shaykh is of those who were wrecked in the ship and hath made his way to
this island.” So I drew near to him and saluted him, and he returned my
salam by signs, but spoke not; and I said to him, “O nuncle mine, what
causeth thee to sit here?” He shook his head and moaned and signed to me
with his hand as who should say, “Take me on thy shoulders and carry me
to the other side of the well-channel.” And quoth I in my mind, “I will
deal kindly with him and do what he desireth; it may be I shall win me a
reward in Heaven for he may be a paralytic.” So I took him on my back
and carrying him to the place whereat he pointed, said to him, “Dismount
at thy leisure.” But he would not get off my back and wound his legs
about my neck. I looked at them and seeing that they were like a
buffalo’s hide for blackness and roughness,[62] was affrighted and would
have cast him off; but he clung to me and gripped my neck with his legs,
till I was well-nigh choked, the world grew black in my sight and I fell
senseless to the ground like one dead. But he still kept his seat and
raising his legs drummed with his heels and beat harder than palm-rods
my back and shoulders, till he forced me to rise for excess of pain.
Then he signed to me with his hand to carry him hither and thither among
the trees which bore the best fruits; and if ever I refused to do his
bidding or loitered or took my leisure he beat me with his feet more
grievously than if I had been beaten with whips. He ceased not to signal
with his hand wherever he was minded to go; so I carried him about the
island, like a captive slave, and he bepissed and conskited my shoulders
and back, dismounting not night nor day; and whenas he wished to sleep
he wound his legs about my neck and leaned back and slept awhile, then
arose and beat me; whereupon I sprang up in haste, unable to gainsay him
because of the pain he inflicted on me. And indeed I blamed myself and
sore repented me of having taken compassion on him and continued in this
condition, suffering fatigue not to be described, till I said to myself,
“I wrought him a weal and he requited me with my ill; by Allah, never
more will I do any man a service so long as I live!” And again and again
I besought the Most High that I might die, for stress of weariness and
misery; and thus I abode a long while till, one day, I came with him to
a place wherein was abundance of gourds, many of them dry. So I took a
great dry gourd and, cutting open the head, scooped out the inside and
cleaned it; after which I gathered grapes from a vine which grew hard by
and squeezed them into the gourd, till it was full of the juice. Then I
stopped up the mouth and set it in the sun, where I left it for some
days, until it became strong wine; and every day I used to drink of it,
to comfort and sustain me under my fatigues with that froward and
obstinate fiend; and as often as I drank myself drunk, I forgot my
troubles and took new heart. One day he saw me drinking and signed to me
with his hand, as who should say, “What is that?” Quoth I, “It is an
excellent cordial, which cheereth the heart and reviveth the spirits.”
Then, being heated with wine, I ran and danced with him among the trees,
clapping my hands and singing and making merry; and I staggered under
him by design. When he saw this, he signed to me to give him the gourd
that he might drink, and I feared him and gave it him. So he took it
and, draining it to the dregs, cast it on the ground, whereupon he grew
frolicsome and began to clap hands and jig to and fro on my shoulders
and he made water upon me so copiously that all my dress was drenched.
But presently the fumes of the wine rising to his head, he became
helplessly drunk and his side-muscles and limbs relaxed and he swayed to
and fro on my back. When I saw that he had lost his senses for
drunkenness, I put my hand to his legs and, loosing them from my neck,
stooped down well-nigh to the ground and threw him at full length——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

[Illustration]

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the Seaman
continued:—So I threw the devil off my shoulders, hardly crediting my
deliverance from him and fearing lest he should shake off his
drunkenness and do me a mischief. Then I took up a great stone from
among the trees and coming up to him smote him therewith on the head
with all my might and crushed in his skull as he lay dead drunk.
Thereupon his flesh and fat and blood being in a pulp, he died and went
to his deserts, The Fire, no mercy of Allah be upon him! I then
returned, with a heart at ease, to my former station on the sea-shore
and abode in that island many days, eating of its fruits and drinking of
its waters and keeping a look-out for passing ships; till one day, as I
sat on the beach, recalling all that had befallen me and saying, “I
wonder if Allah will save me alive and restore me to my home and family
and friends!” behold, a ship was making for the island through the
dashing sea and clashing waves. Presently, it cast anchor and the
passengers landed; so I made for them, and when they saw me all hastened
up to me and gathering round me questioned me of my case and how I came
thither. I told them all that had betided me, whereat they marvelled
with exceeding marvel and said, “He who rode on thy shoulder is called
the ‘Shaykh al-Bahr’ or Old Man of the Sea,[63] and none ever felt his
legs on neck and came off alive but thou; and those who die under him he
eateth: so praised be Allah for thy safety!” Then they set somewhat of
food before me, whereof I ate my fill, and gave me somewhat of clothes
wherewith I clad myself anew and covered my nakedness; after which they
took me up into the ship, and we sailed days and nights, till fate
brought us to a place called the City of Apes, builded with lofty
houses, all of which gave upon the sea and it had a single gate studded
and strengthened with iron nails. Now every night, as soon as it is dusk
the dwellers in this city used to come forth of the gates and, putting
out to sea in boats and ships, pass the night upon the waters in their
fear lest the apes should come down on them from the mountains. Hearing
this I was sore troubled remembering what I had before suffered from the
ape-kind. Presently I landed to solace myself in the city, but meanwhile
the ship set sail without me and I repented of having gone ashore, and
calling to mind my companions and what had befallen me with the apes,
first and after, sat down and fell a-weeping and lamenting. Presently
one of the townsfolk accosted me and said to me, “O my lord, meseemeth
thou art a stranger to these parts?” “Yes,” answered I, “I am indeed a
stranger and a poor one, who came hither in a ship which cast anchor
here, and I landed to visit the town; but when I would have gone on
board again, I found they had sailed without me.” Quoth he, “Come and
embark with us, for if thou lie the night in the city, the apes will
destroy thee.” “Hearkening and obedience,” replied I, and rising,
straightway embarked with him in one of the boats, whereupon they pushed
off from shore and anchoring a mile or so from the land, there passed
the night. At daybreak, they rowed back to the city and landing, went
each about his business. Thus they did every night, for if any tarried
in the town by night the apes came down on him and slew him. As soon as
it was day, the apes left the place and ate of the fruits of the
gardens, then went back to the mountains and slept there till nightfall,
when they again came down upon the city.[64] Now this place was in the
farthest part of the country of the blacks, and one of the strangest
things that befel me during my sojourn in the city was on this wise. One
of the company with whom I passed the night in the boat, asked me, “O my
lord, thou art apparently a stranger in these parts; hast thou any craft
whereat thou canst work?”; and I answered, “By Allah, O my brother, I
have no trade nor know I any handicraft, for I was a merchant and a man
of money and substance and had a ship of my own, laden with great store
of goods and merchandise; but it foundered at sea and all were drowned
excepting me who saved myself on a piece of plank which Allah vouchsafed
to me of His favour.” Upon this he brought me a cotton bag and giving it
to me, said, “Take this bag and fill it with pebbles from the beach and
go forth with a company of the townsfolk to whom I will give a charge
respecting thee. Do as they do and belike thou shalt gain what may
further thy return voyage to thy native land.” Then he carried me to the
beach, where I filled my bag with pebbles large and small, and presently
we saw a company of folk issue from the town, each bearing a bag like
mine, filled with pebbles. To these he committed me, commending me to
their care, and saying, “This man is a stranger, so take him with you
and teach him how to gather, that he may get his daily bread, and you
will earn your reward and recompense in Heaven.” “On our head and eyes
be it!” answered they and bidding me welcome, fared on with me till we
came to a spacious Wady, full of lofty trees with trunks so smooth that
none might climb them. Now sleeping under these trees were many apes,
which when they saw us rose and fled from us and swarmed up among the
branches; whereupon my companions began to pelt them with what they had
in their bags, and the apes fell to plucking of the fruit of the trees
and casting them at the folk. I looked at the fruits they cast at us and
found them to be Indian[65] or cocoa-nuts; so I chose out a great tree,
full of apes, and going up to it, began to pelt them with stones, and
they in return pelted me with nuts, which I collected, as did the rest;
so that even before I had made an end of my bagful of pebbles, I had
gotten great plenty of nuts; and as soon as my companions had in like
manner gotten as many nuts as they could carry, we returned to the city,
where we arrived at the fag-end of day. Then I went in to the kindly man
who had brought me in company with the nut-gatherers and gave him all I
had gotten, thanking him for his kindness; but he would not accept them,
saying, “Sell them and make profit by the price;” and presently he added
(giving me the key of a closet in his house), “Store thy nuts in this
safe place and go thou forth every morning and gather them as thou hast
done to-day, and choose out the worst for sale and supplying thyself;
but lay up the rest here, so haply thou mayst collect enough to serve
thee for thy return home.” “Allah requite thee!” answered I and did as
he advised me, going out daily with the cocoa-nut gatherers, who
commended me to one another and showed me the best-stocked trees.[66]
Thus did I for some time, till I had laid up great store of excellent
nuts, besides a large sum of money, the price of those I had sold. I
became thus at my ease and bought all I saw and had a mind to, and
passed my time pleasantly greatly enjoying my stay in the city, till, as
I stood on the beach, one day, a great ship steering through the heart
of the sea presently cast anchor by the shore and landed a company of
merchants, who proceeded to sell and buy and barter their goods for
cocoa-nuts and other commodities. Then I went to my friend and told him
of the coming of the ship and how I had a mind to return to my own
country; and he said, “‘Tis for thee to decide.” So I thanked him for
his bounties and took leave of him; then, going to the captain of the
ship, I agreed with him for my passage and embarked my cocoa-nuts and
what else I possessed. We weighed anchor——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the Seaman
continued:—So I left the City of the Apes and embarked my cocoa-nuts and
what else I possessed. We weighed anchor the same day and sailed from
island to island and sea to sea; and whenever we stopped, I sold and
traded with my cocoa-nuts, and the Lord requited me more than I erst had
and lost. Amongst other places, we came to an island abounding in
cloves[67] and cinnamon and pepper; and the country people told me that
by the side of each pepper-bunch groweth a great leaf which shadeth it
from the sun and casteth the water off it in the wet season; but, when
the rain ceaseth the leaf turneth over and droopeth down by the side of
the bunch.[68] Here I took in great store of pepper and cloves and
cinnamon, in exchange for cocoa-nuts, and we passed thence to the Island
of Al-Usirát,[69] whence cometh the Comorin aloes-wood and thence to
another island, five days’ journey in length, where grows the Chinese
lign-aloes, which is better than the Comorin; but the people of this
island[70] are fouler of condition and religion than those of the other,
for that they love fornication and wine-bibbing, and know not prayer nor
call to prayer. Thence we came to the pearl-fisheries, and I gave the
divers some of my cocoa-nuts and said to them, “Dive for my luck and
lot!” They did so and brought up from the deep bight[71] great store of
large and priceless pearls; and they said to me, “By Allah, O my master,
thy luck is a lucky!” Then we sailed on, with the blessing of Allah
(whose name be exalted!); and ceased not sailing till we arrived safely
at Bassorah. There I abode a little and then went on to Baghdad, where I
entered my quarter and found my house and foregathered with my family
and saluted my friends who gave me joy of my safe return, and I laid up
all my goods and valuables in my storehouses. Then I distributed alms
and largesse and clothed the widow and the orphan and made presents to
my relations and comrades; for the Lord had requited me fourfold that I
had lost. After which I returned to my old merry way of life and forgot
all I had suffered in the great profit and gain I had made. Such, then,
is the history of my fifth voyage and its wonderments, and now to
supper; and to-morrow, come again and I will tell you what befel me in
my sixth voyage; for it was still more wonderful than this. (Saith he
who telleth the tale), Then he called for food; and the servants spread
the table, and when they had eaten the evening-meal, he bade give
Sindbad the porter an hundred golden dinars and the Landsman returned
home and lay him down to sleep, much marvelling at all he had heard.
Next morning, as soon as it was light, he prayed the dawn-prayer; and,
after blessing Mohammed the Cream of all creatures, betook himself to
the house of Sindbad the Seaman and wished him a good day. The merchant
bade him sit and talked with him, till the rest of the company arrived.
Then the servants spread the table and when they had well eaten and
drunken and were mirthful and merry, Sindbad the Seaman began in these
words the narrative of


               _THE SIXTH VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SEAMAN_.

Know, O my brothers and friends and companions all, that I abode some
time, after my return from my fifth voyage, in great solace and
satisfaction and mirth and merriment, joyance and enjoyment; and I
forgot what I had suffered, seeing the great gain and profit I had made
till, one day, as I sat making merry and enjoying myself with my
friends, there came in to me a company of merchants whose case told
tales of travel, and talked with me of voyage and adventure and
greatness of pelf and lucre. Hereupon I remembered the days of my return
from abroad, and my joy at once more seeing my native land and
foregathering with my family and friends; and my soul yearned for travel
and traffic. So compelled by Fate and Fortune I resolved to undertake
another voyage; and, buying me fine and costly merchandise meet for
foreign trade, made it up into bales, with which I journeyed from
Baghdad to Bassorah. Here I found a great ship ready for sea and full of
merchants and notables, who had with them goods of price; so I embarked
my bales therein. And we left Bassorah in safety and good spirits under
the safeguard of the King, the Preserver.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Five Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the Seaman
continued:—And after embarking my bales and leaving Bassorah in safety
and good spirits, we continued our voyage from place to place and from
city to city, buying and selling and profiting and diverting ourselves
with the sight of countries where strange folk dwell. And Fortune and
the voyage smiled upon us, till one day, as we went along, behold, the
captain suddenly cried with a great cry and cast his turband on the
deck. Then he buffeted his face like a woman and plucked out his beard
and fell down in the waist of the ship well nigh fainting for stress of
grief and rage, and crying, “Oh and alas for the ruin of my house and
the orphanship of my poor children!” So all the merchants and sailors
came round about him and asked him, “O master, what is the matter?”; for
the light had become night before their sight. And he answered, saying,
“Know, O folk, that we have wandered from our course and left the sea
whose ways we wot, and come into a sea whose ways I know not; and unless
Allah vouchsafe us a means of escape, we are all dead men; wherefore
pray ye to the Most High, that He deliver us from this strait. Haply
amongst you is one righteous whose prayers the Lord will accept.” Then
he arose and clomb the mast to see an there were any escape from that
strait; and he would have loosed the sails; but the wind redoubled upon
the ship and whirled her round thrice and drave her backwards; whereupon
her rudder brake and she fell off towards a high mountain. With this the
captain came down from the mast, saying, “There is no Majesty and there
is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great; nor can man prevent
that which is fore-ordained of fate! By Allah, we are fallen on a place
of sure destruction, and there is no way of escape for us, nor can any
of us be saved!” Then we all fell a-weeping over ourselves and bidding
one another farewell for that our days were come to an end, and we had
lost all hopes of life. Presently the ship struck the mountain and broke
up, and all and everything on board of her were plunged into the sea.
Some of the merchants were drowned and others made shift to reach the
shore and save themselves upon the mountain; I amongst the number, and
when we got ashore, we found a great island, or rather peninsula[72]
whose base was strewn with wreckage of crafts and goods and gear cast up
by the sea from broken ships whose passengers had been drowned; and the
quantity confounded compt and calculation. So I climbed the cliffs into
the inward of the isle and walked on inland, till I came to a stream of
sweet water, that welled up at the nearest foot of the mountains and
disappeared in the earth under the range of hills on the opposite side.
But all the other passengers went over the mountains to the inner
tracts; and, dispersing hither and thither, were confounded at what they
saw and became like madmen at the sight of the wealth and treasures
wherewith the shores were strewn. As for me I looked into the bed of the
stream aforesaid and saw therein great plenty of rubies, and great royal
pearls[73] and all kinds of jewels and precious stones which were as
gravel in the bed of the rivulets that ran through the fields, and the
sands sparkled and glittered with gems and precious ores. Moreover we
found in the island abundance of the finest lign-aloes, both Chinese and
Comorin; and there also is a spring of crude ambergris[74] which floweth
like wax or gum over the stream-banks, for the great heat of the sun,
and runneth down to the sea-shore, where the monsters of the deep come
up and swallowing it, return into the sea. But it burneth in their
bellies; so they cast it up again and it congealeth on the surface of
the water, whereby its colour and quantities are changed; and at last,
the waves cast it ashore, and the travellers and merchants who know it,
collect it and sell it. But as to the raw ambergris which is not
swallowed, it floweth over the channel and congealeth on the banks and
when the sun shineth on it, it melteth and scenteth the whole valley
with a musk-like fragrance: then, when the sun ceaseth from it, it
congealeth again. But none can get to this place where is the crude
ambergris, because of the mountains which enclose the island on all
sides and which foot of man cannot ascend.[75] We continued thus to
explore the island, marvelling at the wonderful works of Allah and the
riches we found there, but sore troubled for our own case, and dismayed
at our prospects. Now we had picked up on the beach some small matter of
victual from the wreck and husbanded it carefully, eating but once every
day or two, in our fear lest it should fail us and we die miserably of
famine and affright. Moreover, we were weak for colic brought on by
sea-sickness and low diet, and my companions deceased, one after other,
till there was but a small company of us left. Each that died we washed
and shrouded in some of the clothes and linen cast ashore by the tides;
and after a little, the rest of my fellows perished, one by one, till I
had buried the last of the party and abode alone on the island, with but
a little provision left, I who was wont to have so much. And I wept over
myself, saying, “Would Heaven I had died before my companions and they
had washed me and buried me! It had been better than I should perish and
none wash me and shroud me and bury me. But there is no Majesty and
there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the Seaman
continued in these words:—Now after I had buried the last of my party
and abode alone on the island, I arose and dug me a deep grave on the
sea-shore, saying to myself, “Whenas I grow weak and know that death
cometh to me, I will cast myself into the grave and die there, so the
wind may drift the sand over me and cover me and I be buried
therein.”[76] Then I fell to reproaching myself for my little wit in
leaving my native land and betaking me again to travel, after all I had
suffered during my first five voyages, and when I had not made a single
one without suffering more horrible perils and more terrible hardships
than in its forerunner and having no hope of escape from my present
stress; and I repented me of my folly and bemoaned myself, especially as
I had no need of money, seeing that I had enough and more than enough
and could not spend what I had, no, nor a half of it in all my life.
However, after a while Allah sent me a thought and I said to myself, “By
God, needs must this stream have an end as well as a beginning; ergo an
issue somewhere, and belike its course may lead to some inhabited place;
so my best plan is to make me a little boat[77] big enough to sit in,
and carry it and launching it on the river, embark therein and drop down
the stream. If I escape, I escape, by God’s leave; and if I perish,
better die in the river than here.” Then, sighing for myself, I set to
work collecting a number of pieces of Chinese and Comorin aloes-wood and
I bound them together with ropes from the wreckage; then I chose out
from the broken up ships straight planks of even size and fixed them
firmly upon the aloes-wood, making me a boat-raft a little narrower than
the channel of the stream; and I tied it tightly and firmly as though it
were nailed. Then I loaded it with the goods, precious ores and jewels:
and the union pearls which were like gravel and the best of the
ambergris crude and pure, together with what I had collected on the
island and what was left me of victual and wild herbs. Lastly I lashed a
piece of wood on either side, to serve me as oars; and launched it, and
embarking, did according to the saying of the poet:—

 Fly, fly with life whenas evils threat; ✿ Leave the house to tell of its
    builder’s fate!
 Land after land shalt thou seek and find ✿ But no other life on thy wish
    shall wait:
 Fret not thy soul in thy thoughts o’ night; ✿ All woes shall end or
    sooner or late.
 Whoso is born in one land to die, ✿ There and only there shall gang his
    gait:
 Nor trust great things to another wight, ✿ Soul hath only soul for
    confederate.[78]

My boat-raft drifted with the stream, I pondering the issue of my
affair; and the drifting ceased not till I came to the place where it
disappeared beneath the mountain. I rowed my conveyance into the place
which was intensely dark; and the current carried the raft with it down
the underground channel.[79] The thin stream bore me on through a narrow
tunnel where the raft touched either side and my head rubbed against the
roof, return therefrom being impossible. Then I blamed myself for having
thus risked my life, and said, “If this passage grow any straiter, the
raft will hardly pass, and I cannot turn back; so I shall inevitably
perish miserably in this place.” And I threw myself down upon my face on
the raft, by reason of the narrowness of the channel, whilst the stream
ceased not to carry me along, knowing not night from day, for the excess
of the gloom which encompassed me about and my terror and concern for
myself lest I should perish. And in such condition my course continued
down the channel which now grew wider and then straiter till, sore
aweary by reason of the darkness which could be felt, I fell asleep, as
I lay prone on the raft, and I slept knowing not an the time were long
or short. When I awoke at last, I found myself in the light of Heaven
and opening my eyes I saw myself in a broad of the stream and the raft
moored to an island in the midst of a number of Indians and Abyssinians.
As soon as these blackamoors[80] saw that I was awake, they came up to
me and bespoke me in their speech; but I understood not what they said
and thought that this was a dream and a vision which had betided me for
stress of concern and chagrin. But I was delighted at my escape from the
river. When they saw I understood them not and made them no answer, one
of them came forward and said to me in Arabic, “Peace be with thee, O my
brother! Who art thou and whence faredst thou hither? How camest thou
into this river and what manner of land lies behind yonder mountains,
for never knew we any one make his way thence to us?” Quoth I, “And upon
thee be peace and the ruth of Allah and his blessing! Who are ye and
what country is this?” “O my brother,” answered he, “we are husbandmen
and tillers of the soil, who came out to water our fields and
plantations; and, finding thee asleep on this raft, laid hold of it and
made it fast by us, against thou shouldst awake at thy leisure. So tell
us how thou camest hither?” I answered, “For Allah’s sake, O my lord,
ere I speak give me somewhat to eat, for I am starving, and after ask me
what thou wilt.” So he hastened to fetch me food and I ate my fill, till
I was refreshed and my fear was calmed by a good belly-full and my life
returned to me. Then I rendered thanks to the Most High for mercies
great and small, glad to be out of the river and rejoicing to be amongst
them, and I told them all my adventures from first to last, especially
my troubles in the narrow channel.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

[Illustration]

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the Seaman
continued:—When I landed and found myself amongst the Indians and
Abyssinians and had taken some rest, they consulted among themselves and
said to one another, “There is no help for it but we carry him with us
and present him to our King, that he may acquaint him with his
adventures.” So they took me, together with the raft-boat and its lading
of monies and merchandise; jewels, minerals and golden gear, and brought
me to their King, who was King of Sarandib,[81] telling him what had
happened; whereupon he saluted me and bade me welcome. Then he
questioned me of my condition and adventures through the man who had
spoken Arabic and I repeated to him my story from beginning to end,
whereat he marvelled exceedingly and gave me joy of my deliverance;
after which I arose and fetched from the raft great store of precious
ores and jewels and ambergris and lign-aloes and presented them to the
King, who accepted them and entreated me with the utmost honour,
appointing me a lodging in his own palace. So I consorted with the chief
of the islanders, and they paid me the utmost respect. And I quitted not
the royal palace. Now the Island Sarandib lieth under the equinoctial
line, its night and day both numbering twelve hours. It measureth eighty
leagues long by a breadth of thirty and its width is bounded by a lofty
mountain[82] and a deep valley. The mountain is conspicuous from a
distance of three days and it containeth many kinds of rubies and other
minerals, and spice-trees of all sorts. The surface is covered with
emery wherewith gems are cut and fashioned; diamonds are in its rivers
and pearls are in its valleys. I ascended that mountain and solaced
myself with a view of its marvels which are indescribable and afterwards
I returned to the King.[83] Thereupon, all the travellers and merchants
who came to the place questioned me of the affairs of my native land and
of the Caliph Harun al-Rashid and his rule and I told them of him and of
that wherefor he was renowned, and they praised him because of this;
whilst I in turn questioned them of the manners and customs of their own
countries and got the knowledge I desired. One day, the King himself
asked me of the fashions and form of government of my country, and I
acquainted him with the circumstance of the Caliph’s sway in the city of
Baghdad and the justice of his rule. The King marvelled at my account of
his appointments and said, “By Allah, the Caliph’s ordinances are indeed
wise and his fashions of praiseworthy guise and thou hast made me love
him by what thou tellest me; wherefore I have a mind to make him a
present and send it by thee.” Quoth I, “Hearkening and obedience, O my
lord; I will bear thy gift to him and inform him that thou art his
sincere lover and true friend.” Then I abode with the King in great
honour and regard and consideration for a long while till, one day, as I
sat in his palace, I heard news of a company of merchants, that were
fitting out a ship for Bassorah, and said to myself, “I cannot do better
than voyage with these men.” So I rose without stay or delay and kissed
the King’s hand and acquainted him with my longing to set out with the
merchants, for that I pined after my people and mine own land. Quoth he,
“Thou art thine own master; yet, if it be thy will to abide with us, on
our head and eyes be it, for thou gladdenest us with thy company.” “By
Allah, O my lord,” answered I, “thou hast indeed overwhelmed me with thy
favours and well-doings; but I weary for a sight of my friends and
family and native country.” When he heard this, he summoned the
merchants in question and commended me to their care, paying my freight
and passage-money. Then he bestowed on me great riches from his
treasuries and charged me with a magnificent present for the Caliph
Harun al-Rashid. Moreover he gave me a sealed letter, saying, “Carry
this with thine own hand to the Commander of the Faithful and give him
many salutations from us!” “Hearing and obedience,” I replied. The
missive was written on the skin of the Kháwi[84] (which is finer than
lamb-parchment and of yellow colour), with ink of ultramarine and the
contents were as follows. “Peace be with thee from the King of Al-Hind,
before whom are a thousand elephants and upon whose palace-crenelles are
a thousand jewels. But after (laud to the Lord and praises to His
Prophet!): we send thee a trifling gift which be thou pleased to accept.
Thou art to us a brother and a sincere friend; and great is the love we
bear for thee in heart; favour us therefore with a reply. The gift
besitteth not thy dignity: but we beg of thee, O our brother, graciously
to accept it and peace be with thee.” And the present was a cup of ruby
a span high[85] the inside of which was adorned with precious pearls;
and a bed covered with the skin of the serpent which swalloweth the
elephant, which skin hath spots each like a dinar and whoso sitteth upon
it never sickeneth;[86] and an hundred thousand miskals of Indian
lign-aloes and a slave-girl like a shining moon. Then I took leave of
him and of all my intimates and acquaintances in the island and embarked
with the merchants aforesaid. We sailed with a fair wind, committing
ourselves to the care of Allah (be He extolled and exalted!) and by His
permission arrived at Bassorah, where I passed a few days and nights
equipping myself and packing up my bales. Then I went on to
Baghdad-city, the House of Peace, where I sought an audience of the
Caliph and laid the King’s presents before him. He asked me whence they
came and I said to him, “By Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, I know
not the name of the city nor the way thither!” He then asked me, “O
Sindbad, is this true which the King writeth?”; and I answered, after
kissing the ground, “O my lord, I saw in his kingdom much more than he
hath written in his letter. For state processions a throne is set for
him upon a huge elephant, eleven cubits high: and upon this he sitteth
having his great lords and officers and guests standing in two ranks, on
his right hand and on his left. At his head is a man hending in hand a
golden javelin and behind him another with a great mace of gold whose
head is an emerald[87] a span long and as thick as a man’s thumb. And
when he mounteth horse there mount with him a thousand horsemen clad in
gold brocade and silk; and as the King proceedeth a man precedeth him,
crying, This is the King of great dignity, of high authority! And he
continueth to repeat his praises in words I remember not, saying at the
end of his panegyric, This is the King owning the crown whose like nor
Solomon nor the Mihraj[88] ever possessed. Then he is silent and one
behind him proclaimeth, saying, He will die! Again I say he will die!;
and the other addeth, Extolled be the perfection of the Living who dieth
not![89] Moreover by reason of his justice and ordinance and
intelligence, there is no Kazi in his city, and all his lieges
distinguish between Truth and Falsehood.” Quoth the Caliph, “How great
is this King! His letter hath shown me this; and as for the mightiness
of his dominion thou hast told us what thou hast eye-witnessed. By
Allah, he hath been endowed with wisdom as with wide rule.” Then I
related to the Commander of the Faithful all that had befallen me in my
last voyage; at which he wondered exceedingly and bade his historians
record my story and store it up in his treasuries, for the edification
of all who might see it. Then he conferred on me exceeding great
favours, and I repaired to my quarter and entered my home, where I
warehoused all my goods and possessions. Presently, my friends came to
me and I distributed presents among my family and gave alms and
largesse; after which I yielded myself to joyance and enjoyment, mirth
and merry-making, and forgot all that I had suffered. Such, then, O my
brothers, is the history of what befel me in my sixth voyage, and
to-morrow, Inshallah! I will tell you the story of my seventh and last
voyage, which is still more wondrous and marvellous than that of the
first six. (Saith he who telleth the tale), Then he bade lay the table,
and the company supped with him; after which he gave the Porter an
hundred dinars, as of wont, and they all went their ways, marvelling
beyond measure at that which they had heard.——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Sindbad the
Seaman had related the history of what befel him in his sixth voyage,
and all the company had dispersed, Sindbad the Landsman went home and
slept as of wont. Next day he rose and prayed the dawn-prayer and
repaired to his namesake’s house where, after the company was all
assembled, the host began to relate


              _THE SEVENTH VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SEAMAN_.

Know, O company, that after my return from my sixth voyage, which
brought me abundant profit, I resumed my former life in all possible
joyance and enjoyment and mirth and making merry day and night; and I
tarried some time in this solace and satisfaction till my soul began
once more to long to sail the seas and see foreign countries and company
with merchants and hear new things. So having made up my mind, I packed
up in bales a quantity of precious stuffs suited for sea-trade and
repaired with them from Baghdad-city to Bassorah-town, where I found a
ship ready for sea, and in her a company of considerable merchants. I
shipped with them and becoming friends, we set forth on our venture, in
health and safety; and sailed with a fair wind, till we came to a city
called Madínat-al-Sín; but after we had left it, as we fared on in all
cheer and confidence, devising of traffic and travel, behold, there
sprang up a violent head-wind and a tempest of rain fell on us and
drenched us and our goods. So we covered the bales with our cloaks and
garments and drugget and canvas, lest they be spoiled by the rain, and
betook ourselves to prayer and supplication to Almighty Allah and
humbled ourselves before Him for deliverance from the peril that was
upon us. But the captain arose and tightening his girdle tucked up his
skirts and, after taking refuge with Allah from Satan the Stoned, clomb
to the mast-head, whence he looked out right and left and gazing at the
passengers and crew fell to buffeting his face and plucking out his
beard. So we cried to him, “O Rais, what is the matter?”; and he replied
saying, “Seek ye deliverance of the Most High from the strait into which
we have fallen and bemoan yourselves and take leave of one another; for
know that the wind hath gotten the mastery of us and hath driven us into
the uttermost of the seas of the world.” Then he came down from the
mast-head and opening his sea-chest, pulled out a bag of blue cotton,
from which he took a powder like ashes. This he set in a saucer wetted
with a little water and, after waiting a short time, smelt and tasted
it; and then he took out of the chest a booklet, wherein he read awhile
and said weeping, “Know, O ye passengers, that in this book is a
marvellous matter, denoting that whoso cometh hither shall surely die,
without hope of escape; for that this ocean is called the Sea of the
Clime of the King, wherein is the sepulchre of our lord Solomon, son of
David (on both be peace!) and therein are serpents of vast bulk and
fearsome aspect: and what ship soever cometh to these climes there
riseth to her a great fish[90] out of the sea and swalloweth her up with
all and everything on board her.” Hearing these words from the captain
great was our wonder, but hardly had he made an end of speaking, when
the ship was lifted out of the water and let fall again and we applied
to praying the death-prayer[91] and committing our souls to Allah.
Presently we heard a terrible great cry like the loud-pealing thunder,
whereat we were terror-struck and became as dead men, giving ourselves
up for lost. Then behold, there came up to us a huge fish, as big as a
tall mountain, at whose sight we became wild for affright and, weeping
sore, made ready for death, marvelling at its vast size and gruesome
semblance; when lo! a second fish made its appearance than which we had
seen naught more monstrous. So we bemoaned ourselves of our lives and
farewelled one another; but suddenly up came a third fish bigger than
the two first; whereupon we lost the power of thought and reason and
were stupefied for the excess of our fear and horror. Then the three
fish began circling round about the ship and the third and biggest
opened his mouth to swallow it, and we looked into its mouth and behold,
it was wider than the gate of a city and its throat was like a long
valley. So we besought the Almighty and called for succour upon His
Apostle (on whom be blessing and peace!), when suddenly a violent squall
of wind arose and smote the ship, which rose out of the water and
settled upon a great reef, the haunt of sea-monsters, where it broke up
and fell asunder into planks and all and everything on board were
plunged into the sea. As for me, I tore off all my clothes but my gown
and swam a little way, till I happened upon one of the ship’s planks
whereto I clung and bestrode it like a horse, whilst the winds and the
waters sported with me and the waves carried me up and cast me down; and
I was in most piteous plight for fear and distress and hunger and
thirst. Then I reproached myself for what I had done and my soul was
weary after a life of ease and comfort; and I said to myself, “O
Sindbad, O Seaman, thou repentest not and yet thou art ever suffering
hardships and travails; yet wilt thou not renounce sea-travel; or, an
thou say, ‘I renounce,’ thou liest in thy renouncement. Endure then with
patience that which thou sufferest, for verily thou deservest all that
betideth thee!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the Seaman
continued:—But when I had bestridden the plank, quoth I to myself, “Thou
deservest all that betideth thee. All this is decreed to me of Allah
(whose name be exalted!), to turn me from my greed of gain, whence
ariseth all that I endure, for I have wealth galore.” Then I returned to
my senses and said, “In very sooth, this time I repent to the Most High,
with a sincere repentance, of my lust for gain and venture; and never
will I again name travel with tongue nor in thought.” And I ceased not
to humble myself before Almighty Allah and weep and bewail myself,
recalling my former estate of solace and satisfaction and mirth and
merriment and joyance; and thus I abode two days, at the end of which
time I came to a great island abounding in trees and streams. There I
landed and ate of the fruits of the island and drank of its waters, till
I was refreshed and my life returned to me and my strength and spirits
were restored and I recited:—

 Oft when thy case shows knotty and tangled skein, ✿ Fate downs from
    Heaven and straightens every ply:
 In patience keep thy soul till clear thy lot ✿ For He who ties the knot
    can eke untie.

Then I walked about, till I found on the further side, a great river of
sweet water, running with a strong current; whereupon I called to mind
the boat-raft I had made aforetime and said to myself, “Needs must I
make another; haply I may free me from this strait. If I escape, I have
my desire and I vow to Allah Almighty to forswear travel; and if I
perish I shall be at peace and shall rest from toil and moil.” So I rose
up and gathered together great store of pieces of wood from the trees
(which were all of the finest sanders-wood, whose like is not albe I
knew it not), and made shift to twist creepers and tree-twigs into a
kind of rope, with which I bound the billets together and so contrived a
raft. Then saying, “An I be saved, ‘tis of God’s grace,” I embarked
thereon and committed myself to the current, and it bore me on for the
first day and the second and the third after leaving the island; whilst
I lay in the raft, eating not and drinking, when I was athirst, of the
water of the river, till I was weak and giddy as a chicken, for stress
of fatigue and famine and fear. At the end of this time I came to a high
mountain, whereunder ran the river; which when I saw, I feared for my
life by reason of the straitness I had suffered in my former journey,
and I would fain have stayed the raft and landed on the mountain-side;
but the current overpowered me and drew it into the subterranean passage
like an archway; whereupon I gave myself up for lost and said, “There is
no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the
Great!” However, after a little, the raft glided into open air and I saw
before me a wide valley, whereinto the river fell with a noise like the
rolling of thunder and a swiftness as the rushing of the wind. I held on
to the raft, for fear of falling off it, whilst the waves tossed me
right and left; and the craft continued to descend with the current nor
could I avail to stop it nor turn it shorewards, till it stopped with me
at a great and goodly city, grandly edified and containing much people.
And when the townsfolk saw me on the raft, dropping down with the
current, they threw me out ropes which I had not strength enough to
hold; then they tossed a net over the craft and drew it ashore with me,
whereupon I fell to the ground amidst them, as I were a dead man, for
stress of fear and hunger and lack of sleep. After a while, there came
up to me out of the crowd an old man of reverend aspect, well stricken
in years, who welcomed me and threw over me abundance of handsome
clothes, wherewith I covered my nakedness. Then he carried me to the
Hammam-bath and brought me cordial sherbets and delicious perfumes;
moreover, when I came out, he bore me to his house, where his people
made much of me and, seating me in a pleasant place, set rich food
before me, whereof I ate my fill and returned thanks to God the Most
High for my deliverance. Thereupon his pages fetched me hot water, and I
washed my hands, and his handmaids brought me silken napkins, with which
I dried them and wiped my mouth. Also the Shaykh set apart for me an
apartment in a part of his house and charged his pages and slave-girls
to wait upon me and do my will and supply my wants. They were assiduous
in my service, and I abode with him in the guest-chamber three days,
taking my ease of good eating and good drinking and good scents till
life returned to me and my terrors subsided and my heart was calmed and
my mind was eased. On the fourth day the Shaykh, my host, came in to me
and said, “Thou cheerest us with thy company, O my son, and praised be
Allah for thy safety! Say: wilt thou now come down with me to the beach
and the bazar and sell thy goods and take their price? Belike thou mayst
buy thee wherewithal to traffic. I have ordered my servants to remove
thy stock-in-trade from the sea and they have piled it on the shore.” I
was silent awhile and said to myself, “What mean these words and what
goods have I?” Then said he, “O my son, be not troubled nor careful, but
come with me to the market and if any offer for thy goods what price
contenteth thee, take it; but, an thou be not satisfied, I will lay them
up for thee in my warehouse, against a fitting occasion for sale.” So I
bethought me of my case and said to myself, “Do his bidding and see what
are these goods!”; and I said to him, “O my nuncle the Shaykh, I hear
and I obey; I may not gainsay thee in aught for Allah’s blessing is on
all thou dost.” Accordingly he guided me to the market-street, where I
found that he had taken in pieces the raft which carried me and which
was of sandal-wood and I heard the broker crying it for sale.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the Seaman
thus resumed his tale:—I found that the Shaykh had taken to pieces my
raft which lay on the beach and the broker was crying the sandal-wood
for sale. Then the merchants came and opened the gate of bidding for the
wood and bid against one another till its price reached a thousand
dinars, when they left bidding and my host said to me, “Hear, O my son,
this is the current price of thy goods in hard times like these: wilt
thou sell them for this or shall I lay them up for thee in my
storehouses, till such time as prices rise?” “O my lord,” answered I,
“the business is in thy hands: do as thou wilt.” Then asked he, “Wilt
thou sell the wood to me, O my son, for an hundred gold pieces over and
above what the merchants have bidden for it?” and I answered, “Yes: I
have sold it to thee for monies received.”[92] So he bade his servants
transport the wood to his storehouses and, carrying me back to his
house, seated me and counted out to me the purchase money; after which
he laid it in bags and setting them in a privy place, locked them up
with an iron padlock and gave me its key. Some days after this, the
Shaykh said to me, “O my son, I have somewhat to propose to thee,
wherein I trust thou wilt do my bidding.” Quoth I, “What is it?” Quoth
he, “I am a very old man and have no son; but I have a daughter who is
young in years and fair of favour and endowed with abounding wealth and
beauty. Now I have a mind to marry her to thee, that thou mayst abide
with her in this our country, and I will make thee master of all I have
in hand for I am an old man and thou shalt stand in my stead.” I was
silent for shame and made him no answer, whereupon he continued, “Do my
desire in this, O my son, for I wish but thy weal; and if thou wilt but
do as I say, thou shalt have her at once and be as my son; and all that
is under my hand or that cometh to me shall be thine. If thou have a
mind to traffic and travel to thy native land, none shall hinder thee,
and thy property will be at thy sole disposal; so do as thou wilt.” “By
Allah, O my uncle,” replied I, “thou art become to me even as my father,
and I am a stranger and have undergone many hardships: while for stress
of that which I have suffered naught of judgment or knowledge is left to
me. It is for thee, therefore, to decide what I shall do.” Hereupon he
sent his servants for the Kazi and the witnesses and married me to his
daughter making for us a noble marriage-feast[93] and high festival.
When I went in to her, I found her perfect in beauty and loveliness and
symmetry and grace, clad in rich raiment and covered with a profusion of
ornaments and necklaces and other trinkets of gold and silver and
precious stones, worth a mint of money, a price none could pay. She
pleased me and we loved each other; and I abode with her in all solace
and delight of life, till her father was taken to the mercy of Allah
Almighty. So we shrouded him and buried him, and I laid hands on the
whole of his property and all his servants and slaves became mine.
Moreover, the merchants installed me in his office, for he was their
Shaykh and their Chief; and none of them purchased aught but with his
knowledge and by his leave. And now his rank passed on to me. When I
became acquainted with the townsfolk, I found that at the beginning of
each month they were transformed, in that their faces changed and they
became like unto birds and they put forth wings wherewith they flew unto
the upper regions of the firmament and none remained in the city save
the women and children; and I said in my mind, “When the first of the
month cometh, I will ask one of them to carry me with them, whither they
go.” So when the time came and their complexion changed and their forms
altered, I went in to one of the townsfolk and said to him, “Allah upon
thee! carry me with thee, that I might divert myself with the rest and
return with you.” “This may not be,” answered he; but I ceased not to
solicit him and I importuned him till he consented. Then I went out in
his company, without telling any of my family[94] or servants or
friends, and he took me on his back and flew up with me so high in air,
that I heard the angels glorifying God in the heavenly dome, whereat I
wondered and exclaimed, “Praised be Allah! Extolled be the perfection of
Allah!” Hardly had I made an end of pronouncing the Tasbíh—praised be
Allah!—when there came out a fire from heaven and all but consumed the
company; whereupon they fled from it and descended with curses upon me
and, casting me down on a high mountain, went away, exceeding wroth with
me, and left me there alone. As I found myself in this plight, I
repented of what I had done and reproached myself for having undertaken
that for which I was unable, saying, “There is no Majesty and there is
no Might, save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! No sooner am I
delivered from one affliction than I fall into a worse.” And I continued
in this case knowing not whither I should go, when lo! there came up two
young men, as they were moons, each using as a staff a rod of red gold.
So I approached them and saluted them; and when they returned my salam,
I said to them, “Allah upon you twain; who are ye and what are ye?”
Quoth they, “We are of the servants of the Most High Allah, abiding in
this mountain;” and, giving me a rod of red gold they had with them,
went their ways and left me. I walked on along the mountain-ridge
staying my steps with the staff and pondering the case of the two
youths, when behold, a serpent came forth from under the mountain, with
a man in her[95] jaws, whom she had swallowed even to below his navel,
and he was crying out and saying, “Whoso delivereth me, Allah will
deliver him from all adversity!” So I went up to the serpent and smote
her on the head with the golden staff, whereupon she cast the man forth
of her mouth.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

[Illustration]


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the Seaman
thus continued:—When I smote the serpent on the head with my golden
staff she cast the man forth of her mouth. Then I smote her a second
time, and she turned and fled; whereupon he came up to me and said,
“Since my deliverance from yonder serpent hath been at thy hands I will
never leave thee, and thou shalt be my comrade on this mountain.” “And
welcome,” answered I; so we fared on along the mountain, till we fell in
with a company of folk, and I looked and saw amongst them the very man
who had carried me and cast me down there. I went up to him and spake
him fair, excusing myself to him and saying, “O my comrade, it is not
thus that friend should deal with friend.” Quoth he, “It was thou who
well-nigh destroyed us by thy Tasbih and thy glorifying God on my back.”
Quoth I, “Pardon me, for I had no knowledge of this matter; but, if thou
wilt take me with thee, I swear not to say a word.” So he relented and
consented to carry me with him, but he made an express condition that,
so long as I abode on his back, I should abstain from pronouncing the
Tasbih or otherwise glorifying God. Then I gave the wand of gold to him
whom I had delivered from the serpent and bade him farewell, and my
friend took me on his back and flew with me as before, till he brought
me to the city and set me down in my own house. My wife came to meet me
and saluting me gave me joy of my safety and then said, “Beware of going
forth hereafter with yonder folk, neither consort with them, for they
are brethren of the devils, and know not how to mention the name of
Allah Almighty; neither worship they Him.” “And how did thy father with
them?” asked I; and she answered, “My father was not of them, neither
did he as they; and as now he is dead methinks thou hadst better sell
all we have and with the price buy merchandise and journey to thine own
country and people, and I with thee; for I care not to tarry in this
city, my father and my mother being dead.” So I sold all the Shaykh’s
property piecemeal, and looked for one who should be journeying thence
to Bassorah that I might join myself to him. And while thus doing I
heard of a company of townsfolk who had a mind to make the voyage, but
could not find them a ship; so they bought wood and built them a great
ship wherein I took passage with them, and paid them all the hire. Then
we embarked, I and my wife, with all our moveables, leaving our houses
and domains and so forth, and set sail, and ceased not sailing from
island to island and from sea to sea, with a fair wind and a favouring,
till we arrived at Bassorah safe and sound. I made no stay there, but
freighted another vessel and, transferring my goods to her, set out
forthright for Baghdad-city, where I arrived in safety, and entering my
quarter and repairing to my house, foregathered with my family and
friends and familiars and laid up my goods in my warehouses. When my
people who, reckoning the period of my absence on this my seventh
voyage, had found it to be seven and twenty years, and had given up all
hope of me, heard of my return, they came to welcome me and to give me
joy of my safety; and I related to them all that had befallen me;
whereat they marvelled with exceeding marvel. Then I forswore travel and
vowed to Allah the Most High I would venture no more by land or sea, for
that this seventh and last voyage had surfeited me of travel and
adventure; and I thanked the Lord (be He praised and glorified!), and
blessed Him for having restored me to my kith and kin and country and
home. “Consider, therefore, O Sindbad, O Landsman,” continued Sindbad
the Seaman, “what sufferings I have undergone and what perils and
hardships I have endured before coming to my present state.” “Allah upon
thee, O my Lord!” answered Sindbad the Landsman, “pardon me the wrong I
did thee.”[96] And they ceased not from friendship and fellowship,
abiding in all cheer and pleasures and solace of life, till there came
to them the Destroyer of delights and the Sunderer of Societies, and the
Shatterer of palaces and the Caterer for Cemeteries to wit, the Cup of
Death, and glory be to the Living One who dieth not![97]


               _THE SEVENTH VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SEAMAN_

         (_According to the version of the Calcutta Edition_).

_Know, O my brothers and friends and companions all, that_ when I left
voyaging and commercing, I said in myself, “Sufficeth me that hath
befallen me;” and I spent my time in solace and pleasure. One day as I
sat at home there came a knock at the door, and when the porter opened a
page entered and said, “The Caliph biddeth thee to him.” I went with him
to the King’s majesty and kissed ground and saluted him; whereupon he
welcomed me and entreated me with honour and said, “O Sindbad, I have an
occasion for thee: wilt thou do it?” So I kissed his hand and asked him,
saying, “O my lord, what occasion hath the master for the slave?”;
whereto he answered me, “I am minded that thou travel to the King of
Sarandib and carry to him our writ and our gift, for that he hath sent
to us a present and a letter.” I trembled at these words and rejoined,
“By Allah the Omnipotent, O my lord, I have taken a loathing to wayfare,
and when I hear the words ‘Voyage’ or ‘Travel,’ my limbs tremble for
what hath befallen me of hardships and horrors. Indeed I have no desire
whatever for this; more by token as I have bound myself by oath not to
quit Baghdad.” Then I informed the Caliph of all I had passed through
from first to last, and he marvelled with exceeding marvel and said, “By
the Almighty, O Sindbad, from ages of old such mishaps as happened to
thee were never known to happen to any, and thou dost only right never
even to talk of travel. For our sake, however, thou wilt go this time
and carry our present and our letter to him of Sarandib; and
Inshallah—by God’s leave!—thou shalt return quickly; and on this wise we
shall be under no obligation to the said King.” I replied that I heard
and obeyed, being unable to oppose his command, so he gave me the gifts
and the missive with money to pay my way and I kissed hands and left the
presence. Then I dropped down from Baghdad to the Gulf, and with other
merchants embarked, and our ship sailed before a fair wind many days and
nights till, by Allah’s aid, we reached the island of Sarandib. As soon
as we had made fast we landed and I took the present and the letter;
and, going in with them to the King, kissed ground before him. When he
saw me, he said, “Well come, O Sindbad! By Allah Omnipotent we were
longing to see thee, and glory be to God who hath again shown us thy
face!” Then taking me by the hand he made me sit by his side, rejoicing,
and he welcomed me with familiar kindness again and entreated me as a
friend. After this he began to converse with me and courteously
addressed me and asked, “What was the cause of thy coming to us, O
Sindbad?” So after kissing his hand and thanking him I answered, “O my
lord, I have brought thee a present from my master, the Caliph Harun
Al-Rashid;” and offered him the present and the letter which he read and
at which he rejoiced with passing joy. The present consisted of a mare
worth ten thousand ducats, bearing a golden saddle set with jewels; a
book; a sumptuous suit of clothes and an hundred different kinds of
white Cairene cloths and silks of Suez,[98] Cufa and Alexandria; Greek
carpets and an hundred maunds[99] weight of linen and raw silk. Moreover
there was a wondrous rarety, a marvellous cup of crystal middlemost of
which was the figure of a lion faced by a kneeling man grasping a bow
with arrow drawn to the very head, together with the food-tray[100] of
Sulayman the son of David (on whom be peace!). The missive ran as
follows:—Peace from King Al-Rashid, the aided of Allah (who hath
vouchsafed to him and his forefathers noble rank and wide-spread glory),
be on the fortunate Sultan. But after. Thy letter came to our hands and
we rejoiced thereat; and we have sent the book entituled “Delight of the
Intelligent and for Friends the Rare Present,”[101] together with sundry
curiosities suitable for Kings; so do thou favour us by accepting them:
and peace be with thee! Then the King lavished upon me much wealth and
entreated me with all honour; so I prayed for him and thanked him for
his munificence. Some days after I craved his leave to depart, but could
not obtain it except by great pressing, whereupon I farewelled him and
fared forth from his city, with merchants and other companions,
homewards-bound without any desire for travel or trade. We continued
voyaging and coasting along many islands; but, when we were half-way, we
were surrounded by a number of canoes, wherein were men like devils
armed with bows and arrows, swords and daggers; habited in mail-coats
and other armoury. They fell upon us and wounded and slew all who
opposed them; then, having captured the ship and her contents, carried
us to an island, where they sold us at the meanest price. Now I was
bought by a wealthy man who, taking me to his house, gave me meat and
drink and clothing and treated me in the friendliest manner; so I was
heartened and I rested a little. One day he asked me, “Dost thou know
any art or craft?” and I answered him, “O my lord, I am a merchant and
know nothing but trade and traffic.” “Dost thou know,” rejoined he, “how
to use bow and arrow?” “Yes,” replied I, “I know that much.” Thereupon
he brought me a bow and arrows and mounted me behind him upon an
elephant: then he set out as night was well nigh over and, passing
through a forest of huge growths, came to a tall and sturdy tree up
which he made me climb. Then he gave me the bow and arrows, saying, “Sit
here now, and when the elephants troop hither in early morning, shoot at
them; belike thou wilt hit one; and, if he fall, come and tell me.” With
this he left me. I hid myself in the tree being in sore terror and
trembled till the sun arose; and, when the elephants appeared and
wandered about among the trees, I shot my arrows at them and continued
till I had shot down one of them. In the evening I reported my success
to my master who was delighted in me and entreated me with high honour;
and next morning he removed the slain elephant. In this wise I
continued, every morning shooting an elephant which my master would
remove till, one day, as I was perched in hiding on the tree there came
on suddenly and unexpectedly an innumerable host of elephants whose
screaming and trumpeting were such that I imagined the earth trembled
under them. All surrounded my tree, whose circumference was some fifty
cubits,[102] and one enormous monster came up to it and winding his
trunk round the bole haled it up by the roots, and dashed it to the
ground. I fell down fainting amongst the beasts when the monster
elephant wound his trunk about me and, setting me on his back, went off
with me, the others accompanying us. He carried me still unconscious
till he reached the place for which he was making, when he rolled me off
his back and presently went his ways followed by the others. So I rested
a little; and, when my terror had subsided, I looked about me and I
found myself among the bones of elephants, whereby I concluded that this
was their burial-place, and that the monster elephant had led me thither
on account of the tusks.[103] So I arose and walked a whole day and
night till I arrived at the house of my master, who saw my colour
changed by stress of affright and famine. He rejoiced in my return and
said to me, “By Allah, thou hast made my heart sore! I went when thou
wast missing and found the tree torn up, and thought that the elephants
had slain thee. Tell me how it was with thee.” I acquainted him with all
that had betided me; whereat he wondered greatly, and rejoiced and at
last asked me, “Dost thou know the place?”; whereto I answered, “Yes, O
my master!” So we mounted an elephant and fared until we came to the
spot; and, when my master beheld the heaps of tusks, he rejoiced
greatly; then carrying away as many as he wanted he returned with me
home. After this, he entreated me with increased favour and said, “O my
son, thou hast shown us the way to great gain, wherefore Allah requite
thee! Thou art freed for the Almighty’s sake and before His face! The
elephants used to destroy many of us on account of our hunting them for
their ivories and scrivellos; but Allah hath preserved thee from them,
and thou hast profited us by the heaps to which thou hast led us.” “O my
master,” replied I, “God free thy neck from the fire! And do thou grant
me, O my master, thy gracious leave to return to my own country.” “Yes,”
quoth he, “thou shalt have that permission. But we have a yearly fair,
when merchants come to us from various quarters to buy up these ivories.
The time is drawing near; and, when they shall have done their business,
I will send thee under their charge and will give thee wherewithal to
reach thy home.” So I blessed and thanked him and remained with him,
treated with respect and honour, for some days, when the merchants came
as he had foretold, and bought and sold and bartered; and when they had
made their preparations to return, my master came to me and said, “Rise
and get thee ready to travel with the traders en route to thy country.”
They had bought a number of tusks which they had bound together in loads
and were embarking them when my master sent me with them, paying for my
passage and settling all my debts; besides which he gave me a large
present in goods. We set out and voyaged from island to island till we
had crossed the sea and landed on the shores of the Persian Gulf, when
the merchants brought out and sold their stores: I also sold what I had
at a high profit; and I bought some of the prettiest things in the place
for presents and beautiful rareties and everything else I wanted. I
likewise bought for myself a beast and we fared forth and crossed the
deserts from country to country till I reached Baghdad. Here I went in
to the Caliph and, after saluting him and kissing hands, informed him of
all that had befallen me; whereupon he rejoiced in my safety and thanked
Almighty Allah; and he bade my story be written in letters of gold. I
then entered my house and met my family and brethren: and such is the
end of the history that happened to me during my seven voyages. Praise
be to Allah, the One, the Creator, the Maker of all things in Heaven and
Earth!——Now when Shahrazad had ended her story of the two Sindbads,
Dinarzad exclaimed, “O my sister, how pleasant is thy tale and how
tasteful! How sweet and how grateful!” She replied, “And what is this
compared with that I could tell thee to-morrow night?” Quoth the King,
“What may it be?” And she said:—It is a tale touching

-----

Footnote 1:

  Lane (vol. iii. 1) calls our old friend “Es-Sindibád of the Sea,” and
  Benfey derives the name from the Sanskrit “Siddhapati” = lord of
  sages. The etymology (in Heb. Sandabar and in Greek Syntipas) is still
  uncertain, although the term often occurs in Arab stories; and some
  look upon it as a mere corruption of “Bidpai” (Bidyápati). The
  derivation offered by Hole (Remarks on the Arabian Nights’
  Entertainments, by Richard Hole, LL.D. London, Cadell, 1797) from the
  Persian ábád (a region) is impossible. It is, however, not a little
  curious that this purely Persian word (= a “habitation”) should be
  found in Indian names as early as Alexander’s day, _e.g._ the “Dachina
  bades” of the Periplus is “Dakhshin-ábád,” the Sanskr. being
  “Dakshinapatha.”

Footnote 2:

  A porter like the famous Armenians of Constantinople. Some edits call
  him “Al-Hindibád.”

Footnote 3:

  Arab. “Karawán” (Charadrius œdicnemus, Linn.): its shrill note is
  admired by Egyptians and hated by sportsmen.

Footnote 4:

  This ejaculation, still popular, averts the evil eye. In describing
  Sindbad the Seaman the Arab writer seems to repeat what one reads of
  Marco Polo returned to Venice.

Footnote 5:

  Our old friend must not be confounded with the eponym of the
  “Sindibád-námah;” the Persian book of Sindbad the Sage. See Night
  dlxxviii.

Footnote 6:

  The first and second are from Eccles. chapts. vii. 1, and ix. 4. The
  Bul. Edit. reads for the third, “The grave is better than the palace.”
  None are from Solomon, but Easterns do not “verify quotations.”

Footnote 7:

  Arab. “Kánún”; a furnace, a brasier before noticed (vol. v., p. 272);
  here a pot full of charcoal sunk in the ground, or a little hearth of
  clay shaped like a horse-shoe and opening down wind.

Footnote 8:

  These fish-islands are common in the Classics, _e.g._ the Pristis of
  Pliny (xvii. 4), which Olaus Magnus transfers to the Baltic (xxi. 6)
  and makes timid as the whales of Nearchus. C. J. Solinus (_Plinii
  Simia_) says, “Indica maria balænas habent ultra spatia quatuor
  jugerum.” See also Bochart’s Hierozoicon (i. 50) for Job’s Leviathan
  (xli. 16–17). Hence Boiardo (Orl. Innam, lib. iv.) borrowed his
  magical whale and Milton (P.L. i.) his Leviathan deemed an island. A
  basking whale would readily suggest the Kraken and Cetus of Olaus
  Magnus (xxi. 25). Al-Kazwíni’s famous treatise on the “Wonders of the
  World” (Ajáib al-Makhlúkát) tells the same tale of the “Sulahfah”
  tortoise, the colossochelys, for which see Night dl.

Footnote 9:

  Sindbad does not say that he was a shipwrecked man, being a model in
  the matter of “travellers’ tales,” _i.e._ he always tells the truth
  when an untruth would not serve him.

Footnote 10:

  Lane (iii. 83) would make this a corruption of the Hindu “Maharáj” =
  great Rajah: but it is the name of the great autumnal fête of the
  Guebres; a term composed of two good old Persian words “Mihr” (the
  sun, whence “Mithras”) and “ján” = life. As will presently appear, in
  the days of the Just King Anushirwán, the Persians possessed Southern
  Arabia and East Africa south of Cape Guardafui (Jird Háfún.) On the
  other hand, supposing the word to be a corruption of Maharaj, Sindbad
  may allude to the famous Narsinga kingdom in Mid-south India whose
  capital was Vijayanagar; or to any great Indian Rajah even he of
  Kachch (Cutch), famous in Moslem story as the Balhará (Ballaba Rais,
  who founded the Ballabhi era; or the Zamorin of Camoens, the Samdry
  Rajah of Malabar). For Mahrage, or Mihrage, see Renaudot’s “Two
  Mohammedan Travellers of the Ninth Century.” In the account of Ceylon
  by Wolf (English Transl. p. 168) it adjoins the “Ilhas de Cavalos” (of
  wild horses) to which the Dutch merchants sent their brood-mares. Sir
  W. Jones (Description of Asia, chapt. ii.) makes the Arabian island
  Soborma or Mahráj = Borneo.

Footnote 11:

  Arab. “Sáis”; the well-known Anglo-Indian word for a groom or rather a
  “horsekeeper.”

Footnote 12:

  Arab. “Darakah”; whence our word.

Footnote 13:

  The myth of mares being impregnated by the wind was known to the
  Classics of Europe; and the “sea-stallion” may have arisen from the
  Arab practice of picketing mare asses to be covered by the wild ass.
  Colonel J. D. Watson of the Bombay Army suggests to me that Sindbad
  was wrecked at the mouth of the Ran of Kachch (Cutch) and was carried
  in a boat to one of the Islands there formed during the rains and
  where the wild ass (_Equus Onager_, Khar-gadh, in Pers. Gor-khar)
  still breeds. This would explain the “stallions of the sea” and we
  find traces of the ass blood in the true Kathiawár horse, with his dun
  colour, barred legs and dorsal stripe.

Footnote 14:

  The second or warrior caste (Kshatriya), popularly supposed to have
  been annihilated by Battle-axe Ráma (Parashu Ráma); but several tribes
  of Rajputs and other races claim the honourable genealogy. Colonel
  Watson would explain the word by “Shakháyát” or noble Káthis
  (Kathiawar-men), or by “Shikári,” the professional hunter here acting
  as stable-groom.

Footnote 15:

  In Bul. Edit. “Kábil.” Lane (iii. 88) supposes it to be the “Bartail”
  of Al-Kazwini near Borneo and quotes the Spaniard B. L. de Argensola
  (History of the Moluccas) who places near Banda a desert island,
  Poelsatton, infamous for cries, whistlings, roarings and dreadful
  apparitions, suggesting that it was peopled by devils (Stevens, vol.
  i., p. 168).

Footnote 16:

  Some texts substitute for this last phrase, “And the sailors say that
  Al-Dajjál is there.” He is a manner of Moslem Antichrist, the Man of
  Sin per excellentiam, who will come in the latter days and lay waste
  the earth, leading 70,000 Jews, till encountered and slain by Jesus at
  the gate of Lud. Sale’s Essay, sect. 4.

Footnote 17:

  Also from Al-Kazwini: it is an exaggerated description of the whale
  still common off the East African Coast. My crew was dreadfully
  frightened by one between Berberah and Aden. Nearchus scared away the
  whales in the Persian Gulf by trumpets (Strabo, lib. xv.). The
  owl-faced fish is unknown to me: it may perhaps be a seal or a
  manatee. Hole says that Father Martini, the Jesuit (seventeenth
  century), placed in the Canton Seas, an “animal with the head of a
  bird and the tail of a fish,”—a parrot-beak?

Footnote 18:

  The captain or master (not owner) of a ship.

Footnote 19:

  The kindly Moslem feeling, shown to a namesake, however humble.

Footnote 20:

  A popular phrase to express utter desolation.

Footnote 21:

  The literature of all peoples contains this physiological perversion.
  Birds do not sing hymns; the song of the male is simply to call the
  female and when the pairing-season ends all are dumb.

Footnote 22:

  The older “roc.” The word is Persian, with many meanings, _e.g._ a
  cheek (Lalla “Rookh”); a “rook” (hero) at chess; a rhinoceros, etc.
  The fable world-wide of the _wundervogel_ is, as usual, founded upon
  fact: man remembers and combines but does not create. The Egyptian
  Bennu (Ti-bennu = phœnix) may have been a reminiscence of gigantic
  pterodactyls and other winged monsters. From the Nile the legend
  fabled by these Oriental “putters out or five for one” overspread the
  world and gave birth to the Eorosh of the Zend, whence the Pers.
  “Símurgh” (= the “thirty-fowl-like”), the “Bar Yuchre” of the Rabbis,
  the “Garuda” of the Hindus; the “Anká” (“longneck”) of the Arabs; the
  Hathilinga bird, of Buddhagosha’s Parables, which had the strength of
  five elephants; the Kerkes of the Turks; the Gryps of the Greeks; the
  Russian “Norka”; the sacred dragon of the Chinese; the Japanese
  “Pheng” and “Kirni”; the “wise and ancient Bird” which sits upon the
  ash-tree Yggdrasil, and the dragons, griffins, basilisks, etc. of the
  Middle Ages. A second basis wanting only a superstructure of
  exaggeration (M. Polo’s Ruch had wing-feathers twelve paces long)
  would be the huge birds but lately killed out. Sindbad may allude to
  the Æpyornus of Madagascar, a gigantic ostrich whose egg contains 2.35
  gallons. The late Herr Hildebrand discovered on the African coast,
  facing Madagascar, traces of another huge bird. Bochart (Hierozoicon
  ii. 854) notices the Avium Avis Ruch and taking the _pulli_ was
  followed by lapidation on the part of the parent bird. A Persian
  illustration in Lane (iii. 90) shows the Rukh carrying off three
  elephants in beak and pounces with the proportions of a hawk and field
  mice: and the Rukh hawking at an elephant is a favourite Persian
  subject. It is possible that the “Twelve Knights of the Round Table”
  were the twelve Rukhs of Persian story. We need not go, with Faber, to
  the Cherubim which guarded the Paradise-gate. The curious reader will
  consult Dr. H. H. Wilson’s Essays, edited by my learned correspondent,
  Dr. Rost, Librarian of the India House, vol. i. pp. 192–3.

Footnote 23:

  It is not easy to explain this passage unless it be a garbled allusion
  to the steel-plate of the diamond-cutter. Nor can we account for the
  wide diffusion of this tale of perils unless to enhance the value of
  the gem. Diamonds occur in alluvial lands mostly open and
  comparatively level, as in India, the Brazil and the Cape. Archbishop
  Epiphanius of Salamis (ob. A.D. 403) tells this story about the
  jacinth or ruby (Epiphanii Opera, a Petaio, Coloniæ 1682); and it was
  transferred to the diamond by Marco Polo (iii. 29, “of Eagles bring up
  diamonds”) and Nicolò de Conti, whose “mountain Albenigaras” must be
  Vijayanagar in the kingdom of Golconda. Major Rennel places the famous
  mines of Pauna or Purna in a mountain-tract of more than 200 miles
  square to the south-west of the Jumna. Al-Kazwini locates the “Chaos”
  in the “Valley of the Moon amongst the mountains of Serendib”
  (Ceylon); the Chinese tell the same tale in the campaigns of Hulaku;
  and it is known in Armenia. Col. Yule (M. P. ii. 349) suggests that
  all these are ramifications of the legend told by Herodotus concerning
  the Arabs and their cinnamon (iii. 3). But whence did Herodotus borrow
  the tale?

Footnote 24:

  Sindbad correctly describes the primitive way of extracting camphor, a
  drug unknown to the Greeks and Romans, introduced by the Arabs and
  ruined in reputation by M. Raspail. The best Laurus Camphora grows in
  the Malay Peninsula, Sumatra and Borneo: although Marsden (Marco Polo)
  declares that the tree is not found South of the Equator. In the Calc.
  Edit. of two hundred Nights the camphor-island (or peninsula) is
  called “Al-Ríhah” which is the Arab name for Jericho-town.

Footnote 25:

  In Bul. Edit. Kazkazan: Calc. Karkaddan and others Karkand and
  Karkadan; the word being Persian, Karg or Kargadan; the καρτάζυνον of
  Ælian (Hist. Anim. xvi. 21). The length of the horn (greatly
  exaggerated) shows that the white species is meant; and it supplies
  only walking-sticks. Cups are made of the black horn (a bundle of
  fibres) which, like Venetian glass, sweat at the touch of poison. A
  section of the horn is supposed to show white lines in the figure of a
  man, and sundry likenesses of birds; but these I never saw. The
  rhinoceros gives splendid sport and the African is perhaps the most
  dangerous of noble game. It has served to explain away and abolish the
  unicorn among the Scientists of Europe. But Central Africa with one
  voice assures us that a horse-like animal with a single erectile horn
  on the forehead exists. The late Dr. Baikic, of Niger fame, thoroughly
  believed in it and those curious on the subject will read about Abu
  Karn (Father of a Horn) in Preface (pp. xvi.-xviii.) of the Voyage au
  Darfour, by Mohammed ibn Omar al-Tounsy (Al-Tunisi), Paris, Duprat,
  1845.

Footnote 26:

  Ibn al-Wardi mentions an “Isle of Apes” in the Sea of China and
  Al-Idrísi places it two days’ sail from Sukutra (Dwipa Sukhatra,
  Socotra). It is a popular error to explain the Homeric and Herodotean
  legend of the Pygmies by anthropoid apes. The Pygmy fable (Pygmæi
  Spithamai = 1 cubit = 3 spans) was, as usual, based upon fact, as the
  explorations of late years have proved: the dwarfs are homunculi of
  various tribes, the Akka, Doko, Tiki-Tiki, Wambilikimo (“two-cubit
  men”), the stunted race that share the central regions of
  Intertropical Africa with the abnormally tall peoples who speak
  dialects of the Great South African tongue, miscalled the “Bantu.”
  Hole makes the Pygmies “monkeys,” a word we have borrowed from the
  Italians (monichio à mono = ape) and quotes Ptolemy, Νῆσοι τῶν Σατυρῶν
  (Ape-islands) East of Sunda.

Footnote 27:

  A kind of barge (Arab. Bárijah, plur. Bawárij) used on the Nile of
  sub-pyriform shape when seen in bird’s eye. Lane translates “ears like
  two mortars” from the Calc. Edit.

Footnote 28:

  This giant is distinctly Polyphemus; but the East had giants and
  cyclopes of her own (Hierozoicon ii. 845). The Ajáib al-Hind (chapt.
  cxxii.) makes Polyphemus copulate with the sheep. Sir John Mandeville
  (if such person ever existed) mentions men fifty feet high in the
  Indian Islands; and Al-Kazwini and Al-Idrisi transfer them to the Sea
  of China, a Botany Bay for monsters in general.

Footnote 29:

  Fire is forbidden as a punishment amongst Moslems, the idea being that
  it should be reserved for the next world. Hence the sailors fear the
  roasting more than the eating: with ours it would probably be the
  reverse. The Persian insult “Pidar-sokhtah” = (son of a) burnt father,
  is well known. I have noted the advisability of burning the Moslem’s
  corpse under certain circumstances: otherwise the murderer may come to
  be canonised.

Footnote 30:

  Arab. “Mastabah” = the bench or form of masonry before noticed. In
  olden Europe benches were much more used than chairs, these being
  articles of luxury. So King Horne “sett him abenche;” and hence our
  “King’s Bench” (Court).

Footnote 31:

  This is from the Bresl. Edit. vol. iv. 32: the Calc. Edit. gives only
  an abstract and in the Bul. Edit. the Ogre returned “accompanied by a
  female, greater than he and more hideous.” We cannot accept Mistress
  Polyphemus.

Footnote 32:

  This is from Al-Kazwini, who makes the serpent “wind itself round a
  tree or a rock, and thus break to pieces the bones of the breast in
  its belly.”

Footnote 33:

  “Like a closet,” in the Calc. Edit. The serpent is an exaggeration of
  the python which grows to an enormous size. Monstrous Ophidia are
  mentioned in sober history, _e.g._ that which delayed the army of
  Regulus. Dr. de Lacerda, a sober and sensible Brazilian traveller,
  mentions his servants sitting down upon a tree-trunk in the Captaincy
  of Sam Paulo (Brazil), which began to move and proved to be a huge
  snake. F. M. Pinto (the Sindbad of Portugal though not so respectable)
  when in Sumatra takes refuge in a tree from “tigers, crocodiles,
  copped adders and serpents which slay men with their breath.” Father
  Lobo in Tigre (chapt. x.) was nearly killed by the poison-breath of a
  huge snake, and healed himself with a bezoar carried _ad hoc_. Maffæus
  makes the breath of crocodiles suavissimus, but that of the Malabar
  serpents and vipers “adeo teter ac noxius ut afflatu ipso necare
  perhibeantur.”

Footnote 34:

  Arab. “Aurat”: the word has been borrowed by the Hindostani jargon,
  and means a woman, a wife.

Footnote 35:

  So in Al-Idrísi and Langlès: the Bres. Edit. has “Al-Kalásitah”; and
  Al-Kazwini “Al-Salámit.” The latter notes in it a petrifying spring
  which Camoens (The Lus. x. 104), places in Sunda, _i.e._ Java-Minor of
  M. Polo. Some read Salabat-Timor, one of the Moluccas famed for
  sanders, cloves, cinnamon, etc. (Purchas ii. 1784.)

Footnote 36:

  Evidently the hippopotamus (Pliny, viii. 25; ix. 3 and xxiii. 11). It
  can hardly be the Mulaccan Tapir, as shields are not made of the hide.
  Hole suggests the buffalo which found its way to Egypt from India
  _viâ_ Persia; but this would not be a speciosum miraculum.

Footnote 37:

  The ass-headed fish is from Pliny (ix. cap. 3): all those tales are
  founded upon the manatee (whose dorsal protuberance may have suggested
  the camel), the seal and the dugong or sea-calf. I have noticed
  (Zanzibar i. 205) legends of ichthyological marvels current on the
  East African seaboard; and even the monsters of the Scottish waters
  are not all known: witness the mysterious “brigdie.” See Bochart De
  Cetis i. 7; and Purchas iii. 930.

Footnote 38:

  The colossal tortoise is noticed by Ælian (De Nat. Animal. xvi. 17),
  by Strabo (Lib. xv.), by Pliny (ix. 10) and Diodorus Siculus (iv. 1)
  who had heard of a tribe of Chelonophagi. Ælian makes them 16 cubits
  long near Taprobane and serving as house-roofs; and others turn the
  shell into boats and coracles. A colossochelys was first found on the
  Scwalik Hills by Dr. Falconer and Major (afterwards Sir Proby)
  Cantley. In 1867 M. Emile Blanchard exhibited to the Académie des
  Sciences a monster crab from Japan 1.20 metres long (or 2.50 including
  legs); and other travellers have reported 4 metres. These crustacea
  seem never to cease growing and attain great dimensions under
  favourable circumstances, _i.e._ when not troubled by man.

Footnote 39:

  Lane suggests (iii. 97), and with some probability, that the “bird”
  was a nautilus; but the wild traditions concerning the barnacle-goose
  may perhaps have been the base of the fable. The albatross also was
  long supposed never to touch land. Possibly the barnacle, like the
  barometz or Tartarean lamb, may be a survivor of the day when the
  animal and vegetable kingdoms had not yet branched off into different
  directions.

Footnote 40:

  Arab. “Zahwah,” also meaning a luncheon. The five daily prayers made
  all Moslems take strict account of time, and their nomenclature of its
  division is extensive.

Footnote 41:

  This is the “insane herb.” Davis, who visited Sumatra in 1599 (Purchas
  i. 120) speaks “of a kind of seed, whereof a little being eaten,
  maketh a man to turn foole, all things seeming to him to be
  metamorphosed.” Linschoten’s “Dutroa” was a poppy-like bud containing
  small kernels like melons which stamped and administered as a drink
  make a man “as if he were foolish, or out of his wits.” This is Father
  Lobo’s “Vanguini” of the Cafres, called by the Portuguese _dutro_
  (_Datura Stramonium_) still used by dishonest confectioners. It may be
  Dampier’s Ganga (Ganjah) or Bang (Bhang) which he justly describes as
  acting differently “according to different constitutions; for some it
  stupefies, others it makes sleepy, others merry and some quite mad.”
  (Harris, Collect. ii. 900). Dr. Fryer also mentions Duty, Bung and
  Post, the Poust of Bernier, an infusion of poppy-seed.

Footnote 42:

  Arab. “Ghul,” here an ogre, a cannibal. I cannot but regard the “Ghul
  of the waste” as an embodiment of the natural fear and horror which a
  man feels when he faces a really dangerous desert. As regards
  cannibalism, Al-Islam’s religion of common sense freely allows it when
  necessary to save life, and unlike our mawkish modern sensibility,
  never blames those who

                                  Alimentis talibus usi
                  Produxere animos.

Footnote 43:

  For Cannibals, see the Massagetæ of Herod (i.), the Padæi of India
  (iii.), and the Essedones near Mæotis (iv.); Strabo (lib. iv.) of the
  Luci; Pomponius Mela (iii. 7) and St. Jerome (ad Jovinum) of Scoti. M.
  Polo locates them in Dragvia, a kingdom of Sumatra (iii. 17), and in
  Angaman (the Andamanian Isles?), possibly the ten Maniolai which
  Ptolemy (vii.), confusing with the Nicobars, places on the Eastern
  side of the Bay of Bengal; and thence derives the Heraklian stone
  (magnet) which attracts the iron of ships (See Serapion, De Magnete,
  fol. 6, Edit. of 1479, and Brown’s Vulgar Errors, p. 74, 6th Edit.).
  Mandeville finds his cannibals in Lamaray (Sumatra) and Barthema in
  the “Isle of Gyava” (Java). Ibn Al-Wardi and Al-Kazwini notice them in
  the Isle Saksar, in the Sea of the Zanj (Zanzibar): the name is
  corrupted Persian “Sag-Sar” (Dogs’-heads) hence the dog-descended race
  of Camoens in Pegu (The Lus. x. 122). The Bresl. Edit. (iv. 52) calls
  them “Khawárij” = certain sectarians in Eastern Arabia. Needless to
  say that cocoa-nut oil would have no stupefying effect unless mixed
  with opium or datura, hemp or henbane.

Footnote 44:

  Black pepper is produced in the Goanese but we must go south to find
  the “Bilád al-Filfil” (home of pepper) _i.e._ Malabar. The exorbitant
  prices demanded by Venice for this spice led directly to the discovery
  of The Cape route by the Portuguese; as the “Grains of Paradise”
  (Amomum Granum Paradisi) induced the English to explore the West
  African Coast.

Footnote 45:

  Arab. “Kazdír.” Sansk. “Kastír.” Gr. “Kassiteron.” Lat. “Cassiteros,”
  evidently derived from one root. The Heb. is “Badih,” a substitute, an
  alloy. “Tanakah” is the vulg. Arab. word, a congener of the Assyrian
  “Anaku,” and “Kala i” is the corrupt Arab. term used in India.

Footnote 46:

  Our Arabian Ulysses had probably left a Penelope or two at home and
  finds a Calypso in this Ogygia. His modesty at the mention of
  womankind is notable.

Footnote 47:

  These are the commonplaces of Moslem consolation on such occasions:
  the artistic part is their contrast with the unfortunate widower’s
  prospect.

Footnote 48:

  Lit. “a margin of stone, like the curb-stone of a well.”

Footnote 49:

  I am not aware that this vivisepulture of the widower is the custom of
  any race but the fable would be readily suggested by the Sati
  (Suttee)-rite of the Hindus. Simple vivisepulture was and is practised
  by many people.

Footnote 50:

  Because she was weaker than a man. The Bresl. Edit. however, has “a
  gugglet of water and five scones.”

Footnote 51:

  The confession is made with true Eastern sang-froid and probably none
  of the hearers “disapproved” of the murders which saved the speaker’s
  life.

Footnote 52:

  This tale is evidently taken from the escape of Aristomenes the
  Messenian from the pit into which he had been thrown, a fox being his
  guide. The Arabs in an early day were eager students of Greek
  literature. Hole (p. 140) noted the coincidence.

Footnote 53:

  Bresl. Edit. “Khwájah,” our “Howajee,” meaning a schoolmaster, a man
  of letters, a gentleman.

Footnote 54:

  And he does repeat at full length what the hearers must have known
  right well. I abridge.

Footnote 55:

  Island of the Bell (Arab. “Nákús” = a wooden gong used by Christians
  but forbidden to Moslems). “Kala” is written “Kela,” “Kullah” and a
  variety of ways. Baron Walckenaer places it at Keydah in the Malay
  peninsula opposite Sumatra. Renaudot identifies it with Calabar,
  “somewhere about the point of Malabar.”

Footnote 56:

  Islands, because Arab cosmographers love to place their _speciosa
  miracula_ in such places.

Footnote 57:

  Like the companions of Ulysses who ate the sacred oxen (Od. xii.).

Footnote 58:

  So the enormous kingfisher of Lucian’s True History (lib. ii.).

Footnote 59:

  This tale is borrowed from Ibn Al-Wardi, who adds that the greybeards
  awoke in the morning after eating the young Rukh with black hair which
  never turned white. The same legend is recounted by Al-Dimiri (ob.
  A.H. 808 = 1405–6) who was translated into Latin by Bochart
  (Hierozoicon ii. p. 854) and quoted by Hole and Lane (iii. 103). An
  excellent study of Marco Polo’s Rukh was made by my learned friend the
  late Prof. G. G. Bianconi of Bologna, “Dell’Uccello Ruc,” Bologna,
  Gamberini, 1868. Prof. Bianconi predicted that other giant birds would
  be found in Madagascar on the East African Coast opposite; but he died
  before hearing of Hildebrand’s discovery.

Footnote 60:

  Arab. “Izár,” the earliest garb of Eastern man; and, as such preserved
  in the Meccan pilgrimage. The “waist-cloth” is either tucked in or
  kept in place by a girdle.

Footnote 61:

  Arab. “Líf,” a succedaneum for the unclean sponge, not unknown in the
  “Turkish Baths” of London.

Footnote 62:

  The Persians have a Plinian monster called “Tasmeh-pá” = Strap-legs
  without bones. The “Old Man” is not an ourang-outang nor an Ifrít as
  in Sayf al-Mulúk, Night dcclxxi., but a jocose exaggeration of a
  custom prevailing in parts of Asia and especially in the African
  interior where the Tsetse-fly prevents the breeding of burden-beasts.
  Ibn Batútah tells us that in Malabar everything was borne upon men’s
  backs. In Central Africa the kinglet rides a slave, and on ceremonious
  occasions mounts his Prime Minister. I have often been reduced to this
  style of conveyance and found man the worst imaginable riding: there
  is no hold and the sharpness of the shoulder-ridge soon makes the legs
  ache intolerably. The classicists of course find the Shaykh of the Sea
  in the Tritons and Nereus, and Bochart (Hiero. ii. 858, 880) notices
  the homo aquaticus, Senex Judæus and Senex Marinus. Hole (p. 151)
  suggests the inevitable ourang-outang (man o’ wood), one of “our
  humiliating copyists,” and quotes “Destiny” in Scarron’s comical
  romance (Part ii. chapt. 1) and “Jealousy” enfolding Rinaldo (O.F.
  lib. 42).

Footnote 63:

  More literally “The Chief of the Sea (-Coast),” Shaykh being here a
  chief rather than an elder (eoldermann, alderman). So the “Old Man of
  the Mountain,” famous in crusading days, was the Chief who lived on
  the Nusayriyah or Ansári range, a northern prolongation of the
  Libanus. Our “old man” of the text may have been suggested by the
  Koranic commentators on chapt. vi. When an Infidel rises from the
  grave, a hideous figure meets him and says, Why wonderest thou at my
  loathsomeness? I am thine Evil Deeds: thou didst ride upon me in the
  world and now I will ride upon thee (suiting the action to the words).

Footnote 64:

  In parts of West Africa and especially in Gorilla-land there are many
  stories of women and children being carried off by apes, and all
  believe that the former bear issue to them. It is certain that the
  anthropoid ape is lustfully excited by the presence of women and I
  have related how at Cairo (1856) a huge cynocephalus would have raped
  a girl had it not been bayonetted. Young ladies who visited the
  Demidoff Gardens and menagerie at Florence were often scandalised by
  the vicious exposure of the baboons’ parti-coloured persons. The
  female monkey equally solicits the attentions of man and I heard in
  India from my late friend, Mirza Ali Akbar of Bombay, that to his
  knowledge connection had taken place. Whether there would be issue and
  whether such issue would be viable are still disputed points: the
  produce would add another difficulty to the pseudo-science called
  psychology, as such mule would have only half a soul and issue by a
  congener would have a quarter-soul. A traveller well known to me once
  proposed to breed pithecoid men who might be useful as hewers of wood
  and drawers of water: his idea was to put the highest races of apes to
  the lowest of humanity. I never heard what became of his “breeding
  stables.”

Footnote 65:

  Arab. “Jauz al-Hindi”: our word cocoa is from the Port. “Coco,”
  meaning a “bug” (bugbear) in allusion to its caricature of the human
  face, hair, eyes and mouth. I may here note that a cocoa-tree is
  easily climbed with a bit of rope or a handkerchief.

Footnote 66:

  Tomb-pictures in Egypt show tame monkeys gathering fruits and Grossier
  (Description of China, quoted by Hole and Lane) mentions a similar
  mode of harvesting tea by irritating the monkeys of the Middle
  Kingdom.

Footnote 67:

  Bresl. Edit. Cloves and cinnamon in those days grew in widely distant
  places.

Footnote 68:

  In pepper-plantations it is usual to set bananas (_Musa Paradisiaca_)
  for shading the young shrubs which bear bunches like ivy-fruit, not
  pods.

Footnote 69:

  The Bresl. Edit. has “Al-Ma’arat.” Langlès calls it the Island of
  Al-Kamárí. See Lane, iii. 86.

Footnote 70:

  Insula, pro peninsula. “Comorin” is a corrupt. of “Kanyá” (= Virgo,
  the goddess Durgá) and “Kumári” (a maid, a princess); from a temple of
  Shiva’s wife: hence Ptolemy’s Κῶρυ ἄκρον and near it to the N. East
  Κομαρία ἄκρον καὶ πολις, “Promontorium Cori quod Comorini caput insulæ
  vocant,” says Maffæus (Hist. Indic. i. p. 16). In the text “Al’úd”
  refers to the eagle-wood (Aloekylon Agallochum) so called because
  spotted like the bird’s plume. That of Champa (Cochin-China, mentioned
  by Camoens, The Lus. x. 129) is still famous.

Footnote 71:

  Arab. “Birkat” = tank, pool, reach, bight. Hence Birkat Far’aun in the
  Suez Gulf (Pilgrimage i. 297).

Footnote 72:

  Probably Cape Comorin, to judge from the river, but the text names
  Sarandib (Ceylon Island) famous for gems. This was noticed by Marco
  Polo, iii. cap. 19; and ancient authors relate the same of
  “Taprobane.”

Footnote 73:

  I need hardly trouble the reader with a note on pearl-fisheries: the
  descriptions of travellers are continuous from the days of Pliny (ix.
  35), Solinus (cap. 56) and Marco Polo (iii. 23). Maximilian of
  Transylvania, in his narrative of Magellan’s voyage (Novus Orbis, p.
  532) says that the Celebes produce pearls big as turtle-doves’ eggs;
  and the King of Porne (Borneo) had two unions as great as goose’s
  eggs. Pigafetta (in Purchas) reduces this to hen’s eggs and Sir Thomas
  Herbert to dove’s eggs.

Footnote 74:

  Arab. “Anbar” pronounced “Ambar;” wherein I would derive “Ambrosia.”
  Ambergris was long supposed to be a fossil, a vegetable which grew
  upon the sea-bottom or rose in springs; or a “substance produced in
  the water like naphtha or bitumen”(!): now it is known to be the
  egesta of a whale. It is found in lumps weighing several pounds upon
  the Zanzibar Coast and is sold at a high price, being held a potent
  aphrodisiac. A small hollow is drilled in the bottom of the cup and
  the coffee is poured upon the bit of ambergris it contains; when the
  oleaginous matter shows in dots amidst the “Kaymagh” (coffee-cream),
  the bubbly froth which floats upon the surface and which an expert
  “coffee servant” distributes equally among the guests. Argensola
  mentions in Ceylon, “springs of liquid bitumen thicker than our oil
  and some of pure balsam.”

Footnote 75:

  The tale-teller forgets that Sindbad and his companions have just
  ascended it; but this _inconséquence_ is a characteristic of the
  Eastern Saga. I may note that the description of ambergris in the text
  tells us admirably well what it is not.

Footnote 76:

  This custom is alluded to by Lane (Mod. Egypt, ch. xv.): it is the
  rule of pilgrims to Meccah when too ill to walk or ride (Pilgrimage i.
  180). Hence all men carry their shrouds: mine, after being dipped in
  the Holy Water of Zemzem, was stolen from me by the rascally Somal of
  Berberah.

Footnote 77:

  Arab. “Fulk;” some Edits. read “Kalak” and “Ramaz” (= a raft).

Footnote 78:

  These lines occur in modified form in Night xi.

Footnote 79:

  These underground rivers (which Dr. Livingstone derided) are familiar
  to every geographer from Spenser’s “Mole” to the Poika of Adelberg and
  the Timavo near Trieste. Hence “Peter Wilkins” borrowed his cavern
  which led him to Grandevolet. I have some experience of Sindbad’s
  sorrows, having once attempted to descend the Poika on foot. The
  Classics had the Alpheus (Pliny v. 31; and Seneca, Nat. Quæ. vi.), and
  the Tigris-Euphrates supposed to flow underground: and the Mediævals
  knew the Abana of Damascus and the Zenderúd of Isfahan.

Footnote 80:

  Abyssinians can hardly be called “blackamoors,” but the arrogance of
  the white skin shows itself in Easterns (_e.g._ Turks and Brahmans) as
  much as, if not more than, amongst Europeans. Southern India at the
  time it was explored by Vasco da Gama was crowded with Abyssinian
  slaves imported by the Arabs.

Footnote 81:

  “Sarandib” and “Ceylon” (the Taprobane of Ptolemy and Diodorus
  Siculus) derive from the Pali “Sihalam” (not the Sansk. “Sinhala”)
  shortened to Silam and Ilam in old Tamul. Van der Tunk would find it
  in the Malay “Pulo Selam” = Isle of Gems (the Ratna-dwípa or Jewel
  Isle of the Hindus and the Jazirat al-Yakút or Ruby-Island of the
  Arabs); and the learned Colonel Yule (Marco Polo ii. 296) remarks that
  we have adopted many Malayan names, _e.g._ Pegu, China and Japan.
  Sarandib is clearly “Selan-dwípa,” which Mandeville reduced to
  “Silha.”

Footnote 82:

  This is the well-known Adam’s Peak, the Jabal al-Ramun of the Arabs
  where Adam fell when cast out of Eden in the lowest or lunar sphere.
  Eve fell at Jeddah (a modern myth) and the unhappy pair met at Mount
  Arafat (_i.e._ recognition) near Meccah. Thus their fall was a fall
  indeed. (Pilgrimage iii. 259).

Footnote 83:

  He is the Alcinous of our Arabian Odyssy.

Footnote 84:

  This word is not in the dictionaries; Hole (p. 192) and Lane
  understand it to mean the hog-deer; but why, one cannot imagine. The
  animal is neither “beautiful” nor “uncommon” and most men of my day
  have shot dozens in the Sind-Shikárgáhs.

Footnote 85:

  M. Polo speaks of a ruby in Seilan (Ceylon) a palm long and three
  fingers thick: William of Tyre mentions a ruby weighing twelve
  Egyptian drams (Gibbon ii. 123), and Mandeville makes the King of
  Mammera wear about his neck a “rubye orient” one foot long by five
  fingers large.

Footnote 86:

  The fable is from Al-Kazwini and Ibn Al-Wardi who place the serpent
  (an animal sacred to Æsculapius, Pliny, xxix. 4) “in the sea of Zanj”
  (_i.e._ Zanzibar). In the “garrow hills” of N. Eastern Bengal the skin
  of the snake Burrawar(?) is held to cure pain (Asiat. Res. vol. iii.).

Footnote 87:

  For “Emerald,” Hole (p. 177) would read emery or adamantine spar.

Footnote 88:

  Evidently Maháráj = Great Rajah, Rajah in Chief, an Hindu title common
  to the three potentates before alluded to, the Narsinga, Balhara or
  Samiry.

Footnote 89:

  This is probably classical. So the page said to Philip of Macedon
  every morning, “Remember, Philip, thou art mortal”; also the slave in
  the Roman Triumph,

                Respice post te: hominem te esse memento!

  And the dying Severus, “Urnlet, soon shalt thou enclose what hardly a
  whole world could contain.” But the custom may also have been Indian:
  the contrast of external pomp with the real vanity of human life
  suggests itself to all.

Footnote 90:

  Arab. “Hút”; a term applied to Jonah’s whale and to monsters of the
  deep, “Samak” being the common fishes.

Footnote 91:

  Usually a two-bow prayer.

Footnote 92:

  This is the recognised formula of Moslem sales.

Footnote 93:

  Arab. “Walímah”; like our wedding-breakfast but a much more
  ceremonious and important affair.

Footnote 94:

  _i.e._ his wife (euphemistically). I remember an Italian lady being
  much hurt when a Maltese said to her “Mia moglie—con rispetto
  parlando” (my wife, saving your presence.) “What,” she cried, “he
  speaks of his wife as if he would of the sweepings!”

Footnote 95:

  The serpent in Arabic is mostly feminine.

Footnote 96:

  _i.e._ in envying his wealth, with the risk of the evil eye.

Footnote 97:

  I subjoin a translation of the Seventh Voyage from the Calc. Edit. of
  the two hundred Nights which differs in essential points from the
  above. All respecting Sindbad the Seaman has an especial interest. In
  one point this world-famous tale is badly ordered. The most exciting
  adventures are the earliest and the falling off of the interest has a
  somewhat depressing effect. The Rukh, the Ogre and the Old Man o’ the
  Sea should come last.

Footnote 98:

  Arab. Al-Suways: this successor of ancient Arsinoë was, according to
  local tradition, founded by a Santon from Al-Sús in Marocco who called
  it after his name “Little Sús” (the wormlet).

Footnote 99:

  Arab. “Mann,” a weight varying from two to six pounds: even this
  common term is not found in the tables of Lane’s Mod. Egyptians,
  Appendix B. The “Maund” is a well-known Anglo-Indian weight.

Footnote 100:

  This article is not mentioned elsewhere in The Nights.

Footnote 101:

  Apparently a fancy title.

Footnote 102:

  The island is evidently Ceylon long famed for elephants and the tree
  is the well known “Banyan” (Ficus Indica). According to Linschoten and
  Wolf, the elephants of all lands do reverence and honour to those of
  Ceylon.

Footnote 103:

  “Tusks” not “teeth” which are not valued. As Hole remarks, the
  elephants of Pliny and Sindbad are equally conscious of the value of
  ivory. Pliny (viii. 3) quotes Herodotus about the buying of ivories
  and relates how elephants, when hunted, break their “cornua” (as Juba
  called them) against a tree trunk by way of ransom. Ælian, Plutarch,
  and Philostratus speak of the linguistic intelligence and religious
  worship of the “half-reason with the hand,” which the Hindus term
  “Háthí” = unimanus. Finally, Topsell’s Gesner (p. 152) makes elephants
  bury their tusks, “which commonly drop out every tenth year.” In
  Arabian literature the elephant is always connected with India.




                        THE CITY OF BRASS.[104]


It is related that there was, in tide of yore and in times and years
long gone before, at Damascus of Syria, a Caliph known as Abd al-Malik
bin Marwan, the fifth of the Ommiade house. As this Commander of the
Faithful was seated one day in his palace, conversing with his Sultans
and Kings and the Grandees of his empire, the talk turned upon the
legends of past peoples and the traditions of our Lord Solomon, David’s
son (on the twain be peace!), and on that which Allah Almighty had
bestowed on him of lordship and dominion over men and Jinn and birds and
beasts and reptiles and the wind and other created things; and quoth the
Caliph, “Of a truth we hear from those who forewent us that the Lord
(extolled and exalted be He!) vouchsafed unto none the like of that
which He vouchsafed unto our lord Solomon and that he attained unto that
whereto never attained other than he, in that he was wont to imprison
Jinns and Marids and Satans in cucurbites of copper and to stop them
with lead and seal[105] them with his ring.”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Caliph
Abd al-Malik bin Marwan sat conversing with his Grandees concerning our
lord Solomon, and these noted what Allah had bestowed upon him of
lordship and dominion, quoth the Commander of the Faithful, “Indeed he
attained unto that whereto never attained other than he, in that he was
wont to imprison Jinns and Marids and Satans in cucurbites of copper and
stop them with lead and seal them with his ring.” Then said Tálib bin
Sahl (who was a seeker after treasures and had books that discovered to
him hoards and wealth hidden under the earth), “O Commander of the
Faithful,—Allah make thy dominion to endure and exalt thy dignity here
and hereafter!—my father told me of my grandfather, that he once took
ship with a company, intending for the island of Sikiliyah or Sicily,
and sailed until there arose against them a contrary wind, which drove
them from their course and brought them, after a month, to a great
mountain in one of the lands of Allah the Most High, but where that land
was they wot not.” Quoth my grandfather:—This was in the darkness of the
night and as soon as it was day, there came forth to us, from the caves
of the mountain, folk black of colour and naked of body, as they were
wild beasts, understanding not one word of what was addressed to them;
nor was there any of them who knew Arabic, save their King who was of
their own kind. When he saw the ship, he came down to it with a company
of his followers and saluting us, bade us welcome and questioned us of
our case and our faith. We told him all concerning ourselves and he
said, Be of good cheer for no harm shall befal you. And when we, in
turn, asked them of their faith, we found that each was of one of the
many creeds prevailing before the preaching of Al-Islam and the mission
of Mohammed, whom may Allah bless and keep! So my shipmates remarked, We
wot not what thou sayest. Then quoth the King, No Adam-son hath ever
come to our land before you: but fear not, and rejoice in the assurance
of safety and of return to your own country. Then he entertained us
three days, feeding us on the flesh of birds and wild beasts and fishes,
than which they had no other meat; and, on the fourth day, he carried us
down to the beach, that we might divert ourselves by looking upon the
fisher-folk. There we saw a man casting his net to catch fish, and
presently he pulled them up and behold, in them was a cucurbite of
copper, stopped with lead and sealed with the signet of Solomon, son of
David, on whom be peace! He brought the vessel to land and broke it
open, when there came forth a smoke, which rose a-twisting blue to the
zenith, and we heard a horrible voice, saying, I repent! I repent!
Pardon, O Prophet of Allah! I will never return to that which I did
aforetime. Then the smoke became a terrible Giant frightful of form,
whose head was level with the mountain-tops, and he vanished from our
sight, whilst our hearts were well-nigh torn out for terror; but the
blacks thought nothing of it. Then we returned to the King and
questioned him of the matter; whereupon quoth he, Know that this was one
of the Jinns whom Solomon, son of David, being wroth with them, shut up
in these vessels and cast into the sea, after stopping the mouths with
melted lead. Our fishermen ofttimes, in casting their nets, bring up
such bottles, which being broken open, there come forth of them Jinnis
who, deeming that Solomon is still alive and can pardon them, make their
submission to him and say, “I repent, O Prophet of Allah!” The Caliph
marvelled at Talib’s story and said, “Glory be to God! Verily, to
Solomon was given a mighty dominion.” Now Al-Nábighah al-Zubyání[106]
was present, and he said, “Talib hath spoken soothly as is proven by the
saying of the All-wise, the Primæval One:—

 And Solomon, when Allah to him said, ✿ ‘Rise, be thou Caliph, rule with
    righteous sway:
 Honour obedience for obeying thee; ✿ And who rebels imprison him for
    aye.’

Wherefore he used to put them in copper-bottles and cast them into the
sea.” The poet’s words seemed good to the Caliph, and he said, “By
Allah, I long to look upon some of these Solomonic vessels, which must
be a warning to whoso will be warned.” “O Commander of the Faithful,”
replied Talib, “it is in thy power to do so, without stirring abroad.
Send to thy brother Abd al-Azíz bin Marwán, so he may write to Músá bin
Nusayr,[107] governor of the Maghrib or Morocco, bidding him take horse
thence to the mountains whereof I spoke and fetch thee therefrom as many
of such cucurbites as thou hast a mind to; for those mountains adjoin
the frontiers of his province.” The Caliph approved his counsel and said
“Thou hast spoken sooth, O Talib, and I desire that, touching this
matter, thou be my messenger to Musa bin Nusayr; wherefore thou shalt
have the White Flag[108] and all thou hast a mind to of monies and
honour and so forth; and I will care for thy family during thine
absence.” “With love and gladness, O Commander of the Faithful!”
answered Talib. “Go, with the blessing of Allah and His aid,” quoth the
Caliph, and bade write a letter to his brother, Abd al-Aziz, his viceroy
in Egypt, and another to Musa bin Nusayr, his viceroy in North-Western
Africa, bidding him go himself in quest of the Solomonic bottles,
leaving his son to govern in his stead. Moreover, he charged him to
engage guides and to spare neither men nor money, nor to be remiss in
the matter as he would take no excuse. Then he sealed the two letters
and committed them to Talib bin Sahl, bidding him advance the royal
ensigns before him and make his utmost speed, and he gave him treasure
and horsemen and footmen, to further him on his way, and made provision
for the wants of his household during his absence. So Talib set out and
arrived in due course at Cairo.[109]——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Talib bin Sahl set
out with his escort and crossed the desert country between Syria and
Egypt, where the Governor came out to meet him and entreated him and his
company with high honour whilst they tarried with him. Then he gave them
a guide to bring them to the Sa’íd or Upper Egypt, where the Emir Musa
had his abiding-place; and when the son of Nusayr heard of Talib’s
coming, he went forth to meet him and rejoiced in him. Talib gave him
the Caliph’s letter, and he took it reverently and, laying it on his
head, cried, “I hear and I obey the Prince of the Faithful.” Then he
deemed it best to assemble his chief officers and when all were present
he acquainted them with the contents of the Caliph’s letter and sought
counsel of them how he should act. “O Emir,” answered they, “if thou
seek one who shall guide thee to the place summon the Shaykh ‘Abd
al-Samad, ibn ‘Abd al-Kuddús, al-Samúdí;[110] for he is a man of varied
knowledge, who hath travelled much and knoweth by experience all the
seas and wastes and wolds and countries of the world and the inhabitants
and wonders thereof; wherefore send thou for him and he will surely
guide thee to thy desire.” So Musa sent for him, and behold, he was a
very ancient man shot in years and broken down with lapse of days. The
Emir saluted him and said, “O Shaykh Abd al-Samad, our lord the
Commander of the Faithful, Abd al-Malik bin Marwan, hath commanded me
thus and thus. I have small knowledge of the land wherein is that which
the Caliph desireth; but it is told me that thou knowest it well and the
ways thither. Wilt thou, therefore, go with me and help me to accomplish
the Caliph’s need? So it please Allah the Most High, thy trouble and
travail shall not go waste.” Replied the Shaykh, “I hear and obey the
bidding of the Commander of the Faithful; but know, O Emir, that the
road thither is long and difficult and the ways few.” “How far is it?”
asked Musa, and the Shaykh answered, “It is a journey of two years and
some months going and the like returning; and the way is full of
hardships and terrors and things wondrous and marvellous. Now thou art a
champion of the Faith[111] and our country is hard by that of the enemy;
and peradventure the Nazarenes may come out upon us in thine absence;
wherefore it behoveth thee to leave one to rule thy government in thy
stead.” “It is well,” answered the Emir and appointed his son Hárún
Governor during his absence, requiring the troops to take the oath of
fealty to him and bidding them obey him in all he should command. And
they heard his words and promised obedience. Now this Harun was a man of
great prowess and a renowned warrior and a doughty knight, and the
Shaykh Abd al-Samad feigned to him that the place they sought was
distant but four months’ journey along the shore of the sea, with
camping-places all the way, adjoining one another, and grass and
springs, adding, “Allah will assuredly make the matter easy to us
through thy blessing, O Lieutenant of the Commander of the Faithful!”
Quoth the Emir Musa, “Knowest thou if any of the Kings have trodden this
land before us?”; and quoth the Shaykh, “Yes, it belonged aforetime to
Darius the Greek, King of Alexandria.” But he said to Musa privily, “O
Emir, take with thee a thousand camels laden with victual and store of
gugglets.”[112] The Emir asked, “And what shall we do with these?”; and
the Shaykh answered, “On our way is the desert of Kayrawán or Cyrene,
the which is a vast wold four days’ journey long, and lacketh water; nor
therein doth sound of voice ever sound nor is soul at any time to be
seen. Moreover, there bloweth the Simoon[113] and other hot winds called
Al-Juwayb, which dry up the water-skins; but if the water be in
gugglets, no harm can come to it.” “Right,” said Musa and sending to
Alexandria, let bring thence great plenty of gugglets. Then he took with
him his Wazir and two thousand cavalry, clad in mail cap-à-pie and set
out, without other to guide them but Abd al-Samad who forewent them,
riding on his hackney. The party fared on diligently, now passing
through inhabited lands, then ruins and anon traversing frightful wolds
and thirsty wastes and then mountains which spired high in air; nor did
they leave journeying a whole year’s space till, one morning, when the
day broke, after they had travelled all night, behold, the Shaykh found
himself in a land he knew not and said, “There is no Majesty and there
is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!” Quoth the Emir,
“What is to do, O Shaykh?”; and he answered, saying, “By the Lord of the
Ka’abah, we have wandered from our road!” “How cometh that?” asked Musa,
and Abd al-Samad replied, “The stars were overclouded and I could not
guide myself by them.” “Where on God’s earth are we now?” asked the
Emir, and the Shaykh answered, “I know not; for I never set eyes on this
land till this moment.” Said Musa, “Guide us back to the place where we
went astray”; but the other, “I know it no more.” Then Musa, “Let us
push on; haply Allah will guide us to it or direct us aright of His
power.” So they fared on till the hour of noon-prayer, when they came to
a fair champaign, and wide and level and smooth as it were the sea when
calm, and presently there appeared to them, on the horizon some great
thing, high and black, in whose midst was as it were smoke rising to the
confines of the sky. They made for this, and stayed not in their course
till they drew near thereto, when, lo! it was a high castle, firm of
foundations and great and gruesome, as it were a towering mountain,
builded all of black stone, with frowning crenelles and a door of
gleaming China steel, that dazzled the eyes and dazed the wits. Round
about it were a thousand steps and that which appeared afar off as it
were smoke was a central dome of lead an hundred cubits high. When the
Emir saw this, he marvelled thereat with exceeding marvel and how this
place was void of inhabitants; and the Shaykh, after he had certified
himself thereof, said, “There is no god but _the_ God and Mohammed is
the Apostle of God!” Quoth Musa, “I hear thee praise the Lord and hallow
Him, and meseemeth thou rejoicest.” “O Emir,” answered Abd al-Samad,
“Rejoice, for Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) hath delivered us from
the frightful wolds and thirsty wastes.” “How knowest thou that?” said
Musa, and the other, “I know it for that my father told me of my
grandfather that he said:—We were once journeying in this land and,
straying from the road, we came to this palace and thence to the City of
Brass; between which and the place thou seekest is two full months’
travel; but thou must take to the sea-shore and leave it not, for there
be watering-places and wells and camping-grounds established by King Zú
al-Karnayn Iskandar who, when he went to the conquest of Mauritania,
found by the way thirsty deserts and wastes and wilds and dug therein
water-pits and built cisterns.” Quoth Musa, “Allah rejoice thee with
good news!” and quoth the Shaykh, “Come, let us go look upon yonder
palace and its marvels, for it is an admonition to whoso will be
admonished.” So the Emir went up to the palace, with the Shaykh and his
officers, and coming to the gate, found it open. Now this gate was
builded with lofty columns and porticoes whose walls and ceilings were
inlaid with gold and silver and precious stones; and there led up to it
flights of steps, among which were two wide stairs of coloured marble,
never was seen their like; and over the doorway was a tablet whereon
were graven letters of gold in the old ancient Ionian character. “O
Emir,” asked the Shaykh, “shall I read?”; and Musa answered, “Read and
God bless thee!; for all that betideth us in this journey dependeth upon
thy blessing.” So the Shaykh, who was a very learned man and versed in
all tongues and characters, went up to the tablet and read whatso was
thereon and it was verse like this:—

 The signs that here their mighty works portray ✿ Warn us that all must
    tread the self-same way:
 O thou who standest in this stead to hear ✿ Tidings of folk, whose power
    hath passed for aye,
 Enter this palace-gate and ask the news ✿ Of greatness fallen into dust
    and clay:
 Death has destroyed them and dispersed their might ✿ And in the dust
    they lost their rich display;
 As had they only set their burdens down ✿ To rest awhile, and then had
    rode away.

When the Emir Musa heard these couplets, he wept till he lost his senses
and said, “There is no god but _the_ God, the Living, the Eternal, who
ceaseth not!” Then he entered the palace and was confounded at its
beauty and the goodliness of its construction. He diverted himself
awhile by viewing the pictures and images therein, till he came to
another door, over which also were written verses, and said to the
Shaykh, “Come read me these!” So he advanced and read as follows:—

 Under these domes how many a company ✿ Halted of old and fared withouten
    stay:
 See thou what might displays on other wights ✿ Time with his shifts
    which could such lords waylay:
 They shared together what they gatherèd ✿ And left their joys and fared
    to Death-decay:
 What joys they joyed! what food they ate! and now ✿ In dust they’re
    eaten, for the worm a prey.

At this the Emir Musa wept bitter tears; and the world waxed yellow
before his eyes and he said, “Verily, we were created for a mighty
matter!”[114] Then they proceeded to explore the palace and found it
desert and void of living thing, its courts desolate and dwelling-places
waste laid. In the midst stood a lofty pavilion with a dome rising high
in air, and about it were four hundred tombs, builded of yellow marble.
The Emir drew near unto these and behold, amongst them was a great tomb,
wide and long; and at its head stood a tablet of white marble, whereon
were graven these couplets:—

 How oft have I fought! and how many have slain! ✿ How much have I
    witnessed of blessing and bane!
 How much have I eaten! how much have I drunk! ✿ How oft have I hearkened
    to singing-girl’s strain!
 How much have I bidden! how oft have forbid! ✿ How many a castle and
    castellain
 I have sieged and have searched, and the cloistered maids ✿ In the
    depths of its walls for my captives were ta’en!
 But of ignorance sinned I to win me the meeds ✿ Which won provèd naught
    and brought nothing of gain:
 Then reckon thy reck’ning, O man, and be wise ✿ Ere the goblet of death
    and of doom thou shalt drain;
 For yet but a little the dust on thy head ✿ They shall strew, and thy
    life shall go down to the dead.

The Emir and his companions wept; then, drawing near unto the pavilion,
they saw that it had eight doors of sandal-wood, studded with nails of
gold and stars of silver and inlaid with all manner precious stones. On
the first door were written these verses:—

 What I left, I left it not for nobility of soul, ✿ But through sentence
    and decree that to every man are dight.
 What while I lived happy, with a temper haught and high, ✿ My
    hoarding-place defending like a lion in the fight,
 I took no rest, and greed of gain forbad me give a grain ✿ Of
    mustard-seed to save from the fires of Hell my sprite,
 Until stricken on a day, as with arrow, by decree ✿ Of the Maker, the
    Fashioner, the Lord of Might and Right.
 When my death was appointed, my life I could not keep ✿ By the many of
    my stratagems, my cunning and my sleight:
 My troops I had collected availed me not, and none ✿ Of my friends and
    of my neighbours had power to mend my plight:
 Through my life I was wearied in journeying to death ✿ In stress or in
    solace, in joyance or despight:
 So when money-bags are bloated, and dinar unto dinar ✿ Thou addest, all
    may leave thee with fleeting of the night:
 And the driver of a camel and the digger of a grave[115] ✿ Are what
    thine heirs shall bring ere the morning dawneth bright:
 And on Judgment Day alone shalt thou stand before thy Lord, ✿ Overladen
    with thy sins and thy crimes and thine affright:
 Let the world not seduce thee with lurings, but behold ✿ What measure to
    thy family and neighbours it hath doled.

When Musa heard these verses, he wept with such weeping that he swooned
away; then, coming to himself, he entered the pavilion and saw therein a
long tomb, awesome to look upon, whereon was a tablet of China steel and
Shaykh Abd al-Samad drew near it and read this inscription: “In the name
of Everlasting Allah, the Never-beginning, the Never-ending; in the name
of Allah who begetteth not nor is He begot and unto whom the like is
not; in the name of Allah the Lord of Majesty and Might; in the name of
the Living One who to death is never dight!”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shaykh Abd
al-Samad, having read the aforesaid, also found the following:—O thou
who comest to this place, take warning by that which thou seest of the
accidents of Time and the vicissitudes of Fortune and be not deluded by
the world and its pomps and vanities and fallacies and falsehoods and
vain allurements, for that it is flattering, deceitful and treacherous,
and the things thereof are but a loan to us which it will borrow back
from all borrowers. It is like unto the dreams of the dreamer and the
sleep-visions of the sleeper or as the mirage of the desert, which the
thirsty take for water;[116] and Satan maketh it fair for men even unto
death. These are the ways of the world; wherefore put not thou thy trust
therein neither incline thereto, for it bewrayeth him who leaneth upon
it and who committeth himself thereunto in his affairs. Fall not thou
into its snares neither take hold upon its skirts, but be warned by my
example. I possessed four thousand bay horses and a haughty palace, and
I had to wife a thousand daughters of kings, high-bosomed maids, as they
were moons: I was blessed with a thousand sons as they were fierce
lions, and I abode a thousand years, glad of heart and mind, and I
amassed treasures beyond the competence of all the Kings of the regions
of the earth, deeming that delight would still endure to me. But there
fell on me unawares the Destroyer of delights and the Sunderer of
societies, the Desolator of domiciles and the Spoiler of inhabited
spots, the Murtherer of great and small, babes and children and mothers,
he who hath no ruth on the poor for his poverty, or feareth the King for
all his bidding or forbidding. Verily, we abode safe and secure in this
palace, till there descended upon us the judgement of the Lord of the
Three Worlds, Lord of the Heavens, and Lord of the Earths, the vengeance
of the Manifest Truth[117] overtook us, when there died of us every day
two, till a great company of us had perished. When I saw that
destruction had entered our dwellings and had homed with us and in the
sea of deaths had drowned us, I summoned a writer and bade him indite
these verses and instances and admonitions, the which I let grave, with
rule and compass, on these doors and tablets and tombs. Now I had an
army of a thousand thousand bridles, men of warrior mien with forearms
strong and keen, armed with spears and mail-coats sheen and swords that
gleam; so I bade them don their long-hanging hauberks and gird on their
biting blades and mount their high-mettled steeds and level their
dreadful lances; and whenas there fell on us the doom of the Lord of
heaven and earth, I said to them, “Ho, all ye soldiers and troopers, can
ye avail to ward off that which is fallen on me from the Omnipotent
King?” But troopers and soldiers availed not unto this and said, “How
shall we battle with Him to whom no chamberlain barreth access, the Lord
of the door which hath no doorkeeper?” Then quoth I to them, “Bring me
my treasures.” Now I had in my treasuries a thousand cisterns in each of
which were a thousand quintals[118] of red gold and the like of white
silver, besides pearls and jewels of all kinds and other things of
price, beyond the attainment of the kings of the earth. So they did that
and when they had laid all the treasure in my presence, I said to them,
“Can ye ransom me with all this treasure or buy me one day of life
therewith?” But they could not! So they resigned themselves to
fore-ordained Fate and fortune and I submitted to the judgement of
Allah, enduring patiently that which he decreed unto me of affliction,
till He took my soul and made me to dwell in my grave. And if thou ask
of my name, I am Kúsh, the son of Shaddád son of Ád the Greater. And
upon the tablets were engraved these lines:—

 An thou wouldst know my name, whose day is done ✿ With shifts of time
    and changes ‘neath the sun,
 Know I am Shaddád’s son, who ruled mankind ✿ And o’er all earth upheld
    dominion!
 All stubborn peoples abject were to me; ✿ And Shám to Cairo and to
    Adnanwone;[119]
 I reigned in glory conquering many kings; ✿ And peoples feared my
    mischief every one.
 Yea, tribes and armies in my hand I saw; ✿ The world all dreaded me,
    both friends and fone.
 When I took horse, I viewed my numbered troops, ✿ Bridles on neighing
    steeds a million.
 And I had wealth that none could tell or count, ✿ Against misfortune
    treasuring all I won;

 Fain had I bought my life with all my wealth, ✿ And for a moment’s space
    my death to shun;
 But God would naught save what His purpose willed; ✿ So from my brethren
    cut I ‘bode alone:
 And Death, that sunders man, exchanged my lot ✿ To pauper hut from
    grandeur’s mansion,
 When found I all mine actions gone and past ✿ Wherefor I’m pledged[120]
    and by my sin undone.
 Then fear, O man, who by a brink dost range, ✿ The turns of Fortune and
    the chance of Change.

The Emir Musa was hurt to his heart and loathed his life for what he saw
of the slaughtering-places of the folk; and, as they went about the
highways and bye-ways of the palace, viewing its sitting-chambers and
pleasaunces, behold they came upon a table of yellow onyx, upborne on
four feet of juniper-wood,[121] and thereon these words graven:—“At this
table have eaten a thousand kings blind of the right eye and a thousand
blind of the left and yet other thousand sound of both eyes, all of whom
have departed the world and have taken up their sojourn in the tombs and
the catacombs.” All this the Emir wrote down and left the palace,
carrying off with him naught save the table aforesaid. Then he fared on
with his host three days’ space, under the guidance of the Shaykh Abd
al-Samad, till they came to a high hill, whereon stood a horseman of
brass. In his hand he held a lance with a broad head, in brightness like
blinding leven, whereon was graven:—“O thou that comest unto me, if thou
know not the way to the City of Brass, rub the hand of this rider and he
will turn round and presently stop. Then take the direction whereto he
faceth and fare fearless, for it will bring thee, without hardship, to
the city aforesaid.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Five Hundred and Seventieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Emir Musa
rubbed the horseman’s hand he revolved like the dazzling lightning, and
stopped facing in a direction other than that wherein they were
journeying. So they took the road to which he pointed (which was the
right way) and, finding it a beaten track, fared on through their days
and nights till they had covered a wide tract of country. Then they came
upon a pillar of black stone like a furnace-chimney wherein was one
sunken up to his armpits. He had two great wings and four arms, two of
them like the arms of the sons of Adam and other two as they were lion’s
paws, with claws of iron, and he was black and tall and frightful of
aspect, with hair like horses’ tails and eyes like blazing coals, slit
upright in his face. Moreover, he had in the middle of his forehead a
third eye, as it were that of a lynx, from which flew sparks of fire,
and he cried out saying, “Glory to my Lord, who hath adjudged unto me
this grievous torment and sore punishment until the Day of Doom!” When
the folk saw him, they lost their reason for affright and turned to
flee; so the Emir Musa asked the Shaykh Abd al-Samad, “What is this?”;
and he answered, “I know not.” Whereupon quoth Musa, “Draw near and
question him of his condition; haply he will discover to thee his case.”
“Allah assain thee, Emir! Indeed, I am afraid of him;” replied the
Shaykh; but the Emir rejoined, saying, “Fear not; he is hindered from
thee and from all others by that wherein he is.” So Abd al-Samad drew
near to the pillar and said to him which was therein, “O creature, what
is thy name and what art thou and how camest thou here in this fashion?”
“I am an Ifrit of the Jinn,” replied he, “by name Dáhish, son of
Al-A’amash,[122] and am confined here by the All-might, prisoned here by
the Providence and punished by the judgement of Allah, till it pleases
Him, to whom belong Might and Majesty, to release me.” Then said Musa,
“Ask him why he is in durance of this column?” So the Shaykh asked him
of this, and the Ifrit replied, saying:—Verily my tale is wondrous and
my case marvellous, and it is this. One of the sons of Iblis had an idol
of red carnelian, whereof I was guardian, and there served it a King of
the Kings of the sea, a Prince of puissant power and prow of prowess,
over-ruling a thousand thousand warriors of the Jann who smote with
swords before him and answered his summons in time of need. All these
were under my commandment and obeyed my behest, being each and every
rebels against Solomon, son of David, on whom be peace! And I used to
enter the belly of the idol and thence bid and forbid them. Now this
King’s daughter loved the idol and was frequent in prostration to it and
assiduous in its service; and she was the fairest woman of her day,
accomplished in beauty and loveliness, elegance and grace. She was
described unto Solomon and he sent to her father, saying, “Give me thy
daughter to wife and break thine idol of carnelian and testify saying,
There is no god but _the_ God and Solomon is the Prophet of Allah!, an
thou do this, our due shall be thy due and thy debt shall be our debt
but, if thou refuse, make ready to answer the summons of the Lord and
don thy grave-gear, for I will come upon thee with an irresistible host,
which shall fill the waste places of earth and make thee as yesterday
that is passed away and hath no return for aye.” When this message
reached the King, he waxed insolent and rebellious, pride-full and
contumacious and he cried to his Wazirs, “What say ye of this? Know ye
that Solomon son of David hath sent requiring me to give him my daughter
to wife, and break my idol of carnelian and enter his faith!” And they
replied, “O mighty King, how shall Solomon do thus with thee? Even could
he come at thee in the midst of this vast ocean, he could not prevail
against thee, for the Marids of the Jann will fight on thy side and thou
wilt ask succour of thine idol whom thou servest, and he will help thee
and give thee victory over him. So thou wouldst do well to consult on
this matter thy Lord,” (meaning the idol aforesaid) “and hear what he
saith. If he say, Fight him, fight him, and if not, not.” So the King
went in without stay or delay to his idol and offered up sacrifices and
slaughtered victims; after which he fell down before him, prostrate and
weeping, and repeated these verses:—

 “O my Lord, well I weet thy puissant hand: ✿ Sulaymán would break thee
    and see thee bann’d.
 O my Lord, to crave succour here I stand ✿ Command and I bow to thy high
    command!”

Then I (continued the Ifrit addressing the Shaykh and those about him),
of my ignorance and want of wit and recklessness of the commandment of
Solomon and lack of knowledge anent his power, entered the belly of the
idol and made answer as follows:—

 “As for me, of him I feel naught affright; ✿ For my lore and my wisdom
    are infinite:
 If he wish for warfare I’ll show him fight ✿ And out of his body I’ll
    tear his sprite!”

When the King heard my boastful reply, he hardened his heart and
resolved to wage war upon the Prophet and to offer him battle; wherefore
he beat the messenger with a grievous beating and returned a foul answer
to Solomon, threatening him and saying, “Of a truth, thy soul hath
suggested to thee a vain thing; dost thou menace me with mendacious
words? But gird thyself for battle; for, an thou come not to me, I will
assuredly come to thee.” So the messenger returned to Solomon and told
him all that had passed and whatso had befallen him, which when the
Prophet heard, he raged like Doomsday and addressed himself to the fray
and levied armies of men and Jann and birds and reptiles. He commanded
his Wazir Al-Dimiryát, King of the Jann, to gather together the Marids
of the Jinn from all parts, and he collected for him six hundred
thousand thousand of devils.[123] Moreover, by his order, his Wazir Ásaf
bin Barkhiyá levied him an army of men, to the number of a thousand
thousand or more. These all he furnished with arms and armour and
mounting, with his host, upon his carpet, look flight through air, while
the beasts fared under him and the birds flew overhead, till he lighted
down on the island of the refractory King and encompassed it about,
filling earth with his hosts.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Ifrit
continued:—So when Solomon the prophet (with whom be peace!) lighted
down with his host on the island he sent to our King, saying, “Behold, I
am come: defend thy life against that which is fallen upon thee, or else
make thy submission to me and confess my apostleship and give me thy
daughter to lawful wife and break thine idol and worship the one God,
the alone Worshipful; and testify, thou and thine, and say, There is no
God but _the_ God, and Solomon is the Apostle of Allah![124] This if
thou do, thou shalt have pardon and peace; but if not, it will avail
thee nothing to fortify thyself in this island, for Allah (extolled and
exalted be He!) hath bidden the Wind obey me; so I will bid it bear me
to thee on my carpet and make thee a warning and an example to deter
others.” But the King made answer to his messenger, saying, “It may not
on any wise be as he requireth of me; so tell him I come forth to him.”
With this reply the messenger returned to Solomon, who thereupon
gathered together all the Jinn that were under his hand, to the number
of a thousand thousand, and added to them other than they of Marids and
Satans from the islands of the sea and the tops of the mountains and,
drawing them up on parade, opened his armouries and distributed to them
arms and armour. Then the Prophet drew out his host in battle array,
dividing the beasts into two bodies, one on the right wing of the men
and the other on the left, and bidding them tear the enemies’ horses in
sunder. Furthermore, he ordered the birds which were in the island to
hover over their heads and, whenas the assault should be made, that they
should swoop down and tear out the foe’s eyes with their beaks and
buffet their faces with their wings; and they answered, saying, “We hear
and we obey Allah and thee, O Prophet of Allah!” Then Solomon seated
himself on a throne of alabaster, studded with precious stones and
plated with red gold; and, commanding the wind to bear him aloft, set
his Wazir Asaf bin Barkhiya[125] and the kings of mankind on his right
and his Wazir Al-Dimiryat and the kings of the Jinn on his left,
arraying the beasts and vipers and serpents in the van. Thereupon they
all set on us together, and we gave them battle two days over a vast
plain; but, on the third day, disaster befel us, and the judgment of
Allah the Most High was executed upon us. Now the first to charge upon
them were I and my troops, and I said to my companions, “Abide in your
places, whilst I sally forth to them and provoke Al-Dimiryat to combat
singular.” And behold, he came forth to the duello as he were a vast
mountain, with his fires flaming and his smoke spireing, and shot at me
a falling star of fire; but I swerved from it and it missed me. Then I
cast at him in my turn, a flame of fire, and it smote him; but his
shaft[126] overcame my fire and he cried out at me so terrible a cry
that meseemed the skies were fallen flat upon me, and the mountains
trembled at his voice. Then he commanded his hosts to charge;
accordingly they rushed on us and we rushed on them, each crying out
upon other, and battle reared its crest rising in volumes and smoke
ascending in columns and hearts well nigh cleaving. The birds and the
flying Jinn fought in the air and the beasts and men and the foot-faring
Jann in the dust and I fought with Al-Dimiryat, till I was aweary and he
not less so. At last, I grew weak and turned to flee from him, whereupon
my companions and tribesmen likewise took to flight and my hosts were
put to the rout, and Solomon cried out, saying, “Take yonder furious
tyrant, the accursed, the infamous!” Then man fell upon man and Jinn
upon Jinn and the armies of the Prophet charged down upon us, with the
wild beasts and lions on their right hand and on their left, rending our
horses and tearing our men; whilst the birds hovered overhead in air
pecking out our eyes with their claws and beaks and beating our faces
with their wings, and the serpents struck us with their fangs, till the
most of our folk lay prone upon the face of the earth, like the trunks
of date-trees. Thus defeat befel our King and we became a spoil unto
Solomon. As to me, I fled from before Al-Dimiryat; but he followed me
three months’ journey, till I fell down for weariness and he overtook
me, and pouncing upon me, made me prisoner. Quoth I, “By the virtue of
Him who hath exalted thee and abased me, spare me and bring me into the
presence of Solomon, on whom be peace!” So he carried me before Solomon,
who received me after the foulest fashion and bade bring this pillar and
hollow it out. Then he set me herein and chained me and sealed me with
his signet-ring, and Al-Dimiryat bore me to this place wherein thou
seest me. Moreover, he charged a great angel to guard me, and this
pillar is my prison until Judgment-day.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Jinni who
was prisoned in the pillar had told them his tale, from first to last,
the folk marvelled at his story and at the frightfulness of his favour,
and the Emir Musa said, “There is no God but _the_ God! Soothly was
Solomon gifted with a mighty dominion.” Then said the Shaykh Abd
al-Samad to the Jinni, “Ho there! I would fain ask thee of a thing,
whereof do thou inform us.” “Ask what thou wilt,” answered the Ifrit
Dahish and the Shaykh said, “Are there hereabouts any of the Ifrits
imprisoned in bottles of brass from the time of Solomon (on whom be
peace!)?” “Yes,” replied the Jinni; “there be such in the sea of
Al-Karkar[127] on the shores whereof dwell a people of the lineage of
Noah (on whom be peace!); for their country was not reached by the
Deluge and they are cut off there from the other sons of Adam.” Quoth
Abd al-Samad, “And which is the way to the City of Brass and the place
wherein are the cucurbites of Solomon, and what distance lieth between
us and it?” Quoth the Ifrit, “It is near at hand,” and directed them in
the way thither. So they left him and fared forward till there appeared
to them afar off a great blackness and therein two fires facing each
other, and the Emir Musa asked the Shaykh, “What is yonder vast
blackness and its twin fires?”; and the guide answered, “Rejoice O Emir,
for this is the City of Brass, as it is described in the Book of Hidden
Treasures which I have by me. Its walls are of black stone and it hath
two towers of Andalusian brass,[128] which appear to the beholder in the
distance as they were twin fires, and hence is it named the City of
Brass.” Then they fared on without ceasing till they drew near the city
and behold, it was as it were a piece of a mountain or a mass of iron
cast in a mould and impenetrable for the height of its walls and
bulwarks; while nothing could be more beautiful than its buildings and
its ordinance. So they dismounted down and sought for an entrance, but
saw none neither found any trace of opening in the walls, albeit there
were five-and-twenty portals to the city, but none of them was visible
from without. Then quoth the Emir, “O Shaykh, I see to this city no sign
of any gate;” and quoth he, “O Emir, thus is it described in my Book of
Hidden Treasures; it hath five-and-twenty portals; but none thereof may
be opened save from within the city.” Asked Musa, “And how shall we do
to enter the city and view its wonders?” and Talib son of Sahl, his
Wazir, answered, “Allah assain the Emir! let us rest here two or three
days and, God willing, we will make shift to come within the walls.”
Then said Musa to one of his men, “Mount thy camel and ride round about
the city, so haply thou may light upon a gate or a place somewhat lower
than this fronting us, or Inshallah! a breach whereby we can enter.”
Accordingly he mounted his beast, taking water and victuals with him,
and rode round the city two days and two nights, without drawing rein to
rest, but found the wall thereof as it were one block, without breach or
way of ingress; and on the third day, he came again in sight of his
companions, dazed and amazed at what he had seen of the extent and
loftiness of the place, and said, “O Emir, the easiest place of access
is this where you have alighted.” Then Musa took Talib and Abd al-Samad
and ascended the highest hill which overlooked the city. When they
reached the top, they beheld beneath them a city, never saw eyes a
greater or a goodlier, with dwelling-places and mansions of towering
height, and palaces and pavilions and domes gleaming gloriously bright
and sconces and bulwarks of strength infinite; and its streams were
a-flowing and flowers a-blowing and fruits a-glowing. It was a city with
gates impregnable; but void and still, without a voice or a cheering
inhabitant. The owl hooted in its quarters; the bird skimmed circling
over its squares and the raven croaked in its great thoroughfares
weeping and bewailing the dwellers who erst made it their dwelling.[129]
The Emir stood awhile, marvelling and sorrowing for the desolation of
the city and saying, “Glory to Him whom nor ages nor changes nor times
can blight, Him who created all things of His Might!” Presently, he
chanced to look aside and caught sight of seven tablets of white marble
afar off. So he drew near them and finding inscriptions graven thereon,
called the Shaykh and bade him read these. Accordingly he came forward
and, examining the inscriptions, found that they contained matter of
admonition and warning and instances and restraint to those of
understanding. On the first tablet was inscribed, in the ancient Greek
character: “O son of Adam, how heedless art thou of that which is before
thee! Verily, thy years and months and days have diverted thee
therefrom. Knowest thou not that the cup of death is filled for thy bane
which in a little while to the dregs thou shalt drain? Look to thy doom
ere thou enter thy tomb. Where be the Kings who held dominion over the
lands and abased Allah’s servants and built these palaces and had armies
under their commands? By Allah, the Destroyer of delights and the
Severer of societies and the Devastator of dwelling-places came down
upon them and transported them from the spaciousness of their palaces to
the staidness of their burial-places.” And at the foot of the tablet
were written the following verses:—

 “Where are the Kings earth-peopling, where are they? ✿ The built and
    peopled left they e’er and aye!
 They’re tombed yet pledged to actions past away ✿ And after death upon
    them came decay.
 Where are their troops? They failed to ward and guard! ✿ Where are the
    wealth and hoards in treasuries lay?
 Th’ Empyrean’s Lord surprised them with one word, ✿ Nor wealth nor
    refuge could their doom delay!”

When the Emir heard this, he cried out and the tears ran down his cheeks
and he exclaimed, “By Allah, from the world abstaining is the wisest
course and the sole assaining!” And he called for pen-case and paper and
wrote down what was graven on the first tablet. Then he drew near the
second tablet and found these words graven thereon, “O son of Adam, what
hath seduced thee from the service of the Ancient of Days and made thee
forget that one day thou must defray the debt of death? Wottest thou not
that it is a transient dwelling wherein for none there is abiding; and
yet thou takest thought unto the world and cleavest fast thereto? Where
be the kings who Irak peopled and the four quarters of the globe
possessed? Where be they who abode in Ispahan and the land of Khorasan?
The voice of the Summoner of Death summoned them and they answered him,
and the Herald of Destruction hailed them and they replied, Here are we!
Verily, that which they builded and fortified profited them naught;
neither did what they had gathered and provided avail for their
defence.” And at the foot of the tablet were graven the following
verses:—

 Where be the men who built and fortified ✿ High places never man their
    like espied?
 In fear of Fate they levied troops and hosts, ✿ Availing naught when
    came the time and tide,
 Where be the Kisrás homed in strongest walls? ✿ As though they ne’er had
    been from home they hied!

The Emir Musa wept and exclaimed, “By Allah, we are indeed created for a
grave matter!” Then he copied the inscription and passed on to the third
tablet,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Emir Musa
passed on to the third tablet, whereon was written, “O son of Adam, the
things of this world thou lovest and prizest and the hest of thy Lord
thou spurnest and despisest. All the days of thy life pass by and thou
art content thus to aby. Make ready thy viaticum against the day
appointed for thee to see and prepare to answer the Lord of every
creature that be!” And at the foot were written these verses:—

 Where is the wight who peopled in the past ✿ Hind-land and Sind; and
    there the tyrant played?
 Who Zanj[130] and Habash bound beneath his yoke, ✿ And Nubia curbed and
    low its puissance laid.
 Look not for news of what is in his grave. ✿ Ah, he is far who can thy
    vision aid!
 The stroke of death fell on him sharp and sure; ✿ Nor saved him palace,
    nor the lands he swayed.

At this Musa wept with sore weeping and, going on to the fourth tablet,
he read inscribed thereon, “O son of Adam, how long shall thy Lord bear
with thee and thou every day sunken in the sea of thy folly? Hath it
then been stablished unto thee that some day thou shalt not die? O son
of Adam, let not the deceits of thy days and nights and times and hours
delude thee with their delights; but remember that death lieth ready for
thee ambushing, fain on thy shoulders to spring, nor doth a day pass but
he mourneth with thee in the morning and nighteth with thee by night.
Beware, then, of his onslaught and make provision there-against. As was
with me, so it is with thee; thou wastest thy whole life and squanderest
the joys in which thy days are rife. Hearken, therefore, to my words and
put thy trust in the Lord of Lords; for in the world there is no
stability; it is but as a spider’s web to thee.” And at the foot of the
tablet were written these couplets:—

 Where is the man who did those labours ply ✿ And based and built and
    reared these walls on high?
 Where be the castles’ lords? Who therein dwelt ✿ Fared forth and left
    them in decay to lie.
 All are entombed, in pledge against the day ✿ When every sin shall show
    to every eye.
 None but the Lord Most High endurance hath, ✿ Whose Might and Majesty
    shall never die.

When the Emir read this, he swooned away and presently coming to himself
marvelled exceedingly and wrote it down. Then he drew near the fifth
tablet and behold, thereon was graven, “O son of Adam, what is it that
distracteth thee from obedience of thy Creator and the Author of thy
being, Him who reared thee whenas thou wast a little one, and fed thee
whenas thou wast full-grown? Thou art ungrateful for His bounty, albeit
He watcheth over thee with His favours, letting down the curtain of His
protection over thee. Needs must there be for thee an hour bitterer than
aloes and hotter than live coals. Provide thee, therefore, against it;
for who shall sweeten its gall or quench its fires? Bethink thee who
forewent thee of peoples and heroes and take warning by them, ere thou
perish.” And at the foot of the tablet were graven these couplets:—

 Where be the Earth-kings who from where they ‘bode, ✿ Sped and to
    graveyards with their hoardings yode:

 Erst on their mounting-days there hadst beheld ✿ Hosts that concealed
    the ground whereon they rode:
 How many a king they humbled in their day! ✿ How many a host they led
    and laid on load!
 But from th’ Empyrean’s Lord in haste there came ✿ One word, and joy
    waxed grief ere morning glowed.

The Emir marvelled at this and wrote it down; after which he passed on
to the sixth tablet and behold, was inscribed thereon, “O son of Adam,
think not that safety will endure for ever and aye, seeing that death is
sealed to thy head alway. Where be thy fathers, where be thy brethren,
where thy friends and dear ones? They have all gone to the dust of the
tombs and presented themselves before the Glorious, the Forgiving, as if
they had never eaten nor drunken, and they are a pledge for that which
they have earned. So look to thyself, ere thy tomb come upon thee.” And
at the foot of the tablet were these couplets:—

 Where be the Kings who ruled the Franks of old? ✿ Where be the King who
    peopled Tingis-wold[131]?
 Their works are written in a book which He, ✿ The One, th’ All-father
    shall as witness hold.

At this the Emir Musa marvelled and wrote it down, saying, “There is no
god but _the_ God! Indeed, how goodly were these folk!” Then he went up
to the seventh tablet and behold, thereon was written, “Glory to Him who
fore-ordaineth death to all He createth, the Living One, who dieth not!
O son of Adam, let not thy days and their delights delude thee, neither
thine hours and the delices of their time, and know that death to thee
cometh and upon thy shoulder sitteth. Beware, then, of his assault and
make ready for his onslaught. As it was with me, so it is with thee;
thou wastest the sweet of thy life and the joyance of thine hours. Give
ear, then, to my rede and put thy trust in the Lord of Lords and know
that in the world is no stability, but it is as it were a spider’s web
to thee and all that is therein shall die and cease to be. Where is he
who laid the foundation of Amid[132] and builded it and builded
Fárikín[133] and exalted it? Where be the peoples of the strong places?
Whenas them they had inhabited, after their might into the tombs they
descended. They have been carried off by death and we shall in like
manner be afflicted by doom. None abideth save Allah the Most High, for
He is Allah the Forgiving One.” The Emir Musa wept and copied all this,
and indeed the world was belittled in his eyes. Then he descended the
hill and rejoined his host, with whom he passed the rest of the day,
casting about for a means of access to the city. And he said to his
Wazir Talib bin Sahl and to the chief officers about him, “How shall we
contrive to enter this city and view its marvels?: haply we shall find
therein wherewithal to win the favour of the Commander of the Faithful.”
“Allah prolong the Emir’s fortune!” replied Talib, “let us make a ladder
and mount the wall therewith, so peradventure we may come at the gate
from within.” Quoth the Emir, “This is what occurred to my thought also,
and admirable is the advice!” Then he called for carpenters and
blacksmiths and bade them fashion wood and build a ladder plated and
banded with iron. So they made a strong ladder and many men wrought at
it a whole month. Then all the company laid hold of it and set it up
against the wall, and it reached the top as truly as if it had been
built for it before that time. The Emir marvelled and said, “The
blessing of Allah be upon you. It seems as though ye had taken the
measure of the mure, so excellent is your work.” Then said he to his
men, “Which of you will mount the ladder and walk along the wall and
cast about for a way of descending into the city, so to see how the case
stands and let us know how we may open the gate?” Whereupon quoth one of
them, “I will go up, O Emir, and descend and open to you”; and Musa
answered, saying, “Go and the blessing of Allah go with thee!” So the
man mounted the ladder; but, when he came to the top of the wall, he
stood up and gazed fixedly down into the city, then clapped his hands
and crying out, at the top of his voice, “By Allah, thou art fair!” cast
himself down into the place, and Musa cried, “By Allah, he is a dead
man!” But another came up to him and said, “O Emir, this was a madman
and doubtless his madness got the better of him and destroyed him. I
will go up and open the gate to you, if it be the will of Allah the Most
High.” “Go up,” replied Musa, “and Allah be with thee! But beware lest
thou lose thy head, even as did thy comrade.” Then the man mounted the
ladder, but no sooner had he reached the top of the wall than he laughed
aloud, saying, “Well done! well done!”; and clapping palms cast himself
down into the city and died forthright. When the Emir saw this, he said,
“An such be the action of a reasonable man, what is that of the madman?
If all our men do on this wise, we shall have none left and shall fail
of our errand and that of the Commander of the Faithful. Get ye ready
for the march: verily we have no concern with this city.” But a third
one of the company said, “Haply another may be steadier than they.” So a
third mounted the wall and a fourth and a fifth and all cried out and
cast themselves down, even as did the first; nor did they leave to do
thus, till a dozen had perished in like fashion. Then the Shaykh Abd
al-Samad came forward and heartened himself and said, “This affair is
reserved to none other than myself; for the experienced is not like the
inexperienced.” Quoth the Emir, “Indeed thou shalt not do that nor will
I have thee go up: an thou perish, we shall all be cut off to the last
man since thou art our guide.” But he answered, saying, “Peradventure,
that which we seek may be accomplished at my hands, by the grace of God
Most High!” So the folk all agreed to let him mount the ladder, and he
arose and heartening himself, said, “In the name of Allah, the
Compassionating, the Compassionate!” and mounted the ladder, calling on
the name of the Lord and reciting the Verses of Safety.[134] When he
reached the top of the wall, he clapped his hands and gazed fixedly down
into the city; whereupon the folk below cried out to him with one
accord, saying, “O Shaykh Abd al-Samad, for the Lord’s sake, cast not
thyself down!”; and they added, “Verily we are Allah’s and unto Him we
are returning! If the Shaykh fall, we are dead men one and all.” Then he
laughed beyond all measure and sat a long hour, reciting the names of
Allah Almighty and repeating the Verses of Safety; then he rose and
cried out at the top of his voice, saying, “O Emir, have no fear; no
hurt shall betide you, for Allah (to whom belong Might and Majesty!)
hath averted from me the wiles and malice of Satan, by the blessing of
the words, ‘In the name of Allah the Compassionating the
Compassionate!’” Asked Musa, “What didst thou see, O Shaykh?” and Abd
al-Samad answered, “I saw ten maidens, as they were Houris of Heaven
calling to me with their hands”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Shaykh Abd
al-Samad answered, “I saw ten maidens like Houris of Heaven,[135] and
they calling and signing[136]:—Come hither to us; and meseemed there was
below me a lake of water. So I thought to throw myself down, when
behold, I espied my twelve companions lying dead; so I restrained myself
and recited somewhat of Allah’s Book, whereupon He dispelled from me the
damsels’ witchlike wiles and malicious guiles and they disappeared. And
doubtless this was an enchantment devised by the people of the city, to
repel any who should seek to gaze upon or to enter the place. And it
hath succeeded in slaying our companions.” Then he walked on along the
wall, till he came to the two towers of brass aforesaid and saw therein
two gates of gold, without padlocks or visible means of opening. Hereat
he paused as long as Allah pleased[137] and gazed about him awhile, till
he espied in the middle of one of the gates, a horseman of brass with
hand outstretched as if pointing, and in his palm was somewhat written.
So he went up to it and read these words, “O thou who comest to this
place, an thou wouldst enter turn the pin in my navel twelve times and
the gate will open.” Accordingly, he examined the horseman and finding
in his navel a pin of gold, firm-set and fast fixed, he turned it twelve
times, whereupon the horseman revolved like the blinding lightning and
the gate swung open with a noise like thunder. He entered and found
himself in a long passage,[138] which brought him down some steps into a
guard-room furnished with goodly wooden benches, whereon sat men dead,
over whose heads hung fine shields and keen blades and bent bows and
shafts ready notched. Thence, he came to the main gate of the city; and,
finding it secured with iron bars and curiously wrought locks and bolts
and chains and other fastenings of wood and metal, said to himself,
“Belike the keys are with yonder dead folk.” So he turned back to the
guard-room and seeing amongst the dead an old man seated upon a high
wooden bench, who seemed the chiefest of them, said in his mind, “Who
knows but they are with this Shaykh? Doubtless he was the warder of the
city, and these others were under his hand.” So he went up to him and
lifting his gown, behold, the keys were hanging to his girdle; whereat
he joyed with exceeding joy and was like to fly for gladness. Then he
took them and going up to the portal, undid the padlocks and drew back
the bolts and bars, whereupon the great leaves flew open with a crash
like the pealing thunder by reason of its greatness and terribleness. At
this he cried out, saying, “Allaho Akbar—God is most great!” And the
folk without answered him with the same words, rejoicing and thanking
him for his deed. The Emir Musa also was delighted at the Shaykh’s
safety and the opening of the city-gate, and the troops all pressed
forward to enter; but Musa cried out to them, saying, “O folk, if we all
go in at once we shall not be safe from some ill-chance which may betide
us. Let half enter and other half tarry without.” So he pushed forwards
with half his men, bearing their weapons of war, and finding their
comrades lying dead, they buried them; and they saw the doorkeepers and
eunuchs and chamberlains and officers reclining on couches of silk and
all were corpses. Then they fared on till they came to the chief
market-place, full of lofty buildings whereof none overpassed the
others, and found all its shops open, with the scales hung out and the
brazen vessels ordered and the caravanserais full of all manner goods;
and they beheld the merchants sitting on the shop-boards dead, with
shrivelled skin and rotted bones, a warning to those who can take
warning; and here they saw four separate markets all replete with
wealth. Then they left the great bazar and went on till they came to the
silk market, where they found silks and brocades, orfrayed with red gold
and diapered with white silver upon all manner of colours, and the
owners lying dead upon mats of scented goats’ leather, and looking as if
they would speak; after which they traversed the market-street of pearls
and rubies and other jewels and came to that of the schroffs and
money-changers, whom they saw sitting dead upon carpets of raw silk and
dyed stuffs in shops full of gold and silver. Thence they passed to the
perfumers’ bazar where they found the shops filled with drugs of all
kinds and bladders of musk and ambergris and Nadd-scent and camphor and
other perfumes, in vessels of ivory and ebony and Khalanj-wood and
Andalusian copper, the which is equal in value to gold; and various
kinds of rattan and Indian cane; but the shopkeepers all lay dead nor
was there with them aught of food. And hard by this drug-market they
came upon a palace, imposingly edified and magnificently decorated; so
they entered and found therein banners displayed and drawn sword-blades
and strung bows and bucklers hanging by chains of gold and silver and
helmets gilded with red gold. In the vestibules stood benches of ivory,
plated with glittering gold and covered with silken stuffs, whereon lay
men, whose skin had dried up on their bones; the fool had deemed them
sleeping; but, for lack of food, they had perished and tasted the cup of
death. Now when the Emir Musa saw this, he stood still, glorifying Allah
the Most High and hallowing Him and contemplating the beauty of the
palace and the massiveness of its masonry and fair perfection of its
ordinance, for it was builded after the goodliest and stablest fashion
and the most part of its adornment was of green[139] lapis-lazuli; and
on the inner door, which stood open, were written in characters of gold
and ultramarine, these couplets:—

[Illustration]

 Consider thou, O man, what these places to thee showed ✿ And be upon thy
    guard ere thou travel the same road:
 And prepare thee good provision some day may serve thy turn ✿ For each
    dweller in the house needs must yede wi’ those who yode
 Consider how this people their palaces adorned ✿ And in dust have been
    pledged for the seed of acts they sowed:
 They built but their building availed them not, and hoards ✿ Nor saved
    their lives nor day of Destiny forslowed:
 How often did they hope for what things were undecreed. ✿ And passed
    unto their tombs before Hope the bounty showed:
 And from high and awful state all a-sudden they were sent ✿ To the
    straitness of the grave and oh! base is their abode:
 Then came to them a Crier after burial and cried, ✿ What booted thrones
    or crowns or the gold to you bestowed:
 Where now are gone the faces hid by curtain and by veil, ✿ Whose charms
    were told in proverbs, those beauties à-la-mode?
 The tombs aloud reply to the questioners and cry, ✿ “Death’s canker and
    decay those rosy cheeks corrode!”
 Long time they ate and drank, but their joyaunce had a term; ✿ And the
    eater eke was eaten, and was eaten by the worm.

When the Emir read this, he wept, till he was like to swoon away,——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Emir wept till
he was like to swoon away, and bade write down the verses, after which
he passed on into the inner palace and came to a vast hall, at each of
whose four corners stood a pavilion lofty and spacious, washed with gold
and silver and painted in various colours. In the heart of the hall was
a great jetting-fountain of alabaster, surmounted by a canopy of
brocade, and in each pavilion was a sitting-place and each place had its
richly-wrought fountain and tank paved with marble and streams flowing
in channels along the floor and meeting in a great and grand cistern of
many-coloured marbles. Quoth the Emir to the Shaykh Abd al-Samad, “Come,
let us visit yonder pavilion!” So they entered the first and found it
full of gold and silver and pearls and jacinths and other precious
stones and metals, besides chests filled with brocades, red and yellow
and white. Then they repaired to the second pavilion, and, opening a
closet there, found it full of arms and armour, such as gilded helmets
and Davidean[140] hauberks and Hindi swords and Arabian spears and
Chorasmian[141] maces and other gear of fight and fray. Thence they
passed to the third pavilion, wherein they saw closets padlocked and
covered with curtains wrought with all manner of embroidery. They opened
one of these and found it full of weapons curiously adorned with open
work and with gold and silver damascene and jewels. Then they entered
the fourth pavilion, and opening one of the closets there, beheld in it
great store of eating and drinking vessels of gold and silver, with
platters of crystal and goblets set with fine pearls and cups of
carnelian and so forth. So they all fell to taking that which suited
their tastes and each of the soldiers carried off what he could. When
they left the pavilions, they saw in the midst of the palace a door of
teak-wood marqueteried with ivory and ebony and plated with glittering
gold, over which hung a silken curtain purfled with all manner of
embroideries; and on this door were locks of white silver, that opened
by artifice without a key. The Shaykh Abd al-Samad went valiantly up
thereto and by the aid of his knowledge and skill opened the locks,
whereupon the door admitted them into a corridor paved with marble and
hung with veil-like[142] tapestries embroidered with figures of all
manner beasts and birds, whose bodies were of red gold and white silver
and their eyes of pearls and rubies, amazing all who looked upon them.
Passing onwards they came to a saloon builded all of polished marble,
inlaid with jewels, which seemed to the beholder as though the floor
were flowing water[143] and whoso walked thereon slipped. The Emir bade
the Shaykh strew somewhat upon it, that they might walk over it; which
being done, they made shift to fare forwards till they came to a great
domed pavilion of stone, gilded with red gold and crowned with a cupola
of alabaster, about which were set lattice-windows carved and jewelled
with rods of emerald,[144] beyond the competence of any King. Under this
dome was a canopy of brocade, reposing upon pillars of red gold and
wrought with figures of birds whose feet were of smaragd, and beneath
each bird was a network of fresh-hued pearls. The canopy was spread
above a jetting fountain of ivory and carnelian, plated with glittering
gold and thereby stood a couch set with pearls and rubies and other
jewels and beside the couch a pillar of gold. On the capital of the
column stood a bird fashioned of red rubies and holding in his bill a
pearl which shone like a star; and on the couch lay a damsel, as she
were the lucident sun, eyes never saw a fairer. She wore a tight-fitting
body-robe of fine pearls, with a crown of red gold on her head, filleted
with gems, and on her forehead were two great jewels, whose light was as
the light of the sun. On her breast she wore a jewelled amulet, filled
with musk and ambergris and worth the empire of the Cæsars; and around
her neck hung a collar of rubies and great pearls, hollowed and filled
with odoriferous musk. And it seemed as if she gazed on them to the
right and to the left.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the damsel seemed
to be gazing at the folk to the right and to the left. The Emir Musa
marvelled at her exceeding beauty and was confounded at the blackness of
her hair and the redness of her cheeks, which made the beholder deem her
alive and not dead, and said to her, “Peace be with thee, O damsel!” But
Talib ibn Sahl said to him, “Allah preserve thee, O Emir, verily this
damsel is dead and there is no life in her; so how shall she return thy
salam?”; adding, “Indeed, she is but a corpse embalmed with exceeding
art; her eyes were taken out after her death and quicksilver set under
them, after which they were restored to their sockets. Wherefore they
glisten and when the air moveth the lashes, she seemeth to wink and it
appeareth to the beholder as though she looked at him, for all she is
dead.” At this the Emir marvelled beyond measure and said, “Glory be to
God who subjugateth His creatures to the dominion of Death!” Now the
couch on which the damsel lay, had steps, and thereon stood two statues
of Andalusian copper representing slaves, one white and the other black.
The first held a mace of steel[145] and the second a sword of watered
steel which dazzled the eye; and between them, on one of the steps of
the couch, lay a golden tablet, whereon were written, in characters of
white silver, the following words: “In the name of God, the
Compassionating, the Compassionate! Praise be to Allah, the Creator of
mankind; and He is the Lord of Lords, the Causer of Causes! In the name
of Allah, the Never-beginning, the Everlasting, the Ordainer of Fate and
Fortune! O son of Adam! what hath befooled thee in this long esperance?
What hath unminded thee of the Death-day’s mischance? Knowest thou not
that Death calleth for thee and hasteneth to seize upon the soul of
thee? Be ready, therefore, for the way and provide thee for thy
departure from the world; for, assuredly, thou shalt leave it without
delay. Where is Adam, first of humanity? Where is Noah with his progeny?
Where be the Kings of Hind and Irak-plain and they who over earth’s
widest regions reign? Where do the Amalekites abide and the giants and
tyrants of olden tide? Indeed, the dwelling-places are void of them and
they have departed from kindred and home. Where be the Kings of Arab and
Ajem? They are dead, all of them, and gone and are become rotten bones.
Where be the lords so high in stead? They are all done dead. Where are
Kora and Haman? Where is Shaddad son of Ad? Where be Canaan and
Zu’l-Autád,[146] Lord of the Stakes? By Allah, the Reaper of lives hath
reaped them and made void the lands of them. Did they provide them
against the Day of Resurrection or make ready to answer the Lord of men?
O thou, if thou know me not, I will acquaint thee with my name: I am
Tadmurah,[147] daughter of the Kings of the Amalekites, of those who
held dominion over the lands in equity and brought low the necks of
humanity. I possessed that which never King possessed and was righteous
in my rule and did justice among my lieges; yea, I gave gifts and
largesse and freed bondsmen and bondswomen. Thus lived I many years in
all ease and delight of life, till Death knocked at my door and to me
and to my folk befel calamities galore; and it was on this wise. There
betided us seven successive years of drought, wherein no drop of rain
fell on us from the skies and no green thing sprouted for us on the face
of earth.[148] So we ate what was with us of victual, then we fell upon
the cattle and devoured them, until nothing was left. Thereupon I let
bring my treasures and meted them with measures and sent out trusty men
to buy food. They circuited all the lands in quest thereof and left no
city unsought, but found it not to be bought and returned to us with the
treasure after a long absence; and gave us to know that they could not
succeed in bartering fine pearls for poor wheat, bushel for bushel,
weight for weight. So, when we despaired of succour, we displayed all
our riches and things of price and, shutting the gates of the city and
its strong places, resigned ourselves to the deme of our Lord and
committed our case to our King. Then we all died,[149] as thou seest us,
and left what we had builded and all we had hoarded. This, then, is our
story, and after the substance naught abideth but the trace.” Then they
looked at the foot of the tablet and read these couplets:—

 O child of Adam, let not hope make mock and flyte at thee, ✿ From all
    thy hands have treasurèd, removèd thou shalt be;
 I see thou covetest the world and fleeting worldly charms, ✿ And races
    past and gone have done the same as thou I see.
 Lawful and lawless wealth they got; but all their hoarded store, ✿ Their
    term accomplished, naught delayed of Destiny’s decree.

 Armies they led and puissant men and gained them gold galore; ✿ Then
    left their wealth and palaces by Fate compelled to flee,
 To straitness of the grave-yard and humble bed of dust ✿ Whence, pledged
    for every word and deed, they never more win free:
 As a company of travellers had unloaded in the night ✿ At house that
    lacketh food nor is o’erfain of company:
 Whose owner saith, ‘O folk, there be no lodging here for you;’ ✿ So
    packed they who had erst unpacked and farèd hurriedly:
 Misliking much the march, nor the journey nor the halt ✿ Had aught of
    pleasant chances or had aught of goodly gree.
 Then prepare thou good provision for to-morrow’s journey stored, ✿
    Naught but righteous honest life shall avail thee with the Lord!

And the Emir Musa wept as he read, “By Allah, the fear of the Lord is
the best of all property, the pillar of certainty and the sole sure
stay. Verily, Death is the truth manifest and the sure behest, and
therein, O thou, is the goal and return-place evident. Take warning,
therefore, by those who to the dust did wend and hastened on the way of
the predestined end. Seest thou not that hoary hairs summon thee to the
tomb and that the whiteness of thy locks maketh moan of thy doom?
Wherefore be thou on the wake ready for thy departure and thine account
to make. O son of Adam, what hath hardened thy heart in mode abhorred?
What hath seduced thee from the service of thy Lord? Where be the
peoples of old time? They are a warning to whoso will be warned! Where
be the Kings of Al-Sín and the lords of majestic mien? Where is Shaddad
bin Ad and whatso he built and he stablished? Where is Nimrod who
revolted against Allah and defied Him? Where is Pharaoh who rebelled
against God and denied Him? Death followed hard upon the trail of them
all, and laid them low sparing neither great nor small, male nor female;
and the Reaper of Mankind cut them off, yea, by Him who maketh night to
return upon day! Know, O thou who comest to this place, that she whom
thou seest here was not deluded by the world and its frail delights, for
it is faithless, perfidious, a house of ruin, vain and treacherous; and
salutary to the creature is the remembrance of his sins; wherefore she
feared her Lord and made fair her dealings and provided herself with
provaunt against the appointed marching-day. Whoso cometh to our city
and Allah vouchsafeth him competence to enter it, let him take of the
treasure all he can, but touch not aught that is on my body, for it is
the covering of my shame[150] and the outfit for the last journey;
wherefore let him fear Allah and despoil naught thereof; else will he
destroy his own self. This have I set forth to him for a warning from me
and a solemn trust to be; wherewith, peace be with ye and I pray Allah
to keep you from sickness and calamity.”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


      Now when it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Emir Musa
read this, he wept with exceeding weeping till he swooned away and
presently coming to himself, wrote down all he had seen and was
admonished by all he had witnessed. Then he said to his men, “Fetch the
camels and load them with these treasures and vases and jewels.” “O
Emir,” asked Talib, “shall we leave our damsel with what is upon her,
things which have no equal and whose like is not to be found and more
perfect than aught else thou takest; nor couldst thou find a goodlier
offering wherewithal to propitiate the favour of the Commander of the
Faithful?” But Musa answered, “O man, heardest thou not what the Lady
saith on this tablet? More by token that she giveth it in trust to us
who are no traitors.” “And shall we,” rejoined the Wazir Talib, “because
of these words, leave all these riches and jewels, seeing that she is
dead? What should she do with these that are the adornments of the world
and the ornament of the worldling, seeing that one garment of cotton
would suffice for her covering? We have more right to them than she.” So
saying he mounted the steps of the couch between the pillars, but when
he came within reach of the two slaves, lo! the mace-bearer smote him on
the back and the other struck him with the sword he held in his hand and
lopped off his head, and he dropped down dead. Quoth the Emir, “Allah
have no mercy on thy resting-place! Indeed there was enough in these
treasures; and greed of gain assuredly degradeth a man.” Then he bade
admit the troops; so they entered and loaded the camels with those
treasures and precious ores; after which they went forth and the Emir
commanded them to shut the gate as before. They fared on along the
sea-shore a whole month, till they came in sight of a high mountain
overlooking the sea and full of caves, wherein dwelt a tribe of blacks,
clad in hides, with burnooses also of hide and speaking an unknown
tongue. When they saw the troops they were startled like shying steeds
and fled into the caverns, whilst their women and children stood at the
cave-doors, looking on the strangers. “O Shaykh Abd al-Samad,” asked the
Emir, “what are these folk?” and he answered, “They are those whom we
seek for the Commander of the Faithful.” So they dismounted and setting
down their loads, pitched their tents; whereupon, almost before they had
done, down came the King of the blacks from the mountain and drew near
the camp. Now he understood the Arabic tongue; so, when he came to the
Emir he saluted him with the salam and Musa returned his greeting and
entreated him with honour. Then quoth he to the Emir, “Are ye men or
Jinn?” “Well, we are men,” quoth Musa; “but doubtless ye are Jinn, to
judge by your dwelling apart in this mountain which is cut off from
mankind, and by your inordinate bulk.” “Nay,” rejoined the black; “we
also are children of Adam, of the lineage of Ham, son of Noah (with whom
be peace!), and this sea is known as Al-Karkar.” Asked Musa, “O King,
what is your religion and what worship ye?”; and he answered, saying,
“We worship the God of the heavens and our religion is that of Mohammed,
whom Allah bless and preserve!” “And how came ye by the knowledge of
this,” questioned the Emir, “seeing that no prophet was inspired to
visit this country?” “Know, Emir,” replied the King, “that there
appeared to us whilere from out the sea a man, from whom issued a light
that illumined the horizons and he cried out, in a voice which was heard
of men far and near, saying:—O children of Ham, reverence to Him who
seeth and is not seen and say ye, There is no god but _the_ God, and
Mohammed is the messenger of God! And he added:—I am Abu al-Abbás
al-Khizr. Before this we were wont to worship one another, but he
summoned us to the service of the Lord of all creatures; and he taught
us to repeat these words, There is no god save _the_ God alone, who hath
for partner none, and His is the kingdom and His is the praise. He
giveth life and death and He over all things is Almighty. Nor do we draw
near unto Allah (be He exalted and extolled!) except with these words,
for we know none other; but every eve before Friday[151] we see a light
upon the face of earth and we hear a voice saying, Holy and glorious,
Lord of the Angels and the Spirit! What He willeth is, and what He
willeth not, is not. Every boon is of His grace and there is neither
Majesty nor is there Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!” “But
ye,” quoth the King, “who and what are ye and what bringeth you to this
land?” Quoth Musa, “We are officers of the Sovereign of Al-Islam, the
Commander of the Faithful, Abd al-Malik bin Marwan, who hath heard tell
of the lord Solomon, son of David (on whom be peace!) and of that which
the Most High bestowed upon him of supreme dominion; how he held sway
over Jinn and beast and bird and was wont when he was wroth with one of
the Marids, to shut him in a cucurbite of brass and, stopping its mouth
on him with lead, whereon he impressed his seal-ring, to cast him into
the sea of Al-Karkar. Now we have heard tell that this sea is nigh your
land; so the Commander of the Faithful hath sent us hither, to bring him
some of these cucurbites, that he may look thereon and solace himself
with their sight. Such, then, is our case and what we seek of thee, O
King, and we desire that thou further us in the accomplishment of our
errand commanded by the Commander of the Faithful.” “With love and
gladness,” replied the black King, and carrying them to the guest-house,
entreated them with the utmost honour and furnished them with all they
needed, feeding them upon fish. They abode thus three days, when he bade
his divers fetch from out the sea some of the vessels of Solomon. So
they dived and brought up twelve cucurbites, whereat the Emir and the
Shaykh and all the company rejoiced in the accomplishment of the
Caliph’s need. Then Musa gave the King of the blacks many and great
gifts; and he, in turn, made him a present of the wonders of the deep,
being fishes in human form,[152] saying “Your entertainment these three
days hath been of the meat of these fish.” Quoth the Emir, “Needs must
we carry some of these to the Caliph, for the sight of them will please
him more than the cucurbites of Solomon.” Then they took leave of the
black King and, setting out on their homeward journey, travelled till
they came to Damascus, where Musa went in to the Commander of the
Faithful and told him all that he had sighted and heard of verses and
legends and instances, together with the manner of the death of Talib
bin Sahl; and the Caliph said, “Would I had been with you, that I might
have seen what you saw!” Then he took the brazen vessels and opened
them, cucurbite after cucurbite, whereupon the devils came forth of
them, saying, “We repent, O Prophet of Allah! Never again will we return
to the like of this thing; no never!” And the Caliph marvelled at this.
As for the daughters of the deep presented to them by the black King,
they made them cisterns of planks, full of water, and laid them therein;
but they died of the great heat. Then the Caliph sent for the spoils of
the Brazen City and divided them among the Faithful,——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
marvelled much at the cucurbites and their contents; then he sent for
the spoils and divided them among the Faithful, saying, “Never gave
Allah unto any the like of that which he bestowed upon Solomon
David-son!” Thereupon the Emir Musa sought leave of him to appoint his
son Governor of the Province in his stead, that he might betake himself
to the Holy City of Jerusalem, there to worship Allah. So the Commander
of the Faithful invested his son Harun with the government and Musa
repaired to the Glorious and Holy City, where he died. This, then, is
all that hath come down to us of the story of the City of Brass, and God
is All-knowing!——Now (continued Shahrazad) I have another tale to tell
anent the

-----

Footnote 104:

  This is a true “City of Brass.” (Nuhás asfar = yellow copper), as we
  learn in Night dcclxxii. It is situated in the “Maghrib” (Mauritania),
  the region of magic and mystery; and the idea was probably suggested
  by the grand Roman ruins which rise abruptly from what has become a
  sandy waste. Compare with this tale “The City of Brass” (Night
  cclxxii). In Egypt Nuhás is vulg. pronounced Nihás.

Footnote 105:

  The Bresl. Edit. adds that the seal-ring was of stamped stone and
  iron, copper and lead. I have borrowed copiously from its vol. vi. pp.
  343, _et seq._

Footnote 106:

  As this was a well-known pre-Islamitic bard, his appearance here is
  decidedly anachronistic, probably by intention.

Footnote 107:

  The first Moslem conqueror of Spain whose lieutenant, Tárik, the
  gallant and unfortunate, named Gibraltar (Jabal al-Tarik).

Footnote 108:

  The colours of the Banú Umayyah (Ommiade) Caliphs were white; of the
  Banú Abbás (Abbasides) black, and of the Fatimites green. Carrying the
  royal flag denoted the generalissimo or plenipotentiary.

Footnote 109:

  _i.e._ Old Cairo, or Fustat: the present Cairo was then a Coptic
  village founded on an old Egyptian settlement called Lui-Tkeshroma, to
  which belonged the tanks on the hill and the great well, Bir Yusuf,
  absurdly attributed to Joseph the Patriarch. Lui is evidently the
  origin of Levi and means a high priest (Brugsh ii. 130) and his son’s
  name was Roma.

Footnote 110:

  I cannot but suspect that this is a clerical error for “Al-Samanhúdi,”
  a native of Samanhúd (Wilkinson’s “Semenood”) in the Delta on the
  Damietta branch, the old Sebennytus (in Coptic Jem-nuti = Jem the
  God), a town which has produced many distinguished men in Moslem
  times. But there is also a Samhúd lying a few miles down stream from
  Denderah and, as its mounds prove, it is an ancient site.

Footnote 111:

  Egypt had not then been conquered from the Christians.

Footnote 112:

  Arab. “Kízán fukká’a,” _i.e._ thin and slightly porous earthenware
  jars used for Fukká’a, a fermented drink, made of barley or raisins.

Footnote 113:

  I retain this venerable blunder: the right form is Samúm, from Samm,
  the poison-wind.

Footnote 114:

  _i.e._ for worship and to prepare for futurity.

Footnote 115:

  The camel carries the Badawi’s corpse to the cemetery which is often
  distant: hence to dream of a camel is an omen of death.

Footnote 116:

  Koran xxiv. 39. The word “Saráb” (mirage) is found in Isaiah (xxxv. 7)
  where the passage should be rendered “And the mirage (sharab) shall
  become a lake” (not, “and the parched ground shall become a pool”).
  The Hindus prettily call it “Mrigatrishná” = the thirst of the deer.

Footnote 117:

  A name of Allah.

Footnote 118:

  Arab. “Kintár” = a hundredweight (_i.e._ 100 lbs.), about 98¾ lbs.
  avoir. Hence the French _quintal_ and its congeners (Littré).

Footnote 119:

  _i.e._ “from Shám” (Syria) to (the land of) Adnan, ancestor of the
  Naturalized Arabs that is, to Arabia.

Footnote 120:

  Koran lii. 21. “Every man is given in pledge for that which he shall
  have wrought.”

Footnote 121:

  There is a constant clerical confusion in the texts between “Arar”
  (Juniperus Oxycedrus used by the Greeks for the images of their gods)
  and “Marmar” marble or alabaster, in the Talmud “Marmora” = marble,
  evidently from μάρμαρος = brilliant, the brilliant stone.

Footnote 122:

  These Ifritical names are chosen for their _bizarrerie_. “Al-Dáhish” =
  the Amazed; and “Al-A’amash” = one with weak eyes always watering.

Footnote 123:

  The Arabs have no word for million; so Messer Marco Miglione could not
  have learned it from them. On the other hand the Hindus have more
  quadrillions than modern Europe.

Footnote 124:

  This formula, according to Moslems, would begin with the beginning
  “There is no iláh but Allah and Adam is the Apostle (rasúl = one sent,
  a messenger; not nabí = prophet) of Allah.” And so on with Noah,
  Moses, David (not Solomon as a rule) and Jesus to Mohammed.

Footnote 125:

  This son of Barachia has been noticed before. The text embroiders the
  Koranic chapter No. xxvii.

Footnote 126:

  The Bresl. Edit. (vi. 371) reads “Samm-hu” = his poison, prob. a
  clerical error for “Sahmhu” = his shaft. It was a duel with the
  “Shiháb” or falling stars, the meteors which are popularly supposed, I
  have said, to be the arrows shot by the angels against devils and evil
  spirits when they approach too near Heaven in order to overhear divine
  secrets.

Footnote 127:

  A fancy sea from the Lat. “Carcer” (?).

Footnote 128:

  Andalusian = Spanish, the Vandal-land, a term accepted by the Moslem
  invader.

Footnote 129:

  This fine description will remind the traveller of the old Haurani
  towns deserted since the sixth century, which a silly writer miscalled
  the “Giant Cities of Bashan.” I have never seen anything weirder than
  a moonlight night in one of these strong places whose masonry is
  perfect as when first built, the snowy light pouring on the jet-black
  basalt and the breeze sighing and the jackal wailing in the desert
  around.

Footnote 130:

  “Zanj,” I have said, is the Arab. form of the Persian “Zang-bar” (=
  Black-land), our Zanzibar. Those who would know more of the etymology
  will consult my “Zanzibar,” etc., chapt. i.

Footnote 131:

  Arab. “Tanjah” = Strabo Τίγγις (derivation uncertain), Tingitania,
  Tangiers. But why the terminal _s_?

Footnote 132:

  Or Amidah, by the Turks called “Kara (black) Amid” from the colour of
  the stones; and the Arabs “Diyar-bakr” (Diarbekir), a name which they
  also give to the whole province—Mesopotamia.

Footnote 133:

  Mayyáfárikín, an episcopal city in Diyar-bakr: the natives are called
  Fárikí; hence the abbreviation in the text.

Footnote 134:

  Arab. “Ayát al-Naját,” certain Koranic verses which act as talismans,
  such as, “And wherefore should we not put our trust in Allah?” (xiv.
  15); “Say thou, ‘Naught shall befal us save what Allah hath decreed
  for us.’” (ix. 51), and sundry others.

Footnote 135:

  These were the “Brides of the Treasure,” alluded to in the story of
  Hasan of Bassorah and elsewhere.

Footnote 136:

  Arab. “Ishárah,” which may also mean beckoning. Easterns reverse our
  process: we wave band or finger towards ourselves; they towards the
  object; and our fashion represents to them, Go away!

Footnote 137:

  _i.e._ musing a long time and a longsome.

Footnote 138:

  Arab. “Dihlíz” from the Persian. This is the long dark passage which
  leads to the inner or main gate of an Eastern city, and which is built
  up before a siege. It is usually furnished with Mastabah-benches of
  wood and masonry, and forms a favourite lounge in hot weather. Hence
  Lot and Moses sat and stood in the gate, and here man speaks with his
  enemies.

Footnote 139:

  The names of colours are as loosely used by the Arabs as by the
  Classics of Europe; for instance, a light grey is called a “blue or a
  green horse.” Much nonsense has been written upon the colours in Homer
  by men who imagine that the semi-civilised determine tints as we do.
  They see them but they do not name them, having no occasion for the
  words. As I have noticed, however, the Arabs have a complete
  terminology for the varieties of horse-hues. In our day we have
  witnessed the birth of colours, named by the dozen, because required
  by women’s dress.

Footnote 140:

  For David’s miracles of metallurgy see vol. i. 286.

Footnote 141:

  Arab. “Khwárazm,” the land of the Chorasmioi, who are mentioned by
  Herodotus (iii. 93) and a host of classical geographers. They place it
  in Sogdiana (hod. Sughd) and it corresponds with the Khiva country.

Footnote 142:

  Arab. “Burka’,” usually applied to a woman’s face-veil and hence to
  the covering of the Ka’abah, which is the “Bride of Meccah.”

Footnote 143:

  Alluding to the trick played upon Bilkís by Solomon who had heard that
  her legs were hairy like those of an ass: he laid down a pavement of
  glass over flowing water in which fish were swimming and thus she
  raised her skirts as she approached him and he saw that the report was
  true. Hence, as I have said, the depilatory (Koran xxvii.).

Footnote 144:

  I understand the curiously carved windows cut in arabesque-work of
  marble (India) or basalt (the Haurán) and provided with small panes of
  glass set in emeralds where tinfoil would be used by the vulgar.

Footnote 145:

  Arab. “Bulád” from the Pers. “Pulád.” Hence the name of the famous
  Druze family “Jumblat,” a corruption of “Ján-pulád” = Life o’ Steel.

Footnote 146:

  Pharaoh, so called in Koran (xxxviii. 11) because he tortured men by
  fastening them to four stakes driven into the ground. Sale translates
  “the contriver of the stakes” and adds, “Some understand the word
  figuratively, of the firm establishment of Pharaoh’s kingdom, because
  the Arabs fix their tents with stakes; but they may possibly intend
  that prince’s obstinacy and hardness of heart.” I may note that in
  “Tasawwuf,” or Moslem Gnosticism, Pharaoh represents, like Prometheus
  and Job, the typical creature who upholds his own dignity and rights
  in presence and despight of the Creator. Sáhib the Súfí declares that
  the secret of man’s soul (_i.e._ its emanation) was first revealed
  when Pharaoh declared himself god; and Al-Ghazálí sees in his claim
  the most noble aspiration to the divine, innate in the human spirit
  (Dabistan, vol. iii.).

Footnote 147:

  In the Calc. Edit. “Tarmuz, son of the daughter,” etc. According to
  the Arabs, Tadmur (Palmyra) was built by Queen Tadmurah, daughter of
  Hassán bin Uzaynah.

Footnote 148:

  It is only by some such drought that I can account for the survival of
  those marvellous Haurani cities in the great valley S. E. of Damascus.

Footnote 149:

  So Moses described his own death and burial.

Footnote 150:

  A man’s “aurat” (shame) extends from the navel (included) to his
  knees; a woman’s from the top of the head to the tips of her toes. I
  have before noticed the Hindostaní application of the word.

Footnote 151:

  Arab. “Jum’ah” (= the assembly) so called because the General
  Resurrection will take place on that day and it witnessed the creation
  of Adam. Both these reasons are evidently after-thoughts; as the Jews
  received a divine order to keep Saturday, and the Christians, at their
  own sweet will, transferred the weekly rest-day to Sunday, wherefore
  the Moslem preferred Friday. Sabbatarianism, however, is unknown to
  Al-Islam and business is interrupted, by Koranic order (lxii. 9–10),
  only during congregational prayers in the Mosque. The most a
  Mohammedan does is not to work or travel till after public service.
  But the Moslem hardly wants a “day of rest;” whereas a Christian,
  especially in the desperately dull routine of daily life and toil,
  without a gleam of light to break the darkness of his civilised and
  most unhappy existence, distinctly requires it.

Footnote 152:

  Mankind, which sees itself everywhere and in everything, must create
  its own analogues in all the elements, air (Sylphs), fire (Jinns),
  water (Mermen and Mermaids) and earth (Kobolds). These merwomen were
  of course seals or manatees, as the wild women of Hanno were gorillas.




 CRAFT AND MALICE OF WOMEN,[153] OR THE TALE OF THE KING, HIS SON, HIS
                    CONCUBINE AND THE SEVEN WAZIRS.


There was, in days of yore and in ages and times long gone before, a
puissant King among the Kings of China, the crown of crowned heads, who
ruled over many men of war and vassals with wisdom and justice, might
and majesty; equitable to his Ryots, liberal to his lieges and dearly
beloved by the hearts of his subjects. He was wealthy as he was
powerful, but he had grown old without being blessed with a son, and
this caused him sore affliction. He could only brood over the cutting
off of his seed and the oblivion that would bury his name and the
passing of his realm into the stranger’s hands. So he secluded himself
in his palace, never going in and out or rising and taking rest till the
lieges lost all tidings of him and were sore perplexed and began to talk
about their King. Some said, “He’s dead”; others said, “No, he’s not but
all resolved to find a ruler who could reign over them and carry out the
customs of government.” At last, utterly despairing of male issue, he
sought the intercession of the Prophet (whom Allah bless and keep!) with
the Most High and implored Him, by the glory of His Prophets and Saints
and Martyrs and others of the Faithful who were acceptable to Heaven
that he would grant him a son, to be the coolth of his eyes and heir to
the kingdom after him. Then he rose forthright and, withdrawing to his
sitting-saloon, sent for his wife who was the daughter of his uncle. Now
this Queen was of surpassing beauty and loveliness, the fairest of all
his wives and the dearest to him as she was the nearest: and to boot a
woman of excellent wit and passing judgement. She found the King
dejected and sorrowful, tearful-eyed and heavy-hearted; so she kissed
ground between his hands and said, “O King, may my life ransom thy life!
may Time never prove thy foe, nor the shifts of Fortune prevail over
thee; may Allah grant thee every joy and ward off from thee all annoy!
How is it I see thee brooding over thy case and tormented by the
displeasures of memory?” He replied, “Thou wottest well that I am a man
now shotten in years, who hath never been blessed with a son, a sight to
cool his eyes; so I know that my kingdom shall pass away to the stranger
in blood and my name and memory will be blotted out amongst men. ‘Tis
this causeth me to grieve with excessive grief.” “Allah do away with thy
sorrows,” quoth she: “long ere this day a thought struck me; and
yearning for issue arose in my heart even as in thine. One night I
dreamed a dream and a voice said to me:—The King thy husband pineth for
progeny: if a daughter be vouchsafed to him, she will be the ruin of his
realm; if a son, the youth will undergo much trouble and annoy but he
will pass through it without loss of life. Such a son can be conceived
by thee and thee only and the time of thy conception is when the moon
conjoineth with Gemini! I woke from my dream, but after what I heard
that voice declare I refrained from breeding and would not consent to
bear children.” “There is no help for it but that I have a son,
Inshallah,—God willing!” cried the King. Thereupon she soothed and
consoled him till he forgot his sorrows and went forth amongst the
lieges and sat, as of wont, upon his throne of estate. All rejoiced to
see him once more and especially the Lords of his realm. Now when the
conjunction of the moon and Gemini took place, the King knew his wife
carnally and, by order of Allah Almighty she became pregnant. Presently
she announced the glad tidings to her husband and led her usual life
until her nine months of pregnancy were completed and she bare a male
child whose face was as the rondure of the moon on its fourteenth night.
The lieges of the realm congratulated one another thereanent and the
King commanded an assembly of his Olema and philosophers, astrologers
and horoscopists, whom he thus addressed, “I desire you to forecast the
fortune of my son and to determine his ascendant[154] and whatever is
shown by his nativity.” They replied “‘Tis well, in Allah’s name, let us
do so!” and cast his nativity with all diligence. After ascertaining his
ascendant, they pronounced judgement in these words, “We see his lot
favourable and his life viable and durable; save that a danger awaiteth
his youth.” The father was sorely concerned at this saying, when they
added “But, O King, he shall escape from it nor shall aught of injury
accrue to him!” Hereupon the King cast aside all cark and care and robed
the wizards and dismissed them with splendid honoraria; and he resigned
himself to the will of Heaven and acknowledged that the decrees of
Destiny may not be countervailed. He committed his boy to wet nurses and
dry nurses, handmaids and eunuchs, leaving him to grow and fill out in
the Harim till he reached the age of seven. Then he addressed letters to
his Viceroys and Governors in every clime and by their means gathered
together Olema and philosophers and doctors of law and religion, from
all countries, to a number of three hundred and three score. He held an
especial assembly for them and, when all were in presence, he bade them
draw near him and be at their ease while he sent for the food-trays and
all ate their sufficiency. And when the banquet ended and the wizards
had taken seats in their several degrees, the King asked them, “Wot ye
wherefore I have gathered ye together?”; whereto all answered, “We wot
not, O King!” He continued, “It is my wish that you select from amongst
you fifty men, and from these fifty ten, and from these ten one, that he
may teach my son omnem rem scibilem; for whenas I see the youth perfect
in all science, I will share my dignity with the Prince and make him
partner with me in my possessions.” “Know, O King,” they replied, “that
among us none is more learned or more excellent than Al-Sindibad,[155]
hight the Sage, who woneth in thy capital under thy protection. If such
be thy design, summon him and bid him do thy will.” The King acted upon
their advice and the Sage, standing in the presence, expressed his loyal
sentiments with his salutation, whereupon his Sovereign bade him draw
nigh and thus raised his rank, saying, “I would have thee to know, O
Sage, that I summoned this assembly of the learned and bade them choose
me out a man to teach my son all knowledge; when they selected thee
without dissenting thought or voice. If, then, thou feel capable of what
they claimed for thee, come thou to the task and understand that a man’s
son and heir is the very fruit of his vitals and core of his heart and
liver. My desire of thee is thine instruction of him; and to happy issue
Allah guideth!” The King then sent for his son and committed him to
Al-Sindibad conditioning the Sage to finish his education in three
years. He did accordingly but, at the end of that time, the young Prince
had learned nothing, his mind being wholly occupied with play and
disport; and when summoned and examined by his sire, behold, his
knowledge was as nil. Thereupon the King turned his attention to the
learned once more and bade them elect a tutor for his youth; so they
asked, “And what hath his governor, Al-Sindibad, been doing?” and when
the King answered, “He hath taught my son naught;” the Olema and
philosophers and high officers summoned the instructor and said to him,
“O Sage, what prevented thee from teaching the King’s son during this
length of days?” “O wise men,” he replied, “the Prince’s mind is wholly
occupied with disport and play; yet, an the King will make with me three
conditions and keep to them, I will teach him in seven months what he
would not learn (nor indeed could any other lesson him) within seven
years.” “I hearken to thee,” quoth the King, “and I submit myself to thy
conditions;” and quoth Al-Sindibad, “Hear from me, Sire, and bear in
mind these three sayings, whereof the first is:—Do not to others what
thou wouldest not they do unto thee;[156] and second:—Do naught hastily
without consulting the experienced; and thirdly:—Where thou hast power
show pity.[157] In teaching this lad I require no more of thee but to
accept these three dictes and adhere thereto.” Cried the King, “Bear ye
witness against me, O all ye here assembled, that I stand firm by these
conditions!”; and caused a _procès verbal_ to be drawn up with his
personal security and the testimony of his courtiers. Thereupon the
Sage, taking the Prince’s hand, led him to his place, and the King sent
them all requisites of provaunt and kitchen-batteries, carpets and other
furniture. Moreover the tutor bade build a house whose walls he lined
with the whitest stucco painted over with ceruse,[158] and, lastly, he
delineated thereon all the objects concerning which he proposed to
lecture his pupil. When the place was duly furnished, he took the lad’s
hand and installed him in the apartment which was amply furnished with
belly-timber; and, after stablishing him therein, went forth and
fastened the door with seven padlocks. Nor did he visit the Prince save
every third day when he lessoned him on the knowledge to be extracted
from the wall-pictures and renewed his provision of meat and drink,
after which he left him again to solitude. So whenever the youth was
straitened in breast by the tedium and ennui of loneliness, he applied
himself diligently to his object-lessons and mastered all the deductions
therefrom. His governor seeing this turned his mind into other channel
and taught him the inner meanings of the external objects; and in a
little time the pupil mastered every requisite. Then the Sage took him
from the house and taught him cavalarice and Jeríd play and archery.
When the pupil had thoroughly mastered these arts, the tutor sent to the
King informing him that the Prince was perfect and complete in all
things required to figure favourably amongst his peers. Hereat the King
rejoiced; and, summoning his Wazirs and Lords of estate to be present at
the examination, commanded the Sage to send his son into the presence.
Thereupon Al-Sindibad consulted his pupil’s horoscope and found it
barred by an inauspicious conjunction which would last seven days; so,
in sore affright for the youth’s life, he said, “Look into thy
nativity-scheme.” The Prince did so and, recognising the potent, feared
for himself and presently asked the Sage, saying, “What dost thou bid me
do?” “I bid thee,” he answered, “remain silent and speak not a word
during this se’nnight; even though thy sire slay thee with scourging. An
thou pass safely through this period, thou shalt win to high rank and
succeed to thy sire’s reign; but an things go otherwise then the behest
is with Allah from the beginning to the end thereof.” Quoth the pupil,
“Thou art in fault, O preceptor, and thou hast shown undue haste in
sending that message to the King before looking into my horoscope. Hadst
thou delayed till the week had passed all had been well.” Quoth the
tutor, “O my son, what was to be was; and the sole defaulter therein was
my delight in thy scholarship. But now be firm in thy resolve; rely upon
Allah Almighty and determine not to utter a single word.” Thereupon the
Prince fared for the presence and was met by the Wazirs who led him to
his father. The King accosted him and addressed him but he answered not;
and sought speech of him but he spake not. Whereupon the courtiers were
astounded and the monarch, sore concerned for his son, summoned
Al-Sindibad. But the tutor so hid himself that none could hit upon his
trace nor gain tidings of him; and folk said, “He was ashamed to appear
before the King’s majesty and the courtiers.” Under these conditions the
Sovereign heard some of those present saying, “Send the lad to the
Serraglio where he will talk with the women and soon set aside this
bashfulness;” and, approving their counsel, gave orders accordingly. So
the Prince was led into the palace, which was compassed about by a
running stream whose banks were planted with all manner of fruit-trees
and sweet-smelling flowers. Moreover, in this palace were forty chambers
and in every chamber ten slave-girls, each skilled in some instrument of
music, so that whenever one of them played, the palace danced to her
melodious strains. Here the Prince passed one night; but, on the
following morning, the King’s favourite concubine happened to cast eyes
upon his beauty and loveliness, his symmetrical stature, his brilliancy
and his perfect grace, and love gat hold of her heart and she was
ravished with his charms.[159] So she went up to him and threw herself
upon him, but he made her no response; whereupon, being dazed by his
beauty, she cried out to him and required him of himself and importuned
him; then she again threw herself upon him and clasped him to her bosom
kissing him and saying, “O King’s son, grant me thy favours and I will
set thee in thy father’s stead; I will give him to drink of poison, so
he may die and thou shalt enjoy his realm and wealth.” When the Prince
heard these words, he was sore enraged against her and said to her by
signs, “O accursed one, so it please Almighty Allah, I will assuredly
requite thee this thy deed, whenas I can speak; for I will go forth to
my father and will tell him, and he shall kill thee.” So signing, he
arose in rage, and went out from her chamber; whereat she feared for
herself. Thereupon she buffeted her face and rent her raiment and tare
her hair and bared her head, then went in to the King and cast herself
at his feet, weeping and wailing. When he saw her in this plight, he was
sore concerned and asked her, “What aileth thee, O damsel? How is it
with thy lord, my son? Is he not well?”; and she answered, “O King, this
thy son, whom thy courtiers avouch to be dumb, required me of myself and
I repelled him, whereupon he did with me as thou seest and would have
slain me; so I fled from him, nor will I ever return to him, nor to the
palace again, no, never again!” When the King heard this, he was wroth
with exceeding wrath and, calling his seven Wazirs, bade them put the
Prince to death. However, they said one to other, “If we do the King’s
Commandment, he will surely repent of having ordered his son’s death,
for he is passing dear to him and this child came not to him save after
despair; and he will round upon us and blame us, saying:—Why did ye not
contrive to dissuade me from slaying him?” So they took counsel
together, to turn him from his purpose, and the chief Wazir said, “I
will warrant you from the King’s mischief this day.” Then he went in to
the presence and prostrating himself craved leave to speak. The King
gave him permission, and he said, “O King, though thou hadst a thousand
sons, yet were it no light matter to thee to put one of them to death,
on the report of a woman, be she true or be she false; and belike this
is a lie and a trick of her against thy son; for indeed, O King, I have
heard tell great plenty of stories of the malice, the craft and perfidy
of women.” Quoth the King, “Tell me somewhat of that which hath come to
thy knowledge thereof.” And the Wazir answered, saying:—Yes, there hath
reached me, O King, a tale entituled


                 _THE KING AND HIS WAZIR’S WIFE._[160]

There was once a King of the Kings, a potent man and a proud, who was
devoted to the love of women and one day being in the privacy of his
palace, he espied a beautiful woman on the terrace-roof of her house and
could not contain himself from falling consumedly in love with her.[161]
He asked his folk to whom the house and the damsel belonged and they
said, “This is the dwelling of the Wazir such an one and she is his
wife.” So he called the Minister in question and despatched him on an
errand to a distant part of the kingdom, where he was to collect
information and to return; but, as soon as he obeyed and was gone, the
King contrived by a trick to gain access to his house and his spouse.
When the Wazir’s wife saw him, she knew him and springing up, kissed his
hands and feet and welcomed him. Then she stood afar off, busying
herself in his service, and said to him, “O our lord, what is the cause
of thy gracious coming? Such an honour is not for the like of me.” Quoth
he, “The cause of it is that love of thee and desire thee-wards have
moved me to this.” Whereupon she kissed ground before him a second time
and said, “By Allah, O our lord, indeed I am not worthy to be the
handmaid of one of the King’s servants; whence then have I the great
good fortune to be in such high honour and favour with thee?” Then the
King put out his hand to her intending to enjoy her person, when she
said, “This thing shall not escape us; but take patience, O my King, and
abide with thy handmaid all this day, that she may make ready for thee
somewhat to eat and drink.” So the King sat down on his Minister’s couch
and she went in haste and brought him a book wherein he might read,
whilst she made ready the food. He took the book and, beginning to read,
found therein moral instances and exhortations, such as restrained him
from adultery and broke his courage to commit sin and crime. After
awhile, she returned and set before him some ninety dishes of different
kinds and colours, and he ate a mouthful of each and found that, while
the number was many, the taste of them was one. At this, he marvelled
with exceeding marvel and said to her, “O damsel, I see these meats to
be manifold and various, but the taste of them is simple and the same.”
“Allah prosper the King!” replied she, “this is a parable I have set for
thee, that thou mayst be admonished thereby.” He asked, “And what is its
meaning?”; and she answered, “Allah amend the case of our lord the
King!; in thy palace are ninety concubines of various colours, but their
taste is one.”[162] When the King heard this, he was ashamed and rising
hastily, went out, without offering her any affront and returned to his
palace; but, in his haste and confusion, he forgot his signet-ring and
left it under the cushion where he had been sitting and albeit he
remembered it he was ashamed to send for it. Now hardly had he reached
home when the Wazir returned and, presenting himself before the King,
kissed the ground and made his report to him of the State of the
province in question. Then he repaired to his own house and sat down on
his couch and chancing to put his hand under the cushion, behold, he
found the King’s seal-ring. So he knew it and taking the matter to
heart, held aloof in great grief from his wife for a whole year, not
going in unto her nor even speaking to her, whilst she knew not the
reason of his anger.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir held
aloof from his wife, whilst she knew not the cause of his wrath. At
last, being weary of the longsome neglect, she sent for her sire and
told him the case; whereupon quoth he, “I will complain of him to the
King, at some time when he is in the presence.” So, one day, he went in
to the King and, finding the Wazir and the Kazi of the army before
him,[163] complained thus saying, “Almighty Allah amend the King’s case!
I had a fair flower-garden, which I planted with mine own hand and
thereon spent my substance till it bare fruit; and its fruitage was ripe
for plucking, when I gave it to this thy Wazir, who ate of it what
seemed good to him, then deserted it and watered it not, so that its
bloom wilted and withered and its sheen departed and its state changed.”
Then said the Wazir, “O my King, this man saith sooth. I did indeed care
for and guard the garden and kept it in good condition and ate thereof,
till one day I went thither and I saw the trail of the lion there,
wherefore I feared for my life and withdrew from the garden.” The King
understood him that the trail of the lion meant his own seal-ring, which
he had forgotten in the woman’s house; so he said, “Return, O Wazir, to
thy flower-garden and fear nothing, for the lion came not near it. It
hath reached me that he went thither; but, by the honour of my fathers
and forefathers, he offered it no hurt.” “Hearkening and obedience,”
answered the Minister and, returning home sent for his wife and made his
peace with her and thenceforth put faith in her chastity. This I tell
thee, O King (continued the Wazir), for no other purpose save to let
thee know how great is their craft and how precipitancy bequeatheth
repentance.[164] And I have also heard the following


         _STORY OF THE CONFECTIONER, HIS WIFE, AND THE PARROT._

Once upon a time there dwelt in Egypt a confectioner who had a wife
famed for beauty and loveliness; and a parrot which, as occasion
required, did the office of watchman and guard, bell and spy, and
flapped her wings did she but hear a fly buzzing about the sugar. This
parrot caused abundant trouble to the wife, always telling her husband
what took place in his absence. Now one evening, before going out to
visit certain friends, the confectioner gave the bird strict injunctions
to watch all night and bade his wife make all fast, as he should not
return until morning. Hardly had he left the door than the woman went
for her old lover, who returned with her and they passed the night
together in mirth and merriment, while the parrot observed all. Betimes
in the morning the lover fared forth and the husband, returning, was
informed by the parrot of what had taken place; whereupon he hastened to
his wife’s room and beat her with a painful beating. She thought in
herself, “Who could have informed against me?” and she asked a woman
that was in her confidence whether it was she. The woman protested by
the worlds visible and invisible that she had not betrayed her mistress;
but informed her that on the morning of his return home, the husband had
stood some time before the cage listening to the parrot’s talk. When the
wife heard this, she resolved to contrive the destruction of the bird.
Some days after, the husband was again invited to the house of a friend
where he was to pass the night; and, before departing, he enjoined the
parrot with the same injunctions as before; wherefore his heart was free
from care, for he had his spy at home. The wife and her confidante then
planned how they might destroy the credit of the parrot with the master.
For this purpose they resolved to counterfeit a storm; and this they did
by placing over the parrot’s head a hand-mill (which the lover worked by
pouring water upon a piece of hide), by waving a fan and by suddenly
uncovering a candle hid under a dish. Thus did they raise such a tempest
of rain and lightning, that the parrot was drenched and half-drowned in
a deluge. Now rolled the thunder, then flashed the lightning; that from
the noise of the hand-mill, this from the reflection of the candle; when
thought the parrot to herself, “In very sooth the Flood hath come on,
such an one as belike Noah himself never witnessed.” So saying she
buried her head under her wing, a prey to terror. The husband, on his
return, hastened to the parrot to ask what had happened during his
absence; and the bird answered that she found it impossible to describe
the deluge and tempest of the last night; and that years would be
required to explain the uproar of the hurricane and storm. When the
shopkeeper heard the parrot talk of last night’s deluge, he said:
“Surely, O bird, thou art gone clean daft! Where was there, even in a
dream, rain or lightning last night? Thou hast utterly ruined my house
and ancient family. My wife is the most virtuous woman of the age and
all thine accusations of her are lies.” So in his wrath he dashed the
cage upon the ground, tore off the parrot’s head, and threw it from the
window. Presently his friend, coming to call upon him, saw the parrot in
this condition with head torn off, and without wings or plumage. Being
informed of the circumstances he suspected some trick on the part of the
woman, and said to the husband, “When your wife leaves home to go to the
Hammam-bath, compel her confidante to disclose the secret.” So as soon
as his wife went out, the husband entered his Harim and insisted on the
woman telling him the truth. She recounted the whole story and the
husband now bitterly repented having killed the parrot, of whose
innocence he had proof. This I tell thee, O King (continued the Wazir),
that thou mayst know how great are the craft and malice of women and
that to act in haste leadeth to repent at leisure. So the King turned
from slaying his son: but, next day, the favourite came in to him and,
kissing the ground before him, said, “O King, why dost thou delay to do
me justice? Indeed, the Kings have heard that thou commandest a thing
and thy Wazir countermandeth it. Now the obedience of Kings is in the
fulfilment of their commandments, and every one knows thy justice and
equity: so do thou justice for me on the Prince. I also have heard tell
a tale concerning


                       _THE FULLER AND HIS SON_.

There was once a man which was a fuller, and he used every day to go
forth to the Tigris-bank a-cleaning clothes; and his son was wont to go
with him that he might swim whilst his father was fulling, nor was he
forbidden from this. One day, as the boy was swimming,[165] he was taken
with cramp in the forearms and sank, whereupon the fuller plunged into
the water and caught hold of him; but the boy clung about him and pulled
him down and so father and son were both drowned. Thus it is with thee,
O King. Except thou prevent thy son and do me justice on him, I fear
lest both of you sink together, thou and he.”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Five Hundred and Eightieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the favourite
had told her tale of the Fuller and his son, she ended with, “I fear
lest both of you sink together, thou and he. Moreover,” continued she,
“for an instance of the malice of men, I have heard tell a tale
concerning


              _THE RAKE’S TRICK AGAINST THE CHASTE WIFE_.”

A certain man loved a beautiful and lovely woman, a model of charms and
grace, married to a man whom she loved and who loved her. Moreover, she
was virtuous and chaste, like unto me, and her rake of a lover found no
way to her; so when his patience was at an end, he devised a device to
win his will. Now the husband had a young man, whom he had brought up in
his house and who was in high trust with him as his steward. So the rake
addressed himself to the youth and ceased not insinuating himself into
his favour by presents and fair words and deeds, till he became more
obedient to him than the hand to the mouth and did whatever he ordered
him. One day, he said to him, “Harkye, such an one; wilt thou not bring
me into the family dwelling-place some time when the lady is gone out?”
“Yes,” answered the young steward; so, when his master was at the shop
and his mistress gone forth to the Hammam, he took his friend by the
hand and, bringing him into the house, showed him the sitting-rooms and
all that was therein. Now the lover was determined to play a trick upon
the woman; so he took the white of an egg which he had brought with him
in a vessel, and spilt it on the merchant’s bedding, unseen by the young
man; after which he returned thanks and leaving the house went his way.
In an hour or so the merchant came home; and, going to the bed to rest
himself, found thereon something wet so he took it up in his hand and
looked at it and deemed it man’s seed; whereat he stared at the young
man with eyes of wrath, and asked him, “Where is thy mistress?”; and he
answered, “She is gone forth to the Hammam and will return forthright
after she has made her ablutions.”[166] When the man heard this, his
suspicion concerning the semen was confirmed; and he waxed furious and
said, “Go at once and bring her back.” The steward accordingly fetched
her and when she came before her husband, the jealous man sprang upon
her and beat her a grievous beating; then, binding her arms behind her,
offered to cut her throat with a knife; but she cried out to the
neighbours, who came to her, and she said to them, “This my man hath
beaten me unjustly and without cause and is minded to kill me, though I
know not what is mine offence.” So they rose up and asked him, “Why hast
thou dealt thus by her?” And he answered, “She is divorced.” Quoth they,
“Thou hast no right to maltreat her; either divorce her or use her
kindly, for we know her prudence and purity and chastity. Indeed, she
hath been our neighbour this long time and we wot no evil of her.” Quoth
he, “When I came home, I found on my bed seed like human sperm, and I
know not the meaning of this.” Upon this a little boy, one of those
present, came forward and said, “Show it to me, nuncle mine!” When he
saw it, he smelt it and, calling for fire and a frying-pan, he took the
white of egg and cooked it so that it became solid. Then he ate of it
and made the husband and the others taste of it, and they were certified
that it was white of egg. So the husband was convinced that he had
sinned against his wife’s innocence, she being clear of all offence, and
the neighbours made peace between them after the divorce, and he prayed
her pardon and presented her with an hundred gold pieces. And so the
wicked lover’s cunning trick came to naught. And know, O King, that this
is an instance of the malice of men and their perfidy. When the King
heard this, he bade his son be slain; but on the next day the second
Wazir came forward for intercession and kissed ground in prostration.
Whereupon the King said, “Raise thy head: prostration must be made to
Allah only.”[167] So the Minister rose from before him and said, “O
King, hasten not to slay thy son, for he was not granted to his mother
by the Almighty but after despair, nor didst thou expect such good luck;
and we hope that he will live to become a guerdon to thy reign and a
guardian of thy good. Wherefore, have patience, O King; belike he will
offer a fit excuse; and, if thou make haste to slay him, thou wilt
surely repent, even as the merchant-wight repented.” Asked the King,
“And how was it with the merchant, O Wazir?”; and the Wazir answered:—O
King, I have heard a tale of


                  _THE MISER AND THE LOAVES OF BREAD_.

There was once a merchant, who was a niggard and miserly in his eating
and drinking. One day, he went on a journey to a certain town and as he
walked in the market-streets, behold, he met an old trot with two scones
of bread which looked sound and fair. He asked her, “Are these for
sale?”; and she answered, “Yes!” So he beat her down and bought them at
the lowest price and took them home to his lodging, where he ate them
that day. When morning morrowed, he returned to the same place and,
finding the old woman there with other two scones, bought these also;
and thus he ceased not during twenty-five days’ space when the old wife
disappeared. He made enquiry for her, but could hear no tidings of her,
till, one day as he was walking about the high streets, he chanced upon
her: so he accosted her and, after the usual salutation and with much
praise and politeness, asked why she had disappeared from the market and
ceased to supply the two cakes of bread? Hearing this, at first she
evaded giving him a reply; but he conjured her to tell him her case; so
she said, “Hear my excuse, O my lord, which is that I was attending upon
a man who had a corroding ulcer on his spine, and his doctor bade us
knead flour with butter into a plaster and lay it on the place of pain,
where it abode all night. In the morning, I used to take that flour and
turn it into dough and make it into two scones, which I cooked and sold
to thee or to another; but presently the man died and I was cut off from
making cakes.”[168] When the merchant heard this, he repented whenas
repentance availed him naught, saying, “Verily, we are Allah’s and
verily unto Him we are returning! There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Him, the Glorious, the Great!”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the old trot
told the merchant the provenance of the scones, he cried, “There is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!”
And he repeated the saying of the Most High, “Whatever evil falleth to
thee it is from thyself;”[169] and vomited till he fell sick and
repented whenas repentance availed him naught. Moreover, O King
(continued the second Wazir), I have heard tell, of the malice of women,
a tale of


                     _THE LADY AND HER TWO LOVERS_.

Once upon a time there was a man, who was sword-bearer to one of the
Kings, and he loved a damsel of the common sort. One day, he sent his
page to her with a message, as of wont between them, and the lad sat
down with her and toyed with her. She inclined to him and pressed him to
her breast and groped him and kissed him whereupon he sought carnal
connection of her and she consented; but, as the two were thus, lo! the
youth’s master knocked at the door. So she pushed the page through a
trapdoor into an underground chamber there and opened the door to his
lord, who entered hending sword in hand and sat down upon her bed. Then
she came up to him and sported and toyed with him, kissing him and
pressing him to her bosom, and he took her and lay with her. Presently,
her husband knocked at the door and the gallant asked her, “Who is
that?”; whereto she answered, “My husband.” Quoth he, “How shall I do?”
Quoth she, “Draw thy sword and stand in the vestibule and abuse me and
revile me; and when my husband comes in to thee, do thou go forth and
wend thy ways.” He did as she bade him; and, when the husband entered,
he saw the King’s sword-bearer standing with naked brand in hand,
abusing and threatening his wife; but, when the lover saw him, he was
ashamed and sheathing his scymitar, went forth the house. Said the man
to his wife, “What means this?”; and she replied, “O man, how blessed is
the hour of thy coming! Thou hast saved a True Believer from slaughter,
and it happed after this fashion. I was on the house-terrace,
spinning,[170] when behold, there came up to me a youth, distracted and
panting for fear of death, fleeing from yonder man, who followed upon
him as hard as he could with his drawn sword. The young man fell down
before me, and kissed my hands and feet, saying, “O Protector, of thy
mercy, save me from him who would slay me wrongously!” So I hid him in
that underground chamber of ours and presently in came yonder man to me,
naked brand in hand, demanding the youth. But I denied him to him,
whereupon he fell to abusing and threatening me as thou sawest. And
praised be Allah who sent thee to me, for I was distraught and had none
to deliver me!” “Well hast thou done, O woman!” answered the husband.
“Thy reward is with Allah the Almighty, and may He abundantly requite
thy good deed!” Then he went to the trap door and called to the page,
saying, “Come forth and fear not; no harm shall befal thee.” So he came
out, trembling for fear, and the husband said, “Be of good cheer: none
shall hurt thee;” condoling with him on what had befallen him; whilst
the page called down blessings on his head. Then they both went forth,
nor was that Cornuto nor was the page aware of that which the woman had
contrived. “This, then, O King,” said the Wazir, “is one of the tricks
of women; so beware lest thou rely upon their words.” The King was
persuaded and turned from putting his son to death; but, on the third
day, the favourite came in to him and, kissing the ground before him,
cried, “O King, do me justice on thy son and be not turned from thy
purpose by thy Ministers’ prate, for there is no good in wicked Wazirs,
and be not as the King of Baghdad, who relied on the word of a certain
wicked counsellor of his.” Quoth he, “And how was that?” Quoth
she:—There hath been told me, O auspicious and well-advised King, a tale
of


                 _THE KING’S SON AND THE OGRESS_.[171]

A certain King had a son, whom he loved and favoured with exceeding
favour, over all his other children; and this son said to him one day,
“O my father, I have a mind to fare a-coursing and a-hunting.” So the
King bade furnish him and commanded one of his Wazirs to bear him
company and do all the service he needed during his trip. The Minister
accordingly took everything that was necessary for the journey and they
set out with a retinue of eunuchs and officers and pages, and rode on,
sporting as they went, till they came to a green and well-grassed
champaign abounding in pasture and water and game. Here the Prince
turned to the Minister and told him that the place pleased him and he
purposed to halt there. So they set down in that site and they loosed
the falcons and lynxes and dogs and caught great plenty of game, whereat
they rejoiced and abode there some days, in all joyance of life and its
delight. Then the King’s son gave the signal for departure; but, as they
went along, a beautiful gazelle, as if the sun rose shining from between
her horns, that had strayed from her mate, sprang up before the Prince,
whereupon his soul longed to make prize of her and he coveted her. So he
said to the Wazir, “I have a mind to follow that gazelle;” and the
Minister replied, “Do what seemeth good to thee.” Thereupon the Prince
rode single-handed after the gazelle, till he lost sight of his
companions, and chased her all that day till dusk, when she took refuge
in a bit of rocky ground[172] and darkness closed in upon him. Then he
would have turned back, but knew not the way; whereat he was sore
concerned and said, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great!” He sat his mare all night till morning
dawned, in quest of relief, but found none; and, when the day appeared,
he fared on at hazard fearful, famished, thirsty, and knowing not
whither to wend till it was noon and the sun beat down upon him with
burning heat. By that time he came in sight of a great city, with
massive base and lofty bulwarks; but it was ruined and desolate, nor was
there any live thing therein save owl and raven. As he stood among the
buildings, marvelling at their ordinance, lo! his eyes fell on a damsel,
young, beautiful and lovely, sitting under one of the city walls wailing
and weeping copious tears. So he drew nigh to her and asked, “Who art
thou and who brought thee hither?” She answered, “I am called Bint
al-Tamímah, daughter of Al-Tiyákh, King of the Gray Country. I went out
one day to obey a call of nature,[173] when an Ifrit of the Jinn
snatched me up and soared with me between heaven and earth; but as he
flew there fell on him a shooting-star in the form of a flame of fire
and burned him, and I dropped here, where these three days I have
hungered and thirsted; but when I saw thee I longed for life.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Prince, when
addressed by the daughter of King Al-Tiyakh who said to him, “When I saw
thee I longed for life,” was smitten with ruth and grief for her and
took her up on his courser’s crupper, saying, “Be of good cheer and keep
thine eyes cool and clear; for, if Allah (extolled and exalted be He!)
restore me to my people and family, I will send thee back to thine own
folk.” Then he rode on, praying for deliverance, and presently the
damsel said to him, “O King’s son, set me down, that I may do an
occasion under this wall.” So he drew bridle and she alighted. He waited
for her a long while as she hid herself behind the wall; and she came
forth, with the foulest of favours; which when he saw, his hair stood on
end and he quaked for fear of her and he turned deadly pale. Then she
sprang up on his steed, behind him, wearing the most loathly of aspects,
and presently she said to him, “O King’s son, what ails thee that I see
thee troubled and thy favour changed?” “I have bethought me of somewhat
that troubles me.” “Seek aid against it of thy father’s troops and his
braves.” “He whom I fear careth naught for troops, neither can braves
affright him.” “Aid thyself against him with thy father’s monies and
treasures.” “He whom I fear will not be satisfied with wealth.” “Ye hold
that ye have in Heaven a God who seeth and is not seen and is Omnipotent
and Omniscient.” “Yes, we have none but Him.” “Then pray thou to Him;
haply He will deliver thee from me thine enemy!” So the King’s son
raised his eyes to heaven and began to pray with his whole heart,
saying, “O my God, I implore Thy succour against that which troubleth
me.” Then he pointed to her with his hand, and she fell to the ground,
burnt black as charred coal. Therewith he thanked Allah and praised Him
and ceased not to fare forwards; and the Almighty (extolled and exalted
be He!) of His grace made the way easy to him and guided him into the
right road, so that he reached his own land and came upon his father’s
capital, after he had despaired of life. Now all this befel by the
contrivance of the Wazir, who travelled with him, to the end that he
might cause him to perish on the way; but Almighty Allah succoured him.
“And this” (said the damsel) “have I told thee, O King, that thou mayst
know that wicked Wazirs deal not honestly by nor counsel with sincere
intent their Kings; wherefore be thou wise and ware of them in this
matter.” The King gave ear to her speech and bade put his son to death;
but the third Wazir came in and said to his brother Ministers, “I will
warrant you from the King’s mischief this day,” and, going in to him,
kissed the ground between his hands and said, “O King, I am thy true
counsellor and solicitous for thee and for thine estate, and indeed I
rede thee the best of rede; it is that thou hasten not to slay thy son,
the coolth of thine eyes and the fruit of thy vitals. Haply his sin is
but a slight slip, which this damsel hath made great to thee; and indeed
I have heard tell that the people of two villages once destroyed one
another, because of a drop of honey.” Asked the King, “How was that?”;
and the Wazir answered, saying:—Know, O King, that I have heard this
story anent


                       _THE DROP OF HONEY_.[174]

A certain hunter used to chase wild beasts in wold, and one day he came
upon a grotto in the mountains, where he found a hollow full of bees’
honey. So he took somewhat thereof in a water-skin he had with him and,
throwing it over his shoulder, carried it to the city, followed by a
hunting dog which was dear to him. He stopped at the shop of an oilman
and offered him the honey for sale and he bought it. Then he emptied it
out of the skin, that he might see it, and in the act a drop fell to the
ground, whereupon the flies flocked to it and a bird swooped down upon
the flies. Now the oilman had a cat, which sprang upon the bird, and the
huntsman’s dog, seeing the cat, sprang upon it and slew it; whereupon
the oilman sprang upon the dog and slew it, and the huntsman in turn
sprang upon the oilman and slew him. Now the oilman was of one village
and the huntsman of another; and when the people of the two places heard
what had passed, they took up arms and weapons and rose one on other in
wrath and the two lines met; nor did the sword leave to play amongst
them, till there died of them much people, none knoweth their number
save Almighty Allah. And amongst other stories of the malice of women
(continued the Wazir) I have heard tell, O King, one concerning


            _THE WOMAN WHO MADE HER HUSBAND SIFT DUST_.[175]

A man once gave his wife a dirham to buy rice; so she took it and went
to the rice-seller, who gave her the rice and began to jest with her and
ogle her, for she was dowered with beauty and loveliness, saying, “Rice
is not good but with sugar which if thou wilt have, come in with me for
an hour.” So, saying, “Give me sugar,” she went in with him into his
shop and he won his will of her and said to his slave, “Weigh her out a
dirham’s worth of sugar.” But he made the slave a privy sign, and the
boy, taking the napkin, in which was the rice, emptied it out and put in
earth and dust in its stead, and for the sugar set stones, after which
he again knotted up the napkin and left it by her. His object, in doing
this, was that she should come to him a second time; so, when she went
forth of the shop, he gave her the napkin and she took it, thinking to
have in it rice and sugar, and ganged her gait; but when she returned
home and, setting it before her husband, went for a cooking-pot, he
found in it earth and stones. So, as soon as she came back bringing the
pot, he said to her, “Did I tell thee I had aught to build, that thou
bringest me earth and stones?” When she saw this, she knew that the
rice-seller’s slave had tricked her; so she said to her husband, “O man,
in my trouble of mind for what hath befallen me, I went to fetch the
sieve and brought the cooking-pot.” “What hath troubled thee?” asked he;
and she answered, “O husband, I dropped the dirham thou gavest me in the
market-street and was ashamed to search for it before the folk; yet I
grudged to lose the silver, so I gathered up the earth from the place
where it fell and brought it away, thinking to sift it at home.
Wherefore I went to fetch the sieve, but brought the cooking-pot
instead.” Then she fetched the sieve and gave it to her husband, saying,
“Do thou sift it; for thine eyes are sharper than mine.” Accordingly he
sat, sifting the clay, till his face and beard were covered with dust;
and he discovered not her trick, neither knew what had befallen her.
“This then, O King,” said the Wazir, “is an instance of the malice of
women, and consider the saying of Allah Almighty:—Surely the cunning of
you (women) is great![176] And again:—Indeed, the malice of Satan is
weak in comparison with the malice of women.”[177] The King gave ear to
his Wazir’s speech and was persuaded thereby and was satisfied by what
he cited to him of the signs of Allah[178]; and the lights of good
counsel arose and shone in the firmament of his understanding and he
turned from his purpose of slaying his son. But on the fourth day, the
favourite came in to him weeping and wailing and, kissing the ground
before him, said, “O auspicious King, and lord of good rede, I have made
plainly manifest to thee my grievance and thou hast dealt unjustly by me
and hast forborne to avenge me on him who hath wronged me, because he is
thy son and the darling of thy heart; but Allah (extolled and exalted be
He!) will presently succour me against him, even as He succoured the
King’s son against his father’s Wazir.” “And how was that?” asked the
King; and she answered:—I have heard tell, O King, a tale of


                      _THE ENCHANTED SPRING_.[179]

There was once in times gone by a King who had one son and none other;
and, when the Prince grew up to man’s estate, he contracted him in
marriage to another King’s daughter. Now the damsel was a model of
beauty and grace and her uncle’s son had sought her in wedlock of her
sire, but she would none of him. So, when he knew that she was to be
married to another, envy and jealousy gat hold of him and he bethought
himself and sent a noble present to the Wazir of the bridegroom’s father
and much treasure, desiring him to use craft for slaying the Prince or
contrive to make him leave his intent of espousing the girl and adding,
“O Wazir, indeed jealousy moveth me to this for she is my cousin.”[180]
The Wazir accepted the present and sent an answer, saying, “Be of good
cheer and of eyes cool and clear, for I will do all that thou wishest.”
Presently, the bride’s father wrote to the Prince, bidding him to his
capital, that he might go in to his daughter; whereupon the King his
father gave him leave to wend his way thither, sending with him the
bribed Wazir and a thousand horse, besides presents and litters, tents
and pavilions. The Minister set out with the Prince, plotting the while
in his heart to do him a mischief; and when they came into the desert,
he called to mind a certain spring of running water in the mountains
there, called Al-Zahrá,[181] whereof whosoever drank from a man became a
woman. So he called a halt of the troops near the fountain and presently
mounting steed again, said to the Prince, “Hast thou a mind to go with
me and look upon a spring of water near hand?” The Prince mounted,
knowing not what should befal him in the future,[182] and they rode on,
unattended by any, and without stopping till they came to the spring.
The Prince being thirsty said to the Wazir, “O Minister, I am suffering
from drouth,” and the other answered, “Get thee down and drink of this
spring!” So he alighted and washed his hands and drank, when behold, he
straightway became a woman. As soon as he knew what had befallen him, he
cried out and wept till he fainted away, and the Wazir came up to him as
if to learn what had befallen him and cried, “What aileth thee?” So he
told him what had happened, and the Minister feigned to condole with him
and weep for his affliction, saying, “Allah Almighty be thy refuge in
thine affliction! How came this calamity upon thee and this great
misfortune to betide thee, and we carrying thee with joy and gladness,
that thou mightest go in to the King’s daughter? Verily, now I know not
whether we shall go to her or not; but the rede[183] is thine. What dost
thou command me to do?” Quoth the Prince, “Go back to my sire and tell
him what hath betided me, for I will not stir hence till this matter be
removed from me or I die in my regret.” So he wrote a letter to his
father, telling him what had happened, and the Wazir took it and set out
on his return to the city, leaving what troops he had with the Prince
and inwardly exulting for the success of his plot. As soon as he reached
the King’s capital, he went in to him and, telling him what had passed,
delivered the letter. The King mourned for his son with sore mourning
and sent for the wise men and masters of esoteric science, that they
might discover and explain to him this thing which had befallen his son,
but none could give him an answer. Then the Wazir wrote to the lady’s
cousin, conveying to him the glad news of the Prince’s misfortune, and
he when he read the letter rejoiced with great joy and thought to marry
the Princess and answered the Minister sending him rich presents and
great store of treasure and thanking him exceedingly. Meanwhile, the
Prince abode by the stream three days and three nights, eating not nor
drinking and committing himself, in his strait, unto Allah (extolled and
exalted be He!) who disappointeth not whoso relieth on him. On the
fourth night, lo! there came to him a cavalier on a bright-bay
steed[184] with a crown on his head, as he were of the sons of the
Kings, and said to him, “Who brought thee hither, O youth?” The Prince
told him his mishap, how he was wending to his wedding, and how the
Wazir had led him to a spring whereof he drank and incurred what had
occurred; and as he spoke his speech was broken by tears. Having heard
him the horseman pitied his case and said, “It was thy father’s Wazir
who cast thee into this strait, for no man alive save he knoweth of this
spring;” presently adding, “Mount thee behind me and come with me to my
dwelling, for thou art my guest this night.” “Acquaint me who thou art
ere I fare with thee,” quoth the Prince; and quoth the other, “I am a
King’s son of the Jinn, as thou a King’s son of mankind; so be of good
cheer and keep thine eyes clear of tear, for I will surely do away thy
cark and care; and this is a slight thing unto me.” So the Prince
mounted him behind the stranger, and they rode on, leaving the troops,
from the first of the day till midnight, when the King’s son of the Jinn
asked the Prince, “Knowest thou how many days’ march we have covered in
this time?” “Not I.” “We have come a full year’s journey for a diligent
horseman.” The Prince marvelled at this and said, “How shall I do to
return to my people?” “That is not thine affair, but my business. As
soon as thou art quit of thy complaint, thou shalt return to thy people
in less than the twinkling of an eye; for that is an easy matter to me.”
When the Prince heard these words he was ready to fly for excess of joy;
it seemed to him as he were in the imbroglio of a dream and he
exclaimed, “Glory be to Him who can restore the unhappy to
happiness!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Prince of the
Jinn said to the Prince of mankind, “When thou art quit of thy
complaint, thou shalt return to thy folk in less than the twinkling of
an eye;” and the King’s son rejoiced. They fared on all that night till
the morning morrowed when lo! they found themselves in a green and
smiling country, full of trees spireing and birds quiring and garths
fruit-growing and palaces high-showing and waters a-flowing and
odoriferous flowers a-blowing. Here the King’s son of the Jinn alighted
from his steed and, bidding the Prince do the like, took him by the hand
and carried him into one of the palaces, where he found a great King and
puissant Sultan; and abode with him all that day eating and drinking,
till nightfall. Then the King’s son of the Jinn mounted his courser and
taking the Prince up behind him, fared on swiftly through the murks and
glooms until morning, when lo, they found themselves in a dark land and
a desert, full of black rocks and stones, as it were a piece of Hell;
and the Prince asked the Jinni, “What is the name of this land?”
Answered the other, “It is called the Black Country, and belongs to one
of the Kings of the Jinn, by name Zu’l Janáhayn, against whom none of
the other Kings may prevail, neither may any enter his dominions save by
his permit; so tarry thou here, whilst I go ask leave.” So saying, he
went away and, returning after awhile, they fared on again, till they
ended at a spring of water welling forth of a black rock, and the King’s
son of the Jinn said to the King’s son of men, “Alight!” He dismounted
and the other cried, “Drink of this water!” So he drank of the spring
without stay or delay; and, no sooner had he done so than, by grace of
Allah, he became a man as before. At this he joyed with exceeding joy
and asked the Jinni, “O my brother, how is this spring called?” Answered
the other, “It is called the Women’s Spring, for that no woman drinketh
thereof but she becometh a man: wherefore do thou praise Allah the Most
High and thank Him for thy restoration and mount.” So the Prince
prostrated himself in gratitude to the Almighty, after which he mounted
again and they fared on diligently all that day, till they returned to
the Jinni’s home, where the Prince passed the night in all solace of
life. They spent the next day in eating and drinking till nightfall,
when the King’s son of the Jinn asked the Prince, “Hast thou a mind to
return to thy people this very night?” “Yes,” he answered; “for indeed I
long for them.” Then the Jinni called one of his father’s slaves,
Rájiz[185] hight, and said to him, “Take this young man mounted on thy
shoulders, and let not the day dawn ere he be with his father-in-law and
his wife.” Replied the slave. “Hearkening and obedience, and with love
and gladness, and upon my head and eyes!” then, withdrawing awhile,
re-appeared in the form of an Ifrit. When the Prince saw this, he lost
his senses for affright, but the Jinni said to him, “Fear not; no harm
shall befal thee. Mount thy horse and leap him on to the Ifrit’s
shoulders.” “Nay,” answered he, “I will leave my horse with thee and
bestride his shoulders myself.” So he bestrode the Ifrit’s shoulders
and, when the Jinni cried, “Close thine eyes, O my lord, and be not a
craven!” he strengthened his heart and shut his eyes. Thereupon the
Ifrit rose with him into the air and ceased not to fly between sky and
earth, whilst the Prince was unconscious, nor was the last third of the
night come before he lighted down with him on the terrace-roof of his
father-in-law’s palace. Then said the Ifrit, “Dismount and open thine
eyes; for this is the palace of thy father-in-law and his daughter.” So
he came down and the Ifrit flew away and left him on the roof of the
palace. When the day broke and the Prince recovered from his troubles,
he descended into the palace and as his father-in-law caught sight of
him, he came to meet him and marvelled to see him descend from the roof
of the palace, saying, “We see folk enter by the doors; but thou comest
from the skies.” Quoth the Prince, “Whatso Allah (may He be extolled and
exalted!) willeth that cometh to pass.” And he told him all that had
befallen him, from first to last, whereat the King marvelled and
rejoiced in his safety; and, as soon, as the sun rose, bade his Wazir
make ready splendid bride-feasts. So did he and they held the marriage
festival: after which the Prince, went in unto his bride and abode with
her two months, then departed with her for his father’s capital. As for
the damsel’s cousin, he died forthright of envy and jealousy. When the
Prince and his bride drew near his father’s city, the King came out to
meet them with his troops and Wazirs, and so Allah (blessed and exalted
be He!) enabled the Prince to prevail against his bride’s cousin and his
father’s Minister. “And I pray the Almighty” (added the damsel) “to aid
thee against thy Wazirs, O King, and I beseech thee to do me justice on
thy son!” When the King heard this, he bade put his son to death;——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the favourite
had told her tale to the King she said, “I beseech thee to do me justice
by putting thy son to death.” Now this was the fourth day, so the fourth
Wazir entered and, kissing the ground before him, said, “Allah stablish
and protect the King! O King, be deliberate in doing this thou art
resolved upon, for the wise man doth naught till he hath considered the
issue thereof, and the proverb saith:—Whoso looketh not to his actions’
end, hath not the world to friend; and whoso acteth without
consideration, there befalleth him what befel the Hammam-keeper with his
wife.” “And what betided him?” asked the King. And the Wazir answered:—I
have heard tell, O King, a tale of the


            _WAZIR’S SON AND THE HAMMAM-KEEPER’S WIFE_.[186]

There was once a bath-keeper, to whom resorted the notables of the folk
and head men, and one day there came in to him a handsome youth of the
sons of Wazirs who was fat and bulky of body. So he stood to serve him
and when the young man put off his clothes,[187] he saw not his yard,
for that it was hidden between his thighs, by reason of the excess of
his fat, and there appeared thereof but what was like unto a
filbert.[188] At this the bath-keeper fell a-lamenting and smiting hand
upon hand, which when the youth saw, he said to him, “What ails thee, O
bath-keeper, to lament thus?” And he answered, saying, “O my lord, my
lamentation is for thee, because thou art in sore straits, for all thy
fair fortune and goodliness and exceeding comeliness, seeing thou hast
naught wherewithal to do and receive delight, like unto other men.”
Quoth the youth, “Thou sayst sooth, but thou mindest me of somewhat I
had forgotten.” “What is that?” asked the bath-keeper, and the youth
answered, “Take this gold piece and fetch me a pretty woman, that I may
prove my nature on her.” So he took the money and betaking himself to
his wife, said to her, “O woman, there is come to me in the bath a young
man of the sons of the Wazirs, as he were the moon on the fullest night;
but he hath no prickle like other men, for that which he hath is but
some small matter like unto a filbert. I lamented over his youth and he
gave me this dinar and asked me to fetch him a woman on whom he might
approve himself. Now thou art worthier of the money than another, and
from this no harm shall betide us, for I will protect thee. So do thou
sit with him awhile and laugh at him and take this dinar from him.” So
the good wife took the dinar and rising, adorned herself and donned the
richest of her raiment. Now she was the fairest woman of her time. Then
she went out with her husband and he carried her in to the Wazir’s son
in a privy place. When she came in to him, she looked at him and finding
him a handsome youth, fair of favour as he were the moon at full, was
confounded at his beauty and loveliness; and on like wise his heart and
wit were amazed at the first sight of her and the sweetness of her
smile. So he rose forthright and locking the door, took the damsel in
his arms and pressed her to his bosom and they embraced, whereupon the
young man’s yard swelled and rose on end, as it were that of a jackass,
and he rode upon her breast and futtered her, whilst she sobbed and
sighed and writhed and wriggled under him. Now the bath-keeper was
standing behind the door, awaiting what should betide between them, and
he began to call her saying, “O Umm Abdillah, enough! Come out, for the
day is long upon thy sucking child.” Quoth the youth, “Go forth to thy
boy and come back;” but quoth she, “If I go forth from thee, my soul
will depart my body; as regards the child, so I must either leave him to
die of weeping or let him be reared an orphan, without a mother.” So she
ceased not to abide with him till he had done his desire of her ten
times running, while her husband stood at the door, calling her and
crying out and weeping and imploring succour. But none came to aid him
and he ceased not to do thus, saying, “I will slay myself!”; till at
last, finding no way of access to his wife, and being distraught with
rage and jealousy, to hear sighing and murmuring and breathing hard
under the young man, he went up to the top of the bath and, casting
himself down therefrom, died. “Moreover, O King” (continued the Wazir),
“there hath reached me another story of the malice of women.” “What is
that?” asked the King, and the Wazir said:—Know, O King, that it is
anent


               _THE WIFE’S DEVICE TO CHEAT HER HUSBAND_.

There was once a woman who had no equal in her day for beauty and
loveliness and grace and perfection; and a certain lewd youth and an
obscene setting eyes on her, fell in love with her and loved her with
exceeding passion, but she was chaste and inclined not to adultery. It
chanced one day that her husband went on a journey to a certain town,
whereupon the young man fell to sending to her many times a day; but she
made him no reply At last, he resorted to an old woman, who dwelt hard
by, and after saluting her he sat down and complained to her of his
sufferings for love of the woman and his longing to enjoy her. Quoth
she, “I will warrant thee this; no harm shall befal thee, for I will
surely bring thee to thy desire, Inshallah,—an it please Allah the Most
High!” At these words he gave her a dinar and went his way. When the
morning morrowed she appeared before the woman and, renewing an old
acquaintance with her, fell to visiting her daily, eating the undertime
with her and the evening meal and carrying away food for her children.
Moreover, she used to sport and jest with her, till the wife became
corrupted[189] and could not endure an hour without her company. Now she
was wont, when she left the lady’s house, to take bread and fat
wherewith she mixed a little pepper and to feed a bitch, that was in
that quarter; and thus she did day by day, till the bitch became fond of
her and followed her wherever she went. One day she took a cake of dough
and, putting therein an overdose of pepper, gave it to the bitch to eat,
whereupon the beast’s eyes began to shed tears, for the heat of the
pepper, and she followed the old woman, weeping. When the lady saw this,
she was amazed and asked the ancient, “O my mother, what ails this bitch
to weep?” Answered she, “Learn, O my heart’s love, that hers is a
strange story. Know that she was once a close friend of mine, a lovely
and accomplished young lady, a model of comeliness and perfect grace. A
young Nazarene of the quarter fell in love with her and his passion and
pining increased on him, till he took to his pillow, and he sent to her
times manifold, begging her to have compassion on him and show him
mercy, but she refused, albeit I gave her good counsel, saying:—O my
daughter, have pity on him and be kind and consent to all he wisheth.
She gave no heed to my advice, until, the young man’s patience failing
him, he complained at last to one of his friends, who cast an
enchantment on her and changed her human shape into canine form. When
she saw what transformation had befallen her and that there was none to
pity her case save myself, she came to my house and began to fawn on me
and buss my hands and feet and whine and shed tears, till I recognised
her and said to her:—How often did I not warn thee?; but my advice
profited thee naught.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old trot
related to the young lady the tale of the bitch and recounted the case
in her cunning and deceit, with the view to gain her consent and said to
her, “When the enchanted beast came to me and wept I reminded her:—How
often did I not warn thee?; but my advice profited thee naught. However,
O my daughter, seeing her misery, I had compassion on her case and kept
her by me; and as often as she bethinketh herself of her former estate,
she weepeth thus, in pity for herself.” When the lady heard this, she
was taken with great alarm and said, “O my mother, by Allah, thou
affrightest me with this thy story.” “Why so?” asked the old woman.
Answered the lady, “Because a certain handsome young man fell in love
with me and hath sent many times to me, but hitherto I have repelled
him; and now I fear lest there befal me the like of what befel this
bitch.” “O my daughter,” rejoined the old woman, “look thou to what I
counsel thee and beware of crossing me, for I am in great fear for thee.
If thou know not his abiding-place, describe his semblance to me, that I
may fetch him to thee, and let not any one’s heart be angered against
thee.” So the lady described him to her, and she showed not to know him
and said, “When I go out, I will ask after him.” But when she left the
lady, she went straight to the young man and said to him, “Be of good
cheer, for I have played with the girl’s wits; so to-morrow at noon wait
thou at the head of the street, till I come and carry thee to her house,
where thou shalt take thine ease with her the rest of the day and all
night long.” At this the young man rejoiced with exceeding joy and gave
her two dinars, saying, “When I have won my wish of her, I will give
thee ten gold pieces.” Then she returned to the lady and said to her, “I
have seen him and spoken with him on this matter. I found him exceeding
wroth with thee and minded to do thee a harm, but I plied him with fair
words till he agreed to come to-morrow at the time of the call to
noon-prayer.” When the lady heard this she rejoiced exceedingly and
said, “O my mother, if he keep his promise, I will give thee ten
dinars.” Quoth the old woman, “Look to his coming from none but from
me.” When the next morn morrowed she said to the lady, “Make ready the
early meal and forget not the wine and adorn thyself and don thy richest
dress and decoration, whilst I go and fetch him to thee.” So she clad
herself in her finest finery and prepared food, whilst the old woman
went out to look for the young man, who came not. So she went around
searching for him, but could come by no news of him, and she said to
herself, “What is to be done? Shall the food and drink she hath gotten
ready be wasted and I lose the gold pieces she promised me? Indeed, I
will not allow my cunning contrivance to come to naught, but will look
her out another man and carry him to her.” So she walked about the
highways till her eyes fell on a pretty fellow, young and
distinguished-looking, to whom the folk bowed and who bore in his face
the traces of travel. She went up to him and saluting him, asked, “Hast
thou a mind to meat and drink and a girl adorned and ready?” Answered
he, “Where is this to be had?” “At home, in my house,” rejoined she and
carrying him to his own house, knocked at the door. The lady opened to
them and ran in again, to make an end of her dressing and perfuming;
whilst the wicked old woman brought the man, who was the husband and
house-master, into the saloon and made him sit down congratulating
herself on her cunning contrivance. Presently in walked the lady, who no
sooner set eyes on her husband sitting by the old trot than she knew him
and guessed how the case stood; nevertheless, she was not taken aback
and without stay or delay bethought her of a device to hoodwink him. So
she pulled off her outer boot and cried at her husband, “Is this how
thou keepest the contract between us? How canst thou betray me and deal
thus with me? Know that, when I heard of thy coming, I sent this old
woman to try thee and she hath made thee fall into that against which I
warned thee: so now I am certified of thine affair and that thou hast
broken faith with me. I thought thee chaste and pure till I saw thee,
with my own eyes, in this old woman’s company and knew that thou didst
frequent loose baggages.” So saying, she fell to beating him with her
slipper about the head, and crying out, “Divorce me! Divorce me!”;
whilst he excused himself and swore to her, by Allah the Most High, that
he had never in his life been untrue to her nor had done aught of that
whereof she suspected him. But she stinted not to weep and scream and
bash him, crying out and saying, “Come to my help, O Moslems!”; till he
laid hold of her mouth with his hand and she bit it. Moreover, he
humbled himself to her and kissed her hands and feet, whilst she would
not be appeased and continued to cuff him. At last, she winked at the
old woman to come and hold her hand from him. So she came up to her and
kissed her hands and feet, till she made peace between them and they sat
down together; whereupon the husband began to kiss her hands, saying,
“Allah Almighty requite thee with all good, for that thou hast delivered
me from her!” And the old woman marvelled at the wife’s cunning and
ready wit. “This, then, O King” (said the Wazir) “is one of many
instances of the craft and malice and perfidy of women.” When the King
heard this story, he was persuaded by it and turned from his purpose to
slay his son;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the fourth
Wazir had told his tale, the King turned from his purpose to slay his
son; but, on the fifth day, the damsel came in to him hending a bowl of
poison in hand, calling on Heaven for help and buffeting her cheeks and
face, and said to him, “O King, either thou shalt do me justice and
avenge me on thy son, or I will drink up this poison-cup and die, and
the sin of my blood shall be on thy head at the Day of Doom. These thy
Ministers accuse me of malice and perfidy, but there be none in the
world more perfidious than men. Hast thou not heard the story of the
Goldsmith and the Cashmere[190] singing-girl?” “What befel the twain, O
damsel?” asked the King; and she answered, saying:—There hath come to my
knowledge, O august King, a tale of


             _THE GOLDSMITH AND THE CASHMERE SINGING-GIRL_.

THERE lived once, in a city of Persia a goldsmith who delighted in women
and in drinking wine. One day, being in the house of one of his
intimates, he saw painted on the wall the figure of a lutanist, a
beautiful damsel, beholder never beheld a fairer or a more pleasant. He
looked at the picture again and again, marvelling at its beauty, and
fell so desperately in love with it, that he sickened for passion and
came near to die. It chanced that one of his friends came to visit him
and sitting down by his side, asked how he did and what ailed him,
whereto the goldsmith answered, “O my brother, that which ails me is
love, and it befel on this wise. I saw the figure of a woman painted on
the house-wall of my brother such an one and became enamoured of it.”
Hereupon the other fell to blaming him and said, “This was of thy lack
of wit; how couldst thou fall in love with a painted figure on a wall,
that can neither harm nor profit, that seeth not neither heareth, that
neither taketh nor withholdeth.” Said the sick man, “He who painted
yonder picture never could have limned it save after the likeness of
some beautiful woman.” “Haply,” rejoined his friend, “he painted it from
imagination.” “In any case,” replied the goldsmith, “Here am I dying for
love of the picture, and if there live the original thereof in the
world, I pray Allah Most High to protect my life till I see her.” When
those who were present went out, they asked for the painter of the
picture and, finding that he had travelled to another town, wrote him a
letter, complaining of their comrade’s case and enquiring whether he had
drawn the figure of his own inventive talents or copied it from a living
model; to which he replied, “I painted it after a certain singing-girl
belonging to one of the Wazirs in the city of Cashmere in the land of
Hind.” When the goldsmith heard this, he left Persia for Cashmere-city,
where he arrived after much travail. He tarried awhile there till one
day he went and clapped up an acquaintance with a certain of the
citizens who was a druggist, a fellow of a sharp wit, keen, crafty; and,
being one eventide in company with him, asked him of their King and his
polity; to which the other answered, saying, “Well, our King is just and
righteous in his governance, equitable to his lieges and beneficent to
his commons and abhorreth nothing in the world save sorcerers; but,
whenever a sorcerer or sorceress falls into his hands, he casteth them
into a pit without the city and there leaveth them in hunger to die.”
Then he questioned him of the King’s Wazirs, and the druggist told him
of each Minister, his fashion and condition, till the talk came round to
the singing-girl and he told him, “She belongeth to such a Wazir.” The
goldsmith took note of the Minister’s abiding place and waited some
days, till he had devised a device to his desire; and one night of rain
and thunder and stormy winds, he provided himself with thieves’ tackle
and repaired to the house of the Wazir who owned the damsel. Here he
hanged a rope-ladder with grappling-irons to the battlements and climbed
up to the terrace-roof of the palace. Thence he descended to the inner
court and, making his way into the Harim, found all the slave-girls
lying asleep, each on her own couch; and amongst them reclining on a
couch of alabaster and covered with a coverlet of cloth of gold a
damsel, as she were the moon rising on a fourteenth night. At her head
stood a candle of ambergris, and at her feet another, each in a
candlestick of glittering gold, her brilliancy dimming them both; and
under her pillow lay a casket of silver, wherein were her jewels. He
raised the coverlet and drawing near her, considered her straitly, and
behold, it was the lutanist whom he desired and of whom he was come in
quest. So he took out a knife and wounded her in the back parts, a
palpable outer wound, whereupon she awoke in terror; but, when she saw
him, she was afraid to cry out, thinking he came to steal her goods. So
she said to him, “Take the box and what is therein, but slay me not, for
I am in thy protection and under thy safeguard[191] and my death will
profit thee nothing.” Accordingly, he took the box and went away.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the goldsmith
had entered the Wazir’s palace he wounded the damsel slightly in the
back parts and, taking the box which contained her jewels, wended his
way. And when morning morrowed he donned clothes after the fashion of
men of learning and doctors of the law and, taking the jewel-case went
in therewith to the King of the city, before whom he kissed the ground
and said to him, “O King, I am a devout man; withal a loyal well-wisher
to thee and come hither a pilgrim to thy court from the land of
Khorasan, attracted by the report of thy just governance and righteous
dealing with thy subjects and minded to be under thy standard. I reached
this city at the last of the day and finding the gate locked and barred,
threw me down to sleep without the walls; but, as I lay betwixt sleep
and wake, behold, I saw four women come up; one riding on a broom-stick,
another on a wine-jar, a third on an oven-peel and a fourth on a black
bitch,[192] and I knew that they were witches making for thy city. One
of them came up to me and kicked me with her foot and beat me with a
fox’s tail she had in her hand, hurting me grievously, whereat I was
wroth and smote her with a knife I had with me, wounding her in the back
parts, as she turned to flee from me. When she felt the wound, she fled
before me and in her flight let drop this casket, which I picked up and
opening, found these costly jewels therein. So do thou take it, for I
have no need thereof, being a wanderer in the mountains,[193] who hath
rejected the world from my heart and renounced it and all that is in it,
seeking only the face of Allah the Most High.” Then he set the casket
before the King and fared forth. The King opened the box and emptying
out all the trinkets it contained, fell to turning them over with his
hand, till he chanced upon a necklace whereof he had made gift to the
Wazir to whom the girl belonged. Seeing this, he called the Minister in
question and said to him, “This is the necklace I gave thee?” He knew it
at first sight and answered, “It is; and I gave it to a singing girl of
mine.” Quoth the King, “Fetch that girl to me forthwith.” So he fetched
her to him, and he said, “Uncover her back parts and see if there be a
wound therein or no.” The Wazir accordingly bared her backside and
finding a knife-wound there, said, “Yes, O my lord, there is a wound.”
Then said the King, “This is the witch of whom the devotee told me, and
there can be no doubt of it,” and bade cast her into the witches’ well.
So they carried her thither at once. As soon as it was night and the
goldsmith knew that his plot had succeeded, he repaired to the pit,
taking with him a purse of a thousand dinars, and, entering into
converse with the warder, sat talking with him till a third part of the
night was passed, when he broached the matter to him, saying, “Know, O
my brother, that this girl is innocent of that they lay to her charge
and that it was I brought this calamity upon her.” Then he told him the
whole story, first and last, adding, “Take, O my brother, this purse of
a thousand dinars and give me the damsel, that I may carry her to my own
land, for these gold pieces will profit thee more than keeping her in
prison; moreover Allah will requite thee for us, and we too will both
offer up prayers for thy prosperity and safety.” When the warder heard
this story, he marvelled with exceeding marvel at that device and its
success; then taking the money, he delivered the girl to the goldsmith,
conditioning that he should not abide one hour with her in the city.
Thereupon the goldsmith took the girl and fared on with her, without
ceasing, till he reached his own country and so he won his wish. “See,
then, O King” (said the damsel), “the malice of men and their wiles. Now
thy Wazirs hinder thee from doing me justice on thy son; but to-morrow
we shall stand, both thou and I, before the Just Judge, and He shall do
me justice on thee, O King.” When the King heard this, he commanded to
put his son to death; but the fifth Wazir came in to him and kissing the
ground before him, said, “O mighty King, delay and hasten not to slay
thy son: speed will oftentimes repentance breed; and I fear for thee
lest thou repent, even as did the man who never laughed for the rest of
his days.” “And how was that, O Wazir?” asked the King. Quoth he:—I have
heard tell, O King, this tale concerning


        _THE MAN WHO NEVER LAUGHED DURING THE REST OF HIS DAYS_.

There was once a man who was rich in lands and houses and monies and
goods, eunuchs and slaves, and he died and went to the mercy of Allah
the Most High; leaving a young son, who, when he grew up, gave himself
to feasting and carousing and hearing music and singing and the loud
laughter of parasites; and he wasted his substance in gifts and
prodigality till he had squandered all the money his father left
him——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young man,
when he had squandered all the money his father had left him and naught
thereof remained to him, betook himself to selling his slaves and
handmaids, lands and houses and spent the proceeds on like wise, till he
was reduced to beggary and must needs labour for his living. He abode
thus a year’s space, at the end of which time he was sitting one day
under a wall, awaiting who should hire him when behold, there came up to
him an old man of comely aspect and apparel and saluted him. The young
man asked, “O uncle, hast thou known me aforetime?” and the other
answered, “Not so, O my son, I know thee not at all, at all; but I see
the trace of gentle breeding on thee despite thy present case.” “O
uncle,” rejoined the poor man, “needs must Fate and Fortune be
accomplished; but, O uncle, O bright of blee, hast thou any occasion
wherein thou wouldst employ me?” Said the other, “I wish, O my son, to
employ thee in a slight matter.” “What is it?” quoth the young man, and
quoth the stranger, “We are eleven old men in one house, but we have
none to serve us; so an thou wilt stay and take service with us, thou
shalt have food and clothing to thy heart’s content, besides what cometh
to thee of coin and other good; and haply Allah will restore thee thy
fortune by our means.” Replied the youth, “Hearkening and obedience!”
“But I have a condition to impose on thee.” “What is that?” “O my Son,
it is that thou keep our secret in what thou seest us do, and if thou
see us weep, that thou question us not of the cause of our weeping.” “It
is well, O uncle;” “Come with me, O my son, with the blessing of Allah
Almighty.” So he followed him to the bath, where the old man caused
cleanse his body of the crusted dirt, after which he sent one to fetch a
handsome garment of linen and clad him therein. Then he carried him to
his company which was in his domicile and the youth found a house lofty
and spacious and strongly builded, wherein were sitting-chambers facing
one another; and saloons, in each one a fountain of water, with the
birds warbling over it, and windows on every side, giving upon a fair
garden within the house. The old man brought him into one of the
parlours, which was variegated with many-coloured marbles, the ceiling
thereof being decorated with ultramarine and glowing gold; and the floor
bespread with silken carpets. Here he found ten Shayks in mourning
apparel, seated one opposite other, weeping and wailing. He marvelled at
their case and purposed to ask the reason, when he remembered the
condition and held his peace. Then he who had brought him delivered to
him a chest containing thirty thousand dinars and said to him, “O my
son, spend freely from this chest what is fitting for our entertainment
and thine own; and be thou faithful and remember that wherewith I
charged thee.” “I hear and I obey,” answered he and served them days and
nights, till one of them died, whereupon his fellows washed him and
shrouded him and buried him in a garden behind the house,[194] nor did
death cease to take them, one after other, till there remained but the
Shaykh who had hired the youth for service. Then the two men, old and
young, dwelt together in that house alone for years and years, nor was
there with them a third save Allah the Most High, till the elder fell
sick; and when the younger despaired of his life, he went up to him and
condoling with him, said, “O nuncle mine, I have waited upon you twelve
years and have not failed of my duties a single hour, but have been
loyal and faithful to you and served you with my might and main.” “Yes,
O my son,” answered the old man, “thou hast served us well until all my
comrades are gone to the mercy of Allah (to whom belong honour and
glory!) and needs must I die also.” “O my lord,” said the other, “thou
art in danger of death and I would fain have thee acquaint me with the
cause of your weeping and wailing and of your unceasing mourning and
lamentation and regrets.” “O my son,” answered the old man, “it concerns
thee not to know this, so importune me not of what I may not do: for I
have vowed to Almighty Allah that I would acquaint none of His creatures
with this, lest he be afflicted with what befel me and my comrades. If,
then, thou desire to be delivered from that into which we fell, look
thou open not yonder door”[195] and pointed to a certain part of the
house; “but, if thou have a mind to suffer what we have suffered, then
open it and thou shalt learn the cause of that thou hast seen us do; and
whenas thou knowest it, thou shalt repent what time repentance will
avail thee not.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the surviving
Shaykh of the ten said to the youth, “Beware how thou open yonder door
or thou shalt repent what time repentance will avail thee not.” Then his
sickness grew on him and he accomplished his term and departed life to
the presence of his Lord; and the young man washed him with his own
hands and shrouded him and buried him by the side of his comrades; after
which he abode alone in the place and took possession of whatsoever was
therein. Withal he was uneasy and troubled concerning the case of the
old men, till, one day, as he sat pondering the words of his dead master
and his injunction not to open the door, he suddenly bethought himself
to go and look for it. So he rose up and repaired to the part whither
the dead man had pointed and sought till, in a dark unfrequented corner,
he found a little door, over which the spider had spun her webs and
which was fastened with four padlocks of steel. Seeing this he recalled
the old man’s warning and restrained himself and went away; and he held
aloof from it seven days, whilst all the time his heart prompted him to
open it. On the eighth day his curiosity got the better of him and he
said, “Come what will, needs must I open the door and see what will
happen to me therefrom. Nothing can avert what is fated and
fore-ordained of Allah the Most High; nor doth aught befal but by His
will.” So saying, he rose and broke the padlocks and opening the door
saw a narrow passage, which he followed for some three hours when lo! he
came out on the shore of a vast ocean[196] and fared on along the beach,
marvelling at this main, whereof he had no knowledge and turning right
and left. Presently, a great eagle swooped down upon him from the lift
and seizing him in its talons, flew away with him betwixt heaven and
earth, till it came to an island in the midst of the sea, where it cast
him down and flew away. The youth was dazed and knew not whither he
should wend, but after a few days as he sat pondering his case, he
caught sight of the sails of a ship in the middlemost of the main, as it
were a star in the sky; and his heart clave to it, so haply his
deliverance might be therein. He continued gazing at the ship, until it
drew nigh, when he saw that it was a foyst builded all of ivory and
ebony, inlaid with glistening gold made fast by nails of steel, with
oars of sandal and lign-aloes. In it were ten damsels, high-bosomed
maids, as they were moons; and when they saw him, they came ashore to
him and kissed his hands, saying, “Thou art the King, the Bridegroom!”
Then there accosted him a young lady, as she were the sun shining in sky
serene bearing in hand a silken napkin, wherein were a royal robe and a
crown of gold set with all manner rubies and pearls. She threw the robe
over him and set the crown upon his head, after which the damsels bore
him on their arms to the foyst, where he found all kinds of silken
carpets and hangings of various colours. Then they spread the sails and
stretched out into mid-ocean. Quoth the young man:—Indeed, when they put
to sea with me, meseemed it was a dream and I knew not whither they were
wending with me. Presently, we drew near to land, and I saw the shore
full of troops none knoweth their number save Allah (extolled and
exalted be He!) and all were magnificently arrayed and clad in complete
steel. As soon as the vessel had made fast to the land, they brought me
five marked[197] horses of noble breeds, housed and saddled with gold,
inlaid with all manner pearls and high-priced bezel stones. I chose out
one of them and mounted it, whilst they led the four others before me.
Then they raised the banners and the standards over my head, whilst the
troops ranged themselves right and left, and we set out, with drums
beating and cymbals clashing, and rode on; whilst I debated in myself
whether I were in sleep or on wake; and we never ceased faring, I
believing not in that my estate, but taking all this for the imbroglio
of a dream, till we drew near to the green mead, full of palaces and
gardens and trees and streams and blooms and birds chanting the praises
of Allah the One, the Victorious. Hereupon, behold, an army sallied out
from amid the palaces and gardens, as it were the torrent when it
poureth down,[198] and the host overflowed the mead. These troops halted
at a little distance from me and presently there rode forth from amongst
them a King, preceded by some of his chief officers on foot. When he
came up to the young man (saith the tale-teller) he dismounted also, and
the two saluted each other after the goodliest fashion. Then said the
King, “Come with us, for thou art my guest.” So they took horse again
and rode on stirrup touching stirrup in great and stately procession,
conversing as they went, till they came to the royal palace, where they
alighted together.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Five Hundred and Ninetieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the two rode
together in stately procession till they entered the palace, when the
King taking the young man by the hand, led him into a domed room
followed by his suite, and making him sit down on a throne of gold,
seated himself beside him. Then he unbound the swathe from his lower
face; and behold, the King was a young lady, like the splendid sun
shining in the sheeny sky, perfect in beauty and loveliness, brilliancy
and grace, arrogance[199] and all perfection. The youth looked upon this
singular blessing and embodied boon and was lost in wonder at her charms
and comeliness and seemlihead and at the splendour and affluence he saw
about him, when she said “Know, O King, that I am the Queen of this land
and that all the troops thou hast seen, whether horse or foot, are
women, there is no man amongst them; for in this our state the men delve
and sow and ear and occupy themselves with the tillage of the earth and
the building of towns and other mechanical crafts and useful arts,
whilst the women govern and fill the great offices of state and bear
arms.” At this the youth marvelled with exceeding marvel and, as they
were in discourse, behold, in came the Wazir who was a tall gray-haired
old woman of venerable semblance and majestic aspect, and it was told
him that this was the Minister. Quoth the Queen to her, “Bring us the
Kazi and witnesses.” So she went out to do this, and the Queen, turning
to him, conversed with him in friendly fashion, and enforced herself to
reassure his awe of her and do away his shame with speech blander than
the zephyr, saying, “Art thou content to be to me baron and I to thee
feme?” Thereupon he arose and would have kissed ground between her
hands, but she forbade him and he replied, saying, “O my lady, I am the
least of thy slaves who serve thee.” “Seest thou all these servants and
soldiers and riches and hoards and treasures?” asked she, and he
answered, “Yes!” Quoth she, “All these are at thy commandment to dispose
of them and give and bestow as seemeth good to thee.” Then she pointed
to a closed door and said, “All these things are at thy disposal, save
yonder door; that shalt thou not open, and if thou open it thou shalt
repent when repentance will avail thee naught. So beware! and again I
say, beware!” Hardly had she made an end of speaking when the Waziress
entered followed by the Kazi and witnesses, all old women, with their
hair streaming over their shoulders and of reverend and majestic
presence; and the Queen bade them draw up the contract of marriage
between herself and the young man. Accordingly, they performed the
marriage-ceremony and the Queen made a great bride-feast, to which she
bade all the troops; and after they had eaten and drunken, he went in
unto his bride and found her a maid virginal. So he did away her hymen,
and abode with her seven years in all joyance and solace and delight of
life, till, one day of the days, he bethought himself of the forbidden
door and said in himself, “Except there were therein treasures greater
and grander than any I have seen, she had not forbidden me therefrom.”
So he rose and opened the door, when, lo! behind it was the very bird
which had brought him from the sea-shore to the island, and it said to
him, “No welcome to a face that shall never prosper!” When he saw it and
heard what it said, he fled from it; but it followed him and seizing him
in its talons, flew with him an hour’s journey betwixt heaven and earth,
till it set him down in the place whence it had first carried him off
and flew away. When he came to his senses, he remembered his late
estate, great, grand and glorious, and the troops which rode before him
and his lordly rule and all the honour and fair fortune he had lost and
fell to weeping and wailing.[200] He abode two months on the sea-shore,
where the bird had set him down, hoping yet to return to his wife, till,
as he sat one night wakeful, mourning and musing, behold, he heard one
speaking, albeit he saw no one, and saying, “How great were the
delights! Alas, far from thee is the return of that which is past!” When
he heard this, he redoubled in his regrets and despaired of recovering
his wife and his fair estate that was; so he returned, weary and
broken-hearted, to the house where he had dwelt with the old men and
knew that they had fared even as he and that this was the cause of their
shedding tears and lamenting their lot; wherefore he ever after held
them excused. Then, being overcome with chagrin and concern, he took to
his chamber and gave himself up to mourning and lamentation; and he
ceased not crying and complaining and left eating and drinking and
pleasant scents and merriment; nor did he laugh once till the day of his
death, when they buried him beside the Shaykhs. “See, then, O King,”
continued the Wazir “what cometh of precipitance; verily, it is
unpraiseworthy and bequeatheth repentance; and in this I give thee true
advice and loyal counsel.” When the King heard this story, he turned
from slaying his son;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the King
heard this story he turned from slaying his son; but, on the sixth day,
the favourite came in to him hending a naked knife in hand, and said to
him, “Know, O my lord, that except thou hearken to my complaint and
protect thy right and thine honour against these thy Ministers, who are
banded together against me, to do me wrong, I will kill myself with this
knife, and my blood will testify against thee on the Day of Doom.
Indeed, they pretend that women are full of tricks and malice and
perfidy; and they design thereby to defeat me of my due and hinder the
King from doing me justice; but, behold, I will prove to thee that men
are more perfidious than women by the story of a King among the Kings
and how he gained access to the wife of a certain merchant.” “And what
passed between them?” asked the King, and she answered:—I have heard
tell, O august King, a tale of


               _THE KING’S SON AND THE MERCHANT’S WIFE_.

A certain merchant, who was addicted to jealousy, had a wife that was a
model of beauty and loveliness; and of the excess of his fear and
jealousy of her, he would not abide with her in any town, but built her
a pavilion without the city, apart from all other buildings. And he
raised its height and strengthened its doors and provided them with
curious locks; and when he had occasion to go into the city, he locked
the doors and hung the keys about his neck.[201] One day, when the
merchant was abroad, the King’s son of that city came forth, to take his
pleasure and solace in the open country without the walls, and seeing
the solitary pavilion, stood still to examine it for a long while. At
last he caught sight of a charming lady looking and leaning out of one
of the windows,[202] and being smitten with amazement at her grace and
charms, cast about for a means of getting to her, but could find none.
So he called up one of his pages, who brought him ink-case[203] and
paper and wrote her a letter, setting forth his condition for love of
her. Then he set it on the pile-point of an arrow and shot it at the
pavilion, and it fell in the garden, where the lady was then walking
with her maidens. She said to one of the girls, “Hasten and bring me yon
letter,” for she could read writing;[204] and, when she had read it and
understood what he said in it of his love and passion, yearning and
longing, she wrote him a merciful reply, to the effect that she was
smitten with a yet fiercer desire for him; and then threw the letter
down to him from one of the windows of the pavilion. When he saw her, he
picked up the reply and after reading it, came under the window and said
to her, “Let me down a thread, that I may send thee this key; which do
thou take and keep by thee.” So she let down a thread and he tied the
key to it.[205] Then he went away and repairing to one of his father’s
Wazirs, complained to him of his passion for the lady and that he could
not live without her; and the Minister said, “And how dost thou bid me
contrive?” Quoth the Prince, “I would have thee set me in a chest[206]
and commit it to the merchant, feigning to him that it is thine and
desiring him to keep it for thee in his country-house some days, that I
may have my will of her; then do thou demand it back from him.” The
Wazir answered, “With love and gladness.” So the Prince returned to his
palace and fixing the padlock, the key whereof he had given the lady, on
a chest he had by him, entered therein. Then the Wazir locked it upon
him and setting it on a mule, carried it to the pavilion of the
merchant, who, seeing the Minister, came forth to him and kissed his
hands, saying, “Belike our lord the Wazir hath some need or business
which we may have the pleasure and honour of accomplishing for him?”
Quoth the Minister, “I would have thee set this chest in the safest and
best place within thy house and keep it till I seek it of thee.” So the
merchant made the porters carry it inside and set it down in one of his
store-closets, after which he went out on business. As soon as he was
gone, his wife arose and went up to the chest and unlocked it with the
key the King’s son had given her, whereupon there came forth a youth
like the moon. When she saw him, she donned her richest raiment and
carried him to her sitting-saloon, where they abode seven days, eating
and drinking and making merry: and as often as her husband came home,
she put the Prince back into the chest and locked it upon him. One day
the King asked for his son and the Wazir hurried off to the merchant’s
place of business and sought of him the chest.——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Ninety-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Wazir
reached the merchant’s counting-house he asked for the box. The man
accordingly repaired in haste to his pavilion, contrary to his custom
and knocked at the door. When his wife was ware of him, she hurried the
Prince back into the chest, but, in her confusion, forgot to lock it.
The merchant bade the porters take it up and carry it to his house in
the town. So they took up the box by the lid, whereupon it flew open and
lo! the Prince was lying within. When the merchant saw him and knew him
for the King’s son, he went out to the Wazir and said to him, “Go in,
thou, and take the King’s son; for none of us may lay hands on him.” So
the Minister went in and taking the Prince, went away with him. As soon
as they were gone, the merchant put away his wife and swore that he
would never marry again. And, continued the damsel, I have heard tell,
also, O King, a tale of


        _THE PAGE WHO FEIGNED TO KNOW THE SPEECH OF BIRDS_.[207]

A certain man of rank once entered the slave-market and saw a page being
cried for sale; so he bought him and carrying him home, said to his
wife, “Take good care of him.” The lad abode there for a while till, one
day, the man said to his wife, “Go forth to-morrow to the garden and
take thy solace therein and amuse thyself and enjoy thyself.” And she
replied, “With love and gladness!” Now when the page heard this, he made
ready in secret meat and drink and fruits and dessert, and sallied forth
with them privily that night to the garden, where he laid the meat under
one tree, the wine under another and the fruit and conserves under a
third, in the way his mistress must pass. When morning morrowed the
husband bade him accompany the lady to that garden carrying with him all
the provisions required for the day; so she took horse and riding
thither with him, dismounted and entered. Presently, as they were
walking about, a crow croaked,[208] and the page said, “Thou sayst
sooth;” whereupon his mistress asked him, “Dost thou know what the crow
said?” and he answered, “Yes, O my lady, he said, Under yonder tree is
meat; go and eat it.” So she said, “I see thou really dost understand
them;” then she went up to the tree and, finding a dish of meat ready
dressed, was assured that the youth told the truth and marvelled with
exceeding marvel. They ate of the meat and walked about awhile, taking
their pleasure in the garden, till the crow croaked a second time, and
the page again replied, “Thou sayst sooth.” “What said he?” quoth the
lady, and quoth the page, “O my lady, he saith that under such a tree
are a gugglet of water flavoured with musk and a pitcher of old wine.”
So she went up with him to the tree and, finding the wine and water
there, redoubled in wonderment and the page was magnified in her eyes.
They sat down and drank, then arose and walked in another part of the
garden. Presently the crow croaked again and the page said, “Thou sayst
sooth.” Said the lady, “What saith he now?” and the page replied, “He
saith that under yonder tree are fruits, fresh and dried.” So they went
thither and found all as he said and sat down and ate. Then they walked
about again till the crow croaked a fourth time, whereupon the page took
up a stone and threw it at him. Quoth she, “What said he, that thou
shouldst stone him?” “O my lady,” answered he, “he said what I cannot
tell thee.” “Say on,” rejoined she, “and be not abashed in my presence,
for there is naught between me and thee.” But he ceased not to say,
“No,” and she to press him to speak, till at last she conjured him to
tell her, and he answered, “The crow said to me:—Do with thy lady even
as doth her husband.” When she heard his words she laughed till she fell
backward and said, “This is a light matter, and I may not gainsay thee
therein.” So saying, she went up to a tree and, spreading the carpet
under it, lay down, and called to him to come and do her need, when, lo!
her husband, who had followed them unawares and saw this, called out to
the page, saying, “Harkye, boy! What ails thy mistress to lie there,
weeping?” Answered the page, “O my lord, she fell off the tree and was
killed;[209] and none but Allah (be He extolled and exalted!) restored
her to thee. Wherefore she lay down awhile to recover herself by rest.”
When the lady saw her husband standing by her head, she rose and made a
show of weakness and pain, saying, “O my back! O my sides! Come to my
help, O my friends! I shall never survive this.” So her husband was
deceived and said to the page, “Fetch thy mistress’s horse and set her
thereon.” Then he carried her home, the boy holding one stirrup and the
man the other and saying, “Allah vouchsafe thee ease and recovery!”
“These then, O King,” (said the damsel) “are some instances of the craft
of men and their perfidy; wherefore let not thy Wazirs turn thee from
succouring me and doing me justice.” Then she wept, and when the King
saw her weeping (for she was the dearest to him of all his slave-girls)
he once more commanded to put his son to death; but the sixth Minister
entered and kissing ground before him, said, “May the Almighty advance
the King! Verily I am a loyal counsellor to thee, in that I counsel thee
to deal deliberately in the matter of thy son;”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Ninety-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the sixth Wazir
said, “O King, deal deliberately in the matter of thy son; for falsehood
is as smoke and fact is built on base which shall not be broken; yea,
and the light of sooth dispelleth the night of untruth. Know that the
perfidy of women is great, even as saith Allah the Most High in His Holy
Book, “Verily, the malice of you is great.”[210] And indeed a tale hath
reached me that a certain woman befooled the Chiefs of the State on such
wise as never did any before her.” Asked the King, “And how was that?”
And the Wazir answered:—I have heard tell a tale, O King, as follows
concerning


                 _THE LADY AND HER FIVE SUITORS_.[211]

A woman of the daughters of the merchants was married to a man who was a
great traveller. It chanced once that he set out for a far country and
was absent so long that his wife, for pure ennui, fell in love with a
handsome young man of the sons of the merchants, and they loved each
other with exceeding love. One day, the youth quarrelled with another
man, who lodged a complaint against him with the Chief of Police, and he
cast him into prison. When the news came to the merchant’s wife his
mistress, she well-nigh lost her wits; then she arose and donning her
richest clothes repaired to the house of the Chief of Police. She
saluted him and presented a written petition to this purport:—“He thou
hast clapped in jail is my brother, such and such, who fell out with
such an one; and those who testified against him bore false witness. He
hath been wrongfully imprisoned, and I have none other to come in to me
nor to provide for my support; therefore I beseech thee of thy grace to
release him.” When the magistrate had read the paper, he cast his eyes
on her and fell in love with her forthright; so he said to her, “Go into
the house, till I bring him before me; then I will send for thee and
thou shalt take him.” “O my lord,” replied she, “I have none to protect
me save Almighty Allah!: I am a stranger and may not enter any man’s
abode.” Quoth the Wali, “I will not let him go, except thou come to my
home and I take my will of thee.” Rejoined she, “If it must be so, thou
must needs come to my lodging and sit and sleep the siesta and rest the
whole day there.” “And where is thy abode?” asked he; and she answered,
“In such a place,” and appointed him for such a time. Then she went out
from him, leaving his heart taken with love of her, and she repaired to
the Kazi of the city, to whom she said, “O our lord the Kazi!” He
exclaimed, “Yes!” and she continued, “Look into my case, and thy reward
be with Allah the Most High!” Quoth he, “Who hath wronged thee?” and
quoth she, “O my lord, I have a brother and I have none but that one,
and it is on his account that I come to thee; because the Wali hath
imprisoned him for a criminal and men have borne false witness against
him that he is a wrong-doer; and I beseech thee to intercede for him
with the Chief of Police.” When the Kazi looked on her, he fell in love
with her forthright and said to her, “Enter the house and rest awhile
with my handmaids whilst I send to the Wali to release thy brother. If I
knew the money-fine which is upon him, I would pay it out of my own
purse, so I may have my desire of thee, for thou pleasest me with thy
sweet speech.” Quoth she, “If thou, O my lord, do thus, we must not
blame others.” Quoth he, “An thou wilt not come in, wend thy ways.” Then
said she, “An thou wilt have it so, O our lord, it will be privier and
better in my place than in thine, for here are slave-girls and eunuchs
and goers-in and comers-out, and indeed I am a woman who wotteth naught
of this fashion; but need compelleth.” Asked the Kazi, “And where is thy
house?”; and she answered, “In such a place,” and appointed him for the
same day and time as the Chief of Police. Then she went out from him to
the Wazir, to whom she preferred her petition for the release from
prison of her brother who was absolutely necessary to her: but he also
required her of herself, saying, “Suffer me to have my will of thee and
I will set thy brother free.” Quoth she, “An thou wilt have it so, be it
in my house, for there it will be privier both for me and for thee. It
is not far distant and thou knowest that which behoveth us women of
cleanliness and adornment.” Asked he, “Where is thy house?” “In such a
place,” answered she and appointed him for the same time as the two
others. Then she went out from him to the King of the city and told him
her story and sought of him her brother’s release. “Who imprisoned him?”
enquired he; and she replied, “‘Twas thy Chief of Police.” When the King
heard her speech, it transpierced his heart with the arrows of love and
he bade her enter the palace with him, that he might send to the Kazi
and release her brother. Quoth she, “O King, this thing is easy to thee,
whether I will or nill; and if the King will indeed have this of me, it
is of my good fortune; but, if he come to my house, he will do me the
more honour by setting step therein, even as saith the poet:—

 O my friends, have ye seen or have ye heard ✿ Of his visit whose virtues
    I hold so high?”

Quoth the King, “We will not cross thee in this.” So she appointed him
for the same time as the three others, and told him where her house
was.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Ninety-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the woman told the
King where her house was and appointed him for the same time as the
Wali, the Kazi and the Wazir. Then she left him and betaking herself to
a man which was a carpenter, said to him, “I would have thee make me a
cabinet with four compartments one above other, each with its door for
locking up. Let me know thy hire and I will give it thee.” Replied he,
“My price will be four dinars; but, O noble lady and well-protected, if
thou wilt vouchsafe me thy favours, I will ask nothing of thee.”
Rejoined she, “An there be no help but that thou have it so, then make
thou five compartments with their padlocks;” and she appointed him to
bring it exactly on the day required. Said he, “It is well; sit down, O
my lady, and I will make it for thee forthright, and after I will come
to thee at my leisure.” So she sat down by him, whilst he fell to work
on the cabinet, and when he had made an end of it she chose to see it at
once carried home and set up in the sitting-chamber. Then she took four
gowns and carried them to the dyer, who dyed them each of a different
colour; after which she applied herself to making ready meat and drink;
fruits, flowers and perfumes. Now when the appointed trysting day came,
she donned her costliest dress and adorned herself and scented herself,
then spread the sitting-room with various kinds of rich carpets and sat
down to await who should come. And behold, the Kazi was the first to
appear, devancing the rest, and when she saw him, she rose to her feet
and kissed the ground before him; then, taking him by the hand, made him
sit down by her on the couch and lay with him and fell to jesting and
toying with him. By and by, he would have her do his desire, but she
said, “O my lord, doff thy clothes and turband and assume this yellow
cassock and this head-kerchief,[212] whilst I bring thee meat and drink;
and after thou shalt win thy will.” So saying, she took his clothes and
turband and clad him in the cassock and the kerchief; but hardly had she
done this, when lo! there came a knocking at the door. Asked he, “Who is
that rapping at the door?” and she answered, “My husband.” Quoth the
Kazi, “What is to be done, and where shall I go?” Quoth she, “Fear
nothing, I will hide thee in this cabinet;” and he, “Do as seemeth good
to thee.” So she took him by the hand and pushing him into the lowest
compartment, locked the door upon him. Then she went to the house-door,
where she found the Wali; so she bussed ground before him and taking his
hand brought him into the saloon, where she made him sit down and said
to him, “O my lord, this house is thy house; this place is thy place,
and I am thy handmaid: thou shalt pass all this day with me; wherefore
do thou doff thy clothes and don this red gown, for it is a sleeping
gown.” So she took away his clothes and made him assume the red gown and
set on his head an old patched rag she had by her; after which she sat
by him on the divan and she sported with him while he toyed with her
awhile, till he put out his hand to her. Whereupon she said to him, “O
our lord, this day is thy day and none shall share in it with thee; but
first, of thy favour and benevolence, write me an order for my brother’s
release from gaol that my heart may be at ease.” Quoth he, “Hearkening
and obedience: on my head and eyes be it!”; and wrote a letter to his
treasurer, saying:—“As soon as this communication shall reach thee, do
thou set such an one free, without stay or delay; neither answer the
bearer a word.” Then he sealed it and she took it from him, after which
she began to toy again with him on the divan when, behold, some one
knocked at the door. He asked, “Who is that?” and she answered, “My
husband.” “What shall I do?” said he, and she, “Enter this cabinet, till
I send him away and return to thee.” So she clapped him into the second
compartment from the bottom and padlocked the door on him; and meanwhile
the Kazi heard all they said. Then she went to the house-door and opened
it, whereupon lo! the Wazir entered. She bussed the ground before him
and received him with all honour and worship, saying, “O my lord, thou
exaltest us by thy coming to our house; Allah never deprive us of the
light of thy countenance!” Then she seated him on the divan and said to
him, “O my lord, doff thy heavy dress and turband and don these lighter
vestments.” So he put off his clothes and turband and she clad him in a
blue cassock and a tall red bonnet, and said to him, “Erst thy garb was
that of the Wazirate; so leave it to its own time and don this light
gown, which is better fitted for carousing and making merry and sleep.”
Thereupon she began to play with him and he with her, and he would have
done his desire of her; but she put him off, saying, “O my lord, this
shall not fail us.” As they were talking there came a knocking at the
door, and the Wazir asked her, “Who is that?”: to which she answered,
“My husband.” Quoth he, “What is to be done?” Quoth she, “Enter this
cabinet, till I get rid of him and come back to thee and fear thou
nothing.” So she put him in the third compartment and locked the door on
him, after which she went out and opened the house-door when lo and
behold! in came the King. As soon as she saw him she kissed ground
before him, and taking him by the hand, led him into the saloon and
seated him on the divan at the upper end. Then said she to him, “Verily,
O King, thou dost us high honour, and if we brought thee to gift the
world and all that therein is, it would not be worth a single one of thy
steps us-wards.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the King
entered the lady’s house she said to him, “Had we brought thee to gift
the world and all which is therein, it would not be worth a single one
of thy steps us-wards.” And when he had taken his seat upon the divan
she said, “Give me leave to speak one word.” “Say what thou wilt,”
answered he, and she said, “O my lord, take thine ease and doff thy
dress and turband.” Now his clothes were worth a thousand dinars; and
when he put them off she clad him in a patched gown, worth at the very
most ten dirhams, and fell to talking and jesting with him; all this
while the folk in the cabinet hearing everything that passed, but not
daring to say a word. Presently, the King put his hand to her neck and
sought to do his desire of her; when she said, “This thing shall not
fail us, but I had first promised myself to entertain thee in this
sitting-chamber, and I have that which shall content thee.” Now as they
were speaking, some one knocked at the door and he asked her, “Who is
that?” “My husband,” answered she, and he, “Make him go away of his own
good will, or I will fare forth to him and send him away perforce.”
Replied she, “Nay, O my lord, have patience till I send him away by my
skilful contrivance.” “And I, how shall I do?” enquired the King;
whereupon she took him by the hand and making him enter the fourth
compartment of the cabinet, locked it upon him. Then she went out and
opened the house door when behold, the carpenter entered and saluted
her. Quoth she, “What manner of thing is this cabinet thou hast made
me?” “What aileth it, O my lady?” asked he, and she answered, “The top
compartment is too strait.” Rejoined he, “Not so;” and she, “Go in
thyself and see; it is not wide enough for thee.” Quoth he, “It is wide
enough for four,” and entered the fifth compartment, whereupon she
locked the door on him. Then she took the letter of the Chief of Police
and carried it to the treasurer who, having read and understood it,
kissed it and delivered her lover to her. She told him all she had done
and he said, “And how shall we act now?” She answered, “We will remove
hence to another city, for after this work there is no tarrying for us
here.” So the twain packed up what goods they had and, loading them on
camels, set out forthright for another city. Meanwhile, the five abode
each in his compartment of the cabinet without eating or drinking three
whole days, during which time they held their water until at last the
carpenter could retain his no longer; so he staled on the King’s head,
and the King urined on the Wazir’s head, and the Wazir piddled on the
Wali and the Wali pissed on the head of the Kazi; whereupon the Judge
cried out and said, “What nastiness[213] is this? Doth not what strait
we are in suffice us, but you must make water upon us?” The Chief of
Police recognised the Kazi’s voice and answered, saying aloud, “Allah
increase thy reward, O Kazi!” And when the Kazi heard him, he knew him
for the Wali. Then the Chief of Police lifted up his voice and said,
“What means this nastiness?” and the Wazir answered, saying, “Allah
increase thy reward, O Wali!” whereupon he knew him to be the Minister.
Then the Wazir lifted up his voice and said, “What means this
nastiness?” But when the King heard and recognised his Minister’s voice,
he held his peace and concealed his affair. Then said the Wazir, “May
God damn[214] this woman for her dealing with us! She hath brought
hither all the Chief Officers of the state, except the King.” Quoth the
King, “Hold your peace, for I was the first to fall into the toils of
this lewd strumpet.” Whereat cried the carpenter, “And I, what have I
done? I made her a cabinet for four gold pieces, and when I came to seek
my hire, she tricked me into entering this compartment and locked the
door on me.” And they fell to talking with one another, diverting the
King and doing away his chagrin. Presently the neighbours came up to the
house and, seeing it deserted, said one to other, “But yesterday our
neighbour, the wife of such an one, was in it; but now no sound is to be
heard therein nor is soul to be seen. Let us break open the doors and
see how the case stands, lest it come to the ears of the Wali or the
King and we be cast into prison and regret not doing this thing before.”
So they broke open the doors and entered the saloon, where they saw a
large wooden cabinet and heard men within groaning for hunger and
thirst. Then said one of them, “Is there a Jinni in this cabinet?” and
his fellow, “Let us heap fuel about it and burn it with fire.” When the
Kazi heard this, he bawled out to them, “Do it not!”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
neighbours proposed to heap fuel about the cabinet and to burn it the
Kazi bawled out to them, “Do it not!” And they said to one another,
“Verily the Jinn make believe to be mortals and speak with men’s
voices.” Thereupon the Kazi repeated somewhat of the Sublime Koran and
said to the neighbours, “Draw near to the cabinet wherein we are.” So
they drew near, and he said, “I am so and so the Kazi, and ye are such
an one and such an one, and we are here a company.” Quoth the
neighbours. “Who brought you here?” And he told them the whole case from
beginning to end. Then they fetched a carpenter, who opened the five
doors and let out Kazi, Wazir, Wali, King and carpenter in their queer
disguises; and each, when he saw how the others were accoutred, fell
a-laughing at them. Now she had taken away all their clothes; so every
one of them sent to his people for fresh clothes and put them on and
went out, covering himself therewith from the sight of the folk.
Consider, therefore, O our lord the King (said the Wazir), what a trick
this woman played off upon the folk! And I have heard tell also a tale
of


   _THE THREE WISHES,[215] OR THE MAN WHO LONGED TO SEE THE NIGHT OF
                                POWER_.

A certain man had longed all his life to look upon the Night of
Power,[216] and one night it befel that he gazed at the sky and saw the
angels, and Heaven’s gates thrown open; and he beheld all things
prostrating themselves before their Lord, each in its several stead. So
he said to his wife, “Harkye, such an one, verily Allah hath shown me
the Night of Power, and it hath been proclaimed to me, from the
invisible world, that three prayers will be granted unto me; so I
consult thee for counsel as to what shall I ask.” Quoth she, “O man, the
perfection of man and his delight is in his prickle; therefore do thou
pray Allah to greaten thy yard and magnify it.” So he lifted up his
hands to heaven and said, “O Allah, greaten my yard and magnify it.”
Hardly had he spoken when his tool became as big as a column and he
could neither sit nor stand nor move about nor even stir from his stead;
and when he would have carnally known his wife, she fled before him from
place to place. So he said to her, “O accursed woman, what is to be
done? This is thy list, by reason of thy lust.” She replied, “No, by
Allah, I did not ask for this length and huge bulk, for which the gate
of a street were too strait. Pray Heaven to make it less.” So he raised
his eyes to Heaven and said, “O Allah, rid me of this thing and deliver
me therefrom.” And immediately his prickle disappeared altogether and he
became clean smooth. When his wife saw this, she said, “I have no
occasion for thee, now thou are become pegless as a eunuch, shaven and
shorn;” and he answered her, saying, “All this comes of thine ill-omened
counsel and thine imbecile judgment. I had three prayers accepted of
Allah, wherewith I might have gotten me my good, both in this world and
in the next, and now two wishes are gone in pure waste, by thy lewd
will, and there remaineth but one.” Quoth she, “Pray Allah the Most High
to restore thee thy yard as it was.” So he prayed to his Lord and his
prickle was restored to its first estate. Thus the man lost his three
wishes by the ill counsel and lack of wit in the woman; “And this, O
King” (said the Wazir), “have I told thee, that thou mightest be
certified of the thoughtlessness of women and their inconsequence and
silliness and see what cometh of hearkening to their counsel. Wherefore
be not persuaded by them to slay thy son, thy heart’s core, who shall
cause thy remembrance to survive thee.” The King gave ear to his
Minister’s words and forebore to put his son to death; but, on the
seventh day, the damsel came in, shrieking, and after lighting a great
fire in the King’s presence, made as she would cast herself therein;
whereupon they laid hands on her and brought her before him. He asked
her, “Why hast thou done this?” and she answered, “Except thou do me
justice on thy son, I will cast myself into this very fire and accuse
thee of this on the Day of Resurrection, for I am aweary of my life, and
before coming into thy presence I wrote my last will and testament and
gave alms of my goods and resolved upon death. And thou wilt repent with
all repentance, even as did the King of having punished the pious woman
who kept the Hammam.” Quoth the King, “How was that?” and quoth she:—I
have heard tell, O King, this tale concerning


                         _THE STOLEN NECKLACE_.

There was once a devotee, a recluse, a woman who had devoted herself to
religion. Now she used to resort to a certain King’s palace,[217] whose
dwellers were blessed by her presence and she was held of them in high
honour. One day she entered that palace according to her custom and sat
down beside the King’s wife. Presently the Queen gave her a necklace,
worth a thousand dinars, saying, “Keep this for me, O woman, whilst I go
to the Hammam.” So she entered the bath, which was in the palace, and
the pious woman remaining in the place where the Queen was and awaiting
her return laid the necklace on the prayer-carpet and stood up to pray.
As she was thus engaged, there came a magpie[218] which snatched up the
necklace, while she went out to obey a call of nature and carrying it
off, hid it inside a crevice in a corner of the palace-walls. When the
Queen came out of the bath, she sought the necklace of the recluse, who
also searched for it, but found it not nor could light on any trace of
it; so she said to the King’s wife, “By Allah, O my daughter, none hath
been with me. When thou gavest me the necklace, I laid it on the
prayer-carpet, and I know not if one of the servants saw it and took it
without my heed, whilst I was engaged in prayer. Almighty Allah only
knoweth what is come of it!” When the King heard what had happened, he
bade his Queen put the bath-woman to the question by fire and grievous
blows,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the King bade
his Queen question the bath-woman with fire and grievous blows, they
tortured her with all manner tortures, but could not bring her to
confess or to accuse any. Then he commanded to cast her into prison and
manacle and fetter her; and they did as he bade. One day, after this, as
the King sat in the inner court of his palace, with the Queen by his
side and water flowing around him, he saw the pie fly into a crevice in
a corner of the wall and pull out the necklace, whereupon he cried out
to a damsel who was with him, and she caught the bird and took the
necklace from it. By this the King knew that the pious bath-woman had
been wronged and repented of that he had done with her. So he sent for
her to the presence and fell to kissing her head and with many tears
sought pardon of her. Moreover, he commanded much treasure to be given
to her, but she refused and would none of it. However, she forgave him
and went away, swearing never again to enter any one’s house. So she
betook herself to wandering in the mountains and valleys and worshipped
God until she died, and Almighty Allah have mercy upon her! And for an
instance of the malice of the male sex (continued the damsel), I have
heard, O King, tell this tale of


                        _THE TWO PIGEONS_.[219]

A pair of pigeons once stored up wheat and barley in their nest during
the winter, and when the summer came, the grain shrivelled and became
less; so the male pigeon said to his wife, “Thou hast eaten of this
grain.” Replied she, “No, by Allah, I have never touched it!” But he
believed not her words and beat her with his wings and pecked her with
his bill, till he killed her. When the cold season returned, the corn
swelled out and became as before, whereupon he knew that he had slain
his wife wrongously and wickedly, and he repented whenas repentance
availed him naught. Then he lay down by her side, mourning over her and
weeping for grief, and left meat and drink, till he fell sick and died.
“But” (added the damsel), “I know a story of the malice of men more
extraordinary than either of these.” Quoth the King, “Let us hear what
thou hast to tell;” and quoth she:—I have heard tell, O King, this


          _STORY OF PRINCE BEHRAM AND THE PRINCESS AL-DATMA_.

There was once a King’s daughter, who had no equal in her time for
beauty and loveliness and symmetrical stature and grace, brilliancy,
amorous lace and the art of ravishing the wits of the masculine race and
her name was Al-Datmá. She used to boast, “Indeed there is none like me
in this age.” Nor was there one more accomplished than she in
horsemanship and martial exercises and all that behoveth a cavalier. So
all the Kings’ sons sought her to wife; but she would take none of them,
saying, “No man shall marry me except he overcome me at lunge of lance
and stroke of sword in fair field and patent plain. If any can do this,
I will willingly wed him; but, if I overcome him, I will take his horse
and clothes and arms and write with fire upon his forehead:—This is the
freed man of Al-Datma.” Now the sons of the Kings flocked to her from
every quarter far and near, and she overcame them and put them to shame,
stripping them of their arms and branding them with fire. Presently the
son of a King of the Kings of the Persians, by name Behram ibn Tájí,
heard of her and journeyed from afar to her father’s court, bringing
with him men and horses and great store of wealth and royal treasures.
When he drew near the city, he sent her parent a rich present and the
King came out to meet him and honoured him with the utmost honour. Then
the King’s son sent a message to him by his Wazir, demanding his
daughter’s hand in marriage; but the King answered, saying, “O my son,
as regards my daughter Al-Datma, I have no power over her, for she hath
sworn by her soul to marry none except he overcome her in the listed
field.” Quoth the Prince, “I journeyed hither from my father’s court
with no other object but this; I came here to woo and for thine alliance
to sue;” quoth the King, “Thou shalt meet her to-morrow.” So next day he
sent to bid his daughter who, making ready for battle, donned her
harness of war, and the folk, hearing of the coming joust, flocked from
all sides to the field. Presently the Princess rode into the lists,
armed cap-à-pie and belted and with vizor down, and the Persian King’s
son came out single-handed to meet her, equipped at all points after the
fairest of fashions. Then they drove at each other and fought a great
while, wheeling and falsing, advancing and retreating, till the
Princess, finding in him such courage and cavalarice as she had seen in
none else, began to fear for herself lest he put her to shame before the
bystanders and knew that he would assuredly overcome her. So she
resolved to trick him and, raising her vizor, lo! her face appeared more
brilliant than the full moon, which when he saw, he was confounded by
her beauty and his strength failed and his spirit faltered. When she
perceived this, she fell upon him at unawares in his moment of weakness,
and tare him from his saddle, and he became in her hands as he were a
sparrow in the clutches of an eagle, knowing not what was done with him
for amazement and confusion. So she took his steed and clothes and
armour and, branding him with fire, let him wend his ways. When he
recovered from his stupor, he abode several days without meat or drink
or sleep for despite and love of the girl which had taken hold upon his
heart. Then he sent a letter by certain of his slaves to his father,
advising him that he could not return home till he had won his will of
the Princess or died for want of her. When his sire got the letter, he
was sore concerned for his son and would have succoured him by sending
troops and soldiers; but his Wazirs dissuaded him from this and exhorted
him to patience; so he committed his affair to Almighty Allah.
Meanwhile, the Prince cast about for a means of coming to his desire;
and presently, disguising himself as a decrepit old man, with a white
beard over his own black beard repaired to a garden of the Princess
wherein she used to walk most of her days. Here he sought out the
gardener and said to him, “I am a stranger from a far country and from
my youth upwards I have been a gardener, and in the grafting of trees
and the culture of fruits and flowers and care of the vine none is more
skilled than I.” When the gardener heard this, he rejoiced in him with
exceeding joy and carried him into the garden, where he commended him to
his underlings, and the Prince betook himself to the service of the
garden and the tending of the trees and the bettering of their fruits
and improving the Persian water-wheels and disposing the
irrigation-channels. One day, as he was thus employed, lo! he saw some
slaves enter the garden, leading mules laden with carpets and vessels,
and asked them the meaning of this, to which they answered, “The
Princess is minded to take her pleasure.” When he heard these words he
hastened to his lodging and, fetching some of the jewels and ornaments
he had brought with him from home, sat down in the garden and spread
somewhat of them out before him, shaking and making a show of extreme
old age——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Five Hundred and Ninety-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the son of the
Persian King, after disguising himself as an old man shotten in years
and taking a seat in the garden, spread out somewhat of the jewels and
ornaments before him and made a show of shaking and trembling as if for
decrepitude and the weakness of extreme senility. After an hour or so a
company of damsels and eunuchs entered with the Princess in their midst,
as she were the moon among the stars, and dispersed about the garden,
plucking the fruits and diverting themselves. Presently they espied a
man sitting under one of the trees; and, making towards him (who was the
Prince), found him a very old man, whose hands and feet trembled for
decrepitude, and before him store of precious jewels and royal
ornaments. So they marvelled at his case and asked him what he did there
with the jewels; when he answered, “With these trinkets I would fain buy
me to wife one of you.” They laughed together at him and said, “If one
of us marry thee, what wilt thou do with her?” Said he, “I will give her
one kiss and divorce her.” Then quoth the Princess, “I give thee this
damsel to wife.” So he rose and coming up to her, leaning on a staff and
shivering and staggering, kissed her and gave her the jewels and
ornaments; whereat she rejoiced and they, laughing at him, went their
way. Next day, they came again to the garden, and finding him seated in
the same place, with more jewels and ornaments than before spread in
front of him, asked him, “O Shaykh, what wilt thou do with this
jewellery?”; and he answered, saying, “I wish therewith to take one of
you to wife even as yesterday.” So the Princess said, “I marry thee to
this damsel;” and he came up to her and kissed her and gave her the
jewels, and they all went their ways. But, seeing such generosity to her
handmaids, the Princess said in herself, “I have more right to all these
fine things than these baggages, and no harm can betide me.” So when
morning morrowed she went down from her chamber singly into the garden,
in the habit of one of her damsels, and presenting herself privily
before the Prince, said to him, “O Shaykh, the King’s daughter hath sent
me to thee, that thou mayst marry me.” He looked at her and knew her; so
he answered, “With love and gladness,” and gave her jewels and ornaments
of the finest and costliest. Then he rose to kiss her, and she off her
guard and fearing nothing but, when he came up to her, he suddenly laid
hold of her with a strong hand and instantly throwing her down, on the
ground abated her maidenhead.[220] Then he pulled the beard from his
face and said to her, “Dost thou not know me?” Asked she, “Who art
thou?” and he answered, “I am Behram, the King’s son of Persia, who have
changed my favour and am become a stranger to my people and estate for
thy sake and have lavished my treasures for thy love.” So she rose from
under him in silence and answered not his address nor spake a word of
reply to him, being dazed for what had befallen her and seeing nothing
better than to be silent, for fear of shame; and she bethought herself
and said, “If I kill myself it will be useless and if I do him die, his
death will profit me naught;” and presently added, “Nothing will serve
me but that I elope with him to his own country.” Then she gathered
together her monies and treasures and sent to him, acquainting him
therewith, to the intent that he also might equip himself with his
wealth and needs; and they agreed upon a night on which to depart. So,
at the appointed time, they mounted race-horses and set out under cover
of the gloom, nor did morning morrow till they had traversed a great
distance; and they ceased not faring forwards till they drew near his
father’s capital in the land of the Persians. When the King heard of his
son’s coming, he rode out to meet him with his troops and rejoiced in
him with exceeding joy. Then, after a few days, he sent the Princess’s
father a splendid present, and a letter to the effect that his daughter
was with him and demanding her wedding equipage. Al-Datma’s father came
out to meet the messengers with the greatest gladness (for that he had
deemed his daughter lost and had grieved sore for her loss): after which
he made bride-feasts and, summoning the Kazi and the witnesses, let draw
up the marriage-contract between his daughter and the Prince of Persia.
He invested the envoys with robes of honour, then he made ready her
equipage and despatched it to her; and Prince Behram abode with her till
death sundered their union. See therefore, O King (continued the
favourite), the malice of men in their dealing with women. As for me, I
will not go back from my due till I die. So the King once more commanded
to put his son to death; but the seventh Wazir came in to him and
kissing the ground before him, said, “O King, have patience with me
whilst I speak these words of good counsel to thee; how many patient and
slow-moving men unto their hope attain, and how many who are precipitate
fall into shameful state! Now I have seen how this damsel hath
profligately excited the King by lies to horrible and unnatural
cruelties; but I his Mameluke, whom he hath overwhelmed with his favours
and bounties, do proffer him true and loyal rede; for that I, O King,
know of the malice of women that which none knoweth save myself; and in
particular there hath reached me, on this subject, the story of the old
woman and the son of the merchant with its warning instances.” Asked the
King, “And what fell out between them, O Wazir?” and the seventh Wazir
answered:—I have heard tell, O King, the tale of


                  _THE HOUSE WITH THE BELVEDERE_.[221]

A wealthy merchant had a son who was very dear to him and who said to
him one day, “O my father, I have a boon to beg of thee.” Quoth the
merchant, “O my son, what is it, that I may give it thee and bring thee
to thy desire, though it were the light of mine eyes.” Quoth the youth,
“Give me money, that I may journey with the merchants to the city of
Baghdad and see its sights and sail on the Tigris and look upon the
palace of the Caliphs[222]; for the sons of the merchants have described
these things to me and I long to see them for myself.” Said the father,
“O my child, O my little son, how can I endure to part from thee?” But
the youth replied, “I have said my say and there is no help for it but I
journey to Baghdad with thy consent or e’en without it: such a longing
for its sight hath fallen upon me as can only be assuaged by the going
thither.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Five Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the merchant’s son
said to his sire, “There is no help for it but that I journey to
Baghdad.” Now when the father saw that there was no help for it, he
provided his son with goods to the value of thirty thousand gold pieces
and sent him with certain merchants in whom he trusted, committing him
to their charge. Then he took leave of the youth, who journeyed with his
friends the merchants till they reached Baghdad, the House of Peace,
where he entered the market and hired him a house, so handsome and
delectable and spacious and elegant that on seeing it he well-nigh lost
his wits for admiration; for therein were pavilions facing one another,
with floors of coloured marbles and ceilings inlaid with gold and lapis
lazuli, and its gardens were full of warbling birds. So he asked the
door-keeper[223] what was its monthly rent, and he replied, “Ten
dinars.” Quoth the young man, “Speakest thou soothly or dost thou but
jest with me?”. Quoth the porter, “By Allah, I speak naught but the
truth, for none who taketh up his abode in this house lodgeth in it more
than a week[224] or two.” “And how is that?” quoth the youth; and quoth
the porter, “O my son, whoso dwelleth in this house cometh not forth of
it, except sick or dead, wherefore it is known amongst all the folk of
Baghdad, so that none offereth to inhabit it, and thus cometh it that
its rent is fallen so low.” Hearing this the young merchant marvelled
with exceeding marvel and said, “Needs must there be some reason for
this sickening and perishing.” However after considering awhile and
seeking refuge with Allah from Satan the Stoned, he rented the house and
took up his abode there. Then he put away apprehension from his thought
and busied himself with selling and buying; and some days passed by
without any such ill case befalling him in the house, as the door-keeper
had mentioned. One day as he sat upon the bench before his door, there
came up a grizzled crone, as she were a snake speckled white and black,
calling aloud on the name of Allah, magnifying Him inordinately and, at
the same time, putting away the stones and other obstacles from the
path.[225] Seeing the youth sitting there, she looked at him and
marvelled at his case; whereupon quoth he to her, “O woman, dost thou
know me or am I like any thou knowest?” When she heard him speak, she
toddled up to him and saluting him with the salam, asked, “How long hast
thou dwelt in this house?” Answered he, “Two months, O my mother;” and
she said, “It was hereat I marvelled; for I, O my son, know thee not,
neither dost thou know me, nor yet art thou like unto any one I know;
but I marvelled for that none other than thou hath taken up his abode in
this house but hath gone forth from it, dead or dying, saving thee
alone. Doubtless, O my son, thou hast perilled thy young years; but I
suppose thou hast not gone up to the upper story neither looked out from
the belvedere there.” So saying, she went her way and he fell
a-pondering her words and said to himself, “I have not gone up to the
top of the house; nor did I know that there was a belvedere there.” Then
he arose forthright and going in, searched the by-ways of the house till
he espied, in a wall-corner among the trees, a narrow door between whose
posts[226] the spider had woven her webs, and said in himself, “Haply
the spider hath not webbed over the door, but because death and doom is
within.” However, he heartened himself with the saying of God the Most
High, “Say, nothing shall befal us but what Allah hath written for
us;”[227] and opening the door, ascended a narrow flight of stairs, till
he came to the terrace-roof, where he found a belvedere, in which he sat
down to rest and solace himself with the view. Presently, he caught
sight of a fine house and a well-cared for hard by, surmounted by a
lofty belvedere, overlooking the whole of Baghdad, in which sat a damsel
fair as a Houri. Her beauty took possession of his whole heart and made
away with his reason, bequeathing to him the pains and patience of Job
and the grief and weeping of Jacob. And as he looked at her and
considered her curiously, an object to enamour an ascetic and make a
devotee lovesick, fire was lighted in his vitals and he cried, “Folk say
that whoso taketh up his abode in this house dieth or sickeneth. An this
be so, yon damsel is assuredly the cause. Would Heaven I knew how I
shall win free of this affair, for my wits are clean gone!” Then he
descended from the terrace, pondering his case, and sat down in the
house, but being unable to rest, he went out and took his seat at the
door, absorbed in melancholy thought when, behold, up came the old woman
afoot, praising and magnifying Allah as she went. When he saw her, he
rose and accosting her with a courteous salam and wishes for her life
being prolonged said to her, “O my mother, I was healthy and hearty till
thou madest mention to me of the door leading to the belvedere; so I
opened it and ascending to the top of the house, saw thence what stole
away my senses; and now methinks I am a lost man, and I know no
physician for me but thyself.” When she heard this, she laughed and
said, “No harm shall befal thee Inshallah—so Allah please!” Whereupon he
rose and went into the house and coming back with an hundred dinars in
his sleeve, said to her, “Take this, O my mother, and deal with me the
dealing of lords with slaves and succour me quickly for, if I die, a
claim for my blood will meet thee on the Day of Doom.” Answered she,
“With love and gladness; but, O my son, I expect thou lend me thine aid
in some small matter, whereby hangs the winning of thy wish.” Quoth he,
“What wouldst thou have me do, O my mother?” Quoth she, “Go to the
silk-market and enquire for the shop of Abú al-Fath bin Kaydám. Sit thee
down on his counter and salute him and say to him, “Give me the
face-veil[228] thou hast by thee orfrayed with gold:” for he hath none
handsomer in his shop. Then buy it of him, O my son, at his own price
however high and keep it till I come to thee to-morrow, Allah Almighty
willing.” So saying, she went away and he passed the night upon live
coals of the Ghazá[229]-wood. Next morning he took a thousand ducats in
his pocket and repairing to the silk-market, sought out the shop of Abu
al-Fath to whom he was directed by one of the merchants. He found him a
man of dignified aspect, surrounded by pages, eunuchs and attendants;
for he was a merchant of great wealth and consideration befriended by
the Caliph; and of the blessings which Allah the Most High had bestowed
upon him was the damsel who had ravished the young man’s heart. She was
his wife and had not her match for beauty, nor was her like to be found
with any of the sons of the Kings. The young man saluted him and Abu
al-Fath returned his salam and bade him be seated. So he sat down by him
and said to him, “O merchant, I wish to look at such a face-veil.”
Accordingly he bade his slave bring him a bundle of silk from the inner
shop and opening it, brought out a number of veils, whose beauty amazed
the youth. Among them was the veil he sought; so he bought it for fifty
gold pieces and bore it home well pleased.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


                Now when it was the Six Hundredth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the youth after
buying the veil of the merchant bore it home; but hardly had he reached
the house when lo! up came the old woman. He rose to her and gave her
his purchase when she bade him bring a live coal, with which she burnt
one of the corners of the veil, then folded it up as before and,
repairing to Abu al-Fath’s house, knocked at the door. Asked the damsel,
“Who is there?”; and she answered, “I, such an one.” Now the damsel knew
her for a friend of her mother so, when she heard her voice, she came
out and opening the door to her, said, “What brought thee here, O my
mother? My mamma hath left me and gone to her own house.” Replied the
old woman, “O my daughter, I know thy mother is not with thee, for I
have been with her in her home, and I come not to thee, but because I
fear to pass the hour of prayer; wherefore I desire to make my
Wuzu-ablution with thee, for I know thou art clean and thy house
pure.”[230] The damsel admitted the old trot who saluted her and called
down blessings upon her. Then she took the ewer and went into the
wash-house, where she made her ablutions and prayed in a place there.
Presently, she came out again and said to the damsel, “O my daughter, I
suspect thy handmaidens have been in yonder place and defiled it; so do
thou show me another place where I may pray, for the prayer I have
prayed I account null and void.” Thereupon the damsel took her by the
hand and said to her, “O my mother, come and pray on my carpet, where my
husband sits.” So she stood there and prayed and worshipped, bowed and
prostrated; and presently, she took the damsel unawares and made shift
to slip the veil under the cushion, unseen of her. Then she blessed her
and went her ways. Now as the day was closing Abu al-Fath came home and
sat down upon the carpet, whilst his wife brought him food and he ate of
it his sufficiency and washed his hands; after which he leant back upon
the cushion. Presently, he caught sight of a corner of the veil
protruding from under the cushion; so he pulled it out and considered it
straitly, when, knowing it for that he had sold to the young man, he at
once suspected his wife of unchastity. Thereupon he called her and said,
“Whence hadst thou this veil?” And she swore an oath to him, saying,
“None hath come to me but thou.” The merchant was silent for fear of
scandal, and said to himself, “If I open up this chapter, I shall be put
to shame before all Baghdad;” for he was one of the intimates of the
Caliph and so he could do nothing save hold his peace. So he asked no
questions, but said to his wife, whose name was Mahzíyah, “It hath
reached me that thy mother lieth ill of heart-ache[231] and all the
women are with her, weeping over her; wherefore I order thee to go to
her.” Accordingly, she repaired to her mother’s house and found her in
the best of health; and she asked her daughter, “What brings thee here
at this hour?” So she told her what her husband had said and sat with
her awhile; when behold, up came porters, who brought her clothes from
her husband’s house, and transporting all her paraphernalia and what not
else belonged to her of goods and vessels, deposited them in her
mother’s lodging. When the mother saw this, she said to her daughter,
“Tell me what hath passed between thee and thy husband, to bring about
this.” But she swore to her that she knew not the cause thereof and that
there had befallen nothing between them to call for this conduct. Quoth
her mother, “Needs must there be a cause for this.” And she answered,
saying, “I know of none, and after this, with Almighty Allah be it to
make provision!” Whereupon her mother fell a-weeping and lamented her
daughter’s separation from the like of this man, by reason of his
sufficiency and fortune and the greatness of his rank and dignity. On
this wise things abode some days, after which the curst, ill-omened old
woman, whose name was Miryam the Koranist,[232] paid a visit to Mahziyah
in her mother’s house and saluted her cordially, saying, “What ails
thee, O my daughter, O my darling? Indeed, thou hast troubled my mind.”
Then she went in to her mother and said to her, “O my sister, what is
this business about thy daughter and her husband? It hath reached me
that he hath divorced her! What hath she done to call for this?” Quoth
the mother, “Belike her husband will return to her by the blessed
influence of thy prayers, O Háfizah; so do thou pray for her, O my
sister, for thou art a day-faster and a night-prayer.” Then the three
fell to talking together and the old woman said to the damsel, “O my
daughter, grieve not for, if Allah please, I will make peace between
thee and thy husband before many days.” Then she left them and going to
the young merchant, said to him, “Get ready a handsome entertainment for
us, for I will bring her to thee this very night.” So he sprang up and
went forth and provided all that was fitting of meat and drink and so
forth, then sat down to await the twain; whilst the old woman returned
to the girl’s mother and said to her, “O my sister, we have a splendid
bride-feast to-night; so let thy daughter go with me, that she may
divert herself and make merry with us and throw off her cark and care,
and forget the ruin of her home. I will bring her back to thee even as I
took her away.” The mother dressed her daughter in her finest dress and
costliest jewels and accompanied her to the door, where she commended
her to the old woman’s charge, saying, “‘Ware lest thou let any of
Almighty Allah’s creatures look upon her, for thou knowest her husband’s
rank with the Caliph; and do not tarry, but bring her back to me as soon
as possible.” The old woman carried the girl to the young man’s house
which she entered, thinking it the place where the wedding was to be
held: but as soon as she came into the sitting-saloon——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


            Now when it was the Six Hundred and First Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that as soon as the
damsel entered the sitting-saloon, the youth sprang up to her and flung
his arms round her neck and kissed her hands and feet. She was
confounded at his loveliness, as well as at the beauty of the place and
the profusion of meat and drink, flowers and perfumes that she saw
therein, and deemed all was a dream. When the old woman saw her
amazement, she said to her, “The name of Allah be upon thee, O my
daughter! Fear not; I am here sitting with thee and will not leave thee
for a moment. Thou art worthy of him and he is worthy of thee.” So the
damsel sat down shamefast and in great confusion; but the young man
jested and toyed with her and entertained her with laughable stories and
loving verses, till her breast broadened and she became at her ease.
Then she ate and drank and growing warm with wine, took the lute and
sang these couplets:-

 My friend who went hath returned once more; ✿ Oh, the welcome light that
    such beauty shows!
 And but for the fear of those arrowy eyes, ✿ From his lovely cheek I had
    culled the rose.

And when the youth saw that she to his beauty did incline he waxt
drunken without wine and his life was a light matter to him compared
with his love.[233] Presently the old woman went out and left them alone
together to enjoy their loves till the next morning, when she went into
them and gave them both good morrow[234] and asked the damsel, “How hast
thou passed the night, O my lady?” Answered the girl, “Right well,
thanks to thy adroitness and the excellence of thy going-between[235].”
Then said the old woman, “Up, let us go back to thy mother.” At these
words the young man pulled out an hundred sequins and gave them to her,
saying, “Take this and leave her with me to-night.” So she left them and
repaired to the girl’s mother, to whom quoth she, “Thy daughter saluteth
thee, and the bride’s mother hath sworn her to abide with her this
night.” Replied the mother, “O my sister, bear her my salam, and, if it
please and amuse the girl, there is no harm in her staying the night; so
let her do this and divert herself and come back to me at her leisure,
for all I fear for her is chagrin on account of an angry husband.” The
old woman ceased not to make excuse after excuse to the girl’s mother
and to put off cheat upon cheat upon her, till Mahziyah had tarried
seven days with the young man, of whom she took an hundred dinars each
day for herself; while he enjoyed all the solace of life and coition.
But at the end of this time, the girl’s mother said to her, “Bring my
daughter back to me forthright; for I am uneasy about her, because she
hath been so long absent, and I misdoubt me of this.” So the old woman
went out saying, “Woe to thee! shall such words be spoken to the like of
me? and, going to the young man’s house, took the girl by the hand and
carried her away (leaving him lying asleep on his bed, for he was
drunken with wine) to her mother.” She received her with pleasure and
gladness and seeing her in redoubled beauty and brilliancy rejoiced in
her with exceeding joy, saying, “O my daughter, my heart was troubled
about thee and in my uneasiness I offended against this my sister the
Koranist with a speech that wounded her.” Replied Mahziyah, “Rise and
kiss her hands and feet, for she hath been to me as a servant in my hour
of need, and if thou do it not thou art no mamma of mine, nor am I thy
girl.” So the mother went up at once to the old woman and made her peace
with her. Meanwhile, the young man recovered from his drunkenness and
missed the damsel, but congratulated himself on having enjoyed his
desire. Presently Miryam the old Koranist came in to him and saluted
him, saying, “What thinkest thou of my feat?” Quoth he, “Excellently
well conceived and contrived of thee was that same.” Then quoth she,
“Come, let us mend what we have marred and restore this girl to her
husband, for we have been the cause of their separation and it is
unrighteous.” Asked he, “How shall I do?” and she answered, “Go to Abu
al-Fath’s shop and salute him and sit down by him, till thou seest me
pass by, when do thou rise in haste and catch hold of my dress and abuse
me and threaten me, demanding of me the veil. And do thou say to the
merchant:—Thou knowest, O my lord, the face-veil I bought of thee for
fifty dinars? It so chanced that my handmaid put it on and burnt a
corner of it by accident; so she gave it to this old woman, who took it,
promising to get it fine-drawn[236] and return it, and went away, nor
have I seen her from that day to this.” “With joy and good will,”
replied the young man, and rising forthright, walked to the shop of the
silk merchant, with whom he sat awhile till behold, the old woman passed
telling her beads on a rosary she held in hand; whereupon he sprang up
and laying hold of her dress began to abuse and rail at her, whilst she
answered him with fair words, saying, “Indeed, my son, thou art
excusable.” So the people of the bazar flocked round the two, saying,
“What is the matter?” and he replied, “O folk, I bought of this merchant
a veil for fifty dinars and gave it to my slave-girl, who wore it
awhile, then sat down to fumigate it with perfume. Presently a spark
flew out of the censer and, lighting on the edge of the veil, burnt a
hole in it. So we committed it to this pestilent old woman, that she
might give it to who should fine-draw it and return it to us; but from
that time we have never set eyes on her again till this day.” Answered
the old woman, “This young man speaks sooth. I had the veil from him,
but I took it with me into one of the houses where I am wont to visit
and forgot it there, nor do I know where I left it; and, being a poor
woman, I feared its owner and dared not face him.” Now the girl’s
husband was listening to all they said,——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Six Hundred and Second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the young man
seized the old woman and spoke to her of the veil as she had primed him,
the girl’s husband was listening to all they said, from beginning to
end, and when he heard the tale which the crafty old woman had contrived
with the young man, he rose to his feet and said, “Allah Almighty! I
crave pardon of the Omnipotent One for my sins and for what my heart
suspected!” And he praised the Lord who had discovered to him the truth.
Then he accosted the old woman and said to her, “Dost thou use to visit
us?”[237] Replied she, “O my son, I visit you and other than you, for
the sake of alms; but from that day to this, none hath given me news of
the veil.” Asked the merchant, “Hast thou enquired at my house?” and she
answered, “O my lord, I did indeed go to thy house and ask; but they
told me that the person of the house[238] had been divorced by the
merchant; so I went away and asked no farther; nor have I enquired of
anybody else until this day.” Hereupon the merchant turned to the young
man and said. “Let the old woman go her way; for the veil is with me.”
So saying he brought it out from the shop and gave it to the fine-drawer
before all present. Then he betook himself to his wife and, giving her
somewhat of money, took her to himself again, after making abundance of
excuses to her and asking pardon of Allah, because he knew not what the
old woman had done. (Said the Wazir), This then, O King, is an instance
of the malice of women and for another to the same purport, I have heard
tell the following tale anent


            _THE KING’S SON AND THE IFRIT’S MISTRESS_.[239]

A certain King’s son was once walking alone for his pleasure, when he
came to a green meadow, abounding in trees laden with fruit and birds
singing on the boughs, and a river running athwart it. The place pleased
him; so he sat down there and taking out some dried fruits he had
brought with him, began to eat, when lo! he espied a great smoke rising
up to heaven and, taking fright, he climbed up into a tree and hid
himself among the branches. Thence he saw an Ifrit rise out of the midst
of the stream bearing on his head a chest of marble, secured by a
padlock. He set down the chest on the meadow-sward and opened it and
there came forth a damsel of mortal race like the sun shining in the
sheeny sky. After seating her he solaced himself by gazing on her
awhile, then laid his head in her lap and fell asleep, whereupon she
lifted up his head and laying it on the chest, rose and walked about.
Presently, she chanced to raise her eyes to the tree wherein was the
Prince, and seeing him, signed to him to come down. He refused, but she
swore to him, saying, “Except thou come down and do as I bid thee, I
will wake the Ifrit and point thee out to him, when he will straightway
kill thee.” The King’s son fearing she would do as she said, came down,
whereupon she kissed his hands and feet and besought him to do her need.
To this he consented and, when he had satisfied her wants, she said to
him, “Give me this seal-ring I see on thy finger.” So he gave her his
signet and she set it in a silken kerchief she had with her, wherein
were more than fourscore others. When the Prince saw this, he asked her,
“What dost thou with all these rings?” and she answered, “In very sooth
this Ifrit carried me off from my father’s palace and shut me in this
box, which he beareth about on his head wherever he goeth, with the keys
about him; and he hardly leaveth me one moment alone of the excess of
his jealousy over me, and hindereth me from what I desire. When I saw
this, I swore that I would deny my last favours to no man whatsoever,
and these rings thou seest are after the tale of the men who have had
me; for after coition I took from each a seal-ring and laid it in this
kerchief.” Then she added, “And now go thy ways, that I may look for
another than thyself, for the Ifrit will not awake yet awhile.” Hardly
crediting what he had heard, the Prince returned to his father’s palace,
but the King knew naught of the damsel’s malice (for she feared not this
and took no count thereof), and seeing that his son had lost his ring,
he bade put him to death.[240] Then he rose from his place and entered
his palace; but his Wazirs came in to him and prevailed with him to
abandon his purpose. The same night, the King sent for all of them and
thanked them for having dissuaded him from slaying his son; and the
Prince also thanked them, saying, “It was well done of you to counsel my
father to let me live and Inshallah! I will soon requite you
abundantly.” Then he related to them how he had lost the ring, and they
offered up prayers for his long life and advancement and withdrew. “See
then, O King,” (said the Wazir), “the malice of women and what they do
unto men.” The King hearkened to the Minister’s counsel and again
countermanded his order to slay his son. Next morning, it being the
eighth day, as the King sat in his audience-chamber in the midst of his
Grandees and Emirs and Wazirs and Olema, the Prince entered, with his
hand in that of his governor, Al-Sindibad, and praised his father and
his Ministers and lords and divines in the most eloquent words and
thanked them for having saved his life; so that all who were present
wondered at his eloquence and fluency of speech. His father rejoiced in
him with exceeding, all-surpassing joy, and calling him to him, kissed
him between the eyes. Then he called his preceptor, Al-Sindibad, and
asked him why his son had kept silence these seven days, to which he
replied, “O our lord, the truth is, it was I who enjoined him to this,
in my fear for him of death: I knew this from the day of his birth; and,
when I took his nativity, I found it written in the stars that, if he
should speak during this period, he would surely die; but now the danger
is over, by the King’s fortune.” At this the King was glad and said to
his Wazirs, “If I had killed my son, would the fault have fallen on me
or the damsel or on the preceptor, Al-Sindibad?” But all present
refrained from replying, and Al-Sindibad said to the Prince, “Answer
thou, O my son.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


            Now when it was the Six Hundred and Third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Al-Sindibad
said, “Answer thou, O my son,” the Prince replied, “I have heard tell
that a merchant at whose house certain guests once alighted sent his
slave-girl to the market to buy a jar of clotted milk.[241] So she
bought it and set out on her return home; but on the way there passed
over her a kite, holding and squeezing a serpent in its claws, and a
drop of the serpent’s venom fell into the milk-jar, unknown of the girl.
So, when she came back, the merchant took the milk from her and drank of
it, he and his guests; but hardly had it settled in their stomachs when
they all died.[242] Now consider, O King, whose was the fault in this
matter?” Thereupon some present said, “It was the fault of the company
who drank the milk without examining it.” And other some, “That of the
girl, who left the jar without cover.” But Al-Sindibad asked the Prince,
“What sayest thou, O my son?” Answered he, “I say that the folk err; it
was neither the fault of the damsel nor of the company, for their
appointed hour was come, their divinely-decreed provision was exhausted
and Allah had fore-ordained them to die thus.”[243] When the courtiers
heard this, they marvelled greatly and lifted up their voices, blessing
the King’s son, and saying, “O our lord, thou hast made a reply _sans
peur_, and thou art the sagest man of thine age _sans reproche_.”
“Indeed, I am no sage,” answered the Prince; “the blind Shaykh and the
son of three years and the son of five years were wiser than I.” Said
the bystanders, “O youth, tell us the stories of these three who were
wiser than thou art, O youth.” Answered he:—With all my heart. I have
heard tell this tale concerning


           _THE SANDAL-WOOD MERCHANT AND THE SHARPERS_.[244]

There once lived an exceeding rich merchant, who was a great traveller
and who visited all manner of places. One day, being minded to journey
to a certain city, he asked those who came thence, saying, “What kind of
goods brought most profit there?” and they answered, “Chanders-wood; for
it selleth at a high price.” So he laid out all his money in sandal and
set out for that city; and arriving there at close of day, behold, he
met an old woman driving her sheep. Quoth she to him, “Who art thou, O
man?” and quoth he, “I am a stranger, a merchant.” “Beware of the
townsfolk,” said she, “for they are cheats, rascals, robbers who love
nothing more than imposing on the foreigner that they may get the better
of him and devour his substance. Indeed I give thee good counsel.” Then
she left him and on the morrow there met him one of the citizens who
saluted him and asked him, “O my lord, whence comest thou?” Answered the
merchant, “From such a place.” “And what merchandise hast thou brought
with thee?” enquired the other; and replied he, “Chanders-wood, for it
is high of price with you.” Quoth the townsman, “He blundered who told
thee that; for we burn nothing under our cooking-pots save sandal-wood,
whose worth with us is but that of fuel.” When the merchant heard this
he sighed and repented and stood balanced between belief and unbelief.
Then he alighted at one of the khans of the city, and, when it was
night, he saw a merchant make fire of chanders-wood under his
cooking-pot. Now this was the man who had spoken with him and this
proceeding was a trick of his. When the townsman saw the merchant
looking at him, he asked, “Wilt thou sell me thy sandal-wood for a
measure[245] of whatever thy soul shall desire?” “I sell it to thee,”
answered the merchant; and the buyer transported all the wood to his own
house and stored it up there; whilst the seller purposed to take an
equal quantity of gold for it. Next morning the merchant, who was a
blue-eyed man, went out to walk in the city but, as he went along, one
of the townsfolk, who was blue-eyed and one-eyed to boot, caught hold of
him, saying, “Thou art he who stole my eye and I will never let thee
go.”[246] The merchant denied this, saying, “I never stole it: the thing
is impossible.” Whereupon the folk collected round them and besought the
one-eyed man to grant him till the morrow, that he might give him the
price of his eye. So the merchant procured one to be surety for him, and
they let him go. Now his sandal had been rent in the struggle with the
one-eyed man; so he stopped at a cobbler’s stall and gave it to him,
saying, “Mend it and thou shalt have of me what shall content thee.”
Then he went on, till he came to some people sitting at play of forfeits
and sat down with them, to divert his cark and care. They invited him to
play with them and he did so; but they practised on him and overcoming
him, offered him his choice,[247] either to drink up the sea or disburse
all the money he had. “Have patience with me till to-morrow,” said he,
and they granted him the delay he sought; whereupon he went away, sore
concerned for what had betided him and knowing not how he should do, and
sat down in a solitary place heart-heavy, care-full, thought-opprest.
And behold, the old woman passed by and seeing him thus, said to him,
“Peradventure the townsfolk have gotten the better of thee, for I see
thee troubled at that which hath befallen thee: recount to me what
aileth thee.” So he told her all that had passed from first to last, and
she said, “As for him who diddled thee in the matter of the
chanders-wood, thou must know that with us it is worth ten gold pieces a
pound. But I will give thee a rede, whereby I trust thou shalt deliver
thyself; and it is this. Go to such and such a gate whereby lives a
blind Shaykh, a cripple, who is knowing, wise as a wizard and
experienced; and all resort to him and ask him what they require, when
he counsels them what will be for their advantage; for he is versed in
craft[248] and magic and trickery. Now he is a sharper and the sharpers
resort to him by night; therefore, I repeat, go thou to his lodging and
hide thyself from thine adversaries, so thou mayst hear what they say,
unseen of them; for he telleth them which party got the better and which
got the worse; and haply thou shalt learn from them some plan which may
avail to deliver thee from them.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Six Hundred and Fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old woman said
to the merchant, “Go this night to that expert who is frequented by the
townsfolk and hide thine identity: haply shalt thou hear from him some
plea which shall deliver thee from thine adversaries.” So he went to the
place she mentioned and hid himself albeit he took seat near the blind
man. Before long, up came the Shaykh’s company who were wont to choose
him for their judge: they saluted the oldster and one another and sat
down round him, whereupon the merchant recognised his four adversaries.
The Chief set somewhat of food before them and they ate; then each began
to tell what had befallen him during his day, and amongst the rest came
forward he of the chanders-wood and told the Shaykh how he had bought of
one man sandal below its price, and had agreed to pay for it a Sá’a or
measure of whatever the seller should desire.[249] Quoth the old man,
“Thine opponent hath the better of thee.” Asked the other, “How can that
be?”; and the Shaykh answered, “What if he say, I will take the measure
full of gold or silver, wilt thou give it to him?” “Yes,” replied the
other, “I will give it to him and still be the gainer.” And the Shaykh
answered, “And if he say, I will take the measure full of fleas,[250]
half male and half female, what wilt thou do?” So the sharper knew that
he was worsted. Then came forward the one-eyed man and said, “O Shaykh,
I met to-day a blue-eyed man, a stranger to the town; so I picked a
quarrel with him and caught hold of him, saying:—‘Twas thou robbedst me
of my eye; nor did I let him go, till some became surety for him that he
should return to me to-morrow and satisfy me for my eye.” Quoth the
oldster, “If he will he may have the better of thee and thou the worse.”
“How so?” asked the sharper; and the Chief said, “He may say to thee,
Pluck out thine eye, and I will pluck out one of mine; then we will
weigh them both, and if thine eye be of the same weight as mine, thou
sayest sooth in what thou avouchest. So wilt thou owe him the legal
price of his eye and be stone blind, whilst he will still see with his
other eye.” So the sharper knew that the merchant might baffle him with
such plea. Then came the cobbler; and said, “O Shaykh, a man brought me
his sandal-shoe to-day, saying, Mend this; and I asked him, What wage
wilt thou give me?; when he answered, Thou shalt have of me what will
content thee. Now nothing will content me but all the wealth he hath.”
Quoth the oldster, “An he will, he may take his sandal from thee and
give thee nothing.” “How so?” quoth the cobbler, and quoth the Shaykh,
“He has but to say to thee, The Sultan’s enemies are put to the rout;
his foes are waxed weak and his children and helpers are multiplied. Art
thou content or no? If thou say, I am content,[251] he will take his
sandal and go away; and if thou say, I am not content, he will take his
sandal and beat thee therewith over the face and neck.” So the cobbler
owned himself worsted. Then came forward the gamester and said, “O
Shaykh, I played at forfeits with a man to-day and beat him and quoth I
to him:—If thou drink the sea I will give thee all my wealth; and if not
I will take all that is thine.” Replied the Chief, “An he will he may
worst thee.” “How so?” asked the sharper, and the Shaykh answered, “He
hath but to say, Hold for me the mouth of the sea in thine hand and give
it me and I will drink it. But thou wilt not be able to do this; so he
will baffle thee with this plea.” When the merchant heard this, he knew
how it behoved him to deal with his adversaries. Then the sharpers left
the Shaykh and the merchant returned to his lodging. Now when morning
morrowed, the gamester came to him and summoned him to drink the sea; so
he said to him, “Hold for me its mouth and I will drink it up.”
Whereupon he confessed himself beaten and redeemed his forfeit by paying
an hundred gold pieces. Then came the cobbler and sought of him what
should content him. Quoth the merchant, “Our lord the Sultan hath
overcome his foes and hath destroyed his enemies and his children are
multiplied. Art thou content or no?” “I am content,” replied the cobbler
and, giving up the shoe[252] without wage, went away. Next came the
one-eyed man and demanded the legal price of his eye. Said the merchant,
“Pluck out thine eye, and I will pluck out mine: then we will weigh
them, and if they are equal in weight, I will acknowledge thy truth, and
pay thee the price of thine eye; but, if they differ, thou liest and I
will sue thee for the price of mine eye.” Quoth the one-eyed man, “Grant
me time;” but the merchant answered, saying, “I am a stranger and grant
time to none, nor will I part from thee till thou pay.” So the sharper
ransomed his eye by paying him an hundred ducats and went away. Last of
all came the buyer of the chanders-wood and said, “Take the price of thy
ware.” Asked the merchant, “What wilt thou give me?”; and the other
answered, “We agreed for a Sá’a-measure of whatever thou shouldst
desire; so, if thou wilt, take it full of gold and silver.” “Not I,”
rejoined the merchant, “Not I! nothing shall serve me but I must have it
full of fleas, half male and half female.” Said the Sharper, “I can do
nothing of the kind;” and, confessing himself beaten, returned him his
sandal-wood and redeemed himself from him with an hundred sequins, to be
off his bargain. Then the merchant sold the chanders-wood at his own
price and, quitting that city of sharpers, returned to his own
land.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


            Now when it was the Six Hundred and Fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the merchant
had sold his chanders-wood and had taken the money he quitted that city
and returned to his own land. Then the Prince continued, “But this is
not more wondrous than the tale of the three-year-old child.” “What may
that be?” asked the King, and the Prince answered:—I have heard tell
this tale of


             _THE DEBAUCHEE AND THE THREE-YEAR-OLD CHILD_.

Know, O King that a certain profligate man, who was addicted to the sex,
once heard of a beautiful and lovely woman who dwelt in a city other
than his own. So he journeyed thither, taking with him a present, and
wrote her a note, setting forth all that he suffered of love-longing and
desire for her and how his passion for her had driven him to forsake his
native land and come to her and he ended by praying for an assignation.
She gave him leave to visit her and, as he entered her abode, she stood
up and received him with all honour and worship, kissing his hands and
entertaining him with the best entertainment of meat and drink. Now she
had a little son, but three years old, whom she left and busied herself
in cooking rice.[253] Presently the man said to her, “Come, let us go
and lie together;” but she replied, “My son is sitting looking at us.”
Quoth the man, “He is a little child, understanding not neither knowing
how to speak.” Quoth the woman, “Thou wouldst not say thus, an thou knew
his intelligence.” When the boy saw that the rice was done, he wept with
bitter weeping and his mother said to him, “What gars thee weep, O my
son?” “Ladle me out some rice,” answered he, “and put clarified butter
in it.” So she ladled him out somewhat of rice and put butter therein;
and the child ate a little, then began to weep again. Quoth she, “What
ails thee now, O my son?”; and quoth he, “O mother mine, I want some
sugar with my rice.” At this said the man, who was an-angered, “Thou art
none other than a curst child.” “Curst thyself, by Allah,” answered the
boy, “seeing thou weariest thyself and journeyest from city to city, in
quest of adultery. As for me, I wept because I had somewhat in my eye,
and my tears brought it ought; and now I have eaten rice with butter and
sugar and am content; so which is the curst of us twain?” The man was
confounded at this rebuke from a little child and forthright grace
entered him and he was reclaimed. Wherefore he laid not a finger on the
woman, but went out from her and returned to his own country, where he
lived a contrite life till he died. As for the story of the
five-year-old child (continued the Prince), I have heard tell, O King,
the following anent


                          _THE STOLEN PURSE_.

Four merchants once owned in common a thousand gold pieces; so they laid
them mingled together in one purse and set out to buy merchandise
therewith. They happened as they wended their way on a beautiful garden;
so they left the purse with a woman who had care of the garden, saying
to her, “Mind thee, thou shalt not give it back save when all four of us
in person demand it of thee.” She agreed to this and they entered and
strolled awhile about the garden-walks and ate and drank and made merry,
after which one of them said to the others, “I have with me scented
fuller’s-earth; come, let us wash our heads therewith in this running
water.” Quoth another, “We lack a comb;” and a third, “Let us ask the
keeper; belike she hath a comb.” Thereupon one of them arose and
accosting the care-taker, said to her, “Give me the purse.” Said she,
“Not until ye be all present or thy fellows bid me give it thee.” Then
he called to his companions (who could see him but not hear him) saying,
“She will not give it me;” and they said to her, “Give it him,” thinking
he meant the comb. So she gave him the purse and he took it and made off
as fast as he could. When the three others were weary of waiting, they
went to the keeper and asked her, “Why wilt thou not give him the comb?”
Answered she, “He demanded naught of me save the purse, and I gave not
that same but with your consent, and he went his way with it.” When they
heard her words they buffeted their faces and, laying hands upon her,
said, “We authorized thee only to give him the comb;” and she rejoined,
“He named not a comb to me.” Then they seized her and haled her before
the Kazi, to whom they related their claim and he condemned her to make
good the purse and bound over sundry of her debtors to answer for
her.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


            Now when it was the Six Hundred and Sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Kazi condemned
the care-taker to make good the purse and bound over sundry of her
debtors to answer for her. So she went forth, confounded and knowing not
her way out of the difficulty. Presently she met a five-year-old boy
who, seeing her troubled, said to her, “What ails thee, O my mother?”
But she gave him no answer, contemning him because of his tender age,
and he repeated his question a second time and a third time till, at
last, she told him all that had passed,[254] not forgetting the
condition that she was to keep the purse until all four had demanded it
of her. Said the boy, “Give me a dirham to buy sweetmeats withal and I
will tell thee how thou mayst acquit thyself.” So she gave him a silver
and said to him, “What hast thou to say?” Quoth he, “Return to the Kazi,
and say to him, It was agreed between myself and them that I should not
give them the purse, except all four of them were present. Let them all
four come and I will give them the purse, as was agreed.” So she went
back to the Kazi and said to him as the boy had counselled; and he asked
the merchants, “Was it thus agreed between you and this woman?”; and
they answered, “Yes.” Quoth the Kazi, “Then bring me your comrade and
take the purse.” So they went in quest of their fellow, whilst the
keeper came off scot-free and went her way without let or hindrance. And
Allah is Omniscient![255] When the King and his Wazir and those present
in the assembly heard the Prince’s words they said to his father, “O our
lord the King, in very sooth thy son is the most accomplished man of his
time;” and they called down blessings upon the King and the Prince. Then
the King strained his son to his bosom and kissed him between the eyes
and questioned him of what had passed between the favourite and himself;
and the Prince sware to him, by Almighty Allah and by His Holy Prophet
that it was she who had required him of love which he refused, adding,
“Moreover, she promised me that she would give thee poison to drink and
kill thee, so should the kingship be mine; whereupon I waxed wroth and
signed to her:—O accursed One, whenas I can speak I will requite thee!
So she feared me and did what she did.” The King believed his words and
sending for the favourite said to those present, “How shall we put this
damsel to death?” Some counselled him to cut out her tongue and other
some to burn it with fire; but, when she came before the King, she said
to him, “My case with thee is like unto naught save the tale of the fox
and the folk.” “How so?” asked he; and she said:—I have heard, O King,
tell a


                 _STORY OF THE FOX AND THE FOLK_.[256]

A fox once made his way into a city by the wall and, entering a
currier’s storehouse, played havoc with all therein and spoiled the
skins for the owner. One day, the currier set a trap for him and taking
him, beat him with the hides, till he fell down senseless, whereupon the
man deeming him to be dead, cast him out into the road by the city-gate.
Presently, an old woman who was walking by, seeing the fox said, “This
is a fox whose eye, hung about a child’s neck, is salutary against
weeping.” So she pluckt out his right eye and went away. Then passed a
boy, who said, “What does this tail on this fox?”; and cut off his
brush. After a while, up came a man and saying, “This is a fox whose
gall cleareth away film and dimness from the eyes, if they be anointed
therewith like kohl,” took out his knife to slit up the fox’s paunch.
But Reynard said in himself, “We bore with the plucking out of the eye
and the cutting off of the tail; but, as for the slitting of the paunch,
there is no putting up with that!” So saying, he sprang up and made off
through the gate of the city, hardly believing in his escape. Quoth the
King, “I excuse her, and in my son’s hands be her doom. If he will, let
him torture her, and if he will, let him kill her.” Quoth the Prince,
“Pardon is better than vengeance and mercy is of the quality of the
noble;” and the King repeated, “‘Tis for thee to decide, O my son.” So
the Prince set her free, saying, “Depart from our neighbourhood and
Allah pardon what is past!” Therewith the King rose from his throne of
estate and seating his son thereon, crowned him with his crown and bade
the Grandees of his realm swear fealty and commanded them do homage to
him. And he said, “O folk, indeed, I am stricken in years and desire to
withdraw apart and devote myself only to the service of my Lord; and I
call you to witness that I divest myself of the kingly dignity, even as
I have divested myself of my crown and set it on my son’s head.” So the
troops and officers swore fealty to the Prince, and his father gave
himself up to the worship of his Lord nor stinted from this, whilst his
son abode in his kingship, doing justice and righteousness; and his
power was magnified and his sultanate strengthened and he abode in all
delight and solace of life, till there came to him the Certainty.

-----

Footnote 153:

  Here begins the Sindibad-namah, the origin of Dolopathos (thirteenth
  century by the Trouvère Harbers); of the “Seven Sages” (John Holland
  in 1575); the “Seven Wise Masters” and a host of minor romances. The
  Persian Sindibád-Námah assumed its present shape in A.D. 1375:
  Professor Falconer printed an abstract of it in the Orient. Journ.
  (xxxv. and xxxvi. 1841), and Mr. W. A. Clouston reissued the “Book of
  Sindibad,” with useful notes in 1884. An abstract of the Persian work
  is found in all edits. of The Nights; but they differ greatly,
  especially that in the Bresl. Edit. xii. pp. 237–377, from which I
  borrow the introduction. According to Hamzah Isfahání (ch. xli.) the
  Reguli who succeeded to Alexander the Great and preceded Sapor caused
  some seventy books to be composed, amongst which were the Liber Maruc,
  Liber Barsínas, Liber Sindibad, Liber Shimás, etc., etc., etc.

Footnote 154:

  Eusebius De Præp. Evang. iii. 4, quotes Prophesy concerning the
  Egyptian belief in the Lords of the Ascendant whose names are given ἐν
  τοῖς ἀλμενιχιακοῖς: in these “Almenichiaka” we have the first almanac,
  as the first newspaper in the Roman “Acta Diurna.”

Footnote 155:

  “Al-Mas’údi,” the “Herodotus of the Arabs,” thus notices Sindibad the
  Sage (in his Murúj etc., written about A.D. 934). “During the reign of
  Kurúsh (Cyrus) lived Al-Sindibad who wrote the Seven Wazirs, etc.”
  Al-Ya’akúbi had also named him circ. A.D. 880. For notes on the name
  Sindibad, see Sindbad the Seaman, Night dxxxvi. I need not enter into
  the history of the “Seven Sages,” a book evidently older than The
  Nights in present form; but refer the reader to Mr. Clouston, of whom
  more in a future page.

Footnote 156:

  Evidently borrowed from the Christians, although the latter borrowed
  from writers of the most remote antiquity. Yet the saying is the basis
  of all morality and in few words contains the highest human wisdom.

Footnote 157:

  It is curious to compare the dry and business-like tone of the Arab
  style with the rhetorical luxuriance of the Persian: p. 10 of Mr.
  Clouston’s “Book of Sindibad.”

Footnote 158:

  In the text “Isfídáj,” the Pers. Isped (or Saféd) áb, lit. = white
  water, ceruse used for women’s faces suggesting our “Age of Bismuth,”
  Blanc Rosati, Crême de l’Impératrice, Perline, Opaline, Milk of
  Beauty, etc., etc., etc.

Footnote 159:

  Commentators compare this incident with the biblical story of Joseph
  and Potiphar’s wife and with the old Egyptian romance and fairy tale
  of the brothers Anapon and Saton dating from the fourteenth century,
  the days of Pharaoh Ramses Miamun (who built Pi-tum and Ramses) at
  whose court Moses or Osarsiph is supposed to have been reared
  (Cambridge Essays 1858). The incident would often occur, _e.g._
  Phædra-cum-Hippolytus; Fausta-cum-Crispus and Lucinian; Asoka’s wife
  and Kunála, etc., etc. Such things happen in every-day life, and the
  situation has recommended itself to the folklore of all peoples.

Footnote 160:

  Another version of this tale is given in the Bresl. Edit. (vol. viii.
  pp. 273–8: Night 675–6). It is the “Story of the King and the Virtuous
  Wife” in the Book of Sindibad. In the versions Arabic and Greek
  (Syntipas) the King forgets his ring; in the Hebrew Mishlé Sandabar
  his staff, and his sandals in the old Spanish Libro de los Engannos et
  los Asayamientos de las Mugeres.

Footnote 161:

  One might fancy that this is Biblical, Bathsheba and Uriah. But such
  “villanies” must often have occurred in the East, at different times
  and places, without requiring direct derivation. The learned Prof. H.
  H. Wilson was mistaken in supposing that these fictions “originate in
  the feeling which has always pervaded the East unfavourable to the
  dignity of women.” They belong to a certain stage of civilisation when
  the sexes are at war with each other; and they characterise chivalrous
  Europe as well as misogynous Asia; witness Jankins, clerk of
  Oxenforde; while Æsop’s fable of the Lion and the Man also explains
  their frequency.

Footnote 162:

  The European form of the tale is “Toujours perdrix,” a sentence often
  quoted but seldom understood. It is the reproach of M. l’Abbé when the
  Count (proprietor of the pretty Countess) made him eat partridge every
  day for a month; on which the Abbé says, “Always partridge is too much
  of a good thing!” Upon this text the Count speaks. A correspondent
  mentions that it was told by Horace Walpole concerning the Confessor
  of a French King who reproved him for conjugal infidelities. The
  degraded French (for “toujours de la perdrix” or “des perdrix”)
  suggests a foreign origin. Another friend refers me to No. x. of the
  “Cent Nouvelles Nouvelles” (compiled in A.D. 1432 for the amusement of
  the Dauphin, afterwards Louis XI.) whose chief personage “un grand
  seigneur du Royaulme d’Angleterre,” is lectured upon fidelity by the
  lord’s mignon, a “jeune et gracieux gentil homme de son hostel.” Here
  the partridge became pastés d’anguille. Possibly Scott refers to it in
  Redgauntlet (chapt. iv.); “One must be very fond of partridge to
  accept it when thrown in one’s face.” Did not Voltaire complain at
  Potsdam of “toujours perdrix” and make it one of his grievances? A
  similar story is that of the chaplain who, weary of the same diet,
  uttered “grace” as follows:—

                   Rabbits hot, rabbits cold,
                     Rabbits tender, and rabbits tough,
                   Rabbits young, and rabbits old—
                     I thank the Lord I’ve had enough.

  And I as cordially thank my kind correspondents.

Footnote 163:

  The great legal authority of the realm.

Footnote 164:

  In all editions the Wazir here tells the Tale of the Merchant’s Wife
  and the Parrot which, following Lane, I have transferred to vol. i. p.
  52. But not to break the tradition I here introduce the Persian
  version of the story from the “Book of Sindibad.” In addition to the
  details given in the note to vol. i., 52; I may quote the two
  talking-birds left to watch over his young wife by Rajah Rasálú (son
  of Shaliváhana the great Indian monarch circ. A.D. 81), who is to the
  Punjab what Rustam is to Persia and Antar to Arabia. In the “Seven
  Wise Masters” the parrot becomes a magpie and Mr. Clouston, in some
  clever papers on “Popular Tales and Fictions” contributed to the
  _Glasgow Evening Times_ (1884), compares it with the history, in the
  Gesta Romanorum, of the Adulteress, the Abigail, and the Three Cocks,
  two of which crowed during the congress of the lady and her lover. All
  these evidently belong to the Sindibad cycle.

Footnote 165:

  In the days of the Caliph Al-Mustakfí bi ‘llah (A.H. 333 = 944) the
  youth of Baghdad studied swimming and it is said that they could swim
  holding chafing-dishes upon which were cooking-pots and keep afloat
  till the meat was dressed. The story is that of “The Washerman and his
  Son who were drowned in the Nile,” of the Book of Sindibad.

Footnote 166:

  Her going to the bath suggested that she was fresh from coition.

Footnote 167:

  Taken from the life of the Egyptian Mameluke Sultan (No. viii. regn.
  A.H. 825 = A.D. 1421) who would not suffer his subjects to prostrate
  themselves or kiss the ground before him. See D’Herbelot for details.

Footnote 168:

  This nauseous Joe Miller has often been told in the hospitals of
  London and Paris. It is as old as the Hitopadesa.

Footnote 169:

  Koran iv. 81, “All is from Allah;” but the evil which befals mankind,
  though ordered by Allah, is yet the consequence of their own
  wickedness (I add, which wickedness was created by Allah).

Footnote 170:

  The Bresl. Edit. (xii. 266) says “bathing.”

Footnote 171:

  This tale is much like that told in the Fifth Night (vol. i. 54). It
  is the story of the Prince and the Lamia in the Book of Sindibad
  wherein it is given with Persian rhetoric and diffuseness.

Footnote 172:

  Arab “Wa’ar” = rocky, hilly, tree-less ground unfit for riding. I have
  noted that the three Heb. words “Year” (_e.g._ Kiryath-Yearim = City
  of forest), “Choresh” (now Hirsh, a scrub), and “Pardés” (παράδεισος a
  chase, a hunting-park opposed to κῆπος, an orchard) are preserved in
  Arabic and are intelligible in Palestine (Unexplored Syria, i. 207).

Footnote 173:

  The privy and the bath are favourite haunts of the Jinns.

Footnote 174:

  Arab history is full of petty wars caused by trifles. In Egypt the
  clans Sa’ad and Harám and in Syria the Kays and Yaman (which remain to
  the present day) were as pugnacious as Highland Caterans. The tale
  bears some likeness to the accumulative nursery rhymes in “The House
  that Jack Built,” and “The Old Woman and the Crooked Sixpence;” which
  find their indirect original in an allegorical Talmudic hymn.

Footnote 175:

  This is “The Story of the Old Man who sent his Young Wife to the
  Market to buy Rice,” told with Persian reflections in the “Book of
  Sindibad.”

Footnote 176:

  Koran xii. 28. The words were spoken by Potiphar to Joseph.

Footnote 177:

  Koran iv. 78. A mis-quotation, the words are, “Fight therefore against
  the friends of Satan, for the craft of Satan shall be weak.”

Footnote 178:

  _i.e._ Koranic versets.

Footnote 179:

  In the Book of Sindibad this is the “Story of the Prince who went out
  to hunt and the stratagem which the Wazir practised on him.”

Footnote 180:

  I have noted that it is a dire affront to an Arab if his first cousin
  marry any save himself without his formal leave.

Footnote 181:

  _i.e._ the flowery, the splendid; an epithet of Fatimah, the daughter
  of the Apostle “the bright blooming.” Fátimah is an old Arab name of
  good omen, “the weaner:” in Egypt it becomes Fattúmah (an
  incrementative = “great weaner”); and so Amínah, Khadíjah and Nafísah
  on the banks of the Nile are barbarised to Ammúnah, Khaddúgah and
  Naffúsah.

Footnote 182:

  _i.e._ his coming misfortune, the phrase being euphemistic.

Footnote 183:

  Arab. Ráy: in theology it means “private judgment” and Ráyí (act.
  partic.) is a Rationalist. The Hanaff School is called “Asháb al-Ráy”
  because it allows more liberty of thought than the other three
  orthodox.

Footnote 184:

  The angels in Al-Islam ride piebalds.

Footnote 185:

  In the Bresl. Edit. “Zájir” (xii. 286).

Footnote 186:

  This is the “King’s Son and the Merchant’s Wife” of the Hitopadesa
  (chapt. i.) transferred to all the Prakrit versions of India. It is
  the Story of the Bath-keeper who conducted his Wife to the Son of the
  King of Kanuj in the Book of Sindibad.

Footnote 187:

  The pious Caliph Al-Muktadi bi Amri ‘llah (A.H. 467 = A.D. 1075) was
  obliged to forbid men entering the baths of Baghdad without drawers.

Footnote 188:

  This peculiarity is not uncommon amongst the so-called Aryan and
  Semitic races, while to the African it is all but unknown. Women
  highly prize a conformation which (as the prostitute described it) is
  always “either in his belly or in mine.”

Footnote 189:

  Easterns, I have said, are perfectly aware of the fact that women
  corrupt women much more than men do. The tale is the “Story of the
  Libertine Husband” in the Book of Sindibad; blended with the “Story of
  the Go-between and the Bitch” in the Book of Sindibad. It is related
  in the “Disciplina Clericalis” of Alphonsus (A.D. 1106); the fabliau
  of _La vieille qui séduisit la jeune fille_; the Gesta Romanorum
  (thirteenth century) and the “Cunning Siddhikari” in the
  Kathá-Sarit-Ságara.

Footnote 190:

  The Kashmír people, men and women, have a very bad name in Eastern
  tales, the former for treachery and the latter for unchastity. A
  Persian distich says:

  If folk be scarce as food in dearth ne’er let three lots come near ye:
  First Sindi, second Jat, and third a rascally Kashmeeree.

  The women have fair skins and handsome features but, like all living
  in that zone, Persians, Sindis, Afghans, etc., their bosoms fall after
  the first child and become like udders. This is not the case with
  Hindú women, Rajpúts, Maráthís, etc.

Footnote 191:

  By these words she appealed to his honour.

Footnote 192:

  These vehicles suggest derivation from European witchery. In the
  Bresl. Edit. (xii. 304) one of the women rides a “Miknasah” or broom.

Footnote 193:

  _i.e._ a recluse who avoids society.

Footnote 194:

  “Consecrated ground” is happily unknown to Moslems.

Footnote 195:

  This incident occurs in the “Third Kalandar’s Tale.” See vol. i, 157;
  and note to p. 145.

Footnote 196:

  The Mac. Edit. has “Nahr” = river.

Footnote 197:

  _i.e._ marked with the Wasm or tribal sign to show their blood. The
  subject of Wasm is extensive and highly interesting, for many of these
  brands date doubtless from prehistoric ages. For instance, some of the
  great Anazah nation (not tribe) uses a circlet, the initial of their
  name (an Ayn-letter), which thus shows the eye from which it was
  formed. I have given some specimens of Wasm in The Land of Midian (i.
  320) where, as amongst the “Sinaitic” Badawin, various kinds of
  crosses are preserved long after the death and burial of Christianity.

Footnote 198:

  _i.e._ from the heights. The “Sayl” is a dangerous feature in Arabia
  as in Southern India, where many officers have lost their lives by
  trying to swim it.

Footnote 199:

  Arab. “‘Ujb.” I use arrogance in the Spanish sense of “arrogante,” gay
  and gallant.

Footnote 200:

  In this rechauffé Paul Pry escapes without losing an eye.

Footnote 201:

  Eastern tale-tellers always harp upon this theme, the cunning
  precautions taken by mankind and their utter confusion by “Fate and
  Fortune.” In such matters the West remarks, “Ce que femme veut, Dieu
  veut.”

Footnote 202:

  As favourite an occupation in Oriental lands as in Southern Europe and
  the Brazil, where the Quinta or country villa must be built by the
  road-side to please the mistress.

Footnote 203:

  The ink-case would contain the pens; hence called in India Kalamdán =
  reed (pen) box. I have advised travellers to prefer the strong
  Egyptian article of brass to the Persian, which is of wood or
  papier-mâché, prettily varnished, but not to wear it in the
  waist-belt, as this is a sign of being a scribe (Pilgrimage i. 353).

Footnote 204:

  The vulgar Eastern idea is that women are quite knowing enough without
  learning to read and write: and at all events they should not be
  taught anything beyond reading the Koran, or some clearly-written
  book. The contrast with modern Europe is great; greater still in
  Anglo-America of our day, and greatest with the new sects which
  propose “biunes” and “bisexuals” and “women robed with the sun.”

Footnote 205:

  In the Bresl. Edit. the Prince ties a key to a second arrow and shoots
  it into the pavilion.

Footnote 206:

  The “box-trick” has often been played with success, by Lord Byron
  amongst a host of others. The readiness with which the Wazir enters
  into the scheme is characteristic of oriental servility: an honest
  Moslem should at least put in a remonstrance.

Footnote 207:

  This story appears familiar, but I have not found it easy to trace. In
  “The Book of Sindibad” (p. 83) it is apparently represented by a
  lacuna. In the Squire’s Tale of Chaucer Canace’s ring enables the
  wearer to understand bird-language, not merely to pretend as does the
  slave-boy in the text.

Footnote 208:

  The crow is an ill-omened bird in Al-Islam and in Eastern Christendom.
  “The crow of cursed life and foul odour,” says the Book of Kalilah and
  Dimna (p. 44). The Hindus are its only protectors, and in this matter
  they follow suit with the Guebres. I may note that the word belongs to
  the days before “Aryan” and “Semitic” speech had parted; we find it in
  Heb. Oreb; Arab. Ghuráb; Lat. Corvus; Engl. Crow, etc.

Footnote 209:

  Again in the Hibernian sense of being “kilt.”

Footnote 210:

  Quoted in Night dlxxxii.; said by Kitfír or Itfír (Potiphar) when his
  wife (Ráil or Zulaykha) charged Joseph with attempting her chastity
  and he saw that the youth’s garment was whole in front and rent in
  rear (Koran, chapt. xii.).

Footnote 211:

  This witty tale, ending somewhat grossly here, has over-wandered the
  world. First we find it in the Kathá (S. S.) where Upakoshá, the merry
  wife of Vararuchi, disrobes her suitors, a family priest, a commander
  of the guard and the prince’s tutor, under plea of the bath and stows
  them away in baskets which suggest Falstaff’s “buck-basket.” In Miss
  Stokes’ “Indian Fairy Tales” the fair wife of an absent merchant plays
  a similar notable prank upon the Kotwal, the Wazir, the Kazi and the
  King; and akin to this is the exploit of Temal Rámákistnan, the
  Madrasi Tyl Eulenspiegel and Scogin who by means of a lady saves his
  life from the Rajah and the High Priest. Mr. G. H. Damant (pp. 357–360
  of the “Indian Antiquary” of 1873) relates the “Tale of the
  Touchstone,” a legend of Dinahpur, wherein a woman “sells” her four
  admirers. In the Persian Tales ascribed to the Dervish “Mokles”
  (Mukhlis) of Isfahan, the lady Aruyá tricks and exposes a Kazi, a
  doctor and a governor. Boccaccio (viii. 1) has the story of a lady who
  shut up her gallant in a chest with her husband’s sanction; and a
  similar tale (ix. 1) of Rinuccio and Alexander with the corpse of
  Scannadeo (Throkh-god). Hence a Lydgate (circ. A.D. 1430) derived the
  plot of his metrical tale of the “Lady Prioress and her Three
  Sisters”; which was modified in the Netherlandish version by the
  introduction of the Long Wapper, a Flemish Robin Goodfellow. Followed
  in English the metrical tale of “The Wright’s Chaste Wife,” by Adam of
  Cobham (edited by Mr. Furnivall from a MS. of circ. A.D. 1460) where
  the victims are a lord, a steward and a proctor. See also “The
  Master-Maid” in Dr. (now Sir George) Dasent’s “Popular Tales from the
  Norse.” Mr. Clouston, who gives these details more fully, mentions a
  similar Scottish story concerning a lascivious monk and the chaste
  wife of a miller.

Footnote 212:

  When Easterns sit down to a drinking bout, which means to get drunk as
  speedily and pleasantly as possible, they put off dresses of dull
  colours and robe themselves in clothes supplied by the host, of the
  brightest he may have, especially yellow, green and red of different
  shades. So the lady’s proceeding was not likely to breed suspicion;
  although her tastes were somewhat fantastic and like Miss
  Julia’s—peculiar.

Footnote 213:

  Arab. “Najásah,” meaning anything unclean which requires ablution
  before prayer. Unfortunately mucus is not of the number, so the common
  Moslem is very offensive in the matter of nose.

Footnote 214:

  Here the word “la’an” is used which most Moslems express by some
  euphemism. The vulgar Egyptian says “Na’al” (_Sapré_ and _Sapristi_
  for _Sacre_ and _Sacristie_); the Hindostani express it “I send him
  the three letters”—lám, ayn and nún.

Footnote 215:

  The Mac. Edit. is here very concise; better the Bresl. Edit. (xii.
  326). Here we have the Eastern form of the Three Wishes which dates
  from the earliest ages and which amongst us has been degraded to a
  matter of “black pudding.” It is the grossest and most brutal satire
  on the sex, suggesting that a woman would prefer an additional inch of
  penis to anything this world or the next can offer her. In the Book of
  Sindibad it is the story of the Peri and Religious Man; his learning
  the Great Name; and his consulting with his wife. See also La
  Fontaine’s “Trois Souhaits,” Prior’s “Ladle,” and “Les quatre Souhaits
  de Saint-Martin.”

Footnote 216:

  Arab. “Laylat al-Kadr” = Night of Power or of Divine Decrees. It is
  “better than a thousand months” (Koran xcvii. 3), but unhappily the
  exact time is not known although all agree that it is one of the last
  ten in Ramazan. The latter when named by Kiláb ibn Murrah, ancestor of
  Mohammed, about two centuries before Al-Islam, corresponded with
  July-August and took its name from “Ramzá” or intense heat. But the
  Prophet, in the tenth Hijrah year, most unwisely forbade “Nasy” =
  triennial intercalation (Koran ix. 36) and thus the lunar month went
  round all the seasons. On the Night of Power the Koran was sent down
  from the Preserved Tablet by Allah’s throne, to the first or lunar
  Heaven whence Gabriel brought it for opportunest revelation to the
  Apostle (Koran xcvii.). Also during this night all Divine Decrees for
  the ensuing year are taken from the Tablet and are given to the angels
  for execution whilst, the gates of Heaven being open, prayer (as in
  the text) is sure of success. This mass of absurdity has engendered a
  host of superstitions everywhere varying. Lane (Mod. Egypt, chapt.
  xxv.) describes how some of the Faithful keep tasting a cup of salt
  water which should become sweet in the Night of Nights. In (Moslem)
  India not only the sea becomes sweet, but all the vegetable creation
  bows down before Allah. The exact time is known only to Prophets; but
  the pious sit through the Night of Ramazan 27th (our 26th) praying and
  burning incense-pastilles. In Stambul this is officially held to be
  the Night of Power. So in mediæval Europe on Christmas Eve the cattle
  worshipped God in their stalls and I have met peasants in France and
  Italy who firmly believed that brute beasts on that night not only
  speak but predict the events of the coming year.

Footnote 217:

  Hence the misfortune befel her: the pious especially avoid temporal
  palaces.

Footnote 218:

  This is our tale of “The Maid and the Magpie;” the Mac. Edit. does not
  specify the “Tayr” (any bird) but the Bresl. Edit. has Ak’ak, a pie.
  The true Magpie (_C. Pica_) called Buzarái (?) and Zaghzaghán Abú
  Massáh (= the Sweeper, from its tail) is found on the Libanus and
  Anti-Libanus (Unexplored Syria ii. 77–143), but I never saw it in
  other parts of Syria or in Arabia. It is completely ignored by the
  Reverend Mr. Tristram in his painfully superficial book “The Natural
  History of the Bible,” published by the Society for Promoting
  Christian Knowledge (or rather Ignorance), London, 1873.

Footnote 219:

  This is “The Story of the Two Partridges,” told at great length in the
  Book of Sindibad. See De Sacy’s text in the Kalilah wa Damnah, quoted
  in the “Book of Kalilah and Damnah” (p. 306).

Footnote 220:

  This extremely wilful young person had rendered rape excusable. The
  same treatment is much called for by certain heroines of modern
  fiction—let me mention Princess Napraxine.

Footnote 221:

  The Story of the Hidden Robe, in the Book of Sindibad; where it is
  told with all manner of Persian embellishments.

Footnote 222:

  Now turned into Government offices for local administration; a
  “Tribunal of Commerce,” etc.

Footnote 223:

  Arab. “Bawwáb,” a personage as important as the old French concierge
  and a man of trust who has charge of the keys and with letting vacant
  rooms. In Egypt the Berber from the Upper Nile is the favourite
  suisse; being held more honest or rather less rascally than the usual
  Egyptian. These Berbers, however, are true barbarians, overfond of
  Búzah (the beer of Osiris) and not unfrequently dangerous. They are
  supposed by Moslems to descend from the old Syrians expelled by
  Joshua. For the favourite chaff against them, eating the dog (not the
  puppy-pie), see Pilgrimage i. 93. They are the “Paddies” of Egypt to
  whom all kinds of bulls and blunders are attributed.

Footnote 224:

  Arab. “Juma’ah,” which means either Friday or a week. In pre-Moslem
  times it was called Al-Arúbah (the other week-days being Shiyár or
  Saturday, Bawal, Bahan, Jabar, Dabar and Fámunís or Thursday).
  Juma’ah, literally = “Meeting” or Congregation (-day), was made to
  represent the Jewish Sabbath and the Christian Sunday because on that
  day Allah ended the work of creation; it was also the date of
  Mohammed’s entering Al-Medinah. According to Al-Bayzáwí, it was called
  Assembly-day because Ka’ab ibn Lowa, one of the Prophet’s ancestors,
  used to gather the people before him on Fridays. Moslems are not
  forbidden to do secular work after the congregational prayers at the
  hour when they must “hasten to the commemoration of Allah and leave
  merchandising” (Koran, chapt. lxii. 9).

Footnote 225:

  This is done only by the very pious: if they see a bit of bread they
  kiss it, place it upon their heads and deposit it upon a wall or some
  place where it will not be trodden on. She also removed the stones
  lest haply they prove stumbling-blocks to some Moslem foot.

Footnote 226:

  Arab. “Ashjár,” which may mean either the door-posts or the wooden
  bolts. Lane (iii. 174) translates it “among the trees”—in a room!

Footnote 227:

  Koran (ix. 51), when Mohammed reproaches the unbelievers for not
  accompanying him to victory or martyrdom.

Footnote 228:

  Arab. “Kiná’,” a true veil, not the “Burka’” or “nose-bag” with the
  peepholes. It is opposed to the “Tarkah” or “head-veil.” Europeans
  inveigh against the veil which represents the _loup_ of Louis
  Quatorze’s day: it is on the contrary the most coquettish of
  contrivances, hiding coarse skins, fleshy noses, wide mouths and
  vanishing chins; and showing only lustrous and liquid black eyes.
  Moreover a pretty woman, when she wishes, will always let you see
  something under the veil. (Pilgrimage i. 337).

Footnote 229:

  A yellow-flowered artemisia or absinthe whose wood burns like
  holm-oak. (Unexplored Syria ii. 43). See vol. ii. 24 for further
  details.

Footnote 230:

  The Farz or obligatory prayers, I have noted, must be recited (if
  necessary) in the most impure place; not so the other orisons. Hence
  the use of the “Sajjádah” or prayer-rug, an article too well known to
  require description.

Footnote 231:

  _Anglicè_ a stomach-ache, a colic.

Footnote 232:

  Arab. Al-Háfizah which has two meanings. Properly it signifies the
  third order of Traditionists out of a total of five, or those who know
  300,000 traditions and their ascriptions. Popularly “one who can
  recite the Koran by rote.” There are six great Traditionists whose
  words are held to be prime authorities; (1) Al-Bokhári; (2) Muslim;
  and these are entitled Al-Sahíhayn, The (two true) authorities. After
  them (3) Al-Tirmidi; and (4) Abu Dáud: these four being the authors of
  the “Four Sunan;” the others are (5) Al-Nasái and (6) Ibn Májah (see
  Jarrett’s Al-Siyuti pp. 2, 6; and, for modern Arab studies. Pilgrimage
  i. 154 _et seq._)

Footnote 233:

  Lane (iii. 176) marries the amorous couple, thus making the story
  highly proper and robbing it of all its point.

Footnote 234:

  Arab. “Sabbahat,” _i.e._ Sabbah-ak’ Allah bi’l khayr = Allah give thee
  good morning: still the popular phrase.

Footnote 235:

  Arab. “Ta’rísak,” with the implied hint of her being a “Mu’arrisah” or
  shepander. The Bresl. Edit. (xii. 356) bluntly says “Kiyádatak”—thy
  pimping.

Footnote 236:

  Arab. “Rafw”; the “Rafu-gar” or fine-drawer in India, who does this
  artistic style of darning, is famed for skill.

Footnote 237:

  The question sounds strange to Europeans, but in the Moslem East a man
  knows nothing, except by hearsay, of the women who visit his wife.

Footnote 238:

  Arab. “Ahl al-bayt,” so as not rudely to say “wife.”

Footnote 239:

  This is a mere abstract of the tale told in the Introduction (vol. i.
  10–12). Here, however, the rings are about eighty; there the number
  varies from ninety to five hundred and seventy.

Footnote 240:

  The father suspected the son of intriguing with one of his own women.

Footnote 241:

  Arab, and Heb. “Laban” (opp. to “laban-halíb,” or simply “halíb” =
  fresh milk), milk artificially soured, the Dahin of India, the Kisainá
  of the Slavs and our Corstophine cream. But in The Nights, contrary to
  modern popular usage, “Laban” is also applied to fresh milk. The
  soured form is universally in the East eaten with rice and enters into
  the Salátah or cucumber-salad. I have noted elsewhere that all the
  Galactophagi, the nomades who live on milk, use it in the soured never
  in the fresh form. The Badawi have curious prejudices about it: it is
  a disgrace to sell it (though not to exchange it), and “Labbán,” or
  “milk-vendor,” is an insult. The Bráhni and Beloch nomades have the
  same pundonor possibly learnt from the Arabs (Pilgrimage i. 363). For
  ‘Igt (Akit), Mahir, Saribah, Jamídah and other lactal preparations,
  see _ibid._ i. 362.

Footnote 242:

  I need hardly say that the poison would have been utterly harmless,
  unless there had been an abrasion of the skin. The slave-girl is
  blamed for carrying the jar uncovered because thus it would attract
  the evil eye. In the Book of Sindibad the tale appears as the Story of
  the Poisoned Guests; and the bird is a stork.

Footnote 243:

  The Prince expresses the pure and still popular Moslem feeling; and
  yet the learned and experienced Mr. Redhouse would confuse this
  absolute Predestination with Providence. A friend tells me that the
  idea of absolute Fate in The Nights makes her feel as if the world
  were a jail.

Footnote 244:

  In the Book of Sindibad this is the Story of the Sandal-wood Merchant
  and the Advice of the Blind Old Man. Mr. Clouston (p. 163) quotes a
  Talmudic joke which is akin to the Shaykh’s advice and a reply of Tyl
  Eulenspiegel, the arch-rogue, which has also a family resemblance.

Footnote 245:

  Arab. “Sá’a,” a measure of corn, etc., to be given in alms. The Kamus
  makes it = four mudds (each being ⅓ lbs.); the people understand by it
  four times the measure of a man’s two open hands.

Footnote 246:

  _i.e._ till thou restore my eye to me. This style of prothesis without
  apodosis is very common in Arabic and should be preserved in
  translation, as it adds a naiveté to the style. We find it in Genesis
  iii. 2, “And now lest he put forth his hand,” etc.

Footnote 247:

  They were playing at Muráhanah, like children amongst us. It is also
  called “Hukm wa Rizá” = order and consent. The penalty is usually
  something ridiculous, but here it was villainous.

Footnote 248:

  Every Moslem capital has a “Shaykh of the thieves” who holds regular
  levées and who will return stolen articles for a consideration; and
  this has lasted since the days of Diodorus Siculus (Pilgrimage i. 91).

Footnote 249:

  This was not the condition; but I have left the text as it is
  characteristic of the writer’s inconsequence.

Footnote 250:

  The idea would readily occur in Egypt where the pulex is still a
  plague although the Sultan is said to hold his court at Tiberias.
  “Male and female” says the rogue, otherwise it would be easy to fill a
  bushel with fleas. The insect was unknown to older India according to
  some and was introduced by strangers. This immigration is quite
  possible. In 1863 the jigger (_P. penetrans_) was not found in Western
  Africa; when I returned there in 1882 it had passed over from the
  Brazil and had become naturalised on the equatorial African seaboard.
  The Arabs call shrimps and prawns “sea-fleas” (bargúth al-bahr)
  showing an inland race. (See Pilgrimage i. 322.)

Footnote 251:

  Submission to the Sultan and the tidings of his well-being should
  content every Eastern subject. But, as Oriental history shows, the
  form of government is a Despotism tempered by assassination. And under
  no rule is man socially freer and his condition contrasts strangely
  with the grinding social tyranny which characterises every mode of
  democracy or constitutionalism, _i.e._ political equality.

Footnote 252:

  Here the text has “Markúb” = a shoe; elsewhere “Na’al” = a sandal,
  especially with wooden sole. In classical Arabia, however, “Na’al” may
  be a shoe, a horse-shoe (iron-plate, not rim like ours). The Bresl.
  Edit. has “Watá,” any foot gear.

Footnote 253:

  Water-melons (batáyikh) says the Mac. Edit. a misprint for Aruz or
  rice. Water-melons are served up raw cut into square mouthfuls, to be
  eaten with rice and meat. They serve excellently well to keep the
  palate clean and cool.

Footnote 254:

  The text recounts the whole story over again—more than European
  patience can bear.

Footnote 255:

  The usual formula when telling an improbable tale. But here it is
  hardly called for: the same story is told (on weak authority) of the
  Alewife, the Three Graziers and Attorney-General Nay (temp. James II.
  1577–1634) when five years old (Journ. Asiat. Soc. N.S. xxx. 280). The
  same feat had been credited to Thomas Egerton, Lord Chancellor in A.D.
  1540–1617 (Chalmers, Biographical Dictionary xxiii. 267–68). But the
  story had already found its way into the popular jest-books such as
  “Tales and Quick Answers, very Mery and Pleasant to Rede” (1530);
  “Jacke of Dover’s Quest of Inquirie for the Foole of all Fooles”
  (1604) under the title “The Foole of Westchester”, and in “Witty and
  Entertaining Exploits of George Buchanan, commonly called the King’s
  Fool.” The banker-bard Rogers (in Italy) was told a similar story
  concerning a widow of the Lambertini house (xiv^{th} century). Thomas
  Wright (Introduction to the Seven Sages) says he had met the tale in
  Latin (xiii^{th}-xiv^{th} centuries) and a variant in the “Nouveaux
  Contes à rire” (Amsterdam 1737), under the title “Jugement Subtil du
  Duc d’Ossone contre Deux Marchands.” Its origin is evidently the old
  Sindibád-namah translated from Syriac into Greek (“Syntipas,” xi^{th}
  century); into Hebrew (Mishlé Sandabar, xii^{th} century), and from
  the Arabian version into old Castilian, “Libro de los Engannos et los
  Asayamientos de las Mugeres” (A.D. 1255), whereof a translation is
  appended to Professor Comparetti’s “Ricerche intorne al Libro di
  Sindibad,” translated by Mr. H. C. Coote for the Folk-Lore Society.
  The Persian metrical form (an elaboration of one much older) dates
  from 1375; and gave rise to a host of imitations such as the Turkish
  Tales of the Forty Wazirs and the Canarese “Kathá Manjari,” where four
  persons contend about a purse. See also Gladwin’s “Persian Moonshee,”
  No. vi. of “Pleasing Stories;” and Mr. Clouston’s paper, “The Lost
  Purse,” in the _Glasgow Evening Times_. All are the Eastern form of
  Gavarni’s “Enfants Terribles,” showing the portentous precocity for
  which some children (infant phenomena, calculating boys, etc. etc.)
  have been famous.

Footnote 256:

  From the Bresl. Edit. xii. 381. The Sa’lab or Abu Hosayn (Father of
  the Fortlet) is the fox, in Marocco Akkáb: Talib Yúsuf and Wa’wi are
  the jackal. Arabs have not preserved “Jakal” from the Heb. Shu’al and
  Persian Shaghál (not Shagul) as the Rev. Mr. Tristram misinforms his
  readers (Nat. Hist. p. 85).




                      JUDAR[257] AND HIS BRETHREN.


There was once a man and a merchant named Omar and he had for issue
three sons, the eldest called Sálim, the youngest Júdar, and the cadet
Salím. He reared them all till they came to man’s estate, but the
youngest he loved more than his brothers, who, seeing this, waxed
jealous of Judar and hated him. Now when their father, who was a man
shotten in years, saw that his two eldest sons hated their brother, he
feared lest after his death trouble should befal him from them. So he
assembled a company of his kinsfolk, together with divers men of
learning and property-distributors of the Kazi’s court, and bidding
bring all his monies and cloth, said to them, “O folk, divide ye this
money and stuff into four portions according to the law.” They did so,
and he gave one part to each of his sons and kept the fourth himself,
saying, “This was my good and I have divided it among them in my
lifetime; and this that I have kept shall be for my wife, their mother,
wherewithal to provide for her subsistence whenas she shall be a
widow.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


           Now when it was the Six Hundred and Seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the merchant
had divided his money and stuff into four portions, he said, “This share
shall be for my wife, their mother, wherewithal to provide for her
subsistence whenas she shall be a widow.” A little while after this he
died, and neither of the two elder brothers was content with his
share,[258] but sought more of Judar, saying, “Our father’s wealth is in
thy hands.” So he appealed to the judges; and the Moslems who had been
present at the partition came and bore witness of that which they knew,
wherefore the judge forbade them from one another; but Judar and his
brothers wasted much money in bribes to him. After this, the twain left
him awhile; presently, however, they began again to plot against him and
he appealed a second time to the magistrate, who once more decided in
his favour; but all three lost much money which went to the judges.
Nevertheless Sálim and Salím forbore not to seek his hurt and to carry
the case from court to court,[259] he and they losing till they had
given all their good for food to the oppressors and they became poor,
all three. Then the two elder brothers went to their mother and flouted
her and beat her, and seizing her money drave her away. So she betook
herself to her son Judar and told him how his brothers had dealt with
her and fell to cursing the twain. Said he, “O my mother, do not curse
them, for Allah will requite each of them according to his deed.” But, O
mother mine, see, I am become poor, and so are my brethren, for strife
occasioneth loss ruin-rife, and we have striven amain, and fought, I and
they, before the judges, and it hath profited us naught: nay, we have
wasted all our father left us and are disgraced among the folk by reason
of our testimony one against other. Shall I then contend with them anew
on thine account and shall we appeal to the judges? This may not be!
Rather do thou take up thine abode with me, and the scone I eat I will
share with thee. Do thou pray for me and Allah will give me the means of
thine alimony. Leave them to receive of the Almighty the recompense of
their deed, and console thyself with the saying of the poet who said:—

 If a fool oppress thee bear patiently; ✿ And from Time expect thy
    revenge to see:
 Shun tyranny; for if mount oppressed ✿ A mount, ‘twould be shattered by
    tyranny.

And he soothed and comforted her till she consented and took up her
dwelling with him. Then he gat him a net and went a-fishing every day in
the river or the banks about Bulák and old Cairo or some other place in
which there was water; and one day he would earn ten coppers,[260]
another twenty and another thirty, which he spent upon his mother and
himself, and they ate well and drank well. But, as for his brothers,
they plied no craft and neither sold nor bought; misery and ruin and
overwhelming calamity entered their houses and they wasted that which
they had taken from their mother and became of the wretched naked
beggars. So at times they would come to their mother, humbling
themselves before her exceedingly and complaining to her of hunger; and
she (a mother’s heart being pitiful) would give them some mouldy,
sour-smelling bread or, if there were any meat cooked the day before,
she would say to them, “Eat it quick and go ere your brother come; for
‘twould be grievous to him and he would harden his heart against me, and
ye would disgrace me with him.” So they would eat in haste and go. One
day among days they came in to their mother, and she set cooked meat and
bread before them. As they were eating, behold, in came their brother
Judar, at whose sight the parent was put to shame and confusion, fearing
lest he should be wroth with her; and she bowed her face earthwards
abashed before her son. But he smiled in their faces, saying, “Welcome,
O my brothers! A blessed day![261] How comes it that ye visit me this
blessed day?” Then he embraced them both and entreated them lovingly,
saying to them, “I thought not that ye would have left me desolate by
your absence nor that ye would have forborne to come and visit me and
your mother.” Said they, “By Allah, O our brother, we longed sore for
thee and naught withheld us but abashment because of what befel between
us and thee; but indeed we have repented much. ‘Twas Satan’s doing, the
curse of Allah the Most High be upon him! And now we have no blessing
but thyself and our mother.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Six Hundred and Eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Judar entered
his place and saw his brothers, he welcomed them both, saying, “And I
have no blessing but you twain.” And his mother exclaimed, “Allah whiten
thy face, and increase thy prosperity, for thou art the most generous of
us all, O my son!” Then he said “Welcome to you both! Abide with me; for
the Lord is bountiful and good aboundeth with me.” So he made peace with
them, and they supped and nighted with him; and next morning, after they
had broken their fast, Judar shouldered his net and went out, trusting
in The Opener[262] whilst the two others also went forth and were absent
till midday, when they returned and their mother set the noon-meal
before them. At nightfall Judar came home, bearing meat and greens, and
they abode on this wise a month’s space, Judar catching fish and selling
it and spending their price on his mother and his brothers, and these
eating and frolicking till, one day, it chanced he went down to the
river-bank and throwing his net, brought it up empty. He cast it a
second time, but again it came up empty and he said in himself, “No fish
in this place!” So he removed to another and threw the net there, but
without avail. And he ceased not to remove from place to place till
nightfall, but caught not a single sprat[263] and said to himself,
“Wonderful! Hath the fish fled the river or what?” Then he shouldered
the net and made for home, chagrined, concerned, feeling for his mother
and brothers and knowing not how he should feed them that night.
Presently, he came to a baker’s oven and saw the folk crowding for
bread, with silver in their hands, whilst the baker took no note of
them. So he stood there sighing, and the baker said to him, “Welcome to
thee, O Judar! Dost thou want bread?” But he was silent and the baker
continued, “An thou have no dirhams, take thy sufficiency and thou shalt
get credit.” So Judar said, “Give me ten coppers’ worth of bread and
take this net in pledge.” Rejoined the baker, “Nay, my poor fellow, the
net is thy gate of earning thy livelihood, and if I take it from thee, I
shall close up against thee the door of thy subsistence. Take thee ten
Nusfs’ worth of bread and take these other ten, and to-morrow bring me
fish for the twenty.” “On my head and eyes be it!” quoth Judar and took
the bread and money saying, “To-morrow the Lord will dispel the trouble
of my case and will provide me the means of acquittance.” Then he bought
meat and vegetables and carried them home to his mother, who cooked them
and they supped and went to bed. Next morning he arose at daybreak and
took the net, and his mother said to him, “Sit down and break thy fast.”
But he said, “Do thou and my brothers breakfast,” and went down to the
river about Bulak where he ceased not to cast once, twice, thrice; and
to shift about all day, without aught falling to him, till the hour of
mid-afternoon prayer, when he shouldered his net and went away sore
dejected. His way led him perforce by the booth of the baker who, when
he saw him, counted out to him the loaves and the money, saying, “Come,
take it and go; an it be not to-day, ‘twill be to-morrow.” Judar would
have excused himself, but the baker said to him, “Go! There needeth no
excuse; an thou had netted aught, it would be with thee; so seeing thee
empty-handed, I knew thou hadst gotten naught; and if to-morrow thou
have no better luck, come and take bread and be not abashed, for I will
give thee credit.” So Judar took the bread and money and went home. On
the third day also he sallied forth and fished from tank to tank until
the time of afternoon-prayer, but caught nothing; so he went to the
baker and took the bread and silver as usual. On this wise he did seven
days running, till he became disheartened and said in himself, “To-day I
go to the Lake Kárún.”[264] So he went thither and was about to cast his
net, when there came up to him unawares a Maghrabí, a Moor, clad in
splendid attire and riding a she-mule with a pair of gold-embroidered
saddle-bags on her back and all her trappings also orfrayed. The Moor
alighted and said to him, “Peace be upon thee, O Judar, O son of Omar!”
“And on thee likewise be peace, O my lord the pilgrim!” replied the
fisherman. Quoth the Maghrabi, “O Judar, I have need of thee and, given
thou obey me, thou shalt get great good and shalt be my companion and
manage my affairs for me.” Quoth Judar, “O my lord, tell me what is in
thy mind and I will obey thee, without demur.” Said the Moor, “Repeat
the Fatihah, the Opening Chapter of the Koran.”[265] So he recited it
with him and the Moor bringing out a silken cord, said to Judar, “Pinion
my elbows behind me with this cord, as fast as fast can be, and cast me
into the lake; then wait a little while; and, if thou see me put forth
my hands above the water, raising them high ere my body show, cast thy
net over me and drag me out in haste; but if thou see me come up feet
foremost, then know that I am dead; in which case do thou leave me and
take the mule and saddle-bags and carry them to the merchants’ bazar,
where thou wilt find a Jew by name Shamáyah. Give him the mule and he
will give thee an hundred dinars, which do thou take and go thy ways and
keep the matter secret with all secrecy.” So Judar tied his arms tightly
behind his back and he kept saying, “Tie tighter.” Then said he, “Push
me till I fall into the lake:” so he pushed him in and he sank. Judar
stood waiting some time till, behold, the Moor’s feet appeared above the
water, whereupon he knew that he was dead. So he left him and drove the
mule to the bazar, where seated on a stool at the door of his storehouse
he saw the Jew who spying the mule, cried, “In very sooth the man hath
perished,” adding, “and naught undid him but covetise.” Then he took the
mule from Judar and gave him an hundred dinars, charging him to keep the
matter secret. So Judar went and bought what bread he needed, saying to
the baker, “Take this gold piece!”; and the man summed up what was due
to him and said, “I still owe thee two days’ bread”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


            Now when it was the Six Hundred and Ninth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Judar, when
the baker after summing up what was due to him said, “I still owe thee
two days’ bread,” replied, “Good,” and went on to the butcher, to whom
he gave a gold piece and took meat, saying, “Keep the rest of the dinar
on account.” Then he bought vegetables and going home, found his
brothers importuning their mother for victual, whilst she cried, “Have
patience till your brother come home, for I have naught.” So he went in
to them and said, “Take and eat;” and they fell on the food like
cannibals. Then he gave his mother the rest of his gold saying, “If my
brothers come to thee, give them wherewithal to buy food and eat in my
absence.” He slept well that night and next morning he took his net and
going down to Lake Karun stood there and was about to cast his net, when
behold, there came up to him a second Maghribi, riding on a she-mule
more handsomely accoutred than he of the day before and having with him
a pair of saddle-bags of which each pocket contained a casket. “Peace be
with thee, O Judar!” said the Moor: “And with thee be peace, O my lord,
the pilgrim!” replied Judar. Asked the Moor, “Did there come to thee
yesterday a Moor riding on a mule like this of mine?” Hereat Judar was
alarmed and answered, “I saw none,” fearing lest the other say, “Whither
went he?” and if he replied, “He was drowned in the lake,” that haply he
should charge him with having drowned him; wherefore he could not but
deny. Rejoined the Moor, “Harkye, O unhappy![266] this was my brother,
who is gone before me.” Judar persisted, “I know naught of him.” Then
the Moor enquired, “Didst thou not bind his arms behind him and throw
him into the lake, and did he not say to thee:—If my hands appear above
the water first, cast thy net over me and drag me out in haste; but, if
my feet show first, know that I am dead and carry the mule to the Jew
Shamayah, who shall give thee an hundred dinars.” Quoth Judar, “Since
thou knowest all this why and wherefore dost thou question me?”; and
quoth the Moor, “I would have thee do with me as thou didst with my
brother.” Then he gave him a silken cord, saying, “Bind my hands behind
me and throw me in, and if I fare as did my brother, take the mule to
the Jew and he will give thee other hundred dinars.” Said Judar, “Come
on;” so he came and he bound him and pushed him into the lake, where he
sank. Then Judar sat watching and after awhile, his feet appeared above
the water and the fisher said, “He is dead and damned! Inshallah, may
Maghribis come to me every day, and I will pinion them and push them in
and they shall die; and I will content me with an hundred dinars for
each dead man.” Then he took the mule to the Jew, who seeing him asked,
“The other is dead?” Answered Judar, “May thy head live!”; and the Jew
said, “This is the reward of the covetous!” Then he took the mule and
gave Judar an hundred dinars, with which he returned to his mother. “O
my son,” said she, “whence hast thou this?” So he told her, and she
said, “Go not again to Lake Karun, indeed I fear for thee from the
Moors.” Said he, “O my mother, I do but cast them in by their own wish,
and what am I to do? This craft bringeth me an hundred dinars a day and
I return speedily; wherefore, by Allah, I will not leave going to Lake
Karun, till the trace of the Magháribah[267] is cut off and not one of
them is left.” So, on the morrow which was the third day, he went down
to the lake and stood there, till there came up a third Moor, riding on
a mule with saddle-bags and still more richly accoutred than the first
two, who said to him, “Peace be with thee, O Judar, O son of Omar!” And
the fisherman saying in himself, “How comes it that they all know me?”
returned his salute. Asked the Maghribi, “Have any Moors passed by
here?” “Two,” answered Judar. “Whither went they?” enquired the Moor,
and Judar replied, “I pinioned their hands behind them and cast them
into the lake, where they were drowned, and the same fate is in store
for thee.” The Moor laughed and rejoined, saying, “O unhappy! every life
hath its term appointed.” Then he alighted and gave the fisherman the
silken cord, saying, “Do with me, O Judar, as thou didst with them.”
Said Judar, “Put thy hands behind thy back, that I may pinion thee, for
I am in haste, and time flies.” So he put his hands behind him and Judar
tied him up and cast him in. Then he waited awhile; presently the Moor
thrust both hands forth of the water and called out to him, saying, “Ho,
good fellow, cast out thy net!” So Judar threw the net over him and drew
him ashore, and lo! in each hand he held a fish as red as coral. Quoth
the Moor, “Bring me the two caskets that are in the saddle-bags.” So
Judar brought them and opened them to him, and he laid in each casket a
fish and shut them up. Then he pressed Judar to his bosom and kissed him
on the right cheek and the left, saying, “Allah save thee from all
stress! By the Almighty, hadst thou not cast the net over me and pulled
me out, I should have kept hold of these two fishes till I sank and was
drowned, for I could not get ashore of myself.” Quoth Judar, “O my lord
the pilgrim, Allah upon thee, tell me the true history of the two
drowned men and the truth anent these two fishes and the Jew.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


            Now when it was the Six Hundred and Tenth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Judar
asked the Maghribi, saying, “Prithee tell me first of the drowned men,”
the Maghribi answered:—Know, O Judar, that these drowned men were my two
brothers, by name Abd al-Salám and Abd al-Ahad. My own name is Abd
al-Samad, and the Jew also is our brother; his name is Abd al-Rahím and
he is no Jew, but a true believer of the Maliki school. Our father,
whose name was Abd al-Wadúd,[268] taught us magic and the art of solving
mysteries and bringing hoards to light, and we applied ourselves
thereto, till we compelled the Ifrits and Marids of the Jinn to do us
service. By-and-by, our sire died and left us much wealth, and we
divided amongst us his treasures and talismans, till we came to the
books, when we fell out over a volume called “The Fables of the
Ancients,” whose like is not in the world, nor can its price be paid of
any, nor is its value to be evened with gold and jewels; for in it are
particulars of all the hidden hoards of the earth and the solution of
every secret. Our father was wont to make use of this book, of which we
had some small matter by heart, and each of us desired to possess it,
that he might acquaint himself with what was therein. Now when we fell
out there was in our company an old man by name Cohen Al-Abtan,[269] who
had reared our sire and taught him divination and gramarye, and he said
to us, “Bring me the book.” So we gave it him and he continued:—Ye are
my son’s sons, and it may not be that I should wrong any of you. So
whoso is minded to have the volume, let him address himself to achieve
the treasure of Al-Shamardal[270] and bring me the celestial planisphere
and the Kohl-phial and the seal-ring and the sword. For the ring hath a
Marid that serveth it called Al-Ra’ad al-Kásif;[271] and whoso hath
possession thereof, neither King nor Sultan may prevail against him; and
if he will, he may therewith make himself master of the earth, in all
the length and breadth thereof. As for the brand, if its bearer draw it
and brandish it against an army, the army will be put to the rout; and
if he say the while, “Slay yonder host,” there will come forth of that
sword lightning and fire, that will kill the whole many. As for the
planisphere, its possessor hath only to turn its face toward any
country, east or west, with whose sight he hath a mind to solace
himself, and therein he will see that country and its people, as they
were between his hands and he sitting in his place; and if he be wroth
with a city and have a mind to burn it, he hath but to face the
planisphere towards the sun’s disc, saying, “Let such a city be burnt,”
and that city will be consumed with fire. As for the Kohl-phial, whoso
pencilleth his eyes therefrom, he shall espy all the treasures of the
earth. And I make this condition with you which is that whoso faileth to
hit upon the hoards shall forfeit his right; and that none save he who
shall achieve the treasure and bring me the four precious things which
be therein shall have any claim to take this book. So we all agreed to
this condition, and he continued, “O my sons, know that the treasure of
Al-Shamardal is under the commandment of the sons of the Red King, and
your father told me that he had himself essayed to open the treasure,
but could not; for the sons of the Red King fled from him into the land
of Egypt and took refuge in a lake there, called Lake Karun, whither he
pursued them, but could not prevail over them, by reason of their
stealing into that lake, which was guarded by a spell.”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Six Hundred and Eleventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Cohen
Al-Abtan had told the youths this much, he continued his tale as
follows, “So your father returned empty-handed and unable to win to his
wish; and after failing he complained to me of his ill-success,
whereupon I drew him an astrological figure and found that the treasure
could be achieved only by means of a young fisherman of Cairo, hight
Judar bin Omar, the place of foregathering with whom was at Lake Karun,
for that he should be the means of capturing the sons of the Red King
and that the charm would not be dissolved, save if he should bind the
hands of the treasure-seeker behind him and cast him into the lake,
there to do battle with the sons of the Red King. And he whose lot it
was to succeed would lay hands upon them; but, if it were not destined
to him he should perish and his feet appear above water. As for him who
was successful, his hands would show first, whereupon it behoved that
Judar should cast the net over him and draw him ashore.” Now quoth my
brothers Abd al-Salam and Abd al-Ahad, “We will wend and make trial,
although we perish;” and quoth I, “And I also will go;” but my brother
Abd al-Rahím (he whom thou sawest in the habit of a Jew) said, “I have
no mind to this.” Thereupon we agreed with him that he should repair to
Cairo in the disguise of a Jewish merchant, so that, if one of us
perished in the lake, he might take his mule and saddle-bags and give
the bearer an hundred dinars. The first that came to thee the sons of
the Red King slew, and so did they with my second brother; but against
me they could not prevail and I laid hands on them. Cried Judar, “And
where is thy catch?” Asked the Moor, “Didst thou not see me shut them in
the caskets?” “Those were fishes,” said Judar. “Nay,” answered the
Maghribi, “they are Ifrits in the guise of fish. But, O Judar,”
continued he, “thou must know that the treasure can be opened only by
thy means: so say, wilt thou do my bidding and go with me to the city
Fez and Mequinez[272] where we will open the treasure?; and after I will
give thee what thou wilt and thou shalt ever be my brother in the bond
of Allah and return to thy family with a joyful heart.” Said Judar, “O
my lord the pilgrim, I have on my neck a mother and two brothers,”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Six Hundred and Twelfth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Judar said to
the Maghribi, “I have on my neck a mother and two brothers, whose
provider I am; and if I go with thee, who shall give them bread to eat?”
Replied the Moor, “This is an idle excuse! if it be but a matter of
expenditure, I will give thee a thousand ducats for thy mother,
wherewith she may provide herself till thou come back: and indeed thou
shalt return before the end of four months.” So when Judar heard mention
of the thousand dinars, he said, “Here with them, O Pilgrim, and I am
thy man;” and the Moor, pulling out the money, gave it to him, whereupon
he carried it to his mother and told her what had passed between them,
saying, “Take these thousand dinars and expend of them upon thyself and
my brothers, whilst I journey to Marocco with the Moor, for I shall be
absent four months, and great good will betide me; so bless me, O my
mother!” Answered she, “O my son, thou desolatest me and I fear for
thee.” “O my mother,” rejoined he, “no harm can befal him who is in
Allah’s keeping, and the Maghribi is a man of worth;” and he went on to
praise his condition to her. Quoth she, “Allah incline his heart to
thee! Go with him, O my son; peradventure, he will give thee somewhat.”
So he took leave of his mother and rejoined the Moor Abd al-Samad, who
asked him, “Hast thou consulted thy mother?” “Yes,” answered Judar; “and
she blessed me.” “Then mount behind me,” said the Maghribi. So Judar
mounted the mule’s crupper and they rode on from noon till the time of
mid-afternoon prayer, when the fisherman was an-hungered; but seeing no
victual with the Moor, said to him, “O my lord the pilgrim, belike thou
hast forgotten to bring us aught to eat by the way?” Asked the Moor,
“Art thou hungry?” and Judar answered, “Yes.” So Abd al-Samad alighted
and made Judar alight and take down the saddle-bags[273]; then he said
to him, “What wilt thou have, O my brother?” “Anything.” “Allah upon
thee, tell me what thou hast a mind to.” “Bread and cheese.” “O my poor
fellow! bread and cheese besit thee not; wish for something good.” “Just
now everything is good to me.” “Dost thou like nice browned chicken?”
“Yes!” “Dost thou like rice and honey?” “Yes!” And the Moor went on to
ask him if he liked this dish and that dish till he had named
four-and-twenty kinds of meats; and Judar thought to himself, “He must
be daft! Where are all these dainties to come from, seeing he hath
neither cook nor kitchen? But I’ll say to him, ‘Tis enough!” So he
cried, “That will do: thou makest me long for all these meats, and I see
nothing.” Quoth the Moor, “Thou art welcome, O Judar!” and, putting his
hand into the saddle-bags, pulled out a golden dish containing two hot
browned chickens. Then he thrust his hand a second time and drew out a
golden dish, full of kabobs[274]; nor did he stint taking out dishes
from saddle-bags, till he had brought forth the whole of the
four-and-twenty kinds he had named, whilst Judar looked on. Then said
the Moor, “Fall to, poor fellow!”, and Judar said to him, “O my lord,
thou carriest in yonder saddle-bags kitchen and kitcheners!” The Moor
laughed and replied, “These are magical saddle-bags and have a servant,
who would bring us a thousand dishes an hour, if we called for them,”
Quoth Judar, “By Allah, a meat thing in saddle-bags!” Then they ate
their fill and threw away what was left; after which the Moor replaced
the empty dishes in the saddle-bags and putting in his hand, drew out an
ewer. They drank and making the Wuzu-ablution, prayed the mid-afternoon
prayer; after which Abd al-Samad replaced the ewer and the two caskets
in the saddle-bags and throwing them over the mule’s back, mounted and
cried, “Up with thee and let us be off,” presently adding, “O Judar,
knowest thou how far we have come since we left Cairo?” “Not I, by
Allah,” replied he, and Abd al-Samad, “We have come a whole month’s
journey.” Asked Judar, “And how is that?”; and the Moor answered, “Know,
O Judar, that this mule under us is a Marid of the Jinn who every day
performeth a year’s journey; but, for thy sake, she hath gone an easier
pace.” Then they set out again and fared on westwards till nightfall,
when they halted and the Maghribi brought out supper from the
saddle-bags, and in like manner, in the morning, he took forth
wherewithal to break their fast. So they rode on four days, journeying
till midnight and then alighting and sleeping until morning, when they
fared on again; and all that Judar had a mind to, he sought of the Moor,
who brought it out of the saddle-bags. On the fifth day, they arrived at
Fez and Mequinez and entered the city, where all who met the Maghribi
saluted him and kissed his hands; and he continued riding through the
streets, till he came to a certain door, at which he knocked, whereupon
it opened and out came a girl like the moon, to whom said he, “O my
daughter, O Rahmah,[275] open us the upper chamber.” “On my head and
eyes, O my papa!” replied she and went in, swaying her hips to and fro
with a graceful and swimming gait like a thirsting gazelle, movements
that ravished Judar’s reason, and he said, “This is none other than a
King’s daughter.” So she opened the upper chamber, and the Moor, taking
the saddle-bags from the mule’s back, said, “Go, and God bless thee!”
when lo! the earth clove asunder and swallowing the mule, closed up
again as before. And Judar said, “O Protector! praised be Allah, who
hath kept us in safety on her back!” Quoth the Maghribi, “Marvel not, O
Judar. I told thee that the mule was an Ifrit; but come with us into the
upper chamber.” So they went up into it, and Judar was amazed at the
profusion of rich furniture and pendants of gold and silver and jewels
and other rare and precious things which he saw there. As soon as they
were seated, the Moor bade Rahmah bring him a certain bundle[276] and
opening it, drew out a dress worth a thousand dinars, which he gave to
Judar, saying, “Don this dress, O Judar, and welcome to thee!” So Judar
put it on and became a fair ensample of the Kings of the West. Then the
Maghribi laid the saddle-bags before him, and, putting in his hand,
pulled out dish after dish, till they had before them a tray of forty
kinds of meat, when he said to Judar, “Come near, O my master! eat and
excuse us”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Thirteenth Night,

[Illustration]

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Maghribi
having served up in the pavilion a tray of forty kinds of meat, said to
Judar, “Come near, O my master, and excuse us for that we know not what
meats thou desirest; but tell us what thou hast a mind to, and we will
set it before thee without delay.” Replied Judar, “By Allah, O my lord
the pilgrim, I love all kinds of meat and unlove none; so ask me not of
aught, but bring all that cometh to thy thought, for save eating to do I
have nought.” After this he tarried twenty days with the Moor, who clad
him in new clothes every day, and all this time they ate from the
saddle-bags; for the Maghribi bought neither meat nor bread nor aught
else, nor cooked, but brought everything out of the bags, even to
various sorts of fruit. On the twenty-first day, he said, “O Judar, up
with thee; this is the day appointed for opening the hoard of
Al-Shamardal.” So he rose and they went afoot[277] without the city,
where they found two slaves, each holding a she-mule. The Moor mounted
one beast and Judar the other, and they ceased not riding till noon,
when they came to a stream of running water, on whose banks Abd al-Samad
alighted saying, “Dismount, O Judar!” Then he signed with his hand to
the slaves and said, “To it!” So they took the mules and going each his
own way, were absent awhile, after which they returned, one bearing a
tent, which he pitched, and the other carpets, which he spread in the
tent and laid mattresses, pillows and cushions there-around. Then one of
them brought the caskets containing the two fishes; and another fetched
the saddle-bags; whereupon the Maghribi arose and said, “Come, O Judar!”
So Judar followed him into the tent and sat down beside him; and he
brought out dishes of meat from the saddle-bags and they ate the undurn
meal. Then the Moor took the two caskets and conjured over them both,
whereupon there came from within voices that said, “Adsumus, at thy
service, O diviner of the world! Have mercy upon us!” and called aloud
for aid. But he ceased not to repeat conjurations and they to call for
help, till the two caskets flew in sunder, the fragments flying about,
and there came forth two men, with pinioned hands saying, “Quarter, O
diviner of the world! What wilt thou with us?” Quoth he, “My will is to
burn you both with fire, except ye make a covenant with me, to open to
me the treasure of Al-Shamardal.” Quoth they, “We promise this to thee,
and we will open the treasure to thee, so thou produce to us Judar bin
Omar, the fisherman, for the hoard may not be opened but by his means,
nor can any enter therein save Judar.” Cried the Maghribi, “Him of whom
ye speak, I have brought, and he is here, listening to you and looking
at you.” Thereupon they covenanted with him to open the treasure to him,
and he released them. Then he brought out a hollow wand and tablets of
red carnelian which he laid on the rod; and after this he took a
chafing-dish and setting charcoal thereon, blew one breath into it and
it kindled forthwith. Presently he brought incense and said, “O Judar, I
am now about to begin the necessary conjurations and fumigations, and
when I have once begun, I may not speak, or the charm will be naught; so
I will teach thee first what thou must do to win thy wish.” “Teach me,”
quoth Judar. “Know,” quoth the Moor, “that when I have recited the spell
and thrown on the incense, the water will dry up from the river’s bed
and discover to thee a golden door, the bigness of the city-gate, with
two rings of metal thereon; whereupon do thou go down to the door and
knock a light knock and wait awhile; then knock a second time a knock
louder than the first and wait another while; after which give three
knocks in rapid succession, and thou wilt hear a voice ask:—Who knocketh
at the door of the treasure, unknowing how to solve the secrets? Do thou
answer:—I am Judar the fisherman son of Omar: and the door will open and
there will come forth a figure with a brand in hand who will say to
thee: If thou be that man, stretch forth thy neck, that I may strike off
thy head. Then do thou stretch forth thy neck and fear not; for, when he
lifts his hand and smites thee with the sword, he will fall down before
thee, and in a little thou wilt see him a body sans soul; and the stroke
shall not hurt thee nor shall any harm befal thee; but, if thou gainsay
him, he will slay thee. When thou hast undone his enchantment by
obedience, enter and go on till thou see another door, at which do thou
knock, and there will come forth to thee a horseman riding a mare with a
lance on his shoulder and say to thee:—What bringeth thee hither, where
none may enter ne man ne Jinni? And he will shake his lance at thee.
Bare thy breast to him and he will smite thee and fall down forthright
and thou shalt see him a body without a soul; but if thou cross him he
will kill thee. Then go on to the third door, whence there will come
forth to thee a man with a bow and arrows in his hand and take aim at
thee. Bare thy breast to him and he will shoot at thee and fall down
before thee, a body without a soul; but if thou oppose him, he will kill
thee. Then go on to the fourth door”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Fourteenth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Maghribi
said to Judar, “Go on to the fourth door and knock and it shall be
opened to thee, when there will come forth to thee a lion huge of bulk
which will rush upon thee, opening his mouth and showing he hath a mind
to devour thee. Have no fear of him, neither flee from him: but when he
cometh to thee, give him thy hand and he will bite at it and fall down
straightway, nor shall aught of hurt betide thee. Then enter the fifth
door, where thou shalt find a black slave, who will say to thee, Who art
thou? Say, I am Judar! and he will answer, If thou be that man, open the
sixth door. Then do thou go up to the door and say, O Isa, tell Musa to
open the door; whereupon the door will fly open and thou wilt see two
dragons, one on the left hand and another on the right, which will open
their mouths and fly at thee, both at once. Do thou put forth to them
both hands and they will bite each a hand and fall down dead; but an
thou resist them, they will slay thee. Then go on to the seventh door
and knock, whereupon there will come forth to thee thy mother and
say:—Welcome, O my son! Come, that I may greet thee! But do thou reply,
Hold off from me and doff thy dress. And she will make answer:—O my son,
I am thy mother and I have a claim upon thee for suckling thee and for
rearing thee: how then wouldst thou strip me naked? Then do thou say,
Except thou put off thy clothes, I will kill thee! and look to thy right
where thou wilt see a sword hanging up. Take it and draw it upon her,
saying, Strip! whereupon she will wheedle thee and humble herself to
thee; but have thou no ruth on her nor be beguiled, and as often as she
putteth off aught, say to her, off with the lave; nor do thou cease to
threaten her with death, till she doff all that is upon her and fall
down, whereupon the enchantment will be dissolved and the charms undone,
and thou wilt be safe as to thy life. Then enter the hall of the
treasure, where thou wilt see the gold lying in heaps; but pay no heed
to aught thereof, but look to a closet at the upper end of the hall,
where thou wilt see a curtain drawn. Draw back the curtain and thou wilt
descry the enchanter, Al-Shamardal, lying upon a couch of gold, with
something at his head round and shining like the moon, which is the
celestial planisphere. He is baldrick’d with the sword[278]; on his
finger is the ring and about his neck hangs a chain, to which hangs the
Kohl-phial. Bring me the four talismans, and beware lest thou forget
aught of that which I have told thee, or thou wilt repent and there will
be fear for thee.” And he repeated his directions a second and a third
and a fourth time, till Judar said, “I have them by heart: but who may
face all these enchantments that thou namest and endure against these
mighty terrors?” Replied the Moor, “O Judar, fear not, for they are
semblances without life;” and he went on to hearten him, till he said,
“I put my trust in Allah.” Then Abd al-Samad threw perfumes on the
chafing-dish, and addressed himself to reciting conjurations for a time
when, behold, the water disappeared and uncovered the river-bed and
discovered the door of the treasure, whereupon Judar went down to the
door and knocked. Therewith he heard a voice saying, “Who knocketh at
the door of the treasure, unknowing how to solve the secrets?” Quoth he,
“I am Judar son of Omar;” whereupon the door opened and there came forth
a figure with a drawn sword, who said to him, “Stretch forth thy neck.”
So he stretched forth his neck and the species smote him and fell down,
lifeless. Then he went on to the second door and did the like, nor did
he cease to do thus, till he had undone the enchantments of the first
six doors and came to the seventh door, whence there issued forth to him
his mother, saying, “I salute thee, O my son!” He asked, “What art
thou?”, and she answered, “O my son, I am thy mother who bare thee nine
months and suckled thee and reared thee.” Quoth he, “Put off thy
clothes.” Quoth she, “Thou art my son, how wouldst thou strip me naked?”
But he said “Strip, or I will strike off thy head with this sword;” and
he stretched out his hand to the brand and drew it upon her saying,
“Except thou strip, I will slay thee.” Then the strife became long
between them and as often as he redoubled on her his threats, she put
off somewhat of her clothes and he said to her, “Doff the rest,” with
many menaces; while she removed each article slowly and kept saying, “O
my son, thou hast disappointed my fosterage of thee,” till she had
nothing left but her petticoat-trousers. Then said she, “O my son, is
thy heart stone? Wilt thou dishonour me by discovering my shame? Indeed,
this is unlawful, O my son!” And he answered, “Thou sayest sooth; put
not off thy trousers.” At once, as he uttered these words, she cried
out, “He hath made default; beat him!” Whereupon there fell upon him
blows like rain-drops and the servants of the treasure flocked to him
and dealt him a tunding which he forgot not in all his days; after which
they thrust him forth and threw him down without the treasure and the
hoard-doors closed of themselves, whilst the waters of the river
returned to their bed.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

[Illustration]


          Now when it was the Six Hundred and Fifteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the servants
of the treasure beat Judar and cast him out and the hoard-doors closed
of themselves, whilst the river-waters returned to their bed, Abd
al-Samad the Maghribi took Judar up in haste and repeated conjurations
over him, till he came to his senses but still dazed as with drink, when
he asked him, “What hast thou done, O wretch?” Answered Judar, “O my
brother, I undid all the opposing enchantments, till I came to my mother
and there befel between her and myself a long contention. But I made her
doff her clothes, O my brother, till but her trousers remained upon her
and she said to me, Do not dishonour me; for to discover one’s shame is
forbidden. So I left her her trousers out of pity, and behold, she cried
out and said, He hath made default; beat him! Whereupon there came out
upon me folk, whence I know not, and tunding me with a belabouring which
was a Sister of Death, thrust me forth; nor do I know what befel me
after this.” Quoth the Moor, “Did I not warn thee not to swerve from my
directions? Verily, thou hast injured me and hast injured thyself: for
if thou hadst made her take off her petticoat-trousers, we had won to
our wish; but now thou must abide with me till this day next year.” Then
he cried out to the two slaves, who struck the tent forthright and
loaded it on the beasts; then they were absent awhile and presently
returned with the two mules; and the twain mounted and rode back to the
city of Fez, where Judar tarried with the Maghribi, eating well and
drinking well and donning a grand dress every day, till the year was
ended and the anniversary day dawned. Then the Moor said to him, “Come
with me, for this is the appointed day.” And Judar said, “‘Tis well.” So
the Maghribi carried him without the city, where they found the two
slaves with the mules, and rode on till they reached the river. Here the
slaves pitched the tent and furnished it; and the Moor brought forth the
tray of food and they ate the morning meal; after which Abd al-Samad
brought out the wand and the tablets as before and, kindling the fire in
the chafing-dish, made ready the incense. Then said he, “O Judar, I wish
to renew my charge to thee.” “O my lord the pilgrim,” replied he, “if I
have forgotten the bastinado, I have forgotten the injunctions.”[279]
Asked the Moor, “Dost thou indeed remember them?” and he answered,
“Yes.” Quoth the Moor, “Keep thy wits, and think not that the woman is
thy very mother; nay, she is but an enchantment in her semblance, whose
purpose is to find thee defaulting. Thou camest off alive the first
time; but, an thou trip this time, they will slay thee.” Quoth Judar,
“If I slip this time, I deserve to be burnt of them.” Then Abd al-Samad
cast the perfumes into the fire and recited the conjurations, till the
river dried up; whereupon Judar descended and knocked. The door opened
and he entered and undid the several enchantments, till he came to the
seventh door and the semblance of his mother appeared before him,
saying, “Welcome,[280] O my son!” But he said to her, “How am I thy son,
O accursed? Strip!” And she began to wheedle him and put off garment
after garment, till only her trousers remained; and he said to her,
“Strip, O accursed!” So she put off her trousers and became a body
without a soul. Then he entered the hall of the treasures, where he saw
gold lying in heaps, but paid no heed to it and passed on to the closet
at the upper end, where he saw the enchanter Al-Shamardal lying on a
couch of gold, baldrick’d with the sword, with the ring on his finger,
the Kohl-phial on his breast and the celestial planisphere hanging over
his head. So he loosed the sword and taking the ring, the Kohl-phial and
the planisphere, went forth, when behold, a band of music sounded for
him and the servants of the treasure cried out, saying, “Mayest thou be
assained with that thou hast gained, O Judar!” Nor did the music leave
sounding, till he came forth of the treasure to the Maghribi, who gave
up his conjurations and fumigations and rose up and embraced him and
saluted him. Then Judar made over to him the four hoarded talismans, and
he took them and cried out to the slaves, who carried away the tent and
brought the mules. So they mounted and returned to Fez-city, where the
Moor fetched the saddle-bags and brought forth dish after dish of meat,
till the tray was full, and said, “O my brother, O Judar, eat!” So he
ate till he was satisfied, when the Moor emptied what remained of the
meats and other dishes and returned the empty platters to the
saddle-bags. Then quoth he, “O Judar, thou hast left home and native
land on our account and thou hast accomplished our dearest desire;
wherefore thou hast a right to require a reward of us. Ask, therefore,
what thou wilt, it is Almighty Allah who giveth unto thee by our
means.[281] Ask thy will and be not ashamed, for thou art deserving.” “O
my lord,” quoth Judar, “I ask first of Allah the Most High and then of
thee, that thou give me yonder saddle-bags.” So the Maghribi called for
them and gave them to him, saying, “Take them, for they are thy due;
and, if thou hadst asked of me aught else instead, I had given it to
thee. Eat from them, thou and thy family; but, my poor fellow, these
will not profit thee, save by way of provaunt, and thou hast wearied
thyself with us and we promised to send thee home rejoicing. So we will
join to these other saddle-bags, full of gold and gems, and forward thee
back to thy native land, where thou shalt become a gentleman and a
merchant and clothe thyself and thy family; nor shalt thou want ready
money for thine expenditure. And know that the manner of using our gift
is on this wise. Put thy hand therein and say:—O servant of these
saddle-bags, I conjure thee by the virtue of the Mighty Names which have
power over thee, bring me such a dish! And he will bring thee whatsoever
thou askest, though thou shouldst call for a thousand different dishes a
day.” So saying, he filled him a second pair of saddle-bags half with
gold and half with gems and precious stones; and, sending for a slave
and a mule, said to him, “Mount this mule, and the slave shall go before
thee and show thee the way, till thou come to the door of thy house,
where do thou take the two pair of saddle-bags and give him the mule,
that he may bring it back. But admit none into thy secret; and so we
commend thee to Allah!” “May the Almighty increase thy good!” replied
Judar and, laying the two pairs of saddle-bags on the mule’s back,
mounted and set forth. The slave went on before him and the mule
followed him all that day and night, and on the morrow he entered Cairo
by the Gate of Victory,[282] where he saw his mother seated, saying,
“Alms, for the love of Allah!” At this sight he well-nigh lost his wits
and alighting, threw himself upon her: and when she saw him she wept.
Then he mounted her on the mule and walked by her stirrup,[283] till
they came to the house, where he set her down and, taking the
saddle-bags, left the she-mule to the slave, who led her away and
returned with her to his master, for that both slave and mule were
devils. As for Judar, it was grievous to him that his mother should beg;
so, when they were in the house, he asked her, “O my mother, are my
brothers well?”; and she answered, “They are both well.” Quoth he, “Why
dost thou beg by the wayside?” Quoth she, “Because I am hungry, O my
son,” and he, “Before I went away, I gave thee an hundred dinars one
day, the like the next and a thousand on the day of my departure.” “O my
son, they cheated me and took the money from me, saying:—We will buy
goods with it. Then they drove me away, and I fell to begging by the
wayside, for stress of hunger.” “O my mother, no harm shall befal thee,
now I am come; so have no concern, for these saddle-bags are full of
gold and gems, and good aboundeth with me.” “Verily, thou art blessed, O
my son! Allah accept of thee and increase thee of His bounties! Go, O my
son, fetch us some victual, for I slept not last night for excess of
hunger, having gone to bed supperless.” “Welcome to thee, O my mother!
Call for what thou wilt to eat, and I will set it before thee this
moment; for I have no occasion to buy from the market, nor need I any to
cook.” “O my son, I see naught with thee.” “I have with me in these
saddle-bags all manner of meats.” “O my son, whatever is ready will
serve to stay hunger.” “True, when there is no choice, men are content
with the smallest thing; but where there is plenty, they like to eat
what is good: and I have abundance; so call for what thou hast a mind
to.” “O my son, give me some hot bread and a slice of cheese.” “O my
mother, this befitteth not thy condition.” “Then give me to eat of that
which befitteth my case, for thou knowest it.” “O my mother,” rejoined
he, “what suit thine estate are browned meat and roast chicken and
peppered rice and it becometh thy rank to eat of sausages and stuffed
cucumbers and stuffed lamb and stuffed ribs of mutton and vermicelli
with broken almonds and nuts and honey and sugar and fritters and almond
cakes.” But she thought he was laughing at her and making mock of her;
so she said to him, “Yauh! Yauh![284] what is come to thee? Dost thou
dream or art thou daft?” Asked he, “Why deemest thou that I am mad?” and
she answered, “Because thou namest to me all manner rich dishes. Who can
avail unto their price, and who knoweth how to dress them?” Quoth he,
“By my life! thou shalt eat of all that I have named to thee, and that
at once;” and quoth she, “I see nothing;” and he, “Bring me the
saddle-bags.” So she fetched them and feeling them, found them empty.
However, she laid them before him and he thrust in his hand and pulled
out dish after dish, till he had set before her all he had named.
Whereupon asked she, “O my son, the saddle-bags are small and moreover
they were empty; yet hast thou taken thereout all these dishes. Where
then were they all?”; and he answered, “O my mother, know that these
saddle-bags, which the Moor gave me, are enchanted and they have a
servant whom, if one desire aught, he hath but to adjure by the Names
which command him, saying, “O servant of these saddle-bags, bring me
such a dish! and he will bring it.”” Quoth his mother, “And may I put
out my hand and ask of him?” Quoth he, “Do so.” So she stretched out her
hand and said, “O servant of the saddle-bags, by the virtue of the Names
which command thee, bring me stuffed ribs.” Then she thrust in her hand
and found a dish containing delicate stuffed ribs of lamb. So she took
it out, and called for bread and what else she had a mind to: after
which Judar said to her, “O my mother, when thou hast made an end of
eating, empty what is left of the food into dishes other than these, and
restore the empty platters to the saddle-bags carefully.” So she arose
and laid them up in a safe place. “And look, O mother mine, that thou
keep this secret,” added he; “and whenever thou hast a mind to aught,
take it forth of the saddle-bags and give alms and feed my brothers,
whether I be present or absent.” Then he fell to eating with her and
behold, while they were thus occupied, in came his two brothers, whom a
son of the quarter[285] had apprised of his return, saying, “Your
brother is come back, riding on a she-mule, with a slave before him, and
wearing a dress that hath not its like.” So they said to each other,
“Would to Heaven we had not evilly entreated our mother! There is no
hope but that she will surely tell him how we did by her, and then, oh
our disgrace with him!” But one of the twain said, “Our mother is
soft-hearted, and if she tell him, our brother is yet tenderer over us
than she; and, given we excuse ourselves to him, he will accept our
excuse.” So they went in to him and he rose to them and saluting them
with the friendliest salutation, bade them sit down and eat. So they ate
till they were satisfied, for they were weak with hunger; after which
Judar said to them, “O my brothers, take what is left and distribute it
to the poor and needy.” “O brother,” replied they, “let us keep it to
sup withal.” But he answered, “When suppertime cometh, ye shall have
more than this.” So they took the rest of the victual and going out,
gave it to every poor man who passed by them, saying, “Take and eat,”
till nothing was left. Then they brought back the dishes and Judar said
to his mother, “Put them in the saddle-bags.”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Six Hundred and Sixteenth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Judar, when
his brethren had finished their under-meal, said to his mother, “Put
back the platters in the saddle-bags.” And when it was eventide, he
entered the saloon and took forth of the saddle-bags a table of forty
dishes; after which he went up to the upper room and, sitting down
between his brothers, said to his mother, “Bring the supper.”[286] So
she went down to the saloon and, finding there the dishes ready, laid
the tray and brought up the forty dishes, one after other. Then they ate
the evening meal, and when they had done, Judar said to his brothers,
“Take and feed the poor and needy.” So they took what was left and gave
alms thereof, and presently he brought forth to them sweetmeats, whereof
they ate, and what was left he bade them give to the neighbours. On the
morrow, they brake their fast after the same fashion, and thus they
fared ten days, at the end of which time quoth Sálim to Salím, “How
cometh it that our brother setteth before us a banquet in the morning, a
banquet at noon, and a banquet at sundown, besides sweetmeats late at
night, and all that is left he giveth to the poor? Verily, this is the
fashion of Sultans. Yet we never see him buy aught, and he hath neither
kitchener nor kitchen, nor doth he light a fire. Whence hath he this
great plenty? Hast thou not a mind to discover the cause of all this?”
Quoth Salím, “By Allah, I know not: but knowest thou any who will tell
us the truth of the case?” Quoth Sálim, “None will tell us save our
mother.” So they laid a plot and repairing to their mother one day, in
their brother’s absence, said to her, “O our mother, we are hungry.”
Replied she, “Rejoice, for ye shall presently be satisfied;” and going
into the saloon, sought of the servant of the saddle-bags hot meats,
which she took out and set before her sons. “O our mother,” cried they,
“this meat is hot; yet hast thou not cooked, neither kindled a fire.”
Quoth she, “It cometh from the saddle-bags;” and quoth they, “What
manner of thing be these saddle-bags?” She answered, “They are
enchanted; and the required is produced by the charm:” she then told her
sons their virtue, enjoining them to secrecy. Said they, “The secret
shall be kept, O our mother, but teach us the manner of this.” So she
taught them the fashion thereof and they fell to putting their hands
into the saddle-bags and taking forth whatever they had a mind to. But
Judar knew naught of this. Then quoth Sálim privily to Salím, “O my
brother, how long shall we abide with Judar servant-wise and eat of his
alms? Shall we not contrive to get the saddle-bags from him and make off
with them?” “And how shall we make shift to do this?” “We will sell him
to the galleys.” “How shall we do that?” “We two will go to the Raís,
the Chief Captain of the Sea of Suez and bid him to an entertainment,
with two of his company. What I say to Judar do thou confirm, and at the
end of the night I will show thee what I will do.” So they agreed upon
the sale of their brother and going to the Captain’s quarters said to
him, “O Rais, we have come to thee on an errand that will please thee.”
“Good,” answered he; and they continued, “We two are brethren, and we
have a third brother, a lewd fellow and good-for-nothing. When our
father died, he left us some money, which we shared amongst us, and he
took his part of the inheritance and wasted it in frowardness and
debauchery, till he was reduced to poverty, when he came upon us and
cited us before the magistrates, avouching that we had taken his good
and that of his father, and we disputed the matter before the judges and
lost the money. Then he waited awhile and attacked us a second time,
until he brought us to beggary; nor will he desist from us, and we are
utterly weary of him; wherefore we would have thee buy him of us.” Quoth
the Captain, “Can ye cast about with him and bring him to me here? If
so, I will pack him off to sea forthright.” Quoth they “We cannot manage
to bring him here; but be thou our guest this night and bring with thee
two of thy men, not one more; and when he is asleep, we will aid one
another to fall upon him, we five, and seize and gag him. Then shalt
thou carry him forth the house, under cover of the night, and after do
thou with him as thou wilt.” Rejoined the Captain, “With all my heart!
Will ye sell him for forty dinars?” and they, “Yes, come after nightfall
to such a street, by such a mosque, and thou shalt find one of us
awaiting thee.” And he replied, “Now be off.” Then they repaired to
Judar and waited awhile, after which Sálim went up to him and kissed his
hand. Quoth Judar, “What ails thee, O my brother?” And he made answer,
saying, “Know that I have a friend, who hath many a time bidden me to
his house in thine absence and hath ever hospitably entreated me, and I
owe him a thousand kindnesses, as my brother here wotteth. I met him
to-day and he invited me to his house, but I said to him:—I cannot leave
my brother Judar. Quoth he, Bring him with thee; and quoth I:—He will
not consent to that; but if ye will be my guests, thou and thy
brothers[287] * * * * * (for his brothers were sitting with him); and I
invited them thinking that they would refuse. But he accepted my
invitation for all of them, saying, Look for me at the gate of the
little mosque,[288] and I will come to thee, I and my brothers. And now
I fear they will come and am ashamed before thee. So wilt thou hearten
my heart and entertain them this night, for thy good is abundant, O my
brother? Or if thou consent not, give me leave to take them into the
neighbours’ houses.” Replied Judar, “Why shouldst thou carry them into
the neighbours’ houses? Is our house then so strait or have we not
wherewith to give them supper? Shame on thee to consult me! Thou hast
but to call for what thou needest and have rich viands and sweetmeats
and to spare. Whenever thou bringest home folk in my absence, ask thy
mother, and she will set before thee victual more than enough. Go and
fetch them; blessings have descended upon us through such guests.” So
Sálim kissed his hand and going forth, sat at the gate of the little
mosque till after sundown, when the Captain and his men came up to him,
and he carried them to the house. When Judar saw them he bade them
welcome and seated them and made friends of them, knowing not what the
future had in store for him at their hands. Then he called to his mother
for supper, and she fell to taking dishes out of the saddle-bags, whilst
he said, “Bring such and such meats,” till she had set forty different
dishes before them. They ate their sufficiency and the tray was taken
away, the sailors thinking the while that this liberal entertainment
came from Sálim. When a third part of the night was past, Judar set
sweetmeats before them and Sálim served them, whilst his two brothers
sat with the guests, till they sought to sleep. Accordingly Judar lay
down and the others with him, who waited till he was asleep, when they
fell upon him together and gagging and pinioning him, before he was
awake, carried him forth of the house,[289] under cover of the
night,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Seventeenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that they seized Judar
and carrying him forth of the house under cover of the night, at once
packed him off to Suez, where they shackled him and set him to work as a
galley-slave; and he ceased not to serve thus in silence a whole
year.[290] So far concerning Judar; but as for his brothers, they went
in next morning to his mother and said to her, “O our mother, our
brother Judar is not awake.” Said she, “Do ye wake him.” Asked they,
“Where lieth he?” and she answered, “With the guests.” They rejoined,
“Haply he went away with them whilst we slept, O mother. It would seem
that he had tasted of strangerhood and yearned to get at hidden hoards;
for we heard him at talk with the Moors, and they said to him, We will
take thee with us and open the treasure to thee.” She enquired, “Hath he
then been in company with Moors?;” and they replied, saying, “Were they
not our guests yesternight?” And she, “Most like he hath gone with them,
but Allah will direct him on the right way; for there is a blessing upon
him and he will surely come back with great good.” But she wept, for it
was grievous to her to be parted from her son. Then said they to her, “O
accursed woman, dost thou love Judar with all this love, whilst as for
us, whether we be absent or present, thou neither joyest in us nor
sorrowest for us? Are we not thy sons, even as Judar is thy son?” She
said, “Ye are indeed my sons: but ye are reprobates who deserve no
favour of me, for since your father’s death I have never seen any good
in you; whilst as for Judar, I have had abundant good of him and he hath
heartened my heart and entreated me with honour; wherefore it behoveth
me to weep for him, because of his kindness to me and to you.” When they
heard this, they abused her and beat her; after which they sought for
the saddle-bags, till they found the two pairs and took the enchanted
one and all the gold from one pouch and jewels from the other of the
unenchanted, saying, “This was our father’s good.” Said their mother,
“Not so, by Allah!; it belongeth to your brother Judar, who brought it
from the land of the Magharibah.” Said they, “Thou liest, it was our
father’s property; and we will dispose of it, as we please.” Then they
divided the gold and jewels between them; but a brabble arose between
them concerning the enchanted saddle-bags, Sálim saying, “I will have
them;” and Salím, saying, “I will take them;” and they came to high
words. Then said she, “O my sons, ye have divided the gold and the
jewels, but this may not be divided, nor can its value be made up in
money; and if it be cut in twain, its spell will be voided; so leave it
with me and I will give you to eat from it at all times and be content
to take a morsel with you. If ye allow me aught to clothe me, ‘twill be
of your bounty, and each of you shall traffic with the folk for himself.
Ye are my sons and I am your mother; wherefore let us abide as we are,
lest your brother come back and we be disgraced.” But they accepted not
her words and passed the night, wrangling with each other. Now it
chanced that a Janissary[291] of the King’s guards was a guest in the
house adjoining Judar’s and heard them through the open window. So he
looked out and listening, heard all the angry words that passed between
them and saw the division of the spoil. Next morning he presented
himself before the King of Egypt, whose name was Shams al-Daulah,[292]
and told him all he had heard, whereupon he sent for Judar’s brothers
and put them to the question, till they confessed; and he took the two
pairs of saddle-bags from them and clapped them in prison, appointing a
sufficient daily allowance to their mother. Now as regards Judar, he
abode a whole year in service at Suez, till one day, being in a ship
bound on a voyage over the sea, a wind arose against them and cast the
vessel upon a rock projecting from a mountain, where she broke up and
all on board were drowned and none gat ashore save Judar. As soon as he
landed he fared on inland, till he reached an encampment of Badawi, who
questioned him of his case, and he told them he had been a sailor.[293]
Now there was in camp a merchant, a native of Jiddah, who took pity on
him and said to him, “Wilt thou take service with me, O Egyptian, and I
will clothe thee and carry thee with me to Jiddah?” So Judar took
service with him and companied him to Jiddah, where he showed him much
favour. After awhile, his master the merchant set out on a pilgrimage to
Meccah, taking Judar with him, and when they reached the city, the
Cairene repaired to the Haram temple, to circumambulate the Ka’abah. As
he was making the prescribed circuits,[294] he suddenly saw his friend
Abd al-Samad the Moor doing the like;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Eighteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Judar, as he was
making the circuits, suddenly saw his friend Abd al-Samad also
circumambulating; and when the Maghribi caught sight of him, he saluted
him and asked him of his state; whereupon Judar wept and told him all
that had befallen him. So the Moor carried him to his lodging and
entreated him with honour, clothing him in a dress of which the like was
not, and saying to him, “Thou hast seen the end of thine ills, O Judar.”
Then he drew out for him a geomantic figure, which showed what had
befallen Sálim and Salím and said to Judar, “Such and such things have
befallen thy brothers and they are now in the King of Egypt’s prison;
but thou art right welcome to abide with me and accomplish thine
ordinances of pilgrimage and all shall be well.” Replied Judar, “O my
lord, let me go and take leave of the merchant with whom I am and after
I will come back to thee.” “Dost thou owe money?” asked the Moor, and he
answered, “No.” Said Abd al-Samad, “Go thou and take leave of him and
come back forthright, for bread hath claims of its own from the
ingenuous.” So Judar returned to the merchant and farewelled him,
saying, “I have fallen in with my brother.”[295] “Go bring him here,”
said the merchant, “and we will make him an entertainment.” But Judar
answered, saying, “He hath no need of that; for he is a man of wealth
and hath many servants.” Then the merchant gave Judar twenty dinars,
saying, “Acquit me of responsibility”;[296] and he bade him adieu and
went forth from him. Presently, he saw a poor man, so he gave him the
twenty ducats and returned to the Moor, with whom he abode till they had
accomplished the pilgrimage-rites when Abd al-Samad gave him the
seal-ring, that he had taken from the treasure of Al-Shamardal, saying,
“This ring will win thee thy wish, for it enchanteth and hath a servant,
by name Al-Ra’ad al-Kásif; so whatever thou hast a mind to of the wants
of this world; rub this ring and its servant will appear and do all thou
biddest him.” Then he rubbed the ring before him, whereupon the Jinni
appeared, saying, “Adsum, O my lord! Ask what thou wilt and it shall be
given thee. Hast thou a mind to people a ruined city or ruin a populous
one? to slay a king or to rout a host?” “O Ra’ad,” said Abd al-Samad,
“this is become thy lord; do thou serve him faithfully.” Then he
dismissed him and said to Judar, “Rub the ring and the servant will
appear; and do thou command him to do whatever thou desirest, for he
will not gainsay thee. Now go to thine own country and take care of the
ring, for by means of it thou wilt baffle thine enemies; and be not
ignorant of its puissance.” “O my lord,” quoth Judar, “with thy leave, I
will set out homewards.” Quoth the Maghribi, “Summon the Jinni and mount
upon his back; and if thou say to him:—Bring me to my native city this
very day, he will not disobey thy commandment.” So he took leave of Moor
Abd al-Samad and rubbed the ring, whereupon Al-Ra’ad presented himself,
saying, “Adsum; ask and it shall be given to thee.” Said Judar, “Carry
me to Cairo this day;” and he replied, “Thy will be done;” and, taking
him on his back, flew with him from noon till midnight, when he set him
down in the courtyard of his mother’s house and disappeared. Judar went
in to his mother, who rose weeping, and greeted him fondly, and told him
how the King had beaten his brothers and cast them into gaol and taken
the two pairs of saddle-bags; which when he heard, it was no light
matter to him and he said to her, “Grieve not for the past; I will show
thee what I can do and bring my brothers hither forthright.” So he
rubbed the ring, whereupon its servant appeared, saying, “Here am I! Ask
and thou shalt have.” Quoth Judar, “I bid thee bring me my two brothers
from the prison of the King.” So the Jinni sank into the earth and came
not up but in the midst of the gaol where Sálim and Salím lay in piteous
plight and sore sorrow for the plagues of prison,[297] so that they
wished for death, and one of them said to the other, “By Allah, O my
brother, affliction is longsome upon us! How long shall we abide in this
prison? Death would be relief.” As he spoke, behold, the earth clove in
sunder and out came Al-Ra’ad, who took both up and plunged with them
into the earth. They swooned away for excess of fear, and when they
recovered, they found themselves in their mother’s house and saw Judar
seated by her side. Quoth he, “I salute you, O my brothers! you have
cheered me by your presence.” And they bowed their heads and burst into
tears. Then said he, “Weep not, for it was Satan and covetise that led
you to do thus. How could you sell me? But I comfort myself with the
thought of Joseph, whose brothers did with him even more than ye did
with me, because they cast him into the pit.”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Nineteenth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Judar said to
his brothers, “How could you do with me thus?” But repent unto Allah and
crave pardon of Him, and He will forgive you both, for He is the Most
Forgiving, the Merciful. As for me, I pardon you and welcome you: no
harm shall befal you. Then he comforted them and set their hearts at
ease and related to them all he had suffered, till he fell in with
Shaykh Abd al-Samad, and told them also of the seal-ring. They replied,
“O our brother, forgive us this time; and, if we return to our old ways,
do with us as thou wilt.” Quoth he, “No harm shall befal you; but tell
me what the King did with you.” Quoth they, “He beat us and threatened
us with death and took the two pairs of saddle-bags from us.” “Will he
not care?”[298] said Judar, and rubbed the ring, whereupon Al-Ra’ad
appeared. When his brothers saw him, they were affrighted and thought
Judar would bid him slay them; so they fled to their mother, crying, “O
our mother, we throw ourselves on thy generosity; do thou intercede for
us, O our mother!” And she said to them, “O my sons, fear nothing!” Then
said Judar to the servant, “I command thee to bring me all that is in
the King’s treasury of goods and such; let nothing remain and fetch the
two pairs of saddle-bags he took from my brothers.” “I hear and I obey,”
replied Al-Ra’ad; and, disappearing straightway gathered together all he
found in the treasury and returned with the two pairs of saddle-bags and
the deposits therein and laid them before Judar, saying, “O my lord, I
have left nothing in the treasury.” Judar gave the treasure to his
mother bidding her keep it and laying the enchanted saddle-bags before
him, said to the Jinni, “I command thee to build me this night a lofty
palace and overlay it with liquid gold and furnish it with magnificent
furniture: and let not the day dawn, ere thou be quit of the whole
work.” Replied he, “Thy bidding shall be obeyed;” and sank into the
earth. Then Judar brought forth food and they ate and took their ease
and lay down to sleep. Meanwhile, Al-Ra’ad summoned his attendant Jinn
and bade them build the palace. So some of them fell to hewing stones
and some to building, whilst others plastered and painted and furnished;
nor did the day dawn ere the ordinance of the palace was complete;
whereupon Al-Ra’ad came to Judar and said to him, “O my lord, the palace
is finished and in best order, an it please thee to come and look on
it.” So Judar went forth with his mother and brothers and saw a palace,
whose like there was not in the whole world; and it confounded all minds
with the goodliness of its ordinance. Judar was delighted with it while
he was passing along the highway and withal it had cost him nothing.
Then he asked his mother, “Say me, wilt thou take up thine abode in this
palace?” and she answered, “I will, O my son,” and called down blessings
upon him. Then he rubbed the ring and bade the Jinni fetch him forty
handsome white handmaids and forty black damsels and as many Mamelukes
and negro slaves. “Thy will be done,” answered Al-Ra’ad and betaking
himself, with forty of his attendant Genii to Hind and Sind and Persia,
snatched up every beautiful girl and boy they saw, till they had made up
the required number. Moreover, he sent other fourscore, who fetched
comely black girls, and forty others brought male chattels and carried
them all to Judar’s house, which they filled. Then he showed them to
Judar, who was pleased with them and said, “Bring for each a dress of
the finest.” “Ready!” replied the servant. Then quoth he, “Bring a dress
for my mother and another for myself, and also for my brothers.” So the
Jinni fetched all that was needed and clad the female slaves, saying to
them, “This is your mistress: kiss her hands and cross her not, but
serve her, white and black.” The Mamelukes also dressed themselves and
kissed Judar’s hands; and he and his brothers arrayed themselves in the
robes the Jinni had brought them and Judar became like unto a King and
his brothers as Wazirs. Now his house was spacious; so he lodged Sálim
and his slave-girls in one part thereof and Salím and his slave-girls in
another, whilst he and his mother took up their abode in the new palace;
and each in his own place was like a Sultan. So far concerning them; but
as regards the King’s Treasurer, thinking to take something from the
treasury, he went in and found it altogether empty, even as saith the
poet:—

 ‘Twas as a hive of bees that greatly thrived; ✿ But, when the bee-swarm
    fled, ‘twas clean unhived.[299]

So he gave a great cry and fell down in a fit. When he came to himself,
he left the door open and going in to King Shams al-Daulah, said to him,
“O Commander of the Faithful,[300] I have to inform thee that the
treasury hath become empty during the night.” Quoth the King, “What hast
thou done with my monies which were therein?” Quoth he, “By Allah, I
have not done aught with them nor know I what is come of them! I visited
the place yesterday and saw it full; but to-day when I went in, I found
it clean empty, albeit the doors were locked, the walls were
unpierced[301] and the bolts[302] are unbroken; nor hath a thief entered
it.” Asked the King, “Are the two pairs of saddle-bags gone?” “Yes,”
replied the Treasurer; whereupon the King’s reason flew from his
head——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Six Hundred and Twentieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Treasurer
informed the King that all in the treasury had been plundered, including
the two pairs of saddle-bags, the King’s reason flew from his head and
he rose to his feet, saying, “Go thou before me.” Then he followed the
Treasurer to the treasury and he found nothing there, whereat he was
wroth with him; and he said to them, “O soldiers! know that my treasury
hath been plundered during the night, and I know not who did this deed
and dared thus to outrage me, without fear of me.” Said they, “How so?”;
and he replied, “Ask the Treasurer.” So they questioned him, and he
answered, saying, “Yesterday I visited the treasury and it was full, but
this morning when I entered it I found it empty, though the walls were
unpierced and the doors unbroken.” They all marvelled at this and could
make the King no answer, when in came the Janissary, who had denounced
Sálim and Salím, and said to Shams al-Daulah, “O King of the age, all
this night I have not slept for that which I saw.” And the King asked,
“And what didst thou see?” “Know, O King of the age,” answered the
Kawwás, “that all night long I have been amusing myself with watching
builders at work; and, when it was day, I saw a palace ready edified,
whose like is not in the world. So I asked about it and was told that
Judar had come back with great wealth and Mamelukes and slaves and that
he had freed his two brothers from prison, and built this palace,
wherein he is as a Sultan.” Quoth the King, “Go, look in the prison.” So
they went thither and not finding Sálim and Salím, returned and told the
King, who said, “It is plain now who be the thief; he who took Sálim and
Salím out of prison it is who hath stolen my monies.” Quoth the Wazir,
“O my lord, and who is he?”; and quoth the King, “Their brother Judar,
and he hath taken the two pairs of saddle-bags; but, O Wazir, do thou
send him an Emir with fifty men to seal up his goods and lay hands on
him and his brothers and bring them to me, that I may hang them.” And he
was sore enraged and said, “Ho, off with the Emir at once, and fetch
them, that I may put them to death.” But the Wazir said to him, “Be thou
merciful, for Allah is merciful and hasteth not to punish His servants,
whenas they sin against Him. Moreover, he who can build a palace in a
single night, as these say, none in the world can vie with him; and
verily I fear lest the Emir fall into difficulty for Judar. Have
patience, therefore, whilst I devise for thee some device of getting at
the truth of the case, and so shalt thou win thy wish, O King of the
age.” Quoth the King, “Counsel me how I shall do, O Wazir.” And the
Minister said, “Send him an Emir with an invitation; and I will make
much of him for thee and make a show of love for him and ask him of his
estate; after which we will see. If we find him stout of heart, we will
use sleight with him, and if weak of will, then do thou seize him and do
with him thy desire.” The King agreed to this and despatched one of his
Emirs, Othman hight, to go and invite Judar and say to him, “The King
biddeth thee to a banquet;” and the King said to him, “Return not,
except with him.” Now this Othman was a fool, proud and conceited; so he
went forth upon his errand, and when he came to the gate of Judar’s
palace, he saw before the door an eunuch seated upon a chair of gold,
who at his approach rose not, but sat as if none came near, though there
were with the Emir fifty footmen. Now this eunuch was none other than
Al-Ra’ad al-Kasif, the servant of the ring, whom Judar had commanded to
put on the guise of an eunuch and sit at the palace-gate. So the Emir
rode up to him and asked him, “O slave, where is thy lord?”; whereto he
answered, “In the palace;” but he stirred not from his leaning posture;
whereupon the Emir Othman waxed wroth and said to him, “O pestilent
slave, art thou not ashamed, when I speak to thee, to answer me,
sprawling at thy length, like a gallows-bird?” Replied the eunuch, “Off
and multiply not words.” Hardly had Othman heard this, when he was
filled with rage and drawing his mace[303] would have smitten the
eunuch, knowing not that he was a devil; but Al-Ra’ad leapt upon him and
taking the mace from him, dealt him four blows with it. Now when the
fifty men saw their lord beaten, it was grievous to them; so they drew
their swords and ran to slay the slave; but he said, “Do ye draw on us,
O dogs?” and rose at them with the mace, and every one whom he smote, he
broke his bones and drowned him in his blood. So they fell back before
him and fled, whilst he followed them, beating them, till he had driven
them far from the palace-gate; after which he returned and sat down on
his chair at the door, caring for none.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the eunuch having
put to flight the Emir Othman, the King’s Officer, and his men, till
they were driven far from Judar’s gate, returned and sat down on his
chair at the door, caring for none. But as for the Emir and his company,
they returned, discomfited and tunded, to King Shams al-Daulah, and
Othman said, “O King of the age, when I came to the palace gate, I
espied an eunuch seated there in a chair of gold and he was passing
proud for, when he saw me approach, he stretched himself at full length
albeit he had been sitting in his chair and entreated me contumeliously,
neither offered to rise to me. So I began to speak to him and he
answered without stirring, whereat wrath gat hold of me and I drew the
mace upon him, thinking to smite him. But he snatched it from me and
beat me and my men therewith and overthrew us. So we fled from before
him and could not prevail against, him.” At this, the King was wroth and
said, “Let an hundred men go down to him.” Accordingly, the hundred men
went down to attack him; but he arose and fell upon them with the mace
and ceased not smiting them till he had put them to the rout; when he
regained his chair; upon which they returned to the King and told him
what had passed, saying, “O King of the age, he beat us and we fled for
fear of him.” Then the King sent two hundred men against him, but these
also he put to the rout, and Shams Al-Daulah said to his Minister, “I
charge thee, O Wazir, take five hundred men and bring this eunuch in
haste, and with him his master Judar and his brothers.” Replied the
Wazir, “O King of the age, I need no soldiers, but will go down to him
alone and unarmed.” “Go,” quoth the King, “and do as thou seest
suitable.” So the Wazir laid down his arms and donning a white
habit,[304] took a rosary in his hand and set out afoot alone and
unattended. When he came to Judar’s gate, he saw the slave sitting
there; So he went up to him and seating himself by his side courteously,
said to him, “Peace be with thee!”; whereto he replied, “And on thee be
peace, O mortal! What wilt thou?” When the Wazir heard him say “O
mortal,” he knew him to be of the Jinn and quaked for fear; then he
asked him, “O my lord, tell me, is thy master Judar here?” Answered the
eunuch, “Yes, he is in the palace.” Quoth the Minister, “O my lord, go
thou to him and say to him:—King Shams Al-Daulah saluteth thee and
biddeth thee honour his dwelling with thy presence and eat of a banquet
he hath made for thee.” Quoth the eunuch, “Tarry thou here, whilst I
consult him.” So the Wazir stood in a respectful attitude, whilst the
Marid went up to the palace and said to Judar, “Know, O my lord, that
the King sent to thee an Emir and fifty men, and I beat them and drove
them away. Then he sent an hundred men and I beat them also; then two
hundred, and these also I put to the rout. And now he hath sent thee his
Wazir unarmed, bidding thee visit him and eat of his banquet. What sayst
thou?” Said Judar, “Go, bring the Wazir hither.” So the Marid went down
and said to him, “O Wazir, come speak with my lord.” “On my head be it,”
replied he and going in to Judar, found him seated, in greater state
than the King, upon a carpet, whose like the King could not spread, and
was dazed and amazed at the goodliness of the palace and its decoration
and appointments, which made him seem as he were a beggar in comparison.
So he kissed the ground before Judar and called down blessings on him;
and Judar said to him, “What is thy business, O Wazir?” Replied he, “O
my lord, thy friend King Shams Al-Daulah saluteth thee with the salam
and longeth to look upon thy face; wherefore he hath made thee an
entertainment. So say, wilt thou heal his heart and eat of his banquet?”
Quoth Judar, “If he be indeed my friend, salute him and bid him come to
me.” “On my head be it,” quoth the Minister. Then Judar bringing out the
ring rubbed it and bade the Jinni fetch him a dress of the best, which
he gave to the Wazir, saying, “Don this dress and go tell the King what
I say.” So the Wazir donned the dress, the like whereof he had never
donned, and returning to the King told him what had passed and praised
the palace and that which was therein, saying, “Judar biddeth thee to
him.” So the King called out, “Up, ye men; mount your horses and bring
me my steed, that we may go to Judar!” Then he and his suite rode off
for the Cairene palace. Meanwhile Judar summoned the Marid and said to
him, “It is my will that thou bring me some of the Ifrits at thy command
in the guise of guards and station them in the open square before the
palace, that the King may see them and be awed by them; so shall his
heart tremble and he shall know that my power and majesty be greater
than his.” Thereupon Al-Ra’ad brought him two hundred Ifrits of great
stature and strength, in the guise of guards, magnificently armed and
equipped, and when the King came and saw these tall burly fellows his
heart feared them. Then he entered the palace, and found Judar sitting
in such state as nor King nor Sultan could even. So he saluted him and
made his obeisance to him; yet Judar rose not to him nor did him honour
nor said “Be seated,” but left him standing,——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the King
entered, Judar rose not to him, nor did him honour nor even said “Be
seated!”; but left him standing,[305] so that fear entered into him and
he could neither sit nor go away and said to himself, “If he feared me,
he would not leave me thus unheeded; peradventure he will do me a
mischief, because of that which I did with his brothers.” Then said
Judar, “O King of the age, it beseemeth not the like of thee to wrong
the folk and take away their good.” Replied the King, “O my lord, deign
excuse me, for greed impelled me to this and fate was thereby fulfilled;
and, were there no offending, there would be no forgiving.” And he went
on to excuse himself for the past and pray to him for pardon and
indulgence till he recited amongst other things this poetry:—

 O thou of generous seed and true nobility, ✿ Reproach me not for that
    which came from me to thee:
 We pardon thee if thou have wrought us any wrong ✿ And if I wrought the
    wrong I pray thee pardon me!

And he ceased not to humble himself before him, till he said, “Allah
pardon thee!” and bade him be seated. So he sat down and Judar invested
him with garments of pardon and immunity and ordered his brothers spread
the table. When they had eaten, he clad the whole of the King’s company
in robes of honour and gave them largesse; after which he bade the King
depart. So he went forth and thereafter came every day to visit Judar
and held not his Divan save in his house: wherefore friendship and
familiarity waxed great between them, and they abode thus awhile, till
one day the King, being alone with his Minister, said to him, “O Wazir,
I fear lest Judar slay me and take the kingdom away from me.” Replied
the Wazir, “O King of the age, as for his taking the kingdom from thee,
have no fear of that, for Judar’s present estate is greater than that of
the King, and to take the kingdom would be a lowering of his dignity;
but, if thou fear that he kill thee, thou hast a daughter: give her to
him to wife and thou and he will be of one condition.” Quoth the King,
“O Wazir, be thou intermediary between us and him”; and quoth the
Minister, “Do thou invite him to an entertainment and pass the night
with him in one of thy saloons. Then bid thy daughter don her richest
dress and ornaments and pass by the door of the saloon. When he seeth
her, he will assuredly fall in love with her, and when we know this, I
will turn to him and tell him that she is thy daughter and engage him in
converse and lead him on, so that thou shalt seem to know nothing of the
matter, till he ask her of thee to wife. When thou has married him to
the Princess, thou and he will be as one thing and thou wilt be safe
from him; and if he die, thou wilt inherit all he hath, both great and
small.” Replied the King, “Thou sayst sooth, O my Wazir,” and made a
banquet and invited thereto Judar who came to the Sultan’s palace and
they sat in the saloon in great good cheer till the end of the day. Now
the King had commanded his wife to array the maiden in her richest
raiment and ornaments and carry her by the door of the saloon. She did
as he told her, and when Judar saw the Princess, who had not her match
for beauty and grace, he looked fixedly at her and said, “Ah!”; and his
limbs were loosened; for love and longing and passion and pine were sore
upon him; desire and transport gat hold upon him and he turned pale.
Quoth the Wazir, “May no harm befal thee, O my lord! Why do I see thee
change colour and in suffering?” Asked Judar, “O Wazir, whose daughter
is this damsel? Verily she hath enthralled me and ravished my reason.”
Replied the Wazir, “She is the daughter of thy friend the King; and if
she please thee, I will speak to him that he marry thee to her.” Quoth
Judar, “Do so, O Wazir, and as I live, I will bestow on thee what thou
wilt and will give the King whatsoever he shall ask to her dowry; and we
will become friends and kinsfolk.” Quoth the Minister, “It shall go hard
but thy desire be accomplished.” Then he turned to the King and said in
his ear, “O King of the age, thy friend Judar seeketh alliance with thee
and will have me ask of thee for him the hand of thy daughter, the
Princess Asiyah; so disappoint me not, but accept my intercession, and
what dowry soever thou askest he will give thee.” Said the King, “The
dowry I have already received, and as for the girl, she is his handmaid;
I give her to him to wife and he will do me honour by accepting
her.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Wazir
whispered the King, “Judar seeketh alliance with thee by taking thy
daughter to wife,” the other replied, “The dowry I have already
received, and the girl is his handmaid; he will do me honour by
accepting her.” So they spent the rest of that night together and on the
morrow the King held a court, to which he summoned great and small,
together with the Shaykh al-Islam.[306] Then Judar demanded the Princess
in marriage and the King said, “The dowry I have received.” Thereupon
they drew up the marriage-contract and Judar sent for the saddle-bags
containing the jewels and gave them to the King as settlement upon his
daughter. The drums beat and the pipes sounded and they held high
festival, whilst Judar went in unto the girl. Thenceforward he and the
King were as one flesh and they abode thus for many days, till Shams
al-Daulah died; whereupon the troops proclaimed Judar Sultan, and he
refused; but they importuned him, till he consented and they made him
King in his father-in-law’s stead. Then he bade build a cathedral-mosque
over the late King’s tomb in the Bundukániyah[307] quarter and endowed
it. Now the quarter of Judar’s house was called Yamániyah; but, when he
became Sultan he built therein a congregational mosque and other
buildings, wherefore the quarter was named after him and was called the
Judariyah[308] quarter. Moreover, he made his brother Sálim his Wazir of
the right and his brother Salím his Wazir of the left hand; and thus
they abode a year and no more; for, at the end of that time, Sálim said
to Salím, “O my brother, how long is this state to last? Shall we pass
our whole lives in slavery to our brother Judar? We shall never enjoy
luck or lordship whilst he lives,” adding, “so how shall we do to kill
him and take the ring and the saddle-bags?” Replied Salím, “Thou art
craftier than I; do thou device, whereby we may kill him.” “If I effect
this,” asked Sálim, “wilt thou agree that I be Sultan and keep the ring
and that thou be my right-hand Wazir and have the saddle-bags?” Salím
answered, “I consent to this;” and they agreed to slay Judar their
brother for love of the world and of dominion. So they laid a snare for
Judar and said to him, “O our brother, verily we have a mind to glory in
thee and would fain have thee enter our houses and eat of our
entertainment and solace our hearts.” Replied Judar, “So be it, in whose
house shall the banquet be?” “In mine,” said Sálim “and after thou hast
eaten of my victual, thou shalt be the guest of my brother.” Said Judar,
“‘Tis well,” and went with him to his house, where he set before him
poisoned food, of which when he had eaten, his flesh rotted from his
bones and he died.[309] Then Sálim came up to him and would have drawn
the ring from his finger, but it resisted him; so he cut off the finger
with a knife. Then he rubbed the ring and the Marid presented himself,
saying, “Adsum! Ask what thou wilt.” Quoth Sálim, “Take my brother Salím
and put him to death and carry forth the two bodies, the poisoned and
the slaughtered, and cast them down before the troops.” So the Mahrid
took Salím and slew him; then, carrying the two corpses forth, he cast
them down before the chief officers of the army, who were sitting at
table in the parlour of the house. When they saw Judar and Salím slain,
they raised their hands from the food and fear gat hold of them and they
said to the Marid, “Who hath dealt thus with the Sultan and the Wazir?”
Replied the Jinni, “Their brother Sálim.” And behold, Sálim came up to
them and said, “O soldiers, eat and make merry, for Judar is dead and I
have taken to me the seal-ring, whereof the Marid before you is the
servant; and I bade him slay my brother Salím lest he dispute the
kingdom with me, for he was a traitor and I feared lest he should betray
me. So now I am become Sultan over you; will ye accept of me? If not, I
will rub the ring and bid the Marid slay you all, great and small.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Sálim
said to the officers, “Will ye accept me as your Sultan, otherwise I
will rub the ring and the Marid shall slay you all, great and small?”;
they replied, “We accept thee to King and Sultan.” Then he bade bury his
brothers and summoned the Divan; and some of the folk followed the
funeral, whilst others forewent him in state procession to the
audience-hall of the palace, where he sat down on the throne and they
did homage to him as King; after which he said, “It is my will to marry
my brother Judar’s wife.” Quoth they, “Wait till the days of widowhood
are accomplished.”[310] Quoth he, “I know not days of widowhood nor
aught else. As my head liveth, I needs must go in unto her this very
night.” So they drew up the marriage-contract and sent to tell the
Princess Asiyah, who replied, “Bid him enter.” Accordingly, he went in
to her and she received him with a show of joy and welcome; but by and
by she gave him poison in water and made an end of him. Then she took
the ring and broke it, that none might possess it thenceforward, and
tore up the saddle-bags; after which she sent to the Shaykh al-Islam and
other great Officers of state, telling them what had passed and saying
to them, “Choose you out a King to rule over you.” And this is all that
hath come down to us of the Story of Judar and his Brethren.[311] But I
have also heard, O King, a tale called the

-----

Footnote 257:

  The name is old and classical Arabic: in Antar the young Amazon Jaydá
  was called Judar in public (Story of Jaydá and Khálid). It is also, as
  will be seen, the name of a quarter in Cairo, and men are often called
  after such places, _e.g._ Al-Jubní from the Súk al-Jubn in Damascus.
  The story is exceedingly Egyptian and the style abounds in Cairene
  vulgarisms; especially in the Bresl. Edit. ix. 311.

Footnote 258:

  Had the merchant left his property to be divided after his death and
  not made a will, the widow would have had only one-eighth instead of a
  fourth.

Footnote 259:

  Lit. “from tyrant to tyrant,” _i.e._ from official to official,
  Al-Zalamah, the “tyranny” of popular parlance.

Footnote 260:

  The coin is omitted in the text but it is evidently the “Nusf” or
  half-dirham. Lane (iii. 235), noting that the dinar is worth 170
  “nusfs” in this tale, thinks that it was written (or copied?) after
  the Osmanh Conquest of Egypt. Unfortunately he cannot tell the precise
  period when the value of the small change fell so low.

Footnote 261:

  Arab. “Yaum mubárak!” still a popular exclamation.

Footnote 262:

  _i.e._ of the door of daily bread.

Footnote 263:

  Arab. “Sírah,” a small fish differently described (De Sacy, “Relation
  de l’Egypte par Abd-allatif,” pp. 278–288: Lane, Nights iii. 234). It
  is not found in Sonnini’s list.

Footnote 264:

  A tank or lakelet in the southern parts of Cairo, long ago filled up;
  Von Hammer believes it inherited the name of the old Charon’s Lake of
  Memphis, over which corpses were ferried.

Footnote 265:

  Thus making the agreement a kind of religious covenant; as Catholics
  would recite a Pater or an Ave Maria.

Footnote 266:

  Arab. “Yá miskín” = O poor devil; mesquin, meschino, words evidently
  derived from the East.

Footnote 267:

  Plur. of Maghribí, a Western man, a Moor. I have already derived the
  word through the Lat. “Maurus” from Maghribiyún. Europeans being
  unable to pronounce the Ghayn (or gh like the modern Cairenes) would
  turn it into “Ma’ariyún.” They are mostly of the Maliki school (for
  which see Sale) and are famous as magicians and treasure-finders.
  Amongst the suite of the late Amir Abd al-Kadir, who lived many years
  and died in Damascus, I found several men profoundly versed in Eastern
  spiritualism and occultism.

Footnote 268:

  The names are respectively, Slave of the Salvation; of the One (God);
  of the Eternal; of the Compassionate; and of the Loving.

Footnote 269:

  _i.e._ “the most profound”; the root is that of “Bátiní,” a gnostic, a
  reprobate.

Footnote 270:

  _i.e._ the Tall One.

Footnote 271:

  The loud-pealing or (ear-) breaking Thunder.

Footnote 272:

  Arab. “Fás and Miknás” which the writer evidently regards as one city.
  “Fás” means a hatchet, from the tradition of one having been found,
  says Ibn Sa’id, when digging the base under the founder Idrís bin
  Idrís (A.D. 808). His sword was placed on the pinnacle of the minaret
  built by the Imám Abu Ahmad bin Abi Bakr enclosed in a golden étui
  studded with pearls and precious stones. From the local pronunciation
  “Fes” is derived the red cap of the nearer Moslem East (see Ibn
  Batutah p. 230).

Footnote 273:

  Arab. “Al-Khurj,” whence the Span. Las Alforjas.

Footnote 274:

  Arab. “Kabáb,” mutton or lamb cut into small squares and grilled upon
  skewers: it is the roast meat of the nearer East where, as in the
  West, men have not learned to cook meat so as to preserve all its
  flavour. This is found in the “Asa’o” of the Argentine Gaucho who
  broils the flesh while still quivering and before the fibre has time
  to set. Hence it is perfectly tender, if the animal be young, and it
  has a “meaty” taste half lost by keeping.

Footnote 275:

  Equivalent to our puritanical “Mercy.”

Footnote 276:

  Arab. “Bukjah,” from the Persian Bukcheh: a favourite way of keeping
  fine clothes in the East is to lay them folded in a piece of rough
  long-cloth with pepper and spices to drive away moths.

Footnote 277:

  This is always specified, for respectable men go out of town on
  horse-back, never on “foot-back,” as our friends the Boers say. I have
  seen a Syrian put to sore shame when compelled by politeness to walk
  with me, and every acquaintance he met addressed him, “Anta
  Zalamah!”—What! afoot!

Footnote 278:

  This tale, including the Enchanted Sword which slays whole armies, was
  adopted in Europe as we see in Straparola (iv. 3), and the “Water of
  Life” which the Grimms found in Hesse, etc., “Gammer Grethel’s German
  Popular Stories,” Edgar Taylor, Bells, 1878; and now published in
  fuller form as “Grimm’s Household Tales,” by Mrs. Hunt, with
  Introduction by A. Lang, 2 vols. 8vo, 1884. It is curious that so
  biting and carping a critic, who will condescend to notice a misprint
  in another’s book, should lay himself open to general animadversion by
  such a rambling farrago of half-digested knowledge as that which
  composes Mr. Andrew Lang’s Introduction.

Footnote 279:

  These retorts of Judar are exactly what a sharp Egyptian Fellah would
  say on such occasions.

Footnote 280:

  Arab. “Salámát,” plur. of Salam, a favourite Egyptian welcome.

Footnote 281:

  This sentence expresses a Moslem idea which greatly puzzles strangers.
  Arabic has no equivalent of our “Thank you” (Kassara ‘llah Khayr-ak
  being a mere blessing—Allah increase thy weal!), nor can Al-Islam
  express gratitude save by a periphrase. The Moslem acknowledges a
  favour by blessing the donor and by wishing him increase of
  prosperity. “May thy shadow never be less!” means, Mayest thou always
  extend to me thy shelter and protection. I have noticed this before
  but it merits repetition. Strangers, and especially Englishmen, are
  very positive and very much mistaken upon a point, which all who have
  to do with Egyptians and Arabs ought thoroughly to understand. Old
  dwellers in the East know that the theory of ingratitude in no way
  interferes with the sense of gratitude innate in man (and beast) and
  that the “lively sense of favours to come,” is as quick in Orient-land
  as in Europe.

Footnote 282:

  Outside this noble gate, the Bab al-Nasr, there is a great cemetery
  wherein, by the by, lies Burckhardt, my predecessor as a Hájj to
  Meccah and Al-Medinah. Hence many beggars are always found squatting
  in its neighbourhood.

Footnote 283:

  Friends sometimes walk alongside the rider holding the stirrup in sign
  of affection and respect, especially to the returning pilgrim.

Footnote 284:

  Equivalent to our Alas! It is woman’s word never used by men; and
  foreigners must be most careful of this distinction under pain of
  incurring something worse than ridicule. I remember an officer in the
  Bombay Army who, having learned Hindostani from women, always spoke of
  himself in the feminine and hugely scandalised the Sepoys.

Footnote 285:

  _i.e._ a neighbour. The “quarters” of a town in the East are often on
  the worst of terms. See Pilgrimage.

Footnote 286:

  In the patriarchal stage of society the mother waits upon her adult
  sons. Even in Dalmatia I found, in many old-fashioned houses, the
  ladies of the family waiting upon the guests. Very pleasant, but
  somewhat startling at first.

Footnote 287:

  Here the apodosis would be “We can all sup together.”

Footnote 288:

  Arab. “Záwiyah” (= oratory), which is to a Masjid what a chapel is to
  a church.

Footnote 289:

  Arab. “Kasr,” prop. a palace: so the Tuscan peasant speaks of his
  “palazzo.”

Footnote 290:

  This sale of a free-born Moslem was mere felony. But many centuries
  later Englishmen used to be sold and sent to the plantations in
  America.

Footnote 291:

  Arab. “Kawwás,” lit. an archer, suggesting _les archers de la Sainte
  Hermandade_. In former days it denoted a sergeant, an apparitor, an
  officer who executed magisterial orders. In modern Egypt he became a
  policeman (Pilgrimage i. 29). As “Cavass” he appears in gorgeous
  uniform and sword, an orderly attached to public offices and
  Consulates.

Footnote 292:

  A purely imaginary King.

Footnote 293:

  The Bresl. Edit. (ix. 370) here and elsewhere uses the word “Nútiyá” =
  Nautá, for the common Bahríyah or Malláh.

Footnote 294:

  Arab. “Tawáf,” the name given to the sets (Ashwát) of seven circuits
  with the left shoulder presented to the Holy House; that is walking
  “widdershins” or “against the sun” (“with the sun” being like the
  movement of a watch). For the requisites of this rite see Pilgrimage
  iii. 234.

Footnote 295:

  Arab. “Akh”; brother has a wide signification amongst Moslems and may
  be used to and of any of the Saving Faith.

Footnote 296:

  Said by the master when dismissing a servant and meaning, “I have not
  failed in my duty to thee!” The answer is, “Allah acquit thee
  thereof!”

Footnote 297:

  A Moslem prison is like those of Europe a century ago; to think of it
  gives goose-flesh. Easterns laugh at our idea of penitentiary and the
  Arabs of Bombay call it “Al-Bistán” (the Garden) because the court
  contains a few trees and shrubs. And with them a garden always
  suggests an idea of Paradise. There are indeed only two efficacious
  forms of punishment all the world over, corporal for the poor and
  fines for the rich, the latter being the severer form.

Footnote 298:

  _i.e._ he shall answer for this.

Footnote 299:

  A pun upon “Khalíyah” (bee-hive) and “Khaliyah” (empty). Khalíyah is
  properly a hive of bees with a honey-comb in the hollow of a
  tree-trunk, opposed to Kawwárah, hive made of clay or earth
  (Al-Hariri; Ass. of Tiflis). There are many other terms, for Arabs are
  curious about honey. Pilgrimage iii. 110.

Footnote 300:

  Lane (iii. 237) supposes by this title that the author referred his
  tale to the days of the Caliphate. “Commander of the Faithful” was, I
  have said, the style adopted by Omar in order to avoid the clumsiness
  of “Caliph” (successor) of the Caliph (Abu Bakr) of the Apostle of
  Allah.

Footnote 301:

  Eastern thieves count four modes of housebreaking; (1) picking out
  burnt bricks; (2) cutting through unbaked bricks; (3) wetting a mud
  wall and (4) boring through a wooden wall (Vikram and the Vampire p.
  172).

Footnote 302:

  Arab. “Zabbat,” lit. a lizard (fem.) also a wooden lock, the only one
  used throughout Egypt. An illustration of its curious mechanism is
  given in Lane (M. E. Introduction).

Footnote 303:

  Arab. “Dabbús.” The Eastern mace is well known to English collectors;
  it is always of metal, and mostly of steel, with a short handle like
  our facetiously called “life-preserver.” The head is in various forms,
  the simplest a ball, smooth and round, or broken into sundry high and
  angular ridges like a melon, and in select weapons shaped like the
  head of some animal, bull, etc. See Night dcxlvi.

Footnote 304:

  The red habit is a sign of wrath and vengeance and the Persian Kings
  like Fath Ali Shah, used to wear it when about to order some horrid
  punishment, such as the “Shakk”; in this a man was hung up by his
  heels and cut in two from the fork downwards to the neck, when a turn
  of the chopper left that untouched. White robes denoted peace and
  mercy as well as joy. The “white” hand and “black” hand have been
  explained. A “white death” is quiet and natural, with forgiveness of
  sins. A “black death” is violent and dreadful, as by strangulation: a
  “green death” is robing in rags and patches like a dervish; and a “red
  death” is by war or bloodshed (A. P. ii. 670). Among the mystics it is
  the resistance of man to his passions.

Footnote 305:

  This in the East is the way “_pour se faire valoir_”; whilst Europeans
  would hold it a mere “bit of impudence,” aping dignity.

Footnote 306:

  The Chief Mufti or Doctor of the Law, an appointment first made by the
  Osmanli Mohammed II., when he captured Constantinople in A.D. 1453.
  Before that time the functions were discharged by the Kázi al-Kuzát
  (Kazi-in-Chief), the Chancellor.

Footnote 307:

  So called because here lived the makers of crossbows (Arab. Bunduk now
  meaning a fire-piece, musket, etc.) It is the modern district about
  the well-known Khan al-Hamzawi.

Footnote 308:

  Pronounced “Goodareeyyah,” and so called after one of the troops of
  the Fatimite Caliphs. The name “Yamániyah” is probably due to the
  story-teller’s inventiveness.

Footnote 309:

  I have noted that as a rule in The Nights poetical justice is
  administered with much rigour and exactitude. Here, however, the
  tale-teller allows the good brother to be slain by the two wicked
  brothers as he permitted the adulterous queens to escape the sword of
  Kamar al-Zaman. Dr. Steingass brings to my notice that I have failed
  to do justice to the story of Sharrkán (vol. ii., p. 172), where I
  note that the interest is injured by the gratuitous incest. But this
  has a deeper meaning and a grander artistic effect. Sharrkán begins
  with most unbrotherly feelings towards his father’s children by a
  second wife. But Allah’s decree forces him to love his half-sister
  despite himself, and awe and repentance convert the savage, who joys
  at the news of his brother’s reported death, to a loyal and devoted
  subject of the same brother. But Judar with all his goodness proved
  himself an arrant softy and was no match for two atrocious villains.
  And there may be overmuch of forgiveness as of every other good thing.

Footnote 310:

  In such case the “‘iddah” would be four months and ten days.

Footnote 311:

  Not quite true. Weil’s German version, from a MS. in the Ducal Library
  of Gotha, gives the “Story of Judar of Cairo and Mahmud of Tunis” in a
  very different form. It has been pleasantly “translated (from the
  German) and edited” by Mr. W. F. Kirby, of the British Museum, under
  the title of “The New Arabian Nights” (London: W. Swan Sonnenschein &
  Co.), and the author kindly sent me a copy. “New Arabian Nights” seems
  now to have become a fashionable title applied without any
  signification: such at least is the pleasant collection of Nineteenth
  Century Novelettes, published under that designation by Mr. Robert
  Louis Stevenson, Chatto and Windus, Piccadilly, 1884.




              HISTORY OF GHARIB AND HIS BROTHER AJIB.[312]


There was once in olden time a King of might, Kundamir hight, who had
been a brave and doughty man of war, a Kahramán,[313] in his day, but
was grown passing old and decrepit. Now it pleased Allah to vouchsafe
him, in his extreme senility, a son, whom he named Ajíb[314]—the
Wonderful—because of his beauty and loveliness; so he committed the babe
to the midwives and wet-nurses and handmaids and serving-women, and they
reared him till he was full seven years old, when his father gave him in
charge to a divine of his own folk and faith. The priest taught him the
laws and tenets of their Misbelief and instructed him in philosophy and
all manner of other knowledge, and it needed but three full-told years
ere he was proficient therein and his spirit waxed resolute and his
judgment mature; and he became learned, eloquent and philosophic[315];
consorting with the wise and disputing with the doctors of the law. When
his father saw this of him, it pleased him and he taught him to back the
steed and stab with spear and smite with sword, till he grew to be an
accomplished cavalier, versed in all martial exercises; and, by the end
of his twentieth year, he surpassed in all things all the folk of his
day. But his skill in weapons made him grow up a stubborn tyrant and a
devil arrogant, using to ride forth a-hunting and a-chasing amongst a
thousand horsemen and to make raids and razzias upon the neighbouring
knights, cutting off caravans and carrying away the daughters of Kings
and nobles; wherefore many brought complaints against him to his father,
who cried out to five of his slaves and when they came said, “Seize this
dog!” So they seized Prince Ajib and, pinioning his hands behind him,
beat him by his father’s command till he lost his senses; after which
the King imprisoned him in a chamber so dark one might not know heaven
from earth or length from breadth; and there he abode two days and a
night. Then the Emirs went in to the King and, kissing the ground
between his hands, interceded with him for the Prince, and he released
him. So Ajib bore with his father for ten days, at the end of which he
went in to him as he slept by night and smote his neck. When the day
rose, he mounted the throne of his sire’s estate and bade his men arm
themselves cap-à-pie in steel and stand with drawn swords in front of
him and on his right hand and on his left. By and by, the Emirs and
Captains entered and finding their King slain and his son Ajib seated on
the throne were confounded in mind and knew not what to do. But Ajib
said to them, “O folk, verily ye see what your King hath gained. Whoso
obeyeth me, I will honour him, and whoso gainsayeth me, I will do with
him that which I did with my sire.” When they heard these words they
feared lest he do them a mischief; so they replied, “Thou art our King
and the son of our King;” and kissed ground before him; whereupon he
thanked them and rejoiced in them. Then he bade bring forth money and
apparel and clad them in sumptuous robes of honour and showered largesse
upon them, wherefore they all loved him and obeyed him. In like manner
he honoured the governors of the Provinces and the Shaykhs of the
Badawin, both tributary and independent, so that the whole kingdom
submitted to him and the folk obeyed him and he reigned and bade and
forbade in peace and quiet for a time of five months. One night,
however, he dreamed a dream as he lay slumbering; whereupon he awoke
trembling, nor did sleep visit him again till the morning. As soon as it
was dawn he mounted his throne and his officers stood before him, right
and left. Then he called the oneiromants and the astrologers and said to
them, “Expound to me my dream!” “What was the dream?” asked they; and he
answered, “As I slept last night, I saw my father standing before me,
with his yard uncovered, and there came forth of it a thing the bigness
of a bee, which grew till it became as a mighty lion, with claws like
hangers. As I lay wondering at this lo! it ran upon me and smiting me
with its claws, rent my belly in sunder; whereupon I awoke startled and
trembling. So expound ye to me the meaning of this dream.” The
interpreters looked one at other; and, after considering, said, “O
mighty King, this dream pointeth to one born of thy sire, between whom
and thee shall befal strife and enmity, wherein he shall get the better
of thee: so be on thy guard against him, by reason of this thy vision.”
When Ajib heard their words, he said, “I have no brother whom I should
fear; so this your speech is mere lying.” They replied, “We tell thee
naught save what we know;” but he was an-angered with them and
bastinadoed them. Then he rose and, going in to the paternal palace,
examined his father’s concubines and found one of them seven months gone
with child; whereupon he gave an order to two of his slaves, saying,
“Take this damsel, ye twain, and carry her to the sea-shore and drown
her.” So they took her forthright and, going to the sea-shore, designed
to drown her, when they looked at her and seeing her to be of singular
beauty and loveliness said to each other, “Why should we drown this
damsel? Let us rather carry her to the forest and live with her there in
rare love-liasse.” Then they took her and fared on with her days and
nights till they had borne her afar off and had brought her to a bushy
forest, abounding in fruit-trees and streams, where they both thought at
the same time to win their will of her; but each said, “I will have her
first.” So they fell out one with the other concerning this, and while
so doing a company of blackamoors came down upon them, and they drew
their swords and both sides fell to laying on load. The mellay waxed hot
with cut and thrust; and the two slaves fought their best; but the
blacks slew them both in less than the twinkling of an eye. So the
damsel abode alone and wandered about the forest, eating of its fruits
and drinking of its founts, till in due time she gave birth to a boy,
brown but clean-limbed and comely, whom she named Gharíb, the Stranger,
by reason of her strangerhood. Then she cut his navel-string and
wrapping him in some of her own clothes, gave him to suck, harrowed at
heart, and with vitals sorrowing for the estate she had lost and its
honour and solace.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the damsel abode
in the bush harrowed at heart and a-sorrowed; but she suckled her babe
albeit she was full of grief and fear for her loneliness. Now behold,
one day, there came horsemen and footmen into the forest with hawks and
hounds and horses laden with partridges and cranes and wild geese and
divers and other waterfowl; and young ostriches and hares and gazelles
and wild oxen and lynxes and wolves and lions.[316] Presently, these
Arabs entered the thicket and came upon the damsel, sitting with her
child on her breast a-suckling him: so they drew near and asked her,
“Say art thou a mortal or a Jinniyah?” Answered she, “I am a mortal, O
Chiefs of the Arabs.” Thereupon they told their Emir, whose name was
Mardás, Prince of the Banú Kahtán,[317] and who had come forth that day
to hunt with five hundred of his cousins and the nobles of his tribe,
and who in the course of the chase had happened upon her. He bade them
bring her before him, which they did and she related to him her past
from first to last, whereat he marvelled. Then he cried to his kinsmen
and escort to continue the chase, after which they took her and returned
to their encampment, where the Emir appointed her a separate
dwelling-place and five damsels to serve her; and he loved her with
exceeding love and went in to her and lay with her. She conceived by him
straightway, and, when her months were accomplished, she bare a man
child and named him Sahím al-Layl.[318] He grew up with his brother
Gharib among the nurses and throve and waxed upon the lap of the Emir
Mardas who, in due time committed the two boys to a Fakih for
instruction in the things of their faith; after which he gave them in
charge to valiant knights of the Arabs, for training them to smite with
sword and lunge with lance and shoot with shaft; so by the time they
reached the age of fifteen, they knew all they needed and surpassed each
and every brave of their tribe; for Gharib would undertake a thousand
horse and Sahim al-Layl no fewer. Now Mardas had many enemies, and the
men of his tribe were the bravest of all the Arabs, being doughty
cavaliers, none might warm himself at their fire.[319] In his
neighbourhood was an Emir of the Arabs, Hassán bin Sábit hight, who was
his intimate friend; and he took to wife a noble lady of his tribe and
bade all his friends to the wedding, amongst them Mardas lord of the
Banu Kahtan, who accepted his invitation and set forth with three
hundred riders of his tribe, leaving other four hundred to guard the
women. Hassan met him with honour and seated him in the highest stead.
Then came all the cavaliers to the bridal and he made them bride-feasts
and held high festival by reason of the marriage, after which the Arabs
departed to their dwelling-places. When Mardas came in sight of his
camp, he saw slain men lying about and birds hovering over them right
and left; and his heart sank within him at the sight. Then he entered
the camp and was met by Gharib, clad in complete suit of ring-mail, who
gave him joy of his safe return. Quoth Mardas, “What meaneth this case,
O Gharib?”; and quoth Gharib, “Al-Hamal bin Májid attacked us with five
hundred horsemen of his tribe.” Now the reason of this was that the Emir
Mardas had a daughter called Mahdíyah, seer never saw fairer than she,
and Al-Hamal, lord of the Banu Nabhán,[320] heard of her charms;
whereupon he took horse with five hundred of his men and rode to Mardas
to demand her hand; but he was not accepted and was sent away
disappointed.[321] So he awaited till Mardas was absent on his visit to
Hassan, when he mounted with his champions and, falling upon the camp of
the Banu Kahtan, slew a number of their knights and the rest fled to the
mountains. Now Gharib and his brother had ridden forth a-hunting and
chasing with an hundred horse and returned not till midday, when they
found that Al-Hamal had seized the camp and all therein and had carried
off the maidens, among whom was Mahdiyah, driving her away with the
captives. When Gharib saw this, he lost his wits for rage and cried out
to Sahim, saying, “O my brother, O son of an accursed dam,[322] they
have plundered our camp and carried off our women and children! Up and
at the enemy, that we may deliver the captives!” So Gharib and Sahim and
their hundred horse rushed upon the foe, and Gharib’s wrath redoubled,
and he reaped a harvest of heads slain, giving the champions death-cup
to drain, till he won to Al-Hamal and saw Mahdiyah among the captives.
Then he drave at the lord of the Banu Nabhan braves; with his lance
lunged him and from his destrier hurled him; nor was the time of
mid-afternoon prayer come before he had slain the most part of the foe
and put to rout the rest and rescued the captives; whereupon he returned
to the camp in triumph, bearing the head of Al-Hamal on the point of his
lance and improvising these couplets:—

 I am he who is known on the day of fight, ✿ And the Jinn of earth at my
    shade take fright:
 And a sword have I when my right hand wields, ✿ Death hastens from left
    on mankind to alight;

 I have eke a lance and who look thereon ✿ See a crescent-head of the
    liveliest light.[323]
 And Gharib I’m hight of my tribe the brave ✿ And if few my men I feel
    naught affright.

Hardly had Gharib made an end of these verses when up came Mardas who,
seeing the slain and the vultures, was sore troubled and with fluttering
heart asked the cause. The youth, after due greetings, related all that
had befallen the tribe in his step-sire’s absence. So Mardas thanked him
and said, “Thou hast well requited our fosterage-pains in rearing thee,
O Gharib!”; then he alighted and entered his pavilion, and the men stood
about him, all the tribe praising Gharib and saying, “O our Emir, but
for Gharib, not one of the tribe had been saved!” And Mardas again
thanked him.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Mardas, hearing
the tribesmen’s praises of Gharib, again thanked him for his derring-do.
But the youth, when he had delivered Mahdiyah from Al-Hamal whom he
slew, was smitten by the shaft of her glances and fell into the nets of
her allurements, wherefore his heart could not forget her and he became
drowned in love and longing and the sweets of sleep forsook him and he
had no joy of drink or meat. He would spur his horse up to the mountain
tops, where he would spend the day in composing verses and return at
nightfall; and indeed manifest upon him were the signs of affection and
distraction. He discovered his secret to one of his companions and it
became noised abroad in the camp, till it reached the ears of Mardas,
who thundered and lightened and rose up and sat down and snarked and
snorted and reviled the sun and the moon, saying, “This is the reward of
him who reareth the sons of adultery! But except I kill Gharib, I shall
be put to shame.”[324] Then he consulted one of the wise men of his
tribe and after telling his secret took counsel with him of killing the
youth. Quoth the elder, “O Emir, ‘twas but yesterday that he freed thy
daughter from captivity. If there be no help for it but thou must slay
him, let it be by the hand of another than thyself, so none of the folk
may misdoubt of thee.” Quoth Mardas, “Advise me how I may do him die,
for I look to none but to thee for his death.” “O Emir,” answered the
other, “wait till he go forth to hunt and chase, when do thou take an
hundred horse and lie in wait for him in some cave till he pass; then
fall upon him unawares and cut him in pieces, so shalt thou be quit of
his reproach.” Said Mardas, “This should serve me well;” and chose out
an hundred and fifty of his furious knights and Amalekites[325] whom he
lessoned to his will. Then he watched Gharib till one day, he went forth
to hunt and rode far away amongst the dells and hills; whereupon Mardas
followed him with his men, ill-omened wights, and lay in wait for him by
the way against he should return from the chase that they might sally
forth and slay him. But as they lay in ambush among the trees behold,
there fell upon them five hundred true Amalekites, who slew sixty of
them and made fourscore and ten prisoners and trussed up Mardas with his
arms behind his back. Now the reason of this was that when Gharib put
Al-Hamal and his men to the sword, the rest fled and ceased not flying
till they reached their lord’s brother and told him what had happened,
whereat his Doom-day rose and he gathered together his Amalekites and
choosing out five hundred cavaliers, each fifty ells high,[326] set out
with them in quest of blood-revengement for his brother. By the way he
fell in with Mardas and his companions and there happened between them
what happened; after which he bade his men alight and rest, saying, “O
folk, the idols have given us an easy blood-wreak; so guard ye Mardas
and his tribesmen, till I carry them away and do them die with the
foulest of deaths.” When Mardas saw himself a prisoner, he repented of
what he had done and said, “This is the reward of rebelling against the
Lord!” Then the enemy passed the night rejoicing in their victory,
whilst Mardas and his men despaired of life and made sure of doom. So
far concerning them; but as regards Sahim al-Layl, who had been wounded
in the fight with Al-Hamal, he went in to his sister Mahdiyah, and she
rose to him and kissed his hands, saying, “May thy two hands ne’er
wither nor thine enemies have occasion to be blither! But for thee and
Gharib, we had not escaped captivity among our foes. Know, however, O my
brother, that thy father hath ridden forth with an hundred and fifty
horse, purposing to slaughter Gharib; and thou wottest it would be sore
loss and foul wrong to slay him, for that it was he who saved your shame
and rescued your good.” When Sahim heard this, the light in his sight
became night, he donned his battle-harness; and, mounting steed, rode
for the place where Gharib was a-hunting. He presently came up with him
and found that he had taken great plenty of game; so he accosted him and
saluted him and said, “O my brother, why didst thou go forth without
telling me?” Replied Gharib, “By Allah, naught hindered me but that I
saw thee wounded and thought to give thee rest.” Then said Sahim, “O my
brother, beware of my sire!” and told him how Mardas was abroad with an
hundred and fifty men, seeking to slay him. Quoth Gharib, “Allah shall
cause his treason to cut his own throat.” Then the brothers set out
camp-wards, but night overtook them by the way and they rode on in the
darkness, till they drew near the Wady wherein the enemy lay and heard
the neighing of steeds in the gloom; whereupon said Sahim, “O my
brother, my father and his men are ambushed in yonder valley; let us
flee from it.” But Gharib dismounted and throwing his bridle to his
brother, said to him, “Stay in this stead till I come back to thee.”
Then he went on till he drew in sight of the folk, when he saw that they
were not of his tribe and heard them naming Mardas and saying, “We will
not slay him, save in his own land.” Wherefore he knew that nuncle
Mardas was their prisoner, and said, “By the life of Mahdiyah, I will
not depart hence till I have delivered her father, that she may not be
troubled!” Then he sought and ceased not seeking till he hit upon Mardas
and found him bound with cords; so he sat down by his side and said to
him, “Heaven deliver thee, O uncle, from these bonds and this shame!”
When Mardas saw Gharib his reason fled, and he said to him, “O my son, I
am under thy protection: so deliver me in right of my fosterage of
thee!” Quoth Gharib, “If I deliver thee, wilt thou give me Mahdiyah?”
Quoth the Emir, “O my son, by whatso I hold sacred, she is thine to all
time!” So he loosed him, saying, “Make for the horses, for thy son Sahim
is there:” and Mardas crept along like a snake till he came to his son,
who rejoiced in him and congratulated him on his escape. Meanwhile,
Gharib unbound one after another of the prisoners, till he had freed the
whole ninety and they were all far from the foe. Then he sent them their
weapons and war-horses, saying to them, “Mount ye and scatter yourselves
round about the enemy and cry out, Ho, sons of Kahtan! And when they
awake, do ye remove from them and encircle them in a thin ring.”[327] So
he waited till the last and third watch of the night, when he cried out,
“Ho, sons of Kahtan!” and his men answered in like guise, crying, “Ho,
sons of Kahtan,” as with one voice; and the mountains echoed their
slogan, so that it seemed to the raiders as though the whole tribe of
Banu Kahtan were assailing them; wherefore they all snatched up their
arms and fell upon one another——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Six Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
raiders[328] awoke from sleep and heard Gharib and his men crying out,
“Ho, sons of Kahtan!”; they imagined that the whole tribe was assailing
them; wherefore they snatched up their arms and fell one upon other with
mighty slaughter. Gharib and his men held aloof, and they fought one
another till daybreak, when Gharib and Mardas and their ninety warriors
came down upon them and killed some of them and put the rest to flight.
Then the Banu Kahtan took the horses of the fugitives and the weapons of
the slain and returned to their tribal camp, whilst Mardas could hardly
credit his deliverance from the foe. When they reached the encampment,
the stay-at-home folk all came forth to meet them and rejoiced in their
safe return. Then they alighted and betook them to their tents; and all
the youths of the tribe flocked to Gharib’s stead and great and small
saluted him and did him honour. But when Mardas saw this and the youths
encircling his stepson he waxed more jealous of Gharib than before and
said to his kinsfolk, “Verily, hatred of Gharib groweth on my heart, and
what irketh me most is that I see these flocking about him! And
to-morrow he will demand Mahdiyah of me.” Quoth his confidant, “O Emir,
ask of him somewhat he cannot avail to do.” This pleased Mardas who
passed a pleasant night and on the morrow, as he sat on his stuffed
carpet, with the Arabs about him, Gharib entered, followed by his men
and surrounded by the youth of the tribe, and kissed the ground before
Mardas who, making a show of joy, rose to do him honour and seated him
beside himself. Then said Gharib, “O uncle, thou madest me a promise; do
thou fulfil it.” Replied the Emir, “O my son, she is thine to all time;
but thou lackest wealth.” Quoth Gharib, “O uncle, ask of me what thou
wilt, and I will fall upon the Emirs of the Arabs in their houses and on
the Kings in their towns and bring thee fee[329] enough to fence the
land from East to West.” “O my son,” quoth Mardas, “I have sworn by all
the Idols that I would not give Mahdiyah save to him who should take my
blood-wite of mine enemy and do away my reproach.” “O uncle,” said
Gharib, “tell me with which of the Kings thou hast a feud, that I may go
to him and break his throne upon his pate.” “O my son,” replied Mardas,
“I once had a son, a champion of champions, and he went forth one day to
chase and hunt with an hundred horse. They fared on from valley to
valley, till they had wandered far away amongst the mountains and came
to the Wady of Blossoms and the Castle of Hám bin Shays bin Shaddád bin
Khalad. Now in this place, O my son, dwelleth a black giant, seventy
cubits high, who fights with trees from their roots uptorn; and when my
son reached his Wady, the tyrant sallied out upon him and his men and
slew them all, save three braves, who escaped and brought me the news.
So I assembled my champions and fared forth to fight the giant, but
could not prevail against him; wherefore I was baulked of my revenge and
swore that I would not give my daughter in marriage save to him who
should avenge me of my son.” Said Gharib, “O uncle, I will go to this
Amalekite and take the wreak of thy son on him with the help of Almighty
Allah.” And Mardas, answered, saying, “O Gharib, if thou get the victory
over him, thou wilt gain of him such booty of wealth and treasures as
fires may not devour.” Cried Gharib, “Swear to me before witnesses thou
wilt give me her to wife, so that with heart at ease I may go forth to
find my fortune.” Accordingly, Mardas swore this to him and took the
elders of the tribe to witness; whereupon Gharib fared forth, rejoicing
in the attainment of his hopes, and went in to his mother, to whom he
related what had passed. “O my son,” said she, “know that Mardas hateth
thee and doth but send thee to this mountain, to bereave me of thee;
then take me with thee and let us depart the tents of this tyrant.” But
he answered, “O my mother, I will not depart hence till I win my wish
and foil my foe.” Thereupon he slept till morning arose with its sheen
and shone, and hardly had he mounted his charger when his friends, the
young men, came up to him; two hundred stalwart knights armed cap-à-pie
and cried out to him, saying, “Take us with thee; we will help thee and
company thee by the way.” And he rejoiced in them and cried, “Allah
requite you for us with good!” adding, “Come, my friends, let us go.” So
they set out and fared on the first day and the second day till evening,
when they halted at the foot of a towering mount and baited their
horses. As for Gharib, he left the rest and walked on into that
mountain, till he came to a cave whence issued a light. He entered and
found, at the higher facing end of the cave a Shaykh, three hundred and
forty years old, whose eyebrows overhung his eyes and whose moustachios
hid his mouth. Gharib at this sight was filled with awe and veneration,
and the hermit said to him, “Methinks thou art of the idolaters, O my
son, stone-worshipping[330] in the stead of the All-powerful King, the
Creator of Night and Day and of the sphere rolling on her way.” When
Gharib heard his words, his side muscles quivered and he said, “O
Shaykh, where is this Lord of whom thou speakest, that I may worship him
and take my fill of his sight?” Replied the Shaykh, “O my son, this is
the Supreme Lord, upon whom none may look in this world. He seeth and is
not seen. He is the Most High of aspect and is present everywhere in His
works. He it is who maketh all the made and ordereth time to vade and
fade; He is the Creator of men and Jinn and sendeth the Prophets to
guide His creatures into the way of right. Whoso obeyeth Him, He
bringeth into Heaven, and whoso gainsayeth Him, He casteth into Hell.”
Asked Gharib, “And how, O uncle, saith whoso worshippeth this puissant
Lord who over all hath power?” “O my son,” answered the Shaykh, “I am of
the tribe of Ad, which were transgressors in the land and believed not
in Allah. So He sent unto them a Prophet named Húd, but they called him
liar and he destroyed them by means of a deadly wind; but I believed
together with some of my tribe, and we were saved from destruction.[331]
Moreover, I was present with the tribe of Thamúd and saw what befel them
with their Prophet Sálih. After Salih, the Almighty sent a prophet,
called Abraham the Friend,[332] to Nimrod son of Canaan, and there befel
what befel between them. Then my companions died in the Saving Faith and
I continued in this cave to serve Allah the Most High, who provideth my
daily bread without my taking thought.” Quoth Gharib, “O uncle, what
shall I say, that I may become of the troop of this mighty Lord?” “Say,”
replied the old man:—“There is no god but _the_ God and Abraham is the
Friend of God.” So Gharib embraced the Faith of Submission[333] with
heart and tongue and the Shaykh said to him, “May the sweetness of
belief and devotion be stablished in thy heart!” Then he taught him
somewhat of the biblical ordinances and scriptures of Al-Islam and said
to him, “What is thy name?”; and he replied, “My name is Gharib.” Asked
the old man, “Whither art thou bound, O Gharib?” So he told him all his
history, till he came to the mention of the Ghúl of the Mountain whom he
sought,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib became
a Moslem and told the Shaykh his past, from first to last, till he came
to the mention of the Mountain-Ghul whom he sought, the old man asked
him, “O Gharib, art thou mad that thou goest forth against the Ghul of
the Mountain single handed?” and he answered, “O my lord, I have with me
two hundred horse.” “O Gharib,” rejoined the hermit, “hadst thou ten
thousand riders yet shouldest thou not prevail against him, for his name
is _The-Ghul-who-eateth-men-we-pray-Allah-for-safety_, and he is of the
children of Ham. His father’s name was Hindi, who peopled Hind and named
it, and he left this son after him, whom he called Sa’adan the Ghul. Now
the same was, O my son, even in his sire’s lifetime, a cruel tyrant and
a rebellious devil and had no other food than flesh of the sons of Adam.
His father when about to die forbade him from this, but he would not be
forbidden and he redoubled in his frowardness, till Hindi banished him
and drove him forth the Land of Hind, after battles and sore travail.
Then he came to this country and fortifying himself herein, established
his home in this place, whence he is wont to sally forth and cut the
road of all that come and go, presently returning to the valley he
haunteth. Moreover, he hath begotten five sons, warlike warlocks, each
one of whom will do battle with a thousand braves, and he hath flocked
the valley with his booty of treasure and goods besides horses and
camels and cattle and sheep. Wherefore I fear for thee from him; so do
thou implore Almighty Allah to further thee against him by the Tahlíl,
the formula of Unity, and when thou drivest at the Infidels, cry:—God is
most Great! for, saying, There is no god but _the_ God confoundeth those
who misbelieve.” Then the Shaykh gave him a steel mace, an hundred
pounds in weight, with ten rings which clashed like thunder whenas the
wielder brandished it, and a sword forged of a thunderbolt,[334] three
ells long and three spans broad, wherewith if one smote a rock, the
stroke would cleave it in sunder. Moreover he gave him a hauberk and
target and a book and said to him, “Return to thy tribe and expound unto
them Al-Islam.” So Gharib left him, rejoicing in his new Faith, and
fared till he found his companions, who met him with salams, saying,
“What made thee tarry thus?” Whereupon he related to them that which had
befallen him and expounded to them Al-Islam, and they all islamised.
Early next morning, Gharib mounted and rode to the hermit to farewell
him, after which he set out to return to his camp when behold, on his
way, there met him a horseman cap-à-pie armed so that only his eyes
appeared, who made at him, saying, “Doff what is on thee, O scum[335] of
the Arabs; or I will do thee die!” Therewith Gharib drave at him and
there befel between them a battle such as would make a new-born child
turn grey and melt the flinty rock with its sore affray; but presently
the Badawi did off his face-veil, and lo! it was Gharib’s half-brother
Sahim al-Layl. Now the cause of his coming thither was that when Gharib
set out in quest of the Mountain-Ghul, Sahim was absent and on his
return, not seeing his brother, he went in to his mother, whom he found
weeping. He asked the reason of her tears and she told him what had
happened of his brother’s journey, whereupon, without allowing himself
aught of rest, he donned his war-gear and mounting rode after Gharib,
till he overtook him and there befel between them what befel. When,
therefore, Sahim discovered his face, Gharib knew him and saluted him,
saying, “What moved thee to do this?” Quoth Sahim, “I had a mind to
measure myself with thee in the field and make trial of my lustihood in
cut and thrust.” Then they rode together and on the way Gharib expounded
Al-Islam to Sahim, who embraced the Faith; nor did they cease riding
till they were hard upon the valley. Meanwhile, the Mountain-Ghul espied
the dust of their horses’ feet and said to his sons, “O my sons, mount
and fetch me yonder loot.” So the five took horse and made for the
party. When Gharib saw the five Amalekites approaching, he plied
shovel-iron upon his steed’s flank and cried out, saying, “Who are ye,
and what is your race and what do ye require?” Whereupon Falhún bin
Sa’adan, the eldest of the five, came out and said, “Dismount ye and
bind one another[336] and we will drive you to our father, that he may
roast various of you and boil various, for it is long since he has
tasted the flesh of Adam-son.” When Gharib heard these words he drove at
Falhun, shaking his mace, so that the rings rang like the roaring
thunder and the giant was confounded. Then he smote him a light blow
with the mace between the shoulders, and he fell to the ground like a
tall-trunked palm-tree; whereupon Sahim and some of his men fell upon
him and pinioned him; then, putting a rope about his neck, they haled
him along like a cow. Now when his brothers saw him a prisoner, they
charged home upon Gharib, who took three[337] of them captive and the
fifth fled back to his sire, who said to him, “What is behind thee and
where are the brothers of thee?” Quoth he, “Verily, a beardless youth,
forty cubits high, hath taken them prisoner.” Quoth Sa’adan, “May the
sun pour no blessing on you!” and, going down from his hold, tore up a
huge tree, with which he went in quest of Gharib and his folk; and he
was on foot, for that no horse might carry him, because of the bigness
of his body. His son followed him and the twain went on till they came
up with Gharib and his company, when the Ghul fell upon them, without
word said, and slew five men with his club. Then he made at Sahim and
struck at him with his tree, but Sahim avoided the blow and it fell
harmless; whereat Sa’adan was wroth and throwing down the weapon, sprang
upon Sahim and caught him in his pounces as the sparrow-hawk catcheth up
the sparrow. Now when Gharib saw his brother in the Ghul’s clutches, he
cried out, saying, “Allaho Akbar—God is most Great! Oh the favour of
Abraham the Friend, the Muhammad,[338] the Blessed One (whom Allah keep
and assain!)”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib
saw his brother in the clutches of the Ghul, he cried out, saying “Oh
the favour of Ibrahim, the Friend, the Blessed one (whom Allah keep and
assain!)”; and drave his charger at Sa’adan, shaking his mace, till the
rings loud rang. Then he cried out again, “God is most Great!” and smote
the Ghul on the flat of the ribs with his mace, whereupon he fell to the
ground, insensible, and loosed his grip on Sahim; nor did he come to
himself ere he was pinioned and shackled. When his son saw this, he
turned and fled; but Gharib drove steed after him and smiting him with
his mace between the shoulders, threw him from his horse. So they bound
him with his father and brethren and haltering them with ropes, haled
them all six along like baggage-camels, till they reached the Ghul’s
castle, which they found full of goods and treasures and things of
price; and there they also came upon twelve hundred Ajamis, men of
Persia, bound and shackled. Gharib sat down on Sa’adan’s chair, which
had aforetime belonged to Sásá[339] bin Shays bin Shaddad bin Ad causing
Sahim to stand on his right and his companions on his either hand, and
sending for the Ghul of the Mountain, said to him, “How findest thou
thyself, O accursed?” Replied Sa’adan, “O my lord, in the sorriest of
plights for abasement and mortification; my sons and I, we are bound
with ropes like camels.” Quoth Gharib, “It is my will that you enter my
faith, the faith Al-Islam hight, and acknowledge the Unity of the
All-knowing King whose All-might created Light and Night and every
thing,—there is no God but He, the Requiting King!—and confess the
mission and prophethood of Abraham the Friend (on whom be peace!).” So
the Ghul and his sons made the required profession after the goodliest
fashion, and Gharib bade loose their bonds; whereupon Sa’adan wept and
would have kissed his feet, he and his sons: but Gharib forbade them and
they stood with the rest who stood before him. Then said Gharib,
“Harkye, Sa’adan!”; and he replied, “At thy service, O my lord!” Quoth
Gharib, “What are these captives?” “O my lord,” quoth the Ghul, “these
are my game from the land of the Persians and are not the only ones.”
Asked Gharib, “And who is with them?”; and Sa’adan answered, “O my lord,
there is with them the Princess Fakhr Táj, daughter of King Sabúr of
Persia,[340] and an hundred damsels like moons.” When Gharib heard this,
he marvelled and said, “O Emir, how came ye by these?” Replied Sa’adan,
“I went forth one night with my sons and five of my slaves in quest of
booty, but finding no spoil in our way, we dispersed over wilds and
wolds and fared on, hoping we might happen on somewhat of prey and not
return empty-handed, till we found ourselves in the land of the
Persians. Presently, we espied a dust-cloud and sent on to reconnoitre
one of our slaves, who was absent a while and presently returned and
said:—O my lord, this is the Princess Fakhr Taj, daughter of Sabur, King
of the Persians, Turcomans and Medes; and she is on a journey, attended
by two thousand horse. Quoth I, Thou hast gladdened us with good news!
We could have no finer loot than this. Then I and my sons fell upon the
Persians and slew of them three hundred men and took the Princess and
twelve hundred cavaliers prisoners, together with all that was with her
of treasure and riches and brought them to this our castle.” Quoth
Gharib, “Hast thou offered any violence to the Princess Fakhr Taj?”
Quoth Sa’adan, “Not I, as thy head liveth and by the virtue of the Faith
I have but now embraced!” Gharib replied, “It was well done of thee, O
Sa’adan, for her father is King of the world and doubtless he will
despatch troops in quest of her and lay waste the dwellings of those who
took her. And whoso looketh not to issue and end hath not Fate to
friend. But where is the damsel?” Said Sa’adan, “I have set apart a
pavilion for her and her damsels;” and said Gharib, “Show me her
lodging,” whereto Sa’adan rejoined, “Hearkening and obedience!” So he
carried him to the pavilion, and there he found the Princess mournful
and cast down, weeping for her former condition of dignity and delight.
When Gharib saw her, he thought the moon was near him and magnified
Allah, the All-hearing, the All-seeing. The Princess also looked at him
and saw him a princely cavalier, with valour shining from between his
eyes and testifying for him and not against him; so she rose and kissed
his hands, then fell at his feet, saying, “O hero of the age, I am under
thy protection; guard me from this Ghul, for I fear lest he do away my
maidenhead and after devour me. So take me to serve thine handmaidens.”
Quoth Gharib, “Thou art safe and thou shalt be restored to thy father
and the seat of thy worship.” Whereupon she prayed that he might live
long and have advancement in rank and honour. Then he bade unbind the
Persians and, turning to the Princess, said to her, “What brought thee
forth of thy palace to the wilds and wastes, so that the highway-robbers
made prize of thee?” She replied, “O my lord, my father and all the
people of his realm, Turks and Daylamites, are Magians, fire
worshipping, and not the All-powerful King. Now in our country is a
monastery called the Monastery of the Fire, whither every year the
daughters of the Magians and worshippers of the Fire resort at the time
of their festival and abide there a month, after which they return to
their houses. So I and my damsels set out, as of wont, attended by two
thousand horse, whom my father sent with me to guard me; but by the way
this Ghul came out against us and slew some of us and, taking the rest
captive, imprisoned us in this hold. This, then, is what befel me, O
valiant champion, whom Allah guard against the shifts of Time!” And
Gharib said, “Fear not; for I will bring thee to thy palace and the seat
of thy honours.” Wherefore she blessed him and kissed his hands and
feet. Then he went out from her, after having commanded to treat her
with respect, and slept till morning, when he made the Wuzu-ablution and
prayed a two-bow prayer, after the rite of our father Abraham the Friend
(on whom be peace!), whilst the Ghul and his sons and Gharib’s company
all did the like after him. Then he turned to the Ghul and said to him,
“O Sa’adan, wilt thou not show me the Wady of Blossoms?”[341] “I will, O
my lord,” answered he. So Gharib and his company and Princess Fakhr Taj
and her maidens all rose and went forth, whilst Sa’adan commanded his
slaves and slave-girls to slaughter and cook and make ready the
morning-meal and bring it to them among the trees. For the Giant had an
hundred and fifty handmaids and a thousand chattels to pasture his
camels and oxen and sheep. When they came to the valley, they found it
beautiful exceedingly and passing all degree; and birds on tree sang
joyously and the mocking-nightingale trilled out her melody, and the
cushat filled with her moan the mansions made by the Deity,——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Six Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib and
his merry men and the Giant and his tribe reached the Wady of Blossoms
they found birds flying free; the cushat filling with her moan the
mansions made by the Deity, the bulbul singing as if ‘twere human
harmony and the merle whom to describe tongue faileth utterly; the
turtle, whose plaining maddens men for love-ecstasy and the ringdove
and the popinjay answering her with fluency. There also were trees
laden with all manner of fruitery, of each two kinds,[342] the
pomegranate, sweet and sour upon branches growing luxuriantly, the
almond-apricot,[343] the camphor-apricot[344] and the almond Khorasan
hight; the plum, with whose branches the boughs of the myrobalan were
entwined tight; the orange, as it were a cresset flaming light, the
shaddock weighed down with heavy freight; the lemon, that cures lack
of appetite, the citron against jaundice of sovereign might, and the
date, red and yellow-bright, the especial handiwork of Allah the Most
High. Of the like of this place saith the enamoured poet:—

 When its birds in the lake make melody, ✿ The lorn lover yearneth its
    sight to see:
 ‘Tis as Eden breathing a fragrant breeze, ✿ With its shade and fruits
    and rills flowing free.

Gharib marvelled at the beauty of that Wady and bade them set up there
the pavilion of Fakhr Taj the Chosroite; so they pitched it among the
trees and spread it with rich tapestries. Then he sat down and the
slaves brought food and they ate their sufficiency; after which quoth
Gharib, “Harkye, Sa’adan!”: and quoth he, “At thy service, O my lord.”
“Hast thou aught of wine?” asked Gharib, and Sa’adan answered, “Yes, I
have a cistern full of old wine.” Said Gharib, “Bring us some of it.” So
Sa’adan sent ten slaves, who returned with great plenty of wine, and
they ate and drank and were mirthful and merry. And Gharib bethought him
of Mahdiyah and improvised these couplets:—

 I mind our union days when ye were nigh, ✿ And flames my heart with
    love’s consuming lowe.
 By Allah, ne’er of will I quitted you: ✿ But shifts of Time from you
    compelled me go:
 Peace and fair luck and greetings thousand-fold ✿ To you, from exiled
    lover’s pining woe.

They abode eating and drinking and taking their pleasure in the valley
for three days, after which they returned to the castle. Then Gharib
called Sahim and said to him, “Take an hundred horse and go to thy
father and mother and thy tribe, the Banu Kahtan, and bring them all to
this place, here to pass the rest of their days, whilst I carry the
Princess of Persia back to her father. As for thee, O Sa’adan, tarry
thou here with thy sons, till I return to thee.” Asked Sa’adan, “And why
wilt thou not carry me with thee to the land of the Persians?”; and
Gharib answered, “Because thou stolest away King Sabur’s daughter and if
his eye fall on thee, he will eat thy flesh and drink thy blood.” When
the Ghul heard this, he laughed a loud laugh, as it were the pealing
thunder, and said, “O my lord, by the life of thy head, if the Persians
and Medes united against me, I would make them quaff the cup of
annihilation.” Quoth Gharib, “‘Tis as thou sayest;[345] but tarry thou
here in fort till I return to thee;” and quoth the Ghul, “I hear and I
obey.” Then Sahim departed with his comrades of the Banu Kahtan for the
dwelling-places of their tribe, and Gharib set out with Princess Fakhr
Taj and her company, intending for the cities of Sabur, King of the
Persians. Thus far concerning them; but as regards King Sabur, he abode
awaiting his daughter’s return from the Monastery of the Fire, and when
the appointed time passed by and she came not, flames raged in his
heart. Now he had forty Wazirs, whereof the oldest, wisest and chiefest
was hight Daydán: so he said to him, “O Minister, verily my daughter
delayeth her return and I have no news of her though the appointed time
is past; so do thou send a courier to the Monastery of the Fire to learn
what is come of her.” “Hearkening and obedience,” replied Daydan; and,
summoning the chief of the couriers, said to him, “Wend thou forthright
to the Monastery.” So he lost no time and when he reached it, he asked
the monks of the King’s daughter, but they said, “We have not seen her
this year.” So the courier returned to the city of Isbánír[346] and told
the Wazir, who went in to the King and acquainted him with the message.
Now when Sabur heard this, he cast his crown on the ground, tore his
beard and fell down in a trance. They sprinkled water upon him, and
presently he came to himself, tearful-eyed and heavy-hearted, and
repeated the words of the poet:—

 When I far-parted patience call and tears, ✿ Tears came to call but
    Patience never hears:
 What, then, if Fortune parted us so far? ✿ Fortune and Perfidy are peers
    and feres!

Then he called ten of his captains and bade them mount with a thousand
horse and ride in different directions, in quest of his daughter. So
they mounted forthright and departed each with his thousand; whilst
Fakhr Taj’s mother clad herself and her women in black and strewed ashes
on her head and sat weeping and lamenting. Such was their case;——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Sabur sent
his troops in quest of his daughter, whose mother clad herself and her
women in black. Such was their case; but as regards the strange
adventures of Gharib and the Princess, they journeyed on ten days, and
on the eleventh day, appeared a dust-cloud which rose to the confines of
the sky; whereupon Gharib called the Emir of the Persians and said to
him, “Go learn the cause thereof.” “I hear and obey,” replied he and
drave his charger, till he came under the cloud of dust, where he saw
folk and enquired of them. Quoth one of them, “We are of the Banu Hattál
and are questing for plunder; our Emir is Samsám bin Al-Jiráh and we are
five thousand horse.” The Persians returned in haste and told their
saying to Gharib, who cried out to his men of the Banu Kahtan and to the
Persians, saying, “Don your arms!” They did as he bade them and
presently up came the Arabs who were shouting, “A plunder! a plunder!”
Quoth Gharib, “Allah confound you, O dogs of Arabs!” Then he loosed his
horse and drove at them with the career of a right valiant knight,
shouting, “Allaho Akbar! Ho for the faith of Abraham the Friend, on whom
be peace!” And there befel between them great fight and sore fray and
the sword went round in sway and there was much said and say; nor did
they leave fighting till fled the day and gloom came, when they drew
from one another away. Then Gharib numbered his tribesmen and found that
five of the Banu Kahtan had fallen and three-and-seventy of the
Persians; but of the Banu Hattal they had slain more than five hundred
horse. As for Samsam, he alighted and sought nor meat nor sleep, but
said, “In all my life I never saw such a fighter as this youth! Anon he
fighteth with the sword and anon with the mace; but, to-morrow I will go
forth on champion wise and defy him to combat of twain in battle plain
where edge and point are fain and I will cut off these Arabs.” Now, when
Gharib returned to his camp, the Princess Fakhr Taj met him, weeping and
affrighted for the terror of that which had befallen, and kissed his
foot in the stirrup, saying, “May thy hands never wither nor thy foes be
blither, O champion of the age! Alhamdolillah—Praise to God—who hath
saved thee alive this day! Verily, I am in fear for thee from yonder
Arabs.” When Gharib heard this, he smiled in her face and heartened and
comforted her, saying, “Fear not, O Princess! Did the enemy fill this
wild and wold yet would I scatter them, by the might of Allah Almighty.”
She thanked him and prayed that he might be given the victory over his
foes; after which she returned to her women and Gharib went to his tent,
where he cleansed himself of the blood of the Infidels, and they lay on
guard through the night. Next morning, the two hosts mounted and sought
the plain where cut and thrust ruled sovereign. The first to prick into
the open was Gharib, who drave his charger till he was near the Infidels
and cried out, “Who is for jousting with me? Let no sluggard or weakling
come out to me!” Whereupon there rushed forth a giant Amalekite of the
lineage of the tribe of Ad, armed with an iron flail twenty pounds in
weight, and drove at Gharib, saying, “O scum of the Arabs, take what
cometh to thee and learn the glad tidings that thy last hour is at
hand!” So saying, he aimed a blow at Gharib, but he avoided it and the
flail sank a cubit into the ground. Now the Badawi was bent double with
the blow; so Gharib smote him with his mace and clove his forehead in
sunder; and he fell down dead and Allah hurried his soul to Hell-fire.
Then Gharib charged and wheeled and called for champions; so there came
out to him a second and a third and a fourth and so on, till ten had
come forth to him and he slew them all. When the Infidels saw his form
of fight and his swashing blows they hung back and forebore to fare
forth to him, whereupon Samsam looked at them and said, “Allah never
bless you! I will go forth to him.” So he donned his battle-gear and
driving his charger into mid-field where he fronted the foe and cried
out to Gharib, saying, “Fie on thee, O dog of the Arabs! hath thy
strength waxed so great that thou shouldst defy me in the open field and
slaughter my men?” And Gharib replied, “Up and take blood-revenge for
the slaughter of thy braves!” So Samsam ran at Gharib who awaited him
with broadened breast and heart enheartened, and they smote each at
other with maces, till the two hosts marvelled and every eye was fixed
on them. Then they wheeled about in the field and struck at each other
two strokes; but Gharib avoided Samsam’s stroke which wreak had wroke
and dealt him a buffet that beat in his breastbone and cast him to the
ground—stone dead. Thereupon all his host ran at Gharib as one man, and
he ran at them, crying, “God is most Great! Help and Victory for us and
shame and defeat for those who misbelieve the faith of Abraham the
Friend, on whom be peace!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Samsam’s
tribesmen rushed upon Gharib as one man, he ran at them crying, “God is
most Great! Help and Victory for us and shame and defeat for the
Miscreant!” Now when the Infidels heard the name of the All-powerful
King, the One, the All-conquering, whom the sight comprehendeth not, but
He comprehendeth the sight,[347] they looked at one another and said,
“What is this say that maketh our side-muscles tremble and weakeneth our
resolution and causeth the life to fail in us? Never in our lives heard
we aught goodlier than this saying!” adding, “Let us leave fighting,
that we may ask its meaning.” So they held their hands from the battle
and dismounted; and their elders assembled and held counsel together,
seeking to go to Gharib and saying, “Let ten of us repair to him!” So
they chose out ten of their best, who set out for Gharib’s tents. Now he
and his people had alighted and returned to their camp, marvelling at
the withdrawal of the Infidels from the fight. But, presently, lo and
behold! the ten came up and seeking speech of Gharib, kissed the earth
before him and wished him glory and lasting life. Quoth he to them,
“What made you leave fighting?”; and quoth they, “O, my lord, thou didst
affright us with the words thou shoutest out at us.” Then asked Gharib,
“What calamity do ye worship?”; and they answered, “We worship Wadd and
Suwá’a and Yaghús,[348] lords of the tribe of Noah”; and Gharib, “We
serve none but Allah Almighty, Maker of all things and Provider of all
livings. He it is who created the heavens and the earth and stablished
the mountains, who made water to well from the stones and the trees to
grow and feedeth wild beasts in wold; for He is Allah, the One, the
All-powerful Lord.” When they heard this, their bosoms broadened to the
words of Unity-faith, and they said, “Verily, this be a Lord high and
great, compassionating and compassionate!”; adding, “And what shall we
say, to become of the Moslems, of those which submit themselves to Him?”
Quoth Gharib, “Say:—There is no god but _the_ God and Abraham is the
Friend of God.” So the ten made veracious profession of the veritable
religion and Gharib said to them, “An the sweet savour of Al-Islam be
indeed stablished in your hearts, fare ye to your tribe and expound the
faith to them; and if they profess, they shall be saved, but if they
refuse we will burn them with fire.” So the ten elders returned and
expounded Al-Islam to their people and set forth to them the path of
truth and creed, and they embraced the Faith of Submission with heart
and tongue. Then they repaired on foot to Gharib’s tent and kissing
ground between his hands wished him honour and high rank, saying, “O our
lord, we are become thy slaves; so command us what thou wilt, for we are
to thee audient and obedient and we will never depart from thee, since
Allah hath guided us into the right way at thy hands.” Replied he,
“Allah abundantly requite you! Return to your dwellings and march forth
with your good and your children and forego me to the Wady of Blossoms
and the castle of Sásá bin Shays,[349] whilst I carry the Princess Fakhr
Taj, daughter of Sabur, King of the Persians, back to her father and
return to you.” “Hearkening and obedience,” said they and straightway
returned to their encampment, rejoicing in Al-Islam, and expounded the
True Faith to their wives and children, who became Believers. Then they
struck their tents and set forth, with their good and cattle, for the
Wady of Blossoms. When they came in sight of the castle of Shays,
Sa’adan and his sons sallied forth to them, but Gharib had charged them,
saying, “If the Ghul of the Mountain come out to you and offer to attack
you, do ye call upon the name of Allah the All-creator, and he will
leave his hostile intent and receive you hospitably.” So when he would
have fallen upon them they called aloud upon the name of Almighty Allah
and straightway he received them kindly and asked them of their case.
They told him all that had passed between Gharib and themselves,
whereupon he rejoiced in them and lodged them with him and loaded them
with favours. Such was their case; but as regards Gharib, he and his,
escorting the Princess fared on five days’ journey towards the City of
Isbanir, and on the sixth day they saw a dust-cloud. So Gharib sent one
of the Persians to learn the meaning of this and he went and returned,
swiftlier than bird in flight, saying, “O my lord, these be a thousand
horse of our comrades, whom the King hath sent in quest of his daughter
Fakhr Taj.” When Gharib heard this, he commanded his company to halt and
pitch the tents. So they halted and waited till the new comers reached
them, when they went to meet them and told Túmán, their captain, that
the Princess was with them; whereupon he went in to Gharib and kissing
the ground before him, enquired for her. Gharib sent him to her
pavilion, and he entered and kissed her hands and feet and acquainted
her with what had befallen her father and mother. She told him in return
all that had betided her and how Gharib had delivered her from the Ghul
of the Mountain,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the King’s
daughter, Fakhr Taj, had told Tuman all that had befallen her from the
Mountain-Ghul, and how he had imprisoned her and would have devoured her
but for Gharib, adding, “And indeed, it behoveth my sire to give him the
half of his reign,” Tuman arose and returned to Gharib and kissed his
hands and feet and thanked him for his good dealing, saying, “With thy
leave, O my lord, I will return to Isbanir City and deliver to our King
the good news of his daughter’s approach.” “Go,” replied Gharib, “and
take of him the gift of glad tidings.” So Tuman returned with all
diligence to Isbanir, the Cities, and entering the palace, kissed ground
before the King, who said to him, “What is there of new, O bringer of
good news?” Quoth Tuman, “I will not speak thee, till thou give me the
gift of glad tidings.” Quoth the King, “Tell me thy glad tidings and I
will content thee.” So Tuman said, “O King, I bring thee joyful
intelligence of the return of Princess Fakhr Taj.” When Sabur heard his
daughter’s name, he fell down fainting and they sprinkled rose-water on
him, till he recovered and cried to Tuman, “Draw near to me and tell me
all the good which hath befallen her.” So he came forward and acquainted
him with all that had betided the Princess; and Sabur beat hand upon
hand, saying, “Unhappy thou, O Fakhr Taj!”[350] And he bade give Tuman
ten thousand gold pieces and conferred on him the government of Isfáhán
City and its dependencies. Then he cried out to his Emirs, saying,
“Mount, all of you, and fare we forth to meet the Princess Fakhr Taj!”;
and the Chief Eunuch went in to the Queen-mother and told her and all
the Harim the good news, whereat she rejoiced and gave him a robe of
honour and a thousand dinars. Moreover, the people of the city heard of
this and decorated the market streets and houses. Then the King and
Tuman took horse and rode till they had sight of Gharib, when Sabur
footed it and made some steps towards Gharib, who also dismounted and
advanced to meet him; and they embraced and saluted each other, and
Sabur bent over Gharib’s hand and kissed it and thanked him for his
favours.[351] They pitched their pavilions in face of each other and
Sabur went in to his daughter, who rose and embracing him told him, all
that had befallen her and how Gharib had rescued her from the clutches
of the Ghul of the Mountain. Quoth the King, “By thy life, O Princess of
fair ones, I will overwhelm him with gifts!”; and quoth she, “O my papa,
make him thy son-in-law, that he may be to thee a force against thy
foes, for he is passing valiant.” Her father replied, “O my daughter,
knowst thou not that King Khirad Sháh seeketh thee in marriage and that
he hath cast the brocade[352] and hath given an hundred thousand dinars
in settlement, and he is King of Shiraz and its dependencies and is lord
of empire and horsemen and footmen?” But when the Princess heard these
words she said, “O my papa! I desire not that whereof thou speakest, and
if thou constrain me to that I have no mind to, I will slay myself.” So
Sabur left her and went in to Gharib, who rose to him; and they sat
awhile together; but the King could not take his fill of looking upon
him; and he said in his mind, “By Allah, my daughter is excusable if she
love this Badawi!” Then he called for food and they ate and passed the
night together. On the morrow, they took horse and rode till they
arrived at the City of Isbanir and entered, stirrup to stirrup, and it
was for them a great day. Fakhr Taj repaired to her palace and the
abiding-place of her rank, where her mother and her women received her
with cries of joy and loud lullilooings. As for King Sabur, he sat down
on his throne and seated Gharib on his right hand, whilst the Princes
and Chamberlains, the Emirs, Wazirs and Nabobs stood on either hand and
gave him joy of the recovery of his daughter. Said Sabur, “Whoso loveth
me let him bestow a robe of honour on Gharib,” and there fell dresses of
honour on him like drops of rain. Then Gharib abode the King’s guest ten
days, when he would have departed, but Sabur clad him in an honourable
robe and swore him by his faith that he should not march for a whole
month. Quoth Gharib, “O King, I am plighted to one of the girls of the
Arabs and I desire to go in to her.” Quoth the King, “Whether is the
fairer, thy betrothed or Fakhr Taj?” “O King of the age,” replied
Gharib, “what is the slave beside the lord?” And Sabur said, “Fakhr Taj
is become thy handmaid, for that thou didst rescue her from the pounces
of the Ghul, and she shall have none other husband than thyself.”
Thereupon Gharib rose and kissed ground, saying, “O King of the age,
thou art a sovereign and I am but a poor man, and belike thou wilt ask a
heavy dowry.” Replied the King, “O my son, know that Khirad Shah, lord
of Shiráz and dependencies thereof, seeketh her in marriage and hath
appointed an hundred thousand dinars to her dower; but I have chosen
thee before all men, that I may make thee the sword of my kingship and
my shield against vengeance.”[353] Then he turned to his Chief Officers
and said to them, “Bear witness[354] against me, O Lords of mine Empire,
that I marry my daughter Fakhr Taj to my son Gharib.”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sabur, King
of Ajam-land said to his Chief Officers, “Bear ye witness against me
that I marry my daughter, Fakhr Taj, to my son Gharib!” With that he
joined palms[355] with him and she became his wife. Then said Gharib,
“Appoint me a dower and I will bring it to thee, for I have in the
Castle of Sasa wealth and treasures beyond count.” Replied Sabur, “O my
son, I want of thee neither treasure nor wealth and I will take nothing
for her dower save the head of Jamrkán King of Dasht and the city of
Ahwáz.[356]” Quoth Gharib, “O King of the age, I will fetch my folk
forthright and go to thy foe and spoil his realm.” Quoth Sabur, “Allah
requite thee with good!” and dismissed the lords and commons, thinking,
“If Gharib go forth against Jamrkan, he will never more return.” When
morning morrowed the King mounted with Gharib and bidding all his troops
take horse rode forth to the plain, where he said to his men, “Do ye
tilt with spears and gladden my heart.” So the champions of Persia-land
played one against other, and Gharib said, “O King of the age, I have a
mind to tilt with the horsemen of Ajam-land, but on one condition.”
Asked the King, “What is that?”; and answered Gharib, “It is that I
shall don a light tunic and take a headless lance, with a pennon dipped
in saffron, whilst the Persian champions sally forth and tilt against me
with sharp spears. If any conquer me, I will render myself to him: but,
if I conquer him I will mark him on the breast and he shall leave the
plain.” Then the King cried to the commander of the troops to bring
forward the champions of the Persians; so he chose out from amongst the
Princes one thousand two hundred of his stoutest champions, and the King
said to them, in the Persian tongue, “Whoso slayeth this Badawi may ask
of me what he will.” So they strove with one another for precedence and
charged down upon Gharib and truth was distinguished from falsehood and
jest from earnest. Quoth Gharib, “I put my trust in Allah, the God of
Abraham the Friend, the Deity who hath power over all and from whom
naught is hidden, the One, the Almighty, whom the sight comprehendeth
not!” Then an Amalekite-like giant of the Persian champions rushed out
to him, but Gharib let him not stand long before him ere he marked him
and covered his breast with saffron, and as he turned away, he smote him
on the nape with the shaft of his lance, and he fell to the ground and
his pages bore him from the lists.[357] Then a second champion came
forth against him and he overcame him and marked him on the breast; and
thus did he with a third and a fourth and a fifth; and there came out
against him champion after champion till he had overcome them all and
marked them on the breast; for Almighty Allah gave him the victory over
them and they fared forth vanquisht from the plain. Then the servants
set food and strong wine before them and they ate and drank, till
Gharib’s wits were dazed by the drink. By and by, he went out to obey a
call of Nature and would have returned, but lost his way and entered the
palace of Fakhr Taj. When she saw him, her reason fled and she cried out
to her women saying, “Go forth from me to your own places!” So they
withdrew and she rose and kissed Gharib’s hand, saying, “Welcome to my
lord, who delivered me from the Ghul! Indeed I am thine handmaid for
ever and ever.” Then she drew him to her bed and embraced him, whereupon
desire was hot upon him and he broke her seal and lay with her till the
morning. Meanwhile the King thought that he had departed; but on the
morrow he went in to him and Sabur rose to him and made him sit by his
side. Then entered the tributary kings and kissing the ground stood
ranged in rows on the right and left and fell to talking of Gharib’s
valour and saying, “Extolled be He who gave him such prowess albeit he
is so young in years!” As they were thus engaged, behold all espied from
the palace-windows the dust of horse approaching and the King cried out
to his scouts, saying, “Woe to you! Go and bring me news of yonder
dust!” So a cavalier took horse and riding off, returned after a while,
and said, “O King, we found under that dust an hundred horse belonging
to an Emir hight Sahim al-Layl.” Gharib hearing these words, cried out,
“O my lord, this is my brother, whom I had sent on an errand, and I will
go forth to meet him.” So saying, he mounted, with his hundred men of
the Banu Kahtan and a thousand Persians, and rode to meet his brother in
great state, but greatness belongeth to God alone.[358] When the two
came up with each other, they dismounted and embraced, and Gharib said
to Sahim, “O my brother, hast thou brought our tribe to the Castle of
Sasa and the Wady of Blossoms?” “O my brother,” replied Sahim, “when the
perfidious dog Mardas heard that thou hadst made thee master of the
stronghold belonging to the Mountain-Ghul, he was sore chagrined and
said:—Except I march hence, Gharib will come and carry off my daughter
Mahdiyah without dower. So he took his daughter and his goods and set
out with his tribe for the land of Irak, where he entered the city of
Cufa and put himself under the protection of King Ajib, seeking to give
him his daughter to wife.” When Gharib heard his brother’s story, he
well-nigh gave up the ghost for rage and said, “By the virtue of the
faith of Al-Islam, the faith of Abraham the Friend, and by the Supreme
Lord, I will assuredly go to the land of Irak and fierce war upon it I
will set on foot.” Then they returned to the city and going in to the
King, kissed ground before him. He rose to Gharib and saluted Sahim;
after which the elder brother told him what had happened and he put ten
captains at his commandment, under each one’s hand ten thousand horse of
the doughtiest of the Arabs and the Ajams, who equipped themselves and
were ready to depart in three days. Then Gharib set out and journeyed
till he reached the Castle of Sasa whence the Ghul and his sons came
forth to meet him and dismounting, kissed his feet in the stirrups. He
told them all that had passed and the giant said, “O my lord, do thou
abide in this thy castle, whilst I with my sons and servants repair to
Irak and lay waste the city Al-Rusták[359] and bring to thy hand all its
defenders bound in straitest bond.” But Gharib thanked him and said, “O
Sa’adan, we will all go.” So he made him ready and the whole body set
out for Irak, leaving a thousand horse to guard the Castle. Thus far
concerning them; but as regards Mardas, he arrived with his tribe in the
land of Irak bringing with him a handsome present and fared for
Cufa-city which he entered. Then, he presented himself before Ajib and
kissed ground between his hands and, after wishing him what is wished to
kings, said, “O my lord, I come to place myself under thy
protection.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King that Mardas, coming into
the presence of Ajib, said to him, “I come to place myself under thy
protection!” Quoth Ajib, “Tell me who hath wronged thee, that I may
protect thee against him, though it were Sabur, King of the Persians and
Turcomans and Daylamites.” Quoth Mardas, “O King of the Age, he who hath
wronged me is none other than a youth whom I reared in my bosom. I found
him in his mother’s lap in a certain valley and took her to wife. She
brought me a son, whom I named Sahim al-Layl, and her own son, Gharib
hight, grew up on my knees and became a blasting thunderbolt and a
lasting calamity,[360] for he smote Al-Hamal,[361] Prince of the Banu
Nabhan, and slew footmen and threw horsemen. Now I have a daughter, who
befitteth thee alone, and he sought her of me; so I required of him the
head of the Ghul of the Mountain, wherefore he went to him and, after
engaging him in singular combat, made the master his man and took the
Castle of Sasa bin Shays bin Shaddad bin Ad, wherein are the treasures
of the ancients and the hoards of the moderns. Moreover, I hear that,
become a Moslem, he goeth about, summoning the folk to his faith. He is
now gone to bear the Princess of Persia, whom he delivered from the
Ghul, back to her father, King Sabur, and will not return but with the
treasures of the Persians.” When Ajib heard the story of Mardas he
changed colour to yellow and was in ill case and made sure of his own
destruction; then he said, “O Mardas, is the youth’s mother with thee or
with him?”; and Mardas replied, “She is with me in my tents.” Quoth
Ajib, “What is her name?”; quoth Mardas, “Her name is Nusrah.” “‘Tis
very she,” rejoined Ajib and sent for her to the presence. Now when she
came before him, he looked on her and knew her and asked her, “O
accursed, where are the two slaves I sent with thee?”; and she answered,
“They slew each other on my account;” whereupon Ajib bared his blade and
smote her and cut her in twain. Then they dragged her away and cast her
out; but trouble and suspicion entered Ajib’s heart and he cried, “O
Mardas, give me thy daughter to wife.” He rejoined, “She is one of thine
handmaids: I give her to thee to wife, and I am thy slave.” Said Ajib,
“I desire to look upon this son of an adulteress, Gharib, that I may
destroy him and cause him taste all manner of torments.” Then he bade
give Mardas, to his daughter’s dowry, thirty thousand dinars and an
hundred pieces of silk brocaded and fringed with gold and an hundred
pieces of silk-bordered stuffs and kerchiefs and golden collars. So he
went forth with this mighty fine dowry and set himself to equip Mahdiyah
in all diligence. Such was their case; but as regards Gharib, he fared
on till he came to Al-Jazírah, which is the first town of Al-Irak[362]
and is a walled and fortified city and he hard by it called a halt. When
the townsfolk saw his army encamped before it, they bolted the gates and
manned the walls, then went to the King of the city, who was called
Al-Dámigh, the Brainer, for that he used to brain the champions in the
open field of fight, and told him what was come upon them. So he looked
forth from the battlements of the palace and seeing a conquering host,
all of them Persians; encamped before the city, said to the citizens, “O
folk, what do yonder Ajams want?”; and they replied, “We know not.” Now
Al-Damigh had among his officers a man called Saba’ al-Kifár, the
Desert-lion, keen of wit and penetrating as he were a flame of fire; so
he called him and said to him, “Go to this stranger host and find out
who they be and what they want and return quickly.” Accordingly, he sped
like the wind to the Persian tents, where a company of Arabs rose up and
met him saying, “Who art thou and what dost thou require?” He replied,
“I am a messenger and an envoy from the lord of the city to your chief.”
So they took him and carried him through the lines of tents, pavilions
and standards, till they came to Gharib’s Shahmiyánah and told him of
the mission. He bade them bring him in and they did so, whereupon he
kissed ground before Gharib and wished him honour and length of days.
Quoth Gharib, “What is thine errand?” and quoth Saba’ al-Kifar, “I am an
envoy from the lord of the city of Al-Jazirah, Al-Damigh, brother of
King Kundamir, lord of the city of Cufa and the land of Irak.” When
Gharib heard his father’s name, the tears railed from his eyes in rills
and he looked at the messenger and said, “What is thy name?”; and he
replied, “My name is Saba’ al-Kifar.” Said Gharib, “Return to thy lord
and tell him that the commander of this host is called Gharib, son of
Kundamir, King of Cufa, whom his son Ajib slew, and he is come to take
blood-revenge for his sire on Ajib the perfidious hound.” So Saba’
al-Kifar returned to the city and in great joy kissed the ground, when
Al-Damigh said, “What is going on there, O Saba’ al-Kifar?” He replied,
“O my master, the leader of yon host is thy nephew, thy brother’s son,”
and told him all. The King deemed himself in a dream and asked the
messenger, “O Saba’ al-Kifar, is this thou tellest me true?” and the
Desert-lion answered, “As thy head liveth, it is sooth!” Then Al-Damigh
bade his chief officers take horse forthright and all rode out to the
camp, whence Gharib came forth and met him and they embraced and saluted
each other; after which Gharib carried him to his tents and they sat
down on beds of estate. Al-Damigh rejoiced in Gharib, his brother’s son,
and presently turning to him, said, “I also have yearned to take
blood-revenge for thy father, but could not avail against the dog thy
brother; for that his troops are many and my troops are few.” Replied
Gharib, “O uncle, here am I come to avenge my sire and blot out our
shame and rid the realm of Ajib.” Said Al-Damigh, “O son of my brother,
thou hast two blood-wreaks to take, that of thy father and that of thy
mother.” Asked Gharib, “And what aileth my mother?” and Al-Damigh
answered, “Thy brother Ajib hath slain her.”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib heard
these words of his uncle Al-Damigh, “Verily thy brother Ajib hath slain
her!”, he asked what was the cause thereof and was told of all that had
happened, especially how Mardas had married his daughter to Ajib who was
about to go into her. Thereupon Gharib’s reason fled from his head and
he swooned away and was nigh upon death. No sooner did he come to
himself than he cried out to the troops, saying, “To horse!” But
Al-Damigh said to him, “O son of my brother, wait till I make ready mine
affairs and mount among my men and fare with thee at thy stirrup.”
Replied Gharib, “I have no patience to wait; do thou equip thy troops
and join me at Cufa.” Thereupon Gharib mounted with his troops and rode,
till he came to the town of Babel,[363] whose folk took fright at him.
Now there was in this town a King called Jamak, under whose hand were
twenty thousand horsemen, and there gathered themselves together to him
from the villages other fifty thousand horse, who pitched their tents
facing the city. Then Gharib wrote a letter and sent it to King Jamak by
a messenger, who came up to the city-gate and cried out, saying, “I am
an envoy;” whereupon the Warder of the Gate went in and told Jamak, who
said, “Bring him to me.” So he led in the messenger, who kissing the
ground before the King, gave him the letter, and Jamak opened it and
read its contents as follows: “Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Three
Worlds, Lord of all things, who giveth to all creatures their daily
bread and who over all things is Omnipotent! These from Gharib, son of
King Kundamir, lord of Irak and Cufa, to Jamak. Immediately this letter
reacheth thee, let not thy reply be other than to break thine idols and
confess the unity of the All-knowing King, Creator of light and
darkness, Creator of all things, the All-powerful; and except thou do as
I bid thee, I will make this day the blackest of thy days. Peace be on
those who follow in the way of Salvation, fearing the issues of
fornication, and obey the hest of the Most High King, Lord of this world
and the next, Him who saith to a thing:—Be; and it becometh!” Now when
Jamak read this letter, his eyes paled and his colour failed and he
cried out to the messenger, “Go to thy lord and say to him:—To-morrow,
at daybreak there shall be fight and conflict and it shall appear who is
the conquering hero.” So he returned and told Gharib, who bade his men
make ready for battle, whilst Jamak commanded his tents to be pitched in
face of Gharib’s camp; and his troops poured forth like the surging sea
and passed the night with intention of slaughter. As soon as dawned the
day, the two hosts mounted and drew up in battle-array and beat their
drums amain and drave their steeds of swiftest strain; and they filled
the whole earthly plain; and the champions to come out were fain. Now
the first who sallied forth a-championing to the field was the Ghul of
the Mountain, bearing on shoulder a terrible tree, and he cried out
between the two hosts, saying, “I am Sa’adan the Ghul! Who is for
fighting, who is for jousting? Let no sluggard come forth to me nor
weakling.” And he called out to his sons, saying, “Woe to you! Bring me
fuel and fire, for I am an-hungered.” So they cried upon their slaves
who brought firewood and kindled a fire in the heart of the plain. Then
there came out to him a man of the Kafirs, an Amalekite of the
unbelieving Amalekites, bearing on his shoulder a mace like the mast of
a ship, and drove at Sa’adan the Ghul, saying, “Woe to thee, O Sa’adan!”
When the giant heard this, he waxed furious beyond measure and raising
his tree-club, aimed at the Infidel a blow, that hummed through the air.
The Amalekite met the stroke with his mace, but the tree beat down his
guard and descending with its own weight, together with the weight of
the mace upon his head, beat in his brain-pan, and he fell like a
long-stemmed palm-tree. Thereupon Sa’adan cried to his slaves, saying,
“Take this fatted calf and roast him quickly.” So they hastened to skin
the Infidel and roasted him and brought him to the Ghul, who ate his
flesh and crunched his bones.[364] Now when the Kafirs saw how Sa’adan
did with their fellow, their hair and pile stood on end; their skins
quaked, their colour changed, their hearts died within them and they
said to one another, “Whoso goeth out against this Ghul, he eateth him
and cracketh his bones and causeth him to lack the zephyr-wind of the
world.” Wherefore they held their hands, quailing for fear of the Ghul
and his sons and turned to fly, making for the town; but Gharib cried
out to his troops, saying, “Up and after the runaways!” So the Persians
and the Arabs drave after the King of Babel and his host and caused
sword to smite them, till they slew of them twenty thousand or more.
Then the fugitives crowded together in the city-gate and they killed of
them much people; and they could not avail to shut the gate. So the
Arabs and the Persians entered with them, fighting, and Sa’adan,
snatching a mace from one of the slain, wielded it in the enemy’s face
and gained the city race-course. Thence he fought his way through the
foe and broke into the King’s palace, where he met with Jamak and so
smote him with the mace, that he toppled senseless to the ground. Then
he fell upon those who were in the palace and pounded them into pieces,
till all that were left cried out, “Quarter! Quarter!” and Sa’adan said
to them, “Pinion your King.”——And Shahrazad saw the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

[Illustration]

-----

Footnote 312:

  Von Hammer holds this story to be a satire on Arab superstition and
  the compulsory propagation, the _compelle intrare_, of Al-Islam. Lane
  (iii. 235) omits it altogether for reasons of his own. I differ with
  great diffidence from the learned Baron whose Oriental reading was
  extensive; but the tale does not seem to justify his explanations. It
  appears to me simply one of the wilder romances, full of purposeful
  anachronisms (_e.g._ dated between Abraham and Moses, yet quoting the
  Koran) and written by someone familiar with the history of Oman. The
  style too is peculiar, in many places so abrupt that much manipulation
  is required to make it presentable: it suits, however, the rollicking,
  violent, brigand-like life which it depicts. There is only one
  incident about the end which justifies Von Hammer’s suspicion.

Footnote 313:

  The Persian hero of romance who converses with the Simurgh or Griffin.

Footnote 314:

  The word is as much used in Egypt as _wunderbar_ in Germany. As an
  exclamation it is equivalent to “mighty fine!”

Footnote 315:

  In modern days used in a bad sense, as a freethinker, etc. So Dalilah
  the Wily is noted to be a philosopheress.

Footnote 316:

  The game is much mixed up after Arab fashion. The “Tufat” is the
  Siyáhgosh = Black-ears, of India (_Felis caracal_), the Persian lynx,
  which gives very good sport with Dachshunds. Lynxes still abound in
  the thickets near Cairo.

Footnote 317:

  The “Sons of Kahtán,” especially the Ya’arubah tribe, made much
  history in Oman. Ya’arub (the eponymus) is written Ya’arab and
  Ya’arib; but Ya’arub (from Ya’arubu, Aorist of ‘Aruba) is best,
  because according to all authorities he was the first to cultivate
  primitive Arabian speech and Arabic poetry. (Caussin de Perceval’s
  Hist. des Arabes i. 50, etc.)

Footnote 318:

  He who shooteth an arrow by night. See the death of Antar shot down in
  the dark by the archer Jazár, son of Jábir, who had been blinded by a
  red-hot sabre passed before his eyes. I may note that it is a mere
  fiction of Al-Asma’i, as the real ‘Antar (or ‘Antarah) lived to a good
  old age, and probably died the “straw-death.”

Footnote 319:

  See vol. ii., p. 77, for a reminiscence of masterful King Kulayb and
  his Himà or domain. Here the phrase would mean, “None could approach
  them when they were wroth; none were safe from their rage.”

Footnote 320:

  The sons of Nabhán (whom Mr. Badger calls Nebhán) supplied the old
  Maliks or Kings of Oman (History of the Imams and Sayyids of Oman,
  etc., London, Hakluyt Soc. 1871).

Footnote 321:

  This is a sore insult in Arabia, where they have not dreamt of a
  “Jawáb-club,” like that of Calcutta in the old days, to which only men
  who had been half a dozen times “jawab’d” (= refused in Anglo-Indian
  jargon) could belong. “I am not a stallion to be struck on the nose,”
  say the Arabs.

Footnote 322:

  Again “inverted speech”: it is as if we said, “Now, you’re a damned
  fine fellow, so,” etc. “Allah curse thee! Thou hast guarded thy women
  alive and dead;” said the man of Sulaym in admiration after thrusting
  his spear into the eye of dead Rabí’ah.

Footnote 323:

  The Badawi use javelins or throw-spears of many kinds, especially the
  prettily worked Mizrák (Pilgrimage i. 349); spears for footmen
  (Shalfah, a bamboo or palm-stick with a head about a hand broad), and
  the knightly lance, a male bamboo some 12 feet long with iron heel and
  a long tapering point often of open work or damascened steel, under
  which are tufts of black ostrich feathers, one or two. I never saw a
  crescent-shaped head as the text suggests. It is a “Pundonor” not to
  sell these weapons: you say, “Give me that article and I will satisfy
  thee!” After which the Sons of the Sand will haggle over each copper
  as if you were cheapening a sheep (Ibid. iii. 73).

Footnote 324:

  The shame was that Gharib had seen the girl and had fallen in love
  with her beauty; instead of applying for her hand in recognised form.
  These punctilios of the Desert are peculiarly nice and tetchy; nor do
  strangers readily realise them.

Footnote 325:

  The Arabs derive these Noachidæ from Imlik, great-grandson of Shem,
  who after the confusion of tongues settled at Sana’a, then moved North
  to Meccah and built the fifth Ka’abah. The dynastic name was Arkam, M.
  C. de Perceval’s “Arcam,” which he would identify with Rekem (Numbers
  xxxi. 8). The last Arkam fell before an army sent by Moses to purge
  the Holy Land (Al-Hijaz) of idolatry. Commentators on the Koran
  (chapt. vii.) call the Pharaoh of Moses Al-Walíd and derive him from
  the Amalekites: we have lately ascertained that this Mene-Ptah was of
  the Shepherd-Kings and thus, according to the older Moslems, the
  Hyksos were of the seed of Imlik. (Pilgrimage ii. 116; and iii. 190.)
  In Syria they fought with Joshua son of Nun. The tribe or rather
  nationality was famous and powerful: we know little about it and I may
  safely predict that when the Amalekite country shall have been well
  explored, it will produce monuments second in importance only to the
  Hittites. “A nomadic tribe which occupied the Peninsula of Sinai”
  (Smith’s Dict. of the Bible) is peculiarly superficial, even for that
  most superficial of books.

Footnote 326:

  The Amalekites were giants and lived 500 years (Pilgrimage, _loc.
  cit._).

Footnote 327:

  His men being ninety against five hundred.

Footnote 328:

  Arab. “Kaum” (pron. Gúm) here = a razzia, afterwards = a tribe.
  Relations between Badawi tribes are of three kinds; (1) Asháb, allies
  offensive and defensive, friends who intermarry; (2) Kímán (plur. of
  Kaum) when the blood-feud exists, and (3) Akhwán = brothers. The last
  is a complicated affair; “Akháwat” or brotherhood, denotes the tie
  between patron and client (a noble and an ignoble tribe) or between
  the stranger and the tribe which claims an immemorial and unalienable
  right to its own lands. Hence a small fee (Al-Rifkah) must be paid and
  the traveller and his beast become “dakhíl,” or entitled to
  brother-help. The guardian is known in the West as Rafík; Rabí’a in
  Eastern Arabia; Ghafír in “Sinai;” amongst the Somal, Abbán and the
  Gallas Mogásá. Further details are given in Pilgrimage iii. 85–87.

Footnote 329:

  Arab. “Mál,” here = Badawi money, flocks and herds, our “fee” from
  feoh, vieh, cattle; as pecunia from pecus, etc., etc.

Footnote 330:

  The litholatry of the old Arabs is undisputed: Manát the goddess-idol
  was a large rude stone and when the Meccans sent out colonies these
  carried with them stones of the Holy Land to be set up and worshipped
  like the Ka’abah. I have suggested (Pilgrimage iii. 159) that the
  famous Black Stone of Meccah, which appears to me a large aerolite, is
  a remnant of this worship and that the tomb of Eve near Jeddah was the
  old “Sakhrah tawílah” or Long Stone (ibid. iii. 388). Jeddah is now
  translated the grandmother, alluding to Eve, a myth of late growth: it
  is properly Juddah = a plain lacking water.

Footnote 331:

  The First Adites, I have said, did not all perish: a few believers
  retired with the prophet Hud (Heber?) to Hazramaut. The Second Adites,
  who had Márib of the Dam for capital and Lukman for king, were
  dispersed by the Flood of Al-Yaman. Their dynasty lasted a thousand
  years, the exodus taking place according to De Sacy in A.D. 150–170 or
  shortly after A.D. 100 (C. de Perceval), and was overthrown by Ya’arub
  bin Kahtán, the first Arabist; see Night dcxxv.

Footnote 332:

  This title has been noticed: it suggests the “Saint Abraham” of our
  mediæval travellers. Every great prophet has his agnomen: Adam the
  Pure (or Elect) of Allah; Noah the Nájiy (or saved) of Allah; Moses
  (Kalím) the Speaker with Allah; Jesus the Rúh (Spirit, breath) or
  Kalám (the word) of Allah. For Mohammed’s see Al-Busiri’s Mantle-poem
  vv. 31–58.

Footnote 333:

  Koran (chapt. iii. 17) “Verily the true religion in the sight of Allah
  is Islam” _i.e._ resigning or devoting myself to the Lord, with a
  suspicion of “Salvation” conveyed by the root Salima, he was safe.

Footnote 334:

  Arab. “Sá’ikah,” which is supposed to be a stone. The allusion is to
  Antar’s sword, “Dhámi,” made of a stone, black, brilliant and hard as
  a rock (an aerolite), which had struck a camel on the right side and
  had come out by the left. The blacksmith made it into a blade three
  feet long by two spans broad, a kind of falchion or chopper, cased it
  with gold and called it Dhámi (the “Trenchant”) from its sharpness.
  But he said to the owner:—

            The sword is trenchant, O son of the Ghalib clan,
            Trenchant in sooth, but where is the sworder-man?

  Whereupon the owner struck off the maker’s head, a most satisfactory
  answer to all but one.

Footnote 335:

  Arab. “Kutá’ah”: lit. a bit cut off, fragment, nail-paring, and here
  _un diminutif_. I have described this scene in Pilgrimage iii. 68.
  Latro often says, “Thy gear is wanted by the daughter of my paternal
  uncle” (wife), and thus parades his politeness by asking in a lady’s
  name.

Footnote 336:

  As will appear the two brothers were joined by a party of horsemen.

Footnote 337:

  “Four” says the Mac. Edit. forgetting Falhun with characteristic
  inconsequence.

Footnote 338:

  Muhammad (the deserving great praise) is the name used by men; Ahmad
  (more laudable) by angels, and Mahmúd (praised) by devils. For a
  similar play upon the name, “Allah, Allah, Muhammad ast” (God is God
  the praiseworthy), see Dabistan ii. 416.

Footnote 339:

  The Mac. Edit. here gives “Sás,” but elsewhere “Sásá,” which is the
  correct form.

Footnote 340:

  Sapor the Second (A.D. 310–330) was compelled to attack the powerful
  Arab hordes of Oman, most of whom, like the Tayy, Aus and Khazraj, the
  Banu Nabhán and the Hináwi left Al-Yaman A.D. 100–170, and settled in
  the north and north-east of Al-Najd. This great exodus and dispersion
  of the tribes was caused, as has been said, by the bursting of the Dam
  of Márib originally built by Abd al-Shams Sabá, father of Himyar.
  These Yamanian races were plunged into poverty and roamed northwards,
  planting themselves amongst the Arabs of Ma’add son of Adnán. Hence
  the kingdom of Ghassan in Syria whose phylarchs under the Romans
  (_i.e._ Greek Emperors of Constantinople) controlled Palestine Tertia,
  the Arabs of Syria and Palestine; and the kingdom of Hírah, whose
  Lakhmite Princes, dependent upon Persia, managed the Arabs of the
  Euphrates, Oman and Al-Bahrayn. The Ma’addites still continued to
  occupy the central plateau of Arabia, a feature analogous with India
  “above the Ghauts.”

Footnote 341:

  I have described (Pilgrimage i. 370) the grisly spot which a Badawi
  will dignify by the name of Wady al-Ward = Vale of Roses.

Footnote 342:

  Koran xiii. 3, “Of every fruit two different kinds,” _i.e._ large and
  small, black and white, sweet and sour.

Footnote 343:

  A graft upon an almond-tree, which makes its kernel sweet and gives it
  an especial delicacy of flavour. See Russell’s (excellent) Natural
  History of Aleppo, p. 21.

Footnote 344:

  So called from the flavour of the kernel: it is well-known at Damascus
  where a favourite fruit is the dried apricot with an almond by way of
  kernel. There are many preparations of apricots, especially the
  “Mare’s skin” (Jild al-faras or Kamar al-din) a paste folded into
  sheets and exactly resembling the article from which it takes a name.
  When wanted it is dissolved in water and eaten as a relish with bread
  or biscuit (Pilgrimage i. 289).

Footnote 345:

  “Anta Kamá takúl” = the vulgarest Cairene.

Footnote 346:

  This may be Ctesiphon, the ancient capital of the Chosroës, on the
  Tigris below Baghdad; and spoken of elsewhere in The Nights;
  especially as, in Night dclxvii., it is called Isbanir Al-Madáin;
  Madáin Kisrá (the cities of Chosroes) being the Arabic name of the old
  dual city.

Footnote 347:

  Koran vi. 103. The translation is Sale’s which I have generally
  preferred, despite many imperfections: Lane renders this sentence,
  “The eyes see not Him, but He seeth the eyes;” and Mr. Rodwell, “No
  vision taketh in Him (?), but He taketh in all vision;” and (better)
  “No eyesight reacheth to Him.”

Footnote 348:

  Sale (sect. 1.) tells us all that was then known of these three which
  with Yá’úk and Nasr and the three “daughters of God,” Goddesses or
  Energies (the Hindu Saktis) Allát, Al-Uzzá and Manát mentioned in the
  Koran were the chiefs of the pre-Islamitic Pantheon. I cannot but
  suspect that all will be connected with old Babylonian worship.
  Al-Baydáwi (on Kor. lxxi. 22) says of Wadd, Suwá’a, Yaghus, Ya’úk and
  Nasr that they were names of pious men between Adam and Noah,
  afterwards deified: Yaghús was the giant idol of the Mazhaj tribe at
  Akamah of Al-Yaman and afterwards at Najrán Al-Uzzá was widely
  worshipped: her idol (of the tree Semurat) belonging to Ghatafán was
  destroyed after the Prophet’s order by Khálid bin Walíd. Allát or
  Al-Lát is written by Pocock (spec. 110) “Ilahat” _i.e._ deities in
  general. But Herodotus evidently refers to one god when he makes the
  Arabs worship Dionysus as Ὀροτὰλ and Urania as Ἀλιλάτ and the
  “tashdid” in Allát would, to a Greek ear, introduce another syllable
  (Alilat). This was the goddess of the Kuraysh and Thakíf whose temple
  at Táif was circuited like the Ka’abah before Mohammed destroyed it.

Footnote 349:

  Shays (Shayth) is Ab Seth (Father Seth) of the Hebrews, a
  name containing the initial and terminal letters of the
  Egypto-Phœnico-Hebrew Alphabet and the “Abjad” of the Arabs. Those
  curious about its connection with the name of Allah (El), the Zodiacal
  signs and with the constellations, visions but not wholly
  uninteresting, will consult “Unexplored Syria” (vol. i. 33).

Footnote 350:

  The exclamation of an honest Fellah.

Footnote 351:

  This is Antar with the Chosroë who “kissed the Absian hero between the
  eyes and bade him adieu, giving him as a last token a rich robe.” The
  coarser hand of the story-teller exaggerates everything till he makes
  it ridiculous.

Footnote 352:

  The context suggests that this is a royal form of “throwing the
  handkerchief;” but it does not occur elsewhere. In fact, the European
  idea seems to have arisen from the oriental practice of sending
  presents in napkins or kerchiefs.

Footnote 353:

  _i.e._ if the disappointed suitor attack me.

Footnote 354:

  _i.e._ if ever I be tempted to deny it.

Footnote 355:

  Arab. “Musáfahah,” the Arab fashion of shaking hands. The right palms
  are applied flat to each other; then the fingers are squeezed and the
  hand is raised to the forehead (Pilgrimage ii. 332).

Footnote 356:

  A city and province of Khuzistán, the old Susiana. Dasht may be either
  the town in Khorasan or the “forests” (dasht) belonging to Ahwáz
  (Ahuaz in D’Herbelot).

Footnote 357:

  This is the contest between “Antar and the Satrap Khosrewan at the
  Court of Monzar,” but without its tragical finish.

Footnote 358:

  Elliptical “he rode out in great state, that is to say if greatness
  can truly be attributed to man,” for, etc.

Footnote 359:

  According to D’Herbelot (_s.v._ Rostac) it is a name given to the
  villages of Khorasan as “Souad” (Sawád) to those of Irak and Makhlaf
  to those of Al-Yaman: there is, however, a well-known Al-Rustak (which
  like Al-Bahrayn always takes the article) in the Province of Oman West
  of Maskat; and as it rhymes with “Irak” it does well enough. Mr.
  Badger calls this ancient capital of the Ya’arubah Imáms “er-Rasták”
  (Imams of Oman).

Footnote 360:

  _i.e._ a furious knight.

Footnote 361:

  In the Mac. Edit. “Hassán,” which may rhyme with Nabhán, but it is a
  mere blunder.

Footnote 362:

  In Classical Arabic Irak (like Yaman, Bahrayn and Rusták) always takes
  the article.

Footnote 363:

  The story-teller goes back from Kufah founded in Omar’s day to the
  times of Abraham.

Footnote 364:

  This manœuvre has often been practised; especially by the first
  Crusaders under Bohemond (Gibbon) and in late years by the Arab
  slavers in Eastern Intertropical Africa. After their skirmishes with
  the natives they quartered and “brittled” the dead like game, roasted
  and boiled the choice pieces and pretended to eat the flesh. The
  enemy, who was not afraid of death, was struck with terror by the idea
  of being devoured; and this seems instinctive to the undeveloped mind.




                           END OF VOLUME VI.

[Illustration: والسلام]




                                 INDEX.


 A’amash (Al-) = one with watering eyes, 96

 Abd al-Ahad = slave of the One (God), 221

 Abd al-Rahím = slave of the Compassionate, 211

 Abd al-Salám (Pr. N.) = slave of salvation, 211

 Abd al-Samad = slave of the Eternal, 221

 Abd al-Samad al-Samúdi (for Samanhúdi?), 87

 Abraham the friend = mediæval “St. Abraham”, 270

 Abtan (Al-) = the most profound (_see_ Bátiní), 221

 Abu Karn = Father of the Horn (unicorn?), 21

 Abu Hosayn = Father of the Fortlet (fox), 211

 Abyssinians (hardly to be called blackamoors), 63

 Acquit me of responsibility (formula of dismissing a servant), 243

 Adam’s Peak (Ar. Jabal al-Ramun), 65

 Adites (first and second), 269

 Adnán (land of) = Arabia, 94

 Ahwáz (city and province of Khuzistan), 287

 Ahl al-Bait = the person of the house (euphemistically for wife), 199

 Ajíb (Pr. N.) = wonderful, 257

 Akh = brother (wide signification of the word), 243

 Albatross (supposed never to touch land), 33

 Alcinous (of the Arabian Odyssy), 65

 Allah (be praised whatso be our case), 3

 —— (“the Manifest Truth”), 93

 —— is omniscient, (formula used when telling an improbable tale), 210

 —— (the Opener), 216

 —— (it is He who gives by our means), 233

 —— (sight comprehendeth Him not), 283

 Almenichiaka, 124

 Almond-Apricot, 277

 Amalekites, 264; 265

 Amid (Amidah), town in Mesopotamia, 106

 Anbar (Ambar) = ambergris, 60

 Andalusian = Spanish (_i.e._ of Vandal-land), 101

 Angels (ride piebalds), 146

 Antar and the Chosroë, 285

 —— (contest with Khosrewan), 289

 Apodosis omitted, 203; 239

 Apes (isle of), 23

 —— (and their lustful propensities), 54

 —— (gathering fruits), 56

 Arab (style compared with Persian), 125

 Arar = Juniper, 95

 Aristomenes and his fox, 45

 Arúbah (Al-) = Friday, 190

 Armenians (porters of Constantinople), 1

 Asaf bin Barkhiya (Solomon’s Wazir), 99

 Asháb al-Ráy (epithet of the Hanaff school), 146

 Asoka’s wife and Kunála, 127

 Ashjár = door-posts or wooden bolts, 191

 Aurat = shame, nakedness (woman, wife), 30

 —— (of man and woman), 118

 Ayát al-Naját = Verses of Safety, 108


 Báb al-Nasr = Gate of Victory (at Cairo), 234

 Bundukániyah (quarter of Cairo), 254

 Banú Abbás (their colours black), 86

 —— Kahtán, 260

 —— Nabhán, 262

 —— Umayyah (their colours, white), 86

 Banyán = Ficus Indica, 81

 Barge (Ar. Bárijah), 24

 Bárijah (pl. bawárij) = Jarm, barge, _ib._

 Batáikh (batáyikh) = water-melons, 208

 Bath (suggesting freshness from coition), 135

 —— and privy favourite haunts of the Jinns, 141

 —— (not to be entered by men without drawers), 150

 Bathsheba and Uriah, and their congeners, 129

 Bátini = a gnostic, a reprobate, 221

 Bawwáb = door-keeper, 189

 Beckoning (Eastern fashion of, the reverse of ours), 109

 Benches (in olden Europe more usual than chairs), 26

 Berbers from the Upper Nile (the “Paddies” of Egypt), 189

 Bilád al-Filfil = home of pepper (Malabar), 38

 Birds (sing only in the pairing season), 15

 —— (huge ones discovered on the African coast), 17

 —— (left to watch over wives), 132

 —— (pretended understanding of their language), 169

 Birkat = tank, pool, etc., 57

 Biunes, bisexuals and women robed with the sun, 168

 Black (colour of the Abbasides), 86

 Box-trick (and Lord Byron), 168

 Brass (Ar. Nuhás asfar), 83

 Breath (of crocodiles, serpents, etc.), 29

 Brides of the Treasure, 109

 Brother (has a wide signification amongst Moslems), 243

 Bukjah = bundle, 226

 Bulád (Pers. Pulád) = steel, 115

 Burka’ = face-veil, 131; 192


 Cairene vulgarism, 278

 Camel (seen in a dream is an omen of death; why?), 92

 Camphor (primitive way of extracting it), 21

 Camphor-apricot, 277

 Cannibals and cannibalism, 36

 Ceruse (Ar. Isfídáj), 126

 Ceylon (Ar. Sarandib), 64; 81

 City of Brass, 83

 Cocoa-nut (Ar. Jauz al-Hindi), 55

 Colossochelys = colossal tortoise, 33

 Colours (of the Caliphs), 86

 —— (names of), 111

 Commander of the Faithful (title introduced by Omar), 247

 Comorin (derivation of the name), 57

 “Consecrated ground” (unknown to Moslems), 161

 Cousin (first, affronts an Arab if she marries any save him without his
    leave), 145

 Created for a mighty matter (_i.e._ for worship and to prepare for
    futurity), 91

 Crocodiles (breath of), 29

 Crow (an ill-omened bird), 170


 Dabbús = mace, 249

 Dáhish (Al-) = the Amazed, 96

 Dajjál (Al-) = Moslem Anti-Christ, 11

 Darakah = target, 9

 Datura Stramonium (the insane herb), 36

 “Daughters of God” (the three), 282

 David (hauberks of his make), 113

 Death (manners of, symbolised by colours), 250

 Death-prayer (usually a two-bow prayer), 70

 Delight of the Intelligent, etc. (fancy title of a book), 80

 Despotism (tempered by assassination), 206

 Dhámí = the Trenchant (sword of Antar), 271

 Diamonds (occurring in alluvial lands), 18

 Dihlíz = passage, 10

 Do not to others what thou wouldest not they do unto thee, 125

 Door-keepers (in Egypt mostly Berbers), 189

 Drinking bouts (attended in bright dresses), 175


 Elliptical expression, 288

 Emerald (mace-head of), 67

 —— (rods in lattice-windows), 117

 “Enfants Terrible” in Eastern guise, 211

 Envying another’s wealth wrongs him, 77

 Euphemisms, 75; 145

 Evil (befalling thee is from thyself), 138


 Family (euphemistically for wife), 75

 Fás = city of Fez, 222

 Fárikín for Mayyafárikín (city in Diyar-bakr), 107

 Farz = obligatory prayer, 193

 Fátihah (repeated to confirm an agreement), 217

 Fátimah (Pr. N. = the weaner), 145

 Fatimite (Caliphs, their colours green), 86

 Fausta and Crispus, 127

 Fire (there is no blower of = utter desolation), 15

 —— (forbidden as punishment), 26

 —— (none might warm himself at their), 261

 Fish (-islands), 6

 —— (the ass-headed), 33

 —— (great = Hút, common = Samak), 69

 Flea (still an Egyptian plague), 205

 Food-tray of Sulayman, 80

 Fox (Ar. Abú Hosayn, Sa’lab), 211

 Fruit of two kinds, 277

 Fulk = boat, 62

 Fustát = Old Cairo, 87


 Galactophagi (use milk always in the soured form), 201

 Gems and their mines, 18

 Ghazá-wood = yellow-flowered Artemisia, 192

 Ghúl = ogre, cannibal, 36

 “Greatness belongeth to God alone” (used elliptically), 288

 Green (colour of the Fatimite Caliphs), 86

 Grimm’s “Household Tales” quoted, 230


 Háfiz (f. Háfizah) = 1, traditionist; 2, one who can recite the Koran
    by rote, 195

 Halíb = fresh milk, 201

 Hauráni towns (weird aspect of), 102

 —— —— (their survival accounted for by some protracted drought), 116

 Heart-ache (for stomach-ache), 194

 Herb (the insane), 36

 Hippopotamus, 33

 House-breaking (four modes of), 247

 Hút = great fish, 69


 Ichthyological marvels, 33

 ‘Iddah (of widowhood), 256

 Imlik (great-grandson of Shem), 264

 Inconsequence (characteristic of the Eastern Saga), 61

 —— (of writer of The Nights), 205

 Insula (for Peninsula), 57

 Inverted speech, 262

 Irak, etc., used always with the article, 291

 Isbánír = Ctesiphon (?), 279

 Isfídáj = ceruse, 126

 Ishárah = signing, beckoning, 109

 Izár = waist cloth, 50


 Jabal al-Ramun = Adam’s Peak, 65

 Jarm (Ar. Bárijah), 24

 Jauz al-Hindi = cocoa-nut, 55

 Javelins, 263

 Jawáb-club, 262

 Joseph and Potiphar’s wife, 127

 Júdar (Classical Arab name), 213

 —— (and his brethren, version of a Gotha MS.), 257

 Júdariyah (quarter of Cairo), 254

 Jum’ah = assembly (Friday), 120; 190

 Jumblat (for Ján-pulád, Life o’ Steel, Pr. N.), 115

 Justice (poetical in the Nights), 255


 Kabáb (mutton or lamb grilled in small squares), 225

 Kahramán (Persian hero), 257

 Kahtan (sons of), 260

 Kala (island), 47

 Kalamdán = reed-box (ink-case), 167

 Kánún = furnace, brazier, 5

 Kaum = razzia; tribe, 266

 Karawán = Charadrius œdicnemus, 1

 Karkadán, etc. = rhinoceros, 21

 Karkar (Carcer?), Sea of Al-, 101

 Karún (lake), 217

 Kashmír people (have a bad name in Eastern tales), 156

 Kassar’ Allah Khayr-ak = Allah increase thy weal, 233

 Kazdír = tin, 39

 Kasr = palace, one’s house, 240

 Kawwás = archer, Janissary, 241

 Kázi of the army (the great legal authority of a country), 131

 Khalíyah = bee-hive; empty, 246

 Kháwí (skin of), 66

 Khurj (Al-) = saddle-bag (las Alforjas), 224

 Khwájah (Howajee) = schoolmaster, man of letters, etc., 46

 Khwárazm = land of the Chorasmioi, 113

 Killed (once more = Hibernicè kilt), 171

 Kiná’ = veil, 192

 Kingfisher (Lucian’s), 49

 Kintar = a hundred weight (quintal), 94

 Kitfír (Itfír) = Potiphar, 172

 Kízan fukká’a = jars for fukká’a (a kind of beer), 88

 Koran quoted (xxiv. 39), 93

 —— (lii. 21), 95

 —— (ix. 51; xiv. 15), 108

 —— (xxxviii. 11), 115

 —— (iv. 81), 138

 —— (iv. 78; xli 28), 144

 —— (ix. 51), 191

 —— (iii. 17), 270

 —— (xiii. 3), 277

 —— (vi. 103), 282

 Kulayb (and his domain), 261

 Kuta’ah = a bit cut off, etc., 272


 La’an = curse, 178

 Laban = milk artificially soured, 201

 Laban-halíb = fresh milk, _ib._

 Ladies of the family (waiting upon the guests), 237

 Lake Kárún, 217

 Lane quoted, 1; 8; 11; 33; 61; 66; 80; 191; 196; 214; 216; 247; 257;
    282

 Lasting Calamity = a furious knight, 290

 Laylat al-Kadr = Night of power, 180

 Leaving one standing (pour se faire valoir), 252

 Líf = fibre of palm-fronds, 50

 Litholatry of the old Arabs, 269

 Living (the, who dieth not), 67


 Mace (Ar. Dabbús), 249

 Magháribah (pl. of Maghribi) = Western man, Moor, “Maurus”, 220

 Maháráj = great Rajah, 8; 67

 Maid and Magpie, 182

 Mál = Badawi money, flocks, “fee”, 267

 Mankind (creates its analogues in all the elements), 121

 Mann = from two to six pounds, 80

 Mares (impregnated by the wind), 9

 Markúb = shoe, 207

 Marmar = marble, alabaster, 95

 Mastabah = bench of masonry, 26

 Maund, _see_ Mann, 80

 Mihráj = Maháráj _q.v._, 67

 Miknás = town Mequinez, 223

 Miknasah = broom, 158

 Milk (Ar. Laban, Halíb), 201

 —— (by nomades always used in the soured form), _ib._

 Million (no Arabic word for, expressed by a thousand thousand), 98

 “Mis”-conformation (prized by women), 156

 Moses (describes his own death and burial), 116

 Moslem (kind feeling shown to a namesake), 13

 —— (corpses should be burnt under certain circumstances), 26

 —— (commonplace of condolence), 41

 —— (sales, formula of), 73

 —— (consecrated ground unknown to them), 161

 —— (a free-born’s sale is felony), 240

 Mother (waiting upon the adult sons), 237

 Mrigatrishná = the thirst of the deer (mirage), 93

 Mufti (Doctor of Law), 254

 Muhammad, Ahmad and Mahmúd, 273

 Muráhanah = game of forfeits, 204

 Murders (to save one’s life approved of), 44

 Músá bin Nusayr (conqueror of Spain), 86

 Musáfahat = joining palms for shaking hands, 287


 Na’al = sandal, shoe, horse-shoe, 207

 Nabhán (sons of), 262

 Nábigah al-Zubyáni (pre-Islamitic poet), 85

 Nahr = river, 163

 Najásah = nastiness (anything unclean), 178

 Nakedness (Ar. Aurat), 30

 Nákús = wooden gong (used as bell), 47

 Neighbours (frequently on the worst of terms), 236

 “New Arabian Nights”, 257

 Nuhás (vulg. Nihás, Nahás) asfar = brass, 83

 Nusf = half-dirham, 214


 Opener (of the door of daily bread), 216

 Ophidia (of monstrous size), 29


 Palace (of the Caliphs of Baghdad), 189

 Palaces (avoided by the pious), 182

 Partridges (story of the two), 183

 Pausing as long as Allah pleased = musing a long time, 109

 Pearl-fisheries, 60

 Pepper (and the discovery of the Cape route), 38

 —— (-plantations shaded by bananas), 57

 Phædra and Hippolytus, 127

 Philosophic (used in a bad sense), 257

 Pidar sokhtah = (son of a) burnt father (Persian insult), 26

 Pilgrimage quoted (i. 297), 57

 —— (i. 180), 61

 —— (i. 349; iii. 73), 263

 —— (ii. 116; iii. 190), 264

 —— (i. 370), 276

 —— (i. 298), 277

 —— (ii. 332), 287

 Poetical justice (administered with vigour in The Nights), 25

 Poison (deadly only in contact with abraded skin), 202

 Polyphemus (in Arab garb), 24

 —— (no Mistress P. accepted), 27

 Precautions (thwarted by Fate and Fortune), 167

 Predestination (not Providence, a Moslem belief), 202

 Prisons (Moslem), 244

 Privy and bath favourite haunts of the Jinns, 141

 Property (left by will), 213

 Prophets (and their agnomina), 270

 Prostration (must be made to Allah only), 136

 Prothesis without apodosis (a favourite style in Arabic), 203; 239

 Punctilios of the Desert, 264


 Quarter (son of the = neighbour), 236


 Ra’ad al-Kásif (Pr. N. = the loud-pealing Thunder), 221

 Rafw = artistic style of darning, 198

 Rahmah (Pr. N. = the puritanical “Mercy”), 226

 Rais = captain, master (not owner) of a ship, 12

 Rape (rendered excusable by wilfulness), 187

 Ráy = rede (“private judgment”), 146

 Ráyí = rationalist, _ib._

 Red habit (sign of wrath), 250

 Refusal of a demand in marriage a sore insult, 262

 Relations between Badawi tribes, 267

 Retorts (of a sharp Fellah), 232

 Ring (in memoriam), 199

 —— (lost in the Harím raises jealous suspicion), 200

 Rivers (underground), 63

 Robe (the hidden, story of), 188

 Ruby (of exceptional size), 66

 Rustak (Al-), city of Oman, 289

 Rukh (the world-wide Wundervogel), 16

 —— (study of, by Prof. Bianconi), 49


 Sá’a (measure of corn, etc.), 203

 Sabbah-ak’ Allah bi’l khayr = Allah give thee good morning, 196

 Sabúr = Sapor II, 274

 Safe-guard (I am in thy = I appeal to thy honour), 158

 Sahmhu = his shaft, 100

 Sahím al-Layl (Pr. N. = he who shooteth an arrow by night), 261

 Sail = torrent, 164

 Sá’ikah = thunderbolt, 271

 Sailor (Ar. equivalents for), 242

 Sáis = groom, horsekeeper (Syce), 9

 Sajjádah = prayer-rug, 193

 Saksar (Pers. Sag-sar = dogs’ heads), 37

 Sa’lab = fox, 211

 Saláhitah (Al-), island, 30

 Salámát = Welcome!, 232

 Sales (formula of), 73

 Samak = common fish, 69

 Samúm = poisonous wind (Simoon), 88

 Sandal (Ar. Na’al), 207

 Saráb = mirage, 93

 Sarandib = Selan-dwípa (Ceylon), 64

 Sásá bin Shays, 274

 Satan (his malice weak in comparison with that of women), 144

 Sea of Al-Karkar, 101

 Sea-stallion (myth of the), 9

 Serpent (breaks the bones of its devoured prey by winding round a tree
    or rock), 29

 —— (preserving from sickness), 66

 —— (in Ar. mostly feminine), 75

 Shakiriyah = Kshatriya caste, 10

 Shamardal (Al-) = the Tall One, 221

 Shams al-Daulah (imaginary king of Egypt), 241

 Shaykh al-Bahr = the Chief of the Sea (-coast), 51, 53

 Shaykh of the thieves (one of the worthies of a Moslem capital), 204

 Shays = Ab Seth, 283

 Shoe (Ar. Markúb, Na’al), 207

 Shrouds (carried by the pilgrims to Meccah), 61

 Sight comprehendeth Him not, etc., 282

 Signs of Allah = Koranic versets, 144

 Simoon (Ar. Samúm = poisonous wind), 88

 Sindbád (not to be confounded with the eponym of the Sindibád-námah), 4

 Sindibád the Sage, 124

 Sindibád-námah (Persian romance), 122

 Sindibad-námah (quoted), 129; 132; 134; 139; 143; 145; 150; 152; 169;
    180; 183; 188; 202

 Sírah (small fish, fry, sprat), 216

 Siyághosh, _see_ Tufah.

 Sold to thee for monies received (formula of Moslem sales), 73

 Solomon (his food-tray), 80

 —— (his seal-ring), 84

 —— (the Apostle of Allah), 99

 —— (his Wazír Asaf), _ib._

 —— (his trick upon Bilkís), 113

 Spears and javelins, 263

 Stallion (I am not one to be struck on the nose), 262

 Steel (Ar. Bulád), 115

 Stirrup (walking by the), 234

 Stones (precious, and their mines), 18

 —— (removed from the path by the pious), 190

 Suez (Ar. Al-Suways), 80

 Suways (Al-) = Suez, _ib._

 Swimming (studied in Baghdad), 134

 Sword (the enchanted), 230


 Tadmurah (founds Tadmur or Palmyra), 116

 Talking birds (watching over wives), 132

 Tanjah = Tangiers, 106

 Target (Ar. darakah), 9

 Ta’rísak = thy going between (pimping), 196

 Tasmeh-pá = strap-legs, 51

 Tawáf (circuit of the Ka’abah), 242

 Thousand thousand = a million, 98

 Three things are better than other three, 5

 “Throwing the handkerchief”, 285

 Tin (Ar. Kazdír), 39

 Tingis = Tanjah (Tangiers), 106

 Torrents (Ar. Sail) a dangerous feature in Arabia, 164

 Tortoise (the colossal), 33

 Toujours perdrix, 130

 Traveller (a model one tells the truth when an untruth would not serve
    him), 7

 Tribes (relations between), 267

 Tufah = felis caracal, lynx, 260

 Tusks (not teeth), 82

 Tyrant (from —, to tyrant = from official to official), 214


 Ujb = arrogance (in the Spanish sense of gaiety, etc.), 164

 Ulysses (the Arabian), 40

 Unhappy thou!, 285

 Underground rivers, 63

 Upakoshá (Vararuchi’s wife), 172

 Usirát (Al-), island, 57


 Vengeance (of a disappointed suitor apprehended), 286

 Vivisepulture, 41


 Wa’ar = rough ground unfit for riding, 140

 Wadd, Suwá’a and Yaghús, 282

 Wady al-Ward (the Vale of Roses), 276

 Walímah = marriage-feast, 74

 Walking afoot (not dignified), 227

 Wanderer in the mountains = a recluse avoiding society, 158

 Wars (caused by trifles frequent in Arab history), 142

 Wasm = tribal sign, 163

 Water-melons (eaten with rice and meat), 208

 Week-days (old names for), 190

 Whale (still common off the East African coast), 11

 White (colour of the Ommiades), 86

 —— robes denote grace and mercy, 250

 Wife (Aurat), 30

 —— (called “Family”), 75

 Will he not care? = he shall answer for this, 245

 Windows (looking out of, a favourite occupation in the East and South),
    167

 Wishes (tale of the three), 180

 Witches (and their vehicles), 158

 Witness (bear —, against me, _i.e._ in case of my denial), 286

 Wives (and their suitors), 172

 Woman (in Hindostani jargon = aurat), 30

 —— (her shame extends from head to toes), 118

 —— (their cunning and malice), 144

 —— (corrupts woman more than men do), 152

 —— (knowing enough without learning to read and write), 168

 —— (of Kashmír), 156

 —— (her female visitors unknown to the husband, except by hearsay), 199

 —— (words used only by them, not by men), 233


 Ya’arub (eponymus of an Oman tribe), 260

 Yá miskín = O poor devil, 219

 Yauh! Yauh! = Alas, 235

 Yaum mubárak = a blessed day, 215


 Zabbat = lizard; bolt, 247

 Zughzaghán (Abú Massáh = Father of the Sweeper) = magpie, 182

 Zahra = the flowery, 145

 Zahwah = mid-time between sunrise and noon, 35

 Zalamah (Al-) = “tyranny”, 214

 Zanj = Zang-bar (Black-land, Zanzibar), 104

 Záwiyah = oratory, 259

 Zu al-Autád = the contriver of the stakes (Pharaoh), 118

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Changed ‘city use’ to ‘city used’ on p. 53.
 2. Changed ‘nre’ to ‘fire’ on p. 222.
 3. Changed ‘mattrasses’ to ‘mattresses’ on p. 227.
 4. Changed ‘centuries late’ to ‘centuries later’ on p. 240.
 5. Changed ‘into goal’ to ‘into gaol’ on p. 244.
 6. Silently corrected simple spelling, grammar, and typographical
    errors.
 7. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
 8. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 9. Superscripts are denoted by a carat before a single superscript
    character or a series of superscripted characters enclosed in curly
    braces, e.g. M^r. or M^{ister}.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — VOLUME 06 (OF 10) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night — Volume 07 (of 10)
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night — Volume 07 (of 10)

Translator: Sir Richard Francis Burton


        
Release date: May 24, 2017 [eBook #54778]
                Most recently updated: May 23, 2025

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/54778

Credits: Produced by Richard Hulse and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — VOLUME 07 (OF 10) ***

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: ’لا]

                   “TO THE PURE ALL THINGS ARE PURE.”
                           (Puris omnia pura)

                                                        —_Arab Proverb._

          “Niuna corrotta mente intese mai sanamente parole.”

                                            —“_Decameron_”—_conclusion_.

              “Erubuit, posuitque meum Lucretia librum
                  Sed coram Bruto. Brute! recede, leget.”

                                                             —_Martial._

            “Mieulx est de ris que de larmes escripre,
                Pour ce que rire est le propre des hommes.”

                                                              —RABELAIS.

“The pleasure we derive from perusing the Thousand-and-One Stories makes
us regret that we possess only a comparatively small part of these truly
enchanting fictions.”

                                      —CRICHTON’S “_History of Arabia_.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

_A PLAIN AND LITERAL TRANSLATION OF THE ARABIAN NIGHTS ENTERTAINMENTS.
NOW ENTITULED_




                           _THE BOOK OF THE_
                      Thousand Nights and a Night

   _WITH INTRODUCTION EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF
    MOSLEM MEN AND A TERMINAL ESSAY UPON THE HISTORY OF THE NIGHTS_

                              VOLUME VII.


                                   BY
                           RICHARD F. BURTON

[Illustration]

        PRINTED BY THE BURTON CLUB FOR PRIVATE SUBSCRIBERS ONLY

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            Shammar Edition

Limited to one thousand numbered sets, of which this is

                              Number _547_




                          PRINTED IN U. S. A.




                         I INSCRIBE THESE PAGES

                                   TO

                       AN OLD AND VALUED FRIEND,

                            JOHN W. LARKING

                        (WHILOME OF ALEXANDRIA),

       IN WHOSE HOSPITABLE HOME (“THE SYCAMORES”) I MADE MY FINAL

                PREPARATIONS FOR A PILGRIMAGE TO MECCAH

                            AND EL-MEDINAH.

                                                           R. F. BURTON.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                    CONTENTS OF THE SEVENTH VOLUME.


                                                                    PAGE

 CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORY OF GHARIB AND HIS BROTHER AJIB            1

 OTBAH AND RAYYA                                                      91

 HIND DAUGHTER OF AL-NU’MAN AND AL-HAJJAJ                             96

 KHUZAYMAH BIN BISHR AND IKRIMAH AL-FAYYAZ                            99

 YUNUS THE SCRIBE AND THE CALIPH WALID BIN SAHL                      104

 HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE ARAB GIRL                                   108

 AL-ASMA’I AND THE THREE GIRLS OF BASSORAH                           110

 IBRAHIM OF MOSUL AND THE DEVIL                                      113

                       (_Lane, Vol. I. page 223._)

 THE LOVERS OF THE BANU UZRAH                                        117

 THE BADAWI AND HIS WIFE                                             124

                         (_Lane, Vol. I. 521._)

 THE LOVERS OF BASSORAH                                              130

 ISHAK OF MOSUL AND HIS MISTRESS AND THE DEVIL                       136

 THE LOVERS OF AL-MEDINAH                                            139

           (_Lane, Another Anecdote of Two Lovers, III. 252._)

 AL-MALIK AL-NASIR AND HIS WAZIR                                     142

 THE ROGUERIES OF DALILAH THE CRAFTY AND HER DAUGHTER ZAYNAB THE
   CONEY-CATCHER                                                     144

                             (_Lane omits._)

 THE ADVENTURES OF MERCURY ALI OF CAIRO                              172

                             (_Lane omits._)

 ARDASHIR AND HAYAT AL-NUFUS                                         209

                             (_Lane omits._)

 JULNAR THE SEA-BORN AND HER SON KING BADR BASIM OF PERSIA           264

          (_Lane, III. 255, The Story of Jullanar of the Sea._)

 KING MOHAMMED BIN SABAIK AND THE MERCHANT HASAN                     308

                (_Lane, III. 373, Notes to Chapt. xxiv._)

     _a._ STORY OF PRINCE SAYF AL-MULUK AND THE PRINCESS BADI’A
            AL-JAMAL                                                 314

 (_Lane, III. 308, The Story of Seif El-Mulook and Badeea El-Jamal, with
            the Introduction transferred to a note, p. 372._)


       Now when it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

Shahrazad continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sa’adan
having broken into the palace of King Jamak and pounded to pieces those
therein, the survivors cried out, “Quarter! Quarter!”; and Sa’adan said
to them, “Pinion your King!” So they bound Jamak and took him up, and
Sa’adan drove them before him like sheep and brought them to Gharib’s
presence, after the most part of the citizens had perished by the
enemy’s swords. When the King of Babel came to himself, he found himself
bound and heard Sa’adan say, “I will sup to-night off this King Jamak:”
whereupon he turned to Gharib and cried to him, “I throw myself on thy
mercy.” Replied Gharib, “Become a Moslem, and thou shalt be safe from
the Ghul and from the vengeance of the Living One who ceaseth not.” So
Jamak professed Al-Islam with heart and tongue and Gharib bade loose his
bonds. Then he expounded The Faith to his people and they all became
True Believers; after which Jamak returned to the city and despatched
thence provaunt and henchmen to Gharib; and wine to the camp before
Babel where they passed the night. On the morrow, Gharib gave the signal
for the march and they fared on till they came to Mayyáfárikín,[1] which
they found empty, for its people had heard what had befallen Babel and
had fled to Cufa-city and told Ajib. When he heard the news, his
Doom-day appeared to him and he assembled his braves and informing them
of the enemy’s approach ordered them make ready to do battle with his
brother’s host; after which he numbered them and found them thirty
thousand horse and ten thousand foot.[2] So, needing more, he levied
other fifty thousand men, cavalry and infantry, and taking horse amid a
mighty host, rode forwards, till he came upon his brother’s army
encamped before Mosul and pitched his tents in face of their lines. Then
Gharib wrote a writ and said to his officers, “Which of you will carry
this letter to Ajib?” Whereupon Sahim sprang to his feet and cried, “O
King of the Age, I will bear thy missive and bring thee back an answer.”
So Gharib gave him the epistle and he repaired to the pavilion of Ajib
who, when informed of his coming, said, “Admit him!” and when he stood
in the presence asked him, “Whence comest thou?” Answered Sahim, “From
the King of the Arabs and the Persians, son-in-law of Chosroë, King of
the world, who sendeth thee a writ; so do thou return him a reply.”
Quoth Ajib, “Give me the letter;” accordingly Sahim gave it to him and
he tore it open and found therein:—“In the name of Allah the
Compassionating, the Compassionate! Peace on Abraham the Friend await!
But afterwards. As soon as this letter shall come to thy hand, do thou
confess the Unity of the Bountiful King, Causer of causes and Mover of
the clouds;[3] and leave worshipping idols. An thou do this thing, thou
art my brother and ruler over us and I will pardon thee the deaths of my
father and mother, nor will I reproach thee with what thou hast done.
But an thou obey not my bidding, behold, I will hasten to thee and cut
off thy head and lay waste thy dominions. Verily, I give thee good
counsel, and the Peace be on those who pace the path of salvation and
obey the Most High King!” When Ajib read these words and knew the threat
they contained, his eyes sank into the crown of his head and he gnashed
his teeth and flew into a furious rage. Then he tore the letter in
pieces and threw it away, which vexed Sahim and he cried out upon Ajib,
saying, “Allah wither thy hand for the deed thou hast done!” With this
Ajib cried out to his men, saying, “Seize yonder hound and hew him in
pieces with your hangers.”[4] So they ran at Sahim; but he bared blade
and fell upon them and slew of them more than fifty braves; after which
he cut his way out, though bathed in blood, and won back to Gharib, who
said, “What is this case, O Sahim?” And he told him what had passed,
whereat he grew livid for rage and crying “Allaho Akbar—God is most
great!”—bade the battle-drums beat. So the fighting-men donned their
hauberks and coats of strait-woven mail and baldrick’d themselves with
their swords; the footmen drew out in battle-array, whilst the horsemen
mounted their prancing horses and dancing camels and levelled their long
lances, and the champions rushed into the field. Ajib and his men also
took horse and host charged down upon host.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib and
his merry men took horse, Ajib and his troops also mounted and host
charged down upon host. Then ruled the Kazi of Battle, in whose
ordinance is no wrong, for a seal is on his lips and he speaketh not;
and the blood railed in rills and purfled earth with curious embroidery;
heads grew gray and hotter waxed battle and fiercer. Feet slipped and
stood firm the valiant and pushed forwards, whilst turned the
faint-heart and fled, nor did they leave fighting till the day darkened
and the night starkened. Then clashed the cymbals of retreat and the two
hosts drew apart each from other, and returned to their tents, where
they nighted. Next morning, as soon as it was day, the cymbals beat to
battle and derring-do, and the warriors donned their harness of fight
and baldrick’d[5] their blades the brightest bright and with the brown
lance bedight mounted doughty steed every knight and cried out, saying,
“This day no flight!” And the two hosts drew out in battle array, like
the surging sea. The first to open the chapter[6] of war was Sahim, who
drave his destrier between the two lines and played with swords and
spears and turned over all the Capitula of combat till men of choicest
wits were confounded. Then he cried out, saying, “Who is for fighting?
Who is for jousting? Let no sluggard come out or weakling!” Whereupon
there rushed at him a horseman of the Kafirs, as he were a flame of
fire; but Sahim let him not stand long before him ere he overthrew him
with a thrust. Then a second came forth and he slew him also, and a
third and he tare him in twain, and a fourth and he did him to death;
nor did they cease sallying out to him and he left not slaying them,
till it was noon, by which time he had laid low two hundred braves. Then
Ajib cried to his men, “Charge once more,” and sturdy host on sturdy
host down bore and great was the clash of arms and battle-roar. The
shining swords out rang; the blood in streams ran and footman rushed
upon footman; Death showed in van and horse-hoof was shodden with skull
of man; nor did they cease from sore smiting till waned the day and the
night came on in black array, when they drew apart and, returning to
their tents, passed the night there. As soon as morning morrowed the two
hosts mounted and sought the field of fight; and the Moslems looked for
Gharib to back steed and ride under the standards as was his wont, but
he came not. So Sahim sent to his brother’s pavilion a slave who,
finding him not, asked the tent-pitchers,[7] but they answered, “We know
naught of him.” Whereat he was greatly concerned and went forth and told
the troops, who refrained from battle, saying, “An Gharib be absent, his
foe will destroy us.” Now there was for Gharib’s absence a cause strange
but true which we will set out in order due. And it was thus. When Ajib
returned to his camp on the preceding night, he called one of his
guardsmen by name Sayyár and said to him, “O Sayyar, I have not
treasured thee save for a day like this; and now I bid thee enter among
Gharib’s host and, pushing into the marquee of their lord, bring him
hither to me and prove how wily thy cunning be.” And Sayyar said, “I
hear and I obey.” So he repaired to the enemy’s camp and stealing into
Gharib’s pavilion, under the darkness of the night, when all the men had
gone to their places of rest, stood up as though he were a slave to
serve Gharib, who presently, being athirst, called to him for water. So
he brought him a pitcher of water, drugged with Bhang, and Gharib could
not fulfil his need ere he fell down with head distancing heels,
whereupon Sayyar wrapped him in his cloak and carrying him to Ajib’s
tent, threw him down at his feet. Quoth Ajib, “O Sayyar, what is this?”
Quoth he, “This be thy brother Gharib;” whereat Ajib rejoiced and said,
“The blessings of the Idols light upon thee! Loose him and wake him.” So
they made him sniff up vinegar and he came to himself and opened his
eyes; then, finding himself bound and in a tent other than his own,
exclaimed, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great!” Thereupon Ajib cried out at him, saying, “Dost
thou draw on me, O dog, and seek to slay me and take on me thy
blood-wreak of thy father and thy mother? I will send thee this very day
to them and rid the world of thee.” Replied Gharib, “Kafir hound! soon
shalt thou see against whom the wheels of fate shall revolve and who
shall be overthrown by the wrath of the Almighty King, Who wotteth what
is in hearts and Who shall leave thee in Gehenna tormented and
confounded! Have ruth on thyself and say with me:—There is no god but
_the_ God and Abraham is the Friend of God!” When Ajib heard Gharib’s
words, he snarked and snorted and railed at his god, the stone, and
called for the sworder and the leather-rug of blood; but his Wazir, who
was at heart a Moslem though outwardly a Miscreant, rose and kissing
ground before him, said, “Patience, O King, deal not hastily, but wait
till we know the conquered from the conqueror. If we prove the victors,
we shall have power to kill him and, if we be beaten, his being alive in
our hands will be a strength to us.” And the Emirs said, “The Minister
speaketh sooth!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ajib
purposed to slay Gharib, the Wazir rose and said, “Deal not hastily, for
we have always power to kill him!” So Ajib bade lay his brother Gharib
in irons and chain him up in his own tent and set a thousand stout
warriors to guard him. Meanwhile Gharib’s host, when they awoke that
morning and found not their King, were as sheep sans a shepherd; but
Sa’adan the Ghul cried out at them, saying, “O folk, don your war-gear
and trust to your Lord to defend you!” So Arabs and Ajams mounted horse,
after clothing themselves in hauberks of iron and shirting themselves in
straight-knit mail, and sallied forth to the field, the Chiefs and the
colours moving in van. Then dashed out the Ghul of the Mountain, with a
club on his shoulder, two hundred pounds in weight, and wheeled and
careered, saying, “Ho, worshippers of idols, come ye out and renown it
this day, for ’tis a day of onslaught! Whoso knoweth me hath enough of
my mischief and whoso knoweth me not, I will make myself known to him. I
am Sa’adan, servant of King Gharib. Who is for jousting? Who is for
fighting? Let no faint-heart come forth to me to-day or weakling.” And
there rushed upon him a Champion of the Infidels, as he were a flame of
fire, and drove at him, but Sa’adan charged home at him and dealt him
with his club a blow which broke his ribs and cast him lifeless to the
earth. Then he called out to his sons and slaves, saying, “Light the
bonfire, and whoso falleth of the Kafirs do ye dress him and roast him
well in the flame, then bring him to me that I may break my fast on
him!” So they kindled a fire midmost the plain and laid thereon the
slain, till he was cooked, when they brought him to Sa’adan, who gnawed
his flesh and crunched his bones. When the Miscreants saw the
Mountain-Ghul do this deed they were affrighted with sore affright, but
Ajib cried out to his men, saying, “Out on you! Fall upon the Ogre and
hew him in hunks with your scymitars!” So twenty thousand men ran at
Sa’adan, whilst the footmen circled round him and rained upon him darts
and shafts so that he was wounded in four-and-twenty places, and his
blood ran down upon the earth, and he was alone. Then the host of the
Moslems drave at the heathenry, calling for help upon the Lord of the
three Worlds, and they ceased not from fight and fray till the day came
to an end, when they drew apart. But the Infidels had captured Sa’adan,
as he were a drunken man for loss of blood; and they bound him fast and
set him by Gharib who, seeing the Ghul a prisoner, said, “There is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! O
Sa’adan, what case is this?” “O my lord,” replied Sa’adan, “it is Allah
(extolled and exalted be He!) who ordaineth joy and annoy and there is
no help but this and that betide.” And Gharib rejoined, “Thou speakest
sooth, O Sa’adan!” But Ajib passed the night in joy and he said to his
men, “Mount ye on the morrow and fall upon the Moslems so shall not one
of them be left alive.” And they replied, “Hearkening and obedience!”
This is how it fared with them; but as regards the Moslems, they passed
the night, dejected and weeping for their King and Sa’adan; but Sahim
said to them, “O folk, be not concerned, for the aidance of Almighty
Allah is nigh.” Then he waited till midnight, when he assumed the garb
of a tent-pitcher; and, repairing to Ajib’s camp, made his way between
the tents and pavilions till he came to the King’s marquee, where he saw
him seated on his throne surrounded by his Princes. So he entered and
going up to the candles which burnt in the tent, snuffed them and
sprinkled levigated henbane on the wicks; after which he withdrew and
waited without the marquee, till the smoke of the burning henbane
reached Ajib and his Princes and they fell to the ground like dead men.
Then he left them and went to the prison tent, where he found Gharib and
Sa’adan, guarded by a thousand braves, who were overcome with sleep. So
he cried out at the guards, saying, “Woe to you! Sleep not; but watch
your prisoners and light the cressets.” Presently he filled a cresset
with firewood, on which he strewed henbane, and lighting it, went round
about the tent with it, till the smoke entered the nostrils of the
guards, and they all fell asleep drowned by the drug; when he entered
the tent and finding Gharib and Sa’adan also insensible he aroused them
by making them smell and sniff at a sponge full of vinegar he had with
him. Thereupon he loosed their bonds and collars, and when they saw him,
they blessed him and rejoiced in him. After this they went forth and
took all the arms of the guards and Sahim said to them, “Go to your own
camp;” while he re-entered Ajib’s pavilion and, wrapping him in his
cloak, lifted him up and made for the Moslem encampment. And the Lord,
the Compassionate, protected him, so that he reached Gharib’s tent in
safety and unrolled the cloak before him. Gharib looked at its contents
and seeing his brother Ajib bound, cried out, “Allaho Akbar—God is Most
Great! Aidance! Victory!” And he blessed Sahim and bade him arouse Ajib.
So he made him smell the vinegar mixed with incense, and he opened his
eyes and, finding himself bound and shackled, hung down his head
earthwards.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Six Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after Sahim had
aroused Ajib, whom he had made insensible with henbane and had brought
to his brother Gharib, the captive opened his eyes and, feeling himself
bound and shackled, hung down his head earthwards. Thereupon cried
Sahim, “O Accursed, lift thy head!” So he raised his eyes and found
himself amongst Arabs and Ajams and saw his brother seated on the throne
of his estate and the place of his power, wherefore he was silent and
spake not. Then Gharib cried out and said, “Strip me this hound!” So
they stripped him and came down upon him with whips, till they weakened
his body and subdued his pride, after which Gharib set over him a guard
of an hundred knights. And when this fraternal correction had been
administered they heard shouts of, “There is no God but _the_ God!” and
“God is Most Great!” from the camp of the Kafirs. Now the cause of this
was that, ten days after his nephew King Al-Damigh, Gharib’s uncle, had
set out from Al-Jazirah, with twenty thousand horse, and on nearing the
field of battle, had despatched one of his scouts to get news. The man
was absent a whole day, at the end of which time he returned and told
Al-Damigh all that had happened to Gharib with his brother. So he waited
till the night, when he fell upon the Infidels, crying out, “Allaho
Akbar!” and put them to the edge of the biting scymitar. When Gharib
heard the Takbir,[8] he said to Sahim, “Go find out the cause of these
shouts and war-cries.” So Sahim repaired to the field of battle and
questioned the slaves and camp followers, who told him that King
Al-Damigh had come up with twenty thousand men and had fallen upon the
idolaters by night, saying, “By the virtue of Abraham the Friend, I will
not forsake my brother’s son, but will play a brave man’s part and beat
back the host of Miscreants and please the Omnipotent King!” So Sahim
returned and told his uncle’s derring-do to Gharib, who cried out to his
men, saying. “Don your arms and mount your steeds and let us succour my
father’s brother!” So they took horse and fell upon the Infidels and put
them to the edge of the sharp sword. By the morning they had killed nigh
fifty thousand of the Kafirs and made other thirty thousand prisoners,
and the rest of Ajib’s army dispersed over the length and breadth of
earth. Then the Moslems returned in victory and triumph, and Gharib rode
out to meet his uncle, whom he saluted and thanked for his help. Quoth
Al-Damigh, “I wonder if that dog Ajib fell in this day’s affair.” Quoth
Gharib, “O uncle, be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear:
know that he is with me in chains.” When Al-Damigh heard this he
rejoiced with exceeding joy and the two kings dismounted and entered the
pavilion, but found no Ajib there; whereupon Gharib exclaimed, “O glory
of Abraham, the Friend (with whom be peace!),” adding, “Alas, what an
ill end is this to a glorious day!” and he cried out to the
tent-pitchers, saying, “Woe to you! Where is my enemy who oweth me so
much?” Quoth they, “When thou mountedst and we went with thee, thou
didst not bid us guard him;” and Gharib exclaimed, “There is no Majesty
and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!” But
Al-Damigh said to him, “Hasten not nor be concerned, for where can he
go, and we in pursuit of him?” Now the manner of Ajib’s escape was in
this wise. His page Sayyar had been ambushed in the camp and when he saw
Gharib mount and ride forth, leaving none to guard his enemy Ajib, he
could hardly credit his eyes. So he waited awhile and presently crept to
the tent and taking Ajib, who was senseless for the pain of the
bastinado, on his back, made off with him into the open country and
fared on at the top of his speed from early night to the next day, till
he came to a spring of water, under an apple tree. There he set down
Ajib from his back and washed his face, whereupon he opened his eyes and
seeing Sayyar, said to him, “O Sayyar, carry me to Cufa that I may
recover there and levy horsemen and soldiers wherewith to overthrow my
foe: and know, O Sayyar, that I am anhungered.” So Sayyar sprang up and
going out to the desert caught an ostrich-poult and brought it to his
lord. Then he gathered fuel and deftly using the fire-sticks kindled a
fire, by which he roasted the bird which he had hallal’d[9] and fed Ajib
with its flesh and gave him to drink of the water of the spring, till
his strength returned to him, after which he went to one of the Badawi
tribal encampments, and stealing thence a steed mounted Ajib upon it and
journeyed on with him for many days till they drew near the city of
Cufa. The Viceroy of the capital came out to meet and salute the King,
whom he found weak with the beating his brother had inflicted upon him;
and Ajib entered the city and called his physicians. When they answered
his summons, he bade them heal him in less than ten days’ time: they
said, “We hear and we obey,” and they tended him till he became whole of
the sickness that was upon him and of the punishment. Then he commanded
his Wazirs to write letters to all his Nabobs and vassals, and he
indited one-and-twenty writs and despatched them to the governors, who
assembled their troops and set out for Cufa by forced marches.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Forty-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ajib sent
orders to assemble the troops, who marched forthright to Cufa.
Meanwhile, Gharib, being troubled for Ajib’s escape, despatched in quest
of him a thousand braves, who dispersed on all sides and sought him a
day and a night, but found no trace of him; so they returned and told
Gharib, who called for his brother Sahim, but found him not; whereat he
was sore concerned, fearing for him from the shifts of Fortune. And lo!
Sahim entered and kissed ground before Gharib, who rose, when he saw
him, and asked, “Where hast thou been, O Sahim?” He answered, “O King, I
have been to Cufa and there I find that the dog Ajib hath made his way
to his capital and is healed of his hurts: eke, he hath written letters
to his vassals and sent them to his Nabobs who have brought him troops.”
When Gharib heard this, he gave the command to march; so they struck
tents and fared for Cufa. When they came in sight of the city, they
found it compassed about with a host like the surging main, having
neither beginning nor end. So Gharib with his troops encamped in face of
the Kafirs and set up his standards, and darkness fell down upon the two
hosts, whereupon they lighted camp-fires and kept watch till daybreak.
Then King Gharib rose and making the Wuzu-ablution, prayed a two-bow
prayer according to the rite of our father Abraham the Friend (on whom
be the Peace!); after which he commanded the battle-drums to sound the
point of war. Accordingly, the kettle-drums beat to combat and the
standards fluttered whilst the fighting men armour donned and their
horses mounted and themselves displayed and to plain fared. Now the
first to open the gate of war was King Al-Damigh, who urged his charger
between the two opposing armies and displayed himself and played with
the swords and the spears, till both hosts were confounded and at him
marvelled, after which he cried out, saying, “Who is for jousting? Let
no sluggard come out to me or weakling; for I am Al-Damigh, the King,
brother of Kundamir the King.” Then there rushed forth a horseman of the
Kafirs, as he were a flame of fire, and drave at Al-Damigh, without word
said; but the King received him with a lance-thrust in the breast so
dour that the point issued from between his shoulders and Allah hurried
his soul to the fire, the abiding-place dire. Then came forth a second
he slew, and a third he slew likewise, and they ceased not to come out
to him and he to slay them, till he had made an end of six-and-seventy
fighting men. Hereupon the Miscreants and men of might hung back and
would not encounter him; but Ajib cried out to his men and said, “Fie on
you, O folk! if ye all go forth to him, one by one, he will not leave
any of you, sitting or standing. Charge on him all at once and cleanse
of them our earthly wone and strew their heads for your horses’ hoofs
like a plain of stone!” So they waved the awe-striking flag and host was
heaped upon host; blood rained in streams upon earth and railed and the
Judge of battle ruled, in whose ordinance is no unright. The fearless
stood firm on feet in the stead of fight, whilst the faint-heart gave
back and took to flight thinking the day would never come to an end nor
the curtains of gloom would be drawn by the hand of Night; and they
ceased not to battle with swords and to smite till light darkened and
murk starkened. Then the kettle-drums of the Infidels beat the retreat,
but Gharib, refusing to stay his arms, drave at the Paynimry, and the
Believers in Unity, the Moslems, followed him. How many heads and hands
they shore, how many necks and sinews they tore, how many knees and
spines they mashed and how many grown men and youths they to death
bashed! With the first gleam of morning grey the Infidels broke and fled
away, in disorder and disarray; and the Moslems followed them till
middle-day and took over twenty thousand of them, whom they brought to
their tents in bonds to stay. Then Gharib sat down before the gate of
Cufa and commanded a herald to proclaim pardon and protection for every
wight who should leave the worship to idols dight and profess the unity
of His All-might the Creator of mankind and of light and night. So was
made proclamation as he bade in the streets of Cufa and all that were
therein embraced the True Faith, great and small; then they issued forth
in a body and renewed their Islam before King Gharib, who rejoiced in
them with exceeding joy and his breast broadened and he threw off all
annoy. Presently he enquired of Mardas and his daughter Mahdiyah, and,
being told that he had taken up his abode behind the Red Mountain, he
called Sahim and said to him, “Find out for me what is become of thy
father.” Sahim mounted steed without stay or delay and set his
berry-brown spear in rest and fared on in quest till he reached the Red
Mountain, where he sought for his father, yet found no trace of him nor
of his tribe; however, he saw in their stead an elder of the Arabs, a
very old man, broken with excess of years, and asked him of the folk and
whither they were gone. Replied he, “O my son, when Mardas heard of
Gharib’s descent upon Cufa he feared with great fear and, taking his
daughter and his folk, set out with his handmaids and negroes into the
wild and wold, and I wot not whither he went.” So Sahim, hearing the
Shaykh’s words, returned to Gharib and told him thereof, whereat he was
greatly concerned. Then he sat down on his father’s throne and, opening
his treasuries, distributed largesse to each and every of his braves.
And he took up his abode in Cufa and sent out spies to get news of Ajib.
He also summoned the Grandees of the realm, who came and did him homage;
as also did the citizens and he bestowed on them sumptuous robes of
honour and commended the Ryots to their care.——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Forty-second Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Gharib, after
giving robes of honour to the citizens of Cufa and commending the Ryots
to their care, went out on a day of the days to hunt, with an hundred
horse, and fared on till he came to a Wady, abounding in trees and
fruits and rich in rills and birds. It was a pasturing-place for roes
and gazelles, to the spirit a delight whose scents reposed from the
languor of fight. They encamped in the valley, for the day was clear and
bright, and there passed the night. On the morrow, Gharib made the
Wuzu-ablution and prayed the two-bow dawn-prayer, offering up praise and
thanks to Almighty Allah; when, lo and behold! there arose a clamour and
confusion in the meadows, and he bade Sahim go see what was to do. So
Sahim mounted forthright and rode till he espied goods being plundered
and horses haltered and women carried off and children crying out.
Whereupon he questioned one of the shepherds, saying, “What be all
this?”; and they replied, “This is the Harim of Mardas, Chief of the
Banu Kahtan, and his good and that of his clan; for yesterday Jamrkan
slew Mardas and made prize of his women and children and household stuff
and all the belonging of his tribe. It is his wont to go a-raiding and
to cut off highways and waylay wayfarers and he is a furious tyrant;
neither Arabs nor Kings can prevail against him and he is the scourge
and curse of the country.” Now when Sahim heard these news of his sire’s
slaughter and the looting of his Harim and property, he returned to
Gharib and told him the case, wherefore fire was added to his fire and
his spirit chafed to wipe out his shame and his blood-wit to claim: so
he rode with his men after the robbers till he overtook them and fell
upon them, crying out and saying, “Almighty Allah upon the rebel, the
traitor, the infidel!” and he slew in a single charge one-and-twenty
fighting-men. Then he halted in mid-field, with no coward’s heart, and
cried out, “Where is Jamrkan? Let him come out to me, that I may make
him quaff the cup of disgrace and rid of him earth’s face!” Hardly had
he made an end of speaking, when forth rushed Jamrkan, as he were a
calamity of calamities or a piece of a mountain, cased in steel. He was
a mighty huge[10] Amalekite; and he drave at Gharib without speech or
salute, like the fierce tyrant he was. And he was armed with a mace of
China steel, so heavy, so potent, that had he smitten a hill he had
smashed it. Now when he charged, Gharib met him like a hungry lion, and
the brigand aimed a blow at his head with his mace; but he evaded it and
it smote the earth and sank therein half a cubit deep. Then Gharib took
his battle flail and smiting Jamrkan on the wrist, crushed his fingers
and the mace dropped from his grasp; whereupon Gharib bent down from his
seat in selle and snatching it up, swiftlier than the blinding leven,
smote him therewith full on the flat of the ribs, and he fell to the
earth like a long-stemmed palm-tree. So Sahim took him and pinioning
him, haled him off with a rope, and Gharib’s horsemen fell on those of
Jamrkan and slew fifty of them: the rest fled; nor did they cease flying
till they reached their tribal camp and raised their voices in clamour;
whereupon all who were in the Castle came out to meet them and asked the
news. They told the tribe what had passed; and, when they heard that
their chief was a prisoner, they set out for the valley vying one with
other in their haste to deliver him. Now when King Gharib had captured
Jamrkan and had seen his braves take flight, he dismounted and called
for Jamrkan, who humbled himself before him, saying, “I am under thy
protection, O champion of the Age!” Replied Gharib, “O dog of the Arabs,
dost thou cut the road for the servants of Almighty Allah, and fearest
thou not the Lord of the Worlds?” “O my master,” asked Jamrkan, “and who
is the Lord of the Worlds?” “O dog,” answered Gharib, “and what calamity
dost thou worship?” He said, “O my lord, I worship a god made of
dates[11] kneaded with butter and honey, and at times I eat him and make
me another.” When Gharib heard this, he laughed till he fell backwards
and said, “O miserable, there is none worship-worth save Almighty Allah,
who created thee and created all things and provideth all creatures with
daily bread, from whom nothing is hid and He over all things is
Omnipotent.” Quoth Jamrkan, “And where is this great god, that I may
worship him?” Quoth Gharib, “O fellow, know that this god’s name is
Allah—_the_ God—and it is He who fashioned the heavens and the earth and
garred the trees to grow and the waters to flow. He created wild beasts
and birds and Paradise and Hell-fire and veileth Himself from all eyes
seeing and of none being seen. He, and He only, is the Dweller on high.
Extolled be His perfection! There is no god but He!” When Jamrkan heard
these words, the ears of his heart were opened; his skin shuddered with
horripilation and he said, “O my lord, what shall I say that I may
become of you and that this mighty Lord may accept of me?” Replied
Gharib, “Say:—There is no god but _the_ God and Abraham the Friend is
the Apostle of God!” So he pronounced the profession of the Faith and
was written of the people of felicity. Then quoth Gharib, “Say me, hast
thou tasted the sweetness of Al-Islam?”; and quoth the other, “Yes;”
whereupon Gharib cried, “Loose his bonds!” So they unbound him and he
kissed ground before Gharib and his feet. Now whilst this was going on,
behold, they espied a great cloud of dust that towered till it walled
the wold.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Jamrkan
islamised and kissed the ground between the hands of Gharib; and, as
they were thus, behold, a great cloud of dust towered till it walled the
wold and Gharib said to Sahim, “Go and see for us what it be.” So he
went forth, like a bird in full flight, and presently returned, saying,
“O King of the Age, this dust is of the Banu Amir, the comrades of
Jamrkan.” Whereupon quoth Gharib to the new Moslem, “Ride out to thy
people and offer to them Al-Islam: an they profess, they shall be saved;
but, an they refuse, we will put them to the sword.” So Jamrkan mounted
and driving steed towards his tribesmen, cried out to them; and they
knew him and dismounting, came up to him on foot and said, “We rejoice
in thy safety, O our lord!” Said he, “O folk, whoso obeyeth me shall be
saved; but whoso gainsayeth me, I will cut him in twain with this
scymitar.” And they made answer, saying, “Command us what thou wilt, for
we will not oppose thy commandment.” Quoth he, “Then say with me:—There
is no god but _the_ God and Abraham is the Friend of God!” They asked,
“O our lord, whence haddest thou these words?” And he told them what had
befallen him with Gharib, adding, “O folk, know ye not that I am your
chief in battle-plain and where men of cut and thrust are fain; and yet
a man single-handed me to prisoner hath ta’en and made me the cup of
shame and disgrace to drain?” When they heard his speech, they spoke the
word of Unity and Jamrkan led them to Gharib, at whose hands they
renewed their profession of Al-Islam and wished him glory and victory,
after they had kissed the earth before him. Gharib rejoiced in them and
said to them, “O folk, return to your people and expound Al-Islam to
them;” but all replied, “O our lord, we will never leave thee, whilst we
live; but we will go and fetch our families and return to thee.” And
Gharib said, “Go, and join me at the city of Cufa.” So Jamrkan and his
comrades returned to their tribal camp and offered Al-Islam to their
women and children, who all to a soul embraced the True Faith, after
which they dismantled their abodes and struck their tents and set out
for Cufa driving before them their steeds, camels and sheep. During this
time Gharib returned to Cufa, where the horsemen met him in state. He
entered his palace and sat down on his sire’s throne with his champions
ranged on either hand. Then the spies came forwards, and informed him
that his brother Ajib had made his escape and had taken refuge with
Jaland[12] bin Karkar, lord of the city of Oman and land of Al-Yaman;
whereupon Gharib cried aloud to his host, “O men, make you ready to
march in three days.” Then he expounded Al-Islam to the thirty thousand
men he had captured in the first affair and exhorted them to profess and
take service with him. Twenty thousand embraced the Faith, but the rest
refused and he slew them. Then came forward Jamrkan and his tribe and
kissed the ground before Gharib, who bestowed on him a splendid robe of
honour and made him captain of his vanguard, saying, “O Jamrkan, mount
with the Chiefs of thy kith and kin and twenty thousand horse and fare
on before us to the land of Jaland bin Karkar.” “Hearkening and
obedience,” answered Jamrkan and, leaving the women and children of the
tribe in Cufa, he set forward. Then Gharib passed in review the Harim of
Mardas and his eye lit upon Mahdiyah, who was among the women, wherewith
he fell down fainting. They sprinkled rose-water on his face, till he
came to himself, when he embraced Mahdiyah and carried her into a
sitting-chamber, where he sat with her; and they twain lay together that
night without fornication. Next morning he went out and sitting down on
the throne of his kingship, robed his uncle Al-Damigh with a robe of
honour; and appointed him his viceroy over all Al-Irak, commending
Mahdiyah to his care, till he should return from his expedition against
Ajib; and, when the order was accepted, he set out for the land of
Al-Yaman and the City of Oman with twenty thousand horse and ten
thousand foot. Now, when Ajib and his defeated army drew in sight of
Oman, King Jaland saw the dust of their approach and sent to find out
its meaning scouts who returned and said, “Verily this is the dust of
one hight Ajib, lord of Al-Irak.” And Jaland wondered at his coming to
his country and, when assured of the tidings, he said to his officers,
“Fare ye forth and meet him.” So they went out and met him and pitched
tents for him at the city-gate; and Ajib entered in to Jaland,
weeping-eyed and heavy-hearted. Now Jaland’s wife was the daughter of
Ajib’s paternal uncle and he had children by her; so, when he saw his
kinsman in this plight, he asked for the truth of what ailed him and
Ajib told him all that had befallen him, first and last, from his
brother and said, “O King, Gharib biddeth the folk worship the Lord of
the Heavens and forbiddeth them from the service of simulacres and other
of the gods.” When Jaland heard these words he raged and revolted and
said, “By the virtue of the Sun, Lord of Life and Light, I will not
leave one of thy brother’s folk in existence! But where didst thou quit
them and how many men are they?” Answered Ajib, “I left them in Cufa and
they be fifty thousand horse.” Whereupon Jaland called his Wazir
Jawámard,[13] saying, “Take thee seventy thousand horse and fare to Cufa
and bring me the Moslems alive, that I may torture them with all manner
of tortures.” So Jawamard departed with his host and fared through the
first day and the second till the seventh day, when he came to a Wady
abounding in trees and rills and fruits. Here he called a halt——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Jaland
sent Jawamard with his army to Cufa, they came upon a Wady abounding in
trees and rills where a halt was called and they rested till the middle
of the night, when the Wazir gave the signal for departure and mounting,
rode on before them till hard upon dawn, at which time he descended into
a well-wooded valley, whose flowers were fragrant and whose birds
warbled on boughs, as they swayed gracefully to and fro, and Satan blew
into his sides and puffed him up with pride and he improvised these
couplets and cried:—

 I plunge with my braves in the seething sea; ✿ Seize the foe in my
    strength and my valiancy;
 And the doughtiest knights wot me well to be ✿ Friend to friend and
    fierce foe to mine enemy.
 I will load Gharib with the captive’s chains ✿ Right soon, and return in
    all joy and glee;
 For I’ve donned my mail and my weapons wield ✿ And on all sides charge
    at the chivalry.[14]

Hardly had Jawamard made an end of his verses when there came out upon
him from among the trees a horseman of terrible mien covered and clad in
steely sheen, who cried out to him, saying, “Stand, O riff-raff of the
Arabs! Doff thy dress and ground thine arms-gear and dismount thy
destrier and be off with thy life!” When Jawamard heard this, the light
in his eyes became darkest night and he drew his sabre and drove at
Jamrkan, for he it was, saying, “O thief of the Arabs, wilt thou cut the
road for me, who am captain of the host of Jaland bin Karkar and am come
to bring Gharib and his men in bond?” When Jamrkan heard these words, he
said, “How cooling is this to my heart and liver!” And he made at
Jawamard versifying in these couplets:—

 I’m the noted knight in the field of fight, ✿ Whose sabre and spear
    every foe affright!
 Jamrkan am I, to my foes a fear, ✿ With a lance-lunge known unto every
    knight:
 Gharib is my lord, nay my pontiff, my prince, ✿ Where the two hosts dash
    very lion of might:
 An Imam of the Faith, pious, striking awe ✿ On the plain where his foes
    like the fawn take flight;
 Whose voice bids folk to the faith of the Friend, ✿ False, doubling
    idols and gods despite!

Now Jamrkan had fared on with his tribesmen ten days’ journey from
Cufa-city and called a halt on the eleventh day till midnight, when he
ordered a march and rode on devancing them till he descended into the
valley aforesaid and heard Jawamard reciting his verses. So he drave at
him as the driving of a ravening lion, and smiting him with his sword,
clove him in twain and waited till his captains came up, when he told
them what had passed and said to them, “Take each of you five thousand
men and disperse round about the Wady, whilst I and the Banu Amir fall
upon the enemy’s van, shouting, Allaho Akbar—God is Most Great! When ye
hear my slogan, do ye charge them, crying like me upon the Lord, and
smite them with the sword.” “We hear and we obey,” answered they and
turning back to their braves did his bidding and spread themselves about
the sides of the valley in the twilight forerunning the dawn. Presently,
lo and behold! up came the army of Al-Yaman, like a flock of sheep,
filling plain and steep, and Jamrkan and the Banu Amir fell upon them,
shouting, “Allaho Akbar!” till all heard it, Moslems and Miscreants.
Whereupon the True Believers ambushed in the valley answered from every
side and the hills and mountains responsive cried and all things
replied, green and dried, saying, “God is Most Great! Aidance and
Victory to us from on High! Shame to the Miscreants who His name deny!”
And the Kafirs were confounded and smote one another with sabres keen
whilst the True Believers and pious fell upon them like flames of fiery
sheen and naught was seen but heads flying and blood jetting and
faint-hearts hieing. By the time they could see one another’s faces,
two-thirds of the Infidels had perished and Allah hastened their souls
to the fire and abiding-place dire. The rest fled and to the deserts
sped whilst the Moslems pursued them to slay and take captives till
middle-day, when they returned in triumph with seven thousand prisoners;
and but six-and-twenty thousand of the Infidels escaped and the most of
them wounded. Then the Moslems collected the horses and arms, the loads
and tents of the enemy and despatched them to Cufa with an escort of a
thousand horse;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Jamrkan in his
battle with Jawamard slew him and slew his men; and, after taking many
prisoners and much money and many horses and loads, sent them with an
escort of a thousand riders, to Cufa city. Then he and the army of
Al-Islam dismounted and expounded The saving Faith to the prisoners, who
made profession with heart and tongue; whereupon they released them from
bonds and embraced them and rejoiced in them. Then Jamrkan made his
troops, who had swelled to a mighty many, rest a day and a night and
marched with the dawn, intending to attack Jaland bin Karkar in the city
of Oman; whilst the thousand horse fared back to Cufa with the loot.
When they reached the city, they went in to King Gharib and told him
what had passed, whereat he rejoiced and gave them joy and, turning to
the Ghul of the Mountain, said, “Take horse with twenty thousand and
follow Jamrkan.” So Sa’adan and his sons mounted and set out, amid
twenty thousand horse for Oman. Meanwhile, the fugitives of the defeated
Kafirs reached Oman and went in to Jaland, weeping and crying, “Woe!”
and “Ruin!” whereat he was confounded and said to them, “What calamity
hath befallen you?” So they told him what had happened and he said, “Woe
to you! How many men were they?” They replied, “O King, there were
twenty standards, under each a thousand men.” When Jaland heard these
words he said, “May the sun pour no blessing on you! Fie upon you! What,
shall twenty thousand overcome you, and you seventy thousand horse and
Jawamard able to withstand three thousand in field of fight?” Then, in
the excess of his rage and mortification, he bared his blade and cried
out to those who were present, saying, “Fall on them!” So the courtiers
drew their swords upon the fugitives and annihilated them to the last
man and cast them to the dogs. Then Jaland cried aloud to his son,
saying, “Take an hundred thousand horse and go to Al-Irak and lay it
waste altogether.” Now this son’s name was Kúraján and there was no
doughtier knight in all the force; for he could charge single-handed
three thousand riders. So he and his host made haste to equip themselves
and marched in battle-array, rank following rank, with the Prince at
their head, glorying in himself and improvising these couplets:—

 I’m Al-Kurajan, and my name is known ✿ To beat all who in wold or in
    city wone!
 How many a soldier my sword at will ✿ Struck down like a cow on the
    ground bestrown?
 How many a soldier I’ve forced to fly ✿ And have rolled their heads as a
    ball is thrown?
 Now I’ll drive and harry the land Irak[15] ✿ And like rain I’ll shower
    the blood of fone;
 And lay hands on Gharib and his men, whose doom ✿ To the wise a warning
    shall soon be shown!

The host fared on twelve days’ journey and, while they were still
marching, behold, a great dust cloud arose before them and walled the
horizon, and the whole region. So Kurajan sent out scouts, saying, “Go
forth and bring me tidings of what meaneth this dust.” They went till
they passed under the enemy’s standards and presently returning said, “O
King, verily this is the dust of the Moslems.” Whereat he was glad and
said, “Did ye count them?” And they answered, “We counted the colours
and they numbered twenty.” Quoth he, “By my faith, I will not send one
man-at-arms against them, but will go forth to them alone by myself and
strew their heads under the horses’ hooves!” Now this was the army of
Jamrkan who, espying the host of the Kafirs and seeing them as a surging
sea, called a halt; so his troops pitched the tents and set up the
standards, calling upon the name of the All-wise One, the Creator of
light and gloom, Lord of all creatures, Who seeth while Him none see,
the High to infinity, extolled and exalted be He! There is no God but
He! The Miscreants also halted and pitched their tents, and Kurajan said
to them, “Keep on your arms, and in armour sleep, for during the last
watch of the night we will mount and trample yonder handful under feet!”
Now one of Jamrkan’s spies was standing nigh and heard what Kurajan had
contrived; so he returned to the host and told his chief who said to
them, “Arm yourselves and as soon as it is night, bring me all the mules
and camels and hang all the bells and clinkets and rattles ye have about
their necks.” Now they had with them more than twenty thousand camels
and mules. So they waited till the Infidels fell asleep, when Jamrkan
commanded them to mount, and they arose to ride and on the Lord of the
Worlds they relied. Then said Jamrkan, “Drive the camels and mules to
the Miscreants’ camp and push them with your spears for goads!” They did
as he bade and the beasts rushed upon the enemy’s tents, whilst the
bells and clinkets and rattles jangled[16] and the Moslems followed at
their heels, shouting, “God is Most Great!” till all the hills and
mountains resounded with the name of the Highmost Deity, to whom belong
glory and majesty! The cattle hearing this terrible din, took fright and
rushed upon the tents and trampled the folk, as they lay asleep.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Jamrkan
fell upon them with his men and steeds and camels, and the camp lay
sleeping, the idolaters started up in confusion and, snatching up their
arms, fell upon one another with smiting, till the most part was
slaughtered. And when the day broke, they looked and found no Moslem
slain, but saw them all on horseback, armed and armoured; wherefore they
knew that this was a sleight which had been played upon them, and
Kurajan cried out to the remnant of his folk, “O sons of whores, what we
had a mind to do with them, that have they done with us and their craft
hath gotten the better of our cunning.” And they were about to charge
when, lo and behold! a cloud of dust rose high and walled the
horizon-sky, when the wind smote it, so that it spired aloft and spread
pavilion-wise in the lift and there it hung; and presently appeared
beneath it the glint of helmet and gleam of hauberk and splendid
warriors, baldrick’d with their tempered swords and holding in rest
their supple spears. When the Kafirs saw this, they held back from the
battle and each army sent out, to know the meaning of this dust, scouts,
who returned with the news that it was an army of Moslems. Now this was
the host of the Mountain-Ghul whom Gharib had despatched to Jamrkan’s
aid, and Sa’adan himself rode in their van. So the two hosts of the True
Believers joined company and rushing upon the Paynimry like a flame of
fire, plied them with keen sword and Rudaynian spear and quivering
lance, what while day was darkened and eyes for the much dust starkened.
The valiant stood fast and the faint-hearted coward fled and to the
wilds and the wolds swift sped, whilst the blood over earth was like
torrents shed; nor did they cease from fight till the day took flight
and in gloom came the night. Then the Moslems drew apart from the
Miscreants and returned to their tents, where they ate and slept, till
the darkness fled away and gave place to smiling day; when they prayed
the dawn-prayer and mounted to battle. Now Kurajan had said to his men
as they drew off from fight (for indeed two-thirds of their number had
perished by sword and spear), “O folk, to-morrow, I will champion it in
the stead of war where cut and thrust jar, and where braves push and
wheel I will take the field.” So, as soon as light was seen and morn
appeared with its shine and sheen, took horse the hosts twain and
shouted their slogans amain and bared the brand and hent lance in hand
and in ranks took stand. The first to open the door of war was Kurajan,
who cried out, saying, “Let no coward come out to me this day nor
craven!” Whereupon Jamrkan and Sa’adan stood by the colours, but there
ran at him a captain of the Banu Amir and the two drave each at other
awhile, like two rams butting. Presently Kurajan seized the Moslem by
the jerkin under his hauberk and, dragging him from his saddle, dashed
him to the ground where he left him; upon which the Kafirs laid hands on
him and bound him and bore him off to their tents; whilst Kurajan
wheeled about and careered and offered battle, till another captain came
out, whom also he took prisoner; nor did he leave to do thus till he had
made prize of seven captains before mid-day. Then Jamrkan cried out with
so mighty a cry, that the whole field made reply and heard it the armies
twain, and ran at Kurajan with a heart in rageful pain, improvising
these couplets:—

 Jamrkan am I! and a man of might, ✿ Whom the warriors fear with a sore
    affright:
 I waste the forts and I leave the walls ✿ To wail and weep for the
    wights I smite:
 Then, O Kurajan, tread the rightful road ✿ And quit the paths of thy
    foul unright:
 Own the One True God, who dispread the skies ✿ And made founts to flow
    and the hills pegged tight:
 An the slave embrace the True Faith, he’ll ’scape ✿ Hell-pains and in
    Heaven be deckt and dight!

When Kurajan heard these words, he snarked and snorted and foully abused
the sun and the moon and drave at Jamrkan, versifying with these
couplets:—

 I’m Kurajan, of this age the knight; ✿ And my shade to the lions of
    Shara’[17] is blight:
 I storm the forts and snare kings of beasts ✿ And warriors fear me in
    field of fight;
 Then, Harkye Jamrkan, if thou doubt my word, ✿ Come forth to the combat
    and try my might!

When Jamrkan heard these verses, he charged him with a stout heart and
they smote each at other with swords till the two hosts lamented for
them, and they lunged with lance and great was the clamour between them:
nor did they leave fighting till the time of mid-afternoon prayer was
passed and the day began to wane. Then Jamrkan drave at Kurajan and
smiting him on the breast with his mace,[18] cast him to the ground, as
he were the trunk of a palm-tree; and the Moslems pinioned him and
dragged him off with ropes like a camel. Now when the Miscreants saw
their Prince captive, a hot fever-fit of ignorance seized on them and
they bore down upon the True Believers thinking to rescue him; but the
Moslem champions met them and left most of them prostrate on the earth,
whilst the rest turned and sought safety in flight, seeking surer site,
while the clanking sabres their backsides smite. The Moslems ceased not
pursuing them till they had scattered them over mount and wold, when
they returned from them to the spoil; whereof was great store of horses
and tents and so forth:—good look to it for a spoil! Then Jamrkan went
in to Kurajan and expounded to him Al-Islam, threatening him with death
unless he embraced the Faith. But he refused; so they cut off his head
and stuck it on a spear, after which they fared on towards Oman[19]
city. But as regards the Kafirs, the survivors returned to Jaland and
made known to him the slaying of his son and the slaughter of his host,
hearing which he cast his crown to the ground and buffeting his face,
till the blood ran from his nostrils, fell fainting to the floor. They
sprinkled rose-water on his head, till he came to himself and cried to
his Wazir, “Write letters to all my Governors and Nabobs, and bid them
leave not a smiter with the sword nor a lunger with the lance nor a
bender of the bow, but bring them all to me in one body.” So he wrote
letters and despatched them by runners to the Governors, who levied
their power and joined the King with a prevailing host, whose number was
one hundred and eighty-thousand men. Then they made ready tents and
camels and noble steeds and were about to march when, behold, up came
Jamrkan and Sa’adan the Ghul, with seventy thousand horse, as they were
lions fierce-faced, all steel-encased. When Jaland saw the Moslems
trooping on he rejoiced and said, “By the virtue of the Sun, and her
resplendent light, I will not leave alive one of my foes; no, not one to
carry the news, and I will lay waste the land of Al-Irak, that I may
take my wreak for my son, the havoc-making champion bold; nor shall my
fire be quenched or cooled!” Then he turned to Ajib and said to him, “O
dog of Al-Irak, ’twas thou broughtest this calamity on us! But by the
virtue of that which I worship, except I avenge me of mine enemy I will
do thee die after foulest fashion!” When Ajib heard these words he was
troubled with sore trouble and blamed himself; but he waited till
nightfall, when the Moslems had pitched their tents for rest. Now he had
been degraded and expelled the royal camp together with those who were
left to him of his suite: so he said to them, “O my kinsmen, know that
Jaland and I are dismayed with exceeding dismay at the coming of the
Moslems, and I know that he will not avail to protect me from my brother
nor from any other; so it is my counsel that we make our escape, whilst
all eyes sleep, and flee to King Ya’arub bin Kahtán,[20] for that he
hath more of men and is stronger of reign.” They, hearing his advice
exclaimed “Right is thy rede,” whereupon he bade them kindle fires at
their tent-doors and march under cover of the night. They did his
bidding and set out, so by daybreak they had already fared far away. As
soon as it was morning Jaland mounted with two hundred and sixty
thousand fighting-men, clad cap-à-pie in hauberks and cuirasses and
strait-knit mail-coats, the kettle-drums beat a point of war and all
drew out for cut and thrust and fight and fray. Then Jamrkan and Sa’adan
rode out with forty-thousand stalwart fighting-men, under each standard
a thousand cavaliers, doughty champions, foremost in champaign. The two
hosts drew out in battles and bared their blades and levelled their
limber lances, for the drinking of the cup of death. The first to open
the gate of strife was Sa’adan, as he were a mountain of syenite or a
Marid of the Jinn. Then dashed out to him a champion of the Infidels,
and the Ghul slew him and casting him to the earth, cried out to his
sons and slaves, saying, “Light the fire and roast me this dead one.”
They did as he bade and brought him the roast and he ate it and crunched
the bones, whilst the Kafirs stood looking on from afar; and they cried
out, “Oh for aid from the light-giving Sun!” and were affrighted at the
thought of being slain by Sa’adan. Then Jaland shouted to his men,
saying, “Slay me yonder loathsome beast!” Whereupon another captain of
his host drove at the Ghul; but he slew him, and he ceased not to slay
horseman after horseman, till he had made an end of thirty men. With
this the blamed Kafirs held back and feared to face him, crying, “Who
shall cope with Jinns and Ghuls?” But Jaland raised his voice saying,
“Let an hundred horse charge him and bring him to me, bound or slain.”
So an hundred horse set upon Sa’adan with swords and spears, and he met
them with a heart firmer than flint, proclaiming the unity of the
Requiting King, whom no one thing diverteth from other thing. Then he
cried aloud, “Allaho Akbar!” and, smiting them with his sword, made
their heads fly and in one onset he slew of them four-and-seventy
whereupon the rest took to flight. So Jaland shouted aloud to ten of his
captains, each commanding a thousand men, and said to them, “Shoot his
horse with arrows till it fall under him, and then lay hands on him.”
Therewith ten thousand horse drove at Sa’adan who met them with a stout
heart; and Jamrkan, seeing this, bore down upon the Miscreants with his
Moslems, crying out, “God is Most Great!” Before they could reach the
Ghul, the enemy had slain his steed and taken him prisoner; but they
ceased not to charge the Infidels, till the day grew dark for dust and
eyes were blinded, and the sharp sword clanged while firm stood the
valiant cavalier and destruction overtook the faint-heart in his fear;
till the Moslems were amongst the Paynims like a white patch on a black
bull.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that battle raged
between the Moslems and the Paynims till the True Believers were like a
white patch on a black bull. Nor did they stint from the mellay till the
darkness fell down, when they drew apart, after there had been slain of
the Infidels men without compt. Then Jamrkan and his men returned to
their tents; but they were in great grief for Sa’adan, so that neither
meat nor sleep was sweet to them, and they counted their host and found
that less than a thousand had been slain. But Jamrkan said, “O folk,
to-morrow I will go forth into the battle-plain and place where cut and
thrust obtain, and slay their champions and make prize of their families
after taking them captives and I will ransom Sa’adan therewith, by the
leave of the Requiting King, whom no one thing diverteth from other
thing!” Wherefore their hearts were heartened and they joyed as they
separated to their tents. Meanwhile Jaland entered his pavilion and
sitting down on his sofa of estate, with his folk about him, called for
Sa’adan and forthright on his coming, said to him, “O dog run wood and
least of the Arab brood and carrier of firewood, who was it slew my son
Kurajan, the brave of the age, slayer of heroes and caster down of
warriors?” Quoth the Ghul, “Jamrkan slew him, captain of the armies of
King Gharib, Prince of cavaliers, and I roasted and ate him, for I was
anhungered.” When Jaland heard these words, his eyes sank into his head
for rage and he bade his swordbearer smite Sa’adan’s neck. So he came
forward in that intent, whereupon Sa’adan stretched himself mightily and
bursting his bonds, snatched the sword from the headsman and hewed off
his head. Then he made at Jaland who threw himself down from the throne
and fled; whilst Sa’adan fell on the bystanders and killed twenty of the
King’s chief officers, and all the rest took to flight. Therewith loud
rose the crying in the camp of the Infidels and the Ghul sallied forth
of the pavilion and falling upon the troops smote them with the sword,
right and left, till they opened and left a lane for him to pass; nor
did he cease to press forward, cutting at them on either side, till he
won free of the Miscreants’ tents and made for the Moslem camp. Now
these had heard the uproar among their enemies and said, “Haply some
calamity hath befallen them.” But whilst they were in perplexity,
behold, Sa’adan stood amongst them and they rejoiced at his coming with
exceeding joy; more especially Jamrkan, who saluted him with the salam
as did other True Believers and gave him joy of his escape. Such was the
case with the Moslems; but as regards the Miscreants, when, after the
Ghul’s departure, they and their King returned to their tents, Jaland
said to them, “O folk, by the virtue of the Sun’s light-giving ray and
by the darkness of the Night and the light of the Day and the Stars that
stray, I thought not this day to have escaped death in mellay; for, had
I fallen into yonder fellow’s hands, he had eaten me, as I were a kernel
of wheat or a barley-corn or any other grain.” They replied, “O King,
never saw we any do the like of this Ghul.” And he said, “O folk,
to-morrow do ye all don arms and mount steed and trample them under your
horses’ hooves.” Meanwhile the Moslems had ended their rejoicings at
Sa’adan’s return and Jamrkan said to them, “To-morrow, I will show you
my derring-do and what behoveth the like of me, for by the virtue of
Abraham the Friend, I will slay them with the foulest of slaughters and
smite them with the bite of the sword, till all who have understanding
confounded at them shall stand. But I mean to attack both right and left
wings; so, when ye see me drive at the King under the standards, do ye
charge behind me with a resolute charge, and Allah’s it is to decree
what thing shall be!” Accordingly the two sides lay upon their arms till
the day broke through night and the sun appeared to sight. Then they
mounted swiftlier than the twinkling of the eyelid; the raven of the
wold croaked and the two hosts, looking each at other with the eye of
fascination, formed in line-array and prepared for fight and fray. The
first to open the chapter of war was Jamrkan who wheeled and careered
and offered fight in field; and Jaland and his men were about to charge
when, behold, a cloud of dust up-rolled till it walled the wold and
overlaid the day. Then the four winds smote it and away it floated torn
to rags, and there appeared beneath it cavaliers, with helms black and
garb white and many a princely knight and lances that bite and swords
that smite and footmen who lion-like knew no affright. Seeing this both
armies left fighting and sent out scouts to reconnoitre and report who
thus had come in main and might. So they went and within the dust-cloud
disappeared from sight, and returned after awhile with the news aright
that the approaching host was one of Moslems, under the command of King
Gharib. When the True Believers heard from the scouts of the coming of
their King, they rejoiced and driving out to meet him, dismounted and
kissed the earth between his hands——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Moslems saw the presence of their King Gharib, they joyed with exceeding
joy; and, kissing the earth between his hands, saluted him and gat
around him whilst he welcomed them and rejoiced in their safety. Then
they escorted him to their camp and pitched pavilions for him and set up
standards; and Gharib sat down on his couch of estate, with his Grandees
about him; and they related to him all that had befallen, especially to
Sa’adan. Meanwhile the Kafirs sought for Ajib and finding him not among
them nor in their tents, told Jaland of his flight, whereat his Doomsday
rose and he bit his fingers, saying, “By the Sun’s light-giving round,
he is a perfidious hound and hath fled with his rascal rout to
desert-ground. But naught save force of hard fighting will serve us to
repel these foes; so fortify your resolves and hearten your hearts and
beware of the Moslems.” And Gharib also said to the True Believers,
“Strengthen your courage and fortify your hearts and seek aid of your
Lord, beseeching him to vouchsafe you the victory over your enemies.”
They replied, “O King, soon thou shalt see what we will do in
battle-plain where men cut and thrust amain.” So the two hosts slept
till the day arose with its sheen and shone and the rising sun rained
light upon hill and down, when Gharib prayed the two-bow prayer, after
the rite of Abraham the Friend (on whom be the Peace!) and wrote a
letter, which he despatched by his brother Sahim to the King of the
Kafirs. When Sahim reached the enemies’ camp, the guards asked him what
he wanted, and he answered them, “I want your ruler.”[21] Quoth they,
“Wait till we consult him anent thee;” and he waited, whilst they went
in to their Sovran and told him of the coming of a messenger, and he
cried, “Hither with him to me!” So they brought Sahim before Jaland, who
said to him, “Who hath sent thee?” Quoth he, “King Gharib sends me, whom
Allah hath made ruler over Arab and Ajam; receive his letter and return
its reply.” Jaland took the writ and opening it, read as follows:—“In
the name of Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate ✿ the One, the
All-knowing, the supremely Great ✿ the Immemorial, the Lord of Noah and
Sálih and Húd and Abraham and of all things He made! ✿ The Peace be on
him who followeth in the way of righteousness and who feareth the issues
of frowardness ✿ who obeyeth the Almighty King and followeth the Faith
saving and preferreth the next world to any present thing! ✿ But
afterwards: O Jaland, none is worthy of worship save Allah alone, the
Victorious, the One, Creator of night and day and the sphere revolving
alway ✿ Who sendeth the holy Prophets and garreth the streams to flow
and the trees to grow, who vaulted the heavens and spread out the earth
like a carpet below ✿ Who feedeth the birds in their nests and the wild
beasts in the deserts ✿ for He is Allah the All-powerful, the Forgiving,
the Long-suffering, the Protector, whom eye comprehendeth on no wise and
who maketh night on day arise ✿ He who sent down the Apostles and their
Holy Writ. Know, O Jaland, that there is no faith but the Faith of
Abraham the Friend; so cleave to the Creed of Salvation and be saved
from the biting glaive and the Fire which followeth the grave ✿ But, an
thou refuse Al-Islam look for ruin to haste and thy reign to be waste
and thy traces untraced ✿ And, lastly, send me the dog Ajib hight that I
may take from him my father’s and mother’s blood-wit.” When Jaland had
read this letter, he said to Sahim, “Tell thy lord that Ajib hath fled,
he and his folk, and I know not whither he is gone; but, as for Jaland,
he will not forswear his faith, and to-morrow, there shall be battle
between us and the Sun shall give us the victory.” So Sahim returned to
his brother with this reply, and when the morning morrowed, the Moslems
donned their arms and armour and bestrode their stout steeds, calling
aloud on the name of the All-conquering King, Creator of bodies and
souls, and magnifying Him with “Allaho Akbar.” Then the kettle-drums of
battle beat until earth trembled, and sought the field all the lordly
warriors and doughty champions. The first to open the gate of battle was
Jamrkan, who drave his charger into mid-plain and played with sword and
javelin, till the understanding was amazed; after which he cried out,
saying, “Ho! who is for tilting? Ho! who is for fighting? Let no
sluggard come out to me to-day nor weakling! I am the slayer of Kurajan
bin Jaland; who will come forth to avenge him?” When Jaland heard the
name of his son, he cried out to his men, “O whore-sons, bring me yonder
horseman who slew my son, that I may eat his flesh and drink his blood.”
So an hundred fighting men charged at Jamrkan, but he slew the most part
of them and put their chief to flight; which feat when Jaland saw, he
cried out to his folk, “At him all at once and assault him with one
assault.” Accordingly they waved the awe-striking banners and host was
heaped on host; Gharib rushed on with his men and Jamrkan did the same
and the two sides met like two seas together clashing. The Yamáni sword
and spear wrought havoc and breasts and bellies were rent, whilst both
armies saw the Angel of Death face to face and the dust of the battle
rose to the skirts of the sky. Ears went deaf and tongues went dumb and
doom from every side came on whilst valiant stood fast and faint-heart
fled: and they ceased not from fight and fray till ended the day, when
the drums beat the retreat and the two hosts drew apart and returned,
each to its tents.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King Gharib
ended the battle and the two hosts drew apart and each had returned to
his own tents, he sat down on the throne of his realm and the place of
his reign, whilst his chief officers ranged themselves about him, and he
said, “I am sore concerned for the flight of the cur Ajib and I know not
whither he has gone. Except I overtake him and take my wreak of him, I
shall die of despite.” Whereupon Sahim came forward and kissing the
earth before him, said, “O King, I will go to the army of the Kafirs and
find out what is come of the perfidious dog Ajib.” Quoth Gharib, “Go,
and learn the truth anent the dog.” So Sahim disguised himself in the
habit of the Infidels and became as he were of them; then, making for
the enemy’s camp, he found them all asleep, drunken with war and battle,
and none were on wake save only the guards. He passed on and presently
came to the King’s pavilion where he found King Jaland asleep
unattended; so he crept up and made him smell and sniff up levigated
Bhang and he became as one dead. Then Sahim went out and took a male
mule, and wrapping the King in the coverlet of his bed, laid him on its
back; after which he threw a mat over him and led the beast to the
Moslem camp. Now when he came to Gharib’s pavilion and would have
entered, the guards knew him not and prevented him, saying, “Who art
thou?” He laughed and uncovered his face, and they knew him and admitted
him. When Gharib saw him he said, “What bearest thou there, O Sahim?”;
and he replied, “O King, this is Jaland bin Karkar.” Then he uncovered
him, and Gharib knew him and said, “Arouse him, O Sahim,” So he made him
smell vinegar[22] and frankincense; and he cast the Bhang from his
nostrils and, opening his eyes, found himself among the Moslems;
whereupon quoth he, “What is this foul dream?” and closing his eyelids
again, would have slept; but Sahim dealt him a kick, saying, “Open thine
eyes, O accursed!” So he opened them and asked, “Where am I?”; and Sahim
answered, “Thou art in the presence of King Gharib bin Kundamir, King of
Irak.” When Jaland heard this, he said, “O King, I am under thy
protection! Know that I am not at fault, but that who led us forth to
fight thee was thy brother, and the same cast enmity between us and then
fled.” Quoth Gharib, “Knowest thou whither he is gone?”; and quoth
Jaland, “No, by the light-giving sun, I know not whither.” Then Gharib
bade lay him in bonds and set guards over him, whilst each captain
returned to his own tent, and Jamrkan while wending said to his men, “O
sons of my uncle, I purpose this night to do a deed wherewith I may
whiten my face with King Gharib.” Quoth they, “Do as thou wilt, we
hearken to thy commandment and obey it.” Quoth he, “Arm yourselves and,
muffling your steps while I go with you, let us fare softly and disperse
about the Infidels’ camp, so that the very ants shall not be ware of
you; and, when you hear me cry Allaho Akbar, do ye the like and cry out,
saying, God is Most Great! and hold back and make for the city gate; and
we seek aid from the Most High.” So the folk armed themselves cap-à-pie
and waited till the noon of night, when they dispersed about the enemy’s
camp and tarried awhile when, lo and behold! Jamrkan smote shield with
sword and shouted, “Allaho Akbar!” Thereupon they all cried out the
like, till rang again valley and mountain, hills, sands and ruins. The
Miscreants awoke in dismay and fell one upon other, and the sword went
round amongst them; the Moslems drew back and made for the city gates,
where they slew the warders and entering, made themselves masters of the
town, with all that was therein of treasure and women. Thus it befel
with Jamrkan; but as regards King Gharib, hearing the noise and clamour
of “God is Most Great,” he mounted with his troops to the last man and
sent on in advance Sahim who, when he came near the field of fight, saw
that Jamrkan had fallen upon the Kafirs with the Banu Amir by night and
made them drink the cup of death. So he returned and told all to his
brother, who called down blessings on Jamrkan. And the Infidels ceased
not to smite one another with the biting sword and expending their
strength till the day rose and lighted up the land, when Gharib cried
out to his men, “Charge, O ye noble, and do a deed to please the
All-knowing King!” So the True Believers fell upon the idolaters and
plied upon every false hypocritical breast the keen sword and the
quivering spear. They sought to take refuge in the city; but Jamrkan
came forth upon them with his kinsmen, who hemmed them in between two
mountain-ranges, and slew an innumerable host of them, and the rest fled
into the wastes and wolds.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Six Hundred and Fiftieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Moslem host charged upon the Miscreants they hewed them in pieces with
the biting scymitar and the rest fled to the wastes and wolds; nor did
the Moslems cease pursuing them with the sword, till they had scattered
them abroad in the plains and stony places. Then they returned to Oman
city, and King Gharib entered the palace of the King and, sitting down
on the throne of his kingship, with his Grandees and Officers ranged
right and left, sent for Jaland. They brought him in haste and Gharib
expounded to him Al-Islam; but he rejected it; wherefore Gharib bade
crucify him on the gate of the city, and they shot at him with shafts
till he was like unto a porcupine. Then Gharib honourably robed Jamrkan
and said to him, “Thou shalt be lord of this city and ruler thereof with
power to loose and to bind therein, for it was thou didst open it with
thy sword and thy folk.” And Jamrkan kissed the King’s feet, thanked him
and wished him abiding victory and glory and every blessing. Moreover
Gharib opened Jaland’s treasuries and saw what was therein of coin,
whereof he gave largesse to his captains and standard-bearers and
fighting-men, yea, even to the girls and children; and thus he lavished
his gifts ten days long. After this, one night he dreamt a terrible
dream and awoke, troubled and trembling. So he aroused his brother Sahim
and said to him, “I saw in my vision that we were in a wide valley, when
there pounced down on us two ravening birds of prey, never in my life
saw I greater than they; their legs were like lances, and as they
swooped we were in sore fear of them.” Replied Sahim, “O King, this be
some great enemy; so stand on thy guard against him.” Gharib slept not
the rest of the night and, when the day broke, he called for his courser
and mounted. Quoth Sahim, “Whither goest thou, my brother?” and quoth
Gharib, “I awoke heavy at heart; so I mean to ride abroad ten days and
broaden my breast.” Said Sahim, “Take with thee a thousand braves;” but
Gharib replied, “I will not go forth but with thee and only thee.” So
the two brothers mounted and, seeking the dales and leasows, fared on
from Wady to Wady and from meadow to meadow, till they came to a valley
abounding in streams and sweet-smelling flowers and trees laden with all
manner eatable fruits, two of each kind. Birds warbled on the branches
their various strains; the mocking-bird trilled out her sweet notes fain
and the turtle filled with her voice the plain. There sang the
nightingale, whose chant arouses the sleeper, and the merle with his
note like the voice of man and the cushat and the ring-dove, whilst the
parrot with its eloquent tongue answered the twain. The valley pleased
them and they ate of its fruits and drank of its waters, after which
they sat under the shadow of its trees till drowsiness overcame them and
they slept,—glory be to Him who sleepeth not! As they lay asleep, lo!
two fierce Marids swooped down on them and, taking each one on his
shoulders, towered with them high in air, till they were above the
clouds. So Gharib and Sahim awoke and found themselves betwixt heaven
and earth; whereupon they looked at those who bore them and saw that
they were two Marids, the head of the one being as that of a dog and the
head of the other as that of an ape[23] with hair like horses’ tails and
claws like lions’ claws, and both were big as great palm-trees. When
they espied this case, they exclaimed, “There is no Majesty and there is
no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!” Now the cause of this
was that a certain King of the Kings of the Jinn, hight Mura’ash, had a
son called Sá’ik, who loved a damsel of the Jinn, named Najmah;[24] and
the twain used to foregather in that Wady under the semblance of two
birds. Gharib and Sahim saw them thus and deeming them birds, shot at
them with shafts but wounding only Sa’ik whose blood flowed. Najmah
mourned over him; then, fearing lest the like calamity befal herself,
snatched up her lover and flew with him to his father’s palace, where
she cast him down at the gate. The warders bore him in and laid him
before his sire who, seeing the pile sticking in his rib exclaimed,
“Alas, my son! Who hath done with thee this thing, that I may lay waste
his abiding-place and hurry on his destruction, though he were the
greatest of the Kings of the Jann?” Thereupon Sa’ik opened his eyes and
said, “O my father, none slew me save a mortal in the Valley of
Springs.” Hardly had he made an end of these words, when his soul
departed; whereupon his father buffeted his face, till the blood
streamed from his mouth, and cried out to two Marids, saying, “Hie ye to
the Valley of Springs and bring me all who are therein.” So they betook
themselves to the Wady in question, where they found Gharib and Sahim
asleep, and, snatching them up, carried them to King Mura’ash.[25]——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

[Illustration]


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the two
Marids, after snatching up Gharib and Sahim in their sleep, carried them
to Mura’ash, king of the Jann, whom they saw seated on the throne of his
kingship, as he were a huge mountain, with four heads on his body,[26]
the first that of a lion, the second that of an elephant, the third that
of a panther, and the fourth that of a lynx. The Marids set them down
before Mura’ash and said to him, “O King, these twain be they we found
in the Valley of Springs.” Thereupon he looked at them with wrathful
eyes and snarked and snorted and shot sparks from his nostrils, so that
all who stood by feared him. Then said he, “O dogs of mankind, ye have
slain my son and lighted fire in my liver.” Quoth Gharib, “Who is thy
son, and who hath seen him?” Quoth Mura’ash, “Were ye not in the Valley
of Springs and did ye not see my son there, in the guise of a bird, and
did ye not shoot at him with wooden bolts that he died?” Replied Gharib,
“I know not who slew him; and, by the virtue of the Great God, the One,
the Immemorial who knoweth things all, and of Abraham the Friend, we saw
no bird, neither slew we bird or beast!” Now when Mura’ash heard Gharib
swear by Allah and His greatness and by Abraham the Friend, he knew him
for a Moslem (he himself being a worshipper of Fire, not of the
All-powerful Sire), so he cried out to his folk, “Bring me my
Goddess.[27]” Accordingly they brought a brazier of gold and, setting it
before him, kindled therein fire and cast on drugs, whereupon there
arose therefrom green and blue and yellow flames and the King and all
who were present prostrated themselves before the brazier, whilst Gharib
and Sahim ceased not to attest the Unity of Allah Almighty, to cry out
“God is Most Great” and to bear witness to His Omnipotence. Presently,
Mura’ash raised his head and, seeing the two Princes standing in lieu of
falling down to worship, said to them, “O dogs, why do ye not prostrate
yourselves?” Replied Gharib, “Out on you, O ye accursed! Prostration
befitteth not man save to the Worshipful King, who bringeth forth all
creatures into beingness from nothingness and maketh water to well from
the barren rock-well, Him who inclineth heart of sire unto new-born
scion and who may not be described as sitting or standing; the God of
Noah and Salih and Hud and Abraham the Friend, Who created Heaven and
Hell and trees and fruit as well,[28] for He is Allah, the One, the
All-powerful.” When Mura’ash heard this, his eyes sank into his head[29]
and he cried out to his guards, saying, “Pinion me these two dogs and
sacrifice them to my Goddess.” So they bound them and were about to cast
them into the fire when, behold, one of the crenelles of the
palace-parapet fell down upon the brazier and brake it and put out the
fire, which became ashes flying in air. Then quoth Gharib, “God is Most
Great! He giveth aid and victory and He forsaketh those who deny Him,
Fire worshipping and not the Almighty King!” Presently quoth Mura’ash,
“Thou art a sorcerer and hast bewitched my Goddess, so that this thing
hath befallen her.” Gharib replied, “O madman, an the fire had soul or
sense it would have warded off from self all that hurteth it.” When
Mura’ash heard these words, he roared and bellowed and reviled the Fire,
saying, “By my faith, I will not kill you save by the fire!” Then he
bade cast them into gaol; and, calling an hundred Marids, made them
bring much fuel and set fire thereto. So they brought great plenty of
wood and made a huge blaze, which flamed up mightily till the morning,
when Mura’ash mounted an elephant, bearing on its back a throne of gold
dubbed with jewels, and the tribes of the Jinn gathered about him in
their various kinds. Presently they brought in Gharib and Sahim who,
seeing the flaming of the fire, sought help of the One, the
All-conquering Creator of night and day, Him of All-might, whom no sight
comprehendeth, but who comprehendeth all sights, for He is the Subtle,
the All-knowing. And they ceased not humbly beseeching Him till, behold,
a cloud arose from West to East and, pouring down showers of rain, like
the swollen sea, quenched the fire. When the King saw this, he was
affrighted, he and his troops, and entered the palace, where he turned
to the Wazirs and Grandees and said to them, “How say ye of these two
men?” They replied, “O King, had they not been in the right, this thing
had not befallen the fire; wherefore we say that they be true men which
speak sooth.” Rejoined Mura’ash, “Verily the Truth hath been displayed
to me, ay, and the manifest way, and I am certified that the worship of
the fire is false; for, were it goddess, it had warded off from itself
the rain which quenched it and the stone which broke its brasier and
beat it into ashes. Wherefore I believe in Him Who created the fire and
the light and the shade and the heat. And ye, what say ye?” They
answered, “O King, we also hear and follow and obey.” So the King called
for Gharib and embraced him and kissed him between the eyes and then
summoned Sahim; whereupon the bystanders all crowded to kiss their hands
and heads.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-second Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Mura’ash
and his men found salvation in the Saving Faith, Al-Islam, he called for
Gharib and Sahim and kissed them between the eyes and so did all the
Grandees who crowded to buss their hands and heads. Then Mura’ash sat
down on the throne of his kingship and, seating Gharib on his right and
Sahim on his left hand, said to them, “O mortals, what shall we say,
that we may become Moslems?” Replied Gharib, “Say:—There is no god but
_the_ God, and Abraham is the Friend of God!” So the King and his folk
professed Al-Islam with heart and tongue, and Gharib abode with them
awhile, teaching them the ritual of prayer. But presently he called to
mind his people and sighed, whereupon quoth Mura’ash, “Verily, trouble
is gone and joy and gladness are come.” Quoth Gharib, “O King, I have
many foes and I fear for my folk from them.” Then he related to him his
history with his brother Ajib from first to last, and the King of the
Jinns said, “O King of men, I will send one who shall bring thee news of
thy people, for I will not let thee go till I have had my fill of thy
face.” Then he called two doughty Marids, by name Kaylaján and Kúraján,
and after they had done him homage, he bade them repair to Al-Yaman and
bring him news of Gharib’s army. They replied, “To hear is to obey,” and
departed. Thus far concerning the brothers; but as regards the Moslems,
they arose in the morning and led by their captains rode to King
Gharib’s palace, to do their service to him; but the eunuchs told them
that the King had mounted with his brother and had ridden forth at peep
o’ day. So they made for the valleys and mountains and followed the
track of the Princes, till they came to the Valley of Springs, where
they found their arms cast down and their two gallant steeds grazing and
said, “The King is missing from this place, by the glory of Abraham the
Friend!” Then they mounted and sought in the valley and the mountains
three days, but found no trace of them; whereupon they began the
mourning ceremonies and, sending for couriers, said to them, “Do ye
disperse yourselves about the cities and sconces and castles, and seek
ye news of our King.” “Hearkening and obedience!” cried the couriers,
who dispersed hither and thither each over one of the Seven Climes and
sought everywhere for Gharib, but found no trace of him. Now when the
tidings came to Ajib by his spies that his brother was lost and there
was no news of the missing, he rejoiced and going in to King Ya’arub bin
Kahtan, sought of him aid which he granted and gave him two hundred
thousand Amalekites, wherewith he set out for Al-Yaman and sat down
before the city of Oman. Jamrkan and Sa’adan sallied forth and offered
him battle, and there were slain of the Moslems much folk, so the True
Believers retired into the city and shut the gates and manned the walls.
At this moment came up the two Marids Kaylajan and Kurajan and, seeing
the Moslem beleaguered waited till nightfall, when they fell upon the
miscreants and plied them with sharp swords of the swords of the Jinn,
each twelve cubits long, if a man smote therewith a rock, verily he
would cleave it in sunder. They charged the Idolators, shouting, “Allaho
Akbar! God is Most Great! He giveth aid and victory and forsaketh those
who deny the Faith of Abraham the Friend!” and whilst they raged amongst
the foes, fire issued from their mouths and nostrils, and they made
great slaughter amongst them. Thereupon the Infidels ran out of their
tents offering battle but, seeing these strange things, were confounded
and their hair stood on end and their reason fled. So they snatched up
their arms and fell one upon other, whilst the Marids shore off their
heads, as a reaper eareth grain, crying, “God is Most Great! We are the
lads of King Gharib, the friend of Mura’ash, King of the Jinn!” The
sword ceased not to go round amongst them till the night was half spent,
when the Misbelievers, imagining that the mountains were all Ifrits,
loaded their tents and treasure and baggage upon camels and made off;
and the first to fly was Ajib.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Misbelievers made off and the first to fly was Ajib. Thereupon the
Moslems gathered together, marvelling at this that had betided the
Infidels and fearing the tribesmen of the Jinn. But the Marids ceased
not from pursuit, till they had driven them far away into the hills and
wolds; and but fifty thousand Rebels[30] of two hundred thousand escaped
with their lives and made for their own land, wounded and sore
discomfited. Then the two Jinns returned and said to them, “O host of
the Moslems, your lord King Gharib and his brother Sahim salute you;
they are the guests of Mura’ash, King of the Jann, and will be with you
anon.” When Gharib’s men heard that he was safe and well, they joyed
with exceeding joy and said to the Marids, “Allah gladden you twain with
good news, O noble spirits!” So Kurajan and Kaylajan returned to
Mura’ash and Gharib; and acquainted them with that which had happened,
whereat Gharib finding the two sitting together felt heart at ease and
said, “Allah abundantly requite you!” Then quoth King Mura’ash, “O my
brother, I am minded to show thee our country and the city of Japhet[31]
son of Noah (on whom be peace!)” Quoth Gharib, “O King, do what seemeth
good to thee.” So he called for three noble steeds and mounting, he and
Gharib and Sahim, set out with a thousand Marids, as they were a piece
of a mountain cloven lengthwise. They fared on, solacing themselves with
the sight of valleys and mountains, till they came to Jabarsá,[32] the
city of Japhet son of Noah (on whom be peace!) where the townsfolk all,
great and small, came forth to meet King Mura’ash and brought them into
the city in great state. Then Mura’ash went up to the palace of Japhet
son of Noah and sat down on the throne of his kingship, which was of
alabaster, ten stages high and latticed with wands of gold wherefrom
hung all manner coloured silks. The people of the city stood before him
and he said to them, “O seed of Yafis bin Nuh, what did your fathers and
grandfathers worship?” They replied, “We found them worshipping Fire and
followed their example, as thou well knowest.” “O folk,” rejoined
Mura’ash, “we have been shown that the fire is but one of the creatures
of Almighty Allah, Creator of all things; and when we knew this, we
submitted ourselves to God, the One, the All-powerful, Maker of night
and day and the sphere revolving alway, Whom comprehendeth no sight, but
Who comprehendeth all sights, for He is the Subtle, the All-wise. So
seek ye Salvation and ye shall be saved from the wrath of the Almighty
One and from the fiery doom in the world to come.” And they embraced
Al-Islam with heart and tongue. Then Mura’ash took Gharib by the hand
and showed him the palace and its ordinance and all the marvels it
contained, till they came to the armoury, wherein were the arms of
Japhet son of Noah. Here Gharib saw a sword hanging to a pin of gold and
asked, “O King, whose is that?” Mura’ash answered, “’Tis the sword of
Yafis bin Nuh, wherewith he was wont to do battle against men and Jinn.
The sage Jardúm forged it and graved on its back names of might.[33] It
is named Al-Máhik—the Annihilator—for that it never descendeth upon a
man, but it annihilateth him, nor upon a Jinni, but it crusheth him; and
if one smote therewith a mountain ’twould overthrow it.” When Gharib
heard tell of the virtues of the sword, he said, “I desire to look on
this blade;” and Mura’ash said, “Do as thou wilt.” So Gharib put out his
hand, and, hending the sword, drew it from its sheath; whereupon it
flashed and Death crept on its edge and glittered; and it was twelve
spans long and three broad. Now Gharib wished to become owner of it, and
King Mura’ash said, “An thou canst smite with it, take it.” “’Tis well,”
Gharib replied, and took it up, and it was in his hand as a staff;
wherefore all who were present, men and Jinn, marvelled and said, “Well
done, O Prince of Knights!” Then said Mura’ash, “Lay thy hand on this
hoard for which the Kings of the earth sigh in vain, and mount, that I
may show thee the city.” Then they took horse and rode forth the palace,
with men and Jinns attending them on foot,——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib and
King Mura’ash rode forth the palace of Japhet, with men and Jinns
attending them on foot, they passed through the streets and
thoroughfares of the town, by palaces and deserted mansions and gilded
doorways, till they issued from the gates and entered gardens full of
trees fruit-bearing and waters welling and birds speaking and
celebrating the praises of Him to whom belong Majesty and Eternity; nor
did they cease to solace themselves in the land till nightfall, when
they returned to the palace of Japhet son of Noah and they brought them
the table of food. So they ate and Gharib turned to the King of the Jann
and said to him, “O King, I would fain return to my folk and my force;
for I know not their plight after me.” Replied Mura’ash, “By Allah, O my
brother, I will not part with thee for a full month, till I have had my
fill of thy sight.” Now Gharib could not say nay, so he abode with him
in the city of Japhet, eating and drinking and making merry, till the
month ended, when Mura’ash gave him great store of gems and precious
ores, emeralds and balass-rubies, diamonds and other jewels, ingots of
gold and silver and likewise ambergris and musk and brocaded silks and
else of rarities and things of price. Moreover he clad him and Sahim in
silken robes of honour gold-inwoven and set on Gharib’s head a crown
jewelled with pearls and diamonds of inestimable value. All these
treasures he made up into even loads for him and, calling five hundred
Marids, said to them, “Get ye ready to travel on the morrow, that we may
bring King Gharib and Sahim back to their own country.” And they
answered, “We hear and we obey.” So they passed the night in the city,
purposing to depart on the morrow, but, next morning, as they were about
to set forth behold, they espied a great host advancing upon the city,
with horses neighing and kettle-drums beating and trumpets braying and
riders filling the earth for they numbered threescore and ten thousand
Marids, flying and diving, under a King called Barkán. Now this Barkan
was lord of the City of Carnelian and the Castle of Gold and under his
rule were five hill-strongholds, in each five hundred thousand Marids;
and he and his tribe worshipped the Fire, not the Omnipotent Sire. He
was a cousin of Mura’ash, the son of his father’s brother, and the cause
of his coming was that there had been among the subjects of King
Mura’ash a misbelieving Marid, who professed Al-Islam hypocritically,
and he stole away from his people and made for the Valley of Carnelian,
where he went in to King Barkan and, kissing the earth before him,
wished him abiding glory and prosperity. Then he told him of Mura’ash
being converted to Al-Islam, and Barkan said, “How came he to tear
himself away from his faith[34]?” So the rebel told him what had passed
and, when Barkan heard it, he snorted and snarked and railed at Sun and
Moon and sparkling Fire, saying, “By the virtue of my faith, I will
surely slay mine uncle’s son and his people and this mortal, nor will I
leave one of them alive!” Then he cried out to the legions of the Jinn
and choosing of them seventy thousand Marids, set out and fared on till
he came to Jabarsá[35] the city of Japhet and encamped before its gates.
When Mura’ash saw this, he despatched a Marid, saying, “Go to this host
and learn all that it wanteth and return hither in haste.” So the
messenger rushed away to Barkan’s camp, where the Marids flocked to meet
him and said to him, “Who art thou?” Replied he, “An envoy from King
Mura’ash;” whereupon they carried him in to Barkan, before whom he
prostrated himself, saying, “O my lord, my master hath sent me to thee,
to learn tidings of thee.” Quoth Barkan, “Return to thy lord and say to
him:—This is thy cousin Barkan, who is come to salute thee.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Marid-envoy of Mura’ash was borne before Barkan and said to him, “O my
lord, my master hath sent me to thee to learn tidings of thee,” Barkan
replied, “Return to thy lord and say to him:—This is thy cousin Barkan
who is come to salute thee!” So the messenger went back and told
Mura’ash, who said to Gharib, “Sit thou on thy throne whilst I go and
salute my cousin and return to thee.” Then he mounted and rode to the
camp of his uncle’s son. Now this was a trick[36] of Barkan, to bring
Mura’ash out and seize upon him, and he said to his Marids, whom he had
stationed about him, “When ye see me embrace him,[37] lay hold of him
and pinion him.” And they replied, “To hear is to obey.” So, when King
Mura’ash came up and entered Barkan’s pavilion, the owner rose to him
and threw his arms round his neck; whereat the Jann fell upon Mura’ash
and pinioned him and chained him. Mura’ash looked at Barkan and said,
“What manner of thing is this?” Quoth Barkan, “O dog of the Jann, wilt
thou leave the faith of thy fathers and grandfathers and enter a faith
thou knowest not?” Rejoined Mura’ash, “O son of my uncle, indeed I have
found the faith of Abraham the Friend to be the True Faith and all other
than it vain.” Asked Barkan, “And who told thee of this?”; and Mura’ash
answered, “Gharib, King of Irak, whom I hold in the highest honour.” “By
the right of the Fire and the Light and the Shade and the Heat,” cried
Barkan, “I will assuredly slay both thee and him!” And he cast him into
gaol. Now when Mura’ash’s henchman saw what had befallen his lord, he
fled back to the city and told the King’s legionaries who cried out and
mounted. Quoth Gharib, “What is the matter?” And they told him all that
had passed, whereupon he cried out to Sahim, “Saddle me one of the
chargers that King Mura’ash gave me.” Said Sahim, “O my brother, wilt
thou do battle with the Jinn?” Gharib replied, “Yes, I will fight them
with the sword of Japhet son of Noah, seeking help of the Lord of
Abraham the Friend (on whom be the Peace!); for He is the Lord of all
things and sole Creator!” So Sahim saddled him a sorrel horse of the
horses of the Jinn, as he were a castle strong among castles, and he
armed and mounting, rode out with the legions of the Jinn, hauberk’d
cap-à-pie. Then Barkan and his host mounted also and the two hosts drew
out in lines facing each other. The first to open the gate of war was
Gharib, who drave his steed into the mid-field and bared the enchanted
blade, whence issued a glittering light that dazzled the eyes of all the
Jinn and struck terror to their hearts. Then he played[38] with the
sword till their wits were wildered, and cried out, saying, “Allaho
Akbar! I am Gharib, King of Irak. There is no Faith save the Faith of
Abraham the Friend!” Now when Barkan heard Gharib’s words, he said,
“This is he who seduced my cousin from his religion; so, by the virtue
of my faith, I will not sit down on my throne till I have decapitated
this Gharib and suppressed his breath of life and forced my cousin and
his people back to their belief: and whoso baulketh me, him will I
destroy.” Then he mounted an elephant paper-white as he were a tower
plastered with gypsum, and goaded him with a spike of steel which ran
deep into his flesh, whereupon the elephant trumpeted and made for the
battle-plain where cut and thrust obtain; and, when he drew near Gharib,
he cried out to him, saying, “O dog of mankind, what made thee come into
our land, to debauch my cousin and his folk and pervert them from one
faith to other faith. Know that this day is the last of thy worldly
days.” Gharib replied, “Avaunt,[39] O vilest of the Jann!” Therewith
Barkan drew a javelin and making it quiver[40] in his hand, cast it at
Gharib; but it missed him. So he hurled a second javelin at him; but
Gharib caught it in mid-air and after poising it launched it at the
elephant. It smote him on the flank and came out on the other side,
whereupon the beast fell to the earth dead and Barkan was thrown to the
ground, like a great palm-tree. Before he could stir, Gharib smote him
with the flat of Japhet’s blade on the nape of the neck, and he fell
upon the earth in a fainting-fit; whereupon the Marids swooped down on
him and surrounding him pinioned his elbows. When Barkan’s people saw
their king a prisoner, they drove at the others, seeking to rescue him,
but Gharib and the Islamised Jinn fell upon them and gloriously done for
Gharib! indeed that day he pleased the Lord who answereth prayer and
slaked his vengeance with the talisman-sword! Whomsoever he smote, he
clove him in sunder and before his soul could depart he became a heap of
ashes in the fire; whilst the two hosts of the Jinn shot each other with
flamy meteors till the battle-field was wrapped in smoke. And Gharib
tourneyed right and left among the Kafirs who gave way before him, till
he came to King Barkan’s pavilion, with Kaylajan and Kurajan on his
either hand, and cried out to them, “Loose your lord!” So they unbound
Mura’ash and broke his fetters and——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Gharib cried out to Kaylajan and Kurajan, saying, “Loose your lord!”,
they unbound Mura’ash and broke his fetters, and he said to them, “Bring
me my arms and my winged horse.” Now he had two flying steeds, one of
which he had given to Gharib and the other he had kept for himself; and
this he mounted after he had donned his battle-harness. Then he and
Gharib fell upon the enemy, flying through the air on their winged
horses, and the true believing Jinn followed them, shouting “Allaho
Akbar—God is Most Great!”—till plains and hills, valleys and mountains
re-worded the cry. The Infidels fled before them and they returned,
after having slain more than thirty thousand Marids and Satans, to the
city of Japhet, where the two Kings sat down on their couches of estate
and sought Barkan, but found him not; for after capturing him they were
diverted from him by stress of battle, where an Ifrit of his servants
made his way to him and loosing him, carried him to his folk, of whom he
found part slain and the rest in full flight. So he flew up with the
King high in air and sat him down in the City of Carnelian and Castle of
Gold, where Barkan seated himself on the throne of his kingship.
Presently, those of his people who had survived the affair came in to
him and gave him joy of his safety; and he said, “O folk, where is
safety? My army is slain and they took me prisoner and have rent in
pieces mine honour among the tribes of the Jann.” Quoth they, “O King,
’tis ever thus that kings still afflict and are afflicted.” Quoth he,
“There is no help but I take my wreak and wipe out my shame, else shall
I be for ever disgraced among the tribes of the Jann.” Then he wrote
letters to the Governors of his fortresses, who came to him right
loyally and, when he reviewed them, he found three hundred and twenty
thousand fierce Marids and Satans; who said to him, “What is thy need?”
And he replied, “Get ye ready to set out in three days’ time;” whereto
they rejoined “Harkening and obedience!” On this wise it befel King
Barkan; but as regards Mura’ash, when he discovered his prisoner’s
escape, it was grievous to him and he said, “Had we set an hundred
Marids to guard him, he had not fled; but whither shall he go from us?”
Then said he to Gharib, “Know, O my brother, that Barkan is perfidious
and will never rest from wreaking blood-revenge on us, but will
assuredly assemble his legions and return to attack us; wherefore I am
minded to forestall him and follow the trail of his defeat, whilst he is
yet weakened thereby.” Replied Gharib, “This is the right rede, and will
best serve our need;” and Mura’ash said, “Oh my brother, let the Marids
bear thee back to thine own country and leave me to fight the battles of
the Faith against the Infidels, that I may be lightened of my sin-load.”
But Gharib rejoined, “By the virtue of the Clement, the Bountiful, the
Veiler, I will not go hence till I do to death all the misbelieving
Jinn; and Allah hasten their souls to the fire and dwelling-place dire;
and none shall be saved but those who worship Allah the One, the
Victorious! But do thou send Sahim back to the city of Oman, so haply he
may be healed of his ailment.” For Sahim was sick. So Mura’ash cried to
the Marids, saying, “Take ye up Sahim and these treasures and bear them
to Oman city.” And after replying, “We hear and we obey,” they took them
and made for the land of men. Then Mura’ash wrote letters to all his
Governors and Captains of fortresses and they came to him with an
hundred and sixty thousand warriors. So they made them ready and
departed for the City of Carnelian and the Castle of Gold, covering in
one day a year’s journey and halted in a valley, where they encamped and
passed the night. Next morning as they were about to set forth, behold,
the vanguard of Barkan’s army appeared, whereupon the Jinn cried out and
the two hosts met and fell each upon other in that valley. Then the
engagement was dight and there befel a sore fight as though an
earthquake shook the site and fair plight waxed foul plight. Earnest
came and jest took flight, and parley ceased ’twixt wight and wight,[41]
whilst long lives were cut short in a trice and the Unbelievers fell
into disgrace and despite; for Gharib charged them, proclaiming the
Unity of the Worshipful, the All-might and shore through necks and left
heads rolling in the dust; nor did night betide before nigh seventy
thousand of the Miscreants were slain, and of the Moslemised over ten
thousand Marids had fallen. Then the kettle-drums beat the retreat, and
the two hosts drew apart,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the two
hosts drew apart, Gharib and Mura’ash returned to their tents, after
wiping their weapons, and supper being set before them, they ate and
gave each other joy of their safety, and the loss of their Marids being
so small. As for Barkan, he returned to his tent, grieving for the
slaughter of his champions, and said to his officers, “O folk, an we
tarry here and do battle with them on this wise in three days’ time we
shall be cut off to the last wight.” Quoth they, “And how shall we do, O
King?” Quoth Barkan, “We will fall upon them under cover of night whilst
they are deep in sleep, and not one of them shall be left to tell the
tale. So take your arms and when I give the word of command, attack and
fall on your enemies as one.” Now there was amongst them a Marid named
Jandal whose heart inclined to Al-Islam; so, when he heard the Kafirs’
plot, he stole away from them and going in to King Mura’ash and King
Gharib, told the twain what Barkan had devised; whereupon Mura’ash
turned to Gharib and said to him, “O my brother, what shall we do?”
Gharib replied, “To-night we will fall upon the Miscreants and chase
them into the wilds and the wolds if it be the will of the Omnipotent
King.” Then he summoned the Captains of the Jann and said to them, “Arm
yourselves, you and yours; and, as soon as ’tis dark, steal out of your
tents on foot, hundreds after hundreds, and lie in ambush among the
mountains; and when ye see the enemy engaged among the tents, do ye fall
upon them from all quarters. Hearten your hearts and rely on your Lord,
and ye shall certainly conquer; and behold, I am with you!” So, as soon
as it was dark night, the Infidels attacked the camp, invoking aid of
the fire and light; but when they came among the tents, the Moslems fell
upon them, calling for help on the Lord of the Worlds and saying, “O
Most Merciful of Mercifuls, O Creator of all createds!” till they left
them like mown grass, cut down and dead. Nor did morning dawn before the
most part of the unbelievers were species without souls and the rest
made for the wastes and marshes, whilst Gharib and Mura’ash returned
triumphant and victorious; and, making prize of the enemy’s baggage,
they rested till the morrow, when they set out for the City of Carnelian
and Castle of Gold. As for Barkan, when the battle had turned against
him and most of his lieges were slain, he fled through the dark with the
remnant of his power to his capital where he entered his palace and
assembling his legionaries said to them, “O folk, whoso hath aught of
price, let him take it and follow me to the Mountain Káf, to the Blue
King, lord of the Pied Palace; for he it is who shall avenge us.” So
they took their women and children and goods and made for the
Caucasus-mountain. Presently Mura’ash and Gharib arrived at the City of
Carnelian and Castle of Gold to find the gates open and none left to
give them news; whereupon they entered and Mura’ash led Gharib that he
might show him the city, whose walls were builded of emeralds and its
gates of red carnelian, with studs of silver, and the terrace-roofs of
its houses and mansions reposed upon beams of lign-aloes and
sandal-wood. So they took their pleasure in its streets and alleys, till
they came to the Palace of Gold and entering passed through seven
vestibules, when they drew near to a building, whose walls were of royal
balass-rubies and its pavement of emerald and jacinth. The two Kings
were astounded at the goodliness of the place and fared on from
vestibule to vestibule, till they had passed through the seventh and
happened upon the inner court of the palace wherein they saw four
daïses, each different from the others, and in the midst a jetting fount
of red gold, compassed about with golden lions,[42] from whose mouths
issued water. These were things to daze man’s wit. The estrade at the
upper end was hung and carpeted with brocaded silks of various colours
and thereon stood two thrones of red gold, inlaid with pearls and
jewels. So Mura’ash and Gharib sat down on Barkan’s thrones and held
high state in the Palace of Gold.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Mura’ash and
Gharib took seat on Barkan’s thrones and held high state. Then said
Gharib to Mura’ash, “What thinkest thou to do?” And Mura’ash replied, “O
King of mankind, I have despatched an hundred horse to learn where
Barkan is, that we may pursue him.” Then they abode three days in the
palace, till the scouting Marids returned with the news that Barkan had
fled to the Mountain Kaf and craved protection of the Blue King who
granted it; whereupon quoth Mura’ash to Gharib, “What sayest thou, O my
brother?” and quoth Gharib, “Except we attack them they will attack us.”
So they bade the host make ready for departure and after three days,
they were about to set out with their troops, when the Marids, who had
carried Sahim and the presents back to Oman, returned and kissed ground
before Gharib. He questioned them of his people and they replied, “After
the last affair, thy brother Ajib, leaving Ya’arub bin Kahtan, fled to
the King of Hind and, submitting his case, sought his protection. The
King granted his prayer and writing letters to all his governors, levied
an army as it were the surging sea, having neither beginning nor end,
wherewith he purposeth to invade Al-Irak and lay it waste.” When Gharib
heard this, he said, “Perish the Misbelievers! Verily, Allah Almighty
shall give the victory to Al-Islam and I will soon show them hew and
foin.” Said Mura’ash, “O King of humans, by the virtue of the Mighty
Name, I must needs go with thee to thy kingdom and destroy thy foes and
bring thee to thy wish.” Gharib thanked him and they rested on this
resolve till the morrow, when they set out, intending for Mount Caucasus
and marched many days till they reached the City of Alabaster and the
Pied Palace. Now this city was fashioned of alabaster and precious
stones by Bárik bin Fáki’, father of the Jinn, and he also founded the
Pied Palace, which was so named because edified with one brick of gold
alternating with one of silver, nor was there builded aught like it in
all the world. When they came within half a day’s journey of the city,
they halted to take their rest, and Mura’ash sent out to reconnoitre a
scout who returned and said, “O King, within the City of Alabaster are
legions of the Jinn, for number as the leaves of the trees or as the
drops of rain.” So Mura’ash said to Gharib, “How shall we do, O King of
Mankind?” He replied, “O King, divide your men into four bodies and
encompass with them the camp of the Infidels; then, in the middle of the
night, let them cry out, saying;—God is Most Great! and withdraw and
watch what happeneth among the tribes of the Jinn.” So Mura’ash did as
Gharib counselled and the troops waited till midnight, when they
encircled the foe and shouted, “Allaho Akbar! Ho for the Faith of
Abraham the Friend, on whom be the Peace!” The Misbelievers at this cry
awoke in affright and snatching up their arms, fell one upon other till
the morning, when most part of them were dead bodies and but few
remained. Then Gharib cried out to the True Believers, saying, “Up and
at the remnant of the Kafirs! Behold I am with you, and Allah is your
helper!” So the Moslems drave at the enemy and Gharib bared his magical
blade Al-Mahik and fell upon the foe, lopping off noses and making heads
wax hoary and whole ranks turn tail. At last he came up with Barkan and
smote him and bereft him of life and he fell down, drenched in his
blood. On like wise he did with the Blue King, and by undurn-hour not
one of the Kafirs was left alive to tell the tale. Then Gharib and
Mura’ash entered the Pied Palace and found its walls builded of
alternate courses of gold and silver, with door-sills of crystal and
keystones of greenest emerald. In its midst was a fountain adorned with
bells and pendants and figures of birds and beasts spouting forth water,
and thereby a daïs[43] furnished with gold-brocaded silk, bordered or
embroidered with jewels: and they found the treasures of the palace past
count or description. Then they entered the women’s court, where they
came upon a magnificent serraglio and Gharib saw, among the Blue King’s
woman-folk a girl clad in a dress worth a thousand dinars, never had he
beheld a goodlier. About her were an hundred slave-girls, upholding her
train with golden hooks, and she was in their midst as the moon among
stars. When he saw her, his reason was confounded and he said to one of
the waiting-women, “Who may be yonder maid?” Quoth they, “This is the
Blue King’s daughter, Star o’ Morn.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib asked
the slave-women saying, “Who may be yonder maid,” they replied, “This is
Star o’ Morn, daughter to the Blue King.” Then Gharib turned to Mura’ash
and said to him, “O King of the Jinn, I have a mind to take yonder
damsel to wife.” Replied Mura’ash, “The palace and all that therein is,
live stock and dead, are the prize of thy right hand; for, hadst thou
not devised a stratagem to destroy the Blue King and Barkan, they had
cut us off to the last one: wherefore the treasure is thy treasure and
the folk thy thralls.” Gharib thanked him for his fair speech and going
up to the girl, gazed steadfastly upon her and loved her with exceeding
love, forgetting Fakhr Taj the Princess and even Mahdiyah. Now her
mother was the Chinese King’s daughter whom the Blue King had carried
off from her palace and perforce deflowered, and she conceived by him
and bare this girl, whom he named Star o’ Morn, by reason of her beauty
and loveliness; for she was the very Princess of the Fair. Her mother
died when she was a babe of forty days, and the nurses and eunuchs
reared her, till she reached the age of seventeen; but she hated her
sire and rejoiced in his slaughter. So Gharib put his palm to hers[44]
and went in unto her that night and found her a virgin. Then he bade
pull down the Pied Palace and divided the spoil with the true-believing
Jinn, and there fell to his share one-and-twenty thousand bricks of gold
and silver and money and treasure beyond speech and count. Then Mura’ash
took Gharib and showed him the Mountain Kaf and all its marvels; after
which they returned to Barkan’s fortress and dismantled it and shared
the spoil thereof. Then they repaired to Mura’ash’s capital, where they
tarried five days, when Gharib sought to revisit his native country and
Mura’ash said, “O King of mankind, I will ride at thy stirrup and bring
thee to thine own land.” Replied Gharib, “No, by the virtue of Abraham
the Friend, I will not suffer thee to weary thyself thus, nor will I
take any of the Jinn save Kaylajan and Kurajan.” Quoth the King, “Take
with thee ten thousand horsemen of the Jinn, to serve thee;” but quoth
Gharib, “I will take only as I said to thee.” So Mura’ash bade a
thousand Marids carry him to his native land, with his share of the
spoil; and he commanded Kaylajan and Kurajan to follow him and obey him;
and they answered, “Hearkening and obedience.” Then said Gharib to the
Marids, “Do ye carry the treasure and Star o’ Morn;” for he himself
thought to ride his flying steed. But Mura’ash said to him, “This horse,
O my brother, will live only in our region, and, if it come upon man’s
earth, ’twill die: but I have in my stables a sea-horse, whose fellow is
not found in Al-Irak, no, nor in all the world is its like.” So he
caused bring forth the horse, and when Gharib saw it, it interposed
between him and his wits.[45] Then they bound it and Kaylajan bore it on
his shoulders and Kurajan took what he could carry. And Mura’ash
embraced Gharib and wept for parting from him, saying, “O my brother, if
aught befal thee wherein thou art powerless, send for me and I will come
to thine aid with an army able to lay waste the whole earth and what is
thereon.” Gharib thanked him for his kindness and zeal for the True
Faith and took leave of him; whereupon the Marids set out with Gharib
and his goods; and, after traversing fifty years’ journey in two days
and a night, alighted near the city of Oman and halted to take rest.
Then Gharib sent out Kaylajan, to learn news of his people, and he
returned and said, “O King, the city is beleaguered by a host of
Infidels, as they were the surging sea, and thy people are fighting
them. The drums beat to battle and Jamrkan goeth forth as champion in
the field.” When Gharib heard this, he cried aloud, “God is Most Great!”
and said to Kaylajan, “Saddle me the steed and bring me my arms and
spear; for to-day the valiant shall be known from the coward in the
place of war and battle-stead.” So Kaylajan brought him all he sought
and Gharib armed and belting in baldrick Al-Mahik, mounted the sea-horse
and made toward the hosts. Quoth Kaylajan and Kurajan to him, “Set thy
heart at rest and let us go to the Kafirs and scatter them abroad in the
wastes and wilds till, by the help of Allah, the All-powerful, we leave
not a soul alive, no, not a blower of the fire.” But Gharib said, “By
the virtue of Abraham the Friend, I will not let you fight them without
me and behold, I mount!” Now the cause of the coming of that great host
was right marvellous.[46]——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Six Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib
had bidden Kaylajan go and learn news of his people, the Jinn fared
forth and presently returning said, “Verily around thy city is a mighty
host!” Now the cause of its coming was that Ajib, having fled the field
after Ya’arub’s army had been put to the rout, said to his people, “O
folk, if we return to Ya’arub bin Kahtan, he will say to us:—But for
you, my son and my people had not been slain; and he will put us to
death, even to the last man. Wherefore, methinks we were better go to
Tarkanán, King of Hind, and beseech him to avenge us.” Replied they,
“Come, let us go thither; and the blessing of the Fire be upon thee!” So
they fared days and nights till they reached King Tarkanan’s capital
city and, after asking and obtaining permission to present himself, Ajib
went in to him and kissed ground before him. Then he wished him what men
use to wish to monarchy and said to him, “O King, protect me, so may
protect thee the sparkling Fire and the Night with its thick darkness!”
Tarkanan looked at Ajib and asked, “Who art thou and what dost thou
want?”; to which the other answered, “I am Ajib King of Al-Irak; my
brother hath wronged me and gotten the mastery of the land and the
subjects have submitted themselves to him. Moreover, he hath embraced
the faith of Al-Islam and he ceaseth not to chase me from country to
country; and behold, I am come to seek protection of thee and thy
power.” When Tarkanan heard Ajib’s words, he rose and sat down and
cried, “By the virtue of the Fire, I will assuredly avenge thee and will
let none serve other than my goddess the Fire!” And he called aloud to
his son, saying, “O my son, make ready to go to Al-Irak and lay it waste
and bind all who serve aught but the Fire and torment them and make
example of them; yet slay them not, but bring them to me, that I may ply
them with various tortures and make them taste the bitterness of
humiliation and leave them a warning to whoso will be warned in this our
while.” Then he chose out to accompany him eighty thousand fighting men
on horseback and the like number on giraffes,[47] besides ten thousand
elephants, bearing on their backs seats[48] of sandal-wood, latticed
with golden rods, plated and studded with gold and silver and shielded
with pavises of gold and emerald; moreover he sent good store of
war-chariots, in each eight men fighting with all kinds of weapons. Now
the Prince’s name was Ra’ad Sháh,[49] and he was the champion of his
time, for prowess having no peer. So he and his army equipped them in
ten day’s time, then set out, as they were a bank of clouds, and fared
on two months’ journey, till they came upon Oman city and encompassed
it, to the joy of Ajib, who thought himself assured of victory. Jamrkan
and Sa’adan and all their fighting-men sallied forth into the field of
fight whilst the kettle-drums beat to battle and the horses neighed. At
this moment up came King Gharib, who, as we have said, had been warned
by Kaylajan; and he urged on his destrier and entered among the Infidels
waiting to see who should come forth and open the chapter of war. Then
out rushed Sa’adan the Ghul and offered combat, whereupon there issued
forth to him one of the champions of Hind; but Sa’adan scarce let him
take stand in front ere he smote him with his mace and crushed his bones
and stretched him on the ground; and so did he with a second and a
third, till he had slain thirty fighting men. Then there dashed out at
him an Indian cavalier, by name Battásh al-Akrán,[50] uncle to King
Tarkanan and of his day the doughtiest man, reckoned worth five thousand
horse in battle-plain and cried out to Sa’adan, saying, “O thief of the
Arabs, hath thy daring reached that degree that thou shouldst slay the
Kings of Hind and their champions and capture their horsemen? But this
day is the last of thy worldly days.” When Sa’adan heard these words,
his eyes waxed blood-red and he drave at Battash and aimed a stroke at
him with his club; but he evaded it and the force of the blow bore
Sa’adan to the ground; and before he could recover himself, the Indians
pinioned him and haled him off to their tents. Now when Jamrkan saw his
comrade a prisoner, he cried out, saying, “Ho for the Faith of Abraham
the Friend!” and clapping heel to his horse, ran at Battash. They
wheeled about awhile, till Battash charged Jamrkan and catching him by
his jerkin[51] tare him from his saddle and cast him to the ground;
whereupon the Indians bound him and dragged him away to their tents. And
Battash ceased not to overcome all who came out to him, Captain after
Captain till he had made prisoners of four-and-twenty Chiefs of the
Moslems, whereat the True Believers were sore dismayed. When Gharib saw
what had befallen his braves, he drew from beneath his knee[52] a mace
of gold weighing six-score pounds which had belonged to Barkan King of
the Jann——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib beheld
what had befallen his braves he drew forth a golden mace which had
belonged to Barkan King of the Jann and clapped heel to his sea-horse,
which bore him like the wind-gust into mid-field. Then he let drive at
Battash, crying out, “God is Most Great! He giveth aid and victory and
He abaseth whoso reject the Faith of Abraham the Friend!” and smote him
with the mace, whereupon he fell to the ground and Gharib, turning to
the Moslems, saw his brother Sahim and said to him, “Pinion me this
hound.” When Sahim heard his brother’s words, he ran to Battash and
bound him hard and fast and bore him off, whilst the Moslem braves
wondered who this knight could be and the Indians said one to other,
“Who is this horseman which came out from among them and hath taken our
Chief prisoner?” Meanwhile Gharib continued to offer battle and there
issued forth to him a captain of the Hindís whom he felled to earth with
his mace, and Kaylajan and Kurajan pinioned him and delivered him over
to Sahim; nor did Gharib leave to do thus, till he had taken prisoner
two-and-fifty of the doughtiest Captains of the army of Hind. Then the
day came to an end and the kettle-drums beat the retreat; whereupon
Gharib left the field and rode towards the Moslem camp. The first to
meet him was Sahim, who kissed his feet in the stirrups and said, “May
thy hand never wither, O champion of the age! Tell us who thou art among
the braves.” So Gharib raised his vizor of mail and Sahim knew him and
cried out, saying, “This is your King and your lord Gharib, who is come
back from the land of the Jann!” When the Moslems heard Gharib’s name,
they threw themselves off their horses’ backs, and, crowding about him,
kissed his feet in the stirrups and saluted him, rejoicing in his safe
return. Then they carried him into the city of Oman, where he entered
his palace and sat down on the throne of his kingship, whilst his
officers stood around him in the utmost joy. Food was set on and they
ate, after which Gharib related to them all that had betided him with
the Jinn in Mount Kaf, and they marvelled thereat with exceeding marvel
and praised Allah for his safety. Then he dismissed them to their
sleeping-places; so they withdrew to their several lodgings, and when
none abode with him but Kaylajan and Kurajan, who never left him, he
said to them, “Can ye carry me to Cufa that I may take my pleasure in my
Harim, and bring me back before the end of the night?” They replied, “O
our lord, this thou askest is easy.” Now the distance between Cufa and
Oman is sixty days’ journey for a diligent horseman, and Kaylajan said
to Kurajan, “I will carry him going and thou coming back.” So he took up
Gharib and flew off with him, in company with Kurajan; nor was an hour
past before they set him down at the gate of his palace, in Cufa. He
went in to his uncle Al-Damigh, who rose to him and saluted him; after
which quoth Gharib, “How is it with my wives Fakhr Taj[53] and
Mahdiyah?” Al-Damigh answered, “They are both well and in good case.”
Then the eunuch went in and acquainted the women of the Harim with
Gharib’s coming, whereat they rejoiced and raised the trill of joy and
gave him the reward for good news. Presently in came King Gharib, and
they rose and saluting him, conversed with him, till Al-Damigh entered,
when Gharib related to them all that had befallen him in the land of the
Jinn, whereat they all marvelled. Then he lay with Fakhr Taj till near
daybreak, when he took leave of his wives and his uncle and mounted
Kurajan’s back, nor was the darkness dispelled before the two Marids set
him down in the city of Oman. Then he and his men armed and he bade open
the gates when, behold, up came a horseman from the host of the Indians,
with Jamrkan and Sa’adan and the rest of the captive captains whom he
had delivered, and committed them to Gharib. The Moslems, rejoicing in
their safety, donned their mails and took horse, while the kettle drums
beat a point of war; and the Miscreants also drew up in line.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Moslem host mounted and rode to the plain of cut and thrust, the first
to open the door of war was King Gharib who, drawing his sword Al-Mahik,
drove his charger between the two ranks and cried out, saying, “Whoso
knoweth me hath enough of my mischief and whoso unknoweth me, to him I
will make myself known. I am Gharib, King of Al-Irak and Al-Yaman,
brother of Ajib.” When Ra’ad Shah, son of the King of Hind, heard this,
he shouted to his captains, “Bring me Ajib.” So they brought him and
Ra’ad Shah said to him, “Thou wottest that this quarrel is thy quarrel
and thou art the cause of all this slaughter. Now yonder standeth thy
brother Gharib middle-most the fight-field and stead where sword and
spear we shall wield; go thou to him and bring him to me a prisoner,
that I may set him on a camel arsy-versy, and make a show of him and
carry him to the land of Hind.” Answered Ajib, “O King, send out to him
other than I, for I am in ill-health this morning.” But Ra’ad Shah
snarked and snorted and cried, “By the virtue of the sparkling Fire and
the light and the shade and the heat, unless thou fare forth to thy
brother and bring him to me in haste, I will cut off thy head and make
an end of thee.” So Ajib took heart and urging his horse up to his
brother in mid-field, said to him, “O dog of the Arabs and vilest of all
who hammer down tent-pegs, wilt thou contend with Kings? Take what to
thee cometh and receive the glad tidings of thy death.” When Gharib
heard this, he said to him, “Who art thou among the Kings?” And Ajib
answered, saying, “I am thy brother, and this day is the last of thy
worldly days.” Now when Gharib was assured that he was indeed his
brother Ajib, he cried out and said, “Ho, to avenge my father and
mother!” Then giving his sword to Kaylajan,[54] he drave at Ajib and
smote him with his mace a smashing blow and a swashing, that went nigh
to beat in his ribs, and seizing him by the mail-gorget tore him from
the saddle and cast him to the ground; whereupon the two Marids pounced
upon him and binding him fast, dragged him off dejected and abject;
whilst Gharib rejoiced in the capture of his enemy and repeated these
couplets of the poet:—

 I have won my wish and my need have scored ✿ Unto Thee be the praise and
    the thanks, O our Lord!
 I grew up dejected and abject; poor, ✿ But Allah vouchsafed me all boons
    implored:
 I have conquered countries and mastered men ✿ But for Thee were I
    naught, O thou Lord adored!

When Ra’ad Shah saw how evilly Ajib fared with his brother, he called
for his charger and donning his harness and habergeon, mounted and
dashed out a-field. As soon as he drew near King Gharib, he cried out at
him, saying, “O basest of Arabs and bearer of scrubs,[55] who art thou,
that thou shouldest capture Kings and braves? Down from thy horse and
put elbows behind back and kiss my feet and set my warriors free and go
with me in bond of chains to my reign that I may pardon thee and make
thee a Shaykh in our own land, so mayst thou eat there a bittock of
bread.” When Gharib heard these words he laughed till he fell backwards
and answered, saying, “O mad hound and mangy wolf, soon shalt thou see
against whom the shifts of Fortune will turn!” Then he cried out to
Sahim, saying, “Bring me the prisoners;” so he brought them, and Gharib
smote off their heads; whereupon Ra’ad Shah drave at him, with the
driving of a lordly champion and the onslaught of a fierce slaughterer
and they falsed and feinted and fought till nightfall, when the
kettle-drums beat the retreat.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
kettle-drums beat the retreat, the two Kings parted and returned, each
to his own place where his people gave him joy of his safety. And the
Moslems said to Gharib, “’Tis not thy wont, O King, to prolong a fight;”
and he replied, “O folk, I have done battle with many royalties[56] and
champions; but never saw I a harder hitter than this one. Had I chosen
to draw Al-Mahik upon him, I had mashed his bones and made an end of his
days: but I delayed with him, thinking to take him prisoner and give him
part enjoyment in Al-Islam.” Thus far concerning Gharib; but as regards
Ra’ad Shah, he returned to his marquee and sat upon his throne, when his
Chiefs came in to him and asked him of his adversary, and he answered,
“By the truth of the sparkling Fire, never in my life saw I the like of
yonder brave! But to-morrow I will take him prisoner and lead him away
dejected and abject.” Then they slept till daybreak, when the
battle-drums beat to fight and the swords in baldric were dight; and
war-cries were cried amain and all mounted their horses of generous
strain and drew out into the field, filling every wide place and hill
and plain. The first to open the door of war was the rider outrageous
and the lion rageous, King Gharib, who drave his steed between the two
hosts and wheeled and careered over the field, crying, “Who is for fray,
who is for fight? Let no sluggard come out to me this day nor dullard!”
Before he had made an end of speaking, out rushed Ra’ad Shah, riding on
an elephant, as he were a vast tower, in a seat girthed with silken
bands; and between the elephant’s ears sat the driver, bearing in hand a
hook, wherewith he goaded the beast and directed him right and left.
When the elephant drew near Gharib’s horse, and the steed saw a creature
it had never before set eyes on, it took fright;[57] wherefore Gharib
dismounted and gave the horse to Kaylajan. Then he drew Al-Mahik and
advanced to meet Ra’ad Shah afoot, walking on till he faced the
elephant. Now it was Ra’ad Shah’s wont, when he found himself
overmatched by any brave, to mount an elephant, taking with him an
implement called the lasso,[58] which was in the shape of a net, wide at
base and narrow at top with a running cord of silk passed through rings
along its edges. With this he would attack horsemen and casting the
meshes over them, draw the running noose and drag the rider off his
horse and make him prisoner; and thus had he conquered many cavaliers.
So, as Gharib came up to him, he raised his hand and, bespreading the
net over him, pulled him on to the back of the elephant and cried out to
the beast to return to the Indian camp. But Kaylajan and Kurajan had not
left Gharib and, when they beheld what had befallen their lord, they
laid hold of the elephant, whilst Gharib strove with the net, till he
rent it in sunder. Upon this the two Marids seized Ra’ad Shah and bound
him with a cord of palm-fibre. Then the two armies drove each at other
and met with a shock like two seas crashing or two mountains together
dashing, whilst the dust rose to the confines of the sky and blinded was
every eye. The battle waxed fierce and fell, the blood ran in rills, nor
did they cease to wage war with lunge of lance and sway of sword in
lustiest way, till the day darkened and the night starkened, when the
drums beat the retreat and the two hosts drew asunder.[59] Now the
Moslems were evilly entreated that day by reason of the riders on
elephants and giraffes,[60] and many of them were killed and most of the
rest were wounded. This was grievous to Gharib, who commanded the hurt
to be medicined and turning to his Chief Officers, asked them what they
counselled. Answered they, “O King, ’tis only the elephants and giraffes
that irk us; were we but quit of them, we should overcome the enemy.”
Quoth Kaylajan and Kurajan, “We twain will unsheath our swords and fall
on them and slay the most part of them.” But there came forward a man of
Oman, who had been privy counsellor to Jaland, and said, “O King, I will
be surety for the host, an thou wilt but hearken to me and follow my
counsel.” Gharib turned to his Captains and said to them, “Whatsoever
this wise man shall say to you that do.”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib
said to his Captains, “Whatsoever this wise man shall say to you, that
do”; they replied, “Hearing and obeying!” So the Omani chose out ten
captains and asked them, “How many braves have ye under your hands?”;
and they answered, “Ten thousand fighting-men.” Then he carried them
into the armoury and armed five thousand of them with harquebuses and
other five thousand with cross-bows and taught them to shoot with these
new weapons.[61] Now as soon as it was day, the Indians came out to the
field, armed cap-à-pie, with the elephants, giraffes and champions in
their van; whereupon Gharib and his men mounted and both hosts drew out
and the big drums beat to battle. Then the man of Oman cried out to the
archers and harquebusiers to shoot, and they plied the elephants and
giraffes with shafts and leaden bullets, which entered the beasts’
flanks, whereat they roared out and turning upon their own ranks, trod
them down with their hoofs. Presently the Moslems charged the
Misbelievers and outflanked them right and left, whilst the elephants
and giraffes trampled them and drove them into the hills and wolds,
whither the Moslems followed hard upon them with the keen-edged sword
and but few of the giraffes and elephants escaped. Then King Gharib and
his folk returned, rejoicing in their victory; and on the morrow they
divided the loot and rested five days; after which King Gharib sat down
on the throne of his kingship and sending for his brother Ajib, said to
him, “O dog, why hast thou assembled the Kings against us? But He who
hath power over all things hath given us the victory over thee. So
embrace the Saving Faith and thou shalt be saved, and I will forbear to
avenge my father and mother on thee therefor, and I will make thee King
again as thou wast, placing myself under thy hand.” But Ajib said, “I
will not leave my faith.” So Gharib bade lay him in irons and appointed
an hundred stalwart slaves to guard him; after which he turned to Ra’ad
Shah and said to him, “How sayst thou of the faith of Al-Islam?” Replied
he, “O my lord, I will enter thy faith; for, were it not a true Faith
and a goodly, thou hadst not conquered us. Put forth thy hand and I will
testify that there is no god but _the_ God and that Abraham the Friend
is the Apostle of God.” At this Gharib rejoiced and said to him, “Is thy
heart indeed stablished in the sweetness of this Belief?” And he
answered, saying, “Yes, O my lord!” Then quoth Gharib, “O, Ra’ad Shah,
wilt thou go to thy country and thy kingdom?”; and quoth he, “O, my
lord, my father will put me to death, for that I have left his faith.”
Gharib rejoined, “I will go with thee and make thee king of the country
and constrain the folk to obey thee, by the help of Allah the Bountiful,
the Beneficent.” And Ra’ad Shah kissed his hands and feet. Then Gharib
rewarded the counsellor who had caused the rout of the foe and gave him
great wealth; after which he turned to Kaylajan and Kurajan, and said to
them, “Harkye, Chiefs of the Jinn, ’tis my will that ye carry me,
together with Ra’ad Shah and Jamrkan and Sa’adan to the land of Hind.”
“We hear and we obey,” answered they. So Kurajan took up Jamrkan and
Sa’adan, whilst Kaylajan took Gharib and Ra’ad Shah and made for the
land of Hind.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the two
Marids had taken up Gharib and Jamrkan, Sa’adan the Ghul and Ra’ad Shah,
they flew on with them from sundown till the last of the night, when
they set them down on the terrace of King Tarkanan’s palace at Cashmere.
Now news was brought to Tarkanan by the remnants of his host of what had
befallen his son, whereat he slept not neither took delight in aught,
and he was troubled with sore trouble. As he sat in his Harim, pondering
his case, behold, Gharib and his company descended the stairways of the
palace and came in to him; and when he saw his son and those who were
with him, he was confused and fear took him of the Marids. Then Ra’ad
Shah turned to him and said, “How long wilt thou persist in thy
frowardness, O traitor and worshipper of the Fire? Woe to thee! Leave
worshipping the Fire and serve the Magnanimous Sire, Creator of day and
night, whom attaineth no sight.” When Tarkanan heard his son’s speech,
he cast at him an iron club he had by him; but it missed him and fell
upon a buttress of the palace and smote out three stones. Then cried the
King, “O dog, thou hast destroyed mine army and hast forsaken thy faith
and comest now to make me do likewise!” With this Gharib went up to him
and dealt him a cuff on the neck which knocked him down; whereupon the
Marids bound him fast and all the Harim-women fled. Then Gharib sat down
on the throne of kingship and said to Ra’ad Shah, “Do thou justice upon
thy father.” So Ra’ad Shah turned to him and said, “O perverse old man,
become one of the saved and thou shalt be saved from the fire and the
wrath of the All-powerful.” But Tarkanan cried, “I will not die save in
my own faith.” Whereupon Gharib drew Al-Mahik and smote him therewith,
and he fell to the earth in two pieces, and Allah hurried his soul to
the fire and abiding-place dire.[62] Then Gharib bade hang his body over
the palace gate and they hung one-half on the right hand and the other
on the left and waited till day, when Gharib caused Ra’ad Shah don the
royal habit and sit down on his father’s throne, with himself on his
dexter hand and Jamrkan and Sa’adan and the Marids standing right and
left; and he said to Kaylajan and Kurajan, “Whoso entereth of the
Princes and Officers, seize him and bind him, and let not a single
Captain escape you.” And they answered, “Hearkening and obedience!”
Presently, the Officers made for the palace, to do their service to the
King, and the first to appear was the Chief Captain who, seeing King
Tarkanan’s dead body cut in half and hanging on either side of the gate,
was seized with terror and amazement. Then Kaylajan laid hold of him by
the collar and threw him and pinioned him; after which he dragged him
into the palace and before sunrise they had bound three hundred and
fifty Captains and set them before Gharib, who said to them, “O folk,
have you seen your King hanging at the palace-gate?” Asked they, “Who
hath done this deed?”; and he answered, “I did it, by the help of Allah
Almighty; and whoso opposeth me, I will do with him likewise.” Then
quoth they, “What is thy will with us?”; and quoth he, “I am Gharib,
King of Al-Irak, he who slew your warriors; and now Ra’ad Shah hath
embraced the Faith of Salvation and is become a mighty King and ruler
over you. So do ye become True Believers and all shall be well with you;
but, if ye refuse, you shall repent it.” So they pronounced the
profession of the Faith and were enrolled among the people of felicity.
Then said Gharib, “Are your hearts indeed stablished in the sweetness of
the Belief?”; and they replied, “Yes”; whereupon he bade release them
and clad them in robes of honour, saying, “Go to your people and expound
Al-Islam to them. Whoso accepteth the Faith, spare him; but if he refuse
slay him.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Gharib
said to the troops of Ra’ad Shah, “Go to your people and offer Al-Islam
to them. Whoso accepteth the Faith spare him; but if he refuse, slay
him.” So they went out and, assembling the men under their command,
explained what had taken place and expounded Al-Islam to them, and they
all professed, except a few, whom they put to death; after which they
returned and told Gharib, who blessed Allah and glorified Him, saying,
“Praised be the Almighty who hath made this thing easy to us without
strife!” Then he abode in Cashmere of India forty days, till he had
ordered the affairs of the country and cast down the shrines and temples
of the Fire and built in their stead mosques and cathedrals, whilst
Ra’ad Shah made ready for him rarities and treasures beyond count and
despatched them to Al-Irak in ships. Then Gharib mounted on Kaylajan’s
back and Jamrkan and Sa’adan on that of Kurajan, after they had taken
leave of Ra’ad Shah; and journeyed through the night till break of day,
when they reached Oman city where their troops met them and saluted them
and rejoiced in them. Then they set out for Cufa where Gharib called for
his brother Ajib and commanded to hang him. So Sahim brought hooks of
iron and driving them into the tendons of Ajib’s heels, hung him over
the gate; and Gharib bade them shoot him; so they riddled him with
arrows, till he was like unto a porcupine. Then Gharib entered his
palace and sitting down on the throne of his kingship, passed the day in
ordering the affairs of the state. At nightfall he went in to his Harim,
where Star o’ Morn came to meet him and embraced him and gave him joy,
she and her women, of his safety. He spent that day and lay that night
with her and on the morrow, after he had made the Ghusl-ablution and
prayed the dawn-prayer, he sat down on his throne and commanded
preparation to be made for his marriage with Mahdiyah. Accordingly they
slaughtered three thousand head of sheep and two thousand oxen and a
thousand he-goats and five hundred camels and the like number of horses,
beside four thousand fowls and great store of geese; never was such
wedding in Al-Islam to that day. Then he went in to Mahdiyah and took
her maidenhead and abode with her ten days; after which he committed the
kingdom to his uncle Al-Damigh, charging him to rule the lieges justly,
and journeyed with his women and warriors, till he came to the ships
laden with the treasures and rarities which Ra’ad Shah had sent him, and
divided the monies among his men who from poor became rich. Then they
fared on till they reached the city of Babel, where he bestowed on Sahim
Al-Layl a robe of honour and appointed him Sultan of the city.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Gharib, after
robing his brother Sahim and appointing him Sultan, abode with him ten
days, after which he set out again and journeyed nor stinted travel till
he reached the castle of Sa’adan the Ghul, where they rested five days.
Then quoth Gharib to Kaylajan and Kurajan, “Pass over to Isbánír
al-Madáin, to the palace of the Chosroe, and find what is come of Fakhr
Taj and bring me one of the King’s kinsmen, who shall acquaint me with
what hath passed.” Quoth they, “We hear and we obey,” and set out
forthright for Isbanir. As they flew between heaven and earth, behold,
they caught sight of a mighty army, as it were the surging sea, and
Kaylajan said to Kurajan, “Let us descend and determine what be this
host.” So they alighted and walking among the troops, found them
Persians and questioned the soldiers whose men they were and whither
they were bound; whereto they made answer, “We are _en route_ for
Al-Irak, to slay Gharib and all who company him.” When the Marids heard
these words, they repaired to the pavilion of the Persian general, whose
name was Rustam, and waited till the soldiers slept, when they took up
Rustam, bed and all, and made for the castle where Gharib lay. They
arrived there by midnight and going to the door of the King’s pavilion,
cried, “Permission!” which when he heard, he sat up and said, “Come in.”
So they entered and set down the couch with Rustam asleep thereon.
Gharib asked, “Who be this?” and they answered, “This be a Persian
Prince, whom we met coming with a great host, thinking to slay thee and
thine, and we have brought him to thee, that he may tell thee what thou
hast a mind to know.” “Fetch me an hundred braves!” cried Gharib, and
they fetched them; whereupon he bade them, “Draw your swords and stand
at the head of this Persian carle!” Then they awoke him and he opened
his eyes; and, finding an arch of steel over his head, shut them again,
crying, “What be this foul dream?” But Kaylajan pricked him with his
sword-point and he sat up and said, “Where am I?” Quoth Sahim, “Thou art
in the presence of King Gharib, son-in-law of the King of the Persians.
What is thy name and whither goest thou?” When Rustam heard Gharib’s
name, he bethought himself and said in his mind, “Am I asleep or awake?”
Whereupon Sahim dealt him a buffet, saying, “Why dost thou not answer?”
And he raised his head and asked, “Who brought me from my tent out of
the midst of my men?” Gharib answered, “These two Marids brought thee.”
So he looked at Kaylajan and Kurajan and skited in his bag-trousers.
Then the Marids fell upon him, baring their tusks and brandishing their
blades, and said to him, “Wilt thou not rise and kiss ground before King
Gharib?” And he trembled at them and was assured that he was not asleep;
so he stood up and kissed the ground between the hands of Gharib,
saying, “The blessing of the Fire be on thee, and long life be thy life,
O King!” Gharib cried, “O dog of the Persians, fire is not worshipful,
for that it is harmful and profiteth not save in cooking food.” Asked
Rustam, “Who then is worshipful?”; and Gharib answered, “Alone
worship-worth is God, who formed thee and fashioned thee and created the
heavens and the earth.” Quoth the Ajami, “What shall I say that I may
become of the party of this Lord and enter thy Faith?”; and quoth
Gharib, “Say:—There is no god but _the_ God, and Abraham is the Friend
of God.” So Rustam pronounced the profession of the Faith and was
enrolled among the people of felicity. Then said he to Gharib, “Know, O
my lord, that thy father-in-law, King Sabúr, seeketh to slay thee; and
indeed he hath sent me with an hundred thousand men, charging me to
spare none of you.” Gharib rejoined, “Is this my reward for having
delivered his daughter from death and dishonour? Allah will requite him
his ill intent. But what is thy name?” The Persian answered, “My name is
Rustam, general of Sabur;” and Gharib, “Thou shalt have the like rank in
my army,” adding, “But tell me, O Rustam, how is it with the Princess
Fakhr Taj?” “May thy head live, O King of the age!” “What was the cause
of her death?” Rustam replied, “O my lord, no sooner hadst thou left us
than one of the Princess’s women went in to King Sabur and said to
him:—O my master, didst thou give Gharib leave to lie with the Princess
my mistress? whereto he answered:—No, by the virtue of the fire! and
drawing his sword, went in to his daughter and said to her:—O foul
baggage, why didst thou suffer yonder Badawi to sleep with thee, without
dower or even wedding? She replied:—O my papa, ’twas thou gavest him
leave to sleep with me. Then he asked:—Did the fellow have thee? but she
was silent and hung down her head. Hereupon he cried out to the midwives
and slave-girls, saying:—Pinion me this harlot’s elbows behind her and
look at her privy parts. So they did as he bade them and after
inspecting her slit said to him:—O King, she hath lost her maidenhead.
Whereupon he ran at her and would have slain her, but her mother rose up
and threw herself between them crying:—O King, slay her not, lest thou
be for ever dishonoured; but shut her in a cell till she die. So he cast
her into prison till nightfall, when he called two of his courtiers and
said to them:—Carry her afar off and throw her into the river Jayhun and
tell none. They did his commandment, and indeed her memory is forgotten
and her time is past.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib
asked news of Fakhr Taj, Rustam informed him that she had been drowned
in the river by her sire’s command. And when Gharib heard this, the
world waxed wan before his eyes and he cried, “By the virtue of Abraham
the Friend, I will assuredly go to yonder dog and overwhelm him and lay
waste his realm!” Then he sent letters to Jamrkan and to the governors
of Mosul and Mayyáfárikín; and, turning to Rustam, said to him, “How
many men hadst thou in thine army?” He replied, “An hundred thousand
Persian horse;” and Gharib rejoined, “Take ten thousand horse and go to
thy people and occupy them with war; I will follow on thy trail.” So
Rustam mounted and taking ten thousand Arab horse made for his tribe,
saying in himself, “I will do a deed shall whiten my face with King
Gharib.” So he fared on seven days, till there remained but half a day’s
journey between him and the Persian camp; when, dividing his host into
four divisions he said to his men, “Surround the Persians on all sides
and fall upon them with the sword.” They rode on from eventide till
midnight, when they had compassed the camp of the Ajamis, who were
asleep in security, and fell upon them, shouting, “God is Most Great!”
Whereupon the Persians started up from sleep and their feet slipped and
the sabre went round amongst them; for the All-knowing King was wroth
with them, and Rustam wrought amongst them as fire in dry fuel; till, by
the end of the night, the whole of the Persian host was slain or wounded
or fled, and the Moslems made prize of their tents and baggage, horses,
camels and treasure-chests. Then they alighted and rested in the tents
of the Ajamis till King Gharib came up and, seeing what Rustam had done
and how he had gained by stratagem a great and complete victory, he
invested him with a robe of honour and said to him, “O Rustam, it was
thou didst put the Persians to the rout; wherefore all the spoil is
thine.” So he kissed Gharib’s hand and thanked him, and they rested till
the end of the day, when they set out for King Sabur’s capital.
Meanwhile, the fugitives of the defeated force reached Isbanir and went
in to Sabur, crying out and saying, “Alas!” and “Well-away!” and “Woe
worth the day!” Quoth he, “What hath befallen you and who with his
mischief hath smitten you?” So they told him all that had passed and
said, “Naught befel us except that thy general Rustam fell upon us in
the darkness of the night because he had turned Moslem; nor did Gharib
come near us.” When the King heard this, he cast his crown to the ground
and said, “There is no worth left us!” Then he turned to his son Ward
Shah[63] and said to him, “O my son, there is none for this affair save
thou.” Answered Ward Shah, “By thy life, O my father, I will assuredly
bring Gharib and his chiefs of the people in chains and slay all who are
with him.” Then he numbered his army and found it two hundred and twenty
thousand men. So they slept, intending to set forth on the morrow; but,
next morning, as they were about to march, behold, a cloud of dust arose
and spread till it walled the world and baffled the sight of the
farthest-seeing wight. Now Sabur had mounted to farewell his son, and
when he saw this mighty great dust, he let call a runner and said to
him, “Go find me out the cause of this dust-cloud.” The scout went and
returned, saying, “O my lord, Gharib and his braves are upon you;”
whereupon they unloaded their bât-beasts and drew out in line of battle.
When Gharib came up and saw the Persians ranged in row, he cried out to
his men, saying, “Charge with the blessing of Allah!” So they waved the
flags, and the Arabs and the Ajamis drave one at other and folk were
heaped upon folk. Blood ran like water and all souls saw death face to
face; the brave advanced and pressed forward to assail and the coward
hung back and turned tail and they ceased not from fight and fray till
ended day, when the kettle-drums beat the retreat and the two hosts drew
apart. Then Sabur commanded to pitch his camp hard over the city-gate,
and Gharib set up his pavilions in front of theirs; and every one went
to his tent.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the two hosts
drew apart, every one went to his tent until the morning. As soon as it
was day, the two hosts mounted their strong steeds and levelled their
lances and wore their harness of war; then they raised their
slogan-cries and drew out in battle-array, whilst came forth all the
lordly knights and the lions of fights. Now the first to open the gate
of battle was Rustam, who urged his charger into mid-field and cried
out, “God is most Great! I am Rustam champion-in-chief of the Arabs and
Ajams. Who is for tilting, who is for fighting? Let no sluggard come out
to me this day or weakling!” Then there rushed forth to him a champion
of the Persians; the two charged each other and there befel between them
a sore fight, till Rustam sprang upon his adversary and smote him with a
mace he had with him, seventy pounds in weight, and beat his head down
upon his breast, and he fell to the earth, dead and in his blood
drowned. This was no light matter to Sabur and he commanded his men to
charge; so they drave at the Moslems, invoking the aid of the
light-giving Sun, whilst the True Believers called for help upon the
Magnanimous King. But the Ajams, the Miscreants, outnumbered the Arabs,
the Moslems, and made them drain the cup of death; which when Gharib saw
he drew his sword Al-Mahik and crying out his war-cry, fell upon the
Persians, with Kaylajan and Kurajan at either stirrup; nor did he leave
playing upon them with blade till he hewed his way to the
standard-bearer and smote him on the head with the flat of his sword,
whereupon he fell down in a fainting-fit and the two Marids bore him off
to their camp. When the Persians saw the standard fall, they turned and
fled and for the city-gates made; but the Moslems followed them with the
blade and they crowded together to enter the city, so that they could
not shut the gates and there died of them much people. Then Rustam and
Sa’adan, Jamrkan and Sahim, Al-Damigh, Kaylajan and Kurajan and all the
braves Mohammedan and the champions of Faith Unitarian fell upon the
misbelieving Persians in the gates, and the blood of the Kafirs ran in
the streets like a torrent till they threw down their arms and harness
and called out for quarter; whereupon the Moslems stayed their swords
from the slaughter and drove them to their tents, as one driveth a flock
of sheep. Meanwhile Gharib returned to his pavilion, where he doffed his
gear and washed himself of the blood of the Infidels; after which he
donned his royal robes and sat down on his chair of estate. Then he
called for the King of the Persians and said to him, “O dog of the
Ajams, what moved thee to deal thus with thy daughter? How seest thou me
unworthy to be her baron?” And Sabur answered, saying, “O King, punish
me not because of that deed which I did; for I repent me and confronted
thee not in fight but in my fear of thee.”[64] When Gharib heard these
words he bade throw him flat and beat him. So they bastinadoed him, till
he could no longer groan, and cast him among the prisoners. Then Gharib
expounded Al-Islam to the Persians and one hundred and twenty thousand
of them embraced The Faith, and the rest he put to the sword. Moreover
all the citizens professed Al-Islam and Gharib mounted and entered in
great state the city Isbanir al-Madain. Then he went into the King’s
palace and sitting down on Sabur’s throne, gave robes and largesse and
distributed the booty and treasure among the Arabs and Persians,
wherefore they loved him and wished him victory and honour and endurance
of days. But Fakhr Taj’s mother remembered her daughter and raised the
voice of mourning for her, and the palace was filled with wails and
cries. Gharib heard this and entering the Harim, asked the women what
ailed them, whereupon the Princess’s mother came forward and said, “O my
lord, thy presence put me in mind of my daughter and how she would have
joyed in thy coming, had she been alive and well.” Gharib wept for her
and sitting down on his throne, called for Sabur, and they brought him
stumbling in his shackles. Quoth Gharib to him, “O dog of the Persians,
what didst thou do with thy daughter?” “I gave her to such an one and
such an one,” quoth the King, “saying:—Drown her in the river Jayhún.”
So Gharib sent for the two men and asked them, “Is what he saith true?”
Answered they, “Yes; but, O King, we did not drown her, nay we took pity
on her and left her on the banks of the Jayhun, saying:—Save thyself and
return not to the city, lest the King slay thee and slay us with thee.
This is all we know of her.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Six Hundred and Seventieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the two men
ended the tale of Fakhr Taj with these words, “And we left her upon the
bank of the river Jayhun!” Now, when Gharib heard this he bade bring the
astrologers and said to them, “Strike me a board of geomancy and find
out what is come of Fakhr Taj, and whether she is still in the bonds of
life or dead.” They did so and said, “O King of the age, it is manifest
to us that the Princess is alive and hath borne a male child; but she is
with a tribe of the Jinn, and will be parted from thee twenty years;
count, therefore, how many years thou hast been absent in travel.” So he
reckoned up the years of his absence and found them eight years and
said, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great!”[65] Then he sent for all Sabur’s Governors of
towns and strongholds and they came and did him homage. Now one day
after this, as he sat in his palace, behold, a cloud of dust appeared in
the distance and spread till it walled the whole land and darkened the
horizon. So he summoned the two Marids and bade them reconnoitre, and
they went forth under the dust cloud and snatching up a horseman of the
advancing host, returned and set him down before Gharib, saying, “Ask
this fellow, for he is of the army.” Quoth Gharib, “Whose power is
this?” and the man answered, “O King, ’tis the army of Khirad Shah,[66]
King of Shiras, who is come forth to fight thee.” Now the cause of
Khirad Shah’s coming was this. When Gharib defeated Sabur’s army, as
hath been related, and took him prisoner, the King’s son fled, with a
handful of his father’s force and ceased not flying till he reached the
city of Shiras, where he went into King Khirad Shah and kissed ground
before him, whilst the tears ran down his cheeks. When the King saw him
in this case, he said to him, “Lift thy head, O youth, and tell me what
maketh thee weep.” He replied, “O King, a King of the Arabs, by name
Gharib, hath fallen on us and captured the King my sire and slain the
Persians making them drain the cup of death.” And he told him all that
had passed from first to last. Quoth Khirad Shah, “Is my wife[67] well?”
and quoth the Prince, “Gharib hath taken her.” Cried the King “As my
head liveth, I will not leave a Badawi or a Moslem on the face of the
earth!” So he wrote letters to his Viceroys, who levied their troops and
joined him with an army which when reviewed numbered eighty-five
thousand men. Then he opened his armouries and distributed arms and
armour to the troops, after which he set out with them and journeyed
till he came to Isbanir, and all encamped before the city-gate. Hereupon
Kaylajan and Kurajan came in to Gharib and kissing his knee, said to
him, “O our Lord, heal our hearts and give us this host to our share.”
And he said, “Up and at them!” So the two Marids flew aloft high in the
lift and lighting down in the pavilion of the King of Shiras, found him
seated on his chair of estate, with the Prince of Persia, Ward Shah son
of Sabur, sitting on his right hand, and about him his Captains, with
whom he was taking counsel for the slaughter of the Moslems. Kaylajan
came forward and caught up the Prince and Kurajan snatched up the King
and the twain flew back with them to Gharib, who caused beat them till
they fainted. Then the Marids returned to the Shirazian camp and,
drawing their swords, which no mortal man had strength to wield, fell
upon the Misbelievers and Allah hurried their souls to the Fire and
abiding-place dire, whilst they saw no one and nothing save two swords
flashing and reaping men, as a husbandman reaps corn. So they left their
tents and mounting their horses bare-backed, fled; and the Marids
pursued them two days and slew of them much people; after which they
returned and kissed Gharib’s hand. He thanked them for the deed they had
done and said to them, “The spoil of the Infidels is yours alone: none
shall share with you therein.” So they called down blessings on him and
going forth, gathered the booty together and abode in their own homes.
On this wise it fared with them; but as regards Gharib and his
lieges,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-first Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after Gharib
had put to flight the host of Khirad Shah, he bade Kaylajan and Kurajan
take the spoil to their own possession nor share it with any; so they
gathered the booty and abode in their own homes. Meanwhile the remains
of the beaten force ceased not flying till they reached the city of
Shiras and there lifted up the voice of weeping and began the ceremonial
lamentations for those of them that had been slain. Now King Khirad Shah
had a brother Sírán the Sorcerer hight, than whom there was no greater
wizard in his day, and he lived apart from his brother in a certain
stronghold, called the Fortalice of Fruits,[68] in a place abounding in
trees and streams and birds and blooms, half a day’s journey from
Shiras. So the fugitives betook them thither and went in to Siran the
Sorcerer, weeping and wailing aloud. Quoth he, “O folk, what garreth you
weep?” and they told him all that had happened, especially how the two
Marids had carried off his brother Khirad Shah; whereupon the light of
his eyes became night and he said, “By the virtue of my faith, I will
certainly slay Gharib and all his men and leave not one alive to tell
the tale!” Then he pronounced certain magical words and summoned the Red
King, who appeared and Siran said to him, “Fare for Isbanir and fall on
Gharib, as he sitteth upon his throne.” Replied he, “Hearkening and
obedience!” and, gathering his troops, repaired to Isbanir and assailed
Gharib, who seeing him, drew his sword Al-Mahik and he and Kaylajan and
Kurajan fell upon the army of the Red King and slew of them five hundred
and thirty and wounded the King himself with a grievous wound; whereupon
he and his people fled and stayed not in their flight, till they reached
the Fortalice of Fruits and went into Siran, crying out and exclaiming,
“Woe!” and “Ruin!” And the Red King said to Siran, “O sage, Gharib hath
with him the enchanted sword of Japhet son of Noah, and whomsoever he
smiteth therewith he severeth him in sunder, and with him also are two
Marids from Mount Caucasus, given to him by King Mura’ash. He it is who
slew the blue King and Barkan Lord of the Carnelian City, and did to
death much people of the Jinn.” When the Enchanter heard this, he said
to the Red King, “Go,” and he went his ways; whereupon he resumed his
conjurations, and calling up a Marid, by name Zu’ázi’a gave him a drachm
of levigated Bhang and said to him, “Go thou at Isbanir, and enter King
Gharib’s palace and assume the form of a sparrow. Wait till he fall and
there be none with him; then put the Bhang up his nostrils and bring him
to me.” “To hear is to obey,” replied the Marid and flew to Isbanir,
where, changing himself into a sparrow, he perched on the window of the
palace and waited till all Gharib’s attendants retired to their rooms
and the King himself slept. Then he flew down and going up to Gharib,
blew the powdered Bhang into his nostrils, till he lost his senses,
whereupon he wrapped him in the bed-coverlet and flew off with him, like
the storm-wind, to the Fortalice of Fruits; where he arrived at midnight
and laid his prize before Siran. The Sorcerer thanked him and would have
put Gharib to death, as he lay senseless under Bhang; but a man of his
people withheld him saying, “O Sage, an thou slay him, his friend King
Mura’ash will fall on us with all his Ifrits and lay waste our realm.”
“How then shall we do with him?” asked Siran, and the other answered,
“Cast him into the Jayhun while he is still in Bhang and he shall be
drowned and none will know who threw him in.” And Siran bade the Marid
take Gharib and cast him into Jayhun river.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

[Illustration]

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Marid took
Gharib and carried him to the Jayhun purposing to cast him therein, but
it was grievous to him to drown him, wherefore he made a raft of wood
and binding it with cords, pushed it out (and Gharib thereon) into the
current, which carried it away. Thus fared it with Gharib; but as
regards his people, when they awoke in the morning and went in to do
their service to their King, they found him not and seeing his rosary on
the throne, awaited him awhile, but he came not. So they sought out the
head Chamberlain and said to him, “Go into the Harim and look for the
King: for it is not his habit to tarry till this time.” Accordingly, the
Chamberlain entered the Serraglio and enquired for the King, but the
women said, “Since yesterday we have not seen him.” Thereupon he
returned and told the Officers, who were confounded and said, “Let us
see if he have gone to take his pleasure in the gardens.” Then they went
out and questioned the gardeners if they had seen the King, and they
answered, “No;” whereat they were sore concerned and searched all the
garths till the end of the day, when they returned in tears. Moreover,
the two Marids sought for him all round the city, but came back after
three days, without having happened on any tidings of him. So the people
donned black and made their complaint to the Lord of all worshipping men
who doth as he is fain. Meanwhile, the current bore the raft along for
five days till it brought it to the salt sea, where the waves disported
with Gharib and his stomach, being troubled, threw up the Bhang. Then he
opened his eyes and finding himself in the midst of the main, a
plaything of the billows, said, “There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! Would to Heaven I wot who
hath done this deed by me!” Presently as he lay, perplexed concerning
his case, lo! he caught sight of a ship sailing by and signalled with
his sleeve to the sailors, who came to him and took him up, saying, “Who
art thou and whence comest thou?” He replied, “Do ye feed me and give me
to drink, till I recover myself, and after I will tell you who I am.” So
they brought him water and victual, and he ate and drank and Allah
restored to him his reason. Then he asked them, “O folk, what countrymen
are ye and what is your Faith?;” and they answered, “We are from
Karaj[69] and we worship an idol called Minkásh.” Cried Gharib,
“Perdition to you and your idol! O dogs, none is worthy of worship save
Allah who created all things, who saith to a thing Be! and it becometh.”
When they heard this, they rose up and fell upon him in great wrath and
would have seized him. Now he was without weapons, but whomsoever he
struck, he smote down and deprived of life, till he had felled forty
men, after which they overcame him by force of numbers and bound him
fast, saying, “We will not slay him save in our own land, that we may
first show him to our King.” Then they sailed on till they came to the
city of Karaj.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the ship’s
crew seized Gharib and bound him fast they said, “We will not slay him
save in our own land.” Then they sailed on till they came to the city of
Karaj, the builder whereof was an Amalekite, fierce and furious; and he
had set up at each gate of the city a magical figure of copper which,
whenever a stranger entered, blew a blast on a trumpet, that all in the
city heard it and fell upon the stranger and slew him, except they
embraced their creed. When Gharib entered the city, the figure stationed
at the gate blew such a horrible blast that the King was affrighted and
going into his idol, found fire and smoke issuing from its mouth, nose
and eyes. Now a Satan had entered the belly of the idol and speaking as
with its tongue, said, “O King, there is come to thy city one hight
Gharib, King of Al-Irak, who biddeth the folk quit their belief and
worship his Lord; wherefore, when they bring him before thee, look thou
spare him not.” So the King went out and sat down on his throne; and
presently, the sailors brought in Gharib and set him before the
presence, saying, “O King, we found this youth shipwrecked in the midst
of the sea, and he is a Kafir and believeth not in our gods.” Then they
told him all that had passed and the King said, “Carry him to the house
of the Great Idol and cut his throat before him, so haply our god may
look lovingly upon us.” But the Wazir said, “O King, it befitteth not to
slaughter him thus, for he would die in a moment: better we imprison him
and build a pyre of fuel and burn him with fire.” Thereupon the King
commanded to cast Gharib into gaol and caused wood to be brought, and
they made a mighty pyre and set fire to it, and it burnt till the
morning. Then the King and the people of the city came forth and the
Ruler sent to fetch Gharib; but his lieges found him not; so they
returned and told their King who said, “And how made he his escape?”
Quoth they, “We found the chains and shackles cast down and the doors
fast locked.” Whereat the King marvelled and asked, “Hath this fellow to
Heaven up flown or into the earth gone down?;” and they answered, “We
know not.” Then said the King, “I will go and question my God, and he
will inform me whither he is gone.” So he rose and went in, to prostrate
himself to his idol, but found it not and began to rub his eyes and say,
“Am I in sleep or on wake?” Then he turned to his Wazir and said to him,
“Where is my God and where is my prisoner? By my faith, O dog of Wazirs,
haddest thou not counselled me to burn him, I had slaughtered him; for
it is he who hath stolen my god and fled; and there is no help but I
take blood-wreak of him!” Then he drew his sword and struck off the
Wazir’s head. Now there was for Gharib’s escape with the idol a strange
cause and it was on this wise. When they had shut him up in a cell
adjoining the doomed shrine under which stood the idol, he rose to pray,
calling upon the name of Almighty Allah and seeking deliverance of Him,
to whom be honour and glory! The Marid who had charge of the idol and
spoke in its name, heard him and fear got hold upon his heart and he
said, “O shame upon me! Who is this seeth me while I see him not?” So he
went in to Gharib and throwing himself at his feet, said to him, “O my
Lord, what must I say that I may become of thy company and enter thy
religion?” Replied Gharib, “Say:—There is no god but _the_ God and
Abraham is the Friend of God.” So the Marid pronounced the profession of
Faith and was enrolled among the people of felicity. Now his name was
Zalzál, son of Al-Muzalzil,[70] one of the Chiefs of the Kings of the
Jinn. Then he unbound Gharib and taking him and the idol, made for the
higher air.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Marid took up
Gharib and the idol and made for the higher air. Such was his case; but
as regards the King, when his soldiers saw what had befallen and the
slaughter of the Wazir they renounced the worship of the idol and
drawing their swords, slew the King; after which they fell on one
another, and the sword went round amongst them three days, till there
abode alive but two men, one of whom prevailed over the other and killed
him. Then the boys attacked the survivor and slew him and fell to
fighting amongst themselves, till they were all killed; and the women
and girls fled to the hamlets and forted villages; wherefore the city
became desert and none dwelt therein but the owl. Meanwhile, the Marid
Zalzal flew with Gharib towards his own country, the Island of Camphor
and the Castle of Crystal and the Land of the Enchanted Calf, so called
because its King Al-Muzalzil, had a pied calf, which he had clad in
housings brocaded with red gold, and worshipped as a god. One day the
King and his people went in to the calf and found him trembling; so the
King said, “O my God, what hath troubled thee?” whereupon the Satan in
the calf’s belly cried out and said, “O Muzalzil, verily thy son hath
deserted to the Faith of Abraham the Friend, at the hands of Gharib Lord
of Al-Irak;” and went on to tell him all that had passed from first to
last. When the King heard the words of his calf he was confounded and
going forth, sat down upon his throne. Then he summoned his Grandees who
came in a body, and he told them what he had heard from the idol,
whereat they marvelled and said, “What shall we do, O King?” Quoth he,
“When my son cometh and ye see him embrace him, do ye lay hold of him.”
And they said, “Hearkening and obedience!” After two days came Zalzal
and Gharib, with the King’s idol of Karaj, but no sooner had they
entered the palace-gate than the Jinn seized on them and carried them
before Al-Muzalzil, who looked at his son with eyes of ire and said to
him, “O dog of the Jann, hast thou left thy Faith and that of thy
fathers and grandfathers?” Quoth Zalzal, “I have embraced the True
Faith, and on like wise do thou (Woe be to thee!) seek salvation and
thou shalt be saved from the wrath of the King Almighty in sway, Creator
of Night and Day.” Therewith his father waxed wroth and said, “O son of
adultery, dost confront me with these words?” Then he bade clap him in
prison and turning to Gharib, said to him, “O wretch of a mortal, how
hast thou abused my son’s wit and seduced him from his Faith?” Quoth
Gharib, “Indeed, I have brought him out of wrongousness into the way of
righteousness, out of Hell into Heaven and out of unfaith to the True
Faith.” Whereupon the King cried out to a Marid called Sayyár, saying,
“Take this dog and cast him into the Wady of Fire, that he may perish.”
Now this valley was in the “Waste Quarter[71]” and was thus named from
the excess of its heat and the flaming of its fire, which was so fierce
that none who went down therein could live an hour, but was destroyed;
and it was compassed about by mountains high and slippery wherein was no
opening. So Sayyar took up Gharib and flew with him towards the Valley
of Fire, till he came within an hour’s journey thereof, when being
weary, he alighted in a valley full of trees and streams and fruits, and
setting down from his back Gharib chained as he was, fell asleep for
fatigue. When Gharib heard him snore, he strove with his bonds till he
burst them; then, taking up a heavy stone, he cast it down on the
Marid’s head and crushed his bones, so that he died on the spot. Then he
fared on into the valley.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Gharib after
killing the Marid fared on into the valley and found himself in a great
island in mid-ocean, full of all fruits that lips and tongue could
desire. So he abode alone on the island, drinking of its waters and
eating of its fruits and of fish that he caught, and days and years
passed over him, till he had sojourned there in his solitude seven
years. One day, as he sat, behold, there came down on him from the air
two Marids, each carrying a man; and seeing him they said, “Who art
thou, O fellow, and of which of the tribes art thou?” Now they took him
for a Jinni, because his hair was grown long; and he replied, saying, “I
am not of the Jann,” whereupon they questioned him, and he told them all
that had befallen him. They grieved for him and one of the Ifrits said,
“Abide thou here till we bear these two lambs to our King, that he may
break his fast on the one and sup on the other, and after we will come
back and carry thee to thine own country.” He thanked them and said,
“Where be the lambs?” Quoth they, “These two mortals are the lambs.” And
Gharib said, “I take refuge with Allah the God of Abraham the Friend,
the Lord of all creatures, who hath power over everything!” Then the
Marids flew away and Gharib abode awaiting them two days, when one of
them returned, bringing with him a suit of clothes wherewith he clad
him. Then he took him up and flew with him sky-high out of sight of
earth, till Gharib heard the angels glorifying God in heaven, and a
flaming shaft issued from amongst them and made for the Marid, who fled
from it towards the earth. The meteor pursued him, till he came within a
spear’s cast of the ground, when Gharib leaped from his shoulders and
the fiery shaft overtook the Marid, who became a heap of ashes. As for
Gharib, he fell into the sea and sank two fathoms deep, after which he
rose to the surface and swam for two days and two nights, till his
strength failed him and he made certain of death. But, on the third day
as he was despairing he caught sight of an island steep and mountainous;
so he swam for it and landing, walked on inland, where he rested a day
and a night, feeding on the growth of the ground. Then he climbed to the
mountain top, and, descending the opposite slope, fared on two days till
he came in sight of a walled and bulwarked city, abounding in trees and
rills. He walked up to it; but, when he reached the gate, the warders
seized on him, and carried him to their Queen, whose name was Ján
Sháh.[72] Now she was five hundred years old, and every man who entered
the city, they brought to her and she made him sleep with her, and when
he had done his work, she slew him and so had she slain many men. When
she saw Gharib, he pleased her mightily; so she asked him, “What be thy
name and Faith and whence comest thou?” and he answered, “My name is
Gharib King of Irak, and I am a Moslem.” Said she, “Leave this Creed and
enter mine and I will marry thee and make thee King.” But he looked at
her with eyes of ire and cried, “Perish thou and thy faith!” Cried she,
“Dost thou blaspheme my idol, which is of red carnelian, set with pearls
and gems?” And she called out to her men, saying, “Imprison him in the
house of the idol; haply it will soften his heart.” So they shut him up
in the domed shrine and locking the doors upon him, went their way.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when they took
Gharib, they jailed him in the idol’s domed shrine; and locking the
doors upon him, went their way. As soon as they were gone, Gharib gazed
at the idol, which was of red carnelian, with collars of pearls and
precious stones about its neck, and presently he went close to it and
lifting it up, dashed it on the ground and brake it in bits; after which
he lay down and slept till daybreak. When morning morrowed, the Queen
took seat on her throne and said, “O men, bring me the prisoner.” So
they opened the temple doors and entering, found the idol broken in
pieces, whereupon they buffeted their faces till the blood ran from the
corners of their eyes. Then they made at Gharib to seize him; but he
smote one of them with his fist and slew him, and so did he with another
and yet another, till he had slain five-and-twenty of them and the rest
fled and went in to Queen Jan Shah, shrieking loudly. Quoth she, “What
is the matter?” and quoth they, “The prisoner hath broken thine idol and
slain thy men,” and told her all that had passed. When she heard this,
she cast her crown to the ground and said, “There is no worth left in
idols!” Then she mounted amid a thousand fighting-men and rode to the
temple, where she found Gharib had gotten him a sword and come forth and
was slaying men and overthrowing warriors. When she saw his prowess, her
heart was drowned in the love of him and she said to herself, “I have no
need of the idol and care for naught save this Gharib, that he may lie
in my bosom the rest of my life.” Then she cried to her men, “Hold aloof
from him and leave him to himself!”; then, going up to him she muttered
certain magical words, whereupon his arm became benumbed, his forearm
relaxed and the sword dropped from his hand. So they seized him and
pinioned him, as he stood confounded, stupefied. Then the Queen returned
to her palace, and seating herself on her seat of estate, bade her
people withdraw and leave Gharib with her. When they were alone, she
said to him, “O dog of the Arabs, wilt thou shiver my idol and slay my
people?” He replied, “O accursed woman, had he been a god he had
defended himself?” Quoth she, “Stroke me and I will forgive thee all
thou hast done.” But he replied, saying, “I will do nought of this.” And
she said, “By the virtue of my faith, I will torture thee with grievous
torture!” So she took water and conjuring over it, sprinkled it upon him
and he became an ape. And she used to feed and water and keep him in a
closet, appointing one to care for him; and in this plight he abode two
years. Then she called him to her one day and said to him, “Wilt thou
hearken to me?” And he signed to her with his head, “Yes.” So she
rejoiced and freed him from the enchantment. Then she brought him food
and he ate and toyed with her and kissed her, so that she trusted in
him. When it was night she lay down and said to him, “Come, do thy
business.” He replied, “’Tis well;” and, mounting on her breast, seized
her by the neck and brake it, nor did he arise from her till life had
left her. Then, seeing an open cabinet, he went in and found there a
sword of damascened[73] steel and a targe of Chinese iron; so he armed
himself cap-à-pie and waited till the day. As soon as it was morning, he
went forth and stood at the gate of the palace. When the Emirs came and
would have gone in to do their service to the Queen, they found Gharib
standing at the gate, clad in complete war-gear; and he said to them, “O
folk, leave the service of idols and worship the All-wise King, Creator
of Night and Day, the Lord of men, the Quickener of dry bones, for He
made all things and hath dominion over all.” When the Kafirs heard this,
they ran at him, but he fell on them like a rending lion and charged
through them again and again, slaying of them much people;——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night,

[Illustration]

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Kafirs
fell upon Gharib, he slew of them much people; but, when the night came,
they overcame him by dint of numbers and would have taken him by
strenuous effort, when behold, there descended upon the Infidels a
thousand Marids, under the command of Zalzal, who plied them with the
keen sabre and made them drink the cup of destruction, whilst Allah
hurried their souls to Hell-fire, till but few were left of the people
of Jan Shah to tell the tale and the rest cried out, “Quarter! Quarter!”
and believed in the Requiting King, whom no one thing diverteth from
other thing, the Destroyer of the Jabábirah[74] and Exterminator of the
Akásirah, Lord of this world and of the next. Then Zalzal saluted Gharib
and gave him joy of his safety; and Gharib said to him, “How knowest
thou of my case?” and he replied, “O my lord, my father kept me in
prison two years, after sending thee to the Valley of Fire; then he
released me, and I abode with him another year, till I was restored to
favour with him, when I slew him and his troops submitted to me. I ruled
them for a year’s space till, one night, I lay down to sleep, having
thee in thought, and saw thee in a dream, fighting against the people of
Jan Shah; wherefore I took these thousand Marids and came to thee.” And
Gharib marvelled at this happy conjuncture. Then he seized upon Jan
Shah’s treasures and those of the slain and appointed a ruler over the
city; after which the Marids took up Gharib and the monies and he lay
the same night in the Castle of Crystal. He abode Zalzal’s guest six
months, when he desired to depart; so Zalzal gave him rich presents and
despatched three thousand Marids, who brought the spoils of Karaj-city
and added them to those of Jan Shah. Then Zalzal loaded forty thousand
Marids with the treasure and himself taking up Gharib, flew with his
host towards the city of Isbanir al-Madain where they arrived at
midnight. But as Gharib glanced around he saw the walls invested on all
sides by a conquering army,[75] as it were the surging sea, so he said
to Zalzal, “O my brother, what is the cause of this siege and whence
came this army?” Then he alighted on the terrace-roof of his palace and
cried out, saying, “Ho, Star o’ Morn! Ho, Mahdiyah!” Whereupon the twain
started up from sleep in amazement and said, “Who calleth us at this
hour?” Quoth he, “’Tis I, your lord, Gharib, the Marvellous One of the
deeds wondrous.” When the Princesses heard their lord’s voice, they
rejoiced and so did the women and the eunuchs. Then Gharib went down to
them and they threw themselves upon him and lullilooed with cries of
joy, so that all the palace rang again and the Captains of the army
awoke and said, “What is to do?” So they made for the palace and asked
the eunuchs, “Hath one of the King’s women given birth to a child?”; and
they answered, “No; but rejoice ye, for King Gharib hath returned to
you.” So they rejoiced, and Gharib, after salams to the women came forth
amongst his comrades, who threw themselves upon him and kissed his hands
and feet, returning thanks to Almighty Allah and praising Him. Then he
sat down on his throne, with his officers sitting about him, and
questioned them of the beleaguering army. They replied, “O King, these
troops sat down before the city three days ago and there are amongst
them Jinns as well as men; but we know not what they want, for we have
had with them neither battle nor speech.” And presently they added, “The
name of the commander of the besieging army is Murad Shah and he hath
with him an hundred thousand horse and three thousand foot, besides two
hundred tribesmen of the Jinn.” Now the manner of his coming was
wondrous.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the cause of this
army coming upon Isbanir city was wondrous. When the two men, whom Sabur
had charged to drown his daughter Fakhr Taj, let her go, bidding her
flee for her life, she went forth distracted, unknowing whither to turn
and saying, “Where is thine eye, O Gharib, that thou mayst see my case
and the misery I am in?”; and wandered on from country to country, and
valley to valley, till she came to a Wady abounding in trees and
streams, in whose midst stood a strong-based castle and a lofty-builded
as it were one of the pavilions of Paradise. So she betook herself
thither and entering the fortalice, found it hung and carpeted with
stuffs of silk and great plenty of gold and silver vessels; and therein
were an hundred beautiful damsels. When the maidens saw Fakhr Taj, they
came up to her and saluted her, deeming her of the virgins of the Jinn,
and asked her of her case. Quoth she, “I am daughter to the Persians’
King;” and told them all that had befallen her; which when they heard,
they wept over her and condoled with her and comforted her, saying, “Be
of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear, for here shalt thou
have meat and drink and raiment, and we all are thy handmaids.” She
called down blessings on them and they brought her food, of which she
ate till she was satisfied. Then quoth she to them, “Who is the owner of
this palace and lord over you girls?” and quoth they, “King Salsál, son
of Dál, is our master; he passeth a night here once in every month and
fareth in the morning to rule over the tribes of the Jann.” So Fakhr Taj
took up her abode with them and after five days she gave birth to a male
child, as he were the moon. They cut his navel cord and kohl’d his eyes
then they named him Murad Shah, and he grew up in his mother’s lap.
After a while came King Salsal, riding on a paper-white elephant, as he
were a tower plastered with lime and attended by the troops of the Jinn.
He entered the palace, where the hundred damsels met him and kissed
ground before him, and amongst them Fakhr Taj. When the King saw her, he
looked at her and said to the others, “Who is yonder damsel?”; and they
replied, “She is the daughter of Sabur, King of the Persians and Turks
and Daylamites.” Quoth he, “Who brought her hither?” So they repeated to
him her story; whereat he was moved to pity for her and said to her,
“Grieve not, but take patience till thy son be grown a man, when I will
go to the land of the Ajams and strike off thy father’s head from
between his shoulders and seat thy son on the throne in his stead.” So
she rose and kissed his hands and blessed him. Then she abode in the
castle and her son grew up and was reared with the children of the King.
They used to ride forth together a-hunting and birding and he became
skilled in the chase of wild beasts and ravening lions and ate of their
flesh, till his heart became harder than the rock. When he reached the
age of fifteen, his spirit waxed big in him and he said to Fakhr Taj, “O
my mamma, who is my papa?” She replied, “O my son, Gharib, King of Irak,
is thy father and I am the King’s daughter, of the Persians,” and she
told him her story. Quoth he, “Did my grandfather indeed give orders to
slay thee and my father Gharib?”; and quoth she, “Yes.” Whereupon he,
“By the claim thou hast on me for rearing me, I will assuredly go to thy
father’s city and cut off his head and bring it into thy presence!”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Murad Shah
son of Fakhr Taj thus bespake his mother, she rejoiced in his speech.
Now he used to go a-riding with two hundred Marids till he grew to man’s
estate, when he and they fell to making raids and cutting off the roads
and they pushed their razzias ever farther till one day he attacked the
city of Shiraz and took it. Then he proceeded to the palace and cut off
the King’s head, as he sat on his throne, and slew many of his troops,
whereupon the rest cried “Quarter! Quarter!” and kissed his stirrups.
Finding that they numbered ten thousand horse, he led them to Balkh,
where he slew the King of the city and put his men to the rout and made
himself master of the riches of the place. Thence he passed to
Núrayn,[76] at the head of an army of thirty thousand horse, and the
Lord of Nurayn came out to him, with treasure and tribute, and did him
homage. Then he went on to Samarcand of the Persians and took the city,
and after that to Akhlát[77] and took that town also; nor was there any
city he came to but he captured it. Thus Murad Shah became the head of a
mighty host, and all the booty he made and spoils in the sundry cities
he divided among his soldiery, who loved him for his valour and
munificence. At last he came to Isbanir al-Madain and sat down before
it, saying, “Let us wait till the rest of my army come up, when I will
seize on my grandfather and solace my mother’s heart by smiting his neck
in her presence.” So he sent for her, and by reason of this, there was
no battle for three days, when Gharib and Zalzal arrived with the forty
thousand Marids, laden with treasure and presents. They asked concerning
the besiegers, but none could enlighten them beyond saying that the host
had been there encamped for three days without a fight taking place.
Presently came Fakhr Taj, and her son Murad Shah embraced her saying,
“Sit in thy tent till I bring thy father to thee.” And she sought
succour for him of the Lord of the Worlds, the Lord of the heavens and
the Lord of the earths. Next morning, as soon as it was day, Murad Shah
mounted and rode forth, with the two hundred Marids on his right hand
and the Kings of men on his left, whilst the kettle-drums beat to
battle. When Gharib heard this, he also took to horse and, calling his
people to the combat, rode out, with the Jinn on his dexter hand and the
men on his sinistral. Then came forth Murad Shah, armed cap-à-pie and
drave his charger right and left, crying, “O folk, let none come forth
to me but your King. If he conquer me, he shall be lord of both armies,
and if I conquer him, I will slay him, as I have slain others.” When
Gharib heard his speech, he said, “Avaunt, O dog of the Arabs!” And they
charged at each other and lunged with lances, till they broke, then
hewed at each other with swords, till the blades were notched; nor did
they cease to advance and retire and wheel and career, till the day was
half spent and their horses fell down under them, when they dismounted
and gripped each other. Then Murad Shah seizing Gharib lifted him up and
strove to dash him to the ground; but Gharib caught him by the ears and
pulled him with his might, till it seemed to the youth as if the heavens
were falling on the earth[78] and he cried out, with his heart in his
mouth, saying, “I yield myself to thy mercy, O Knight of the Age!” So
Gharib bound him,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Six Hundred and Eightieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib
caught Murad Shah by the ears and well nigh tore them off he cried, “I
yield myself to thy mercy, O Knight of the Age!” So Gharib bound him,
and the Marids his comrades would have charged and rescued him, but
Gharib fell on them with a thousand Marids and was about to smite them
down, when they cried out, “Quarter! Quarter!” and threw away their
arms. Then Gharib returned to his Shahmiyánah which was of green silk,
embroidered with red gold and set with pearls and gems; and, seating
himself on his throne, called for Murad Shah. So they brought him,
shuffling in his manacles and shackles. When the prisoner saw him, he
hung down his head for shame; and Gharib said to him, “O dog of the
Arabs, who art thou that thou shouldst ride forth and measure thyself
against kings?” Replied Murad Shah, “O my lord, reproach me not, for
indeed I have excuse.” Quoth Gharib, “What manner of excuse hast thou?”;
And quoth he, “Know, O my lord, that I came out to avenge my mother and
my father on Sabur, King of the Persians; for he would have slain them;
but my mother escaped and I know not whether he killed my father or
not.” When Gharib heard these words, he replied, “By Allah, thou art
indeed excusable! But who were thy father and mother and what are their
names?” Murad Shah said, “My sire was Gharib, King of Al-Irak, and my
mother Fakhr Taj, daughter of King Sabur of Persia.” When Gharib heard
this, he gave a great cry and fell down fainting. They sprinkled
rose-water on him, till he came to himself, when he said to Murad Shah,
“Art thou indeed Gharib’s son by Fakhr Taj?”; and he replied, “Yes.”
Cried Gharib, “Thou art a champion, the son of a champion. Loose my
child!” And Sahim and Kaylajan went up to Murad Shah and set him free.
Then Gharib embraced his son and, seating him beside himself, said to
him, “Where is thy mother?” “She is with me in my tent,” answered Murad
Shah; and Gharib said, “Bring her to me.” So Murad Shah mounted and
repaired to his camp, where his comrades met him, rejoicing in his
safety, and asked him of his case; but he answered, “This is no time for
questions.” Then he went in to his mother and told her what had passed;
whereat she was gladdened with exceeding gladness: so he carried her to
Gharib, and they two embraced and rejoiced in each other. Then Fakhr Taj
and Murad Shah islamised and expounded The Faith to their troops, who
all made profession with heart and tongue. After this, Gharib sent for
Sabur and his son Ward Shah, and upbraided them for their evil dealing
and expounded Al-Islam to them; but they refused to profess; wherefore
he crucified them on the gate of the city and the people decorated the
town and held high festival. Then Gharib crowned Murad Shah with the
crown of the Chosroes and made him King of the Persians and Turks and
Medes; moreover, he made his uncle Al-Damigh, King over Al-Irak, and all
the peoples and lands submitted themselves to Gharib. Then he abode in
his kingship, doing justice among his lieges, wherefore all the people
loved him, and he and his wives and comrades ceased not from all solace
of life, till there came to them the Destroyer of Delights and Sunderer
of Societies, and extolled be the perfection of Him whose glory endureth
for ever and aye and whose boons embrace all His creatures! This is
every thing that hath come down to us of the history of Gharib and
Ajib.——And Abdullah bin Ma’amar al-Kaysi hath thus related the tale of

-----

Footnote 1:

  Mayyáfárikín, whose adjective for shortness is “Fárikí”: the place is
  often mentioned in the Nights as the then capital of Diyár Bakr,
  thirty parasangs from Násibín, the classical Nisibis, between the
  upper Euphrates and Tigris.

Footnote 2:

  This proportion is singular to moderns but characterised Arab and more
  especially Turcoman armies.

Footnote 3:

  Such is the bathos caused by the Saja’-assonance: in the music of the
  Arabic it contrasts strangely with the baldness of translation. The
  same is the case with the Koran, beautiful in the original and
  miserably dull in European languages; it is like the glorious style of
  the “Anglican Version” by the side of its bastard brothers in
  Hindostani or Marathi; one of these marvels of stupidity translating
  the “Lamb of God” by “God’s little goat.”

Footnote 4:

  This incident is taken from the Life of Mohammed who, in the “Year of
  Missions” (A.H. 7) sent letters to foreign potentates bidding them
  embrace Al-Islam; and, his seal being in three lines, Mohammed |
  Apostle | of Allah, Khusrau Parwíz (= the Charming) was offended
  because his name was placed below Mohammed’s. So he tore the letter in
  pieces adding, says Firdausi, these words:—

               Hath the Arab’s daring performed such feat,
               Fed on camel’s milk and the lizard’s meat,
               That he cast on Kayánian crown his eye?
               Fie, O whirling world! on thy faith and fie!

  Hearing of this insult Mohammed exclaimed, “Allah shall tear his
  kingdom!” a prophecy which was of course fulfilled, or we should not
  have heard of it. These lines are horribly mutilated in the Dabistan
  iii. 99.

Footnote 5:

  This “Taklíd” must not be translated “girt on the sword.” The Arab
  carries his weapon by a baldrick or bandoleer passed over his right
  shoulder. In modern days the “Majdal” over the left shoulder supports
  on the right hip a line of Tatárif or brass cylinders for cartridges:
  the other cross-belt (Al-Masdar) bears on the left side the Kharízah
  or bullet-pouch of hide; and the Hizám or waist-belt holds the dagger
  and extra cartridges. (Pilgrimage iii. 90.)

Footnote 6:

  Arab. “Bab,” which may mean door or gate. The plural form (Abwáb)
  occurs in the next line, meaning that he displayed all manner of
  martial prowess.

Footnote 7:

  Arab. “Farrásh” (also used in Persian), a man of general utility who
  pitches tents, sweeps the floors, administers floggings, etc. etc.
  (Pilgrimage iii. 90).

Footnote 8:

  _i.e._ the slogan-cry of “Allaho Akbar,” which M. C. Barbier de
  Meynard compares with the Christian “Te Deum.”

Footnote 9:

  The Anglo-Indian term for the Moslem rite of killing animals for food.
  (Pilgrimage i. 377.)

Footnote 10:

  Arab “tawílan jiddan”—a hideous Cairenism in these days; but formerly
  used by Al-mas’údí and other good writers.

Footnote 11:

  Arab “’Ajwah,” enucleated dates pressed together into a solid mass so
  as to be sliced with a knife like cold pudding. The allusion is to the
  dough-idols of the Hanífah tribe, whose eating their gods made the
  saturnine Caliph Omar laugh.

Footnote 12:

  Mr. Payne writes “Julned.” In a fancy name we must not look for
  grammar; but a quiescent lám (_l_) followed by nún (_n_) is unknown to
  Arabic while we find sundry cases of “lan” (fath’d lám and nún), and
  Jalandah means noxious or injurious. In Oman also there was a dynasty
  called Julándah, for which see Mr. Badger xiii:. and _passim_.

Footnote 13:

  Doubtless for Jawán-mard—un giovane, a brave. (See vol. iv., p. 208).

Footnote 14:

  Mr. Payne transposes the distichs, making the last first. I have
  followed the Arabic order finding it in the Mac. and Bul. Edits. (ii.
  129).

Footnote 15:

  Al-Irak like Al-Yaman may lose the article in verse.

Footnote 16:

  Arab. “Ka’ka’at”: hence Jabal Ka’ka’án, the higher levels in Meccah,
  of old inhabited by the Jurhamites and so called from their clashing
  and jangling arms; whilst the Amalekites dwelt in the lower grounds
  called Jiyád from their generous steeds (Pilgrimage iii. 191).

Footnote 17:

  Al-Shara’, a mountain in Arabia.

Footnote 18:

  See vol. vi., 249. “This (mace) is a dangerous weapon when struck on
  the shoulders or unguarded arm: I am convinced that a blow with it on
  a head armoured with a salade (cassis cælata, a light iron helmet)
  would stun a man” (says La Brocquière).

Footnote 19:

  Oman, which the natives pronounce “Amán,” is the region best known by
  its capital, Maskat. These are the Omana Moscha and Omanum Emporium of
  Ptolemy and the Periplus. Ibn Batutah writes Ammán, but the best
  dictionaries give “Oman.” (N.B.—Mr. Badger, p. 1, wrongly derives
  Sachalitis from “Sawáhíly”: it is evidently “Sáhili.”) The people bear
  by no means the best character: Ibn Batutah (fourteenth century) says,
  “their wives are most base; yet, without denying this, their husbands
  express nothing like jealousy on the subject.” (Lee, p. 62.)

Footnote 20:

  The name I have said of a quasi historical personage, son of Joktan,
  the first Arabist and the founder of the Tobbá (“successor”) dynasty
  in Al-Yaman; while Jurham, his brother, established that of Al-Hijaz.
  The name is probably chosen because well-known.

Footnote 21:

  Arab “Hákim”: lit. one who orders; often confounded by the
  unscientific with Hakím, a doctor, a philosopher. The latter
  re-appears in the Heb. Khákhám applied in modern days to the Jewish
  scribe who takes the place of the Rabbi.

Footnote 22:

  As has been seen, acids have ever been and are still administered as
  counter-inebriants, while hot spices and sweets greatly increase the
  effect of Bhang, opium, henbane, datura, &c. The Persians have a most
  unpleasant form of treating men when dead-drunk with wine or spirits.
  They hang them up by the heels, as we used to do with the drowned, and
  stuff their mouths with human ordure which is sure to produce emesis.

Footnote 23:

  Compare the description of the elephant-faced Vetála (Kathá S.S. Fasc.
  xi. p. 388).

Footnote 24:

  The lover’s name Sá’ik = the Striker (with lightning); Najmah, the
  beloved = the star.

Footnote 25:

  I have modified the last three lines of the Mac. Edit. which contain a
  repetition evidently introduced by the carelessness of the copyist.

Footnote 26:

  The Hindu Charvakas explain the Triad, Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva, by
  the sexual organs and upon Vishnu’s having four arms they gloss, “At
  the time of sexual intercourse, each man and woman has as many.”
  (Dabistan ii. 202). This is the Eastern view of Rabelais’ “beast with
  two backs.”

Footnote 27:

  Arab. “Rabbat-i,” my she Lord, fire (nár) being feminine.

Footnote 28:

  The prose-rhyme is answerable for this galimatias.

Footnote 29:

  A common phrase equivalent to our “started from his head.”

Footnote 30:

  Arab. “Máridúna” = rebels (against Allah and his orders).

Footnote 31:

  Arab. Yáfis or Yáfat. He had eleven sons and was entitled Abú al-Turk
  because this one engendered the Turcomans as others did the Chinese,
  Scythians, Slaves (Saklab), Gog, Magog, and the Muscovites or
  Russians. According to the Moslems there was a rapid falling off in
  size amongst this family. Noah’s grave at Karak (the Ruin) a suburb of
  Zahlah, in La Brocquière’s “Valley of Noah, where the Ark was built,”
  is 104 ft. 10 in. long by 8 ft. 8 in. broad. (N.B.—It is a bit of the
  old aqueduct which Mr. Porter, the learned author of the “Giant Cities
  of Bashan,” quotes as a “traditional memorial of primeval
  giants”—talibus carduis pascuntur asini!). Nabi Ham measures only 9
  ft. 6 in. between headstone and tombstone, being in fact about as long
  as his father was broad.

Footnote 32:

  See Night dcliv., vol. vii., p. 43, _infra_.

Footnote 33:

  According to Turcoman legends (evidently post-Mohammedan) Noah gave
  his son Japhet a stone inscribed with the Greatest Name, and it had
  the virtue of bringing on or driving off rain. The Moghuls long
  preserved the tradition and hence probably the sword.

Footnote 34:

  This expresses Moslem sentiment; the convert to Al-Islam being
  theoretically respected and practically despised. The Turks call him a
  “Burmá” = twister, a turncoat, and no one either trusts him or
  believes in his sincerity.

Footnote 35:

  The name of the city first appears here: it is found also in the Bul.
  Edit., vol. ii, p. 132.

Footnote 36:

  Arab. “’Amala hílah,” a Syro-Egyptian vulgarism.

Footnote 37:

  _i.e._ his cousin, but he will not use the word.

Footnote 38:

  Arab. “La’ab,” meaning very serious use of the sword: we still
  preserve the old “sword-play.”

Footnote 39:

  Arab. “Ikhsa,” from a root meaning to drive away a dog.

Footnote 40:

  Arab. “Hazza-hu,” the quivering motion given to the “Harbak” (a light
  throw-spear or javelin) before it leaves the hand.

Footnote 41:

  Here the translator must either order the sequence of the sentences or
  follow the rhyme.

Footnote 42:

  Possibly taken from the Lions’ Court in the Alhambra = (Dár) Al-hamrá,
  the Red House.

Footnote 43:

  Arab. “Sházarwán” from Pers. Shadurwán, a palace, cornice, etc. That
  of the Meccań Ka’abah is a projection of about a foot broad in pent
  house shape sloping downwards and two feet above the granite pavement:
  its only use appears in the large brass rings welded into it to hold
  down the covering. There are two breaks in it, one under the doorway
  and the other opposite Ishmael’s tomb; and pilgrims are directed
  during circuit to keep the whole body outside it.

Footnote 44:

  The “Musáfahah” before noticed, (vol. vi., p. 287).

Footnote 45:

  _i.e._ He was confounded at its beauty.

Footnote 46:

  Arab. “’Ajíb,” punning upon the name.

Footnote 47:

  Arab. “Zarráf” (whence our word) from “Zarf” = walking hastily: the
  old “camelopard” which originated the nursery idea of its origin. It
  is one of the most timid of the antelope tribe and unfit for riding.

Footnote 48:

  Arab. “Takht,” a useful word, meaning even a saddle. The usual term is
  “Haudaj” = the Anglo-Indian “howdah.”

Footnote 49:

  “Thunder-King,” Arab. and Persian.

Footnote 50:

  _i.e._ “He who violently assaults his peers” (the best men of the
  age). Batshat al-Kubrá = the Great Disaster, is applied to the unhappy
  “Battle of Bedr” (Badr) on Ramazan 17, A.H. 2 (= Jan. 13, 624) when
  Mohammed was so nearly defeated that the Angels were obliged to assist
  him (Koran, chapts. iii. 11; i. 42; viii. 9). Mohammed is soundly
  rated by Christian writers for beheading two prisoners Utbah ibn
  Rabí’a who had once spat on his face and Nazir ibn Háris who recited
  Persian romances and preferred them to the “foolish fables of the
  Koran.” What would our forefathers have done to a man who spat in the
  face of John Knox and openly preferred a French play to the
  Pentateuch?

Footnote 51:

  Arab. “Jilbáb” either habergeon (mail-coat) or the buff-jacket worn
  under it.

Footnote 52:

  A favourite way, rough and ready, of carrying light weapons; often
  alluded to in The Nights. So Khusrawán in Antar carried “under his
  thighs four small darts, each like a blazing flame.”

Footnote 53:

  Mr. Payne very reasonably supplants here and below Fakhr Taj (who in
  Night dcxxxiv. is left in her father’s palace and who is reported to
  be dead in Night dclxvii.) by Star o’ Morn. But the former is also
  given in the Bul. Edit. (ii. 148), so the story-teller must have
  forgotten all about her. I leave it as a model specimen of Eastern
  incuriousness.

Footnote 54:

  There is some chivalry in his unwillingness to use the magical blade.
  As a rule the Knights of Romance utterly ignore fair play and take
  every dirty advantage in the magic line that comes to hand.

Footnote 55:

  Arab. “Hammál al-Hatabi” = one who carries to market the fuel-sticks
  which he picks up in the waste. In the Koran (chapt. cxi.) it is
  applied to Umm Jamíl, wife of Mohammed’s hostile cousin, Abd al-Uzza,
  there termed Abú Lahab (Father of smokeless Flame) with the implied
  meaning that she will bear fuel to feed Hell-fire.

Footnote 56:

  Arab. “Akyál,” lit. whose word (Kaul) is obeyed, a title of the
  Himyarite Kings, of whom Al-Bergendi relates that one of them left an
  inscription at Samarcand, which many centuries ago no man could read.
  This evidently alludes to the dynasty which preceded the “Tobba” and
  to No. xxiv. Shamar Yar’ash (Shamar the Palsied). Some make him son of
  Malik surnamed Náshir al-Ni’am (Scatterer of Blessings) others of
  Afríkús (No. xviii.), who, according to Al-Jannabi, Ahmad bin Yusuf
  and Ibn Ibdun (Pocock, Spec. Hist. Arab.) founded the Berber (Barbar)
  race, the remnants of the Causanites expelled by the “robber, Joshua
  son of Nún,” and became the eponymous of “Africa.” This word which,
  under the Romans, denoted a small province on the Northern Sea-board,
  is, I would suggest, A’far-Káhi (Afar-land), the Afar being now the
  Dankali race, the country of Osiris whom my learned friend, the late
  Mariette Pasha, derived from the Egyptian “Punt” identified by him
  with the Somali country. This would make “Africa,” as it ought to be,
  an Egyptian (Coptic) term.

Footnote 57:

  Herodotus (i. 80) notes this concerning the camel. Elephants are not
  allowed to walk the streets in Anglo-Indian cities, where they have
  caused many accidents.

Footnote 58:

  Arab. Wahk or Wahak, suggesting the Roman retiarius. But the lasso
  pure and simple, the favourite weapon of shepherd and herdsmen was
  well-known to the old Egyptians and in ancient India. It forms one of
  the T-letters in the hieroglyphs.

Footnote 59:

  Compare with this and other Arab battle-pieces the Pandit’s
  description in the Kathá Sarit Sagara, _e.g._ “Then a confused battle
  arose with dint of arrow, javelin, lance, mace and axe, costing the
  lives of countless soldiers (N.B.—Millions are nothing to him); rivers
  of blood flowed with the bodies of elephants and horses for
  alligators, with the pearls from the heads of elephants for sands and
  with the heads of heroes for stones. That feast of battle delighted
  the flesh-loving demons who, drunk with blood instead of wine, were
  dancing with the palpitating trunks,” etc., etc. Fasc. xii. 526.

Footnote 60:

  The giraffe is here mal-placé: it is, I repeat, one of the most timid
  of the antelope tribe. Nothing can be more graceful than this huge
  game as it stands under a tree extending its long and slender neck to
  the foliage above it; but when in flight all the limbs seem loose and
  the head is carried almost on a level with the back.

Footnote 61:

  The fire-arms may have been inserted by the copier; the cross-bow
  (Arcubalista) is of unknown antiquity. I have remarked in my book of
  the Sword (p. 19) that the bow is the first crucial evidence of the
  distinction between the human weapon and the bestial arm, and like the
  hymen or membrane of virginity proves a difference of degree if not of
  kind between man and the so-called lower animals. I note from Yule’s
  Marco Polo (ii., 143) “that the cross-bow was re-introduced into
  European warfare during the twelfth century”; but the arbalest was
  well known to the _bon roi_ Charlemagne (Regnier Sat. X).

Footnote 62:

  In Al-Islam this was unjustifiable homicide, excused only because the
  Kafir had tried to slay his own son. He should have been summoned to
  become a tributary and then, on express refusal, he might legally have
  been put to death.

Footnote 63:

  _i.e._ “Rose King,” like the Sikh name “Gulab Singh” = Rosewater Lion,
  sounding in translation almost too absurd to be true.

Footnote 64:

  “Repentance acquits the penitent” is a favourite and noble saying
  popular in Al-Islam. It is first found in Seneca; and is probably as
  old as the dawn of literature.

Footnote 65:

  Here an ejaculation of impatience.

Footnote 66:

  _i.e._ “King Intelligence”: it has a ludicrous sound suggesting only
  “Dandanha-i-Khirad” = wisdom-teeth. The Mac. Edit. persistently keeps
  “Ward Shah,” copyist-error.

Footnote 67:

  _i.e._ Fakhr Taj, who had been promised him in marriage. See Night
  dcxxxiii. _supra_, vol. vi.

Footnote 68:

  The name does not appear till further on, after vague Eastern fashion
  which, here and elsewhere I have not had the heart to adopt. The same
  may be found in Ariosto, _passim_.

Footnote 69:

  A town in Persian Irak, unhappily far from the “Salt sea.”

Footnote 70:

  “Earthquake son of Ennosigaius” (the Earthquake-maker).

Footnote 71:

  Arab. “Ruba’al-Kharáb” or Ruba’al-Khálí (empty quarter), the great
  central wilderness of Arabia covering some 50,000 square miles and
  still left white on our maps (Pilgrimage, i. 14).

Footnote 72:

  Pers. “Life King,” women also assume the title of Shah.

Footnote 73:

  Arab. “Mujauhar”: the watery or wavy mark upon Eastern blades is
  called the “jauhar,” lit. = jewel. The peculiarity is also called
  water and grain, which gives rise to a host of _double-entendres_,
  puns, paronomasias and conceits more or less frigid.

Footnote 74:

  Etymologically meaning tyrants or giants; and applied to great heathen
  conquerors like Nimrod and the mighty rulers of Syria, the Anakim,
  Giants and other peoples of Hebrew fable. The Akásirah are the
  Chosroës before noticed.

Footnote 75:

  Arab. “Askar jarrár” lit. “drawing”: so in Egyptian slang “Nás jarrár”
  = folk who wish to draw your money out of your pocket, greedy cheats.

Footnote 76:

  In Turkestan: the name means “Two lights.”

Footnote 77:

  In Armenia, mentioned by Sadik Isfaháni (Transl. p. 62).

Footnote 78:

  This is the only ludicrous incident in the tale which justifies Von
  Hammer’s suspicion. Compare it with the combat between Rustam and his
  son Sohráb.




                          OTBAH[79] AND RAYYA.


I went one year on the pilgrimage to the Holy House of Allah, and when I
had accomplished my pilgrimage, I turned back for visitation of the tomb
of the Prophet, whom Allah bless and keep! One night, as I sat in the
garden,[80] between the tomb and the pulpit, I heard a low moaning in a
soft voice; so I listened to it and it said:—

 Have the doves that moan in the lotus-tree ✿ Woke grief in thy heart and
    bred misery?
 Or doth memory of maiden in beauty deckt ✿ Cause this doubt in thee,
    this despondency?
 O night, thou art longsome for love-sick sprite ✿ Complaining of Love
    and its ecstacy:
 Thou makest him wakeful, who burns with fire ✿ Of a love, like the live
    coal’s ardency.
 The moon is witness my heart is held ✿ By a moonlight brow of the
    brightest blee:
 I reckt not to see me by Love ensnared ✿ Till ensnared before I could
    reck or see.

Then the voice ceased and not knowing whence it came to me I abode
perplexed; but lo! it again took up its lament and recited:—

 Came Rayya’s phantom to grieve thy sight ✿ In the thickest gloom of the
    black-haired Night!
 And hath love of slumber deprived those eyes ✿ And the phantom-vision
    vexed thy sprite?
 I cried to the Night, whose glooms were like ✿ Seas that surge and
    billow with might, with might:
 “O Night, thou art longsome to lover who ✿ Hath no aid nor help save the
    morning-light!”
 She replied, “Complain not that I am long: ✿ ’Tis love is the cause of
    thy longsome plight!”

Now, at the first of the couplets, I sprang up and made for the quarter
whence the sound came, nor had the voice ended repeating them, ere I was
with the speaker and saw a youth of the utmost beauty, the hair of whose
side face had not sprouted and in whose cheeks tears had worn twin
trenches.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah ibn
Ma’amar al-Kaysi thus continued:—So I sprang up and made for the quarter
whence the sound came, nor had the voice ended repeating the verses, ere
I was with the speaker and saw a youth on whose side face the hair had
not sprouted and in whose cheeks tears had worn twin trenches. Quoth I
to him, “Fair befal thee for a youth!”; and quoth he, “And thee also!
Who art thou?” I replied, “Abdullah bin Ma’amar al-Kaysi;” and he said,
“Dost thou want aught?” I rejoined, “I was sitting in the garden and
naught hath troubled me this night but thy voice. With my life would I
ransom thee! What aileth thee?” He said, “Sit thee down.” So I sat down
and he continued, “I am Otbah bin al-Hubáb bin al-Mundhir bin al-Jamúh
the Ansárí.[81] I went out in the morning to the Mosque Al-Ahzáb[82] and
occupied myself there awhile with prayer-bows and prostrations, after
which I withdrew apart, to worship privily. But lo! up came women, as
they were moons, walking with a swaying gait, and surrounding a damsel
of passing loveliness, perfect in beauty and grace, who stopped before
me and said:—O Otbah, what sayst thou of union with one who seeketh
union with thee? Then she left me and went away; and since that time I
have had no tidings of her nor come upon any trace of her; and behold, I
am distracted and do naught but remove from place to place.” Then he
cried out and fell to the ground fainting. When he came to himself, it
was as if the damask of his cheeks were dyed with safflower,[83] and he
recited these couplets:—

 I see you with my heart from far countrie ✿ Would Heaven you also me
    from far could see
 My heart and eyes for you are sorrowing; ✿ My soul with you abides and
    you with me.
 I take no joy in life when you’re unseen ✿ Or Heaven or Garden of
    Eternity.

Said I, “O Otbah, O son of my uncle, repent to thy Lord and crave pardon
for thy sin; for before thee is the terror of standing up to Judgment.”
He replied, “Far be it from me so to do. I shall never leave to love
till the two mimosa-gatherers return.”[84] I abode with him till
daybreak, when I said to him, “Come let us go to the Mosque Al-Ahzab.”
So we went thither and sat there, till we had prayed the midday prayers,
when lo! up came the women; but the damsel was not among them. Quoth
they to him, “O Otbah, what thinkest thou of her who seeketh union with
thee?” He said, “And what of her?”; and they replied, “Her father hath
taken her and departed to Al-Samawah.”[85] I asked them the name of the
damsel and they said, “She is called Rayyá, daughter of Al-Ghitríf
al-Sulami.”[86] Whereupon Otbah raised his head and recited these
verses:—

 My friends, Rayyá hath mounted soon as morning shone, ✿ And to Samáwah’s
    wilds her caravan is gone.
 My friends, I’ve wept till I can weep no more, Oh, say, ✿ Hath any one a
    tear that I can take on loan.

Then said I to him, “O Otbah, I have brought with me great wealth,
wherewith I desire to succour generous men; and by Allah, I will lavish
it before thee,[87] so thou mayst attain thy desire and more than thy
desire! Come with me to the assembly of the Ansaris.” So we rose and
went, till we entered their assembly, when I salam’d to them and they
returned my greeting civilly. Then quoth I, “O assembly, what say ye of
Otbah and his father?”: and they replied, “They are of the princes of
the Arabs.” I continued, “Know that he is smitten with the calamity of
love and I desire your furtherance to Al-Samawah.” And they said, “To
hear is to obey.” So they mounted with us, the whole party, and we rode
till we drew near the place of the Banu Sulaym. Now when Ghitrif heard
of our being near, he hastened forth to meet us, saying, “Long life to
you, O nobles!”; whereto we replied, “And to thee also! Behold we are
thy guests.” Quoth he, “Ye have lighted down at a most hospitable abode
and ample;” and alighting he cried out, “Ho, all ye slaves, come down!”
So they came down and spread skin-rugs and cushions and slaughtered
sheep and cattle; but we said, “We will not taste of thy food, till thou
have accomplished our need.” He asked, “And what is your need?”; and we
answered, “We demand thy noble daughter in marriage for Otbah bin Hubab
bin Mundhir the illustrious and well-born.” “O my brethren,” said he,
“she whom you demand is owner of herself, and I will go in to her and
tell her.” So he rose in wrath[88] and went in to Rayya, who said to
him, “O my papa, why do I see thee show anger?” And he replied, saying,
“Certain of the Ansaris have come upon me to demand thy hand of me in
marriage.” Quoth she, “They are noble chiefs; the Prophet, on whom be
the choicest blessings and peace, intercedeth for them with Allah. For
whom among them do they ask me?” Quoth he, “For a youth known as Otbah
bin al-Hubab;” and she said, “I have heard of Otbah that he performeth
what he promiseth and findeth what he seeketh.” Ghitrif cried, “I swear
that I will never marry thee to him; no, never, for there hath been
reported to me somewhat of thy converse with him.” Said she, “What was
that? But in any case, I swear that the Ansaris shall not be uncivilly
rejected; wherefore do thou offer them a fair excuse.” “How so?” “Make
the dowry heavy to them and they will desist.” “Thou sayst well,” said
he, and going out in haste, told the Ansaris, “The damsel of the
tribe[89] consenteth; but she requireth a dowry worthy herself. Who
engageth for this?” “I,” answered I. Then said he, “I require for her a
thousand bracelets of red gold and five thousand dirhams of the coinage
of Hajar[90] and a hundred pieces of woollen cloth and striped
stuffs[91] of Al-Yaman and five bladders of ambergris.” Said I, “Thou
shalt have that much; dost thou consent?”; and he said, “I do consent.”
So I despatched to Al-Medinah the Illumined[92] a party of the Ansaris,
who brought all for which I had become surety; whereupon they
slaughtered sheep and cattle and the folk assembled to eat of the food.
We abode thus forty days when Ghitrif said to us, “Take your bride.” So
we sat her in a dromedary-litter and her father equipped her with thirty
camel-loads of things of price; after which we farewelled him and
journeyed till we came within a day’s journey of Al-Medinah the
Illumined, when there fell upon us horsemen, with intent to plunder, and
methinks they were of the Banu Sulaym. Otbah drove at them and slew of
them much people, but fell back, wounded by a lance-thrust, and
presently dropped to the earth. Then there came to us succour of the
country people, who drove away the highwaymen; but Otbah’s days were
ended. So we said, “Alas for Otbah, oh!;” and the damsel hearing it cast
herself down from the camel and throwing herself upon him, cried out
grievously and repeated these couplets:—

 Patient I seemed, yet Patience shown by me ✿ Was but self-guiling till
    thy sight I see:
 Had my soul done as due my life had gone, ✿ Had fled before mankind
    forestalling thee:
 Then, after me and thee none shall to friend ✿ Be just, nor any soul
    with soul agree.

Then she sobbed a single sob and gave up the ghost. We dug one grave for
them and laid them in the earth, and I returned to the dwellings of my
people, where I abode seven years. Then I betook me again to Al-Hijaz
and entering Al-Medinah the Illumined for pious visitation said in my
mind, “By Allah, I will go again to Otbah’s tomb!” So I repaired
thither, and, behold, over the grave was a tall tree, on which hung
fillets of red and green and yellow stuffs.[93] So I asked the people of
the place, “How be this tree called?”; and they answered, “The tree of
the Bride and the Bridegroom.” I abode by the tomb a day and a night,
then went my way; and this is all I know of Otbah. Almighty Allah have
mercy upon him! And they also tell this tale of

-----

Footnote 79:

  I cannot understand why Trébutien, iii., 457, writes this word Afba.
  He remarks that it is the “Oina and Riya” of Jámí, elegantly
  translated by M. de Chezy in the Journal Asiatique, vol. 1, 144.

Footnote 80:

  I have described this part of the Medinah Mosque in Pilgrimage ii,
  62–69. The name derives from a saying of Mohammed (of which there are
  many variants), “Between my tomb and my pulpit is a garden of the
  Gardens of Paradise” (Burckhardt, Arabia, p. 337). The whole Southern
  portico (not only a part) now enjoys that honoured name and the tawdry
  decorations are intended to suggest a parterre.

Footnote 81:

  Mohammed’s companions (Asháb), numbering some five hundred, were
  divided into two orders, the Muhájirin (fugitives) or Meccans who
  accompanied the Apostle to Al-Medinah (Pilgrimage ii. 138) and the
  Ansár (Auxiliaries) or Medinites who invited him to their city and
  lent him zealous aid (Ibid ii. 130). The terms constantly occur in
  Arab history.

Footnote 82:

  The “Mosque of the Troops,” also called Al-Fath (victory), the largest
  of the “Four Mosques:” it is still a place of pious visitation where
  prayer is granted. Koran, chapt. xxxiii., and Pilgrimage ii. 325.

Footnote 83:

  Arab. “Al-Wars,” with two meanings. The Alfáz Adwiyah gives it =
  Kurkum, curcuma, turmeric, safran d’Inde; but popular usage assigns it
  to Usfur, Kurtum or safflower (_carthamus tinctorius_). I saw the
  shrub growing all about Harar which exports it, and it is plentiful in
  Al-Yaman (Niebuhr, p. 133), where women affect it to stain the skin a
  light yellow and remove freckles: it is also an internal remedy in
  leprosy. But the main use is that of a dye, and the Tob stained with
  Wars is almost universal in some parts of Arabia. Sonnini (p. 510)
  describes it at length and says that Europeans in Egypt call it
  “Parrot-seeds” because the bird loves it, and the Levant trader
  “Saffrenum.”

Footnote 84:

  Two men of the great ’Anazah race went forth to gather Karaz, the
  fruit of the Sant (_Mimosa Nilotica_) both used for tanning, and never
  returned. Hence the proverb which is obsolete in conversation. See
  Burckhardt, Prov. 659: where it takes the place of “_ad Graecas
  Kalendas_.”

Footnote 85:

  Name of a desert (Mafázah) and a settlement on the Euphrates’ bank
  between Basrah and the site of old Kufah near Kerbela; the well known
  visitation place in Babylonian Irak.

Footnote 86:

  Of the Banu Sulaym tribe; the adjective is Sulami not Sulaymi.

Footnote 87:

  Arab. “Amám-ak” = before thee (in space); from the same root as Imám =
  antistes, leader of prayer; and conducing to perpetual puns, _e.g._
  “You are Imám-i (my leader) and therefore should be Amám-i” (in
  advance of me).

Footnote 88:

  He was angry, as presently appears, because he had heard of certain
  love passages between the two and this in Arabia is a dishonour to the
  family.

Footnote 89:

  Euphemy for “my daughter.”

Footnote 90:

  The Badawin call a sound dollar “Kirsh hajar” or “Riyal hajar” (a
  stone dollar; but the word is spelt with the greater _h_).

Footnote 91:

  Arab. Burdah and Habárah. The former often translated mantle is a
  thick woollen stuff, brown or gray, woven oblong and used like a plaid
  by day and by night. Mohammed’s Burdah woven in his Harem and given to
  the poet, Ka’ab, was 7½ ft. long by 4½: it is still in the upper
  Serraglio of Stambul. In early days the stuff was mostly striped; now
  it is either plain or with lines so narrow that it looks like one
  colour. The Habarah is a Burd made in Al-Yaman and not to be
  confounded with the Egyptian mantilla of like name (Lane, M. E. chapt.
  iii).

Footnote 92:

  Every Eastern city has its special title. Al-Medinah is entitled
  “Al-Munawwarah” (the Illumined) from the blinding light which
  surrounds the Prophet’s tomb and which does not show to eyes profane
  (Pilgrimage ii. 3). I presume that the idea arose from the huge lamps
  of “The Garden.” I have noted that Mohammed’s coffin suspended by
  magnets is an idea unknown to Moslems, but we find the fancy in
  Al-Harawi related of St. Peter, “Simon Cephas (the rock) is in the
  City of Great Rome, in its largest church within a silver ark hanging
  by chains from the ceiling.” (Lee, Ibn Batutah, p. 161).

Footnote 93:

  Here the fillets are hung instead of the normal rag-strips to denote
  an honoured tomb. Lane (iii. 242) and many others are puzzled about
  the use of these articles. In many cases they are suspended to trees
  in order to transfer sickness from the body to the tree and whoever
  shall touch it. The Sawáhílí people term such articles a Keti (seat or
  vehicle) for the mysterious haunter of the tree who prefers occupying
  it to the patient’s person. Briefly the custom still popular
  throughout Arabia, is African and Fetish.




             HIND DAUGHTER OF AL-NU’MAN AND AL-HAJJAJ.[94]


It is related that Hind daughter of Al-Nu’man was the fairest woman of
her day, and her beauty and loveliness were reported to Al-Hajjaj, who
sought her in marriage and lavished much treasure on her. So he took her
to wife, engaging to give her a dowry of two hundred thousand dirhams in
case of divorce, and when he went into her, he abode with her a long
time. One day after this, he went in to her and found her looking at her
face in the mirror and saying:—

 Hind is an Arab filly purest bred, ✿ Which hath been covered by a
    mongrel mule;
 An colt of horse she throw by Allah! well; ✿ If mule, it but results
    from mulish rule.[95]

When Al-Hajjaj heard this, he turned back and went his way, unseen of
Hind; and, being minded to put her away, he sent Abdullah bin Táhir to
her, to divorce her. So Abdullah went in to her and said to her,
“Al-Hajjaj Abu Mohammed saith to thee: Here be the two hundred thousand
dirhams of thy contingent dowry he oweth thee; and he hath deputed me to
divorce thee.” Replied she, “O Ibn Tahir, I gladly agree to this; for
know that I never for one day took pleasure in him; so, if we separate,
by Allah, I shall never regret him, and these two hundred thousand
dirhams I give to thee as a reward for the glad tidings thou bringest me
of my release from yonder dog of the Thakafites.”[96] After this, the
Commander of the Faithful, Abd al-Malik bin Marwán, heard of her beauty
and loveliness, her stature and symmetry, her sweet speech and the
amorous grace of her glances and sent to her, to ask her in
marriage;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-second Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Prince of
True Believers, Abd al-Malik bin Marwan, hearing of the lady’s beauty
and loveliness, sent to ask her in marriage; and she wrote him in reply
a letter, in which, after the glorification of Allah and benediction of
His Prophet, she said, “But afterwards. Know, O Commander of the
Faithful, that the dog hath lapped in the vase.” When the Caliph read
her answer, he laughed and wrote to her, citing his saying (whom may
Allah bless and keep!) “If a dog lap in the vessel of one of you, let
him wash seven times, once thereof with earth,” and adding, “Wash the
affront from the place of use.”[97] With this she could not gainsay him;
so she replied to him, saying (after praise and blessing), “O Commander
of the Faithful I will not consent save on one condition, and if thou
ask me what it is, I reply that Al-Hajjaj lead my camel to the town
where thou tarriest barefoot and clad as he is.”[98] When the Caliph
read her letter, he laughed long and loudly and sent to Al-Hajjaj,
bidding him do as she wished. He dared not disobey the order, so he
submitted to the Caliph’s commandment and sent to Hind, telling her to
make ready for the journey. So she made ready and mounted her litter,
when Al-Hajjaj with his suite came up to Hind’s door and as she mounted
and her damsels and eunuchs rode around her, he dismounted and took the
halter of her camel and led it along, barefooted, whilst she and her
damsels and tirewomen laughed and jeered at him and made mock of him.
Then she said to her tirewoman, “Draw back the curtain of the litter;”
and she drew back the curtain, till Hind was face to face with
Al-Hajjaj, whereupon she laughed at him and he improvised this couplet:—

 Though now thou jeer, O Hind, how many a night ✿ I’ve left thee wakeful
    sighing for the light.

And she answered him with these two:—

 We reck not, an our life escape from bane, ✿ For waste of wealth and
    gear that went in vain:
 Money may be regained and rank re-won ✿ When one is cured of malady and
    pain.

And she ceased not to laugh at him and make sport of him, till they drew
near the city of the Caliph, when she threw down a dinar with her own
hand and said to Al-Hajjaj, “O camel-driver, I have dropped a dirham;
look for it and give it to me.” So he looked and seeing naught but the
dinar, said, “This is a dinar.” She replied, “Nay, ’tis a dirham.” But
he said, “This is a dinar.” Then quoth she, “Praised be Allah who hath
given us in exchange for a paltry dirham a dinar! Give it us.” And
Al-Hajjaj was abashed at this. Then he carried her to the palace of the
Commander of the Faithful, and she went in to him and became his
favourite.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that men also tell a
tale anent

-----

Footnote 94:

  Al-Mas’údí (chapt. xcv.), mentions a Hind bint Asmá and tells a
  facetious story of her and the “enemy of Allah,” the poet Jarír.

Footnote 95:

  Here the old Shiah hatred of the energetic conqueror of Oman crops out
  again. Hind’s song is that of Maysum concerning her husband Mu’áwiyah
  which Mrs. Godfrey Clark (’Ilâm-en-Nâs, p. 108) thus translates:—

           A hut that the winds make tremble
             Is dearer to me than a noble palace;
           And a dish of crumbs on the floor of my home
             Is dearer to me than a varied feast;
           And the soughing of the breeze through every crevice
             Is dearer to me than the beating of drums.

  Compare with Dr. Carlyle’s No. X.:—

              The russet suit of camel’s hair
                With spirits light and eye serene
              Is dearer to my bosom far
                Than all the trappings of a queen, etc. etc.

  And with mine (Pilgrimage iii. 262):—

          O take these purple robes away,
            Give back my cloak of camel’s hair
          And bear me from this towering pile
            To where the black tents flap i’ the air, etc. etc.

Footnote 96:

  Al-Hajjaj’s tribal name was Al-Thakifi or descendant of Thakíf.
  According to Al-Mas’udi, he was son of Faríghah (the tall Beauty) by
  Yúsuf bin Ukayl the Thakafite and vint au monde tout difforme avec
  l’anus obstrué. As he refused the breast, Satan, in human form,
  advised suckling him with the blood of two black kids, a black
  buck-goat and a black snake; which had the desired effect.

Footnote 97:

  Trébutien, iii. 465, translates these sayings into Italian.

Footnote 98:

  Making him a “Kawwád” = leader, _i.e._ pimp; a true piece of feminine
  spite. But the Caliph prized Al-Hajjaj too highly to treat him as in
  the text.




             KHUZAYMAH BIN BISHR AND IKRIMAH AL-FAYYAZ.[99]


There lived once, in the days of the Caliph Sulayman bin Abd
al-Malik[100] a man of the Banu Asad, by name Khuzaymah bin Bishr, who
was famed for bounty and abundant wealth and excellence and righteous
dealing with his brethren. He continued thus till times grew strait with
him and he became in need of the aid of those Moslem brethren on whom he
had lavished favour and kindness. So they succoured him a while and then
grew weary of him, which when he saw, he went in to his wife who was the
daughter of his father’s brother, and said to her, “O my cousin, I find
a change in my brethren; wherefore I am resolved to keep my house till
death come to me.” So he shut his door and abode in his home, living on
that which he had by him, till it was spent and he knew not what to do.
Now Ikrimah al-Raba’í, surnamed Al-Fayyáz, governor of Mesopotamia,[101]
had known him, and one day, as he sat in his audience-chamber, mention
was made of Khuzaymah, whereupon quoth Ikrimah, “How is it with him?”
And quoth they, “He is in a plight past telling, and hath shut his door
and keepeth the house.” Ikrimah rejoined, “This cometh but of his
excessive generosity: but how is it that Khuzaymah bin Bishr findeth nor
comforter nor requiter?” And they replied, “He hath found naught of
this.” So when it was night, Ikrimah took four thousand dinars and laid
them in one purse; then, bidding saddle his beast, he mounted and rode
privily to Khuzaymah’s house, attended only by one of his pages,
carrying the money. When he came to the door, he alighted and taking the
purse from the page made him withdraw afar off; after which he went up
to the door and knocked. Khuzaymah came out to him, and he gave him the
purse, saying, “Better thy case herewith.” He took it and finding it
heavy put it from his hand and laying hold of the bridle of Ikrimah’s
horse, asked, “Who art thou? My soul be thy ransom!” Answered Ikrimah,
“O man I come not to thee at a time like this desiring that thou
shouldst know me.” Khuzaymah rejoined, “I will not let thee go till thou
make thyself known to me,” whereupon Ikrimah said “I am hight Jábir
Atharát al-Kirám.”[102] Quoth Khuzaymah, “Tell me more.” But Ikrimah
cried, “No,” and fared forth, whilst Khuzaymah went in to his cousin and
said to her, “Rejoice for Allah hath sent us speedy relief and wealth;
if these be but dirhams, yet are they many. Arise and light the lamp.”
She said, “I have not wherewithal to light it.” So he spent the night
handling the coins and felt by their roughness that they were dinars,
but could not credit it. Meanwhile Ikrimah returned to his own house and
found that his wife had missed him and asked for him, and when they told
her of his riding forth, she misdoubted of him, and said to him, “Verily
the Wali of Al-Jazirah rideth not abroad after such an hour of the
night, unattended and secretly, save to a wife or a mistress.” He
answered, “Allah knoweth that I went not forth to either of these.”
“Tell me then wherefore thou wentest forth?” “I went not forth at this
hour save that none should know it.” “I must needs be told.” “Wilt thou
keep the matter secret, if I tell thee?” “Yes!” So he told her the state
of the case, adding, “Wilt thou have me swear to thee?” Answered she,
“No, no, my heart is set at ease and trusteth in that which thou hast
told me.” As for Khuzaymah, soon as it was day he made his peace with
his creditors and set his affairs in order; after which he got him ready
and set out for the Court of Sulayman bin Abd al-Malik, who was then
sojourning in Palestine.[103] When he came to the royal gate, he sought
admission of the chamberlain, who went in and told the Caliph of his
presence. Now he was renowned for his beneficence and Sulayman knew of
him; so he bade admit him. When he entered, he saluted the Caliph after
the usual fashion of saluting[104] and the King asked, “O Khuzaymah,
what hath kept thee so long from us?” Answered he, “Evil case,” and
quoth the Caliph, “What hindered thee from having recourse to us?” Quoth
he, “My infirmity, O Commander of the Faithful!” “And why,” said
Sulayman, “comest thou to us now?” Khuzaymah replied, “Know, O Commander
of the Faithful, that I was sitting one night late in my house, when a
man knocked at the door and did thus and thus;” and he went on to tell
him of all that had passed between Ikrimah and himself from first to
last. Sulayman asked, “Knowest thou the man?” and Khuzaymah answered,
“No, O Commander of the Faithful, he was reserved[105] and would say
naught save:—I am hight Jabir Atharat al-Kiram.” When Sulayman heard
this, his heart burned within him for anxiety to discover the man, and
he said, “If we knew him, truly we would requite him for his
generosity.” Then he bound for Khuzaymah a banner[106] and made him
Governor of Mesopotamia, in the stead of Ikrimah al-Fayyaz; and he set
out for Al-Jazirah. When he drew near the city, Ikrimah and the people
of the place came forth to meet him and they saluted each other and went
on into the town, where Khuzaymah took up his lodging in the
Government-house and bade take security for Ikrimah and that he should
be called to account.[107] So an account was taken against him and he
was found to be in default for much money; whereupon Khuzaymah required
of him payment, but he said, “I have no means of paying aught.” Quoth
Khuzaymah, “It must be paid;” and quoth Ikrimah, “I have it not; do what
thou hast to do.” So Khuzaymah ordered him to gaol.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Khuzaymah, having
ordered the imprisonment of Ikrimah al-Fayyaz, sent to him again to
demand payment of the debt; but he replied, “I am not of those who
preserve their wealth at the expense of their honour; do what thou
wilt.” Then Khuzaymah bade load him with irons and kept him in prison a
month or more, till confinement began to tell upon him and he became
wasted. After this, tidings of his plight travelled to the daughter of
his uncle who was troubled with sore concern thereat and, sending for a
freedwoman of hers, a woman of abundant judgment, and experience, said
to her, “Go forthwith to the Emir Khuzaymah’s gate and say:—I have a
counsel for the Emir. If they ask what it is, add:—I will not tell it
save to himself; and when thou enterest to him, beg to see him in
private and when private ask him:—What be this deed thou hast done? Hath
Jabir Atharat al-Kiram deserved of thee no better reward than to be cast
into strait prison and hard bond of irons?” The woman did as she was
bid, and when Khuzaymah heard her words, he cried out at the top of his
voice, saying, “Alas, the baseness of it! Was it indeed he?” And she
answered, “Yes.” Then he bade saddle his beast forthwith and, summoning
the honourable men of the city, repaired with them to the prison and
opening the door, went in with them to Ikrimah, whom they found sitting
in evil case, worn out and wasted with blows and misery. When he looked
at Khuzaymah, he was abashed and hung his head; but the other bent down
to him and kissed his face; whereupon he raised his head and asked,
“What maketh thee do this?” Answered Khuzaymah, “The generosity of thy
dealing and the vileness of my requital.” And Ikrimah said, “Allah
pardon us and thee!” Then Khuzaymah commanded the jailor to strike off
Ikrimah’s fetters and clap them on his own feet; but Ikrimah said, “What
is this thou wilt do?” Quoth the other, “I have a mind to suffer what
thou hast suffered.” Quoth Ikrimah, “I conjure thee by Allah, do not
so!” Then they went out together and returned to Khuzaymah’s house,
where Ikrimah would have farewelled him and wended his way; but he
forbade him and Ikrimah said, “What is thy will of me?” Replied
Khuzaymah, “I wish to change thy case, for my shame before the daughter
of thine uncle is yet greater than my shame before thee.” So he bade
clear the bath and entering with Ikrimah, served him there in person and
when they went forth he bestowed on him a splendid robe of honour and
mounted him and gave him much money. Then he carried him to his house
and asked his leave to make his excuses to his wife and obtained her
pardon. After this he besought him to accompany him to the Caliph, who
was then abiding at Ramlah[108] and he agreed. So they journeyed
thither, and when they reached the royal quarters the chamberlain went
in and acquainted the Caliph Sulayman bin Abd al-Malik with Khuzaymah’s
arrival, whereat he was troubled and said, “What! is the Governor of
Mesopotamia come without our command? This can be only on some grave
occasion.” Then he bade admit him and said, before saluting him, “What
is behind thee, O Khuzaymah?” Replied he, “Good, O Commander of the
Faithful.” Asked Sulayman, “What bringeth thee?”; and he answered,
saying, “I have discovered Jabir Atharat al-Kiram and thought to gladden
thee with him, knowing thine excessive desire to know him and thy
longing to see him.” “Who is he?” quoth the Caliph and quoth Khuzaymah,
“He is Ikrimah al-Fayyaz.” So Sulayman called for Ikrimah, who
approached and saluted him as Caliph; and the King welcomed him and
making him draw near his sitting-place, said to him, “O Ikrimah, thy
good deed to him hath brought thee naught but evil,” adding, “Now write
down in a note thy needs each and every, and that which thou desirest.”
He did so and the Caliph commanded to do all that he required and that
forthwith. Moreover he gave him ten thousand dinars more than he asked
for and twenty chests of clothes over and above that he sought, and
calling for a spear, bound him a banner and made him Governor over
Armenia and Azarbiján[109] and Mesopotamia, saying, “Khuzaymah’s case is
in thy hands, an thou wilt, continue him in his office, and if thou
wilt, degrade him.” And Ikrimah said, “Nay, but I restore him to his
office, O Commander of the Faithful.” Then they went out from him and
ceased not to be Governors under Sulayman bin Abd al-Malik all the days
of his Caliphate. And they also tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 99:

  _i.e._ “The overflowing,” with benefits; on account of his generosity.

Footnote 100:

  The seventh Ommiade A. H. 96–99 (715–719). He died of his fine
  appetite after eating at a sitting a lamb, six fowls, seventy
  pomegranates, and 11¼ lbs. of currants. He was also proud of his youth
  and beauty and was wont to say, “Mohammed was the Apostle and Abu Bakr
  witness to the Truth; Omar the Discriminator and Othman the Bashful,
  Mu’awiyah the Mild and Yazid the Patient; Abd al-Malik the
  Administrator and Walid the Tyrant; but I am the Young King!”

Footnote 101:

  Arab. Al-Jazírah, “the Island;” name of the region and the capital.

Footnote 102:

  _i.e._ “Repairer of the Slips of the Generous,” an evasive reply,
  which of course did not deceive the questioner.

Footnote 103:

  Arab. “Falastín,” now obselete. The word has echoed far west and the
  name of the noble race has been degraded to “Philister,” a bourgeois,
  a greasy burgher.

Footnote 104:

  Saying, “The Peace be with thee, O Prince of True Believers!”

Footnote 105:

  Arab. “Mutanakkir,” which may also mean proud or in disguise.

Footnote 106:

  On appointment as viceroy. See vol. iii., 307.

Footnote 107:

  The custom with outgoing Governors. It was adopted by the Spaniards
  and Portuguese especially in America. The generosity of Ikrimah
  without the slightest regard to justice or common honesty is
  characteristic of the Arab in story-books.

Footnote 108:

  The celebrated half-way house between Jaffa and Jerusalem.

Footnote 109:

  Alias the Kohistan or mountain region, Susiana (Khuzistan) whose
  capital was Susa; and the head quarters of fire-worship. Azar (fire)
  was the name of Abraham’s father whom Eusebius calls “Athar”
  (Pilgrimage iii. 336).




            YUNUS THE SCRIBE AND THE CALIPH WALID BIN SAHL.


There lived in the reign of the Caliph Hishám,[110] son of Abd al-Malik,
a man called Yúnus the Scribe well-known to the general, and he set out
one day on a journey to Damascus, having with him a slave-girl of
surpassing beauty and loveliness, whom he had taught all that was
needful to her and whose price was an hundred thousand dirhams. When
they drew near to Damascus, the caravan halted by the side of a lake and
Yunus went down to a quiet place with his damsel and took out some
victual he had with him and a leather bottle of wine. As he sat at meat,
behold, came up a young man of goodly favour and dignified presence,
mounted on a sorrel horse and followed by two eunuchs, and said to him,
“Wilt thou accept me to guest?” “Yes,” replied Yunus. So the stranger
alighted and said, “Give me to drink of thy wine.” Yunus gave him to
drink and he said, “If it please thee, sing us a song.” So Yunus sang
this couplet extempore:—

 She joineth charms were never seen conjoined in mortal dress: ✿ And for
    her love she makes me love my tears and wakefulness.

At which the stranger rejoiced with exceeding joy and Yunus gave him to
drink again and again, till the wine got the better of him and he said,
“Bid thy slave-girl sing.” So she improvised this couplet:—

 A houri, by whose charms my heart is moved to sore distress: ✿ Nor wand
    of tree nor sun nor moon her rivals I confess!

The stranger was overjoyed with this and they sat drinking till
nightfall, when they prayed the evening-prayer and the youth said to
Yunus, “What bringeth thee to our city?” He replied, “Quest of
wherewithal to pay my debts and better my case.” Quoth the other, “Wilt
thou sell me this slave-girl for thirty thousand dirhams?” Whereto quoth
Yunus, “I must have more than that.” He asked, “Will forty thousand
content thee?”; but Yunus answered, “That would only settle my debts,
and I should remain empty-handed.” Rejoined the stranger, “We will take
her of thee at fifty thousand dirhams[111] and give thee a suit of
clothes to boot and the expenses of thy journey and make thee a sharer
in my condition as long as thou livest.” Cried Yunus, “I sell her to
thee on these terms.” Then said the young man, “Wilt thou trust me to
bring thee the money to-morrow and let me take her with me, or shall she
abide with thee till I pay thee down her price?” Whereto wine and shame
and awe of the stranger led Yunus to reply, “I will trust thee; take her
and Allah bless thee in her!” Whereupon the visitor bade one of his
pages sit her before him on his beast, and mounting his own horse,
farewelled of Yunus and rode away out of sight. Hardly had he left him,
when the seller bethought himself and knew that he had erred in selling
her and said to himself, “What have I done? I have delivered my
slave-girl to a man with whom I am unacquainted, neither know I who he
is; and grant that I were acquainted with him, how am I to get at him?”
So he abode in thought till the morning, when he prayed the dawn-prayers
and his companions entered Damascus, whilst he sat, perplexed and
wotting not what to do, till the sun scorched him and it irked him to
abide there. He thought to enter the city, but said in his mind, “If I
enter Damascus, I cannot be sure but that the messenger will come and
find me not, in which case I shall have sinned against myself a second
sin.” Accordingly he sat down in the shade of a wall that was there, and
towards the wane of day, up came one of the eunuchs whom he had seen
with the young man, whereat great joy possessed Yunus and he said in
himself, “I know not that aught hath ever given me more delight than the
sight of this castrato.” When the eunuch reached him, he said to him, “O
my lord, we have kept thee long waiting”; but Yunus disclosed nothing to
him of the torments of anxiety he had suffered. Then quoth the castrato,
“Knowest thou the man who bought the girl of thee?”; and quoth Yunus,
“No,” to which the other rejoined, “’Twas Walid bin Sahl,[112] the Heir
Apparent.” And Yunus was silent. Then said the eunuch, “Ride,” and made
him mount a horse he had with him and they rode till they came to a
mansion, where they dismounted and entered. Here Yunus found the damsel,
who sprang up at his sight and saluted him. He asked her how she had
fared with him who had bought her and she answered, “He lodged me in
this apartment and ordered me all I needed.” Then he sat with her
awhile, till suddenly one of the servants of the house-owner came in and
bade him rise and follow him. So he followed the man into the presence
of his master and found him yesternight’s guest, whom he saw seated on
his couch and who said to him, “Who art thou?” “I am Yunus the Scribe.”
“Welcome to thee, O Yunus! by Allah, I have long wished to look on thee;
for I have heard of thy report. How didst thou pass the night?” “Well,
may Almighty Allah advance thee.” “Peradventure thou repentedest thee of
that thou didst yesterday and saidst to thyself: I have delivered my
slave-girl to a man with whom I am not acquainted, neither know I his
name nor whence he cometh?” “Allah forbid, O Emir, that I should repent
over her! Had I made gift of her to the Prince, she were the least of
the gifts that are given unto him,”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Yunus
the Scribe said to Walid, “Allah forbid I should repent over her! Had I
made gift of her to the Prince, she were the least of gifts that are
given to him, nor indeed is she worthy of his rank,” Walid rejoined, “By
Allah, but I repented me of having carried her away from thee and said
to myself:—This man is a stranger and knoweth me not, and I have taken
him by surprise and acted inconsiderately by him, in my haste to take
the damsel! Dost thou recall what passed between us?” Quoth Yunus,
“Yes!” and quoth Walid, “Dost thou sell this damsel to me for fifty
thousand dirhams?” And Yunus said, “I do.” Then the Prince called to one
of his servants to bring him fifty thousand dirhams and a thousand and
five hundred dinars to boot, and gave them all to Yunus, saying, “Take
the slave’s price: the thousand dinars are for thy fair opinion of us
and the five hundred are for thy viaticum and for what present thou
shalt buy for thy people. Art thou content?” “I am content,” answered
Yunus and kissed his hands, saying, “By Allah, thou hast filled my eyes
and my hands and my heart!” Quoth Walid, “By Allah, I have as yet had no
privacy of her nor have I taken my fill of her singing. Bring her to
me!” So she came and he bade her sit, then said to her, “Sing.” And she
sang these verses:—

 O thou who dost comprise all Beauty’s boons! ✿ O sweet of nature, fain
    of coquetry!
 In Turks and Arabs many beauties dwell; ✿ But, O my fawn, in none thy
    charms I see.
 Turn to thy lover, O my fair, and keep ✿ Thy word, though but in
    visioned phantasy:
 Shame and disgrace are lawful for thy sake ✿ And wakeful nights full
    fill with joy and glee:
 I’m not the first for thee who fared distraught; ✿ Slain by thy love how
    many a many be!
 I am content with thee for worldly share ✿ Dearer than life and good art
    thou to me!

When he heard this, he was delighted exceedingly and praised Yunus for
his excellent teaching of her and her fair education. Then he bade his
servants bring him a roadster with saddle and housings for his riding,
and a mule to carry his gear, and said to him, “O Yunus, when it shall
reach thee that command hath come to me, do thou join me; and, by Allah,
I will fill thy hands with good and advance thee to honour and make thee
rich as long as thou livest!” So Yunus said, “I took his goods and went
my ways; and when Walid succeeded to the Caliphate, I repaired to him;
and by Allah, he kept his promise and entreated me with high honour and
munificence. Then I abode with him in all content of case and rise of
rank and mine affairs prospered and my wealth increased and goods and
farms became mine, such as sufficed me and will suffice my heirs after
me; nor did I cease to abide with Walid, till he was slain, the mercy of
Almighty Allah be on him!” And men tell a tale concerning

-----

Footnote 110:

  Tenth Ommiade A.H. 105–125 (= 724–743), a wise and discreet ruler with
  an inclination to avarice and asceticism. According to some, the
  Ommiades produced only three statesmen, Mu’awiyah, Abd al-Malik and
  Hisham; and the reign of the latter was the end of sage government and
  wise administration.

Footnote 111:

  About £1,250, which seems a long price; but in those days Damascus had
  been enriched with the spoils of the world adjacent.

Footnote 112:

  Eleventh Ommiade dynasty, A.H. 125–126 (= 743–744). Ibn Sahl (son of
  ease, _i.e._ free and easy) was a nickname; he was the son of Yazíd
  II. and brother of Hishám. He scandalised the lieges by his
  profligacy, wishing to make the pilgrimage in order to drink upon the
  Ka’abah-roof; so they attacked the palace and lynched him. His death
  is supposed to have been brought about (27th of Jamáda al-Akhirah =
  April 16, 744) by his cousin and successor Yazíd (No. iii.) surnamed
  the Retrencher. The tale in the text speaks well for him; but
  generosity amongst the Arabs covers a multitude of sins, and people
  say, “Better a liberal sinner than a stingy saint.”




                   HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE ARAB GIRL.


The Caliph Harun al-Rashid was walking one day with Ja’afar the
Barmecide, when he espied a company of girls drawing water and went up
to them, having a mind to drink. As he drew near, one of them turned to
her fellows and improvised these lines:—

 Thy phantom bid thou fleet, and fly ✿ Far from the couch whereon I lie;
 So I may rest and quench the fire, ✿ Bonfire in bones aye flaming high;
 My love-sick form Love’s restless palm ✿ Rolls o’er the rug whereon I
    sigh:
 How ’tis with me thou wottest well ✿ How long, then, union wilt deny?

The Caliph marvelled at her elegance and eloquence.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph,
hearing the girl’s verses, marvelled at her elegance and eloquence, and
said to her, “O daughter of nobles, are these thine own or a quotation?”
Replied she, “They are my very own,” and he rejoined, “An thou say sooth
keep the sense and change the rhyme.” So she said:—

 Bid thou thy phantom distance keep ✿ And quit this couch the while I
    sleep;
 So I may rest and quench the flames ✿ Through all my body rageful creep,
 In love-sick one, whom passion’s palms ✿ Roll o’er the bed where grief I
    weep.
 How ’tis with me thou wottest well; ✿ All but thy union hold I cheap!

Quoth the Caliph, “This also is stolen”; and quoth she, “Nay, ’tis my
very own.” He said, “If it be indeed thine own, change the rhyme again
and keep the sense.” So she recited the following:—

 Unto thy phantom deal behest ✿ To shun my couch the while I rest,
 So I repose and quench the fire ✿ That burns what lieth in my breast,
 My weary form Love’s restless palm ✿ Rolls o’er with boon of sleep
    unblest.
 How ’tis with me thou wottest well ✿ When union’s bought ’tis haply
    best!

Quoth Al-Rashid, “This too is stolen”; and quoth she, “Not so, ’tis
mine.” He said, “If thy words be true change the rhyme once more.” And
she recited:—

 Drive off the ghost that ever shows ✿ Beside my couch when I’d repose,
 So I may rest and quench the fire ✿ Beneath my ribs e’er flames and
    glows,
 In love-sick one, whom passion’s palms ✿ Roll o’er the couch where
    weeping flows,
 How ’tis with me thou wottest well ✿ Will union come as union goes?

Then said the Caliph, “Of what part of this camp art thou?”; and she
replied, “Of its middle in dwelling and of its highest in
tent-poles.”[113] Wherefore he knew that she was the daughter of the
tribal chief. “And thou,” quoth she, “of what art thou among the
guardians of the horses?”; and quoth he, “Of the highest in tree and of
the ripest in fruit.” “Allah protect thee, O Commander of the Faithful!”
said she, and kissing ground called down blessings on him. Then she went
away with the maidens of the Arabs, and the Caliph said to Ja’afar,
“There is no help for it but I take her to wife.” So Ja’afar repaired to
her father and said to him, “The Commander of the Faithful hath a mind
to thy daughter.” He replied, “With love and goodwill, she is a gift as
a handmaid to His Highness our Lord the Commander of the Faithful.” So
he equipped her and carried her to the Caliph, who took her to wife and
went in to her, and she became of the dearest of his women to him.
Furthermore, he bestowed on her father largesse such as succoured him
among Arabs, till he was transported to the mercy of Almighty Allah. The
Caliph, hearing of his death, went in to her greatly troubled; and, when
she saw him looking afflicted, she entered her chamber and doffing all
that was upon her of rich raiment, donned mourning apparel and raised
lament for her father. It was said to her, “What is the reason of
this?”; and she replied, “My father is dead.” So they repaired to the
Caliph and told him and he rose and going in to her, asked her who had
informed her of her father’s death; and she answered “It was thy face, O
Commander of the Faithful!” Said he, “How so?”; and she said, “Since I
have been with thee, I never saw thee on such wise till this time, and
there was none for whom I feared save my father, by reason of his great
age; but may thy head live, O Commander of the Faithful!” The Caliph’s
eyes filled with tears and he condoled with her; but she ceased not to
mourn for her father, till she followed him—Allah have mercy on the
twain! And a tale is also told of

-----

Footnote 113:

  The tents of black wool woven by the Badawi women are generally
  supported by three parallel rows of poles lengthways and crossways
  (the highest line being the central) and the covering is pegged down.
  Thus the outline of the roofs forms two or more hanging curves, and
  these characterise the architecture of the Tartars and Chinese; they
  are still preserved in the Turkish (and sometimes in the European)
  “Kiosque,” and they have extended to the Brazil where the upturned
  eaves, often painted vermilion below, at once attract the traveller’s
  notice.




               AL-ASMA’I AND THE THREE GIRLS OF BASSORAH.


The Commander of the Faithful Harun Al-Rashid was exceeding restless one
night and rising from his bed, paced from chamber to chamber, but could
not compose himself to sleep. As soon as it was day, he said, “Fetch me
Al-Asma’i!”[114] So the eunuch went out and told the doorkeepers; these
sent for the poet and when he came, informed the Caliph who bade admit
him and said to him, “O Asma’i, I wish thee to tell me the best thou
hast heard of stories of women and their verses.” Answered Al-Asma’i,
“Hearkening and obedience! I have heard great store of women’s verses;
but none pleased me save three sets of couplets I once heard from three
girls.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-seventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Al-Asma’i said
to the Prince of True Believers, “Verily I have heard much, but nothing
pleased me save three sets of couplets improvised by as many girls.”
Quoth the Caliph, “Tell me of them,” and quoth he, “Know then, O
Commander of the Faithful, that I once abode in Bassorah, and one day,
as I was walking, the heat was sore upon me and I sought for a
siesta-place but found none. However by looking right and left I came
upon a porch swept and sprinkled, at the upper end whereof was a wooden
bench under an open lattice-window, whence exhaled a scent of musk. I
entered the porch and sitting down on the bench, would have stretcht me
at full length when I heard from within a girl’s sweet voice talking and
saying:—O my sisters, we are here seated to spend our day in friendly
converse; so come, let us each put down an hundred dinars and recite a
line of verse; and whoso extemporiseth the goodliest and sweetest line,
the three hundred dinars shall be hers.” “With love and gladness,” said
the others; and the eldest recited the first couplet which is this:—

 Would he come to my bed during sleep ’twere delight ✿ But a visit on
    wake were delightsomer sight!

Quoth the second:—

 Naught came to salute me in sleep save his shade ✿ But “welcome, fair
    welcome,” I cried to the spright!

Then said the youngest:—


 My soul and my folk I engage for the youth ✿ Musk-scented I see in my
                            bed every night!

Quoth I, “An she be fair as her verse hath grace, the thing is complete
in every case.” Then I came down from my bench[115] and was about to go
away, when behold, the door opened and out came a slave-girl, who said
to me, “Sit, O Shaykh!” So I climbed up and sat down again when she gave
me a scroll, wherein was written, in characters of the utmost beauty,
with straight Alifs,[116] big-bellied Hás and rounded Waws, the
following:—We would have the Shaykh (Allah lengthen his days!) to know
that we are three maidens, sisters, sitting in friendly converse, who
have laid down each an hundred dinars, conditioning that whoso recite
the goodliest and sweetest couplet shall have the whole three hundred
dinars; and we appoint thee umpire between us: so decide as thou seest
best, and the Peace be on thee! Quoth I to the girl, Here to me inkcase
and paper. So she went in and, returning after a little, brought me a
silvered inkcase and gilded pens[117] with which I wrote these
couplets:—

 They talked of three beauties whose converse was quite ✿ Like the talk
    of a man with experience dight:
 Three maidens who borrowed the bloom of the dawn ✿ Making hearts of
    their lovers in sorriest plight.
 They were hidden from eyes of the prier and spy ✿ Who slept and their
    modesty mote not affright;
 So they opened whatever lay hid in their hearts ✿ And in frolicsome fun
    began verse to indite.
 Quoth one fair coquette with her amorous grace ✿ Whose teeth for the
    sweet of her speech flashèd bright:—
 Would he come to my bed during sleep ’twere delight ✿ But a visit on
    wake were delightsomer sight!
 When she ended, her verse by her smiling was gilt: ✿ Then the second
    ’gan singing as nightingale might:—
 Naught came to salute me in sleep save his shade ✿ But welcome, fair
    welcome, I cried to the spright!
 But the third I preferred for she said in reply, ✿ With expression most
    apposite, exquisite:—
 My soul and my folk I engage for the youth ✿ Musk-scented I see in my
    bed every night!
 So when I considered their words to decide, ✿ And not make me the mock
    of the cynical wight;
 I pronounced for the youngest, declaring her verse ✿ Of all verses be
    that which is nearest the right.

Then I gave the scroll to the slave-girl, who went upstairs with it, and
behold, I heard a noise of dancing and clapping of hands and Doomsday
astir. Quoth I to myself, “’Tis no time for me to stay here.” So I came
down from the platform and was about to go away, when the damsel cried
out to me, “Sit down, O Asma’i!” Asked I, “Who gave thee to know that I
was Al-Asma’i?” and she answered, “O Shaykh, an thy name be unknown to
us, thy poetry is not!” So I sat down again and suddenly the door opened
and out came the first damsel, with a dish of fruits and another of
sweetmeats. I ate of both and praised their fashion and would have
ganged my gait; but she cried out, “Sit down, O Asma’i!” Wherewith I
raised my eyes to her and saw a rosy palm in a saffron sleeve, meseemed
it was the full moon rising splendid in the cloudy East. Then she threw
me a purse containing three hundred dinars and said to me, “This is mine
and I give it to thee by way of douceur in requital of thy judgment.”
Quoth the Caliph, “Why didst thou decide for the youngest?” and quoth
Al-Asma’i, “O Commander of the Faithful, whose life Allah prolong! the
eldest said:—I should delight in him, if he visited my couch in sleep.
Now this is restricted and dependent upon a condition which may befal or
may not befal; whilst, for the second, an image of dreams came to her in
sleep, and she saluted it; but the youngest’s couplet said that she
actually lay with her lover and smelt his breath sweeter than musk and
she engaged her soul and her folk for him, which she had not done, were
he not dearer to her than her sprite.” Said the Caliph, “Thou didst
well, O Asma’i,” and gave him other three hundred ducats in payment of
his story. And I have heard a tale concerning

-----

Footnote 114:

  See vol. iv., 159. The author of “Antar,” known to Englishmen by the
  old translation of Mr. Terrick Hamilton, secretary of Legation at
  Constantinople. There is an abridgement of the forty-five volumes of
  Al-Asma’i’s “Antar” which mostly supplies or rather supplied the
  “Antariyyah” or professional tale-tellers; whose theme was the heroic
  Mulatto lover.

Footnote 115:

  The “Dakkah” or long wooden sofa, as opposed to the “mastabah” or
  stone bench, is often a tall platform and in mosques is a kind of ambo
  railed round and supported by columns. Here readers recite the Koran:
  Lane (M.E. chapt. iii.) sketches it in the “Interior of a Mosque.”

Footnote 116:

  Alif (ا) Ha (ه) and Waw (و‎), the first, twenty-seventh and
  twenty-sixth letters of the Arabic alphabet: No. 1 is the most simple
  and difficult to write calligraphically.

Footnote 117:

  Reeds washed with gold and used for love-letters, &c.




                  IBRAHIM OF MOSUL AND THE DEVIL.[118]


Quoth Abu Ishak Ibrahim al-Mausili:—I asked Al-Rashid once to give me a
day’s leave that I might be private with the people of my household and
my brethren, and he gave me leave for Saturday the Sabbath. So I went
home and betook myself to making ready meat and drink and other
necessaries and bade the doorkeepers shut the doors and let none come in
to me. However, presently, as I sat in my sitting-chamber, with my women
who were looking after my wants, behold, there appeared an old man of
comely and reverend aspect,[119] clad in white clothes and a shirt of
fine stuff with a doctor’s turband on his head and a silver-handled
staff in his hand, and the house and porch were full of the perfumes
wherewith he was scented. I was greatly vexed at his coming in to me and
thought to turn away the doorkeepers; but he saluted me after the
goodliest fashion and I returned his greeting and bade him be seated. So
he sat down and began entertaining me with stories of the Arabs and
their verses, till my anger left me and methought my servants had sought
to pleasure me by admitting a man of such good breeding and fine
culture. Then I asked him, “Art thou for meat?”; and he answered, “I
have no need of it.” “And for drink?” quoth I, and quoth he, “That is as
thou wilt.” So I drank off a pint of wine and poured him out the like.
Then said he, “O Abu Ishak, wilt thou sing us somewhat, so we may hear
of thine art that wherein thou excellest high and low?” His words
angered me; but I swallowed my anger and taking the lute played and
sang. “Well done, O Abu Ishak!”[120] said he; whereat my wrath redoubled
and I said to myself, “Is it not enough that he should intrude upon me,
without my leave, and importune me thus, but he must call me by name, as
though he knew not the right way to address me?” Quoth he, “An thou wilt
sing something more we will requite thee.” I dissembled my annoyance and
took the lute and sang again, taking pains with what I sang and rising
thereto altogether, in consideration of his saying, “We will requite
thee.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-eighth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Shaykh said to Abu Ishak, “If thou wilt sing something more we will
requite thee,” I dissembled my annoyance (continued Ibrahim) and, taking
the lute, sang again with great attention to my singing and rising
altogether thereto, in consideration of his saying, “We will requite
thee.” He was delighted, and cried, “Well done, O my lord!”; presently
adding, “Dost thou give me leave to sing?” “As thou wilt,” answered I,
deeming him weak of wit, in that he should think to sing in my presence,
after that which he had heard from me. So he took the lute and swept the
strings, and by Allah, I fancied they spoke in Arabic tongue, with a
sweet and liquid and murmurous voice; then he began and sang these
couplets:—

 I bear a hurt heart, who will sell me for this ✿ A heart whole and free
    from all canker and smart?
 Nay, none will consent or to barter or buy ✿ Such loss, ne’er from
    sorrow and sickness to part:
 I groan wi’ the groaning of wine-wounded men ✿ And pine for the pining
    ne’er freeth my heart.

And by Allah, meseemed the doors and the walls and all that was in the
house answered and sang with him, for the beauty of his voice, so that I
fancied my very limbs and clothes replied to him, and I abode amazed and
unable to speak or move, for the trouble of my heart. Then he sang these
couplets:—

 Culvers of Liwa![121] to your nests return; ✿ Your mournful voices
    thrill this heart of mine.
 Then back a-copse they flew, and well-nigh took ✿ My life and made me
    tell my secret pine.
 With cooing call they one who’s gone, as though ✿ Their breasts were
    maddened with the rage of wine:
 Ne’er did mine eyes their like for culvers see ✿ Who weep yet tear-drops
    never dye their eyne.

And also these couplets:—

 O Zephyr of Najd, when from Najd thou blow, ✿ Thy breathings heap only
    new woe on woe!
 The turtle bespake me in bloom of morn ✿ From the cassia-twig and the
    willow-bough
 She moaned with the moaning of love-sick youth ✿ And exposed love-secret
    I ne’er would show:
 They say lover wearies of love when near ✿ And is cured of love an afar
    he go:

 I tried either cure which ne’er cured my love; ✿ But that nearness is
    better than farness I know:[122]
 Yet,—the nearness of love shall no ’vantage prove ✿ An whoso thou lovest
    deny thee of love.

Then said he, “O Ibrahim, sing this song after me, and preserving the
mode thereof in thy singing, teach it to thy slave-girls.” Quoth I,
“Repeat it to me.” But he answered, “There needs no repetition; thou
hast it by heart nor is there more to learn.” Then he suddenly vanished
from my sight. At this I was amazed and running to my sword drew it and
made for the door of the Harim, but found it closed and said to the
women, “What have ye heard?” Quoth they, “We have heard the sweetest of
singing and the goodliest.” Then I went forth amazed, to the house-door
and, finding it locked, questioned the doorkeepers of the old man. They
replied, “What old man? By Allah, no one hath gone in to thee this day!”
So I returned pondering the matter, when, behold, there arose from one
of the corners of the house, a Vox et præterea nihil, saying, “O Abu
Ishak, no harm shall befal thee. ’Tis I, Abú Murrah,[123] who have been
thy cup-companion this day, so fear nothing!” Then I mounted and rode to
the palace, where I told Al-Rashid what had passed, and he said, “Repeat
to me the airs thou heardest from him.” So I took the lute and played
and sang them to him; for, behold, they were rooted in my heart. The
Caliph was charmed with them and drank thereto, albeit he was no
confirmed wine-bibber, saying, “Would he would some day pleasure us with
his company, as he hath pleasured thee!”[124] Then he ordered me a
present and I took it and went away. And men relate this story anent

-----

Footnote 118:

  Lane introduced this tale into vol. i., p. 223, notes on chapt. iii.,
  apparently not knowing that it was in The Nights. He gives a mere
  abstract, omitting all the verse, and he borrowed it either from the
  Halbat Al-Kumayt (chapt. xiv.) or from Al-Mas’údí (chapt. cxi.). (See
  the French translation, vol. vi. p. 340). I am at pains to understand
  why M. C. Barbier de Maynard writes “Réchid” with an accented vowel;
  although French delicacy made him render, by “fils de courtisane,” the
  expression in the text, “O biter of thy mother’s enlarged (or
  uncircumcised) clitoris” (Bazar).

Footnote 119:

  In Al-Mas’údí the Devil is “a young man fair of favour and formous of
  figure,” which is more appropriate to a “Tempter.” He also wears light
  stuffs of dyed silks.

Footnote 120:

  It would have been more courteous in an utter stranger to say, O my
  lord.

Footnote 121:

  The Arab Tempe (of fiction, not of grisly fact).

Footnote 122:

  These four lines are in Al-Mas’údi, chapt. cxviii. Fr. trans. vii.
  313, but that author does not tell us who wrote them.

Footnote 123:

  _i.e._ Father of Bitterness = the Devil. This legend of the Foul Fiend
  appearing to Ibrahim of Mosul (and also to Isam, N. dcxcv.) seems to
  have been accepted by contemporaries and reminds us of similar
  visitations in Europe—notably to Dr. Faust. One can only exclaim,
  “Lor, papa, what nonsense you are talking!” the words of a small girl
  whose father thought proper to indoctrinate her into certain Biblical
  stories. I once began to write a biography of the Devil; but I found
  that European folk-lore had made such an unmitigated fool of the grand
  old Typhon-Ahriman as to take away from him all human interest.

Footnote 124:

  In Al-Mas’údi the Caliph exclaims, “Verily thou hast received a visit
  from Satan!”




                   THE LOVERS OF THE BANU UZRAH.[125]


Quoth Masrur the Eunuch:—The Caliph Harun Al-Rashid was very wakeful one
night and said to me, “See which of the poets is at the door to-night.”
So I went out and finding Jamíl bin Ma’amar al-Uzrí[126] in the
antechamber, said to him, “Answer the Commander of the Faithful.” Quoth
he, “I hear and I obey,” and going in with me, saluted the Caliph, who
returned his greeting and bade him sit down. Then he said to him, “O
Jamil, hast thou any of thy wonderful new stories to tell us?” He
replied, “Yes, O Commander of the Faithful: wouldst thou fainer hear
that which I have seen with mine eyes or that which I have only heard?”
Quoth the Caliph, “Tell me something thou hast actually beheld.” Quoth
Jamil, “’Tis well, O Prince of True Believers; incline thy heart to me
and lend me thine ears.” The Caliph took a bolster of red brocade,
purfled with gold and stuffed with ostrich-feathers and, laying it under
his thighs, propped up both elbows thereon; then he said to Jamil,
“Now[127] for thy tale, O Jamil!” Thereupon he begun:—Know, O Commander
of the Faithful, that I was once desperately enamoured of a certain girl
and used to pay her frequent visits.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saving her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-ninth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Caliph
had propped his elbows upon the brocaded cushion, he said, “Out with thy
tale, O Jamil!” and the poet begun:—Know, O Commander of the Faithful, I
was desperately in love with a girl and used often to visit her, because
she was my desire and delight of all the things of this world. After a
while, her people removed with her, by reason of scarcity of pasture,
and I abode some time without seeing her, till I grew restless for
desire and longed for her sight and the flesh[128] urged me to journey
to her. One night, I could hold out no longer; so I rose and saddling my
she-camel, bound on my turban and donned my oldest dress.[129] Then I
baldricked myself with my sword and slinging my spear behind me, mounted
and rode forth in quest of her. I fared on fast till, one night, it was
pitch dark and exceeding black, yet I persisted in the hard task of
climbing down Wadys and up hills, hearing on all sides the roaring of
lions and howling of wolves and the cries of the wild beasts. My reason
was troubled thereat and my heart sank within me; but for all that my
tongue ceased not to call on the name of Almighty Allah. As I went along
thus, sleep overtook me and the camel carried me aside out of my road,
till, presently, something[130] smote me on the head, and I woke,
startled and alarmed, and found myself in a pasturage full of trees and
streams and birds on the branches, warbling their various speech and
notes. As the trees were tangled I alighted and, taking my camel’s
halter in hand, fared on softly with her, till I got clear of the thick
growth and came out into the open country, where I adjusted her saddle
and mounted again, knowing not where to go nor whither the Fates should
lead me; but, presently, peering afar into the desert, I espied a fire
in its middle depth. So I smote my camel and made for the fire. When I
drew near, I saw a tent pitched, and fronted by a spear stuck in the
ground, with a pennon flying[131] and horses tethered and camels
feeding, and said in myself, “Doubtless there hangeth some grave matter
by this tent, for I see none other than it in the desert.” So I went up
thereto and said, “Peace be with you, O people of the tent, and the
mercy of Allah and His blessing!” Whereupon there came forth to me a
young man as youths are when nineteen years old, who was like the full
moon shining in the East, with valour written between his eyes, and
answered, saying, “And with thee be the Peace, and Allah’s mercy and His
blessing! O brother of the Arabs, methinks thou hast lost thy way?”
Replied I, “Even so, direct me right, Allah have mercy on thee!” He
rejoined, “O brother of the Arabs, of a truth this our land is infested
with lions and the night is exceeding dark and dreary, beyond measure
cold and gloomy, and I fear lest the wild beasts rend thee in pieces;
wherefore do thou alight and abide with me this night in ease and
comfort, and to-morrow I will put thee in the right way.” Accordingly, I
dismounted and hobbled my she-camel with the end of her halter;[132]
then I put off my heavy upper clothes and sat down. Presently the young
man took a sheep and slaughtered it and kindled a brisk fire; after
which he went into the tent and bringing out finely powdered salt and
spices, fell to cutting off pieces of mutton and roasting them over the
fire and feeding me therewith, weeping at one while and sighing at
another. Then he groaned heavily and wept sore and improvised these
couplets:—

 There remains to him naught save a flitting breath ✿ And an eye whose
    babe ever wandereth.
 There remains not a joint in his limbs, but what ✿ Disease firm fixt
    ever tortureth.
 His tears are flowing, his vitals burning; ✿ Yet for all his tongue
    still he silenceth.
 All foemen in pity beweep his woes; ✿ Ah for freke whom the foeman
    pitieth!

By this I knew, O Commander of the Faithful, that the youth was a
distracted lover (for none knoweth passion save he who hath tasted the
passion-savour), and quoth I to myself, “Shall I ask him?” But I
consulted my judgment and said, “How shall I assail him with
questioning, and I in his abode?” So I restrained myself and ate my
sufficiency of the meat. When we had made an end of eating, the young
man arose and entering the tent, brought out a handsome basin and ewer
and a silken napkin, whose ends were purfled with red gold and a
sprinkling-bottle full of rose-water mingled with musk. I marvelled at
his dainty delicate ways and said in my mind, “Never wot I of delicacy
in the desert.” Then we washed our hands and talked a while, after which
he went into the tent and making a partition between himself and me with
a piece of red brocade, said to me, “Enter, O Chief of the Arabs, and
take thy rest; for thou hast suffered more of toil and travel than
sufficeth this night and in this thy journey.” So I entered and finding
a bed of green brocade, doffed my dress and passed a night such as I had
never passed in my life.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Six Hundred and Ninetieth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Jamil spoke,
saying:—Never in my life passed I a night like that. I pondered the
young man’s case, till the world was dark and all eyes slept, when I was
aroused by the sound of a low voice, never heard I a softer or sweeter.
I raised the curtain which hung between us and saw a damsel (never
beheld I a fairer of face), by the young man’s side and they were both
weeping and complaining, one to other of the pangs of passion and desire
and of the excess of their longing for union.[133] Quoth I, “By Allah, I
wonder who may be this second one! When I entered this tent, there was
none therein save this young man.” And after reflection I added,
“Doubtless this damsel is of the daughters of the Jinn and is enamoured
of this youth; so they have secluded themselves with each other in this
solitary place.” Then I considered her closely and behold, she was a
mortal and an Arab girl, whose face, when she unveiled, shamed the
shining sun, and the tent was lit up by the light of her countenance.
When I was assured that she was his beloved, I bethought me of
lover-jealousy; so I let drop the curtain and covering my face, fell
asleep. As soon as it was dawn I arose and donning my clothes, made the
Wuzu-ablution and prayed such prayers as are obligatory and which I had
deferred. Then I said, “O brother of the Arabs, wilt thou direct me into
the right road and thus add to thy favours?” He replied, “At thy
leisure, O chief of the Arabs, the term of the guest-rite is three
days,[134] and I am not one to let thee go before that time.” So I abode
with him three days, and on the fourth day as we sat talking, I asked
him of his name and lineage. Quoth he “As for my lineage, I am of the
Banú Odhrah; my name is such an one, son of such an one and my father’s
brother is called such an one.” And behold, O Commander of the Faithful,
he was the son of my paternal uncle and of the noblest house of the Banu
Uzrah. Said I, “O my cousin, what moved thee to act on this wise,
secluding thyself in the waste and leaving thy fair estate and that of
thy father and thy slaves and handmaids?” When he heard my words, his
eyes filled with tears and he replied, “Know, O my cousin, that I fell
madly in love of the daughter of my father’s brother, fascinated by her,
distracted for her, passion-possessed as by a Jinn, wholly unable to let
her out of my sight. So I sought her in marriage of her sire, but he
refused and married her to a man of the Banu Odhrah, who went in to her
and carried her to his abiding-place this last year. When she was thus
far removed from me and I was prevented from looking on her, the fiery
pangs of passion and excess of love-longing and desire drove me to
forsake my clan[135] and friends and fortune and take up my abode in
this desert, where I have grown used to my solitude.” I asked, “Where
are their dwellings?” and he answered, “They are hard by, on the crest
of yonder hill; and every night, at the dead time, when all eyes sleep,
she stealeth secretly out of the camp, unseen of any one, and I satisfy
my desire of her converse and she of mine.[136] So I abide thus,
solacing myself with her a part of the night, till Allah work out that
which is to be wrought; either I shall compass my desire, in spite[137]
of the envious, or Allah will determine for me and He is the best of
determinators.” Now when the youth told me his case, O Commander of the
Faithful, I was concerned for him and perplexed by reason of my jealousy
for his honour; so I said to him, “O son of my uncle, wilt thou that I
point out to thee a plan and suggest to thee a project, whereby (please
Allah) thou shalt find perfect welfare and the way of right and
successful issue whereby the Almighty shall do away from thee that thou
dreadest?” He replied, “Say on, O my cousin”; and quoth I, “When it is
night and the girl cometh, set her on my she-camel which is swift of
pace, and mount thou thy steed, whilst I bestride one of these
dromedaries. So will we fare on all night and when the morrow morns, we
shall have traversed wolds and wastes, and thou wilt have attained thy
desire and won the beloved of thy heart. The Almighty’s earth is wide,
and by Allah, I will back thee with heart and wealth and sword.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Jamil advised
the elopement and night journey, promising his aid as long as he lived,
the youth accepted and said, “O cousin, wait till I take counsel with
her, for she is quick-witted and prudent and hath insight into affairs.”
So (continued Jamil) when the night darkened and the hour of her coming
arrived, and he awaiting her at the appointed tide, she delayed beyond
her usual time, and I saw him go forth the door of the tent and opening
his mouth, inhale the wafts of breeze that blew from her quarter, as if
to snuff her perfume, and he repeated these two couplets:—

 Breeze of East who bringest me gentle air ✿ From the place of sojourn
    where dwells my fair:
 O Breeze, of the lover thou bearest sign, ✿ Canst not of her coming some
    signal bear?

Then he entered the tent and sat weeping awhile; after which he said to
me, “O my cousin, some mischance must have betided the daughter of mine
uncle, or some accident must have hindered her from coming to me this
night,” presently adding, “But abide where thou art, till I bring thee
the news.” And he took sword and shield and was absent a while of the
night, after which he returned, carrying something in hand and called
aloud to me. So I hastened to him and he said, “O my cousin, knowest
thou what hath happened?” I replied, “No, by Allah!” Quoth he, “Verily,
I am distraught concerning my cousin this night; for, as she was coming
to me, a lion met her in the way and devoured her, and there remaineth
of her but what thou seest.” So saying, he threw down what he had in his
hand, and behold, it was the damsel’s turband and what was left of her
bones. Then he wept sore and casting down his bow,[138] took a bag and
went forth again saying, “Stir not hence till I return to thee, if it
please Almighty Allah.” He was absent a while and presently returned,
bearing in his hand a lion’s head, which he threw on the ground and
called for water. So I brought him water, with which he washed the
lion’s mouth and fell to kissing it and weeping; and he mourned for her
exceedingly and recited these couplets:—

 Ho thou lion who broughtest thyself to woe, ✿ Thou art slain and worse
    sorrows my bosom rend!
 Thou hast reft me of fairest companionship, ✿ Made her home Earth’s womb
    till the world shall end.
 To Time, who hath wrought me such grief, I say, ✿ “Allah grant in her
    stead never show a friend!”

Then said he to me, “O cousin, I conjure thee by Allah and the claims of
kindred and consanguinity[139] between us, keep thou my charge. Thou
wilt presently see me dead before thee; whereupon do thou wash me and
shroud me and these that remain of my cousin’s bones in this robe and
bury us both in one grave and write thereon these two couplets:”—

 On Earth surface we lived in rare ease and joy ✿ By fellowship joined in
    one house and home.
 But Fate with her changes departed us, ✿ And the shroud conjoins us in
    Earth’s cold womb.

Then he wept with sore weeping and, entering the tent, was absent
awhile, after which he came forth, groaning and crying out. Then he gave
one sob and departed this world. When I saw that he was indeed dead, it
was grievous to me and so sore was my sorrow for him that I had
well-nigh followed him for excess of mourning over him. Then I laid him
out and did as he had enjoined me, shrouding his cousin’s remains with
him in one robe and laying the twain in one grave. I abode by their tomb
three days, after which I departed and continued to pay frequent pious
visits[140] to the place for two years. This then is their story, O
Commander of the Faithful! Al-Rashid was pleased with Jamil’s story and
rewarded him with a robe of honour and a handsome present. And men also
tell a tale concerning

-----

Footnote 125:

  Al-Mas’udi, chapt. cxix. (Fr. transl. vii., 351) mentions the Banu
  Odhrah as famed for lovers and tells the pathetic tale of ’Orwah and
  ’Afrá.

Footnote 126:

  Jamil bin Ma’amar the poet has been noticed in Vol. ii. 102; and he
  has no business here as he died years before Al-Rashid was born. The
  tale begins like that of Ibn Mansúr and the Lady Budúr (Night
  cccxxvii.), except that Mansur does not offer his advice.

Footnote 127:

  Arab “Halumma,” an interjection = bring! a congener of the Heb.
  “Halúm,” the grammarians of Kufah and Bassorah are divided concerning
  its origin.

Footnote 128:

  Arab. “Nafs-í” which here corresponds with our canting “the flesh,”
  the “Old Adam,” &c.

Footnote 129:

  Arab. “Atmárí” used for travel. The Anglo-Americans are the only
  people who have the common sense to travel (where they are not known)
  in their “store clothes” and reserve the worst for where they are
  known.

Footnote 130:

  _e.g._, a branch or bough.

Footnote 131:

  Arab. “Ráyah káimah,” which Lane translates a “beast standing”!

Footnote 132:

  Tying up the near foreleg just above the knee; and even with this a
  camel can hop over sundry miles of ground in the course of a night.
  The hobbling is shown in Lane (Nights vol. ii., p. 46).

Footnote 133:

  As opposed to “Severance” in the old knightly language of love, which
  is now apparently lost to the world. I tried it in the Lyrics of
  Camoens and found that I was speaking a forgotten tongue, which
  mightily amused the common sort of critic and reviewer.

Footnote 134:

  More exactly three days and eight hours, after which the guest becomes
  a friend, and as in the Argentine prairies is expected to do friend’s
  duty. The popular saying is, “The entertainment of a guest is three
  days; the viaticum (jáizah) is a day and a night, and whatso exceedeth
  this is alms.”

Footnote 135:

  Arab. “’Ashírah.” Books tell us there are seven degrees of connection
  among the Badawin: Sha’ab, tribe or rather race, nation (as the
  Anazah) descended from a common ancestor; Kabílah the tribe proper
  (whence _les Kabyles_); Fasílah (sept), Imárah, Ashirah (all a man’s
  connections); Fakhiz (lit. the thigh, _i.e._, his blood relations) and
  Batn (belly) his kith and kin. Practically Kabílah is the tribe,
  Ashírah the clan, and Bayt the household; while Hayy may be anything
  between tribe and kith and kin.

Footnote 136:

  This is the true platonic love of noble Arabs, the Ishk ’uzrí, noted
  in vol. ii., 104.

Footnote 137:

  Arab. “’Alà raghm,” a favourite term. It occurs in theology; for
  instance, when the Shi’ahs are asked the cause of such and such a
  ritual distinction they will reply, “Ala raghmi ’l-Tasannun”: lit. =
  to spite the Sunnis.

Footnote 138:

  In the text “Al-Kaus” for which Lane and Payne substitute a shield.
  The bow had not been mentioned but—_n’importe_, the Arab reader would
  say. In the text it is left at home because it is a cowardly,
  far-killing weapon compared with sword and lance. Hence the Spaniard
  calls and justly calls the knife the “bravest of arms” as it wants a
  man behind it.

Footnote 139:

  Arab. “Rahim” or “Rihm” = womb, uterine relations, pity or sympathy,
  which may here be meant.

Footnote 140:

  Reciting Fátihahs and so forth, as I have described in the Cemetery of
  Al-Medinah (ii. 300). Moslems do not pay for prayers to benefit the
  dead like the majority of Christendom and, according to Calvinistic
  Wahhábi-ism, their prayers and blessings are of no avail. But the
  mourner’s heart loathes reason and he prays for his dead instinctively
  like the so-termed “Protestant.” Amongst the latter, by the bye, I
  find four great _Sommités_, (1) Paul of Tarsus who protested against
  the Hebraism of Peter; (2) Mohammed who protested against the
  perversions of Christianity; (3) Luther who protested against Italian
  rule in Germany, and lastly (4) one (who shall be nameless) that
  protests against the whole business.




                     THE BADAWI AND HIS WIFE.[141]


Caliph Mu’áwiyah was sitting one day in his palace[142] at Damascus, in
a room whose windows were open on all four sides, that the breeze might
enter from every quarter. Now it was a day of excessive heat, with no
breeze from the hills stirring, and the middle of the day, when the heat
was at its height, and the Caliph saw a man coming along, scorched by
the heat of the ground and limping, as he fared on barefoot. Mu’awiyah
considered him awhile and said to his courtiers, “Hath Allah (may He be
extolled and exalted!) created any miserabler than he who need must hie
abroad at such an hour and in such sultry tide as this?” Quoth one of
them, “Haply he seeketh the Commander of the Faithful;” and quoth the
Caliph, “By Allah, if he seek me, I will assuredly give to him, and if
he be wronged, I will certainly succour him. Ho, boy! Stand at the door,
and if yonder wild Arab seek to come in to me, forbid him not
therefrom.” So the page went out and presently the Arab came up to him
and he said, “What dost thou want?” Answered the other, “I want the
Commander of the Faithful,” and the page said, “Enter.” So he entered
and saluted the Caliph,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the page
allowed him to enter, the Badawi saluted the Caliph, who said to him,
“Who art thou?” Replied the Arab, “I am a man of the Banú Tamím.”[143]
“And what bringeth thee here at this season?” asked Mu’awiyah; and the
Arab answered, “I come to thee, complaining and thy protection
imploring.” “Against whom?” “Against Marwan bin al-Hakam,[144] thy
deputy,” replied he, and began reciting:—

 Mu’áwiyah,[145] thou gen’rous lord, and best of men that be; ✿ And oh,
    thou lord of learning, grace and fair humanity,
 Thee-wards I come because my way of life is strait to me: ✿ O help! and
    let me not despair thine equity to see.
 Deign thou redress the wrong that dealt the tyrant whim of him ✿ Who
    better had my life destroyed than made such wrong to dree.

 He robbed me of my wife Su’ád and proved him worst of foes, ✿ Stealing
    mine honour ’mid my folk with foul iniquity;
 And went about to take my life before th’ appointed day ✿ Hath dawned
    which Allah made my lot by destiny’s decree.

Now when Mu’awiyah heard him recite these verses, with the fire flashing
from his mouth, he said to him, “Welcome and fair welcome, O brother of
the Arabs! Tell me thy tale and acquaint me with thy case.” Replied the
Arab, “O Commander of the Faithful, I had a wife whom I loved passing
dear with love none came near; and she was the coolth of mine eyes and
the joy of my heart; and I had a herd of camels, whose produce enabled
me to maintain my condition; but there came upon us a bad year which
killed off hoof and horn and left me naught. When what was in my hand
failed me and wealth fell from me and I lapsed into evil case, I at once
became abject and a burden to those who erewhile wished to visit me; and
when her father knew it, he took her from me and abjured me and drove me
forth without ruth. So I repaired to thy deputy, Marwan bin al-Hakam,
and asked his aid. He summoned her sire and questioned him of my case,
when he denied any knowledge of me.” Quoth I, “Allah assain the Emir! An
it please him to send for the woman and question her of her father’s
saying, the truth will appear.” So he sent for her and brought her; but
no sooner had he set eyes on her than he fell in love with her; so,
becoming my rival, he denied me succour and was wroth with me, and sent
me to prison, where I became as I had fallen from heaven and the wind
had cast me down in a far land. Then said Marwan to her father, “Wilt
thou give her to me to wife, on a present settlement of a thousand
dinars and a contingent dowry of ten thousand dirhams,[146] and I will
engage to free her from yonder wild Arab!” Her father was seduced by the
bribe and agreed to the bargain; whereupon Marwan sent for me and
looking at me like an angry lion, said to me, “O Arab, divorce Su’ad.” I
replied, “I will not put her away; but he set on me a company of his
servants, who tortured me with all manner of tortures, till I found no
help for it but to divorce her. I did so and he sent me back to prison,
where I abode till the days of her purification were accomplished, when
he married her and let me go. So now I come hither in thee hoping and
thy succour imploring and myself on thy protection throwing.” And he
spoke these couplets:—

     Within my heart is fire ✿ Whichever flameth higher;
     Within my frame are pains ✿ For skill of leach too dire.
     Live coals in vitals burn ✿ And sparks from coal up spire:
     Tears flood mine eyes and down ✿ Coursing my cheek ne’er tire:
     Only God’s aid and thine ✿ I crave for my desire!

Then he was convulsed,[147] and his teeth chattered and he fell down in
a fit, squirming like a scotched snake. When Mu’awiyah heard his story
and his verse, he said, “Marwan bin al-Hakam hath transgressed against
the laws of the Faith and hath violated the Harim of True
Believers!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-third Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Caliph Mu’awiyah heard the wild Arab’s words, he said, “The son of
al-Hakam hath indeed transgressed against the laws of the Faith and hath
violated the Harim of True Believers,” presently adding, “O Arab, thou
comest to me with a story, the like whereof I never heard!” Then he
called for inkcase and paper and wrote to Marwan as follows:—Verily it
hath reached me that thou transgresseth the laws of the Faith with
regard to thy lieges. Now it behoveth the Wali who governeth the folk to
keep his eyes from their lusts and stay his flesh from its delights. And
after he wrote many words, which (quoth he who told me the tale) I omit,
for brevity’s sake, and amongst them these couplets:—

 Thou wast invested (woe to thee!)[148] with rule for thee unfit; ✿ Crave
    thou of Allah pardon for thy foul adultery.
 Th’ unhappy youth to us is come complaining ’mid his groans ✿ And asks
    redress for parting-grief and saddened me through thee.

 An oath have I to Allah sworn shall never be forsworn; ✿ Nay, for I’ll
    do what Faith and Creed command me to decree.
 An thou dare cross me in whate’er to thee I now indite ✿ I of thy flesh
    assuredly will make the vulture free.
 Divorce Su’ad, equip her well, and in the hottest haste ✿ With Al-Kumayt
    and Zíbán’s son, hight Nasr, send to me.

Then he folded the letter and, sealing it with his seal, delivered it to
Al-Kumayt[149] and Nasr bin Zíbán (whom he was wont to employ on weighty
matters, because of their trustiness) who took the missive and carried
it to Al-Medinah, where they went in to Marwan and saluting him
delivered to him the writ and told him how the case stood. He read the
letter and fell a-weeping; but he went in to Su’ad (as ’twas not in his
power to refuse obedience to the Caliph) and, acquainting her with the
case, divorced her in the presence of Al-Kumayt and Nasr; after which he
equipped her and delivered her to them, together with a letter to the
Caliph wherein he versified as follows:—

 Hurry not, Prince of Faithful Men! with best of grace thy vow ✿ I will
    accomplish as ’twas vowed and with the gladdest gree.
 I sinned not adulterous sin when loved her I, then how ✿ Canst charge me
    with advowtrous deed or any villainy?
 Soon comes to thee that splendid sun which hath no living peer ✿ On
    earth, nor aught in mortal men or Jinns her like shalt see.

This he sealed with his own signet and gave to the messengers who
returned with Su’ad to Damascus and delivered to Mu’awiyah the letter,
and when he had read it he cried, “Verily, he hath obeyed handsomely,
but he exceedeth in his praise of the woman.” Then he called for her and
saw beauty such as he had never seen, for comeliness and loveliness,
stature and symmetrical grace; moreover, he talked with her and found
her fluent of speech and choice in words. Quoth he, “Bring me the Arab.”
So they fetched the man, who came, sore disordered for shifts and
changes of fortune, and Mu’awiyah said to him, “O Arab, an thou wilt
freely give her up to me, I will bestow upon thee in her stead three
slave girls, high-bosomed maids like moons, with each a thousand dinars;
and I will assign thee on the Treasury such an annual sum as shall
content thee and enrich thee.” When the Arab heard this, he groaned one
groan and swooned away, so that Mu’awiyah thought he was dead; and, as
soon as he revived, the Caliph said to him, “What aileth thee?” The Arab
answered, “With heavy heart and in sore need have I appealed to thee
from the injustice of Marwan bin al-Hakam; but to whom shall I appeal
from thine injustice?” And he versified in these couplets:—

 Make me not (Allah save the Caliph!) one of the betrayed ✿ Who from the
    fiery sands to fire must sue for help and aid:
 Deign thou restore Su’ád to this afflicted heart distraught, ✿ Which
    every morn and eve by sorest sorrow is waylaid:
 Loose thou my bonds and grudge me not and give her back to me; ✿ And if
    thou do so ne’er thou shalt for lack of thanks upbraid!

Then said he, “By Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, wert thou to give
me all the riches contained in the Caliphate, yet would I not take them
without Su’ad.” And he recited this couplet:—

 I love Su’ád and unto all but hers my love is dead, ✿ Each morn I feel
    her love to me is drink and daily bread.

Quoth the Caliph, “Thou confessest to having divorced her and Marwan
owned the like; so now we will give her free choice. An she choose other
than thee, we will marry her to him, and if she choose thee, we will
restore her to thee.” Replied the Arab, “Do so.” So Mu’awiyah said to
her, “What sayest thou, O Su’ad? Which dost thou choose; the Commander
of the Faithful, with his honour and glory and dominion and palaces and
treasures and all else thou seest at his command, or Marwan bin al-Hakam
with his violence and tyranny, or this Arab, with his hunger and
poverty?” So she improvised these couplets:—

 This one, whom hunger plagues, and rags enfold, ✿ Dearer than tribe and
    kith and kin I hold;
 Than crownèd head, or deputy Marwán, ✿ Or all who boast of silver coins
    and gold.

Then said she, “By Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, I will not
forsake him for the shifts of Fortune or the perfidies of Fate, there
being between us old companionship we may not forget, and love beyond
stay and let; and indeed ’tis but just that I bear with him in his
adversity, even as I shared with him in prosperity.” The Caliph
marvelled at her wit and love and constancy and, ordering her ten
thousand dirhams, delivered her to the Arab, who took his wife and went
away.[150] And they likewise tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 141:

  Lane transfers this to vol. i. 520 (notes to chapt. vii.); and gives a
  mere abstract as of that preceding.

Footnote 142:

  We learn from Ibn Batutah that it stood South of the Great Mosque and
  afterwards became the Coppersmiths’ Bazar. The site was known as
  Al-Khazrá (the Green) and the building was destroyed by the Abbasides.
  See Defrémery and Sanguinetti, i. 206.

Footnote 143:

  This great tribe or rather nation has been noticed before (vol. ii.
  170). The name means “Strong,” and derives from one Tamim bin Murr of
  the race of Adnan, nat. circ. A.D. 121. They hold the North-Eastern
  uplands of Najd, comprising the great desert Al-Dahná and extend to
  Al-Bahrayn. They are split up into a multitude of clans and septs; and
  they can boast of producing two famous sectarians. One was Abdullah
  bin Suffár, head of the Suffriyah; and the other Abdullah bin Ibáz
  (Ibadh) whence the Ibázíyah heretics of Oman who long included her
  princes. Mr. Palgrave wrongly writes Abadeeyah and Biadeeyah and my
  “Bayázi” was an Arab vulgarism used by the Zanzibarians. Dr. Badger
  rightly prefers Ibáziyah which he writes Ibâdhiyah (Hist. of the
  Imams, etc.)

Footnote 144:

  Governor of Al-Medinah under Mu’awiyah and afterwards (A.H. 64–65 =
  683–4) fourth Ommiade. Al-Siyúti (p. 216) will not account him amongst
  the princes of the Faithful, holding him a rebel against Al-Zubayr.
  Ockley makes Ibn al-Zubayr ninth and Marwán tenth Caliph.

Footnote 145:

  The address, without the vocative particle, is more emphatic; and the
  P.N. Mu’awiyah seems to court the omission.

Footnote 146:

  This may also mean that the £500 were the woman’s “mahr” or marriage
  dowry and the £250 a present to buy the father’s consent.

Footnote 147:

  Quite true to nature. See an account of the quasi-epileptic fits to
  which Syrians are subject and by them called Al-Wahtah in “The Inner
  Life of Syria,” i. 233.

Footnote 148:

  Arab “Wayha-k” here equivalent to Wayla-k. M. C. Barbier de Meynard
  renders the first “mon ami” and the second “misérable.”

Footnote 149:

  This is an instance when the article (Al) is correctly used with one
  proper name and not with another. Al-Kumayt (P. N. of poet) lit. means
  a bay horse with black points: Nasr is victory.

Footnote 150:

  This anecdote, which reads like truth, is ample set off for a
  cart-load of abuse of women. But even the Hindus, determined
  misogynists in books, sometimes relent. Says the Katha Sarit Sagara:
  “So you see, King, honourable matrons are devoted to their husbands,
  and it is not the case that all women are always bad” (ii. 624). Let
  me hope that after all this Mistress Su’ad did not lead her husband a
  hardish life.




                        THE LOVERS OF BASSORAH.


The Caliph Harun al-Rashid was sleepless one night; so he sent for
Al-Asma’i and Husayn al-Khalí’a[151] and said to them, “Tell me a story
you twain and do thou begin, O Husayn.” He said, “’Tis well, O Commander
of the Faithful;” and thus began:—Some years ago, I dropped down stream
to Bassorah, to present to Mohammed bin Sulayman al-Rabí’í[152] a
Kasidah or elegy I had composed in his praise; and he accepted it and
bade me abide with him. One day, I went out to Al-Mirbad,[153] by way of
Al-Muháliyah;[154] and, being oppressed by the excessive heat, went up
to a great door, to ask for drink, when I was suddenly aware of a
damsel, as she were a branch swaying, with eyes languishing, eyebrows
arched and finely pencilled and smooth cheeks rounded, clad in a shift
the colour of a pomegranate-flower, and a mantilla of Sana’á[155] work;
but the perfect whiteness of her body overcame the redness of her shift,
through which glittered two breasts like twin granadoes and a waist, as
it were a roll of fine Coptic linen, with creases like scrolls of pure
white paper stuffed with musk.[156] Moreover, O Prince of True
Believers, round her neck was slung an amulet of red gold that fell down
between her breasts, and on the plain of her forehead were brow-locks
like jet.[157] Her eyebrows joined and her eyes were like lakes; she had
an aquiline nose and thereunder shell-like lips showing teeth like
pearls. Pleasantness prevailed in every part of her; but she seemed
dejected, disturbed, distracted and in the vestibule came and went,
walking upon the hearts of her lovers, whilst her legs[158] made mute
the voices of their ankle-rings; and indeed she was as saith the poet:—

    Each portion of her charms we see ✿ Seems of the whole a simile.

I was overawed by her, O Commander of the Faithful, and drew near her to
greet her, and behold, the house and vestibule and highways breathed
fragrant with musk. So I saluted her and she returned my salam with a
voice dejected and heart depressed and with the ardour of passion
consumed. Then said I to her, “O my lady, I am an old man and a stranger
and sore troubled by thirst. Wilt thou order me a draught of water, and
win reward in heaven?” She cried, “Away, O Shaykh, from me! I am
distracted from all thought of meat and drink.”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the damsel
said, “O Shaykh, I am distracted from all thought of meat and drink.”
Quoth I (continued Husayn), “By what ailment, O my lady?” and quoth she,
“I love one who dealeth not justly by me and I desire one who of me will
none. Wherefore I am afflicted with the wakefulness of those who wake
star-gazing.” I asked, “O my lady, is there on the wide expanse of earth
one to whom thou hast a mind and who to thee hath no mind?” Answered
she, “Yes; and this for the perfection of beauty and loveliness and
goodliness wherewith he is endowed.” “And why standeth thou in this
porch?” enquired I. “This is his road,” replied she, “and the hour of
his passing by.” I said, “O my lady, have ye ever foregathered and had
such commerce and converse as might cause this passion?” At this she
heaved a deep sigh; the tears rained down her cheeks, as they were dew
falling upon roses, and she versified with these couplets:—

 We were like willow-boughs in garden shining ✿ And scented joys in
    happiest life combining;
 Whenas one bough from other self would rend ✿ And oh! thou seest this
    for that repining!

Quoth I, “O maid, and what betideth thee of thy love for this man?”; and
quot. she, “I see the sun upon the walls of his folk and I think the sun
is he; or haply I catch sight of him unexpectedly and am confounded and
the blood and the life fly my body and I abide in unreasoning plight a
week or e’en a se’nnight.” Said I, “Excuse me, for I also have suffered
that which is upon thee of love-longing and distraction of soul and
wasting of frame and loss of strength; and I see in thee pallor of
complexion and emaciation, such as testify of the fever-fits of desire.
But how shouldst thou be unsmitten of passion and thou a sojourner in
the land of Bassorah?” Said she, “By Allah, before I fell in love of
this youth, I was perfect in beauty and loveliness and amorous grace
which ravished all the Princes of Bassorah, till he fell in love with
me.” I asked, “O maid, and who parted you?”; and she answered, “The
vicissitudes of fortune,” but the manner of our separation was strange;
and ’twas on this wise. One New Year’s day I had invited the damsels of
Bassorah and amongst them a girl belonging to Sírán, who had bought her
out of Oman for fourscore thousand dirhams. She loved me and loved me to
madness and when she entered she threw herself upon me and well-nigh
tore me in pieces with bites and pinches.[159] Then we withdrew apart,
to drink wine at our ease, till our meat was ready[160] and our delight
was complete, and she toyed with me and I with her, and now I was upon
her and now she was upon me. Presently, the fumes of the wine moved her
to strike her hand on the inkle of my petticoat-trousers, whereby it
became loosed, unknown of either of us, and my trousers fell down in our
play. At this moment he came in unobserved and, seeing me thus, was
wroth at the sight and made off, as the Arab filly hearing the tinkle of
her bridle.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the maiden said
to Husayn al-Khali’a, “When my lover saw me playing, as I described to
thee, with Siran’s girl, he went forth in anger. And ’tis now, O Shaykh,
three years ago, and since then I have never ceased to excuse myself to
him and coax him and crave his indulgence, but he will neither cast a
look at me from the corner of his eye, nor write me a word nor speak to
me by messenger nor hear from me aught.” Quoth I, “Harkye maid, is he an
Arab or an Ajam?”; and quoth she, “Out on thee! He is of the Princes of
Bassorah.” “Is he old or young?” asked I; and she looked at me
laughingly and answered, “Thou art certainly a simpleton! He is like the
moon on the night of its full, smooth-cheeked and beardless, nor is
there any defect in him except his aversion to me.” Then I put the
question, “What is his name?” and she replied, “What wilt thou do with
him?” I rejoined, “I will do my best to come at him, that I may bring
about reunion between you.” Said she, “I will tell thee on condition
that thou carry him a note;” and I said, “I have no objection to that.”
Then quoth she, “His name is Zamrah bin al-Mughayrah, hight Abú
al-Sakhá,[161] and his palace is in the Mirbad.” Therewith she called to
those within for inkcase and paper and tucking up[162] her sleeves,
showed two wrists like broad rings of silver. She then wrote after the
Basmalah as follows, “My lord, the omission of blessings[163] at the
head of this my letter shows mine insufficiency, and know that had my
prayer been answered, thou hadst never left me; for how often have I
prayed that thou shouldest not leave me, and yet thou didst leave me!
Were it not that distress with me exceedeth the bounds of restraint,
that which thy servant hath forced herself to do in writing this writ
were an aidance to her, despite her despair of thee, because of her
knowledge of thee that thou wilt fail to answer. Do thou fulfil her
desire, my lord, of a sight of thee from the porch, as thou passest in
the street, wherewith thou wilt quicken the dead soul in her. Or, far
better for her still than this, do thou write her a letter with thine
own hand (Allah endow it with all excellence!), and appoint it in
requital of the intimacy that was between us in the nights of time past,
whereof thou must preserve the memory. My lord, was I not to thee a
lover sick with passion? An thou answer my prayer, I will give to thee
thanks and to Allah praise; and so—The Peace!”[164] Then she gave me the
letter and I went away. Next morning I repaired to the door of the
Viceroy Mohammed bin Sulayman, where I found an assembly of the notables
of Bassorah, and amongst them a youth who adorned the gathering and
surpassed in beauty and brightness all who were there; and indeed the
Emir Mohammed set him above himself. I asked who he was and behold, it
was Zamrah himself: so I said in my mind, “Verily, there hath befallen
yonder unhappy one that which hath befallen her[165]!” Then I betook
myself to the Mirbad and stood waiting at the door of his house, till he
came riding up in state, when I accosted him and invoking more than
usual blessings on him, handed him the missive. When he read it and
understood it he said to me, “O Shaykh, we have taken other in her
stead. Say me, wilt thou see the substitute?” I answered, “Yes.”
Whereupon he called out a woman’s name, and there came forth a damsel
who shamed the two greater lights; swelling-breasted, walking the gait
of one who hasteneth without fear, to whom he gave the note, saying, “Do
thou answer it.” When she read it, she turned pale at the contents and
said to me, “O old man, crave pardon of Allah for this that thou hast
brought.” So I went out, O Commander of the Faithful, dragging my feet
and returning to her asked leave to enter. When she saw me, she asked,
“What is behind thee?”; and I answered, “Evil and despair.” Quoth she,
“Have thou no concern of him. Where are Allah and His power?”[166] Then
she ordered me five hundred dinars and I took them and went away. Some
days after I passed by the place and saw there horsemen and footmen. So
I went in and lo! these were the companions of Zamrah, who were begging
her to return to him; but she said, “No, by Allah, I will not look him
in the face!” And she prostrated herself in gratitude to Allah and
exultation over Zamrah’s defeat. Then I drew near her, and she pulled
out to me a letter, wherein was written, after the Bismillah, “My lady,
but for my forbearance towards thee (whose life Allah lengthen!) I would
relate somewhat of what betided from thee and set out my excuse, in that
thou trans-gressedst against me, whenas thou wast manifestly a sinner
against thyself and myself in breach of vows and lack of constancy and
preference of another over us; for, by Allah, on whom we call for help
against that which was of thy free-will, thou didst transgress against
the love of me; and so—The Peace!” Then she showed me the presents and
rarities he had sent her, which were of the value of thirty thousand
dinars. I saw her again after this, and Zamrah had married her. Quoth
Al-Rashid, “Had not Zamrah been beforehand with us, I should certainly
have had to do with her myself.”[167] And men tell the tale of

-----

Footnote 151:

  Al-Khalí’a has been explained in vol. i. 311: the translation of
  Al-Mas’udi (vi. 10) renders it “scélérat.” Abú Alí al-Husayn the Wag
  was a Bassorite and a worthy companion of Abu Nowas the Debauchee; but
  he adorned the Court of Al-Amin the son, not of Al-Rashid the father.

Footnote 152:

  Governor of Bassorah, but not in Al-Husayn’s day.

Footnote 153:

  The famous market-place where poems were recited; mentioned by
  Al-Hariri

Footnote 154:

  A quarter of Bassorah.

Footnote 155:

  Capital of Al-Yaman, and then famed for its leather and other work
  (vol. v. 16).

Footnote 156:

  The creases in the stomach like the large navel are always insisted
  upon. Says the Kathá (ii. 525) “And he looked on that torrent river of
  the elixir of beauty, adorned with a waist made charming by those
  wave-like wrinkles,” etc.

Footnote 157:

  Arab. Sabaj (not Sabah, as the Mac. Edit. misprints it): I am not sure
  of its meaning.

Footnote 158:

  A truly Arab conceit, suggesting—

               The mind, the music breathing from her face;

  her calves moved rhythmically, suggesting the movement and consequent
  sound of a musical instrument.

Footnote 159:

  The _morosa voluptas_ of the Catholic divines. The Sapphist described
  in the text would procure an orgasm (_in gloria_, as the Italians call
  it) by biting and rolling over the girl she loved; but by loosening
  the trouser-string she evidently aims at a closer tribadism—the Arab
  “Musáhikah.”

Footnote 160:

  We drink (or drank) after dinner; Easterns before the meal and
  half-Easterns (like the Russians) before and after. We talk of liquor
  being unwholesome on an empty stomach; but the truth is that all is
  purely habit. And as the Russian accompanies his Vodki with caviare,
  etc., so the Oriental drinks his Raki or Mahayá (Ma al-hayát—aqua
  vitæ) alternately with a Salátah, for whose composition see Pilgrimage
  i. 198. The Eastern practice has its advantages: it awakens the
  appetite, stimulates digestion and, what Easterns greatly regard, it
  is economical; half a bottle doing the work of a whole. Bhang and
  Kusumbá (opium dissolved and strained through a pledget of cotton) are
  always drunk before dinner and thus the “jolly” time is the
  preprandial, not the postprandial.

Footnote 161:

  “Abu al-Sakhá” (pronounced Abussakhá) = Father of munificence.

Footnote 162:

  Arab. “Shammara,” also used for gathering up the gown, so as to run
  the faster.

Footnote 163:

  _i.e._, blessing the Prophet and all True Believers (herself
  included).

Footnote 164:

  The style of this letter is that of a public scribe in a Cairo
  market-place thirty years ago.

Footnote 165:

  _i.e._ she could not help falling in love with this beauty man.

Footnote 166:

  “Kudrat,” used somewhat in the sense of our vague “Providence.” The
  sentence means, leave Omnipotence to manage him. Mr. Redhouse, who
  forces a likeness between Moslem and Christian theology, tells us that
  “Qader is unjustly translated by Fate and Destiny, an old pagan idea
  abhorrent to Al-Islam which reposes on God’s providence.” He makes
  Kazá and Kismet quasi synonyms of “Qazá” and “Qader,” the former
  signifying God’s decree, the latter our allotted portion; and he would
  render both by dispensation. Of course it is convenient to forget the
  Guarded Tablet of the learned and the Night of Power and
  skull-lectures of the vulgar. The eminent Turkish scholar would also
  translate Salát by worship (du’á being prayer) because it signifies a
  simple act of adoration without entreaty. If he will read the Opener
  of the Koran, recited in every set of prayers, he will find an
  especial request to be “led to the path which is straight.” These
  vagaries are seriously adopted by Mr. E. J. W. Gibb in his Ottoman
  Poems (p. 245, etc.) London: Trübner and Co., 1882; and they deserve,
  I think, reprehension, because they serve only to mislead; and the
  high authority of the source whence they come necessarily recommends
  them to many.

Footnote 167:

  The reader will have noticed the likeness of this tale to that of Ibn
  Mansúr and the Lady Budúr (vol. iv., 228 _et seq._) For this reason
  Lane leaves it untranslated (iii. 252).




          ISHAK OF MOSUL AND HIS MISTRESS AND THE DEVIL.[168]


Quoth Ishak bin Ibrahim al-Mausili:—I was in my house one night in the
winter-time, when the clouds had dispread themselves and the rains
poured down in torrents, as from the mouths of water-skins, and the folk
forbore to come and go about the ways for that which was therein of rain
and slough. Now I was straitened in breast because none of my brethren
came to me nor could I go to them, by reason of the mud and mire; so I
said to my servant, “Bring me wherewithal I may divert myself.”
Accordingly he brought me meat and drink, but I had no heart to eat,
without someone to keep me company, and I ceased not to look out of
window and watch the ways till nightfall, when I bethought myself of a
damsel belonging to one of the sons of Al-Mahdi,[169] whom I loved and
who was skilled in singing and playing upon instruments of music, and
said to myself, “Were she here with us to-night, my joy would be
complete and my night would be abridged of the melancholy and
restlessness which are upon me.” At this moment one knocked at the door,
saying, “Shall a beloved enter in who standeth at the door?” Quoth I to
myself, “Meseems the plant of my desire hath fruited.” So I went to the
door and found my mistress, with a long green skirt[170] wrapped about
her and a kerchief of brocade on her head, to fend her from the rain.
She was covered with mud to her knees and all that was upon her was
drenched with water from gargoyles[171] and house-sprouts; in short, she
was in sorry plight. So I said to her, “O my mistress, what bringeth
thee hither through all this mud?” Replied she, “Thy messenger came and
set forth to me that which was with thee of love and longing, so that I
could not choose but yield and hasten to thee.” I marvelled at this——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the damsel
came and knocked at Ishak’s door, he went forth to her and cried, “O my
lady, what bringeth thee hither through all this mud?”; and she replied,
“Thy messenger came and set forth to me that which was with thee of love
and longing, so that I could not choose but yield and hasten to thee.” I
marvelled at this, but did not like to tell her that I had sent no
messenger; wherefore I said, “Praised be Allah for that He hath brought
us together, after all I have suffered by the mortification of patience!
Verily, hadst thou delayed an hour longer, I must have run to thee,
because of my much love for thee and longing for thy presence.” Then I
called to my boy for water, that I might better her plight, and he
brought a kettle full of hot water such as she wanted. I bade pour it
over her feet, whilst I set to work to wash them myself; after which I
called for one of my richest dresses and clad her therein after she had
doffed the muddy clothes. Then, as soon as we were comfortably seated, I
would have called for food, but she refused and I said to her, “Art thou
for wine?”; and she replied, “Yes.” So I fetched cups and she asked me,
“Who shall sing?” “I, O my princess!” “I care not for that;” “One of my
damsels?” “I have no mind to that either!” “Then sing thyself.” “Not I!”
“Who then shall sing for thee?” I enquired, and she rejoined, “Go out
and seek some one to sing for me.” So I went out, in obedience to her,
though I despaired of finding any one in such weather and fared on till
I came to the main street, where I suddenly saw a blind man striking the
earth with his staff and saying, “May Allah not requite with weal those
with whom I was! When I sang, they listened not, and when I was silent,
they made light of me.” So I said to him, “Art thou a singer?” and he
replied, “Yes.” Quoth I, “Wilt thou finish thy night with us and cheer
us with thy company?”; and quoth he, “If it be thy will, take my hand.”
So I took his hand and, leading him to my house, said to the damsel, “O
my mistress, I have brought a blind singer, with whom we may take our
pleasure and he will not see us.” She said, “Bring him to me.” So I
brought him in and invited him to eat. He ate but a very little and
washed his hands, after which I brought him wine and he drank three
cupsful. Then he said to me, “Who art thou?”; and I replied, “I am Ishak
bin Ibrahim al-Mausili.” Quoth he, “I have heard of thee and now I
rejoice in thy company;” and I, “O my lord, I am glad in thy gladness.”
He said, “O Ishak, sing to me.” So I took the lute, by way of jest, and
cried, “I hear and I obey.” When I had made an end of my song, he said
to me, “O Ishak, thou comest nigh to be a singer!” His words belittled
me in mine own eyes and I threw the lute from my hand; whereupon he
said, “Hast thou not with thee some one who is skilled in singing?”
Quoth I, “I have a damsel with me;” and quoth he, “Bid her sing.” I
asked him, “Wilt thou sing, when thou hast had enough of her singing?”;
and he answered “Yes.” So she sang and he said, “Nay, thou hast shown no
art.” Whereupon she flung the lute from her hand in wrath and cried, “We
have done our best: if thou have aught, favour us with it by way of an
alms.” Quoth he, “Bring me a lute hand hath not touched.” So I bade the
servant bring him a new lute and he tuned it and preluding in a mode I
knew not began to sing, improvising these couplets:—

 Clove through the shades and came to me in night so dark and sore ✿ The
    lover weeting of herself ’twas trysting-tide once more:
 Naught startled us but her salám and first of words she said ✿ “May a
    belovèd enter in who standeth at the door!”

When the girl heard this, she looked at me askance and said, “What
secret was between us could not thy breast hold for one hour, but thou
must discover it to this man?” However, I swore to her that I had not
told him and excused myself to her and fell to kissing her hands and
tickling her breasts and biting her cheeks, till she laughed and,
turning to the blind man, said to him, “Sing, O my lord!” So he took the
lute and sang these two couplets:—

 Ah, often have I sought the fair; how often lief and fain ✿ My palming
    felt the finger ends that bear the varied stain!
 And tickled pouting breasts that stand firm as pomegranates twain ✿ And
    bit the apple of her cheek kissed o’er and o’er again.

So I said to her, “O my princess, who can have told him what we were
about?” Replied she, “True,” and we moved away from him. Presently quoth
he, “I must make water;” and quoth I, “O boy, take the candle and go
before him.” Then he went out and tarried a long while. So we went in
search of him, but could not find him; and behold, the doors were locked
and the keys in the closet, and we knew not whether to heaven he had
flown or into earth had sunk. Wherefore I knew that he was Iblís and
that he had done me pimp’s duty, and I returned, recalling to myself the
words of Abu Nowas in these couplets:—

I marvel in Iblis such pride to see ✿ Beside his low intent and
villeiny: He sinned to Adam who to bow refused, ✿ Yet pimps for all of
Adam’s progeny.

And they tell a tale concerning

-----

Footnote 168:

  Lane also omits this tale (iii. 252). See Night dclxxxviii., vol. vii.
  p. 113 _et seq._, for a variant of the story.

Footnote 169:

  Third Abbaside, A. H. 158–169 (= 775–785), and father of Harun
  Al-Rashid. He is known chiefly for his eccentricities, such as cutting
  the throats of all his carrier-pigeons, making a man dine off marrow
  and sugar and having snow sent to him at Meccah, a distance of 700
  miles.

Footnote 170:

  Arab. Mirt; the dictionaries give a short shift, cloak or breeches of
  wool or coarse silk.

Footnote 171:

  Arab. “Mayázíb” plur. of the Pers. Mízáb (orig. Míz-i-áb = channel of
  water) a spout for roof-rain. That which drains the Ka’abah on the N.
  W. side is called Mizáb al-Rahmah (Gargoyle of Mercy) and pilgrims
  stand under it for a douche of holy water. It is supposed to be of
  gold, but really of silver gold-plated and is described of Burckhardt
  and myself (Pilgrimage iii. 164). The length is 4 feet 10 in.; width 9
  in.; height of sides 8 in.; and slope at mouth 1 foot 6 in. long.




                       THE LOVERS OF AL-MEDINAH.


Quoth Ibrahim the father of Ishak,[172] I was ever a devoted friend to
the Barmecide family. And it so happened to me one day, as I sat at home
quite alone, a knock was heard at the door; so my servant went out and
returned, saying, “A comely youth is at the door, asking admission.” I
bade admit him and there came in to me a young man, on whom were signs
of sickness, and he said, “I have long wished to meet thee, for I have
need of thine aid.” “What is it thou requirest?” asked I. Whereupon he
pulled out three hundred dinars and laying them before me, said, “I
beseech thee to accept these and compose me an air to two couplets I
have made.” Said I, “Repeat them to me;”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
youth came in to Ibrahim and placed the gold in his hands, saying,
“Prithee accept it and compose me an air to two couplets.” He replied,
“Recite them to me,” whereupon he recited:—

 By Allah, glance of mine! thou hast opprest ✿ My heart, so quench the
    fire that burns my breast.
 Blames me the world because in him[173] I live ✿ Yet cannot see him till
    in shroud I rest.

Accordingly, quoth Ibrahim, I set the verses to an air plaintive as a
dirge and sang it to him; whereupon he swooned away and I thought that
he was dead. However, after a while, he came to himself, and said to me,
“Repeat the air.” But I conjured him by Allah to excuse me, saying, “I
fear lest thou die.” “Would Heaven it were so!” replied he and ceased
not humbly to importune me, till I had pity on him and repeated it;
whereupon he cried out with a grievous cry and fell into a fit worse
than before and I doubted not but that he was dead; but I sprinkled
rose-water on him till he revived and sat up. I praised Allah for his
recovery and laying the ducats before him, said, “Take thy money and
depart from me.” Quoth he, “I have no need of the money and thou shalt
have the like of it, if thou wilt repeat the air.” My breast broadened
at the mention of the money and I said, “I will repeat it, but on three
conditions: the first, that thou tarry with me and eat of my victual,
till thou regain strength; the second, that thou drink wine enough to
hearten thy heart; and the third, that thou tell me thy tale.” He agreed
to this and ate and drank; after which he said:—“I am of the citizens of
Al-Medinah and I went forth one day a-pleasuring with my friends; and,
following the road to Al-Akík,[174] saw a company of girls and amongst
them a damsel as she were a branch pearled with dew, with eyes whose
sidelong glances were never withdrawn till they had stolen away his soul
who looked on them. The maidens rested in the shade till the end of the
day, when they went away, leaving in my heart wounds slow to heal. I
returned next morning to scent out news of her, but found none who could
tell me of her; so I sought her in the streets and markets, but could
come on no trace of her; wherefore I fell ill of grief and told my case
to one of my kinsmen, who said to me, No harm shall befal thee: the days
of spring are not yet past and the skies show sign of rain,[175]
whereupon she will go forth, and I will go out with thee, and do thou
thy will. His words comforted my heart and I waited till Al-Akik ran
with water, when I went forth with my friends and kinsmen and sat in the
very same place where I first saw her.” We had not been seated long
before up came the women, like horses running for a wager; and I
whispered to a girl of my kindred, “Say to yonder damsel—Quoth this man
to thee, He did well who spoke this couplet:—

 She shot my heart with shaft, then turned on heel ✿ And flying dealt
    fresh wound and scarring wheal.”

So she went to her and repeated my words, to which she replied saying,
“Tell him that he said well who answered in this couplet:—

 The like of whatso feelest thou we feel; ✿ Patience! perchance swift
    cure our hearts shall heal.”

I refrained from further speech for fear of scandal and rose to go away.
She rose at my rising, and I followed and she looked back at me, till
she saw I had noted her abode. Then she began to come to me and I to go
to her, so that we foregathered and met often, till the case was noised
abroad and grew notorious and her sire came to know of it. However, I
ceased not to meet her most assiduously and complained of my condition
to my father, who assembled our kindred and repaired to ask her in
marriage for me, of her sire, who cried, “Had this been proposed to me
before he gave her a bad name by his assignations, I would have
consented; but now the thing is notorious and I am loath to verify the
saying of the folk.” Then (continued Ibrahim) I repeated the air to him
and he went away, after having acquainted me with his abode, and we
became friends. Now I was devoted to the Barmecides; so next time
Ja’afar bin Yahya sat to give audience, I attended, as was my wont, and
sang to him the young man’s verses. They pleased him and he drank some
cups of wine and said, “Fie upon thee! whose song is this?” So I told
him the young man’s tale and he bade me ride over to him and give him
assurances of the winning of his wish. Accordingly I fetched him to
Ja’afar who asked him to repeat his story. He did so and Ja’afar said,
“Thou art now under my protection: trust me to marry thee to her.” So
his heart was comforted and he abode with us. When the morning morrowed
Ja’afar mounted and went in to Al-Rashid, to whom he related the story.
The Caliph was pleased with it and sending for the young man and myself,
commanded me to repeat the air and drank thereto. Then he wrote to the
Governor of Al-Hijaz, bidding him despatch the girl’s father and his
household in honourable fashion to his presence and spare no expense for
their outfit. So, in a little while, they came and the Caliph, sending
for the man, commanded him to marry his daughter to her lover; after
which he gave him an hundred thousand dinars, and the father went back
to his folk. As for the young man, he abode one of Ja’afar’s
cup-companions till there happened what happened;[176] whereupon he
returned with his household to Al-Medinah; may Almighty Allah have mercy
upon their souls one and all! And they also tell, O auspicious King, a
tale of

-----

Footnote 172:

  The Mac. and Bul. Edits. have by mistake “Son of Ishak.” Lane has
  “Is-hak the son of Ibrahim” following Trébutien (iii. 483) but
  suggests in a note the right reading as above.

Footnote 173:

  Again masculine for feminine.

Footnote 174:

  There are two of this name. The Upper Al-Akik contains the whole site
  of Al-Medinah; the Lower is on the Meccan road about four miles S.W.
  of the city. The Prophet called it “blessed” because ordered by an
  angel to pray therein. The poets have said pretty things about it,
  _e.g._

    O friend, this is the vale Akík; here stand and strive in thought:
    If not a very lover, strive to be by love distraught!

  for whose esoteric meaning see Pilgrimage ii. 24. I passed through
  Al-Akík in July when it was dry as summer dust and its “beautiful
  trees” were mere vegetable mummies.

Footnote 175:

  Those who live in the wet climates of the Northern temperates can
  hardly understand the delight of a shower in rainless lands, like
  Arabia and Nubia. In Sind we used to strip and stand in the downfall
  and raise faces sky-wards to get the full benefit of the douche. In
  Southern Persia food is hastily cooked at such times, wine strained,
  Kaliuns made ready and horses saddled for a ride to the nearest
  gardens and a happy drinking-bout under the cypresses. If a man
  refused, his friends would say of him, “See how he turns his back upon
  the blessing of Allah!” (like an ass which presents its tail to the
  weather).

Footnote 176:

  _i.e._ the destruction of the Barmecides.




                    AL-MALIK AL-NASIR AND HIS WAZIR.


There was given to Abú Ámir bin Marwán,[177] a boy of the Christians,
than whom never fell eyes on a handsomer. Al-Nasir the conquering Soldan
saw him and said to Abu Amir, who was his Wazir, “Whence cometh this
boy?” Replied he, “From Allah;” whereupon the other, “Wilt thou terrify
us with stars and make us prisoner with moons?” Abu Amir excused himself
to him and preparing a present, sent it to him with the boy, to whom he
said, “Be thou part of the gift: were it not of necessity, my soul had
not consented to give thee away.” And he wrote with him these two
couplets:—

 My lord, this full moon takes in Heaven of thee new birth; ✿ Nor can
    deny we Heaven excelleth humble earth:
 Thee with my soul I please and—oh! the pleasant case! ✿ No man e’er saw
    I who to give his soul prefer’th.

The thing pleased Al-Nasir and he requited him with much treasure and
the Minister became high in favour with him. After this, there was
presented to the Wazir a slave-girl, one of the loveliest women in the
world, and he feared lest this should come to the King’s ears and he
desire her, and the like should happen as with the boy. So he made up a
present still costlier than the first and sent it with her to the
King,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir Abu
Amir, when presented with the beautiful slave-girl, feared lest it come
to the Conquering King’s ears and that the like should happen as with
the boy, so he made up a present still costlier than the first and sent
it with her to his master, accompanying it with these couplets:—

 My lord, this be the Sun, the Moon thou hadst before; ✿ So the two
    greater lights now in thy Heaven unite:
 Conjunction promising to me prosperity, ✿ And Kausar-draught to thee and
    Eden’s long delight.
 Earth shows no charms, by Allah, ranking as their third, ✿ Nor King who
    secondeth our Conquering King in might.

Wherefore his credit redoubled with Al-Nasir; but, after a while, one of
his enemies maligned him to the King, alleging that there still lurked
in him a hot lust for the boy and that he ceased not to desire him,
whenever the cool northern breezes moved him, and to gnash his teeth for
having given him away. Cried the King, “Wag not thou thy tongue at him,
or I will shear off thy head.” However, he wrote Abu Amir a letter, as
from the boy, to the following effect: “O my lord, thou knowest that
thou wast all and one to me and that I never ceased from delight with
thee. Albeit I am with the Sultan, yet would I choose rather solitude
with thee, but that I fear the King’s majesty: wherefore devise thou to
demand me of him.” This letter he sent to Abu Amir by a little
foot-page, whom he enjoined to say, “This is from such an one: the King
never speaketh to him.” When the Wazir read the letter and heard the
cheating message, he noted the poison-draught[178] and wrote on the back
of the note these couplets:—

 Shall man experience-lectured ever care ✿ Fool-like to thrust his head
    in lion’s lair?
 I’m none of those whose wits to love succumb ✿ Nor witless of the snares
    my foes prepare:
 Wert thou my sprite, I’d give thee loyally; ✿ Shall sprite, from body
    sundered, backwards fare?

When Al-Nasir knew of this answer, he marvelled at the Wazir’s quickness
of wit and would never again lend ear to aught of insinuations against
him. Then said he to him, “How didst thou escape falling into the net?”
And he replied, “Because my reason is unentangled in the toils of
passion.” And they also tell a tale of

-----

Footnote 177:

  He was Wazir to the Great “Saladin” (Saláh al-Din = one conforming
  with the Faith): see vol. iv. 271, where Saladin is also entitled
  al-Malik al-Nasir = the Conquering King. He was a Kurd and therefore
  fond of boys (like Virgil, Horace, etc.), but that perversion did not
  prevent his being one of the noblest of men. He lies in the Great
  Amawi Mosque of Damascus and I never visited a tomb with more
  reverence.

Footnote 178:

  Arab. “Ahassa bi’l-Shurbah;” in our idiom “he smelt a rat.”




    THE ROGUERIES OF DALILAH THE CRAFTY AND HER DAUGHTER ZAYNAB THE
                          CONEY-CATCHER.[179]


There lived in the time of Harun al-Rashid a man named Ahmad al-Danaf
and another Hasan Shúmán[180] hight, the twain past masters in fraud and
feints, who had done rare things in their day; wherefore the Caliph
invested them with caftans of honour and made them Captains of the watch
for Baghdad (Ahmad of the right hand and Hasan of the left hand); and
appointed to each of them a stipend of a thousand dinars a month and
forty stalwart men to be at their bidding. Moreover to Calamity Ahmad
was committed the watch of the district outside the walls. So Ahmad and
Hasan went forth in company of the Emir Khalid, the Wali or Chief of
Police, attended each by his forty followers on horseback, and preceded
by the Crier, crying aloud and saying, “By command of the Caliph! None
is captain of the watch of the right hand but Ahmad al-Danaf and none is
captain of the watch of the left hand but Hasan Shuman, and both are to
be obeyed when they bid and are to be held in all honour and worship.”
Now there was in the city an old woman called Dalílah the Wily, who had
a daughter by name Zaynab the Coney-catcher. They heard the proclamation
made and Zaynab said to Dalilah, “See, O my mother, this fellow, Ahmad
al-Danaf! He came hither from Cairo, a fugitive, and played the
double-dealer in Baghdad, till he got into the Caliph’s company and is
now become captain of the right hand, whilst that mangy chap Hasan
Shuman is captain of the left hand, and each hath a table spread morning
and evening and a monthly wage of a thousand dinars; whereas we abide
unemployed and neglected in this house, without estate and without
honour, and have none to ask of us.” Now Dalilah’s husband had been
town-captain of Baghdad with a monthly wage of one thousand dinars; but
he died leaving two daughters, one married and with a son by name Ahmad
al-Lakít[181] or Ahmad the Abortion; and the other called Zaynab, a
spinster. And this Dalilah was a past mistress in all manner of craft
and trickery and double dealing; she could wile the very dragon out of
his den and Iblis himself might have learnt deceit of her. Her
father[182] had also been governor of the carrier-pigeons to the Caliph
with a solde of one thousand dinars a month. He used to rear the birds
to carry letters and messages, wherefore in time of need each was dearer
to the Caliph than one of his own sons. So Zaynab said to her mother,
“Up and play off some feint and fraud that may haply make us
notorious”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Zaynab thus
addressed her dam, “Up and play off some feint and fraud which may haply
make us notorious in Baghdad, so perchance we shall win our father’s
stipend for ourselves.” Replied the old trot, “As thy head liveth, O my
daughter, I will play off higher-class rogueries in Baghdad than ever
played Calamity Ahmad or Hasan the Pestilent.” So saying, she rose and
threw over her face the Lisám-veil and donned clothes such as the poorer
Sufis wear, petticoat-trousers falling over her heels, and a gown of
white wool with a broad girdle. She also took a pitcher[183] and filled
it with water to the neck; after which she set three dinars in the mouth
and stopped it up with a plug of palm-fibre. Then she threw round her
shoulder, baldrick-wise, a rosary as big as a load of firewood, and
taking in her hand a flag, made of parti-coloured rags, red and yellow
and green, went out, crying, “Allah! Allah!” with tongue celebrating the
praises of the Lord, whilst her heart galloped in the Devil’s
race-course, seeking how she might play some sharping trick upon town.
She walked from street to street, till she came to an alley swept and
watered and marble-paved, where she saw a vaulted gateway, with a
threshold of alabaster, and a Moorish porter standing at the door, which
was of sandal-wood plated with brass and furnished with a ring of silver
for knocker. Now this house belonged to the Chief of the Caliph’s
Serjeant-ushers, a man of great wealth in fields, houses and allowances,
called the Emir Hasan Sharr al-Tarík, or Evil of the Way, and therefor
called because his blow forewent his word. He was married to a fair
damsel, Khátún[184] hight, whom he loved and who had made him swear, on
the night of his going in unto her, that he would take none other to
wife over her nor lie abroad for a single night. And so things went on
till one day, he went to the Diyan and saw that each Emir had with him a
son or two. Then he entered the Hammam-bath and looking at his face in
the mirror, noted that the white hairs in his beard overlay its black,
and he said in himself, “Will not He who took thy sire bless thee with a
son?” So he went in to his wife, in angry mood, and she said to him,
“Good evening to thee”; but he replied, “Get thee out of my sight: from
the day I saw thee I have seen naught of good.” “How so?” quoth she.
Quoth he, “On the night of my going in unto thee, thou madest me swear
to take no other wife over thee, and this very day I have seen each Emir
with a son and some with two. So I minded me of death[185]; and also
that to me hath been vouchsafed neither son nor daughter and that whoso
leaveth no male hath no memory. This, then, is the reason of my anger,
for thou art barren; and knowing thee is like planing a rock.” Cried
she, “Allah’s name upon thee. Indeed, I have worn out the mortars with
beating wool and pounding drugs,[186] and I am not to blame; the
barrenness is with thee, for that thou art a snub-nosed mule and thy
sperm is weak and watery and impregnateth not neither getteth children.”
Said he, “When I return from my journey, I will take another wife;” and
she, “My luck is with Allah!” Then he went out from her and both
repented of the sharp words spoken each to other. Now as the Emir’s wife
looked forth of her lattice, as she were a Bride of the Hoards[187] for
the jewellery upon her, behold, there stood Dalilah espying her and
seeing her clad in costly clothes and ornaments, said to herself,
“’Twould be a rare trick, O Dalilah, to entice yonder young lady from
her husband’s house and strip her of all her jewels and clothes and make
off with the whole lot.” So she took up her stand under the windows of
the Emir’s house, and fell to calling aloud upon Allah’s name and
saying, “Be present, O ye Walis, ye friends of the Lord!” Whereupon
every woman in the street looked from her lattice and, seeing a matron
clad, after Sufi fashion, in clothes of white wool, as she were a
pavilion of light, said, “Allah bring us a blessing by the aidance of
this pious old person, from whose face issueth light!” And Khatun, the
wife of the Emir Hasan, burst into tears and said to her handmaid, “Get
thee down, O Makbúlah, and kiss the hand of Shaykh Abú Alí, the porter,
and say to him:—Let yonder Religious enter to my lady, so haply she may
get a blessing of her.” So she went down to the porter and kissing his
hand, said to him, “My mistress telleth thee:—Let yonder pious old woman
come in to me, so may I get a blessing of her; and belike her
benediction may extend to us likewise.”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


               Now when it was the Seven Hundredth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the handmaid
went down and said to the porter, “Suffer yonder Religious enter to my
lady so haply she may get a blessing of her, and we too may be blessed,
one and all,” the gate-keeper went up to Dalilah and kissed her hand,
but she forbade him, saying, “Away from me, lest my ablution be made
null and void.[188] Thou, also, art of the attracted God-wards and
kindly looked upon by Allah’s Saints and under His especial
guardianship. May He deliver thee from this servitude, O Abu Ali!” Now
the Emir owed three months’ wage to the porter who was straitened
thereby, but knew not how to recover his due from his lord; so he said
to the old woman, “O my mother, give me to drink from thy pitcher, so I
may win a blessing through thee.” She took the ewer from her shoulder
and whirled it about in air, so that the plug flew out of its mouth and
the three dinars fell to the ground. The porter saw them and picked them
up, saying in his mind, “Glory to God! This old woman is one of the
Saints that have hoards at their command! It hath been revealed to her
of me that I am in want of money for daily expenses; so she hath
conjured me these three dinars out of the air.” Then said he to her,
“Take, O my aunt, these three dinars which fell from thy pitcher;” and
she replied, “Away with them from me! I am of the folk who occupy not
themselves with the things of the world, no never! Take them and use
them for thine own benefit, in lieu of those the Emir oweth thee.” Quoth
he, “Thanks to Allah for succour! This is of the chapter of revelation!”
Thereupon the maid accosted her and kissing her hand, carried her up to
her mistress. She found the lady as she were a treasure, whose guardian
talisman had been loosed; and Khatun bade her welcome and kissed her
hand. Quoth she, “O my daughter, I come not to thee save for thy weal
and by Allah’s will.” Then Khatun set food before her; but she said, “O
my daughter, I eat naught except of the food of Paradise and I keep
continual fast breaking it but five days in the year. But, O my child, I
see thee chagrined and desire that thou tell me the cause of thy
concern.” “O my mother,” replied Khatun, “I made my husband swear, on my
wedding-night, that he would wive none but me, and he saw others with
children and longed for them and said to me:—Thou art a barren thing! I
answered:—Thou art a mule which begetteth not; so he left me in anger,
saying, When I come back from my journey, I will take another wife, for
he hath villages and lands and large allowances, and if he begat
children by another, they will possess the money and take the estates
from me.” Said Dalilah, “O my daughter, knowest thou not of my master,
the Shaykh Abú al-Hamlát,[189] whom if any debtor visit, Allah quitteth
him his debt, and if a barren woman, she conceiveth?” Khatun replied, “O
my mother, since the day of my wedding I have not gone forth the house,
no, not even to pay visits of condolence or congratulation.” The old
woman rejoined, “O my child, I will carry thee to him and do thou cast
thy burden on him and make a vow to him: haply when thy husband shall
return from his journey and lie with thee thou shalt conceive by him and
bear a girl or a boy: but, be it female or male, it shall be a dervish
of the Shaykh Abu al-Hamlat.” Thereupon Khatun rose and arrayed herself
in her richest raiment, and donning all her jewellery said, “Keep thou
an eye on the house,” to her maid, who replied, “I hear and obey, O my
lady.” Then she went down and the porter Abu Ali met her and asked her,
“Whither away, O my lady?” “I go to visit the Shaykh Abu al-Hamlat;”
answered she; and he, “Be a year’s fast incumbent on me! Verily yon
Religious is of Allah’s saints and full of holiness, O my lady, and she
hath hidden treasure at her command, for she gave me three dinars of red
gold and divined my case, without my asking her, and knew that I was in
want.” Then the old woman went out with the young lady Khatun, saying to
her, “Inshallah, O my daughter, when thou hast visited the Shaykh Abu
al-Hamlat, there shall betide thee solace of soul and by leave of
Almighty Allah thou shalt conceive, and thy husband the Emir shall love
thee by the blessing of the Shaykh and shall never again let thee hear a
despiteful word.” Quoth Khatun, “I will go with thee to visit him, O my
mother!” But Dalilah said to herself, “Where shall I strip her and take
her clothes and jewellery, with the folk coming and going?” Then she
said to her, “O my daughter, walk thou behind me, within sight of me,
for this thy mother is a woman sorely burdened; everyone who hath a
burden casteth it on me and all who have pious offerings[190] to make
give them to me and kiss my hand.” So the young lady followed her at a
distance, whilst her anklets tinkled and her hair-coins[191] clinked as
she went, till they reached the bazar of the merchants. Presently, they
came to the shop of a young merchant, by name Sídí Hasan who was very
handsome[192] and had no hair on his face. He saw the lady approaching
and fell to casting stolen glances at her, which when the old woman saw,
she beckoned to her and said, “Sit down in this shop, till I return to
thee.” Khatun obeyed her and sat down in the shop-front of the young
merchant, who cast at her one glance of eyes that cost him a thousand
sighs. Then the old woman accosted him and saluted him, saying, “Tell
me, is not thy name Sidi Hasan, son of the merchant Mohsin?” He replied,
“Yes, who told thee my name?” Quoth she, “Folk of good repute direct me
to thee. Know that this young lady is my daughter and her father was a
merchant, who died and left her much money. She is come of marriageable
age and the wise say:—Offer thy daughter in marriage and not thy son;
and all her life she hath not come forth the house till this day. Now a
divine warning and a command given in secret bid me wed her to thee; so,
if thou art poor, I will give thee capital and will open for thee
instead of one shop two shops.” Thereupon quoth the young merchant to
himself, “I asked Allah for a bride, and He hath given me three things,
to wit, coin, clothing, and coynte.” Then he continued to the old trot,
“O my mother, that whereto thou directest me is well; but this long
while my mother saith to me:—I wish to marry thee, but I object
replying, I will not marry except on the sight of my own eyes.” Said
Dalilah, “Rise and follow my steps, and I will show her to thee,
naked.”[193] So he rose and took a thousand dinars, saying in himself,
“Haply we may need to buy somewhat”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Seven Hundred and First Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old woman
said to Hasan, son of Mohsin the merchant, “Rise up and follow me, and I
will show her naked to thee.” So he rose and took with him a thousand
dinars, saying in himself, “Haply we may need to buy somewhat or pay the
fees for drawing up the marriage contract.” The old woman bade him walk
behind the young lady at a distance but within shot of sight and said to
herself, “Where wilt thou carry the young lady and the merchant that
thou mayest strip them both whilst his shop is still shut?” Then she
walked on and Khatun after her, followed by the young merchant, till she
came to a dyery, kept by a master dyer, by name Hajj Mohammed, a man of
ill-repute; like the colocasia[194] seller’s knife cutting male and
female, and loving to eat both figs and pomegranates.[195] He heard the
tinkle of the ankle rings and, raising his head, saw the lady and the
young man. Presently the old woman came up to him and, after salaaming
to him and sitting down opposite him, asked him, “Art thou not Hajj
Mohammed the dyer?” He answered, “Yes, I am he: what dost thou want?”
Quoth she, “Verily, folks of fair repute have directed me to thee. Look
at yonder handsome girl, my daughter, and that comely beardless youth,
my son; I brought them both up and spent much money on both of them.
Now, thou must know that I have a big old ruinous house which I have
shored up with wood, and the builder saith to me:—Go and live in some
other place, lest belike it fall upon thee; and when this is repaired
return hither. So I went forth to seek me a lodging, and people of worth
directed me to thee, and I wish to lodge my son and daughter with thee.”
Quoth the dyer in his mind, “Verily, here is fresh butter upon cake come
to thee.” But he said to the old woman, “’Tis true I have a house and
saloon and upper floor; but I cannot spare any part thereof, for I want
it all for guests and for the indigo-growers my clients.” She replied,
“O my son, ’twill be only for a month or two at the most, till our house
be repaired, and we are strange folk. Let the guest-chamber be shared
between us and thee, and by thy life, O my son, an thou desire that thy
guests be ours, we will welcome them and eat with them and sleep with
them.” Then he gave her the keys, one big and one small and one crooked,
saying to her, “The big key is that of the house, the crooked one that
of the saloon and the little one that of the upper floor.” So Dalilah
took the keys and fared on, followed by the lady who forwent the young
merchant, till she came to the lane wherein was the house. She opened
the door and entered, introducing the damsel to whom said she, “O my
daughter, this (pointing to the saloon) is the lodging of the Shaykh Abu
al-Hamlat; but go thou into the upper floor and loose thy outer veil and
wait till I come to thee.” So she went up and sat down. Presently
appeared the young merchant, whom Dalilah carried into the saloon,
saying, “Sit down, whilst I fetch my daughter and show her to thee.” So
he sat down and the old trot went up to Khatun who said to her, “I wish
to visit the Shaykh, before the folk come.” Replied the beldame, “O my
daughter, we fear for thee.” Asked Khatun, “Why so?” and Dalilah
answered, “Because here is a son of mine, a natural who knoweth not
summer from winter, but goeth ever naked. He is the Shaykh’s deputy and,
if he saw a girl like thee come to visit his chief, he would snatch her
earrings and tear her ears and rend her silken robes.[196] So do thou
doff thy jewellery and clothes and I will keep them for thee, till thou
hast made thy pious visitation.” Accordingly the damsel did off her
outer dress and jewels and gave them to the old woman, who said, “I will
lay them for thee on the Shaykh’s curtain, that a blessing may betide
thee.” Then she went out, leaving the lady in her shift and
petticoat-trousers, and hid the clothes and jewels in a place on the
staircase; after which she betook herself to the young merchant, whom
she found impatiently awaiting the girl, and he cried, “Where is thy
daughter, that I may see her?” But she smote palm on breast and he said,
“What aileth thee?” Quoth she, “Would there were no such thing as the
ill neighbour and the envious! They saw thee enter the house with me and
asked me of thee; and I said:—This is a bridegroom I have found for my
daughter. So they envied me on thine account and said to my girl, Is thy
mother tired of keeping thee, that she marrieth thee to a leper?
Thereupon I swore to her that she should not see thee save naked.” Quoth
he, “I take refuge with Allah from the envious,” and baring his forearm,
showed her that it was like silver. Said she, “Have no fear; thou shalt
see her naked, even as she shall see thee naked;” and he said, “Let her
come and look at me.” Then he put off his pelisse and sables and his
girdle and dagger and the rest of his raiment, except his shirt and
bag-trousers, and would have laid the purse of a thousand dinars with
them, but Dalilah cried, “Give them to me, that I may take care of
them.” So she took them and fetching the girl’s clothes and jewellery
shouldered the whole and locking the door upon them went her ways.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Second Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the old
woman had taken the property of the young merchant and the damsel and
wended her ways, having locked the door upon them, she deposited her
spoils with a druggist of her acquaintance and returned to the dyer,
whom she found sitting, awaiting her. Quoth he, “Inshallah, the house
pleaseth thee?”; and quoth she, “There is a blessing in it; and I go now
to fetch porters to carry hither our goods and furniture. But my
children would have me bring them a _panade_ with meat; so do thou take
this dinar and buy the dish and go and eat the morning meal with them.”
Asked the dyer, “Who shall guard the dyery meanwhile and the people’s
goods that be therein?”; and the old woman answered, “Thy lad!” “So be
it,” rejoined he, and taking a dish and cover, went out to do her
bidding. So far concerning the dyer who will again be mentioned in the
tale; but as regards the old woman, she fetched the clothes and jewels
she had left with the druggist and going back to the dyery, said to the
lad, “Run after thy master, and I will not stir hence till you both
return.” “To hear is to obey,” answered he and went away, while she
began to collect all the customers’ goods. Presently, there came up an
ass-driver, a scavenger, who had been out of work for a week and who was
an Hashísh-eater to boot; and she called him, saying, “Hither, O
donkey-boy!” So he came to her and she asked, “Knowest thou my son the
dyer?”; whereto he answered, “Yes, I know him.” Then she said, “The poor
fellow is insolvent and loaded with debts, and as often as he is put in
prison, I set him free. Now we wish to see him declared bankrupt and I
am going to return the goods to their owners; so do thou lend me thine
ass to carry the load and receive this dinar to its hire. When I am
gone, take the handsaw and empty out the vats and jars and break them,
so that if there come an officer from the Kází’s court, he may find
nothing in the dyery.” Quoth he, “I owe the Hajj a kindness and will do
something for Allah’s love.” So she laid the things on the ass and, the
Protector protecting her, made for her own house; so that she arrived
there in safety and went in to her daughter Zaynab, who said to her, “O
my mother, my heart hath been with thee! What hast thou done by way of
roguery?” Dalilah replied, “I have played off four tricks on four
wights; the wife of the Serjeant-usher, a young merchant, a dyer and an
ass-driver, and have brought thee all their spoil on the donkey-boy’s
beast.” Cried Zaynab, “O my mother, thou wilt never more be able to go
about the town, for fear of the Serjeant-usher, whose wife’s raiment and
jewellery thou hast taken, and the merchant whom thou hast stripped
naked, and the dyer whose customers’ goods thou hast stolen and the
owner of the ass.” Rejoined the old woman, “Pooh, my girl! I reck not of
them, save the donkey-boy, who knoweth me.” Meanwhile the dyer bought
the meat-panade and set out for the house, followed by his servant with
the food on head. On his way thither, he passed his shop, where he found
the donkey-boy breaking the vats and jars and saw that there was neither
stuff nor liquor left in them and that the dyery was in ruins. So he
said to him, “Hold thy hand, O ass-driver;” and the donkey-boy desisted
and cried, “Praised be Allah for thy safety, O master! Verily my heart
was with thee.” “Why so?” “Thou art become bankrupt and they have filed
a docket of thine insolvency.” “Who told thee this?” “Thy mother told
me, and bade me break the jars and empty the vats, that the Kazi’s
officers might find nothing in the shop, if they should come.” “Allah
confound the far One!”[197] cried the dyer; “My mother died long ago.”
And he beat his breast, exclaiming, “Alas, for the loss of my goods and
those of the folk!” The donkey-boy also wept and ejaculated, “Alas, for
the loss of my ass!”; and he said to the dyer, “Give me back my beast
which thy mother stole from me.” The dyer laid hold of him by the throat
and fell to buffeting him, saying, “Bring me the old woman;” whilst the
other buffeted him in return saying, “Give me back my beast.” So they
beat and cursed each other, till the folk collected around them——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Third Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the dyer caught
hold of the donkey-boy and the donkey-boy caught hold of the dyer and
they beat and cursed each other till the folk collected round them and
one of them asked, “What is the matter, O Master Mohammed?” The
ass-driver answered, “I will tell thee the tale,” and related to them
his story, saying, “I deemed I was doing the dyer a good turn; but, when
he saw me he beat his breast and said, My mother is dead. And now, I for
one require my ass of him, it being he who hath put this trick on me,
that he might make me lose my beast.” Then said the folk to the dyer, “O
Master Mohammed, dost thou know this matron, that thou didst entrust her
with the dyery and all therein?” And he replied, “I know her not; but
she took lodgings with me to-day, she and her son and daughter.” Quoth
one, “In my judgment, the dyer is bound to indemnify the ass-driver.”
Quoth another, “Why so?” “Because,” replied the first, “he trusted not
the old woman nor gave her his ass save only because he saw that the
dyer had entrusted her with the dyery and its contents.” And a third
said, “O master, since thou hast lodged her with thee, it behoveth thee
to get the man back his ass.” Then they made for the house, and the tale
will come round to them again. Meanwhile, the young merchant remained
awaiting the old woman’s coming with her daughter, but she came not nor
did her daughter; whilst the young lady in like manner sat expecting her
return with leave from her son, the God-attended one, the Shaykh’s
deputy, to go in to the holy presence. So weary of waiting, she rose to
visit the Shaykh by herself and went down into the saloon, where she
found the young merchant, who said to her, “Come hither! where is thy
mother, who brought me to marry thee?” She replied, “My mother is dead,
art thou the old woman’s son, the ecstatic, the deputy of the Shaykh Abu
al-Hamlat?” Quoth he, “The swindling old trot is no mother of mine; she
hath cheated me and taken my clothes and a thousand dinars.” Quoth
Khatun, “And me also hath she swindled for she brought me to see the
Shaykh Abu al-Hamlat and in lieu of so doing she hath stripped me.”
Thereupon he, “I look to thee to make good my clothes and my thousand
dinars;” and she, “I look to thee to make good my clothes and
jewellery.” And, behold, at this moment in came the dyer and seeing them
both stripped of their raiment, said to them, “Tell me where your mother
is.” So the young lady related all that had befallen her and the young
merchant related all that had betided him, and the Master-dyer
exclaimed, “Alas, for the loss of my goods and those of the folk!”; and
the ass-driver ejaculated, “Alas, for my ass! Give me, O dyer, my ass!”
Then said the dyer, “This old woman is a sharper. Come forth, that I may
lock the door.” Quoth the young merchant, “’Twere a disgrace to thee
that we should enter thy house dressed and go forth from it undressed.”
So the dyer clad him and the damsel and sent her back to her house where
we shall find her after the return of her husband. Then he shut the
dyery and said to the young merchant, “Come, let us go and search for
the old woman and hand her over to the Wali,[198] the Chief of Police.”
So they and the ass-man repaired to the house of the master of police
and made their complaint to him. Quoth he, “O folk, what want ye?” and
when they told him he rejoined, “How many old women are there not in the
town! Go ye and seek for her and lay hands on her and bring her to me,
and I will torture her for you and make her confess.” So they sought for
her all round the town; and an account of them will presently be
given.[199] As for old Dalilah the Wily, she said, “I have a mind to
play off another trick,” to her daughter who answered, “O my mother, I
fear for thee;” but the beldam cried, “I am like the bean husks which
fall, proof against fire and water.” So she rose, and donning a
slave-girl’s dress of such as serve people of condition, went out to
look for some one to defraud. Presently she came to a by-street, spread
with carpets and lighted with hanging lamps, and heard a noise of
singing-women and drumming of tambourines. Here she saw a handmaid
bearing on her shoulder a boy, clad in trousers laced with silver and a
little Abá-cloak of velvet, with a pearl embroidered Tarbush-cap on his
head, and about his neck a collar of gold set with jewels. Now the house
belonged to the Provost of the Merchants of Baghdad, and the boy was his
son. He had a virgin daughter, to boot, who was promised in marriage,
and it was her betrothal they were celebrating that day. There was with
her mother a company of noble dames and singing-women, and whenever she
went upstairs or down, the boy clung to her. So she called the
slave-girl and said to her, “Take thy young master and play with him,
till the company break up.” Seeing this, Dalilah asked the handmaid,
“What festivities are these in your mistress’s house;” and was answered,
“She celebrates her daughter’s betrothal this day, and she hath
singing-women with her.” Quoth the old woman to herself, “O Dalilah, the
thing to do is to spirit away this boy from the maid,”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the old trot
said to herself, “O Dalilah, the thing to do is to spirit away this boy
from the maid!” she began crying out, “O disgrace! O ill luck!” Then
pulling out a brass token, resembling a dinar, she said to the maid, who
was a simpleton, “Take this ducat and go in to thy mistress and say to
her:—Umm al-Khayr rejoiceth with thee and is beholden to thee for thy
favours, and on the day of assembly she and her daughters will visit
thee and handsel the tiring-women with the usual gifts.” Said the girl,
“O my mother, my young master here catcheth hold of his mamma, whenever
he seeth her;” and she replied “Give him to me, whilst thou goest in and
comest back.” So she gave her the child and taking the token, went in;
whereupon Dalilah made off with the boy to a by-lane, where she stripped
him of his clothes and jewels, saying to herself, “O Dalilah, ’twould
indeed be the finest of tricks, even as thou hast cheated the maid and
taken the boy from her, so now to carry on the game and pawn him for a
thousand dinars.” So she repaired to the jewel-bazar, where she saw a
Jew goldsmith seated with a cage full of jewellery before him, and said
to herself, “’Twould be a rare trick to chouse this Jew fellow and get a
thousand gold pieces worth of jewellery from him and leave the boy in
pledge for it.” Presently the Jew looked at them and seeing the boy with
the old woman, knew him for the son of the Provost of the Merchants. Now
the Israelite was a man of great wealth, but would envy his neighbour if
he sold and himself did not sell; so espying Dalilah, he said to her,
“What seekest thou, O my mistress?” She asked, “Art thou Master
Azariah[200] the Jew?” having first enquired his name of others; and he
answered, “Yes.” Quoth she, “This boy’s sister, daughter of the
Shahbandar of the Merchants, is a promised bride, and to-day they
celebrate her betrothal; and she hath need of jewellery. So give me two
pair of gold ankle-rings, a brace of gold bracelets, and pearl
ear-drops, with a girdle, a poignard and a seal-ring.” He brought them
out and she took of him a thousand dinars’ worth of jewellery, saying,
“I will take these ornaments on approval; and whatso pleaseth them, they
will keep and I will bring thee the price and leave this boy with thee
till then.” He said, “Be it as thou wilt!” So she took the jewellery and
made off to her own house, where her daughter asked her how the trick
had sped. She told her how she had taken and stripped the Shahbandar’s
boy, and Zaynab said, “Thou wilt never be able to walk abroad again in
the town.” Meanwhile, the maid went in to her mistress and said to her,
“O my lady, Umm al-Khayr saluteth thee and rejoiceth with thee and on
assembly-day she will come, she and her daughters, and give the
customary presents.” Quoth her mistress, “Where is thy young master?”
Quoth the slave-girl, “I left him with her lest he cling to thee, and
she gave me this, as largesse for the singing-women.” So the lady said
to the chief of the singers, “Take thy money;” and she took it and found
it a brass counter; whereupon the lady cried to the maid, “Get thee
down, O whore, and look to thy young master.” Accordingly, she went down
and finding neither boy nor old woman, shrieked aloud and fell on her
face. Their joy was changed into annoy, and behold, the Provost came in,
when his wife told him all that had befallen and he went out in quest of
the child, whilst the other merchants also fared forth and each sought
his own road. Presently, the Shahbandar, who had looked everywhere,
espied his son seated, naked, in the Jew’s shop and said to the owner,
“This is my son.” “’Tis well,” answered the Jew. So he took him up,
without asking for his clothes, of the excess of his joy at finding him;
but the Jew laid hold of him, saying, “Allah succour the Caliph against
thee!”[201] The Provost asked, “What aileth thee, O Jew?”; and he
answered, “Verily the old woman took of me a thousand dinars’ worth of
jewellery for thy daughter, and left this lad in pledge for the price;
and I had not trusted her, but that she offered to leave the child whom
I knew for thy son.” Said the Provost, “My daughter needeth no
jewellery, give me the boy’s clothes.” Thereupon the Jew shrieked out,
“Come to my aid, O Moslems!” but at that moment up came the dyer and the
ass-man and the young merchant, who were going about, seeking the old
woman, and enquired the cause of their jangle. So they told them the
case and they said, “This old woman is a cheat, who hath cheated us
before you.” Then they recounted to them how she had dealt with them,
and the Provost said, “Since I have found my son, be his clothes his
ransom! If I come upon the old woman, I will require them of her.” And
he carried the child home to his mother, who rejoiced in his safety.
Then the Jew said to the three others, “Whither go ye?”; and they
answered, “We go to look for her.” Quoth the Jew, “Take me with you,”
presently adding, “Is there any one of you knoweth her?” The donkey-boy
cried, “I know her;” and the Jew said, “If we all go forth together, we
shall never catch her; for she will flee from us. Let each take a
different road, and be our rendezvous at the shop of Hajj Mas’úd, the
Moorish barber.” They agreed to this and set off, each in a different
direction. Presently, Dalilah sallied forth again to play her tricks and
the ass-driver met her and knew her. So he caught hold of her and said
to her, “Woe to thee! Hast thou been long at this trade?” She asked,
“What aileth thee?”; and he answered, “Give me back my ass.” Quoth she,
“Cover what Allah covereth, O my son! Dost thou seek thine ass and the
people’s things?” Quoth he, “I want my ass; that’s all;” and quoth she,
“I saw that thou wast poor: so I deposited thine ass for thee with the
Moorish barber. Stand off, whilst I speak him fair, that he may give
thee the beast.” So she went up to the Maghrabi and kissed his hand and
shed tears. He asked her what ailed her and she said, “O my son, look at
my boy who standeth yonder. He was ill and exposed himself to the air,
which injured his intellect. He used to buy asses and now, if he stand
he saith nothing but, My ass! if he sit he crieth, My ass! and if he
walk he crieth, My ass! Now I have been told by a certain physician that
his mind is disordered and that nothing will cure him but drawing two of
his grinders and cauterising him twice on either temple. So do thou take
this dinar and call him to thee, saying:—Thine ass is with me.” Said the
barber, “May I fast for a year, if I do not give him his ass in his
fist!” Now he had with him two journeymen, so he said to one of them,
“Go, heat the irons.” Then the old woman went her way and the barber
called to the donkey-boy,[202] saying, “Thine ass is with me, good
fellow! come and take him, and as thou livest, I will give him into thy
palm.” So he came to him and the barber carried him into a dark room,
where he knocked him down and the journeymen bound him hand and foot.
Then the Maghrabi arose and pulled out two of his grinders and fired him
on either temple; after which he let him go, and he rose and said, “O
Moor, why hast thou used me with this usage?” Quoth the barber, “Thy
mother told me that thou hadst taken cold whilst ill, and hadst lost thy
reason, so that, whether sitting or standing or walking, thou wouldst
say nothing but My ass! So here is thine ass in thy fist.” Said the
other, “Allah requite thee for pulling out my teeth.” Then the barber
told him all that the old woman had related and he exclaimed, “Allah
torment her!”; and the twain left the shop and went out, disputing. When
the barber returned, he found his booth empty, for, whilst he was
absent, the old woman had taken all that was therein and made off with
it to her daughter, whom she acquainted with all that had befallen and
all she had done. The barber, seeing his place plundered, caught hold of
the donkey-boy and said to him, “Bring me thy mother.” But he answered,
saying, “She is not my mother; she is a sharper who hath cozened much
people and stolen my ass.” And lo! at this moment up came the dyer and
the Jew and the young merchant, and seeing the Moorish barber holding on
to the ass-driver who was fired on both temples, they said to him, “What
hath befallen thee, O donkey-boy?” So he told them all that had betided
him and the barber did the like; and the others in turn related to the
Moor the tricks the old woman had played them. Then he shut up his shop
and went with them to the office of the Police-master to whom they said,
“We look to thee for our case and our coin.”[203] Quoth the Wali, “And
how many old women are there not in Baghdad! Say me, doth any of you
know her?” Quoth the ass-man, “I do; so give me ten of thine officers.”
He gave them half a score archers and they all five went out, followed
by the sergeants, and patrolled the city, till they met the old woman,
when they laid hands on her and carrying her to the house of the Chief
of Police, stood waiting under his office windows till he should come
forth. Presently, the warders fell asleep, for excess of watching with
their chief, and old Dalilah feigned to follow their example, till the
ass-man and his fellows slept likewise, when she stole away from them
and, going in to the Wali’s Harim, kissed the hand of the mistress of
the house and asked her, “Where is the Chief of Police?” The lady
answered, “He is asleep; what wouldst thou with him?” Quoth Dalilah, “My
husband is a merchant of chattels and gave me five Mamelukes to sell,
whilst he went on a journey. The Master of Police met me and bought them
of me for a thousand dinars and two hundred for myself, saying:—Bring
them to my house. So I have brought them.”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old
woman, entering the Harim of the Police-Master, said to his wife,
“Verily the Wali bought of me five slaves for one thousand ducats and
two hundred for myself, saying:—Bring them to my quarters. So I have
brought them.” Hearing the old woman’s story she believed it and asked
her, “Where are the slaves?” Dalilah replied, “O my lady, they are
asleep under the palace window”; whereupon the dame looked out and
seeing the Moorish barber clad in a Mameluke habit and the young
merchant as he were a drunken Mameluke[204] and the Jew and the dyer and
the ass-driver as they were shaven Mamelukes, said in herself, “Each of
these white slaves is worth more than a thousand dinars.” So she opened
her chest and gave the old woman the thousand ducats, saying, “Fare thee
forth now and come back anon; when my husband waketh, I will get thee
the other two hundred dinars from him.” Answered the old woman, “O my
lady, an hundred of them are thine, under the sherbet-gugglet whereof
thou drinkest,[205] and the other hundred do thou keep for me against I
come back,” presently adding, “Now let me out by the private door.” So
she let her out, and the Protector protected her and she made her way
home to her daughter, to whom she related how she had gotten a thousand
gold pieces and sold her five pursuers into slavery, ending with, “O my
daughter, the one who troubleth me most is the ass-driver, for he
knoweth me.” Said Zaynab, “O my mother, abide quiet awhile and let what
thou hast done suffice thee, for the crock shall not always escape the
shock.” When the Chief of Police awoke, his wife said to him, “I give
thee joy of the five slaves thou hast bought of the old woman.” Asked
he, “What slaves?” And she answered, “Why dost thou deny it to me? Allah
willing, they shall become like thee people of condition.” Quoth he, “As
my head liveth, I have bought no slaves! Who saith this?” Quoth she,
“The old woman, the brokeress, from whom thou boughtest them; and thou
didst promise her a thousand dinars for them and two hundred for
herself.” Cried he, “Didst thou give her the money?” And she replied,
“Yes; for I saw the slaves with my own eyes, and on each is a suit of
clothes worth a thousand dinars; so I sent out to bid the sergeants have
an eye to them.” The Wali went out and, seeing the five plaintiffs, said
to the officers, “Where are the five slaves we bought for a thousand
dinars of the old woman?” Said they, “There are no slaves here; only
these five men, who found the old woman, and seized her and brought her
hither. We fell asleep, whilst waiting for thee, and she stole away and
entered the Harim. Presently out came a maid and asked us:—Are the five
with you with whom the old woman came?”; and we answered, “Yes.” Cried
the Master of Police, “By Allah, this is the biggest of swindles!”; and
the five men said, “We look to thee for our goods.” Quoth the Wali, “The
old woman, your mistress, sold you to me for a thousand gold pieces.”
Quoth they, “That were not allowed of Allah; we are free-born men and
may not be sold, and we appeal from thee to the Caliph.” Rejoined the
Master of Police, “None showed her the way to the house save you, and I
will sell you to the galleys for two hundred dinars apiece.” Just then,
behold, up came the Emir Hasan Sharr al-Tarik who, on his return from
his journey had found his wife stripped of her clothes and jewellery and
heard from her all that had passed; whereupon quoth he, “The Master of
Police shall answer me this” and repairing to him, said, “Dost thou
suffer old women to go round about the town and cozen folk of their
goods? This is thy duty and I look to thee for my wife’s property.” Then
said he to the five men, “What is the case with you?” So they told him
their stories and he said, “Ye are wronged men,” and turning to the
Master of Police, asked him, “Why dost thou arrest them?” Answered he,
“None brought the old wretch to my house save these five, so that she
took a thousand dinars of my money and sold them to my women.” Whereupon
the five cried, “O Emir Hasan, be thou our advocate in this cause.” Then
said the Master of Police to the Emir, “Thy wife’s goods are at my
charge and I will be surety for the old woman. But which of you knoweth
her?” They cried, “We all know her: send ten apparitors with us, and we
will take her.” So he gave them ten men, and the ass-driver said to
them, “Follow me, for I should know her with blue eyes.”[206] Then they
fared forth and lo! they meet old Dalilah coming out of a by-street: so
they at once laid hands on her and brought her to the office of the Wali
who asked her, “Where are the people’s goods?” But she answered, saying,
“I have neither gotten them nor seen them.” Then he cried to the gaoler,
“Take her with thee and clap her in gaol till the morning;” but he
replied, “I will not take her nor will I imprison her lest she play a
trick on me and I be answerable for her.” So the Master of Police
mounted and rode out with Dalilah and the rest to the bank of the
Tigris, where he bade the lamp-lighter crucify her by her hair. He drew
her up by the pulley and bound her on the cross; after which the Master
of Police set ten men to guard her and went home. Presently, the night
fell down and sleep overcame the watchmen. Now a certain Badawi had
heard one man say to a friend, “Praise be to Allah for thy safe return!
Where hast thou been all this time?” Replied the other, “In Baghdad
where I broke my fast on honey-fritters.”[207] Quoth the Badawi to
himself, “Needs must I go to Baghdad and eat honey-fritters therein”;
for in all his life he had never entered Baghdad nor seen fritters of
the sort. So he mounted his stallion and rode on towards Baghdad, saying
in his mind, “’Tis a fine thing to eat honey-fritters! On the honour of
an Arab, I will break my fast with honey-fritters and naught else!”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Sixth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the wild Arab
mounted horse and made for Baghdad saying in his mind, “’Tis a fine
thing to eat honey-fritters! On the honour of an Arab I will break my
fast with honey-fritters and naught else;” and he rode on till he came
to the place where Dalilah was crucified and she heard him mutter these
words. So he went up to her and said to her, “What art thou?” Quoth she,
“I throw myself on thy protection, O Shaykh of the Arabs!” and quoth he,
“Allah indeed protect thee! But what is the cause of thy crucifixion?”
Said she, “I have an enemy, an oilman, who frieth fritters, and I
stopped to buy some of him, when I chanced to spit and my spittle fell
on the fritters. So he complained of me to the Governor, who commanded
to crucify me, saying:—I adjudge that ye take ten pounds of
honey-fritters and feed her therewith upon the cross. If she eat them,
let her go, but if not, leave her hanging. And my stomach will not brook
sweet things.” Cried the Badawi, “By the honour of the Arabs, I departed
not the camp but that I might taste of honey-fritters! I will eat them
for thee.” Quoth she, “None may eat them, except he be hung up in my
place.” So he fell into the trap and unbound her; whereupon she bound
him in her stead, after she had stripped him of his clothes and turband
and put them on; then covering herself with his burnous and mounting his
horse, she rode to her house, where Zaynab asked her, “What meaneth this
plight?”; and she answered, “They crucified me;” and told her all that
had befallen her with the Badawi. This is how it fared with her; but as
regards the watchmen, the first who woke roused his companions and they
saw that the day had broken. So one of them raised his eyes and cried,
“Dalilah.” Replied the Badawi, “By Allah! I have not eaten all night.
Have ye brought the honey-fritters?” All exclaimed, “This is a man and a
Badawi,” and one of them asked him, “O Badawi, where is Dalilah and who
loosed her?” He answered, “’Twas I; she shall not eat the honey-fritters
against her will; for her soul abhorreth them.” So they knew that the
Arab was ignorant of her case, whom she had cozened, and said to one
another, “Shall we flee or abide the accomplishment of that which Allah
hath written for us?” As they were talking, up came the Chief of Police,
with all the folk whom the old woman had cheated, and said to the
guards, “Arise, loose Dalilah.” Quoth the Badawi, “We have not eaten
to-night. Hast thou brought the honey-fritters?” Whereupon the Wali
raised his eyes to the cross and seeing the Badawi hung up in the stead
of the old woman, said to the watchmen, “What is this?” “Pardon, O our
lord!” “Tell me what hath happened.” “We were weary with watching with
thee on guard and said:—Dalilah is crucified. So we fell asleep, and
when we awoke, we found the Badawi hung up in her room; and we are at
thy mercy.” “O folk, Allah’s pardon be upon you! She is indeed a clever
cheat!” Then they unbound the Badawi, who laid hold of the Master of
Police, saying, “Allah succour the Caliph against thee! I look to none
but thee for my horse and clothes!” So the Wali questioned him and he
told him what had passed between Dalilah and himself. The magistrate
marvelled and asked him, “Why didst thou release her?”; and the Badawi
answered, “I knew not that she was a felon.” Then said the others, “O
Chief of Police, we look to thee in the matter of our goods; for we
delivered the old woman into thy hands and she was in thy guard; and we
cite thee before the Divan of the Caliph.” Now the Emir Hasan had gone
up to the Divan, when in came the Wali with the Badawi and the five
others, saying, “Verily, we are wronged men!” “Who hath wronged you?”
asked the Caliph; so each came forward in turn and told his story, after
which said the Master of Police, “O Commander of the Faithful, the old
woman cheated me also and sold me these five men as slaves for a
thousand dinars, albeit they are free-born.” Quoth the Prince of True
Believers, “I take upon myself all that you have lost”; adding to the
Master of Police, “I charge thee with the old woman.” But he shook his
collar, saying, “O Commander of the Faithful, I will not answer for her;
for, after I had hung her on the cross, she tricked this Badawi and,
when he loosed her, she tied him up in her room and made off with his
clothes and horse.” Quoth the Caliph, “Whom but thee shall I charge with
her?”; and quoth the Wali, “Charge Ahmad al-Danaf, for he hath a
thousand dinars a month and one-and-forty followers, at a monthly wage
of an hundred dinars each.” So the Caliph said, “Harkye, Captain Ahmad!”
“At thy service, O Commander of the Faithful,” said he; and the Caliph
cried, “I charge thee to bring the old woman before us.” Replied Ahmad,
“I will answer for her.” Then the Caliph kept the Badawi and the five
with him,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Seventh Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Caliph
said to Calamity Ahmad, “I charge thee to bring the old woman before
us,” he said, “I will answer for her, O Commander of the Faithful!” Then
the Caliph kept the Badawi and the five with him, whilst Ahmad and his
men went down to their hall,[208] saying to one another, “How shall we
lay hands on her, seeing that there are many old women in the town?” And
quoth Ahmad to Hasan Shuman, “What counsellest thou?” Whereupon quoth
one of them, by name Ali Kitf al-Jamal,[209] to al-Danaf, “Of what dost
thou take counsel with Hasan Shuman? Is the Pestilent one any great
shakes?” Said Hasan, “O Ali, why dost thou disparage me? By the Most
Great Name, I will not company with thee at this time!”; and he rose and
went out in wrath. Then said Ahmad, “O my braves, let every sergeant
take ten men, each to his own quarter and search for Dalilah.” All did
his bidding, Ali included, and they said, “Ere we disperse let us agree
to rendezvous in the quarter Al-Kalkh.” It was noised abroad in the city
that Calamity Ahmad had undertaken to lay hands on Dalilah the Wily, and
Zaynab said to her, “O my mother, an thou be indeed a trickstress, do
thou befool Ahmad al-Danaf and his company.” Answered Dalilah, “I fear
none save Hasan Shuman;” and Zaynab said, “By the life of my brow-lock,
I will assuredly get thee the clothes of all the one-and-forty.” Then
she dressed and veiled herself and going to a certain druggist, who had
a saloon with two doors, salamed to him and gave him an ashrafi and said
to him, “Take this gold piece as a douceur for thy saloon and let it to
me till the end of the day.” So he gave her the keys and she fetched
carpets and so forth on the stolen ass and furnishing the place, set on
each raised pavement a tray of meat and wine. Then she went out and
stood at the door, with her face unveiled and behold, up came Ali Kitf
al-Jamal and his men. She kissed his hand; and he fell in love with her,
seeing her to be a handsome girl, and said to her, “What dost thou
want?” Quoth she, “Art thou Captain Ahmad al-Danaf?”; and quoth he, “No,
but I am of his company and my name is Ali Camel-shoulder.” Asked she,
“Whither fare you?”; and he answered, “We go about in quest of a
sharkish old woman, who hath stolen folk’s good, and we mean to lay
hands on her. But who art thou and what is thy business?” She replied,
“My father was a taverner at Mosul and he died and left me much money.
So I came hither, for fear of the Dignities, and asked the people who
would protect me, to which they replied:—None but Ahmad al-Danaf.” Said
the men, “From this day forth, thou art under his protection”; and she
replied, “Hearten me by eating a bit and drinking a sup of water.”[210]
They consented and entering, ate and drank till they were drunken, when
she drugged them with Bhang and stripped them of their clothes and arms;
and on like wise she did with the three other companions. Presently,
Calamity Ahmad went out to look for Dalilah, but found her not, neither
set eyes on any of his followers, and went on till he came to the door
where Zaynab was standing. She kissed his hand and he looked on her and
fell in love with her. Quoth she, “Art thou Captain Ahmad al-Danaf?”;
and quoth he, “Yes: who art thou?” She replied, “I am a stranger from
Mosul. My father was a vintner at that place and he died and left me
much money wherewith I came to this city, for fear of the powers that
be, and opened this tavern. The Master of Police hath imposed a tax on
me, but it is my desire to put myself under thy protection and pay thee
what the police would take of me, for thou hast the better right to it.”
Quoth he, “Do not pay him aught: thou shalt have my protection and
welcome.” Then quoth she, “Please to heal my heart and eat of my
victual.” So he entered and ate and drank wine, till he could not sit
upright, when she drugged him and took his clothes and arms. Then she
loaded her purchase on the Badawi’s horse and the donkey-boy’s ass and
made off with it, after she had aroused Ali Kitf al-Jamal.
Camel-shoulder awoke and found himself naked and saw Ahmad and his men
drugged and stripped: so he revived them with the counter-drug and they
awoke and found themselves naked. Quoth Calamity Ahmad, “O lads, what is
this? We were going to catch her, and lo! this strumpet hath caught us!
How Hasan Shuman will rejoice over us! But we will wait till it is dark
and then go away.” Meanwhile Pestilence Hasan said to the hall-keeper,
“Where are the men?”; and as he asked, up they came naked; and he
recited these two couplets[211]:—

 Men in their purposes are much alike, ✿ But in their issues difference
    comes to light:
 Of men some wise are, others simple souls; ✿ As of the stars some dull,
    some pearly bright.

Then he looked at them and asked, “Who hath played you this trick and
made you naked?”; and they answered, “We went in quest of an old woman,
and a pretty girl stripped us.” Quoth Hasan, “She hath done right well.”
They asked, “Dost thou know her?”; and he answered, “Yes, I know her and
the old trot too.” Quoth they, “What shall we say to the Caliph?”; and
quoth he, “O Danaf, do thou shake thy collar before him, and he will
say:—Who is answerable for her; and if he ask why thou hast not caught
her; say thou:—We know her not; but charge Hasan Shuman with her. And if
he give her into my charge, I will lay hands on her.” So they slept that
night and on the morrow they went up to the Caliph’s Divan and kissed
ground before him. Quoth he, “Where is the old woman, O Captain Ahmad?”
But he shook his collar. The Caliph asked him why he did so, and he
answered, “I know her not; but do thou charge Hasan Shuman to lay hands
on her, for he knoweth her and her daughter also.” Then Hasan interceded
for her with the Caliph, saying, “Indeed, she hath not played off these
tricks, because she coveted the folk’s stuff, but to show her cleverness
and that of her daughter, to the intent that thou shouldst continue her
husband’s stipend to her and that of her father to her daughter. So an
thou wilt spare her life I will fetch her to thee.” Cried the Caliph,
“By the life of my ancestors, if she restore the people’s goods, I will
pardon her on thine intercession!” And said the Pestilence, “Give me a
pledge, O Prince of True Believers!” Whereupon Al-Rashid gave him the
kerchief of pardon. So Hasan repaired to Dalilah’s house and called to
her. Her daughter Zaynab answered him and he asked her, “Where is thy
mother?” “Upstairs,” she answered; and he said, “Bid her take the
people’s goods and come with me to the presence of the Caliph; for I
have brought her the kerchief of pardon, and if she will not come with a
good grace, let her blame only herself.” So Dalilah came down and tying
the kerchief about her neck gave him the people’s goods on the
donkey-boy’s ass and the Badawi’s horse. Quoth he, “There remain the
clothes of my Chief and his men”; and quoth she, “By the Most Great
Name, ’twas not I who stripped them!” Rejoined Hasan, “Thou sayst sooth,
it was thy daughter Zaynab’s doing, and this was a good turn she did
thee.” Then he carried her to the Divan and laying the people’s goods
and stuff before the Caliph, set the old trot in his presence. As soon
as he saw her, he bade throw her down on the carpet of blood, whereat
she cried, “I cast myself on thy protection, O Shuman!” So he rose and
kissing the Caliph’s hands, said, “Pardon, O Commander of the Faithful!
Indeed, thou gavest me the kerchief of pardon.” Said the Prince of True
Believers, “I pardon her for thy sake: come hither, O old woman; what is
thy name?” “My name is Wily Dalilah,” answered she, and the Caliph said,
“Thou art indeed crafty and full of guile.” Whence she was dubbed
Dalilah the Wily One. Then quoth he, “Why hast thou played all these
tricks on the folk and wearied our hearts?” and quoth she, “I did it not
of lust for their goods, but because I had heard of the tricks which
Ahmad al-Danaf and Hasan Shuman played in Baghdad and said to myself:—I
too will do the like. And now I have returned the folk their goods.” But
the ass-driver rose and said, “I invoke Allah’s law[212] between me and
her; for it sufficed her not to take my ass, but she must needs egg on
the Moorish barber to tear out my eye-teeth and fire me on both
temples.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
donkey-boy rose and cried out, “I invoke Allah’s law between me and her;
for it sufficed her not to take my ass, but she must needs egg on the
barber to tear out my eye-teeth and fire me on both temples;” thereupon
the Caliph bade give him an hundred dinars and ordered the dyer the
like, saying, “Go; set up thy dyery again.” So they called down
blessings on his head and went away. The Badawi also took his clothes
and horse and departed, saying, “’Tis henceforth unlawful and forbidden
me to enter Baghdad and eat honey-fritters.” And the others took their
goods and went away. Then said the Caliph, “Ask a boon of me, O
Dalilah!”; and she said, “Verily, my father was governor of the
carrier-pigeons to thee and I know how to rear the birds; and my husband
was town-captain of Baghdad. Now I wish to have the reversion of my
husband and my daughter wisheth to have that of her father.” The Caliph
granted both their requests and she said, “I ask of thee that I may be
portress of thy Khan.” Now he had built a Khan of three stories, for the
merchants to lodge in, and had assigned to its service forty slaves and
also forty dogs he had brought from the King of the Sulaymániyah,[213]
when he deposed him; and there was in the Khan a cook-slave, who cooked
for the chattels and fed the hounds for which he let make collars. Said
the Caliph, “O Dalilah, I will write thee a patent of guardianship of
the Khan, and if aught be lost therefrom, thou shalt be answerable for
it.” “’Tis well,” replied she; “but do thou lodge my daughter in the
pavilion over the door of the Khan, for it hath terraced roofs, and
carrier-pigeons may not be reared to advantage save in an open space.”
The Caliph granted her this also and she and her daughter removed to the
pavilion in question, where Zaynab hung up the one-and-forty dresses of
Calamity Ahmad and his company. Moreover, they delivered to Dalilah the
forty pigeons which carried the royal messages, and the Caliph appointed
the Wily One mistress over the forty slaves and charged them to obey
her. She made the place of her sitting behind the door of the Khan, and
every day she used to go up to the Caliph’s Divan, lest he should need
to send a message by pigeon-post and stay there till eventide whilst the
forty slaves stood on guard at the Khan; and when darkness came on they
loosed the forty dogs that they might keep watch over the place by
night. Such were the doings of Dalilah the Wily One in Baghdad and much
like them were

-----

Footnote 179:

  This and the next tale are omitted by Lane (iii. 254) on “account of
  its vulgarity, rendered more objectionable by indecent incidents.” It
  has been honoured with a lithographed reprint at Cairo A.H. 1278 and
  the Bresl. Edit. ix. 193 calls it the “Tale of Ahmad al-Danaf with
  Dalílah.”

Footnote 180:

  “Ahmad, the Distressing Sickness,” or “Calamity”; Hasan the Pestilent
  and Dalílah the bawd. See vol. ii. 329, and vol. iv. 75.

Footnote 181:

  A fœtus, a foundling, a contemptible fellow.

Footnote 182:

  In the Mac. Edit. “her husband”: the end of the tale shows the error,
  _infra_, p. 171. The Bresl. Edit., x. 195, informs us that Dalilah was
  a “Faylasúfíyah” = philosopheress.

Footnote 183:

  Arab. “Ibrík” usually a ewer, a spout-pot, from the Pers. Ab-ríz =
  water-pourer; the old woman thus vaunted her ceremonial purity. The
  basin and ewer are called in poetry “the two rumourers,” because they
  rattle when borne about.

Footnote 184:

  Khátún in Turk. is = a lady, a dame of high degree; at times, as here
  and elsewhere, it becomes a P. N.

Footnote 185:

  Arab. “Maut,” a word mostly avoided in the Koran and by the Founder of
  Christianity.

Footnote 186:

  Arab. “Akákír,” drugs, spices, simples which cannot be distinguished
  without study and practice. Hence the proverb (Burckhardt, 703), Is
  this an art of drugs?—difficult as the druggist’s craft?

Footnote 187:

  _i.e._ Beautiful as the fairy damsels who guard enchanted treasures,
  such as that of Al-Shamardal (vol. vi. 221).

Footnote 188:

  _i.e._ by contact with a person in a state of ceremonial impurity;
  servants are not particular upon this point and “Salát mamlúkíyah”
  (Mameluke’s prayers) means praying without ablution.

Footnote 189:

  _i.e._ Father of assaults, burdens or pregnancies; the last being here
  the meaning.

Footnote 190:

  Ex votos and so forth.

Footnote 191:

  Arab. “Iksah,” plaits, braids, also the little gold coins and other
  ornaments worn in the hair, now mostly by the middle and lower
  classes. Low Europeans sometimes take advantage of the native
  prostitutes by detaching these valuables, a form of “bilking” peculiar
  to the Nile-Valley.

Footnote 192:

  In Bresl. Edit. Malíh Kawí (pron. ’Awi), a Cairene vulgarism.

Footnote 193:

  Meaning without veil or upper clothing.

Footnote 194:

  Arab. “Kallakás” the edible African arum before explained. This
  Colocasia is supposed to bear, unlike the palm, male and female
  flowers in one spathe.

Footnote 195:

  See vol. iii. 302. The figs refer to the anus and the pomegranates,
  like the sycomore, to the female parts. Me nec fæmina nec puer, &c.,
  says Horace in pensive mood.

Footnote 196:

  It is in accordance to custom that the Shaykh be attended by a
  half-witted fanatic who would be made furious by seeing gold and silks
  in the reverend presence so coyly curtained.

Footnote 197:

  In English, “God damn everything an inch high!”

Footnote 198:

  Burckhardt notes that the Wali, or chief police officer at Cairo, was
  exclusively termed Al-Agha and quotes the proverb (No. 156) “One night
  the whore repented and cried:—What! no Wali (Al-Aghá) to lay whores by
  the heels?” Some of these Egyptian by-words are most amusing and
  characteristic; but they require literal translation, not the timid
  touch of the last generation. I am preparing, for the use of my
  friend, Bernard Quaritch, a bonâ fide version which awaits only the
  promised volume of Herr Landberg.

Footnote 199:

  Lit. for “we leave them for the present”; the formula is much used in
  this tale, showing another hand, author or copyist.

Footnote 200:

  Arab. “Uzrah.”

Footnote 201:

  _i.e._ “Thou art unjust and violent enough to wrong even the Caliph!”

Footnote 202:

  I may note that a “donkey-boy” like our “post-boy” can be of any age
  in Egypt.

Footnote 203:

  They could legally demand to be recouped but the chief would have
  found some pretext to put off payment. Such at least is the legal
  process of these days.

Footnote 204:

  _i.e._ drunk with the excess of his beauty.

Footnote 205:

  A delicate way of offering a fee. When officers commanding regiments
  in India contracted for clothing the men, they found these douceurs
  under their dinner-napkins. All that is now changed; but I doubt the
  change being an improvement: the public is plundered by a “Board”
  instead of an individual.

Footnote 206:

  This may mean, I should know her even were my eyes blue (or blind)
  with cataract and the Bresl. Edit. ix., 231, reads “Ayní” = my eye; or
  it may be, I should know her by her staring, glittering, hungry eyes,
  as opposed to the “Hawar” soft-black and languishing (Arab. Prov. i.
  115, and ii. 848). The Prophet said “blue-eyed (women) are of good
  omen.” And when one man reproached another saying “Thou art Azrak”
  (blue-eyed!) he retorted, “So is the falcon!” “Zurk-an” in Kor. xx.
  102, is translated by Mr. Rod well “leaden eyes.” It ought to be
  blue-eyed, dim-sighted, purblind.

Footnote 207:

  Arab. “Zalábiyah bi-’Asal.”

Footnote 208:

  Arab. “Ká’ah,” their mess-room, barracks.

Footnote 209:

  _i.e._ Camel shoulder-blade.

Footnote 210:

  So in the Brazil you are invited to drink a _copa d’agua_ and find a
  splendid banquet. There is a smack of Chinese ceremony in this
  practice which lingers throughout southern Europe; but the less
  advanced society is, the more it is fettered by ceremony and
  “etiquette.”

Footnote 211:

  The Bresl. Edit. (ix. 239) prefers these lines:—

  Some of us be hawks and some sparrow-hawks, ✿ And vultures some which
     at carrion pike;
  And maidens deem all alike we be ✿ But, save in our turbands, we’re
     not alike.

Footnote 212:

  Arab. Shar’a = holy law; here it especially applies to Al-Kisás = _lex
  talionis_, which would order her eye-tooth to be torn out.

Footnote 213:

  _i.e._, of the Afghans. Sulaymáni is the Egypt and Hijazi term for an
  Afghan and the proverb says “Sulaymáni harámi”—the Afghan is a
  villainous man. See Pilgrimage i. 59, which gives them a better
  character. The Bresl. Edit. simply says, “King Sulaymán.”




              THE ADVENTURES OF MERCURY ALI OF CAIRO.[214]


Now as regards the works of Mercury ’Alí; there lived once at
Cairo,[215] in the days of Saláh the Egyptian, who was Chief of the
Cairo Police and had forty men under him, a sharper named Ali, for whom
the Master of Police used to set snares and think that he had fallen
therein; but, when they sought for him, they found that he had fled like
zaybak, or quicksilver, wherefore they dubbed him Ali Zaybak or Mercury
Ali of Cairo. Now one day, as he sat with his men in his hall, his heart
became heavy within him and his breast was straitened. The hall-keeper
saw him sitting with frowning face and said to him, “What aileth thee, O
my Chief? If thy breast be straitened take a turn in the streets of
Cairo, for assuredly walking in her markets will do away with thy irk.”
So he rose up and went out and threaded the streets awhile, but only
increased in cark and care. Presently, he came to a wine-shop and said
to himself, “I will go in and drink myself drunken.” So he entered and
seeing seven rows of people in the shop, said, “Harkye, taverner! I will
not sit except by myself.” Accordingly, the vintner placed him in a
chamber alone and set strong pure wine before him whereof he drank till
he lost his senses. Then he sallied forth again and walked till he came
to the road called Red, whilst the people left the street clear before
him, out of fear of him. Presently, he turned and saw a water-carrier
trudging along, with his skin and gugglet, crying out and saying, “O
exchange! There is no drink but what raisins make, there is no
love-delight but what of the lover we take and none sitteth in the place
of honour save the sensible freke[216]!” So he said to him, “Here, give
me to drink!” The water-carrier looked at him and gave him the gugglet
which he took and gazing into it, shook it up and lastly poured it out
on the ground. Asked the water-carrier, “Why dost thou not drink?”; and
he answered, saying, “Give me to drink.” So the man filled the cup a
second time and he took it and shook it and emptied it on the ground;
and thus he did a third time. Quoth the water-carrier, “An thou wilt not
drink, I will be off.” And Ali said, “Give me to drink.” So he filled
the cup a fourth time and gave it to him; and he drank and gave the man
a dinar. The water-carrier looked at him with disdain and said,
belittling him, “Good luck to thee! Good luck to thee, my lad! Little
folk are one thing and great folk another!”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Ninth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
water-carrier receiving the dinar, looked at the giver with disdain and
said, “Good luck to thee! Good luck to thee! Little folk are one thing
and great folk another.” Now when Mercury Ali heard this, he caught hold
of the man’s gaberdine and drawing on him a poignard of price, such an
one as that whereof the poet speaketh in these two couplets:—

 Watered steel-blade, the world perfection calls, ✿ Drunk with the viper
    poison foes appals,
 Cuts lively, burns the blood whene’er it falls; ✿ And picks up gems from
    pave of marble halls;[217]

cried to him, “O Shaykh, speak reasonably to me! Thy water-skin is worth
if dear three dirhams, and the gugglets I emptied on the ground held a
pint or so of water.” Replied the water-carrier “’Tis well,” and Ali
rejoined, “I gave thee a golden ducat: why, then dost thou belittle me?
Say me, hast thou ever seen any more valiant than I or more generous
than I?” Answered the water-carrier; “I have indeed, seen one more
valiant than thou and eke more generous than thou; for, never, since
women bare children, was there on earth’s face a brave man who was not
generous.” Quoth Ali, “and who is he thou deemest braver and more
generous than I?” Quoth the other, “Thou must know that I have had a
strange adventure. My father was a Shaykh of the Water-carriers who give
drink in Cairo and, when he died, he left me five male camels, a
he-mule, a shop and a house; but the poor man is never satisfied; or, if
he be satisfied he dieth. So I said to myself:—I will go up to Al-Hijaz;
and, taking a string of camels, bought goods on tick, till I had run in
debt for five hundred ducats, all of which I lost in the pilgrimage.
Then I said in my mind:—If I return to Cairo the folk will clap me in
jail for their goods. So I fared with the pilgrims-caravan of Damascus
to Aleppo and thence I went on to Baghdad, where I sought out the Shaykh
of the Water-carriers of the city and finding his house I went in and
repeated the opening chapter of the Koran to him. He questioned me of my
case and I told him all that had betided me, whereupon he assigned me a
shop and gave me a water-skin and gear. So I sallied forth a-morn
trusting in Allah to provide, and went round about the city. I offered
the gugglet to one, that he might drink; but he cried, I have eaten
naught whereon to drink; for a niggard invited me this day and set two
gugglets before me; so I said to him:—O son of the sordid, hast thou
given me aught to eat that thou offerest me drink after it? Wherefore
wend thy ways, O water-carrier, till I have eaten somewhat: then come
and give me to drink.” Thereupon I accosted another and he said:—Allah
provide thee! And so I went on till noon, without taking hansel, and I
said to myself, Would Heaven I had never come to Baghdad! Presently, I
saw the folk running as fast as they could; so I followed them and
behold, a long file of men riding two and two and clad in steel, with
double neck-rings and felt bonnets and burnouses and swords and
bucklers. I asked one of the folk whose suite this was, and he answered,
That of Captain Ahmad al-Danaf. Quoth I, And what is he? and quoth the
other, He is town-captain of Baghdad and her Divan, and to him is
committed the care of the suburbs. He getteth a thousand dinars a month
from the Caliph and Hasan Shuman hath the like. Moreover, each of his
men draweth an hundred dinars a month; and they are now returning to
their barrack from the Divan. And lo! Calamity Ahmad saw me and cried
out, Come give me drink. So I filled the cup and gave it him, and he
shook it and emptied it out, like unto thee; and thus he did a second
time. Then I filled the cup a third time and he took a draught as thou
diddest; after which he asked me, O water-carrier, whence comest thou?
And I answered, From Cairo, and he, Allah keep Cairo and her citizens!
What may bring thee thither? So I told him my story and gave him to
understand that I was a debtor fleeing from debt and distress. He cried,
Thou art welcome to Baghdad; then he gave me five dinars and said to his
men, For the love of Allah be generous to him. So each of them gave me a
dinar and Ahmad said to me, O Shaykh, what while thou abidest in Baghdad
thou shalt have of us the like every time thou givest us to drink.
Accordingly, I paid them frequent visits and good ceased not to come to
me from the folk till, one day, reckoning up the profit I had made of
them, I found it a thousand dinars and said to myself, The best thing
thou canst do is to return to Egypt. So I went to Ahmad’s house and
kissed his hand, and he said, What seekest thou? Quoth I, I have a mind
to depart; and I repeated these two couplets:—

 Sojourn of stranger, in whatever land, ✿ Is like the castle based upon
    the wind:
 The breaths of breezes level all he raised. ✿ And so on homeward-way’s
    the stranger’s mind.

I added, The caravan is about to start for Cairo and I wish to return to
my people. So he gave me a she-mule and an hundred dinars and said to
me, I desire to send somewhat by thee, O Shaykh! Dost thou know the
people of Cairo? Yes, answered I;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Tenth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ahmad
al-Danaf had given the water-carrier a she-mule and an hundred dinars
and said to him, “I desire to send a trust by thee. Dost thou know the
people of Cairo?” I answered (quoth the water-carrier), “Yes; and he
said, Take this letter and carry it to Ali Zaybak of Cairo and say to
him, Thy Captain saluteth thee and he is now with the Caliph. So I took
the letter and journeyed back to Cairo, where I paid my debts and plied
my water-carrying trade; but I have not delivered the letter, because I
know not the abode of Mercury Ali.” Quoth Ali, “O elder, be of good
cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear: I am that Ali, the first of
the lads of Captain Ahmad: here with the letter!” So he gave him the
missive and he opened it and read these two couplets:—

 “O adornment of beauties to thee write I ✿ On a paper that flies as the
    winds go by:
 Could I fly, I had flown to their arms in desire, ✿ But a bird with cut
    wings; how shall ever he fly?”

“But after salutation from Captain Ahmad al-Danaf to the eldest of his
sons, Mercury Ali of Cairo. Thou knowest that I tormented Salah al-Din
the Cairene and befooled him till I buried him alive and reduced his
lads to obey me, and amongst them Ali Kitf al-Jamal; and I am now become
town-captain of Baghdad in the Divan of the Caliph who hath made me
overseer of the suburbs. An thou be still mindful of our covenant, come
to me; haply thou shalt play some trick in Baghdad which may promote
thee to the Caliph’s service, so he may appoint thee stipends and
allowances and assign thee a lodging, which is what thou wouldst see and
so peace be on thee.” When Ali read this letter, he kissed it and laying
it on his head, gave the water-carrier ten dinars; after which he
returned to his barracks and told his comrades and said to them, “I
commend you one to other.” Then he changed all his clothes and, donning
a travelling cloak and a tarboosh, took a case, containing a spear of
bamboo-cane, four-and-twenty cubits long, made in several pieces, to fit
into one another. Quoth his lieutenant, “Wilt thou go a journey when the
treasury is empty?”; and quoth Ali, “When I reach Damascus I will send
you what shall suffice you.” Then he set out and fared on, till he
overtook a caravan about to start, whereof were the Shahbandar, or
Provost of the Merchants, and forty other traders. They had all loaded
their beasts, except the Provost, whose loads lay upon the ground, and
Ali heard his caravan-leader, who was a Syrian, say to the muleteers,
“Bear a hand, one of you!” But they reviled him and abused him. Quoth
Ali in himself, “None will suit me so well to travel withal as this
leader.” Now Ali was beardless and well-favoured; so he went up to and
saluted the leader who welcomed him and said, “What seekest thou?”
Replied Ali, “O my uncle, I see thee alone with forty mule-loads of
goods; but why hast thou not brought hands to help thee?” Rejoined the
other, “O my son, I hired two lads and clothed them and put in each
one’s pocket two hundred dinars; and they helped me till we came to the
Dervishes’ Convent,[218] when they ran away.” Quoth Ali, “Whither are
you bound?” and quoth the Syrian, “to Aleppo,” when Ali said, “I will
lend thee a hand.” Accordingly they loaded the beasts and the Provost
mounted his she-mule and they set out he rejoicing in Ali; and presently
he loved him and made much of him and on this wise they fared on till
nightfall, when they dismounted and ate and drank. Then came the time of
sleep and Ali lay down on his side and made as if he slept; whereupon
the Syrian stretched himself near him and Ali rose from his stead and
sat down at the door of the merchant’s pavilion. Presently, the Syrian
turned over and would have taken Ali in his arms, but found him not and
said to himself, “Haply he hath promised another and he hath taken him;
but I have the first right and another night I will keep him.” Now Ali
continued sitting at the door of the tent till nigh upon daybreak, when
he returned and lay down near the Syrian, who found him by his side,
when he awoke, and said to himself, “If I ask him where he hath been, he
will leave me and go away.” So he dissembled with him and they went on
till they came to a forest, in which was a cave, where dwelt a rending
lion. Now whenever a caravan passed, they would draw lots among
themselves and him on whom the lot fell they would throw to the beast.
So they drew lots and the lot fell not save upon the Provost of the
Merchants. And lo! the lion cut off their way awaiting his pray,
wherefore the Provost was sore distressed and said to the leader, “Allah
disappoint the fortunes[219] of the far one and bring his journey to
naught! I charge thee, after my death, give my loads to my children.”
Quoth Ali the Clever One, “What meaneth all this?” So they told him the
case and he said, “Why do ye run from the tom-cat of the desert? I
warrant you I will kill him.” So the Syrian went to the Provost and told
him of this and he said, “If he slay him, I will give him a thousand
dinars,” and said the other merchants, “We will reward him likewise one
and all.” With this Ali put off his mantle and there appeared upon him a
suit of steel; then he took a chopper of steel[220] and opening it
turned the screw; after which he went forth alone and standing in the
road before the lion, cried out to him. The lion ran at him, but Ali of
Cairo smote him between the eyes with his chopper and cut him in sunder,
whilst the caravan-leader and the merchants looked on. Then said he to
the leader, “Have no fear, O nuncle!” and the Syrian answered, saying,
“O my son, I am thy servant for all future time.” Then the Provost
embraced him and kissed him between the eyes and gave him the thousand
dinars, and each of the other merchants gave him twenty dinars. He
deposited all the coin with the Provost and they slept that night till
the morning, when they set out again, intending for Baghdad, and fared
on till they came to the Lion’s Clump and the Wady of Dogs, where lay a
villain Badawi, a brigand and his tribe, who sallied forth on them. The
folk fled from the highwaymen, and the Provost said, “My monies are
lost!”; when, lo! up came Ali in a buff coat hung with bells, and
bringing out his long lance, fitted the pieces together. Then he seized
one of the Arab’s horses and mounting it cried out to the Badawi Chief,
saying, “Come out to fight me with spears!” Moreover he shook his bells
and the Arab’s mare took fright at the noise and Ali struck the chief’s
spear and broke it. Then he smote him on the neck and cut off his
head.[221] When the Badawin saw their chief fall, they ran at Ali, but
he cried out, saying, “Allaho Akbar—God is Most Great!”—and, falling on
them broke them and put them to flight. Then he raised the Chief’s head
on his spear-point and returned to the merchants, who rewarded him
liberally and continued their journey, till they reached Baghdad.
Thereupon Ali took his money from the Provost and committed it to the
Syrian caravan-leader, saying, “When thou returnest to Cairo, ask for my
barracks and give these monies to my deputy.” Then he slept that night
and on the morrow he entered the city and threading the streets enquired
for Calamity Ahmad’s quarters; but none would direct him thereto.[222]
So he walked on, till he came to the square Al-Nafz, where he saw
children at play, and amongst them a lad called Ahmad al-Lakít,[223] and
said to himself, “O my Ali, thou shalt not get news of them but from
their little ones.” Then he turned and seeing a sweetmeat-seller bought
Halwá of him and called to the children; but Ahmad al-Lakit drove the
rest away and coming up to him, said, “What seekest thou?” Quoth Ali, “I
had a son and he died and I saw him in a dream asking for sweetmeats:
wherefore I have bought them and wish to give each child a bit.” So
saying, he gave Ahmad a slice, and he looked at it and seeing a dinar
sticking to it, said, “Begone! I am no catamite: seek another than I.”
Quoth Ali, “O my son, none but a sharp fellow taketh the hire, even as
he is a sharp one who giveth it. I have sought all day for Ahmad
al-Danaf’s barrack, but none would direct me thereto; so this dinar is
thine an thou wilt guide me thither.” Quoth the lad, “I will run before
thee and do thou keep up with me, till I come to the place, when I will
catch up a pebble with my foot[224] and kick it against the door; and so
shalt thou know it.” Accordingly he ran on and Ali after him, till they
came to the place, when the boy caught up a pebble between his toes and
kicked it against the door so as to make the place known.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Eleventh Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ahmad the
Abortion had made known the place, Ali laid hold of him and would have
taken the dinar from him, but could not; so he said to him, “Go: thou
deservest largesse for thou art a sharp fellow, whole of wit and stout
of heart. Inshallah, if I become a captain to the Caliph, I will make
thee one of my lads.” Then the boy made off and Ali Zaybak went up to
the door and knocked; whereupon quoth Ahmad al-Danaf, “O doorkeeper,
open the door; that is the knock of Quicksilver Ali the Cairene.” So he
opened the door and Ali entered and saluted with the salam Ahmad who
embraced him, and the Forty greeted him. Then Calamity Ahmad gave him a
suit of clothes, saying, “When the Caliph made me captain, he clothed my
lads and I kept this suit[225] for thee.” Then they seated him in the
place of honour and setting on meat they ate well and drink they drank
hard and made merry till the morning, when Ahmad said to Ali, “Beware
thou walk not about the streets of Baghdad, but sit thee still in this
barrack.” Asked Ali, “Why so? Have I come hither to be shut up? No, I
came to look about me and divert myself.” Replied Ahmad, “O my son,
think not that Baghdad be like Cairo. Baghdad is the seat of the
Caliphate; sharpers abound therein and rogueries spring therefrom as
worts spring out of earth.” So Ali abode in the barrack three days when
Ahmad said to him, “I wish to present thee to the Caliph, that he may
assign thee an allowance.” But he replied, “When the time cometh.” So he
let him go his own way. One day, as Ali sat in the barrack, his breast
became straitened and his soul troubled and he said in himself, “Come,
let us up and thread the ways of Baghdad and broaden my bosom.” So he
went out and walked from street to street, till he came to the middle
bazar, where he entered a cook-shop and dined;[226] after which he went
out to wash his hands. Presently he saw forty slaves, with felt bonnets
and steel cutlasses, come walking, two by two; and last of all came
Dalilah the Wily, mounted on a she-mule, with a gilded helmet which bore
a ball of polished steel, and clad in a coat of mail, and such like. Now
she was returning from the Divan to the Khan of which she was portress;
and when she espied Ali, she looked at him fixedly and saw that he
resembled Calamity Ahmad in height and breadth. Moreover, he was clad in
a striped Abá-cloak and a burnous, with a steel cutlass by his side and
similar gear, while valour shone from his eyes, testifying in favour of
him and not in disfavour of him. So she returned to the Khan and going
in to her daughter, fetched a table of sand, and struck a geomantic
figure, whereby she discovered that the stranger’s name was Ali of Cairo
and that his fortune overcame her fortune and that of her daughter.
Asked Zaynab, “O my mother, what hath befallen thee that thou hast
recourse to the sand-table?” Answered Dalilah, “O my daughter, I have
seen this day a young man who resembleth Calamity Ahmad, and I fear lest
he come to hear how thou didst strip Ahmad and his men and enter the
Khan and play us a trick, in revenge for what we did with his chief and
the forty; for methinks he has taken up his lodging in al-Danaf’s
barrack.” Zaynab rejoined, “What is this? Methinks thou hast taken his
measure.” Then she donned her fine clothes and went out into the
streets. When the people saw her, they all made love to her and she
promised and sware and listened and coquetted and passed from market to
market, till she saw Ali the Cairene coming, when she went up to him and
rubbed her shoulder against him. Then she turned and said, “Allah give
long life to folk of discrimination!” Quoth he, “How goodly is thy form!
To whom dost thou belong?”; and quoth she, “To the gallant[227] like
thee;” and he said, “Art thou wife or spinster?” “Married,” said she.
Asked Ali, “Shall it be in my lodging or thine?”[228] and she answered,
“I am a merchant’s daughter and a merchant’s wife and in all my life I
have never been out of doors till to-day, and my only reason was that
when I made ready food and thought to eat, I had no mind thereto without
company. When I saw thee, love of thee entered my heart: so wilt thou
deign solace my soul and eat a mouthful with me?” Quoth he, “Whoso is
invited, let him accept.” Thereupon she went on and he followed her from
street to street, but presently he bethought himself and said, “What
wilt thou do and thou a stranger? Verily ’tis said:—Whoso doth whoredom
in his strangerhood, Allah will send him back disappointed. But I will
put her off from thee with fair words.” So he said to her, “Take this
dinar and appoint me a day other than this;” and she said, “By the
Mighty Name, it may not be but thou shalt go home with me as my guest
this very day and I will take thee to fast friend.” So he followed her
till she came to a house with a lofty porch and a wooden bolt on the
door and said to him, “Open this lock.”[229] Asked he “Where is the
key?”; and she answered, “’Tis lost.” Quoth he, “Whoso openeth a lock
without a key is a knave whom it behoveth the ruler to punish, and I
know not how to open doors without keys?[230]” With this she raised her
veil and showed him her face, whereat he took one glance of eyes that
cost him a thousand sighs. Then she let fall her veil on the lock and
repeating over it the names of the mother of Moses, opened it without a
key and entered. He followed her and saw swords and steel-weapons
hanging up; and she put off her veil and sat down with him. Quoth he to
himself, “Accomplish what Allah hath decreed to thee,” and bent over
her, to take a kiss of her cheek; but she caught the kiss upon her palm,
saying, “This beseemeth not but by night.” Then she brought a tray of
food and wine, and they ate and drank; after which she rose and drawing
water from the well, poured it from the ewer over his hands, whilst he
washed them. Now whilst they were on this wise, she cried out and beat
upon her breast, saying, “My husband had a signet-ring of ruby, which
was pledged to him for five hundred dinars, and I put it on; but ’twas
too large for me, so I straitened it with wax, and when I let down the
bucket,[231] that ring must have dropped into the well. So turn thy face
to the door, the while I doff my dress and go down into the well and
fetch it.” Quoth Ali, “’Twere shame on me that thou shouldst go down
there I being present; none shall do it save I.” So he put off his
clothes and tied the rope about himself and she let him down into the
well. Now there was much water therein and she said to him, “The rope is
too short; loose thyself and drop down.” So he did himself loose from
the rope and dropped into the water, in which he sank fathoms deep
without touching bottom; whilst she donned her mantilla and taking his
clothes, returned to her mother——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Twelfth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ali of Cairo
was in the well, Zaynab donned her mantilla and, taking his clothes,
returned to her mother and said, “I have stripped Ali the Egyptian and
cast him into the Emir Hasan’s well, whence alas for his chance of
escaping!”[232] Presently, the Emir Hasan, the master of the house, who
had been absent at the Divan, came home and, finding the door open, said
to his Syce, “Why didst thou not draw the bolt?” “O my lord,” replied
the groom, “indeed I locked it with my own hand.” The Emir cried, “As my
head liveth, some robber hath entered my house!” Then he went in and
searched, but found none and said to the groom, “Fill the ewer, that I
may make the Wuzu-ablution.” So the man lowered the bucket into the well
but, when he drew it up, he found it heavy and looking down, saw
something therein sitting; whereupon he let it fall into the water and
cried out, saying, “O my lord, an Ifrit came up to me out of the well!”
Replied the Emir, “Go and fetch four doctors of the law, that they may
read the Koran over him, till he go away.” So he fetched the doctors and
the Emir said to them, “Sit round this well and exorcise me this Ifrit.”
They did as he bade them; after which the groom and another servant
lowered the bucket again and Ali clung to it and hid himself under it
patiently till he came near the top, when he sprang out and landed among
the doctors, who fell a-cuffing one another and crying out, “Ifrit!
Ifrit!” The Emir looked at Ali and seeing him a young man, said to him,
“Art thou a thief?” “No,” replied Ali; “Then what dost thou in the
well?” asked the Emir; and Ali answered, “I was asleep and dreamt a wet
dream;[233] so I went down to the Tigris to wash myself and dived,
whereupon the current carried me under the earth and I came up in this
well.” Quoth the other, “Tell the truth.”[234] So Ali told him all that
had befallen him, and the Emir gave him an old gown and let him go. He
returned to Calamity Ahmad’s lodging and related to him all that had
passed. Quoth Ahmad, “Did I not warn thee that Baghdad is full of women
who play tricks upon men?” And quoth Ali Kitf al-Jamal, “I conjure thee
by the Mighty Name, tell me how it is that thou art the chief of the
lads of Cairo and yet hast been stripped by a girl?” This was grievous
to Ali and he repented him of not having followed Ahmad’s advice. Then
the Calamity gave him another suit of clothes and Hasan Shuman said to
him, “Dost thou know the young person?” “No,” replied Ali; and Hasan
rejoined, “’Twas Zaynab, the daughter of Dalilah the Wily, the portress
of the Caliph’s Khan; and hast thou fallen into her toils, O Ali?” Quoth
he, “Yes,” and quoth Hasan, “O Ali, ’twas she who took thy Chief’s
clothes and those of all his men.” “This is a disgrace to you all!” “And
what thinkest thou to do?” “I purpose to marry her.” “Put away that
thought far from thee, and console thy heart of her.” “O Hasan, do thou
counsel me how I shall do to marry her.” “With all my heart: if thou
wilt drink from my hand and march under my banner, I will bring thee to
thy will of her.” “I will well.” So Hasan made Ali put off his clothes;
and, taking a cauldron heated therein somewhat as it were pitch,
wherewith he anointed him and he became like unto a blackamoor slave.
Moreover, he smeared his lips and cheeks and pencilled his eyes with red
Kohl.[235] Then he clad him in a slave’s habit and giving him a tray of
kabobs and wine, said to him, “There is a black cook in the Khan who
requires from the bazar only meat; and thou art now become his like; so
go thou to him civilly and accost him in friendly fashion and speak to
him in the blacks’ lingo, and salute him, saying, ’Tis long since we met
in the beer-ken. He will answer thee, I have been too busy: on my hands
be forty slaves, for whom I cook dinner and supper, besides making ready
a tray for Dalilah and the like for her daughter Zaynab and the dogs’
food. And do thou say to him, Come, let us eat kabobs and lush
swipes.[236] Then go with him into the saloon and make him drunken and
question him of his service, how many dishes and what dishes he hath to
cook, and ask him of the dogs’ food and the keys of the kitchen and the
larder; and he will tell thee; for a man, when he is drunken, telleth
all he would conceal were he sober. When thou hast done this drug him
and don his clothes and sticking the two knives in thy girdle, take the
vegetable-basket and go to the market and buy meat and greens, with
which do thou return to the Khan and enter the kitchen and the larder
and cook the food. Dish it up and put Bhang in it, so as to drug the
dogs and the slaves and Dalilah and Zaynab and lastly serve up. When all
are asleep, hie thee to the upper chamber and bring away every suit of
clothes thou wilt find hanging there. And if thou have a mind to marry
Zaynab, bring with thee also the forty carrier-pigeons.” So Ali went to
the Khan and going in to the cook, saluted him and said, “’Tis long
since I have met thee in the beer-ken.” The slave replied, “I have been
busy cooking for the slaves and the dogs.” Then he took him and making
him drunken, questioned him of his work. Quoth the kitchener, “Every day
I cook five dishes for dinner and the like for supper; and yesterday
they sought of me a sixth dish,[237] yellow rice,[238] and a seventh, a
mess of cooked pomegranate seed.” Ali asked, “And what is the order of
thy service?” and the slave answered, “First I serve up Zaynab’s tray,
next Dalilah’s; then I feed the slaves and give the dogs their
sufficiency of meat, and the least that satisfies them is a pound each.”
But, as fate would have it, he forgot to ask him of the keys. Then he
drugged him and donned his clothes; after which he took the basket and
went to the market. There he bought meat and greens.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Thirteenth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ali of Cairo,
after drugging the cook-slave with Bhang, took the two knives which he
stuck in his belt and, carrying the vegetable-basket, went to the market
where he bought meat and greens; and, presently returning to the Khan,
he saw Dalilah seated at the gate, watching those who went in and came
out, and the forty slaves with her, armed. So he heartened his heart and
entered; but Dalilah knew him and said to him, “Back, O captain of
thieves! Wilt thou play a trick on me in the Khan?” Thereupon he
(dressed as a slave) turned and said to her, “What sayest thou, O
portress?” She asked, “What hast thou done with the slave, our cook?;
say me if thou hast killed or drugged him?” He answered, “What cook? Is
there here another slave-cook than I?” She rejoined, “Thou liest, thou
art Mercury Ali the Cairene.” And he said to her, in slaves’ patois, “O
portress, are the Cairenes black or white? I will slave for you no
longer.” Then said the slaves to him, “What is the matter with thee, O
our cousin?” Cried Dalilah, “This is none of your uncle’s children, but
Ali Zaybak the Egyptian; and meseems he hath either drugged your cousin
or killed him.” But they said, “Indeed this is our cousin Sa’adu’llah
the cook;” and she, “Not so, ’tis Mercury Ali, and he hath dyed his
skin.” Quoth the sharper, “And who is Ali? I am Sa’adu’llah.” Then she
fetched unguent of proof, with which she anointed Ali’s forearm and
rubbed it; but the black did not come off; whereupon quoth the slaves,
“Let him go and dress us our dinner.” Quoth Dalilah, “If he be indeed
your cousin, he knoweth what you sought of him yesternight[239] and how
many dishes he cooketh every day.” So they asked him of this and he
said, “Every day I cook you five dishes for the morning and the like for
the evening meal, lentils and rice and broth and stew[240] and sherbet
of roses; and yesternight ye sought of me a sixth dish and a seventh, to
wit yellow rice and cooked pomegranate seed.” And the slaves said
“Right!” Then quoth Dalilah, “In with him and if he know the kitchen and
the larder, he is indeed your cousin; but, if not, kill him.” Now the
cook had a cat which he had brought up, and whenever he entered the
kitchen it would stand at the door and spring to his back, as soon as he
went in. So, when Ali entered, the cat saw him and jumped on his
shoulders; but he threw it off and it ran before him to the door of the
kitchen and stopped there. He guessed that this was the kitchen door; so
he took the keys and seeing one with traces of feathers thereon, knew it
for the kitchen key and therewith opened the door. Then he entered and
setting down the greens, went out again, led by the cat, which ran
before him and stopped at another door. He guessed that this was the
larder and seeing one of the keys marked with grease, knew it for the
key and opened the door therewith; whereupon quoth the slaves, “O
Dalilah, were he a stranger, he had not known the kitchen and the
larder, nor had he been able to distinguish the keys thereof from the
rest; verily, he is our cousin Sa’adu’llah.” Quoth she, “He learned the
places from the cat and distinguished the keys one from the other by the
appearance: but this cleverness imposeth not upon _me_.” Then he
returned to the kitchen where he cooked the dinner and, carrying
Zaynab’s tray up to her room, saw all the stolen clothes hanging up;
after which he went down and took Dalilah her tray and gave the slaves
and the dogs their rations. The like he did at sundown and drugged
Dalilah’s food and that of Zaynab and the slaves. Now the doors of the
Khan were opened and shut with the sun. So Ali went forth and cried out,
saying, “O dwellers in the Khan, the watch is set and we have loosed the
dogs; whoso stirreth out after this can blame none save himself.” But he
had delayed the dogs’ supper and put poison therein; consequently when
he set it before them, they ate of it and died while the slaves and
Dalilah and Zaynab still slept under Bhang. Then he went up and took all
the clothes and the carrier-pigeons and, opening the gate, made off to
the barrack of the Forty, where he found Hasan Shuman the Pestilence who
said to him, “How hast thou fared?” Thereupon he told him what had
passed and he praised him. Then he caused him put off his clothes and
boiled a decoction of herbs wherewith he washed him, and his skin became
white as it was; after which he donned his own dress and going back to
the Khan, clad the cook in the habit he had taken from him and made him
smell to the counter-drug; upon which the slave awoke and going forth to
the greengrocer’s, bought vegetables and returned to the Khan. Such was
the case with Al-Zaybak of Cairo; but as regards Dalilah the Wily, when
the day broke, one of the lodgers in the Khan came out of his chamber
and, seeing the gate open and the slaves drugged and the dogs dead, he
went in to her and found her lying drugged, with a scroll on her neck
and at her head a sponge steeped in the counter-drug. He set the sponge
to her nostrils and she awoke and asked, “Where am I?” The merchant
answered, “When I came down from my chamber I saw the gate of the Khan
open and the dogs dead and found the slaves and thee drugged.” So she
took up the paper and read therein these words, “None did this deed save
Ali the Egyptian.” Then she awoke the slaves and Zaynab by making them
smell the counter-Bhang and said to them, “Did I not tell you that this
was Ali of Cairo?”; presently adding to the slaves, “But do ye conceal
the matter.” Then she said to her daughter, “How often have I warned
thee that Ali would not forego his revenge? He hath done this deed in
requital of that which thou diddest with him and he had it in his power
to do with thee other than this thing; but he refrained therefrom out of
courtesy and a desire that there should be love and friendship between
us.” So saying, she doffed her man’s gear and donned woman’s attire[241]
and, tying the kerchief of peace about her neck, repaired to Ahmad
al-Danaf’s barrack. Now when Ali entered with the clothes and the
carrier-pigeons, Hasan Shuman gave the hall-keeper the price of forty
pigeons and he bought them and cooked them amongst the men. Presently
there came a knock at the door and Ahmad said, “That is Dalilah’s knock:
rise and open to her, O hall-keeper.” So he admitted her and——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Fourteenth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Dalilah
was admitted, Hasan asked her, “What bringeth thee hither, O ill-omened
old woman? Verily, thou and thy brother Zurayk the fishmonger are of a
piece!”; and she answered, “O captain I am in the wrong and this my neck
is at thy mercy; but tell me which of you it was that played me this
trick?” Quoth Calamity Ahmad, “’Twas the first of my lads.” Rejoined
Dalilah, “For the sake of Allah intercede with him to give me back the
carrier-pigeons and what not, and thou wilt lay me under great
obligation.” When Hasan heard this he said, “Allah requite thee, O Ali!
Why didst thou cook the pigeons?”; and Ali answered, “I knew not that
they were carrier-pigeons.” Then said Ahmad, “O hall-keeper bring us the
cooked pigeons.” So he brought them and Dalilah took a piece and tasting
it, said, “This is none of the carrier-pigeons’ flesh, for I fed them on
grains of musk and their meat is become even as musk.” Quoth Shuman, “An
thou desire to have the carrier-pigeons, comply with Ali’s will.” Asked
she “What is that?” And Hasan answered, “He would have thee marry him to
thy daughter Zaynab.” She said, “I have not command over her except of
affection”; and Hasan said to Ali the Cairene “Give her the pigeons.” So
he gave them to her, and she took them and rejoiced in them. Then quoth
Hasan to her, “There is no help but thou return us a sufficient reply”;
and Dalilah rejoined, “If it be indeed his wish to marry her, it availed
nothing to play this clever trick upon us: it behoveth him rather to
demand her in marriage of her mother’s brother and her guardian, Captain
Zurayk, him who crieth out, saying:—Ho! a pound of fish for two
farthings! and who hangeth up in his shop a purse containing two
thousand dinars.” When the Forty heard this, they all rose and cried
out, saying, “What manner of blather is this, O harlot? Dost thou wish
to bereave us of our brother Ali of Cairo?” Then she returned to the
Khan and said to her daughter, “Ali the Egyptian seeketh thee in
marriage.” Whereat Zaynab rejoiced, for she loved him because of his
chaste forbearance towards her,[242] and asked her mother what had
passed. So she told her, adding, “I made it a condition that he should
demand thy hand of thine uncle, so I might make him fall into
destruction.” Meanwhile Ali turned to his fellows and asked them, “What
manner of man is this Zurayk?”; and they answered, “He was chief of the
sharpers of Al-Irak land and could all but pierce mountains and lay hold
upon the stars. He would steal the Kohl from the eye and, in brief, he
had not his match for roguery; but he hath repented his sins and
forsworn his old way of life and opened him a fishmonger’s shop. And now
he hath amassed two thousand dinars by the sale of fish and laid them in
a purse with strings of silk, to which he hath tied bells and rings and
rattles of brass, hung on a peg within the doorway. Every time he
openeth his shop he suspendeth the said purse and crieth out,
saying:—Where are ye, O sharpers of Egypt, O prigs of Al-Irak, O
tricksters of Ajam-land? Behold, Zurayk the fishmonger hath hung up a
purse in front of his shop, and whoso pretendeth to craft and cunning,
and can take it by sleight, it is his. So the long fingered and
greedy-minded come and try to take the purse, but cannot; for, whilst he
frieth his fish and tendeth the fire, he layeth at his feet scone-like
circles of lead; and whenever a thief thinketh to take him unawares and
maketh a snatch at the purse he casteth at him a load of lead and
slayeth him or doeth him a damage. So O Ali, wert thou to tackle him,
thou wouldst be as one who jostleth a funeral cortège, unknowing who is
dead;[243] for thou art no match for him, and we fear his mischief for
thee. Indeed, thou hast no call to marry Zaynab, and he who leaveth a
thing alone liveth without it.” Cried Ali, “This were shame, O comrades;
needs must I take the purse: but bring me a young lady’s habit.” So they
brought him women’s clothes and he clad himself therein and stained his
hands with Henna, and modestly hung down his veil. Then he took a lamb
and killing it, cut out the long intestine[244] which he cleaned and
tied up below; moreover he filled it with the blood and bound it between
his thighs; after which he donned petticoat-trousers and walking boots.
He also made himself a pair of false breasts with birds’ crops and
filled them with thickened milk and tied round his hips and over his
belly a piece of linen, which he stuffed with cotton, girding himself
over all with a kerchief of silk well starched. Then he went out, whilst
all who saw him exclaimed, “What a fine pair of hind cheeks!” Presently
he saw an ass-driver coming, so he gave him a dinar and mounting, rode
till he came to Zurayk’s shop, where he saw the purse hung up and the
gold glittering through it. Now Zurayk was frying fish, and Ali said, “O
ass-man, what is that smell?” Replied he, “It’s the smell of Zurayk’s
fish.” Quoth Ali, “I am a woman with child and the smell harmeth me; go,
fetch me a slice of the fish.” So the donkey-boy said to Zurayk, “What
aileth thee to fry fish so early and annoy pregnant women with the
smell? I have here the wife of the Emir Hasan Sharr al-Tarik, and she is
with child; so give her a bit of fish, for the babe stirreth in her
womb. O Protector, O my God, avert from us the mischief of this day!”
Thereupon Zurayk took a piece of fish and would have fried it, but the
fire had gone out and he went in to rekindle it. Meanwhile Ali
dismounted and sitting down, pressed upon the lamb’s intestine till it
burst and the blood ran out from between his legs. Then he cried aloud,
saying, “O my back! O my side!” Whereupon the driver turned and seeing
the blood running, said, “What aileth thee, O my lady?” Replied Ali, “I
have miscarried”; whereupon Zurayk looked out and seeing the blood fled
affrighted into the inner shop. Quoth the donkey-driver, “Allah torment
thee, O Zurayk! The lady hath miscarried and thou art no match for her
husband. Why must thou make a stench so early in the morning? I said to
thee:—Bring her a slice, but thou wouldst not.” Thereupon, he took his
ass and went his way and, as Zurayk still did not appear, Ali put out
his hand to the purse; but no sooner had he touched it than the bells
and rattles and rings began to jingle and the gold to chink. Quoth
Zurayk, who returned at the sound, “Thy perfidy hath come to light, O
gallows-bird! Wilt thou put a cheat on me and thou in a woman’s habit?
Now take what cometh to thee!” And he threw a cake of lead at him, but
it went agley and lighted on another; whereupon the people rose against
Zurayk and said to him, “Art thou a tradesman, or a swashbuckler? An
thou be a tradesman, take down thy purse and spare the folk thy
mischief.” He replied, “Bismillah, in the name of Allah! On my head be
it.” As for Ali, he made off to the barrack and told Hasan Shuman what
had happened, after which he put off his woman’s gear and donning a
groom’s habit which was brought to him by his chief took a dish and five
dirhams. Then he returned to Zurayk’s shop and the fishmonger said to
him, “What dost thou want, O my master?”[245] He showed him the dirhams
and Zurayk would have given him of the fish in the tray, but he said, “I
will have none save hot fish.” So he set fish in the earthen pan and
finding the fire dead, went in to relight it; whereupon Ali put out his
hand to the purse and caught hold of the end of it. The rattles and
rings and bells jingled and Zurayk said, “Thy trick hath not deceived
me. I knew thee for all thou art disguised as a groom by the grip of thy
hand on the dish and the dirhams.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Fifteenth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ali of
Egypt put out his hand to the purse, the bells and rings jingled and
Zurayk said, “Thy trick hath not deceived me; for all thou comest
disguised as a groom I knew thee by the grip of thy hand on the dish and
the dirhams!” So saying, he threw the lead at him, but he avoided it and
it fell into the pan full of hot fish and broke it and overturned it,
fat and all, upon the breast and shoulders of the Kazi, who was passing.
The oil ran down inside his clothes to his privy parts and he cried out,
“O my privities! What a sad pickle you are in! Alas, unhappy I! Who hath
played me this trick?” Answered the people, “O our lord, it was some
small boy that threw a stone into the pan: but for Allah’s ward, it had
been worse.” Then they turned and seeing the loaf of lead and that it
was Zurayk who had thrown it, rose against him and said to him, “O
Zurayk, this is not allowed of Allah! Take down the purse or it shall go
ill for thee.” Answered he, “I will take it down, Inshallah!” Meanwhile
Ali returned to the barrack and told his comrades who cried, “Where is
the purse?”, all that had passed and they said, “Thou hast exhausted
two-thirds of his cunning.” Then he changed his groom’s dress for the
garb of a merchant and going out, met a snake-charmer, with a bag of
serpents and a wallet containing his kit to whom said he, “O charmer,
come and amuse my lads, and thou shalt have largesse.” So he accompanied
him to the barrack, where he fed him and drugging him with Bhang, doffed
his clothes and put them on. Then he took the bags and repairing to
Zurayk’s shop began to play the reed-pipe. Quoth Zurayk, “Allah provide
thee!” But Ali pulled out the serpents and cast them down before him;
whereat the fish-seller, who was afraid of snakes, fled from them into
the inner shop. Thereupon Ali picked up the reptiles and, thrusting them
back into the bag, stretched out his hand and caught hold of the end of
the purse. The rings again rang and the bells and rattles jangled, and
Zurayk cried, “Wilt thou never cease to play me tricks? Now thou
feignest thyself a serpent-charmer!” So saying, he took up a piece of
lead, and hurled it at Ali; but it missed him and fell on the head of a
groom, who was passing by, following his master, a trooper, and knocked
him down. Quoth the soldier, “Who felled him?”; and the folk said,
“’Twas a stone fell from the roof.” So the soldier passed on and the
people, seeing the piece of lead, went up to Zurayk and cried to him,
“Take down the purse!”; and he said, “Inshallah, I will take it down
this very night!” Ali ceased not to practice upon Zurayk till he had
made seven different attempts but without taking the purse. Then he
returned the snake-charmer his clothes and kit and gave him due
benevolence; after which he went back to Zurayk’s shop and heard him
say, “If I leave the purse here to-night, he will dig through the
shop-wall and take it; I will carry it home with me.” So he arose and
shut the shop; then he took down the purse and putting it in his bosom
set out home, till he came near his house, when he saw a wedding in a
neighbour’s lodging and said to himself, “I will hie me home and give my
wife the purse and don my fine clothes and return to the marriage.” And
Ali followed him. Now Zurayk had married a black girl, one of the freed
women of the Wazir Ja’afar and she had borne him a son, whom he named
Abdallah, and he had promised her to spend the money in the purse on the
occasion of the boy’s circumcision and of his marriage-procession. So he
went into his house and, as he entered, his wife saw that his face was
overcast and asked him, “What hath caused thy sadness?” Quoth he, “Allah
hath afflicted me this day with a rascal who made seven attempts to get
the purse, but without avail;” and quoth she, “Give it to me, that I may
lay it up against the boy’s festival-day.” (Now Ali, who had followed
him lay hidden in a closet whence he could see and hear all.) So he gave
her the purse and changed his clothes, saying, “Keep the purse safely, O
Umm Abdallah, for I am going to the wedding.” But she said, “Take thy
sleep awhile.” So he lay down and fell asleep. Presently, Ali rose and
going on tiptoe to the purse, took it and went to the house of the
wedding and stood there, looking on at the fun. Now meanwhile, Zurayk
dreamt that he saw a bird fly away with the purse and awaking in
affright, said to his wife, “Rise; look for the purse.” So she looked
and finding it gone, buffeted her face and said, “Alas the blackness of
thy fortune, O Umm Abdallah! A sharper hath taken the purse.” Quoth
Zurayk, “By Allah it can be none other than rascal Ali who hath plagued
me all day! He hath followed me home and seized the purse; and there is
no help but that I go and get it back.” Quoth she, “Except thou bring
it, I will lock on thee the door and leave thee to pass the night in the
street.” So he went up to the house of the wedding, and seeing Ali
looking on, said to himself, “This is he who took the purse; but he
lodgeth with Ahmad al-Danaf.” So he forewent him to the barrack and,
climbing up at the back, dropped down into the saloon, where he found
every one asleep. Presently there came a rap at the door and Zurayk
asked, “Who is there?” “Ali of Cairo,” answered the knocker; and Zurayk
said, “Hast thou brought the purse?” So Ali thought it was Hasan Shuman
and replied, “I have brought it;[246] open the door.” Quoth Zurayk,
“Impossible that I open to thee till I see the purse; for thy chief and
I have laid a wager about it.” Said Ali, “Put out thy hand.” So he put
out his hand through the hole in the side-door and Ali laid the purse in
it; whereupon Zurayk took it and going forth, as he had come in,
returned to the wedding. Ali stood for a long while at the door, but
none opened to him; and at last he gave a thundering knock that awoke
all the men and they said, “That is Ali of Cairo’s peculiar rap.” So the
hall-keeper opened to him and Hasan Shuman said to him, “Hast thou
brought the purse?” Replied Ali, “Enough of jesting, O Shuman: didst
thou not swear that thou wouldest not open to me till I showed thee the
purse, and did I not give it thee through the hole in the side door? And
didst thou not say to me, I am sworn never to open the door till thou
show me the purse?” Quoth Hasan, “By Allah, ’twas not I who took it, but
Zurayk!” Quoth Ali, “Needs must I get it again,” and repaired to the
house of the wedding, where he heard the buffoon[247] say, “Bravo,[248]
O Abu Abdallah! Good luck to thee with thy son!” Said Ali, “My luck is
in the ascendant,” and going to the fishmonger’s lodging, climbed over
the back wall of the house and found his wife asleep. So he drugged her
with Bhang and clad himself in her clothes. Then he took the child in
his arms and went round, searching, till he found a palm-leaf basket
containing buns,[249] which Zurayk of his niggardliness, had kept from
the Greater Feast. Presently, the fishmonger returned and knocked at the
door, whereupon Ali imitated his wife’s voice and asked, “Who is at the
door?” “Abu Abdallah,” answered Zurayk and Ali said, “I swore that I
would not open the door to thee, except thou broughtest back the purse.”
Quoth the fishmonger, “I have brought it.” Cried Ali, “Here with it into
my hand before I open the door;” and Zurayk answered, saying, “Let down
the basket and take it therein.” So Sharper Ali let down the basket and
the other put the purse therein, whereupon Ali took it and drugged the
child. Then he aroused the woman and making off by the back way as he
had entered, returned with the child and the purse and the basket of
cakes to the barrack and showed them all to the Forty, who praised his
dexterity. Thereupon he gave them cakes, which they ate, and made over
the boy to Hasan Shuman, saying, “This is Zurayk’s child; hide it by
thee.” So he hid it and fetching a lamb, gave it to the hall-keeper who
cooked it whole, wrapped in a cloth, and laid it out shrouded as it were
a dead body. Meanwhile Zurayk stood awhile, waiting at the door, then
gave a knock like thunder and his wife said to him, “Hast thou brought
the purse?” He replied, “Didst thou not take it up in the basket thou
diddest let down but now?”; and she rejoined, “I let no basket down to
thee, nor have I set eyes on the purse.” Quoth he, “By Allah the sharper
hath been beforehand with me and hath taken the purse again!” Then he
searched the house and found the basket of cakes gone and the child
missing and cried out, saying, “Alas, my child!” Whereupon the woman
beat her breast and said, “I and thee to the Wazir, for none hath killed
my son save this sharper, and all because of thee.” Cried Zurayk, “I
will answer for him.” So he tied the kerchief of truce about his neck
and going to Ahmad al-Danaf’s lodging, knocked at the door. The
hall-keeper admitted him and as he entered Hasan Shuman asked him, “What
bringeth thee here?” He answered, “Do ye intercede with Ali the Cairene
to restore me my child and I will yield to him the purse of gold.” Quoth
Hasan, “Allah requite thee, O Ali! Why didst thou not tell me it was his
child?” “What hath befallen him?” cried Zurayk, and Hasan replied, “We
gave him raisins to eat, and he choked and died; and this is he.” Quoth
Zurayk “Alas, my son! What shall I say to his mother?” Then he rose and
opening the shroud, saw it was a lamb barbecued and said, “Thou makest
sport of me, O Ali!” Then they gave him the child and Calamity Ahmad
said to him, “Thou didst hang up the purse, proclaiming that it should
be the property of any sharper who should be able to take it, and Ali
hath taken it; so ’tis the very property of our Cairene.” Zurayk
answered, “I make him a present of it;” but Ali said to him, “Do thou
accept it on account of thy niece Zaynab.” And Zurayk replied, “I accept
it.” Then quoth the Forty, “We demand of thee Zaynab in marriage for Ali
of Cairo;” but quoth he, “I have no control over her save of kindness.”
Hasan asked, “Dost thou grant our suit?”; and he answered, “Yes, I will
grant her in marriage to him who can avail to her mahr or
marriage-settlement.” “And what is her dowry?” enquired Hasan; and
Zurayk replied, “She hath sworn that none shall mount her breast save
the man who bringeth her the robe of Kamar, daughter of Azariah the Jew
and the rest of her gear.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Sixteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Zurayk
replied to Shuman, “She hath sworn that none shall ride astraddle upon
her breast save the man who bringeth her the clothes of Kamar, daughter
of Azariah the Jew and her crown and girdle and pantoufle[250] of gold,”
Ali cried, “If I do not bring her the clothes this very night, I
renounce my claim to her.” Rejoined Zurayk, “O Ali, thou art a dead man
if thou play any of thy pranks on Kamar.” “Why so?” asked Ali and the
other answered, “Her father, Jew Azariah, is a skilful, wily, perfidious
magician who hath the Jinn at his service. He owneth without the city a
castle, whose walls are one brick of gold and one of silver and which is
visible to the folk only whilst he is therein: when he goeth forth, it
disappeareth. He brought his daughter this dress I speak of from an
enchanted treasure, and every day he layeth it in a charger of gold and,
opening the windows of the palace, crieth out:—Where are the sharpers of
Cairo, the prigs of Al-Irak, the master-thieves of Ajam-land? Whoso
prevaileth to take this dress, ’tis his. So all the long fingered ones
essayed the adventure, but failed to take it, and he turned them by his
magic into apes and asses.” But Ali said, “I will assuredly take it, and
Zaynab shall be displayed therein.”[251] So he went to the shop of the
Jew and found him a man of stern and forbidding aspect, seated with
scales and stone-weights and gold and silver and nests of drawers and so
forth before him, and a she-mule tethered hard by. Presently he rose and
shutting his shop, laid the gold and silver in two purses, which he
placed in a pair of saddle-bags and set on the she-mule’s back. Then he
mounted and rode till he reached the city-outskirts followed, without
his knowledge, by Ali, when he took out some dust from a pocket-purse
and, muttering over it, sprinkled it upon the air. No sooner had he done
this than sharper Ali saw a castle which had not its like, and the Jew
mounted the steps upon his beast which was a subject Jinni; after which
he dismounted and taking the saddle-bags off her back, dismissed the
she-mule and she vanished. Then he entered the castle and sat down.
Presently, he arose and opening the lattices, took a wand of gold, which
he set up in the open window and, hanging thereto a golden charger by
chains of the same metal, laid in it the dress, whilst Ali watched him
from behind the door, and presently he cried out, saying, “Where are the
sharpers of Cairo? Where are the prigs of Al-Irak, the master-thieves of
the Ajam-land? Whoso can take this dress by his sleight, ’tis his!” Then
he pronounced certain magical words and a tray of food spread itself
before him. He ate and conjured a second time, whereupon the tray
disappeared; and yet a third time, when a table of wine was placed
between his hands and he drank. Quoth Ali, “I know not how I am to take
the dress except if he be drunken.” Then he stole up behind the Jew
whinger in grip; but the other turned and conjured, saying to his hand,
“Hold with the sword;” whereupon Ali’s right arm was held and abode
half-way in the air hending the hanger. He put out his left hand to the
weapon, but it also stood fixed in the air, and so with his right foot,
leaving him standing on one foot. Then the Jew dispelled the charm from
him and Ali became as before. Presently Azariah struck a table of sand
and found that the thief’s name was Mercury Ali of Cairo; so he turned
to him and said, “Come nearer! Who art thou and what dost thou here?” He
replied, “I am Ali of Cairo, of the band of Ahmad al-Danaf. I sought the
hand of Zaynab, daughter of Dalilah the Wily, and she demanded thy
daughter’s dress to her dowry; so do thou give it to me and become a
Moslem, an thou wouldst save thy life.” Rejoined the Jew, “After thy
death! Many have gone about to steal the dress, but failed to take it
from me; wherefore an thou deign be advised, thou wilt begone and save
thyself; for they only seek the dress of thee, that thou mayst fall into
destruction; and indeed, had I not seen by geomancy that thy fortune
overrideth my fortunes I had smitten thy neck.” Ali rejoiced to hear
that his luck overcame that of the Jew and said to him, “There is no
help for it but I must have the dress and thou must become a True
Believer.” Asked the Jew, “Is this thy will and last word,” and Ali
answered, “Yes.” So the Jew took a cup and filling it with water,
conjured over it and said to Ali, “Come forth from this shape of a man
into the form of an ass.” Then he sprinkled him with the water and
straightway he became a donkey, with hoofs and long ears, and fell to
braying after the manner of asinines. The Jew drew round him a circle
which became a wall over against him, and drank on till the morning,
when he said to Ali, “I will ride thee to-day and give the she-mule a
rest.” So he locked up the dress, the charger, the rod and the charms in
a cupboard[252] and conjured over Ali, who followed him. Then he set the
saddle-bags on his back and mounting, fared forth of the Castle,
whereupon it disappeared from sight and he rode into Baghdad, till he
came to his shop, where he alighted and emptied the bags of gold and
silver into the trays before him. As for Ali, he was tied up by the
shop-door, where he stood in his asinine form hearing and understanding
all that passed, without being able to speak. And behold, up came a
young merchant with whom fortune had played the tyrant and who could
find no easier way of earning his livelihood than water-carrying. So he
brought his wife’s bracelets to the Jew and said to him, “Give me the
price of these bracelets, that I may buy me an ass.” Asked the Jew,
“What wilt thou do with him?”; and the other answered, “O master, I mean
to fetch water from the river on his back, and earn my living thereby.”
Quoth the Jew, “Take this ass of mine.” So he sold him the bracelets and
received the ass-shaped Ali of Cairo in part payment and carried him
home. Quoth Ali to himself, “If the Ass-man clap the pannel on thee and
load thee with water-skins and go with thee half a score journeys a day
he will ruin thy health and thou wilt die.” So, when the water-carrier’s
wife came to bring him his fodder, he butted her with his head and she
fell on her back; whereupon he sprang on her and smiting her brow with
his mouth, put out and displayed that which his begetter left him. She
cried aloud and the neighbours came to her assistance and beat him and
raised him off her breast. When her husband the intended water-carrier
came home, she said to him, “Now either divorce me or return the ass to
his owner.” He asked, “What hath happened?”; and she answered, “This is
a devil in the guise of a donkey. He sprang upon me, and had not the
neighbours beaten him off my bosom he had done with me a foul thing.” So
he carried the ass back to the Jew, who said to him, “Wherefore hast
thou brought him back?” and he replied, “He did a foul thing with my
wife.” So the Jew gave him his money again and he went away; and Azariah
said to Ali, “Hast thou recourse to knavery, unlucky wretch that thou
art, in order that”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Seventeenth Night,

[Illustration]

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
water-carrier brought back the ass, its Jew owner returned to him the
monies and turning to Ali of Cairo said, “Hast thou recourse to knavery,
unlucky wretch that thou art, in order that he may return thee to me?
But since it pleaseth thee to be an ass, I will make thee a spectacle
and a laughing stock to great and small.” Then he mounted him and rode
till he came without the city, when he brought out the ashes in powder
and conjuring over it sprinkled it upon the air and immediately the
Castle appeared. He entered and taking the saddle-bags off the ass’s
back set up the rod and hung to it the charger wherein were the clothes
proclaiming aloud, “Where be the clever ones of all quarters who may
avail to take this dress?” Then he conjured as before and meat was set
before him and he ate and then wine when he drank; after which he took a
cup of water and muttering certain words thereover, sprinkled it on the
ass Ali, saying, “Quit this form and return to thy former shape.” Ali
straightway became a man once more and Azariah said to him, “O Ali, take
good advice and be content with my mischief. Thou hast no call to marry
Zaynab nor to take my daughter’s dress, for ’tis no easy matter for
thee: so leave greed and ’twill be better for thee; else will I turn
thee into a bear or an ape or set on thee an Ifrit, who will cast thee
behind the Mountain Kaf.” He replied, “I have engaged to take the dress
and needs must I have it and thou must Islamize or I will slay thee.”
Rejoined the Jew, “O Ali, thou art like a walnut; unless it be broken it
cannot be eaten.” Then he took a cup of water and conjuring over it,
sprinkled Ali with somewhat thereof, saying, “Take thou shape of bear;”
whereupon he instantly became a bear and the Jew put a collar about his
neck, muzzled him and chained him to a picket of iron. Then he sat down
and ate and drank, now and then throwing him a morsel of his orts and
emptying the dregs of the cup over him, till the morning, when he rose
and laid by the tray and the dress and conjured over the bear, which
followed him to the shop. There the Jew sat down and emptied the gold
and silver into the trays before Ali, after binding him by the chain;
and the bear there abode seeing and comprehending but not able to speak.
Presently up came a man and a merchant, who accosted the Jew and said to
him, “O Master, wilt thou sell me yonder bear? I have a wife who is my
cousin and is sick; and they have prescribed for her to eat bears’ flesh
and anoint herself with bears’ grease.” At this the Jew rejoiced and
said to himself, “I will sell him to this merchant, so he may slaughter
him and we be at peace from him.” And Ali also said in his mind, “By
Allah, this fellow meaneth to slaughter me; but deliverance is with the
Almighty.” Then said the Jew, “He is a present from me to thee.” So the
merchant took him and carried him to the butcher, to whom he said,
“Bring thy tools and company me.” The butcher took his knives and
followed the merchant to his house, where he bound the beast and fell to
sharpening his blade: but, when he went up to him to slaughter him, the
bear escaped from his hands and rising into the air, disappeared from
sight between heaven and earth; nor did he cease flying till he alighted
at the Jew’s castle. Now the reason thereof was on this wise. When the
Jew returned home, his daughter questioned him of Ali and he told her
what had happened; whereupon she said, “Summon a Jinni and ask him of
the youth, whether he be indeed Mercury Ali or another who seeketh to
put a cheat on thee.” So Azariah called a Jinni by conjurations and
questioned him of Ali; and he replied, “’Tis Ali of Cairo himself. The
butcher hath pinioned him and whetted his knife to slaughter him.” Quoth
the Jew, “Go, snatch him up and bring him hither, ere the butcher cut
his throat.” So the Jinni flew off and, snatching Ali out of the
butcher’s hands, bore him to the palace and set him down before the Jew,
who took a cup of water and conjuring over it, sprinkled him therewith,
saying, “Return to thine own shape.” And he straightway became a man
again as before. The Jew’s daughter Kamar,[253] seeing him to be a
handsome young man, fell in love with him and he fell in love with her;
and she said to him, “O unlucky one, why dost thou go about to take my
dress, enforcing my father to deal thus with thee?” Quoth he, “I have
engaged to get it for Zaynab the Coney-catcher, that I may wed her
therewith.” And she said, “Others than thou have played pranks with my
father to get my dress, but could not win to it,” presently adding, “So
put away this thought from thee.” But he answered, “Needs must I have
it, and thy father must become a Moslem, else I will slay him.” Then
said the Jew, “See, O my daughter, how this unlucky fellow seeketh his
own destruction,” adding, “Now I will turn thee into a dog.” So he took
a cup graven with characters and full of water and conjuring over it,
sprinkled some of it upon Ali, saying, “Take thou form of dog.”
Whereupon he straightway became a dog, and the Jew and his daughter
drank together till the morning, when the father laid up the dress and
charger and mounted his mule. Then he conjured over the dog, which
followed him, as he rode towards the town, and all dogs barked at
Ali[254] as he passed, till he came to the shop of a broker, a seller of
second-hand goods, who rose and drove away the dogs, and Ali lay down
before him. The Jew turned and looked for him, but finding him not,
passed onwards. Presently, the broker shut up his shop and went home,
followed by the dog, which, when his daughter saw enter the house, she
veiled her face and said, “O my papa, dost thou bring a strange man in
to me?” He replied, “O my daughter, this is a dog.” Quoth she, “Not so,
’tis Ali the Cairene, whom the Jew Azariah hath enchanted;” and she
turned to the dog and said to him, “Art not Ali of Cairo?” And he signed
to her with his head, “Yes.” Then her father asked her, “Why did the Jew
enchant him?”; and she answered, “Because of his daughter Kamar’s dress;
but I can release him.” Said the broker, “An thou canst indeed do him
this good office, now is the time,” and she, “If he will marry me, I
will release him.” And he signed to her with his head, “Yes.” So she
took a cup of water, graven with certain signs and conjuring over it,
was about to sprinkle Ali therewith, when lo and behold! she heard a
great cry and the cup fell from her hand. She turned and found that it
was her father’s handmaid, who had cried out; and she said to her, “O my
mistress, is’t thus thou keepest the covenant between me and thee? None
taught thee this art save I, and thou didst agree with me that thou
wouldst do naught without consulting me and that whoso married thee
should marry me also, and that one night should be mine and one night
thine.” And the broker’s daughter said, “’Tis well.” When the broker
heard the maid’s words, he asked his daughter, “Who taught the maid?”;
and she answered, “O my papa, enquire of herself.” So he put the
question and she replied, “Know, O my lord, that, when I was with
Azariah the Jew, I used to spy upon him and listen to him, when he
performed his gramarye; and when he went forth to his shop in Baghdad, I
opened his books and read in them, till I became skilled in the
Cabbala-science. One day, he was warm with wine and would have me lie
with him, but I objected, saying, I may not grant thee this except thou
become a Moslem. He refused and I said to him, Now for the Sultan’s
market.[255] So he sold me to thee and I taught my young mistress,
making it a condition with her that she should do naught without my
counsel, and that whoso might wed her should wed me also, one night for
me and one night for her.” Then she took a cup of water and conjuring
over it, sprinkled the dog therewith; saying, “Return thou to form of
man.” And he straightway was restored to his former shape; whereupon the
broker saluted him with the salam and asked him the reason of his
enchantment. So Ali told him all that had passed——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Eighteenth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the broker,
having saluted Ali of Cairo with the salam, asked him the reason of his
enchantment and what had befallen him; and he answered by telling him
all that had passed, when the broker said to him, “Will not my daughter
and the handmaid suffice thee?” but he answered, “Needs must I have
Zaynab also.” Now suddenly there came a rap at the door and the maid
said, “Who is at the door?” The knocker replied, “Kamar, daughter of
Azariah the Jew; say me, is Ali of Cairo with you?” Replied the broker’s
daughter, “O thou daughter of a dog! If he be with us, what wilt thou
with him? Go down, O maid, and open to her.” So the maid let her in, and
when she looked upon Ali and he upon her, he said, “What bringeth thee
hither O dog’s daughter?” Quoth she, “I testify that there is no god but
_the_ God and I testify that Mohammed is the Apostle of God.” And,
having thus Islamised, she asked him, “Do men in the Faith of Al-Islam
give marriage portions to women or do women dower men?” Quoth he, “Men
endow women.” “Then,” said she, “I come and dower myself for thee,
bringing thee, as my marriage-portion, my dress together with the rod
and charger and chains and the head of my father, the enemy of thee and
the foeman of Allah.” And she threw down the Jew’s head before him. Now
the cause of her slaying her sire was as follows. On the night of his
turning Ali into a dog, she saw, in a dream, a speaker who said to her,
“Become a Moslemah.” She did so; and as soon as she awoke next morning
she expounded Al-Islam to her father who refused to embrace the Faith;
so she drugged him with Bhang and killed him. As for Ali, he took the
gear and said to the broker, “Meet we to-morrow at the Caliph’s Divan,
that I may take thy daughter and the handmaid to wife.” Then he set out
rejoicing, to return to the barrack of the Forty. On his way he met a
sweetmeat seller, who was beating hand upon hand and saying, “There is
no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!
Folk’s labour hath waxed sinful and man is active only in fraud!” Then
said he to Ali, “I conjure thee, by Allah, taste of this confection!” So
Ali took a piece and ate it and fell down senseless, for there was Bhang
therein; whereupon the sweetmeat-seller seized the dress and the charger
and the rest of the gear and thrusting them into the box where he kept
his sweetmeats hoisted it up and made off. Presently he met a Kazi, who
called to him, saying, “Come hither, O sweetmeat seller!” So he went up
to him and setting down his sack laid the tray of sweetmeats upon it and
asked, “What dost thou want?” “Halwá and dragées,[256]” answered the
Kazi and, taking some in his hand, said, “Both of these are
adulterated.” Then he brought out sweetmeats from his breast-pocket[257]
and gave them to the sweetmeat-seller, saying, “Look at this fashion;
how excellent it is! Eat of it and make the like of it.” So he ate and
fell down senseless, for the sweetmeats were drugged with Bhang,
whereupon the Kazi bundled him into the sack and made off with him,
charger and chest and all, to the barrack of the Forty. Now the Judge in
question was Hasan Shuman and the reason of this was as follows. When
Ali had been gone some days in quest of the dress and they heard no news
of him, Calamity Ahmad said to his men, “O lads, go and seek for your
brother Ali of Cairo.” So they sallied forth in quest of him and among
the rest Hasan Shuman the Pestilence, disguised in a Kazi’s gear. He
came upon the sweetmeat-seller and, knowing him for Ahmad al-Lakit[258]
suspected him of having played some trick upon Ali; so he drugged him
and did as we have seen. Meanwhile, the other Forty fared about the
streets and highways making search in different directions, and amongst
them Ali Kitf al-Jamal, who espying a crowd, made towards the people and
found the Cairene Ali lying drugged and senseless in their midst. So he
revived him and he came to himself and seeing the folk flocking around
him asked, “Where am I?” Answered Ali Camel-shoulder and his comrades,
“We found thee lying here drugged but know not who drugged thee.” Quoth
Ali, “’Twas a certain sweetmeat-seller who drugged me and took the gear
from me; but where is he gone?” Quoth his comrades, “We have seen
nothing of him; but come, rise and go home with us.” So they returned to
the barrack, where they found Ahmad al-Danaf, who greeted Ali and
enquired if he had brought the dress. He replied, “I was coming hither
with it and other matters, including the Jew’s head, when a
sweetmeat-seller met me and drugged me with Bhang and took them from
me.” Then he told him the whole tale ending with, “If I come across that
man of goodies again, I will requite him.” Presently Hasan Shuman came
out of a closet and said to him, “Hast thou gotten the gear, O Ali?” So
he told him what had befallen him and added, “If I know whither the
rascal is gone and where to find the knave, I would pay him out. Knowest
thou whither he went?” Answered Hasan, “I know where he is,” and opening
the door of the closet, showed him the sweetmeat-seller within, drugged
and senseless. Then he aroused him and he opened his eyes and finding
himself in presence of Mercury Ali and Calamity Ahmad and the Forty,
started up and said, “Where am I and who hath laid hands on me?” Replied
Shuman, “’Twas I laid hands on thee;” and Ali cried, “O perfidious
wretch, wilt thou play thy pranks on me?” And he would have slain him:
but Hasan said to him, “Hold thy hand for this fellow is become thy
kinsman.” “How my kinsman?” quoth Ali; and quoth Hasan, “This is Ahmad
al-Lakit son of Zaynab’s sister.” Then said Ali to the prisoner, “Why
didst thou thus, O Lakit?” and he replied, “My grandmother, Dalilah the
Wily, bade me do it; only because Zurayk the fishmonger foregathered
with the old woman and said:—Mercury Ali of Cairo is a sharper and a
past master in knavery, and he will certainly slay the Jew and bring
hither the dress. So she sent for me and said to me, O Ahmad, dost thou
know Ali of Cairo? Answered I:—Indeed I do and ’twas I directed him to
Ahmad al-Danaf’s lodging when he first came to Baghdad. Quoth she:—Go
and set thy nets for him, and if he have brought back the gear, put a
cheat on him and take it from him. So I went round about the highways of
the city, till I met a sweetmeat-seller and buying his clothes and
stock-in-trade and gear for ten dinars, did what was done.” Thereupon
quoth Ali, “Go back to thy grandmother and Zurayk, and tell them that I
have brought the gear and the Jew’s head and say to them:—Meet me
to-morrow at the Caliph’s Divan, there to receive Zaynab’s dowry.” And
Calamity Ahmad rejoiced in this and said, “We have not wasted our pains
in rearing thee, O Ali!” Next morning Ali took the dress, the charger,
the rod and the chains of gold, together with the head of Azariah the
Jew mounted on a pike, and went up, accompanied by Ahmad al-Danaf and
the Forty, to the Divan, where they kissed ground before the Caliph——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Nineteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ali the
Cairene went up to the Caliph’s Divan, accompanied by his uncle Ahmad
al-Danaf and his lads they kissed ground before the Caliph who turned
and seeing a youth of the most valiant aspect, enquired of Calamity
Ahmad concerning him and he replied, “O Commander of the Faithful, this
is Mercury Ali the Egyptian captain of the brave boys of Cairo, and he
is the first of my lads.” And the Caliph loved him for the valour that
shone from between his eyes, testifying for him and not against him.
Then Ali rose; and, casting the Jew’s head down before him, said, “May
thine every enemy be like this one, O Prince of True Believers!” Quoth
Al-Rashid, “Whose head is this?”; and quoth Ali, “’Tis the head of
Azariah the Jew.” “Who slew him?” asked the Caliph. So Ali related to
him all that had passed, from first to last, and the Caliph said, “I had
not thought thou wouldst kill him, for that he was a sorcerer.” Ali
replied, “O Commander of the Faithful, my Lord made me prevail to his
slaughter.” Then the Caliph sent the Chief of Police to the Jew’s
palace, where he found him lying headless; so he laid the body on a
bier,[259] and carried it to Al-Rashid, who commanded to burn it.
Whereat, behold, up came Kamar and kissing the ground before the Caliph,
informed him that she was the daughter of Jew Azariah and that she had
become a Moslemah. Then she renewed her profession of Faith before the
Commander of the Faithful and said to him “Be thou my intercessor with
Sharper Ali that he take me to wife.” She also appointed him her
guardian to consent to her marriage with the Cairene, to whom he gave
the Jew’s palace and all its contents, saying, “Ask a boon of me.” Quoth
Ali, “I beg of thee to let me stand on thy carpet and eat of thy table;”
and quoth the Caliph, “O Ali, hast thou any lads?” He replied, “I have
forty lads; but they are in Cairo.” Rejoined the Caliph, “Send to Cairo
and fetch them hither,” presently adding, “But, O Ali, hast thou a
barrack for them?” “No,” answered Ali; and Hasan Shuman said, “I make
him a present of my barrack with all that is therein, O Commander of the
Faithful.” However, the Caliph retorted, saying, “Thy lodging is thine
own, O Hasan;” and he bade his treasurer give the court architect ten
thousand dinars, that he might build Ali a hall with four daïses and
forty sleeping-closets for his lads. Then said he, “O Ali, hast thou any
further wish, that we may command its fulfilment?”; and said Ali, “O
King of the age, be thou my intercessor with Dalilah the Wily that she
give me her daughter Zaynab to wife and take the dress and gear of
Azariah’s girl in lieu of dower.” Dalilah accepted the Caliph’s
intercession and accepted the charger and dress and what not, and they
drew up the marriage contracts between Ali and Zaynab and Kamar, the
Jew’s daughter and the broker’s daughter and the handmaid. Moreover, the
Caliph assigned him a solde with a table morning and evening, and
stipends and allowances for fodder; all of the most liberal. Then Ali
the Cairene fell to making ready for the wedding festivities and, after
thirty days, he sent a letter to his comrades in Cairo, wherein he gave
them to know of the favours and honours which the Caliph had bestowed
upon him and said, “I have married four maidens and needs must ye come
to the wedding.” So, after a reasonable time the forty lads arrived and
they held high festival; he homed them in his barrack and entreated them
with the utmost regard and presented them to the Caliph, who bestowed on
them robes of honour and largesse. Then the tiring-women displayed
Zaynab before Ali in the dress of the Jew’s daughter, and he went in
unto her and found her a pearl unthridden and a filly by all save
himself unridden. Then he went in unto the three other maidens and found
them accomplished in beauty and loveliness. After this it befel that Ali
of Cairo was one night on guard by the Caliph who said to him, “I wish
thee O Ali, to tell me all that hath befallen thee from first to last
with Dalilah the Wily and Zaynab the Coney-catcher and Zurayk the
Fishmonger.” So Ali related to him all his adventures and the Commander
of the Faithful bade record them and lay them up in the royal
muniment-rooms. So they wrote down all that had befallen him and kept it
in store with other histories for the people of Mohammed the Best of
Men. And Ali and his wives and comrades abode in all solace of life, and
its joyance, till there came to them the Destroyer of Delights and
Sunderer of Societies; and Allah (be He extolled and exalted!) is
All-knowing![260] And also men relate the tale of

-----

Footnote 214:

  This is a sequel to the Story of Dalilah and both are highly relished
  by Arabs. The Bresl. Edit. ix. 245, runs both into one.

Footnote 215:

  Arab. Misr, Masr, the Capital, says Savary, applied alternately to
  Memphis, Fostat and Grand Cairo each of which had a Jízah (pron.
  Gízah), skirt, angle outlying suburb.

Footnote 216:

  For the curious street-cries of old Cairo see Lane (M. E. chapt. xiv.)
  and my Pilgrimage (i. 120): here the rhymes are of Zabíb (raisins),
  habíb (lover) and labíb (man of sense).

Footnote 217:

  The Mac. and Bul. Edits. give two silly couplets of moral advice:—

  Strike with thy stubborn steel, and never fear ✿ Aught save the
     Godhead of Almighty Might;
  And shun ill practices and never show ✿ Through life but generous
     gifts to human sight.

  The above is from the Bresl. Edit. ix. 247.

Footnote 218:

  Arab. “Al-Khanakah” now more usually termed a Takíyah (Pilgrim. i.
  124).

Footnote 219:

  Arab. “Ka’b al-ba’íd” (Bresl. Edit. ix. 255) = heel or ankle, metaph.
  for fortune, reputation: so the Arabs say the “Ka’b of the tribe is
  gone!” Here “the far one” = the caravan-leader.

Footnote 220:

  Arab. “Sharít,” from Sharata = he Scarified; “Mishrat” = a lancet and
  “Sharítah” = a mason’s rule. Mr. Payne renders “Sharít” by whinyard:
  it must be a chopper-like weapon, with a pin or screw (laulab) to keep
  the blade open like the snap of the Spaniard’s cuchillo. Dozy explains
  it = epée, synonyme de Sayf.

Footnote 221:

  Text “Dimágh,” a Persianism when used for the head: the word properly
  means brain or meninx.

Footnote 222:

  They were afraid even to stand and answer this remarkable ruffian.

Footnote 223:

  Ahmad the Abortion, or the Foundling, nephew (sister’s son) of Zaynab
  the Coney-catcher. See _supra_, p. 145.

Footnote 224:

  Here the sharp lad discovers the direction without pointing it out. I
  need hardly enlarge upon the prehensile powers of the Eastern foot:
  the tailor will hold his cloth between his toes and pick up his needle
  with it, whilst the woman can knead every muscle and at times catch a
  mosquito between the toes. I knew an officer in India whose mistress
  hurt his feelings by so doing at a critical time when he attributed
  her movement to pleasure.

Footnote 225:

  Arab. “Hullah” = dress. In old days it was composed of the Burd or
  Ridá, the shoulder-cloth from 6 to 9 or 10 feet long, and the Izár or
  waistcloth which was either tied or tucked into a girdle of leather or
  metal. The woman’s waistcloth was called Nitáh and descended to the
  feet while the upper part was doubled and provided with a Tikkah or
  string over which it fell to the knees overhanging the lower folds.
  This doubling of the “Hujrah,” or part round the waist, was called the
  “Hubkah.”

Footnote 226:

  Arab. “Taghaddá,” the dinner being at eleven a.m. or noon.

Footnote 227:

  Arab. Ghandúr for which the Dictionaries give only “fat, thick.” It
  applies in Arabia especially to a Harámi, brigand or freebooter, most
  honourable of professions, slain in foray or fray, opposed to “Fatís”
  or carrion (the _corps crévé_ of the Klephts), the man who dies the
  straw-death. Pilgrimage iii. 66.

Footnote 228:

  My fair readers will note with surprise how such matters are hurried
  in the East. The picture is, however, true to life in lands where
  “flirtation” is utterly unknown and, indeed, impossible.

Footnote 229:

  Arab. “Zabbah,” the wooden bolt (before noticed) which forms the lock
  and is opened by a slider and pins. It is illustrated by Lane (M. E.
  Introduction).

Footnote 230:

  _i.e._ I am not a petty thief.

Footnote 231:

  Arab. “Satl” = kettle, bucket. Lat. Situla (?)

Footnote 232:

  _i.e._ “there is no chance of his escaping.” It may also mean, “And
  far from him (Hayhát) is escape.”

Footnote 233:

  Arab. “Ihtilám,” the sign of puberty in boy or girl; this, like all
  emissions of semen, voluntary or involuntary, requires the Ghuzl or
  total ablution before prayers can be said, etc. See vol. v. 199, in
  the Tale of Tawaddud.

Footnote 234:

  This is the way to take an Eastern when he tells a deliberate lie; and
  it often surprises him into speaking the truth.

Footnote 235:

  The conjunctiva in Africans is seldom white; often it is red and more
  frequently yellow.

Footnote 236:

  So in the texts, possibly a clerical error for the wine which he had
  brought with the kabobs. But beer is the especial tipple of African
  slaves in Egypt.

Footnote 237:

  Arab. Laun, prop. = color, hue; but applied to species and genus, our
  “kind”; and especially to dishes which differ in appearance; whilst in
  Egypt it means any dish.

Footnote 238:

  Arab. “Zardah” = rice dressed with honey and saffron. Vol. ii. 313.
  The word is still common in Turkey.

Footnote 239:

  Arab. “Laylat Ams,” the night of yesterday (Al-bárihah) not our “last
  night” which would be the night of the day spoken of.

Footnote 240:

  Arab. “Yakhní,” a word much used in Persia and India and properly
  applied to the complicated broth prepared for the rice and meat. For a
  good recipe see Herklots, Appendix xxix.

Footnote 241:

  In token of defeat and in acknowledgment that she was no match for
  men.

Footnote 242:

  This is a neat touch of nature. Many a woman, even of the world, has
  fallen in love with a man before indifferent to her because he did not
  take advantage of her when he had the opportunity.

Footnote 243:

  The slightest movement causes a fight at a funeral or a
  wedding-procession in the East; even amongst the “mild Hindus.”

Footnote 244:

  Arab. “Al-Musrán” (plur. of “Masír”) properly the intestines which
  contain the chyle. The bag made by Ali was, in fact, a “Cundum” (so
  called from the inventor, Colonel Cundum of the Guards in the days of
  Charles Second) or “French letter”; une capote anglaise, a “check upon
  child.” Captain Grose says (Class. Dict. etc. s.v. Cundum) “The dried
  gut of a sheep worn by a man in the act of coition to prevent venereal
  infection. These machines were long prepared and sold by a matron of
  the name of Philips at the Green Canister in Half Moon Street in the
  Strand * * * Also a false scabbard over a sword and the oilskin case
  for the colours of a regiment.” Another account is given in the Guide
  Pratique des Maladies Secrètes, Dr. G. Harris, Bruxelles. Librairie
  Populaire. He calls these petits sachets de baudruche “Candoms, from
  the doctor who invented them.” (Littré ignores the word) and declares
  that the famous Ricord compared them with a bad umbrella which a storm
  can break or burst, while others term them cuirasses against pleasure
  and cobwebs against infection. They were much used in the last
  century. “Those pretended stolen goods were Mr. Wilkes’s Papers, many
  of which tended to prove his authorship of the North Briton, No. 45,
  April 23, 1763, and some _Cundums_ enclosed in an envelope” (Records
  of C. of King’s Bench, London, 1763). “Pour finir l’inventaire de ces
  curiosités du cabinet de Madame Gourdan, il ne faut pas omettre une
  multitude de _redingottes_ appelées _d’Angleterre_, je ne sais
  pourquois. Vous connoissez, au surplus, ces espèces de boucliers qu’on
  oppose aux traits empoisonnés de l’amour; et qui n’emoussent que ceux
  du plaisir.” (L’Observateur Anglois, Londres 1778, iii. 69). Again we
  read:—

          “Les capotes mélancoliques
          Qui pendent chez les gros Millan (?)
          S’enflent d’elles-mêmes, lubriques,
          Et dechargent en se gonflant.”

                                              Passage Satyrique.

  Also in Louis Prolat:—

               “Il fuyait, me laissant une capote au cul.”

  The articles are now of two kinds mostly of baudruche (sheep’s gut)
  and a few of caoutchouc. They are made almost exclusively in the
  faubourgs of Paris, giving employment to many women and young girls;
  Grenelle turns out the baudruche and Grenelle and Lilas the
  India-rubber article; and of the three or four makers M. Deschamps is
  best known. The sheep’s gut is not joined in any way but of single
  piece as it comes from the animal after, of course, much manipulation
  to make it thin and supple; the inferior qualities are stuck together
  at the sides. Prices vary from 4½ to 36 francs per gross. Those of
  India-rubber are always joined at the side with a solution especially
  prepared for the purpose. I have also heard of fish-bladders but can
  give no details on the subject. The Cundum was unknown to the ancients
  of Europe although syphilis was not: even prehistoric skeletons show
  traces of its ravages.

Footnote 245:

  Arab. “Yá Ustá” (for “Ustáz.”) The Pers. term is Ustád = a
  craft-master, an artisan and especially a barber. Here it is merely a
  polite address.

Footnote 246:

  In common parlance Arabs answer a question (like the classics of
  Europe who rarely used Yes and No, Yea and Nay), by repeating its last
  words. They have, however, many affirmative particles _e.g._ Ni’am
  which answers a negative “Dost thou not go?”—Ni’am (Yes!); and Ajal, a
  stronger form following a command, _e.g._ Sir (go)—Ajal, Yes verily.
  The popular form is Aywá (’lláhi) = Yes, by Allah. The chief negatives
  are Má and Lá, both often used in the sense of “There is not.”

Footnote 247:

  Arab. “Khalbús,” prop. the servant of the Almah-girls who acts buffoon
  as well as pimp. The “Maskharah” (whence our “mask”) corresponds with
  the fool or jester of mediæval Europe: amongst the Arnauts he is
  called “Suttari” and is known by his fox’s tails: he mounts a mare,
  tom-toms on the kettle-drum and is generally one of the bravest of the
  corps. These buffoons are noted for extreme indecency: they generally
  appear in the ring provided with an enormous phallus of whip-cord and
  with this they charge man, woman and child, to the infinite delight of
  the public.

Footnote 248:

  Arab. “Shúbash” pronounced in Egypt Shobash: it is the Persian
  Sháh-básh lit. = be a King, equivalent to our bravo. Here, however,
  the allusion is to the buffoon’s cry at an Egyptian feast, “Shohbash
  ’alayk, yá Sáhib al-faraj,” = a present is due from thee, “O giver of
  the fête!” See Lane M. E. xxvii.

Footnote 249:

  Arab. “Ka’ak al-I’d:” the former is the Arab form of the Persian
  “Kahk” (still retained in Egypt) whence I would derive our word
  “cake.” It alludes to the sweet cakes which are served up with dates,
  the quatre mendiants and sherbets during visits of the Lesser (not the
  greater) Festival, at the end of the Ramazan fast. (Lane M.E. xxv).

Footnote 250:

  Arab. “Tásúmah,” a rare word for a peculiar slipper. Dozy (s.v.) says
  only, espèce de chaussure, sandale, pantoufle, soulier.

Footnote 251:

  Arab. “Ijtilá” = the displaying of the bride on her wedding night so
  often alluded to in The Nights.

Footnote 252:

  Arab. Khiskhánah; a mixed word from Khaysh = canvass or stuffs
  generally and Pers. Khánah = house room. Dozy (s.v.) says _armoire_,
  _buffet_.

Footnote 253:

  The Bresl. Edit. “Kamaríyah” = Moon-like (fem.) for Moon.

Footnote 254:

  Every traveller describes the manners and customs of dogs in Eastern
  cities where they furiously attack all canine intruders. I have
  noticed the subject in writing of Al-Medinah where the beasts are
  confined to the suburbs (Pilgrimage ii. 52–54).

Footnote 255:

  She could legally compel him to sell her; because, being an Infidel,
  he had attempted to debauch a Moslemah.

Footnote 256:

  Arab. “Haláwat wa Mulabbas”; the latter etymologically means one
  dressed or clothed. Here it alludes to almonds, etc., clothed or
  coated with sugar. See Dozy s.v. “labas.”

Footnote 257:

  Arab. “’Ubb” from a root = being long: Dozy (s.v.), says poche au
  sein; Habb al-’ubb is a woman’s ornament.

Footnote 258:

  Who, it will be remembered, was Dalilah’s grandson.

Footnote 259:

  Arab. “Tábút,” a term applied to the Ark of the Covenant (Koran ii.
  349), which contained Moses’ rod and shoes, Aaron’s mitre, the
  manna-pot, the broken Tables of the Law, and the portraits of all the
  prophets which are to appear till the end of time—an extensive list
  for a box measuring 3 by cubits. Europeans often translate it coffin,
  but it is properly the wooden case placed over an honoured grave.
  “Irán” is the Ark of Moses’ exposure, also the large hearse on which
  tribal chiefs were carried to earth.

Footnote 260:

  _i.e._ What we have related is not “Gospel Truth.”




                   ARDASHIR AND HAYAT AL-NUFUS.[261]


There was once in the city of Shíráz a mighty King called Sayf al-A’azam
Shah, who had grown old, without being blessed with a son. So he
summoned the physicists and physicians and said to them, “I am now in
years and ye know my case and the state of the kingdom and its
ordinance; and I fear for my subjects after me; for that up to this
present I have not been vouchsafed a son.” Thereupon they replied, “We
will compound thee a somewhat of drugs wherein shall be efficacy, if it
please Almighty Allah!” So they mixed him drugs, which he used and knew
his wife carnally, and she conceived by leave of the Most High Lord, who
saith to a thing, “Be,” and it becometh. When her months were
accomplished, she gave birth to a male child like the moon, whom his
father named Ardashir,[262] and he grew up and throve and applied
himself to the study of learning and letters, till he attained the age
of fifteen. Now there was in Al-Irak a King called Abd al-Kádir who had
a daughter, by name Hayát al-Nufús, and she was like the rising full
moon; but she had an hatred for men and the folk very hardly dared name
mankind in her presence. The Kings of the Chosroës had sought her in
marriage of her sire; but, when he spoke with her thereof, she said,
“Never will I do this; and if thou force me thereto, I will slay
myself.” Now Prince Ardashir heard of her fame and fell in love with her
and told his father who, seeing his case, took pity on him and promised
him day by day that he should marry her. So he despatched his Wazir to
demand her in wedlock, but King Abd al-Kadir refused, and when the
Minister returned to King Sayf al-A’azam and acquainted him with what
had befallen his mission and the failure thereof, he was wroth with
exceeding wrath and cried, “Shall the like of me send to one of the
Kings on a requisition and he accomplish it not?” Then he bade a herald
make proclamation to his troops, bidding them bring out the tents and
equip them for war with all diligence, though they should borrow money
for the necessary expenses; and he said, “I will on no wise turn back,
till I have laid waste King Abd al-Kadir’s dominions and slain his men
and plundered his treasures and blotted out his traces!” When the report
of this reached Ardashir he rose from his carpet-bed, and going in to
his father, kissed ground[263] between his hands and said, “O mighty
King, trouble not thyself with aught of this thing”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Twentieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when report
of this reached the Prince he went in to his sire the King and, kissing
ground between his hands, said, “O mighty King, trouble not thy soul
with aught of this thing and levy not thy champions and armies neither
spend thy monies. Thou art stronger than he, and if thou loose upon him
this thy host, thou wilt lay waste his cities and dominions and spoil
his good and slay his strong men and himself; but when his daughter
shall come to know what hath befallen her father and his people by
reason of her, she will slay herself, and I shall die on her account;
for I can never live after her; no, never.” Asked the King, “And what
then thinkest thou to do, O my son?” and the Prince answered, “I will
don a merchant’s habit and cast about how I may win to the Princess and
compass my desire of her.” Quoth Sayf al-A’azam, “Art thou determined
upon this?”; and quoth the Prince, “Yes, O my sire;” whereupon the King
called to his Wazir, and said to him, “Do thou journey with my son, the
core of my heart, and help him to win his will and watch over him and
guide him with thy sound judgment, for thou standest to him even in my
stead.” “I hear and obey,” answered the Minister; and the King gave his
son three hundred thousand dinars in gold and great store of jewels and
precious stones and goldsmiths’ ware and stuffs and other things of
price. Then Prince Ardashir went in to his mother and kissed her hands
and asked her blessing. She blessed him and, forthright opening her
treasures, brought out to him necklaces and trinkets and apparel and all
manner of other costly objects hoarded up from the time of the bygone
Kings, whose price might not be evened with coin. Moreover, he took with
him of his Mamelukes and negro-slaves and cattle all that he needed for
the road and clad himself and the Wazir and their company in traders’
gear. Then he farewelled his parents and kinsfolk and friends; and,
setting out, fared on over wolds and wastes all hours of the day and
watches of the night; and whenas the way was longsome upon him he
improvised these couplets:—

 My longing bred of love with mine unease for ever grows; ✿ Nor against
    all the wrongs of time one succourer arose:
 When Pleiads and the Fishes show in sky the rise I watch, ✿ As
    worshipper within whose breast a pious burning glows:
 For Star o’ Morn I speer until at last when it is seen, ✿ I’m madded
    with my passion and my fancy’s woes and throes:
 I swear by you that never from your love have I been loosed; ✿ Naught am
    I save a watcher who of slumber nothing knows!
 Though hard appear my hope to win, though languor aye increase, ✿ And
    after thee my patience fails and ne’er a helper shows;
 Yet will I wait till Allah shall be pleased to join our loves; ✿ I’ll
    mortify the jealous and I’ll mock me of my foes.

When he ended his verse he swooned away and the Wazir sprinkled
rose-water on him, till the Prince came to himself, when the Minister
said to him, “O King’s son, possess thy soul in patience; for the
consequence of patience is consolation, and behold, thou art on the way
to whatso thou wishest.” And he ceased not to bespeak him fair and
comfort him till his trouble subsided; and they continued their journey
with all diligence. Presently, the Prince again became impatient of the
length of the way and bethought him of his beloved and recited these
couplets:—

 Longsome is absence, restlessness increaseth and despite; ✿ And burn my
    vitals in the blaze my love and longings light:
 Grows my hair gray from pains and pangs which I am doomèd bear ✿ For
    pine, while tear-floods stream from eyes and sore offend my sight:
 I swear, O Hope of me, O End of every wish and will, ✿ By Him who made
    mankind and every branch with leafage dight,
 A passion-load for thee, O my Desire, I must endure, ✿ And boast I that
    to bear such load no lover hath the might.
 Question the Night of me and Night thy soul shall satisfy ✿ Mine eyelids
    never close in sleep throughout the livelong night.

Then he wept with sore weeping and ’plained of that he suffered for
stress of love-longing; but the Wazir comforted him and spoke him fair,
promising him the winning of his wish; after which they fared on again
for a few days, when they drew near to the White City, the capital of
King Abd al-Kadir, soon after sunrise. Then said the Minister to the
Prince, “Rejoice, O King’s son, in all good; for see, yonder is the
White City, that which thou seekest.” Whereat the Prince rejoiced with
exceeding joy and recited these couplets:—

 My friends, I yearn in heart distraught for him; ✿ Longing abides and
    with sore pains I brim:
 I mourn like childless mother, nor can find ✿ One to console me when the
    light grows dim;
 Yet when the breezes blow from off thy land, ✿ I feel their freshness
    shed on heart and limb;
 And rail mine eyes like water-laden clouds, ✿ While in a tear-sea shed
    by heart I swim.

Now when they entered the White City they asked for the Merchants’ Khan,
a place of moneyed men; and when shown the hostelry they hired three
magazines and on receiving the keys[264] they laid up therein all their
goods and gear. They abode in the Khan till they were rested, when the
Wazir applied himself to devise a device for the Prince,——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Prince and
the Minister alighted at the Khan and lodged their goods in the
ground-floor magazines and there settled their servants. Then they
tarried awhile till they had rested when the Wazir arose and applied
himself to devise a device for the Prince, and said to him, “I have
bethought me of somewhat wherein, methinks, will be success for thee, so
it please Almighty Allah.” Quoth Ardashir, “O thou Wazir of good
counsel, do what cometh to thy mind, and may the Lord direct thy rede
aright!” Quoth the Minister, “I purpose to hire thee a shop in the
market-street of the stuff-sellers and set thee therein; for that all,
great and small, have recourse to the bazar and, meseems, when the folk
see thee with their own eyes sitting in the shop their hearts will
incline to thee and thou wilt thus be enabled to attain thy desire, for
thou art fair of favour and souls incline to thee and sight rejoiceth in
thee.” The other replied, “Do what seemeth good to thee.” So the Wazir
forthright began to robe the Prince and himself in their richest raiment
and, putting a purse of a thousand dinars in his breast-pocket, went
forth and walked about the city, whilst all who looked upon them
marvelled at the beauty of the King’s son, saying, “Glory be to Him who
created this youth ’of vile water’[265]! Blessed be Allah excellentest
of Creators!” Great was the talk anent him and some said, “This is no
mortal, ’this is naught save a noble angel’”;[266] and others, “Hath
Rizwán, the doorkeeper of the Eden-garden, left the gate of Paradise
unguarded, that this youth hath come forth?” The people followed them to
the stuff-market, where they entered and stood, till there came up to
them an old man of dignified presence and venerable appearance, who
saluted them, and they returned his salam. Then the Shaykh said to them,
“O my lords, have ye any need, that we may have the honour of
accomplishing?”; and the Wazir asked him, “Who art thou, O elder?” He
answered, “I am the Overseer of the market.” Quoth the Wazir, “Know
then, O Shaykh, that this youth is my son and I wish to hire him a shop
in the bazar, that he may sit therein and learn to sell and buy and take
and give, and come to ken merchants’ ways and habits.” “I hear and I
obey,” replied the Overseer and brought them without stay or delay the
key of a shop, which he caused the brokers sweep and clean. And they did
his bidding. Then the Wazir sent for a high mattress, stuffed with
ostrich-down, and set it up in the shop, spreading upon it a small
prayer-carpet, and a cushion fringed with broidery of red gold. Moreover
he brought pillows and transported thither so much of the goods and
stuffs that he had brought with him as filled the shop. Next morning the
young Prince came and opening the shop, seated himself on the divan, and
stationed two Mamelukes, clad in the richest of raiment before him and
two black slaves of the goodliest of the Abyssinians in the lower part
of the shop. The Wazir enjoined him to keep his secret from the folk, so
thereby he might find aid in the winning of his wishes; then he left him
and charging him to acquaint him with what befel him in the shop, day by
day returned to the Khan. The Prince sat in the shop till night as he
were the moon at its fullest, whilst the folk, hearing tell of his
comeliness, flocked to the place, without errand, to gaze on his beauty
and loveliness and symmetry and perfect grace and glorify the Almighty
who created and shaped him, till none could pass through that bazar for
the excessive crowding of the folk about him. The King’s son turned
right and left, abashed at the throng of people that stared at him,
hoping to make acquaintance with some one about the court, of whom he
might get news of the Princess; but he found no way to this, wherefore
his breast was straitened. Meanwhile, the Wazir daily promised him the
attainment of his desire and the case so continued for a time till, one
morning, as the youth sat in the shop, there came up an old woman of
respectable semblance and dignified presence clad in raiment of
devotees[267] and followed by two slave-girls like moons. She stopped
before the shop and, having considered the Prince awhile, cried, “Glory
be to God who fashioned that face and perfected that figure!” Then she
saluted him and he returned her salam and seated her by his side. Quoth
she, “Whence cometh thou, O fair of favour?”; and quoth he, “From the
parts of Hind, O my mother; and I have come to this city to see the
world and look about me.” “Honour to thee for a visitor! What goods and
stuffs hast thou? Show me something handsome, fit for Kings.” “If thou
wish for handsome stuffs, I will show them to thee; for I have wares
that beseem persons of every condition.” “O my son, I want somewhat
costly of price and seemly to sight; brief, the best thou hast.” “Thou
must needs tell me for whom thou seekest it, that I may show thee goods
according to the rank of the requirer.” “Thou speakest sooth, O my son,”
said she, “I want somewhat for my mistress Hayat al-Nufus, daughter of
Abd al-Kadir, lord of this land and King of this country.” Now when
Ardashir heard his mistress’s name, his reason flew for joy and his
heart fluttered and he gave no order to slave or servant, but, putting
his hand behind him, pulled out a purse of an hundred dinars and offered
it to the old woman, saying, “This is for the washing of thy clothes.”
Then he again put forth his hand and brought out of a wrapper a dress
worth ten thousand dinars or more and said to her, “This is of that
which I have brought to your country.” When the old woman saw it, it
pleased her and she asked, “What is the price of this dress, O perfect
in qualities?” Answered he, “I will take no price for it!” whereupon she
thanked him and repeated her question; but he said, “By Allah, I will
take no price for it. I make thee a present of it, an the Princess will
not accept it and ’tis a guest-gift from me to thee. Alhamdolillah—Glory
be to God—who hath brought us together, so that, if one day I have a
want, I shall find thee a helper to me in winning it!” She marvelled at
the goodliness of his speech and the excess of his generosity and the
perfection of his courtesy and said to him, “What is thy name, O my
lord?” He replied, “My name is Ardashir;” and she cried, “By Allah this
is a rare name! Therewith are Kings’ sons named, and thou art in a guise
of the sons of the merchants!” Quoth he, “Of the love my father bore me,
he gave me this name, but a name signifieth naught;” and quoth she in
wonder, “O my son, take the price of thy goods.” But he swore that he
would not take aught. Then the old lady said to him, “O my dear one,
Truth (I would have thee know) is the greatest of all things and thou
hadst not dealt thus generously by me but for a special reason: so tell
me thy case and thy secret thought; belike thou hast some wish to whose
winning I may help thee.” Thereupon he laid his hand in hers and, after
exacting an oath of secrecy, told her the whole story of his passion for
the Princess and his condition by reason thereof. The old woman shook
her head and said, “True; but O my son, the wise say, in the current
adage:—An thou wouldest be obeyed, abstain from ordering what may not be
made; and thou, my son, thy name is Merchant, and though thou hadst the
keys of the Hidden Hoards, yet wouldst thou be called naught but
Merchant. An thou wouldst rise to high rank, according to thy station,
then seek the hand of a Kazi’s daughter or even an Emir’s; but why, O my
son, aspirest thou to none but the daughter of the King of the age and
the time, and she a clean maid, who knoweth nothing of the things of the
world and hath never in her life seen anything but her palace wherein
she dwelleth? Yet, for all her tender age, she is intelligent, shrewd,
vivacious, penetrating, quick of wit, sharp of act and rare of rede: her
father hath no other child and she is dearer to him than his life and
soul. Every morning he cometh to her and giveth her good-morrow, and all
who dwell in the palace stand in dread of her. Think not, O my son, that
any dare bespeak her with aught of these words; nor is there any way for
me thereto. By Allah, O my son, my heart and vitals love thee and were
it in my power to give thee access to her, I would assuredly do it; but
I will tell thee somewhat, wherein Allah may haply appoint the healing
of thy heart, and will risk life and goods for thee, till I win thy will
for thee.” He asked, “And what is that, O my mother”; and she answered,
“Seek of me the daughter of a Wazir or an Emir, and I will grant thy
request; but it may not be that one should mount from earth to heaven at
one bound.” When the Prince heard this, he replied to her with courtesy
and sense, “O my mother, thou art a woman of wit and knowest how things
go. Say me doth a man, when his head irketh him, bind up his hand?”
Quoth she, “No, by Allah, O my son”; and quoth he, “Even so my heart
seeketh none but her and naught slayeth me but love of her. By Allah, I
am a dead man, and I find not one to counsel me aright and succour me!
Allah upon thee, O my mother, take pity on my strangerhood and the
streaming of my tears!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ardashir, the
King’s son said to the old woman, “Allah upon thee, O my mother, take
pity on my strangerhood and the streaming of my tears.” Replied she, “By
Allah, O my son, thy words rend my heart, but my hand hath no cunning
wherewith to help thee.” Quoth he, “I beseech thee of thy favour, carry
her a letter and kiss her hands for me.” So she had compassion on him
and said, “Write what thou wilt and I will bear it to her.” When he
heard this, he was ready to fly for joy and calling for ink-case and
paper, wrote these couplets:—

 O Hayát al-Nufús, be gen’rous, and incline ✿ To one who loving thee for
    parting’s doomed to pine.
 I was in all delight, in gladsomest of life, ✿ But now I am distraught
    with sufferings condign.
 To wakefulness I cling through longsomeness of night ✿ And with me
    sorrow chats[268] through each sad eve of mine;
 Pity a lover sad, a sore afflicted wretch ✿ Whose eyelids ever ulcered
    are with tearful brine;
 And when the morning comes at last, the real morn ✿ He finds him drunken
    and distraught with passion’s wine.

Then he folded the scroll and kissing it, gave it to the old woman;
after which he put his hand to a chest and took out a second purse
containing an hundred dinars, which he presented to her, saying, “Divide
this among the slave girls.” She refused it and cried, “By Allah, O my
son, I am not with thee for aught of this!”; however, he thanked her and
answered, “There is no help but that thou accept of it.” So she took it
and kissing his hands, returned home; and going in to the Princess,
cried, “O my lady, I have brought thee somewhat the like whereof is not
with the people of our city, and it cometh from a handsome young man,
than whom there is not a goodlier on earth’s face!” She asked, “O my
nurse, and whence cometh the youth?” and the old woman answered, “From
the parts of Hind; and he hath given me this dress of gold brocade,
embroidered with pearls and gems and worth the Kingdom of Chosroës and
Cæsar.” Thereupon she opened the dress and the whole palace was
illuminated by its brightness, because of the beauty of its fashion and
the wealth of unions and jewels wherewith it was broidered, and all who
were present marvelled at it. The Princess examined it and, judging it
to be worth no less than a whole year’s revenue of her father’s kingdom,
said to the old woman, “O my nurse, cometh this dress from him or from
another?”[269] Replied she, “From him;” and Hayat al-Nufus asked, “Is
this trader of our town or a stranger?” The old woman answered, “He is a
foreigner, O my lady, newly come hither; and by Allah he hath servants
and slaves; and he is fair of face, symmetrical of form, well mannered,
open-handed and open-hearted, never saw I a goodlier than he, save
thyself.” The King’s daughter rejoined, “Indeed this is an extraordinary
thing, that a dress like this, which money cannot buy, should be in the
hands of a merchant! What price did he set on it, O my nurse?” Quoth
she, “By Allah, he would set no price on it, but gave me back the money
thou sentest by me and swore that he would take naught thereof,
saying:—’Tis a gift from me to the King’s daughter; for it beseemeth
none but her; and if she will not accept it, I make thee a present of
it.” Cried the Princess, “By Allah, this is indeed marvellous generosity
and wondrous munificence! But I fear the issue of his affair, lest
haply[270] he be brought to necessity. Why didst thou not ask him, O my
nurse, if he had any desire, that we might fulfil it for him?” The nurse
replied, “O my lady, I did ask him, and he said to me:—I have indeed a
desire; but he would not tell me what it was. However, he gave me this
letter and said:—Carry it to the Princess.” So Hayat al-Nufus took the
letter and opened and read it to the end; whereupon she was sore chafed;
and lost temper and changing colour for anger she cried out to the old
woman, saying, “Woe to thee, O nurse! What is the name of this dog who
durst write this language to a King’s daughter? What affinity is there
between me and this hound that he should address me thus? By Almighty
Allah, Lord of the well Zemzem and of the Hatim Wall,[271] but that I
fear the Omnipotent, the Most High, I would send and bind the cur’s
hands behind him and slit his nostrils, and shear off his nose and ears
and after, by way of example, crucify him on the gate of the bazar
wherein is his booth!” When the old woman heard these words, she waxed
yellow; her side muscles[272] quivered and her tongue clave to her
mouth; but she heartened her heart and said, “Softly, O my lady! What is
there in his letter to trouble thee thus? Is it aught but a memorial
containing his complaint to thee of poverty or oppression, from which he
hopeth to be relieved by thy favour?” Replied she, “No, by Allah, O my
nurse, ’tis naught of this; but verses and shameful words! However, O my
nurse, this dog must be in one of three cases: either he is Jinn-mad,
and hath no wit, or he seeketh his own slaughter, or else he is assisted
to his wish of me by some one of exceeding puissance and a mighty
Sultan. Or hath he heard that I am one of the baggages of the city, who
lie a night or two with whosoever seeketh them, that he writeth me
immodest verses to debauch my reason by talking of such matters?”
Rejoined the old woman, “By Allah, O my lady, thou sayst sooth! But reck
not thou of yonder ignorant hound, for thou art seated in thy lofty,
firm-builded and unapproachable palace, to which the very birds cannot
soar neither the wind pass over it, and as for him, he is clean
distraught. Wherefore do thou write him a letter and chide him angrily
and spare him no manner of reproof, but threaten him with dreadful
threats and menace him with death and say to him:—Whence hast thou
knowledge of me, that thou durst write me, O dog of a merchant, O thou
who trudgest far and wide all thy days in wilds and wolds for the sake
of gaining a dirham or a dinar? By Allah, except thou awake from thy
sleep and put off thine intoxication, I will assuredly crucify thee on
the gate of the market-street wherein is thy shop!” Quoth the Princess,
“I fear lest he presume, if I write to him”; and quoth the nurse, “And
pray what is he and what is his rank that he should presume to us?
Indeed, we write him but to the intent that his presumption may be cut
off and his fear magnified.” And she ceased not craftily to persuade
her, till she called for ink-case and paper and wrote him these
couplets:—

 O thou who claimest to be prey of love and ecstasy; ✿ Thou, who for
    passion spendest nights in grief and saddest gree:
 Say, dost thou (haughty one!) desire enjoyment of the moon? ✿ Did man
    e’er sue the moon for grace whate’er his lunacy?
 I verily will counsel thee with rede the best to hear: ✿ Cut short this
    course ere come thou nigh sore risk, nay death, to dree!
 If thou to this request return, surely on thee shall fall ✿ Sore
    punishment, for vile offence a grievous penalty.
 Be reasonable then, be wise, hark back unto thy wits; ✿ Behold, in very
    truth I speak with best advice to thee:
 By Him who did all things that be create from nothingness; ✿ Who dressed
    the face of heaven with stars in brightest radiancy:
 If in the like of this thy speech thou dare to sin again! ✿ I’ll surely
    have thee crucified upon a trunk of tree.

Then she rolled up the letter and gave it to the old woman who took it
and, repairing to Ardashir’s shop, delivered it to him,——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the old woman
took that letter from Hayat al-Nufus she fared forth till she found the
youth who was sitting in his shop and gave it to him, saying, “Read
thine answer and know that when she perused thy paper she was wroth with
exceeding wrath; but I soothed her and spake her fair, till she
consented to write thee a reply.” He took the letter joyfully but, when
he had read it and understood its drift, he wept sore, whereat the old
woman’s heart ached and she cried, “O my son, Allah never cause thine
eyes to weep nor thy heart to mourn! What can be more gracious than that
she should answer thy letter when thou hast done what thou diddest?” He
replied, “O my mother what shall I do for a subtle device? Behold, she
writeth to me, threatening me with death and crucifixion and forbidding
me from writing to her; and I, by Allah, see my death to be better than
my life; but I beg thee of thy grace[273] to carry her another letter
from me.” She said, “Write and I warrant I’ll bring thee an answer. By
Allah, I will assuredly venture my life to win for thee thy wish, though
I die to pleasure thee!” He thanked her and kissing her hands, wrote
these verses:—

 Do you threaten me wi’ death for my loving you so well? ✿ When Death to
    me were rest and all dying is by Fate?
 And man’s death is but a boon, when so longsome to him grows ✿ His life,
    and rejected he lives in lonest state:
 Then visit ye a lover who hath ne’er a soul to aid; ✿ For on pious works
    of men Heaven’s blessing shall await.
 But an ye be resolved on this deed then up and on; ✿ I’m in bonds to
    you, a bondsman confined within your gate:
 What path have I whose patience without you is no more? ✿ How is this,
    when a lover’s heart in stress of love is strait?
 O my lady show me ruth, who by passion am misused; ✿ For all who love
    the noble stand for evermore excused.

He then folded the scroll and gave it to the old woman, together with
two purses of two hundred dinars, which she would have refused, but he
conjured her by oath to accept of them. So she took them both and said,
“Needs must I bring thee to thy desire, despite the noses of thy foes.”
Then she repaired to the palace and gave the letter to Hayat al-Nufus
who said, “What is this, O my nurse? Here are we in a correspondence and
thou coming and going! Indeed, I fear lest the matter get wind and we be
disgraced.” Rejoined the old woman, “How so, O my lady? Who dare speak
such word?” So she took the letter and after reading and understanding
it she smote hand on hand, saying, “Verily, this is a calamity which is
fallen upon us, and I know not whence this young man came to us!” Quoth
the old woman, “O my lady, Allah upon thee, write him another letter;
but be rough with him this time and say to him:—An thou write me another
word after this, I will have thy head struck off.” Quoth the Princess,
“O my nurse, I am assured that the matter will not end on such wise;
’twere better to break off this exchange of letters; and, except the
puppy take warning by my previous threats, I will strike off his head.”
The old woman said, “Then write him a letter and give him to know this
condition.” So Hayat al-Nufus called for pen-case and paper and wrote
these couplets:—

 Ho, thou heedless of Time and his sore despight! ✿ Ho, thou heart whom
    hopes of my favours excite!

 Think O pride-full! would’st win for thyself the skies? ✿ Would’st
    attain to the moon shining clear and bright?
 I will burn thee with fire that shall ne’er be quenched, ✿ Or will slay
    thee with scymitar’s sharpest bite!
 Leave it, friend, and ’scape the tormenting pains, ✿ Such as turn
    hair-partings[274] from black to white.
 Take my warning and fly from the road of love; ✿ Draw thee back from a
    course nor seemly nor right!

Then she folded the scroll and gave it to the old woman, who was puzzled
and perplexed by the matter. She carried it to Ardashir, and the Prince
read the letter and bowed his head to the earth, making as if he wrote
with his finger and speaking not a word. Quoth the old woman, “How is it
I see thee silent stay and not say thy say?”; and quoth he, “O my
mother, what shall I say, seeing that she doth but threaten me and
redoubleth in hardheartedness and aversion?” Rejoined the nurse, “Write
her a letter of what thou wilt: I will protect thee; nor let thy heart
be cast down, for needs must I bring you twain together.” He thanked her
for her kindness and kissing her hand, wrote these couplets:—

 A heart, by Allah! never soft to lover-wight, ✿ Who sighs for union only
    with his friends, his sprite!
 Who with tear-ulcered eyelids evermore must bide, ✿ When falleth upon
    earth first darkness of the night:
 Be just, be gen’rous, lend thy ruth and deign give alms ✿ To
    love-molested lover, parted, forced to flight!
 He spends the length of longsome night without a doze; ✿ Fire-brent and
    drent in tear-flood flowing infinite:
 Ah; cut not off the longing of my fondest heart ✿ Now disappointed,
    wasted, flutt’ring for its blight.

Then he folded the scroll and gave it to the old woman, together with
three hundred dinars, saying, “This is for the washing of thy hands.”
She thanked him and kissed his hands, after which she returned to the
palace and gave the letter to the Princess, who took it and read it and
throwing it from her fingers, sprang to her feet. Then she walked, shod
as she was with pattens of gold, set with pearls and jewels, till she
came to her sire’s palace, whilst the vein of anger started out between
her eyes, and none dared ask her of her case. When she reached the
palace, she enquired for the King, and the slave-girls and concubines
replied to her, “O my lady, he is gone forth a-hunting and sporting.” So
she returned, as she were a rending lioness, and bespake none for the
space of three hours, when her brow cleared and her wrath cooled. As
soon as the old woman saw that her irk and anger were past, she went up
to her and, kissing ground between her hands, asked her, “O my lady,
whither went those noble steps?” The Princess answered, “To the palace
of the King my sire.” “And could no one do thine errand?” enquired the
nurse. Replied the Princess, “No, for I went to acquaint him of that
which hath befallen me with yonder cur of a merchant, so he might lay
hands on him and on all the merchants of his bazar and crucify them over
their shops nor suffer a single foreign merchant to tarry in our town.”
Quoth the old woman, “And was this thine only reason, O my lady, for
going to thy sire?”; and quoth Hayat al-Nufus, “Yes, but I found him
absent a-hunting and sporting and now I await his return.” Cried the old
nurse, “I take refuge with Allah, the All-hearing, the All-knowing!
Praised be He! O my lady, thou art the most sensible of women and how
couldst thou think of telling the King these fond words, which it
behoveth none to publish?” Asked the Princess, “And why so?” and the
nurse answered, “Suppose thou had found the King in his palace and told
him all this tale and he had sent after the merchants and commanded to
hang them over their shops, the folk would have seen them hanging and
asked the reason and it would have been answered them:—They sought to
seduce the King’s daughter.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old woman
said to the Princess, “Suppose thou had told this to the King and he had
ordered the merchants to be hanged, would not folk have seen them and
have asked the cause of the execution when the answer would have
been:—They sought to seduce the King’s daughter? Then would they have
dispread divers reports concerning thee, some saying:—She abode with
them ten days, away from her palace, till they had taken their fill of
her; and other some in otherguise; for woman’s honour, O my lady, is
like curded milk, the least dust fouleth it; and like glass, which, if
it be cracked, may not be mended. So beware of telling thy sire or any
other of this matter, lest thy fair fame be smirched, O mistress mine,
for ’twill never profit thee to tell folk aught; no, never! Weigh what I
say with thy keen wit, and if thou find it not just, do whatso thou
wilt.” The Princess pondered her words, and seeing them to be altogether
profitable and right, said, “Thou speakest sooth, O my nurse; but anger
had blinded my judgment.” Quoth the old woman, “Thy resolve to tell no
one is pleasing to the Almighty; but something remaineth to be done: we
must not let the shamelessness of yonder vile dog of a merchant pass
without notice. Write him a letter and say to him:—O vilest of traders,
but that I found the King my father absent, I had straightway commanded
to hang thee and all thy neighbours. But thou shalt gain nothing by
this; for I swear to thee, by Allah the Most High, that an thou return
to the like of this talk, I will blot out the trace of thee from the
face of earth! And deal thou roughly with him in words, so shalt thou
discourage him in this attempt and arouse him from his heedlessness.”
“And will these words cause him to abstain from his offending?” asked
the Princess; and the old woman answered, “How should he not abstain?
Besides, I will talk with him and tell him what hath passed.” So the
Princess called for ink-case and paper and wrote these couplets:—

 To win our favours still thy hopes are bent; ✿ And still to win thy will
    art confident!
 Naught save his pride-full aim shall slay a man; ✿ And he by us shall
    die of his intent.
 Thou art no lord of might, no chief of men, ✿ Nabob or Prince or Soldan
    Heaven-sent;
 And were this deed of one who is our peer, ✿ He had returned with hair
    for fear white-sprent:
 Yet will I deign once more excuse thy sin ✿ So from this time thou prove
    thee penitent.

Then she gave the missive to the old woman, saying, “O my nurse, do thou
admonish this puppy lest I be forced to cut off his head and sin on his
account.” Replied the old woman, “By Allah, O my lady, I will not leave
him a side to turn on!” Then she returned to the youth and, when salams
had been exchanged, she gave him the letter. He read it and shook his
head, saying, “Verily, we are Allah’s and unto him shall we return!”
adding, “O my mother, what shall I do? My fortitude faileth me and my
patience palleth upon me!” She replied, “O my son, be long-suffering:
peradventure, after this Allah shall bring somewhat to pass. Write that
which is in thy mind and I will fetch thee an answer, and be of good
cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear; for needs must I bring about
union between thee and her,—Inshallah!” He blessed her and wrote to the
Princess a note containing these couplets:—

 Since none will lend my love a helping hand, ✿ And I by passion’s bale
    in death low-lain,
 I bear a flaming fire within my heart ✿ By day and night nor place of
    rest attain,
 How cease to hope in thee, my wishes’ term? ✿ Or with my longings to be
    glad and fain?
 The Lord of highmost Heaven to grant my prayer ✿ Pray I, whom love of
    lady fair hath slain;
 And as I’m clean o’erthrown by love and fear, ✿ To grant me speedy union
    deign, oh deign!

Then he folded the scroll and gave it to the old woman, bringing out at
the same time a purse of four hundred dinars. She took the whole and
returning to the palace sought the Princess to whom she gave the letter;
but the King’s daughter refused to take it and cried, “What is this?”
Replied the old woman, “O my lady, this is only the answer to the letter
thou sentest to that merchant dog.” Quoth Hayat al-Nufus, “Didst thou
forbid him as I told thee?”; and quoth she, “Yes, and this is his
reply.” So the Princess took the letter and read it to the end; then she
turned to the old woman and exclaimed, “Where is the result of thy
promise?” “O my lady, saith he not in his letter that he repenteth and
will not again offend, excusing himself for the past?” “Not so, by
Allah!: on the contrary, he increaseth.” “O my lady, write him a letter
and thou shalt presently see what I will do with him.” “There needeth
nor letter nor answer.” “I must have a letter that I may rebuke him
roughly and cut off his hopes.” “Thou canst do that without a letter.”
“I cannot do it without the letter.” So Hayat al-Nufus called for
pen-case and paper and wrote these verses:—

 Long have I chid thee but my chiding hindereth thee not ✿ How often
    would my verse with writ o’ hand ensnare thee, ah!
 Then keep thy passion hidden deep and ever unrevealed, ✿ And if thou
    dare gainsay me Earth shall no more bear thee, ah!

 And if, despite my warning, thou dost to such words return ✿ Death’s
    Messenger[275] shall go his rounds and dead declare thee, ah!
 Soon shall the wold’s fierce chilling blast o’erblow that corse o’
    thine; ✿ And birds o’ the wild with ravening bills and beaks shall
    tear thee, ah!
 Return to righteous course; perchance that same will profit thee; ✿ If
    bent on wilful aims and lewd I fain forswear thee, ah!

When she had made an end of her writing this, she cast the writ from her
hand in wrath, and the old woman picked it up and went with it to
Ardashir. When he read it to the last he knew that she had not softened
to him, but only redoubled in rage against him, and that he would never
win to meet her, so he bethought himself to write her an answer invoking
Allah’s help against her. Thereupon he indited these couplets:—

 O Lord, by the Five Shaykhs, I pray deliver me ✿ From love, which gars
    me bear such grief and misery.
 Thou knowest what I bear for passion’s fiery flame; ✿ What stress of
    sickness for that merciless maid I dree.
 She hath no pity on the pangs to me decreed ✿ How long on weakly wight
    shall last her tyranny?
 I am distraught for her with passing agonies ✿ And find no friend, O
    folk! to hear my plaint and plea.
 How long, when Night hath drooped her pinions o’er the world ✿ Shall I
    lament in public as in privacy?
 For love of you I cannot find forgetfulness; ✿ And how forget when
    Patience taketh wings to flee?
 O thou wild parting-bird[276] say is she safe and sure ✿ From shift and
    change of time and the world’s cruelty?

Then he folded the scroll and gave it to the old woman, adding a purse
of five hundred dinars; and she took it and carried it to the Princess,
who read it to the end and learned its purport. Then, casting it from
her hand, she cried, “Tell me O wicked old woman, the cause of all that
hath befallen me from thee and from thy cunning and thine advocacy of
him, so that thou hast made me write letter after letter and thou
ceasest not to carry messages, going and coming between us twain, till
thou hast brought about a correspondence and a connection. Thou leavest
not to say:—I will ensure thee against his mischief and cut off from
thee his speech; but thou speakest not thus save only to the intent that
I may continue to write thee letters and thou to fetch and carry between
us, evening and morning, till thou ruin my repute. Woe to thee! Ho,
eunuchs, seize her!” Then Hayat al-Nufus commanded them to beat her, and
they lashed her till her whole body flowed with blood and she fainted
away, whereupon the King’s daughter caused her slave-women to drag her
forth by the feet and cast her without the palace and bade one of them
stand by her head till she recovered, and say to her, “The Princess hath
sworn an oath that thou shalt never return to and re-enter this palace;
and she hath commanded to slay thee without mercy an thou dare return
hither.” So, when she came to herself, the damsel told her what the
King’s daughter said and she answered, “Hearkening and obedience.”
Presently the slave-girls fetched a basket and a porter whom they caused
carry her to her own house; and they sent after her a physician, bidding
him tend her assiduously till she recovered. He did what he was told to
do and as soon as she was whole she mounted and rode to the shop of
Ardashir who was concerned with sore concern for her absence and was
longing for news of her. As soon as he saw her, he sprang up and coming
to meet her, saluted her; then he noticed that she was weak and ailing;
so he questioned her of her case and she told him all that had befallen
her from her nursling. When he heard this, he found it grievous and
smote hand upon hand, saying, “By Allah, O my mother, this that hath
betided thee straiteneth my heart! But, what, O my mother, is the reason
of the Princess’s hatred to men?” Replied the old woman, “Thou must know
O my son, that she hath a beautiful garden, than which there is naught
goodlier on earth’s face and it chanced that she lay there one night. In
the joyance of sleep, she dreamt a dream and ’twas this, that she went
down into the garden, where she saw a fowler set up his net and strew
corn thereabout, after which he withdrew and sat down afar off to await
what game should fall into it. Ere an hour had passed the birds flocked
to pick up the corn and a male pigeon[277] fell into the net and
struggled in it, whereat all the others took fright and fled from him.
His mate was amongst them, but she returned to him after the shortest
delay; and, coming up to the net, sought out the mesh wherein his foot
was entangled and ceased not to peck at it with her bill, till she
severed it and released her husband, with whom she flew away. All this
while, the fowler sat dozing, and when he awoke, he looked at the net
and found it spoilt. So he mended it and strewed fresh grain, then
withdrew to a distance and sat down to watch it again. The birds soon
returned and began to pick up the corn, and among the rest the pair of
pigeons. Presently, the she-pigeon fell into the net and struggled to
get free; whereupon all the other birds flew away, and her mate, whom
she had saved, fled with the rest and did not return to her. Meantime,
sleep had again overcome the fowler; and, when he awoke after long
slumbering, he saw the she-pigeon caught in the net; so he went up to
her and freeing her feet from the meshes, cut her throat. The Princess
startled by the dream awoke troubled, and said:—Thus do men with women,
for women have pity on men and throw away their lives for them, when
they are in difficulties; but if the Lord decree against a woman and she
fall into calamity, her mate deserteth her and rescueth her not, and
wasted is that which she did with him of kindness. Allah curse her who
putteth her trust in men, for they ill requite the fair offices which
women do them! And from that day she conceived an hatred to men.” Said
the King’s son, “O my mother, doth she never go out into the highways?”;
and the old woman replied, “Nay, O my son; but I will tell thee somewhat
wherein, Allah willing, there shall be profit for thee. She hath a
garden which is of the goodliest pleasaunces of the age; and every year,
at the time of the ripening of the fruits, she goeth thither and taketh
her pleasure therein only one day, nor layeth the night but in her
pavilion. She entereth the garden by the private wicket of the palace
which leadeth thereto; and thou must know that it wanteth now but a
month to the time of her going forth. So take my advice and hie thee
this very day to the keeper of that garden and make acquaintance with
him and gain his good graces, for he admitteth not one of Allah’s
creatures into the garth, because of its communication with the
Princess’s palace. I will let thee know two days beforehand of the day
fixed for her coming forth, when do thou repair to the garden, as of thy
wont, and make shift to night there. When the King’s daughter cometh be
thou hidden in some place or other;”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old woman
charged the King’s son, saying, “I will let thee know two days
beforehand of the King’s daughter going down to the garden: do thou hide
thee in some place or other; and, when thou espiest her, come forth and
show thyself to her. When she seeth thee, she will fall in love with
thee; for thou art fair to look upon and love covereth all things. So
keep thine eyes cool and clear[278] and be of good cheer, O my son, for
needs must I bring about union between thee and her.” The young Prince
kissed her hand and thanked her and gave her three pieces of Alexandrian
silk and three of satin of various colours, and with each piece, linen
for shifts and stuff for trousers and a kerchief for the turband and
fine white cotton cloth of Ba’albak for the linings, so as to make her
six complete suits, each handsomer than its sister. Moreover, he gave
her a purse containing six hundred gold pieces and said to her, “This is
for the tailoring.” She took the whole and said to him, “O my son, art
thou not pleased to acquaint me with thine abiding-place and I also will
show thee the way to my lodging?” “Yes,” answered he and sent a Mameluke
with her to note her home and show her his own house. Then he rose and
bidding his slaves shut the shop, went back to the Wazir, to whom he
related all that had passed between him and the old woman, from first to
last. Quoth the Minister, “O my son, should the Princess Hayat al-Nufus
come out and look upon thee and thou find no favour with her what wilt
thou do?” Quoth Ardashir, “There will be nothing left but to pass from
words to deeds and risk my life with her; for I will snatch her up from
amongst her attendants and set her behind me on a swift horse and make
for the wildest of the wold. If I escape, I shall have won my wish and
if I perish, I shall be at rest from this hateful life.” Rejoined the
Minister, “O my son, dost thou think to do this thing and live? How
shall we make our escape, seeing that our country is far distant, and
how wilt thou deal thus with a King of the Kings of the Age, who hath
under his hand an hundred thousand horse, nor can we be sure but that he
will despatch some of his troops to cut off our way? Verily, there is no
good in this project which no wise man would attempt.” Asked Ardashir,
“And how then shall we do, O Wazir of good counsel? For unless I win her
I am a dead man without a chance.” The Minister answered, “Wait till
to-morrow when we will visit this garden and note its condition and see
what betideth us with the care-taker.” So when the morning morrowed they
took a thousand dinars in a poke and, repairing to the garden, found it
compassed about with high walls and strong, rich in trees and rill-full
leas and goodly fruiteries. And indeed its flowers breathed perfume and
its birds warbled amid the bloom as it were a garden of the gardens of
Paradise. Within the door sat a Shaykh, an old man on a stone bench and
they saluted him. When he saw them and noted the fairness of their
favour, he rose to his feet after returning their salute, and said, “O
my lords, perchance ye have a wish which we may have the honour of
satisfying?” Replied the Wazir, “Know, O elder, that we are strangers
and the heat hath overcome us: our lodging is afar off at the other end
of the city; so we desire of thy courtesy that thou take these two
dinars and buy us somewhat of provaunt and open us meanwhile the door of
this flower garden and seat us in some shaded place, where there is cold
water, that we may cool ourselves there, against thou return with the
provision, when we will eat, and thou with us, and then, rested and
refreshed, we shall wend our ways.” So saying, he pulled out of his
pouch a couple of dinars and put them into the keeper’s hand. Now this
care-taker was a man aged threescore and ten, who had never in all his
life possessed so much money: So, when he saw the two dinars in his
hand, he was like to fly for joy and rising forthwith opened the garden
gate to the Prince and the Wazir, and made them enter and sit down under
a wide-spreading, fruit-laden, shade-affording tree, saying, “Sit ye
here and go no further into the garden, for it hath a privy door
communicating with the palace of the Princess Hayat al-Nufus.” They
replied, “We will not stir hence.” Whereupon he went out to buy what
they had ordered and returned after awhile, with a porter bearing on his
head a roasted lamb and bread. They ate and drank together and talked
awhile, till, presently, the Wazir, looking about him in all corners
right and left, caught sight of a lofty pavilion at the farther end of
the garden; but it was old and the plaster was peeled from its walls and
its buttresses were broken down. So he said to the Gardener, “O Shaykh,
is this garden thine own or dost thou hire it?”; and he replied, “I am
neither owner nor tenant of the garden, only its care-taker.” Asked the
Minister, “And what is thy wage?” whereto the old man answered, “A dinar
a month,” and quoth the Wazir, “Verily they wrong thee, especially an
thou have a family.” Quoth the elder, “By Allah, O my lord; I have eight
children and I”—The Wazir broke in, “There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! Thou makest me bear thy
grief my poor fellow! What wouldst thou say of him who should do thee a
good turn, on account of this family of thine?” Replied the old man, “O
my lord, whatsoever good thou dost shall be garnered up for thee with
God the Most High!” Thereupon said the Wazir, “O Shaykh, thou knowest
this garden of thine to be a goodly place; but the pavilion yonder is
old and ruinous. Now I mean to repair it and stucco it anew and paint it
handsomely, so that it will be the finest thing in the garth; and when
the owner comes and finds the pavilion restored and beautified, he will
not fail to question thee concerning it. Then do thou say:—O my lord, at
great expense I set it in repair, for that I saw it in ruins and none
could make use of it nor could anyone sit therein. If he says:—Whence
hadst thou the money for this? reply, I spent of my own money upon the
stucco, thereby thinking to whiten my face with thee and hoping for thy
bounties. And needs must he recompense thee fairly over the extent of
thine expenses. To-morrow I will bring builders and plasterers and
painters to repair this pavilion and will give thee what I promised
thee.” Then he pulled out of his poke a purse of five hundred dinars and
gave it to the Gardener, saying, “Take these gold pieces and expend them
upon thy family and let them pray for me and for this my son.” Thereupon
the Prince asked the Wazir, “What is the meaning of all this?” and he
answered, “Thou shalt presently see the issue thereof.”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Wazir
gave five hundred ducats to the old Gardener, saying, “Take these gold
pieces and expend them upon thy family and let them pray for this my
son,” the old man looked at the gold and his wits fled; so he fell down
at the Wazir’s feet, kissing them and invoking blessings on him and his
son; and when they went away, he said to them, “I shall expect you
to-morrow: for by Allah Almighty, there must be no parting between us,
night or day.” Next morning the Wazir went to the Prince’s shop and sent
for the syndic of the builders; then he carried him and his men to the
garth, where the Gardener rejoiced in their sight. He gave them the
price of rations[279] and what was needful to the workmen for the
restoration of the pavilion, and they repaired it and stucco’d it and
decorated it. Then said the Minister to the painters, “Harkye, my
masters, listen to my words and apprehend my wish and my aim. Know that
I have a garden like this, where I was sleeping one night among the
nights and saw in a dream a fowler set up nets and sprinkle corn
thereabout. The birds flocked to pick up the grain, and a cock-bird fell
into the net, whereupon the others took fright and flew away, and
amongst the rest his mate: but, after awhile, she returned alone and
picked at the mesh that held his feet, till she set him free and they
flew away together. Now the fowler had fallen asleep and, when he awoke,
he found the net empty; so he mended it and strewing fresh grain sat
down afar off, waiting for game to fall into that snare. Presently the
birds assembled again to pick up the grains, and amongst the rest the
two pigeons. By-and-by, the hen-bird fell into the net, when all the
other birds took fright at her and flew away, and her husband flew with
them and did not return; whereupon the fowler came up and taking the
quarry, cut her throat. Now, when her mate flew away with the others, a
bird of raven seized him and slew him and ate his flesh and drank his
blood, and I would have you pourtray me the presentment of this my
dream, even as I have related it to you, in the liveliest colours,
laying the fair scene in this rare garden, with its walls and trees and
rills, and dwell especially on the fowler and the falcon. If ye do this
I have set forth to you and the work please me, I will give you what
shall gladden your hearts, over and above your wage.” The painters,
hearing these words, applied themselves with all diligence to do what he
required of them and wrought it out in masterly style; and when they had
made an end of the work, they showed it to the Wazir who, seeing his
so-called dream set forth as it was[280] was pleased and thanked them
and rewarded them munificently. Presently, the Prince came in, according
to his custom, and entered the pavilion, unweeting what the Wazir had
done. So when he saw the portraiture of the fowler and the birds and the
net and beheld the male pigeon in the clutches of the hawk, which had
slain him and was drinking his blood and eating his flesh, his
understanding was confounded and he returned to the Minister and said,
“O Wazir of good counsel, I have seen this day a marvel which, were it
graven with needle-gravers on the eye-corners would be a warner to whoso
will be warned?” Asked the Minister, “And what is that, O my lord?”; and
the Prince answered, “Did I not tell thee of the dream the Princess had
and how it was the cause of her hatred for men?” “Yes,” replied the
Wazir; and Ardashir rejoined, “By Allah, O Minister, I have seen the
whole dream pourtrayed in painting, as I had eyed it with mine own eyes;
but I found therein a circumstance which was hidden from the Princess,
so that she saw it not, and ’tis upon this that I rely for the winning
of my wish.” Quoth the Wazir, “And what is that, O my son?”; and quoth
the Prince, “I saw that, when the male bird flew away; and, leaving his
mate entangled in the net, failed to return and save her, a falcon
pounced on him and slaying him, ate his flesh and drank his blood. Would
to Heaven the Princess had seen the whole of the dream and had beheld
the cause of his failure to return and rescue her!” Replied the Wazir,
“By Allah, O auspicious King, this is indeed a rare thing and a
wonderful!” And the King’s son ceased not to marvel at the picture and
lament that the King’s daughter had not beheld the dream to its end,
saying in himself, “Would she had seen it to the last or might see the
whole over again, though but in the imbroglio of sleep!” Then quoth the
Wazir to him, “Thou saidst to me:—Why wilt thou repair the pavilion?;
and I replied:—Thou shalt presently see the issue thereof. And behold,
now its issue thou seest; for it was I did this deed and bade the
painters pourtray the Princess’s dream thus and paint the male bird in
the pounces of the falcon which eateth his flesh and drinketh his blood;
so that when she cometh to the pavilion, she will behold her dream
depicted and see how the cock-pigeon was slain and excuse him and turn
from her hate for men.” When the Prince heard the Wazir’s words, he
kissed his hands and thanked him, saying, “Verily, the like of thee is
fit to be Minister to the most mighty King, and, by Allah, an I win my
wish and return to my sire, rejoicing, I will assuredly acquaint him
with this, that he may redouble in honouring thee and advance thee in
dignity and hearken to thine every word.” So the Wazir kissed his hand
and they both went to the old Gardener and said, “Look at yonder
pavilion and see how fine it is!” And he replied, “This is all of your
happy thought.” Then said they, “O elder, when the owners of the place
question thee concerning the restoration of the pavilion, say
thou:—’Twas I did it of my own monies; to the intent that there may
betide thee fair favour and good fortune.” He said, “I hear and I obey”;
and the Prince continued to pay him frequent visits. Such was the case
with the Prince and the Wazir; but as regards Hayat al-Nufus, when she
ceased to receive the Prince’s letters and messages and when the old
woman was absent from her, she rejoiced with joy exceeding and concluded
that the young man had returned to his own country. One day, there came
to her a covered tray from her father; so she uncovered it and finding
therein fine fruits, asked her waiting-women, “Is the season of these
fruits come?” Answered they, “Yes.” Thereupon she cried, “Would we might
make ready to take our pleasure in the flower-garden!”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


      Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Princess,
after receiving the fruit from her sire, asked, “Is the season of these
fruits set in?”; and they answered, “Yes!” Thereupon she cried, “Would
we might make ready to take our pleasure in the flower-garden!” “O my
lady,” they replied, “thou sayest well, and by Allah, we also long for
the garden!” So she enquired, “How shall we do, seeing that every year
it is none save my nurse who taketh us to walk in the garden and who
pointeth out to us the various trees and plants; and I have beaten her
and forbidden her from me? Indeed, I repent me of what was done by me to
her, for that, in any case, she is my nurse and hath over me the right
of fosterage. But there is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great!” When her handmaids heard this, they all
sprang up; and, kissing the ground between her hands, exclaimed, “Allah
upon thee, O my lady, do thou pardon her and bid her to the presence!”;
and quoth she, “By Allah, I am resolved upon this; but which of you will
go to her, for I have prepared her a splendid robe of honour?” Hereupon
two damsels came forward, by name Bulbul and Siwád al-’Ayn, who were
comely and graceful and the principals among the Princess’s women, and
her favourites. And they said, “We will go to her, O King’s daughter!”;
and she said, “Do what seemeth good to you.” So they went to the house
of the nurse and knocked at the door and entered; and she, recognising
the twain, received them with open arms and welcomed them. When they had
sat awhile with her, they said to her, “O nurse, the Princess pardoneth
thee and desireth to take thee back into favour.” She replied, “This may
never be, though I drink the cup of ruin! Hast thou forgotten how she
put me to shame before those who love me and those who hate me, when my
clothes were dyed with my blood and I well nigh died for stress of
beating, and after this they dragged me forth by the feet, like a dead
dog, and cast me without the door? So by Allah, I will never return to
her nor fill my eyes with her sight!” Quoth the two girls, “Disappoint
not our pains in coming to thee nor send us away unsuccessful. Where is
thy courtesy uswards? Think but who it is that cometh in to visit thee:
canst thou wish for any higher of standing than we with the King’s
daughter?” She replied, “I take refuge with Allah: well I wot that my
station is less than yours; were it not that the Princess’s favour
exalted me above all her women, so that, were I wroth with the greatest
of them, she had died in her skin of fright.” They rejoined, “All is as
it was and naught is in anywise changed. Indeed, ’tis better than
before, for the Princess humbleth herself to thee and seeketh a
reconciliation without intermediary.” Said the old woman, “By Allah,
were it not for your presence and intercession with me, I had never
returned to her; no, not though she had commanded to slay me!” They
thanked her for this and she rose and dressing herself accompanied them
to the palace. Now when the King’s daughter saw her, she sprang to her
feet in honour, and the old woman said, “Allah! Allah! O King’s
daughter, say me, whose was the fault, mine or thine?” Hayat al-Nufus
replied, “The fault was mine, and ’tis thine to pardon and forgive. By
Allah, O my nurse, thy rank is high with me and thou hast over me the
right of fosterage; but thou knowest that Allah (extolled and exalted be
He!) hath allotted to His creatures four things, disposition, life,
daily bread and death; nor is it in man’s power to avert that which is
decreed. Verily, I was beside myself and could not recover my senses;
but, O my nurse, I repent of what deed I did.” With this, the crone’s
anger ceased from her and she rose and kissed the ground before the
Princess, who called for a costly robe of honour and threw it over her,
whereat she rejoiced with exceeding joy in the presence of the
Princess’s slaves and women. When all ended thus happily, Hayat al-Nufus
said to the old woman, “O my nurse, how go the fruits and growths of our
garth?”; and she replied, “O my lady, I see excellent fruits in the
town; but I will enquire of this matter and return thee an answer this
very day.” Then she withdrew, honoured with all honour and betook
herself to Ardashir, who received her with open arms and embraced her
and rejoiced in her coming, for that he had expected her long and
longingly. She told him all that had passed between herself and the
Princess and how her mistress was minded to go down into the garden on
such a day.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old woman
betook herself to the Prince and told him all that had passed between
herself and the Princess Hayat al-Nufus; and how her mistress was minded
to go down into the garden on such a day and said to him, “Hast thou
done as I bade thee with the Warder of the garden and hast thou made him
taste of thy bounties?” He replied, “Yes, and the oldster is become my
good friend: my way is his way and he would well I had need of him.”
Then he told her all that had happened and of the dream-paintings which
the Wazir had caused to be limned in the pavilion; especially of the
fowler, the net and the falcon: whereat she joyed with great joy and
said, “Allah upon thee, do thou set thy Minister midmost thy heart, for
this that he hath done pointeth to the keenness of his wit and he hath
helped thee to the winning thy wish. So rise forthright, O my son, and
go to the Hammam-bath and don thy daintiest dress, wherein may be our
success. Then fare thou to the Gardener and make shift to pass the night
in the garden, for though he should give the earth full of gold none may
win to pass into it, whilst the King’s daughter is therein. When thou
hast entered, hide thee where no eye may espy thee and keep concealed
till thou hear me cry:—O Thou whose boons are hidden, save us from that
we fear! Then come forth from thine ambush and walk among the trees and
show thy beauty and loveliness which put the moons to shame, to the
intent that Princess Hayat al-Nufus may see thee and that her heart and
soul may be filled with love of thee; so shalt thou attain to thy wish
and thy grief be gone.” “To hear is to obey,” replied the young Prince
and gave her a purse of a thousand dinars, which she took and went away.
Thereupon Ardashir fared straight for the bath and washed; after which
he arrayed himself in the richest of robes of the apparel of the Kings
of the Chosroës and girt his middle with a girdle wherein were conjoined
all manner precious stones and donned a turband inwoven with red gold
and purfled with pearls and gems. His cheeks shone rosy-red and his lips
were scarlet; his eyelids like the gazelle’s wantoned; like a
wine-struck wight in his gait he swayed; beauty and loveliness garbed
him, and his shape shamed the bowing of the bough. Then he put in his
pocket a purse containing a thousand dinars and, repairing to the
flower-garden, knocked at the door. The Gardener opened to him and
rejoicing with great joy salamed to him in most worshipful fashion;
then, observing that his face was overcast, he asked him how he did. The
King’s son answered, “Know, O elder, that I am dear to my father and he
never laid his hand on me till this day, when words arose between us and
he abused me and smote me on the face and struck me with his staff and
drave me away. Now I have no friend to turn to and I fear the perfidy of
Fortune, for thou knowest that the wrath of parents is no light thing.
Wherefore I come to thee, O uncle, seeing that to my father thou art
known, and I desire of thy favour that thou suffer me abide in the
garden till the end of the day, or pass the night there, till Allah
grant good understanding between myself and my sire.” When the old man
heard these words he was concerned anent what had occurred and said, “O
my lord, dost thou give me leave to go to thy sire and be the means of
reconciliation between thee and him?” Replied Ardashir, “O uncle, thou
must know that my father is of impatient nature, and irascible; so an
thou proffer him reconciliation in his heat of temper he will make thee
no answer; but when a day or two shall have passed, his heat will
soften. Then go thou in to him and thereupon he will relent.”
“Hearkening and obedience,” quoth the Gardener; “but, O my lord, do thou
come with me to my house, where thou shalt night with my children and my
family and none shall reproach this to us.” Quoth Ardashir, “O uncle, I
must be alone when I am angry.”[281] The old man said, “It irketh me
that thou shouldst lie solitary in the garden, when I have a house.” But
Ardashir said, “O uncle, I have an aim in this, that the trouble of my
mind may be dispelled from me and I know that in this lies the means of
regaining his favour and softening his heart to me.” Rejoined the
Gardener, “I will fetch thee a carpet to sleep on and a coverlet
wherewith to cover thee;” and the Prince said, “There is no harm in
that, O uncle.” So the keeper rose and opened the garden to him, and
brought him the carpet and coverlet, knowing not that the King’s
daughter was minded to visit the garth. On this wise fared it with the
Prince; but as regards the nurse, she returned to the Princess and told
her that the fruits were kindly ripe on the garden trees; whereupon she
said, “O my nurse, go down with me to-morrow into the garden, that we
may walk about in it and take our pleasure,—Inshallah; and send
meanwhile to the Gardener, to let him know what we purpose.” So she sent
to the Gardener to say:—The Princess will visit the parterre to-morrow,
so leave neither water-carriers nor tree-tenders therein, nor let one of
Allah’s creatures enter the garth. When word came to him, he set his
water-ways and channels in order and, going to Ardashir, said to him, “O
my lord, the King’s daughter is mistress of this garden; and I have only
to crave thy pardon, for the place is thy place and I live only in thy
favours, except that my tongue is under thy feet.[282] I must tell thee
that the Princess Hayat al-Nufus hath a mind to visit it to-morrow at
the first of the day and hath bidden me leave none therein who might
look upon her. So I would have thee of thy favour go forth of the garden
this day, for the Queen will abide only in it till the time of
mid-afternoon prayer and after it shall be at thy service for se’nnights
and fortnights, months and years.” Ardashir asked, “O elder, haply we
have caused thee some mishap?”; and the other answered, “By Allah, O my
lord, naught hath betided me from thee but honour!” Rejoined the Prince,
“An it be so, nothing but all good shall befal thee through us; for I
will hide in the garden and none shall espy me, till the King’s daughter
hath gone back to her palace.” Said the Gardener, “O my lord, an she
espy the shadow of a man in the garden or any of Allah’s male creatures
she will strike off my head;”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Gardener said to the Prince, “An the King’s daughter espy the shadow of
a man in her garden, she will strike off my head;” the youth replied,
“Have no fear, I will on no wise let any see me. But doubtless to-day
thou lackest of spending-money for thy family.” Then he put his hand to
his purse and pulled out five hundred ducats, which he gave to him
saying, “Take this gold and lay it out on thy family, that thy heart may
be at ease concerning them.” When the Shaykh looked upon the gold, his
life seemed a light thing to him[283] and he suffered the Prince to
tarry where he was, charging him straitly not to show himself in the
garden. Then he left him loitering about. Meanwhile, when the eunuchs
went in to the Princess at break of day, she bade open the private
wicket leading from the palace to the parterres and donned a royal robe,
embroidered with pearls and jewels and gems, over a shift of fine silk
purfled with rubies. Under the whole was that which tongue refuseth to
explain, whereat was confounded the brain and whose love would embrave
the craven’s strain. On her head she set a crown of red gold, inlaid
with pearls and gems and she tripped in pattens of cloth of gold,
embroidered with fresh pearls[284] and adorned with all manner precious
stones. Then she put her hand upon the old woman’s shoulder and
commanded to go forth by the privy door; but the nurse looked at the
garden and, seeing it full of eunuchs and handmaids walking about,
eating the fruits and troubling the streams and taking their ease of
sport and pleasure in the water said to the Princess, “O my lady, is
this a garden or a madhouse?” Quoth the Princess, “What meaneth thy
speech, O nurse?”; and quoth the old woman, “Verily the garden is full
of slave-girls and eunuchs, eating of the fruits and troubling the
streams and scaring the birds and hindering us from taking our ease and
sporting and laughing and what not else; and thou hast no need of them.
Wert thou going forth of thy palace into the highway, this would be
fitting, as an honour and a ward to thee; but, now, O my lady, thou
goest forth of the wicket into the garden, where none of Almighty
Allah’s creatures may look on thee.” Rejoined the Princess, “By Allah, O
nurse mine, thou sayst sooth! But how shall we do?”; and the old woman
said, “Bid the eunuchs send them all away and keep only two of the
slave-girls, that we may make merry with them.” So she dismissed them
all, with the exception of two of her handmaids who were most in favour
with her. But when the old woman saw that her heart was light and that
the season was pleasant to her, she said to her, “Now we can enjoy
ourselves aright: so up and let us take our pleasance in the garden.”
The Princess put her hand upon her shoulder and went out by the private
door. The two waiting-women walked in front and she followed them
laughing at them and swaying gracefully to and fro in her ample robes;
whilst the nurse forewent her, showing her the trees and feeding her
with fruits; and so they fared on from place to place, till they came to
the pavilion, which when the King’s daughter beheld and saw that it had
been restored, she asked the old woman, “O my nurse, seest thou yonder
pavilion? It hath been repaired and its walls whitened.” She answered,
“By Allah, O my lady, I heard say that the keeper of the garden had
taken stuffs of a company of merchants and sold them and bought bricks
and lime and plaster and stones and so forth with the price; so I asked
him what he had done with all this, and he said:—I have repaired the
pavilion which lay in ruins, presently adding:—And when the merchants
sought their due of me, I said to them, Wait till the Princess visit the
garden and see the repairs and they satisfy her; then will I take of her
what she is pleased to bestow on me, and pay you what is your due. Quoth
I—What moved thee to do this thing?; and quoth he:—I saw the pavilion in
ruins, the coigns thrown down and the stucco peeled from the walls, and
none had the grace to repair it; so I borrowed the coin on my own
account and restored the place; and I trust in the King’s daughter to
deal with me as befitteth her dignity. I said:—The Princess is all
goodness and generosity and will no doubt requite thee. And he did all
this but in hopes of thy bounty.” Replied the Princess, “By Allah, he
hath dealt nobly in rebuilding it and hath done the deed of generous
men! Call me my purse-keeperess.” The old woman accordingly fetched the
purse-keeperess, whom the Princess bade give the Gardener two thousand
dinars; whereupon the nurse sent to him, bidding him to the presence of
the King’s daughter. But when the messenger said to him, “Obey the
Queen’s order,” the Gardener felt feeble and, trembling in every joint,
said in himself, “Doubtless, the Princess hath seen the young man, and
this day will be the most unlucky of days for me.” So he went home and
told his wife and children what had happened and gave them his last
charges and farewelled them, while they wept for and with him. Then he
presented himself before the Princess, with a face the colour of
turmeric and ready to fall flat at full length. The old woman remarked
his plight and hastened to forestall him, saying, “O Shaykh, kiss the
earth in thanksgiving to Almighty Allah and be constant in prayer to Him
for the Princess. I told her what thou didst in the matter of repairing
the ruined pavilion, and she rejoiceth in this and bestoweth on thee two
thousand dinars in requital of thy pains; so take them from the
purse-keeperess and kiss the earth before the King’s daughter and bless
her and wend thy way.” Hearing these words he took the gold and kissed
the ground before Hayat al-Nufus, calling down blessings on her. Then he
returned to his house, and his family rejoiced in him and blessed
him[285] who had been the prime cause of this business.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Care-taker took the two thousand ducats from the Princess and returned
to his house, all his family rejoiced in him and blessed him who had
been the prime cause of this business. Thus it fared with these; but as
regards the old woman, she said to the Princess, “O my lady, this is
indeed become a fine place! Never saw I a purer white than its
plastering nor properer than its painting! I wonder if he have also
repaired it within: else hath he made the outside white and left the
inside black. Come, let us enter and inspect.” So they went in, the
nurse preceding, and found the interior painted and gilded in the
goodliest way. The Princess looked right and left, till she came to the
upper end of the estrade, when she fixed her eyes upon the wall and
gazed long and earnestly thereat; whereupon the old woman knew that her
glance had lighted on the presentment of her dream and took the two
waiting-women away with her, that they might not divert her mind. When
the King’s daughter had made an end of examining the painting, she
turned to the old woman, wondering and beating hand on hand, and said to
her, “O my nurse, come, see a wondrous thing which were it graven with
needle-gravers on the eye corners would be a warner to whoso will be
warned.” She replied, “And what is that, O my lady?”; when the Princess
rejoined, “Go, look at the upper end of the estrade, and tell me what
thou seest there.” So she went up and considered the dream-drawing: then
she came down, wondering, and said, “By Allah, O my lady, here is
depicted the garden and the fowler and his net and the birds and all
thou sawest in thy dream; and verily, nothing but urgent need withheld
the male pigeon from returning to free his mate after he had fled her,
for I see him in the talons of a bird of raven which hath slaughtered
him and is drinking his blood and rending his flesh and eating it; and
this, O my lady, caused his tarrying to return and rescue her from the
net. But, O my mistress, the wonder is how thy dream came to be thus
depicted, for, wert thou minded to set it forth in painture, thou hadst
not availed to portray it. By Allah, this is a marvel which should be
recorded in histories! Surely, O my lady, the angels appointed to attend
upon the sons of Adam, knew that the cock-pigeon was wronged of us,
because we blamed him for deserting his mate; so they embraced his cause
and made manifest his excuse; and now for the first time we see him in
the hawk’s pounces a dead bird.” Quoth the Princess, “O my nurse,
verily, Fate and Fortune had course against this bird, and we did him
wrong.” Quoth the nurse, “O my mistress, foes shall meet before Allah
the Most High: but, O my lady, verily, the truth hath been made manifest
and the male pigeon’s excuse certified to us; for had the hawk not
seized him and drunk his blood and rent his flesh he had not held aloof
from his mate, but had returned to her, and set her free from the net;
but against death there is no recourse, nor, O my lady, is there aught
in the world more tenderly solicitous than the male for the female,
among all creatures which Almighty Allah hath created. And especially
’tis thus with man; for he starveth himself to feed his wife, strippeth
himself to clothe her, angereth his family to please her and disobeyeth
and denieth his parents to endow her. She knoweth his secrets and
concealeth them and she cannot endure from him a single hour.[286] An he
be absent from her one night, her eyes sleep not, nor is there a dearer
to her than he: she loveth him more than her parents and they lie down
to sleep in each other’s arms, with his hand under her neck and her hand
under his neck, even as saith the poet:—

 I made my wrist her pillow and I lay with her in litter; ✿ And I said to
    Night “Be long!” while the full moon showed glitter:
 Ah me, it _was_ a night, Allah never made its like; ✿ Whose first was
    sweetest sweet and whose last was bitt’rest bitter![287]

Then he kisseth her and she kisseth him; and I have heard of a certain
King that, when his wife fell sick and died, he buried himself alive
with her, submitting himself to death, for the love of her and the
strait companionship which was between them. Moreover, a certain King
sickened and died, and when they were about to bury him, his wife said
to her people: Let me bury myself alive with him: else will I slay
myself and my blood shall be on your heads. So, when they saw she would
not be turned from this thing, they left her, and she cast herself into
the grave with her dead husband, of the greatness of her love and
tenderness for him.” And the old woman ceased not to ply the Princess
with anecdotes of conjugal love between men and women, till there ceased
that which was in her heart of hatred for the sex masculine; and when
she felt that she had succeeded in renewing in her the natural
inclination of woman to man, she said to her, “’Tis time to go and walk
in the garden.” So they fared forth from the pavilion and paced among
the trees. Presently the Prince chanced to turn and his eyes fell on
Hayat al-Nufus; and when he saw the symmetry of her shape and the
rosiclearness of her cheeks and the blackness of her eyes and her
exceeding grace and her passing loveliness and her excelling beauty and
her prevailing elegance and her abounding perfection, his reason was
confounded and he could not take his eyes off her. Passion annihilated
his right judgment and love overpassed all limits in him; his vitals
were occupied with her service and his heart was aflame with the fire of
repine, so that he swooned away and fell to the ground. When he came to
himself, she had passed from his sight and was hidden from him among the
trees;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Prince
Ardashir, who lay hid in the garden, saw the Princess and her nurse
walking amongst the trees, he swooned away for very love-longing. When
he came to himself Hayat al-Nufus had passed from his sight and was
hidden from him among the trees; so he sighed from his heart-core and
improvised these couplets:—

 Whenas mine eyes behold her loveliness, ✿ My heart is torn with love’s
    own ecstasy.

 I wake o’erthrown, cast-down on face of earth ✿ Nor can the
    Princess[288] my sore torment see.
 She turned and ravished this sad Love-thrall’d sprite; ✿ Mercy, by
    Allah, ruth; nay, sympathy!
 O Lord, afford me union, deign Thou soothe ✿ My soul, ere grave-niche
    house this corse of me;
 I’ll kiss her ten times ten times, and times ten ✿ For lover’s wasted
    cheek the kisses be!

The old woman ceased not to lead the Princess a-pleasuring about the
garden, till they reached the place where the Prince lay ambushed, when,
behold she said, “O Thou whose bounties are hidden, vouchsafe us
assurance from that we fear!” The King’s son hearing the signal, left
his lurking-place and, surprised by the summons, walked among the trees,
swaying to and fro with a proud and graceful gait and a shape that
shamed the branches. His brow was crowned with pearly drops and his
cheeks red as the afterglow, extolled be Allah the Almighty in that He
hath created! When the King’s daughter caught sight of him, she gazed a
long while on him and noticed his beauty and grace and loveliness and
his eyes that wantoned like the gazelle’s, and his shape that outvied
the branches of the myrobalan; wherefore her wits were confounded and
her soul captivated and her heart transfixed with the arrows of his
glaces. Then she said to the old woman, “O my nurse, whence came yonder
handsome youth?”; and the nurse asked, “Where is he, O my lady?” “There
he is,” answered Hayat al-Nufus; “near hand, among the trees.” The old
woman turned right and left, as if she knew not of his presence, and
cried, “And pray, who can have taught this youth the way into this
garden?” Quoth Hayat al-Nufus, “Who shall give us news of the young man?
Glory be to Him who created men! But say me, dost thou know him, O my
nurse?” Quoth the old woman, “O my lady, he is the young merchant who
wrote to thee by me.” The Princess (and indeed she was drowned in the
sea of her desire and the fire of her passion and love-longing) broke
out, “O my nurse, how goodly is this youth! Indeed he _is_ fair of
favour. Methinks, there is not on the face of earth a goodlier than he!”
Now when the old woman was assured that the love of him had gotten
possession of the Princess, she said to her, “Did I not tell thee, O my
lady, that he was a comely youth with a beaming favour?” Replied Hayat
al-Nufus, “O my nurse, King’s daughters know not the ways of the world
nor the manners of those that be therein, for that they company with
none, neither give they nor take they. O my nurse, how shall I do to
bring about a meeting and present myself to him, and what shall I say to
him and what will he say to me?” Said the old woman, “What device is
left me? Indeed, we were confounded in this matter by thy behaviour”;
and the Princess said, “O my nurse, know thou that if any ever died of
passion, I shall do so, and behold, I look for nothing but death on the
spot by reason of the fire of my love-longing.” When the old woman heard
her words and saw the transport of her desire for him, she answered, “O
my lady, now as for his coming to thee, there is no way thereto; and
indeed thou art excused from going to him, because of thy tender age;
but rise with me and follow me. I will accost him: so shalt thou not be
put to shame, and in the twinkling of an eye affection shall ensue
between you.” The King’s daughter cried, “Go thou before me, for the
decree of Allah may not be rejected.” Accordingly they went up to the
place where Ardashir sat, as he were the full moon at its fullest, and
the old woman said to him, “See O youth, who is present before thee!
’Tis the daughter of our King of the age, Hayat al-Nufus: bethink thee
of her rank and appreciate the honour she doth thee in coming to thee
and rise out of respect for her and stand before her.” The Prince sprang
to his feet in an instant and his eyes met her eyes, whereupon they both
became as they were drunken without wine. Then the love of him and
desire redoubled upon the Princess and she opened her arms and he his,
and they embraced; but love-longing and passion overcame them and they
swooned away and fell to the ground and lay a long while without sense.
The old woman, fearing scandalous exposure, carried them both into the
pavilion, and, sitting down at the door, said to the two waiting-women,
“Seize the occasion to take your pleasure in the garden, for the
Princess sleepeth.” So they returned to their diversion. Presently the
lovers revived from their swoon and found themselves in the pavilion,
whereat quoth the Prince, “Allah upon thee, O Princess of fair ones, is
this vision or sleep-illusion?” Then the twain embraced and intoxicated
themselves without wine, complaining each to other of the anguish of
passion; and the Prince improvised these couplets:—

 Sun riseth sheen from her brilliant brow, ✿ And her cheek shows the
    rosiest afterglow:

 And when both appear to the looker-on, ✿ The skyline star ne’er for
    shame will show:
 An the leven flash from those smiling lips, ✿ Morn breaks and the rays
    dusk and gloom o’erthrow.
 And when with her graceful shape she sways, ✿ Droops leafiest
    Bán-tree[289] for envy low:
 Me her sight suffices; naught crave I more: ✿ Lord of Men and Morn, be
    her guard from foe!
 The full moon borrows a part of her charms; ✿ The sun would rival but
    fails his lowe.
 Whence could Sol aspire to that bending grace? ✿ Whence should Luna see
    such wit and such mind-gifts know?
 Who shall blame me for being all love to her, ✿ ’Twixt accord and
    discord aye doomed to woe:
 ’Tis she won my heart with those forms that bend ✿ What shall lover’s
    heart from such charms defend?

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Prince
had made an end of his verses, the Princess strained him to her bosom
and kissed him on the mouth and between the eyes; whereupon his soul
returned to him and he fell to complaining to her of that he had endured
for stress of love and tyranny of longing and excess of transport and
distraction and all he had suffered for the hardness of her heart.
Hearing those words she kissed his hands and feet and bared her
head,[290] whereupon the gloom gathered and the full moons dawned
therein. Then said she to him, “O my beloved and term of all my wishes,
would the day of estrangement had never been and Allah grant it may
never return between us!” And they embraced and wept together, whilst
she recited these couplets:—

 O who shamest the Moon and the sunny glow: ✿ Thou whose slaught’ring
    tyranny lays me low;
 With the sword of a look thou hast shorn my heart, ✿ How escape thy
    sword-glance fatal of blow?
 Thus eke are thine eyebrows a bow that shot ✿ My bosom with shafts of
    fiercest lowe:
 From thy cheeks’ rich crop cometh Paradise; ✿ How, then, shall my heart
    the rich crop forego?
 Thy graceful shape is a blooming branch, ✿ And shall pluck the fruits
    who shall bear that bough.
 Perforce thou drawest me, robst my sleep; ✿ In thy love I strip me and
    shameless show:[291]
 Allah lend thee the rays of most righteous light, ✿ Draw the farthest
    near and a tryst bestow:
 Then have ruth on the vitals thy love hath seared, ✿ And the heart that
    flies to thy side the mo’e!

And when she ended her recitation, passion overcame her and she was
distraught for love and wept copious tears, rain-like streaming down.
This burnt the Prince’s heart and he in turn became troubled and
distracted for love of her. So he drew nearer to her and kissed her
hands and wept with sore weeping and they ceased not from
lover-reproaches and converse and versifying, until the call to
mid-afternoon prayer (nor was there aught between them other than this),
when they bethought them of parting and she said to him, “O light of
mine eyes and core of my heart, the time of severance has come between
us twain: when shall we meet again?” “By Allah,” replied he (and indeed
her words shot him as with shafts), “to mention of parting I am never
fain!” Then she went forth of the pavilion, and he turned and saw her
sighing sighs would melt the rock and weeping shower-like tears;
whereupon he for love was sunken in the sea of desolation and improvised
these couplets:—

 O my heart’s desire! grows my misery ✿ From the stress of love, and what
    cure for me?
 By thy face, like dawn when it lights the dark, ✿ And thy hair whose hue
    beareth night-tide’s blee,
 And thy form like the branch which in grace inclines ✿ To Zephyr’s[292]
    breath blowing fain and free,
 By the glance of thine eyes like the fawn’s soft gaze, ✿ When she views
    pursuer of high degree,

 And thy waist down borne by the weight of hips, ✿ These so heavy and
    that lacking gravity,
 By the wine of thy lip-dew, the sweetest of drink, ✿ Fresh water and
    musk in its purity,
 O gazelle of the tribe, ease my soul of grief, ✿ And grant me thy
    phantom in sleep to see!

Now when she heard his verses in praise of her, she turned back to him
and embracing him, with a heart on fire for the anguish of severance,
fire which naught save kisses and embraces might quench, cried, “Sooth
the byword saith, Patience is for a lover and not the lack thereof.
There is no help for it but I contrive a means for our reunion.” Then
she farewelled him and fared forth, knowing not where she set her feet,
for stress of her love; nor did she stay her steps till she found
herself in her own chamber. When she was gone, passion and love-longing
redoubled upon the young Prince and the delight of sleep was forbidden
him, and the Princess in her turn tasted not food and her patience
failed and she sickened for desire. As soon as dawned the day, she sent
for the nurse, who came and found her condition changed and she cried,
“Question me not of my case; for all I suffer is due to thy handiwork.
Where is the beloved of my heart?” “O my lady, when did he leave thee?
Hath he been absent from thee more than this night?” “Can I endure
absence from him an hour? Come, find some means to bring us together
speedily, for my soul is like to flee my body.” “O my lady, have
patience till I contrive thee some subtle device, whereof none shall be
ware.” “By the Great God, except thou bring him to me this very day, I
will tell the King that thou hast corrupted me, and he will cut off thy
head!” “I conjure thee, by Allah, have patience with me, for this is a
dangerous matter!” And the nurse humbled herself to her, till she
granted her three days’ delay, saying, “O my nurse, the three days will
be three years to me; and if the fourth day pass and thou bring him not,
I will go about to slay thee.” So the old woman left her and returned to
her lodging, where she abode till the morning of the fourth day, when
she summoned the tirewomen of the town and sought of them fine dyes and
rouge for the painting of a virgin girl and adorning; and they brought
her cosmetics of the best. Then she sent for the Prince and, opening her
chest, brought out a bundle containing a suit of woman’s apparel, worth
five thousand dinars, and a head-kerchief fringed with all manner gems.
Then said she to him, “O my son, hast thou a mind to foregather with
Hayat al-Nufus?”; and he replied, “Yes.” So she took a pair of tweezers
and pulled out the hairs of his face and pencilled his eyes with
Kohl.[293] Then she stripped him and painted him with Henna[294] from
his nails to his shoulders and from his insteps to his thighs and
tattooed[295] him about the body, till he was like red roses upon
alabaster slabs. After a little, she washed him and dried him and
bringing out a shift and a pair of petticoat-trousers made him put them
on. Then she clad him in the royal suit aforesaid and, binding the
kerchief about his head, veiled him and taught him how to walk, saying,
“Advance thy left and draw back thy right.” He did her bidding and
forewent her, as he were a Houri faring abroad from Paradise. Then said
she to him, “Fortify thy heart, for thou art going to the King’s palace,
where there will without fail be guards and eunuchs at the gate; and if
thou be startled at them and show doubt or dread, they will suspect thee
and examine thee, and we shall both get into grievous trouble and haply
lose our lives: wherefore an thou feel thyself unable to this, tell me.”
He answered, “In very sooth this thing hath no terrors for me, so be of
good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear.” Then she went out
preceding him till the twain came to the palace-gate, which was full of
eunuchs. She turned and looked at him, as much as to say, “Art thou
troubled or no?” and finding him all unchanged, went on. The chief
eunuch glanced at the nurse and knew her but, seeing a damsel following
her, whose charms confounded the reason, he said in his mind, “As for
the old woman, she is the nurse; but as for the girl who is with her
there is none in our land resembleth her in favour or approacheth her in
fairness save the Princess Hayat al-Nufus, who is secluded and never
goeth out. Would I knew how she came into the streets and would Heaven I
wot whether or no ’twas by leave of the King!” Then he rose to learn
somewhat concerning her and well nigh thirty castratos followed him;
which when the old woman saw, her reason fled for fear and she said,
“Verily, we are Allah’s and to Him we shall return! Without recourse we
are dead folk this time.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the old
nurse saw the head of the eunuchry and his assistants making for her she
was in exceeding fear and cried, “There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! Verily we are God’s and
unto him we shall return; without recourse we be dead folk this time.”
When the head eunuch heard her speak thus, fear gat hold upon him, by
reason of that which he knew of the Princess’s violence and that her
father was ruled by her, and he said to himself, “Belike the King hath
commanded the nurse to carry his daughter forth upon some occasion of
hers, whereof she would have none know; and if I oppose her, she will be
wroth with me and will say:—This eunuch fellow stopped me, that he might
pry into my affairs. So she will do her best to kill me, and I have no
call to meddle in this matter.” So saying, he turned back, and with him
the thirty assistants who drove the people from the door of the palace;
whereupon the nurse entered and saluted the eunuchs with her head,
whilst all the thirty stood to do her honour and returned her salam. She
led in the Prince and he ceased not following her from door to door, and
the Protector protected them, so that they passed all the guards, till
they came to the seventh door: it was that of the great pavilion,
wherein was the King’s throne, and it communicated with the chambers of
his women and the saloons of the Harim, as well as with his daughter’s
pavilion. So the old woman halted and said, “Here we are, O my son, and
glory be to Him who hath brought us thus far in safety! But, O my son,
we cannot foregather with the Princess except by night; for night
enveileth the fearful.” He replied, “True, but what is to be done?”
Quoth she, “Hide thee in this black hole,” showing him behind the door a
dark and deep cistern, with a cover thereto. So he entered the cistern,
and she went away and left him there till ended day, when she returned
and carried him into the palace, till they came to the door of Hayat
al-Nufus’s apartment. The old woman knocked and a little maid came out
and said, “Who is at the door?” Said the nurse, “’Tis I,” whereupon the
maid returned and craved permission of her lady, who said, “Open to her
and let her come in with any who may accompany her.” So they entered and
the nurse, casting a glance around, perceived that the Princess had made
ready the sitting-chamber and ranged the lamps in row and lighted
candles of wax in chandeliers of gold and silver and spread the divans
and estrades with carpets and cushions. Moreover, she had set on trays
of food and fruits and confections and she had perfumed the place with
musk and aloes-wood and ambergris. She was seated among the lamps and
the tapers and the light of her face outshone the lustre of them all.
When she saw the old woman, she said to her, “O nurse, where is the
beloved of my heart?”; and the other replied, “O my lady, I cannot find
him nor have mine eyes espied him; but I have brought thee his own
sister; and here she is.” Cried the Princess, “Art thou Jinn-mad? What
need have I of his sister? Say me, an a man’s head irk him, doth he bind
up his hand?” The old woman answered, “No, by Allah, O my lady! But look
on her, and if she pleases thee, let her be with thee.” Then she
uncovered the Prince’s face, whereupon Hayat al-Nufus knew him and
running to him, pressed him to her bosom, and he pressed her to his
breast. Then they both fell down in a swoon and lay without sense a long
while. The old woman sprinkled rose-water upon them till they came to
themselves, when she kissed him on the mouth more than a thousand times
and improvised these couplets:—

 Sought me this heart’s dear love at gloom of night; ✿ I rose in honour
    till he sat forthright,
 And said, “O aim of mine, O sole desire ✿ In such night-visit hast of
    guards no fright?”
 Replied he, “Yes, I fearèd much, but Love ✿ Robbed me of all my wits and
    reft my sprite.”
 We clipt with kisses and awhile clung we ✿ For here ’twas safe; nor
    feared we watchman-wight:
 Then rose we parting without doubtful deed ✿ And shook out skirts where
    none a stain could sight.

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when her lover
visited Hayat al-Nufus in her palace, the twain embraced and she
improvised some happy couplets beseeming the occasion. And when she had
ended her extempore lines she said, “Is it indeed true that I see thee
in my abode and that thou art my cup-mate and my familiar?” Then passion
grew on her and love was grievous to her, so that her reason well-nigh
fled for joy and she improvised these couplets:—

 With all my soul I’ll ransom him who came to me in gloom ✿ Of night,
    whilst I had waited long to see his figure loom;
 And naught aroused me save his weeping voice of tender tone ✿ And
    whispered I, “Fair fall thy foot and welcome and well come!”
 His cheek I kissed a thousand times, and yet a thousand more; ✿ Then
    clipt and clung about his breast enveiled in darkling room.
 And cried, “Now verily I’ve won the aim of every wish ✿ So praise and
    prayers to Allah for this grace now best become.”
 Then slept we even as we would the goodliest of nights ✿ Till morning
    came to end our night and light up earth with bloom.

As soon as it was day, she made him enter a place in her apartment
unknown to any and he abode there till nightfall, when she brought him
out and they sat in converse and carouse. Presently he said to her, “I
wish to return to my own country and tell my father what hath passed
between us, that he may equip his Wazir to demand thee in marriage of
thy sire.” She replied, “O my love, I fear, an thou return to thy
country and kingdom, thou wilt be distracted from me and forget the love
of me; or that thy father will not further thy wishes in this matter and
I shall die. Meseems the better rede were that thou abide with me and in
my hand-grasp, I looking on thy face, and thou on mine, till I devise
some plan, whereby we may escape together some night and flee to thy
country; for I have cut off my hopes from my own people and I despair of
them.” He rejoined, “I hear and obey;” and they fell again to their
carousal and conversing. He tarried with her thus for some time till,
one night, the wine was pleasant to them and they lay not down nor did
they sleep till break of day. Now it chanced that one of the Kings sent
her father a present, and amongst other things, a necklace of union
jewels, nine-and-twenty grains, to whose price a King’s treasures might
not suffice. Quoth Abd-al-Kadir, “This rivière beseemeth none but my
daughter Hayat al-Nufus;” and, turning to an eunuch, whose jaw-teeth the
Princess had knocked out for reasons best known to herself,[296] he
called to him and said, “Carry the necklace to thy lady and say to
her:—One of the Kings hath sent thy father this, as a present, and its
price may not be paid with money; put it on thy neck.” The slave took
the necklace, saying in himself, “Allah Almighty make it the last thing
she shall put on in this world, for that she deprived me of the benefit
of my grinder-teeth!”; and repairing to the Princess’s apartment, found
the door locked and the old woman asleep before the threshold. He shook
her, and she awoke in affright and asked, “What dost thou want?”; to
which he answered, “The King hath sent me on an errand to his daughter.”
Quoth the nurse, “The key is not here, go away, whilst I fetch it;” but
quoth he, “I cannot go back to the King without having done his
commandment.” So she went away, as if to fetch the key; but fear
overtook her and she sought safety in flight. Then the eunuch awaited
her awhile; then, finding she did not return, he feared that the King
would be angry at his delay; so he rattled at the door and shook it,
whereupon the bolt gave way and the leaf opened. He entered and passed
on, till he came to the seventh door and walking in to the Princess’s
chamber found the place splendidly furnished and saw candles and flagons
there. At this spectacle he marvelled and going close up to the bed,
which was curtained by a hanging of silk, embroidered with a net-work of
jewels, drew back the curtain from before the Princess and saw her
sleeping with her arms about the neck of a young man handsomer than
herself; whereat he magnified Allah Almighty, who had created such a
youth of vile water, and said, “How goodly be this fashion for one who
hateth men! How came she by this fellow? Methinks ’twas on his account
that she knocked out my back teeth!” Then he drew the curtain and made
for the door; but the King’s daughter awoke in affright and seeing the
eunuch, whose name was Káfúr, called to him. He made her no answer: so
she came down from the bed on the estrade; and catching hold of his
skirt laid it on her head and kissed his feet, saying, “Veil what Allah
veileth!” Quoth he, “May Allah not veil thee nor him who would veil
thee! Thou didst knock out my grinders and saidst to me:—Let none make
mention to me aught of men and their ways!” So saying, he disengaged
himself from her grasp and running out, locked the door on them and set
another eunuch to guard it. Then he went in to the King who said to him?
“Hast thou given the necklace to Hayat al-Nufus?” The eunuch replied,
“By Allah, thou deservest altogether a better fate;” and the King asked,
“What hath happened? Tell me quickly;” whereto he answered, “I will not
tell thee, save in private and between our eyes,” but the King retorted,
saying, “Tell me at once and in public.” Cried the eunuch, “Then grant
me immunity.” So the King threw him the kerchief of immunity and he
said, “O King, I went into the Princess Hayat al-Nufus and found her
asleep in a carpeted chamber and on her bosom was a young man. So I
locked the door upon the two and came back to thee.” When the King heard
these words he started up and taking a sword in his hand, cried out to
the Rais of the eunuchs, saying, “Take thy lads and go to the Princess’s
chamber and bring me her and him who is with her as they twain lie on
the bed; but cover them both up.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the King
commanded the head eunuch to take his lads and to fetch and set before
him Hayat al-Nufus and him who was with her, the chief and his men
entered the Princess’s apartment where he found her standing up,
dissolved in railing tears, and the Prince by her side; so he said to
them, “Lie down on the bed, as thou wast and let him do likewise.” The
King’s daughter feared for her lover[297] and said to him, “This is no
time for resistance.” So they both lay down and the eunuchs covered them
up and carried the twain into the King’s presence. Thereupon Abd
al-Kadir pulled off the coverings and the Princess sprang to her feet.
He looked at her and would have smitten her neck: but the Prince threw
himself on the father’s breast, saying, “The fault was not hers but mine
only: kill me before thou killest her.” The King made at him, to cut him
down, but Hayat al-Nufus cast herself on her father and said, “Kill me
not him; for he is the son of a great King, lord of all the land in its
length and breadth.” When the King heard this, he turned to the Chief
Wazir, who was a gathering-place of all that is evil, and said to him,
“What sayst thou of this matter, O Minister?” Quoth his Wazir, “What I
say is that all who find themselves in such case as this have need of
lying, and there is nothing for it but to cut off both their heads,
after torturing them with all manner of tortures.” Hereupon the King
called his sworder of vengeance, who came with his lads, and said to
him, “Take this gallows bird and strike off his head and after do the
like with this harlot and burn their bodies, and consult me not about
them a second time.” So the headsmen put his hand to her back, to take
her; but the King cried out at him and cast at him somewhat he hent in
hand, which had well-nigh killed him, saying, “O dog, how durst thou
show ruth to those with whom I am wroth? Put thy hand to her hair and
drag her along by it, so that she may fall on her face.” Accordingly he
haled her by her hair and the Prince in like manner to the place of
blood, where he tore off a piece of his skirt and therewith bound the
Prince’s eyes putting the Princess last, in the hope that some one would
intercede for her. Then, having made ready the Prince he swung his sharp
sword three times (whilst all the troops wept and prayed Allah to send
them deliverance by some intercessor), and raised his hand to cut off
Ardashir’s head when, behold, there arose a cloud of dust, that spread
and flew till it veiled the view. Now the cause thereof was that when
the young Prince had delayed beyond measure, the King, his sire, had
levied a mighty host and had marched with it in person to get tidings of
his son. Such was his case; but as regards King Abd al-Kadir, when he
saw this, he said, “O wights, what is the meaning of yonder dust that
dimmeth sights?” The Grand Wazir sprang up and went out to reconnoitre
and found behind the cloud men like locusts, of whom no count could be
made nor aught avail of aid, filling the hills and plains and valleys.
So he returned with the report to the King, who said to him, “Go down
and learn for us what may be this host and the cause of its marching
upon our country. Ask also of their commander and salute him for me and
enquire the reason of his coming. An he came in quest of aught, we will
aid him, and if he have a blood-feud with one of the Kings, we will ride
with him; or, if he desire a gift, we will handsel him; for this is
indeed a numerous host and a power uttermost, and we fear for our land
from its mischief.” So the Minister went forth and walked among the
tents and troopers and body-guards, and ceased not faring on from the
first of the day till near sundown, when he came to the warders with
gilded swords in tents star-studded. Passing these, he made his way
through Emirs and Wazirs and Nabobs and Chamberlains, to the pavilion of
the Sultan, and found him a mighty King. When the King’s officers saw
him, they cried out to him, saying, “Kiss ground! Kiss ground!”[298] He
did so and would have risen, but they cried out at him a second and a
third time. So he kissed the earth again and again and raised his head
and would have stood up, but fell down at full length for excess of awe.
When at last he was set between the hands of the King he said to him,
“Allah prolong thy days and increase thy sovranty and exalt thy rank, O
thou auspicious King! And furthermore, of a truth, King Abd al-Kadir
saluteth thee and kisseth the earth before thee and asketh on what
weighty business thou art come. An thou seek to avenge thee for blood on
any King, he will take horse in thy service; or, an thou come in quest
of aught, wherein it is in his power to help thee, he standeth up at thy
service on account thereof.” So Ardashir’s father replied to the Wazir,
saying, “O messenger, return to thy lord and tell him that the most
mighty King Sayf al-A’azam Shah, Lord of Shiraz, had a son who hath been
long absent from him and news of him have not come and all traces of him
have been cut off. An he be in this city, he will take him and depart
from you; but, if aught have befallen him or any mischief have ensued to
him from you, his father will lay waste your land and make spoil of your
goods and slay your men and seize your women. Return, therefore, to thy
lord in haste and tell him this, ere evil befal him.” Answered the
Minister, “To hear is to obey!” and turned to go away, when the
Chamberlains cried out to him, saying, “Kiss ground! Kiss ground!” So he
kissed the ground a score of times and rose not till his life-breath was
in his nostrils.[299] Then he left the King’s high court and returned to
the city, full of anxious thought concerning the affair of this King and
the multitude of his troops, and going in to King Abd al-Kadir, pale
with fear and trembling in his side-muscles, acquainted him with that
had befallen him;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir returned
from the court of the Great King, pale with fear and with side-muscles
quivering for dread exceeding; and acquainted his lord with that had
befallen him. Hereat disquietude and terror for himself and for his
people laid hold upon him and he said to the Minister, “O Wazir, and who
is this King’s son?” Replied the other, “’Tis even he whom thou badest
put to death, but praised be Allah who hastened not his slaughter! Else
had his father wasted our lands and spoiled our good.” Quoth the King,
“See now thy corrupt judgment, in that thou didst counsel us to slay
him! Where is the young man, the son of yonder magnanimous King?” And
quoth the Wazir, “O mighty King, thou didst command him be put to
death.” When the King heard this, he was clean distraught and cried out
from his heart’s core and in-most of head, saying, “Woe to you! Fetch me
the Headsman forthright, lest death fall on him!” So they fetched the
Sworder and he said, “O King of the Age, I have smitten off his head
even as thou badest me.” Cried Abd al-Kadir, “O dog, an this be true, I
will assuredly send thee after him.” The Headsman replied, “O King, thou
didst command me to slay him without consulting thee a second time.”
Said the King, “I was in my wrath; but speak the truth, ere thou lose
thy life;” and said the Sworder, “O King, he is yet in the chains of
life.” At this Abd al-Kadir rejoiced and his heart was set at rest; then
he called for Ardashir, and when he came, he stood up to receive him and
kissed his mouth, saying, “O my son, I ask pardon of Allah Almighty for
the wrong I have done thee, and say thou not aught that may lower my
credit with thy sire, the Great King.” The Prince asked “O King of the
Age, and where is my father?” and the other answered, “He is come hither
on thine account.” Thereupon quoth Ardashir, “By thy worship, I will not
stir from before thee till I have cleared my honour and the honour of
thy daughter from that which thou laidest to our charge; for she is a
pure virgin. Send for the midwives and let them examine her before thee.
An they find her maidenhead gone, I give thee leave to shed my blood;
and if they find her a clean maid, her innocence of dishonour and mine
also will be made manifest.” So he summoned the midwives, who examined
the Princess and found her a pure virgin and so told the King, seeking
largesse of him. He gave them what they sought, putting off his royal
robes to bestow on them, and in like manner he was bountiful to all who
were in the Harim. And they brought forth the scent-cups and perfumed
all the Lords of estate and Grandees; and not one but rejoiced with
exceeding joy. Then the King threw his arms about Ardashir’s neck and
entreated him with all worship and honour, bidding his chief eunuchs
bear him to the bath. When he came out, he cast over his shoulders a
costly robe and crowned him with a coronet of jewels; he also girt him
with a girdle of silk, purfled with red gold and set with pearls and
gems, and mounted him on one of his noblest mares, with selle and
trappings of gold inlaid with pearls and jewels. Then he bade his
Grandees and Captains mount on his service and escort him to his
father’s presence; and charged him tell his sire that King Abd al-Kadir
was at his disposal, hearkening to and obeying him in whatso he should
bid or forbid. “I will not fail of this,” answered Ardashir and
farewelling him, repaired to his father who, at sight of him, was
transported for delight and springing up, advanced to meet him and
embraced him, whilst joy and gladness spread among all the host of the
Great King. Then came the Wazirs and Chamberlains and Captains and
guards and kissed the ground before the Prince and rejoiced in his
coming: and it was a great day with them for enjoyment, for the King’s
son gave leave to those of King Abd al-Kadir’s officers who had
accompanied him and others of the townsfolk, to view the ordinance of
his father’s host, without let or stay, so they might know the multitude
of the Great King’s troops and the might of his empire. And all who had
seen him selling stuffs in the linendrapers’ bazar marvelled how his
soul could have consented thereto, considering the nobility of his
spirit and the loftiness of his dignity; but it was his love and
inclination to the King’s daughter that to this had constrained him.
Meanwhile, news of the multitude of her lover’s troops came to Hayat
al-Nufus, who was still jailed by her sire’s commandment, till they knew
what he should order respecting her, whether pardon and release or death
and burning; and she looked down from the terrace-roof of the palace
and, turning towards the mountains, saw even these covered with armed
men. When she beheld all those warriors and knew that they were the army
of Ardashir’s father, she feared lest he should be diverted from her by
his sire and forget her and depart from her, whereupon her father would
slay her. So she called a handmaid that was with her in her apartment by
way of service, and said to her, “Go to Ardashir, son of the Great King,
and fear not. When thou comest into his presence, kiss the ground before
him and tell him what thou art and say to him:—My lady saluteth thee and
would have thee to know that she is a prisoner in her father’s palace,
awaiting his sentence, whether he be minded to pardon her or put her to
death, and she beseecheth thee not to forget her or forsake her; for
to-day thou art all-powerful; and, in whatso thou commandest, no man
dare cross thee. Wherefore, an it seem good to thee to rescue her from
her sire and take her with thee, it were of thy bounty, for indeed she
endureth all these trials for thy sake. But, an this seem not good to
thee, for that thy desire of her is at an end, still speak to thy sire,
so haply he may intercede for her with her father and he depart not,
till he have made him set her free and taken surety from and made
covenant with him, that he will not go about to put her to death nor
work her aught of harm. This is her last word to thee, may Allah not
desolate her of thee, and so The Peace!”[300]——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


      Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the bondmaid
sent by Hayat al-Nufus made her way to Ardashir and delivered him her
lady’s message, which when he heard, he wept with sore weeping and said
to her, “Know that Hayat al-Nufus is my mistress and that I am her slave
and the captive of her love. I have not forgotten what was between us
nor the bitterness of the parting day; so do thou say to her, after thou
hast kissed her feet, that I will speak with my father of her, and he
shall send his Wazir, who sought her aforetime in marriage for me, to
demand her hand once more of her sire, for he dare not refuse. So, if he
send to her to consult her, let her make no opposition; for I will not
return to my country without her.” Then the handmaid returned to Hayat
al-Nufus; and, kissing her hands, delivered to her the message, which
when she heard, she wept for very joy and returned thanks to Almighty
Allah. Such was her case; but as regards Ardashir, he was alone with his
father that night and the Great King questioned him of his case,
whereupon he told him all that had befallen him, first and last. Then
quoth the King, “What wilt thou have me do for thee, O my son? An thou
desire Abd al-Kadir’s ruin, I will lay waste his lands and spoil his
hoards and dishonour his house.” Replied Ardashir, “I do not desire
that, O my father, for he hath done nothing to me deserving thereof; but
I wish for union with her; wherefore I beseech thee of thy favour to
make ready a present for her father, (but let it be a magnificent gift!)
and send it to him by thy Minister, the man of just judgment.” Quoth the
King, “I hear and consent;” and sending for the treasures he had laid up
from time past, brought out all manner precious things and showed them
to his son, who was pleased with them. Then he called his Wazir and bade
him bear the present with him[301] to King Abd al-Kadir and demand his
daughter in marriage for Ardashir, saying, “Accept the present and
return him a reply.” Now from the time of Ardashir’s departure, King Abd
al-Kadir had been troubled and ceased not to be heavy at heart, fearing
the laying waste of his reign and the spoiling of his realm; when
behold, the Wazir came in to him and saluting him, kissed ground before
him. He rose up standing and received him with honour; but the Minister
made haste to fall at his feet and kissing them cried, “Pardon, O King
of the Age! The like of thee should not rise to the like of me, for I am
the least of servants’ slaves. Know, O King, that Prince Ardashir hath
acquainted his father with some of the favours and kindnesses thou hast
done him, wherefore he thanketh thee and sendeth thee in company of thy
servant who standeth before thee, a present, saluting thee and wishing
thee especial blessings and prosperities.” Abd al-Kadir could not
believe what he heard of the excess of his fear, till the Wazir laid the
present before him, when he saw it to be such gift as no money could
purchase nor could one of the Kings of the earth avail to the like
thereof; wherefore he was belittled in his own eyes and springing to his
feet, praised Almighty Allah and glorified Him and thanked the Prince.
Then said the Minister to him, “O noble King, give ear to my word and
know that the Great King sendeth to thee, desiring thine alliance, and I
come to thee seeking and craving the hand of thy daughter, the chaste
dame and treasured gem Hayat al-Nufus, in wedlock for his son Ardashir,
wherefore, if thou consent to this proposal and accept of him, do thou
agree with me for her marriage-portion.” Abd al-Kadir hearing these
words replied, “I hear and obey. For my part, I make no objection, and
nothing can be more pleasurable to me; but the girl is of full age and
reason and her affair is in her own hand. So be assured that I will
refer it to her and she shall chose for herself.” Then he turned to the
chief eunuch and bade him go and acquaint the Princess with the event.
So he repaired to the Harim and, kissing the Princess’s hands,
acquainted her with the Great King’s offer adding, “What sayest thou in
answer?” “I hear and I obey,” replied she.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the chief
eunuch of the Harim having informed the Princess how she had been
demanded in marriage by the Great King and having heard her reply, “I
hear and I obey,” returned therewith to the King and gave him this
answer, whereat he rejoiced with exceeding joy and, calling for a costly
robe of honour, threw it over the Wazir’s shoulders. Furthermore, he
ordered him ten thousand dinars and bade him carry the answer to the
Great King and crave leave for him to pay him a visit. “Hearing and
obeying,” answered the Minister; and, returning to his master, delivered
him the reply and Abd al-Kadir’s message, and repeated all their talk,
whereat he rejoiced greatly and Ardashir was transported for delight and
his breast broadened and he was a most happy man. King Sayf al-A’azam
also gave King Abd al-Kadir leave to come forth to visit him; so, on the
morrow, he took horse and rode to the camp of the Great King, who came
to meet him and saluting him, seated him in the place of honour, and
gave him welcome; and they two sat whilst Ardashir stood before them.
Then arose an orator of the King Abd al-Kadir’s court and pronounced an
eloquent discourse, giving the Prince joy of the attainment of his
desire and of his marriage with the Princess, a Queen among King’s
daughters. When he sat down the Great King caused bring a chest full of
pearls and gems, together with fifty thousand dinars, and said to King
Abd al-Kadir, “I am my son’s deputy in all that concerneth this matter.”
So Abd al-Kadir acknowledged receipt of the marriage-portion and amongst
the rest, fifty thousand dinars for the nuptial festivities; after which
they fetched the Kazis and the witnesses, who wrote out the contract of
marriage between the Prince and Princess, and it was a notable day,
wherein all lovers made merry and all haters and enviers were mortified.
They spread the marriage-feasts and banquets and lastly Ardashir went in
unto the Princess and found her a jewel which had been hidden, an union
pearl unthridden and a filly that none but he had ridden, so he notified
this to his sire. Then King Sayf al-A’azam asked his son, “Hast thou any
wish thou wouldst have fulfilled ere we depart?”; and he answered, “Yes,
O King, know that I would fain take my wreak of the Wazir who entreated
us on evil wise and the eunuch who forged a lie against us.” So the King
sent forthright to Abd al-Kadir, demanding of him the Minister and the
castrato, whereupon he despatched them both to him and he commanded to
hang them over the city gate. After this, they abode a little while and
then sought of Abd al-Kadir leave for his daughter to equip her for
departure. So he equipped her and mounted her in a Takhtrawán, a
travelling litter of red gold, inlaid with pearls and gems and drawn by
noble steeds. She carried with her all her waiting-women and eunuchs, as
well as the nurse, who had returned, after her flight, and resumed her
office. Then King Sayf al-A’azam and his son mounted and Abd al-Kadir
mounted also with all the lords of his land, to take leave of his
son-in-law and daughter; and it was a day to be reckoned of the
goodliest of days. After they had gone some distance, the Great King
conjured Abd al-Kadir to turn back; so he farewelled him and his son,
after he had strained him to his breast and kissed him between the eyes
and thanked him for his grace and favours and commended his daughter to
his care. Then he went in to the Princess and embraced her; and she
kissed his hands and they wept in the standing-place of parting. After
this he returned to his capital and Ardashir and his company fared on,
till they reached Shiraz, where they celebrated the marriage-festivities
anew. And they abode in all comfort and solace and joyance of life, till
there came to them the Destroyer of delights and Severer of societies;
the Depopulator of palaces and the Garnerer of graveyards. And men also
relate the tale of

-----

Footnote 261:

  Omitted by Lane (iii. 252) “because little more than a repetition” of
  Taj al-Mulúk and the Lady Dunyá. This is true; but the nice progress
  of the nurse’s pimping is a well-finished picture and the old woman’s
  speech (_infra_ p. 243) is a gem.

Footnote 262:

  Artaxerxes; in the Mac. Edit. Azdashír, a misprint.

Footnote 263:

  I use “kiss ground” as we say “kiss hands.” But it must not be
  understood literally: the nearest approach would be to touch the earth
  with the finger-tips and apply them to the lips or brow. Amongst
  Hindus the Ashtánga-prostration included actually kissing the ground.

Footnote 264:

  The “key” is mentioned because a fee so called (miftáh) is paid on its
  being handed to the new lodger (Pilgrimage i. 62).

Footnote 265:

  The Koranic term for semen, often quoted.

Footnote 266:

  Koran, xii. 31, in the story of Joseph, before noticed.

Footnote 267:

  Probably the white woollens, so often mentioned, whose use is now
  returning to Europe, where men have a reasonable fear of dyed stuffs,
  especially since Aniline conquered Cochineal.

Footnote 268:

  Arab. “samír,” one who enjoys the musámarah or night-talk outside the
  Arab tents. “Samar” is the shade of the moon, or half darkness when
  only stars shine without a moon, or the darkness of a moonless night.
  Hence the proverb (A. P. ii. 513) “Má af’al-hú al-samar wa’l kamar;” I
  will not do it by moon-darkness or by moonshine, _i.e._ never. I have
  elsewhere remarked that “Early to bed and early to rise” is a
  civilised maxim; most barbarians sit deep into the night in the light
  of the moon of a camp-fire and will not rise till nearly noon. They
  agree in our modern version of the old saw:—

                Early to bed and early to rise
                Makes a man surly and gives him red eyes.

  The Shayks of Arab tribes especially transact most of their public
  business during the dark hours.

Footnote 269:

  Suspecting that it had been sent by some Royal lover.

Footnote 270:

  Arab. “Rubbamá” a particle more emphatic than rubba, = perhaps,
  sometimes, often.

Footnote 271:

  “The broken (wall)” from Hatim = breaking. It fences the Hijr or space
  where Ishmael is buried (vol. vi. 205); and I have described it in
  Pilgrimage iii. 165.

Footnote 272:

  Arab. “Faráis” (plur. of farísah): the phrase has often occurred and
  is = our “trembled in every nerve.” As often happens in Arabic, it is
  “horsey;” alluding to the shoulder-muscles (not shoulder-blades,
  Preston p. 89) between neck and flank which readily quiver in
  blood-horses when excited or frightened.

Footnote 273:

  Arab. “Fazl” = exceeding goodness as in “Fazl wa ma’rifah” = virtue
  and learning.

Footnote 274:

  Arab. “Al-Mafárik” (plur. of Mafrak), = the pole or crown of the head,
  where the hair parts naturally and where baldness mostly begins.

Footnote 275:

  Arab. Ná’í al-maut, the person sent round to announce a death to the
  friends and relations of the deceased and invite them to the funeral.

Footnote 276:

  Arab. Táir al-bayn, any bird, not only the Hátim or black crow, which
  announces separation. Crows and ravens flock for food to the camps
  broken up for the springtide and autumnal marches, and thus become
  emblems of desertion and desolation. The same birds are also connected
  with Abel’s burial in the Koran (v. 34), a Jewish tradition borrowed
  by Mohammed. Lastly, here is a paronomasia in the words “Ghuráb
  al-Bayn” = Raven of the Wold (the black bird with white breast and red
  beak and legs): “Ghuráb” (Heb. Oreb) connects with Cuba =
  strangerhood, exile, and “Bayn” with distance, interval, disunion, the
  desert (between the cultivated spots). There is another and a similar
  pun anent the Bán-tree; the first word meaning “he fared, he left.”

Footnote 277:

  Arab. “Tayr,” any flying thing, a bird; with true Arab carelessness
  the writer waits till the tale is nearly ended before letting us know
  that the birds are pigeons (Hamám).

Footnote 278:

  Arab. “Karalynn.” The Arabs say, “Allah cool thine eye,” because tears
  of grief are hot and those of joy cool (Al-Asma’i); others say the
  cool eye is opposed to that heated by watching; and Al-Hariri (Ass.
  xxvii.) makes a scorching afternoon “hotter than the tear of a
  childless mother.” In the burning climate of Arabia coolth and
  refrigeration are equivalent to refreshment and delight.

Footnote 279:

  Arab. “Muunah,” the “Mona” of Maroccan travellers (English not Italian
  who are scandalised by “Mona”) meaning the provisions supplied gratis
  by the unhappy villagers to all who visit them with passport from the
  Sultan. Our cousins German have lately scored a great success by
  paying for all their rations which the Ministers of other nations,
  England included, were mean enough to accept.

Footnote 280:

  Arab. “Kaannahu huwa”; lit. = as he (was) he. This reminds us of the
  great grammarian, Sibawayh, whose name the Persians derive from
  “Apple-flavour” (Sib + BA). He was disputing, in presence of Harun
  al-Rashid with a rival Al-Kiss, and advocated the Bastian form,
  “Fa-izá huwa hú” (behold, it was he) against the Ku fan, “Fa-izá huwa
  IA” (behold, it was him). The enemy overcame him by appealing to
  Badawin, who spoke impurely, whereupon Sibawayh left the court,
  retired to Khorasan and died, it is said of a broken heart.

Footnote 281:

  This is a sign of the Sada or melancholic temperament in which black
  bile predominates. It is supposed to cause a distaste for society and
  a longing for solitude, an unsettled habit of mind and neglect of
  worldly affairs. I remarked that in Arabia students are subject to it,
  and that amongst philosophers and literary men of Mecca and Al-Medinah
  there was hardly one who was not spoken of as a “Sada.” See Pilgrimage
  ii. 49, 50.

Footnote 282:

  _i.e._ I am a servant and bound to tell thee what my orders are.

Footnote 283:

  A touching lesson how tribes settle matters in the East.

Footnote 284:

  _i.e._ fresh from water (Arab. “Rutub”), before the air can tarnish
  them. The pearl (margarita) in Arab is Lulu’; the “Union” or large
  pearl Durr, plur. Durar. In modern parlance Durr is the second quality
  of the twelve into which pearls are divided.

Footnote 285:

  _i.e._ the Wazir, but purposely left vague.

Footnote 286:

  The whole of the nurse’s speech is admirable: its naïve and striking
  picture of conjugal affection goes far to redeem the grossness of The
  Nights.

Footnote 287:

  The bitterness was the parting in the morning.

Footnote 288:

  English “Prin´cess,” too often pronounced in French fashion Princess.

Footnote 289:

  In dictionaries “Bán” (Anglice ben-tree) is the myrobalan which
  produces gum benzoin. It resembles the tamarisk. Mr. Lyall (p. 74
  Translations of Ancient Arab Poetry, Williams and Norgate, 1885),
  calls it a species of Moringa, tall, with plentiful and intensely
  green foliage used for comparisons on account of its straightness and
  graceful shape of its branches. The nut supplies a medicinal oil.

Footnote 290:

  A sign of extreme familiarity: the glooms are the hands and the full
  moons are the eyes.

Footnote 291:

  Arab. “Khal’a al-’izár”: lit. = stripping off jaws or side-beard.

Footnote 292:

  Arab. “Shimál” = the north wind.

Footnote 293:

  An operation well described by Juvenal—

                Illa supercilium, modicâ fuligine tactum,
                Obliquâ producit acu, pingitque, trementes
                Attolens oculos.

  Sonnini (Travels in Egypt, chapt. xvi.) justly remarks that this
  pencilling the angles of the eyes with Kohl, which the old Levant
  trade called _alquifoux_ or _arquifoux_, makes them appear large and
  more oblong; and I have noted that the modern Egyptian (especially
  Coptic) eye, like that of the Sphinx and the old figures looks in
  profile as if it were seen in full (Pilgrimage i. 214).

Footnote 294:

  The same traveller notes a singular property in the Henna-flower that
  when smelt closely it exhales a “very powerful spermatic odour,” hence
  it became a favourite with women as the tea-rose with us. He finds it
  on the nails of mummies, and identifies it with the Kupros of the
  ancient Greeks (the moderns call it Kene or Kena) and the Βότρυς τῆς
  κύπρου (Botrus cypri) of Solomon’s Song (i. 14). The Hebr. is
  “Copher,” a well-known word which the A. V. translates by “a cluster
  of camphire (?) in the vineyards of En-gedi”; and a note on iv. 13
  ineptly adds, “or, cypress.” The Revised Edit. amends it to “a cluster
  of henna-flowers.” The Solomonic (?) description is very correct; the
  shrub affects vineyards, and about Bombay forms fine hedges which can
  be smelt from a distance.

Footnote 295:

  Hardly the equivalent of the Arab. “Kataba” (which includes true
  tattooing with needles) and is applied to painting “patches” of blue
  or green colour, with sprigs and arabesques upon the arms and
  especially the breasts of women. “Kataba” would also be applied to
  striping the fingers with Henna which becomes a shining black under a
  paste of honey, lime and sal-ammoniac. This “patching” is alluded to
  by Strabo and Galen (Lane M. E. chapt ii.); and we may note that
  savages and barbarians can leave nothing of beauty unadorned; they
  seem to hate a plain surface like the Hindu silversmith, whose art is
  shown only in chasing.

Footnote 296:

  A violent temper, accompanied with _voies de fait_ and personal
  violence, is by no means rare amongst Eastern princesses; and terrible
  tales are told in Persia concerning the daughters of Fath Ali Shah.
  Few men and no woman can resist the temptations of absolute command.
  The daughter of a certain Dictator all-powerful in the Argentine
  Republic was once seen on horseback with a white bridle of peculiar
  leather; it was made of the skin of a man who had boasted of her
  favours. The slave-girls suffer first from these masterful young
  persons and then it is the turn of the eunuchry.

Footnote 297:

  A neat touch; she was too thoroughbred to care for herself first.

Footnote 298:

  Here the ground or earth is really kissed.

Footnote 299:

  Corresponding with our phrase, “His heart was in his mouth.”

Footnote 300:

  Very artful is the contrast of the love-lorn Princess’s humility with
  her furious behaviour, in the pride of her purity, while she was yet a
  virginette and fancy free.

Footnote 301:

  Arab. “Suhbat-hu” lit. = in company with him, a popular idiom in Egypt
  and Syria. It often occurs in the Bresl. Edit.




       JULNAR THE SEA-BORN AND HER SON KING BADR BASIM OF PERSIA.


There was once in days of yore and in ages and times long gone before,
in Ajam-land, a King Shahrimán[302] hight, whose abiding-place was
Khorásán. He owned an hundred concubines, but by none of them had he
been blessed with boon of child, male or female, all the days of his
life. One day, among the days, he bethought him of this and fell
lamenting for that the most part of his existence was past and he had
not been vouchsafed a son, to inherit the kingdom after him, even as he
had inherited it from his fathers and forebears; by reason whereof there
betided him sore cark and care and chagrin exceeding. As he sat thus one
of his Mamelukes came in to him and said, “O my lord, at the door is a
slave-girl with her merchant, and fairer than she eye hath never seen.”
Quoth the King, “Hither to me with merchant and maid!”; and both came in
to him. Now when Shahriman beheld the girl, he saw that she was like a
Rudaynian lance,[303] and she was wrapped in a veil of gold-purfled
silk. The merchant uncovered her face, whereupon the place was illumined
by her beauty and her seven tresses hung down to her anklets like
horses’ tails. She had Nature-kohl’d eyes, heavy hips and thighs and
waist of slenderest guise; her sight healed all maladies and quenched
the fire of sighs, for she was even as the poet cries:—

 I love her madly for she is perfect fair, ✿ Complete in gravity and
    gracious way;
 Nor over-tall nor over-short, the while ✿ Too full for trousers are
    those hips that sway:
 Her shape is midmost ’twixt o’er small and tall; ✿ Nor long to blame nor
    little to gainsay:
 O’erfall her anklets tresses black as night ✿ Yet in her face resplends
    eternal day.

The King seeing her marvelled at her beauty and loveliness, her symmetry
and perfect grace and said to the merchant, “O Shaykh, how much for this
maiden?” Replied the merchant, “O my lord, I bought her for two thousand
dinars of the merchant who owned her before myself, since when I have
travelled with her three years and she hath cost me, up to the time of
my coming hither, other three thousand gold pieces; but she is a gift
from me to thee.” The King robed him with a splendid robe of honour and
ordered him ten thousand ducats, whereupon he kissed his hands, thanking
him for his bounty and beneficence, and went his ways. Then the King
committed the damsel to the tire-women, saying, “Amend ye the case of
this maiden[304] and adorn her and furnish her a bower and set her
therein.” And he bade his chamberlains carry her everything she needed
and shut all the doors upon her. Now his capital wherein he dwelt, was
called the White City and was seated on the sea-shore; so they lodged
her in a chamber, whose latticed casements overlooked the main.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King after
taking the maiden, committed her to the tire-women bidding them amend
her case and set her in a bower, and ordered his chamberlains to shut
all the doors upon her when they had lodged her in a chamber whose
latticed casements overlooked the main. Then Shahriman went in to her;
but she spake not to him neither took any note of him.[305] Quoth he,
“’Twould seem she hath been with folk who have not taught her manners.”
Then he looked at the damsel and saw her surpassing beauty and
loveliness and symmetry and perfect grace, with a face like the rondure
of the moon at its full or the sun shining in the sheeny sky. So he
marvelled at her charms of favour and figure and he praised Allah the
Creator (magnified be His might!), after which he walked up to her and
sat him down by her side; then he pressed her to his bosom and seating
her on his thighs, sucked the dew of her lips, which he found sweeter
than honey. Presently he called for trays spread with richest viands of
all kinds and ate and fed her by mouthfuls, till she had enough; yet she
spoke not one word. The King began to talk to her and asked her of her
name; but she abode still silent and uttered not a syllable nor made him
any answer, neither ceased to hang down her head groundwards; and it was
but the excess of her beauty and loveliness and the amorous grace that
saved her from the royal wrath. Quoth he to himself, “Glory be to God,
the Creator of this girl! How charming she is, save that she speaketh
not! But perfection belongeth only to Allah the Most High.” And he asked
the slave-girls whether she had spoken, and they said, “From the time of
her coming until now she hath not uttered a word nor have we heard her
address us.” Then he summoned some of his women and concubines and bade
them sing to her and make merry with her, so haply she might speak.
Accordingly they played before her all manner instruments of music and
sports and what not and sang, till the whole company was moved to mirth,
except the damsel, who looked at them in silence, but neither laughed
nor spoke. The King’s breast was straitened; thereupon he dismissed the
women and abode alone with that damsel: after which he doffed his
clothes and disrobing her with his own hand, looked upon her body and
saw it as it were a silvern ingot. So he loved her with exceeding love
and falling upon her, took her maidenhead and found her a pure virgin;
whereat he rejoiced with excessive joy and said in himself, “By Allah,
’tis a wonder that a girl so fair of form and face should have been left
by the merchants a clean maid as she is!”[306] Then he devoted himself
altogether to her, heeding none other and forsaking all his concubines
and favourites, and tarried with her a whole year as it were a single
day. Still she spoke not till, one morning he said to her (and indeed
the love of her and longing waxed upon him), “O desire of souls, verily
passion for thee is great with me, and I have forsaken for thy sake all
my slave-girls and concubines and women and favourites and I have made
thee my portion of the world and had patience with thee a whole year;
and now I beseech Almighty Allah, of His favour, to soften thy heart to
me, so thou mayst speak to me. Or, an thou be dumb, tell me by a sign,
that I may give up hope of thy speech. I pray the Lord (extolled be He!)
to vouchsafe me by thee a son child, who shall inherit the kingdom after
me; for I am old and lone and have none to be my heir. Wherefore, Allah
upon thee, an thou love me, return me a reply.” The damsel bowed her
head awhile in thought, and presently raising it, smiled in his face;
whereat it seemed to him as if lightning filled the chamber. Then she
said, “O magnanimous liege lord, and valorous lion, Allah hath answered
thy prayer, for I am with child by thee and the time of my delivery is
near at hand, though I know not if the unborn babe be male or
female.[307] But, had I not conceived by thee, I had not spoken to thee
one word.” When the King heard her speech, his face shone with joy and
gladness and he kissed her head and hands for excess of delight, saying,
“Alhamdolillah—laud to Lord—who hath vouchsafed me the things I
desired!; first, thy speech, and secondly, thy tidings that thou art
with child by me.” Then he rose up and went forth from her and, seating
himself on the throne of his kingship, in an ecstasy of happiness, bade
his Wazir distribute to the poor and needy and widows and others an
hundred thousand dinars, by way of thank-offering to Allah Most High and
alms on his own account. The Minister did as bidden by the King who,
returning to the damsel, sat with her and embraced and pressed her to
his breast, saying, “O my lady, my queen, whose slave I am, prithee what
was the cause of this thy silence? Thou hast been with me a whole year,
night and day, waking and sleeping, yet hast not spoken to me till this
day.” She replied, “Hearken, O King of the Age, and know that I am a
wretched exile, broken-hearted and far-parted from my mother and my
family and my brother.” When the King heard her words, he knew her
desire and said, “As for thy saying that thou art wretched, there is for
such speech no ground, inasmuch as my kingdom and good and all I possess
are at thy service and I also am become thy bondman; but, as for thy
saying:—I am parted from my mother and brother and family, tell me where
they are and I will send and fetch them to thee.” Thereupon she
answered, “Know, then, O auspicious King, that I am called Julnár[308]
the Sea-born and that my father was of the Kings of the Main. He died
and left us his reign, but while we were yet unsettled, behold, one of
the other Kings arose against us and took the realm from our hands. I
have a brother called Sálih, and my mother also is a woman of the sea;
but I fell out with my brother “The Pious” and swore that I would throw
myself into the hands of a man of the folk of the land. So I came forth
of the sea and sat down on the edge of an island in the moonshine,[309]
where a passer-by found me and, carrying me to his house, besought me of
love-liesse; but I smote him on the head, so that he all but died;
whereupon he carried me forth and sold me to the merchant from whom thou
hadst me, and this was a good man and a virtuous; pious, loyal and
generous. Were it not that thy heart loved me and that thou promotedest
me over all thy concubines, I had not remained with thee a single hour,
but had cast myself from this window into the sea and gone to my mother
and family; but I was ashamed to fare them-wards, being with child by
thee; for they would have deemed evilly of me and would not have
credited me, even although I swore to them, an I told them that a King
had bought me with his gold and made me his portion of the world and
preferred me over all his wives and every thing that his right hand
possessed. This then is my story and—the Peace!”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Julnar[310] the Sea-born, answering the question of King Shahriman, told
him her past from first to last, the King thanked her and kissed her
between the eyes, saying, “By Allah, O my lady and light of mine eyes, I
cannot bear to be parted from thee one hour; and given thou leave me, I
shall die forthright. What then is to be done?” Replied she, “O my lord,
the time of my delivery is at hand and my family needs must be present,
that they may tend me; for the women of the land know not the manner of
child-bearing of the women of the sea, nor do the daughters of the ocean
know the manner of the daughters of the earth; and when my people come,
I shall be reconciled to them and they will be reconciled to me.” Quoth
the King, “How do the people of the sea walk therein, without being
wetted?”; and quoth she, “O King of the Age, we walk in the waters with
our eyes open, as do ye on the ground, by the blessing of the names
graven upon the seal-ring of Solomon David-son (on whom be peace!). But,
O King, when my kith and kin come, I will tell them how thou boughtest
me with thy gold, and hast entreated me with kindness and benevolence.
It behoveth that thou confirm my words to them and that they witness
thine estate with their own eyes and they learn that thou art a King,
son of a King.” He rejoined, “O my lady, do what seemeth good to thee
and what pleaseth thee; and I will consent to thee in all thou wouldst
do.” The damsel continued, “Yes, we walk in the sea and see what is
therein and behold the sun, moon, stars and sky, as it were on the
surface of earth; and this irketh us naught. Know also that there be
many peoples in the main and various forms and creatures of all kinds
that are on the land, and that all that is on the land compared with
that which is in the main is but a very small matter.” And the King
marvelled at her words. Then she pulled out from her bosom two bits of
Comorin lign-aloes and, kindling fire in a chafing-dish, chose somewhat
of them and threw it in, then she whistled a loud whistle and spake
words none understood. Thereupon arose a great smoke and she said to the
King, who was looking on, “O my lord, arise and hide thyself in a
closet, that I may show thee my brother and mother and family, whilst
they see thee not; for I design to bring them hither, and thou shalt
presently espy a wondrous thing and shalt marvel at the several
creatures and strange shapes which Almighty Allah hath created.” So he
arose without stay or delay and entering a closet, fell a-watching what
she should do. She continued her fumigations and conjurations till the
sea foamed and frothed turbid and there rose from it a handsome young
man of a bright favour, as he were the moon at its full, with brow
flower-white, cheeks of ruddy light and teeth like the marguerite. He
was the likest of all creatures to his sister and the tongue of the case
spoke in his praise these two couplets:—

 The full moon groweth perfect once a month ✿ But thy face each day we
    see perfectèd.
 And the full moon dwelleth in single sign, ✿ But to thee all hearts be a
    dwelling stead.

After him there came forth of the sea an ancient dame with hair speckled
gray and five maidens, as they were moons, bearing a likeness to the
damsel hight Julnar. The King looked upon them as they all walked upon
the face of the water, till they drew near the window and saw Julnar,
whereupon they knew her and went in to her. She rose to them and met
them with joy and gladness, and they embraced her and wept with sore
weeping. Then said they to her, “O Julnar, how couldst thou leave us
four years, and we unknowing of thine abiding place? By Allah the world
hath been straitened upon us for stress of severance from thee, and we
have had no delight of food or drink; no, not for one day, but have wept
with sore weeping night and day for the excess of our longing after
thee!” Then she fell to kissing the hands of the youth her brother and
her mother and cousins, and they sat with her awhile, questioning her of
her case and of what had betided her, as well as of her present estate.
“Know,” replied she, “that, when I left you, I issued from the sea and
sat down on the shore of an island, where a man found me and sold me to
a merchant, who brought me to this city and sold me for ten thousand
dinars to the King of the country, who entreated me with honour and
forsook all his concubines and women and favourites for my sake and was
distracted by me from all he had and all that was in his city.” Quoth
her brother, “Praised be Allah, who hath reunited us with thee! But now,
O my sister, ’tis my purpose that thou arise and go with us to our
country and people.” When the King heard these words, his wits fled him
for fear lest the damsel accept her brother’s words and he himself avail
not to stay her, albeit he loved her passionately, and he became
distracted with fear of losing her. But Julnar answered, “By Allah, O my
brother, the mortal who bought me is lord of this city and he is a
mighty King and a wise man, good and generous with extreme generosity.
Moreover, he is a personage of great worth and wealth and hath neither
son nor daughter. He hath entreated me with honour and done me all
manner of favour and kindness; nor, from the day of his buying me to
this time have I heard from him an ill word to hurt my heart; but he
hath never ceased to use me courteously; doing nothing save with my
counsel, and I am in the best of case with him and in the perfection of
fair fortune. Furthermore, were I to leave him, he would perish; for he
cannot endure to be parted from me an hour; and if I left him, I also
should die, for the excess of the love I bear him, by reason of his
great goodness to me during the time of my sojourn with him; for, were
my father alive, my estate with him would not be like my estate with
this great and glorious and puissant potentate. And verily, ye see me
with child by him and praise be to Allah, who hath made me a daughter of
the Kings of the sea, and my husband the mightest of the Kings of the
land, and Allah, in very sooth, he hath compensated me for whatso I
lost.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Forty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Julnar the
Sea-born told her brother all her tale, adding “Allah hath not cut me
off, but hath compensated me for whatso I lost. Now this King hath no
issue, male or female, so I pray the Almighty to vouchsafe me a son who
shall inherit of this mighty sovran that which the Lord hath bestowed
upon him of lands and palaces and possessions.” Now when her brother and
the daughters of her uncle heard this her speech, their eyes were cooled
thereby and they said, “O Julnar, thou knowest thy value with us and
thou wottest the affection we bear thee and thou art certified that thou
art to us the dearest of all creatures and thou art assured that we seek
but ease for thee, without travail or trouble. Wherefore, an thou be in
unease, arise and go with us to our land and our folk; but, an thou be
at thine ease here, in honour and happiness, this is our wish and our
will; for we desire naught save thy welfare in any case.”[311] Quoth
she, “By Allah, I am here in the utmost ease and solace and honour and
grace!” When the King heard what she said, he joyed with a heart set at
rest and thanked her silently for this; the love of her redoubled on him
and entered his heart-core and he knew that she loved him as he loved
her and that she desired to abide with him, that she might see his child
by her. Then Julnar bade her women lay the tables and set on all sorts
of viands, which had been cooked in kitchen under her own eyes, and
fruits and sweetmeats, whereof she ate, she and her kinsfolk. But,
presently, they said to her, “O Julnar, thy lord is a stranger to us,
and we have entered his house, without his leave or weeting. Thou hast
extolled to us his excellence and eke thou hast set before us of his
victual whereof we have eaten; yet have we not companied with him nor
seen him, neither hath he seen us nor come to our presence and eaten
with us, so there might be between us bread and salt.” And they all left
eating and were wroth with her, and fire issued from their mouths, as
from cressets; which when the King saw, his wits fled for excess of fear
of them. But Julnar arose and soothed them and going to the closet where
was the King her lord, said to him, “O my lord, hast thou seen and heard
how I praised thee and extolled thee to my people and hast thou noted
what they said to me of their desire to carry me away with them?” Quoth
he, “I both heard and saw: May the Almighty abundantly requite thee for
me! By Allah, I knew not the full measure of thy fondness until this
blessed hour, and now I doubt not of thy love to me!” Quoth she, “O my
lord, is the reward of kindness aught but kindness? Verily, thou hast
dealt generously with me and hast entreated me with worship and I have
seen that thou lovest me with the utmost love, and thou hast done me all
manner of honour and kindness and preferred me above all thou lovest and
desirest. So how should my heart be content to leave thee and depart
from thee, and how should I do thus after all thy goodness to me? But
now I desire of thy courtesy that thou come and salute my family, so
thou mayst see them and they thee and pure love and friendship may be
between you; for know, O King of the Age, that my brother and mother and
cousins love thee with exceeding love, by reason of my praises of thee
to them, and they say:—We will not depart from thee nor go to our homes
till we have foregathered with the King and saluted him. For indeed they
desire to see thee and make acquaintance with thee.” The King replied,
“To hear is to obey, for this is my very own wish.” So saying, he rose
and went in to them and saluted them with the goodliest salutation; and
they sprang up to him and received him with the utmost worship, after
which he sat down in the palace and ate with them; and he entertained
them thus for the space of thirty days. Then, being desirous of
returning home, they took leave of the King and Queen and departed with
due permission to their own land, after he had done them all possible
honour. Awhile after this, Julnar completed the days of her pregnancy
and the time of her delivery being come, she bore a boy, as he were the
moon at its full; whereat the utmost joy betided the King, for that he
had never in his life been vouchsafed son or daughter. So they held high
festival and decorated the city seven days, in the extreme of joy and
jollity: and on the seventh day came Queen Julnar’s mother, Faráshah
Hight,[312] and brother and cousins, whenas they knew of her
delivery.——And Shahrazad perceived the light of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Forty-second Night,

[Illustration]

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Julnar was
brought to bed and was visited by her people, the King received them
with joy at their coming and said to them, “I said that I would not give
my son a name till you should come and name him of your knowledge.” So
they named him Badr Básim,[313] and all agreed upon this name. Then they
showed the child to his uncle Salih, who took him in his arms and
arising began to walk about the chamber with him in all directions right
and left. Presently he carried him forth of the palace and going down to
the salt sea, fared on with him, till he was hidden from the King’s
sight. Now when Shahriman saw him take his son and disappear with him in
the depth of the sea, he gave the child up for lost and fell to weeping
and wailing; but Julnar said to him, “O King of the Age, fear not,
neither grieve for thy son, for I love my child more than thou and he is
with my brother; so reck thou not of the sea neither fear for him
drowning. Had my brother known that aught of harm would betide the
little one, he had not done this deed; and he will presently bring thee
thy son safe, Inshallah—an it please the Almighty.” Nor was an hour past
before the sea became turbid and troubled and King Salih came forth and
flew from the sea till he came up to them with the child lying quiet and
showing a face like the moon on the night of fulness. Then, looking at
the King he said, “Haply thou fearedst harm for thy son, whenas I
plunged into the sea with him?” Replied the father, “Yes, O my lord, I
did indeed fear for him and thought he would never be saved therefrom.”
Rejoined Salih, “O King of the land, we pencilled his eyes with an
eye-powder we know of and recited over him the names graven upon the
seal-ring of Solomon David-son (on whom be the Peace!), for this is what
we use to do with children newly born among us; and now thou needst not
fear for him drowning or suffocation in all the oceans of the world, if
he should go down into them; for, even as ye walk on the land, so walk
we in the sea.” Then he pulled out of his pocket a casket, graven and
sealed and, breaking open the seals, emptied it; whereupon there fell
from it strings of all manner jacinths and other jewels, besides three
hundred bugles of emerald and other three hundred hollow gems, as big as
ostrich eggs, whose light dimmed that of sun and moon. Quoth Salih, “O
King of the Age, these jewels and jacinths are a present from me to
thee. We never yet brought thee a gift, for that we knew not Julnar’s
abiding-place neither had we of her any tidings or trace; but now that
we see thee to be united with her and we are all become one thing, we
have brought thee this present; and every little while we will bring
thee the like thereof, Inshallah! for that these jewels and jacinths are
more plentiful with us than pebbles on the beach and we know the good
and the bad of them and their whereabouts and the way to them, and they
are easy to us.” When the King saw the jewels, his wits were bewildered
and his sense was astounded and he said, “By Allah, one single gem of
these jewels is worth my realm!” Then he thanked for his bounty Salih
the Sea-born and, looking towards Queen Julnar, said, “I am abashed
before thy brother, for that he hath dealt munificently by me and
bestowed on me this splendid gift, which the folk of the land were
unable to present.” So she thanked her brother for his deed and he said,
“O King of the Age, thou hast the prior claim on us and it behoves us to
thank thee, for thou hast entreated our sister with kindness and we have
entered thy dwelling and eaten of thy victual;” and the poet
saith[314]:—

 Had _I_ wept before _she_ did in my passion for Saada, I had healed my
    soul before repentance came.
 But _she_ wept before _I_ did: her tears drew mine; and I said, The
    merit belongs to the precedent.

“And” (resumed Salih the Pious) “if we stood on our faces in thy
service, O King of the Age, a thousand years, yet had we not the might
to requite thee, and this were but a scantling of thy due.” The King
thanked him with heartiest thanks and the Merman and Merwomen abode with
him forty days’ space, at the end of which Salih arose and kissed the
ground before his brother-in-law, who asked “What wantest thou, O
Salih?” He answered, “O King of the Age, indeed thou hast done us
overabundant favours, and we crave of thy bounties that thou deal
charitably with us and grant us permission to depart; for we yearn after
our people and country and kinsfolk and our homes; so will we never
forsake thy service nor that of my sister and my nephew; and by Allah, O
King of the Age, ’tis not pleasant to my heart to part from thee; but
how shall we do, seeing that we have been reared in the sea and that the
sojourn of the shore liketh us not?” When the King heard these words he
rose to his feet and farewelled Salih the Sea-born and his mother and
his cousins, and all wept together, because of parting and presently
they said to him, “Anon we will be with thee again, nor will we forsake
thee, but will visit thee every few days.” Then they flew off and
descending into the sea, disappeared from sight.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the relations
of Julnar the Sea-born farewelled the King and her, weeping together
because of parting; then they flew off and descending into the depths
disappeared from sight. After this King Shahriman showed the more
kindness to Julnar and honoured her with increase of honour; and the
little one grew up and flourished, whilst his maternal uncle and grandam
and cousins visited the King every few days and abode with him a month
or two months at a time. The boy ceased not to increase in beauty and
loveliness with increase of years, till he attained the age of fifteen
and was unique in his perfection and symmetry. He learnt writing and
Koran-reading; history, syntax and lexicography; archery, spear-play and
horsemanship and what not else behoveth the sons of Kings; nor was there
one of the children of the folk of the city, men or women, but would
talk of the youth’s charms, for he was of surpassing beauty and
perfection, even such an one as is praised in the saying of the
poet:[315]—

 The whiskers write upon his cheek, with ambergris on pearl, Two lines,
    as ’twere with jet upon an apple, line for line.
 Death harbours in his languid eye and slays with every glance, And in
    his cheek is drunkenness, and not in any wine.

And in that of another:—

 Upsprings from table of his lovely cheek[316] ✿ A growth like broidery
    my wonder is:
 As ’twere a lamp that burns through night hung up ✿ Beneath the
    gloom[317] in chains of ambergris.

And indeed the King loved him with exceeding love, and summoning his
Wazir and Emirs and the Chief Officers of state and Grandees of his
realm, required of them a binding oath that they would make Badr Basim
King over them after his sire; and they sware the oath gladly, for the
sovran was liberal to the lieges, pleasant in parley and a very compend
of goodness, saying naught but that wherein was advantage for the
people. On the morrow Shahriman mounted, with all his troops and Emirs
and Lords, and went forth into the city and returned. When they drew
near the palace, the King dismounted, to wait upon his son who abode on
horseback, and he and all the Emirs and Grandees bore the saddlecloth of
honour before him, each and every of them bearing it in his turn, till
they came to the vestibule of the palace, where the Prince alighted and
his father and the Emirs embraced him and seated him on the throne of
Kingship, whilst they (including his sire) stood before him. Then Badr
Basim judged the people, deposing the unjust and promoting the just and
continued so doing till near upon noon, when he descended from the
throne and went in to his mother, Julnar the Sea-born, with the crown
upon his head, as he were the moon. When she saw him, with the King
standing before him, she rose and kissing him, gave him joy of the
Sultanate and wished him and his sire length of life and victory over
their foes. He sat with her and rested till the hour of mid-afternoon
prayer, when he took horse and repaired, with the Emirs before him, to
the Maydán-plain, where he played at arms with his father and his lords,
till nightfall, when he returned to the palace, preceded by all the
folk. He rode forth thus every day to the tilting-ground, returning to
sit and judge the people and do justice between carl and churl; and thus
he continued doing a whole year, at the end of which he began to ride
out a-hunting and a-chasing and to go round about in the cities and
countries under his rule, proclaiming security and satisfaction and
doing after the fashion of Kings; and he was unique among the people of
his day for glory and valour and just dealing among the subjects. And it
chanced that one day the old King fell sick and his fluttering heart
forebode him of translation to the Mansion of Eternity. His sickness
grew upon him till he was nigh upon death, when he called his son and
commended his mother and subjects to his care and caused all the Emirs
and Grandees once more swear allegiance to the Prince and assured
himself of them by strongest oaths; after which he lingered a few days
and departed to the mercy of Almighty Allah. His son and widow and all
the Emirs and Wazirs and Lords mourned over him, and they built him a
tomb and buried him therein. They ceased not ceremonially to mourn for
him a whole month, till Salih and his mother and cousins arrived and
condoled with their grieving for the King and said, “O Julnar, though
the King be dead, yet hath he left this noble and peerless youth, and
not dead is whoso leaveth the like of him, the rending lion and the
shining moon;”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Salih brother
of Julnar and her mother and cousins said to her, “Albeit the King be
dead, yet hath he left behind him as successor this noble and peerless
youth, the rending lion and the shining moon.” Thereupon the Grandees
and notables of the Empire went in to King Badr Basim and said to him,
“O King, there is no harm in mourning for the late sovran: but
over-mourning beseemeth none save women; wherefore occupy thou not thy
heart and our hearts with mourning for thy sire; inasmuch as he hath
left thee behind him, and whoso leaveth the like of thee is not dead.”
Then they comforted him and diverted him and lastly carried him to the
bath. When he came out of the Hammam, he donned a rich robe, purfled
with gold and embroidered with jewels and jacinths; and, setting the
royal crown on his head, sat down on his throne of kingship and ordered
the affairs of the folk, doing equal justice between strong and weak,
and exacting from the prince the dues of the pauper; wherefore the
people loved him with exceeding love. Thus he continued doing for a full
year, whilst, every now and then, his kinsfolk of the sea visited him,
and his life was pleasant and his eye was cooled. Now it came to pass
that his uncle Salih went in one night of the nights to Julnar and
saluted her; whereupon she rose and embracing him seated him by her side
and asked him, “O my brother, how art thou and my mother and my
cousins.” He answered, “O my sister, they are well and glad and in good
case, lacking naught save a sight of thy face.” Then she set somewhat of
food before him and he ate, after which talk ensued between the twain
and they spake of King Badr Basim and his beauty and loveliness, his
symmetry and skill in cavalarice and cleverness and good breeding. Now
Badr was propped upon his elbow hard by them; and, hearing his mother
and uncle speak of him, he feigned sleep and listened to their
talk.[318] Presently Salih said to his sister, “Thy son is now seventeen
years old and is unmarried, and I fear least mishap befal him and he
have no son; wherefore it is my desire to marry him to a Princess of the
princesses of the sea, who shall be a match for him in beauty and
loveliness.” Quoth Julnar, “Name them to me for I know them all.” So
Salih proceeded to enumerate them to her, one by one, but to each she
said, “I like not this one for my son; I will not marry him but to one
who is his equal in beauty and loveliness and wit and piety and good
breeding and magnanimity and dominion and rank and lineage.”[319] Quoth
Salih, “I know none other of the daughters of the Kings of the sea, for
I have numbered to thee more than an hundred girls and not one of them
pleaseth thee: but see, O my sister, whether thy son be asleep or no.”
So she felt Badr and finding on him the signs of slumber said to Salih,
“He is asleep; what hast thou to say and what is thine object in making
sure his sleeping?” Replied he, “O my sister, know that I have bethought
me of a Mermaid of the mermaids who befitteth thy son; but I fear to
name her, lest he be awake and his heart be taken with her love and
maybe we shall be unable to win to her; so should he and we and the
Grandees of the realm be wearied in vain and trouble betide us through
this;” for, as saith the poet:—

 Love, at first sight, is a spurt of spray;[320] ✿ But a spreading sea
    when it gaineth sway.

When she heard these words, she cried, “Tell me the condition of this
girl, and her name for I know all the damsels of the sea, Kings’
daughters and others; and, if I judge her worthy of him, I will demand
her in marriage for him of her father, though I spend on her whatso my
hand possesseth. So recount to me all anent her and fear naught, for my
son sleepeth.” Quoth Salih, “I fear lest he be awake;” and the poet
saith:—

 I loved him, soon as his praise I heard; ✿ For ear oft loveth ere eye
    survey.

But Julnar said, “Speak out and be brief and fear not, O my brother.” So
he said, “By Allah, O my sister, none is worthy of thy son save the
Princess Jauharah, daughter of King Al-Samandal,[321] for that she is
like unto him in beauty and loveliness and brilliancy and perfection;
nor is there found, in sea or on land, a sweeter or pleasanter of gifts
than she; for she is prime in comeliness and seemlihead of face and
symmetrical shape of perfect grace; her cheek is ruddy dight, her brow
flower white, her teeth gem-bright, her eyes blackest black and whitest
white, her hips of heavy weight, her waist slight and her favour
exquisite. When she turneth she shameth the wild cattle[322] and the
gazelles and when she walketh, she breedeth envy in the willow branch:
when she unveileth her face outshineth sun and moon and all who look
upon her she enslaveth soon: sweet-lipped and soft-sided indeed is she.”
Now when Julnar heard what Salih said, she replied, “Thou sayest sooth,
O my brother! By Allah, I have seen her many and many a time and she was
my companion, when we were little ones; but now we have no knowledge of
each other, for constraint of distance; nor have I set eyes on her for
eighteen years. By Allah, none is worthy of my son but she!” Now Badr
heard all they said and mastered what had passed, first and last, of
these praises bestowed on Jauharah daughter of King Al-Samandal; so he
fell in love with her on hearsay, pretending sleep the while, wherefore
fire was kindled in his heart on her account full sore and he was
drowned in a sea without bottom or shore.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King Badr
Basim heard the words of his uncle Salih and his mother Julnar, praising
the daughter of King Al-Samandal, a flame of fire burnt in his heart
full sore and he was drowned in a sea which hath nor bottom nor shore.
Then Salih, looking at his sister, exclaimed, “By Allah, O my sister,
there is no greater fool among the Kings of the sea than her father nor
one more violent of temper than he! So name thou not the girl to thy
son, till we demand her in marriage of her father. If he favour us with
his assent, we will praise Allah Almighty; and if he refuse us and will
not give her to thy son to wife, we will say no more about it and seek
another match.” Answered Julnar, “Right is thy rede;” and they parleyed
no more; but Badr passed the night with a heart on fire with passion for
Princess Jauharah. However he concealed his case and spake not of her to
his mother or his uncle, albeit he was on coals of fire for love of her.
Now when it was morning, the King and his uncle went to the Hammam-bath
and washed, after which they came forth and drank wine and the servants
set food before them, whereof they and Julnar ate their sufficiency, and
washed their hands. Then Salih rose and said to his nephew and sister,
“With your leave, I would fain go to my mother and my folk for I have
been with you some days and their hearts are troubled with awaiting me.”
But Badr Basim said to him, “Tarry with us this day;” and he consented.
Then quoth the King, “Come, O my uncle, let us go forth to the garden.”
So they sallied forth and promenaded about the pastures and took their
solace awhile, after which King Badr lay down under a shady tree,
thinking to rest and sleep; but he remembered his uncle’s description of
the maiden and her beauty and loveliness and shed railing tears,
reciting these two couplets[323]:—

 Were it said to me while the flame is burning within me, ✿ And the fire
    blazing in my heart and bowels,
 Wouldst thou rather that thou shouldest behold them ✿ Or a draught of
    pure water?—I would answer, Them.

Then he sighed and wept and lamented, reciting these verses also:—

 Who shall save me from love of a lovely gazelle, ✿ Brighter browed than
    the sunshine, my bonnibel!
 My heart, erst free from her love, now burns ✿ With fire for the maid of
    Al-Samandal.

When Salih heard what his nephew said, he smote hand upon hand and said,
“There is no god but _the_ God! Mohammed is the Apostle of God and there
is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the
Great!” adding, “O my son, heardest thou what passed between me and thy
mother respecting Princess Jauharah?” Replied Badr Basim, “Yes, O my
uncle, and I fell in love with her by hearsay through what I heard you
say. Indeed, my heart cleaveth to her and I cannot live without her.”
Rejoined his uncle, “O King, let us return to thy mother and tell her
how the case standeth and crave her leave that I may take thee with me
and seek the Princess in marriage of her sire; after which we will
farewell her and I and thou will return. Indeed, I fear to take thee and
go without her leave, lest she be wroth with me; and verily the right
would be on her side, for I should be the cause of her separation from
us. Moreover, the city would be left without king and there would be
none to govern the citizens and look to their affairs; so should the
realm be disordered against thee and the kingship depart from thy
hands.” But Badr Basim, hearing these words, cried, “O my uncle, if I
return to my mother and consult her on such matter, she will not suffer
me to do this; wherefore I will not return to my mother nor consult
her.” And he wept before him and presently added, “I will go with thee
and tell her not and after will return.” When Salih heard what his
nephew said, he was confused anent his case and said, “I crave help of
the Almighty in any event.” Then, seeing that Badr Basim was resolved to
go with him, whether his mother would let him or no, he drew from his
finger a seal-ring, whereon were graven certain of the names of Allah
the Most High, and gave it to him, saying, “Put this on thy finger, and
thou shalt be safe from drowning and other perils and from the mischief
of sea-beasts and great fishes.” So King Badr Basim took the ring and
set it on his finger. Then they drove into the deep——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Badr Basim and his
uncle, after diving into the deep, fared on till they came to Salih’s
palace, where they found Badr Basim’s grandmother, the mother of his
mother, seated with her kinsfolk; and, going in to them, kissed their
hands. When the old Queen saw Badr, she rose to him and embracing him,
kissed him between the eyes and said to him, “A blessed coming, O my
son! How didst thou leave thy mother Julnar?” He replied, “She is well
in health and fortune, and saluteth thee and her uncle’s daughters.”
Then Salih related to his mother what had occurred between him and his
sister and how King Badr Basim had fallen in love with the Princess
Jauharah daughter of Al-Samandal by report and told her the whole tale
from beginning to end adding, “He hath not come save to demand her in
wedlock of her sire;” which when the old Queen heard, she was wroth
against her son with exceeding wrath and sore troubled and concerned and
said, “O Salih, O my son, in very sooth thou diddest wrong to name the
Princess before thy nephew, knowing, as thou dost, that her father is
stupid and violent, little of wit and tyrannical of temper, grudging his
daughter to every suitor; for all the Monarchs of the Main have sought
her hand, but he rejected them all; nay, he would none of them,
saying:—Ye are no match for her in beauty or in loveliness or in aught
else. Wherefore we fear to demand her in wedlock of him, lest he reject
us, even as he hath rejected others; and we are a folk of high spirit
and should return broken-hearted.” Hearing these words Salih answered,
“O my mother, what is to do? For King Badr Basim saith:—There is no help
but that I seek her in marriage of her sire, though I expend my whole
kingdom; and he avoucheth that, an he take her not to wife, he will die
of love for her and longing.” And Salih continued, “He is handsomer and
goodlier than she; his father was King of all the Persians, whose King
he now is, and none is worthy of Jauharah save Badr Basim. Wherefore I
purpose to carry her father a gift of jacinths and jewels befitting his
dignity, and demand her of him in marriage. An he object to us that he
is a King, behold, our man also is a King and the son of a King; or, if
he object to us her beauty, behold our man is more beautiful than she;
or, again, if he object to us the vastness of his dominion, behold our
man’s dominion is vaster than hers and her father’s and numbereth more
troops and guards, for that his kingdom is greater than that of
Al-Samandal. Needs must I do my endeavour to further the desire of my
sister’s son, though it relieve me of my life; because I was the cause
of whatso hath betided; and, even as I plunged him into the ocean of her
love, so will I go about to marry him to her, and may Almighty Allah
help me thereto!” Rejoined his mother, “Do as thou wilt, but beware of
giving her father rough words, whenas thou speakest with him; for thou
knowest his stupidity and violence and I fear lest he do thee a
mischief, for he knoweth not respect for any.” And Salih answered,
“Hearkening and obedience.” Then he sprang up and taking two bags full
of gems such as rubies and bugles of emerald, noble ores and all manner
jewels gave them to his servants to carry and set out with his nephew
for the palace of Al-Samandal. When they came thither, he sought
audience of the King and being admitted to his presence, kissed ground
before him and saluted him with the goodliest Salam. The King rose to
him and honouring him with the utmost honour, bade him be seated. So he
sat down and presently the King said to him, “A blessed coming: indeed
thou has desolated us, O Salih! But what bringeth thee to us? Tell me
thine errand that we may fulfil it to thee.” Whereupon Salih arose and,
kissing the ground a second time, said, “O King of the age, my errand is
to Allah and the magnanimous liege lord and the valiant lion, the report
of whose good qualities the caravans far and near have dispread and
whose renown for benefits and beneficence and clemency and graciousness
and liberality to all climes and countries hath sped.” Thereupon he
opened the two bags and, displaying their contents before Al-Samandal,
said to him, “O King of the Age, haply wilt thou accept my gift and by
showing favour to me heal my heart.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Salih
offered his gift to the King, saying, “My aim and end is that the Sovran
show favour to me and heal my heart by accepting my present,” King
Al-Samandal asked, “With what object dost thou gift me with this gift?
Tell me thy tale and acquaint me with thy requirement. An its
accomplishment be in my power I will straightway accomplish it to thee
and spare thee toil and trouble; and if I be unable thereunto, Allah
compelleth not any soul aught beyond its power.”[324] So Salih rose and
kissing ground three times, said, “O King of the Age, that which I
desire thou art indeed able to do; it is in thy power and thou art
master thereof; and I impose not on the King a difficulty, nor am I
Jinn-demented, that I should crave of the King a thing whereto he
availeth not; for one of the sages saith:—An thou wouldst be complied
with ask that which can be readily supplied. Wherefore, that of which I
am come in quest, the King (whom Allah preserve!) is able to grant.” The
King replied, “Ask what thou wouldst have, and state thy case and seek
thy need.” Then said Salih,[325] “O King of the Age, know that I come as
a suitor, seeking the unique pearl and the hoarded jewel, the Princess
Jauharah, daughter of our lord the King; wherefore, O King disappoint
thou not thy suitor.” Now when the King heard this, he laughed till he
fell backwards, in mockery of him and said, “O Salih, I had thought thee
a man of worth and a youth of sense, seeking naught save what was
reasonable and speaking not save advisedly. What then hath befallen thy
reason and urged thee to this monstrous matter and mighty hazard, that
thou seekest in marriage daughters of Kings, lords of cities and
climates? Say me, art thou of a rank to aspire to this great eminence
and hath thy wit failed thee to this extreme pass that thou affrontest
me with this demand?” Replied Salih, “Allah amend the King! I seek her
not for myself (albeit, an I did, I am her match and more than her
match, for thou knowest that my father was King of the Kings of the sea,
for all thou art this day our King), but I seek her for King Badr Basim,
lord of the lands of the Persians and son of King Shahriman, whose
puissance thou knowest. An thou object that thou art a mighty great
King, King Badr is a greater; and if thou object thy daughter’s beauty,
King Badr is more beautiful than she and fairer of form and more
excellent of rank and lineage; and he is the champion of the people of
his day. Wherefore, if thou grant my request, O King of the Age thou
wilt have set the thing in its stead; but, if thou deal arrogantly with
us, thou wilt not use us justly nor travel with us the ’road which is
straight[326].’ Moreover, O King, thou knowest that the Princess
Jauharah, the daughter of our lord the King, must needs be wedded and
bedded, for the sage saith, a girl’s lot is either grace of marriage or
the grave.[327] Wherefore, an thou mean to marry her, my sister’s son is
worthier of her than any other man.” Now when King Al-Samandal heard
Salih’s words, he was wroth with exceeding wrath; his reason well nigh
fled and his soul was like to depart his body for rage, and he cried, “O
dog, shall the like of thee dare to bespeak me thus and name my daughter
in the assemblies,[328] saying that the son of thy sister Julnar is a
match for her? Who art thou and who is this sister of thine and who is
her son and who was his father,[329] that thou durst say to me such say
and address me with such address? What are ye all, in comparison with my
daughter, but dogs?” And he cried out to his pages, saying, “Take yonder
gallows-bird’s head?” So they drew their swords and made for Salih, but
he fled and for the palace-gate sped; and reaching the entrance, he
found of his cousins and kinsfolk and servants, more than a thousand
horse armed cap-à-pie in iron and close knitted mail-coats, hending in
hand spears and naked swords glittering white. And these when they saw
Salih come running out of the palace (they having been sent by his
mother to his succour,) questioned him and he told them what was to do;
whereupon they knew that the King was a fool and violent-tempered to
boot. So they dismounted and baring their blades, went in to the King
Al-Samandal, whom they found seated upon the throne of his Kingship,
unaware of their coming and enraged against Salih with furious rage; and
they beheld his eunuchs and pages and officers unprepared. When the King
saw them enter, drawn brand in hand, he cried out to his people, saying
“Woe to you! Take me the heads of these hounds!” But ere an hour had
sped Al-Samandal’s party were put to the rout and relied upon flight,
and Salih and his kinsfolk seized upon the King and pinioned him.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Salih and
his king-folk pinioned the King, Princess Jauharah awoke and knew that
her father was a captive and his guards slain. So she fled forth the
palace to a certain island, and climbing up into a high tree, hid
herself in its summit. Now when the two parties came to blows, some of
King Al-Samandal’s pages fled and Badr Basim meeting them, questioned
them of their case and they told him what had happened. But when he
heard that the King was a prisoner, Badr feared for himself and fled,
saying in his heart, “Verily, all this turmoil is on my account and none
is wanted but I.” So he sought safety in flight, security to sight,
knowing not whither he went; but destiny from Eternity fore-ordained
drave him to the very island where the Princess had taken refuge, and he
came to the very tree whereon she sat and threw himself down, like a
dead man, thinking to lie and repose himself and knowing not there is no
rest for the pursued, for none knoweth what Fate hideth for him in the
future. As he lay down, he raised his eyes to the tree and they met the
eyes of the Princess. So he looked at her and seeing her to be like the
moon rising in the East, cried, “Glory to Him who fashioned yonder
perfect form, Him who is the Creator of all things and who over all
things is Almighty! Glory to the Great God, the Maker, the Shaper and
Fashioner! By Allah, if my presentiments be true, this is Jauharah,
daughter of King Al-Samandal! Methinks that, when she heard of our
coming to blows with her father, she fled to this island and, happening
upon this tree, hid herself on its head; but, if this be not the
Princess herself, ’tis one yet goodlier than she.” Then he bethought
himself of her case and said in himself, “I will arise and lay hands on
her and question her of her condition; and, if she be indeed the she, I
will demand her in wedlock of herself and so win my wish.” So he stood
up and said to her, “O end of all desire, who art thou and who brought
thee hither?” She looked at Badr Basim and seeing him to be as the full
moon,[330] when it shineth from under the black cloud, slender of shape
and sweet of smile, answered, “O fair of fashion, I am Princess
Jauharah, daughter of King Al-Samandal, and I took refuge in this place,
because Salih and his host came to blows with my sire and slew his
troops and took him prisoner, with some of his men; wherefore I fled,
fearing for my very life,” presently adding, “And I weet not what
fortune hath done with my father.” When King Badr Basim heard these
words he marvelled with exceeding marvel at this strange chance and
thought. “Doubtless I have won my wish by the capture of her sire.” Then
he looked at Jauharah and said to her, “Come down, O my lady; for I am
slain for love of thee and thine eyes have captivated me. On my account
and thine are all these broils and battles; for thou must know that I am
King Badr Basim, Lord of the Persians and Salih is my mother’s brother
and he it is who came to thy sire to demand thee of him in marriage. As
for me, I have quitted my kingdom for thy sake, and our meeting here is
the rarest coincidence. So come down to me and let us twain fare for thy
father’s palace, that I may beseech uncle Salih to release him and I may
make thee my lawful wife.” When Jauharah heard his words, she said in
herself, “’Twas on this miserable gallows bird’s account, then, that all
this hath befallen and that my father hath fallen prisoner and his
chamberlains and suite have been slain and I have been departed from my
palace, a miserable exile and have fled for refuge to this island. But,
an I devise not against him some device to defend myself from him, he
will possess himself of me and take his will of me; for he is in love
and for aught that he doeth a lover is not blamed.” Then she beguiled
him with winning words and soft speeches, whilst he knew not the perfidy
against him she purposed, and asked him, “O my lord and light of my
eyes, say me, art thou indeed King Badr Basim, son of Queen Julnar?” And
he answered, “Yes, O my lady.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Jauharah,
daughter of King Al-Samandal, asked the youth, “Art thou in very soth
King Badr Basim, son of Queen Julnar?” And he answered, “Yes, O my
lady!” Then she, “May Allah cut off my father and gar his kingdom cease
from him and heal not his heart neither avert from him strangerhood, if
he could desire a comelier than thou or aught goodlier than these fair
qualities of thine! By Allah, he is of little wit and judgment!”
presently adding, “But, O King of the Age, punish him not for that he
hath done; more by token that an thou love me a span, verily I love thee
a cubit. Indeed, I have fallen into the net of thy love and am become of
the number of thy slain. The love that was with thee hath transferred
itself to me and there is left thereof with thee but a tithe of that
which is with me.” So saying, she came down from the tree and drawing
near him strained him to her bosom and fell to kissing him; whereat
passion and desire for her redoubled on him and doubting not but she
loved him, he trusted in her, and returned her kisses and caresses.
Presently he said to her, “By Allah, O Princess, my uncle Salih set
forth to me not a fortieth part of thy charms; no, nor a
quarter-carat[331] of the four-and-twenty.” Then Jauharah pressed him to
her bosom and pronounced some unintelligible words; then spat on his
face, saying, “Quit this form of man and take shape of bird, the
handsomest of birds, white of robe, with red bill and legs.” Hardly had
she spoken, when King Badr Basim found himself transformed into a bird,
the handsomest of birds, who shook himself and stood looking at her. Now
Jauharah had with her one of her slave-girls, by name Marsínah;[332] so
she called her and said to her, “By Allah, but that I fear for the life
of my father, who is his uncle’s prisoner, I would kill him! Allah never
requite him with good! How unlucky was his coming to us; for all this
trouble is due to his hard-headedness! But do thou, O slave-girl, bear
him to the Thirsty Island and leave him there to die of thirst.” So
Marsinah carried him to the island in question and would have returned
and left him there; but she said in herself, “By Allah, the lord of such
beauty and loveliness deserveth not to die of thirst!” So she went forth
from that island and brought him to another abounding in trees and
fruits and rills and, setting him down there, returned to her mistress
and told her, “I have left him on the Thirsty Island.” Such was the case
with Badr Basim; but as regards King Salih, he sought for Jauharah after
capturing the King and killing his folk; but, finding her not, returned
to his palace and said to his mother, “Where is my sister’s son, King
Badr Basim?” “By Allah, O my son,” replied she, “I know nothing of him!
For when it reached him that you and King Al-Samandal had come to blows
and that strife and slaughter had betided between you, he was affrighted
and fled.” When Salih heard this, he grieved for his nephew and said, “O
my mother, by Allah, we have dealt negligently by King Badr and I fear
lest he perish or lest one of King Al-Samandal’s soldiers or his
daughter Jauharah fall in with him. So should we come to shame with his
mother and no good betide us from her, for that I took him without her
leave.” Then he despatched guards and scouts throughout the sea and
elsewhere to seek for Badr; but they could learn no tidings of him; so
they returned and told King Salih, wherefore cark and care redoubled on
him and his breast was straitened for King Badr Basim. So far concerning
nephew and uncle, but as for Julnar the Sea-born, after their departure
she abode in expectation of them, but her son returned not and she heard
no report of him. So when many days of fruitless waiting had gone by,
she arose and going down into the sea, repaired to her mother, who
sighting her rose to her and kissed her and embraced her, as did the
Mermaids her cousins. Then she questioned her mother of King Badr Basim,
and she answered, saying, “O my daughter, of a truth he came hither with
his uncle, who took jacinths and jewels and carrying them to King
Al-Samandal, demanded his daughter in marriage for thy son; but he
consented not and was violent against thy brother in words. Now I had
sent Salih nigh upon a thousand horse and a battle befel between him and
King Al-Samandal; but Allah aided thy brother against him, and he slew
his guards and troops and took himself prisoner. Meanwhile, tidings of
this reached thy son, and it would seem as if he feared for himself;
wherefore he fled forth from us, without our will, and returned not to
us, nor have we heard any news of him.” Then Julnar enquired for King
Salih, and his mother said, “He is seated on the throne of his kingship,
in the stead of King Al-Samandal, and hath sent in all directions to
seek thy son and Princess Jauharah.” When Julnar heard the maternal
words, she mourned for her son with sad mourning and was highly incensed
against her brother Salih for that he had taken him and gone down with
him into the sea without her leave; and she said, “O my mother, I fear
for our realm; as I came to thee without letting any know; and I dread
tarrying with thee, lest the state fall into disorder and the kingdom
pass from our hands. Wherefore I deem best to return and govern the
reign till it please Allah to order our son’s affair for us. But look ye
forget him not neither neglect his case; for should he come to any harm,
it would infallibly kill me, since I see not the world save in him and
delight but in his life.” She replied, “With love and gladness, O my
daughter. Ask not what we suffer by reason of his loss and absence.”
Then she sent to seek for her grandson, whilst Julnar returned to her
kingdom, weeping-eyed and heavy-hearted, and indeed the gladness of the
world was straitened upon her.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Fiftieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Queen Julnar
returned from her mother to her own realm, her breast was straitened and
she was in ill-case. So fared it with her; but as regards King Badr
Basim, after Princess Jauharah had ensorcelled him and had sent him with
her handmaid to the Thirsty Island, saying, “Leave him there to die of
thirst,” and Marsinah had set him down in a green islet, he abode days
and nights in the semblance of a bird eating of its fruits and drinking
of its waters and knowing not whither to go nor how to fly; till, one
day, there came a certain fowler to the island to catch somewhat
wherewithal to get his living. He espied King Badr Basim in his form of
a white-robed bird, with red bill and legs, captivating the sight and
bewildering the thought; and, looking thereat, said in himself, “Verily,
yonder is a beautiful bird: never saw I its like in fairness or form.”
So he cast his net over Badr and taking him, carried him to the town,
mentally resolved to sell him for a high price. On his way one of the
townsfolk accosted him and said, “For how much this fowl, O fowler?”
Quoth the fowler, “What wilt thou do with him an thou buy him?” Answered
the other, “I will cut his throat and eat him;” whereupon said the
birder, “Who could have the heart to kill this bird and eat him? Verily,
I mean to present him to our King, who will give me more than thou
wouldest give me and will not kill him, but will divert himself by
gazing upon his beauty and grace, for in all my life, since I have been
a fowler, I never saw his like among land game or water fowl. The utmost
thou wouldst give me for him, however much thou covet him, would be a
dirham, and, by Allah Almighty, I will not sell him!” Then he carried
the bird up to the King’s palace and when the King saw it, its beauty
and grace pleased him and the red colour of its beak and legs. So he
sent an eunuch to buy it, who accosted the fowler and said to him, “Wilt
thou sell this bird?” Answered he, “Nay, ’tis a gift from me to the
King”[333] So the eunuch carried the bird to the King and told him what
the man had said; and he took it and gave the fowler ten dinars,
whereupon he kissed ground and fared forth. Then the eunuch carried the
bird to the palace and placing him in a fine cage, hung him up after
setting meat and drink by him. When the King came down from the Divan,
he said to the eunuch, “Where is the bird? Bring it to me, that I may
look upon it; for, by Allah, ’tis beautiful!” So the eunuch brought the
cage and set it between the hands of the King, who looked and seeing the
food untouched, said, “By Allah, I wis not what it will eat, that I may
nourish it!” Then he called for food and they laid the tables and the
King ate. Now when the bird saw the flesh and meats and fruits and
sweetmeats, he ate of all that was upon the trays before the King,
whereat the Sovran and all the bystanders marvelled and the King said to
his attendants, eunuchs and Mamelukes, “In all my life I never saw a
bird eat as doth this bird!” Then he sent an eunuch to fetch his wife
that she might enjoy looking upon the bird, and he went in to summon her
and said, “O my lady, the King desireth thy presence, that thou mayst
divert thyself with the sight of a bird he hath bought. When we set on
the food, it flew down from its cage and perching on the table, ate of
all that was thereon. So arise, O my lady, and solace thee with the
sight for it is goodly of aspect and is a wonder of the wonders of the
age.” Hearing these words she came in haste; but, when she noted the
bird, she veiled her face and turned to fare away. The King rose up and
looking at her, asked, “Why dost thou veil thy face when there is none
in presence save the women and eunuchs who wait on thee and thy
husband?” Answered she, “O King, this bird is no bird, but a man like
thyself.” He rejoined, “Thou liest, this is too much of a jest. How
should he be other than a bird?”; and she “O King, by Allah, I do not
jest with thee nor do I tell thee aught but the truth; for verily this
bird is King Badr Basim, son of King Shahriman, Lord of the land of the
Persians, and his mother is Julnar the Sea-born.”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Fifty-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
King’s wife said to the King, “Verily, this is no bird but a man like
thyself: he is King Badr Basim son of King Shariman and his mother is
Julnar the Sea-born,” quoth the King, “And how came he in this shape?”;
and quoth she, “Princess Jauharah, daughter of King Al-Samandal, hath
enchanted him:” and told him all that had passed with King Badr Basim
from first to last.[334] The King marvelled exceedingly at his wife’s
words and conjured her, on his life, to free Badr from his enchantment
(for she was the notablest enchantress of her age), and not leave him in
torment, saying, “May Almighty Allah cut off Jauharah’s hand, for a foul
witch as she is! How little is her faith and how great her craft and
perfidy!” Said the Queen, “Do thou say to him:—O Badr Basim, enter
yonder closet!” So the King bade him enter the closet and he went in
obediently. Then the Queen veiled her face and taking in her hand a cup
of water,[335] entered the closet, where she pronounced over the water
certain incomprehensible words ending with, “By the virtue of these
mighty names and holy verses and by the majesty of Allah Almighty,
Creator of heaven and earth, the Quickener of the dead and Appointer of
the means of daily bread and the terms determined, quit this thy form
wherein thou art and return to the shape in which the Lord created
thee!” Hardly had she made an end of her words, when the bird trembled
once and became a man; and the King saw before him a handsome youth,
than whom on earth’s face was none goodlier. But when King Badr Basim
found himself thus restored to his own form he cried, “There is no god
but _the_ God and Mohammed is the Apostle of God! Glory be to the
Creator of all creatures and Provider of their provision, and Ordainer
of their life-terms preordained!” Then he kissed the King’s hand and
wished him long life, and the King kissed his head and said to him, “O
Badr Basim, tell me thy history from commencement to conclusion.” So he
told him his whole tale, concealing naught; and the King marvelled
thereat and said to him, “O Badr Basim, Allah hath saved thee from the
spell: but what hath thy judgment decided and what thinkest thou to do?”
Replied he, “O King of the Age, I desire of thy bounty that thou equip
me a ship with a company of thy servants and all that is needful; for
’tis long since I have been absent and I dread lest the kingdom depart
from me. And I misdoubt me my mother is dead of grief for my loss; and
this doubt is the stronger for that she knoweth not what is come of me
nor whether I am alive or dead. Wherefore, I beseech thee, O King, to
crown thy favours to me by granting me what I seek.” The King, after
beholding the beauty and grace of Badr Basim and listening to his sweet
speech, said, “I hear and obey.” So he fitted him out a ship, to which
he transported all that was needful and which he manned with a company
of his servants; and Badr Basim set sail in it, after having taken leave
of the King. They sailed over the sea ten successive days with a
favouring wind; but, on the eleventh day, the ocean became troubled with
exceeding trouble, the ship rose and fell and the sailors were powerless
to govern her. So they drifted at the mercy of the waves, till the craft
neared a rock in mid-sea which fell upon her[336] and broke her up and
all on board were drowned, save King Badr Basim who got astride one of
the planks of the vessel, after having been nigh upon destruction. The
plank ceased not to be borne by the set of the sea, whilst he knew not
whither he went and had no means of directing its motion, as the wind
and waves wrought for three whole days. But on the fourth the plank
grounded with him on the sea-shore where he sighted a white city, as it
were a dove passing white, builded upon a tongue of land that jutted out
into the deep and it was goodly of ordinance, with high towers and lofty
walls against which the waves beat. When Badr Basim saw this, he
rejoiced with exceeding joy, for he was well-nigh dead of hunger and
thirst, and dismounting from the plank, would have gone up the beach to
the city; but there came down to him mules and asses and horses, in
number as the sea-sands and fell to striking at him and staying him from
landing. So he swam round to the back of the city, where he waded to
shore and entering the place, found none therein and marvelled at this,
saying, “Would I knew to whom doth this city belong, wherein is no lord
nor any liege, and whence came these mules and asses and horses that
hindered me from landing?” And he mused over his case. Then he walked on
at hazard till he espied an old man, a grocer.[337] So he saluted him
and the other returned his salam and seeing him to be a handsome young
man, said to him, “O youth, whence comest thou and what brought thee to
this city?” Badr told him his story; at which the old man marvelled and
said, “O my son, didst thou see any on thy way?” He replied, “Indeed, O
my father, I wondered in good sooth to sight a city void of folk.” Quoth
the Shaykh, “O my son, come up into the shop, lest thou perish.” So Badr
Basim went up into the shop and sat down; whereupon the old man set
before him somewhat of food, saying, “O my son, enter the inner shop;
glory be to Him who hath preserved thee from yonder she-Sathanas!” King
Badr Basim was sore affrighted at the grocer’s words; but he ate his
fill and washed his hands; then glanced at his host and said to him, “O
my lord, what is the meaning of these words? Verily thou hast made me
fearful of this city and its folk.” Replied the old man, “Know, O my
son, that this is the City of the Magicians and its Queen is as she were
a she-Satan, a sorceress and a mighty enchantress, passing crafty and
perfidious exceedingly. All thou sawest of horses and mules and asses
were once sons of Adam like thee and me; they were also strangers, for
whoever entereth this city, being a young man like thyself, this
miscreant witch taketh him and hometh him for forty days, after which
she enchanteth him, and he becometh a mule or a horse or an ass, of
those animals thou sawest on the sea-shore.”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Fifty-second Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old grocer
related to King Badr Basim the history of the enchantress ending with,
“All these people hath she spelled; and, when it was thy intent to land
they feared lest thou be transmewed like themselves; so they counselled
thee by signs that said:—Land not, of their solicitude for thee, fearing
that haply she should do with thee like as she had done with them. She
possessed herself of this city and seized it from its citizens by
sorcery and her name is Queen Láb, which being interpreted, meaneth in
Arabic ’Almanac of the Sun.’”[338] When Badr Basim heard what the old
man said, he was affrighted with sore affright and trembled like reed in
wind saying in himself, “Hardly do I feel me free from the affliction
wherein I was by reason of sorcery, when Destiny casteth me into yet
sorrier case!” And he fell a-musing over his condition and that which
had betided him. When the Shaykh looked at him and saw the violence of
his terror, he said to him, “O my son, come, sit at the threshold of the
shop and look upon yonder creatures and upon their dress and complexion
and that wherein they are by reason of gramarye and dread not; for the
Queen and all in the city love and tender me and will not vex my heart
or trouble my mind.” So King Badr Basim came out and sat at the
shop-door, looking out upon the folk; and there passed by him a world of
creatures without number. But when the people saw him, they accosted the
grocer and said to him, “O elder, is this thy captive and thy prey
gotten in these days?” The old man replied, “He is my brother’s son, I
heard that his father was dead; so I sent for him and brought him here
that I might quench with him the fire of my home-sickness.” Quoth they,
“Verily, he is a comely youth; but we fear for him from Queen Lab, lest
she turn on thee with treachery and take him from thee, for she loveth
handsome young men.” Quoth the Shaykh, “The Queen will not gainsay my
commandment, for she loveth and tendereth me; and when she shall know
that he is my brother’s son, she will not molest him or afflict me in
him neither trouble my heart on his account.” Then King Badr Basim abode
some months with the grocer, eating and drinking, and the old man loved
him with exceeding love. One day, as he sat in the shop according to his
custom, behold, there came up a thousand eunuchs, with drawn swords and
clad in various kinds of raiment and girt with jewelled girdles: all
rode Arabian steeds and bore in baldrick Indian blades. They saluted the
grocer, as they passed his shop and were followed by a thousand damsels
like moons, clad in various raiments of silks and satins fringed with
gold and embroidered with jewels of sorts, and spears were slung to
their shoulders. In their midst rode a damsel mounted on a Rabite mare,
saddled with a saddle of gold set with various kinds of jewels and
jacinths; and they reached in a body the Shaykh’s shop. The damsels
saluted him and passed on, till, lo and behold! up came Queen Lab, in
great state, and seeing King Badr Basim sitting in the shop, as he were
the moon at its full, was amazed at his beauty and loveliness and became
passionately enamoured of him, and distraught with desire of him. So she
alighted and sitting down by King Badr Basim said to the old man,
“Whence hadst thou this handsome one?”; and the Shaykh replied, “He is
my brother’s son, and is lately come to me.” Quoth Lab, “Let him be with
me this night, that I may talk with him;” and quoth the old man, “Wilt
thou take him from me and not enchant him?” Said she, “Yes,” and said
he, “Swear to me.” So she sware to him that she would not do him any
hurt or ensorcell him, and bidding bring him a fine horse, saddled and
bridled with a golden bridle and decked with trappings all of gold set
with jewels, gave the old man a thousand dinars, saying, “Use
this.”[339] Then she took Badr Basim and carried him off, as he were the
full moon on its fourteenth night, whilst all the folk, seeing his
beauty, were grieved for him and said, “By Allah, verily, this youth
deserveth not to be bewitched by yonder sorceress, the accursed!” Now
King Badr Basim heard all they said, but was silent, committing his case
to Allah Almighty, till they came to——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Badr Basim
ceased not faring with Queen Lab and her suite till they came to her
palace-gate, where the Emirs and eunuchs and Lords of the realm took
foot and she bade the Chamberlains dismiss her Officers and Grandees,
who kissed ground and went away, whilst she entered the palace with Badr
Basim and her eunuchs and women. Here he found a place, whose like he
had never seen at all, for it was builded of gold and in its midst was a
great basin brimfull of water midmost a vast flower-garden. He looked at
the garden and saw it abounding in birds of various kinds and colours,
warbling in all manner tongues and voices, pleasurable and plaintive.
And everywhere he beheld great state and dominion and said, “Glory be to
God, who of His bounty and long-suffering provideth those who serve
other than Himself!” The Queen sat down at a latticed window overlooking
the garden on a couch of ivory, whereon was a high bed, and King Badr
Basim seated himself by her side. She kissed him and pressing him to her
breast, bade her women bring a tray of food. So they brought a tray of
red gold, inlaid with pearls and jewels and spread with all manner of
viands and he and she ate, till they were satisfied, and washed their
hands; after which the waiting-women set on flagons of gold and silver
and glass, together with all kinds of flowers and dishes of dried
fruits. Then the Queen summoned the singing-women and there came ten
maidens, as they were moons, hending all manner of musical instruments.
Queen Lab crowned a cup and drinking it off, filled another and passed
it to King Badr Basim, who took it and drank; and they ceased not to
drink till they had their sufficiency. Then she bade the damsels sing,
and they sang all manner modes till it seemed to Badr Basim as if the
palace danced with him for joy. His sense was ecstasied and his breast
broadened, and he forgot his strangerhood and said in himself, “Verily,
this Queen is young and beautiful[340] and I will never leave her; for
her kingdom is vaster than my kingdom and she is fairer than Princess
Jauharah.” So he ceased not to drink with her till eventide came, when
they lighted the lamps and waxen candles and diffused censer-perfumes;
nor did they leave drinking, till they were both drunken, and the
singing-women sang the while. Then Queen Lab, being in liquor, rose from
her seat and lay down on a bed and dismissing her women called to Badr
Basim to come and sleep by her side. So he lay with her, in all delight
of life till the morning.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Queen
awoke she repaired to the Hammam-bath in the palace, King Badr Basim
being with her, and they bathed and were purified; after which she clad
him in the finest of raiment and called for the service of wine. So the
waiting women brought the drinking-gear and they drank. Presently, the
Queen arose and taking Badr Basim by the hand, sat down with him on
chairs and bade bring food, whereof they ate, and washed their hands.
Then the damsels fetched the drinking-gear and fruits and flowers and
confections, and they ceased not to eat and drink,[341] whilst the
singing-girls sang various airs till the evening. They gave not over
eating and drinking and merry-making for a space of forty days, when the
Queen said to him, “O Badr Basim, say me whether is the more pleasant,
this place or the shop of thine uncle the grocer?” He replied, “By
Allah, O Queen, this is the pleasanter, for my uncle is but a beggarly
man, who vendeth pot-herbs.” She laughed at his words and the twain lay
together in the pleasantest of case till the morning, when King Badr
Basim awoke from sleep and found not Queen Lab by his side, so he said,
“Would Heaven I knew where can she have gone!” And indeed he was
troubled at her absence and perplexed about the case, for she stayed
away from him a great while and did not return; so he donned his dress
and went seeking her but not finding her, and he said to himself,
“Haply, she is gone to the flower-garden.” Thereupon he went out into
the garden and came to a running rill beside which he saw a white
she-bird and on the stream-bank a tree full of birds of various colours,
and he stood and watched the birds without their seeing him. And behold,
a black bird flew down upon that white she-bird and fell to billing her
pigeon-fashion, then he leapt on her and trod her three consecutive
times, after which the bird changed and became a woman. Badr looked at
her and lo! it was Queen Lab. So he knew that the black bird was a man
transmewed and that she was enamoured of him and had transformed herself
into a bird, that he might enjoy her; wherefore jealousy got hold upon
him and he was wroth with the Queen because of the black bird. Then he
returned to his place and lay down on the carpet-bed and after an hour
or so she came back to him and fell to kissing him and jesting with him;
but being sore incensed against her he answered her not a word. She saw
what was to do with him and was assured that he had witnessed what befel
her when she was a white bird and was trodden by the black bird; yet she
discovered naught to him but concealed what ailed her. When he had done
her need, he said to her, “O Queen, I would have thee give me leave to
go to my uncle’s shop, for I long after him and have not seen him these
forty days.” She replied, “Go to him but tarry not from me, for I cannot
brook to be parted from thee, nor can I endure without thee an hour.” He
said, “I hear and I obey,” and mounting, rode to the shop of the Shaykh,
the grocer, who welcomed him and rose to him and embracing him said to
him, “How hast thou fared with yonder idolatress?” He replied, “I was
well in health and happiness till this last night,” and told him what
had passed in the garden with the black bird.[342] Now when the old man
heard his words, he said, “Beware of her, for know that the birds upon
the trees were all young men and strangers, whom she loved and enchanted
and turned into birds. That black bird thou sawest was one of her
Mamelukes whom she loved with exceeding love, till he cast his eyes upon
one of her women. Wherefore she changed him into a black bird;”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Badr
Basim acquainted the old grocer with all the doings of Queen Lab and
what he had seen of her proceedings, the Shaykh gave him to know that
all the birds upon the tree were young men and strangers whom she had
enchanted, and that the black bird was one of her Mamelukes whom she had
transmewed. “And,” continued the Shaykh, “whenas she lusteth after him
she transformeth herself into a she-bird that he may enjoy her, for she
still loveth him with passionate love. When she found that thou knewest
of her case, she plotted evil against thee, for she loveth thee not
wholly. But no harm shall betide thee from her, so long as I protect
thee; therefore fear nothing; for I am a Moslem, by name Abdallah, and
there is none in my day more magical than I; yet do I not make use of
gramarye save upon constraint. Many a time have I put to naught the
sorceries of yonder accursed and delivered folk from her, and I care not
for her, because she can do me no hurt: nay, she feareth me with
exceeding fear, as do all in the city who, like her, are magicians and
serve the fire, not the Omnipotent Sire. So to-morrow, come thou to me
and tell me what she doth with thee; for this very night she will cast
about to destroy thee, and I will tell thee how thou shalt do with her,
that thou mayst save thyself from her malice.” Then King Badr Basim
farewelled the Shaykh and returned to the Queen whom he found awaiting
him. When she saw him, she rose and seating him and welcoming him
brought him meat and drink and the two ate till they had enough and
washed their hands; after which she called for wine and they drank till
the night was well nigh half spent, when she plied him with cup after
cup till he was drunken and lost sense[343] and wit. When she saw him
thus, she said to him, “I conjure thee by Allah and by whatso thou
worshippest, if I ask thee a question wilt thou inform me rightly and
answer me truly?” And he being drunken, answered, “Yes, O my lady.”
Quoth she, “O my lord and light of mine eyes, when thou awokest last
night and foundest me not, thou soughtest me, till thou sawest me in the
garden, under the guise of a white she-bird, and also thou sawest the
black bird leap on me and tread me. Now I will tell the truth of this
matter. That black bird was one of my Mamelukes, whom I loved with
exceeding love; but one day he cast his eyes upon a certain of my
slave-girls, wherefore jealousy gat hold upon me and I transformed him
by my spells into a black bird and her I slew. But now I cannot endure
without him a single hour; so, whenever I lust after him, I change
myself into a she-bird and go to him, that he may leap me and enjoy me,
even as thou hast seen. Art thou not therefore incensed against me,
because of this, albeit, by the virtue of Fire and Light, Shade and
Heat, I love thee more than ever and have made thee my portion of the
world?” He answered (being drunken), “Thy conjecture of the cause of my
rage is correct, and it had no reason other than this.” With this she
embraced him and kissed him and made great show of love to him; then she
lay down to sleep and he by her side. Presently, about midnight she rose
from the carpet-bed and King Badr Basim was awake; but he feigned sleep
and watched stealthily to see what she would do. She took out of a red
bag a something red, which she planted a-middlemost the chamber, and it
became a stream, running like the sea; after which she took a handful of
barley and strewing it on the ground, watered it with water from the
river; whereupon it became wheat in the ear, and she gathered it and
ground it into flour. Then she set it aside and returning to bed, lay
down by Badr Basim till morning when he arose and washed his face and
asked her leave to visit the Shaykh his uncle. She gave him permission
and he repaired to Abdallah and told him what had passed. The old man
laughed and said, “By Allah, this miscreant witch plotteth mischief
against thee; but reck thou not of her ever!” Then he gave him a pound
of parched corn[344] and said to him, “Take this with thee and know
that, when she seeth it, she will ask thee:—What is this and what wilt
thou do with it? Do thou answer:—Abundance of good things is good; and
eat of it. Then will she bring forth to thee parched grain of her own
and say to thee:—Eat of this Sawík; and do thou feign to her that thou
eatest thereof, but eat of this instead, and beware and have a care lest
thou eat of hers even a grain; for, an thou eat so much as a grain
thereof, her spells will have power over thee and she will enchant thee
and say to thee:—Leave this form of a man. Whereupon thou wilt quit
thine own shape for what shape she will. But, an thou eat not thereof,
her enchantments will be null and void and no harm will betide thee
therefrom; whereat she will be shamed with shame exceeding and say to
thee:—I did but jest with thee! Then will she make a show of love and
fondness to thee; but this will all be but hypocrisy in her and craft.
And do thou also make a show of love to her and say to her:—O my lady
and light of mine eyes, eat of this parched barley and see how delicious
it is. And if she eat thereof, though it be but a grain, take water in
thy hand and throw it in her face, saying:—Quit this human form (for
what form soever thou wilt have her take). Then leave her and come to me
and I will counsel thee what to do.” So Badr Basim took leave of him and
returning to the palace, went in to the Queen, who said to him, “Welcome
and well come and good cheer to thee!” And she rose and kissed him,
saying, “Thou hast tarried long from me, O my lord.” He replied, “I have
been with my uncle, and he gave me to eat of this Sawik.” Quoth she, “We
have better than that.” Then she laid his parched Sawik in one plate and
hers in another and said to him, “Eat of this, for ’tis better than
thine.” So he feigned to eat of it and when she thought he had done so,
she took water in her hand and sprinkled him therewith, saying, “Quit
this form, O thou gallows-bird, thou miserable, and take that of a mule
one-eyed and foul of favour.” But he changed not; which when she saw,
she arose and went up to him and kissed him between the eyes, saying, “O
my beloved, I did but jest with thee; bear me no malice because of
this.” Quoth he, “O my lady, I bear thee no whit of malice; nay, I am
assured that thou lovest me: but eat of this my parched barley.” So she
eat a mouthful of Abdallah’s Sawik; but no sooner had it settled in her
stomach than she was convulsed; and King Badr Basim took water in his
palm and threw it in her face, saying, “Quit this human form and take
that of a dapple mule.” No sooner had he spoken than she found herself
changed into a she-mule, whereupon the tears rolled down her cheeks and
she fell to rubbing her muzzle against his feet. Then he would have
bridled her, but she would not take the bit; so he left her and, going
to the grocer, told him what had passed. Abdallah brought out for him a
bridle and bade him rein her forthwith. So he took it to the palace, and
when she saw him, she came up to him and he set the bit in her mouth and
mounting her, rode forth to find the Shaykh. But when the old man saw
her, he rose and said to her, “Almighty Allah confound thee, O accursed
woman!” Then quoth he to Badr, “O my son, there is no more tarrying for
thee in this city; so ride her and fare with her whither thou wilt and
beware lest thou commit the bridle[345] to any.” King Badr thanked him
and farewelling him, fared on three days, without ceasing, till he drew
near another city and there met him an old man, gray-headed and comely,
who said to him, “Whence comest thou, O my son?” Badr replied, “From the
city of this witch”; and the old man said, “Thou art my guest to-night.”
He consented and went with him; but by the way behold, they met an old
woman, who wept when she saw the mule, and said, “There is no god but
_the_ God! Verily, this mule resembleth my son’s she-mule, which is
dead, and my heart acheth for her; so, Allah upon thee, O my lord, do
thou sell her to me!” He replied, “By Allah, O my mother, I cannot sell
her.” But she cried, “Allah upon thee, do not refuse my request, for my
son will surely be a dead man except I buy him this mule.” And she
importuned him, till he exclaimed, “I will not sell her save for a
thousand dinars,” saying in himself, “Whence should this old woman get a
thousand gold pieces?” Thereupon she brought out from her girdle a purse
containing a thousand ducats, which when King Badr Basim saw, he said,
“O my mother, I did but jest with thee; I cannot sell her.” But the old
man looked at him and said, “O my son, in this city none may lie, for
whoso lieth they put to death.” So King Badr Basim lighted down from the
mule.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Badr Basim
dismounted from and delivered the mule to the old woman, she drew the
bit from her mouth and, taking water in her hand, sprinkled the mule
therewith, saying, “O my daughter, quit this shape for that form wherein
thou wast aforetime!” Upon this she was straightway restored to her
original semblance and the two women embraced and kissed each other. So
King Badr Basim knew that the old woman was Queen Lab’s mother and that
he had been tricked and would have fled; when, lo! the old woman
whistled a loud whistle and her call was obeyed by an Ifrit as he were a
great mountain, whereat Badr was affrighted and stood still. Then the
old woman mounted on the Ifrit’s back, taking her daughter behind her
and King Badr Basim before her, and the Ifrit flew off with them; nor
was it a full hour ere they were in the palace of Queen Lab, who sat
down on the throne of kingship and said to Badr, “Gallows-bird that thou
art, now am I come hither and have attained to that I desired and soon
will I show thee how I will do with thee and with yonder old man the
grocer! How many favours have I shown him! Yet he doth me frowardness;
for thou hast not attained thine end but by means of him.” Then she took
water and sprinkled him therewith, saying, “Quit the shape wherein thou
art for the form of a foul-favoured fowl, the foulest of all fowls; and
she set him in a cage and cut off from him meat and drink;” but one of
her women seeing this cruelty, took compassion on him and gave him food
and water without her knowledge. One day, the damsel took her mistress
at unawares and going forth the palace, repaired to the old grocer, to
whom she told the whole case, saying, “Queen Lab is minded to make an
end of thy brother’s son.” The Shaykh thanked her and said, “There is no
help but that I take the city from her and make thee Queen thereof in
her stead.” Then he whistled a loud whistle and there came forth to him
an Ifrit with four wings, to whom he said, “Take up this damsel and
carry her to the city of Julnar the Sea-born and her mother
Faráshah[346] for they twain are the most powerful magicians on face of
earth.” And he said to the damsel, “When thou comest thither, tell them
that King Badr Basim is Queen Lab’s captive.” Then the Ifrit took up his
load and, flying off with her, in a little while set her down upon the
terrace roof of Queen Julnar’s palace. So she descended and going in to
the Queen, kissed the earth and told her what had passed to her son,
first and last, whereupon Julnar rose to her and entreated her with
honour and thanked her. Then she let beat the drums in the city and
acquainted her lieges and the lords of her realm with the good news that
King Badr Basim was found; after which she and her mother Farashah and
her brother Salih assembled all the tribes of the Jinn and the troops of
the main; for the Kings of the Jinn obeyed them since the taking of King
Al-Samandal. Presently they all flew up into the air and lighting down
on the city of the sorceress, sacked the town and the palace and slew
all the Unbelievers therein in the twinkling of an eye. Then said Julnar
to the damsel, “Where is my son?” And the slave-girl brought her the
cage and signing to the bird within, cried, “This is thy son.” So Julnar
took him forth of the cage and sprinkled him with water, saying, “Quit
this shape for the form wherein thou wast aforetime;” nor had she made
an end of her speech ere he shook and became a man as before; whereupon
his mother, seeing him restored to human shape, embraced him and he wept
with sore weeping. On like wise did his uncle Salih and his grandmother
and the daughters of his uncle and fell to kissing his hands and feet.
Then Julnar sent for Shaykh Abdallah and thanking him for his kind
dealing with her son, married him to the damsel, whom he had despatched
to her with news of him, and made him King of the city. Moreover, she
summoned those who survived of the citizens (and they were Moslems), and
made them swear fealty to him and take the oath of loyalty, whereto they
replied, “Hearkening and obedience!” Then she and her company farewelled
him and returned to their own capital. The townsfolk came out to meet
them, with drums beating, and decorated the place three days and held
high festival, of the greatness of their joy for the return of their
King Badr Basim. After this Badr said to his mother, “O my mother,
naught remains but that I marry and we be all united.” She replied,
“Right is thy rede, O my son, but wait till we ask who befitteth thee
among the daughters of the Kings.” And his grandmother Farashah, and the
daughters of both his uncles said, “O Badr Basim, we will help thee to
win thy wish forthright.” Then each of them arose and fared forth
questing in the lands, whilst Julnar sent out her waiting women on the
necks of Ifrits, bidding them leave not a city nor a King’s palace
without noting all the handsome girls that were therein. But, when King
Badr Basim saw the trouble they were taking in this matter, he said to
Julnar, “O my mother, leave this thing, for none will content me save
Jauharah, daughter of King Al-Samandal; for that she is indeed a
jewel,[347] according to her name.” Replied Julnar, “I know that which
thou seekest;” and bade forthright bring Al-Samandal the King. As soon
as he was present, she sent for Badr Basim and acquainted him with the
King’s coming, whereupon he went in to him. Now when Al-Samandal was
aware of his presence, he rose to him and saluted him and bade him
welcome; and King Badr Basim demanded of him his daughter Jauharah in
marriage. Quoth he, “She is thine handmaid and at thy service and
disposition,” and despatched some of his suite bidding them seek her
abode and, after telling her that her sire was in the hands of King Badr
Basim, to bring her forthright. So they flew up into the air and
disappeared and they returned after a while, with the Princess who, as
soon as she saw her father, went up to him and threw her arms round his
neck. Then looking at her he said, “O my daughter, know that I have
given thee in wedlock to this magnanimous Sovran, and valiant lion King
Badr Basim, son of Queen Julnar the Sea-born, for that he is the
goodliest of the folk of his day and most powerful and the most exalted
of them in degree and the noblest in rank; he befitteth none but thee
and thou none but him.” Answered she, “I may not gainsay thee, O my
sire; do as thou wilt, for indeed chagrin and despite are at an end, and
I am one of his handmaids.” So they summoned the Kazi and the witnesses
who drew up the marriage-contract between King Badr Basim and the
Princess Jauharah, and the citizens decorated the city and beat the
drums of rejoicing, and they released all who were in the jails, whilst
the King clothed the widows and the orphans and bestowed robes of honour
upon the Lords of the Realm and Emirs and Grandees: and they made
bride-feasts and held high festival night and morn ten days, at the end
of which time they displayed the bride, in nine different dresses,
before King Badr Basim who bestowed an honourable robe upon King
Al-Samandal and sent him back to his country and people and kinsfolk.
And they ceased not from living the most delectable of life and the most
solaceful of days, eating and drinking and enjoying every luxury, till
there came to them the Destroyer of delights and the Sunderer of
Societies; and this is the end of their story,[348] may Allah have mercy
on them all! Moreover, O auspicious King, a tale is also told anent

-----

Footnote 302:

  In the Mac. Edit. “Shahzamán,” a corruption of Sháh Zamán = King of
  the Age. (See vol. i. 2.)

Footnote 303:

  For a note on this subject see vol. ii. 1.

Footnote 304:

  _i.e._ bathe her and apply cosmetics to remove all traces of travel.

Footnote 305:

  These pretentious and curious displays of coquetry are not uncommon in
  handsome slave-girls when newly bought; and it is a kind of pundonor
  to humour them. They may also refuse their favours and a master who
  took possession of their persons by brute force would be blamed by his
  friends, men and women. Even the most despotic of despots, Fath Ali
  Shah of Persia, put up with refusals from his slave-girls and did not,
  as would the mean-minded, marry them to the grooms or cooks of the
  palace.

Footnote 306:

  Such continence is rarely shown by the young Jallabs or slave-traders;
  when older they learn how much money is lost with the chattel’s
  virginity.

Footnote 307:

  Midwives in the East, as in the less civilised parts of the West, have
  many nostrums for divining the sex of the unborn child.

Footnote 308:

  Arabic (which has no written “g”) from Pers. Gulnár (Gul-i-anár)
  pomegranate-flower, the “Gulnare” of Byron who learnt his Orientalism
  at the Mekhitarist (Armenian) Convent, Venice. I regret to see the
  little honour now paid to the gallant poet in the land where he should
  be honoured the most. The systematic depreciation was begun by the
  late Mr. Thackeray, perhaps the last man to value the noble
  independence of Byron’s spirit; and it has been perpetuated, I regret
  to see, by better judges. These critics seem wholly to ignore the fact
  that Byron founded a school which covered Europe from Russia to Spain,
  from Norway to Sicily, and which from England passed over to the two
  Americas. This exceptional success, which has not yet fallen even to
  Shakespeare’s lot, was due to genius only, for the poet almost ignored
  study and poetic art. His great misfortune was being born in England
  under the Georgium Sidus. Any Continental people would have regarded
  him as one of the prime glories of his race.

Footnote 309:

  Arab. “Fí al-Kamar,” which Lane renders “in the moonlight.” It seems
  to me that the allusion is to the Comorin Islands; but the sequel
  speaks simply of an island.

Footnote 310:

  The Mac. Edit. misprints Julnár as Julnáz (so the Bul. Edit. ii. 233),
  and Lane’s Jullanár is an Egyptian vulgarism. He is right in
  suspecting the “White City” to be imaginary; but its sea has no
  apparent connection with the Caspian. The mermen and mermaids appear
  to him to be of an inferior order of the Jinn, termed Al-Ghawwásah,
  the Divers, who fly through air and are made of fire which at times
  issues from their mouths.

Footnote 311:

  Arab. “’Alà Kulli hál,” a popular phrase, like the Anglo-American
  “anyhow.”

Footnote 312:

  In the text the name does not appear till near the end of the tale.

Footnote 313:

  _i.e._ Full moon smiling.

Footnote 314:

  These lines have occurred in vol. iii. 264, so I quote Lane ii. 499.

Footnote 315:

  These lines occurred in vol. ii. 301. I quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 316:

  Arab. “Khadd” = cheek from the eye-orbit to the place where the beard
  grows; also applied to the side of a rough highland, the side-planks
  of a litter, etc. etc.

Footnote 317:

  The black hair of youth.

Footnote 318:

  This manner of listening is not held dishonourable amongst Arabs or
  Easterns generally; who, however, hear as little good of themselves as
  westerns declare in proverb.

Footnote 319:

  Arab. “Hasab wa nasab,” before explained as inherited degree and
  acquired dignity. See vol. iv. 171.

Footnote 320:

  Arab. Mujájat = spittle running from the mouth: hence Lane, “is like
  running saliva,” which, in poetry is not pretty.

Footnote 321:

  Arab. and Heb. Salmandra from Pers. Samandal (—dar—duk—dun, etc), a
  Salamander, a mouse which lives in fire, some say a bird in India and
  China and others confuse with the chameleon (Bochart Hiero. Part ii.
  chapt. vi).

Footnote 322:

  Arab. “Mahá” one of the four kinds of wild cows or bovine antelopes,
  bubalus, Antelope defassa, A. leucoryx, etc.

Footnote 323:

  These lines have occurred in vol. iii. 279; so I quote Lane (iii. 274)
  by way of variety; although I do not like his “bowels.”

Footnote 324:

  The last verse (286) of chapt. ii. The Cow: “compelleth” in the sense
  of “burdeneth.”

Footnote 325:

  Salih’s speeches are euphuistic.

Footnote 326:

  From the Fátihah.

Footnote 327:

  A truly Eastern saying, which ignores the “old maids” of the West.

Footnote 328:

  _i.e._ naming her before the lieges as if the speaker were her and his
  superior. It would have been more polite not to have gone beyond “the
  unique pearl and the hoarded jewel”: the offensive part of the speech
  was using the girl’s name.

Footnote 329:

  Meaning emphatically that one and all were nobodies.

Footnote 330:

  Arab. Badr, the usual pun.

Footnote 331:

  Arab. Kirát (κεράτιον) the bean of the _Abrus precatorius_, used as a
  weight in Arabia and India and as a bead for decoration in Africa. It
  is equal to four Kamhahs or wheat-grains and about 3 grs. avoir.; and
  being the twenty-fourth of a miskal, it is applied to that proportion
  of everything. Thus the Arabs say of a perfect man, “He is of
  four-and-twenty Kirát” _i.e._ pure gold. See vol. iii. 239.

Footnote 332:

  The (she) myrtle: Kazimirski (A. de Biberstein) Dictionnaire
  Arabe-Francais (Paris Maisonneuve 1867) gives Marsín = Rose de
  Jericho: myrte.

Footnote 333:

  Needless to note that the fowler had a right to expect a return
  present worth double or treble the price of his gift. Such is the
  universal practice of the East: in the West the extortioner says, “I
  leave it to you, sir!”

Footnote 334:

  And she does tell him all that the reader well knows.

Footnote 335:

  This was for sprinkling him, but the texts omit that operation. Arabic
  has distinct terms for various forms of metamorphosis. “Naskh” is
  change from a lower to a higher, as beast to man; “Maskh” (the common
  expression) is the reverse; “Raskh” is from animate to inanimate (man
  to stone) and “Faskh” is absolute wasting away to corruption.

Footnote 336:

  I render this improbable detail literally: it can only mean that the
  ship was dashed against a rock.

Footnote 337:

  Who was probably squatting on his shop-counter. The “Bakkál” (who must
  not be confounded with the _épicier_), lit. “vender of herbs” =
  greengrocer, and according to Richardson used incorrectly for Baddál
  (?) vendor of provisions. Popularly it is applied to a seller of oil,
  honey, butter and fruit, like the Ital. “Pizzicagnolo” =
  Salsamentarius, and in N. West Africa to an inn-keeper.

Footnote 338:

  Here the Shaykh is mistaken: he should have said, “The Sun in old
  Persian.” “Almanac” simply makes nonsense of the Arabian Circe’s name.
  In Arab. it is “Takwím,” whence the Span. and Port. “Tacuino:” in Heb.
  Hakamathá-Takunah = sapientia dispositionis astrorum (Asiat. Research.
  iii. 120).

Footnote 339:

  _i.e._ for thy daily expenses.

Footnote 340:

  _Un adolescent aime toutes les femmes._ Man is by nature polygamic
  whereas woman as a rule is monogamic and polyandrous only when tired
  of her lover. For the man, as has been truly said, loves the woman,
  but the love of the woman is for the love of the man.

Footnote 341:

  I have already noted that the heroes and heroines of Eastern
  love-tales are always _bonnes fourchettes_: they eat and drink hard
  enough to scandalise the sentimental amourist of the West; but it is
  understood that this abundant diet is necessary to qualify them for
  the Herculean labours of the love night.

Footnote 342:

  Here again a little excision is necessary; the reader already knows
  all about it.

Footnote 343:

  Arab. “Hiss,” prop. speaking a perception (as of sound or motion) as
  opposed to “Hadas,” a surmise or opinion without proof.

Footnote 344:

  Arab. “Sawík,” the old and modern name for native frumenty, green
  grain (mostly barley) toasted, pounded, mixed with dates or sugar and
  eaten on journeys when cooking is impracticable. M. C. de Perceval
  (iii. 54), gives it a different and now unknown name; and Mr. Lane
  also applies it to “ptisane.” It named the “Day of Sawaykah” (for
  which see Pilgrimage ii. 19), called by our popular authors the “War
  of the Meal-sacks.”

Footnote 345:

  Mr. Keightley (H. 122–24 Tales and Popular Fictions, a book now
  somewhat obselete) remarks, “There is nothing said about the bridle in
  the account of the sale (_infra_), but I am sure that in the original
  tale, Badr’s misfortunes must have been owing to his having parted
  with it. In Chaucer’s Squier’s Tale the bridle would also appear to
  have been of some importance.” He quotes a story from the Notti
  Piacevoli of Straparola, the Milanese, published at Venice in 1550.
  And there is a popular story of the kind in Germany.

Footnote 346:

  Here, for the first time we find the name of the mother who has often
  been mentioned in the story. Faráshah is the fem. or singular form of
  “Farásh,” a butterfly, a moth. Lane notes that his Shaykh gives it the
  very unusual sense of “a locust.”

Footnote 347:

  Punning upon Jauharah = “a jewel” a name which has an Hibernian smack.

Footnote 348:

  In the old version “All the lovers of the Magic Queen resumed their
  pristine forms as soon as she ceased to live;” moreover, they were all
  sons of kings, princes, or persons of high degree.




            KING MOHAMMED BIN SABAIK AND THE MERCHANT HASAN.


There was once, in days of yore and in ages and times long gone before,
a King of the Kings of the Persians, by name Mohammed bin Sabáik, who
ruled over Khorásán-land and used every year to go on razzia into the
countries of the Miscreants in Hind and Sind and China and the lands of
Máwarannahr beyond the Oxus and other regions of the barbarians and what
not else. He was a just King, a valiant and a generous, and loved
table-talk[349] and tales and verses and anecdotes and histories and
entertaining stories and legends of the ancients. Whoso knew a rare
recital and related it to him in such fashion as to please him he would
bestow on him a sumptuous robe of honour and clothe him from head to
foot and give him a thousand dinars, and mount him on a horse saddled
and bridled besides other great gifts; and the man would take all this
and wend his way. Now it chanced that one day there came an old man
before him and related to him a rare story, which pleased the King and
made him marvel, so he ordered him a magnificent present, amongst other
things a thousand dinars of Khorasan and a horse with its housings and
trappings. After this, the bruit of the King’s munificence was blazed
abroad in all countries and there heard of him a man, Hasan the Merchant
hight, who was generous, open-handed and learned, a scholar and an
accomplished poet. Now that King had an envious Wazir, a multum-in-parvo
of ill, loving no man, rich nor poor, and whoso came before the King and
he gave him aught he envied him and said, “Verily, this fashion
annihilateth wealth and ruineth the land; and such is the custom of the
King.” But this was naught save envy and despite in that Minister.
Presently the King heard talk of Hasan the Merchant and sending for him,
said to him as soon as he came into the presence, “O Merchant Hasan,
this Wazir of mine vexeth and thwarteth me concerning the money I give
to poets and boon-companions and story-tellers and glee-men, and I would
have thee tell me a goodly history and a rare story, such as I have
never before heard. An it please me, I will give thee lands galore, with
their forts, in free tenure, in addition to thy fiefs and untaxed lands;
besides which I will put my whole kingdom in thy hands and make thee my
Chief Wazir; so shalt thou sit on my right hand and rule my subjects.
But, an thou bring me not that which I bid thee, I will take all that is
in thy hand and banish thee my realm.” Replied Hasan, “Hearkening and
obedience to our lord the King! But thy slave beseecheth thee to have
patience with him a year; than will he tell thee a tale, such as thou
hast never in thy life heard, neither hath other than thou heard its
like, not to say a better than it.” Quoth the King, “I grant thee a
whole year’s delay.” And he called for a costly robe of honour wherein
he robed Hasan, saying, “Keep thy house and mount not horse, neither go
nor come for a year’s time, till thou bring me that I seek of thee. An
thou bring it, especial favour awaiteth thee and thou mayst count upon
that which I have promised thee; but, an thou bring it not, thou art not
of us nor are we of thee.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King Mohammed
son of Sabaik said to Hasan the Merchant, “An thou bring me that I seek
of thee, especial favour awaiteth thee and thou mayest now rejoice in
that which I have promised thee; but, an thou bring it not, thou art not
of us nor are we of thee.” Hasan kissed ground before the King and went
out from the presence. Then he chose five of the best of his Mamelukes,
who could all write and read and were learned, intelligent,
accomplished; and he gave each of them five thousand dinars, saying, “I
reared you not save for the like of this day; so do ye help me to
further the King’s desire and deliver me from his hand.” Quoth they,
“What wilt thou have us do? Our lives be thy ransom!” Quoth he, “I wish
you to go each to a different country and seek out diligently the
learned and erudite and literate and the tellers of wondrous stories and
marvellous histories and do your endeavour to procure me the story of
Sayf al-Mulúk. If ye find it with any one, pay him what price soever he
asketh for it although he demand a thousand dinars; give him what ye may
and promise him the rest and bring me the story; for whoso happeneth on
it and bringeth it to me, I will bestow on him a costly robe of honour
and largesse galore, and there shall be to me none more worshipped than
he.” Then said he to one of them, “Hie thou to Al-Hind and Al-Sind and
all their provinces and dependencies.” To another, “Hie thou to the home
of the Persians and to China and her climates.” To the third, “Hie thou
to the land of Khorasan with its districts.” To the fourth, “Hie thou to
Mauritania and all its regions, districts, provinces and quarters.” And
to the fifth, “Hie thou to Syria and Egypt and their outliers.”
Moreover, he chose them out an auspicious day and said to them, “Fare ye
forth this day and be diligent in the accomplishment of my need and be
not slothful, though the case cost you your lives.” So they farewelled
him and departed, each taking the direction prescribed to him. Now, four
of them were absent four months, and searched but found nothing; so they
returned and told their master, whose breast was straitened, that they
had ransacked towns and cities and countries for the thing he sought,
but had happened upon naught thereof. Meanwhile, the fifth servant
journeyed till he came to the land of Syria and entered Damascus, which
he found a pleasant city and a secure, abounding in trees and rills,
leas and fruiteries and birds chanting the praises of Allah the One, the
All-powerful of sway, Creator of Night and Day. Here he tarried some
time, asking for his master’s desire, but none answered him wherefore he
was on the point of departing thence to another place, when he met a
young man running and stumbling over his skirts. So he asked to him,
“Wherefore runnest thou in such eagerness and whither dost thou press?”
And he answered, “There is an elder here, a man of learning, who every
day at this time taketh his seat on a stool[350] and relateth tales and
stories and delectable anecdotes, whereof never heard any the like; and
I am running to get me a place near him and fear I shall find no room,
because of the much folk.” Quoth the Mameluke, “Take me with thee;” and
quoth the youth, “Make haste in thy walking.” So he shut his door and
hastened with him to the place of recitation, where he saw an old man of
bright favour seated on a stool holding forth to the folk. He sat down
near him and addressed himself to hear his story, till the going down of
the sun, when the old man made an end of his tale and the people, having
heard it all, dispersed from about him; whereupon the Mameluke accosted
him and saluted him, and he returned his salam and greeted him with the
utmost worship and courtesy. Then said the messenger to him, “O my lord
Shaykh, thou art a comely and reverend man, and thy discourse is goodly;
but I would fain ask thee of somewhat.” Replied the old man, “Ask of
what thou wilt!” Then said the Mameluke, “Hast thou the story of Sayf
al-Muluk and Badí’a al-Jamál?” Rejoined the elder, “And who told thee of
this story and informed thee thereof?” Answered the messenger, “None
told me of it, but I am come from a far country, in quest of this tale,
and I will pay thee whatever thou askest for its price if thou have it
and wilt, of thy bounty and charity, impart it to me and make it an alms
to me, of the generosity of thy nature for, had I my life in my hand and
lavished it upon thee for this thing, yet were it pleasing to my heart.”
Replied the old man, “Be of good cheer and keep thine eye cool and
clear: thou shalt have it; but this is no story that one telleth in the
beaten highway, nor do I give it to every one.” Cried the other, “By
Allah, O my lord, do not grudge it me, but ask of me what price thou
wilt.” And the old man, “If thou wish for the history give me an hundred
dinars and thou shalt have it; but upon five conditions.” Now when the
Mameluke knew that the old man had the story and was willing to sell it
to him, he joyed with exceeding joy and said, “I will give thee the
hundred dinars by way of price and ten to boot as a gratuity and take it
on the conditions of which thou speakest.” Said the old man, “Then go
and fetch the gold pieces, and take that thou seekest.” So the messenger
kissed his hands and joyful and happy returned to his lodging, where he
laid an hundred and ten dinars[351] in a purse he had by him. As soon as
morning morrowed, he donned his clothes and taking the dinars, repaired
to the story-teller, whom he found seated at the door of his house. So
he saluted him and the other returned his salam. Then he gave him the
gold and the old man took it and carrying the messenger into his house
made him sit down in a convenient place, when he set before him inkcase
and reed-pen and paper and giving him a book, said to him, “Write out
what thou seekest of the night-story[352] of Sayf al-Muluk from this
book.” Accordingly the Mameluke fell to work and wrote till he had made
an end of his copy, when he read it to the old man, and he corrected it
and presently said to him, “Know, O my son, that my five conditions are
as follows; firstly, that thou tell not this story in the beaten high
road nor before women and slave-girls nor to black slaves nor
feather-heads; nor again to boys; but read it only before Kings and
Emirs and Wazirs and men of learning, such as expounders of the Koran
and others.” Thereupon the messenger accepted the conditions and kissing
the old man’s hand, took leave of him, and fared forth.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Mameluke of Hasan the Merchant had copied the tale out of the book
belonging to the old man of Damascus, and had accepted his conditions
and farewelled him, he fared forth on the same day, glad and joyful, and
journeyed on diligently, of the excess of his contentment, for that he
had gotten the story of Sayf al-Muluk, till he came to his own country,
when he despatched his servant to bear the good news to his master and
say to him, “Thy Mameluke is come back in safety and hath won his will
and his aim.” (Now of the term appointed between Hasan and the King
there wanted but ten days.) Then, after taking rest in his own quarters
he himself went in to the Merchant and told him all that had befallen
him and gave him the book containing the story of Sayf al-Muluk and
Badi’a al-Jamal, when Hasan joyed with exceeding joy at the sight and
bestowed on him all the clothes he had on and gave him ten thoroughbred
horses and the like number of camels and mules and three negro chattels
and two white slaves. Then Hasan took the book and copied out the story
plainly in his own hand; after which he presented himself before the
King and said to him, “O thou auspicious King, I have brought thee a
night-story and a rarely pleasant relation, whose like none ever heard
at all.” When these words reached the King’s ear, he sent forthright for
all the Emirs, who were men of understanding, and all the learned
doctors and folk of erudition and culture and poets and wits; and Hasan
sat down and read the history before the King, who marvelled thereat and
approved it, as did all who were present, and they showered gold and
silver and jewels upon the Merchant. Moreover, the King bestowed on him
a costly robe of honour of the richest of his raiment and gave him a
great city with its castles and outliers; and he appointed him one of
his Chief Wazirs and seated him on his right hand. Then he caused the
scribes write the story in letters of gold and lay it up in his privy
treasures; and whenever his breast was straitened, he would summon Hasan
and he would read him the story,[353] which was as follows:—


   _STORY OF PRINCE SAYF AL-MULUK AND THE PRINCESS BADI’A AL-JAMAL._

There was once, in days of old and in ages and times long told, a King
in Egypt called Asim bin Safwán,[354] who was a liberal and beneficent
sovran, venerable and majestic. He owned many cities and sconces and
fortresses and troops and warriors and had a Wazir named Fáris bin
Sálih,[355] and he and all his subjects worshipped the sun and the fire,
instead of the All-powerful Sire, the Glorious, the Victorious. Now this
King was become a very old man, weakened and wasted with age and
sickness and decrepitude; for he had lived an hundred and fourscore
years and had no child, male or female, by reason whereof he was ever in
cark and care from morning to night and from night to morn. It so
happened that one day of the days, he was sitting on the throne of his
Kingship, with his Emirs and Wazirs and Captains and Grandees in
attendance on him, according to their custom, in their several stations,
and whenever there came in an Emir, who had with him a son or two sons,
or haply three who stood at the sides of their sires the King envied him
and said in himself, “Every one of these is happy and rejoiceth in his
children, whilst I, I have no child, and to-morrow I die and leave my
reign and throne and lands and hoards, and strangers will take them and
none will bear me in memory nor will there remain any mention of me in
the world.” Then he became drowned in the sea of thought and for the
much thronging of griefs and anxieties upon his heart, like travellers
faring for the well, he shed tears and descending from his throne, sat
down upon the floor,[356] weeping and humbling himself before the Lord.
Now when the Wazir and notables of the realm and others who were present
in the assembly saw him do thus with his royal person, they feared for
their lives and let the poursuivants cry aloud to the lieges, saying,
“Hie ye to your homes and rest till the King recover from what aileth
him.” So they went away, leaving none in the presence save the Minister
who, as soon as the King came to himself, kissed ground between his
hands and said, “O King of the Age and the time, wherefore this weeping
and wailing? Tell me who hath transgressed against thee of the Kings or
Castellans or Emirs or Grandees, and inform me who hath thwarted thee, O
my liege lord, that we may all fall on him and tear his soul from his
two sides.” But he spake not neither raised his head; whereupon the
Minister kissed ground before him a second time and said to him, “O
Master,[357] I am even as thy son and thy slave, nay, I have reared
thee; yet know I not the cause of thy cark and chagrin and of this thy
case; and who should know but I who should stand in my stead between thy
hands? Tell me therefore why this weeping and wherefore thine
affliction.” Nevertheless, the King neither opened his mouth nor raised
his head, but ceased not to weep and cry with a loud crying and lament
with exceeding lamentation and ejaculate, “Alas!” The Wazir took
patience with him awhile, after which he said to him, “Except thou tell
me the cause of this thine affliction, I will set this sword to my heart
and will slay myself before thine eyes, rather than see thee thus
distressed.” Then King Asim raised his head and, wiping away his tears,
said, “O Minister of good counsel and experience, leave me to my care
and my chagrin, for that which is in my heart of sorrow sufficeth me.”
But Faris said, “Tell me, O King, the cause of this thy weeping, haply
Allah will appoint thee relief at my hands.”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir said
to King Asim, “Tell me the cause of this thy weeping: haply Allah shall
appoint thee relief at my hands.” Replied the King, “O Wazir, I weep not
for monies nor horses nor kingdoms nor aught else, but that I am become
an old man, yea, very old nigh upon an hundred and fourscore years of
age, and I have not been blessed with a child, male or female: so, when
I die, they will bury me and my trace will be effaced and my name cut
off; the stranger will take my throne and reign and none will ever make
mention of my being.” Rejoined the Minister Faris, “O King of the Age, I
am older than thou by an hundred years yet have I never been blest with
boon of child and cease not day and night from cark and care and
concern; so how shall we do, I and thou?” Quoth Asim, “O Wazir, hast
thou no device or shift in this matter?” and quoth the Minister, “Know,
O King that I have heard of a Sovran in the land of Sabá[358] by name
Solomon David-son (upon the twain be the Peace!),[359] who pretendeth to
prophetship and avoucheth that he hath a mighty Lord who can do all
things and whose kingdom is in the Heavens and who hath dominion over
all mankind and birds and beasts and over the wind and the Jinn.
Moreover, he kenneth the speech of birds and the language of every other
created thing; and withal, he calleth all creatures to the worship of
his Lord and discourseth to them of their service. So let us send him a
messenger in the King’s name and seek of him our need, beseeching him to
put up prayer to his Lord, that He vouchsafe each of us boon of issue.
If his Faith be soothfast and his Lord Omnipotent, He will assuredly
bless each of us with a child male or female, and if the thing thus fall
out, we will enter his faith and worship his Lord; else will we take
patience and devise us another device.” The King cried, “This is well
seen, and my breast is broadened by this thy speech; but where shall we
find a messenger befitting this grave matter, for that this Solomon is
no Kinglet and the approaching him is no light affair? Indeed, I will
send him none, on the like of this matter, save thyself; for thou art
ancient and versed in all manner affairs and the like of thee is the
like of myself; wherefore I desire that thou weary thyself and journey
to him and occupy thyself sedulously with accomplishing this matter, so
haply solace may be at thy hand.” The Minister said, “I hear and I obey;
but rise thou forthwith and seat thee upon the throne, so the Emirs and
Lords of the realm and officers and the lieges may enter applying
themselves to thy service, according to their custom; for they all went
away from thee, troubled at heart on thine account. Then will I go out
and set forth on the Sovran’s errand.” So the King arose forthright and
sat down on the throne of his kingship, whilst the Wazir went out and
said to the Chamberlain, “Bid the folk proceed to their service, as of
their wont.” Accordingly the troops and Captains and Lords of the land
entered, after they had spread the tables and ate and drank and withdrew
as was their wont, after which the Wazir Faris went forth from King Asim
and, repairing to his own house, equipped himself for travel and
returned to the King, who opened to him the treasuries and provided him
with rarities and things of price and rich stuffs and gear without
compare, such as nor Emir nor Wazir hath power to possess. Moreover,
King Asim charged him to accost Solomon with reverence, foregoing him
with the salam but not exceeding in speech; “and (continued he) then do
thou ask of him thy need, and if he say ’tis granted, return to us in
haste, for I shall be awaiting thee.” Accordingly, the Minister kissed
hands and took the presents and setting out, fared on night and day,
till he came within fifteen days’ journey of Saba. Meanwhile Allah
(extolled and exalted be He!) inspired Solomon the son of David (the
Peace be upon both!) and said to him, “O Solomon, the King of Egypt
sendeth unto thee his Chief Wazir, with a present of rarities and such
and such things of price; so do thou also despatch thy Counsellor Asaf
bin Barkhiyá to meet him with honour and with victual at the
halting-places; and when he cometh to thy presence, say unto
him:—Verily, thy King hath sent thee in quest of this and that and thy
business is thus and thus. Then do thou propound to him The Saving
Faith.”[360] Whereupon Solomon bade his Wazir make ready a company of
his retainers and go forth to meet the Minister of Egypt with honour and
sumptuous provision at the halting-places. So Asaf made ready all that
was needed for their entertainment and setting out, fared on till he
fell in with Faris and accosted him with the salam, honouring him and
his company with exceeding honour. Moreover, he brought them provaunt
and provender at the halting-places and said to them, “Well come and
welcome and fair welcome to the coming guests! Rejoice in the certain
winning of your wish! Be your souls of good cheer and your eyes cool and
clear and your breasts be broadened!” Quoth Faris in himself, “Who
acquainted him with this?”; and he said to Asaf,[361] “O my lord, and
who gave thee to know of us and our need?” “It was Solomon son of David
(on whom be the Peace!), told us of this!” “And who told our lord
Solomon?” “The Lord of the heaven and the earth told him, the God of all
creatures!” “This is none other than a mighty God!” “And do ye not
worship him?” “We worship the Sun, and prostrate ourselves thereto.” “O
Wazir Faris, the sun is but a star of the stars created by Allah
(extolled and exalted be He!), and Allah forbid that it should be a
Lord! Because whiles it riseth and whiles it setteth, but our Lord is
ever present and never absent and He over all things is Omnipotent!”
Then they journeyed on a little while till they came to the land Saba
and drew near the throne of Solomon David-son, (upon the twain be
peace!), who commanded his hosts of men and Jinn and others[362] to form
line on their road. So the beasts of the sea and the elephants and
leopards and lynxes and all beasts of the land ranged themselves in
espalier on either side of the way, after their several kinds, and
similarly the Jinn drew out in two ranks, appearing all to mortal eyes
without concealment, in divers forms grisly and gruesome. So they lined
the road on either hand, and the birds bespread their wings over the
host of creatures to shade them, warbling one to other in all manner of
voices and tongues. Now when the people of Egypt came to this terrible
array, they dreaded it and durst not proceed; but Asaf said to them,
“Pass on amidst them and walk forward and fear them not: for they are
slaves of Solomon son of David, and none of them will harm you.” So
saying, he entered between the ranks, followed by all the folk and
amongst them the Wazir of Egypt and his company, fearful: and they
ceased not faring forwards till they reached the city, where they lodged
the embassy in the guest-house and for the space of three days
entertained them sumptuously entreating them with the utmost honour.
Then they carried them before Solomon, prophet of Allah (on whom be the
Peace!), and when entering they would have kissed the earth before him;
but he forbade them, saying, “It besitteth not a man prostrate himself
to earth save before Allah (to whom belong Might and Majesty!), Creator
of Earth and Heaven and all other things; wherefore, whosoever of you
hath a mind to sit let him be seated in my service, or to stand, let him
stand, but let none stand to do me worship.” So they obeyed him and the
Wazir Faris and some of his intimates sat down, whilst certain of the
lesser sort remained afoot to wait on him. When they had sat awhile, the
servants spread the tables and they all, men and beasts, ate their
sufficiency.[363] Then Solomon bade Faris expound his errand, that it
might be accomplished, saying, “Speak and hide naught of that wherefor
thou art come; for I know why ye come and what is your errand, which is
thus and thus.” The King of Egypt who despatched thee, Asim hight, hath
become a very old man, infirm, decrepit; and Allah (whose name be
exalted!) hath not blessed him with offspring, male or female. So he
abode in cark and care and chagrin from morn to night and from night to
morn. It so happened that one day of the days as he sat upon the throne
of his kingship with his Emirs and Wazirs, and Captains and Grandees in
attendance on him, he saw some of them with two sons, others with one
and others with even three who came with their sire to do him service.
So he said in himself, of the excess of his sorrow, “Who shall get my
kingdom after my death? Will any save a stranger take it? And thus shall
I pass out of being as though I had never been!” On this account he
became drowned in the sea of thought, until his eyes were flooded with
tears and he covered his face with his kerchief and wept with sore
weeping. Then he rose from off his throne and sat down upon the floor
wailing and lamenting and none knew what was in heart as he grovelled in
the ground save Allah Almighty.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Solomon
David-son (upon both of whom be peace!) after disclosing to the Wazir
Faris that which had passed between himself and his master, King Asim,
said to him, “Is this that I have told thee the truth, O Wazir?” Replied
Faris, “O prophet of Allah, this thou hast said is indeed sooth and
verity; but when we discoursed of this matter, none was with the King
and myself, nor was any ware of our case; who, then told thee of all
these things?” Answered Solomon, “They were told to me by my Lord who
knoweth whatso is concealed[364] from the eye and what is hidden in the
breasts.” Quoth Faris, “O Prophet of Allah, verily this is none other
than a mighty Lord and an omnipotent God!” And he Islamized with all his
many. Then said Solomon to him, “Thou hast with thee such and such
presents and rarities;” and Faris replied “Yes.” The prophet continued,
“I accept them all and give them in free gift unto thee. So do ye rest,
thou and thy company, in the place where you have been lodging, till the
fatigue of the journey shall cease from you; and to-morrow, Inshallah!
thine errand shall be accomplished to the uttermost, if it be the will
of Allah the Most High, Lord of heaven and earth and the light which
followeth the gloom; Creator of all creatures.” So Faris returned to his
quarters and passed the night in deep thought. But when morning morrowed
he presented himself before the Lord Solomon, who said to him, “When
thou returnest to King Asim bin Safwan and you twain are reunited, do ye
both go forth some day armed with bow, bolts and brand, and fare to such
a place, where ye shall find a certain tree. Mount upon it and sit
silent until the mid-hour between noon-prayer and that of mid-afternoon,
when the noontide heat hath cooled; then descend and look at the foot of
the tree, whence ye will see two serpents come forth, one with a head
like an ape’s and the other with a head like an Ifrit’s. Shoot them ye
twain with bolts and kill them both; then cut off a span’s length from
their heads and the like from their tails and throw it away. The rest of
the flesh cook and cook well and give it to your wives to eat: then lie
with them that night and, by Allah’s leave, they shall conceive and bear
male children.” Moreover, he gave him a seal-ring a sword and a wrapper
containing two tunics[365] embroidered with gold and jewels, saying, “O
Wazir Faris, when your sons grow up to man’s estate, give to each of
them one of these tunics.” Then said he, “In the name of Allah! May the
Almighty accomplish your desire! And now nothing remaineth for thee but
to depart, relying on the blessing of the Lord the Most High, for the
King looketh for thy return night and day and his eye is ever gazing on
the road.” So the Wazir advanced to the prophet Solomon son of David
(upon both of whom be the Peace!) and farewelled him and fared forth
from him after kissing his hands. Rejoicing in the accomplishment of his
errand he travelled on with all diligence night and day, and ceased not
wayfaring till he drew near to Cairo, when he despatched one of his
servants to acquaint King Asim with his approach and the successful
issue of his journey; which when the King heard he joyed with exceeding
joy, he and his Grandees and Officers and troops especially in the
Wazir’s safe return. When they met, the Minister dismounted and, kissing
ground before the King, gave him the glad news anent the winning of his
wish in fullest fashion; after which he expounded the True Faith to him,
and the King and all his people embraced Al-Islam with much joy and
gladness. Then said Asim to his Wazir, “Go home and rest this night and
a week to boot; then go to the Hammam-bath and come to me, that I may
inform thee of what we shall have to consider.” So Faris kissed ground
and withdrew, with his suite, pages and eunuchs, to his house, where he
rested eight days; after which he repaired to the King and related to
him all that had passed between Solomon and himself, adding, “Do thou
rise and go forth with me alone.” Then the King and the Minister took
two bows and two bolts and repairing to the tree indicated by Solomon,
clomb up into it and there sat in silence till the mid-day heat had
passed away and it was near upon the hour of mid-afternoon prayer, when
they descended and looking about them saw a serpent-couple[366] issue
from the roots of the tree. The King gazed at them, marvelling to see
them ringed with collars of gold about their necks, and said to Faris,
“O Wazir, verily these snakes have golden torques! By Allah, this is
forsooth a rare thing! Let us catch them and set them in a cage and keep
them to look upon.” But the Minister said, “These hath Allah created for
profitable use;[367] so do thou shoot one and I will shoot the other
with these our shafts.” Accordingly they shot at them with arrows and
slew them; after which they cut off a span’s length of their heads and
tails and threw it away. Then they carried the rest to the King’s
palace, where they called the kitchener and giving him that flesh said,
“Dress this meat daintily, with onion-sauce[368] and spices, and ladle
it out into two saucers and bring them hither at such an hour, without
delay!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the King and
the Wazir gave the serpents’ flesh to the kitchener, saying, “Cook it
and ladle it out into two saucers and bring them hither without delay!”;
the cook took the meat and went with it to the kitchen, where he cooked
it and dressed it in skilful fashion with a mighty fine onion-sauce and
hot spices; after which he ladled it out into two saucers and set them
before the King and the Wazir, who took each a dish and gave their wives
to eat of the meat. Then they went in that night unto them and knew them
carnally, and by the good pleasure of Allah (extolled and exalted be
He!) and His all-might and furtherance, they both conceived on one and
the same night. The King abode three months, troubled in mind and saying
in himself, “I wonder whether this thing will prove true or untrue”;
till one day, as the lady his Queen was sitting, the child stirred in
her womb and she felt a pain and her colour changed. So she knew that
she was with child and calling the chief of her eunuchs, gave him this
command, “Go to the King, wherever he may be and congratulate him
saying:—O King of the Age, I bring thee the glad tidings that our lady’s
pregnancy is become manifest, for the child stirreth in her womb.” So
the eunuch went out in haste, rejoicing, and finding the King alone,
with cheek on palm, pondering this thing, kissed ground between his
hands and acquainted him with his wife’s pregnancy. When the King heard
his words, he sprang to his feet and in the excess of his joy, he
kissed[369] the eunuch’s hands and head and doffing the clothes he had
on, gave them to him. Moreover, he said to those who were present in his
assembly, “Whoso loveth me, let him bestow largesse upon this man.”[370]
And they gave him of coin and jewels and jacinths and horses and mules
and estates and gardens what was beyond count or calculation. At that
moment in came the Wazir Faris and said to Asim, “O my master, but now I
was sitting alone at home and absorbed in thought, pondering the matter
of the pregnancy and saying to myself:—Would I wot an this thing be true
and whether my wife Khátún[371] have conceived or not! when, behold, an
eunuch came in to me and brought me the glad tidings that his lady was
indeed pregnant, for that her colour was changed and the child stirred
in her womb; whereupon, in my joy, I doffed all the clothes I had on and
gave them to him, together with a thousand dinars, and made him Chief of
the Eunuchs.” Rejoined the King, “O Minister, Allah (extolled and
exalted be He!) hath, of His grace and bounty and goodness, and
beneficence, made gift to us of the True Faith and brought us out of
night into light, and hath been bountiful to us, of His favour and
benevolence; wherefore I am minded to solace the folk and cause them to
rejoice.” Quoth Faris, “Do what thou wilt,”[372] and quoth the King, “O
Wazir, go down without stay or delay and set free all who are in the
prisons, both criminals and debtors, and whoso transgresseth after this,
we will requite as he deserveth even to the striking off of his head.
Moreover, we forgive the people three years’ taxes, and do thou set up
kitchens all around about the city walls[373] and bid the kitcheners
hang over the fire all kinds of cooking pots and cook all manner of
meats, continuing their cooking night and day, and let all comers, both
of our citizens and of the neighbouring countries, far and near, eat and
drink and carry to their houses. And do thou command the people to make
holiday and decorate the city seven days and shut not the taverns night
nor day;[374] and if thou delay I will behead thee!”[375] So he did as
the King bade him and the folk decorated the city and citadel and
bulwarks after the goodliest fashion and, donning their richest attire,
passed their time in feasting and sporting and making merry, till the
days of the Queen’s pregnancy were accomplished and she was taken, one
night, with labour pains hard before dawn. Then the King bade summon all
the Olema and astronomers, mathematicians and men of learning,
astrologers, scientists and scribes in the city, and they assembled and
sat awaiting the throwing of a bead into the cup[376] which was to be
the signal to the Astrophils, as well as to the nurses and attendants,
that the child was born. Presently, as they sat in expectation, the
Queen gave birth to a boy like a slice of the moon when fullest and the
astrologers fell to calculating and noted his star and nativity and drew
his horoscope. Then, on being summoned they rose and, kissing the earth
before the King, gave him the glad tidings, saying, “In very sooth the
new-born child is of happy augury and born under an auspicious aspect,
but” they added, “in the first of his life there will befall him a thing
which we fear to name before the King.” Quoth Asim, “Speak and fear
not;” so quoth they, “O King, this boy will fare forth from this land
and journey in strangerhood and suffer shipwreck and hardship and
prisonment and distress, and indeed he hath before him the sorest of
sufferings; but he shall free him of them in the end, and win to his
wish and live the happiest of lives the rest of his days, ruling over
subjects with a strong hand and having dominion in the land, despite
enemies and enviers.” Now when the King heard the astrologers’ words, he
said, “The matter is a mystery; but all that Allah Almighty hath written
for the creature of good and bad cometh to pass and needs must betide
him from this day to that a thousand solaces.” So he paid no heed to
their words or attention to their speeches but bestowed on them robes of
honour, as well upon all who were present, and dismissed them; when,
behold, in came Faris the Wazir and kissed the earth before the King in
huge joy, saying, “Good tidings, O King! My wife hath but now given
birth to a son, as he were a slice of the moon.” Replied Asim, “O Wazir,
go, bring thy wife and child hither, that she may abide with my wife in
my palace, and they shall bring up the two boys together.” So Faris
fetched his wife and son and they committed the two children to the
nurses wet and dry. And after seven days had passed over them, they
brought them before the King and said to him, “What wilt thou name the
twain?” Quoth he, “Do ye name them;” but quoth they, “None nameth the
son save his sire.” So he said, “Name my son Sayf al-Muluk, after my
grandfather, and the Minister’s son Sái’d.”[377] Then he bestowed robes
of honour on the nurses wet and dry and said to them, “Be ye ruthful
over them and rear them after the goodliest fashion.” So they brought up
the two boys diligently till they reached the age of five, when the King
committed them to a doctor of Sciences[378] who taught them to read the
Koran and write. When they were ten years old, King Asim gave them in
charge to masters, who instructed them in cavalarice and shooting with
shafts and lunging with lance and play of Polo and the like till, by the
time they were fifteen years old, they were clever in all manner of
martial exercises, nor was there one to vie with them in horsemanship,
for each of them would do battle with a thousand men and make head
against them single handed. So when they came to years of discretion,
whenever King Asim looked on them he joyed in them with exceeding joy;
and when they attained their twenty-fifth year, he took Faris his
Minister apart one day and said to him, “O Wazir, I am minded to consult
with thee concerning a thing I desire to do.” Replied he, “Whatever thou
hast a mind to do, do it; for thy judgment is blessed.” Quoth the King,
“O Wazir, I am become a very old and decrepit man, sore stricken in
years, and I desire to take up my abode in an oratory, that I may
worship Allah Almighty and give my kingdom and Sultanate to my son Sayf
al-Muluk for that he is grown a goodly youth, perfect in knightly
exercises and intellectual attainments, polite letters and gravity,
dignity and the art of government. What sayst thou, O Minister, of this
project?” And quoth the counsellor, “Right indeed is thy rede: the idea
is a blessed and a fortunate, and if thou do this, I will do the like
and my son Sa’id shall be the Prince’s Wazir, for he is a comely young
man and complete in knowledge and judgment. Thus will the two youths be
together, and we will order their affair and neglect not their case, but
guide them to goodness and in the way that is straight.” Quoth the King,
“Write letters and send them by couriers to all the countries and cities
and sconces and fortresses that be under our hands, bidding their chiefs
be present on such a day at the Horse-course of the Elephant.”[379] So
the Wazir went out without stay or delay and despatched letters of this
purport to all the deputies and governors of fortresses and others under
King Asim; and he commanded also that all in the city should be present
far and near, high and low. When the appointed time drew nigh, King Asim
bade the tent-pitchers plant pavilions in the midst of the Champ-de-Mars
and decorate them after the most sumptuous fashion and set up the great
throne whereon he sat not but on festivals. And they at once did his
bidding. Then he and all his Nabobs and Chamberlains and Emirs sallied
forth, and he commanded proclamation be made to the people, saying, “In
the name of Allah, come forth to the Maydán!” So all the Emirs and
Wazirs and Governors of provinces and Feudatories[380] came forth to the
place of assembly and, entering the royal pavilion, addressed themselves
to the service of the King as was their wont, and abode in their several
stations some sitting and others standing, till all the people were
gathered together, when the King bade spread the tables and they ate and
drank and prayed for him. Then he commanded the Chamberlains[381] to
proclaim to the people that they should not depart: so they made
proclamation to them, saying, “Let none of you fare hence till he have
heard the King’s words!” So they withdrew the curtains of the royal
pavilion and the King said, “Whoso loveth me, let him remain till he
have heard my speech!” Whereupon all the folk sat down in mind tranquil
after they had been fearful, saying, “Wherefore have we been summoned by
the King?” Then the Sovran rose to his feet, and making them swear that
none would stir from his stead, said to them, “O ye Emirs and Wazirs and
Lords of the land; the great and the small of you, and all ye who are
present of the people; say me, wot ye not that this kingdom was an
inheritance to me from my fathers and forefathers?” Answered they, “Yes,
O King we all know that.” And he continued, “I and you, we all
worshipped the sun and moon, till Allah (extolled and exalted be He!)
vouchsafed us the knowledge of the True Faith and brought us out of
darkness unto light, and directed us to the religion of Al-Islam. Know
that I am become a very old man, feeble and decrepit, and I desire to
take up my abode in a hermitage[382] there to worship Allah Almighty and
crave His pardon for past offences and make this my son Sayf al-Muluk
ruler. Ye know full well that he is a comely youth, eloquent, liberal,
learned, versed in affairs, intelligent, equitable; wherefore I am
minded presently to resign to him my realm and to make him ruler over
you and seat him as Sultan in my stead, whilst I give myself to solitude
and to the worship of Allah in an oratory and my son and heir shall
judge between you. What say ye then, all of you?” Thereupon they all
rose and kissing ground before him, made answer with “Hearing and
obedience,” saying, “O our King and our defender an thou should set over
us one of thy blackamoor slaves we would obey him and hearken to thy
word and accept thy command: how much more then with thy son Sayf
al-Muluk? Indeed, we accept of him and approve him on our eyes and
heads!” So King Asim bin Safwan arose and came down from his seat and
seating his son on the great throne,[383] took the crown from his own
head and set it on the head of Sayf al-Muluk and girt his middle with
the royal girdle.[384] Then he sat down beside his son on the throne of
his kingship, whilst the Emirs and Wazirs and Lords of the land and all
the rest of the folk rose and kissed ground before him, saying, “Indeed,
he is worthy of the kingship and hath better right to it than any
other.” Then the Chamberlains made proclamation crying, “Amán! Amán!
Safety! Safety!” and offered up prayers for his victory and prosperity.
And Sayf al-Muluk scattered gold and silver on the heads of the lieges
one and all.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King Asim
seated his son, Sayf al-Muluk, upon the throne and all the people prayed
for his victory and prosperity, the youth scattered gold and silver on
the heads of the lieges, one and all, and conferred robes of honour and
gave gifts and largesse. Then, after a moment, the Wazir Faris arose and
kissing ground said, “O Emirs, O Grandees, ye ken that I am Wazir and
that my Wazirate dateth from old, before the accession of King Asim bin
Safwan, who hath now divested himself of the Kingship and made his son
King in his stead?” Answered they, “Yes, we know that thy Wazirate is
from sire after grandsire.” He continued, “And now in my turn I divest
myself of office and invest this my son Sa’id, for he is intelligent,
quick-witted, sagacious. What say ye all?” And they replied, “None is
worthy to be Wazir to King Sayf al-Muluk but thy son Sa’id, and they
befit each other.” With this Faris arose and taking off his Wazirial
turband, set it on his son’s head and eke laid his ink-case of office
before him, whilst the Chamberlains and the Emirs said, “Indeed, he is
deserving of the Wazirship” and the Heralds cried aloud, “Mubárak!
Mubárak!—Felix sit et faustus!” After this, King Asim and Faris the
Minister arose and, opening the royal treasuries, conferred magnificent
robes of honour on all the Viceroys and Emirs and Wazirs and Lords of
the land and other folk and gave salaries and benefactions and wrote
them new mandates and diplomas with the signatures of King Sayf al-Muluk
and his Wazir Sa’id. Moreover, he made distribution of money to the
men-at-arms and gave guerdons, and the provincials abode in the city a
full week ere they departed each to his own country and place. Then King
Asim carried his son and his Wazir Sa’id back to the palace which was in
the city and bade the treasurer bring the seal-ring and signet,[385]
sword and wrapper; which being done, he said to the two young men, “O my
sons, come hither and let each of you choose two of these things and
take them.” The first to make choice was Sayf al-Muluk, who put out his
hand and took the ring and the wrapper, whilst Sa’id took the sword and
the signet; after which they both kissed the King’s hands and went away
to their lodging. Now Sayf al-Muluk opened not the wrapper to see what
was therein, but threw it on the couch where he and Sa’id slept by
night, for it was their habit to lie together. Presently they spread
them the bed and the two lay down with a pair of wax candles burning
over them, and slept till midnight, when Sayf al-Muluk awoke and, seeing
the bundle at his head, said in his mind, “I wonder what thing of price
is in this wrapper my father gave me!” So he took it together with a
candle and descended from the couch leaving Sa’id sleeping and carried
the bundle into a closet, where he opened it and found within a tunic of
the fabric of the Jánn. He spread it out and saw on the lining[386] of
the back, the portraiture wroughten in gold of a girl and marvellous was
her loveliness; and no sooner had he set eyes on the figure than his
reason fled his head and he became Jinn-mad for love thereof, so that he
fell down in a swoon and presently recovering, began to weep and lament,
beating his face and breast and kissing her. And he recited these
verses:—

 Love, at the first, is a spurt of spray[387] ✿ Which Doom disposes and
    Fates display;
 Till, when deep diveth youth in passion-sea ✿ Unbearable sorrows his
    soul waylay.

And also these two couplets:—

 Had I known of love in what fashion he ✿ Robbeth heart and soul I had
    guarded me:
 But of malice prepense I threw self away, ✿ Unwitting of Love what his
    nature be.

And Sayf al-Muluk ceased not to weep and wail and beat face and breast,
till Sa’id awoke and missing him from the bed and seeing but a single
candle, said to himself, “Whither is Sayf al-Muluk gone?” Then he took
the other candle and went round about the palace, till he came upon the
closet where he saw the Prince lying at full length, weeping with sore
weeping and lamenting aloud. So he said to him, “O my brother, for what
cause are these tears and what hath befallen thee? Speak to me and tell
me the reason thereof.” But Sayf al-Muluk spoke not neither raised his
head and continued to weep and wail and beat hand on breast. Seeing him
in this case quoth Sa’id, “I am thy Wazir and thy brother, and we were
reared together, I and thou; so an thou do not unburden thy breast and
discover thy secret to me, to whom shalt thou reveal it and disclose its
cause?” And he went on to humble himself and kiss the ground before him
a full hour, whilst Sayf al-Muluk paid no heed to him nor answered him a
word, but gave not over weeping. At last, being affrighted at his case
and weary of striving with him, he went out and fetched a sword, with
which he returned to the closet, and setting the point to his own
breast, said to the Prince, “Rouse thee, O my brother! An thou tell me
not what aileth thee, I will slay myself and see thee no longer in this
case.” Whereupon Sayf al-Muluk raised his head towards the Wazir and
answered him, “O my brother, I am ashamed to tell thee what hath betided
me;” but Sa’id said, “I conjure thee by Allah, Lord of Lords, Liberator
of Necks,[388] Causer of causes, the One, the Ruthful, the Gift-full,
the Bountiful, that thou tell me what aileth thee and be not abashed at
me, for I am thy slave and thy Minister and counsellor in all thine
affairs!” Quoth Sayf al-Muluk, “Come and look at this likeness.” So
Sa’id looked at it awhile and considering it straitly, behold, he saw
written, as a crown over its head, in letters of pearl, these words,
“This is the counterfeit presentment of Badi’a al-Jamal, daughter of
Shahyál bin Shárukh, a King of the Kings of the true-believing Jann who
have taken up their abode in the city of Babel and sojourn in the garden
of Iram, Son of ’Ad the Greater”[389]——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Sa’id,
son of the Wazir Faris, had read to Sayf al-Muluk son of King Asim the
writ on the tunic, which showed the portraiture of Badi’a al-Jamal,
daughter of Shahyal bin Sharukh, a King of the Kings of the Moslem Jinns
dwelling in Babel-city and in the Garden of Iram, son of ’Ad the
Greater, he cried, “O my brother, knowest thou of what woman this is the
presentment, that we may seek for her?” Sayf al-Muluk replied, “No, by
Allah, O my brother, I know her not!” and Sa’id rejoined, “Come, read
this writing on the crown.” So Sayf al-Muluk read it and cried out from
his heart’s core and very vitals, saying, “Alas! Alas! Alas!” Quoth
Sa’id, “O my brother, an the original of the portrait exist and her name
be Badi’a al-Jamal, and she abide in the world, I will hasten to seek
her, that thou mayst win thy will without delay. But, Allah upon thee, O
my brother, leave this weeping and ascend thy throne, that the Officers
of the State may come in to do their service to thee, and in the undurn,
do thou summon the merchants and fakirs and travellers and pilgrims and
paupers and ask of them concerning this city and the garden of Iram;
haply by the help and blessing of Allah (extolled and exalted be He!),
some one of them shall direct us thither.” So, when it was day, Sayf
al-Muluk went forth and mounted the throne, clasping the tunic in his
arms, for he could neither stand nor sit without it, nor would sleep
visit him save it were with him; and the Emirs and Wazirs and Lords and
Officers came in to him. When the Divan was complete all being assembled
in their places he said to his Minister, “Go forth to them and tell them
that the King hath been suddenly struck by sickness and he, by Allah,
hath passed the night in ill case.” So Sa’id fared forth and told the
folk what he said; which when old King Asim heard, he was concerned for
his son and, summoning the physicians and astrologers, carried them in
to Sayf al-Muluk. They looked at him and prescribed him ptisans and
diet-drinks, simples and medicinal waters and wrote him characts and
incensed him with Nadd and aloes-wood and ambergris three days’ space;
but his malady persisted three months, till King Asim was wroth with the
leaches and said to them, “Woe to you, O dogs! What? Are all of you
impotent to cure my son? Except ye heal him forthright, I will put the
whole of you to death.” The Archiater replied, “O King of the Age, in
very sooth we know that this is thy son and thou wottest that we fail
not of diligence in tending a stranger; so how much more with medicining
thy son? But thy son is afflicted with a malady hard to heal, which, if
thou desire to know, we will discover it to thee.” Quoth Asim, “What
then find ye to be the malady of my son?”; and quoth the leach, “O King
of the Age, thy son is in love and he loveth one to whose enjoyment he
hath no way of access.” At this the King was wroth and asked, “How know
ye that my son is in love and how came love to him?”; they answered,
“Enquire of his Wazir and brother Sa’id, for he knoweth his case.” The
King rose and repaired to his private closet and summoning Sa’id said to
him, “Tell me the truth of thy brother’s malady.” But Sa’id replied, “I
know it not.” So King Asim said to the Sworder, “Take Sa’id and bind his
eyes and strike his neck.” Whereupon Sa’id feared for himself and cried,
“O King of the Age, grant me immunity.” Replied the King, “Speak and
thou shalt have it.” “Thy son is in love.” “With whom is he in love?”
“With a King’s daughter of the Jann.” “And where could he have espied a
daughter of the Jinns?” “Her portrait was wroughten on the tunic that
was in the bundle given thee by Solomon, prophet of Allah!” When the
King heard this, he rose, and going in to Sayf al-Muluk, said to him, “O
my son, what hath afflicted thee? What is this portrait whereof thou art
enamoured? And why didst thou not tell me?” He replied, “O my sire, I
was ashamed to name this to thee and could not bring myself to discover
aught thereof to any one at all; but now thou knowest my case, look how
thou mayest do to cure me.” Rejoined his father, “What is to be done?
Were this one of the daughters of men we might devise a device for
coming at her; but she is a King’s daughter of the Jinns and who can woo
and win her, save it be Solomon David-son, and hardly he?[390] However,
O my son, do thou arise forthright and hearten thy heart and take horse
and ride out a-hunting or to weapon-play in the Maydan. Divert thyself
with eating and drinking and put away cark and care from thy heart, and
I will bring thee an hundred maids of the daughters of Kings; for thou
hast no need to the daughters of the Jann, over whom we lack control and
of kind other than ours.” But he said, “I cannot renounce her nor will I
seek other than her.” Asked King Asim, “How then shall we do, O my
son?”; and Sayf al-Muluk answered, “Bring us all the merchants and
travellers and wanderers in the city, that we may question them thereof.
Peradventure, Allah will lead us to the city of Babel and the garden of
Iram.” So King Asim bade summon all the merchants in the city and
strangers and sea-captains and, as each came, enquired of him anent the
city of Babel and its peninsula[391] and the garden of Iram; but none of
them knew these places nor could any give him tidings thereof. However,
when the séance broke up, one of them said, “O King of the Age, an thou
be minded to ken this thing, up and hie thee to the land of China; for
it hath a vast city[392] and a safe wherein are store of rarities and
things of price and folk of all kinds; and thou shalt not come to the
knowledge of this city and garden but from its folk; it may be one of
them will direct thee to that thou seekest.” Whereupon quoth Sayf
al-Muluk, “O my sire, equip me a ship, that I may fare to the
China-land; and do thou rule the reign in my stead.” Replied the old
King, “O my son, abide thou on the throne of thy kingship and govern thy
commons, and I myself will make the voyage to China and ask for thee of
the city of Babel and the garden of Iram.” But Sayf al-Muluk rejoined,
“O my sire, in very sooth this affair concerneth me and none can search
after it like myself: so, come what will, an thou give me leave to make
the voyage, I will depart and wander awhile. If I find trace or tidings
of her, my wish will be won, and if not, belike the voyage will broaden
my breast and recruit my courage; and haply by foreign travel my case
will be made easy to me, and if I live, I shall return to thee safe and
sound.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sayf al-Muluk
said to his sire King Asim, “Equip me a ship that I may fare therein to
the China-land and search for the object of my desire. If I live I shall
return to thee safe and sound.” The old King looked at his son and saw
nothing for it but to do what he desired; so he gave him the leave he
wanted and fitted him forty ships, manned with twenty thousand armed
Mamelukes, besides servants, and presented him with great plenty of
money and necessaries and warlike gear, as much as he required. When the
ships were laden with water and victual, weapons and troops, Sayf
al-Muluk’s father and mother farewelled him and King Asim said, “Depart,
O my son, and travel in weal and health and safety. I commend thee to
Him with Whom deposits are not lost.”[393] So the Prince bade adieu to
his parents and embarked, with his brother Sa’id, and they weighed
anchor and sailed till they came to the City of China. When the Chinamen
heard of the coming of forty ships, full of armed men and stores,
weapons and hoards, they made sure that these were enemies come to
battle with them and siege them; so they bolted the gates of the town
and made ready the mangonels.[394] But Sayf al-Muluk, hearing of this,
sent two of his Chief Mamelukes to the King of China, bidding them say
to him, “This is Sayf al-Muluk, son of King Asim of Egypt, who is come
to thy city as a guest, to divert himself by viewing thy country awhile,
and not for conquest or contention; wherefore, an thou wilt receive him,
he will come ashore to thee; and if not he will return and will not
disquiet thee nor the people of thy capital.” They presented themselves
at the city gates and said, “We are messengers from King Sayf al-Muluk.”
Whereupon the townsfolk opened the gates and carried them to their King,
whose name was Faghfúr[395] Sháh and between whom and King Asim there
had erst been acquaintance. So, when he heard that the new-comer Prince
was the son of King Asim, he bestowed robes of honour on the messengers
and, bidding open the gates, made ready guest-gifts and went forth in
person with the chief officers of his realm, to meet Sayf al-Muluk, and
the two Kings embraced. Then Faghfur said to his guest, “Well come and
welcome and fair cheer to him who cometh to us! I am thy slave and the
slave of thy sire: my city is between thy hands to command and whatso
thou seekest shall be brought before thee.” Then he presented him with
the guest-gifts and victual for the folk at their stations; and they
took horse, with the Wazir Sa’id and the chiefs of their officers and
the rest of their troops, and rode from the sea-shore to the city, which
they entered with cymbals clashing and drums beating in token of
rejoicing. There they abode in the enjoyment of fair entertainment for
forty days, at the end of which quoth the King of China to Sayf
al-Muluk, “O son of my brother, how is thy case[396]? Doth my country
please thee?”; and quoth Sayf al-Muluk, “May Allah Almighty long honour
it with thee, O King!” Said Faghfur, “Naught hath brought thee hither
save some need which hath occurred to thee; and whatso thou desirest of
my country I will accomplish it to thee.” Replied Sayf al-Muluk, “O
King, my case is a wondrous,” and told him how he had fallen in love
with the portrait of Badi’a al-Jamal, and wept bitter tears. When the
King of China heard his story, he wept for pity and solicitude for him
and cried, “And what wouldst thou have now, O Sayf al-Muluk?”; and he
rejoined, “I would have thee bring me all the wanderers and travellers,
the seafarers and sea-captains, that I may question them of the original
of this portrait; perhaps one of them may give me tidings of her.” So
Faghfur Shah sent out his Nabobs and Chamberlains and body-guards to
fetch all the wanderers and travellers in the land, and they brought
them before the two Kings, and they were a numerous company. Then Sayf
al-Muluk questioned them of the City of Babel and the Garden of Iram,
but none of them returned him a reply, whereupon he was bewildered and
wist not what to do; but one of the sea-captains said to him, “O
auspicious King, an thou wouldst know of this city and that garden up
and hie thee to the Islands of the Indian realm.”[397] Thereupon Sayf
al-Muluk bade bring the ships; which being done, they freighted them
with vivers and water and all that they needed, and the Prince and his
Wazir re-embarked, with all their men, after they had farewelled King
Faghfur Shah. They sailed the seas four months with a fair wind, in
safety and satisfaction till it chanced that one day of the days there
came out upon them a wind and the billows buffeted them from all
quarters. The rain and hail[398] descended on them and during twenty
days the sea was troubled for the violence of the wind; wherefor the
ships drave one against other and brake up, as did the carracks[399] and
all on board were drowned, except Sayf al-Muluk and some of his
servants, who saved themselves in a little cock-boat. Then the wind fell
by the decree of Allah Almighty and the sun shone out; whereupon Sayf
al-Muluk opened his eyes and seeing no sign of the ships nor aught but
sky and sea, said to the Mamelukes who were with him, “Where are the
carracks and cock-boats and where is my brother Sa’id?” They replied, “O
King of the Age, there remain nor ships nor boats nor those who were
therein; for they are all drowned and become food for fishes.” Now when
he heard this, he cried aloud and repeated the saying which whoso saith
shall not be confounded, and it is, “There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!” Then he fell to buffeting
his face and would have cast himself into the sea, but his Mamelukes
withheld him, saying, “O King, what will this profit thee? Thou hast
brought all this on thyself; for, hadst thou hearkened to thy father’s
words, naught thereof had betided thee. But this was written from all
eternity by the will of the Creator of Souls.”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Sayf
al-Muluk would have cast himself into the main, his Mamelukes withheld
him saying, “What will this profit thee? Thou hast done this deed by
thyself, yet was it written from all eternity by the will of the Creator
of Souls, that the creature might accomplish that which Allah hath
decreed unto him. And indeed, at the time of thy birth, the astrologers
assured thy sire that all manner troubles should befal thee. So there is
naught for it but patience till Allah deliver us from this our strait.”
Replied the Prince, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great! Neither is there refuge nor fleeing from
that which He decreeth!” And he sighed and recited these couplets:—

 By the Compassionate, I’m dazed about my case, for lo! Troubles and
    griefs beset me sore; I know not whence they grow.
 I will be patient, so the folk, that I against a thing Bitt’rer than
    very aloes’ self,[400] endurèd have, may know.

 Less bitter than my patience is the taste of aloes-juice; I’ve borne
    with patience what’s more hot than coals with fire aglow.
 In this my trouble what resource have I, save to commit My case to Him
    who orders all that is, for weal or woe?

Then he became drowned in the depth of thoughts and his tears ran down
upon his cheeks like torrent-rain; and he slept a while of the day,
after which he awoke and sought of food somewhat. So they set meat
before him and he ate his sufficiency, till they removed the food from
before him, whilst the boat drove on with them they knew not whither it
was wandering. It drifted with them at the will of the winds and the
waves, night and day a great while, till their victual was spent and
they saw themselves shent and were reduced to extreme hunger and thirst
and exhaustion, when behold, suddenly they sighted an island from afar
and the breezes wafted them on, till they came thither. Then, making the
cock-boat fast to the coast and leaving one therein to guard it, they
fared on into the island, where they found abundance of fruits of all
colours and ate of them till they were satisfied. Presently, they saw a
person sitting among those trees and he was long-faced, of strange
favour and white of beard and body. He called to one of the Mamelukes by
his name, saying, “Eat not of these fruits, for they are unripe; but
come hither to me, that I may give thee to eat of the best and the
ripest.” The slave looked at him and thought that he was one of the
shipwrecked, who had made his way to that island; so he joyed with
exceeding joy at sight of him and went close up to him, knowing not what
was decreed to him in the Secret Purpose nor what was writ upon his
brow. But, when he drew near, the stranger in human shape leapt upon
him, for he was a Marid,[401] and riding upon his shoulder-blades and
twisting one of his legs about his neck, let the other hang down upon
his back, saying, “Walk on, fellow; for there is no escape for thee from
me and thou art become mine ass.” Thereupon the Mameluke fell a-weeping
and cried out to his comrades, “Alas, my lord! Flee ye forth of this
wood and save yourselves, for one of the dwellers therein hath mounted
on my shoulders, and the rest seek you, desiring to ride you like me.”
When they heard these words, all fled down to the boat and pushed off to
sea; whilst the islanders followed them into the water, saying, “Whither
wend ye? Come, tarry with us and we will mount on your backs and give
you meat and drink, and you shall be our donkeys.” Hearing this they
hastened the more seawards till they left them in the distance and fared
on, trusting in Allah Almighty; nor did they leave faring for a month,
till another island rose before them and thereon they landed. Here they
found fruits of various kinds and busied themselves with eating of them,
when behold, they saw from afar, somewhat lying in the road, a hideous
creature as it were a column of silver. So they went up to it and one of
the men gave it a kick, when lo! it was a thing of human semblance, long
of eyes and cloven of head and hidden under one of his ears, for he was
wont, whenas he lay down to sleep, to spread one ear under his head and
cover his face with the other ear.[402] He snatched up the Mameluke who
had kicked him and carried him off into the middle of the island, and
behold, it was all full of Ghuls who eat the sons of Adam. The man cried
out to his fellows, “Save yourselves, for this is the island of the
man-eating Ghuls, and they mean to tear me to bits and devour me.” When
they heard these words they fled back to the boat, without gathering any
store of the fruits and, putting out to sea, fared on some days till it
so happened that they came to another island, where they found a high
mountain. So they climbed to the top and there saw a thick copse. Now
they were sore anhungered; so they took to eating of the fruits; but,
before they were aware, there came upon them from among the trees black
men of terrible aspect, each fifty cubits high with eye-teeth[403]
protruding from their mouths like elephants’ tusks; and, laying hands on
Sayf al-Muluk and his company, carried them to their King, whom they
found seated on a piece of black felt laid on a rock, and about him a
great company of Zanzibar-blacks, standing in his service. The
blackamoors who had captured the Prince and his Mamelukes set them
before the King and said to him, “We found these birds among the trees”;
and the King was sharp-set; so he took two of the servants and cut their
throats and ate them;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Zanzibar-blacks took Sayf al-Muluk and his Mamelukes and set them before
the King, saying, “O King, we came upon these birds among the trees.”
Thereupon the King seized two of the Mamelukes and cut their throats and
ate them; which, when Sayf al-Muluk saw, he feared for himself and wept
and repeated these verses:—

 Familiar with my heart are woes and with them I ✿ Who shunned them; for
    familiar are great hearts and high.
 The woes I suffer are not all of single kind ✿ I have, thank Allah,
    varied thousands to aby!

Then he sighed and repeated these also:—

 The World hath shot me with its sorrows till ✿ My heart is coverèd with
    shafts galore;
 And now, when strike me other shafts, must break ✿ Against th’ old
    points the points that latest pour.

When the King heard his weeping and wailing, he said, “Verily these
birds have sweet voices and their song pleaseth me: put them in cages.”
So they set them each in his own cage and hung them up at the King’s
head that he might listen to their warbling. On this wise Sayf al-Muluk
and his Mamelukes abode and the blackamoors gave them to eat and drink:
and now they wept and now laughed, now spake and now were hushed, whilst
the King of the blacks delighted in the sound of their voices. And so
they continued for a long time. Now this King had a daughter married in
another island who, hearing that her father had birds with sweet voices,
sent a messenger to him seeking of him some of them. So he sent her, by
her Cossid,[404] Sayf al-Muluk and three of his men in four cages; and,
when she saw them, they pleased her and she bade hang them up in a place
over her head. The Prince fell to marvelling at that which had befallen
him and calling to mind his former high and honourable estate and
weeping for himself; and the three servants wept for themselves; and the
King’s daughter deemed that they sang. Now it was her wont, whenever any
one from the land of Egypt or elsewhere fell into her hands and he
pleased her, to advance him to great favour with her; and by the decree
of Allah Almighty it befel that, when she saw Sayf al-Muluk she was
charmed by his beauty and loveliness and symmetry and perfect grace, and
she commanded to entreat him and his companions with honour and to loose
them from their cages. Now one day she took the Prince apart and would
have him enjoy her; but he refused, saying, “O my lady, I am a banisht
wight and with passion for a beloved one in piteous plight, nor with
other will I consent to love-delight.” Then she coaxed him and
importuned him, but he held aloof from her, and she could not approach
him nor get her desire of him by any ways and means. At last, when she
was weary of courting him in vain, she waxed wroth with him and his
Mamelukes, and commanded that they should serve her and fetch her wood
and water. In such condition they abode four years till Sayf al-Muluk
became weary of his life and sent to intercede with the Princess, so
haply she might release them and let them wend their ways and be at rest
from that their hard labour. So she sent for him and said to him, “If
thou wilt do my desire, I will free thee from this thy durance vile and
thou shalt go to thy country, safe and sound.” And she wept and ceased
not to humble herself to him and wheedle him, but he would not hearken
to her words; whereupon she turned from him, in anger, and he and his
companions abode on the island in the same plight. The islanders knew
them for “The Princess’s birds” and durst not work them any wrong; and
her heart was at ease concerning them, being assured that they could not
escape from the island. So they used to absent themselves from her two
and three days at a time and go round about the desert parts in all
directions, gathering firewood, which they brought to the Princess’s
kitchen; and thus they abode five[405] years. Now one day it so chanced
that the Prince and his men were sitting on the sea-shore, devising of
what had befallen, and Sayf al-Muluk, seeing himself and his men in such
case, bethought him of his mother and father and his brother Sa’id and,
calling to mind what high degree he had been in, fell a-weeping and
lamenting passing sore, whilst his slaves wept likewise. Then said they
to him, “O King of the Age, how long shall we weep? Weeping availeth
not; for this thing was written on our brows by the ordinance of Allah,
to whom belong Might and Majesty. Indeed, the Pen runneth with that He
decreeth and nought will serve us but patience: haply Allah (extolled
and exalted be He!) who hath saddened us shall gladden us!” Quoth he, “O
my brothers, how shall we win free from this accursed woman? I see no
way of escape for us, save Allah of his grace deliver us from her; but
methinks we may flee and be at rest from this hard labour.” And quoth
they, “O King of the Age, whither shall we flee? For the whole island is
full of Ghuls which devour the Sons of Adam, and whithersoever we go,
they will find us there and either eat us or capture and carry us back
to that accursed, the King’s daughter, who will be wroth with us.” Sayf
al-Muluk rejoined, “I will contrive you somewhat, whereby peradventure
Allah Almighty shall deliver us and help us to escape from this island.”
They asked, “And how wilt thou do?”; and he answered, “Let us cut some
of these long pieces of wood, and twist ropes of their bark and bind
them one with another, and make of them a raft[406] which we will launch
and load with these fruits: then we will fashion us paddles and embark
on the raft after breaking our bonds with the axe. It may be that
Almighty Allah will make it the means of our deliverance from this
accursed woman and vouchsafe us a fair wind to bring us to the land of
Hind, for He over all things is Almighty!” Said they, “Right is thy
rede,” and rejoiced thereat with exceeding joy. So they arose without
stay or delay and cut with their axes wood for the raft and twisted
ropes to bind the logs and at this they worked a whole month. Every day
about evening they gathered somewhat of fuel and bore it to the
Princess’s kitchen, and employed the rest of the twenty-four hours
working at the raft.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sayf al-Muluk
and his Mamelukes, having cut the wood and twisted the ropes for their
raft, made an end of it and launched it upon the sea; then, after
breaking their bonds with the axe, and loading the craft with fruits
plucked from the island-trees, they embarked at close of day; nor did
any wot of their intent. They put out to sea in their raft and paddled
on four months, knowing not whither the craft carried them, till their
provaunt failed them and they were suffering the severest extreme of
hunger and thirst, when behold, the sea waxed troubled and foamed and
rose in high waves, and there came forth upon them a frightful
crocodile,[407] which put out its claw and catching up one of the
Mamelukes swallowed him. At the sight of this horror Sayf al-Muluk wept
bitterly and he and the two men[408] that remained to him pushed off
from the place where they had seen the crocodile, sore affrighted. After
this they continued drifting on till one day they espied a mountain
terrible tall and spiring high in air, whereat they rejoiced, when
presently an island appeared. They made towards it with all their might
congratulating one another on the prospect of making land; but hardly
had they sighted the island on which was the mountain, when the sea
changed face and boiled and rose in big waves and a second crocodile
raised its head and putting out its claw caught up the two remaining
Mamelukes and swallowed them. So Sayf al-Muluk abode alone, and making
his way to the island, toiled till he reached the mountain-top, where he
looked about and found a copse, and walking among the trees fell to
eating of the fruits. Presently, he saw among the branches more than
twenty great apes, each bigger than a he-mule, whereat he was seized
with exceeding fear. The apes came down and surrounded him;[409] then
they forewent him, signing to him to follow them, and walked on, and he
too, till he came to a castle, tall of base and strong of build whose
ordinance was one brick of gold and one of silver. The apes entered and
he after them, and he saw in the castle all manner of rarities, jewels
and precious metals such as tongue faileth to describe. Here also he
found a young man, passing tall of stature with no hair on his cheeks,
and Sayf al-Muluk was cheered by the sight for there was no human being
but he in the castle. The stranger marvelled exceedingly at sight of the
Prince and asked him, “What is thy name and of what land art thou and
how camest thou hither? Tell me thy tale and hide from me naught
thereof.” Answered the Prince, “By Allah, I came not hither of my own
consent nor is this place of my intent; yet I cannot but go from place
to place till I win my wish.” Quoth the youth, “And what is thy
object?”; and quoth the other, “I am of the land of Egypt and my name is
Sayf al-Muluk son of King Asim bin Safwan”; and told him all that had
passed with him, from first to last. Whereupon the youth arose and stood
in his service, saying, “O King of the Age, I was erst in Egypt and
heard that thou hadst gone to the land of China; but where is this land
and where lies China-land?[410] Verily, this is a wondrous thing and
marvellous matter!” Answered the Prince, “Sooth thou speakest but, when
I left China-land, I set out, intending for the land of Hind and a
stormy wind arose and the sea boiled and broke all my ships”; brief, he
told him all that had befallen him till he came thither; whereupon quoth
the other, “O King’s son, thou hast had enough of strangerhood and its
sufferings; Alhamdolillah,—praised be Allah who hath brought thee
hither! So now do thou abide with me, that I may enjoy thy company till
I die, when thou shalt become King over this island, to which no bound
is known, and these apes thou seest are indeed skilled in all manner of
crafts; and whatso thou seekest here shalt thou find.” Replied Sayf
al-Muluk, “O my brother, I may not tarry in any place till my wish be
won, albeit I compass the whole world in pursuit thereof and make quest
of every one so peradventure Allah may bring me to my desire or my
course lead me to the place wherein is the appointed term of my days,
and I shall die my death.” Then the youth turned with a sign to one of
the apes, and he went out and was absent awhile, after which he returned
with other apes girt with silken zones.[411] They brought the trays and
set on near[412] an hundred chargers of gold and saucers of silver,
containing all manner of meats. Then they stood, after the manner of
servants between the hands of Kings, till the youth signalled to the
Chamberlains, who sat down, and he whose wont it was to serve stood,
whilst the two Princes ate their sufficiency. Then the apes cleared the
table and brought basins and ewers of gold, and they washed their hands
in rose water; after which they set on fine sugar and nigh forty
flagons, in each a different kind of wine, and they drank and took their
pleasure and made merry and had a fine time. And all the apes danced and
gambolled before them, what while the eaters sat at meat; which when
Sayf al-Muluk saw, he marvelled at them and forgot that which had
befallen him of sufferings.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Sayf
al-Muluk saw the gestures and gambols of the apes, he marvelled thereat
and forgot that which had betided him of strangerhood and its
sufferings. At nightfall they lighted waxen candles in candlesticks of
gold studded with gems and set on dishes of confections and fruits of
sugar-candy. So they ate; and when the hour of rest was come, the apes
spread them bedding and they slept. And when morning morrowed, the young
man arose, as was his wont, before sunrise and waking Sayf al-Muluk said
to him, “Put thy head forth of this lattice and see what standeth
beneath it.” So he put out his head and saw the wide waste and all the
wold filled with apes, whose number none knew save Allah Almighty. Quoth
he, “Here be great plenty of apes, for they cover the whole country: but
why are they assembled at this hour?” Quoth the youth, “This is their
custom. Every Sabbath,[413] all the apes in the island come hither, some
from two and three days’ distance, and stand here till I awake from
sleep and put forth my head from this lattice, when they kiss ground
before me and go about their business.” So saying, he put his head out
of the window; and when the apes saw him, they kissed the earth before
him and went their way. Sayf al-Muluk abode with the young man a whole
month when he farewelled him and departed, escorted by a party of nigh a
hundred apes, which the young man bade escort him. They journeyed with
him seven days, till they came to the limits of their islands,[414] when
they took leave of him and returned to their places, while Sayf al-Muluk
fared on alone over mount and hill, desert and plain, four months’
journey, one day anhungered and the next satiated, now eating of the
herbs of the earth and then of the fruits of the trees, till he repented
him of the harm he had done himself by leaving the young man; and he was
about to retrace his steps to him, when he saw a something black afar
off and said to himself, “Is this a city or trees? But I will not turn
back till I see what it is.” So he made towards it and when he drew
near, he saw that it was a palace tall of base. Now he who built it was
Japhet son of Noah (on whom be peace!) and it is of this palace that God
the Most High speaketh in His precious Book, whenas He saith, “And an
abandoned well and a high-builded palace.”[415] Sayf al-Muluk sat down
at the gate and said in his mind, “Would I knew what is within yonder
palace and what King dwelleth there and who shall acquaint me whether
its folk are men or Jinn? Who will tell me the truth of the case?” He
sat considering awhile, but, seeing none go in or come out, he rose and
committing himself to Allah Almighty entered the palace and walked on,
till he had counted seven vestibules; yet saw no one. Presently looking
to his right he beheld three doors, while before him was a fourth, over
which hung a curtain. So he went up to this and raising the curtain,
found himself in a great hall[416] spread with silken carpets. At the
upper end rose a throne of gold whereon sat a damsel, whose face was
like the moon, arrayed in royal raiment and beautified as she were a
bride on the night of her displaying; and at the foot of the throne was
a table of forty trays spread with golden and silvern dishes full of
dainty viands. The Prince went up and saluted her, and she returned his
salam, saying, “Art thou of mankind or of the Jinn?” Replied he, “I am a
man of the best of mankind;[417] for I am a King, son of a King.” She
rejoined, “What seekest thou? Up with thee and eat of yonder food, and
after tell me thy past from first to last and how thou camest hither.”
So he sat down at the table and removing the cover from a tray of meats
(he being hungry) and ate till he was full; then washed his right hand
and going up to the throne, sat down by the damsel who asked him, “Who
art thou and what is thy name and whence comest thou and who brought
thee hither?” He answered, “Indeed my story is a long but do thou first
tell me who and what and whence thou art and why thou dwellest in this
place alone.” She rejoined, “My name is Daulat Khátún[418] and I am the
daughter of the King of Hind. My father dwelleth in the Capital-city of
Sarandíb and hath a great and goodly garden, there is no goodlier in all
the land of Hind or its dependencies; and in this garden is a great
tank. One day, I went out into the garden with my slave-women and I
stripped me naked and they likewise and, entering the tank, fell to
sporting and solacing ourselves therein. Presently, before I could be
ware, a something as it were a cloud swooped down on me and snatching me
up from amongst my handmaids, soared aloft with me betwixt heaven and
earth, saying, “Fear not, O Daulat Khatun, but be of good heart.” Then
he flew on with me a little while, after which he set me down in this
palace and straightway without stay or delay became a handsome young man
daintily apparelled, who said to me:—Now dost thou know me? Replied
I:—No, O my lord; and he said:—I am the Blue King, Sovran of the Jann;
my father dwelleth in the Castle Al-Kulzum[419] hight, and hath under
his hand six hundred thousand Jinn, flyers and divers. It chanced that
while passing on my way I saw thee and fell in love with thee for thy
lovely form: so I swooped down on thee and snatched thee up from among
the slave-girls and brought thee to this the High-builded Castle, which
is my dwelling-place. None may fare hither be he man or be he Jinni, and
from Hind hither is a journey of an hundred and twenty years: wherefore
do thou hold that thou wilt never again behold the land of thy father
and thy mother; so abide with me here, in contentment of heart and
peace, and I will bring to thy hands whatso thou seekest.” Then he
embraced me and kissed me,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the damsel said
to Sayf al-Muluk, “Then the King of the Jann, after he had acquainted me
with his case, embraced me and kissed me, saying:—Abide here and fear
nothing; whereupon he went away from me for an hour and presently
returned with these tables and carpets and furniture. He comes to me
every Third[420] and abideth with me three days and on Friday, at the
time of mid-afternoon prayer, he departeth and is absent till the
following Third. When he is here, he eateth and drinketh and kisseth and
huggeth me, but doth naught else with me, and I am a pure virgin, even
as Allah Almighty created me. My father’s name is Táj al-Mulúk, and he
wotteth not what is come of me nor hath he hit upon any trace of me.
This is my story: now tell me thy tale.” Answered the Prince, “My story
is a long and I fear lest while I am telling it to thee the Ifrit come.”
Quoth she “He went out from me but an hour before thy entering and will
not return till Third: so sit thee down and take thine ease and hearten
thy heart and tell me what hath betided thee, from beginning to end.”
And quoth he, “I hear and I obey.” So he fell to telling her all that
had befallen him from commencement to conclusion but, when she heard
speak of Badi’a al-Jamal, her eyes ran over with railing tears and she
cried, “O Badi’a al-Jamal, I had not thought this of thee! Alack for our
luck! O Badi’a al-Jamal, dost thou not remember me nor say:—My sister
Daulat Khatun whither is she gone?” And her weeping redoubled, lamenting
for that Badi’a al-Jamal had forgotten her.[421] Then said Sayf
al-Muluk, “O Daulat Khatun, thou art a mortal and she is a Jinniyah: how
then can she be thy sister?” Replied the Princess, “She is my sister by
fosterage and this is how it came about. My mother went out to solace
herself in the garden, when labour-pangs seized her and she bare me. Now
the mother of Badi’a al-Jamal chanced to be passing with her guards,
when she also was taken with travail-pains; so she alighted in a side of
the garden and there brought forth Badi’a al-Jamal. She despatched one
of her women to seek food and childbirth-gear of my mother, who sent her
what she sought and invited her to visit her. So she came to her with
Badi’a al-Jamal and my mother suckled the child, who with her mother
tarried with us in the garden two months. And before wending her ways
the mother of Badi’a al-Jamal gave my mother somewhat,[422] saying:—When
thou hast need of me, I will come to thee a middlemost the garden, and
departed to her own land; but she and her daughter used to visit us
every year and abide with us awhile before returning home. Wherefore an
I were with my mother, O Sayf al-Muluk, and if thou wert with me in my
own country and Badi’a al-Jamal and I were together as of wont, I would
devise some device with her to bring thee to thy desire of her: but I am
here and they know naught of me; for that an they kenned what is become
of me, they have power to deliver me from this place; however, the
matter is in Allah’s hands (extolled and exalteth be He!) and what can I
do?” Quoth Sayf al-Muluk, “Rise and let us flee and go whither the
Almighty willeth;” but, quoth she, “We cannot do that: for, by Allah,
though we fled hence a year’s journey that accursed would overtake us in
an hour and slaughter us.” Then said the Prince, “I will hide myself in
his way, and when he passeth by I will smite him with the sword and slay
him.” Daulat Khatun replied, “Thou canst not succeed in slaying him save
thou slay his soul.” Asked he, “And where is his soul?”; and she
answered, “Many a time have I questioned him thereof but he would not
tell me, till one day I pressed him and he waxed wroth with me and said
to me:—How often wilt thou ask me of my soul? What hast thou to do with
my soul? I rejoined:——O Hátim,[423] there remaineth none to me but thou,
except Allah; and my life dependeth on thy life and whilst thou livest,
all is well for me; so, except I care for thy soul and set it in the
apple of this mine eye, how shall I live in thine absence? An I knew
where thy soul abideth, I would never cease whilst I live, to hold it in
mine embrace and would keep it as my right eye. Whereupon said he to
me:——What time I was born, the astrologers predicted that I should lose
my soul at the hands of the son of a king of mankind. So I took it and
set it in the crop of a sparrow, and shut up the bird in a box. The box
I set in a casket, and enclosing this in seven other caskets and seven
chests, laid the whole in a alabastrine coffer,[424] which I buried
within the marge of yon earth-circling sea; for that these parts are far
from the world of men and none of them can win hither. So now see I have
told thee what thou wouldst know, and do thou tell none thereof, for it
is a secret between me and thee.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

[Illustration]


        Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Seventieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Daulat Khatun
acquainted Sayf al-Muluk with the whereabouts of the soul of the Jinni
who had carried her off and repeated to him his speech ending with, “And
this is a secret between me and thee!” “I rejoined,” quoth she:—“To whom
should I tell it, seeing that none but thou cometh hither with whom I
may talk thereof?” adding, “By Allah, thou hast indeed set thy soul in
the strongest of strongholds to which none may gain access! How should a
man win to it, unless the impossible be fore-ordained and Allah decree
like as the astrologers predicted?” Thereupon the Jinni:—Peradventure
one may come, having on his finger the seal-ring of Solomon son of David
(on the twain be peace!) and lay his hand with the ring on the face of
the water, saying:—“By the virtue of the names engraven upon this ring,
let the soul of such an one come forth! Whereupon the coffer will rise
to the surface and he will break it open and do the like with the chests
and caskets, till he come to the little box, when he will take out the
sparrow and strangle it, and I shall die.” Then said Sayf al-Muluk, “I
am the King’s son of whom he spake, and this is the ring of Solomon
David-son on my finger: so rise, let us go down to the sea-shore and see
if his words be leal or leasing!” Thereupon the two walked down to the
sea-shore and the Princess stood on the beach, whilst the Prince waded
into the water to his waist and laying his hand with the ring on the
surface of the sea, said, “By the virtue of the names and talismans
engraven on this ring, and by the might of Sulayman bin Dáúd (on whom be
the Peace!), let the soul of Hatim the Jinni, son of the Blue King, come
forth!” Whereat the sea boiled in billows and the coffer of alabaster
rose to the surface. Sayf al-Muluk took it and shattered it against the
rock and broke open the chests and caskets, till he came to the little
box and drew thereout the sparrow. Then the twain returned to the castle
and sat down on the throne; but hardly had they done this, when lo and
behold! there arose a dust-cloud terrifying and some huge thing came
flying and crying, “Spare me, O King’s son, and slay me not; but make me
thy freedman, and I will bring thee to thy desire!” Quoth Daulat Khatun,
“The Jinni cometh; slay the sparrow, lest this accursed enter the palace
and take it from thee and slaughter me and slaughter thee after me.” So
the Prince wrung the sparrow’s neck and it died, whereupon the Jinni
fell down at the palace-door and became a heap of black ashes. Then said
Daulat Khatun, “We are delivered from the hand of yonder accursed; what
shall we do now?”; and Sayf al-Muluk replied, “It behoveth us to ask aid
of Allah Almighty who hath afflicted us; belike He will direct us and
help us to escape from this our strait.” So saying, he arose and pulling
up[425] half a score of the doors of the palace, which were of
sandal-wood and lign-aloes with nails of gold and silver, bound them
together with ropes of silk and floss[426]-silk and fine linen and
wrought of them a raft, which he and the Princess aided each other to
hale down to the sea-shore. They launched it upon the water till it
floated and, making it fast to the beach, returned to the palace, whence
they removed all the chargers of gold and saucers of silver and jewels
and precious stones and metals and what else was light of load and
weighty of worth and freighted the raft therewith. Then they embarked
after fashioning two pieces of wood into the likeness of paddles and
casting off the rope-moorings, let the raft drift out to sea with them,
committing themselves to Allah the Most High, who contenteth those that
put their trust in Him and disappointeth not them who rely upon Him.
They ceased not faring on thus four months until their victual was
exhausted and their sufferings waxed severe and their souls were
straitened; so they prayed Allah to vouchsafe them deliverance from that
danger. But all this time when they lay down to sleep, Sayf al-Muluk set
Daulat Khatun behind him and laid a naked brand at his back, so that,
when he turned in sleep the sword was between them.[427] At last it
chanced one night, when Sayf al-Muluk was asleep and Daulat Khatun
awake, that behold, the raft drifted landwards and entered a port
wherein were ships. The Princess saw the ships and heard a man, he being
the chief and head of the captains, talking with the sailors; whereby
she knew that this was the port of some city and that they were come to
an inhabited country. So she joyed with exceeding joy and waking the
Prince said to him, “Ask the captain the name of the city and harbour.”
Thereupon Sayf al-Muluk arose and said to the captain, “O my brother,
how is this harbour hight and what be the names of yonder city and its
King?” Replied the Captain, “O false face![428] O frosty beard! an thou
knew not the name of this port and city, how camest thou hither?” Quoth
Sayf al-Muluk, “I am a stranger and had taken passage in a merchant ship
which was wrecked and sank with all on board; but I saved myself on a
plank and made my way hither; wherefore I asked thee the name of the
place, and in asking is no offence.” Then said the captain, “This is the
city of ’Amáriyah and this harbour is called Kamín al-Bahrayn.”[429]
When the Princess heard this she rejoiced with exceeding joy and said,
“Praised be Allah!” He asked, “What is to do?”; and she answered, “O
Sayf al-Muluk, rejoice in succour near hand; for the King of this city
is my uncle, my father’s brother.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Seventy-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Daulat Khatun
said to Sayf al-Muluk, “Rejoice in safety near hand; for the King of
this city is my uncle, my father’s brother and his name is ’Áli
al-Mulúk,”[430] adding, “Say thou then to the captain:—Is the Sultan of
the city, Ali al-Muluk, well?” He asked but the captain was wroth with
him and cried, “Thou sayest:—I am a stranger and never in my life came
hither. Who then told thee the name of the lord of the city?” When
Daulat Khatun heard this, she rejoiced and knew him for Mu’ín
al-Dín,[431] one of her father’s captains. Now he had fared forth in
search of her, after she was lost and finding her not, he never ceased
cruising till he came to her uncle’s city. Then she bade Sayf al-Muluk
say to him, “O Captain Mu’in al-Din, come and speak with thy mistress!”
So he called out to him as she bade, whereat he was wroth with exceeding
wrath and answered, “O dog, O thief, O spy, who art thou and how knowest
thou me?” Then he said to one of the sailors, “Give me an
ash[432]-stave, that I may go to yonder plaguing Arab and break his
head.” So he took the stick and made for Sayf al-Muluk, but, when he
came to the raft, he saw a something, wondrous, beauteous, which
confounded his wits and considering it straitly he made sure that it was
Daulat Khatun sitting there, as she were a slice of the moon; whereat he
said to the Prince, “Who is that with thee?” Replied he, “A damsel by
name Daulat Khatun.” When the captain heard the Princess’s name and knew
that she was his mistress and the daughter of his King, he fell down in
a fainting-fit, and when he came to himself, he left the raft and whatso
was thereon and riding up to the palace, craved an audience of the King;
whereupon the chamberlain went in to the presence and said, “Captain
Mu’in al-Din is come to bring thee good news; so bid he be brought in.”
The King bade admit him; accordingly he entered and kissing ground[433]
said to him, “O King, thou owest me a gift for glad tidings; for thy
brother’s daughter Daulat Khatun hath reached our city safe and sound,
and is now on a raft in the harbour, in company with a young man like
the moon on the night of its full.” When the King heard this, he
rejoiced and conferred a costly robe of honour on the captain. Then he
straightway bade decorate the city in honour of the safe return of his
brother’s daughter, and sending for her and Sayf al-Muluk, saluted the
twain and gave them joy of their safety; after which he despatched a
messenger to his brother, to let him know that his daughter was found
and was with him. As soon as the news reached Taj al-Muluk he gat him
ready and assembling his troops set out for his brother’s capital, where
he found his daughter and they rejoiced with exceeding joy. He sojourned
with his brother a week, after which he took his daughter and Sayf
al-Muluk and returned to Sarandib, where the Princess foregathered with
her mother and they rejoiced at her safe return; and held high festival
and that day was a great day, never was seen its like. As for Sayf
al-Muluk, the King entreated him with honour and said to him, “O Sayf
al-Muluk, thou hast done me and my daughter all this good for which I
cannot requite thee nor can any requite thee, save the Lord of the three
Worlds; but I wish thee to sit upon the throne in my stead and rule the
land of Hind, for I offer thee of my throne and kingdom and treasures
and servants, all this in free gift to thee.” Whereupon Sayf al-Muluk
rose and kissing the ground before the King, thanked him and answered,
“O King of the Age, I accept all thou givest me and return it to thee in
freest gift: for I, O King of the Age, covet not sovranty nor sultanate
nor desire aught but that Allah the Most High bring me to my desire.”
Rejoined the King, “O Sayf al-Muluk these my treasures are at thy
disposal: take of them what thou wilt, without consulting me, and Allah
requite thee for me with all weal!” Quoth the Prince, “Allah advance the
King! There is no delight for me in money or in dominion till I win my
wish: but now I have a mind to solace myself in the city and view its
thoroughfares and market-streets.” So the King bade bring him a mare of
the thoroughbreds, saddled and bridled; and Sayf al-Muluk mounted her
and rode through the streets and markets of the city. As he looked about
him right and left, lo! his eyes fell on a young man, who was carrying a
tunic and crying it for sale at fifteen dinars: so he considered him and
saw him to be like his brother Sa’id; and indeed it was his very self,
but he was wan of blee and changed for long strangerhood and the
travails of travel, so that he knew him not. However, he said to his
attendants, “Take yonder youth and carry him to the palace where I
lodge, and keep him with you till my return from the ride when I will
question him.” But they understood him to say, “Carry him to the
prison,” and said in themselves “Haply this is some runaway Mameluke of
his.” So they took him and bore him to the bridewell, where they laid
him in irons and left him seated in solitude, unremembered by any.
Presently Sayf al-Muluk returned to the palace, but he forgot his
brother Sa’id, and none made mention of him. So he abode in prison, and
when they brought out the prisoners, to cut ashlar from the quarries
they took Sa’id with them, and he wrought with the rest. He abode a
month’s space, in this squalor and sore sorrow, pondering his case and
saying in himself, “What is the cause of my imprisonment?”; while Sayf
al-Muluk’s mind was diverted from him by rejoicing and other things; but
one day, as he sat, he bethought him of Sa’id and said to his Mamelukes,
“Where is the white slave I gave into your charge on such a day?” Quoth
they, “Didst thou not bid us bear him to the bridewell?”; and quoth he,
“Nay I said not so; I bade you carry him to my palace after the ride.”
Then he sent his Chamberlains and Emirs for Sa’id and they fetched him
in fetters, and loosing him from his irons set him before the Prince,
who asked him, “O young man, what countryman art thou?”; and he
answered, “I am from Egypt and my name is Sa’id, son of Faris the
Wazir.” Now hearing these words Sayf al-Muluk sprang to his feet and
throwing himself off the throne and upon his friend, hung on his neck,
weeping aloud for very joy and saying, “O my brother, O Sa’id, praise be
Allah for that I see thee alive! I am thy brother Sayf al-Muluk, son of
King Asim.” Then they embraced and shed tears together and all who were
present marvelled at them. After this Sayf al-Muluk bade his people bear
Sa’id to the Hammam-bath: and they did so. When he came out, they clad
him in costly clothing and carried him back to Sayf al-Muluk who seated
him on the throne beside himself. When King Taj al-Muluk heard of the
reunion of Sayf al-Muluk and his brother Sa’id, he joyed with joy
exceeding and came to them, and the three sat devising of all that had
befallen them in the past from first to last. Then said Sa’id:—O my
brother, O Sayf al-Muluk, when the ship sank with all on board I saved
myself on a plank with a company of Mamelukes and it drifted with us a
whole month, when the wind cast us, by the ordinance of Allah Almighty,
upon an island. So we landed and entering among the trees took to eating
of the fruits, for we were anhungred. Whilst we were busy eating, there
fell on us unawares, folk like Ifrits[434] and springing on our
shoulders rode us[435] and said to us, “Go on with us; for ye are become
our asses.” So I said to him who had mounted me, “What art thou and why
mountest thou me?” At this he twisted one of his legs about my neck,
till I was all but dead, and beat upon my back the while with the other
leg, till I thought he had broken my backbone. So I fell to the ground
on my face, having no strength left in me for famine and thirst. From my
fall he knew that I was hungry and taking me by the hand, led me to a
tree laden with fruit which was a pear-tree[436] and said to me, “Eat
thy fill of this tree.” So I ate till I had enough and rose to walk
against my will; but, ere I had fared afar the creature turned and
leaping on my shoulders again drove me on, now walking, now running and
now trotting, and he the while mounted on me, laughing and saying,
“Never in my life saw I a donkey like unto thee!” We abode thus for
years till, one day of the days, it chanced that we saw there great
plenty of vines, covered with ripe fruit; so we gathered a quantity of
grape-bunches and throwing them into a pit, trod them with our feet,
till the pit became a great water-pool. Then we waited awhile and
presently returning thither, found that the sun had wroughten on the
grape-juice and it was become wine. So we used to drink it till we were
drunken and our faces flushed and we fell to singing and dancing and
running about in the merriment of drunkenness[437]; whereupon our
masters said to us, “What is it that reddeneth your faces and maketh you
dance and sing?” We replied, “Ask us not, what is your quest in
questioning us hereof?” But they insisted, saying, “You must tell us so
that we may know the truth of the case,” till we told them how we had
pressed grapes and made wine. Quoth they, “Give us to drink thereof”;
but quoth we, “The grapes are spent.” So they brought us to a Wady,
whose length we knew not from its breadth nor its beginning from its end
wherein were vines each bunch of grapes on them weighing twenty
pounds[438] by the scale and all within easy reach, and they said,
“Gather of these.” So we gathered a mighty great store of grapes and
finding there a big trench bigger than the great tank in the King’s
garden we filled it full of fruit. This we trod with our feet and did
with the juice as before till it became strong wine, which it did after
a month; whereupon we said to them, “’Tis come to perfection; but in
what will ye drink it?” And they replied, “We had asses like unto you;
but we ate them and kept their heads: so give us to drink in their
skulls.” We went to their caves which we found full of heads and bones
of the Sons of Adam, and we gave them to drink, when they became drunken
and lay down, nigh two hundred of them. Then we said to one another,
“Is’t not enough that they should ride us, but they must eat us also?
There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious,
the Great! But we will ply them with wine, till they are overcome by
drunkenness, when we will slay them and be at rest from them.”
Accordingly, we awoke them and fell to filling the skulls and gave them
to drink, but they said, “This is bitter.” We replied, “Why say ye ’tis
bitter? Whoso saith thus, except he drink of it ten times, he dieth the
same day.” When they heard this, they feared death and cried to us,
“Give us to drink the whole ten times.” So we gave them to drink, and
when they had swallowed the rest of the ten draughts they waxed drunken
exceedingly and their strength failed them and they availed not to mount
us. Thereupon we dragged them together by their hands and laying them
one upon another, collected great plenty of dry vine-stalks and branches
and heaped it about and upon them: then we set fire to the pile and
stood afar off, to see what became of them.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


      Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sa’id
continued:—When we set fire to the pile wherein were the Ghuls, I with
the Mamelukes stood afar off to see what became of them; and, as soon
the fire was burnt out, we came back and found them a heap of ashes,
wherefore we praised Allah Almighty who had delivered us from them. Then
we went forth about the island and sought the sea-shore, where we parted
and I and two of the Mamelukes fared on till we came to a thick copse
full of fruit and there busied ourselves with eating, and behold,
presently up came a man tall of stature long of beard and lengthy of
ear, with eyes like cressets driving before him and feeding a great
flock of sheep:[439] When he saw us he rejoiced and said to us, “Well
come, and fair welcome to you! Draw near me that I may slaughter you an
ewe of these sheep and roast it and give you to eat.” Quoth we, “Where
is thine abode?” And quoth he, “Hard by yonder mountain; go on towards
it till ye come to a cave and enter therein, for you will see many
guests like yourselves; and do ye sit with them, whilst we make ready
for you the guest-meal.” We believed him so fared on, as he bade us,
till we came to the cavern, where we found many guests, Sons of Adam
like ourselves, but they were all blinded[440]; and when we entered, one
said, “I’m sick”; and another, “I’m weak.” So we cried to them, “What is
this you say and what is the cause of your sickness and weakness?” They
asked, “Who are ye?”; and we answered, “We are guests.” Then said they,
“What hath made you fall into the hands of yonder accursed? But there is
no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great?
This is a Ghul who devoureth the Sons of Adam and he hath blinded us and
meaneth to eat us.” Said we, “And how did he blind you?” and they
replied, “Even as he will blind yourselves anon.” Quoth we, “And how
so?” And quoth they, “He will bring you bowls of soured milk[441] and
will say to you:—Ye are weary with wayfare: take this milk and drink it.
And when ye have drunken thereof, ye will become blind like us.” Said I
to myself, “There is no escape for us but by contrivance.” So I dug a
hole in the ground and sat over it. After an hour or so in came the
accursed Ghul with bowls of milk, whereof he gave to each of us, saying,
“Ye come from the desert and are athirst: so take this milk and drink
it, whilst I roast you the flesh.” I took the cup and carried it to my
mouth but emptied it into the hole; then I cried out, “Alas! my sight is
gone and I am blind!” and clapping my hand to my eyes, fell a-weeping
and a-wailing, whilst the accursed laughed and said, “Fear not, thou art
now become like mine other guests.” But, as for my two comrades, they
drank the milk and became blind. Thereupon the Ghul arose and stopping
up the mouth of the cavern came to me and felt my ribs, but found me
lean and with no flesh on my bones: so he tried another and finding him
fat, rejoiced. Then he slaughtered three sheep and skinned them and
fetching iron spits, spitted the flesh thereon and set them over the
fire to roast. When the meat was done, he placed it before my comrades,
who ate and he with them; after which he brought a leather-bag full of
wine and drank thereof and lay down prone and snored. Said I to myself,
“He’s drowned in sleep: how shall I slay him?” Then I bethought me of
the spits and thrusting two of them into the fire, waited till they were
as red-hot coals: whereupon I arose and girded myself and taking a spit
in each hand went up to the accursed Ghul and thrust them into his eyes,
pressing upon them with all my might. He sprang to his feet for sweet
life and would have laid hold of me; but he was blind. So I fled from
him into the inner cavern, whilst he ran after me; but I found no place
of refuge from him nor whence I might escape into the open country, for
the cave was stopped up with stones; wherefore I was bewildered and said
to the blind men, “How shall I do with this accursed?” Replied one of
them, “O Sa’id, with a run and a spring mount up to yonder niche[442]
and thou wilt find there a sharpened scymitar of copper: bring it to me
and I will tell thee what to do.” So I clombed to the niche and taking
the blade, returned to the blind man, who said to me, “Smite him with
the sword in his middle, and he will die forthright.” So I rushed after
the Ghul, who was weary with running after me and felt for the blind men
that he might kill them and, coming up to him smote him with the sword a
single stroke across his waist and he fell in twain. Then he screamed
and cried out to me, “O man, an thou desire to slay me, strike me a
second stroke.” Accordingly, I was about to smite him another cut; but
he who had directed me to the niche and the scymitar said, “Smite him
not a second time, for then he will not die, but will live and destroy
us.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sa’id
continued:—Now when I struck the Ghul with the sword he cried out to me,
“O man, an thou desire to slay me, strike me a second stroke!” I was
about so to do when he who had directed me to the scymitar said, “Smite
him not a second time, for then he will not die but will live and
destroy us!” So I held my hand as he bade me, and the Ghul died. Then
said the blind man to me, “Open the mouth of the cave and let us fare
forth; so haply Allah may help us and bring us to rest from this place.”
And I said, “No harm can come to us now; let us rather abide here and
repose and eat of these sheep and drink of this wine, for long is the
land. Accordingly we tarried there two months, eating of the sheep and
of the fruits of the island and drinking the generous grape-juice till
it so chanced one day, as we sat upon the beach, we caught sight of a
ship looming large in the distance; so we made signs for the crew and
holla’d to them.” They feared to draw near, knowing that the island was
inhabited by a Ghul[443] who ate Adamites, and would have sheered off;
but we ran down to the marge of the sea and made signs to them, with our
turband-ends and shouted to them, whereupon one of the sailors, who was
sharp of sight, said to the rest, “Harkye, comrades, I see these men
formed like ourselves, for they have not the fashion of Ghuls.” So they
made for us, little by little, till they drew near us in the dinghy[444]
and were certified that we were indeed human beings, when they saluted
us and we returned their salam and gave them the glad tidings of the
slaying of the accursed, wherefore they thanked us. Then we carried to
the ship all that was in the cave of stuffs and sheep and treasure,
together with a viaticum of the island-fruits, such as should serve us
days and months, and embarking, sailed on with a fair breeze three days;
at the end of which the wind veered round against us and the air became
exceeding dark; nor had an hour passed before the wind drave the craft
on to a rock, where it broke up and its planks were torn asunder.[445]
However, the Great God decreed that I should lay hold of one of the
planks, which I bestrode, and it bore me along two days, for the wind
had fallen fair again, and I paddled with my feet awhile, till Allah the
Most High brought me safe ashore and I landed and came to this city,
where I found myself a stranger, solitary, friendless, not knowing what
to do; for hunger was sore upon me and I was in great tribulation.
Thereupon I, O my brother, hid myself and pulling off this my tunic,
carried it to the market, saying in my mind, “I will sell it and live on
its price, till Allah accomplish to me whatso he will accomplish.” Then
I took the tunic in my hand and cried it for sale, and the folk were
looking at it and bidding for it, when, O my brother, thou camest by and
seeing me commandedst me to the palace; but thy pages arrested and
thrust me into the prison and there I abode till thou bethoughtest thee
of me and badst bring me before thee. So now I have told thee what befel
me, and Alhamdolillah—Glorified be God—for reunion! Much marvelled the
two Kings at Sa’id’s tale and Taj al-Muluk having made ready a goodly
dwelling for Sayf al-Muluk and his Wazir, Daulat Khatun used to visit
the Prince there and thank him for his favours and talk with him. One
day, he met her and said to her, “O my lady, where is the promise thou
madest me, in the palace of Japhet son of Noah, saying:—Were I with my
people, I would make shift to bring thee to thy desire?” And Sa’id said
to her, “O Princess, I crave thine aid to enable him to win his will.”
Answered she, “Yea, verily; I will do my endeavour for him, that he may
attain his aim, if it please Allah Almighty.” And she turned to Sayf
al-Muluk and said to him, “Be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and
clear.” Then she rose and going in to her mother, said to her, “Come
with me forthright and let us purify ourselves and make fumigations[446]
that Badi’a al-Jamal and her mother may come and see me and rejoice in
me.” Answered the Queen, “With love and goodly gree;” and rising, betook
herself to the garden and burnt off these perfumes which she always had
by her; nor was it long before Badi’a al-Jamal and her mother made their
appearance. The Queen of Hind foregathered with the other Queen and
acquainted her with her daughter’s safe return, whereat she rejoiced;
and Badi’a al-Jamal and Daulat Khatun foregathered likewise and rejoiced
in each other. Then they pitched the pavilions[447] and dressed dainty
viands and made ready the place of entertainment; whilst the two
Princesses withdrew to a tent apart and ate together and drank and made
merry; after which they sat down to converse, and Badi’a al-Jamal said,
“What hath befallen thee in thy strangerhood?” Replied Daulat Khatun, “O
my sister how sad is severance and how gladsome is reunion; ask me not
what hath befallen me! Oh, what hardships mortals suffer!” cried she,
“How so?” and the other said to her, “O my sister, I was immured in the
High-builded Castle of Japhet son of Noah, whither the son of the Blue
King carried me off till Sayf al-Muluk slew the Jinni and brought me
back to my sire;” and she told her to boot all that the Prince had
undergone of hardships and horrors before he came to the Castle.[448]
Badi’a al-Jamal marvelled at her tale and said, “By Allah, O my sister,
this is the most wondrous of wonders! This Sayf al-Muluk is indeed a
man! But why did he leave his father and mother and betake himself to
travel and expose himself to these perils?” Quoth Daulat Khatun, “I have
a mind to tell thee the first part of his history; but shame of thee
hindereth me therefrom.” Quoth Badi’a al-Jamal, “Why shouldst thou have
shame of me, seeing that thou art my sister and my bosom-friend and
there is muchel a matter between thee and me and I know thou willest me
naught but well? Tell me then what thou hast to say and be not abashed
at me and hide nothing from me and have no fear of consequences.”
Answered Daulat Khatun, “By Allah, all the calamities that have betided
this unfortunate have been on thine account and because of thee!” Asked
Badi’a al-Jamal, “How so, O my sister?”; and the other answered, “Know
that he saw thy portrait wrought on a tunic which thy father sent to
Solomon son of David (on the twain be peace!) and he opened it not
neither looked at it, but despatched it, with other presents and
rarities to Asim bin Safwan, King of Egypt, who gave it, still unopened,
to his son Sayf al-Muluk. The Prince unfolded the tunic, thinking to put
it on, and seeing thy portrait, became enamoured of it; wherefore he
came forth in quest of thee, and left his folk and reign and suffered
all these terrors and hardships on thine account.”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


      Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Daulat Khatun
related to Badi’a al-Jamal the first part of Sayf al-Muluk’s history;
how his love for her was caused by the tunic whereon her presentment was
wrought; how he went forth, passion-distraught, in quest of her; how he
forsook his people and his kingdom for her sake and how he had suffered
all these terrors and hardships on her account. When Badi’a al-Jamal
heard this, she blushed rosy red and was confounded at Daulat Khatun and
said, “Verily this may never, never be; for man accordeth not with the
Jann.” Then Daulat Khatun went on to praise Sayf al-Muluk and extol his
comeliness and courage and cavalarice, and ceased not repeating her
memories of his prowess and his excellent qualities till she ended with
saying, “For the sake of Almighty Allah and of me, O sister mine, come
and speak with him, though but one word!” But Badi’a al-Jamal cried, “By
Allah, O sister mine, this that thou sayest I will not hear, neither
will I assent to thee therein;” and it was as if she heard naught of
what the other said and as if no love of Sayf al-Muluk and his beauty
and bearing and bravery had gotten hold upon her heart. Then Daulat
Khatun humbled herself and said, “O Badi’a al-Jamal, by the milk we have
sucked, I and thou, and by that which is graven on the seal-ring of
Solomon (on whom be peace!) hearken to these my words for I pledged
myself in the High-builded Castle of Japhet, to show him thy face. So
Allah upon thee, show it to him once, for the love of me, and look
thyself on him!” And she ceased not to weep and implore her and kiss her
hands and feet, till she consented and said, “For thy sake I will show
him my face once and he shall have a single glance.” With that Daulat
Khatun’s heart was gladdened and she kissed her hands and feet. Then she
went forth and fared to the great pavilion in the garden and bade her
slave-women spread it with carpets and set up a couch of gold and place
the wine-vessels in order; after which she went into Sayf al-Muluk and
to his Wazir Sa’id, whom she found seated in their lodging, and gave the
Prince the glad tidings of the winning of his wish, saying, “Go to the
pavilion in the garden, thou and thy brother, and hide yourselves there
from the eyes of men so none in the palace may espy you, till I come to
you with Badi’a al-Jamal.” So they rose and repaired to the appointed
pavilion, where they found the couch of gold set and furnished with
cushions, and meat and wine ready served. So they sat awhile, whilst
Sayf al-Muluk bethought him of his beloved and his breast was straitened
and love and longing assailed him: wherefore he rose and walked forth
from the vestibule of the pavilion. Sa’id would have followed him, but
he said to him, “O my brother, follow me not, but sit in thy stead till
I return to thee.” So Sa’id abode seated, whilst Sayf al-Muluk went down
into the garden, drunken with the wine of desire and distracted for
excess of love-longing and passion-fire: yearning agitated him and
transport overcame him and he recited these couplets:—

 O passing Fair[449] I have none else but thee; ✿ Pity this slave in thy
    love’s slavery!
 Thou art my search, my joy and my desire! ✿ None save thyself shall love
    this heart of me:

 Would Heaven I knew thou knewest of my wails ✿ Night-long and eyelids
    oped by memory.
 Bid sleep to sojourn on these eyen-lids ✿ Haply in vision I thy sight
    shall see.
 Show favour then to one thus love-distraught: ✿ Save him from ruin by
    thy cruelty!
 Allah increase thy beauty and thy weal; ✿ And be thy ransom every enemy!
 So shall on Doomsday lovers range beneath ✿ Thy flag, and beauties
    ’neath thy banner be.

Then he wept and recited these also:—

 That rarest beauty ever bides my foe ✿ Who holds my heart and lurks in
    secresy:
 Speaking, I speak of nothing save her charms ✿ And when I’m dumb in
    heart-core woneth she.

Then he wept sore and recited the following:—

 And in my liver higher flames the fire; ✿ You are my wish and longsome
    still I yearn:
 To you (none other!) bend I and I hope ✿ (Lovers long-suffering are!)
    your grace to earn;
 And that you pity me whose frame by Love ✿ Is waste and weak his heart
    with sore concern:
 Relent, be gen’rous, tender-hearted, kind: ✿ From you I’ll ne’er remove,
    from you ne’er turn!

Then he wept and recited these also:—

 Came to me care when came the love of thee, ✿ Cruel sleep fled me like
    thy cruelty:
 Tells me the messenger that thou art wroth: ✿ Allah forefend what evils
    told me he!

Presently Sa’id waxed weary of awaiting him and going forth in quest of
him, found him walking in the garden, distraught and reciting these two
couplets:—

 By Allah, by th’ Almighty, by his right[450] ✿ Who read the
    Koran-Chapter “Fátir”[451] hight;
 Ne’er roam my glances o’er the charms I see; ✿ Thy grace, rare beauty,
    is my talk by night.

So he joined him and the twain walked about the garden together solacing
themselves and ate of its fruits. Such was their case;[452] but as
regards the two Princesses, they came to the pavilion and entering
therein after the eunuchs had richly furnished it, according to command,
sat down on the couch of gold, beside which was a window that gave upon
the garden. The castratos then set before them all manner rich meats and
they ate, Daulat Khatun feeding her foster-sister by mouthfuls,[453]
till she was satisfied; when she called for divers kinds of sweetmeats,
and when the neutrals brought them, they ate what they would of them and
washed their hands. After this Daulat Khatun made ready wine and its
service, setting on the ewers and bowls and she proceeded to crown the
cups and give Badi’a al-Jamal to drink, filling for herself after and
drinking in turn. Then Badi’a al-Jamal looked from the window into the
garden and gazed upon the fruits and branches that were therein, till
her glance fell on Sayf al-Muluk, and she saw him wandering about the
parterres, followed by Sa’id, and she heard him recite verses, raining
the while railing tears. And that glance of eyes cost her a thousand
sighs,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Badi’a
al-Jamal caught sight of Sayf al-Muluk as he wandered about the garden,
that glance of eyes cost her a thousand sighs, and she turned to Daulat
Khatun and said to her (and indeed the wine sported with her senses), “O
my sister, who is that young man I see in the garden, distraught,
love-abying, disappointed, sighing?” Quoth the other, “Dost thou give me
leave to bring him hither, that we may look on him?”; and quoth the
other, “An thou can avail to bring him, bring him.” So Daulat Khatun
called to him, saying, “O King’s son, come up to us and bring us thy
beauty and thy loveliness!” Sayf al-Muluk recognised her voice and came
up into the pavilion; but no sooner had he set eyes on Badi’a al-Jamal,
than he fell down in a swoon; whereupon Daulat Khatun sprinkled on him a
little rose-water and he revived. Then he rose and kissed ground before
Badi’a al-Jamal who was amazed at his beauty and loveliness; and Daulat
Khatun said to her, “Know, O Princess, that this is Sayf al-Muluk, whose
hand saved me by the ordinance of Allah Almighty and he it is who hath
borne all manner burthens on thine account: wherefore I would have thee
look upon him with favour.” Hearing this Badi’a al-Jamal laughed and
said, “And who keepeth faith, that this youth should do so? For there is
no true love in men.” Cried Sayf al-Muluk, “O Princess, never shall lack
of faith be in me, and all men are not created alike.” And he wept
before her and recited these verses:—

 O thou, Badí’a ’l-Jamál, show thou some clemency ✿ To one those lovely
    eyes opprest with witchery!
 By rights of beauteous hues and tints thy cheeks combine ✿ Of snowy
    white and glowing red anemone,
 Punish not with disdain one who is sorely sick ✿ By long, long parting
    waste hath waxed this frame of me:
 This is my wish, my will, the end of my desire, ✿ And Union is my hope
    an haply this may be!

Then he wept with violent weeping; and love and longing got the mastery
over him and he greeted her with these couplets:—

 Peace be to you from lover’s wasted love, ✿ All noble hearts to noble
    favour show:
 Peace be to you! Ne’er fail your form my dreams; ✿ Nor hall nor chamber
    the fair sight forego!
 Of you I’m jealous: none may name your name: ✿ Lovers to lovers aye
    should bend thee low:
 So cut not off your grace from him who loves ✿ While sickness wastes and
    sorrows overthrow.
 I watch the flowery stars which frighten me; ✿ While cark and care mine
    every night foreslow.
 Nor Patience bides with me nor plan appears: ✿ What shall I say when
    questioned of my foe?
 God’s peace be with you in the hour of need, ✿ Peace sent by lover
    patient bearing woe!

Then for the excess of his desire and ecstasy he repeated these couplets
also:—

 If I to aught save you, O lords of me, incline; ✿ Ne’er may I win of you
    my wish, my sole design!
 Who doth comprise all loveliness save only you? ✿ Who makes the Doomsday
    dawn e’en now before these eyne?
 Far be it Love find any rest, for I am one ✿ Who lost for love of you
    this heart, these vitals mine.

When he had made an end of his verses, he wept with sore weeping and she
said to him, “O Prince, I fear to grant myself wholly to thee lest I
find in thee nor fondness nor affection; for oftentimes man’s fidelity
is small and his perfidy is great and thou knowest how the lord Solomon,
son of David (on whom be the Peace!), took Bilkis to his love but,
whenas he saw another fairer than she, turned from her thereto.” Sayf
al-Muluk replied, “O my eye and O my soul, Allah hath not made all men
alike, and I, Inshallah, will keep my troth and die beneath thy feet.
Soon shalt thou see what I will do in accordance with my words, and for
whatso I say Allah is my warrant.” Quoth Badi’a al-Jamal, “Sit and be of
good heart and swear to me by the right of thy Faith and let us covenant
together that each will not be false to other; and whichever of us
breaketh faith may Almighty Allah punish!” At these words he sat down
and set his hand in her hand and they sware each to other that neither
of them would ever prefer to the other any one, either of man or of the
Jann. Then they embraced for a whole hour and wept for excess of their
joy, whilst passion overcame Sayf al-Muluk and he recited these
couplets:—

 I weep for longing love’s own ardency ✿ To her who claims the heart and
    soul of me.
 And sore’s my sorrow parted long from you, ✿ And short’s my arm to reach
    the prize I see;
 And mourning grief for what my patience marred ✿ To blamer’s eye
    unveiled my secresy;
 And waxed strait that whilome was so wide ✿ Patience nor force remains
    nor power to dree.
 Would Heaven I knew if God will ever deign to join ✿ Our lives, and from
    our cark and care and grief set free!

After this mutual troth-plighting, Sayf al-Muluk arose and walked in the
garden and Badi’a al-Jamal arose also and went forth also afoot followed
by a slave-girl bearing somewhat of food and a flask[454] of wine. The
Princess sat down and the damsel set the meat and wine before her: nor
remained they long ere they were joined by Sayf al-Muluk, who was
received with greeting and the two embraced and sat them down.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that having provided
food and wine, Badi’a al-Jamal met Sayf al-Muluk with greetings, and the
twain having embraced and kissed sat them down awhile to eat and drink.
Then said she to him, “O King’s son, thou must now go to the garden of
Iram, where dwelleth my grandmother, and seek her consent to our
marriage. My slave-girl Marjánah will convey thee thither and as thou
farest therein thou wilt see a great pavilion of red satin, lined with
green silk. Enter the pavilion heartening thyself and thou wilt see
inside it an ancient dame sitting on a couch of red gold set with pearls
and jewels. Salute her with respect and courtesy; then look at the foot
of the couch, where thou wilt descry a pair of sandals[455] of cloth
interwoven with bars of gold, embroidered with jewels. Take them and
kiss them and lay them on thy head[456]; then put them under thy right
armpit and stand before the old woman, in silence and with thy head
bowed down. If she ask thee, Who art thou and how camest thou hither and
who led thee to this land? And why hast thou taken up the sandals? make
her no answer, but abide silent till Marjanah enter, when she will speak
with her and seek to win her approof for thee and cause her look on thee
with consent; so haply Allah Almighty may incline her heart to thee and
she may grant thee thy wish.” Then she called the handmaid Marjanah
hight and said to her, “As thou lovest me, do my errand this day and be
not neglectful therein! An thou accomplish it, thou shalt be a free
woman for the sake of Allah Almighty, and I will deal honourably by thee
with gifts and there shall be none dearer to me than thou, nor will I
discover my secrets to any save thee. So, by my love for thee, fulfil
this my need and be not slothful therein.” Replied Marjanah, “O my lady
and light of mine eyes, tell me what is it thou requirest of me, that I
may accomplish it with both mine eyes.” Badi’a rejoined, “Take this
mortal on thy shoulders and bear him to the bloom-garden of Iram and the
pavilion of my grandmother, my father’s mother, and be careful of his
safety. When thou hast brought him into her presence and seest him take
the slippers and do them homage, and hearest her ask him, saying:—Whence
art thou and by what road art come and who led thee to this land, and
why hast thou taken up the sandals and what is thy need that I give heed
to it? do thou come forward in haste and salute her with the salam and
say to her:—O my lady, I am she who brought him hither and he is the
King’s son of Egypt.[457] ’Tis he who went to the High-builded Castle
and slew the son of the Blue King and delivered the Princess Daulat
Khatun from the Castle of Japhet son of Noah and brought her back safe
to her father: and I have brought him to thee, that he may give thee the
glad tidings of her safety: so deign thou be gracious to him. Then do
thou say to her:—Allah upon thee! is not this young man handsome, O my
lady? She will reply, Yes; and do rejoin:—O my lady, indeed he is
complete in honour and manhood and valour and he is lord and King of
Egypt and compriseth all praiseworthy qualities. An she ask thee, What
is his need? do thou make answer, My lady saluteth thee and saith to
thee, how long shall she sit at home, a maid and unmarried? Indeed, the
time is longsome upon her for she is as a magazine wherein wheat is
heaped up.[458] What then is thine intent in leaving her without a mate
and why dost thou not marry her in thy life-tide and that of her mother,
like other girls? If she say, How shall we do to marry her? An she have
any one in mind, let her tell us of him, and we will do her will as far
as may be! do thou make answer, O my lady, thy daughter saith to thee,
“Ye were minded aforetime to marry me to Solomon (on whom be peace!) and
portrayed him my portrait on a tunic. But he had no lot in me; so he
sent the tunic to the King of Egypt and he gave it to his son, who saw
my portrait figured thereon and fell in love with me; wherefore he left
his father and mother’s realm and turning away from the world and whatso
is therein, went forth at a venture, a wanderer, love-distraught, and
hath borne the utmost hardships and honors for my sake of me.” Now thou
seest his beauty and loveliness, and thy daughter’s heart is enamoured
of him; so, if ye have a mind to marry her, marry her to this young man
and forbid her not from him for he is young and passing comely and King
of Egypt, nor wilt thou find a goodlier than he; and if ye will not give
her to him, she will slay herself and marry none neither man nor Jinn.”
“And,” continued Badi’a al-Jamal, “Look thou, O Marjanah, _ma mie_,[459]
how thou mayst do with my grandmother, to win her consent, and beguile
her with soft words, so haply she may do my desire.” Quoth the damsel,
“O my lady, upon my head and eyes will I serve thee and do what shall
content thee.” Then she took Sayf al-Muluk on her shoulders and said to
him, “O King’s son, shut thine eyes.” He did so and she flew up with him
into the welkin; and after awhile she said to him, “O King’s son, open
thine eyes.” He opened them and found himself in a garden, which was
none other than the garden of Iram; and she showed him the pavilion and
said, “O Sayf al-Muluk, enter therein!” Thereupon he pronounced the name
of Allah Almighty and entering cast a look upon the garden, when he saw
the old Queen sitting on the couch, attended by her waiting women. So he
drew near her with courtesy and reverence and taking the sandals bussed
them and did as Badi’a al-Jamal had enjoined him. Quoth the ancient
dame, “Who art thou and what is thy country; whence comest thou and who
brought thee hither and what may be thy wish? Wherefore dost thou take
the sandals and kiss them and when didst thou ask of me a favour which I
did not grant?” With this in came Marjanah[460] and saluting her
reverently and worshipfully, repeated to her what Badi’a al-Jamal had
told her; which when the old Queen heard, she cried out at her and was
wroth with her and said, “How shall there be accord between man and
Jinn?”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

-----

Footnote 349:

  Arab. “Munádamah,” = conversation over the cup (Lane), used somewhat
  in the sense of “Musámarah” = talks by moonlight.

Footnote 350:

  Arab. “Kursi,” a word of many meanings; here it would allude to the
  square crate-like seat of palm-fronds used by the Ráwi or public
  reciter of tales when he is not pacing about the coffee-house.

Footnote 351:

  Von Hammer remarks that this is precisely the sum paid in Egypt for a
  MS. copy of The Nights.

Footnote 352:

  Arab. “Samar,” the origin of Musámarah, which see, vol. iv. 237.

Footnote 353:

  The pomp and circumstance, with which the tale is introduced to the
  reader showing the importance attached to it. Lane, most injudiciously
  I think, transfers the Proemium to a note in chapt. xxiv., thus
  converting an Arabian Night into an Arabian Note.

Footnote 354:

  ’Asim = defending (honour) or defended, son of Safwán = clear, cold
  (dry). Trébutien ii. 126, has Safran.

Footnote 355:

  Fáris = the rider, the Knight, son of Sálih = the righteous, the
  pious, the just.

Footnote 356:

  In sign of the deepest dejection, when a man would signify that he can
  fall no lower.

Footnote 357:

  Arab. Yá Khawand (in Bresl. Edit. vol. iv. 191) and fem. form
  Khawandah (p. 20) from Pers. Kháwand or Kháwandagár = superior, lord,
  master; Khudáwand is still used in popular as in classical Persian,
  and is universally understood in Hindostan.

Footnote 358:

  The Biblical Sheba, whence came the Queen of many Hebrew fables.

Footnote 359:

  These would be the interjections of the writer or story-teller. The
  Mac. Edit. is here a sketch which must be filled up by the Bresl.
  Edit. vol. iv. 189–318: “Tale of King Asim and his son Sayf al-Mulúk
  with Badí’a al-Jamál.”

Footnote 360:

  The oath by the Seal-ring of Solomon was the Stygian “swear” in
  Fairy-land. The signet consisted of four jewels, presented by as many
  angels, representing the Winds, the Birds, Earth (including sea) and
  Spirits, and the gems were inscribed with as many sentences (1) To
  Allah belong Majesty and Might; (2) All created things praise the
  Lord; (3) Heaven and Earth are Allah’s slaves and (4) There is no god
  but _the_ God and Mohammed is His messenger. For Sakhr and his theft
  of the signet see Dr. Weil’s, “The Bible, the Koran, and the Talmud.”

Footnote 361:

  Trébutien (ii. 128) remarks, “Cet Assaf peut être celui auquel David
  adresse plusieurs de ses psaumes, et que nos interprètes disent avoir
  été son maître de chapelle” (from Biblioth. Orient).

Footnote 362:

  Mermen, monsters, beasts, etc.

Footnote 363:

  This is in accordance with Eastern etiquette; the guest must be fed
  before his errand is asked. The Porte, in the days of its pride,
  managed in this way sorely to insult the Ambassadors of the most
  powerful European kingdoms and the first French Republic had the
  honour of abating the barbarians’ nuisance. So the old Scottish
  Highlanders never asked the name or clan of a chance guest, lest he
  prove a foe before he had eaten their food.

Footnote 364:

  In Bresl. Edit. (301) Kháfiyah: in Mac. Kháinah, the perfidy.

Footnote 365:

  So in the Mac. Edit., in the Bresl. only one “Kabá” or Kaftan; but
  from the sequel it seems to be a clerical error.

Footnote 366:

  Arab. “Su’ubán” (Thu’ubán) popularly translated “basilisk.” The
  Egyptians suppose that when this serpent forms ring round the Ibn ’Irs
  (weasel or ichneumon) the latter emits a peculiar air which causes the
  reptile to burst.

Footnote 367:

  _i.e._ that prophesied by Solomon.

Footnote 368:

  Arab. “Takliyah” from kaly, a fry: Lane’s Shaykh explained it as
  “onions cooked in clarified butter, after which they are put upon
  other cooked food.” The mention of onions points to Egypt as the
  origin of this tale and certainly not to Arabia, where the
  strong-smelling root is hated.

Footnote 369:

  Von Hammer quotes the case of the Grand Vizier Yúsuf throwing his own
  pelisse over the shoulders of the Aleppine Merchant who brought him
  the news of the death of his enemy, Jazzár Pasha.

Footnote 370:

  This peculiar style of generosity was also the custom in contemporary
  Europe.

Footnote 371:

  Khátún, which follows the name (_e.g._ Hurmat Khatun), in India
  corresponds with the male title Khan, taken by the Pathán Moslems
  (_e.g._ Pír Khán). Khánum is the affix to the Moghul or Tartar
  nobility, the men assuming a double designation _e.g._ Mirza Abdallah
  Beg. See Oriental collections (Ouseley’s) vol. i. 97.

Footnote 372:

  Lit. “Whatso thou wouldest do that do!” a contrast with our European
  laconism.

Footnote 373:

  These are booths built against and outside the walls, made of
  palm-fronds and light materials.

Footnote 374:

  Von Hammer in Trébutien (ii. 135) says, “Such rejoicings are still
  customary at Constantinople, under the name of Donánmá, not only when
  the Sultanas are _enceintes_, but also when they are brought to bed.
  In 1803 the rumour of the pregnancy of a Sultana, being falsely
  spread, involved all the Ministers in useless expenses to prepare for
  a Donánmá which never took place.” Lane justly remarks upon this
  passage that the title Sultán precedes while the feminine Sultánah
  follows the name.

Footnote 375:

  These words (Bresl. Edit.) would be spoken in jest, a grim joke
  enough, but showing the elation of the King’s spirits.

Footnote 376:

  A signal like a gong: the Mac. Edit. reads “Tákah,” = in at the
  window.

Footnote 377:

  Sayf al-Mulúk = “Sword (Egyptian Sif, Arab. Sayf, Gr. ξίφος) of the
  Kings”; and he must not be called tout bonnement Sayf. Sái’d = the
  forearm.

Footnote 378:

  Arab. Fakíh = a divine, from Fikh = theology, a man versed in law and
  divinity _i.e._ (1) the Koran and its interpretation comprehending the
  sacred ancient history of the creation and prophets (Chapters iii, iv,
  v and vi), (2) the traditions and legends connected with early Moslem
  History and (3) some auxiliary sciences as grammar, syntax and
  prosody; logic, rhetoric and philosophy. See p. 18 of “El-Mas’údí,’s
  Historical Encyclopædia etc.,” by my friend Prof. Aloys Springer,
  London 1841. This fine fragment printed by the Oriental Translation
  Fund has been left unfinished when the Asiatic Society of Paris has
  printed in Eight Vols. 8vo the text and translation of MM. Barbier de
  Meynard and Pavet de Courteille. What a national disgrace! And the
  same with the mere abridgment of Ibn Batutah by Prof. Lee (Orient. Tr.
  Fund 1820) when the French have the fine Edition and translation by
  Defrémery and Sanguinetti with index etc. in 4 vols. 8vo 1858–59. But
  England is now content to rank in such matters as encouragement of
  learning, endowment of research etc., into the basest of kingdoms, and
  the contrast of status between the learned Societies of London and of
  Paris, Berlin, Vienna or Rome is mortifying to an Englishman—a
  national opprobrium.

Footnote 379:

  Arab. Maydán al-Fíl prob. for Birkat al-Fíl, the Tank of the Elephant
  before-mentioned. Lane quotes Al-Makrizi who in his Khitat informs us
  that the lakelet was made about the end of the seventh century (A.
  H.), and in the seventeenth year of the eighth century became the site
  of stables. The Bresl. Edit. (iv. 214) reads “Maydan al-’Adl,” prob.
  for Al-’Ádil the name of the King who laid out the Maydán.

Footnote 380:

  Arab. Asháb al-Ziyá’, the latter word mostly signifies estates
  consisting, strictly speaking, of land under artificial irrigation.

Footnote 381:

  The Bresl. Edit. iv. 215 has “Chawáshiyah” = ’Chiaush, the Turkish
  word, written with the Pers. “ch,” a letter which in Arabic is
  supplanted by “sh,” everywhere except in Morocco.

Footnote 382:

  Arab. “Záwiyah” lit. a corner, a cell. Lane (M. E. chapt. xxiv.)
  renders it “a small kiosque,” and translates the famous Zawiyat
  al-Umyán (Blind Men’s Angle) near the south-eastern corner of the
  Azhar or great Collegiate Mosque of Cairo, “Chapel of the Blind”
  (chapt. ix.). In popular parlance it suggests a hermitage.

Footnote 383:

  Arab. “Takht,” a Pers. word used as more emphatic than the Arab.
  Sarír.

Footnote 384:

  This girding the sovereign is found in the hieroglyphs as a
  peculiarity of the ancient Kings of Egypt, says Von Hammer referring
  readers to Denon.

Footnote 385:

  Arab. “Mohr,” which was not amongst the gifts of Solomon in Night
  dcclx. The Bresl. Edit. (p. 220) adds “and the bow,” which is also de
  trop.

Footnote 386:

  Arab. “Batánah,” the ordinary lining opp. to Tazríb, or quilting with
  a layer of cotton between two folds of cloth. The idea in the text is
  that the unhappy wearer would have to carry his cross (the girl) on
  his back.

Footnote 387:

  This line has occurred in Night dccxliv. _supra_ p. 280.

Footnote 388:

  Arab. “Mu’attik al-Rikáb” _i.e._ who frees those in bondage from the
  yoke.

Footnote 389:

  In the Mac. Edit. and in Trébutien (ii. 143) the King is here called
  Schimakh son of Scharoukh, but elsewhere, Schohiali = Shahyál, in the
  Bresl. Edit. Shahál. What the author means by “Son of ’Ád the
  Greater,” I cannot divine.

Footnote 390:

  Lit. “For he is the man who can avail thereto,” with the meaning given
  in the text.

Footnote 391:

  Arab. Jazírat, insula or peninsula, vol. i. 2.

Footnote 392:

  Probably Canton with which the Arabs were familiar.

Footnote 393:

  _i.e._ “Who disappointeth not those who put their trust in Him.”

Footnote 394:

  Arab. “Al-Manjaníkát” plur. of manjanik, from Gr. Μάγγανον, Lat.
  Manganum (Engl. Mangonel from the dim. Mangonella). Ducange
  Glossarium, s.v. The Greek is applied originally to defensive weapons,
  then to the artillery of the day, Ballista, catapults, etc. The
  kindred Arab. form “Manjanín” is applied chiefly to the Noria or
  Persian water-wheel.

Footnote 395:

  Faghfúr is the common Moslem title for the Emperors of China; in the
  Kamus the first syllable is Zammated (Fugh); in Al-Mas’udi (chapt.
  xiv.) we find Baghfúr and in Al-Idrisi Baghbúgh, or Baghbún. In
  Al-Asma’i Bagh = god or idol (Pehlewi and Persian); hence according to
  some Baghdád (?) and Bághistán a pagoda (?). Sprenger (Al-Mas’údi, p.
  327) remarks that Baghfúr is a literal translation of Tien-tse and
  quotes Visdelou, “pour mieux faire comprendre de quel ciel ils veulent
  parler, ils poussent la généalogie (of the Emperor) plus loin. Ils lui
  donnent le ciel pour père, la terre pour mère, le soleil pour frère
  aîné et la lune pour sœur aînée.”

Footnote 396:

  Arab. “Kayf hálak” = how de doo? the salutation of a Fellah.

Footnote 397:

  _i.e._ subject to the Maharajah of Hind.

Footnote 398:

  This is not a mistake: I have seen heavy hail in Africa, N. Lat. 4°;
  within sight of the Equator.

Footnote 399:

  Arab. “Harrákat,” here used in the sense of smaller craft, and
  presently for a cock-boat.

Footnote 400:

  See vol. i. 138: here by way of variety I quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 401:

  This explains the Arab idea of the “Old Man of the Sea” in Sindbad the
  Seaman (vol. vi. 50). He was not a monkey nor an unknown monster; but
  an evil Jinni of the most powerful class, yet subject to defeat and
  death.

Footnote 402:

  These Plinian monsters abound in Persian literature. For a specimen
  see Richardson Dissert. p. xlviii.

Footnote 403:

  Arab. “Anyáb,” plur. of “Náb” = canine tooth (eye-tooth of man), tusks
  of horse and camel etc.

Footnote 404:

  Arab. “Kásid,” the Anglo-Indian Cossid. The post is called Baríd from
  the Persian “burídah” (cut) because the mules used for the purpose
  were dock-tailed. Barid applies equally to the post-mule, the rider
  and the distance from one station (Sikkah) to another which varied
  from two to six parasangs. The letter-carrier was termed Al-Faránik
  from the Pers. Parwánah, a servant. In the Diwán al-Baríd
  (Post-office) every letter was entered in a Madraj or list called in
  Arabic Al-Askidár from the Persian “Az Kih dárí” = from whom hast thou
  it?

Footnote 405:

  “Ten years” in the Bresl. Edit. iv. 244.

Footnote 406:

  In the Bresl. Edit. (iv. 245) we find “Kalak,” a raft, like those used
  upon the Euphrates, and better than the “Fulk,” or ship, of the Mac.
  Edit.

Footnote 407:

  Arab. Timsah from Coptic (Old Egypt) Emsuh or Msuh. The animal cannot
  live in salt-water, a fact which proves that the Crocodile Lakes on
  the Suez Canal were in old days fed by Nile-water; and this was
  necessarily a Canal.

Footnote 408:

  So in the Bresl. Edit. (iv. 245). In the Mac. text “one man,” which
  better suits the second crocodile, for the animal can hardly be
  expected to take two at a time.

Footnote 409:

  He had ample reason to be frightened. The large Cynocephalus is
  exceedingly dangerous. When travelling on the Gold Coast with my late
  friend Colonel De Ruvignes, we suddenly came in the grey of the
  morning upon a herd of these beasts. We dismounted, hobbled our nags
  and sat down, sword and revolver in hand. Luckily it was feeding time
  for the vicious brutes, which scowled at us but did not attack us.
  During my four years’ service on the West African Coast I heard enough
  to satisfy me that these powerful beasts often kill men and rape
  women; but I could not convince myself that they ever kept the women
  as concubines.

Footnote 410:

  As we should say in English it is a far cry to Loch Awe: the Hindu
  byword is, “Dihlí (Delhi) is a long way off.” See vol. i. 37.

Footnote 411:

  Arab. Fútah, a napkin, a waistcloth, the Indian Zones alluded to by
  the old Greek travellers.

Footnote 412:

  Arab. “Yají (it comes) miat khwánjah”—quite Fellah talk.

Footnote 413:

  As Trébutien shows (ii. 155) these apes were a remnant of some ancient
  tribe possibly those of Ád who had gone to Meccah to pray for rain and
  thus escaped the general destruction. See vol. i. 65. Perhaps they
  were the Jews of Aylah who in David’s day were transformed into
  monkeys for fishing on the Sabbath (Saturday). Koran ii. 61.

Footnote 414:

  I can see no reason why Lane purposely changes this to “the extremity
  of their country.”

Footnote 415:

  Koran xxii. 44, Mr. Payne remarks:—This absurd addition is probably
  due to some copyist, who thought to show his knowledge of the Koran,
  but did not understand the meaning of the verse from which the
  quotation is taken and which runs thus, “How many cities have We
  destroyed, whilst yet they transgressed, and they are laid low on
  their own foundations and wells abandoned and high-builded palaces!”
  Mr. Lane observes that the words are either misunderstood or purposely
  misapplied by the author of the tale. Purposeful perversions of Holy
  Writ are very popular amongst Moslems and form part of their rhetoric;
  but such is not the case here. According to Von Hammer (Trébutien ii.
  154), “Eastern geographers place the Bir al-Mu’utallal (Ruined Well)
  and the Kasr al-Mashíd (High-builded Castle) in the province of
  Hadramaut, and we wait for a new Niebuhr to inform us what are the
  monuments or the ruins so called.” His text translates puits arides et
  palais de plâtre (not likely!). Lane remarks that Mashíd mostly means
  “plastered,” but here = Mushayyad, lofty, explained in the Jalálayn
  Commentary as = rafí’a, high-raised. The two places are also mentioned
  by Al-Mas’údi; and they occur in Al-Kazwíni (see Night dccclviii.):
  both of these authors making the Koran directly allude to them.

Footnote 416:

  Arab. (from Pers.) Aywán which here corresponds with the Egyptian
  “líwán” a tall saloon with estrades.

Footnote 417:

  This naïve style of “renowning it” is customary in the East,
  contrasting with the servile address of the subject—“thy slave” etc.

Footnote 418:

  Daulat (not Dawlah) the Anglo-Indian Dowlat; prop. meaning the shifts
  of affairs, hence, fortune, empire, kingdom. Khátún = “lady,” I have
  noted, follows the name after Turkish fashion.

Footnote 419:

  The old name of Suez-town from the Greek Clysma (the shutting), which
  named the Gulf of Suez “Sea of Kulzum.” The ruins in the shape of a
  huge mound, upon which Sá’id Pasha built a Kiosk-palace, lie to the
  north of the modern town and have been noticed by me, (Pilgrimage,
  Midian etc.) The Rev. Prof. Sayce examined the mound and from the
  Roman remains found in it determined it to be a fort guarding the old
  mouth of the Old Egyptian Sweet-water Canal which then debouched near
  the town.

Footnote 420:

  _i.e._ Tuesday. See vol. iii, 249.

Footnote 421:

  Because being a Jinniyah the foster-sister could have come to her and
  saved her from old maidenhood.

Footnote 422:

  Arab. “Hájah” properly a needful thing. This consisted according to
  the Bresl. Edit. of certain perfumes, by burning which she could
  summon the Queen of the Jinn.

Footnote 423:

  Probably used in its sense of a “black crow.” The Bresl. Edit. (iv.
  261). has “Khátim” (seal-ring) which is but one of its almost
  innumerable misprints.

Footnote 424:

  Here it is called “Tábik” and afterwards “Tábút.”

Footnote 425:

  _i.e._ raising from the lower hinge-pins. See vol. ii 214.

Footnote 426:

  Arab. Abrísam or Ibrísam (from Persian Abrísham or Ibrísham) = raw
  silk or floss, _i.e._ untwisted silk.

Footnote 427:

  This knightly practice, evidently borrowed from the East, appears in
  many romances of chivalry _e.g._ When Sir Tristran is found by King
  Mark asleep beside Ysonde (Isentt) with drawn sword between them, the
  former cried:—

                         Gif they weren in sinne
                           Nought so they no lay.

  And we are told:—

                     Sir Amys and the lady bright
                       To bed gan they go;
                     And when they weren in bed laid,
                     Sir Amys his sword out-brayed
                     And held it between them two.

  This occurs in the old French romance of Amys and Amyloun which is
  taken into the tale of the Ravens in the Seven Wise Masters where
  Ludovic personates his friend Alexander in marrying the King of
  Egypt’s daughter and sleeps every night with a bare blade between him
  and the bride. See also Aladdin and his lamp. An Englishman remarked,
  “The drawn sword would be little hindrance to a man and maid coming
  together.” The drawn sword represented _only_ the Prince’s honour.

Footnote 428:

  Arab. “Ya Sáki’ al-Wajh,” which Lane translates by “lying” or “liar.”

Footnote 429:

  Kamín (in Bresl. Edit. “bayn” = between) Al-Bahrayn = Ambuscade or
  lurking-place of the two seas. The name of the city in Lane is
  “’Emareeych” imaginary but derived from Emarch (’imárah) = being
  populous. Trébutien (ii. 161) takes from Bresl. Edit. “Amar” and
  translates the port-name, “le lieu de refuge des deux mers.”

Footnote 430:

  _i.e._ “High of (among) the Kings.” Lane proposes to read ’Ali al-Mulk
  = high in dominion.

Footnote 431:

  Pronounce Mu’inuddeen = Aider of the Faith. The Bresl. Edit. (iv. 266)
  also reads “Mu’in al-Riyásah” = Mu’in of the Captaincies.

Footnote 432:

  Arab. Shúm = a tough wood used for the staves with which donkeys are
  driven. Sir Gardner Wilkinson informed Lane that it is the ash.

Footnote 433:

  In Persian we find the fuller metaphorical form, “kissing the ground
  of obedience.”

Footnote 434:

  For the Shaykh of the Sea(-board) in Sindbad the Seaman see vol. vi.
  50.

Footnote 435:

  That this riding is a facetious exaggeration of the African practice I
  find was guessed by Mr. Keightley.

Footnote 436:

  Arab. “Kummasra”: the root seems to be “Kamsara” = being slender or
  compact.

Footnote 437:

  Lane translates, “by reason of the exhilaration produced by
  intoxication.” But the Arabic here has no assonance. The passage also
  alludes to the drunken habits of those blameless Ethiopians, the races
  of Central Africa where, after midday a chief is rarely if ever found
  sober. We hear much about drink in England but Englishmen are mere
  babes compared with these stalwart Negroes. In Unyamwezi I found all
  the standing bedsteads of pole-sleepers and bark-slabs disposed at an
  angle of about 20 degrees for the purpose of draining off the huge
  pottle-fulls of Pombe (Osirian beer) drained by the occupants; and,
  comminxit lectum potus might be said of the whole male population.

Footnote 438:

  This is not exaggerated. When at Hebron I saw the biblical spectacle
  of two men carrying a huge bunch slung to a pole, not so much for the
  weight as to keep the grapes from injury.

Footnote 439:

  The Mac. and Bul. Edits. add, “and with him a host of others after his
  kind”; but these words are omitted by the Bresl. Edit. and apparently
  from the sequel there was only one Ghul-giant.

Footnote 440:

  Probably alluding to the most barbarous Persian practice of plucking
  or tearing out the eyes from their sockets. See Sir John Malcolm’s
  description of the capture of Kirmán and Morier (in Zohrab, the
  hostage) for the wholesale blinding of the Asterabadian by the
  Eunuch-King Agha Mohammed Shah. I may note that the mediæval Italian
  practice called _bacinare_, or scorching with red-hot basins, came
  from Persia.

Footnote 441:

  Arab. “Laban” as opposed to “Halíb”: in Night dcclxxiv (_infra_ p.
  365) the former is used for sweet milk, and other passages could be
  cited. I have noted that all galaktophagi, or milk-drinking races,
  prefer the artificially soured to the sweet, choosing the fermentation
  to take place outside rather than inside their stomachs. Amongst the
  Somal I never saw man, woman or child drink a drop of fresh milk; and
  they offered considerable opposition to our heating it for coffee.

Footnote 442:

  Arab. Tákah not “an aperture” as Lane has it, but an arched hollow in
  the wall.

Footnote 443:

  In Trébutien (ii. 168) the cannibal is called “Goul Eli-Fenioun” and
  Von Hammer remarks, “There is no need of such likeness of name to
  prove that all this episode is a manifest imitation of the adventures
  of Ulysses in Polyphemus’ cave; * * * and this induces the belief that
  the Arabs have been acquainted with the poems of Homer.” Living
  intimately with the Greeks they could not have ignored the Iliad and
  the Odyssey: indeed we know by tradition that they had translations,
  now apparently lost. I cannot however, accept Lane’s conjecture that
  “the story of Ulysses and Polyphemus may have been of Eastern origin.”
  Possibly the myth came from Egypt, for I have shown that the opening
  of the Iliad bears a suspicious likeness to the proem of Pentaur’s
  Epic.

Footnote 444:

  Arab. Shakhtúr.

Footnote 445:

  In the Bresl. Edit. the ship is not wrecked but lands Sa’id in safety.

Footnote 446:

  So in the Shah-nameh the Símurgh-bird gives one of her feathers to her
  protégé Zál which he will throw into the fire when she is wanted.

Footnote 447:

  Bresl. Edit. Al-Zardakhánát Arab. plur. of Zarad-Khánah, a bastard
  word = armoury, from Arab. Zarad (hauberk) and Pers. Khánah = house
  etc.

Footnote 448:

  Some retrenchment was here found necessary to avoid “damnable
  iteration.”

Footnote 449:

  _i.e._ Badi’a al-Jamal.

Footnote 450:

  Mohammed.

Footnote 451:

  Koran xxxv. “The Creator” (Fátir) or the Angels, so called from the
  first verse.

Footnote 452:

  In the Bresl. Edit. (p. 263) Sayf al-Muluk drops asleep under a tree
  to the lulling sound of a Sákiyah or water-wheel, and is seen by
  Badi’a al-Jamal, who falls in love with him and drops tears upon his
  cheeks, etc. The scene, containing much recitation is long and well
  told.

Footnote 453:

  Arab. “Lukmah” = a _bouchée_ of bread, meat, fruit or pastry, and
  especially applied to the rice balled with the hand and delicately
  inserted into a friend’s mouth.

Footnote 454:

  Arab. “Saláhiyah,” also written Saráhiyah: it means an ewer-shaped
  glass-bottle.

Footnote 455:

  Arab “Sarmújah,” of which Von Hammer remarks that the dictionaries
  ignore it; Dozy gives the forms Sarmúj, Sarmúz and Sarmúzah and
  explains them by “espèce de guêtre, de sandale ou de mule, qu’on
  chausse par-dessus la botte.”

Footnote 456:

  In token of profound submission.

Footnote 457:

  Arab. “Misr” in Ibn Khaldún is a land whose people are settled and
  civilised hence “Namsur” = we settle; and “Amsár” = settled provinces.
  Al-Misrayn was the title of Basrah and Kufah the two military
  cantonments founded by Caliph Omar on the frontier of conquering
  Arabia and conquered Persia. Hence “Tamsír” = founding such posts,
  which were planted in Mesopotamia, Syria and Egypt. In these camps
  were stationed the veterans who had fought under Mohammed; but the
  spoils of the East soon changed them to splendid cities where luxury
  and learning flourished side by side. Sprenger (Al-Mas’údi pp. 19,
  177) compares them ecclesiastically with the primitive Christian
  Churches such as Jerusalem, Alexandria and Antioch. But the Moslems
  were animated with an ardent love of liberty and Kufah under Al-Hajjaj
  the masterful, lost 100,000 of her turbulent sons without the thirst
  for independence being quenched. This can hardly be said of the Early
  Christians who, with the exception of a few staunch-hearted martyrs,
  appear in history as pauvres diables and poules mouillées, ever
  oppressed by their own most ignorant and harmful fancy that the world
  was about to end.

Footnote 458:

  _i.e._ Waiting to be sold and wasting away in single cursedness.

Footnote 459:

  Arab. “Yá dádati”: dádat is an old servant-woman or slave, often
  applied to a nurse, like its congener the Pers. Dádá, the latter often
  pronounced Daddeh, as Daddeh Bazm-árá in the Kuisum-nameh (Atkinson’s
  “Customs of the Women of Persia,” London, 8vo. 1832).

Footnote 460:

  Marjánah has been already explained. D’Herbelot derives from it the
  Romance name _Morgante la Déconvenue_, here confounding Morgana with
  Urganda; and Keltic scholars make Morgain = Mor Gwynn—the white maid
  (p. 10, Keightley’s Fairy Mythology, London, Whittaker, 1833).




                            END OF VOL. VII.

[Illustration: والسلام]




                                 INDEX


 Abú Amir bin Marwán, 142

 Abú al-Hamlát = father of assaults, etc., 149

 Abú Alí al-Husayn the Wag, 130

 Abú al-Sakhá = father of munificence, 133

 Account asked from outgoing Governors, 102

 —— of them will be presently given = we leave them for the present, 157

 Acids applied as counter-inebriants, 32

 Address without vocative particle more emphatic, 125

 Addressing by the name not courteous, 114

 Adolescent (un, aime toutes les femmes), 299

 Affirmative and negative particles, 195

 Africa (suggested derivation of the name), 60

 Agha (Al-) = chief police officer, 156

 Ahassa bi’l-Shurbah = “he smelt a rat”, 144

 Ajal = yes verily, 195

 ’Ajwah = dates pressed into a solid mass and—deified, 14

 Akákír = drugs, spices, 147

 Akhlát (town in Armenia), 88

 Akík (al-) two of the name, 140

 Akyál, title of the Himyarite Kings, 60

 Alà Kulli hál = in any case, 272

 Alà raghm = in spite of, 121

 Alas for his chance of escaping = there is none, 183

 Ali Zaybak = Mercury Ali, 172

 ’Álí al-Mulúk = high among the Kings, 354

 Alif, Há, Wáw as tests of calligraphy, 112

 Alhambra = (Dár) al-hamrá, the Red, 49

 Allah confound the far One (hard swearing), 155

 —— succour the Caliph against thee, 159

 —— is All-knowing, 209

 Alláho Akbar, the Arab slogan-cry, 8

 ’Amala hílah for tricking a Syro-Egyptian vulgarism, 43

 Amám-ak = before thee, 94

 ’Amáriyah (Pr. N. of town), 353

 Amend her case = bathe her etc., 266

 Amsár (pl. of Misr) = settled provinces, 371

 Ansár = Medinite auxiliaries, 92

 Ape _see_ Cynocephalus

 Apes (remnant of some ancient tribe), 346

 Arabian Night converted into an Arabian Note, 314

 Ardashir = Artaxerxes, 209

 Asaf (Solomon’s Wazir), 318

 Asháb (division of), 92

 Asháb al-Ziyá’ = Feudatories, 327

 ’Ashírah = clan, 121

 ’Ásim = defending, 314

 Askar jarrár = drawing (conquering) army, 85

 Asma’í (Al-) author of Antar, 110

 Atmárí = rags (for travelling clothes), 118

 Avaunt = Ikhsa, be chased like a dog, 45

 Aywá (’llahi) = yes, by Allah, 195

 Aywán (saloon with estrades), 347

 Azarbiján = Kohistan, 104

 Azdashír misprint for Ardashír, 209

 Azrak = blue-eyed (so is the falcon), 164


 Báb = gate (for chapter, etc.), 3

 Badr Básím (Pr. N.) = Full moon smiling, 274

 Bakkál = greengrocer, etc., 295

 Bán = myrobalan, 247

 Banner in sign of Investiture, 101

 Banú Tamím (tribe), 125

 Baríd = Post, 340

 Batshat al-Kubrá = the great disaster (battle of Badr), 55

 Battásh al-Akrán = he who assaults his peers, 55

 Batánah = lining, 330

 Battles described, 61

 Bead thrown into a cup (signal of delivery), 324

 Beast with two backs (Eastern view of), 35

 Bir (Al-) al-Mu’utallal = the Ruined Well, 346

 Blessings at the head of letters, 133

 Blue eyes = blind with cataract, or staring, glittering, hungry, 164

 Bow a cowardly weapon, 123

 Breslau edition quoted, 168; 172; 173; 177; 202; 316; 321; 324; 326;
    327; 329; 341; 342; 343; 350; 353; 354; 363; 367

 Bride of the Hoards, 147

 Bridle (not to be committed to another), 304

 Bulak ed. quoted, 173; 359

 Burdah = plaid of striped stuff, 95

 Burckhardt quoted, 91; 93; 156

 Byron (depreciated where he ought to be honoured most), 268


 Caliphs: Hishám, 104

 —— Walid bin Sahl, 106

 —— Mahdí (Al-), 136

 Canton (city of), 334

 Capotes mélancoliques, 190

 Chaste forbearance towards a woman frequently causes love, 189

 Chawáshiyah = Chamberlains, 327

 Coffer (Ar. Tábik, Tábút), 350

 “Compelleth” in the sense of “burdeneth”, 285

 Conjugal affection (striking picture of), 243

 Copa d’agua excuse for a splendid banquet, 168

 Colocasia (Ar. Kallakás), 151

 Combat reminding of that of Rustam and Sohráb, 89

 Conjunctive in Africans seldom white, 184

 Connection (tribal seven degrees of), 121

 Converts theoretically respected and practically despised, 43

 Creases in the stomach insisted upon, 130

 Cross-bows, 62

 Cuirasses against pleasure, cobwebs against infection, 190

 Cundums (French letters), 190

 Cynocephalus (kills men and rapes women), 344


 Dakkah = long wooden bench etc., 111

 Damsel of the tribe = daughter of the chief, 95

 Daulat = fortune, empire, kingdom (Pr. N.), 347

 Deposits are not lost with Him = He disappointeth not etc., 334

 Devotees (white woollen raiment of), 214

 Dimágh = brain, meninx (for head), 178

 Dirhams (50,000 = about £1,250), 105

 Diwán al-Baríd = Post Office, 340

 Dogs (in Eastern cities), 202

 Donánmá (rejoicings for the pregnancy of a Sultana), 324

 Donkey-boy like our “post-boy” of any age, 160

 Donning woman’s attire in token of defeat, 188

 Doors (pulled up = raised from the lower hinge-pins), 352

 Drinking before or after dinner or both, 132

 Drugs (is this an art of?), 147

 Drunk with the excess of his beauty, 162

 Drunken habits of Central African races, 357


 “Early to bed” etc. (modern version of the same), 217

 Elephant-faced Vetála, 34

 Elephants frighting horses, 61

 Eli-Fenioun = Polyphemus, 361

 Euphemism of speech, 134; 142

 Euphuistic speech, 285

 Eyes “sunk” into the head for our “starting” from it, 36

 —— (plucking or tearing out of, a Persian practice), 359


 Fagfúr (Mosl. title for the Emperor of China), 335

 Fakíh = divine, 325

 Falastín, degraded to “Philister”, 101

 Faráis (pl. of farísah) = shoulder-muscles, 219

 Faránik (Al-) = letter-carrier, 340

 Faráshah, noun of unity of Farásh = butterfly, moth, 305

 Fárikí, adjective of Mayyáfárikín, 1

 Fáris = rider, knight, 314

 Farrásh, a man of general utility, tent-pitcher etc., 4

 Father of Bitterness = the Devil, 116

 Fátihah quoted, 286

 Fátir = creator (chapter of the Koran), 366

 Fatís = carrion, corps crévé, 181

 Faylasúfiyah = philosopheress, 145

 Fayyaz (al-) = the overflowing, 99

 Fazl = grace, exceeding goodness, 220

 Fearing for the lover first, 256

 Fee delicately offered, 162

 Fí al-Kamar in the moonshine (perhaps allusion to the Comorin islands),
    269

 Fig = anus, 151

 Fights frequent at funerals or wedding processions, 190

 Fillets hung on trees to denote an honoured tomb, 96

 Fikh = theology, 325

 Fire-arms mentioned, 62

 Flirtation impossible in the East, 181

 Floor (sitting upon the, sign of deepest dejection), 314

 Foot (prehensile powers of the Eastern), 179

 Fortalice of fruits (Ar. Hisn al-Fákihah), 75

 French letters (all about them), 190

 Fumigations to cite Jinnis etc., 363

 Fútah = napkin, waistcloth, 345


 Galaktophagi prefer sour milk to sweet, 360

 Garden (in the Prophet’s tomb at Al-Medinah), 91

 Generosity (peculiar style of), 323

 Ghandúr = a gallant, 181

 Ghuráb al-Bayn = Raven of the Wold, 226

 “Gift from me to,” etc. = “I leave it to you, sir”, 292

 Giraffe, one of the most timid of the antelope tribe, 54

 —— unfit for riding, 62

 Girding the sovereign (found in the hieroglyphs), 328

 Gloom = black hair of youth, 277

 Glooms gathering and full moons dawning for hands and eyes, 247

 Gold (when he looked upon it, his life seemed a light thing to him),
    240

 Grapes (bunch of, weighing twenty pounds, no exaggeration), 358

 Grim joke (showing elation of spirits), 324

 Ground (really kissed), 257

 Guest-rite, 121

 —— (must be fed before his errand is asked), 319


 Habb al-’Ubb (a woman’s ornament), 205

 Hadas = surmise, 302

 Hail within sight of the Equator, 336

 Hájah = a needful thing (for somewhat), 349

 Hajar-coinage (?), 95

 Hajjáj (al-) bin Yúsuf al-Thakifí, 97

 Hákim = ruler, not to be confounded with Hakím, a doctor, etc., 29

 Haláwat = sweets, 205

 Halumma = bring!, 117

 Hallaling = Anglo-Indian term for the Moslem rite of killing animals
    for food, 9

 Hammál al-Hatabi = one who carries fuel-sticks, 59

 Harbak = javelin, 45

 Harrakát = carracks (also used for cock-boat), 336

 Hasab wa Nasal = inherited degree and acquired dignity, 279

 Hatim = broken wall (at Meccah), 219

 Hátim (Pr. N.) = black crow, 350

 Hazza-hu = he made it quiver, 45

 Henna-flower (its spermatic odour), 250

 Heroes and heroines of love-tales are bonnes fourchettes, 300

 Hind bint Asmá and the poet Jarír, 96

 Hishám (Caliph), 104

 Hisn al-Fákihah = Fortalice of fruits, 75

 Hiss = (sensual) perception, 302

 Hobbling a camel (how done), 119

 Hubkah = doubling of a woman’s waistcloth, 180

 Hullah = dress, 180

 Humility of the love-lorn Princess artfully contrasted with her former
    furiosity, 261


 Ibáziyah sect, 125

 Ibrík = ewer, 146

 Ibrísam = raw silk, floss, 352

 Ihtilám = wet dreams, 183

 Ijtilá = displaying of the bride, 198

 Iksah = plait, etc., 150

 Iliad and Pentaur’s Epic, 362

 Incuriousness of the Eastern story-teller, 57

 Indian realm, 336

 Infidel should not be killed unless refusing to become a Moslem or a
    tributary, 64

 Irak for Al-Irak in verse, 20

 Irán = hearse, Moses’ ark, 207

 Ishk ’Uzrí = platonic love, 121


 Jabábirah = tyrants, giants, 84

 Jábarsá, the city of Japhet, 40; 43

 Jábir Atharát al-Kirám = Repairer of the Slips of the Generous, 100

 Jaland, not Julned, 16

 Jamil bin Ma’amar al-Uzrí (poet), 117

 Ján-Sháh = Life King, 82

 Japhet (Ar. Yáfis or Yáfat), 40

 —— his sword, 41

 Jauharah (Pr. N. = jewel), 307

 Jawámard for Jawán-mard, un giovane, a brave, 17

 Jazírah (al-) = Mesopotamia, 100

 —— Insula for Peninsula, 333

 Jilbáb = habergeon, buff jacket, 56

 Julnár = Pers. Gul-i-anár (pomegranate flower), 268


 Ka’ah = mess-room, barracks, 167

 Kaannahu huwa = as he (was) he, 233

 Ka’ak al’-I’d = buns (cake?), 196

 Ka’b = heel, ankle; fortune, 177

 Ka’ka’at = jangling noise, 21

 Kalak = raft, 342

 Kamaríyah = moon-like, 202

 Kamin al-Bahrayn = Ambuscade of the two seas, 353

 Karaj (town in Persian Irak), 77

 Kárizán (al-) = the two mimosa gatherers, 93

 Karr aynan = keep thine eye cool, 229

 Kásid = Anglo-Indian Cossid, 77

 Kasr al-Mashíd = high-built Castle, 346

 Kataba (for tattooing), 250

 Kawwad = leader (for pimp), 98

 Kayf hálak = how de doo?, 336

 Kazá, Kismet and “Providence”, 135

 “Key” = fee paid on the keys being handed to a lodger, 212

 Khadd = cheek, 277

 Kháfiyah = concealed; Kháinah = perfidy, 320

 Khal’a al-’izár = stripping of jaws or side-beard, 248

 Khalbús = buffoon, 195

 Khalí’a (Al-) = the Wag, 130

 Khánakah = Dervishes’ convert, 177

 Khátún = lady; Pr. N., 146

 Khazrá (al-) = the Green, palace of Mu’áwiyah, 124

 Khirad Shah = King Intelligence; Pr. N., 73

 Khiskhánah = cupboard, 199

 Kirát (bean of Abrus precatorius), 289

 Kisás (Al-) = lex talionis, 170

 “Kiss ground” not to be taken literally, 210

 Kitf al-Jamal = Camel shoulder-blade, 167

 Knife, “bravest of arms”, 123

 Koran quoted (iii. 11; i. 42; viii. 9), 55

 —— (cxi.), 59

 —— (xxxiii.), 92

 —— (xx. 102), 164

 —— (xii. 31), 213

 —— (ii. 286), 285

 —— (ii. 61; xxii. 44), 346

 —— (xxxv.), 366

 Kudrat = Omnipotence, 135

 Kulzum (Al-), old name of Suez-town, 348

 Kumayt (Al-) = bay horse with black points, 128

 Kumasrá (Kummasrá) = pear, 357

 Kursí = stool, 311


 La’ab = sword-play, 44

 Láb (old Pers. for Sun), 296

 Laban = sweet milk, 360

 Lakít = fœtus, foundling, contemptible fellow, 145

 Lane quoted, 95; 96; 111; 113; 118; 119; 123; 124; 135; 136; 139; 144;
    172; 182; 195; 196; 209; 269; 275; 280; 282; 303; 309; 314; 328; 361

 Laun = colour, hue (for dish), 185

 Laylat ams = yesternight, 186

 Legs making mute the anklets, 131

 Letter torn tears a kingdom, 2

 Letters (French), 190

 Listening not held dishonourable, 279

 Liwá = Arab Tempe, 115

 Líwán = Aywán (saloon with estrades), 347

 Lukmah = bouchée, mouthful, 367


 Magazine (as one wherein wheat is heaped up = unmarried), 372

 Mujájat = saliva, 280

 Mahá = wild cattle, 280

 Malíh Kawí = very handsome (Cairene vulgarism), 150

 Mafárik (Al-) = partings of the hair, 222

 Mace, a dangerous weapon, 24

 Mahayá = Má al-Hayát = aqua vitæ, 132

 Mahdí (Al-), Caliph, 136

 Mahr = marriage dowry, settlement, 126

 Malík al-Násír (Saladin), 142

 Manjaníkát = mangonels, 335

 Mariduna = Rebels against Allah, 39

 Marsín = myrtle, 290

 Marwán bin al-Hakam (Governor of Al-Medinah), 125

 Masculine for feminine, 140

 Maskharah = masker (buffoon), 195

 Maut = death, 147

 Mayazib (pl. of mízáb) = gargoyles, 136

 Maydán al-Fíl, 326

 Maysum’s song, 97

 Mayyáfárikín capital of Diyár Bakr, 1

 Mercury Ali (his story sequel to that of Dalílah), 172

 Metamorphosis (terms of), 294

 Milk-drinking races prefer the soured milk to the sweet, 360

 Mirbad (al-), market place at Bassorah, 130

 Misr, Masr = Capital (applied to Memphis, Fostat and Cairo), 172

 —— (for Egypt), 370

 Mohammed (Allah’s right hand), 366

 Mohammed bin Sulaymán al-Rabí’í (Governor of Bassorah), 130

 Mohr = signet, 329

 Monsters (abounding in Persian literature), 339

 Morosa voluptas, 132

 Mosque Al-Ahzáb = Mosque of the troops, 92

 MS. copy of The Nights (price of one in Egypt), 312

 Mu’attik al-Rikáb = Liberator of Necks, 331

 Muhájirin = companions in Mohammed’s flight, 92

 Mu’in al-Dín = Aider of the Faith, 354

 Mujauhar = damascened, 84

 Mulabbas = dragées, 205

 Munádamah = table-talk, 309

 Munawwarah (al-) = The Illumined (Title of Al-Medinah), 95

 Musáfahah = putting palm to palm, 52

 Musáhikah = tribadism, 132

 Musámarah = night-talk by moonlight, 217

 Mosquito caught between the toes, 179

 Musrán (Al-) = guts, 190

 Mutanakkir = disguised, proud, reserved, 101

 Muunah = provisions, 232


 Náb (pl. Anyáb) = canine tooth, tusk, 339

 Nafs-í = my soul for “the flesh”, 118

 Ná’í al-maut = messenger of death, 226

 Naked = without veil or upper clothing, 151

 Names frequently do not appear till near the end of a tale, 43; 274

 Naming a girl by name offensive, 286

 Ni’am = yes in answer to a negative, 195

 Night (its last the bitter parting), 243

 Nitáh = a woman’s waist cloth, 180

 Nostrils (his life-breath was in his = his heart was in his mouth), 258

 Nostrums for divining the sex of the unborn child, 268

 Núrayn = two lights (town in Turkestan), 88


 Offerings (pious) = ex votos etc., 150

 “Old maids” ignored in the East, 286

 “Old Man of the Sea” (a Márid or evil Jinn), 338

 Oman with its capital Maskat = Omana Moscha, 24

 Opening doors without a key is the knavish trick of a petty thief, 182


 Payne quoted, 16; 18; 57; 123; 277; 337

 Pearls (fresh from water), 240

 Pencilling the eyes with kohl, 250

 Pens (gilded) = reeds washed with gold, 112

 Pilgrimage quoted (iii. 90), 34

 —— (i. 377), 9

 —— (iii. 191), 21

 —— (i. 14), 80

 —— (ii. 62; 69), 91

 —— (ii. 130; 138; 325), 92

 —— (ii. 3), 95

 —— (iii. 336), 104

 —— (ii. 300), 124

 —— (iii. 164), 136

 —— (ii. 24), 140

 —— (i. 59), 171

 —— (i. 120), 172

 —— (i. 124), 177

 —— (iii. 66), 181

 —— (ii. 52–54), 202

 —— (i. 62), 212

 —— (iii. 165), 219

 Police-master legally answerable for losses, 161

 Pomegranate = female parts, 151

 Prin´cess English, Princess French, 245

 Proportion of horse and foot in Arab and Turcoman armies, 1

 Protestants (four great _Sommités_), 124

 Pun, 53; 288; 307


 Ra’ad Sháh, Pr. N. = thunder-king, 55

 Rabbat-í = my she-Lord, applied to the fire, 36

 Rahim, Rihm = womb for uterine relations, 123

 Raiment of devotees (white wool), 214

 Ramlah (half-way house between Jaffa and Jerusalem), 103

 Ráyah Káimah = pennon flying (not “beast standing”), 118

 “Renowning it” (naïve style of), 347

 Repentance acquits the penitent, 72

 Repetition, 293; 301

 Riding on men as donkeys (facetious exaggeration of African practice),
    357

 Rock (falling upon a ship), 295

 Ruba’al-Kharáb = the waste quarter, 80

 Rubbamá = perhaps, sometimes, 218

 Rudaynian lance (like a), 265

 Rumourers (the two) = basin and ewer, 146

 Rutub (applying to pearls) = fresh from water, 240


 Sabá = the Biblical Sheba, 316

 Sabaj (a black shell), 131

 Safwán = clear, cold, 314

 Sá’ik = the Striker, 35

 Saja’-assonance bald in translation, 2

 —— answerable for galimatias, 36

 Salát mamlúkíyah = praying without ablution, 148

 Salátah (how composed), 132

 Sálih (Pr. N.) = righteous, pious, just, 314

 Samandal (Al-) = Salamander, 280

 Samar = night-story, 312

 Samáwah (Al-) visitation place in Babylonian Irak, 93

 Samír = night-talker, 217

 Sana’á (famed for leather and other work), 130

 Sandals (kissed and laid on the head in token of submission), 370

 Sarmújah = sandals, leggings, slippers, 370

 Satl = kettle, bucket (situla?), 182

 Saudawí = of a melancholic temperament, 238

 Sawík = parched corn, 303

 Sayf ξίφος al-Mulúk = Sword of the Kings, 325

 Seal-ring of Solomon (oath by), 317

 Set-off for abuse of women, 130

 Shahyál bin Shárukh (Pr. N.), 331

 Shakhtúr = dinghy, 362

 Shammara = he tucked up (sleeve or gown), 133

 Shara (Al-), mountain in Arabia, 23

 Shara’ = holy law, 170

 Sharít = chopper, sword, 178

 Shaykh attended by a half-witted lunatic, 152

 Shaykh of the Sea (-board), 357

 Shazarwán = Pers. Shadurwán, palace, cornice, etc., 51

 Sibawayh (Grammarian), 233

 Side-muscles (her quiver = she trembles in every nerve), 219

 Slave (Moslemah can compel an infidel master who has attempted her
    seduction to sell her), 203

 Sleeping with a sword between them, 352

 Shower (how delightful in rainless lands), 141

 Shúm (a tough wood used for staves), 354

 Shubash = Bravo!, 195

 Slave-girls (newly bought pretentious and coquettish), 266

 Solomon (oath by his seal-ring), 317

 Street cries of Cairo, 172

 Style of a Cairene public scribe, 134

 Suhbat-hu = in company with him, 262

 Sulamí (not Sulaymi) = of the tribe Banú Sulaym, 93

 Sulaymán bin Abd al-Malik (Caliph), 99

 Sulaymáníyah = Afghans, 171

 Saráhíyah (vulg. Saláhíyah = glass-bottle), 370

 Su’ubán = “basilisk,” large serpent, 322

 Sword (between two sleepers represents _only_ the man’s honour), 353


 Tábik = coffer, 350

 Tábút = bier, ark, etc., 207

 —— (coffer), 350

 Taghaddá = he dined, 180

 Táir al-bayn = parting bird, 226

 Tákah = arched hollow in the wall, niche, 361

 Takht, a “seat” from a throne to a saddle, 55

 —— (more emphatical than Sarír), 328

 Taklíd = baldricking, not girding a sword, 3

 Taklíyah = onion-sauce, 322

 Takwím = Tacuino (for Almanac), 296

 Tamsír (derived from Misr) = founding a military cantonment, 371

 Tásúmah = sandal, slipper, 197

 Taverns, 324

 Tayr = any flying thing, bird, 227

 Tawílan jiddan, now a Cairenism, 13

 Tazríb = quilting, 330

 “Tell the truth!” way of taking an Eastern liar, 183

 Tent (how constructed), 109

 “There is no Majesty,” etc., as ejaculation of impatience, 73

 Third = Tuesday, 349

 Timsah = crocodile, 343

 Tongue (my, is under thy feet), 239


 ’Ubb = breast-pocket, 205

 Union opposed to “Severance”, 120

 “Use this” (_i.e._ for thy daily expenses), 298

 Uzrah = Azariah, 158


 Vile water (Koranic term for semen), 213

 Violent temper (frequent amongst Eastern princesses), 254

 Virginity of slave-girls (respected by the older slave-trader, rarely
    by the young), 267

 Visits to the tombs, 124


 Wahk, Wahak = Lasso, 61

 Wahtah = quasi-epileptic fit, 127

 Walíd bin Sahl (Caliph), 106

 Ward Shah = Rose King, 70

 Wars (al-) = carthamus tinctorius, 93

 Wayha-k equivalent to Wayla-k, 127

 Weapons carried under the thigh, 56

 —— magic, 59

 —— new forms of, 62

 “Whatso thou wouldest do that do” = Do what thou wilt, 324

 “Where lies China-land?” = it is a far cry to Lock Awe, 344

 “Who art thou?” etc. (meaning “you are nobodies”), 286

 “Whoso loveth me, let him bestow largesse upon this man”, 323

 Women (blue-eyed of good omen), 164


 Ya’arub bin Kahtán, 25

 Yá Dâdatí = “ma mie”, 372

 Yáfis, Yáfat = Japhet, 40

 Yají miat khwánjah = near an hundred chargers, 345

 Yá Khawand = O Master, 315

 Yakhní = stew, broth, 186

 Yá Sákí’ al-Wajh = O false face!, 353

 Yá Ustá (for Ustáz) = O my Master, 192

 Yúsuf (Grand Vizier, and his pelisse), 323


 Zabbah = wooden bolt, 182

 Zalábiyah bi-’Asal = honey fritters, 164

 Zalzál son of Muzalzil = Earthquake son of Ennosigaius, 79

 Zardah = rice dressed with honey and saffron, 189

 Zardakhánat = Zarad (Ar. for hauberk) – Khánah (Pers. for house), 363

 Zarráf = giraffe, 54

 Záwiyah = corner (for cell, oratory), 328

 Zurk = blue-eyed, dim-sighted, purblind, 164

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Changed ‘hog’ to ‘dog’ on p. 31.
 2. Changed ‘fainted’ to ‘feinted’ on p. 60.
 3. Changed ‘thy want’ to ‘thy wont’ on p. 60.
 4. Changed ‘put to the route’ to ‘put to the rout’ on p. 287.
 5. Added missing target for footnote on p. 301.
 6. Changed ‘They son’ to ‘Thy son’ on p. 444.
 7. Silently corrected simple spelling, grammar, and typographical
    errors.
 8. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
 9. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — VOLUME 07 (OF 10) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night — Volume 08 (of 10)
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night — Volume 08 (of 10)

Translator: Sir Richard Francis Burton


        
Release date: July 11, 2017 [eBook #55091]
                Most recently updated: May 23, 2025

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/55091

Credits: Produced by Richard Tonsing, Richard Hulse and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — VOLUME 08 (OF 10) ***

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: ’لا]

                   “TO THE PURE ALL THINGS ARE PURE.”
                           (Puris omnia pura)

                                                        —_Arab Proverb._

          “Niuna corrotta mente intese mai sanamente parole.”

                                            —“_Decameron_”—_conclusion_.

              “Erubuit, posuitque meum Lucretia librum
                  Sed coram Bruto. Brute! recede, leget.”

                                                             —_Martial._

            “Mieulx est de ris que de larmes escripre,
                Pour ce que rire est le propre des hommes.”

                                                              —RABELAIS.

“The pleasure we derive from perusing the Thousand-and-One Stories makes
us regret that we possess only a comparatively small part of these truly
enchanting fictions.”

                                      —CRICHTON’S “_History of Arabia_.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

_A PLAIN AND LITERAL TRANSLATION OF THE ARABIAN NIGHTS ENTERTAINMENTS.
NOW ENTITULED_




                           _THE BOOK OF THE_
                      Thousand Nights and a Night

   _WITH INTRODUCTION EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF
    MOSLEM MEN AND A TERMINAL ESSAY UPON THE HISTORY OF THE NIGHTS_

                              VOLUME VIII.


                                   BY
                           RICHARD F. BURTON

[Illustration]

        PRINTED BY THE BURTON CLUB FOR PRIVATE SUBSCRIBERS ONLY

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            Shammar Edition

Limited to one thousand numbered sets, of which this is

                              Number _547_




                          PRINTED IN U. S. A.




                              A MESSAGE TO

                           Frederick Hankey,

                FORMERLY OF NO. 2, RUE LAFFITTE, PARIS.


            MY DEAR FRED,

            If there be such a thing as “continuation,” you
            will see these lines in the far Spirit-land
            and you will find that your old friend has not
            forgotten you and Annie.

                                          RICHARD F. BURTON.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                     CONTENTS OF THE EIGHTH VOLUME.


                                                                    PAGE

     _a._ STORY OF PRINCE SAYF AL-MULUK AND THE PRINCESS BADI’A
       AL-JAMAL (Continued)                                            1

 (_Lane, III. 308. The Story of Seif El-Mulook and Badeea El-Jamal, with
            the Introduction transferred to a note p. 372._)

 HASAN OF BASSORAH                                                     7

          (_Lane, III. 335. The Story of Hasan of El-Basrah_).

 KHALIFAH THE FISHERMAN OF BAGHDAD                                   145

        (_Lane, IV. 527. The Story of Khaleefeh the Fisherman._)

 NOTE. THE SAME FROM THE BRESLAU EDITION (IV. 318)                   184

 MASRUR AND ZAYN AL-MAWASIF                                          205

                        (_Lane, III. 573. Note._)

 ALI NUR AL-DIN AND MIRIAM THE GIRDLE-GIRL                           264

                        (_Lane omits, III. 572._)


      Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the old
Queen heard the handmaid’s words she was wroth with sore wrath because
of her and cried, “How shall there be accord between man and Jinn?” But
Sayf al-Muluk replied, “Indeed, I will conform to thy will and be thy
page and die in thy love and will keep with thee covenant and regard
none but thee: so right soon shalt thou see my truth and lack of
falsehood and the excellence of my manly dealing with thee, Inshallah!”
The old woman pondered for a full hour with brow earthwards bent; after
which she raised her head and said to him, “O thou beautiful youth, wilt
thou indeed keep compact and covenant?” He replied, “Yes, by Him who
raised the heavens and dispread the earth upon the waters, I will indeed
keep faith and troth!” Thereupon quoth she, “I will win for thee thy
wish, Inshallah! but for the present go thou into the garden and take
thy pleasure therein and eat of its fruits, that have neither like in
the world nor equal, whilst I send for my son Shahyal and confabulate
with him of the matter. Nothing but good shall come of it, so Allah
please, for he will not gainsay me nor disobey my commandment and I will
marry thee with his daughter Badi’a al-Jamal. So be of good heart for
she shall assuredly be thy wife, O Sayf al-Muluk.” The Prince thanked
her for those words and kissing her hands and feet, went forth from her
into the garden; whilst she turned to Marjanah and said to her, “Go seek
my son Shahyal wherever he is and bring him to me.” So Marjanah went out
in quest of King Shahyal and found him and set him before his mother. On
such wise fared it with them; but as regards Sayf al-Muluk, whilst he
walked in the garden, lo and behold! five Jinn of the people of the Blue
King espied him and said to one another, “Whence cometh yonder wight and
who brought him hither? Haply ’tis he who slew the son and heir of our
lord and master the Blue King;” presently adding, “But we will go about
with him and question him and find out all from him.” So they walked
gently and softly up to him, as he sat in a corner of the garden, and
sitting down by him, said to him, “O beauteous youth, thou didst right
well in slaying the son of the Blue King and delivering from him Daulat
Khatun; for he was a treacherous hound and had tricked her, and had not
Allah appointed thee to her, she had never won free; no, never! But how
diddest thou slay him?” Sayf al-Muluk looked at them and deeming them of
the garden-folk, answered, “I slew him by means of this ring which is on
my finger.” Therewith they were assured that it was he who had slain
him; so they seized him, two of them holding his hands, whilst other two
held his feet and the fifth his mouth, lest he should cry out and King
Shahyal’s people should hear him and rescue him from their hands. Then
they lifted him up and flying away with him ceased not their flight till
they came to their King and set him down before him, saying, “O King of
the Age, we bring thee the murderer of thy son.” “Where is he?” asked
the King and they answered, “This is he.” So the Blue King said to Sayf
al-Muluk, “How slewest thou my son, the core of my heart and the light
of my sight, without aught of right, for all he had done thee no ill
deed?” Quoth the Prince, “Yea, verily! I slew him because of his
violence and frowardness, in that he used to seize Kings’ daughters and
sever them from their families and carry them to the Ruined Well and the
High-builded Castle of Japhet son of Noah and entreat them lewdly by
debauching them. I slew him by means of this ring on my finger, and
Allah hurried his soul to the fire and the abiding-place dire.”
Therewithal the King was assured that this was indeed he who slew his
son; so presently he called his Wazirs and said to them, “This is the
murtherer of my son sans shadow of doubt: so how do you counsel me to
deal with him? Shall I slay him with the foulest slaughter or torture
him with the terriblest torments or how?” Quoth the Chief Minister, “Cut
off his limbs, one a day.” Another, “Beat him with a grievous beating
every day till he die.” A third, “Cut him across the middle.” A fourth,
“Chop off all his fingers and burn him with fire.” A fifth, “Crucify
him;” and so on, each speaking according to his rede. Now there was with
the Blue King an old Emir, versed in the vicissitudes and experienced in
the exchanges of the times, and he said, “O King of the Age, verily I
would say to thee somewhat, and thine is the rede whether thou wilt
hearken or not to my say.” Now he was the King’s privy Councillor and
the Chief Officer of his empire, and the sovran was wont to give ear to
his word and conduct himself by his counsel and gainsay him not in
aught. So he rose and kissing ground before his liege lord, said to him,
“O King of the Age, if I advise thee in this matter, wilt thou follow my
advice and grant me indemnity?” Quoth the King, “Set forth thine
opinion, and thou shalt have immunity.” Then quoth he, “O King of the
Age, an thou slay this one nor accept my advice nor hearken to my word,
in very sooth I say that his death were now inexpedient, for that he is
thy prisoner and in thy power, and under thy protection; so whenas thou
wilt, thou mayst lay hand on him and do with him what thou desirest.
Have patience, then, O King of the Age, for he hath entered the garden
of Iram and is become the betrothed of Badi’a al-Jamal, daughter of King
Shahyal, and one of them. Thy people seized him there and brought him
hither and he did not hide his case from them or from thee. So an thou
slay him, assuredly King Shahyal will seek blood-revenge and lead his
host against thee for his daughter’s sake, and thou canst not cope with
him nor make head against his power.” So the King hearkened to his
counsel and commanded to imprison the captive. Thus fared it with Sayf
al-Muluk; but as regards the old Queen, grandmother of Badi’a al-Jamal,
when her son Shahyal came to her she despatched Marjanah in search of
Sayf al-Muluk; but she found him not and returning to her mistress,
said, “I found him not in the garden.” So the ancient dame sent for the
gardeners and questioned them of the Prince. Quoth they, “We saw him
sitting under a tree when behold, five of the Blue King’s folk alighted
by him and spoke with him, after which they took him up and having
gagged him flew away with him.” When the old Queen heard the damsel’s
words it was no light matter to her and she was wroth with exceeding
wrath: so she rose to her feet and said to her son, King Shahyal, “Art a
King and shall the Blue King’s people come to our garden and carry off
our guests unhindered, and thou alive?” And she proceeded to provoke
him, saying, “It behoveth not that any transgress against us during
_thy_ lifetime.”[1] Answered he, “O mother of me, this man slew the Blue
King’s son, who was a Jinni and Allah threw him into his hand. He is a
Jinni and I am a Jinni: how then shall I go to him and make war on him
for the sake of a mortal?” But she rejoined, “Go to him and demand our
guest of him, and if he be still alive and the Blue King deliver him to
thee, take him and return; but an he have slain him, take the King and
all his children and Hiram and household depending on him; then bring
them to me alive that I may cut their throats with my own hand and lay
in ruins his reign. Except thou go to him and do my bidding, I will not
acquit thee of my milk and my rearing of thee shall be counted
unlawful.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


      Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the grandmother of
Badi’a al-Jamal said to Shahyal, “Fare thee to the Blue King and look
after Sayf al-Muluk: if he be still in life come with him hither; but an
he have slain him take that King and all his children and Harim and the
whole of his dependents and protégés and bring them here alive that I
may cut their throats with my own hand and ruin his realm. Except thou
go to him and do my bidding, I will not acquit thee of my milk and my
rearing of thee shall be accounted unlawful.” Thereupon Shahyal rose and
assembling his troops, set out, in deference to his mother, desiring to
content her and her friends, and in accordance with whatso had been
foreordained from eternity without beginning; nor did they leave
journeying till they came to the land of the Blue King, who met them
with his army and gave them battle. The Blue King’s host was put to the
rout and the conquerors having taken him and all his sons, great and
small, and Grandees and officers bound and brought them before King
Shahyal, who said to the captive, “O Azrak,[2] where is the mortal Sayf
al-Muluk who whilome was my guest?” Answered the Blue King, “O Shahyal,
thou art a Jinni and I am a Jinni and is’t on account of a mortal who
slew my son that thou hast done this deed; yea, the murtherer of my son,
the core of my liver and solace of my soul. How couldest thou work such
work and spill the blood of so many thousand Jinn?” He replied, “Leave
this talk! Knowest thou not that a single mortal is better, in Allah’s
sight, than a thousand Jinn?[3] If he be alive, bring him to me, and I
will set thee free and all whom I have taken of thy sons and people; but
an thou have slain him, I will slaughter thee and thy sons.” Quoth the
Malik al-Azrak, “O King, is this man of more account with thee than my
son?” and quoth Shahyal, “Verily, thy son was an evildoer who kidnapped
Kings’ daughters and shut them up in the Ruined Well and the
High-builded Castle of Japhet son of Noah and entreated them lewdly.”
Then said the Blue King, “He is with me; but make thou peace between
us.” So he delivered the Prince to Shahyal, who made peace between him
and the Blue King, and Al-Azrak gave him a bond of absolution for the
death of his son. Then Shahyal conferred robes of honour on them and
entertained the Blue King and his troops hospitably for three days,
after which he took Sayf al-Muluk and carried him back to the old Queen,
his own mother, who rejoiced in him with an exceeding joy, and Shahyal
marvelled at the beauty of the Prince and his loveliness and his
perfection. Then the Prince related to him his story from beginning to
end, especially what did befel him with Badi’a al-Jamal and Shahyal
said, “O my mother, since ’tis thy pleasure that this should be, I hear
and I obey all that to command it pleaseth thee; wherefore do thou take
him and bear him to Sarandib and there celebrate his wedding and marry
him to her in all state, for he is a goodly youth and hath endured
horrors for her sake.” So she and her maidens set out with Sayf al-Muluk
for Sarandib and, entering the Garden belonging to the Queen of Hind,
foregathered with Daulat Khatun and Badi’a al-Jamal. Then the lovers
met, and the old Queen acquainted the two Princesses with all that had
passed between Sayf al-Muluk and the Blue King and how the Prince had
been nearhand to a captive’s death; but in repetition is no fruition.
Then King Taj al-Muluk father of Daulat Khatun assembled the lords of
his land and drew up the contract of marriage between Sayf al-Muluk and
Badi’a al-Jamal; and he conferred costly robes of honour and gave
banquets to the lieges. Then Sayf al-Muluk rose and, kissing ground
before the King, said to him, “O King, pardon! I would fain ask of thee
somewhat but I fear lest thou refuse it to my disappointment.” Taj
al-Muluk replied, “By Allah, though thou soughtest my soul of me, I
would not refuse it to thee, after all the kindness thou hast done me!”
Quoth Sayf al-Muluk, “I wish thee to marry the Princess Daulat Khatun to
my brother Sa’id, and we will both be thy pages.” “I hear and obey,”
answered Taj al-Muluk, and assembling his Grandees a second time, let
draw up the contract of marriage between his daughter and Sa’id; after
which they scattered gold and silver and the King bade decorate the
city. So they held high festival and Sayf al-Muluk went in unto Badi’a
al-Jamal and Sa’id went in unto Daulat Khatun on the same night.
Moreover Sayf al-Muluk abode forty days with Badi’a al-Jamal, at the end
of which she said to him, “O King’s son, say me, is there left in thy
heart any regret for aught?” And he replied, “Allah forfend! I have
accomplished my quest and there abideth no regret in my heart at all:
but I would fain meet my father and my mother in the land of Egypt and
see if they continue in welfare or not.” So she commanded a company of
her slaves to convey them to Egypt, and they carried them to Cairo,
where Sayf al-Muluk and Sa’id foregathered with their parents and abode
with them a week; after which they took leave of them and returned to
Sarandib-city; and from this time forwards, whenever they longed for
their folk, they used to go to them and return. Then Sayf al-Muluk and
Badi’a al-Jamal abode in all solace of life and its joyance as did Sa’id
and Daulat Khatun, till there came to them the Destroyer of delights and
Severer of Societies; and they all died good Moslems. So glory be to the
Living One who dieth not, who createth all creatures and decreeth to
them death and who is the First, without beginning, and the Last,
without end! This is all that hath come down to us of the story of Sayf
al-Muluk and Badi’a al-Jamal. And Allah alone wotteth the truth.[4] But
not less excellent than this tale is the History of

[Illustration: A. Lalauze, Pinx. et Sc.]

-----

Footnote 1:

  Ironicè; we are safe as long as we are defended by such a brave.

Footnote 2:

  Blue, azure. This is hardly the place for a protest, but I must not
  neglect the opportunity of cautioning my readers against rendering
  Bahr al-Azrak (“Blue River”) by “Blue Nile.” No Arab ever knew it by
  that name or thereby equalled it with the White Nile. The term was a
  pure invention of Abyssinian Bruce who was well aware of the unfact he
  was propagating, but his inordinate vanity and self-esteem,
  contrasting so curiously with many noble qualities, especially courage
  and self-reliance, tempted him to this and many other a traveller’s
  tale.

Footnote 3:

  This is orthodox Moslem doctrine and it does something for the dignity
  of human nature which has been so unwisely depreciated and degraded by
  Christianity. The contrast of Moslem dignity and Christian abasement
  in the East is patent to every unblind traveller.

Footnote 4:

  Here ends vol. iii. of the Mac. Edit.




                         HASAN OF BASSORAH.[5]


There was once of days of yore and in ages and times long gone before, a
merchant, who dwelt in the land of Bassorah and who owned two sons and
wealth galore. But in due time Allah, the All-hearing the All-knowing,
decreed that he should be admitted to the mercy of the Most High; so he
died, and his two sons laid him out and buried him, after which they
divided his gardens and estates equally between them and of his portion
each one opened a shop.[6] Presently the elder son, Hasan hight, a youth
of passing beauty and loveliness, symmetry and perfect grace, betook
himself to the company of lewd folk, women and low boys, frolicking with
them in gardens and feasting them with meat and wine for months together
and occupying himself not with his business like as his father had done,
for that he exulted in the abundance of his good. After some time he had
wasted all his ready money, so he sold all his father’s lands and houses
and played the wastrel until there remained in his hand nothing, neither
little nor muchel, nor was one of his comrades left who knew him. He
abode thus anhungred, he and his widowed mother, three days, and on the
fourth day, as he walked along, unknowing whither to wend, there met him
a man of his father’s friends, who questioned him of his case. He told
him what had befallen him and the other said, “O my son, I have a
brother who is a goldsmith; an thou wilt, thou shalt be with him and
learn his craft and become skilled therein.” Hasan consented and
accompanied him to his brother, to whom he commended him, saying, “In
very sooth this is my son; do thou teach him for my sake.” So Hasan
abode with the goldsmith and busied himself with the craft; and Allah
opened to him the door of gain and in due course he set up shop for
himself. One day, as he sat in his booth in the bazar, there came up to
him an ’Ajamí, a foreigner, a Persian, with a great white beard and a
white turband[7] on his head, having the semblance of a merchant who,
after saluting him, looked at his handiwork and examined it knowingly.
It pleased him and he shook his head, saying, “By Allah, thou art a
cunning goldsmith! What may be thy name?” “Hasan,” replied the other,
shortly.[8] The Persian continued to look at his wares, whilst Hasan
read in an old book[9] he hent in hand and the folk were taken up with
his beauty and loveliness and symmetry and perfect grace, till the hour
of mid-afternoon prayer, when the shop became clear of people and the
Persian accosted the young man, saying, “O my son, thou art a comely
youth! What book is that? Thou hast no sire and I have no son, and I
know an art, than which there is no goodlier in the world.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Persian
accosted the young man saying, “O my son, thou art a comely youth! Thou
hast no sire and I have no son, and I know an art than which there is no
goodlier in the world. Many have sought of me instruction therein, but I
consented not to instruct any of them in it; yet hath my soul consented
that I teach it to thee, for thy love hath gotten hold upon my heart and
I will make thee my son and set up between thee and poverty a barrier,
so shalt thou be quit of this handicraft and toil no more with hammer
and anvil,[10] charcoal and fire.” Hasan asked, “O my lord and when wilt
thou teach me this?”; and the Persian answered, “To-morrow, Inshallah, I
will come to thee betimes and make thee in thy presence fine gold of
this copper.” Whereupon Hasan rejoiced and sat talking with the Persian
till nightfall, when he took leave of him and going in to his mother,
saluted her with the salam and ate with her; but he was dazed, without
memory or reason, for that the stranger’s words had gotten hold upon his
heart. So she questioned him and he told her what had passed between
himself and the Persian, which when she heard, her heart fluttered and
she strained him to her bosom, saying, “O my son, beware of hearkening
to the talk of the folk, and especially of the Persians, and obey them
not in aught; for they are sharpers and tricksters, who profess the art
of alchemy[11] and swindle people and take their money and devour it in
vain.” Replied Hasan, “O my mother, we are paupers and have nothing he
may covet, that he should put a cheat on us. Indeed, this Persian is a
right worthy Shaykh and the signs of virtue are manifest on him; Allah
hath inclined his heart to me and he hath adopted me to son.” She was
silent in her chagrin, and he passed the night without sleep, his heart
being full of what the Persian had said to him; nor did slumber visit
him for the excess of his joy therein. But when morning morrowed, he
rose and taking the keys, opened the shop, whereupon behold, the Persian
accosted him. Hasan stood up to him and would have kissed his hands; but
he forbade him from this and suffered it not, saying, “O Hasan, set on
the crucible and apply the bellows.”[12] So he did as the stranger bade
him and lighted the charcoal. Then said the Persian, “O my son, hast
thou any copper?” and he replied, “I have a broken platter.” So he bade
him work the shears[13] and cut it into bittocks and cast it into the
crucible and blow up the fire with the bellows, till the copper became
liquid, when he put hand to turband and took therefrom a folded paper
and opening it, sprinkled thereout into the pot about half a drachm of
somewhat like yellow Kohl or eye-powder.[14] Then he bade Hasan blow
upon it with the bellows, and he did so, till the contents of the
crucible became a lump of gold.[15] When the youth saw this, he was
stupefied and at his wits’ end for the joy he felt and taking the ingot
from the crucible handled it and tried it with the file and found it
pure gold of the finest quality: whereupon his reason fled and he was
dazed with excess of delight and bent over the Persian’s hand to kiss
it. But he forbade him, saying, “Art thou married?” and when the youth
replied “No!” he said, “Carry this ingot to the market and sell it and
take the price in haste and speak not.” So Hasan went down into the
market and gave the bar to the broker, who took it and rubbed it upon
the touchstone and found it pure gold. So they opened the biddings at
ten thousand dirhams and the merchants bid against one another for it up
to fifteen thousand dirhams,[16] at which price he sold it and taking
the money, went home and told his mother all that had passed, saying, “O
my mother, I have learnt this art and mystery.” But she laughed at him,
saying, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Eightieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasan
the goldsmith told his mother what he had done with the Ajami and cried,
“I have learnt this art and mystery,” she laughed at him, saying, “There
is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the
Great!”; and she was silent for vexation. Then of his ignorance, he took
a metal mortar and returning to the shop, laid it before the Persian,
who was still sitting there and who asked him, “O my son, what wilt thou
do with this mortar?” Hasan answered, “Let us put it in the fire, and
make of it lumps of gold.” The Persian laughed and rejoined, “O my son,
art thou Jinn-mad that thou wouldst go down into the market with two
ingots of gold in one day? Knowest thou not that the folk would suspect
us and our lives would be lost? Now, O my son, an I teach thee this
craft, thou must practise it but once in each twelvemonth; for that will
suffice thee from year to year.” Cried Hasan, “True, O my lord,” and
sitting down in his open shop, set on the crucible and cast more
charcoal on the fire. Quoth the Persian, “What wilt thou, O my son?”;
and quoth Hasan, “Teach me this craft.” “There is no Majesty and there
is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!” exclaimed the
Persian, laughing; “Verily, O my son, thou art little of wit and in
nowise fitted for this noble craft. Did ever any during all his life
learn this art on the beaten way or in the bazars? If we busy ourselves
with it here, the folk will say of us, These practise alchemy; and the
magistrates will hear of us, and we shall lose our lives.[17] Wherefore,
O my son, an thou desire to learn this mystery forthright, come thou
with me to my house.” So Hasan barred his shop and went with that Ajami;
but by the way he remembered his mother’s words and thinking in himself
a thousand thoughts he stood still, with bowed head. The Persian turned
and seeing him thus standing laughed and said to him, “Art thou mad?
What! I in my heart purpose thee good and thou misdoubtest I will harm
thee!” presently adding, “But, if thou fear to go with me to my house, I
will go with thee to thine and teach thee there.” Hasan replied, “’Tis
well, O uncle,” and the Persian rejoined, “Go thou before me.” So Hasan
led the way to his own house, and entering, told his mother of the
Persian’s coming, for he had left him standing at the door. She ordered
the house for them and when she had made an end of furnishing and
adorning it, her son bade her go to one of the neighbours’ lodgings. So
she left her home to them and wended her way, whereupon Hasan brought in
the Persian, who entered after asking leave. Then he took in hand a dish
and going to the market, returned with food, which he set before the
Persian, saying, “Eat, O my lord, that between us there may be bread and
salt and may Almighty Allah do vengeance upon the traitor to bread and
salt!” The Persian replied with a smile, “True, O my son! Who knoweth
the virtue and worth of bread and salt?”[18] Then he came forward and
ate with Hasan, till they were satisfied; after which the Ajami said, “O
my son Hasan, bring us somewhat of sweetmeats.” So Hasan went to the
market, rejoicing in his words, and returned with ten saucers[19] of
sweetmeats, of which they both ate and the Persian said, “May Allah
abundantly requite thee, O my son! It is the like of thee with whom folk
company and to whom they discover their secrets and teach what may
profit him!”[20] Then said he, “O Hasan bring the gear.” But hardly did
Hasan hear these words than he went forth like a colt let out to grass
in spring-tide, and hastening to the shop, fetched the apparatus and set
it before the Persian, who pulled out a piece of paper and said, “O
Hasan, by the bond of bread and salt, wert thou not dearer to me than my
son, I would not let thee into the mysteries of this art, for I have
none of the Elixir[21] left save what is in this paper; but by and by I
will compound the simples whereof it is composed and will make it before
thee. Know, O my son Hasan, that to every ten pounds of copper thou must
set half a drachm of that which is in this paper, and the whole ten will
presently become unalloyed virgin gold;” presently adding, “O my son, O
Hasan, there are in this paper three ounces,[22] Egyptian measure, and
when it is spent, I will make thee other and more.” Hasan took the
packet and finding therein a yellow powder, finer than the first, said
to the Persian, “O my lord, what is the name of this substance and where
is it found and how is it made?” But he laughed, longing to get hold of
the youth, and replied, “Of what dost thou question? Indeed thou art a
froward boy! Do thy work and hold thy peace.” So Hasan arose and
fetching a brass platter from the house, shore it in shreds and threw it
into the melting-pot; then he scattered on it a little of the powder
from the paper and it became a lump of pure gold. When he saw this, he
joyed with exceeding joy and was filled with amazement and could think
of nothing save the gold; but, whilst he was occupied with taking up the
lumps of metal from the melting-pot, the Persian pulled out of his
turband in haste a packet of Cretan Bhang, which if an elephant smelt,
he would sleep from night to night, and cutting off a little thereof,
put it in a piece of the sweetmeat. Then said he, “O Hasan, thou art
become my very son and dearer to me than soul and wealth, and I have a
daughter whose like never have eyes beheld for beauty and loveliness,
symmetry and perfect grace. Now I see that thou befittest none but her
and she none but thee; wherefore, if it be Allah’s will, I will marry
thee to her.” Replied Hasan, “I am thy servant and whatso good thou dost
with me will be a deposit with the Almighty!” and the Persian rejoined,
“O my son, have fair patience and fair shall betide thee.” Therewith he
gave him the piece of sweetmeat and he took it and kissing his hand, put
it in his mouth, knowing not what was hidden for him in the after time
for only the Lord of Futurity knoweth the Future. But hardly had he
swallowed it, when he fell down, head foregoing heels, and was lost to
the world; whereupon the Persian, seeing him in such calamitous case,
rejoiced exceedingly and cried, “Thou has fallen into my snares, O
gallows-carrion, O dog of the Arabs! This many a year have I sought thee
and now I have found thee, O Hasan!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Eighty-first Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasan the
goldsmith ate the bit of sweetmeat given to him by the Ajami and fell
fainting to the ground, the Persian rejoiced exceedingly and cried,
“This many a year have I sought thee and now I have found thee!” Then he
girt himself and pinioned Hasan’s arms and binding his feet to his hands
laid him in a chest, which he emptied to that end and locked it upon
him. Moreover, he cleared another chest and laying therein all Hasan’s
valuables, together with the piece of the first gold-lump and the second
ingot which he had made locked it with a padlock. Then he ran to the
market and fetching a porter, took up the two chests and made off with
them to a place within sight of the city, where he set them down on the
sea-shore, hard by a vessel at anchor there. Now this craft had been
freighted and fitted out by the Persian and her master was awaiting him;
so, when the crew saw him, they came to him and bore the two chests on
board. Then the Persian called out to the Rais or Captain, saying, “Up
and let us be off, for I have done my desire and won my wish.” So the
skipper sang out to the sailors, saying, “Weigh anchor and set sail!”
And the ship put out to sea with a fair wind. So far concerning the
Persian; but as regards Hasan’s mother, she awaited him till supper-time
but heard neither sound nor news of him; so she went to the house and
finding it thrown open, entered and saw none therein and missed the two
chests and their valuables; wherefore she knew that her son was lost and
that doom had overtaken him; and she buffeted her face and rent her
raiment crying out and wailing and saying, “Alas, my son, ah! Alas, the
fruit of my vitals, ah!” And she recited these couplets:—

 My patience fails me and grows anxiety; ✿ And with your absence growth
    of grief I see.
 By Allah, Patience went what time ye went! ✿ Loss of all Hope how suffer
    patiently?
 When lost my loved one how can’ joy I sleep? ✿ Who shall enjoy such life
    of low degree?
 Thou’rt gone and, desolating house and home, ✿ Hast fouled the fount
    erst flowed from foulness free:
 Thou wast my fame, my grace ’mid folk, my stay; ✿ Mine aid wast thou in
    all adversity!
 Perish the day, when from mine eyes they bore ✿ My friend, till sight I
    thy return to me!

And she ceased not to weep and wail till the dawn, when the neighbours
came in to her and asked her of her son, and she told them what had
befallen him with the Persian, assured that she should never, never see
him again. Then she went round about the house, weeping, and wending she
espied two lines written upon the wall; so she sent for a scholar, who
read them to her; and they were these:—

 Leyla’s phantom came by night, when drowsiness had overcome me, towards
    morning while my companions were sleeping in the desert,
 But when we awoke to behold the nightly phantom, I saw the air vacant
    and the place of visitation was distant.[23]

When Hasan’s mother heard these lines, she shrieked and said, “Yes, O my
son! Indeed, the house is desolate and the visitation-place is distant!”
Then the neighbours took leave of her and after they had prayed that she
might be vouchsafed patience and speedy reunion with her son went away;
but she ceased not to weep all watches of the night and tides of the day
and she built amiddlemost the house a tomb whereon she let write Hasan’s
name and the date of his loss, and thenceforward she quitted it not, but
made a habit of incessantly biding thereby night and day. Such was her
case; but touching her son Hasan and the Ajami, this Persian was a
Magian, who hated Moslems with exceeding hatred and destroyed all who
fell into his power. He was a lewd and filthy villain, a hankerer after
alchemy, an astrologer and a hunter of hidden hoards, such an one as he
of whom quoth the poet:—

 A dog, dog-fathered, by dog-grandsire bred; ✿ No good in dog from dog
    race issued:
 E’en for a gnat no resting-place gives he ✿ Who is composed of seed by
    all men shed.[24]

The name of this accursed was Bahrám the Guebre, and he was wont, every
year, to take a Moslem and cut his throat for his own purposes. So, when
he had carried out his plot against Hasan the goldsmith, they sailed on
from dawn till dark, when the ship made fast to the shore for the night,
and at sunrise, when they set sail again, Bahram bade his black slaves
and white servants bring him the chest wherein were Hasan. They did so,
and he opened it and taking out the young man, made him sniff up vinegar
and blew a powder into his nostrils. Hasan sneezed and vomited the
Bhang; then, opening his eyes, he looked about him right and left and
found himself amiddleward the sea on aboard a ship in full sail, and saw
the Persian sitting by him; wherefore he knew that the accursed Magian
had put a cheat on him and that he had fallen into the very peril
against which his mother had warned him. So he spake the saying which
shall never shame the sayer, to wit, “There is no Majesty and there is
no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! Verily, we are Allah’s
and unto Him we are returning! O my God, be Thou gracious to me in Thine
appointment and give me patience to endure this Thine affliction, O Lord
of the three Worlds!” Then he turned to the Persian and bespoke him
softly, saying, “O my father, what fashion is this and where is the
covenant of bread and salt and the oath thou swarest to me?” But Bahram
stared at him and replied, “O dog, knoweth the like of me bond of bread
and salt? I have slain of youths like thee a thousand, save one, and
thou shalt make up the thousand.” And he cried out at him and Hasan was
silent, knowing that the Fate-shaft had shot him.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Eighty-second Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasan
beheld himself fallen into the hands of the damned Persian he bespoke
him softly but gained naught thereby for the Ajami cried out at him in
wrath, so he was silent, knowing that the Fate-shaft had shot him. Then
the accursed bade loose his pinion-bonds and they gave him a little
water to drink, whilst the Magian laughed and said, “By the virtue of
the Fire and the Light and the Shade and the Heat, methought not thou
wouldst fall into my nets! But the Fire empowered me over thee and
helped me to lay hold upon thee, that I might win my wish and return and
make thee a sacrifice[25], to her[26] so she may accept of me.” Quoth
Hasan, “Thou hast foully betrayed bread and salt”; whereupon the Magus
raised his hand and dealt him such a buffet that he fell and, biting the
deck with his fore-teeth, swooned away, whilst the tears trickled down
his cheeks. Then the Guebre bade his servants light him a fire and Hasan
said, “What wilt thou do with it?” Replied the Magian, “This is the
Fire, lady of light and sparkles bright! This it is I worship, and if
thou wilt worship her even as I, verily I will give thee half my monies
and marry thee to my maiden daughter.” Thereupon Hasan cried angrily at
him, “Woe to thee! Thou art a miscreant Magian who to Fire dost pray in
lieu of the King of Omnipotent sway, Creator of Night and Day; and this
is naught but a calamity among creeds!” At this the Magian was wroth and
said to him, “Wilt thou not then conform with me, O dog of the Arabs,
and enter my faith?” But Hasan consented not to this: so the accursed
Guebre arose and prostrating himself to the fire, bade his pages throw
him flat on his face. They did so, and he beat him with a hide whip of
plaited thongs[27] till his flanks were laid open, whilst he cried aloud
for aid but none aided him, and besought protection, but none protected
him. Then he raised his eyes to the All-powerful King and sought of Him
succour in the name of the Chosen Prophet. And indeed patience failed
him; his tears ran down his cheeks, like rain, and he repeated these
couplets twain:—

 In patience, O my God, Thy doom forecast ✿ I’ll bear, an thereby come
    Thy grace at last:
 They’ve dealt us wrong, transgressed and ordered ill; ✿ Haply Thy Grace
    shall pardon what is past.

Then the Magian bade his negro-slaves raise him to a sitting posture and
bring him somewhat of meat and drink. So they sat food before him; but
he consented not to eat or drink; and Bahram ceased not to torment him
day and night during the whole voyage, whilst Hasan took patience and
humbled himself in supplication before Almighty Allah to whom belong
Honour and Glory; whereby the Guebre’s heart was hardened against him.
They ceased not to sail the sea three months, during which time Hasan
was continually tortured till Allah Almighty sent forth upon them a foul
wind and the sea grew black and rose against the ship, by reason of the
fierce gale; whereupon quoth the captain and crew,[28] “By Allah, this
is all on account of yonder youth, who hath been these three months in
torture with this Magian. Indeed, this is not allowed of God the Most
High.” Then they rose against the Magian and slew his servants and all
who were with him; which when he saw, he made sure of death and feared
for himself. So he loosed Hasan from his bonds and pulling off the
ragged clothes the youth had on, clad him in others; and made excuses to
him and promised to teach him the craft and restore him to his native
land, saying, “O my son, return me not evil for that I have done with
thee.” Quoth Hasan, “How can I ever rely upon thee again?”; and quoth
Bahram, “O my son, but for sin, there were no pardon. Indeed, I did all
these doings with thee, but to try thy patience, and thou knowest that
the case is altogether in the hands of Allah.” So the crew and captain
rejoiced in Hasan’s release, and he called down blessings on them and
praised the Almighty and thanked Him. With this the wind was stilled and
the sky cleared and with a fair breeze they continued their voyage. Then
said Hasan to Bahram, “O Master,[29] whither wendest thou?” Replied the
Magian, “O my son, I am bound for the Mountain of Clouds, where is the
Elixir which we use in alchemy.” And the Guebre swore to him by the Fire
and the Light that he had no longer any cause to fear him. So Hasan’s
heart was set at ease and rejoicing at the Persian’s words, he continued
to eat and drink and sleep with the Magian, who clad him in his own
raiment. They ceased not sailing on other three months, when the ship
came to anchor off a long shoreline of many-coloured pebbles, white and
yellow and sky-blue and black and every other hue, and the Magian sprang
up and said, “O Hasan, come, let us go ashore for we have reached the
place of our wish and will.” So Hasan rose and landed with Bahram, after
the Persian had commended his goods to the captain’s care. They walked
on inland, till they were far enough from the ship to be out of sight,
when Bahram sat down and taking from his pocket a kettle-drum[30] of
copper and a silken strap, worked in gold with characts, beat the drum
with the strap, until there arose a cloud of dust from the further side
of the waste. Hasan marvelled at the Magian’s doings and was afraid of
him: he repented of having come ashore with him and his colour changed.
But Bahram looked at him and said, “What aileth thee, O my son? By the
truth of the Fire and the Light, thou hast naught to fear from me; and,
were it not that my wish may never be won save by thy means, I had not
brought thee ashore. So rejoice in all good; for yonder cloud of dust is
the dust of somewhat we will mount and which will aid us to cut across
this wold and make easy to us the hardships thereof.”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Eighty-third Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Persian
said to Hasan, “In very sooth yonder dust-cloud is the cloud of
something we will mount and which will aid us to cut across this wold
and will make easy to us the hardships thereof.” Presently the dust
lifted off three she-dromedaries, one of which Bahram mounted and Hasan
another. Then they loaded their victual on the third and fared on seven
days, till they came to a wide champaign and, descending into its midst,
they saw a dome vaulted upon four pilasters of red gold; so they
alighted and entering thereunder, ate and drank and took their rest.
Anon Hasan chanced to glance aside and seeing from afar a something
lofty said to the Magian, “What is that, O nuncle?” Bahram replied,
“’Tis a palace,” and quoth Hasan, “Wilt thou not go thither, that we may
enter and there repose ourselves and solace ourselves with inspecting
it?” But the Persian was wroth and said, “Name not to me yonder palace;
for therein dwelleth a foe, with whom there befel me somewhat whereof
this is no time to tell thee.” Then he beat the kettle-drum and up came
the dromedaries, and they mounted and fared on other seven days. On the
eighth day, the Magian said, “O Hasan, what seest thou?” Hasan replied,
“I see clouds and mists twixt east and west.” Quoth Bahram, “That is
neither clouds nor mists, but a vast mountain and a lofty whereon the
clouds split,[31] and there are no clouds above it, for its exceeding
height and surpassing elevation. Yon mount is my goal and thereon is the
need we seek. ’Tis for that I brought thee hither, for my wish may not
be won save at thy hands.” Hasan hearing this gave his life up for lost
and said to the Magian, “By the right of that thou worshippest and by
the faith wherein thou believest, I conjure thee to tell me what is the
object wherefor thou hast brought me!” Bahram replied, “The art of
alchemy may not be accomplished save by means of a herb which groweth in
the place where the clouds pass and whereon they split. Such a site is
yonder mountain upon whose head the herb groweth and I purpose to send
thee up thither to fetch it; and when we have it, I will show thee the
secret of this craft which thou desirest to learn.” Hasan answered, in
his fear, “’Tis well, O my master;” and indeed he despaired of life and
wept for his parting from his parent and people and patrial stead
repenting him of having gainsaid his mother and reciting these two
couplets:—

 Consider but thy Lord, His work shall bring ✿ Comfort to thee, with
    quick relief and near:
 Despair not when thou sufferest sorest bane: ✿ In bane how many blessed
    boons appear!

They ceased not faring on till they came to the foot-hills of that
mountain where they halted; and Hasan saw thereon a palace and asked
Bahram, “What be yonder palace?”; whereto he answered, “’Tis the abode
of the Jann and Ghuls and Satans.” Then the Magian alighted and making
Hasan also dismount from his dromedary kissed his head and said to him,
“Bear me no ill will anent that I did with thee, for I will keep guard
over thee in thine ascent to the palace; and I conjure thee not to trick
and cheat me of aught thou shalt bring therefrom; and I and thou will
share equally therein.” And Hasan replied, “To hear is to obey.” Then
Bahram opened a bag and taking out a handmill and a sufficiency of
wheat, ground the grain and kneaded three round cakes of the flour;
after which he lighted a fire and baked the bannocks. Then he took out
the copper kettle-drum and beat it with the broidered strap, whereupon
up came the dromedaries. He chose out one and said, “Hearken, O my son,
O Hasan, to what I am about to enjoin on thee;” and Hasan replied, “’Tis
well.” Bahram continued, “Lie down on this skin and I will sew thee up
therein and lay thee on the ground; whereupon the Rakham birds[32] will
come to thee and carry thee up to the mountain-top. Take this knife with
thee; and, when thou feelest that the birds have done flying and have
set thee down, slit open therewith the skin and come forth. The vultures
will then take fright at thee and fly away; whereupon do thou look down
from the mountain head and speak to me, and I will tell thee what to
do.” So he sewed him up in the skin, placing therein three cakes and a
leathern bottle full of water, and withdrew to a distance. Presently a
vulture pounced upon him and taking him up, flew away with him to the
mountain-top and there set him down. As soon as Hasan felt himself on
the ground, he slit the skin and coming forth, called out to the Magian,
who hearing his speech rejoiced and danced for excess of joy, saying to
him, “Look behind thee and tell me what thou seest.” Hasan looked and
seeing many rotten bones and much wood, told Bahram, who said to him,
“This be what we need and seek. Make six bundles of the wood and throw
them down to me, for this is wherewithal we do alchemy.” So he threw him
the six bundles and when he had gotten them into his power he said to
Hasan, “O gallows bird, I have won my wish of thee; and now, if thou
wilt, thou mayst abide on this mountain, or cast thyself down to the
earth and perish.” So saying, he left him[33] and went away, and Hasan
exclaimed, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great! This hound hath played the traitor with me.” And he
sat bemoaning himself and reciting these couplets:—

 When God upon a man possessed of reasoning, Hearing and sight His will
    in aught to pass would bring,
 He stops his ears and blinds his eyes and draws his wit, From him, as
    one draws out the hairs to paste that cling;
 Till, His decrees fulfilled, He gives him back His wit, That therewithal
    he may receive admonishing.
 So say thou not of aught that haps, “How happened it?” For Fate and
    fortune fixed do order everything.[34]

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Magian
sent Hasan to the mountain-top and made him throw down all he required
he presently reviled him and left him and wended his ways and the youth
exclaimed, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great! This damned hound hath played the traitor.” Then he
rose to his feet and looked right and left, after which he walked on
along the mountain top, in mind making certain of death. He fared on
thus till he came to the counterslope of the mountain, along which he
saw a dark-blue sea, dashing with billows clashing and yeasting waves
each as it were a lofty mount. So he sat down and repeated what he might
of the Koran and besought Allah the Most High to ease him of his
troubles, or by death or by deliverance from such strait. Then he
recited for himself the funeral-prayer[35] and cast himself down into
the main; but, the waves bore him up by Allah’s grace, so that he
reached the water unhurt, and the angel in whose charge is the sea
watched over him, so that the billows bore him safe to land, by the
decree of the Most High. Thereupon he rejoiced and praised Almighty
Allah and thanked Him; after which he walked on in quest of something to
eat, for stress of hunger, and came presently to the place where he had
halted with the Magian, Bahram. Then he fared on awhile, till behold, he
caught sight of a great palace, rising high in air, and knew it for that
of which he had questioned the Persian and he had replied, “Therein
dwelleth a foe of mine.” Hasan said to himself, “By Allah, needs must I
enter yonder palace; perchance relief awaiteth me there.” So coming to
it and finding the gate open, he entered the vestibule, where he saw
seated on a bench two girls like twin moons with a chess-cloth before
them and they were at play. One of them raised her head to him and cried
out for joy saying, “By Allah, here is a son of Adam, and methinks ’tis
he whom Bahram the Magian brought hither this year!” So Hasan hearing
her words cast himself at their feet and wept with sore weeping and
said, “Yes, O my ladies, by Allah, I am indeed that unhappy.” Then said
the younger damsel to her elder sister, “Bear witness against me,[36] O
my sister, that this is my brother by covenant of Allah and that I will
die for his death and live for his life and joy for his joy and mourn
for his mourning.” So saying, she rose and embraced him and kissed him
and presently taking him by the hand and her sister with her, led him
into the palace, where she did off his ragged clothes and brought him a
suit of Kings’ raiment wherewith she arrayed him. Moreover, she made
ready all manner viands[37] and set them before him, and sat and ate
with him, she and her sister. Then said they to him, “Tell us thy tale
with yonder dog, the wicked, the wizard, from the time of thy falling
into his hands to that of thy freeing thee from him; and after we will
tell thee all that hath passed between us and him, so thou mayst be on
thy guard against him an thou see him again.” Hearing these words and
finding himself thus kindly received, Hasan took heart of grace and
reason returned to him and he related to them all that had befallen him
with the Magian from first to last. Then they asked, “Didst thou ask him
of this palace?”; and he answered, “Yes, but he said:—Name it not to me;
for it belongeth to Ghuls and Satans.” At this, the two damsels waxed
wroth with exceeding wrath and said, “Did that Miscreant style us Ghuls
and Satans?” And Hasan answered, “Yes.” Cried the younger sister, “By
Allah, I will assuredly do him die with the foulest death and make him
to lack the wind of the world!” Quoth Hasan, “And how wilt thou get at
him, to kill him, for he is a crafty magician?”; and quoth she, “He is
in a garden by name Al-Mushayyad,[38] and there is no help but that I
slay him before long.” Then said her sister, “Sooth spake Hasan in
everything he hath recounted to us of this cur; but now tell him our
tale, that all of it may abide in his memory.” So the younger said to
him, “Know, O my brother, that we are the daughters of a King of the
mightiest Kings of the Jann, having Marids for troops and guards and
servants, and Almighty Allah blessed him with seven daughters by one
wife; but of his folly such jealousy and stiff-neckedness and pride
beyond compare gat hold upon him that he would not give us in marriage
to any one and, summoning his Wazirs and Emirs, he said to them:—Can ye
tell me of any place untrodden by the tread of men and Jinn and
abounding in trees and fruits and rills? And quoth they, What wilt thou
therewith, O King of the Age? And quoth he, I desire there to lodge my
seven daughters. Answered they, O King, the place for them is the Castle
of the Mountain of Clouds, built by an Ifrit of the rebellious Jinn, who
revolted from the covenant of our lord Solomon, on whom be the Peace!
Since his destruction, none hath dwelt there, nor man nor Jinni, for
’tis cut off[39] and none may win to it. And the Castle is girt about
with trees and fruits and rills, and the water running around it is
sweeter than honey and colder than snow: none who is afflicted with
leprosy or elephantiasis[40] or what not else drinketh thereof but he is
healed forthright. Hearing this our father sent us hither, with an
escort of his troops and guards and provided us with all that we need
here. When he is minded to ride to us he beateth a kettle-drum,
whereupon all his hosts present themselves before him and he chooseth
whom he shall ride and dismisseth the rest; but, when he desireth that
we shall visit him, he commandeth his followers, the enchanters, to
fetch us and carry us to the presence; so he may solace himself with our
society and we accomplish our desire of him; after which they again
carry us back hither. Our five other sisters are gone a-hunting in our
desert, wherein are wild beasts past compt or calculation and, it being
our turn to do this we two abode at home, to make ready for them food.
Indeed, we had besought Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) to vouchsafe
us a son of Adam to cheer us with his company and praised be He who hath
brought thee to us! So be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and
clear, for no harm shall befal thee.” Hasan rejoiced and said,
“Alhamdolillah, laud to the Lord who guideth us into the path of
deliverance and inclineth hearts to us!” Then his sister[41] rose and
taking him by the hand, led him into a private chamber, where she
brought out to him linen and furniture that no mortal can avail unto.
Presently, the other damsels returned from hunting and birding and their
sisters acquainted them with Hasan’s case; whereupon they rejoiced in
him and going into him in his chamber, saluted him with the salam and
gave him joy of his safety. Then he abode with them in all the solace of
life and its joyance, riding out with them to the chase and taking his
pleasure with them whilst they entreated him courteously and cheered him
with converse, till his sadness ceased from him and he recovered health
and strength and his body waxed stout and fat, by dint of fair treatment
and pleasant time among the seven moons in that fair palace with its
gardens and flowers; for indeed he led the delightsomest of lives with
the damsels who delighted in him and he yet more in them. And they used
to give him drink of the honey-dew of their lips,[42] these beauties
with the high bosoms, adorned with grace and loveliness, the perfection
of brilliancy and in shape very symmetry. Moreover the youngest Princess
told her sisters how Bahram the Magian had made them of the Ghuls and
Demons and Satans,[43] and they sware that they would surely slay him.
Next year the accursed Guebre again made his appearance, having with him
a handsome young Moslem, as he were the moon, bound hand and foot and
tormented with grievous tortures, and alighted with him below the
palace-walls. Now Hasan was sitting under the trees by the side of the
stream; and when he espied Bahram, his heart fluttered,[44] his hue
changed and he smote hand upon hand.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasan the
goldsmith saw the Magian, his heart fluttered, his hue changed and he
smote hand upon hand. Then he said to the Princesses, “O my sisters,
help me to the slaughter of this accursed, for here he is come back and
in your grasp, and he leadeth with him captive a young Moslem of the
sons of the notables, whom he is torturing with all manner grievous
torments. Lief would I kill him and console my heart of him; and, by
delivering the young Moslem from his mischief and restoring him to his
country and kith and kin and friends, fain would I lay up merit for the
world to come, by taking my wreak of him.[45] This will be an almsdeed
from you and ye will reap the reward thereof from Almighty Allah.” “We
hear and we obey Allah and thee, O our brother, O Hasan,” replied they
and binding chin-veils, armed themselves and slung on their swords:
after which they brought Hasan a steed of the best and equipped him in
panoply and weaponed him with goodly weapons. Then they all sallied out
and found the Magian who had slaughtered and skinned a camel ill-using
the young Moslem, and saying to him, “Sit thee in this hide.” So Hasan
came behind him, without his knowledge, and cried out at him till he was
dazed and amazed. Then he came up to him, saying, “Hold thy hand, O
accursed! O enemy of Allah and foe of the Moslems! O dog! O traitor! O
thou that flame dost obey! O thou that walkest in the wicked ones’ ways,
worshipping the fire and the light and swearing by the shade and the
heat!” Herewith the Magian turned and seeing Hasan, thought to wheedle
him and said to him, “O my son, how diddest thou escape and who brought
thee down to earth?” Hasan replied, “He delivered me, who hath appointed
the taking of thy life to be at my hand, and I will torture thee even as
thou torturest me the whole way long. O miscreant, O atheist,[46] thou
hast fallen into the twist and the way thou hast missed; and neither
mother shall avail thee nor brother, nor friend nor solemn covenant
shall assist thee; for thou saidst, O accursed, Whoso betrayeth bread
and salt, may Allah do vengeance upon him! And thou hast broken the bond
of bread and salt; wherefore the Almighty hath thrown thee into my
grasp, and far is thy chance of escape from me.” Rejoined Bahram, “By
Allah, O my son, O Hasan, thou art dearer to me than my sprite and the
light of mine eyes!” But Hasan stepped up to him and hastily smote him
between the shoulders, that the sword issued gleaming from his
throat-tendons and Allah hurried his soul to the fire, and abiding-place
dire. Then Hasan took the Magian’s bag and opened it, then having taken
out the kettle-drum he struck it with the strap, whereupon up came the
dromedaries like lightning. So he unbound the youth from his bonds and
setting him on one of the camels, loaded him another with victual and
water,[47] saying, “Wend whither thou wilt.” So he departed, after
Almighty Allah had thus delivered him from his strait at the hands of
Hasan. When the damsels saw their brother slay the Magian they joyed in
him with exceeding joy and gat round him, marvelling at his valour and
prowess;[48] and thanked him for his deed and gave him joy of his
safety, saying, “O Hasan thou hast done a deed, whereby thou hast healed
the burning of him that thirsteth for vengeance and pleased the King of
Omnipotence!” Then they returned to the palace, and he abode with them,
eating and drinking and laughing and making merry; and indeed his
sojourn with them was joyous to him and he forgot his mother;[49] but
while he led with them this goodly life one day, behold, there arose
from the further side of the desert a great cloud of dust that darkened
the welkin and made towards them. When the Princesses saw this, they
said to him, “Rise, O Hasan, run to thy chamber and conceal thyself; or
an thou wilt, go down into the garden and hide thyself among the trees
and vines; but fear not, for no harm shall befal thee.” So he arose and
entering his chamber, locked the door upon himself, and lay lurking in
the palace. Presently the dust opened out and showed beneath it a great
and conquering host, as it were a surging sea, coming from the King, the
father of the damsels. Now when the troops reached the castle, the
Princesses received them with all honour and hospitably entertained them
three days; after which they questioned them of their case and tidings
and they replied saying, “We come from the King in quest of you.” They
asked, “And what would the King with us?”; and the officers answered,
“One of the Kings maketh a marriage festival, and your father would have
you be present thereat and take your pleasure therewith.” The damsels
enquired, “And how long shall we be absent from our place?”; and they
rejoined, “The time to come and go, and to sojourn may be two months.”
So the Princesses arose and going in to the palace sought Hasan,
acquainted him with the case and said to him, “Verily this place is thy
place and our house is thy house; so be of good cheer and keep thine
eyes cool and clear and feel nor grief nor fear, for none can come at
thee here; but keep a good heart and a glad mind, till we return to
thee. The keys of our chambers we leave with thee; but, O our brother,
we beseech thee, by the bond of brotherhood, in very deed not to open
such a door, for thou hast no need thereto.” Then they farewelled him
and fared forth with the troops, leaving Hasan alone in the palace. It
was not long before his breast grew straitened and his patience
shortened: solitude and sadness were heavy on him and he sorrowed for
his severance from them with passing chagrin. The palace for all its
vastness, waxed small to him and finding himself sad and solitary, he
bethought him of the damsels and their pleasant converse and recited
these couplets:—

 The wide plain is narrowed before these eyes ✿ And the landscape
    troubles this heart of mine.
 Since my friends went forth, by the loss of them ✿ Joy fled and these
    eyelids rail floods of brine:
 Sleep shunned these eyeballs for parting woe ✿ And my mind is worn with
    sore pain and pine:
 Would I wot an Time shall rejoin our lots ✿ And the joys of love with
    night-talk combine.

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after the
departure of the damsels, Hasan sat in the palace sad and solitary and
his breast was straitened by severance. He used to ride forth a-hunting
by himself in the wold and bring back the game and slaughter it and eat
thereof alone: but melancholy and disquiet redoubled on him, by reason
of his loneliness. So he arose and went round about the palace and
explored its every part; he opened the Princesses’ apartments and found
therein riches and treasures fit to ravish the beholder’s reason; but he
delighted not in aught thereof, by reason of their absence. His heart
was fired by thinking of the door they had charged him not to approach
or open on any account and he said in himself, “My sister had never
enjoined me not to open this door, except there were behind it somewhat
whereof she would have none to know; but, by Allah, I will arise and
open it and see what is within, though within it were sudden death!”
Then he took the key and, opening the door,[50] saw therein no treasure
but he espied a vaulted and winding staircase of Yamani onyx at the
upper end of the chamber. So he mounted the stair, which brought him out
upon the terrace-roof of the palace, whence he looked down upon the
gardens and vergiers, full of trees and fruits and beasts and birds
warbling praises of Allah, the One, the All-powerful; and said in
himself “This is that they forbade to me.” He gazed upon these
pleasaunces and saw beyond a surging sea, dashing with clashing billows,
and he ceased not to explore the palace right and left, till he ended at
a pavilion builded with alternate courses, two bricks of gold and one of
silver and jacinth and emerald and supported by four columns. And in the
centre he saw a sitting-room paved and lined with a mosaic of all manner
precious stones such as rubies and emeralds and balasses and other
jewels of sorts; and in its midst stood a basin[51] brimful of water,
over which was a trellis-work of sandal-wood and aloes-wood reticulated
with rods of red gold and wands of emerald and set with various kinds of
jewels and fine pearls, each sized as a pigeon’s egg. The trellis was
covered with a climbing vine, bearing grapes like rubies, and beside the
basin stood a throne of lign-aloes latticed with red gold, inlaid with
great pearls and comprising vari-coloured gems of every sort and
precious minerals, each kind fronting each and symmetrically disposed.
About it the birds warbled with sweet tongues and various voices
celebrating the praises of Allah the Most High: brief, it was a palace
such as nor Cæsar nor Chosroës ever owned; but Hasan saw therein none of
the creatures of Allah, whereat he marvelled and said in himself, “I
wonder to which of the Kings this place pertaineth, or is it
Many-Columned Iram whereof they tell, for who among mortals can avail to
the like of this?” And indeed he was amazed at the spectacle and sat
down in the pavilion and cast glances around him marvelling at the
beauty of its ordinance and at the lustre of the pearls and jewels and
the curious works which therein were, no less than at the gardens and
orchards aforesaid and at the birds that hymned the praises of Allah,
the One, the Almighty; and he abode pondering the traces of him whom the
Most High had enabled to rear that structure, for indeed He is muchel of
might.[52] And presently, behold, he espied ten birds[53] flying towards
the pavilion from the heart of the desert and knew that they were making
the palace and bound for the basin, to drink of its waters: so he hid
himself, for fear they should see him and take flight. They lighted on a
great tree and a goodly and circled round about it; and he saw amongst
them a bird of marvel-beauty, the goodliest of them all, and the nine
stood around it and did it service; and Hasan marvelled to see it peck
them with its bill and lord it over them while they fled from it. He
stood gazing at them from afar as they entered the pavilion and perched
on the couch; after which each bird rent open its neck-skin with its
claws and issued out of it; and lo! it was but a garment of feathers,
and there came forth therefrom ten virgins, maids whose beauty shamed
the brilliancy of the moon. They all doffed their clothes and plunging
into the basin, washed and fell to playing and sporting one with other;
whilst the chief bird of them lifted up the rest and ducked them down,
and they fled from her and dared not put forth their hands to her. When
Hasan beheld her thus he took leave of his right reason and his sense
was enslaved, so he knew that the Princesses had not forbidden him to
open the door save because of this; for he fell passionately in love
with her, for what he saw of her beauty and loveliness, symmetry and
perfect grace, as she played and sported and splashed the others with
the water. He stood looking upon them whilst they saw him not, with eye
gazing and heart burning and soul[54] to evil prompting; and he sighed
to be with them and wept for longing, because of the beauty and
loveliness of the chief damsel. His mind was amazed at her charms and
his heart taken in the net of her love; lowe was loosed in his heart for
her sake and there waxed on him a flame, whose sparks might not be
quenched, and desire, whose signs might not be hidden. Presently, they
came up out of that basin, whilst Hasan marvelled at their beauty and
loveliness and the tokens of inner gifts in the elegance of their
movements. Then he cast a glance at the chief damsel who stood
mother-naked and there was manifest to him what was between her thighs a
goodly rounded dome on pillars borne, like a bowl of silver or crystal,
which recalled to him the saying of the poet:[55]—

 When I took up her shift and discovered the terrace-roof of her kaze, I
    found it as strait as my humour or eke my worldly ways:
 So I thrust it, incontinent, in, halfway, and she heaved a sigh. “For
    what dost thou sigh?” quoth I. “For the rest of it sure,” she says.

Then coming out of the water they all put on their dresses and
ornaments, and the chief maiden donned a green dress,[56] wherein she
surpassed for loveliness all the fair ones of the world and the lustre
of her face outshone the resplendent full moons: she excelled the
branches with the grace of her bending gait and confounded the wit with
apprehension of disdain; and indeed she was as saith the poet:[57]—

 A maiden ’twas, the dresser’s art had decked with cunning sleight;
 The sun thou ’d’st say had robbed her cheek and shone with borrowed
    light.
 She came to us apparelled fair in under vest of green,
 Like as the ripe pomegranate hides beneath its leafy screen;
 And when we asked her what might be the name of what she wore,
 She answered in a quaint reply that double meaning bore:
 The desert’s heart we penetrate in such apparel dressed,
 And _Pierce-heart_ therefore is the name by which we call the vest.

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


      Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Eighty-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasan
saw the damsels issue forth the basin, the chief maiden robbed his
reason with her beauty and loveliness compelling him to recite the
couplets forequoted. And after dressing they sat talking and laughing,
whilst he stood gazing on them, drowned in the sea of his love, burning
in the flames of passion and wandering in the Wady of his melancholy
thought. And he said to himself, “By Allah, my sister forbade me not to
open the door, but for cause of these maidens and for fear lest I should
fall in love with one of them! How, O Hasan shalt thou woo and win them?
How bring down a bird flying in the vasty firmament? By Allah thou hast
cast thyself into a bottomless sea and snared thyself in a net whence
there is no escape! I shall die desolate and none shall wot of my
death.” And he continued to gaze on the charms of the chief damsel, who
was the lovliest creature Allah had made in her day, and indeed she
outdid in beauty all human beings. She had a mouth magical as Solomon’s
seal and hair blacker than the night of estrangement to the
love-despairing man; her brow was bright as the crescent moon of the
Feast of Ramazán[58] and her eyes were like eyes wherewith gazelles
scan; she had a polished nose straight as a cane and cheeks like
blood-red anemones of Nu’uman, lips like coralline and teeth like strung
pearls in carcanets of gold virgin to man, and a neck like an ingot of
silver, above a shape like a wand of Bán: her middle was full of folds,
a dimpled plain such as enforceth the distracted lover to magnify Allah
and extol His might and main, and her navel[59] an ounce of musk,
sweetest of savour could contain: she had thighs great and plump, like
marble columns twain or bolsters stuffed with down from ostrich ta’en,
and between them a somewhat, as it were a hummock great of span or a
hare with ears back lain while terrace-roof and pilasters completed the
plan; and indeed she surpassed the bough of the myrobalan with her
beauty and symmetry, and the Indian rattan, for she was even as saith of
them the poet whom love did unman:[60]—

 Her lip-dews rival honey-sweets, that sweet virginity; ✿ Keener than
    Hindí scymitar the glance she casts at thee:
 She shames the bending bough of Bán with graceful movement slow ✿ And as
    she smiles her teeth appear with leven’s brilliancy:

 When I compared with rose a-bloom the tintage of her cheeks, ✿ She
    laughed in scorn and cried, “Whoso compares with rosery
 My hue and breasts granados terms, is there no shame in him? ✿ How
    should pomegranates bear on bough such fruit in form or blee?
 Now by my beauty and mine eyes and heart and eke by Heaven ✿ Of favours
    mine and by the Hell of my un-clemency,
 They say ‘She is a garden-rose in very pride of bloom’; ✿ And yet no
    rose can ape my cheek nor branch my symmetry!
 If any garden own a thing which unto me is like, ✿ What then is that he
    comes to crave of me and only me?”

They ceased not to laugh and play, whilst Hasan stood still a-watching
them, forgetting meat and drink, till near the hour of mid-afternoon
prayer, when the beauty, the chief damsel, said to her mates, “O Kings’
daughters, it waxeth late and our land is afar and we are weary of this
stead. Come, therefore, let us depart to our own place.” So they all
arose and donned their feather vests, and becoming birds as they were
before, flew away all together, with the chief lady in their midst.
Then, Hasan, despairing of their return, would have arisen and gone down
into the palace but could not move or even stand; wherefore the tears
ran down his cheeks and passion was sore on him and he recited these
couplets:—

 May God deny me boon of troth if I ✿ After your absence sweets of
    slumber know:
 Yea; since that sev’rance never close mine eyes, ✿ Nor rest repose me
    since departed you!
 ’Twould seem as though you saw me in your sleep; ✿ Would Heaven the
    dreams of sleep were real-true!
 Indeed I dote on sleep though needed not, ✿ For sleep may bring me that
    dear form to view.

Then Hasan walked on, little by little, heeding not the way he went,
till he reached the foot of the stairs, whence he dragged himself to his
own chamber; then he entered and shutting the door, lay sick eating not
nor drinking and drowned in the sea of his solitude. He spent the night
thus, weeping and bemoaning himself, till the morning, and when it
morrowed he repeated these couplets:—

 The birds took flight at eve and winged their way; ✿ And sinless he who
    died of Love’s death-blow.
 I’ll keep my love-tale secret while I can ✿ But, an desire prevail, its
    needs must show:
 Night brought me nightly vision, bright as dawn; ✿ While nights of my
    desire lack morning-glow.

 I mourn for them[61] while they heart-freest sleep ✿ And winds of love
    on me their plaything blow:
 Free I bestow my tears, my wealth, my heart ✿ My wit, my sprite:—most
    gain who most bestow!
 The worst of woes and banes is enmity ✿ Beautiful maidens deal us to our
    woe.
 Favour they say’s forbidden to the fair ✿ And shedding lovers’ blood
    their laws allow;
 That naught can love-sicks do but lavish soul, ✿ And stake in love-play
    life on single throw:[62]
 I cry in longing ardour for my love: ✿ Lover can only weep and wail
    Love-lowe.

When the sun rose he opened the door, went forth of the chamber and
mounted to the stead where he was before: then he sat down facing the
pavilion and awaited the return of the birds till nightfall; but they
returned not; wherefore he wept till he fell to the ground in a
fainting-fit. When he came to after his swoon, he dragged himself down
the stairs to his chamber; and indeed, the darkness was come and
straitened upon him was the whole world and he ceased not to weep and
wail himself through the livelong night, till the day broke and the sun
rained over hill and dale its rays serene. He ate not nor drank nor
slept, nor was there any rest for him; but by day he was distracted and
by night distressed, with sleeplessness delirious and drunken with
melancholy thought and excess of love-longing. And he repeated the
verses of the love-distraught poet:—

 O thou who shamest sun in morning sheen ✿ The branch confounding, yet
    with nescience blest;
 Would Heaven I wot an Time shall bring return ✿ And quench the fires
    which flame unmanifest,—
 Bring us together in a close embrace, ✿ Thy cheek upon my cheek, thy
    breast abreast!
 Who saith, In Love dwells sweetness? when in Love ✿ Are bitterer days
    than Aloë’s[63] bitterest.

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Eighty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasan the
goldsmith felt love redouble upon him, he recited those lines; and, as
he abode thus in the stress of his love-distraction, alone and finding
none to cheer him with company, behold, there arose a dust-cloud from
the desert, wherefore he ran down and hid himself knowing that the
Princesses who owned the castle had returned. Before long, the troops
halted and dismounted round the palace and the seven damsels alighted
and entering, put off their arms and armour of war. As for the youngest,
she stayed not to doff her weapons and gear, but went straight to
Hasan’s chamber, where finding him not, she sought for him, till she
lighted on him in one of the sleeping closets hidden, feeble and thin,
with shrunken body and wasted bones and indeed his colour was changed
and his eyes sunken in his face for lack of food and drink and for much
weeping, by reason of his love and longing for the young lady. When she
saw him in this plight, she was confounded and lost her wits; but
presently she questioned him of his case and what had befallen him,
saying, “Tell me what aileth thee, O my brother, that I may contrive to
do away thine affliction, and I will be thy ransom!”[64] Whereupon he
wept with sore weeping and by way of reply he began reciting:—

 Lover, when parted from the thing he loves, ✿ Has naught save weary woe
    and bane to bear.
 Inside is sickness, outside living lowe, ✿ His first is fancy and his
    last despair.

When his sister heard this, she marvelled at his eloquence and loquent
speech and his readiness at answering her in verse and said to him, “O
my brother, when didst thou fall into this thy case and what hath
betided thee, that I find thee speaking in song and shedding tears that
throng? Allah upon thee, O my brother, and by the honest love which is
between us, tell me what aileth thee and discover to me thy secret, nor
conceal from me aught of that which hath befallen thee in our absence;
for my breast is straitened and my life is troubled because of thee.” He
sighed and railed tears like rain, after which he said, “I fear, O my
sister, if I tell thee, that thou wilt not aid me to win my wish but
wilt leave me to die wretchedly in mine anguish.” She replied, “No, by
Allah, O my brother, I will not abandon thee, though it cost me my
life!” So he told her all that had befallen him, and that the cause of
his distress and affliction was the passion he had conceived for the
young lady whom he had seen when he opened the forbidden door; and how
he had not tasted meat nor drink for ten days past. Then he wept with
sore weeping and recited these couplets:—

 Restore my heart as ’twas within my breast, ✿ Let mine eyes sleep again,
    then fly fro’ me.
 Deem ye the nights have had the might to change ✿ Love’s vow? Who
    changeth may he never be!

His sister wept for his weeping and was moved to ruth for his case and
pitied his strangerhood; so she said to him, “O my brother, be of good
cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear, for I will venture being and
risk existence to content thee and devise thee a device wherewith,
though it cost me my dear life and all I hold dear, thou mayst get
possession of her and accomplish thy desire, if such be the will of
Allah Almighty. But I charge thee, O my brother, keep the matter secret
from my sisterhood and discover not thy case to any one of them, lest my
life be lost with thy life. An they question thee of opening the
forbidden door, reply to them:—I opened it not; no, never; but I was
troubled at heart for your absence and by my loneliness here and
yearning for you.”[65] And he answered, “Yes: this is the right rede.”
So he kissed her head and his heart was comforted and his bosom
broadened. He had been nigh upon death for excess of affright, for he
had gone in fear of her by reason of his having opened the door; but now
his life and soul returned to him. Then he sought of her somewhat of
food and after serving it she left him, and went in to her sisters,
weeping and mourning for him. They questioned her of her case and she
told them how she was heavy at heart for her brother, because he was
sick and for ten days no food had found way into his stomach. So they
asked the cause of his sickness and she answered, “The reason was our
severance from him and our leaving him desolate; for these days we have
been absent from him were longer to him than a thousand years and scant
blame to him, seeing he is a stranger, and solitary and we left him
alone, with none to company with him or hearten his heart; more by token
that he is but a youth and may be he called to mind his family and his
mother, who is a woman in years, and bethought him that she weepeth for
him all whiles of the day and watches of the night, ever mourning his
loss; and we used to solace him with our society and divert him from
thinking of her.” When her sisters heard these words they wept in the
stress of their distress for him and said, “Wa’lláhi—’fore Allah, he is
not to blame!” Then they went out to the army and dismissed it, after
which they went in to Hasan and saluted him with the salam. When they
saw his charms changed with yellow colour and shrunken body, they wept
for very pity and sat by his side and comforted him and cheered him with
converse, relating to him all they had seen by the way of wonders and
rarities and what had befallen the bridegroom with the bride. They abode
with him thus a whole month, tendering him and caressing him with words
sweeter than syrup; but every day sickness was added to his sickness,
which when they saw, they bewept him with sore weeping, and the youngest
wept even more than the rest. At the end of this time, the Princesses
having made up their minds to ride forth a-hunting and a-birding invited
their sister to accompany them but she said, “By Allah, O my sisters, I
cannot go forth with you, whilst my brother is in this plight, nor
indeed till he be restored to health and there cease from him that which
is with him of affliction. Rather will I sit with him and comfort him.”
They thanked her for her kindness and said to her, “Allah will requite
thee all thou dost with this stranger.” Then they left her with him in
the palace and rode forth taking with them twenty days’ victual;——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Eighty-ninth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Princesses
mounted and rode forth a-hunting and a-birding, after leaving in the
palace their youngest sister sitting by Hasan’s side; and as soon as the
damsel knew that they had covered a long distance from home, she went in
to him and said, “O my brother, come, show me the place where thou
sawest the maidens.” He rejoiced in her words, making sure of winning
his wish, and replied, “Bismillah! On my head!” Then he essayed to rise
and show her the place, but could not walk; so she took him up in her
arms, holding him to her bosom between her breasts; and, opening the
staircase-door, carried him to the top of the palace, and he showed her
the pavilion where he had seen the girls and the basin of water, wherein
they had bathed. Then she said to him, “Set forth to me, O my brother,
their case and how they came.” So he described to her whatso he had seen
of them and especially the girl of whom he was enamoured; but hearing
these words she knew her and her cheeks paled and her case changed.
Quoth he, “O my sister, what aileth thee to wax wan and be troubled?”;
and quoth she, “O my brother, know thou that this young lady is the
daughter of a Sovran of the Jann, of one of the most puissant of their
Kings and her father had dominion over men and Jinn and wizards and
cohens and tribal chiefs and guards and countries and cities and islands
galore and hath immense wealth in store. Our father is a Viceroy and one
of his vassals and none can avail against him, for the multitude of his
many and the extent of his empire and the muchness of his monies. He
hath assigned to his offspring, the daughters thou sawest, a tract of
country, a whole year’s journey in length and breadth, a region girt
about with a great river and a deep; and thereto none may attain, nor
man nor Jann. He hath an army of women, smiters with swords and lungers
with lances, five-and-twenty thousand in number, each of whom, whenas
she mounteth steed and donneth battle-gear, eveneth a thousand knights
of the bravest. Moreover, he hath seven daughters, who in valour and
prowess equal and even excel their sisters,[66] and he hath made the
eldest of them, the damsel whom thou sawest,[67] queen over the country
aforesaid and who is the wisest of her sisters and in valour and
horsemanship and craft and skill and magic excels all the folk of her
dominions. The girls who companied with her are the ladies of her court
and guards and grandees of her empire, and the plumed skins wherewith
they fly are the handiwork of enchanters of the Jann. Now an thou
wouldst get possession of this queen and wed this jewel seld-seen and
enjoy her beauty and loveliness and grace, do thou pay heed to my words
and keep them in thy memory. They resort to this place on the first day
of every month; and thou must take seat here and watch for them; and
when thou seest them coming hide thee near the pavilion sitting where
thou mayst see them, without being seen of them, and beware, again
beware lest thou show thyself, or we shall all lose our lives. When they
doff their dress note which is the feather-suit of her whom thou lovest
and take it, and it only, for this it is that carrieth her to her
country, and when thou hast mastered it, thou hast mastered her. And
beware lest she wile thee, saying:—O thou who hast robbed my raiment,
restore it to me, because here am I in thine hands and at thy mercy!
For, an thou give it her, she will kill thee and break down over us
palace and pavilion and slay our sire: know, then, thy case and how thou
shalt act. When her companions see that her feather-suit is stolen, they
will take flight and leave her to thee, and beware lest thou show
thyself to them, but wait till they have flown away and she despaireth
of them: whereupon do thou go in to her and hale her by the hair of her
head[68] and drag her to thee; which being done, she will be at thy
mercy. And I rede thee discover not to her that thou hast taken the
feather-suit, but keep it with care; for, so long as thou hast it in
hold, she is thy prisoner and in thy power, seeing that she cannot fly
to her country save with it. And lastly carry her down to thy chamber
where she will be thine.” When Hasan heard her words his heart became at
ease, his trouble ceased and affliction left him; so he rose to his feet
and kissing his sister’s head, went down from the terrace with her into
the palace, where they slept that night. He medicined himself till
morning morrowed; and when the sun rose, he sprang up and opened the
staircase-door and ascending to the flat roof sat there till supper-tide
when his sister brought him up somewhat of meat and drink and a change
of clothes and he slept. And thus they continued doing, day by day until
the end of the month. When he saw the new moon, he rejoiced and began to
watch for the birds, and while he was thus, behold, up they came, like
lightning. As soon as he espied them, he hid himself where he could
watch them, unwatched by them, and they lighted down one and all of
them, and putting off their clothes, descended into the basin. All this
took place near the stead where Hasan lay concealed, and as soon as he
caught sight of the girl he loved, he arose and crept under cover,
little by little, towards the dresses, and Allah veiled him so that none
marked his approach for they were laughing and playing with one another,
till he laid hand on the dress. Now when they had made an end of their
diversion, they came forth of the basin and each of them slipped on her
feather-suit. But the damsel he loved sought for her plumage that she
might put it on, but found it not; whereupon she shrieked and beat her
cheeks and rent her raiment. Her sisterhood[69] came to her and asked
what ailed her, and she told them that her feather-suit was missing;
wherefore they wept and shrieked and buffeted their faces: and they were
confounded, wotting not the cause of this, and knew not what to do.
Presently the night overtook them and they feared to abide with her lest
that which had befallen her should befal them also; so they farewelled
her and flying away left her alone upon the terrace-roof of the palace,
by the pavilion basin.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

[Illustration]


         Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Ninetieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasan had
carried off the girls plumery, she sought it but found it not and her
sisterhood flew away leaving her alone. When they were out of sight,
Hasan gave ear to her and heard her say, “O who hast taken my dress and
stripped me, I beseech thee to restore it to me and cover my shame, so
may Allah never make thee taste of my tribulation!” But when Hasan heard
her speak thus, with speech sweeter than syrup, his love for her
redoubled, passion got the mastery of his reason and he had not patience
to endure from her. So springing up from his hiding-place, he rushed
upon her and laying hold of her by the hair dragged her to him and
carried her down to the basement of the palace and set her in his own
chamber, where he threw over her a silken cloak[70] and left her weeping
and biting her hands. Then he shut the door upon her and going to his
sister, informed her how he had made prize of his lover and carried her
to his sleeping-closet, “And there,” quoth he, “she is now sitting,
weeping and biting her hands.” When his Sister heard this, she rose
forthright and betook herself to the chamber, where she found the
captive weeping and mourning. So she kissed ground before her and
saluted her with the salam and the young lady said to her, “O King’s
daughter, do folk like you do such foul deed with the daughters of
Kings? Thou knowest that my father is a mighty Sovran and that all the
liege lords of the Jinn stand in awe of him and fear his majesty: for
that there are with him magicians and sages and Cohens and Satans and
Marids, such as none may cope withal, and under his hand are folk whose
number none knoweth save Allah. How then doth it become you, O daughters
of Kings, to harbour mortal men with you and disclose to them our case
and yours? Else how should this man, a stranger, come at us?” Hasan’s
sister made reply, “O King’s daughter, in very sooth this human is
perfect in nobleness and purposeth thee no villainy; but he loveth thee,
and women were not made save for men. Did he not love thee, he had not
fallen sick for thy sake and well-nigh given up the ghost for desire of
thee.” And she told her the whole tale how Hasan had seen her bathing in
the basin with her attendants, and fallen in love with her, and none had
pleased him but she, for the rest were all her handmaids, and none had
availed to put forth a hand to her. When the Princess heard this, she
despaired of deliverance and presently Hasan’s sister went forth and
brought her a costly dress, wherein she robed her. Then she set before
her somewhat of meat and drink and ate with her and heartened her heart
and soothed her sorrows. And she ceased not to speak her fair with soft
and pleasant words, saying, “Have pity on him who saw thee once and
became as one slain by thy love;” and continued to console her and
caress her, quoting fair says and pleasant instances. But she wept till
daybreak, when her trouble subsided and she left shedding tears, knowing
that she had fallen into the net and that there was no deliverance for
her. Then said she to Hasan’s sister, “O King’s daughter, with this my
strangerhood and severance from my country and sisterhood which Allah
wrote upon my brow, patience becometh me to support what my Lord hath
foreordained.” Therewith the youngest Princess assigned her a chamber in
the palace, than which there was none goodlier and ceased not to sit
with her and console her and solace her heart, till she was satisfied
with her lot and her bosom was broadened and she laughed and there
ceased from her what trouble and oppression possessed her, by reason of
her separation from her people and country and sisterhood and parents.
Thereupon Hasan’s sister repaired to him, and said, “Arise, go in to her
in her chamber and kiss her hands and feet.[71]” So he went in to her
and did this and bussed her between the eyes, saying, “O Princess of
fair ones and life of sprites and beholder’s delight, be easy of heart,
for I took thee only that I might be thy bondsman till the Day of Doom,
and this my sister will be thy servant; for I, O my lady, desire naught
but to take thee to wife, after the law of Allah and the practice of His
Apostle, and whenas thou wilt, I will journey with thee to my country
and carry thee to Baghdad-city and abide with thee there: moreover, I
will buy thee handmaidens and negro chattels; and I have a mother, of
the best of women, who will do thee service. There is no goodlier land
than our land; everything therein is better than elsewhere and its folk
are a pleasant people and bright of face.” Now as he bespake her thus
and strave to comfort her, what while she answered him not a syllable,
lo! there came a knocking at the palace-gate. So Hasan went out to see
who was at the door and found there the six Princesses, who had returned
from hunting and birding, whereat he rejoiced and went to meet them and
welcomed them. They wished him safety and health and he wished them the
like; after which they dismounted and going each to her chamber doffed
their soiled clothes and donned fine linen. Then they came forth and
demanded the game, for they had taken a store of gazelles and wild cows,
hares and lions, hyænas, and others; so their suite brought out some
thereof for butchering, keeping the rest by them in the palace, and
Hasan girt himself and fell to slaughtering for them in due form,[72]
whilst they sported and made merry, joying with great joy to see him
standing amongst them hale and hearty once more. When they had made an
end of slaughtering, they sat down and addressed themselves to get ready
somewhat for breaking their fast, and Hasan, coming up to the eldest
Princess, kissed her head and on like wise did he with the rest, one
after other. Whereupon said they to him, “Indeed, thou humblest thyself
to us passing measure, O our brother, and we marvel at the excess of the
affection thou showest us. But Allah forfend that thou shouldst do this
thing, which it behoveth us rather to do with thee, seeing thou art a
man and therefor worthier than we, who are of the Jinn.[73]” Thereupon
his eyes brimmed with tears and he wept sore; so they said to him, “What
causeth thee to weep? Indeed, thou troublest our pleasant lives with thy
weeping this day. ’Twould seem thou longest after thy mother and native
land. An things be so, we will equip thee and carry thee to thy home and
thy friends.” He replied, “By Allah, I desire not to part from you!”
Then they asked, “Which of us hath vexed thee, that thou art thus
troubled?” But he was ashamed to say, “Naught troubleth me save love of
the damsel,” lest they should deny and disavow him: so he was silent and
would tell them nothing of his case. Then his sister came forward and
said to them, “He hath caught a bird from the air and would have you
help him to tame her.” Whereupon they all turned to him and cried, “We
are at thy service every one of us and whatsoever thou seekest that will
we do: but tell us thy tale and conceal from us naught of thy case.” So
he said to his sister, “Do thou tell them, for I am ashamed before them
nor can I face them with these words.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Hasan said to his
sister, “Do thou tell them my tale, for before them I stand abashed nor
can I face them with these words.” So she said to them, “O my sisters,
when we went away and left alone this unhappy one, the palace was
straitened upon him and he feared lest some one should come in to him,
for ye know that the sons of Adam are light of wits. So, he opened the
door of the staircase leading to the roof, of his loneliness and
trouble, and sat there, looking upon the Wady and watching the gate, in
his fear lest any should come thither. One day, as he sat thus, suddenly
he saw ten birds approach him, making for the palace, and they lighted
down on the brink of the basin which is in the pavilion-terrace. He
watched these birds and saw, amongst them, one goodlier than the rest,
which pecked the others and flouted them, whilst none of them dared not
put out a claw to it. Presently, they set their nails to their
neck-collars and, rending their feather-suits, came forth therefrom and
became damsels, each and every, like the moon on fullest night. Then
they doffed their dress and plunging into the water, fell to playing
with one another, whilst the chief damsel ducked the others, who dared
not lay a finger on her and she was fairest of favour and most famous of
form and most feateous of finery. They ceased not to be in this case
till near the hour of mid-afternoon prayer, when they came forth of the
basin and, donning their feather-shifts, flew away home. Thereupon he
waxed distracted, with a heart afire for love of the chief damsel and
repenting him that he had not stolen her plumery. Wherefore he fell sick
and abode on the palace-roof expecting her return and abstaining from
meat and drink and sleep, and he ceased not to be so till the new moon
showed, when behold, they again made their appearance according to
custom and doffing their dresses went down into the basin. So he stole
the chief damsel’s feather-suit, knowing that she could not fly save
therewith, hiding himself carefully lest they sight him and slay him.
Then he waited till the rest had flown away, when he arose and seizing
the damsel, carried her down from the terrace into the castle.” Her
sisters asked, “Where is she?”; and she answered, “She is with him in
such a chamber.” Quoth they, “Describe her to us, O our sister:” so
quoth she, “She is fairer than the moon on the night of fullness and her
face is sheenier than the sun; the dew of her lips is sweeter than honey
and her shape is straighter and slenderer than the cane; one with eyes
black as night and brow flower-white; a bosom jewel-bright, breasts like
pomegranates twain and cheeks like apples twain, a waist with dimples
overlain, a navel like a casket of ivory full of musk in grain, and legs
like columns of alabastrine vein. She ravisheth all hearts with
Nature-kohl’d eyne, and a waist slender-fine and hips of heaviest design
and speech that heals all pain and pine: she is goodly of shape and
sweet of smile, as she were the moon in fullest sheen and shine.” When
the Princesses heard these praises, they turned to Hasan and said to
him, “Show her to us.” So he arose with them, all love-distraught, and
carrying them to the chamber wherein was the captive damsel, opened the
door and entered, preceding the seven Princesses. Now when they saw her
and noted her loveliness, they kissed the ground between her hands,
marvelling at the fairness of her favour and the significance which
showed her inner gifts, and said to her, “By Allah, O daughter of the
Sovran Supreme, this is indeed a mighty matter: and haddest thou heard
tell of this mortal among women thou haddest marvelled at him all thy
days. Indeed, he loveth thee with passionate love; yet, O King’s
daughter, he seeketh not lewdness, but desireth thee only in the way of
lawful wedlock. Had we known that maids can do without men, we had
impeached him from his intent, albeit he sent thee no messenger, but
came to thee in person; and he telleth us he hath burnt the feather
dress; else had we taken it from him.” Then one of them agreed with the
Princess and becoming her deputy in the matter of the wedding contract,
performed the marriage ceremony between them, whilst Hasan clapped palms
with her, laying his hand in hers, and she wedded him to the damsel by
consent; after which they celebrated her bridal feast, as beseemeth
Kings’ daughters, and brought Hasan in to her. So he rose and rent the
veil and oped the gate and pierced the forge[74] and brake the seal,
whereupon affection for her waxed in him and he redoubled in love and
longing for her. Then, since he had gotten that which he sought, he gave
himself joy and improvised these couplets:—

 Thy shape’s temptation, eyes as Houri’s fain ✿ And sheddeth Beauty’s
    sheen[75] that radiance rare:
 My glance portrayed thy glorious portraiture: ✿ Rubies one-half and gems
    the third part were:
 Musk made a fifth: a sixth was ambergris ✿ The sixth a pearl but pearl
    without compare.
 Eve never bare a daughter evening thee ✿ Nor breathes thy like in
    Khuld’s[76] celestial air.
 An thou would torture me ’tis wont of Love ✿ And if thou pardon ’tis thy
    choice I swear:
 Then, O world bright’ner and O end of wish! ✿ Loss of thy charms who
    could in patience bear?

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Ninety-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasan
went in unto the King’s daughter and did away her maidenhead, he enjoyed
her with exceeding joy and affection for her waxed in him and he
redoubled in love-longing for her; so he recited the lines aforesaid.
Now the Princesses were standing at the door and when they heard his
verses, they said to her, “O King’s daughter, hearest thou the words of
this mortal? How canst thou blame us, seeing that he maketh poetry for
love of thee and indeed he hath so done a thousand times.[77]” When she
heard this she rejoiced and was glad and felt happy and Hasan abode with
her forty[78] days in all solace and delight, joyance and happiest
plight, whilst the damsels renewed festivities for him every day and
overwhelmed him with bounty and presents and rarities; and the King’s
daughter became reconciled to her sojourn amongst them and forgot her
kith and kin. At the end of the forty days, Hasan saw in a dream, one
night, his mother mourning for him and indeed her bones were wasted and
her body had waxed shrunken and her complexion had yellowed and her
favour had changed the while he was in excellent case. When she saw him
in this state, she said to him, “O my son, O Hasan, how is it that thou
livest thy worldly life at thine ease and forgettest me? Look at my
plight since thy loss! I do not forget thee, nor will my tongue cease to
name thy name till I die; and I have made thee a tomb in my house, that
I may never forget thee. Would Heaven I knew[79] if I shall live, O my
son, to see thee by my side and if we shall ever again foregather as we
were.” Thereupon Hasan awoke from sleep, weeping and wailing, the tears
railed down his cheeks like rain and he became mournful and melancholy;
his tears dried not nor did sleep visit him, but he had no rest, and no
patience was left to him. When he arose, the Princesses came in to him
and gave him good-morrow and made merry with him as was their wont; but
he paid no heed to them; so they asked his wife concerning his case and
she said, “I ken not.” Quoth they, “Question him of his condition.” So
she went up to him and said, “What aileth thee, O my lord?” Whereupon he
moaned and groaned and told her what he had seen in his dream and
repeated these two couplets:—

 Indeed afflicted sore are we and all distraught, ✿ Seeking for union;
    yet we find no way:
 And Love’s calamities upon us grow      ✿ And Love though light with
    heaviest weight doth weigh.

His wife repeated to the Princesses what he said and they, hearing the
verses, had pity on him and said to him, “In Allah’s name, do as thou
wilt, for we may not hinder thee from visiting thy mother; nay, we will
help thee to thy wish by what means we may. But it behoveth that thou
desert us not, but visit us, though it be only once a year.” And he
answered, “To hear is to obey: be your behest on my head and eyes!” Then
they arose forthright and making him ready victual for the voyage,
equipped the bride for him with raiment and ornaments and everything of
price, such as defy description, and they bestowed on him gifts and
presents which pens of ready writers lack power to set forth. Then they
beat the magical kettle-drum and up came the dromedaries from all sides.
They chose of them such as could carry all the gear they had prepared;
amongst the rest five-and-twenty chests of gold and fifty of silver;
and, mounting Hasan and his bride on others, rode with them three days,
wherein they accomplished a march of three months. Then they bade them
farewell and addressed themselves to return; whereupon his sister, the
youngest damsel, threw herself on Hasan’s neck and wept till she
fainted. When she came to herself, she repeated these two couplets:—

 Ne’er dawn the severance-day on any wise ✿ That robs of sleep these
    heavy-lidded eyes.
 From us and thee it hath fair union torn ✿ It wastes our force and makes
    our forms its prize.

Her verses finished she farewelled him, straitly charging him, whenas he
should have come to his native land and have foregathered with his
mother and set his heart at ease, to fail not of visiting her once in
every six months and saying, “If aught grieve thee or thou fear aught of
vexation, beat the Magian’s kettle-drum, whereupon the dromedaries shall
come to thee; and do thou mount and return to us and persist not in
staying away.” He swore thus to do and conjured them to go home. So they
returned to the palace, mourning for their separation from him,
especially the youngest, with whom no rest would stay nor would Patience
her call obey, but she wept night and day. Thus it was with them; but as
regards Hasan and his wife, they fared on by day and night over plain
and desert site and valley and stony heights through noon-tide glare and
dawn’s soft light; and Allah decreed them safety, so that they reached
Bassorah-city without hindrance and made their camels kneel at the door
of his house. Hasan then dismissed the dromedaries and, going up to the
door to open it, heard his mother weeping and in a faint strain, from a
heart worn with parting-pain and on fire with consuming bane, reciting
these couplets:—

 How shall he taste of sleep who lacks repose ✿ Who wakes a-night when
    all in slumber wone?
 He ownèd wealth and family and fame ✿ Yet fared from house and home an
    exile lone:

 Live coal beneath his[80] ribs he bears for bane, ✿ And mighty longing,
    mightier ne’er was known:
 Passion hath seized him, Passion mastered him; ✿ Yet is he constant
    while he maketh moan;
 His case for Love proclaimed aye that he, ✿ (As prove his tears) is
    wretched, woe-begone.

When Hasan heard his mother weeping and wailing he wept also and knocked
at the door a loud knock. Quoth she, “Who is at the door?”; and quoth
he, “Open!” Whereupon she opened the door and knowing him at first sight
fell down in a fainting fit; but he ceased not to tend her till she came
to herself, when he embraced her and she embraced him and kissed him,
whilst his wife looked on mother and son. Then he carried his goods and
gear into the house, whilst his mother, for that her heart was comforted
and Allah had reunited her with her son versified with these couplets:—

 Fortune had ruth upon my plight ✿ Pitied my long long bane and blight;
 Gave me what I would liefest sight; ✿ And set me free from all affright.
 So pardon I the sin that sin ✿ nèd she in days evanisht quite;
 E’en to the sin she sinned when she ✿ Bleached my hair-parting silvern
    white.

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Ninety-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Hasan with his
mother then sat talking and she asked him, “How faredst thou, O my son,
with the Persian?” whereto he answered, “O my mother, he was no Persian,
but a Magian, who worshipped the fire, not the All-powerful Sire.” Then
he told her how he dealt with him, in that he had journeyed with him to
the Mountain of Clouds and sewed him up in the camel’s skin, and how the
vultures had taken him up and set him down on the summit and what he had
seen there of dead folk, whom the Magian had deluded and left to die on
the crest after they had done his desire. And he told her how he had
cast himself from the mountain-top into the sea and Allah the Most High
had preserved him and brought him to the palace of the seven Princesses
and how the youngest of them had taken him to brother and he had
sojourned with them, till the Almighty brought the Magian to the place
where he was and he slew him. Moreover, he told her of his passion for
the King’s daughter and how he had made prize of her and of his seeing
her[81] in sleep and all else that had befallen him up to the time when
Allah vouchsafed them reunion. She wondered at his story and praised the
Lord who had restored him to her in health and safety. Then she arose
and examined the baggage and loads and questioned him of them. So he
told her what was in them, whereat she joyed with exceeding joy. Then
she went up to the King’s daughter, to talk with her and bear her
company; but, when her eyes fell on her, her wits were confounded at her
brilliancy and she rejoiced and marvelled at her beauty and loveliness
and symmetry and perfect grace: and she sat down beside her, cheering
her and comforting her heart while she never ceased to repeat
“Alhamdolillah, O my son, for thy return to me safe and sound!” Next
morning early she went down into the market and bought mighty fine
furniture and ten suits of the richest raiment in the city, and clad the
young wife and adorned her with everything seemly. Then said she to
Hasan, “O my son, we cannot tarry in this town with all this wealth; for
thou knowest that we are poor folk and the people will suspect us of
practising alchemy. So come, let us depart to Baghdad, the House[82] of
Peace, where we may dwell in the Caliph’s Sanctuary, and thou shalt sit
in a shop to buy and sell, in the fear of Allah (to whom belong Might
and Majesty!) and He shall open to thee the door of blessings with this
wealth.” Hasan approved her counsel and going forth straightway, sold
the house and summoned the dromedaries, which he loaded with all his
goods and gear, together with his mother and wife. Then he went down to
the Tigris, where he hired him a craft to carry them to Baghdad and
embarked therein all his possessions and his mother and wife. They
sailed up the river with a fair wind for ten days till they drew in
sight of Baghdad, at which they all rejoiced, and the ship landed them
in the city, where without stay or delay Hasan hired a storehouse in one
of the caravanserais and transported his goods thither. He lodged that
night in the Khan and on the morrow, he changed his clothes and going
down into the city, enquired for a broker. The folk directed him to one,
and when the broker saw him, he asked him what he lacked. Quoth he, “I
want a house, a handsome one and a spacious.” So the broker showed him
the houses at his disposal and he chose one that belonged to one of the
Wazirs and buying it of him for an hundred thousand golden dinars, gave
him the price. Then he returned to his caravanserai and removed all his
goods and monies to the house; after which he went down to the market
and bought all the mansion needed of vessels and carpets and other
household stuff, besides servants and eunuchs, including a little black
boy for the house. He abode with his wife in all solace and delight of
life three years, during which time he was vouchsafed by her two sons,
one of whom he named Násir and the other Mansúr: but, at the end of this
time he bethought him of his sisters, the Princesses, and called to mind
all their goodness to him and how they had helped him to his desire. So
he longed after them and going out to the market-streets of the city,
bought trinkets and costly stuffs and fruit-confections, such as they
had never seen or known. His mother asked him the reason of his buying
these rarities and he answered, “I purpose to visit my sisters, who
showed me every kind of kindness, and all the wealth that I at present
enjoy is due to their goodness and munificence: wherefore I will journey
to them and return soon, Inshallah!” Quoth she, “O my son, be not long
absent from me;” and quoth he, “Know, O my mother, how thou shalt do
with my wife. Here is her feather-dress in a chest, buried under ground
in such a place; do thou watch over it, lest haply she hap on it and
take it, for she would fly away, she and her children, and I should
never hear of them again and should die of grieving for them; wherefore
take heed, O my mother, while I warn thee that thou name this not to
her. Thou must know that she is the daughter of a King of the Jinn, than
whom there is not a greater among the Sovrans of the Jann nor a richer
in troops and treasure, and she is mistress of her people and dearest to
her father of all he hath. Moreover, she is passing high-spirited, so do
thou serve her thyself and suffer her not to go forth the door neither
look out of window nor over the wall, for I fear the air for her when it
bloweth,[83] and if aught befel her of the calamities of this world, I
should slay myself for her sake.” She replied, “O my son, I take refuge
with Allah[84] from gainsaying thee! Am I mad that thou shouldst lay
this charge on me and I disobey thee therein? Depart, O my son, with
heart at ease, and please Allah, soon thou shalt return in safety and
see her and she shall tell thee how I have dealt with her: but tarry
not, O my son, beyond the time of travel.”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Ninety-fourth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasan had
determined to visit the Princesses, he gave his mother the orders we
have mentioned.[85] Now, as Fate would have it, his wife heard what he
said to his mother and neither of them knew it. Then Hasan went without
the city and beat the kettle-drum, whereupon up came the dromedaries and
he loaded twenty of them with rarities of Al-Irak; after which he
returned to his mother and repeated his charge to her and took leave of
her and his wife and children, one of whom was a yearling babe and the
other two years old. Then he mounted and fared on, without stopping
night or day, over hills and valleys and plains and wastes for a term of
ten days till, on the eleventh, he reached the palace and went in to his
sisters, with the gifts he had brought them. The Princesses rejoiced at
his sight and gave him joy of his safety, whilst his sister decorated
the palace within and without. Then they took the presents and, lodging
him in a chamber as before, asked him of his mother and his wife, and he
told them that she had borne him two sons. And the youngest Princess,
seeing him well and in good case, joyed with exceeding joy and repeated
this couplet:—

 I ever ask for news of you from whatso breezes pass ✿ And never any but
    yourselves can pass across my mind.

Then he abode with them in all honour and hospitality, for three months,
spending his time in feasting and merrymaking, joy and delight, hunting
and sporting. So fared it with him; but as regards his wife, she abode
with his mother two days after her husband’s departure, and on the third
day, she said to her, “Glory be to God! Have I lived with him three
years and shall I never go to the bath?” Then she wept and Hasan’s
mother had pity on her condition and said to her, “O my daughter, here
we are strangers and thy husband is abroad. Were he at home, he would
serve thee himself, but, as for me, I know no one. However, O my
daughter, I will heat thee water and wash thy head in the Hammam-bath
which is in the house.” Answered the King’s daughter, “O my lady, hadst
thou spoken thus to one of the slave-girls, she had demanded to be sold
in the Sultan’s open market and had not abode with thee.[86] Men are
excusable, because they are jealous and their reason telleth them that,
if a woman go forth the house, haply she will do frowardness. But women,
O my lady, are not all equal and alike and thou knowest that, if woman
have a mind to aught, whether it be the Hammam or what not else, none
hath power over her to guard her or keep her chaste or debar her from
her desire; for she will do whatso she willeth and naught restraineth
her but her reason and her religion.[87]” Then she wept and cursed fate
and bemoaned herself and her strangerhood, till Hasan’s mother was moved
to ruth for her case and knew that all she said was but truth and that
there was nothing for it but to let her have her way. So she committed
the affair to Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) and making ready all
that they needed for the bath, took her and went with her to the Hammam.
She carried her two little sons with her, and when they entered, they
put off their clothes and all the women fell to gazing on the Princess
and glorifying God (to whom belong Might and Majesty!) for that He had
created so fair a form. The women of the city, even those who were
passing by, flocked to gaze upon her, and the report of her was noised
abroad in Baghdad till the bath was crowded that there was no passing
through it. Now it chanced there was present on that day and on that
rare occasion with the rest of the women in the Hammam, one of the
slave-girls of the Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, by name
Tohfah[88] the Lutanist, and she, finding the Hammam over crowded and no
passing for the throng of women and girls, asked what was to do; and
they told her of the young lady. So she walked up to her and,
considering her closely, was amazed at her grace and loveliness and
glorified God (magnified be His majesty!) for the fair forms He hath
created. The sight hindered her from her bath, so that she went not
farther in nor washed, but sat staring at the Princess, till she had
made an end of bathing and coming forth of the caldarium donned her
raiment, whereupon beauty was added to her beauty. She sat down on the
divan,[89] whilst the women gazed upon her; then she looked at them and
veiling Herself, went out. Tohfah went out with her and followed her,
till she saw where she dwelt, when she left her and returned to the
Caliph’s palace; and ceased not wending till she went in to the Lady
Zubaydah and kissed ground between her hands; whereupon quoth her
mistress, “O Tohfah, why hast thou tarried in the Hammam?” She replied,
“O my lady, I have seen a marvel, never saw I its like amongst men or
women, and this it was that distracted me and dazed my wit and amazed
me, so that I forgot even to wash my head.” Asked Zubaydah, “And what
was that?”; and Tohfah answered, “O my lady, I saw a damsel in the bath,
having with her two little boys like moons, eye never espied her like,
nor before her nor after her, neither is there the fellow of her form in
the whole world nor her peer amongst Ajams or Turks or Arabs. By the
munificence, O my lady, an thou toldest the Commander of the Faithful of
her, he would slay her husband and take her from him, for her like is
not to be found among women. I asked of her mate and they told me that
he is a merchant Hasan of Bassorah hight. Moreover, I followed her from
the bath to her own house and found it to be that of the Wazir, with the
two gates, one opening on the river and the other on the land.[90]
Indeed, O my lady, I fear lest the Prince of True Believers hear of her
and break the law and slay her husband and take love-liesse with
her.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Tohfah,
after seeing the King’s daughter, described her beauty to the Lady
Zubaydah ending with, “Indeed, O my mistress, I fear lest the Prince of
True Believers hear of her and break the law and slay her mate and take
her to wife,” Zubaydah cried, “Woe to thee, O Tohfah, say me, doth this
damsel display such passing beauty and loveliness that the Commander of
the Faithful should, on her account, barter his soul’s good for his
worldly lust and break the Holy Law! By Allah, needs must I look on her,
and if she be not as thou sayest, I will bid strike off thy head! O
strumpet, there are in the Caliph’s Serraglio three hundred and three
score slave girls, after the number of the days of the year, yet is
there none amongst them so excellent as thou describest!” Tohfah
replied, “No, by Allah, O my lady!: nor is there her like in all
Baghdad; no, nor amongst the Arabs or the Daylamites nor hath Allah (to
whom belong Might and Majesty!) created the like of her!” Thereupon
Zubaydah called for Masrur, the eunuch, who came and kissed the ground
before her, and she said to him, “O Masrur, go to the Wazir’s house,
that with the two gates, one giving on the water and the other on the
land, and bring me the damsel who dwelleth there, also her two children
and the old woman who is with her, and haste thou and tarry not.” Said
Masrur, “I hear and I obey,” and repairing to Hasan’s house, knocked at
the door. Quoth the old woman, “Who is at the door?” and quoth he,
“Masrur, the eunuch of the Commander of the Faithful.” So she opened the
door and he entered and saluted her with the salam; whereupon she
returned his salute and asked his need; and he replied, “The Lady
Zubaydah, daughter of Al-Kasim[91] and queen-spouse of the Commander of
the Faithful Harun al-Rashid sixth[92] of the sons of Al-Abbas, paternal
uncle of the Prophet (whom Allah bless and keep!) summoneth thee to her,
thee and thy son’s wife and her children; for the women have told her
anent her and her beauty.” Rejoined the old woman, “O my lord Masrur, we
are foreigner folk and the girl’s husband (my son) who is abroad and far
from home hath strictly charged me not to go forth nor let her go forth
in his absence, neither show her to any of the creatures of Allah
Almighty; and I fear me, if aught befal her and he come back, he will
slay himself; wherefore of thy favour I beseech thee, O Masrur, require
us not of that whereof we are unable.” Masrur retorted, “O my lady, if I
knew aught to be feared for you in this, I would not require you to go;
the Lady Zubaydah desireth but to see her and then she may return. So
disobey not or thou wilt repent; and like as I take you, I will bring
you both back in safety, Inshallah!” Hasan’s mother could not gainsay
him; so she went in and making the damsel ready, brought her and her
children forth and they all followed Masrur to the palace of the
Caliphate where he carried them in and seated them on the floor before
the Lady Zubaydah. They kissed ground before her and called down
blessings upon her; and Zubaydah said to the young lady (who was
veiled), “Wilt thou not uncover thy face, that I may look on it?” So she
kissed the ground between her hands and discovered a face which put to
shame the full moon in the height of heaven. Zubaydah fixed her eyes on
her and let their glances wander over her, whilst the palace was
illumined by the light of her countenance; whereupon the Queen and the
whole company were amazed at her beauty and all who looked on her became
Jinn-mad and unable to bespeak one another. As for Zubaydah, she rose
and making the damsel stand up, strained her to her bosom and seated her
by herself on the couch. Moreover, she bade decorate the palace in her
honour and calling for a suit of the richest raiment and a necklace of
the rarest ornaments put them upon her. Then said she to her, “O liege
lady of fair ones, verily thou astoundest me and fillest mine eyes.[93]
What arts knowest thou?” She replied, “O my lady, I have a dress of
feathers, and could I but put it on before thee, thou wouldst see one of
the fairest of fashions and marvel thereat, and all who saw it would
talk of its goodliness, generation after generation.” Zubaydah asked,
“And where is this dress of thine?”; and the damsel answered, “’Tis with
my husband’s mother. Do thou seek it for me of her.” So Zubaydah said to
the old woman, “O my lady the pilgrimess, O my mother, go forth and
fetch us her feather-dress, that we may solace ourselves by looking on
what she will do, and after take it back again.” Replied the old woman,
“O my lady, this damsel is a liar. Hast thou ever seen any of womankind
with a dress of feathers? Indeed, this belongeth only to birds.” But the
damsel said to the Lady Zubaydah, “As thou livest, O my lady, she hath a
feather-dress of mine and it is in a chest, which is buried in such a
store-closet in the house.” So Zubaydah took off her neck a rivière of
jewels, worth all the treasures of Chosroe and Cæsar, and gave it to the
old woman, saying, “O my mother, I conjure thee by my life, take this
necklace and go and fetch us this dress, that we may divert ourselves
with the sight thereof, and after take it again!” But she sware to her
that she had never seen any such dress and wist not what the damsel
meant by her speech. Then the Lady Zubaydah cried out at her and taking
the key from her, called Masrur and said to him as soon as he came,
“Take this key and go to the house; then open it and enter a
store-closet there whose door is such and such and amiddlemost of it
thou wilt find a chest buried. Take it out and break it open and bring
me the feather-dress which is therein and set it before me.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Lady Zubaydah,
having taken the key from Hasan’s mother, handed it to Masrur, saying,
“Take this key and open such a closet; then bring forth of it the chest;
break it open; bring me the feather-dress which is therein and set it
before me.” “Hearkening and obedience,” replied he and taking the key
went forth, whereupon the old woman arose and followed him, weeping-eyed
and repenting her of having given ear to the damsel and gone with her to
the bath, for her desire to go thither was but a device. So she went
with him to the house and opened the door of the closet, and he entered
and brought out the chest. Then he took therefrom the feather-dress and
wrapping it in a napkin, carried it to the Lady Zubaydah, who took it
and turned it about, marvelling at the beauty of its make; after which
she gave it to the damsel, saying, “Is this thy dress of feathers?” She
replied, “Yes, O my lady,” and at once putting forth her hand, took it
joyfully. Then she examined it and rejoiced to find it whole as it was,
not a feather gone. So she rose and came down from beside the Lady
Zubaydah and taking her sons in her bosom, wrapped herself in the
feather-dress and became a bird, by the ordinance of Allah (to whom
belong Might and Majesty!), whereat Zubaydah marvelled as did all who
were present. Then she walked with a swaying and graceful gait and
danced and sported and flapped her wings, whilst all eyes were fixed on
her and all marvelled at what she did. Then said she with fluent tongue,
“Is this goodly, O my ladies?”; and they replied, “Yes, O Princess of
the fair! All thou dost is goodly.” Said she, “And this, O my
mistresses, that I am about to do is better yet.” Then she spread her
wings and flying up with her children to the dome of the palace, perched
on the saloon-roof whilst they all looked at her, wide-eyed and said,
“By Allah, this is indeed a rare and peregrine fashion! Never saw we its
like.” Then, as she was about to take flight for her own land, she
bethought her of Hasan and said, “Hark ye, my mistresses!” and she
improvised these couplets[94]:—

 O who hast quitted these abodes and faredst lief and light ✿ To other
    objects of thy love with fain and fastest flight!
 Deem’st thou that ’bided I with you in solace and in joy ✿ Or that my
    days amid you all were clear of bane and blight?
 When I was captive ta’en of Love and snarèd in his snare, ✿ He made of
    Love my prison and he fared fro’ me forthright:
 So when my fear was hidden, he made sure that ne’er should I ✿ Pray to
    the One, th’ Omnipotent to render me my right:
 He charged his mother keep the secret with all the care she could, ✿ In
    closet shut and treated me with enemy’s despight:
 But I o’erheard their words and held them fast in memory ✿ And hoped for
    fortune fair and weal and blessings infinite:
 My faring to the Hammam bath then proved to me the means ✿ Of making
    minds of folk to be confounded at my sight:
 Wondered the Bride of Al-Rashíd to see my brilliancy ✿ When she beheld
    me right and left with all of beauty dight:
 Then quoth I, “O our Caliph’s wife, I once was wont to own ✿ A dress of
    feathers rich and rare that did the eyes delight:
 An it were now on me thou shouldst indeed see wondrous things ✿ That
    would efface all sorrows and disperse all sores of sprite:”
 Then deigned our Caliph’s Bride to cry, “Where is that dress of thine?”
    ✿ And I replied, “In house of him kept darkling as the night.”

 So down upon it pounced Masrúr and brought it unto her, ✿ And when ’twas
    there each feather cast a ray of beaming light:
 Therewith I took it from his hand and opened it straightway ✿ And saw
    its plumèd bosom and its buttons pleased my sight:
 And so I clad myself therein and took with me my babes; ✿ And spread my
    wings and flew away with all my main and might;
 Saying, “O husband’s mother mine tell him when cometh he ✿ An ever
    wouldest meet her thou from house and home must flee.”

When she had made an end of her verses, the Lady Zubaydah said to her,
“Wilt thou not come down to us, that we may take our fill of thy beauty,
O fairest of the fair? Glory be to Him who hath given thee eloquence and
brilliance!” But she said, “Far be from me that the Past return should
see!” Then said she to the mother of the hapless, wretched Hasan, “By
Allah, O my lady, O mother of my husband, it irketh me to part from
thee; but, whenas thy son cometh to thee and upon him the nights of
severance longsome shall be and he craveth reunion and meeting to see
and whenas breezes of love and longing shake him dolefully, let him come
in the islands of Wák[95] to me.” Then she took flight with her children
and sought her own country, whilst the old woman wept and beat her face
and moaned and groaned till she swooned away. When she came to herself,
she said to the Lady Zubaydah, “O my lady, what is this thou hast done?”
And Zubaydah said to her, “O my lady the pilgrimess, I knew not that
this would happen and hadst thou told me of the case and acquainted me
with her condition, I had not gainsaid thee. Nor did I know until now
that she was of the Flying Jinn; else had I not suffered her to don the
dress nor permitted her to take her children: but now, O my lady, words
profit nothing; so do thou acquit me of offence against thee.” And the
old woman could do no otherwise than shortly answer, “Thou art
acquitted!” Then she went forth the palace of the Caliphate and returned
to her own house, where she buffeted her face till she swooned away.
When she came to herself, she pined for her daughter-in-law and her
grandchildren and for the sight of her son and versified with these
couplets:—

 Your faring on the parting-day drew many a tear fro’ me, ✿ Who must your
    flying from the home long mourn in misery:
 And cried I for the parting pang in anguish likest fire ✿ And
    tear-floods chafed mine eyelids sore that ne’er of tears were free;
 “Yes, this is Severance, Ah, shall we e’er joy return of you? ✿ For your
    departure hath deprived my power of privacy!”
 Ah, would they had returned to me in covenant of faith ✿ An they return
    perhaps restore of past these eyne may see.

Then arising she dug in the house three graves and betook herself to
them with weeping all whiles of the day and watches of the night; and
when her son’s absence was longsome upon her and grief and yearning and
unquiet waxed upon her, she recited these couplets:—

 Deep in mine eyeballs ever dwells the phantom-form of thee ✿ My heart
    when throbbing or at rest holds fast thy memory:
 And love of thee doth never cease to course within my breast, ✿ As
    course the juices in the fruits which deck the branchy tree:

 And every day I see thee not my bosom straightened is ✿ And even
    censurers excuse the woes in me they see:
 O thou whose love hath gotten hold the foremost in the heart ✿ Of me
    whose fondness is excelled by mine insanity:
 Fear the Compassionate in my case and some compassion show! ✿ Love of
    thee makes me taste of death in bitterest pungency.

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


      Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Hasan’s
mother bewept through the watches of the night and the whiles of the day
her separation from her son and his wife and children. On this wise it
fared with her; but as regards Hasan, when he came to the Princesses,
they conjured him to tarry with them three months, after which long
sojourn they gave him five loads of gold and the like of silver and one
load of victual and accompanied him on his homeward way till he conjured
them to return, whereupon they farewelled him with an embrace; but the
youngest came up to him, to bid him adieu and clasping his neck wept
till she fainted. Then she recited these two couplets:—

 When shall the severance-fire be quenched by union, love, with you? ✿
    When shall I win my wish of you and days that were renew?
 The parting-day affrighted me and wrought me dire dismay ✿ And doubleth
    woe, O master mine, by the sad word “Adieu.”

Anon came forward the second Princess and embraced him and recited these
two couplets:—

 Farewelling thee indeed is like to bidding life farewell ✿ And like the
    loss of Zephyr[96] ’tis to lose thee far our sight:
 Thine absence is a flaming fire which burneth up my heart ✿ And in thy
    presence I enjoy the Gardens of Delight.[97]

Presently came forward the third and embraced him and recited these two
couplets:—

 We left not taking leave of thee (when bound to other goal) ✿ From aught
    of ill intention or from weariness and dole:
 Thou art my soul, my very soul, the only soul of me: ✿ And how shall I
    farewell myself and say, “Adieu my Soul?”[98]

After her came forward the fourth and embraced him and recited these two
couplets:—

 Nought garred me weep save where and when of severance spake he ✿
    Persisting in his cruel will with sore persistency:
 Look at this pearl-like ornament I’ve hung upon mine ear; ✿ ’Tis of the
    tears of me compact, this choicest jewelry!

In her turn came forward the fifth and embraced him and recited these
two couplets:—

 Ah, fare thee not; for I’ve no force thy faring to endure, ✿ Nor e’en to
    say the word farewell before my friend is sped:
 Nor any patience to support the days of severance, ✿ Nor any tears on
    ruined house and wasted home to shed.

Next came the sixth and embraced him and recited these two couplets:—

 I cried, as the camels went off with them, ✿ And Love pained my vitals
    with sorest pain:
 Had I a King who would lend me rule ✿ I’d seize every ship that dares
    sail the Main.

Lastly came forward the seventh and embraced him and recited these
couplets:—

 When thou seest parting, be patient still, [Symbol: star] Nor let
    foreign parts deal thy soul affright:
 But abide, expecting a swift return, [Symbol: star] For all hearts hold
    parting in sore despight.

And eke these two couplets:—

 Indeed I’m heart-broken to see thee start, ✿ Nor can I farewell thee ere
    thou depart;
 Allah wotteth I left not to say adieu ✿ Save for fear that saying would
    melt your heart.

Hasan also wept for parting from them, till he swooned, and repeated
these couplets:—

 Indeed, ran my tears on the severance-day ✿ Like pearls I threaded in
    necklace-way:
 The cameleer drove his camels with song ✿ But I lost heart, patience and
    strength and stay:
 I bade them farewell and retired in grief ✿ From tryst-place and camp
    where my dearlings lay:
 I turned me unknowing the way nor joyed ✿ My soul, but in hopes to
    return some day.
 Oh listen, my friend, to the words of love ✿ God forbid thy heart forget
    all I say!
 O my soul when thou partest wi’ them, part too ✿ With all joys of life
    nor for living pray!

Then he farewelled them and fared on diligently night and day, till he
came to Baghdad, the House of Peace and Sanctuary of the Abbaside
Caliphs unknowing what had passed during his wayfare. At once entering
his house he went in to his mother to salute her, but found her worn of
body and wasted of bones, for excess of mourning and watching, weeping
and wailing, till she was grown thin as a toothpick and could not answer
him a word. So he dismissed the dromedaries then asked her of his wife
and children and she wept till she fainted, and he seeing her in this
state searched the house for them, but found no trace of them. Then he
went to the store-closet and finding it open and the chest broken and
the feather-dress missing, knew forthright that his wife had possessed
herself thereof and flown away with her children. Then he returned to
his mother and, finding her recovered from her fit, questioned her of
his spouse and babes, whereupon she wept and said, “O my son, may Allah
amply requite thee their loss! These are their three tombs.”[99] When
Hasan heard these words of his mother, he shrieked a loud shriek and
fell down in a fainting-fit in which he lay from the first of the day
till noon-tide; whereupon anguish was added to his mother’s anguish and
she despaired of his life. However, after awhile, he came to himself and
wept and buffeted his face and rent his raiment and went about the house
clean distraught, reciting these two couplets[100]:—

 Folk have made moan of passion before me, of past years, ✿ And live and
    dead for absence have suffered pains and fears;
 But that within my bosom I harbour, with mine eyes ✿ I’ve never seen the
    like of nor heard with mine ears.

Then finishing his verses he bared his brand and coming up to his
mother, said to her, “Except thou tell me the truth of the case, I will
strike off thy head and kill myself.” She replied, “O my son, do not
such deed: put up thy sword and sit down, till I tell thee what hath
passed.” So he sheathed his scymitar and sat by her side, whilst she
recounted to him all that had happened in his absence from first to
last, adding, “O my son, but that I saw her weep in her longing for the
bath and feared that she would go and complain to thee on thy return,
and thou wouldst be wroth with me, I had never carried her thither; and
were it not that the Lady Zubaydah was wroth with me and took the key
from me by force, I had never brought out the feather-dress, though I
died for it. But thou knowest, O my son, that no hand may measure length
with that of the Caliphate. When they brought her the dress, she took it
and turned it over, fancying that somewhat might be lost thereof, but
she found it uninjured; wherefore she rejoiced and making her children
fast to her waist, donned the feather-vest, after the Lady Zubaydah had
pulled off to her all that was upon herself and clad her therein, in
honour of her and because of her beauty. No sooner had she donned the
dress than she shook and becoming a bird, promenaded about the palace,
whilst all who were present gazed at her and marvelled at her beauty and
loveliness. Then she flew up to the palace roof and perching thereon,
looked at me and said:—Whenas thy son cometh to thee and the nights of
separation upon him longsome shall be and he craveth reunion and meeting
to see and whenas the breezes of love and longing shake him dolefully
let him leave his native land and journey to the Islands of Wak and seek
me. This, then, is her story and what befel in thine absence.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Ninety-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that as soon as
Hasan’s mother had made an end of her story, he gave a great cry and
fell down in a fainting fit which continued till the end of day, when he
revived and fell to buffeting his face and writhing on the floor like a
scotched snake. His mother sat weeping by his head until midnight, when
he came to himself and wept sore and recited these couplets[101]:—

 Pause ye and see his sorry state since when ye fain withdrew; ✿ Haply,
    when wrought your cruelty, you’ll have the grace to rue:
 For an ye look on him, you’ll doubt of him by sickness-stress ✿ As
    though, by Allah, he were one before ye never knew.
 He dies for nothing save for love of you, and he would be ✿ Numbered
    amid the dead did not he moan and groan for you.
 And deem not pangs of severance sit all lightly on his soul; ✿ ’Tis
    heavy load on lover-wight; ’twere lighter an ye slew.

Then having ended his verse he rose and went round about the house,
weeping and wailing, groaning and bemoaning himself, five days, during
which he tasted nor meat nor drink. His mother came to him and conjured
him, till he broke his fast, and besought him to leave weeping; but he
hearkened not to her and continued to shed tears and lament, whilst she
strove to comfort him and he heeded her not. Then he recited these
couplets[102]:—

 Beareth for love a burden sore this soul of me, ✿ Could break a mortal’s
    back however strong that be;
 I am distraught to see my case and languor grows ✿ Making my day and
    night indifferent in degree:
 I own to having dreaded Death before this day: ✿ This day I hold my
    death mine only remedy.

And Hasan ceased not to do thus till daybreak, when his eyes closed and
he saw in a dream his wife grief-full and repentant for that which she
had done. So he started up from sleep crying out and reciting these two
couplets:—

 Their image bides with me, ne’er quits me, ne’er shall fly; ✿ but holds
    within my heart most honourable stead;
 But for reunion-hope, I’d see me die forthright, ✿ And but for
    phantom-form of thee my sleep had fled.

And as morning morrowed he redoubled his lamentations. He abode
weeping-eyed and heavy-hearted, wakeful by night and eating little, for
a whole month at the end of which he bethought him to repair to his
sisters and take counsel with them in the matter of his wife, so haply
they might help him to regain her. Accordingly he summoned the
dromedaries and loading fifty of them with rarities of Al-Irak,
committed the house to his mother’s care and deposited all his goods in
safe keeping, except some few he left at home. Then he mounted one of
the beasts and set out on his journey single handed, intent upon
obtaining aidance from the Princesses, and he stayed not till he reached
the Palace of the Mountain of Clouds, when he went in to the damsels and
gave them the presents, in which they rejoiced. Then they wished him joy
of his safety and said to him, “O our brother, what can ail thee to come
again so soon, seeing thou wast with us but two months since?” Whereupon
he wept and improvised these couplets:—

 My soul for loss of lover sped I sight; ✿ Nor life enjoying neither
    life’s delight:
 My case is one whose cure is all unknown; ✿ Can any cure the sick but
    doctor wight?
 O who hast reft my sleep-joys, leaving me ✿ To ask the breeze that blew
    from that fair site,—
 Blew from my lover’s land (the land that owns ✿ Those charms so sore a
    grief in soul excite),
 “O breeze, that visitest her land, perhaps ✿ Breathing her scent, thou
    mayst revive my sprite!”

And when he ended his verse he gave a great cry and fell down in a
fainting-fit. The Princesses sat round him, weeping over him, till he
recovered and repeated these two couplets:—

 Haply and happily may Fortune bend her rein ✿ Bringing my love, for
    Time’s a freke of jealous strain;[103]
 Fortune may prosper me, supply mine every want, ✿ And bring a blessing
    where before were ban and bane.

Then he wept till he fainted again, and presently coming to himself
recited the two following couplets:—

 My wish, mine illness, mine unease! by Allah, own ✿ Art thou content?
    then I in love contented wone!
 Dost thou forsake me thus sans crime or sin ✿ Meet me in ruth, I pray,
    and be our parting gone.

Then he wept till he swooned away once more and when he revived he
repeated these couplets:—

 Sleep fled me, by my side wake ever shows ✿ And hoard of tear-drops from
    these eyne aye flows;
 For love they weep with beads cornelian-like ✿ And growth of distance
    greater dolence grows:
 Lit up my longing, O my love, in me ✿ Flames burning ’neath my ribs with
    fiery throes!
 Remembering thee a tear I never shed ✿ But in it thunder roars and leven
    glows.

Then he wept till he fainted away a fourth time, and presently
recovering, recited these couplets:—

 Ah! for lowe of love and longing suffer ye as suffer we? ✿ Say, as pine
    we and as yearn we for you are pining ye?
 Allah do the death of Love, what a bitter draught is his! ✿ Would I wot
    of Love what plans and what projects nurseth he!
 Your faces radiant-fair though afar from me they shine, ✿ Are mirrored
    in our eyes whatsoe’er the distance be;
 My heart must ever dwell on the memories of your tribe; ✿ And the
    turtledove reneweth all as oft as moaneth she:
 Ho thou dove, who passest night-tide in calling on thy fere, ✿ Thou
    doublest my repine, bringing grief for company;
 And leavest thou mine eyelids with weeping unfulfilled ✿ For the
    dearlings who departed, whom we never more may see:
 I melt for the thought of you at every time and hour, ✿ And I long for
    you when Night showeth cheek of blackest blee.

Now when his sister heard these words and saw his condition and how he
lay fainting on the floor, she screamed and beat her face and the other
Princesses hearing her scream came out and learning his misfortune and
the transport of love and longing and the passion and distraction that
possessed him they questioned him of his case. He wept and told them
what had befallen in his absence and how his wife had taken flight with
her children, wherefore they grieved for him and asked him what she said
at leave-taking. Answered he, “O my sisters, she said to my mother, Tell
thy son, whenas he cometh to thee and the nights of severance upon him
longsome shall be and he craveth reunion and meeting to see, and whenas
the winds of love and longing shake him dolefully, let him fare in the
Islands of Wak to me.” When they heard his words they signed one to
other with their eyes and shook their heads, and each looked at her
sister, whilst Hasan looked at them all. Then they bowed their heads
groundwards and bethought themselves awhile; after which they raised
their heads and said, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great!”; presently adding, “Put forth thy hand
to heaven and when thou reach thither, then shalt thou win to thy
wife.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Seven Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Princesses said to Hasan, “Put forth thy hand to Heaven and when thou
reach thither, then shalt thou win to wife and children,” thereat the
tears ran down his cheeks like rain and wet his clothes, and he recited
these couplets:—

 Pink cheeks and eyes enpupil’d black have dealt me sore despight; ✿ And
    whenas wake overpowered sleep my patience fled in fright:
 The fair and sleek-limbed maidens hard of heart withal laid waste ✿ My
    very bones till not a breath is left for man to sight:
 Houris, who fare with gait of grace as roes o’er sandy-mound: ✿ Did
    Allah’s saints behold their charms they’d doat thereon forthright;
 Faring as fares the garden breeze that bloweth in the dawn, ✿ For love
    of them a sore unrest and troubles rack my sprite:
 I hung my hopes upon a maid, a loveling fair of them, ✿ For whom my
    heart still burns with lowe in Lazá-hell they light;—
 A dearling soft of sides and haught and graceful in her gait, ✿ Her
    grace is white as morning, but her hair is black as night:
 She stirreth me! But ah, how many heroes have her cheeks ✿ Upstirred for
    love, and eke her eyes that mingle black and white.

Then he wept, whilst the Princesses wept for his weeping, and they were
moved to compassion and jealousy for him. So they fell to comforting him
and exhorting him to patience and offering up prayers for his reunion
with his wife; whilst his sister said to him, “O my brother, be of good
cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear and be patient; so shalt thou
win thy will; for whoso hath patience and waiteth, that he seeketh
attaineth. Patience holdeth the keys of relief and indeed the poet
saith:—

 Let destiny with slackened rein its course appointed fare! And lie thou
    down to sleep by night, with heart devoid of care;
 For ’twixt the closing of an eye and th’ opening thereof, God hath it in
    His power to change a case from foul to fair.[104]

So hearten thy heart and brace up thy resolve, for the son of ten years
dieth not in the ninth.[105] Weeping and grief and mourning gender
sickness and disease; wherefore do thou abide with us till thou be
rested, and I will devise some device for thy winning to thy wife and
children, Inshallah—so it please Allah the Most High!” And he wept sore
and recited these verses:—

 An I be healed of disease in frame, ✿ I’m unhealed of illness in heart
    and sprite:
 There is no healing disease of love, ✿ Save lover and loved one to
    reunite.

Then he sat down beside her and she proceeded to talk with him and
comfort him and question him of the cause and the manner of his wife’s
departure. So he told her and she said, “By Allah, O my brother, I was
minded to bid thee burn the feather-dress, but Satan made me forget it.”
She ceased not to converse with him and caress him and company with him
other ten days, whilst sleep visited him not and he delighted not in
food; and when the case was longsome upon him and unrest waxed in him,
he versified with these couplets:—

 A beloved familiar o’erreigns my heart ✿ And Allah’s ruling reigns
    evermore:
 She hath all the Arabs’ united charms ✿ This gazelle who feeds on my
    bosom’s core.
 Though my skill and patience for love of her fail, ✿ I weep whilst I wot
    that ’tis vain to deplore.
 The dearling hath twice seven years, as though ✿ She were moon of five
    nights and of five plus four.[106]

When the youngest Princess saw him thus distracted for love and
longing-for passion and the fever-heat of desire, she went in to her
sisterhood weeping-eyed and woeful-hearted, and shedding copious tears
threw herself upon them, kissed their feet and besought them to devise
some device for bringing Hasan to the Islands of Wak and effecting his
reunion with his wife and wees. She ceased not to conjure them to
further her brother in the accomplishment of his desire and to weep
before them, till she made them weep and they said to her, “Hearten thy
heart: we will do our best endeavour to bring about his reunion with his
family, Inshallah!” And he abode with them a whole year, during which
his eyes never could retain their tears. Now the sisterhood had an
uncle, brother-german to their sire and his name was Abd al-Kaddús, or
Slave of the Most Holy; and he loved the eldest with exceeding love and
was wont to visit her once a year and do all she desired. They had told
him of Hasan’s adventure with the Magian and how he had been able to
slay him; whereat he rejoiced and gave the eldest Princess a pouch[107]
which contained certain perfumes, saying, “O daughter of my brother, an
thou be in concern for aught, or if aught irk thee, or thou stand in any
need, cast of these perfumes upon fire naming my name and I will be with
thee forthright and will do thy desire.” This speech was spoken on the
first of Moharram[108]; and the eldest Princess said to one of the
sisterhood, “Lo, the year is wholly past and my uncle is not come. Rise,
bring me the fire-sticks and the box of perfumes.” So the damsel arose
rejoicing and, fetching what she sought, laid it before her sister, who
opened the box and taking thence a little of the perfume, cast it into
the fire, naming her uncle’s name; nor was it burnt out ere appeared a
dust-cloud at the farther end of the Wady; and presently lifting, it
discovered a Shaykh riding on an elephant, which moved at a swift and
easy pace, and trumpeted under the rider. As soon as he came within
sight of the Princesses, he began making signs to them with his hands
and feet; nor was it long ere he reached the castle and, alighting from
the elephant, came in to them, whereupon they embraced him and kissed
his hands and saluted him with the salam. Then he sat down, whilst the
girls talked with him and questioned him of his absence. Quoth he, “I
was sitting but now with my wife, your aunt, when I smelt the perfumes
and hastened to you on this elephant. What wouldst thou, O daughter of
my brother?” Quoth she, “O uncle, indeed we longed for thee, as the year
is past and ’tis not thy wont to be absent from us more than a
twelvemonth.” Answered he, “I was busy, but I purposed to come to you
to-morrow.” Wherefore they thanked him and blessed him and sat talking
with him.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


               Now when it was the Eight Hundredth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the girls sat
down to chat with their uncle the eldest said to him, “O my uncle, we
told thee the tale of Hasan of Bassorah, whom Bahram the Magian brought
and how he slew the wizard and how, after enduring all manner of
hardships and horrors, he made prize of the Supreme King’s daughter and
took her to wife and journeyed with her to his native land?” Replied he,
“Yes, and what befel him after that?” Quoth the Princess, “She played
him false after he was blest with two sons by her; for she took them in
his absence and fled with them to her own country, saying to his
mother:—Whenas thy son returneth to thee and asketh for me and upon him
the nights of severance longsome shall be and he craveth reunion and
meeting to see and whenas the breezes of love and longing shake him
dolefully, let him come in the Islands of Wak to me.” When Abd al-Kaddus
heard this, he shook his head and bit his forefinger; then, bowing his
brow groundwards he began to make marks on the earth with his
finger-tips;[109] after which he again shook his head and looked right
and left and shook his head a third time, whilst Hasan watched him from
a place where he was hidden from him. Then said the Princesses to their
uncle, “Return us some answer, for our hearts are rent in sunder.” But
he shook his head at them, saying, “O my daughters, verily hath this man
wearied himself in vain and cast himself into grievous predicament and
sore peril; for he may not gain access to the Islands of Wak.” With this
the Princesses called Hasan, who came forth and, advancing to Shaykh Abd
al-Kaddus, kissed his hand and saluted him. The old man rejoiced in him
and seated him by his side; whereupon quoth the damsels, “O uncle,
acquaint our brother Hasan with that thou hast told us.” So he said to
Hasan, “O my son, put away from thee this _peine forte et dure_; for
thou canst never gain access to the Islands of Wak, though the Flying
Jinn and the Wandering Stars were with thee; for that betwixt thee and
these islands are seven Wadys and seven seas and seven mighty mountains.
How then canst thou come at this stead and who shall bring thee thither?
Wherefore, Allah upon thee, O my son, do thou reckon thy spouse and sons
as dead and turn back forthright and weary not thy sprite! Indeed, I
give thee good counsel, an thou wilt but accept it.” Hearing these words
from the Shaykh, Hasan wept till he fainted, and the Princesses sat
round him, weeping for his weeping, whilst the youngest sister rent her
raiment and buffeted her face, till she swooned away. When Shaykh Abd
al-Kaddus saw them in this transport of grief and trouble and mourning,
he was moved to ruth for them and cried, “Be ye silent!” Then said he to
Hasan, “O my son, hearten thy heart and rejoice in the winning of thy
wish, an it be the will of Allah the Most High;” presently adding,
“Rise, O my son, take courage and follow me.” So Hasan arose forthright
and after he had taken leave of the Princesses followed him, rejoicing
in the fulfilment of his wish. Then the Shaykh called the elephant and
mounting, took Hasan up behind him and fared on three days with their
nights, like the blinding leven, till he came to a vast blue mountain,
whose stones were all of azure hue and amiddlemost of which was a
cavern, with a door of Chinese iron. Here he took Hasan’s hand and let
him down and alighting dismissed the elephant. Then he went up to the
door and knocked, whereupon it opened and there came out to him a black
slave, hairless, as he were an Ifrit, with brand in right hand and targe
of steel in left. When he saw Abd al-Kaddus, he threw sword and buckler
from his grip and coming up to the Shaykh kissed his hand. Thereupon the
old man took Hasan by the hand and entered with him, whilst the slave
shut the door behind them; when Hasan found himself in a vast cavern and
a spacious, through which ran an arched corridor and they ceased not
faring on therein a mile or so, till it abutted upon a great open space
and thence they made for an angle of the mountain wherein were two huge
doors cast of solid brass. The old man opened one of them and said to
Hasan, “Sit at the door, whilst I go within and come back to thee in
haste, and beware lest thou open it and enter.” Then he fared inside
and, shutting the door after him, was absent during a full sidereal
hour, after which he returned, leading a black stallion, thin of flank
and short of nose, which was ready bridled and saddled, with velvet
housings; and when it ran it flew, and when it flew, the very dust in
vain would pursue; and brought it to Hasan, saying, “Mount!” So he
mounted and Abd al-Kaddus opened the second door, beyond which appeared
a vast desert. Then the twain passed through the door into that desert
and the old man said to him, “O my son, take this scroll and wend thou
whither this steed will carry thee. When thou seest him stop at the door
of a cavern like this, alight and throw the reins over the saddle-bow
and let him go. He will enter the cavern, which do thou not enter with
him, but tarry at the door five days, without being weary of waiting. On
the sixth day there will come forth to thee a black Shaykh, clad all in
sable, with a long white beard, flowing down to his navel. As soon as
thou seest him kiss his hands and seize his skirt and lay it on thy head
and weep before him, till he take pity on thee and he will ask thee what
thou wouldst have. When he saith to thee, “What is thy want?” give him
this scroll which he will take without speaking and go in and leave
thee. Wait at the door other five days, without wearying, and on the
sixth day expect him; and if he come out to thee himself, know that thy
wish will be won, but, if one of his pages come forth to thee, know that
he who cometh forth to thee, purposeth to kill thee; and—the Peace![110]
For know, O my son, that whoso self imperilleth doeth himself to
death;”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


           Now when it was the Eight Hundred and First Night,

She continued, “It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after
handing the scroll to Hasan, Shaykh Abd al-Kaddus told him what would
befal him and said, “Whoso self imperilleth doeth himself to death;” but
also “who ventureth naught advantageth naught.” However an thou fear for
thy life, cast it not into danger of destruction; but, an thou fear not,
up and do thy will, for I have expounded to thee the whole case. Yet
shouldest thou be minded to return to thy friends the elephant is still
here and he will carry thee to my nieces, who will restore thee to thy
country and return thee to thy home, and Allah will vouchsafe thee a
better than this girl, of whom thou art enamoured.” Hasan answered the
Shaykh, saying, “And how shall life be sweet to me, except I win my
wish? By Allah, I will never turn back, till I regain my beloved or my
death overtake me!” And he wept and recited these couplets:—

 For loss of lover mine and stress of love I dree, ✿ I stood bewailing
    self in deep despondency.
 Longing for him, the Spring-camp’s dust I kissed and kissed, ✿ But this
    bred more of grief and galling reverie.
 God guard the gone, who in our hearts must e’er abide ✿ With nearing
    woes and joys which still the farther flee.
 They say me, “Patience!” But they bore it all away: ✿ On parting-day,
    and left me naught save tormentry.
 And naught affrighted me except the word he said, ✿ “Forget me not when
    gone nor drive from memory.”
 To whom shall turn I? hope in whom when you are lost? ✿ Who were my only
    hopes and joys and woes of me?
 But ah, the pang of home-return when parting thus! ✿ How joyed at seeing
    me return mine enemy.
 Then well-away! this ’twas I guarded me against! ✿ And ah, thou lowe of
    Love double thine ardency![111]
 An fled for aye my friends I’ll not survive the flight; ✿ Yet an they
    deign return, Oh joy! Oh ecstacy!
 Never, by Allah tears and weeping I’ll contain ✿ For loss of you, but
    tears on tears and tears will rain.

When Abd al-Kaddus heard his verse he knew that he would not turn back
from his desire nor would words have effect on him, and was certified
that naught would serve him but he must imperil himself, though it lose
him his life. So he said to him, “Know, O my son, that the Islands of
Wak are seven islands, wherein is a mighty host, all virgin girls, and
the Inner Isles are peopled by Satans and Marids and warlocks and
various tribesmen of the Jinn; and whoso entereth their land never
returneth thence; at least none hath done so to this day. So, Allah upon
thee, return presently to thy people, for know that she whom thou
seekest is the King’s daughter of all these islands; and how canst thou
attain to her? Hearken to me, O my son, and haply Allah will vouchsafe
thee in her stead a better than she.” “O my lord,” answered Hasan,
“though for the love of her I were cut in pieces yet should I but
redouble in love and transport! There is no help but that I enter the
Wak Islands and come to the sight of my wife and children; and
Inshallah, I will not return save with her and with them.” Said the
Shaykh, “Then nothing will serve thee but thou must make the journey?”
Hasan replied, “Nothing! and I only ask of thee thy prayers for help and
aidance; so haply Allah will reunite me with my wife and children right
soon.” Then he wept for stress of longing and recited these couplets:—

 You are my wish, of creatures brightest-light ✿ I deem you lief as
    hearing, fain as sight:
 You hold my heart which hath become your home ✿ And since you left me,
    lords, right sore’s my plight:
 Then think not I have yielded up your love, ✿ Your love which set this
    wretch in fierce affright:
 You went and went my joy whenas you went; ✿ And waned and waxèd wan the
    brightest light:
 You left me lone to watch the stars in woe: ✿ Railing tears likest
    rain-drops infinite.
 Thou’rt longsome to the wight, who pining lies ✿ On wake, moon-gazing
    through the night, O Night!
 Wind! an thou pass the tribe where they abide ✿ Give them my greeting,
    life is fain of flight.
 And tell them somewhat of the pangs I bear: ✿ The loved one kenneth not
    my case aright

Then he wept with sore weeping till he fainted away; and when he came to
himself, Shaykh Abd al-Kaddus said to him, “O my son, thou hast a
mother; make her not taste the torment of thy loss.” Hasan replied, “By
Allah, O my lord, I will never return except with my wife, or my death
shall overtake me.” And he wept and wailed and recited these couplets:—

 By Love’s right! naught of farness thy slave can estrange ✿ Nor am _I_
    one to fail in my fealty:
 I suffer such pains did I tell my case ✿ To folk, they’d cry, “Madness!
    clean witless is he!”
 Then ecstasy, love-longing, transport and lowe! ✿ Whose case is such
    case how shall ever he be?

With this the old man knew that he would not turn from his purpose,
though it cost him his life; so he handed him the scroll and prayed for
him and charged him how he should do, saying “I have in this letter
given a strict charge concerning thee to Abú al-Ruwaysh,[112] son of
Bilkís, daughter of Mu’ín, for he is my Shaykh and my teacher, and all,
men and Jinn, humble themselves to him and stand in awe of him. And now
go with the blessing of God.” Hasan forthright set out giving the horse
the rein, and it flew off with him swiftlier than lightning, and stayed
not in its course ten days, when he saw before him a vast loom black as
night, walling the world from East to West. As he neared it, the
stallion neighed under him, whereupon there flocked to it horses in
number as the drops of rain, none could tell their tale or against them
prevail, and fell to rubbing themselves against it. Hasan was affrighted
at them and fared forwards surrounded by the horses, without drawing
rein till he came to the cavern which Shaykh Abd al-Kaddus had described
to him. The steed stood still at the door and Hasan alighted and bridged
the bridle over the saddle-bow[113]; whereupon the steed entered the
cavern, whilst the rider abode without, as the old man had charged him,
pondering the issue of his case in perplexity and distraction and
unknowing what would befal him.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Second Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Hasan,
dismounting from the steed, stood at the cavern-mouth pondering the
issue of his case and unknowing what might befal him. He abode standing
on the same spot five days with their nights, sleepless, mournful,
tearful-eyed; distracted, perplexed, pondering his severance from home
and family, comrades and friends, with weeping eyelids and heavy heart.
Then he bethought him of his mother and of what might yet happen to him
and of his separation from his wife and children and of all that he had
suffered, and he recited these couplets:—

 With you is my heart-cure a heart that goes; ✿ And from hill-foot of
    eyelids the tear-rill flows:
 And parting and sorrow and exile and dole ✿ And farness from country and
    throe that o’erthrows:
 Naught am I save a lover distracted by love, ✿ Far parted from loved one
    and wilted by woes.
 And ’tis Love that hath brought me such sorrow, say where ✿ Is the noble
    of soul who such sorrow unknows?

Hardly had Hasan made an end of his verses, when out came the Shaykh Abu
al-Ruwaysh, a blackamoor and clad in black raiment, and at first sight
he knew him by the description that Abd al-Kaddus had given him. He
threw himself at his feet and rubbed his cheeks on them and seizing his
skirt, laid it on his head and wept before him. Quoth the old man, “What
wantest thou, O my son?” Whereupon he put out his hand to him with the
letter, and Abu al-Ruwaysh took it and re-entered the cavern, without
making him any answer. So Hasan sat down at the cave-mouth in his place
other five days as he had been bidden, whilst concern grew upon him and
terror redoubled on him and restlessness gat hold of him, and he fell to
weeping and bemoaning himself for the anguish of estrangement and much
watching. And he recited these couplets:—

 Glory to Him who guides the skies! ✿ The lover sore in sorrow lies.
 Who hath not tasted of Love’s food ✿ Knows not what mean its miseries.
 Did I attempt to stem my tears ✿ Rivers of blood would fount and rise.
 How many an intimate is hard ✿ Of heart, and pains in sorest wise!
 An she with me her word would keep, ✿ Of tears and sighs I’d fain
    devise,
 But I’m forgone, rejected quite ✿ Ruin on me hath cast her eyes.
 At my fell pangs fell wildlings weep ✿ And not a bird for me but cries.

Hasan ceased not to weep till dawn of the sixth day, when Shaykh Abu
al-Ruwaysh came forth to him, clad in white raiment, and with his hand
signed[114] to him to enter. So he went in, rejoicing and assured of the
winning of his wish, and the old man took him by the hand and leading
him into the cavern, fared on with him half a day’s journey, till they
reached an arched doorway with a door of steel. The Shaykh opened the
door and they two entered a vestibule vaulted with onyx stones and
arabesqued with gold, and they stayed not walking till they came to a
great hall and a wide, paved and walled with marble. In its midst was a
flower-garden containing all manner trees and flowers and fruits, with
birds warbling on the boughs and singing the praises of Allah the
Almighty Sovran; and there were four daïses, each facing other, and in
each daïs a jetting fountain, at whose corners stood lions of red gold,
spouting gerbes from their mouths into the basin. On each daïs stood a
chair, whereon sat an elder, with exceeding store of books before
him[115] and censers of gold, containing fire and perfumes, and before
each elder were students, who read the books to him. Now when the twain
entered, the elders rose to them and did them honour; whereupon Abu
al-Ruwaysh signed to them to dismiss their scholars and they did so.
Then the four arose and seating themselves before that Shaykh, asked him
of the case of Hasan to whom he said, “Tell the company thy tale and all
that hath betided thee from the beginning of thine adventure to the
end.” So Hasan wept with sore weeping and related to them his story with
Bahram; whereupon all the Shaykhs cried out and said, “Is this indeed he
whom the Magian caused to climb the Mountain of Clouds by means of the
vultures, sewn up in the camel-hide?” And Hasan said, “Yes.” So they
turned to the Shaykh, Abu al-Ruwaysh and said to him, “O our Shaykh of a
truth Bahram contrived his mounting to the mountain-top; but how came he
down and what marvels saw he there?” And Abu al-Ruwaysh said, “O Hasan,
tell them how thou camest down and acquaint them with what thou sawest
of marvels.” So he told them all that had befallen him, first and last;
how he had gotten the Magian into his power and slain him, how he had
delivered the youth from him and sent him back to his own country, and
how he had captured the King’s daughter of the Jinn and married her; yet
had she played him false and taken the two boys she had borne him and
flown away; brief, he related to them all the hardships and horrors he
had undergone; whereat they marvelled, each and every, and said to Abu
al-Ruwaysh, “O elder of elders, verily by Allah, this youth is to be
pitied! But belike thou wilt aid him to recover his wife and wees.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Third Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasan told
his tale to the elders, they said to Shaykh Abu al-Ruwaysh, “This youth
is to be pitied and haply thou wilt aid him to recover his wife and
wees.” He replied, “O my brothers, in very sooth this is a grave matter
and a perilous; and never saw I any loathe his life save this youth. You
know that the Islands of Wak are hard of access and that none may come
to them but at risk of life; and ye know also the strength of their
people and their guards. Moreover I have sworn an oath not to tread
their soil nor transgress against them in aught; so how shall this man
come at the daughter of the Great King, and who hath power to bring him
to her or help him in this matter?” Replied the other, “O Shaykh of
Shaykhs, verily this man is consumed with desire and he hath endangered
himself to bring thee a scroll from thy brother Abd al-Kaddus; wherefore
it behoveth thee to help him.” And Hasan arose and kissed Abu
al-Ruwaysh’s feet and raising the hem of his garment laid it on his
head, weeping and crying, “I beseech thee, by Allah, to reunite me with
my wife and children, though it cost me my life and my soul!” The four
elders all wept for his weeping and said to Abu al-Ruwaysh, “Deal
generously with this unhappy and show him kindness for the sake of thy
brother Abd al-Kaddus and profit by this occasion to earn reward from
Allah for helping him.” Quoth he, “This wilful youth weeteth not what he
undertaketh; but Inshallah! we will help him after the measure of our
means, nor leave aught feasible undone.” When Hasan heard the Shaykh’s
words, he rejoiced and kissed the hands of the five elders, one after
other, imploring their aidance. Thereupon Abd al-Ruwaysh took inkcase
and a sheet of paper and wrote a letter, which he sealed and gave to
Hasan, together with a pouch of perfumed leather,[116] containing
incense and fire-sticks[117] and other needs, and said to him, “Take
strictest care of this pouch, and whenas thou fallest into any strait,
burn a little of the incense therein and name my name, whereupon I will
be with thee forthright and save thee from thy stress.” Moreover, he
bade one of those present fetch him an Ifrit of the Flying Jinn; and he
did so incontinently; whereupon quoth Abu al-Ruwaysh to the fire-drake,
“What is thy name!” Replied the Ifrit, “Thy thrall is hight Dahnash bin
Faktash.” And the Shaykh said “Draw near to me!” So Dahnash drew near to
him and he put his mouth to his ear and said somewhat to him, whereat
the Ifrit shook his head and answered, “I accept, O elder of elders!”
Then said Abu al-Ruwaysh to Hasan, “Arise, O my son, mount the shoulders
of this Ifrit, Dahnash the Flyer; but, when he heaveth thee heaven-wards
and thou hearest the angels glorifying God a-welkin with ‘Subhána
’lláh,’ have a care lest thou do the like; else wilt thou perish and he
too.” Hasan replied, “I will not say a word; no, never;” and the old man
continued, “O Hasan, after faring with thee all this day, to-morrow at
peep of dawn he will set thee down in a land cleanly white, like unto
camphor, whereupon do thou walk on ten days by thyself, till thou come
to the gate of a city. Then enter and enquire for the King of the city;
and when thou comest to his presence, salute him with the salam and kiss
his hand: then give him this scroll and consider well whatso he shall
counsel thee.” Hasan replied, “Hearing and obeying,” and rose up and
mounted the Ifrit’s shoulders, whilst the elders rose and offered up
prayers for him and commended him to the care of Dahnash the Firedrake.
And when he had perched on the Flyer’s back the Ifrit soared with him to
the very confines of the sky, till he heard the angels glorifying God in
Heaven, and flew on with him a day and a night till at dawn of the next
day he set him down in a land white as camphor, and went his way,
leaving him there. When Hasan found himself in the land aforesaid with
none by his side he fared on night and day for ten days, till he came to
the gate of the city in question and entering, enquired for the King.
They directed him to him and told him that his name was King
Hassún,[118] Lord of the Land of Camphor, and that he had troops and
soldiers enough to fill the earth in its length and breadth. So he
sought audience of him and, being admitted to his presence, found him a
mighty King and kissed ground between his hands. Quoth the King, “What
is thy want?” Whereupon Hasan kissed the letter and gave it to him. The
King read it and shook his head awhile, then said to one of his
officers, “Take this youth and lodge him in the house of hospitality.”
So he took him and stablished him in the guest-house, where he tarried
three days, eating and drinking and seeing none but the eunuch who
waited on him and who entertained him with discourse and cheered him
with his company, questioning him of his case and how he came to that
city; whereupon he told him his whole story, and the perilous condition
wherein he was. On the fourth day, that eunuch carried him before the
King, who said to him, “O Hasan, thou comest to me, seeking to enter the
Islands of Wak, as the Shaykh of Shaykhs adviseth me. O my son, I would
send thee thither this very day, but that by the way are many perils and
thirsty wolds full of terrors; yet do thou have patience and naught save
fair shall befal thee for needs must I devise to bring thee to thy
desire, Inshallah! Know, O my son, that here is a mighty host,[119]
equipped with arms and steeds and warlike gear, who long to enter the
Wak Islands and lack power thereto. But, O my son, for the sake of the
Shaykh Abu al-Ruwaysh, son of Bilkis,[120] the daughter of Mu’in, I may
not send thee back to him unfulfilled of thine affair. Presently there
will come to us ships from the Islands of Wak and the first that shall
arrive I will send thee on board of her and give thee in charge to the
sailors, so they may take care of thee and carry thee to the Islands. If
any question thee of thy case and condition, answer him saying:—I am
kinsman to King Hassun, Lord of the Land of Camphor; and when the ship
shall make fast to the shore of the Islands of Wak and the master shall
bid thee land, do thou land. Now as soon as thou comest ashore, thou
wilt see a multitude of wooden settles all about the beach, of which do
thou choose thee one and crouch under it and stir not. And when dark
night sets in, thou wilt see an army of women appear and flock about the
goods landed from the ship, and one of them will sit down on the settle,
under which thou hast hidden thyself, whereupon do thou put forth thy
hand to her and take hold of her and implore her protection. And know
thou, O my son, that an she accord thee protection, thou wilt win thy
wish and regain thy wife and children; but, if she refuse to protect
thee, make thy mourning for thyself and give up all hope of life, and
make sure of death for indeed thou art a dead man. Understand, O my son,
that thou adventurest thy life and this is all I can do for thee,
and—the peace!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Hassun spake
these words to Hasan and charged him as we have related, ending with,
“This is all I can do for thee and know that except the Lord of Heaven
had aided thee, thou hadst not come hither!” The youth wept till he
swooned away, and when he recovered, he recited these two couplets:—

 A term decreed my lot I ’spy; ✿ And, when its days shall end, I die.
 Though lions fought with me in lair ✿ If Time be mine I’d beat them, I!

Then having ended his verse he kissed the ground before the Sovran and
said to him, “O mighty King, how many days remain till the coming of the
ships?” Replied the other, “In a month’s time they will come and will
tarry here, selling their cargason, other two months, after which they
will return to their own country; so hope not to set out save after
three whole months.” Then the King bade him return to the house of
hospitality and bade supply him with all that he needed of meat and
drink and raiment fit for Kings. Hasan abode in the guest-house a month,
at the end of which the vessels arrived and the King and the merchants
went forth to them, taking Hasan with them. Amongst them he saw a ship
with much people therein, like the shingles for number; none knew their
tale save He who created them. She was anchored in mid-harbour and had
cocks which transported her lading to the shore. So Hasan abode till the
crew had landed all the goods and sold and bought and to the time of
departure there wanted but three days; whereupon the King sent for him
and equipped him with all he required and gave him great gifts; after
which he summoned the captain of the great ship and said to him, “Take
this youth with thee in the vessel, so none may know of him save thou,
and carry him to the Islands of Wak and leave him there; and bring him
not back.” And the Rais said, “To hear is to obey: with love and
gladness!” Then quoth the King to Hasan, “Look thou tell none of those
who are with thee in the ship thine errand nor discover to them aught of
thy case; else thou art a lost man;” and quoth he, “Hearing and
obedience!” With this he farewelled the King, after he had wished him
long life and victory over his enviers and his enemies; wherefore the
King thanked him and wished him safety and the winning of his wish. Then
he committed him to the captain, who laid him in a chest which he
embarked in a dinghy, and bore him aboard, whilst the folk were busy in
breaking bulk and no man doubted but the chest contained somewhat of
merchandise. After this, the vessels set sail and fared on without
ceasing ten days, and on the eleventh day they made the land. So the
Rais set Hasan ashore and, as he walked up the beach, he saw wooden
settles[121] without number, none knew their count save Allah, even as
the King had told him. He went on, till he came to one that had no
fellow and hid under it till nightfall, when there came up a mighty many
of women, as they were locusts over-swarming the land and they marched
afoot and armed cap-à-pie in hauberks and strait-knit coats of mail
hending drawn swords in their hands, who, seeing the merchandise landed
from the ships, busied themselves therewith. Presently they sat down to
rest themselves, and one of them seated herself on the settle under
which Hasan had crouched: whereupon he took hold of the hem of her
garment and laid it on his head and throwing himself before her, fell to
kissing her hands and feet and weeping and crying, “Thy protection! thy
good-will!” Quoth she, “Ho, thou! Arise and stand up, ere any see thee
and slay thee.” So he came forth and springing up kissed her hands and
wept and said to her, “O my mistress, I am under thy protection!”;
adding, “Have ruth on one who is parted from his people and wife and
children, one who hath haste to rejoin them and one who adventureth life
and soul for their sake! Take pity on me and be assured that therefor
Paradise will be thy reward; or, an thou wilt not receive me, I beseech
thee, by Allah the Great, the Concealer, to conceal my case!” The
merchants stared to see him talking with her; and she, hearing his words
and beholding his humility, was moved to ruth for him; her heart
inclined to him and she knew that he had not ventured himself and come
to that place, save for a grave matter. So she said to him, “O my son,
be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear, hearten thy heart
and take courage and return to thy hiding-place till the coming night,
and Allah shall do as He will.” Then she took leave of him and Hasan
crept under the wooden settle as before, whilst the troops lighted
flambeaux of wax mixed with aloes-wood and Nadd-perfume and crude
ambergris[122] and passed the night in sport and delight till the
morning. At daybreak, the boats returned to the shore and the merchants
busied themselves with buying and selling and the transport of the goods
and gear till nightfall, whilst Hasan lay hidden beneath the settle,
weeping-eyed and woeful-hearted, knowing not what was decreed to him in
the secret preordainment of Allah. As he was thus, behold, the
merchant-woman with whom he had taken refuge came up to him and giving
him a habergeon and a helmet, a spear, a sword and a gilded girdle, bade
him don them and seat himself on the settle after which she left him,
for fear of the troops. So he arose and donned the mail-coat and helmet
and clasped the girdle about his middle; then he slung the sword over
his shoulder till it hung under his armpit, and taking the spear in his
hand, sat down on that settle, whilst his tongue neglected not to name
Allah Almighty and call on Him for protection.——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasan
received the weapons which the merchant-woman had given to him, saying,
“Sit thee upon the settle and let none wot thy case,” he armed himself
and took his seat, whilst his tongue neglected not to name Allah
Almighty and to call upon Him for protection. And behold, there appeared
cressets and lanthorns and flambeaux and up came the army of women. So
he arose and mingling with them, became as one of them: A little before
daybreak, they set out, and Hasan with them, and fared on till they came
to their camp, where they dispersed each to her tent, and Hasan followed
one of them and lo! it was her’s for whose protection he had prayed.
When she entered, she threw down her arms and doffed her hauberk and
veil. So Hasan did the like and looking at his companion, saw her to be
a grizzled old woman, blue-eyed and big-nosed, a calamity of calamities,
the foulest of all created things, with face pock-marked and eyebrows
bald, gap-toothed and chap-fallen, with hair hoary, nose running and
mouth slavering;[123] even as saith the like of her the poet:—

 In her cheek-corners nine calamities ✿ Wone, and when shown, each one
    Jehannam is:
 Hideous the face and favour foulest foul ✿ As cheek of hog; yea, ’tis a
    cesspool phiz.

And indeed she was like, a pied snake or a scald she-wolf. Now when the
old woman looked at Hasan, she marvelled and said, “How came this one to
these lands and in which of the ships was he and how arrived he hither
in safety?” And she fell to questioning him of his case and admiring at
his arrival, whereupon he fell at her feet and rubbed his face on them
and wept till he fainted; and, when he recovered himself, he recited
these couplets:—

 When will Time grant we meet, when shall we be ✿ Again united after
    severance stark?
 And I shall win my choicest wish and view? ✿ Blame end and Love abide
    without remark?
 Were Nile to flow as freely as my tears, ✿ Twould leave no region but
    with water-mark:
 ’Twould overthrow Hijaz and Egypt-land ✿ ’Twould deluge Syria and
    ’twould drown Irak.
 This, O my love, is caused by thy disdain, ✿ Be kind and promise meeting
    fair and fain!

Then he took the crone’s skirt and laid it on his head and fell to
weeping and craving her protection. When she saw his ardency and
transport and anguish and distress, her heart softened to him and she
promised him her safeguard, saying, “Have no fear whatsoever.” Then she
questioned him of his case and he told her the manner of his coming
thither and all that had befallen him from beginning to end, whereat she
marvelled and said, “This that hath betide thee, methinks, never betided
any save thyself and except thou hadst been vouchsafed the especial
protection of Allah, thou hadst not been saved: but now, O my son, take
comfort and be of good courage; thou hast nothing more to fear, for
indeed thou hast won thy wish and attained thy desire, if it please the
Most High!” Thereat Hasan rejoiced with joy exceeding and she sent to
summon the captains of the army to her presence, and it was the last day
of the month. So they presented themselves and the old woman said to
them, “Go out and proclaim to all the troops that they come forth
to-morrow at daybreak and let none tarry behind, for whoso tarryeth
shall be slain.” They replied, “We hear and we obey,” and going forth,
made proclamation to all the host anent a review next morning, even as
she bade them, after which they returned and told her of this; whereby
Hasan knew that she was the Commander-in-chief of the army and the
Vice-regent in authority over them; and her name was Shawahí the
Fascinator, entituled Umm al-Dawáhi, or Mother of Calamities.[124] She
ceased not to bid and forbid and Hasan doffed not off his arms from his
body that day. Now when the morning broke, all the troops fared forth
from their places, but the old woman came not out with them, and as soon
as they were sped and the stead was clear of them, she said to Hasan,
“Draw near unto me, O my son[125].” So he drew near unto her and stood
between her hands. Quoth she, “Why and wherefore hast thou adventured
thyself so boldly as to enter this land, and how came thy soul to
consent to its own undoing? Tell me the truth and the whole truth and
fear aught of ill come of it, for thou hast my plighted word and I am
moved to compassion for thy case and pity thee and have taken thee under
my protection. So, if thou tell me the truth, I will help thee to win
thy wish, though it involve the undoing of souls and the destruction of
bodies; and since thou hast come to seek me, no hurt shall betide thee
from me, nor will I suffer any to have at thee with harm of all who be
in the Islands of Wak.” So he told her his tale from first to last,
acquainting her with the matter of his wife and of the birds; how he had
captured her as his prize from amongst the ten and married her and abode
with her, till she had borne him two sons, and how she had taken her
children and flown away with them, whenas she knew the way to the
feather-dress. Brief, he concealed from her no whit of his case, from
the beginning to that day. But when Shawahi heard his relation, she
shook her head and said to him, “Glory be to God who hath brought thee
hither in safety and made thee hap upon me! For, hadst thou happened on
any but myself, thou hadst lost thy life without winning thy wish; but
the truth of thine intent and thy fond affection and the excess of thy
love-longing for thy wife and yearning for thy children, these it was
that have brought thee to the attainment of thine aim. Didst thou not
love her and love her to distraction, thou hadst not thus imperilled
thyself, and Alhamdolillah—Praised be Allah—for thy safety! Wherefore it
behoveth us to do thy desire and conduce to thy quest, so thou mayst
presently attain that thou seekest, if it be the will of Almighty Allah.
But know, O my son, that thy wife is not here, but in the seventh of the
Islands of Wak and between us and it is seven months’ journey, night and
day. From here we go to an island called the Land of Birds, wherein, for
the loud crying of the birds and the flapping of their wings, one cannot
hear other speak.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Sixth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old woman
said to Hasan, “Indeed thy wife is in the Seventh Island,[126] the
greatest amongst the Islands of Wak and betwixt us and it is a
seven-months’ journey. From here we fare for the Land of Birds, whereon
for the force of their flying and the flapping of their wings, we cannot
hear one other speak. Over that country we journey night and day, eleven
days, after which we come forth of it to another called the Land of
Ferals where, for stress of roaring of lions and howling of wolves and
laughing of hyænas and the crying of other beasts of prey we shall hear
naught, and therein we travel twenty days’ journey. Then we issue
therefrom and come to a third country, called the Land of the Jánn,
where, for stress of the crying of the Jinn and the flaming of fires and
the flight of sparks and smoke from their mouths and the noise of their
groaning and their arrogance in blocking up the road before us, our ears
will be deafened and our eyes blinded, so that we shall neither hear nor
see, nor dare any look behind him, or he perisheth: but there horseman
boweth head on saddle-bow and raiseth it not for three days. After this,
we abut upon a mighty mountain and a running river contiguous with the
Isles of Wak, which are seven in number and the extent whereof is a
whole year’s journey for a well-girt horseman. And thou must know, O my
son, that these troops are all virgin girls, and that the ruler over us
is a woman of the Archipelago of Wak. On the bank of the river aforesaid
is another mountain, called Mount Wak, and it is thus named by reason of
a tree which beareth fruits like heads of the Sons of Adam.[127] When
the sun riseth on them, the heads cry out all, saying in their
cries:—Wak! Wak! Glory be to the Creating King, Al-Khallák! And when we
hear their crying, we know that the sun is risen. In like manner, at
sundown, the heads set up the same cry, Wak! Wak! Glory to Al-Khallak!
and so we know that the sun hath set. No man may abide with us or reach
to us or tread our earth; and betwixt us and the abiding-place of the
Queen who ruleth over us is a month’s journey from this shore, all the
lieges whereof are under her hand, as are also the tribes of the Jinn,
Marids and Satans, while of the warlocks none kenneth the number save He
who created them. Wherefore, an thou be afraid, I will send with thee
one who will convey thee to the coast and there bring one who will
embark thee on board a ship that bear thee to thine own land. But an
thou be content to tarry with us, I will not forbid thee and thou shalt
be with me in mine eye,[128] till thou win thy wish, Inshallah!” Quoth
he, “O my lady, I will never quit thee till I foregather with my wife or
lose my life!”; and quoth she, “This is a light matter; be of good
heart, for soon shalt thou come to thy desire, Allah willing; and there
is no help but that I let the Queen know of thee, that she may help thee
to attain thine aim.” Hasan blessed her and kissed her head and hands,
thanking her for her good deed and exceeding kindness and firm will.
Then he set out with her, pondering the issue of his case and the
horrors of his strangerhood; wherefore he fell a-weeping and a-wailing
and recited these couplets:—

 A Zephyr bloweth from the lover’s site; ✿ And thou canst view me in the
    saddest plight:
 The Night of Union is as brilliant morn; ✿ And black the Severance-day
    as blackest night:
 Farewelling friend is sorrow sorest sore ✿ Parting from lover’s merest
    undelight.
 I will not blame her harshness save to her, ✿ And ’mid mankind nor
    friend nor fere I sight:
 How can I be consoled for loss of you? ✿ Base censor’s blame shall not
    console my sprite!
 O thou in charms unique, unique’s my love; ✿ O peerless thou, my heart
    hath peerless might!
 Who maketh semblance that he loveth you ✿ And dreadeth blame is most
    blame-worthy wight.

Then the old woman bade beat the kettle-drums for departure and the army
set out. Hasan fared with her, drowned in the sea of solicitude and
reciting verses like those above, whilst she strave to comfort him and
exhorted him to patience; but he awoke not from his tristesse and heeded
not her exhortations. They journeyed thus till they came to the
boundaries of the Land of Birds[129] and when they entered it, it seemed
to Hasan as if the world were turned topsy-turvy for the exceeding
clamour. His head ached and his mind was dazed, his eyes were blinded
and his ears deafened, and he feared with exceeding fear and made
certain of death, saying to himself, “If this be the Land of Birds, how
will be the Land of Beasts?” But, when the crone hight Shawahi saw him
in this plight, she laughed at him, saying, “O my son, if this be thy
case in the first island, how will it fare with thee, when thou comest
to the others?” So he prayed to Allah and humbled himself before the
Lord, beseeching Him to assist him against that wherewith He had
afflicted him and bring him to his wishes; and they ceased not going
till they passed out of the Land of Birds and, traversing the Land of
Beasts, came to the Land of the Jann which when Hasan saw, he was sore
affrighted and repented him of having entered it with them. But he
sought aid of Allah the Most High and fared on with them, till they were
quit of the Land of the Jann and came to the river and set down their
loads at the foot of a vast mountain and a lofty, and pitched their
tents by the stream-bank. Then they rested and ate and drank and slept
in security, for they were come to their own country. On the morrow the
old woman set Hasan a couch of alabaster, inlaid with pearls and jewels
and nuggets of red gold, by the river-side, and he sat down thereon,
having first bound his face with a chin-kerchief, that discovered naught
of him but his eyes. Then she bade proclaim among the troops that they
should all assemble before her tent and put off their clothes and go
down into the stream and wash; and this she did that she might parade
before him all the girls, so haply his wife should be amongst them and
he know her. So the whole army mustered before her and putting off their
clothes, went down into the stream, and Hasan seated on his couch
watched them washing their white skins and frolicking and making merry,
whilst they took no heed of his inspecting them, deeming him to be of
the daughters of the Kings. When he beheld them stripped of their
clothes, his chord stiffened for that looking at them mother-naked he
saw what was between their thighs, and that of all kinds, soft and
rounded, plump and cushioned; large-lipped, perfect, redundant and
ample,[130] and their faces were as moons and their hair as night upon
day, for that they were of the daughters of the Kings. When they were
clean, they came up out of the water, stark naked, as the moon on the
night of fullness and the old woman questioned Hasan of them, company by
company, if his wife were among them; but, as often as she asked him of
a troop, he made answer, “She is not among these, O my lady.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Seventh Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old woman
questioned Hasan of the girls, company after company, if haply his wife
were among them; but as often as she asked him of a troop, he made
answer, “She is not among these, O my lady!” Last of all, there came up
a damsel, attended by ten slave-girls and thirty waiting-women, all of
them high-bosomed maidens. They put off their clothes and went down into
the river, where the damsel fell to riding the high horse over her
women, throwing them down and ducking them. On this wise she continued
for a full hour, after which all came up out of the water and sat down;
and they brought her napkins[131] of gold-purfled silk, with which she
dried herself. Then they brought her clothes and jewels and ornaments of
the handiwork of the Jinn, and she donned them and rose and walked with
graceful pace among the troops, she and her maidens. When Hasan saw her,
his heart was ready to fly from his breast and he said, “Verily this
girl is the likest of all folk to the bird I saw in the basin atop of
the palace of my sisters the Princesses, and she lorded it over her
lieges even as doth this one.” The old woman asked, “O Hasan, is this
thy wife?”; and he answered, “No, by thy life, O my lady; this is not my
wife, nor ever in my life have I set eyes on her; neither among all the
girls I have seen in these islands is there the like of my wife nor her
match for symmetry and grace and beauty and loveliness!” Then said
Shawaki, “Describe her to me and acquaint me with all her attributes,
that I may have her in my mind; for I know every girl in the Islands of
Wak, being commander of the army of maids and governor over them;
wherefore, an thou describe her to me, I shall know her and will
contrive for thee to take her.” Quoth he, “My wife hath the fairest face
and a form all grace; smooth is she of cheeks and high of breasts with
eyes of liquid light, calves and thighs plump to sight, teeth snowy
white, with dulcet speech dight; in speech soft and bland as she were a
willow-wand; her gifts are a moral and lips are red as coral; her eyes
wear natural Kohl-dye and her lower labia[132] in softness lie. On her
right cheek is a mole and on her waist, under her navel, is a sign; her
face shines as the rondure of the moon in sheen, her waist is slight,
her hips a heavy weight, and the water of her mouth the sick doth heal,
as it were Kausar or Salsabil.”[133] Said the old woman, “Give me an
increased account of her, Allah increase thee of passion for her!” Quoth
he, “My wife hath a face the fairest fair and oval cheeks the rarest
rare; neck long and spare and eyes that Kohl wear; her side face shows
the Anemones of Nu’uman, her mouth is like a seal of cornelian and
flashing teeth that lure and stand one in stead of cup and ewer. She is
cast in the mould of pleasantness and between her thighs is the throne
of the Caliphate, there is no such sanctuary among the Holy Places; as
saith in its praise the poet:—

[Illustration]

 The name of what drave me distraught ✿ Hath letters renowned among men:
 A four into five multiplied ✿ And a multiplied six into ten.”[134]

Then Hasan wept and chanted the following Mawwál[135]:—

 O heart, an lover false thee, shun the parting bane ✿ Nor to
    forgetfulness thy thoughts constrain:
 Be patient; thou shalt bury all thy foes; ✿ Allah ne’er falseth man of
    patience fain.

And this also:—

 An wouldst be life-long safe, vaunt not delight; ✿ Never despair, nor
    wone o’erjoyed in sprite!
 Forbear, rejoice not, mourn not o’er thy plight ✿ And in ill day “Have
    not we oped?”—recite.[136]

Thereupon the old woman bowed her head groundwards awhile, then, raising
it, said, “Laud be to the Lord, the Mighty of Award! Indeed I am
afflicted with thee, O Hasan! Would Heaven I had never known thee! This
woman, whom thou describest to me as thy wife, I know by description and
I know her to be none other than the eldest daughter of the Supreme
King, she who ruleth over all the Islands of Wak. So open both eyes and
consider thy case; and if thou be asleep, awake; for, if this woman be
indeed thy wife, it is impossible for thee ever to obtain her, and
though thou come to her, yet couldst thou not avail to her possession,
since between thee and her the distance is as that between earth and
Heaven. Wherefore, O my son, return presently and cast not thyself into
destruction nor cast me with thee; for meseemeth thou hast no lot in
her; so return whence thou camest lest our lives be lost.” And she
feared for herself and for him. When Hasan heard her words, he wept till
he fainted and she left not sprinkling water on his face, till he came
to himself, when he continued to weep, so that he drenched his dress
with tears, for the much cark and care and chagrin which betided him by
reason of her words. And indeed he despaired of life and said to the old
woman, “O my lady, and how shall I go back, after having come hither?
Verily, I thought not thou wouldst forsake me nor fail of the winning of
my wish, especially as thou art the Commander-in-chief of the army of
the girls.” Answered Shawahi, “O my son, I doubted not but thy wife was
a maid of the maids, and had I known she was the King’s daughter, I had
not suffered thee to come hither nor had I shown the troops to thee, for
all the love I bear thee. But now, O my son, thou hast seen all the
girls naked; so tell me which of them pleaseth thee and I will give her
to thee, in lieu of thy wife, and do thou put it that thy wife and
children are dead and take her and return to thine own country in
safety, ere thou fall into the King’s hand and I have no means of
delivering thee. So, Allah upon thee, O my son, hearken unto me. Choose
thyself one of these damsels, in the stead of yonder woman, and return
presently to thy country in safety and cause me not quaff the cup of
thine anguish! For, by Allah, thou hast cast thyself into affliction
sore and peril galore, wherefrom none may avail to deliver thee
evermore!” But Hasan hung down his head and wept with long weeping and
recited these couplets:—

 “Blame not!” said I to all who blamèd me; ✿ “Mine eyelids naught but
    tears were made to dree:”
 The tears that brim these orbs have overflowed ✿ My cheeks, for lovers
    and love’s cruelty.
 Leave me to love though waste this form of me! ✿ For I of Love adore the
    insanity:
 And, Oh my dearling, passion grows on me ✿ For you—and you, why grudge
    me clemency?
 You wronged me after swearing troth and plight, ✿ Falsed my
    companionship and turned to flee:
 And cup of humbling for your rigours sore ✿ Ye made me drain what day
    departed ye:
 Then melt, O heart, with longing for their sight ✿ And, O mine eyes,
    with crowns of tears be dight.

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the old woman
said to Hasan, “By Allah, O my son, hearken to my words! Choose thee one
of these girls in lieu of thy wife and presently return to thy country
in safety,” he hung down his head and recited the couplets quoted above.
Then he wept till he swooned away and Shawahi sprinkled water on his
face till he revived, when she addressed him, “O my lord, I have no
shift left; because if I carry thee to the city thy life is lost and
mine also: for, when the Queen cometh to know of this, she will blame me
for admitting thee into her lands and islands, whereto none of Adam’s
sons hath access, and will slay me for bringing thee with me and for
suffering mortal to look upon the virgins seen by thee in the sea, whom
ne’er touched male, neither approached mate.” And Hasan sware that he
had never looked on them with evil of eye. She resumed, “O my son,
hearken to me and return to thy country and I will give thee wealth and
treasures and things of price, such as shall suffice thee for all the
women in the world. Moreover, I will give thee a girl of the best of
them, so lend an ear to my words and return presently and imperil not
thyself; indeed I counsel thee with good counsel.” But he wept and
rubbed both cheeks against her feet, saying, “O my lady and mistress and
coolth of mine eyes, how can I turn back now that I have made my way
hither, without the sight of those I desire, and now that I have come
near the beloved’s site, hoping for meeting forthright, so haply there
may be a portion in reunion to my plight?” And he improvised these
couplets:—

 O Kings of beauty, grace to prisoner ta’en ✿ Of eyelids fit to rule the
    Chosroës’ reign:
 Ye pass the wafts of musk in perfumed breath; ✿ Your cheeks the charms
    of blooming rose disdain.
 The softest Zephyr breathes where pitch ye camp ✿ And thence
    far-scattered sweetness fills the plain:
 Censor of me, leave blame and stint advice! ✿ Thou bringest wearying
    words and wisdom vain:
 Why heat my passion with this flame and up- ✿ braid me when naught thou
    knowest of its bane?
 Captured me eyes with passion _maladifs_, ✿ And overthrew me with Love’s
    might and main:
 I scatter tears the while I scatter verse; ✿ You are my theme for rhyme
    and prosy strain.
 Melted my vitals glow of rosy cheeks ✿ And in the Lazá-lowe my heart is
    lain:
 Tell me, an I leave to discourse of you, ✿ What speech my breast shall
    broaden? Tell me deign!
 Life-long I loved the lovelings fair, but ah, ✿ To grant my wish eke
    Allah must be fain!

Hearing his verses the old woman was moved to ruth for him and Allah
planted the seed of affection for him in her heart; so coming up to him
she consoled him, saying, “Be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and
clear and put away trouble from thy thought, for, by Allah, I will
venture my life with thee, till thou attain thine aim or death undo me!”
With this, Hasan’s heart was comforted and his bosom broadened and he
sat talking with the old woman till the end of the day, when all the
girls dispersed, some entering their town-mansions and others nighting
in the tents. Then the old woman carried him into the city and lodged
him in a place apart, lest any should come to know of him and tell the
Queen of him and she should slay him and slay her who had brought him
thither. Moreover, she served him herself and strave to put him in fear
of the awful majesty of the Supreme King, his wife’s father; whilst he
wept before her and said, “O my lady, I choose death for myself and
loathe this worldly life, if I foregather not with my wife and children:
I have set my existence on the venture and will either attain my aim or
die.” So the old woman fell to pondering the means of bringing him and
his wife together and casting about how to do in the case of this
unhappy one, who had thrown himself into destruction and would not be
diverted from his purpose by fear or aught else; for, indeed he recked
not of his life and the sayer of bywords saith, “Lover in nowise
hearkeneth he to the speech of the man who is fancy-free.” Now the name
of the Queen of the island wherein they were was Núr al-Hudà,[137]
eldest daughter of the Supreme King, and she had six virgin sisters,
abiding with their father, whose capital and court were in the chief
city of that region and who had made her ruler over all the lands and
islands of Wak. So when the ancient dame saw Hasan on fire with yearning
after his wife and children, she rose up and repaired to the palace and
going in to Queen Nur al-Huda kissed ground before her; for she had a
claim on her favour because she had reared the King’s daughters one and
all and had authority over each and every of them and was high in honour
and consideration with them and with the King. Nur al-Huda rose to her
as she entered and embracing her, seated her by her side and asked her
of her journey. She answered, “By Allah, O my lady ’twas a blessed
journey and I have brought thee a gift which I will presently present to
thee,” adding, “O my daughter, O Queen of the Age and the time, I have a
favour to crave of thee and I fain would discover it to thee, that thou
mayst help me to accomplish it, and but for my confidence that thou wilt
not gainsay me therein, I would not expose it to thee.” Asked the Queen,
“And what is thy need? Expound it to me, and I will accomplish it to
thee, for I and my kingdom and troops are all at thy commandment and
disposition.” Therewithal the old woman quivered as quivereth the reed
on a day when the storm-wind is abroad and saying in herself, “O[138]
Protector, protect me from the Queen’s mischief[139]!” fell down before
her and acquainted her with Hasan’s case, saying, “O my lady, a man, who
had hidden himself under my wooden settle on the sea-shore, sought my
protection; so I took him under my safeguard and carried him with me
among the army of girls armed and accoutred so that none might know him,
and brought him into the city; and indeed I have striven to affright him
with thy fierceness, giving him to know of thy power and prowess; but,
as often as I threatened him, he weepeth and reciteth verses and
sayeth:—Needs must I have my wife and children or die, and I will not
return to my country without them. And indeed he hath adventured himself
and come to the Islands of Wak, and never in all my days saw I mortal
heartier of heart than he or doughtier of derring-do, save that love
hath mastered him to the utmost of mastery.”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the old woman
related to Queen Nur al-Huda the adventure of Hasan, ending with, “Never
I saw any one heartier of heart than he save that love hath mastered him
to the utmost of mastery,” the Queen, after lending an attentive ear and
comprehending the case, waxed wroth at her with exceeding wrath and
bowed her head awhile groundwards; then, raising it, she looked at
Shawahi and said to her, “O ill-omened beldam, art thou come to such a
pass of lewdness that thou carriest males, men, with thee into the
Islands of Wak and bringest them into me, unfearing of my mischief? Who
hath foregone thee with this fashion, that thou shouldst do thus? By the
head of the King, but for thy claim on me for fosterage and service, I
would forthwith do both him and thee to die the foulest of deaths, that
travellers might take warning by thee, O accursed, lest any other do the
like of this outrageous deed thou hast done, which none durst hitherto!
But go and bring him hither forthright, that I may see him; or I will
strike off thy head, O accursed.” So the old woman went out from her,
confounded unknowing whither she went and saying, “All this calamity
hath Allah driven upon me from this Queen because of Hasan!” and going
in to him, said, “Rise, speak with the Queen, O wight whose last hour is
at hand!” So he rose and went with her, whilst his tongue ceased not to
call upon Almighty Allah and say, “O my God, be gracious to me in Thy
decrees and deliver me from this Thine affliction[140]!” And Shawahi
went with him charging him by the way how he should speak with the
Queen. When he stood before Nur al-Huda, he found that she had donned
the chin-veil[141]; so he kissed ground before her and saluted her with
the salam, improvising these two couplets:—

 “God make thy glory last in joy of life: ✿ Allah confirm the boons he
    deigned bestow:
 Thy grace and grandeur may our Lord increase ✿ And aye Th’ Almighty aid
    thee o’er thy foe!”

When he ended his verse Nur al-Huda bade the old woman ask him questions
before her, that she might hear his answers: so she said to him, “The
Queen returneth thy salam-greeting and saith to thee, What is thy name
and that of thy country, and what are the names of thy wife and
children, on whose account thou art come hither?” Quoth he, and indeed
he had made firm his heart and destiny aided him, “O Queen of the age
and tide and peerless jewel of the epoch and the time, my name is Hasan
the fulfilled of sorrow, and my native city is Bassorah. I know not the
name of my wife[142] but my children’s names are Násir and Mansúr.” When
the Queen heard his reply and his provenance, she bespoke him herself
and said, “And whence took she her children?” He replied, “O Queen, she
took them from the city of Baghdad and the palace of the Caliphate.”
Quoth Nur al-Huda, “And did she say naught to thee at the time she flew
away?;” and quoth he, “Yes; she said to my mother:—Whenas thy son cometh
to thee and the nights of severance upon him longsome shall be and he
craveth meeting and reunion to see, and whenas the breezes of love and
longing shake him dolefully let him come in the Islands of Wak to me.”
Whereupon Queen Nur al-Huda shook her head and said to him. “Had she not
desired thee she had not said to thy mother this say, and had she not
yearned for reunion with thee, never had she bidden thee to her stead
nor acquainted thee with her abiding-place.” Rejoined Hasan, “O mistress
of Kings and asylum of prince and pauper, whatso happened I have told
thee and have concealed naught thereof, and I take refuge from evil with
Allah and with thee; wherefore oppress me not, but have compassion on me
and earn recompense and requital for me in the world to come, and aid me
to regain my wife and children. Grant me my urgent need and cool mine
eyes with my children and help me to the sight of them.” Then he wept
and wailed and lamenting his lot recited these two couplets:—

 Yea, I will laud thee while the ring-dove moans, ✿ Though fail my wish
    of due and lawful scope:
 Ne’er was I whirled in bliss and joys gone by ✿ Wherein I found thee not
    both root and rope.[143]

The Queen shook her head and bowed it in thought a long time; then,
raising it, she said to Hasan (and indeed she was wroth), “I have ruth
on thee and am resolved to show thee in review all the girls in the city
and in the provinces of my island; and in case thou know thy wife, I
will deliver her to thee; but, an thou know her not and know not her
place, I will put thee to death and crucify thee over the old woman’s
door.” Replied Hasan, “I accept this from thee, O Queen of the Age, and
am content to submit to this thy condition. There is no Majesty and
there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!” And he
recited these couplets:—

 You’ve roused my desire and remain at rest,— ✿ Waked my wounded lids
    while you slept with zest.
 And ye made me a vow ye would not hang back ✿ But your guile when you
    chained me waxt manifest.
 I loved you in childhood unknowing Love; ✿ Then slay me not who am sore
    opprest.
 Fear ye not from Allah when slaying a friend ✿ Who gazeth on stars when
    folk sleep their best?
 By Allah, my kinsmen, indite on my tomb ✿ “This man was the slave of
    Love’s harshest hest!”
 Haps a noble youth, like me Love’s own thrall, ✿ When he sees my grave
    on my name shall call.

Then Queen Nur al-Huda commanded that not a girl should abide in the
city but should come up to the palace and pass in review before Hasan
and moreover she bade Shawahi go down in person and bring them up
herself. Accordingly all the maidens in the city presented themselves
before the Queen, who caused them to go in to Hasan, hundred after
hundred, till there was no girl left in the place, but she had shown her
to him; yet he saw not his wife amongst them. Then said she to him,
“Seest thou her amongst these?”; and he replied, “By thy life, O Queen,
she is not amongst them.” With this she was sore enraged against him and
said to the old woman, “Go in and bring out all who are in the palace
and show them to him.” So she displayed to him every one of the
palace-girls, but he saw not his wife among them and said to the Queen,
“By the life of thy head, O Queen, she is not among these.” Whereat the
Queen was wroth and cried out at those around her, saying, “Take him and
hale him along, face to earth, and cut off his head, least any adventure
himself after him and intrude upon us in our country and spy out our
estate by thus treading the soil of our islands.” So they threw him down
on his face and dragged him along; then, covering his eyes with his
skirt, stood at his head with bared brands awaiting royal permission.
Thereupon Shawahi came forward and kissing the ground before the Queen,
took the hem of her garment and laid it on her head, saying, “O Queen,
by my claim for fosterage, be not hasty with him, more by token of thy
knowledge that this poor wretch is a stranger, who hath adventured
himself and suffered what none ever suffered before him, and Allah (to
whom belong Might and Majesty,) preserved him from death, for that his
life was ordained to be long. He heard of thine equity and entered thy
city and guarded site;[144] wherefore, if thou put him to death, the
report will dispread abroad of thee, by means of the travellers, that
thou hatest strangers and slayest them. He is in any case at thy mercy
and the slain of thy sword, if his wife be not found in thy dominions;
and whensoever thou desireth his presence, I can bring him back to thee.
Moreover, in very sooth I took him under my protection only of my trust
in thy magnanimity through my claim on thee for fosterage, so that I
engaged to him that thou wouldst bring him to his desire, for my
knowledge of thy justice and quality of mercy. But for this, I had not
brought him into thy kingdom; for I said to myself:—The Queen will take
pleasure in looking upon him, and hearing him speak his verses and his
sweet discourse and eloquent which is like unto pearls strung on string.
Moreover, he hath entered our land and eaten of our meat; wherefore he
hath a claim upon us.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Tenth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Queen
Nur al-Huda bade her pages seize Hasan and smite his neck, the old
woman, Shawahi, began to reason with her and say, “Verily he hath
entered our land and eaten of our meat, wherefore he hath a claim upon
us, the more especially since I promised him to bring him in company
with thee; and thou knowest that, parting is a grievous ill and
severance hath power to kill, especially separation from children. Now
he hath seen all our women, save only thyself; so do thou show him thy
face?” The Queen smiled and said, “How can he be my husband and have had
children by me, that I should show him my face?” Then she made them
bring Hasan before her and when he stood in the presence, she unveiled
her face, which when he saw, he cried out with a great cry and fell down
fainting. The old woman ceased not to tend him, till he came to himself
and as soon as he revived he recited these couplets:—

 O breeze that blowest from the land Irak ✿ And from their corners whoso
    cry “Wak! Wak!”
 Bear news of me to friends and say for me ✿ I’ve tasted passion-food of
    bitter smack.
 O dearlings of my love, show grace and ruth ✿ My heart is melted for
    this severance-rack.

When he ended his verse he rose and looking on the Queen’s face, cried
out with a great cry, for stress whereof the palace was like to fall
upon all therein. Then he swooned away again and the old woman ceased
not to tend him till he revived, when she asked him what ailed him and
he answered, “In very sooth this Queen is either my wife or else the
likest of all folk to my wife.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Eleventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the old
woman asked Hasan what ailed him, he answered, “In very sooth this Queen
is either my wife or else the likest of all folk to my wife.” Quoth Nur
al-Huda to the old woman, “Woe to thee, O nurse! This stranger is either
Jinn-mad or out of his mind, for he stareth me in the face with wide
eyes and saith I am his wife.” Quoth the old woman, “O Queen, indeed he
is excusable; so blame him not, for the saying saith:—For the love-sick
is no remedy and alike are the madman and he.” And Hasan wept with sore
weeping and recited these two couplets:—

 I sight their track and pine for longing love; ✿ And o’er their
    homesteads weep I and I yearn:
 And I pray Heaven who willèd we should part, ✿ Will deign to grant us
    boon of safe return.

Then said Hasan to the Queen once more, “By Allah, thou art not my wife,
but thou art the likest of all folk to her!” Hereupon Nur al-Huda
laughed till she fell backwards and rolled round on her side.[145] Then
she said to him, “O my friend, take thy time and observe me attentively:
answer me at thy leisure what I shall ask thee and put away from thee
insanity and perplexity and inadvertency for relief is at hand.”
Answered Hasan, “O mistress of Kings and asylum of all princes and
paupers, when I looked upon thee, I was distracted, seeing thee to be
either my wife or the likest of all folk to her; but now ask me whatso
thou wilt.” Quoth she, “What is it in thy wife that resembleth me?”; and
quoth he, “O my lady, all that is in thee of beauty and loveliness,
elegance and amorous grace, such as the symmetry of thy shape and the
sweetness of thy speech and the blushing of thy cheeks and the jutting
of thy breasts and so forth, all resembleth her and thou art her very
self in thy faculty of parlance and the fairness of thy favour and the
brilliancy of thy brow.[146]” When the Queen heard this, she smiled and
gloried in her beauty and loveliness and her cheeks reddened and her
eyes wantoned; then she turned to Shawahi Umm Dawahi and said to her, “O
my mother, carry him back to the place where he tarried with thee and
tend him thyself, till I examine into his affair; for, an he be indeed a
man of manliness and mindful of friendship and love and affection, it
behoveth we help him to win his wish, more by token that he hath
sojourned in our country and eaten of our victual, not to speak of the
hardships of travel he hath suffered and the travail and horrors he hath
undergone. But, when thou hast brought him to thy house, commend him to
the care of thy dependents and return to me in all haste; and Allah
Almighty willing![147] all shall be well.” Thereupon Shawahi carried him
back to her lodging and charged her handmaids and servants and suite
wait upon him and bring him all he needed nor fail in what was his due.
Then she returned to Queen Nur al-Huda, who bade her don her arms and
set out, taking with her a thousand doughty horsemen. So she obeyed and
donned her war-gear and having collected the thousand riders reported
them ready to the Queen, who bade her march upon the city of the Supreme
King, her father, there to alight at the abode of her youngest sister,
Manár al-Saná,[148] and say to her, “Clothe thy two sons in the coats of
mail which their aunt hath made them and send them to her; for she
longeth for them.” Moreover the Queen charged her keep Hasan’s affair
secret and say to Manar al-Sana, after securing her children, “Thy
sister inviteth thee to visit her.” “Then,” she continued, “bring the
children to me in haste and let her follow at her leisure. Do thou come
by a road other than her road and journey night and day and beware of
discovering this matter to any. And I swear by all manner of oaths that,
if my sister prove to be his wife and it appear that her children are
his, I will not hinder him from taking her and them and departing with
them to his own country.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Twelfth Night,

She resumed, “It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Queen
said, I swear by Allah and by all manner of oaths that if she prove to
be his wife, I will not hinder him from taking her but will aid him
thereto and eke to departing with them to his mother-land.” And the old
woman put faith in her words, knowing not what she purposed in her mind,
for the wicked Jezebel had resolved that if she were not his wife she
would slay him; but if the children resembled him, she would believe
him. The Queen resumed, “O my mother, an my thought tell me true, my
sister Manar al-Sana is his wife, but Allah alone is All-knowing! seeing
that these traits of surpassing beauty and excelling grace, of which he
spoke, are found in none except my sisters and especially in the
youngest.” The old woman kissed her hand and returning to Hasan, told
him what the Queen had said, whereat he was like to fly for joy and
coming up to her, kissed her head. Quoth she, “O my son, kiss not my
head, but kiss me on the mouth and be this kiss by way of sweetmeat for
thy salvation.[149] Be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear
and grudge not to kiss my mouth, for I and only I was the means of thy
foregathering with her. So take comfort and hearten thy heart and
broaden thy breast and gladden thy glance and console thy soul for,
Allah willing, thy desire shall be accomplished at my hand.” So saying,
she bade him farewell and departed, whilst he recited these two
couplets:—

 Witnesses unto love of thee I’ve four; ✿ And wants each case two
    witnesses; no more!
 A heart aye fluttering, limbs that ever quake, ✿ A wasted frame and
    tongue that speech forswore.

And also these two:—

 Two things there be, an blood-tears thereover ✿ Wept eyes till not one
    trace thou couldst discover,
 Eyes ne’er could pay the tithe to them is due ✿ The prime of youth and
    severance from lover.

Then the old woman armed herself and, taking with her a thousand
weaponed horsemen, set out and journeyed till she came to the island and
the city where dwelt the Lady Manar al-Sana and between which and that
of her sister Queen Nur al-Huda was three days’ journey. When Shawahi
reached the city, she went in to the Princess and saluting her, gave her
her sister’s salam and acquainted her with the Queen’s longing for her
and her children and that she reproached her for not visiting her. Quoth
Manar al-Sana, “Verily, I am beholden to my sister and have failed of my
duty to her in not visiting her, but I will do so forthright.” Then she
bade pitch her tents without the city and took with her for her sister a
suitable present of rare things. Presently, the King her father looked
out of a window of his palace, and seeing the tents pitched by the road,
asked of them, and they answered him, “The Princess Manar al-Sana hath
pitched her tents by the way-side, being minded to visit her sister
Queen Nur al-Huda.” When the King heard this, he equipped troops to
escort her to her sister and brought out to her from his treasuries meat
and drink and monies and jewels and rarities which beggar description.
Now the King had seven daughters, all sisters-german by one mother and
father except the youngest: the eldest was called Núr al-Hudà, the
second Najm al-Sabáh, the third Shams al-Zuhà, the fourth Shajarat
al-Durr, the fifth Kút al-Kulúb, the sixth Sharaf al-Banát and the
youngest Manar al-Sana, Hasan’s wife, who was their sister by the
father’s side only.[150] Anon the old woman again presented herself and
kissed ground before the Princess, who said to her, “Hast thou any need,
O my mother?” Quoth Shawahi, “Thy sister, Queen Nur al-Huda, biddeth
thee clothe thy sons in the two habergeons which she fashioned for them
and send them to her by me, and I will take them and forego thee with
them and be the harbinger of glad tidings and the announcer of thy
coming to her.” When the Princess heard these words, her colour changed
and she bowed her head a long while, after which she shook it and
looking up, said to the old woman, “O my mother, my vitals tremble and
my heart fluttereth when thou namest my children; for, from the time of
their birth none hath looked on their faces either Jinn or man, male or
female, and I am jealous for them of the zephyr when it breatheth in the
night.” Exclaimed the old woman, “What words are these, O my lady? Dost
thou fear for them from thy sister?”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Thirteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old woman said
to the Princess Manar al-Sana, “What words be these, O my lady? Dost
thou fear for them from thy sister? Allah safeguard thy reason! Thou
mayst not cross the Queen’s majesty in this matter, for she would be
wroth with thee. However, O my lady, the children are young, and thou
art excusable in fearing for them, for those that love well are wont to
deem ill: but, O my daughter, thou knowest my tenderness and mine
affection for thee and thy children, for indeed I reared thee before
them. I will take them in my charge and make my cheek their pillow and
open my heart and set them within, nor is it needful to charge me with
care of them in the like of this case; so be of cheerful heart and
tearless eye and send them to her, for, at the most, I shall but precede
thee with them a day or at most two days.” And she ceased not to urge
her, till she gave way, fearing her sister’s fury and unknowing what
lurked for her in the dark future, and consented to send them with the
old woman. So she called them and bathed them and equipped them and
changed their apparel. Then she clad them in the two little coats of
mail and delivered them to Shawahi, who took them and sped on with them
like a bird, by another road than that by which their mother should
travel, even as the Queen had charged her; nor did she cease to fare on
with all diligence, being fearful for them, till she came in sight of
Nur al-Huda’s city, when she crossed the river and entering the town,
carried them in to their aunt. The Queen rejoiced at their sight and
embraced them, and pressed them to her breast; after which she seated
them, one upon the right thigh and the other upon the left; and turning
round said to the old woman, “Fetch me Hasan forthright, for I have
granted him my safeguard and have spared him from my sabre and he hath
sought asylum in my house and taken up his abode in my courts, after
having endured hardships and horrors and passed through all manner
mortal risks, each terribler than other; yet hitherto is he not safe
from drinking the cup of death and from cutting off his breath.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Fourteenth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Queen
Nur al-Huda bade the old woman bring Hasan she said, “Verily he hath
endured hardships and horrors and passed through all manner mortal risks
each terribler than other; yet hitherto he is not safe from death and
from the cutting off of his breath.” Replied Shawahi, “An I bring him to
thee, wilt thou reunite him with these his children? Or, if they prove
not his, wilt thou pardon him and restore him to his own country?”
Hearing these her words the Queen waxed exceeding wroth and cried to
her, “Fie upon thee, O ill-omened old woman! How long wilt thou false us
in the matter of this strange man who hath dared to intrude himself upon
us and hath lifted our veil and pried into our conditions? Say me:
thinkest thou that he shall come to our land and look upon our faces and
betray our honour, and after return in safety to his own country and
expose our affairs to his people, wherefore our report will be bruited
abroad among all the Kings of the quarters of the earth and the
merchants will journey bearing tidings of us in all directions,
saying:—A mortal entered the Isles of Wak and traversed the Land of the
Jinn and the Lands of the Wild Beasts and the Islands of Birds and set
foot in the country of the Warlocks and the Enchanters and returned in
safety? This shall never be; no, never; and I swear by Him who made the
Heavens and builded them; yea, by Him who dispread the earth and
smoothed it, and who created all creatures and counted them, that, an
they be not his children, I will assuredly slay him and strike his neck
with mine own hand!” Then she cried out at the old woman, who fell down
for fear; and set upon her the Chamberlain and twenty Mamelukes, saying,
“Go with this crone and fetch me in haste the youth who is in her
house.” So they dragged Shawaki along, yellow with fright and with
side-muscles quivering, till they came to her house, where she went in
to Hasan, who rose to her and kissed her hands and saluted her. She
returned not his salam, but said to him, “Come; speak the Queen. Did I
not say to thee:—Return presently to thine own country and I will give
thee that to which no mortal may avail? And did I forbid thee from all
this? But thou wouldst not obey me nor listen to my words; nay, thou
rejectedst my counsel and chosest to bring destruction on me and on
thyself. Up, then, and take that which thou hast chosen; for death is
near hand. Arise: speak with yonder vile harlot[151] and tyrant that she
is!” So Hasan arose, broken-spirited, heavy-hearted, and full of fear,
and crying, “O Preserver, preserve Thou me! O my God, be gracious to me
in that which Thou hast decreed to me of Thine affliction and protect
me, O Thou the most Merciful of the Mercifuls!” Then, despairing of his
life, he followed the twenty Mamelukes, the Chamberlain and the crone to
the Queen’s presence, where he found his two sons Nasir and Mansur
sitting in her lap, whilst she played and made merry with them. As soon
as his eyes fell on them, he knew them and crying a great cry fell down
a-fainting for excess of joy at the sight of his children.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Fifteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasan’s eyes
fell upon his two sons, he knew them both and crying a great cry fell
down a-fainting. They also knew him[152] and natural affection moved
them, so that they freed themselves from the Queen’s lap and fell upon
Hasan, and Allah (to whom belong Might and Majesty,) made them speak and
say to him, “O our father!” Whereupon the old woman and all who were
present wept for pity and tenderness over them and said, “Praised be
Allah, who hath reunited you with your Sire!” Presently, Hasan came to
himself and embracing his children, wept till again he swooned away, and
when he revived, he recited these verses:—

 By rights of you, this heart of mine could ne’er aby ✿ Severance from
    you albeit Union death imply!
 Your phantom saith to me, “A-morrow we shall meet!” ✿ Shall I despite
    the foe the morrow-day espy?
 By rights of you I swear, my lords, that since the day ✿ Of severance
    ne’er the sweets of lips enjoyèd I!
 An Allah bade me perish for the love of you, ✿ Mid greatest martyrs for
    your love I lief will die.
 Oft a gazelle doth make my heart her browsing stead ✿ The while her form
    of flesh like sleep eludes mine eye:
 If in the lists of Law my bloodshed she deny, ✿ Prove it two witnesses
    those cheeks of ruddy dye.

When Nur al-Huda was assured that the little ones were indeed Hasan’s
children and that her sister, the Princess Manar al-Sana, was his wife,
of whom he was come in quest, she was wroth against her with wrath
beyond measure.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Sixteenth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Nur
al-Huda was certified that the little ones were Hasan’s children and
that her sister Manar al-Sana was his wife of whom he had come in quest,
she raged with exceeding rage, too great to be assuaged and screamed in
Hasan’s face and reviled him and kicked him in the breast, so that he
fell on his back in a swoon. Then she cried out at him, saying, “Arise!
fly for thy life. But that I swore that no evil should betide thee from
me, should thy tale prove true, I would slay thee with mine own hand
forthright!” And she cried out at the old woman, who fell on her face
for fear, and said to her, “By Allah, but that I am loath to break the
oath that I swore, I would put both thee and him to death after the
foulest fashion!”; presently adding, “Arise, go out from before me in
safety and return to thine own country, for I swear by my fortune, if
ever mine eye espy thee or if any bring thee in to me after this, I will
smite off thy head and that of whoso bringeth thee!” Then she cried out
to her officers, saying, “Put him out from before me!” So they thrust
him out, and when he came to himself, he recited these couplets:—

 You’re far, yet to my heart you’re nearest near; ✿ Absent yet present in
    my sprite you appear:
 By Allah, ne’er to other I’ve inclined ✿ But tyranny of Time in patience
    bear!
 Nights pass while still I love you and they end, ✿ And burns my breast
    with flames of fell Sa’ír[153];
 I was a youth who parting for an hour ✿ Bore not, then what of months
    that make a year?
 Jealous am I of breeze-breath fanning thee; ✿ Yea jealous-mad of fair
    soft-sided fere!

Then he once more fell down in a swoon, and when he came to himself, he
found himself without the palace whither they had dragged him on his
face; so he rose, stumbling over his skirts and hardly crediting his
escape from Nur al-Huda. Now this was grievous to Shawahi; but she dared
not remonstrate with the Queen by reason of the violence of her wrath.
And forthright Hasan went forth, distracted and knowing not whence to
come or whither to go; the world, for all its wideness, was straitened
upon him and he found none to speak a kind word with him and comfort
him, nor any to whom he might resort for counsel or to apply for refuge;
wherefore he made sure of death for that he could not journey to his own
country and knew none to travel with him, neither wist he the way
thither nor might he pass through the Wady of the Jann and the Land of
Beasts and the Islands of Birds. So giving himself up for lost he bewept
himself, till he fainted, and when he revived, he bethought him of his
children and his wife and of that might befal her with her sister,
repenting him of having come to those countries and of having hearkened
to none, and recited these couplets:—

 Suffer mine eye-babes weep lost of love and tears express: ✿ Rare is my
    solace and increases my distress:
 The cup of Severance-chances to the dregs I’ve drained; ✿ Who is the man
    to bear love-loss with manliness?
 Ye spread the Carpet of Disgrace[154] betwixt us twain; ✿ Ah, when shalt
    be uprolled, O Carpet of Disgrace?
 I watched the while you slept; and if you deemed that I ✿ Forgot your
    love I but forget forgetfulness:
 Woe’s me! indeed my heart is pining for the love ✿ Of you, the only
    leaches who can cure my case:
 See ye not what befel me from your fell disdain? ✿ Debased am I before
    the low and high no less.
 I hid my love of you but longing laid it bare, ✿ And burns my heart wi’
    fire of passion’s sorest stress:
 Ah! deign have pity on my piteous case, for I ✿ Have kept our troth in
    secresy and patent place!
 Would Heaven I wot shall Time e’er deign us twain rejoin! ✿ You are my
    heart’s desire, my sprite’s sole happiness:
 My vitals bear the Severance-wound: would Heaven that you ✿ With tidings
    from your camp would deign my soul to bless!

Then he went on, till he came without the city, where he found the
river, and walked along its bank, knowing not whither he went. Such was
Hasan’s case; but as regards his wife Manar al-Sana, as she was about to
carry out her purpose and to set out, on the second day after the
departure of the old woman with her children, behold, there came in to
her one of the chamberlains of the King her sire, and kissed ground
between his hands,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Seventeenth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Manar
al-Sana was about to set out upon the journey, behold, a chamberlain of
the King, her sire, came in to her and kissing the ground before her,
said, “O Princess, the Supreme King, thy father saluteth thee and
biddeth thee to him.” So she rose and accompanied the chamberlain to
learn what was required by her father, who seated her by his side on the
couch, and said to her, “O my daughter, know that I have this night had
a dream which maketh me fear for thee and that long sorrow will betide
thee from this thy journey.” Quoth she, “How so, O my father, and what
didst thou see in thy dream?” and quoth he, “I dreamt that I entered a
hidden hoard, wherein was great store of monies, of jewels, of jacinths
and of other riches; but ’twas as if naught pleased me of all this
treasure and jewelry save seven bezels, which were the finest things
there. I chose out one of the seven jewels, for it was the smallest,
finest and most lustrous of them and its water pleased me; so I took it
in my hand-palm and fared forth of the treasury. When I came without the
door, I opened my hand, rejoicing, and turned over the jewel, when,
behold, there swooped down on me out of the welkin a strange bird from a
far land (for it was not of the birds of our country) and, snatching it
from my hand, returned with it whence it came.[155] Whereupon sorrow and
concern and sore vexation overcame me and my exceeding chagrin so
troubled me that I awoke, mourning and lamenting for the loss of the
jewel. At once on awaking I summoned the interpreters and expounders of
dreams and declared to them my dream,[156] and they said to me:—Thou
hast seven daughters, the youngest of whom thou wilt lose, and she will
be taken from thee perforce, without thy will. Now thou, O my girl, art
the youngest and dearest of my daughters and the most affectionate of
them to me, and look’ye thou art about to journey to thy sister, and I
know not what may befal thee from her; so go thou not; but return to thy
palace.” But when the Princess heard her father’s words, her heart
fluttered and she feared for her children and bent earthwards her head
awhile: then she raised it and said to her sire, “O King, Queen Nur
al-Huda hath made ready for me an entertainment and awaiteth my coming
to her, hour by hour. These four years she hath not seen me and if I
delay to visit her, she will be wroth with me. The utmost of my stay
with her shall be a month and then I will return to thee. Besides, who
is the mortal who can travel our land and make his way to the Islands of
Wak? Who can gain access to the White Country and the Black Mountain and
come to the Land of Camphor and the Castle of Crystal, and how shall he
traverse the Island of Birds and the Wady of Wild Beasts and the Valley
of the Jann and enter our Islands? If any stranger came hither, he would
be drowned in the seas of destruction: so be of good cheer and eyes
without a tear anent my journey; for none may avail to tread our earth.”
And she ceased not to persuade him, till he deigned give her leave to
depart.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Eighteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Princess
ceased not to persuade him till he deigned give her leave to depart, and
bade a thousand horse escort her to the river and abide there, till she
entered her sister’s city and palace and returned to them, when they
should take her and carry her back to him. Moreover, he charged her
tarry with her sister but two days and return to him in haste; and she
answered, “Hearing and obedience.” Then rising up she went forth and he
with her and farewelled her. Now his words had sunken deep into her
heart and she feared for her children; but it availeth not to fortify
herself by any device against the onset of Destiny. So she set out and
fared on diligently three days, till she came to the river and pitched
her tents on its bank. Then she crossed the stream, with some of her
counsellors, pages and suite and, going up to the city and the palace,
went in to Queen Nur al-Huda, with whom she found her children who ran
to her weeping and crying out, “O our father!” At this, the tears railed
from her eyes and she wept; then she strained them to her bosom, saying,
“What! Have you seen your sire at this time? Would the hour had never
been, in which I left him! If I knew him to be in the house of the
world, I would carry you to him.” Then she bemoaned herself and her
husband and her children weeping and reciting these couplets:—

 My friends, despite this distance and this cruelty, ✿ I pine for you,
    incline to you where’er you be.
 My glance for ever turns towards your hearth and home ✿ And mourns my
    heart the bygone days you woned with me,
 How many a night foregathered we withouten fear ✿ One loving, other
    faithful ever fain and free!

When her sister saw her fold her children to her bosom, saying, “’Tis I
who have done thus with myself and my children and have ruined my own
house!” she saluted her not, but said to her, “O whore, whence haddest
thou these children? Say, hast thou married unbeknown to thy sire or
hast thou committed fornication?[157] An thou have played the piece, it
behoveth thou be exemplarily punished; and if thou have married sans our
knowledge, why didst thou abandon thy husband and separate thy sons from
thy sire and bring them hither?”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Nineteenth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth Nur
al-Huda, the Queen, to her sister Manar al-Sana, the Princess, “An thou
have married sans our knowledge, why didst thou abandon thy husband and
separate thy sons from their sire and bring them to our land? Thou hast
hidden thy children from us. Thinkest thou we know not of this? Allah
Almighty, He who is cognisant of the concealed, hath made known to us
thy case and revealed thy condition and bared thy nakedness.” Then she
bade her guards seize her and pinion her elbows and shackle her with
shackles of iron. So they did as she commanded and she beat her with a
grievous beating, so that her skin was torn, and hanged her up by the
hair; after which she cast her in prison and wrote the King her father a
writ acquainting him with her case and saying, “There hath appeared in
our land a man, a mortal, by name Hasan, and our sister Manar al-Sana
avoucheth that she is lawfully married to him and bare him two sons,
whom she hath hidden from us and thee; nor did she discover aught of
herself till there came to us this man and informed us that he wedded
her and she tarried with him a long while; after which she took her
children and departed, without his knowledge, bidding as she went his
mother tell her son, whenas longing began to rack to come to her in the
Islands of Wak. So we laid hands on the man and sent the old woman
Shawahi to fetch her and her offspring, enjoining her to bring us the
children in advance of her. And she did so, whilst Manar al-Sana
equipped herself and set out to visit me. When the boys were brought to
me and ere the mother came, I sent for Hasan the mortal who claimeth her
to wife, and he on entering and at first sight knew them and they knew
him; whereby was I certified that the children were indeed his children
and that she was his wife and I learned that the man’s story was true
and he was not to blame, but that the reproach and the infamy rested
with my sister. Now I feared the rending of our honour-veil before the
folk of our Isles; so, when this wanton, this traitress, came in to me,
I was incensed against her and cast her into prison and bastinado’d her
grievously and hanged her up by the hair. Behold, I have acquainted thee
with her case and it is thine to command, and whatso thou orderest us
that we will do. Thou knowest that in this affair is dishonour and
disgrace to our name and to thine, and haply the islanders will hear of
it, and we shall become amongst them a byword; wherefore it besitteth
thou return us an answer with all speed.” Then she delivered the letter
to a courier and he carried it to the King who, when he read it, was
wroth with exceeding wrath with his daughter Manar al-Sana and wrote to
Nur al-Huda, saying, “I commit her case to thee and give thee command
over her life; so, if the matter be as thou sayest, kill her without
consulting me.” When the Queen had received and read her father’s
letter, she sent for Manar al-Sana and they set before her the prisoner
drowned in her blood and pinioned with her hair, shackled with heavy
iron shackles and clad in hair-cloth; and they made her stand in the
presence abject and abashed. When she saw herself in this condition of
passing humiliation and exceeding abjection, she called to mind her
former high estate and wept with sore weeping and recited these two
couplets[1]:—

 O Lord my foes are fain to slay me in despight ✿ Nor deem I anywise to
    find escape by flight:
 I have recourse to Thee t’ annul what they have done; ✿ Thou art th’
    asylum, Lord, of fearful suppliant wight.

Then wept she grievously, till she fell down in a swoon, and presently
coming to herself, repeated these two couplets[158]:—

 Troubles familiar with my heart are grown and I with them, ✿ erst
    shunning; for the generous are sociable still.
 Not one mere kind alone of woe doth lieger with me lie; ✿ Praised be
    God! There are with me thousands of kinds of ill.

And also these:—

 Oft times Mischance shall straiten noble breast ✿ With grief, whence
    issue is for Him to shape:
 But when the meshes straitest, tightest, seem ✿ They loose, though
    deemed I ne’er to find escape.

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


         Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Twentieth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Queen Nur
al-Huda ordered into the presence her sister Princess Manar al-Sana,
they set her between her hands and she, pinioned as she was recited the
verses aforesaid. Then the Queen[159] sent for a ladder of wood and made
the eunuchs lay her on her back, with her arms spread out and bind her
with cords thereto; after which she bared her head and wound her hair
about the ladder-rungs and indeed all pity for her was rooted out from
her heart. When Manar al-Sana saw herself in this state of abjection and
humiliation, she cried out and wept; but none succoured her. Then said
she to the Queen, “O my sister, how is thy heart hardened against me?
Has thou no mercy on me nor pity on these little children?” But her
words only hardened her sister’s heart and she insulted her, saying, “O
Wanton! O harlot! Allah have no ruth on whoso sueth for thee! How should
I have compassion on thee, O traitress?” Replied Manar al-Sana who lay
stretched on the ladder, “I appeal from thee to the Lord of the Heavens,
concerning that wherewith thou revilest me and whereof I am innocent! By
Allah, I have done no whoredom, but am lawfully married to him, and my
Lord knoweth an I speak sooth or not! Indeed, my heart is wroth with
thee, by reason of thine excessive hardheartedness against me! How canst
thou cast at me the charge of harlotry, without knowledge? But my Lord
will deliver me from thee and if that whoredom whereof thou accusest me
be true, may He presently punish me for it!” Quoth Nur al-Huda after a
few moments of reflection “How durst thou bespeak me thus?” and rose and
beat her till she fainted away[160]; whereupon they sprinkled water on
her face till she revived; and in truth her charms were wasted for
excess of beating and the straitness of her bonds and the sore insults
she had suffered. Then she recited these two couplets:—

 If aught I’ve sinned in sinful way, ✿ Or done ill deed and gone astray,
 The past repent I and I come ✿ To you and for your pardon pray!

When Nur al-Huda heard these lines, her wrath redoubled and she said to
her, “Wilt speak before me in verse, O whore, and seek to excuse thyself
for the mortal sins thou hast sinned? ’Twas my desire that thou shouldst
return to thy husband, that I might witness thy wickedness and matchless
brazen-facedness; for thou gloriest in thy lewdness and wantonness and
mortal heinousness.” Then she called for a palm-stick and, whenas they
brought the Jaríd, she arose and baring arms to elbows, beat her sister
from head to foot; after which she called for a whip of plaited thongs,
wherewith if one smote an elephant, he would start off at full speed,
and came down therewith on her back and her stomach and every part of
her body, till she fainted. When the old woman Shawahi saw this, she
fled forth from the Queen’s presence, weeping and cursing her; but Nur
al-Huda cried out to her eunuchs, saying, “Fetch her to me!” So they ran
after her and seizing her, brought her back to the Queen, who bade throw
her on the ground and making them lay hold of her, rose and took the
whip, with which she beat her, till she swooned away, when she said to
her waiting-women, “Drag this ill-omened beldam forth on her face and
put her out.” And they did as she bade them. So far concerning them; but
as regards Hasan, he walked on beside the river, in the direction of the
desert, distracted, troubled, and despairing of life; and indeed he was
dazed and knew not night from day for stress of affliction. He ceased
not faring on thus, till he came to a tree whereto he saw a scroll
hanging: so he took it and found written thereon these couplets:—

 When in thy mother’s womb thou wast, ✿ I cast thy case the bestest best;
 And turned her heart to thee, so she ✿ Fosterèd thee on fondest breast.
 We will suffice thee in whate’er ✿ Shall cause thee trouble or unrest;
 We’ll aid thee in thine enterprise ✿ So rise and bow to our behest.

When he had ended reading this scroll, he made sure of deliverance from
trouble and of winning reunion with those he loved. Then he walked
forward a few steps and found himself alone in a wild and perilous wold
wherein there was none to company with him; upon which his heart sank
within him for horror and loneliness and his side-muscles trembled, for
that fearsome place, and he recited these couplets:—

 O Zephyr of Morn, an thou pass where the dear ones dwell, ✿ Bear
    greeting of lover who ever in love-longing wones!
 And tell them I’m pledged to yearning and pawned to pine ✿ And the might
    of my passion all passion of lovers unthrones.
 Their sympathies haply shall breathe in a Breeze like thee ✿ And quicken
    forthright this framework of rotting bones.[161]

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasan read
the scroll he was certified of deliverance from his trouble and made
sure of winning reunion with those he loved. Then he walked forward a
couple of steps and stopped finding himself alone in a wild and perilous
wold wherein was none to company with him, so he wept sore and recited
the verses before mentioned. Then he walked on a few steps farther
beside the river, till he came upon two little boys of the sons of the
sorcerers, before whom lay a rod of copper graven with talismans, and
beside it a skull-cap[162] of leather, made of three gores and wroughten
in steel with names and characts. The cap and rod were upon the ground
and the boys were disputing and beating each other, till the blood ran
down between them; whilst each cried, “None shall take the wand but I.”
So Hasan interposed and parted them, saying, “What is the cause of your
contention?” and they replied, “O uncle, be thou judge of our case, for
Allah the Most High hath surely sent thee to do justice between us.”
Quoth Hasan, “Tell me your case, and I will judge between you;” and
quoth one of them, “We twain are brothers-german and our sire was a
mighty magician, who dwelt in a cave on yonder mountain. He died and
left us this cap and rod; and my brother saith:—None shall have the rod
but I, whilst I say the like; so be thou judge between us and deliver us
each from other.” Hasan asked, “What is the difference between the rod
and the cap and what is their value? The rod appears to be worth six
coppers[163] and the cap three;” whereto they answered, “Thou knowest
not their properties.” “And what are their properties?” “Each of them
hath a wonderful secret virtue, wherefore the rod is worth the revenue
of all the Islands of Wak and their provinces and dependencies, and the
cap the like!” “By Allah, O my sons, discover to me their secret
virtues.” So they said, “O uncle, they are extraordinary; for our father
wrought an hundred and thirty and five years at their contrivance, till
he brought them to perfection and ingrafted them with secret attributes
which might serve him extraordinary services and engraved them after the
likeness of the revolving sphere, and by their aid he dissolved all
spells; and when he had made an end of their fashion, Death, which all
needs must suffer, overtook him. Now the hidden virtue of the cap is,
that whoso setteth it on his head is concealed from all folk’s eyes, nor
can any see him, whilst it remaineth on his head; and that of the rod is
that whoso owneth it hath authority over seven tribes of the Jinn, who
all serve the order and ordinance of the rod; and whenever he who
possesseth it smiteth therewith on the ground, their Kings come to do
him homage, and all the Jinn are at his service.” Now when Hasan heard
these words, he bowed his head groundwards awhile, then said in himself,
“By Allah, I shall conquer every foe by means of this rod and cap,
Inshallah! and I am worthier of them both than these two boys. So I will
go about forthright to get them from the twain by craft, that I may use
them to free myself and my wife and children from yonder tyrannical
Queen, and then we will depart from this dismal stead, whence there is
no deliverance for mortal man nor flight. Doubtless, Allah caused me not
to fall in with these two lads, but that I might get the rod and cap
from them.” Then he raised his head and said to the two boys, “If ye
would have me decide the case, I will make trial of you and see what
each of you deserveth. He who overcometh his brother shall have the rod
and he who faileth shall have the cap.” They replied, “O uncle, we
depute thee to make trial of us and do thou decide between us as thou
deems fit.” Hasan asked, “Will ye hearken to me and have regard to my
words?”; and they answered, “Yes.” Then said he, “I will take a stone
and throw it and he who out-runneth his brother thereto and picketh it
up shall take the rod, and the other who is outraced shall take the
cap.” And they said, “We accept and consent to this thy proposal.” Then
Hasan took a stone and threw it with his might, so that it disappeared
from sight. The two boys ran under and after it and when they were at a
distance, he donned the cap and hending the rod in hand, removed from
his place that he might prove the truth of that which the boys had said,
with regard to their scant properties. The younger outran the elder and
coming first to the stone, took it and returned with it to the place
where they had left Hasan, but found no signs of him. So he called to
his brother, saying, “Where is the man who was to be umpire between us?”
Quoth the other, “I espy him not neither wot I whether he hath flown up
to heaven above or sunk into earth beneath.” Then they sought for him,
but saw him not, though all the while he was standing in his stead hard
by them. So they abused each other, saying, “Rod and Cap are both gone;
they are neither mine nor thine: and indeed our father warned us of this
very thing; but we forgot whatso he said.” Then they retraced their
steps and Hasan also entered the city, wearing the cap and bearing the
rod; and none saw him. Now when he was thus certified of the truth of
their speech, he rejoiced with exceeding joy and making the palace, went
up into the lodging of Shawahi, who saw him not, because of the cap.
Then he walked up to a shelf[164] over her head upon which were vessels
of glass and chinaware, and shook it with his hand, so that what was
thereon fell to the ground. The old woman cried out and beat her face;
then she rose and restored the fallen things, to their places,[165]
saying in herself, “By Allah, methinks Queen Nur al-Huda hath sent a
Satan to torment me, and he hath tricked me this trick! I beg Allah
Almighty deliver me from her and preserve me from her wrath, for, O
Lord, if she deal thus abominably with her half-sister, beating and
hanging her, dear as she is to her sire, how will she do with a stranger
like myself, against whom she is incensed?”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the ancient Lady
of Calamities cried, “When Queen Nur al-Huda doeth such misdeed to her
sister, what will she do to a stranger like myself, against whom she is
incensed?” Then said she, “I conjure thee, O devil, by the Most
Compassionate, the Bountiful-great, the High of Estate, of Dominion
Elate who man and Jinn did create, and by the writing upon the seal of
Solomon David-son (on both be the Peace!) speak to me and answer me;”
Quoth Hasan, “I am no devil; I am Hasan, the afflicted, the distraught.”
Then he raised the cap from his head and appeared to the old woman, who
knew him and taking him apart, said to him, “What is come to thy reason,
that thou returnest hither? Go hide thee; for, if this wicked woman have
tormented thy wife with such torments, and she her sister, what will she
do, an she light on thee?” Then she told him all that had befallen his
spouse and that wherein she was of travail and torment and tribulation,
and straitly described all the pains she endured adding, “And indeed the
Queen repenteth her of having let thee go and hath sent one after thee,
promising him an hundred-weight of gold and my rank in her service; and
she hath sworn that, if he bring thee back, she will do thee and thy
wife and children dead.” And she shed tears and discovered to Hasan what
the Queen had done with herself, whereat he wept and said, “O my lady,
how shall I do to escape from this land and deliver myself and my wife
and children from this tyrannical Queen and how devise to return with
them in safety to my own country?” Replied the old woman, “Woe to thee!
Save thyself.” Quoth he, “There is no help but I deliver her and my
children from the Queen perforce and in her despite;” and quoth Shawahi,
“How canst thou forcibly rescue them from her? Go and hide thyself, O my
son, till Allah Almighty empower thee.” Then Hasan showed her the rod
and the cap, whereat she rejoiced with joy exceeding and cried, “Glory
be to Him who quickeneth the bones, though they be rotten! By Allah, O
my son, thou and thy wife were but of lost folk; now, however, thou art
saved, thou and thy wife and children! For I know the rod and I know its
maker, who was my Shaykh in the science of Gramarye. He was a mighty
magician and spent an hundred and thirty and five years working at this
rod and cap, till he brought them to perfection, when Death the
Inevitable overtook him. And I have heard him say to his two boys:—O my
sons, these two things are not of your lot, for there will come a
stranger from a far country, who will take them from you by force, and
ye shall not know how he taketh them. Said they:—O our father, tell us
how he will avail to take them. But he answered:—I wot not.” “And O my
son,” added she, “how availedst thou to take them?” So he told her how
he had taken them from the two boys, whereat she rejoiced and said, “O
my son, since thou hast gotten the whereby to free thy wife and
children, give ear to what I shall say to thee. For me there is no
woning with this wicked woman, after the foul fashion in which she durst
use me; so I am minded to depart from her to the caves of the Magicians
and there abide with them until I die. But do thou, O my son, don the
cap and bend the rod in hand and enter the place where thy wife and
children are. Unbind her bonds and smite the earth with the rod
saying:—Be ye present, O servants of these names! whereupon the servants
of the rod will appear; and if there present himself one of the Chiefs
of the Tribes, command him whatso thou shalt wish and will.” So he
farewelled her and went forth donning the cap and hending the rod and
entered the place where his wife was. He found her well-nigh lifeless
bound to the ladder by her hair, tearful-eyed and woeful-hearted, in the
sorriest of plights, knowing no way to deliver herself. Her children
were playing under the ladder, whilst she looked at them and wept for
them and herself, because of the barbarities and sore treatings and
bitter penalties which had befallen her; and he heard her repeat these
couplets[166]:—

 There remaineth not aught save a fluttering, breath and an eye whose
    owner is confounded.
 And a desirous lover whose bowels are burned with fire notwithstanding
    which she is silent.
 The exulting foe pitieth her at the sight of her. Alas for her whom the
    exulting foe pitieth!

When Hasan saw her in this state of torment and misery and ignominy and
infamy, he wept till he fainted; and when he recovered, he saw his
children playing and their mother a-swoon for excess of pain; so he took
the cap from his head and the children saw him and cried out, “O our
father!” Then he covered his head again and the Princess came to
herself, hearing their cry, but saw only her children weeping and
shrieking, “O our father!” When she heard them name their sire and weep,
her heart was broken and her vitals rent asunder and she said to them,
“What maketh you in mind of your father at this time?” And she wept sore
and cried out, from a bursten liver and an aching bosom, “Where are ye
and where is your father?” Then she recalled the days of her union with
Hasan and what had befallen her since her desertion of him and wept with
sore weeping till her cheeks were seared and furrowed and her face was
drowned in a briny flood. Her tears ran down and wetted the ground and
she had not a hand loose to wipe them from her cheeks, whilst the flies
fed their fill on her skin, and she found no helper but weeping and no
solace but improvising verses. Then she repeated these couplets:—

 I call to mind the parting-day that rent our loves in twain, When, as I
    turned away, the tears in very streams did rain.
 The cameleer urged on his beasts with them, what while I found Nor
    strength nor fortitude, nor did my heart with me remain.
 Yea, back I turned, unknowing of the road nor might shake off The trance
    of grief and longing love that numbed my heart and brain;
 And worst of all betided me, on my return, was one Who came to me, in
    lowly guise, to glory in my pain.
 Since the belovéd’s gone, O soul, forswear the sweet of life Nor covet
    its continuance, for, wanting him, ’twere vain.
 List, O my friend, unto the tale of love, and God forbid That I should
    speak and that thy heart to hearken should not deign!
 As ’twere El Asmaï himself, of passion I discourse Fancies rare and
    marvellous, linked in an endless chain.[167]

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

She continued, When Hasan went in to his wife he saw his children and
heard her repeating the verses afore mentioned.[168] Then she turned
right and left, seeking the cause of her children’s crying out, “O our
father!” but saw no one and marvelled that her sons should name their
sire at that time and call upon him. But when Hasan heard her verses, he
wept till he swooned away and the tears railed down his cheeks like
rain. Then he drew near the children and raised the cap from his head
unseen of his wife, whereupon they saw him and they knew him and cried
out, saying, “O our father!” Their mother fell a-weeping again, when she
heard them name their sire’s name and said, “There is no avoiding the
doom which Almighty Allah hath decreed!” adding, “O Strange! What
garreth them think of their father at this time and call upon him,
albeit it is not of their wont?” Then she wept and recited these
couplets:—

 The land of lamping moon is bare and drear; ✿ O eyne of me pour forth
    the brimming tear!
 They marched: how shall I now be patient? ✿ That I nor heart nor
    patience own I swear!
 O ye, who marched yet bide in heart of me, ✿ Will you, O lords of me,
    return to that we were?
 What harm if they return and I enjoy ✿ Meeting, and they had ruth on
    tears of care?
 Upon the parting-day they dimmed these eyne, ✿ For sad surprise, and lit
    the flames that flare.
 Sore longed I for their stay, but Fortune stayed ✿ Longings and turned
    my hope to mere despair.
 Return to us (O love!) by Allah, deign! ✿ Enow of tears have flowed for
    absence-bane.

Then Hasan could no longer contain himself, but took the cap from his
head; whereupon his wife saw him and recognising him screamed a scream
which startled all in the palace, and said to him, “How camest thou
hither? From the sky hast thou dropped or through the earth hast thou
come up?” And her eyes brimmed with tears and Hasan also wept. Quoth
she, “O man, this be no time for tears or blame. Fate hath had its
course and the sight was blinded and the Pen hath run with what was
ordained of Allah when Time was begun: so, Allah upon thee, whencesoever
thou comest, go hide, lest any espy thee and tell my sister and she do
thee and me die!” Answered he, “O my lady and lady of all Queens, I have
adventured myself and come hither, and either I will die or I will
deliver thee from this strait and travel with thee and my children to my
country, despite the nose of this thy wickedest sister.” But as she
heard his words she smiled and for awhile fell to shaking her head and
said, “Far, O my life, far is it from the power of any except Allah
Almighty to deliver me from this my strait! Save thyself by flight and
wend thy ways and cast not thyself into destruction; for she hath
conquering hosts none may withstand. Given that thou tookest me and
wentest forth, how canst thou make thy country and escape from these
islands and the perils of these awesome places? Verily, thou hast seen
on thy way hither, the wonders, the marvels, the dangers and the terrors
of the road, such as none may escape, not even one of the rebel Jinns.
Depart, therefore, forthright and add not cark to my cark and care to my
care, neither do thou pretend to rescue me from this my plight; for who
shall carry me to thy country through all these vales and thirsty wolds
and fatal steads?” Rejoined Hasan, “By thy life, O light of mine eyes, I
will not depart this place nor fare but with thee!” Quoth she, “O man!
How canst thou avail unto this thing and what manner of man art thou?
Thou knowest not what thou sayest! None can escape from these realms,
even had he command over Jinns, Ifrits, magicians, chiefs of tribes and
Marids. Save thyself and leave me; perchance Allah will bring about good
after ill.” Answered Hasan, “O lady of fair ones, I came not save to
deliver thee with this rod and with this cap.” And he told her what had
befallen him with the two boys; but, whilst he was speaking, behold, up
came the Queen and heard their speech. Now when he was ware of her, he
donned the cap and was hidden from sight, and she entered and said to
the Princess, “O wanton, who is he with whom thou wast talking?”
Answered Manar al-Sanar, “Who is with me that should talk with me,
except these children?” Then the Queen took the whip and beat her,
whilst Hasan stood by and looked on, nor did she leave beating her till
she fainted; whereupon she bade transport her to another place. So they
loosed her and carried her to another chamber whilst Hasan followed
unseen. There they cast her down, senseless, and stood gazing upon her,
till she revived and recited these couplets:[169]—

 I have sorrowed on account of our disunion with a sorrow that made the
    tears to overflow from my eyelids;
 And I vowed that if Fortune reunite us, I would never again mention our
    separation;
 And I would say to the envious, Die ye with regret; By Allah I have now
    attained my desire!
 Joy hath overwhelmed me to such a degree that by its excess it hath made
    me weep.
 O eye, how hath weeping become thy habit? Thou weepest in joy as well as
    in sorrows.

When she ceased her verse the slave-girls went out from her and Hasan
took off the cap; whereupon his wife said to him, “See, O man, all this
befel me not save by reason of my having rebelled against thee and
transgressed thy commandment and gone forth without thy leave.[170] So,
Allah upon thee blame me not for my sins and know that women never wot a
man’s worth till they have lost him. Indeed, I have offended and done
evil; but I crave pardon of Allah Almighty for whatso I did, and if He
reunite us, I will never again gainsay thee in aught, no, never!”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Hasan’s wife
besought pardon of him saying, “Blame me not for my sin; and indeed I
crave mercy of Allah Almighty.” Quoth Hasan (and indeed his heart ached
for her), “’Twas not thou that wast in fault; nay, the fault was mine
and mine only, for I fared forth and left thee with one who knew not thy
rank, neither thy worth nor thy degree. But know, O beloved of my heart
and fruit of my vitals and light of mine eyes, that Allah (blessed be
He!) hath ordained to me power of releasing thee; so, say me, wouldst
thou have me carry thee to thy father’s home, there to accomplish what
Allah decreeth unto thee, or wilt thou forthright depart with me to mine
own country, now that relief is come to thee?” Quoth she, “Who can
deliver me save the Lord of the Heavens? Go to thy mother-land and put
away from thee false hope; for thou knowest not the perils of these
parts which, an thou obey me not, soon shalt thou sight.” And she
improvised these couplets:—

 On me and with me bides thy volunty; ✿ Why then such anger such despite
    to me?
 Whate’er befel us Heaven forbid that love ✿ Fade for long time or e’er
    forgotten be!
 Ceased not the spy to haunt our sides, till seen ✿ Our love estranged
    and then estranged was he:
 In truth I trusted to fair thoughts of thine ✿ Though spake the wicked
    spy maliciously.
 We’ll keep the secret ’twixt us twain and hold ✿ Although the brand of
    blame unsheathed we see.
 The livelong day in longing love I spend ✿ Hoping acceptance-message
    from my friend.

Then wept she and her children, and the handmaidens heard them: so they
came in to them and found them weeping, but saw not Hasan with them;
wherefore they wept for ruth of them and damned Queen Nur al-Huda. Then
Hasan took patience till night came on and her guards had gone to their
sleeping-places, when he arose and girded his waist; then went up to her
and loosing her kissed her on the head and between the eyes and pressed
her to his bosom, saying, “How long have we wearied for our mother-land
and for reunion there! Is this our meeting in sleep, or on wake?” Then
he took up the elder boy and she took up the younger and they went forth
the palace; and Allah veiled them with the veil of His protection, so
that they came safe to the outer gate which closed the entrance to the
Queen’s Serraglio. But finding it locked from without, Hasan said,
“There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious,
the Great! Verily we are Allah’s and unto Him shall we return!” With
this they despaired of escape and Hasan beat hand upon hand, saying, “O
Dispeller of dolours! Indeed, I had bethought me of every thing and
considered its conclusion but this; and now, when it is daybreak, they
will take us, and what device have we in this case?” And he recited the
following two couplets:[171]—

 Thou madest fair thy thought of Fate, whenas the days were fair, And
    fearedst not the unknown ills that they to thee might bring.
 The nights were fair and calm to thee; thou wast deceived by them, For
    in the peace of night is born full many a troublous thing.

Then Hasan wept and his wife wept for his weeping and for the abasement
she had suffered and the cruelties of Time and Fortune:—

 Baulks me my Fate as tho’ she were my foe; ✿ Each day she showeth me new
    cark and care:
 Fate, when I aim at good, brings clear reverse, ✿ And lets foul morrow
    wait on day that’s fair.

And also these:—

 Irks me my Fate and clean unknows that I ✿ Of my high worth her shifts
    and shafts despise.
 She nights parading what ill-will she works: ✿ I night parading Patience
    to her eyes.

Then his wife said to him, “By Allah, there is no relief for us but to
kill ourselves and be at rest from this great and weary travail; else we
shall suffer grievous torment on the morrow.” At this moment, behold,
they heard a voice from without the door say, “By Allah, O my lady Manar
al-Sana, I will not open to thee and thy husband Hasan, except ye obey
me in whatso I shall say to you!” When they heard these words they were
silent for excess of fright and would have returned whence they came;
when lo! the voice spake again saying, “What aileth you both to be
silent and answer me not?” Therewith they knew the speaker for the old
woman Shawahi, Lady of Calamities, and said to her, “Whatsoever thou
biddest us, that will we do; but first open the door to us; this being
no time for talk.” Replied she, “By Allah, I will not open to you until
ye both swear to me that you will take me with you and not leave me with
yonder whore: so, whatever befalleth you shall befal me and if ye
escape, I shall escape, and if ye perish, I shall perish: for yonder
abominable woman, tribade[172] that she is! entreateth me with indignity
and still tormenteth me on your account; and thou, O my daughter,
knowest my worth.” Now recognising her they trusted in her and sware to
her an oath such as contented her, whereupon she opened the door to them
and they fared forth and found her riding on a Greek jar of red
earthenware with a rope of palm-fibres about its neck,[173] which rolled
under her and ran faster than a Najdi colt, and she came up to them, and
said, “Follow me and fear naught, for I know forty modes of magic by the
least of which I could make this city a dashing sea, swollen with
clashing billows, and ensorcel each damsel therein to a fish, and all
before dawn. But I was not able to work aught of my mischief, for fear
of the King her father and of regard to her sisters, for that they are
formidable, by reason of their many guards and tribesmen and servants.
However, soon will I show you wonders of my skill in witchcraft; and now
let us on, relying upon the blessing of Allah and His good aid.” Now
Hasan and his wife rejoiced in this, making sure of escape,——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasan and
his wife, accompanied by the ancient dame Shawahi, fared forth from the
palace, they made sure of deliverance and they walked on till they came
without the city, when he fortified his heart and, smiting the earth
with the rod, cried, “Ho, ye servants of these names, appear to me and
acquaint me with your conditions!” Thereupon the earth clave asunder and
out came ten[174] Ifrits, with their feet in the bowels of the earth and
their heads in the clouds. They kissed the earth three times before
Hasan and said as with one voice, “Adsumus! Here are we at thy service,
O our lord and ruler over us! What dost thou bid us do? For we hear and
obey thy commandment. An thou wilt, we will dry thee up seas and remove
mountains from their places.” So Hasan rejoiced in their words and at
their speedy answer to his evocation; then taking courage and bracing up
his resolution, he said to them, “Who are ye and what be your names and
your races, and to what tribes and clans and companies appertain ye?”
They kissed the earth once more and answered as with one voice, saying,
“We are seven Kings, each ruling over seven tribes of the Jinn of all
conditions, and Satans and Marids, flyers and divers, dwellers in
mountains and wastes and wolds and haunters of the seas: so bid us do
whatso thou wilt; for we are thy servants and thy slaves, and whoso
possesseth this rod hath dominion over all our necks and we owe him
obedience.” Now when Hasan heard this, he rejoiced with joy exceeding,
as did his wife and the old woman, and presently he said to the Kings of
the Jinn, “I desire of you that ye show me your tribes and hosts and
guards.” “O our lord,” answered they, “if we show thee our tribes, we
fear for thee and these who are with thee, for their name is legion and
they are various in form and fashion, figure and favour. Some of us are
heads sans bodies and others bodies sans heads, and others again are in
the likeness of wild beasts and ravening lions. However, if this be thy
will, there is no help but we first show thee those of us who are like
unto wild beasts. But, O our lord, what wouldst thou of us at this
present?” Quoth Hasan, “I would have you carry me forthwith to the city
of Baghdad, me and my wife and this honest woman.” But, hearing his
words they hung down their heads and were silent, whereupon Hasan asked
them, “Why do ye not reply?” And they answered as with one voice, “O our
lord and ruler over us, we are of the covenant of Solomon son of David
(on the twain be Peace!) and he sware us in that we would bear none of
the sons of Adam on our backs; since which time we have borne no mortal
on back or shoulder: but we will straightway harness thee horses of the
Jinn, that shall carry thee and thy company to thy country.” Hasan
enquired, “How far are we from Baghdad?” and they, “Seven years’ journey
for a diligent horseman.” Hasan marvelled at this and said to them,
“Then how came I hither in less than a year?”; and they said “Allah
softened to thee the hearts of His pious servants else hadst thou never
come to this country nor hadst thou set eyes on these regions; no,
never! For the Shaykh Abd al-Kaddus, who mounted thee on the elephant
and the magical horse, traversed with thee, in ten days, three years’
journey for a well-girt rider, and the Ifrit Dahnash, to whom the Shaykh
committed thee, carried thee a three years’ march in a day and a night;
all which was of the blessing of Allah Almighty, for that the Shaykh Abu
al-Ruwaysh is of the seed of Ásaf bin Barkhiyá[175] and knoweth the Most
Great name of Allah.[176] Moreover, from Baghdad to the palace of the
damsels is a year’s journey, and this maketh up the seven years.” When
Hasan heard this, he marvelled with exceeding marvel and cried, “Glory
be to God, Facilitator of the hard, Fortifier of the weak heart,
Approximator of the far and Humbler of every froward tyrant, Who hath
eased us of every accident and carried me to these countries and
subjected to me these creatures and reunited me with my wife and
children! I know not whether I am asleep or awake or if I be sober or
drunken!” Then he turned to the Jinn and asked, “When ye have mounted me
upon your steeds, in how many days will they bring us to Baghdad?”; and
they answered, “They will carry you thither under the year, but not till
after ye have endured terrible perils and hardships and horrors and ye
have traversed thirsty Wadys and frightful wastes and horrible steads
without number; and we cannot promise thee safety, O our lord, from the
people of these islands,”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Jann said to
Hasan, “We cannot promise thee safety, O our lord, from this Islandry,
nor from the mischief of the Supreme King and his enchanters and
warlocks. It may be they will overcome us and take you from us and we
fall into affliction with them, and all to whom the tidings shall come
after this will say to us:—Ye are wrong-doers! How could ye go against
the Supreme King and carry a mortal out of his dominions, and eke the
King’s daughter with him?” adding, “Wert thou alone with us the thing
were light; but He who conveyed thee hither is capable to carry thee
back to thy country and reunite thee with thine own people forthright
and in readiest plight. So take heart and put thy trust in Allah and
fear not; for we are at thy service, to convey thee to thy country.”
Hasan thanked them therefor and said, “Allah requite you with good! but
now make haste with the horses;” they replied, “We hear and we obey,”
and struck the ground with their feet, whereupon it opened and they
disappeared within it and were absent awhile, after which they suddenly
reappeared with three horses, saddled and bridled, and on each
saddle-bow a pair of saddle-bags, with a leathern bottle of water in one
pocket and the other full of provaunt. So Hasan mounted one steed and
took a child before him, whilst his wife mounted a second and took the
other child before her. Then the old woman alighted from the jar and
bestrode the third horse and they rode on, without ceasing, all night.
At break of day, they turned aside from the road and made for the
mountain, whilst their tongues ceased not to name Allah. Then they fared
on under the highland all that day, till Hasan caught sight of a black
object afar as it were a tall column of smoke a-twisting skywards; so he
recited somewhat of the Koran and Holy Writ, and sought refuge with
Allah from Satan the Stoned. The black thing grew plainer as they drew
near, and when hard by it, they saw that it was an Ifrit, with a head
like a huge dome and tusks like grapnels and jaws like a lane and
nostrils like ewers and ears like leathern targes and mouth like a cave
and teeth like pillars of stone and hands like winnowing forks and legs
like masts: his head was in the cloud and his feet in the bowels of the
earth had plowed. Whenas Hasan gazed upon him he bowed himself and
kissed the ground before him, saying, “O Hasan, have no fear of me; for
I am the chief of the dwellers in this land, which is the first of the
Isles of Wak, and I am a Moslem and an adorer of the One God. I have
heard of you and your coming and when I knew of your case, I desired to
depart from the land of the magicians to another land, void of
inhabitants and far from men and Jinn, that I might dwell there alone
and worship Allah till my fated end came upon me. So I wish to accompany
you and be your guide, till ye fare forth of the Wak Islands; and I will
not appear save at night; and do ye hearten your hearts on my account;
for I am a Moslem, even as ye are Moslems.” When Hasan heard the Ifrit’s
words, he rejoiced with exceeding joy and made sure of deliverance; and
he said to him, “Allah requite thee weal! Go with us relying upon the
blessing of Allah!” So the Ifrit forewent them and they followed,
talking and making merry, for their hearts were pleased and their
breasts were eased and Hasan fell to telling his wife all that had
befallen him and all the hardships he had undergone, whilst she excused
herself to him and told him, in turn, all she had seen and suffered.
They ceased not faring all that night——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


      Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that they ceased not
faring all that night and the horses bore them like the blinding leven,
and when the day rose all put their hands to the saddle-bags and took
forth provaunt which they ate and water which they drank. Then they sped
diligently on their way, preceded by the Ifrit, who turned aside with
them from the beaten track into another road, till then untrodden, along
the sea-shore, and they ceased not faring on, without stopping, across
Wadys and wolds a whole month, till on the thirty-first day there arose
before them a dust-cloud, that walled the world and darkened the day;
and when Hasan saw this, he was confused and turned pale; and more so
when a frightful crying and clamour struck their ears. Thereupon the old
woman said to him, “O my son, this is the army of the Wak Islands, that
hath overtaken us; and presently they will lay violent hands on us.”
Hasan asked, “What shall I do, O my mother?”; and she answered, “Strike
the earth with the rod.” He did so whereupon the Seven Kings presented
themselves and saluted him with the salam, kissing ground before him and
saying, “Fear not neither grieve.” Hasan rejoiced at these words and
answered them, saying, “Well said, O Princes of the Jinn and the Ifrits!
This is your time!” Quoth they, “Get ye up to the mountain-top, thou and
thy wife and children and she who is with thee and leave us to deal with
them, for we know that you all are in the right and they in the wrong
and Allah will aid us against them.” So Hasan and his wife and children
and the old woman dismounted and dismissing the horses, ascended the
flank of the mountain.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

[Illustration]

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Hasan with
his wife, his children and the ancient dame ascended the mountain-flank
after they had dismissed the coursers. Presently, up came Queen Nur
al-Huda, with the troops right and left, and the captains went round
about among the host and ranged them rank by rank in battle array. Then
the hosts charged down upon each other and clashed together the twain
with a mighty strain, the brave pressed on amain and the coward to fly
was fain and the Jinn cast flames of fire from their mouths, whilst the
smoke of them rose up to the confines of the sky and the two armies
appeared and disappeared. The champions fought and heads flew from
trunks and the blood ran in rills; nor did brand leave to play and blood
to flow and battle fire to flow, till the murk o’ night came, when the
two hosts drew apart and, alighting from their steeds rested upon the
field by the fires they had kindled. Therewith the Seven Kings went up
to Hasan and kissed the earth before him. He pressed forwards to meet
them and thanked them and prayed Allah to give them the victory and
asked them how they had fared with the Queen’s troops. Quoth they, “They
will not withstand us more then three days, for we had the better of
them to-day, taking some two thousand of them prisoners and slaying of
them much folk whose compt may not be told. So be of good cheer and
broad of breast.” Then they farewelled him and went down to look after
the safety of their troops; and they ceased not to keep up the fires
till the morning rose with its sheen and shone, when the fighting-men
mounted their horses of noble strain and smote one another with
thin-edged skean and with brown of bill they thrust amain nor did they
cease that day battle to darraign. Moreover, they passed the night on
horseback clashing together like dashing seas; raged among them the
fires of war and they stinted not from battle and jar, till the armies
of Wak were defeated and their power broken and their courage quelled;
their feet slipped and whither they fled soever defeat was before them;
wherefore they turned tail and of flight began to avail; but the most
part of them were slain and their Queen and her chief officers and the
grandees of her realm were captive ta’en. When the morning morrowed, the
Seven Kings presented themselves before Hasan and set for him a throne
of alabaster inlaid with pearls and jewels, and he sat down thereon.
They also set thereby a throne of ivory, plated with glittering gold,
for the Princess Manar al Sana and another for the ancient dame Shawahi
Zat al-Dawahi. Then they brought before them the prisoners and among the
rest, Queen Nur al-Huda with elbows pinioned and feet fettered, whom
when Shawahi saw, she said to her, “Thy recompense, O harlot, O tyrant,
shall be that two bitches be starved and two mares stinted of water,
till they be athirst: then shalt thou be bound to the mares’ tails and
these driven to the river, with the bitches following thee that they may
rend thy skin; and after, thy flesh shall be cut off and given them to
eat. How couldst thou do with thy sister such deed, O strumpet, seeing
that she was lawfully married, after the ordinance of Allah and of His
Apostle? For there is no monkery in Al-Islam and marriage is one of the
institutions of the Apostles (on whom be the Peace!)[177] nor were women
created but for men.” Then Hasan commanded to put all the captives to
the sword and the old woman cried out, saying, “Slay them all and spare
none[178]!” But, when Princess Manar al-Sana saw her sister in this
plight, a bondswoman and in fetters, she wept over her and said, “O my
sister, who is this hath conquered us and made us captives in our own
country?” Quoth Nur al-Huda, “Verily, this is a mighty matter. Indeed
this man Hasan hath gotten the mastery over us and Allah hath given him
dominion over us and over all our realm and he hath overcome us, us and
the Kings of the Jinn.” And quoth her sister, “Indeed, Allah aided him
not against you nor did he overcome you nor capture you save by means of
this cap and rod.” So Nur al-Huda was certified and assured that he had
conquered her by means thereof and humbled herself to her sister, till
she was moved to ruth for her and said to her husband, “What wilt thou
do with my sister? Behold, she is in thy hands and she hath done thee no
misdeed that thou shouldest punish her.” Replied Hasan, “Her torturing
of thee was misdeed enow.” But she answered, saying, “She hath excuse
for all she did with me. As for thee, thou hast set my father’s heart on
fire for the loss of me, and what will be his case, if he lose my sister
also?” And he said to her, “’Tis thine to decide; do whatso thou wilt.”
So she bade loose her sister and the rest of the captives, and they did
her bidding. Then she went up to Queen Nur al-Huda and embraced her, and
they wept together a long while; after which quoth the Queen, “O my
sister, bear me not malice for that I did with thee;” and quoth Manar
al-Sana, “O my sister, this was foreordained to me by Fate.” Then they
sat on the couch talking and Manar al-Sana made peace between the old
woman and her sister, after the goodliest fashion, and their hearts were
set at ease. Thereupon Hasan dismissed the servants of the rod, thanking
them for the succour which they had afforded him against his foes, and
Manar al-Sana related to her sister all that had befallen her with Hasan
her husband and every thing he had suffered for her sake, saying, “O my
sister, since he hath done these deeds and is possessed of this might
and Allah Almighty hath gifted him with such exceeding prowess, that he
hath entered our country and beaten thine army and taken thee prisoner
and defied our father, the Supreme King, who hath dominion over all the
Princes of the Jinn, it behoveth us to fail not of what is due to him.”
Replied Nur al-Huda, “By Allah, O my sister, thou sayest sooth in whatso
thou tellest me of the marvels which this man hath seen and suffered;
and none may fail of respect to him. But was all this on thine account,
O my sister?”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Princess
Manar al-Sana repeated to her sister these praises of Hasan, the other
replied, “By Allah, this man can claim all respect more by token of his
generosity. But was all this on thine account?” “Yes,” answered Manar
al-Sana, and they passed the night in converse till the morning morrowed
and the sun rose and they were minded to depart. So they farewelled one
another and Manar al-Sana gave God-speed to the ancient dame after the
reconciling her with Queen Nur al-Huda. Thereupon Hasan smote the earth
with the rod and its servants the Jinn appeared and saluted him, saying,
“Praised be Allah, who hath set thy soul at rest! Command us what thou
wilt, and we will do it for thee in less than the twinkling of an eye.”
He thanked them for their saying and said to them, “Allah requite you
with good! Saddle me two steeds of the best.” So they brought him
forthwith two saddled coursers, one of which he mounted, taking his
elder son before him, and his wife rode the other, taking the younger
son in front of her. Then the Queen and the old woman also backed horse
and departed, Hasan and his wife following the right and Nur al-Huda and
Shawahi the left hand road. The spouses fared on with their children,
without stopping, for a whole month, till they drew in sight of a city,
which they found compassed about with trees and streams and making the
trees dismounted beneath them thinking to rest there. As they sat
talking, behold, they saw many horsemen coming towards them, whereupon
Hasan rose and going to meet them, saw that it was King Hassun, lord of
the Land of Camphor and Castle of Crystal, with his attendants. So Hasan
went up to the King and kissed his hands and saluted him; and when
Hassun saw him, he dismounted and seating himself with Hasan upon
carpets under the trees returned his salam and gave him joy of his
safety and rejoiced in him with exceeding joy, saying to him, “O Hasan,
tell me all that hath befallen thee, first and last.” So he told him all
of that, whereupon the King marvelled and said to him, “O my son, none
ever reached the Islands of Wak and returned thence but thou, and indeed
thy case is wondrous; but Alhamdolillah—praised be God—for safety!” Then
he mounted and bade Hasan ride with his wife and children into the city,
where he lodged them in the guest-house of his palace; and they abode
with him three days, eating and drinking in mirth and merriment, after
which Hasan sought Hassun’s leave to depart to his own country and the
King granted it. Accordingly they took horse and the King rode with them
ten days, after which he farewelled them and turned back, whilst Hasan
and his wife and children fared on a whole month, at the end of which
time they came to a great cavern, whose floor was of brass. Quoth Hasan
to his wife, “Kennest thou yonder cave?”; and quoth she, “No.” Said he,
“Therein dwelleth a Shaykh, Abu al-Ruwaysh hight, to whom I am greatly
beholden, for that he was the means of my becoming acquainted with King
Hassun.” Then he went on to tell her all that had passed between him and
Abu al-Ruwaysh, and as he was thus engaged, behold, the Shaykh himself
issued from the cavern-mouth. When Hasan saw him, he dismounted from his
steed and kissed his hands, and the old man saluted him and gave him joy
of his safety and rejoiced in him. Then he carried him into the antre
and sat down with him, whilst Hasan related to him what had befallen him
in the Islands of Wak; whereat the Elder marvelled with exceeding marvel
and said, “O Hasan, how didst thou deliver thy wife and children?” So he
told them the tale of the cap and the rod, hearing which he wondered and
said, “O Hasan, O my son, but for this rod and the cap, thou hadst never
delivered thy wife and children.” And he replied, “Even so, O my lord.”
As they were talking, there came a knocking at the door and Abu
al-Ruwaysh went out and found Abd al-Kaddus mounted on his elephant. So
he saluted him and brought him into the cavern, where he embraced Hasan
and congratulated him on his safety, rejoicing greatly in his return.
Then said Abu al-Ruwaysh to Hasan, “Tell the Shaykh Abd al-Kaddus all
that hath befallen thee, O Hasan.” He repeated to him every thing that
had passed, first and last, till he came to the tale of the rod and
cap,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


         Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Hasan began
relating to Shaykh Abd al-Kaddus and Shaykh Abd al-Ruwaysh (who sat
chatting in the cave) all that had passed, first and last, till he came
to the tale of the rod and cap; whereupon quoth Abd al-Kaddus, “O my
son, thou hast delivered thy wife and thy children and hast no further
need of the two. Now we were the means of thy winning to the Islands of
Wak, and I have done thee kindness for the sake of my nieces, the
daughters of my brother; wherefore I beg thee, of thy bounty and favour,
to give me the rod and the Shaykh Abu al-Ruwaysh the cap.” When Hasan
heard this, he hung down his head, being ashamed to reply, “I will not
give them to you,” and said in his mind, “Indeed these two Shaykhs have
done me great kindness and were the means of my winning to the Islands
of Wak, and but for them I had never made the place, nor delivered my
children, nor had I gotten me this rod and cap.” So he raised his head
and answered, “Yes, I will give them to you: but, O my lords, I fear
lest the Supreme King, my wife’s father, come upon me with his commando
and combat with me in my own country, and I be unable to repel them, for
want of the rod and the cap.” Replied Abd al-Kaddus, “Fear not, O my
son; we will continually succour thee and keep watch and ward for thee
in this place; and whosoever shall come against thee from thy wife’s
father or any other, him we will fend off from thee; wherefore be thou
of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool of tear, and hearten thy heart
and broaden thy breast and feel naught whatsoever of fear, for no harm
shall come to thee.” When Hasan heard this he was abashed and gave the
cap to Abu al-Ruwaysh, saying to Abd al-Kaddus, “Accompany me to my own
country and I will give thee the rod.” At this the two elders rejoiced
with exceeding joy and made him ready riches and treasures which beggar
all description. He abode with them three days, at the end of which he
set out again and the Shaykh Abd al-Kaddus made ready to depart with
him. So he and his wife mounted their beasts and Abd al-Kaddus whistled
when, behold, a mighty big elephant trotted up with fore hand and feet
on amble from the heart of the desert and he took it and mounted it.
Then they farewelled Abu al-Ruwaysh who disappeared within his cavern;
and they fared on across country traversing the land in its length and
breadth wherever Abd al-Kaddus guided them by a short cut and an easy
way, till they drew near the land of the Princesses; whereupon Hasan
rejoiced at finding himself once more near his mother, and praised Allah
for his safe return and reunion with his wife and children after so many
hardships and perils; and thanked Him for His favours and bounties,
reciting these couplets:—

 Haply shall Allah deign us twain unite ✿ And lockt in strict embrace
    we’ll hail the light:
 And wonders that befel me I’ll recount, ✿ And all I suffered from the
    Severance-blight;
 And fain I’ll cure mine eyes by viewing you ✿ For ever yearned my heart
    to see your sight:
 I hid a tale for you my heart within ✿ Which when we meet o’ morn I’ll
    fain recite:
 I’ll blame you for the deeds by you were done ✿ But while blame endeth
    love shall stay in site.

Hardly had he made an end of these verses, when he looked and behold,
there rose to view the Green Dome[179] and the Jetting Fount and the
Emerald Palace, and the Mountain of Clouds showed to them from afar;
whereupon quoth Abd al-Kaddus, “Rejoice, O Hasan, in good tidings:
to-night shalt thou be the guest of my nieces!” At this he joyed with
exceeding joy and as also did his wife, and they alighted at the domed
pavilion, where they took their rest[180] and ate and drank; after which
they mounted horse again and rode on till they came upon the palace. As
they drew near, the Princesses who were daughters of the King, brother
to Shaykh Abd al-Kaddus, came forth to meet them and saluted them and
their uncle who said to them, “O daughters of my brother, behold, I have
accomplished the need of this your brother Hasan and have helped him to
regain his wife and children.” So they embraced him and gave him joy of
his return in safety and health and of his reunion with his wife and
children, and it was a day of festival[181] with them. Then came forward
Hasan’s sister, the youngest Princess, and embraced him, weeping with
sore weeping, whilst he also wept for his long desolation: after which
she complained to him of that which she had suffered for the pangs of
separation and weariness of spirit in his absence and recited these two
couplets:—

 After thy faring never chanced I’spy ✿ A shape, but did thy form therein
    descry:
 Nor closed mine eyes in sleep but thee I saw, ✿ E’en as though dwelling
    ’twixt the lid and eye.

When she had made an end of her verses, she rejoiced with joy exceeding
and Hasan said to her, “O my sister, I thank none in this matter save
thyself over all thy sisters, and may Allah Almighty vouchsafe thee
aidance and countenance!” Then he related to her all that had past in
his journey, from first to last, and all that he had undergone, telling
her what had betided him with his wife’s sister and how he had delivered
his wife and wees and he also described to her all that he had seen of
marvels and grievous perils, even to how Queen Nur al-Huda would have
slain him and his spouse and children and none saved them from her but
the Lord the Most High. Moreover, he related to her the adventure of the
cap and the rod and how Abd al-Kaddus and Abu al-Ruwaysh had asked for
them and he had not agreed to give them to the twain save for her sake;
wherefore she thanked him and blessed him wishing him long life; and he
cried, “By Allah, I shall never forget all the kindness thou hast done
me from incept to conclusion.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasan
foregathered with the Princesses, he related to his sister all that he
had endured and said to her, “Never will I forget what thou hast done
for me from incept to conclusion.” Then she turned to his wife Manar
al-Sana and embraced her and pressed her children to her breast, saying
to her, “O daughter of the Supreme King, was there no pity in thy bosom,
that thou partedst him and his children and settedst his heart on fire
for them? Say me, didst thou desire by this deed that he should die?”
The Princess laughed and answered, “Thus was it ordained of Allah
(extolled and exalted be He!) and whoso beguileth folk, him shall Allah
beguile.”[182] Then they set on somewhat of meat and drink, and they all
ate and drank and made merry. They abode thus ten days in feast and
festival, mirth and merrymaking, at the end of which time Hasan prepared
to continue his journey. So his sister rose and made him ready riches
and rarities, such as defy description. Then she strained him to her
bosom, because of leave-taking, and threw her arms round his neck whilst
he recited on her account these couplets:—

 The solace of lovers is naught but far, ✿ And parting is naught save
    grief singular:
 And ill-will and absence are naught but woe, ✿ And the victims of Love
    naught but martyrs are;
 And how tedious is night to the loving wight ✿ From his true love parted
    ’neath evening star!
 His tears course over his cheeks and so ✿ He cries, “O tears be there
    more to flow?”

With this Hasan gave the rod to Shaykh Abd al-Kaddus, who joyed therein
with exceeding joy and thanking him and securing it mounted and returned
to his own place. Then Hasan took horse with his wife and children and
departed from the Palace of the Princesses, who went forth[183] with
him, to farewell him. Then they turned back and Hasan fared on, over
wild and wold, two months and ten days, till he came to the city of
Baghdad, the House of Peace, and repairing to his home by the private
postern which gave upon the open country, knocked at the door. Now his
mother, for long absence, had forsworn sleep and given herself to
mourning and weeping and wailing, till she fell sick and ate no meat,
neither took delight in slumber but shed tears night and day. She ceased
not to call upon her son’s name albeit she despaired of his returning to
her; and as he stood at the door, he heard her weeping and reciting
these couplets:—

 By Allah, heal, O my lords, the unwhole ✿ Of wasted frame and heart worn
    with dole:
 An you grant her a meeting ’tis but your grace ✿ Shall whelm in the
    boons of the friend her soul:
 I despair not of Union the Lord can grant ✿ And to weal of meeting our
    woes control!

When she had ended her verses, she heard her son’s voice at the door,
calling out, “O mother, mother ah! fortune hath been kind and hath
vouchsafed our reunion!” Hearing his cry she knew his voice and went to
the door, between belief and misbelief; but, when she opened it she saw
him standing there and with him his wife and children; so she shrieked
aloud, for excess of joy, and fell to the earth in a fainting-fit. Hasan
ceased not soothing her, till she recovered and embraced him; then she
wept with joy, and presently she called his slaves and servants and bade
them carry all his baggage into the house.[184] So they brought in every
one of the loads, and his wife and children entered also, whereupon
Hasan’s mother went up to the Princess and kissed her head and bussed
her feet, saying, “O daughter of the Supreme King, if I have failed of
thy due, behold, I crave pardon of Almighty Allah.” Then she turned to
Hasan and said to him, “O my son, what was the cause of this long
strangerhood?” He related to her all his adventures from beginning to
end; and when she heard tell of all that had befallen him, she cried a
great cry and fell down a-fainting at the very mention of his mishaps.
He solaced her, till she came to herself and said, “By Allah, O my son,
thou hast done unwisely in parting with the rod and the cap for, hadst
thou kept them with the care due to them, thou wert master of the whole
earth, in its breadth and length; but praised be Allah, for thy safety,
O my son, and that of thy wife and children!” They passed the night in
all pleasance and happiness, and on the morrow Hasan changed his clothes
and donning a suit of the richest apparel, went down into the bazar and
bought black slaves and slave-girls and the richest stuffs and ornaments
and furniture such as carpets and costly vessels and all manner other
precious things, whose like is not found with Kings. Moreover, he
purchased houses and gardens and estates and so forth and abode with his
wife and his children and his mother, eating and drinking and
pleasuring: nor did they cease from all joy of life and its solace till
there came to them the Destroyer of delights and the Severer of
societies. And Glory be to Him who hath dominion over the Seen and the
Unseen,[185] who is the Living, the Eternal, Who dieth not at all! And
men also recount the adventures of

-----

Footnote 5:

  This famous tale is a sister prose-poem to the “Arabian Odyssey”
  Sindbad the Seaman; only the Bassorite’s travels are in Jinn-land and
  Japan. It has points of resemblance in “fundamental outline” with the
  Persian Romance of the Fairy Hasan Bánú and King Bahrám-i-Gúr. See
  also the Kathá (s.s.) and the two sons of the Asúra Máyá; the Tartar
  “Sidhi Kúr” (Tales of a Vampire or Enchanted Corpse) translated by Mr.
  W. J. Thoms (the Father of “Folk-lore” in 1846,) in “Lays and Legends
  of various Nations”; the Persian Bahár-i-Dánish (Prime of Lore); Miss
  Stokes’ “Indian Fairy Tales”; Miss Frere’s “Old Deccan Days” and Mrs.
  F. A. Steel’s “Tale of the King and his Seven Sons,” with notes by
  Lieut. (now Captain) R. C. Temple (Folk-lore of the Panjab, Indian
  Antiquary of March, 1882).

Footnote 6:

  In the Mac. Edit. (vol. iv. i.) the merchant has two sons who became
  one a brazier (“dealer in copper-wares” says Lane iii. 385) and the
  other a goldsmith. The Bresl. Edit. (v. 264) mentions only one son,
  Hasan, the hero of the story which is entitled, “Tale of Hasan
  al-Basrí and the Isles of Wák Wák.”

Footnote 7:

  Arab. Shásh Abyaz: this distinctive sign of the True Believer was
  adopted by the Persian to conceal his being a fire-worshipper, Magian
  or “Guebre.” The latter word was introduced from the French by Lord
  Byron and it is certainly far superior to Moore’s “Gheber.”

Footnote 8:

  Persians being always a suspected folk.

Footnote 9:

  Arab. Al-Búdikah afterwards used (Night dcclxxix.) in the sense of
  crucible or melting-pot, in mod. parlance a pipe-bowl; and also
  written Bútakah, an Arab distortion of the Persian “Bútah.”

Footnote 10:

  Arab. Sindán or Sindiyán (Dozy.) Sandán, anvil; Sindán, big, strong
  (Steingass).

Footnote 11:

  Arab. Kímiyá, (see vol. i. 305) properly the substance which
  transmutes metals, the “philosopher’s stone” which, by the by, is not
  a stone; and comes from χυμεία, χυμός = a fluid, a wet drug, as
  opposed to Iksír (Al-) ξηρόν, ξήριον, a dry drug. Those who care to
  see how it is still studied will consult my History of Sindh (chapt.
  vii) and my experience which pointed only to the use made of it in
  base coinage. Hence in mod. tongue Kímiyáwi, an alchemist, means a
  coiner, a smasher. The reader must not suppose that the transmutation
  of metals is a dead study: I calculate that there are about one
  hundred workers in London alone.

Footnote 12:

  Arab. “Al-Kír,” a bellows also = Kúr, a furnace. For the full meaning
  of this sentence, see my “Book of the Sword,” p. 119.

Footnote 13:

  Lit. “bade him lean upon it with the shears” (Al-Káz).

Footnote 14:

  There are many kinds of Kohls (Hindos. Surmá and Kajjal) used in
  medicine and magic. See Herklots, p. 227.

Footnote 15:

  Arab. Sabíkah = bar, lamina, from “Sabk” = melting, smelting: the lump
  in the crucible would be hammered out into an ingot in order to
  conceal the operation.

Footnote 16:

  _i.e._ £375.

Footnote 17:

  Such report has cost many a life: the suspicion was and is still
  deadly as heresy in a “new Christian” under the Inquisition.

Footnote 18:

  Here there is a double entendre: openly it means, “Few men recognise
  as they should the bond of bread and salt;” the other sense would be
  (and that accounts for the smile), “What the deuce do I care for the
  bond?”

Footnote 19:

  Arab. “Kabbát” in the Bresl. Edit. “Ka’abán”; Lane (iii. 519) reads
  “Ka’áb plur. of Ka’ab a cup.”

Footnote 20:

  A most palpable sneer. But Hasan is purposely represented as a “softy”
  till aroused and energized by the magic of Love.

Footnote 21:

  Arab. Al-iksír (see Night dcclxxix. supra p. 9): the Greek word ξηρόν
  which has returned from a trip to Arabia and reappeared in Europe as
  “Elixir.”

Footnote 22:

  “Awák” plur. of “Ukíyah,” the well-known “oke,” or “ocque,” a weight
  varying from 1 to 2 lbs. In Morocco it is pronounced “Wukíyah,” and =
  the Spanish ounce (p. 279 Rudimentos del Arabe Vulgar, etc., by Fr.
  José de Lorchundi, Madrid, Rivadeneyra, 1872.)

Footnote 23:

  These lines have occurred in vol. iv. 267, where references to other
  places is given. I quote Lane by way of variety. In the text they are
  supposed to have been written by the Persian, a hint that Hasan would
  never be seen again.

Footnote 24:

  _i.e._ a superfetation of iniquity.

Footnote 25:

  Arab “Kurbán,” Heb. קרבן Corban = offering, oblation to be brought to
  the priest’s house or to the altar of the tribal God Yahveh, Jehovah
  (Levit. ii. 2–3 etc.) Amongst the Maronites Kurban is the host
  (-wafer) and amongst the Turks ’Id al-Kurban (sacrifice-feast) is the
  Greater Bayram, the time of Pilgrimage.

Footnote 26:

  Nár = fire, being feminine, like the names of the other “elements.”

Footnote 27:

  The Egyptian Kurbáj of hippopotamus-hide (Burkh. Nubia, pp. 62, 282)
  or elephant-hide (Turner ii. 365). Hence the Fr. _Cravache_ (as Cravat
  is from Croat).

Footnote 28:

  In Mac. Edit. “Bahriyah”: in Bresl. Edit. “Nawátíyah.” See vol. vi.
  242, for Ναύτης, navita, nauta.

Footnote 29:

  In Bresl. Edit. (iv. 285) “Yá Khwájah,” for which see vol. vi. 46.

Footnote 30:

  Arab. Tabl (vulg. báz) = a kettle-drum about half a foot broad held in
  the left hand and beaten with a stick or leathern thong. Lane refers
  to his description (M.E. ii. chapt. v.) of the Dervish’s drum of
  tinned copper with parchment face, and renders Zakhmah or Zukhmah
  (strap, stirrup-leather) by “plectrum,” which gives a wrong idea. The
  Bresl. Edit. ignores the strap.

Footnote 31:

  The “Spartivento” of Italy, mostly a tall headland which divides the
  clouds. The most remarkable feature of the kind is the Dalmatian
  Island, Pelagosa.

Footnote 32:

  The “Rocs” (Al-Arkhákh) in the Bresl. Edit. (iv. 290). The Rakham =
  aquiline vulture.

Footnote 33:

  Lane here quotes a similar incident in the romance “Sayf Zú al-Yazan,”
  so called from the hero, whose son, Misr, is sewn up in a camel’s hide
  by Bahrám, a treacherous Magian, and is carried by the Rukhs to a
  mountain-top.

Footnote 34:

  These lines occurred in Night xxvi. vol. i. 275: I quote Mr. Payne for
  variety.

Footnote 35:

  Thus a Moslem can not only circumcise and marry himself but can also
  bury canonically himself. The form of this prayer is given by Lane M.
  E. chapt. xv.

Footnote 36:

  _i.e._ If I fail in my self-imposed duty, thou shalt charge me
  therewith on the Judgment-day.

Footnote 37:

  Arab. Al-Alwán, plur. of laun (colour). The latter in Egyptian Arabic
  means a “dish of meat.” See Burckhardt No. 279. I repeat that the
  great traveller’s “Arabic Proverbs” wants republishing for two
  reasons. First he had not sufficient command of English to translate
  with the necessary laconism and assonance: secondly in his day British
  Philistinism was too rampant to permit a literal translation.
  Consequently the book falls short of what the Oriental student
  requires; and I have prepared it for my friend Mr. Quaritch.

Footnote 38:

  _i.e._ Lofty, high-builded. See Night dcclxviii. vol. vii. p. 347. In
  the Bresl. Edit. Al-Masíd (as in Al-Kazwíni): in the Mac. Edit.
  Al-Mashíd.

Footnote 39:

  Arab. Munkati’ here = cut off from the rest of the world. Applied to a
  man, and a popular term of abuse in Al-Hijáz, it means one cut off
  from the blessings of Allah and the benefits of mankind; a pauvre
  sire. Pilgrimage ii. 22.

Footnote 40:

  Arab. “Baras au Juzám,” the two common forms of leprosy. See vol. iv.
  51. Popular superstition in Syria holds that coition during the menses
  breeds the Juzám, Dáa al-Kabír (Great Evil) or Dáa al-Fíl (Elephantine
  Evil), _i.e._ Elephantiasis and that the days between the beginning of
  the flow (Sabíl) to that of coition shows the age when the progeny
  will be attacked; for instance if it take place on the first day, the
  disease will appear in the tenth year, on the fourth the fortieth and
  so on. The only diseases really dreaded by the Badawin are leprosy and
  small-pox. Coition during the menses is forbidden by all Eastern
  faiths under the severest penalties. Al-Mas’údi relates how a man thus
  begotten became a determined enemy of Ali; and the ancient Jews
  attributed the magical powers of Joshua Nazarenus to this accident of
  his birth, the popular idea being that sorcerers are thus impurely
  engendered.

Footnote 41:

  By adoption: See vol. iii. 151. This sudden affection (not love)
  suggests the “Come to my arms, my slight acquaintance!” of the
  Anti-Jacobin. But it is true to Eastern nature; and nothing can be
  more charming than this fast friendship between the Princess and
  Hasan.

Footnote 42:

  En tout bien et en tout honneur, be it understood.

Footnote 43:

  He had done nothing of the kind; but the feminine mind is prone to
  exaggeration. Also Hasan had told them a fib, to prejudice them
  against the Persian.

Footnote 44:

  These nervous movements have been reduced to a system in the Turk.
  “Ihtilájnámeh” = Book of palpitations, prognosticating from the
  subsultus tendinum and other involuntary movements of the body from
  head to foot; according to Ja’afar the Just, Daniel the Prophet,
  Alexander the Great; the Sages of Persia and the Wise Men of Greece.
  In England we attend chiefly to the eye and ear.

Footnote 45:

  Revenge, amongst the Arabs, is a sacred duty; and, in their state of
  civilization, society could not be kept together without it. So the
  slaughter of a villain is held to be a sacrifice to Allah, who amongst
  Christians claims for Himself the monopoly of vengeance.

Footnote 46:

  Arab. “Zindík.” See vol. v. 230.

Footnote 47:

  Lane translates this “put for him the remaining food and water:” but
  Al-Ákhar (Mac. Edit.) evidently refers to the Najíb (dromedary).

Footnote 48:

  We can hardly see the heroism of the deed, but it must be remembered
  that Bahram was a wicked sorcerer, whom it was every good Moslem’s
  bounden duty to slay. Compare the treatment of witches in England two
  centuries ago.

Footnote 49:

  The mother, in Arab tales, is _ma mère_, now becoming somewhat
  ridiculous in France on account of the over use of that venerable
  personage.

Footnote 50:

  The forbidden closet occurs also in Sayf Zú al-Yazan, who enters it
  and finds the bird-girls. Trébutien ii, 208 says, “Il est assez
  remarquable qu’il existe en Allemagne une tradition à peu près
  semblable, et qui a fourni le sujet d’un des contes de Musaeus,
  entitulé _le voile enlevé_.” Here Hasan is artfully left alone in a
  large palace without other companions but his thoughts and the reader
  is left to divine the train of ideas which drove him to open the door.

Footnote 51:

  Arab. “Buhayrah” (Bresl. Edit. “Bahrah”), the tank or cistern in the
  Hosh (= court-yard) of an Eastern house. Here, however, it is a
  rain-cistern on the flat roof of the palace (See Night dcccviii).

Footnote 52:

  This description of the view is one of the most gorgeous in The
  Nights.

Footnote 53:

  Here again are the “Swan-maidens” (See vol. v. 346) “one of the
  primitive myths, the common heritage of the whole Aryan (Iranian)
  race.” In Persia Bahram-i-Gúr when carried off by the Dív Sapíd seizes
  the Peri’s dove-coat: in Santháli folk-lore Torica, the Goatherd,
  steals the garment doffed by one of the daughters of the sun; and
  hence the twelve birds of Russian Story. To the same cycle belong the
  Seal-tales of the Faroe Islands (Thorpe’s Northern Mythology) and the
  wise women or mermaids of Shetland (Hibbert). Wayland the smith
  captures a wife by seizing a mermaid’s raiment and so did Sir Hagán by
  annexing the wardrobe of a Danubian water-nymph. Lettsom, the
  translator, mixes up this swan-raiment with that of the Valkyries or
  Choosers of the Slain. In real life stealing women’s clothes is an old
  trick and has often induced them, after having been seen naked, to
  offer their persons spontaneously. Of this I knew two cases in India,
  where the theft is justified by divine example. The blue god Krishna,
  a barbarous and grotesque Hindu Apollo, robbed the raiment of the
  pretty Gopálís (cowherdesses) who were bathing in the Arjun River and
  carried them to the top of a Kunduna tree; nor would he restore them
  till he had reviewed the naked girls and taken one of them to wife.
  See also Imr al-Kays (of the Mu’allakah) with “Onaiza” at the port of
  Daratjuljul (Clouston’s Arabian Poetry, p. 4). A critic has complained
  of my tracing the origin of the Swan-maiden legend to the physical
  resemblance between the bird and a high-bred girl (vol. v. 346). I
  should have explained my theory which is shortly, that we must seek a
  material basis for all so-called supernaturalisms, and that
  anthropomorphism satisfactorily explains the Swan-maiden, as it does
  the angel and the devil. There is much to say on the subject; but this
  is not the place for long discussion.

Footnote 54:

  Arab. “Nafs Ammárah,” corresponding with our canting term “The Flesh.”
  Nafs al-Nátíkah is the intellectual soul or function; Nafs
  al-Ghazabíyah = the animal function and Nafs al Shahwániyah = the
  vegetative property.

Footnote 55:

  The lines occur in vol. ii. 331: I have quoted Mr. Payne. Here they
  are singularly out of place.

Footnote 56:

  Not the “green gown” of Anglo-India _i.e._ a white ball-dress with
  blades of grass sticking to it in consequence of a “fall backwards.”

Footnote 57:

  These lines occur in vol. i. 219: I have borrowed from Torrens (p.
  219).

Footnote 58:

  The appearance of which ends the fast and begins the Lesser Festival.
  See vol. i. 84.

Footnote 59:

  See note, vol. i. 84, for notices of the large navel; much appreciated
  by Easterns.

Footnote 60:

  Arab. “Shá’ir Al-Walahán” = the love-distraught poet; Lane has “a
  distracted poet.” My learned friend Professor Aloys Sprenger has
  consulted, upon the subject of Al-Walahán the well-known Professor of
  Arabic at Halle, Dr. Thorbeck, who remarks that the word (here as
  further on) must be an adjective, mad, love-distraught, not a “lakab”
  or poetical cognomen. He generally finds it written Al-Shá’ir
  al-Walahán (the love-demented poet) not Al-Walahán al-Shá’ir = Walahán
  the Poet. Note this burst of song after the sweet youth falls in love:
  it explains the cause of verse-quotation in The Nights, poetry being
  the natural language of love and battle.

Footnote 61:

  “Them” as usual for “her.”

Footnote 62:

  Here Lane proposes a transposition, for “Wa-huwá (and he) fí
  ’l-hubbi,” to read “Fi ’l-hubbi wa huwa (wa-hwa);” but the latter is
  given in the Mac. Edit.

Footnote 63:

  For the pun in “Sabr” = aloe or patience. See vol. i. 138. In Herr
  Landberg (i. 93) we find a misunderstanding of the couplet—

                 Aw’ákibu s-sabri (Kála ba’azuhum)
                 Mahmúdah: Kultu, “khshi an takhirriní.”

  “The effects of patience” (or aloes) quoth one “are praiseworthy!”
  Quoth I, much I fear lest it make me stool. Mahmúdah is not only un
  laxatif, but a slang name for a confection of aloes.

Footnote 64:

  Arab. “Akúna fidá-ka.” Fidá = ransom, self-sacrifice and Fidá’an =
  instead of. The phrase, which everywhere occurs in The Nights, means,
  “I would give my life to save thine.”

Footnote 65:

  Thus accounting for his sickness, improbably enough but in flattering
  way. Like a good friend (feminine) she does not hesitate a moment in
  prescribing a fib.

Footnote 66:

  _i.e._ the 25,000 Amazons who in the Bresl. Edit. (ii. 308) are all
  made to be the King’s “Banát” = daughters or protégées. The Amazons of
  Dahome (see my “Mission”) who may now number 5,000 are all officially
  wives of the King and are called by the lieges “our mothers.”

Footnote 67:

  The tale-teller _has_ made up his mind about the damsel; although in
  this part of the story she is the chief and eldest sister and
  subsequently she appears as the youngest daughter of the supreme Jinn
  King. The mystification is artfully explained by the extraordinary
  likeness of the two sisters. (See Night dcccxi.)

Footnote 68:

  This is a reminiscence of the old-fashioned “marriage by capture,” of
  which many traces survive, even among the civilised who wholly ignore
  their origin.

Footnote 69:

  Meaning her companions and suite.

Footnote 70:

  Arab. “’Abáah” vulg. “’Abáyah.” See vol. ii. 133.

Footnote 71:

  Feet in the East lack that development of sebaceous glands which
  afflicts Europeans.

Footnote 72:

  _i.e._ cutting the animals’ throats after Moslem law.

Footnote 73:

  In Night dcclxxviii. supra p. 5, we find the orthodox Moslem doctrine
  that “a single mortal is better in Allah’s sight than a thousand
  Jinns.” For, I repeat, Al-Islam systematically exalts human nature
  which Christianity takes infinite trouble to degrade and debase. The
  results of its ignoble teaching are only too evident in the East: the
  Christians of the so-called (and miscalled) “Holy Land” are a disgrace
  to the faith and the idiomatic Persian term for a Nazarene is “Tarsá”
  = funker, coward.

Footnote 74:

  Arab. “Sakaba Kúrahá;” the forge in which children are hammered out?

Footnote 75:

  Arab. “Má al-Maláhat” = water (brilliancy) of beauty.

Footnote 76:

  The fourth of the Seven Heavens, the “Garden of Eternity,” made of
  yellow coral.

Footnote 77:

  How strange this must sound to the Young Woman of London in the
  nineteenth century.

Footnote 78:

  “Forty days” is a quasi-religious period amongst Moslem for praying,
  fasting and religious exercises: here it represents our “honey-moon.”
  See vol. v. p. 62.

Footnote 79:

  Yá layta, still popular. Herr Carlo Landberg (Proverbes et Dietons du
  Peuple Arabe, vol. i. of Syria, Leyden, E. J. Brill, 1883) explains
  layta for rayta (= raayta) by permutation of liquids and argues that
  the contraction is ancient (p. 42). But the Herr is no Arabist:
  “Layta” means “would to Heaven,” or, simply “I wish,” “I pray” (for
  something possible or impossible); whilst “La’alla” (perhaps, it may
  be) prays only for the possible; and both are simply particles
  governing the noun in the oblique, or accusative case.

Footnote 80:

  “His” for “her,” _i.e._ herself, making somewhat of confusion between
  her state and that of her son.

Footnote 81:

  _i.e._ his mother; the words are not in the Mac. Edit.

Footnote 82:

  Baghdad is called House of Peace, amongst other reasons, from the
  Dijlah (Tigris) River and Valley “of Peace.” The word was variously
  written Baghdád, Bághdád, (our old Bughdaud and Bagdat), Baghzáz,
  Baghzán, Baghdán, Baghzám and Maghdád as Makkah and Bakkah (Koran iii.
  90). Religious Moslems held Bágh (idol) and Dád (gift) an ill-omened
  conjunction, and the Greeks changed it to Eirenopolis. (See Ouseley’s
  Oriental Collections, vol. i. pp. 18–20.)

Footnote 83:

  This is a popular saying but hardly a “vulgar proverb.” (Lane iii.
  522). It reminds rather of Shakespear’s:

                   “So loving to my mother,
               That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
                   Visit her face too roughly.”

Footnote 84:

  _i.e._ God forbid that I should oppose thee!

Footnote 85:

  Here the writer again forgets apparently that Shahrazad is speaking:
  she may, however, use the plural for the singular when speaking of
  herself.

Footnote 86:

  _i.e._ She would have pleaded ill-treatment and lawfully demanded to
  be sold.

Footnote 87:

  The Hindus speak of “the only bond that woman knows—her heart.”

Footnote 88:

  _i.e._ a rarity, a present (especially in Persian).

Footnote 89:

  Arab. Al-bisát wa’ l-masnad lit. the carpet and the cushion.

Footnote 90:

  For “Báb al-bahr” and “Báb al-Barr” see vol. iii. 281.

Footnote 91:

  She was the daughter of Ja’afar bin Mansúr; but, as will be seen, The
  Nights again and again call her father Al-Kásim.

Footnote 92:

  This is an error for the fifth which occurs in the popular saying, “Is
  he the fifth of the sons of Al-Abbás!” _i.e._ Harun al-Rashid. Lane
  (note, in loco) thus accounts for the frequent mention of the Caliph,
  the greatest of the Abbasides in The Nights. But this is a causa non
  causa.

Footnote 93:

  _i.e._ I find thy beauty all-sufficient. So the proverb “The son of
  the quarter (young neighbour) filleth not the eye,” which prefers a
  stranger.

Footnote 94:

  They are mere doggrel, like most of the pieces de circonstance.

Footnote 95:

  Afterwards called Wák Wák, and in the Bresl. Edit. Wák al-Wák. See
  Lane’s notes upon these Islands. Arab Geographers evidently speak of
  two Wak Waks. Ibn al-Fakih and Al-Mas’údi (Fr. Transl., vol. iii. 6–7)
  locate one of them in East Africa beyond Zanzibar and Sofala. “Le
  territoire des Zendjes (Zanzibar-Negroids) commence au canal
  (Al-Khalij) dérivé du haut Nil (the Juln River?) et se prolonge
  jusqu’au pays de Sofalah et des Wak-Wak.” It is simply the peninsula
  of Guardafui (Jard Hafun.) occupied by the Gallas, pagans and
  Christians, before these were ousted by the Moslem Somal; and the
  former perpetually ejaculated “Wak” (God) as Moslems cry upon Allah.
  This identification explains a host of other myths such as the
  Amazons, who as Marco Polo tells us held the “Female Island” Socotra
  (Yule ii. 396). The fruit which resembled a woman’s head (whence the
  puellæ Wakwakienses hanging by the hair from trees), and which when
  ripe called out “Wak Wak” and “Allah al-Khallák” (the Creator) refers
  to the Calabash-tree (_Adausonia digitata_), that grotesque growth, a
  vegetable elephant, whose gourds, something larger than a man’s head,
  hang by a slender filament. Similarly the “cocoa” got its name, in
  Port. = Goblin, from the fancied face at one end. The other Wak Wak
  has been identified in turns with the Seychelles, Madagascar, Malacca,
  Sunda or Java (this by Langlès), China and Japan. The learned Prof. de
  Goeje (Arabishe Berichten over Japan, Amsterdam Muller, 1880) informs
  us that in Canton the name of Japan is Wo-Kwok, possibly a corruption
  of Koku-tan, the ebony-tree (_Diospyros ebenum_) which Ibn Khordábah
  and others find together with gold in an island 4,500 parasangs from
  Suez and East of China. And we must remember that Basrah was the chief
  starting-place for the Celestial Empire during the rule of the Tang
  dynasty (seventh and ninth centuries). Colonel J. W. Watson of Bombay
  suggests New Guinea or the adjacent islands where the Bird of Paradise
  is said to cry “Wak Wak!” Mr. W. F. Kirby in the Preface (p. ix.) to
  his neat little book “The New Arabian Nights,” says: “The Islands of
  Wak-Wak, seven years’ journey from Bagdad, in the story of Hasan, have
  receded to a distance of a hundred and fifty years’ journey in that of
  Majin (of Khorasan). There is no doubt (?) that the Cora Islands, near
  New Guinea, are intended; for the wonderful fruits which grow there
  are Birds of Paradise, which settle in flocks on the trees at sunset
  and sunrise, uttering this very cry.” Thus, like Ophir, Wak Wak has
  wandered all over the world and has been found even in Peru by the
  Turkish work Tárikh al-Hind al-Gharbi = History of the West Indies
  (Orient. Coll. ii. 189).

Footnote 96:

  I accept the emendation of Lane’s Shaykh, “Nasím” (Zephyr) for “Nadím”
  (cup-companion.)

Footnote 97:

  “Jannat al-Ná’im” = Garden of Delights is No. V Heaven, made of white
  diamond.

Footnote 98:

  This appears to her very prettily put.

Footnote 99:

  This is the “House of Sadness” of our old chivalrous Romances. See
  chapt. vi. of “Palmerin of England,” by Francisco de Moraes (ob.
  1572), translated by old Anthony Munday (dateless, 1590?) and
  “corrected” (read spoiled) by Robert Southey. London, Longmans, 1807.

Footnote 100:

  The lines have occurred in Night clix. (vol. iii. 183), I quote Mr.
  Payne who, like Lane, prefers “in my bosom” to “beneath my ribs.”

Footnote 101:

  In this tale the Bresl. Edit, more than once adds “And let us and you
  send a blessing to the Lord of Lords” (or to “Mohammed,” or to the
  “Prophet”); and in vol. v. p. 52 has a long prayer. This is an act of
  contrition in the tale-teller for romancing against the expressed
  warning of the Founder of Al-Islam.

Footnote 102:

  From Bresl. Edit. (vi. 29): the four in the Mac. Edit. are too
  irrelevant.

Footnote 103:

  Arab. Ghayúr = jealous, an admirable epithet which Lane dilutes to
  “changeable”—making a truism of a metaphor.

Footnote 104:

  These lines have occurred before. I quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 105:

  _i.e._ One fated to live ten years.

Footnote 106:

  This poetical way of saying “fourteen” suggests Camoens (The Lusiads)
  Canto v. 2.

Footnote 107:

  Arab. “Surrah,” lit. = a purse: a few lines lower down it is called
  “’Ulbah” = a box which, of course, may have contained the bag.

Footnote 108:

  The month which begins the Moslem year.

Footnote 109:

  As an Arab often does when deep in thought. Lane appositely quotes
  John viii. 6. “Jesus stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the
  ground.” Mr. Payne translates, “He fell a-drumming on the earth with
  his fingers,” but this does not complete the sense.

Footnote 110:

  _i.e._ “And the peace of Allah be upon thee! that will end thy story.”
  The Arab formula, “Wa al-Salám” (pron. Wassalám) is used in a variety
  of senses.

Footnote 111:

  Like Camoens, one of the model lovers, he calls upon Love to torment
  him still more—ad majorem Dei (amoris) gloriam.

Footnote 112:

  Pron. Aboor-Ruwaysh. “The Father of the little Feather”: he is
  afterwards called “Son of the daughter of the accursed Iblis”; yet, as
  Lane says, “he appears to be a virtuous person.”

Footnote 113:

  Arab. “Kantara al-lijám fí Karbús (bow) sarjih.”

Footnote 114:

  I do not translate “beckoned” because the word would give a wrong
  idea. Our beckoning with the finger moved towards the beckoner makes
  the so-beckoned Eastern depart in all haste. To call him you must wave
  the hand from you.

Footnote 115:

  The Arabs knew what large libraries were; and a learned man could not
  travel without camel-loads of dictionaries.

Footnote 116:

  Arab. “Adim;” now called Bulghár, our Moroccan leather.

Footnote 117:

  Arab. “Zinád,” which Lane renders by “instruments for striking fire,”
  and Mr. Payne, after the fashion of the translators of Al-Hariri,
  “flint and steel.”

Footnote 118:

  A congener of Hasan and Husayn, little used except in Syria where it
  is a favourite name for Christians. The Muhit of Butrus Al-Bostání
  (s.v.) tells us that it also means a bird called Abú Hasan and
  supplies various Egyptian synonyms. In Mod. Arab. Grammar the form
  Fa’’úl is a diminutive as Hammúd for Ahmad, ’Ammúr for ’Amrú. So the
  fem. form, Fa’’úlah, _e.g._ Khaddúgah = little Khadijah and Naffúsah =
  little Nafisah; Ar’úrah = little clitoris: whereas in Heb. it is an
  incrementative _e.g._ dabbúlah a large dablah (cake or lump of dried
  figs, etc).

Footnote 119:

  In the Mac. Edit. “Soldiers of Al-Daylam” _i.e._ warlike as the
  Daylamites or Medes. See vol. ii. 94.

Footnote 120:

  Bilkís, it will be remembered, is the Arab. name of the Queen of Sheba
  who visited Solomon. In Abyssinia she is termed Kebra zá negest or zá
  makadá, the latter (according to Ferdinand Werne’s “African
  Wanderings,” Longmans, 1852) being synonymous with Ityopia or Habash
  (Ethiopia or Abyssinia.)

Footnote 121:

  Arab. “Dakkah,” which Lane translates by “settee.”

Footnote 122:

  Arab. “Ambar al-Khám,” the latter word (raw) being pure Persian.

Footnote 123:

  The author neglects to mention the ugliest part of old-womanhood in
  the East, long empty breasts like tobacco-pouches. In youth the bosom
  is beautifully high, arched and rounded, firm as stone to the touch,
  with the nipples erect and pointing outwards. But after the
  girl-mother’s first child (in Europe _le premier embellit_) all
  changes. Nature and bodily power have been overtasked; then comes the
  long suckling at the mother’s expense: the extension of the skin and
  the enlargement of its vessels are too sudden and rapid for the
  diminished ability of contraction and the bad food aids in the
  continual consumption of vitality. Hence, among Eastern women age and
  ugliness are synonymous. It is only in the highest civilisation that
  we find the handsome old woman.

Footnote 124:

  The name has occurred in the Knightly tale of King Omar and his sons
  vol. ii. 269. She is here called Mother of Calamities, but in p. 123,
  vol. iv. of the Mac. Edit, she becomes “Lady (Zát) al-Dawáhi.” It will
  be remembered that the title means calamitous to the foe.

Footnote 125:

  By this address she assured him that she had no design upon his
  chastity. In Moslem lands it is always advisable to accost a strange
  woman, no matter how young, with, “Yá Ummí!” = O my mother. This is
  pledging one’s word, as it were, not to make love to her.

Footnote 126:

  Apparently the Wakites numbered their Islands as the Anglo-Americans
  do their streets. For this they have been charged with “want of
  imagination”; but the custom is strictly classical. See at Pompeii
  “Reg (io) I; Ins (ula) I, Via Prima, Secunda,” etc.

Footnote 127:

  These are the Puellæ Wakwakienses of whom Ibn Al-Wardi relates after
  an ocular witness, “Here too is a tree which bears fruits like women
  who have fair faces and are hung by their hair. They come forth from
  integuments like large leathern bags (calabash-gourds?) and when they
  sense air and sun they cry “Wak! Wak!” (God! God!) till their hair is
  cut, and when it is cut they die; and the islanders understand this
  cry wherefrom they augur ill.” The Ajáib al-Hind (chapt. xv.) places
  in Wak-land the Samandal, a bird which enters the fire without being
  burnt evidently the Egyptian “Pi-Benni,” which the Greeks
  metamorphised to “Phœnix.” It also mentions a hare-like animal, now
  male then female; and the Somal behind Cape Guardafui tell the same
  tale of their Cynhyænas.

Footnote 128:

  _i.e._ I will keep thee as though thou wert the apple of my eye.

Footnote 129:

  A mere exaggeration of the “Gull-fairs” noted by travellers in sundry
  islands as Ascension and the rock off Brazilian Santos.

Footnote 130:

  Arab. “Kámil wa Basít wa Wáfir” = the names of three popular metres,
  for which see the Terminal Essay.

Footnote 131:

  Arab. “Manáshif” = drying towels, Plur. of Minshafah, and the popular
  term which Dr. Jonathan Swift corrupted to “Munnassaf.” Lane (Nights,
  Introduct. p. ix.)

Footnote 132:

  Arab. “Shafáif” opposed to “Shafah” the mouth-lips.

Footnote 133:

  Fountains of Paradise. This description is a fair instance of how the
  Saj’a (prose-rhyme) dislocates the order; an Arab begins with hair,
  forehead, eyebrows and lashes and when he reaches the nose, he slips
  down to the toes for the sake of the assonance. If the latter be
  neglected the whole list of charms must be otherwise ordered; and the
  student will compare Mr. Payne’s version of this passage with mine.

Footnote 134:

  A fair specimen of the Arab logogriph derived from the Abjad Alphabet
  which contains only the Hebrew and Syriac letters not the six Arabic.
  Thus 4 × 5 = 20 which represents the Kaf (K) and 6 × 10 = 60, or Sin
  (S). The whole word is thus “Kus,” the Greek κυσὸς or κυσσὸς, and the
  lowest word, in Persian as in Arabic, for the female pudenda,
  extensively used in vulgar abuse. In my youth we had at the University
  something of the kind,

                     To five and five and fifty-five
                       The first of letters add
                     To make a thing to please a King
                       And drive a wise man mad.

  Answer VVLVA. Very interesting to the anthropological student is this
  excursus of Hasan, who after all manner of hardships and horrors and
  risking his life to recover his wife and children, breaks out into
  song on the subject of her privities. And it can hardly be
  tale-teller’s gag as both verse and prose show considerable art in
  composition.

Footnote 135:

  Egyptian and Syrian vulgar term for Mawálíyah or Mawáliyah, a short
  poem on subjects either classical or vulgar. It generally consists of
  five lines all rhyming except the penultimate. The metre is a species
  of the Basít which, however, admits of considerable poetical license;
  this being according to Lane the usual “Weight,”

                    ¯ ¯ ˘ ¯ ¯ / ˘ ¯ ˘ / ¯ ¯ ˘ ¯ / ¯ ¯.

  The scheme is distinctly anapæstic and Mr. Lyall (Translations of
  Ancient Arabic Poetry) compares with a cognate metre, the Tawíl,
  certain lines in Abt Vogler, _e.g._

     “Ye know why the forms are fair, ye hear how the tale is told.”

Footnote 136:

  _i.e._ repeat the chapter of the Koran termed The Opening, and
  beginning with these words, “Have we not opened thy breast for thee
  and eased thee of thy burden which galled thy back? * * * Verily with
  the difficulty cometh ease.!”—Koran xciv. vol. I, 5.

Footnote 137:

  Lane renders Nur al-Hudà (Light of Salvation) by Light of Day which
  would be Nur al-Hadà.

Footnote 138:

  In the Bresl. Edit. “Yá Salám” = O safety!—a vulgar ejaculation.

Footnote 139:

  A favourite idiom meaning from the mischief which may (or will) come
  from the Queen.

Footnote 140:

  He is not strong-minded but his feminine persistency of purpose,
  likest to that of a sitting hen, is confirmed by the “Consolations of
  religion.” The character is delicately drawn.

Footnote 141:

  In token that she intended to act like a man.

Footnote 142:

  This is not rare even in real life: Moslem women often hide and change
  their names for superstitious reasons, from the husband and his
  family.

Footnote 143:

  Arab. “Sabab” which also means cause. Vol. ii. 14. There is the same
  metaphorical use of “Habl” = cord and cause.

Footnote 144:

  Arab. “Himà,” a word often occurring in Arab poetry, domain, a pasture
  or watered land forcibly kept as far as a dog’s bark would sound by
  some masterful chief like “King Kulayb.” (See vol. ii. 77). This
  tenure was forbidden by Mohammed except for Allah and the Apostle
  (_i.e._ himself). Lane translates it “asylum.”

Footnote 145:

  She was a maid and had long been of marriageable age.

Footnote 146:

  The young man had evidently “kissed the Blarney stone”; but the
  flattery is the more telling as he speaks from the heart.

Footnote 147:

  “Inshallah” here being = D. V.

Footnote 148:

  _i.e._ The “Place of Light” (Pharos), or of Splendour. Here we find
  that Hasan’s wife is the youngest sister, but with an extraordinary
  resemblance to the eldest, a very masterful young person. The
  anagnorisis is admirably well managed.

Footnote 149:

  _i.e._ the sweetmeats of the feast provided for the returning
  traveller. The old woman (like others) cannot resist the temptation of
  a young man’s lips. Happily for him she goes so far and no farther.

Footnote 150:

  The first, fourth, fifth and last names have already occurred: the
  others are in order, Star o’ Morn, Sun of Undurn and Honour of
  Maidenhood. They are not merely fanciful, but are still used in Egypt
  and Syria.

Footnote 151:

  Arab. “Fájirah” and elsewhere “’Áhirah,” = whore and strumpet used
  often in loose talk as mere abuse without special meaning.

Footnote 152:

  This to Westerns would seem a most improbable detail, but Easterns
  have their own ideas concerning “Al-Muhabbat al-gharizíyah” = natural
  affection, blood speaking to blood, etc.

Footnote 153:

  One of the Hells (see vol. iv. 143). Here it may be advisable to give
  the names of the Seven Heavens (which are evidently based upon
  Ptolemaic astronomy) and which correspond with the Seven Hells after
  the fashion of Arabian system-mania. (1) Dár al-Jalál (House of
  Glory), made of pearls; (2) Dár al-Salám (of Rest), rubies and
  jacinths; (3) Jannat al-Maawá (Garden of Mansions, not “of mirrors,”
  as Herklots has it, p. 98), made of yellow copper; (4) Jannat al-Khuld
  (of Eternity), yellow coral; (5) Jannat al-Na’ím (of Delights), white
  diamond; (6) Jannat al-Firdaus (of Paradise), red gold; and (7) Jannat
  al-’Adn (of Eden, or Al-Karár = of everlasting abode, which some make
  No. 8), of red pearls or pure musk. The seven Hells are given in vol.
  v. 241; they are intended for Moslems (Jahannam); Christians (Lazà);
  Jews (Hutamah); Sabians (Sa’ír); Guebres (Sakar); Pagans or idolaters
  (Jahím); and Hypocrites (Háwiyah).

Footnote 154:

  Arab. “’Atb,” more literally = “blame,” “reproach.”

Footnote 155:

  Bresl. Edit. In the Mac. “it returned to the place whence I had
  brought it”—an inferior reading.

Footnote 156:

  The dreams play an important part in the Romances of Chivalry, _e.g._
  the dream of King Perion in Amadis de Gaul, chapt. ii. (London;
  Longmans, 1803).

Footnote 157:

  Amongst Moslems bastardy is a sore offence and a love-child is
  exceedingly rare. The girl is not only carefully guarded but she also
  guards herself knowing that otherwise she will not find a husband.
  Hence seduction is all but unknown. The wife is equally well guarded
  and lacks opportunities hence adultery is found difficult except in
  books. Of the Ibn (or Walad) Harám (bastard as opposed to the Ibn
  Halál) the proverb says, “This child is not thine, so the madder he be
  the more is thy glee!” Yet strange to say public prostitution has
  never been wholly abolished in Al-Islam. Al-Mas’údi tell us that in
  Arabia were public prostitutes (Bagháyá), even before the days of the
  Apostle, who affected certain quarters as in our day the Tartúshah of
  Alexandria and the Hosh Bardak of Cairo. Here says Herr Carlo Landberg
  (p. 57, Syrian Proverbs) “Elles parlent une langue toute à elle.” So
  pretentious and dogmatic a writer as the author of Proverbes et
  Dictons de la Province de Syrie, ought surely to have known that the
  Hosh Bardak is the head-quarters of the Cairene Gypsies. This author,
  who seems to write in order to learn, reminds me of an acute Oxonian
  undergraduate of my day who, when advised to take a “coach,” became a
  “coach” himself.

Footnote 158:

  These lines occur in vol. vii. p. 340. I quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 159:

  She shows all the semi-maniacal rancour of a good woman, or rather a
  woman who has not broken the eleventh commandment, “Thou shalt not be
  found out,” against an erring sister who has been discovered. In the
  East also these unco’ gúid dames have had, and too often have, the
  power to carry into effect the cruelty and diabolical malignity which
  in London and Paris must vent itself in scan. mag. and anonymous
  letters.

Footnote 160:

  These faintings and trances are as common in the Romances of Chivalry
  _e.g._ Amadis of Gaul, where they unlace the garments to give more
  liberty, pour cold water on the face and bathe the temples and pulses
  with diluted vinegar (for rose water) exactly as they do in The
  Nights.

Footnote 161:

  So Hafiz, “Bád-i-Sabá chu bugzarí” etc.

Footnote 162:

  Arab. “Takiyah.” See vol. i. 224 and for the Tarn-Kappe vol. iv. p.
  176. In the Sinthásana Dwatrinsati (vulgo. Singhásan Battísí), or
  Thirty-two Tales of a Throne, we find a bag always full of gold, a
  bottomless purse; earth which rubbed on the forehead overcomes all; a
  rod which during the first watch of the night furnishes jewelled
  ornaments; in the second a beautiful girl; in the third invisibility,
  and in the fourth a deadly foe or death; a flower-garland which
  renders the possessor invisible and an unfading lotus-flower which
  produces a diamond every day.

Footnote 163:

  Arab. “Judad,” plur. of Jadíd, lit. = new coin, ergo applied to those
  old and obsolete; 10 Judad were = one nusf or half dirham.

Footnote 164:

  Arab. “Raff,” a shelf proper, running round the room about 7–7⅓ feet
  from the ground. During my day it was the fashion in Damascus to range
  in line along the Raff splendid porcelain bowls brought by the
  Caravans in olden days from China, whilst on the table were placed
  French and English specimens of white and gold “china” worth perhaps a
  franc each.

Footnote 165:

  Lane supposes that the glass and chinaware had fallen upon the divan
  running round the walls under the Raff and were not broken.

Footnote 166:

  These lines have occurred in Night dclxxxix. vol. vii. p. 119. I quote
  Lane.

Footnote 167:

  The lines have occurred before. I quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 168:

  This formula, I repeat, especially distinguishes the Tale of Hasan of
  Bassorah.

Footnote 169:

  These lines have occurred in vol. i. 249. I quote Lane.

Footnote 170:

  She speaks to the “Gallery,” who would enjoy a loud laugh against
  Mistress Gadabout. The end of the sentence must speak to the heart of
  many a widow.

Footnote 171:

  These lines occur in vol. i. 25: so I quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 172:

  Arab. “Musáhikah;” the more usual term for a Tribade is “Sahíkah” from
  “Sahk” in the sense of rubbing: both also are applied to onanists and
  masturbators of the gender feminine.

Footnote 173:

  _i.e._ by way of halter. This jar is like the cask in Auerbach’s
  Keller; and has already been used by witches; Night dlxxxvii. vol. vi.
  158.

Footnote 174:

  Here they are ten but afterwards they are reduced to seven: I see no
  reason for changing the text with Lane and Payne.

Footnote 175:

  Wazir of Solomon. See vol. i. 42; and vol. iii. 97.

Footnote 176:

  Arab. Ism al-A’azam, the Ineffable Name, a superstition evidently
  derived from the Talmudic fancies of the Jews concerning their tribal
  god, Yah or Yahvah.

Footnote 177:

  The tradition is that Mohammed asked Akáf al-Wadá’ah “Hast a wife?”;
  and when answered in the negative, “Then thou appertainest to the
  brotherhood of Satans! An thou wilt be one of the Christian monks then
  company therewithal; but an thou be of us, know that it is our custom
  to marry!”

Footnote 178:

  The old woman, in the East as in the West, being the most vindictive
  of her kind. I have noted (Pilgrimage iii. 70) that a Badawi will
  sometimes though in shame take the blood-wit; but that if it be
  offered to an old woman she will dash it to the ground and clutch her
  knife and fiercely swear by Allah that she will not eat her son’s
  blood.

Footnote 179:

  Neither dome nor fount etc. are mentioned before, the normal
  inadvertency.

Footnote 180:

  In Eastern travel the rest comes before the eating and drinking.

Footnote 181:

  Arab. ’Id (pron. ’Eed) which I have said (vol. i. 42, 317) is applied
  to the two great annual festivals, the “Fete of Sacrifice,” and the
  “Break-Fast.” The word denotes restoration to favour and Moslems
  explain as the day on which Adam (and Eve) who had been expelled from
  Paradise for disobedience was re-established (U’ída) by the relenting
  of Allah. But the name doubtless dates amongst Arabs from days long
  before they had heard of the “Lord Nomenclator.”

Footnote 182:

  Alluding to Hasan seizing her feather dress and so taking her to wife.

Footnote 183:

  Arab. “Kharajú” = they (masc.) went forth, a vulgarism for “Kharajna”
  (fem.)

Footnote 184:

  Note the notable housewife who, at a moment when youth would forget
  everything, looks to the main chance.

Footnote 185:

  Arab. “Al-Malakút” (not “Malkút” as in Freytag) a Sufi term for the
  world of Spirits (De Lacy Christ, Ar. i. 451). Amongst Eastern
  Christians it is vulgarly used in the fem. and means the Kingdom of
  Heaven, also the preaching of the Gospel.




                   KHALIFAH THE FISHERMAN OF BAGHDAD.


There was once in tides of yore and in ages and times long gone before
in the city of Baghdad a fisherman, Khalífah hight, a pauper wight, who
had never once been married in all his days.[186] It chanced one
morning, that he took his net and went with it to the river, as was his
wont with the view of fishing before the others came. When he reached
the bank, he girt himself and tucked up his skirts; then stepping into
the water, he spread his net and cast it a first cast and a second but
it brought up naught. He ceased not to throw it, till he had made ten
casts, and still naught came up therein; wherefore his breast was
straitened and his mind perplexed concerning his case and he said, “I
crave pardon of God the Great, there is no god but He, the Living, the
Eternal, and unto Him I repent. There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! Whatso He willeth is and
whatso He nilleth is not! Upon Allah (to whom belong Honour and Glory!)
dependeth daily bread! Whenas He giveth to His servant, none denieth
him; and whenas He denieth a servant, none giveth to him.” And of the
excess of his distress, he recited these two couplets:—

 An Fate afflict thee, with grief manifest, ✿ Prepare thy patience and
    make broad thy breast;
 For of His grace the Lord of all the worlds ✿ Shall send to wait upon
    unrest sweet Rest.

Then he sat awhile pondering his case, and with his head bowed down
recited also these couplets:—

 Patience, with sweet and with bitter Fate! ✿ And weet that His will He
    shall consummate:
 Night oft upon woe as on abscess acts ✿ And brings it up to the bursting
    state:
 And Chance and Change shall pass o’er the youth ✿ And fleet from his
    thoughts and no more shall bait.

Then he said in his mind, “I will make this one more cast, trusting in
Allah, so haply He may not disappoint my hope;” and he rose and casting
into the river the net as far as his arm availed, gathered the cords in
his hands and waited a full hour, after which he pulled at it and,
finding it heavy,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Khalifah
the Fisherman had cast his net sundry times into the stream, yet had it
brought up naught, he pondered his case and improvised the verses afore
quoted. Then he said in his mind, “I will make this one more cast,
trusting in Allah who haply will not disappoint my hope.” So he rose and
threw the net and waited a full hour, after which time he pulled at it
and, finding it heavy, handled it gently and drew it in, little by
little, till he got it ashore, when lo and behold! he saw in it a
one-eyed, lame-legged ape. Seeing this quoth Khalifah, “There is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah! Verily, we are Allah’s and
to Him we are returning! What meaneth this heart-breaking, miserable
ill-luck and hapless fortune? What is come to me this blessed day? But
all this is of the destinies of Almighty Allah!” Then he took the ape
and tied him with a cord to a tree which grew on the river-bank, and
grasping a whip he had with him, raised his arm in the air, thinking to
bring down the scourge upon the quarry, when Allah made the ape speak
with a fluent tongue, saying, “O Khalifah, hold thy hand and beat me
not, but leave me bounden to this tree and go down to the river and cast
thy net, confiding in Allah; for He will give thee thy daily bread.”
Hearing this Khalifah went down to the river and casting his net, let
the cords run out. Then he pulled it in and found it heavier than
before; so he ceased not to tug at it, till he brought it to land, when,
behold, there was another ape in it, with front teeth wide apart,[187]
Kohl-darkened eyes and hands stained with Henna-dyes; and he was
laughing and wore a tattered waistcloth about his middle. Quoth
Khalifah, “Praised be Allah who hath changed the fish of the river into
apes[188]!” Then, going up to the first ape, who was still tied to the
tree, he said to him, “See, O unlucky, how fulsome was the counsel thou
gavest me! None but thou made me light on this second ape: and for that
thou gavest me good-morrow with thy one eye and thy lameness,[189] I am
become distressed and weary, without dirham or dinar.” So saying, he
hent in hand a stick[190] and flourishing it thrice in the air, was
about to come down with it upon the lame ape, when the creature cried
out for mercy and said to him, “I conjure thee, by Allah, spare me for
the sake of this my fellow and seek of him thy need; for he will guide
thee to thy desire!” So he held his hand from him and throwing down the
stick, went up to and stood by the second ape, who said to him, “O
Khalifah, this my speech[191] will profit thee naught, except thou
hearken to what I say to thee; but, an thou do my bidding and cross me
not, I will be the cause of thine enrichment.” Asked Khalifah, “And what
hast thou to say to me that I may obey thee therein?” The Ape answered,
“Leave me bound on the bank and hie thee down to the river; then cast
thy net a third time, and after I will tell thee what to do.” So he took
his net and going down to the river, cast it once more and waited
awhile. Then he drew it in and finding it heavy, laboured at it and
ceased not his travail till he got it ashore, when he found in it yet
another ape; but this one was red, with a blue waistcloth about his
middle; his hands and feet were stained with Henna and his eyes
blackened with Kohl. When Khalifah saw this, he exclaimed, “Glory to God
the Great! Extolled be the perfection of the Lord of Dominion! Verily,
this is a blessed day from first to last: its ascendant was fortunate in
the countenance of the first ape, and the scroll[192] is known by its
superscription! Verily, to-day is a day of apes: there is not a single
fish left in the river, and we are come out to-day but to catch
monkeys!” Then he turned to the third ape and said, “And what thing art
thou also, O unlucky?” Quoth the ape, “Dost thou not know me, O
Khalifah!”; and quoth he, “Not I!” The ape cried, “I am the ape of Abu
al-Sa’ádát[193] the Jew, the shroff.” Asked Khalifah, “And what dost
thou for him?”; and the ape answered, “I give him good-morrow at the
first of the day, and he gaineth five ducats; and again at the end of
the day, I give him good-even and he gaineth other five ducats.”
Whereupon Khalifah turned to the first ape and said to him, “See, O
unlucky, what fine apes other folk have! As for thee, thou givest me
good-morrow with thy one eye and thy lameness and thy ill-omened phiz
and I become poor and bankrupt and hungry!” So saying, he took the
cattle-stick and flourishing it thrice in the air, was about to come
down with it on the first ape, when Abu al-Sa’adat’s ape said to him,
“Let him be, O Khalifah, hold thy hand and come hither to me, that I may
tell thee what to do.” So Khalifah threw down the stick and walking up
to him cried, “And what hast thou to say to me, O monarch of all
monkeys?” Replied the ape, “Leave me and the other two apes here, and
take thy net and cast it into the river; and whatever cometh up, bring
it to me, and I will tell thee what shall gladden thee.”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the ape of Abu
al-Sa’adat said to Khalifah, “Take thy net and cast it into the river;
and whatever cometh up bring it to me and I will tell thee what shall
gladden thee.” He replied, “I hear and obey,” and took the net and
gathered it on his shoulder, reciting these couplets:—

 When straitened is my breast I will of my Creator pray, ✿ Who may and
    can the heaviest weight lighten in easiest way;
 For ere man’s glance can turn or close his eye by God His grace ✿ Waxeth
    the broken whole and yieldeth jail its prison-prey.
 Therefore with Allah one and all of thy concerns commit ✿ Whose grace
    and favour men of wit shall nevermore gainsay.

And also these twain:—

 Thou art the cause that castest men in ban and bane; ✿ Sorrow e’en so
    and sorrow’s cause Thou canst assain:
 Make me not covet aught that lies beyond my reach; ✿ How many a greedy
    wight his wish hath failed to gain!

Now when Khalifah had made an end of his verse, he went down to the
river and casting his net, waited awhile; after which he drew it up and
found therein a fine young fish,[194] with a big head, a tail like a
ladle and eyes like two gold pieces. When Khalifah saw this fish, he
rejoiced, for he had never in his life caught its like, so he took it,
marvelling, and carried it to the ape of Abu al-Sa’adat the Jew, as
’twere he had gotten possession of the universal world. Quoth the ape,
“O Khalifah, what wilt thou do with this and with thine ape?”; and quoth
the Fisherman, “I will tell thee, O monarch of monkeys all I am about to
do. Know then that first, I will cast about to make away with yonder
accursed, my ape, and take thee in his stead and give thee every day to
eat of whatso thou wilt.” Rejoined the ape, “Since thou hast made choice
of me, I will tell thee how thou shalt do wherein, if it please Allah
Almighty, shall be the mending of thy fortune. Lend thy mind, then, to
what I say to thee and ’tis this! Take another cord and tie me also to a
tree, where leave me and go to the midst of The Dyke[195] and cast thy
net into the Tigris.[196] Then after waiting awhile, draw it up and thou
shalt find therein a fish, than which thou never sawest a finer in thy
whole life. Bring it to me and I will tell thee how thou shalt do after
this.” So Khalifah rose forthright and casting his net into the Tigris,
drew up a great cat-fish[197] the bigness of a lamb; never had he set
eyes on its like, for it was larger than the first fish. He carried it
to the ape, who said to him, “Gather thee some green grass and set half
of it in a basket; lay the fish therein and cover it with the other
moiety. Then, leaving us here tied, shoulder the basket and betake thee
to Baghdad. If any bespeak thee or question thee by the way, answer him
not, but fare on till thou comest to the market-street of the
money-changers, at the upper end whereof thou wilt find the shop of
Master[198] Abu al-Sa’adat the Jew, Shaykh of the shroffs, and wilt see
him sitting on a mattress, with a cushion behind him and two coffers,
one for gold and one for silver, before him, while around him stand his
Mamelukes and negro-slaves and servant-lads. Go up to him and set the
basket before him, saying,:—O Abu al-Sa’adat, verily I went out to-day
to fish and cast my net in thy name, and Allah Almighty sent me this
fish. He will ask, Hast thou shown it to any but me?; and do thou
answer, No, by Allah! Then will he take it of thee and give thee a
dinar. Give it him back and he will give thee two dinars; but do thou
return them also and so do with everything he may offer thee; and take
naught from him, though he give thee the fish’s weight in gold. Then
will he say to thee, Tell me what thou wouldst have; and do thou reply,
By Allah, I will not sell the fish save for two words! He will ask, What
are they? And do thou answer, Stand up and say, Bear witness, O ye who
are present in the market, that I give Khalifah the fisherman my ape in
exchange for his ape, and that I barter for his lot my lot and luck for
his luck. This is the price of the fish, and I have no need of gold. If
he do this, I will every day give thee good-morrow and good-even, and
every day thou shalt gain ten dinars of good gold; whilst this one-eyed,
lame-legged ape shall daily give the Jew good-morrow, and Allah shall
afflict him every day with an avanie[199] which he must needs pay, nor
will he cease to be thus afflicted till he is reduced to beggary and
hath naught. Hearken then to my words; so shalt thou prosper and be
guided aright.” Quoth Khalifah, “I accept thy counsel, O monarch of all
the monkeys! But, as for this unlucky, may Allah never bless him! I know
not what to do with him.” Quoth the ape, “Let him go[200] into the
water, and let me go also.” “I hear and obey,” answered Khalifah and
unbound the three apes, and they went down into the river. Then he took
up the cat-fish[201] which he washed then laid it in the basket upon
some green grass, and covered it with other; and lastly shouldering his
load, set out chanting the following Mawwál[202]:—

 Thy case commit to a Heavenly Lord and thou shalt safety see; ✿ Act
    kindly through thy worldly life and live repentance-free.
 Mate not with folk suspected, lest eke thou shouldst suspected be ✿ And
    from reviling keep thy tongue lest men revile at thee!

[Illustration]

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Khalifah the
Fisherman, after ending his song, set out with the basket upon his
shoulder and ceased not faring till he entered the city of Baghdad. And
as he threaded the streets the folk knew him and cried out to him,
saying, “What hast thou there, O Khalifah?” But he paid no heed to them
and passed on till he came to the market-street of the money-changers
and fared between the shops, as the ape had charged him, till he found
the Jew seated at the upper end, with his servants in attendance upon
him, as he were a King of the Kings of Khorasan. He knew him at first
sight; so he went up to him and stood before him, whereupon Abu
al-Sa’adat raised his eyes and recognising him, said, “Welcome, O
Khalifah! What wantest thou and what is thy need? If any have missaid
thee or spited thee, tell me and I will go with thee to the Chief of
Police, who shall do thee justice on him.” Replied Khalifah, “Nay, as
thy head liveth, O chief of the Jews, none hath missaid me. But I went
forth this morning to the river and, casting my net into the Tigris on
thy luck, brought up this fish.” Therewith he opened the basket and
threw the fish before the Jew who admired it and said, “By the
Pentateuch and the Ten Commandments,[203] I dreamt last night that the
Virgin came to me and said:—Know, O Abu al-Sa’adat, that I have sent
thee a pretty present! And doubtless ’tis this fish.” Then he turned to
Khalifah and said to him, “By thy faith, hath any seen it but I?”
Khalifah replied, “No, by Allah, and by Abu Bakr the Viridical,[204]
none hath seen it save thou, O chief of the Jews!” Whereupon the Jew
turned to one of his lads and said to him, “Come, carry this fish to my
house and bid Sa’ádah[205] dress it and fry and broil it, against I make
an end of my business and hie me home.” And Khalifah said, “Go, O my
lad; let the master’s wife fry some of it and broil the rest.” Answered
the boy, “I hear and I obey, O my lord” and, taking the fish, went away
with it to the house. Then the Jew put out his hand and gave Khalifah
the fisherman a dinar, saying, “Take this for thyself, O Khalifah, and
spend it on thy family.” When Khalifah saw the dinar on his palm, he
took it, saying, “Laud to the Lord of Dominion!” as if he had never seen
aught of gold in his life, and went somewhat away; but, before he had
gone far, he was minded of the ape’s charge and turning back threw down
the ducat, saying, “Take thy gold and give folk back their fish! Dost
thou make a laughing stock of folk?” The Jew hearing this thought he was
jesting and offered him two dinars upon the other, but Khalifah said,
“Give me the fish and no nonsense. How knewest thou I would sell it at
this price?” Whereupon the Jew gave him two more dinars and said, “Take
these five ducats for thy fish, and leave greed.” So Khalifah hent the
five dinars in hand and went away, rejoicing, and gazing and marvelling
at the gold and saying, “Glory be to God! There is not with the Caliph
of Baghdad what is with me this day!” Then he ceased not faring on till
he came to the end of the market-street, when he remembered the words of
the ape and his charge and returning to the Jew, threw him back the
gold. Quoth he, “What aileth thee, O Khalifah? Dost thou want silver in
exchange for gold?” Khalifah replied, “I want nor dirhams nor dinars. I
only want thee to give me back folk’s fish.” With this the Jew waxed
wroth and shouted out at him, saying, “O fisherman, thou bringest me a
fish not worth a sequin and I give thee five for it; yet art thou not
content! Art thou Jinn-mad? Tell me for how much thou wilt sell it.”
Answered Khalifah, “I will not sell it for silver nor for gold, only for
two sayings[206] thou shalt say me.” When the Jew heard speak of the
“Two Sayings,” his eyes sank into his head, he breathed hard and ground
his teeth for rage and said to him, “O nail-paring of the Moslems, wilt
thou have me throw off my faith for the sake of thy fish, and wilt thou
debauch me from my religion and stultify my belief and my conviction
which I inherited of old from my forbears?” Then he cried out to the
servants who were in waiting and said, “Out on you! Bash me this unlucky
rogue’s neck and bastinado him soundly!” So they came down upon him with
blows and ceased not beating him till he fell beneath the shop, and the
Jew said to them, “Leave him and let him rise.” Whereupon Khalifah
jumped up, as if naught ailed him, and the Jew said to him, “Tell me
what price thou asketh for this fish and I will give it thee: for thou
hast gotten but scant good of us this day.” Answered the Fisherman,
“Have no fear for me, O master, because of the beating; for I can eat
ten donkeys’ rations of stick.” The Jew laughed at his words and said,
“Allah upon thee, tell me what thou wilt have and by the right of my
Faith, I will give it thee!” The Fisherman replied, “Naught from thee
will remunerate me for this fish save the two words whereof I spake.”
And the Jew said, “Meseemeth thou wouldst have me become a Moslem?”[207]
Khalifah rejoined, “By Allah, O Jew, an thou islamise ’twill nor
advantage the Moslems nor damage the Jews; and in like manner, an thou
hold to thy misbelief ’twill nor damage the Moslems nor advantage the
Jews. But what I desire of thee is that thou rise to thy feet and
say:—Bear witness against me, O people of the market, that I barter my
ape for the ape of Khalifah the Fisherman and my lot in the world for
his lot and my luck for his luck.” Quoth the Jew, “If this be all thou
desirest ’twill sit lightly upon me.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Jew said to
Khalifah the Fisherman, “If this be all thou desirest, ’twill sit
lightly upon me.” So he rose without stay or delay and standing on his
feet, repeated the required words; after which he turned to the
Fisherman and asked him, “Hast thou aught else to ask of me?” “No,”
answered he, and the Jew said, “Go in peace!” Hearing this Khalifah
sprung to his feet forthright; took up his basket and net and returned
straight to the Tigris, where he threw his net and pulled it in. He
found it heavy and brought it not ashore but with travail, when he found
it full of fish of all kinds. Presently, up came a woman with a dish,
who gave him a dinar, and he gave her fish for it; and after her an
eunuch, who also bought a dinar’s worth of fish, and so forth till he
had sold ten dinars’ worth. And he continued to sell ten dinars’ worth
of fish daily for ten days, till he had gotten an hundred dinars. Now
Khalifah the Fisherman had quarters in the Passage of the
Merchants,[208] and, as he lay one night in his lodging much bemused
with Hashísh, he said to himself, “O Khalifah, the folk all know thee
for a poor fisherman, and now thou hast gotten an hundred golden dinars.
Needs must the Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, hear of this
from some one, and haply he will be wanting money and will send for thee
and say to thee:——I need a sum of money and it hath reached me that thou
hast an hundred dinars: so do thou lend them to me those same.” I shall
answer, “O Commander of the Faithful, I am a poor man, and whoso told
thee that I had an hundred dinars lied against me; for I have naught of
this.” Thereupon he will commit me to the Chief of Police,
saying:—“Strip him of his clothes and torment him with the bastinado
till he confess and give up the hundred dinars in his possession.
Wherefore, meseemeth to provide against this predicament, the best thing
I can do, is to rise forthright and bash myself with the whip, so to use
myself to beating.” And his Hashish[209] said to him, “Rise, doff thy
dress.” So he stood up and putting off his clothes, took a whip he had
by him and set handy a leathern pillow; then he fell to lashing himself,
laying every other blow upon the pillow and roaring out the while,
“Alas! Alas! By Allah, ’tis a false saying, O my lord, and they have
lied against me; for I am a poor fisherman and have naught of the goods
of the world!” The noise of the whip falling on the pillow and on his
person resounded in the still of night and the folk heard it, and
amongst others the merchants, and they said, “Whatever can ail the poor
fellow, that he crieth and we hear the noise of blows falling on him?
’Twould seem robbers have broken in upon him and are tormenting him.”
Presently they all came forth of their lodgings, at the noise of the
blows and the crying, and repaired to Khalifah’s room, but they found
the door locked and said one to other, “Belike the robbers have come in
upon him from the back of the adjoining saloon. It behoveth us to climb
over by the roofs.” So they clomb over the roofs and coming down through
the sky-light,[210] saw him naked and flogging himself and asked him,
“What aileth thee, O Khalifah?” He answered, “Know, O folk, that I have
gained some dinars and fear lest my case be carried up to the Prince of
True Believers, Harun al-Rashid, and he send for me and demand of me
those same gold pieces; whereupon I should deny, and I fear that, if I
deny, he will torture me, so I am torturing myself, by way of
accustoming me to what may come.” The merchants laughed at him and said,
“Leave this fooling, may Allah not bless thee and the dinars thou hast
gotten! Verily thou hast disturbed us this night and hast troubled our
hearts.” So Khalifah left flogging himself and slept till the morning,
when he rose and would have gone about his business, but bethought him
of his hundred dinars and said in his mind, “An I leave them at home,
thieves will steal them, and if I put them in a belt[211] about my
waist, peradventure some one will see me and lay in wait for me till he
come upon me in some lonely place and slay me and take the money: but I
have a device that should serve me well, right well.” So he jumped up
forthright and made him a pocket in the collar of his gaberdine and
tying the hundred dinars up in a purse, laid them in the collar-pocket.
Then he took his net and basket and staff and went down to the
Tigris——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Khalifah the
Fisherman, having set his hundred dinars in the collar-pocket took
basket, staff and net and went down to the Tigris, where he made a cast
but brought up naught. So he removed from that place to another and
threw again, but once more the net came up empty; and he went on
removing from place to place till he had gone half a day’s journey from
the city, ever casting the net which kept bringing up naught. So he said
to himself, “By Allah, I will throw my net a-stream but this once more,
whether ill come of it or weal[212]!” Then he hurled the net with all
his force, of the excess of his wrath and the purse with the hundred
dinars flew out of his collar-pocket and, lighting in mid-stream, was
carried away by the strong current; whereupon he threw down the net and
doffing his clothes, left them on the bank and plunged into the water
after the purse. He dived for it nigh a hundred times, till his strength
was exhausted and he came up for sheer fatigue without chancing on it.
When he despaired of finding the purse, he returned to the shore, where
he saw nothing but staff, net and basket and sought for his clothes, but
could light on no trace of them: so he said in himself, “O vilest of
those wherefor was made the byword:—The pilgrimage is not perfected save
by copulation with the camel[213]!” Then he wrapped the net about him
and taking staff in one hand and basket in other, went trotting about
like, a camel in rut, running right and left and backwards and forwards,
dishevelled and dusty, as he were a rebel Marid let loose from Solomon’s
prison.[214] So far for what concerns the Fisherman Khalifah; but as
regards the Caliph Harun al-Rashid, he had a friend, a jeweller called
Ibn al-Kirnás,[215] and all the traders, brokers and middle-men knew him
for the Caliph’s merchant; wherefore there was naught sold in Baghdad,
by way of rarities and things of price or Mamelukes or handmaidens, but
was first shown to him. As he sat one day in his shop, behold, there
came up to him the Shaykh of the brokers, with a slave-girl, whose like
seers never saw, for she was of passing beauty and loveliness, symmetry
and perfect grace, and among her gifts was that she knew all arts and
sciences and could make verses and play upon all manner musical
instruments. So Ibn al-Kirnas bought her for five thousand golden dinars
and clothed her with other thousand; after which he carried her to the
Prince of True Believers, with whom she lay the night and who made trial
of her in every kind of knowledge and accomplishment and found her
versed in all sorts of arts and sciences, having no equal in her time.
Her name was Kút al-Kulúb[216] and she was even as saith the poet:—

 I fix my glance on her, whene’er she wends; ✿ And non-acceptance of my
    glance breeds pain:
 She favours graceful-necked gazelle at gaze; ✿ And “Graceful as gazelle”
    to say we’re fain.

And where is this[217] beside the saying of another?—

 Give me brunettes; the Syrian spears, so limber and so straight, Tell of
    the slender dusky maids, so lithe and proud of gait.
 Languid of eyelids, with a down like silk upon her cheek, Within her
    wasting lover’s heart she queens it still in state.

On the morrow the Caliph sent for Ibn al-Kirnas the Jeweller, and bade
him receive ten thousand dinars to her price. And his heart was taken up
with the slave-girl Kut al-Kulub and he forsook the Lady Zubaydah bint
al-Kasim, for all she was the daughter of his father’s brother[218] and
he abandoned all his favourite concubines and abode a whole month
without stirring from Kut al-Kulub’s side save to go to the Friday
prayers and return to her all in haste. This was grievous to the Lords
of the Realm and they complained thereof to the Wazir Ja’afar the
Barmecide, who bore with the Commander of the Faithful and waited till
the next Friday, when he entered the cathedral-mosque and, foregathering
with the Caliph, related to him all that occurred to him of
extraordinary stories anent seld-seen love and lovers with intent to
draw out what was in his mind. Quoth the Caliph, “By Allah, O Ja’afar,
this is not of my choice; but my heart is caught in the snare of love
and wot I not what is to be done!” The Wazir Ja’afar replied, “O
Commander of the Faithful, thou knowest how this girl Kut al-Kulub is
become at thy disposal and of the number of thy servants, and that which
hand possesseth soul coveteth not. Moreover, I will tell thee another
thing which is that the highest boast of Kings and Princes is in hunting
and the pursuit of sport and victory; and if thou apply thyself to this,
perchance it will divert thee from her, and it may be thou wilt forget
her.” Rejoined the Caliph, “Thou sayest well, O Ja’afar; come let us go
a-hunting forthright, without stay or delay.” So soon as Friday prayers
were prayed, they left the mosque and at once mounting their she-mules
rode forth to the chase.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


      Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Caliph Harun al-Rashid and the Wazir Ja’afar would go forth a-hunting
and a-chasing, they mounted two she-mules and fared on into the open
country, occupied with talk, and their attendants outwent them.
Presently the heat became over-hot and Al-Rashid said to his Wazir, “O
Ja’afar, I am sore athirst.” Then he looked around and espying a figure
in the distance on a high mound, asked Ja’afar, “Seest thou what I see?”
Answered the Wazir, “Yes, O Commander of the Faithful; I see a dim
figure on a high mound; belike he is the keeper of a garden or of a
cucumber-plot, and in whatso wise water will not be lacking in his
neighbourhood;” presently adding, “I will go to him and fetch thee
some.” But Al-Rashid said, “My mule is swifter than thy mule; so do thou
abide here, on account of the troops, whilst I go myself to him and get
of this person[219] drink and return.” So saying, he urged his she-mule,
which started off like racing wind or railing-water and, in the
twinkling of an eye, made the mound, where he found the figure he had
seen to be none other than Khalifah the Fisherman, naked and wrapped in
the net; and indeed he was horrible to behold, as to and fro he rolled
with eyes for very redness like cresset-gleam and dusty hair in
dishevelled trim, as he were an Ifrit or a lion grim. Al-Rashid saluted
him and he returned his salutation; but he was wroth and fires might
have been lit at his breath. Quoth the Caliph, “O man, hast thou any
water?”; and quoth Khalifah, “Ho thou, art thou blind, or Jinn-mad? Get
thee to the river Tigris, for ’tis behind this mound.” So Al-Rashid went
around the mound and going down to the river, drank and watered his
mule: then without a moment’s delay he returned to Khalifah and said to
him, “What aileth thee, O man, to stand here, and what is thy calling?”
The Fisherman cried, “This is a stranger and sillier question than that
about the water! Seest thou not the gear of my craft on my shoulder?”
Said the Caliph, “Belike thou art a fisherman?”; and he replied, “Yes.”
Asked Al-Rashid, “Where is thy gaberdine,[220] and where are thy
waistcloth and girdle and where be the rest of thy raiment?” Now these
were the very things which had been taken from Khalifah, like for like;
so, when he heard the Caliph name them, he got into his head that it was
he who had stolen his clothes from the river-bank and coming down from
the top of the mound, swiftlier than the blinding leven, laid hold of
the mule’s bridle, saying, “Harkye, man, bring me back my things and
leave jesting and joking.” Al-Rashid replied, “By Allah, I have not seen
thy clothes, nor know aught of them!” Now the Caliph had large cheeks
and a small mouth;[221] so Khalifah said to him, “Belike, thou art by
trade a singer or a piper on pipes? But bring me back my clothes fairly
and without more ado, or I will bash thee with this my staff till thou
bepiss thyself and befoul thy clothes.” When Al-Rashid saw the staff in
the Fisherman’s hand and that he had the vantage of him, he said to
himself, “By Allah, I cannot brook from this mad beggar half a blow of
that staff!” Now he had on a satin gown; so he pulled it off and gave it
to Khalifah, saying, “O man, take this in place of thy clothes.” The
Fisherman took it and turned it about and said, “My clothes are worth
ten of this painted ’Abá-cloak;” and rejoined the Caliph, “Put it on
till I bring thee thy gear.” So Khalifah donned the gown, but finding it
too long for him, took a knife he had with him, tied to the handle of
his basket,[222] and cut off nigh a third of the skirt, so that it fell
only beneath his knees. Then he turned to Al-Rashid and said to him,
“Allah upon thee, O piper, tell me what wage thou gettest every month
from thy master, for thy craft of piping.” Replied the Caliph, “My wage
is ten dinars a month,” and Khalifah continued, “By Allah, my poor
fellow, thou makest me sorry for thee! Why, I make thy ten dinars every
day! Hast thou a mind to take service with me and I will teach thee the
art of fishing and share my gain with thee? So shalt thou make five
dinars a day and be my slavey and I will protect thee against thy master
with this staff.” Quoth Al-Rashid, “I will well”; and quoth Khalifah,
“Then get off thy she-ass and tie her up, so she may serve us to carry
the fish hereafter, and come hither, that I may teach thee to fish
forthright.” So Al-Rashid alighted and hobbling his mule, tucked his
skirts into his girdle, and Khalifah said to him, “O piper, lay hold of
the net thus and put it over thy forearm thus and cast it into the
Tigris thus.” Accordingly, the Caliph took heart of grace and, doing as
the fisherman showed him, threw the net and pulled at it, but could not
draw it up. So Khalifah came to his aid and tugged at it with him; but
the two together could not hale it up: whereupon said the fisherman, “O
piper of ill-omen, for the first time I took thy gown in place of my
clothes; but this second time I will have thine ass and will beat thee
to boot, till thou bepiss and beskite thyself! An I find my net torn.”
Quoth Al-Rashid, “Let the twain of us pull at once.” So they both pulled
together and succeeded with difficulty in hauling that net ashore, when
they found it full of fish of all kinds and colours;——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Khalifah
the Fisherman and the Caliph hauled that net ashore, they found it full
of fish of all kinds; and Khalifah said to Al-Rashid, “By Allah, O
piper, thou art foul of favour but, an thou apply thyself to fishing,
thou wilt make a mighty fine fisherman. But now ’twere best thou
bestraddle thine ass and make for the market and fetch me a pair of
frails,[223] and I will look after the fish till thou return, when I and
thou will load it on thine ass’s back. I have scales and weights and all
we want, so we can take them with us and thou wilt have nothing to do
but to hold the scales and pouch the price; for here we have fish worth
twenty dinars. So be fast with the frails and loiter not.” Answered the
Caliph, “I hear and obey” and mounting, left him with his fish, and
spurred his mule, in high good humour, and ceased not laughing over his
adventure with the Fisherman, till he came up to Ja’afar, who said to
him, “O Commander of the Faithful, belike, when thou wentest down to
drink, thou foundest a pleasant flower-garden and enteredst and tookest
thy pleasure therein alone?” At this Al-Rashid fell a laughing again and
all the Barmecides rose and kissed the ground before him, saying, “O
Commander of the Faithful, Allah make joy to endure for thee and do away
annoy from thee! What was the cause of thy delaying when thou faredst to
drink and what hath befallen thee?” Quoth the Caliph, “Verily, a right
wondrous tale and a joyous adventure and a wondrous hath befallen me.”
And he repeated to them what had passed between himself and the
Fisherman and his words, “Thou stolest my clothes!” and how he had given
him his gown and how he had cut off a part of it, finding it too long
for him. Said Ja’afar, “By Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, I had it
in mind to beg the gown of thee: but now I will go straight to the
Fisherman and buy it of him.” The Caliph replied, “By Allah, he hath cut
off a third part of the skirt and spoilt it! But, O Ja’afar, I am tired
with fishing in the river, for I have caught great store of fish which I
left on the bank with my master Khalifah, and he is watching them and
waiting for me to return to him with a couple of frails and a
matchet.[224] Then we are to go, I and he, to the market and sell the
fish and share the price.” Ja’afar rejoined, “O Commander of the
Faithful, I will bring you a purchaser for your fish.” And Al-Rashid
retorted, “O Ja’afar, by the virtue of my holy forefathers, whoso
bringeth me one of the fish that are before Khalifah, who taught me
angling, I will give him for it a gold dinar!” So the crier proclaimed
among the troops that they should go forth and buy fish for the Caliph,
and they all arose and made for the river-side. Now, while Khalifah was
expecting the Caliph’s return with the two frails, behold, the Mamelukes
swooped down upon him like vultures and took the fish and wrapped them
in gold-embroidered kerchiefs, beating one another in their eagerness to
get at the Fisherman. Whereupon quoth Khalifah, “Doubtless these are of
the fish of Paradise[225]!” and hending two fish in right hand and left,
plunged into the water up to his neck and fell a-saying, “O Allah, by
the virtue of these fish, let Thy servant the piper, my partner, come to
me at this very moment.” And suddenly up to him came a black slave which
was the chief of the Caliph’s negro eunuchs. He had tarried behind the
rest, by reason of his horse having stopped to make water by the way,
and finding that naught remained of the fish, little or much, looked
right and left, till he espied Khalifah standing in the stream, with a
fish in either hand, and said to him, “Come hither, O Fisherman!” But
Khalifah replied, “Begone and none of your impudence[226]!” So the
eunuch went up to him and said, “Give me the fish and I will pay thee
their price.” Replied the Fisherman, “Art thou little of wit? I will not
sell them.” Therewith the eunuch drew his mace upon him, and Khalifah
cried out, saying, “Strike not, O loon! Better largesse than the
mace.[227]” So saying, he threw the two fishes to the eunuch, who took
them and laid them in his kerchief. Then he put hand in pouch, but found
not a single dirham and said to Khalifah, “O Fisherman, verily thou art
out of luck for, by Allah, I have not a silver about me! But come
to-morrow to the Palace of the Caliphate and ask for the eunuch Sandal;
whereupon the castratos will direct thee to me and by coming thither
thou shalt get what falleth to thy lot and therewith wend thy ways.”
Quoth Khalifah, “Indeed, this is a blessed day and its blessedness was
manifest from the first of it[228]!” Then he shouldered his net and
returned to Baghdad; and as he passed through the streets, the folk saw
the Caliph’s gown on him and stared at him till he came to the gate of
his quarter, by which was the shop of the Caliph’s tailor. When the man
saw him wearing a dress of the apparel of the Caliph, worth a thousand
dinars, he said to him, “O Khalifah, whence hadst thou that gown?”
Replied the Fisherman, “What aileth thee to be impudent? I had it of one
whom I taught to fish and who is become my apprentice. I forgave him the
cutting off of his hand[229] for that he stole my clothes and gave me
this cape in their place.” So the tailor knew that the Caliph had come
upon him as he was fishing and jested with him and given him the
gown;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph came
upon Khalifah the Fisherman and gave him his own gown in jest wherewith
the man fared home. Such was his case; but as regards Harun al-Rashid,
he had gone out a-hunting and a-fishing only to divert his thoughts from
the damsel, Kut al-Kulub. But when Zubaydah heard of her and of the
Caliph’s devotion to her, the Lady was fired with the jealousy which the
more especially fireth women, so that she refused meat and drink and
rejected the delights of sleep and awaited the Caliph’s going forth on a
journey or what not, that she might set a snare for the damsel. So when
she learnt that he was gone hunting and fishing, she bade her women
furnish the Palace fairly and decorate it splendidly and serve up viands
and confections; and amongst the rest she made a China dish of the
daintiest sweetmeats that can be made wherein she had put Bhang. Then
she ordered one of her eunuchs go to the damsel Kut al-Kulub and bid her
to the banquet, saying, “The Lady Zubaydah bint Al-Kasim, the wife of
the Commander of the Faithful, hath drunken medicine to-day and, having
heard tell of the sweetness of thy singing, longeth to divert herself
with somewhat of thine art.” Kut al-Kulub replied, “Hearing and
obedience are due to Allah and the Lady Zubaydah,” and rose without stay
or delay, unknowing what was hidden for her in the Secret Purpose. Then
she took with her what instruments she needed and, accompanying the
eunuch, ceased not faring till she stood in the presence of the
Princess. When she entered she kissed ground before her again and again,
then rising to her feet, said, “Peace be on the Lady of the exalted seat
and the presence whereto none may avail, daughter of the house Abbásí
and scion of the Prophet’s family! May Allah fulfil thee of peace and
prosperity in the days and the years[230]!” Then she stood with the rest
of the women and eunuchs, and presently the Lady Zubaydah raised her
eyes and considered her beauty and loveliness. She saw a damsel with
cheeks smooth as rose and breasts like granado, a face moon-bright, a
brow flower-white and great eyes black as night; her eyelids were
langour-dight and her face beamed with light, as if the sun from her
forehead arose and the murks of the night from the locks of her brow;
and the fragrance of musk from her breath strayed and flowers bloomed in
her lovely face inlaid; the moon beamed from her forehead and in her
slender shape the branches swayed. She was like the full moon shining in
the nightly shade; her eyes wantoned, her eyebrows were like a bow
arched and her lips of coral moulded. Her beauty amazed all who espied
her and her glances amated all who eyed her. Glory be to Him who formed
her and fashioned her and perfected her! Brief, she was even as saith
the poet of one who favoured her:—

 When she’s incensed thou seest folk lie slain, ✿ And when she’s pleased,
    their souls are quick again:
 Her eyne are armed with glances magical ✿ Wherewith she kills and
    quickens as she’s fain.
 The Worlds she leadeth captive with her eyes ✿ As tho’ the Worlds were
    all her slavish train.

Quoth the Lady Zubaydah, “Well come, and welcome and fair cheer to thee,
O Kut al-Kulub! Sit and divert us with thine art and the goodliness of
thine accomplishments.” Quoth the damsel, “I hear and I obey”; and,
putting out her hand, took the tambourine, whereof one of its praisers
speaketh in the following verses:—

 Ho thou o’ the tabret, my heart takes flight ✿ And love-smit cries while
    thy fingers smite!
 Thou takest naught but a wounded heart, ✿ The while for acceptance longs
    the wight:
 So say thou word or heavy or light; ✿ Play whate’er thou please it will
    charm the sprite.
 _Sois bonne_, unveil thy cheek, _ma belle_ ✿ Rise, deftly dance and all
    hearts delight.

Then she smote the tambourine briskly and so sang thereto, that she
stopped the birds in the sky and the place danced with them blithely;
after which she laid down the tambourine and took the pipe[231] whereof
it is said:—

 She hath eyes whose babes wi’ their fingers sign ✿ To sweet tunes
    without a discordant line.

And as the poet also said in this couplet:—

 And, when she announceth the will to sing, ✿ For Union-joy ’tis a time
    divine!

Then she laid down the pipe, after she had charmed therewith all who
were present, and took up the lute, whereof saith the poet:—

 How many a blooming bough in glee-girl’s hand is fain ✿ As lute to
    ’witch great souls by charm of cunning strain!
 She sweeps tormenting lute strings by her artful touch ✿ Wi’ finger-tips
    that surely chain with endless chain.

Then she tightened its pegs and tuned its strings and laying it in her
lap, bended over it as mother bendeth over child; and it seemed as it
were of her and her lute that the poet spoke in these couplets:—

 Sweetly discourses she on Persian string ✿ And Unintelligence makes
    understand.
 And teaches she that Love’s a murtherer, ✿ Who oft the reasoning Moslem
    hath unmann’d.

 A maid, by Allah, in whose palm a thing ✿ Of painted wood like mouth can
    speech command.
 With lute she stauncheth flow of Love; and so ✿ Stops flow of blood the
    cunning leach’s hand.

Then she preluded in fourteen different modes and sang to the lute an
entire piece, so as to confound the gazers and delight her hearers.
After which she recited these two couplets:—

   The coming unto thee is blest: ✿ Therein new joys for aye attend:
   Its blisses are continuous ✿ Its blessings never, never end.

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


         Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the maiden, Kut
al-Kulub, after singing these songs and sweeping the strings in presence
of the Lady Zubaydah, rose and exhibited tricks of sleight of hand and
legerdemain and all manner pleasing arts, till the Princess came near to
fall in love with her and said to herself, “Verily, my cousin Al-Rashid
is not to blame for loving her!” Then the damsel kissed ground before
Zubaydah and sat down, whereupon they set food before her. Presently
they brought her the drugged dish of sweetmeats and she ate thereof; and
hardly had it settled in her stomach when her head fell backward and she
sank on the ground sleeping. With this, the Lady said to her women,
“Carry her up to one of the chambers, till I summon her”; and they
replied, “We hear and we obey.” Then said she to one of her eunuchs,
“Fashion me a chest and bring it hitherto to me!”, and shortly
afterwards she bade make the semblance of a tomb and spread the report
that Kut al-Kulub had choked and died, threatening her familiars that
she would smite the neck of whoever should say, “She is alive.” Now,
behold, the Caliph suddenly returned from the chase, and the first
enquiry he made was for the damsel. So there came to him one of his
eunuchs, whom the Lady Zubaydah had charged to declare she was dead, if
the Caliph should ask for her and, kissing ground before him, said, “May
thy head live, O my lord! Be certified that Kut al-Kulub choked in
eating and is dead.” Whereupon cried Al-Rashid, “God never gladden thee
with good news, O thou bad slave!” and entered the Palace, where he
heard of her death from every one and asked, “Where is her tomb?” So
they brought him to the sepulchre and showed him the pretended tomb,
saying, “This is her burial-place.” When he saw it, he cried out and
wept and embraced it, quoting these two couplets[232]:—

 By Allah, O tomb, have her beauties ceased and disappeared from sight
    And is the countenance changed and wan, that shone so wonder-bright?
 O tomb, O tomb, thou art neither heaven nor garden, verily: How comes it
    then that swaying branch and moon in thee unite?

The Caliph, weeping sore for her, abode by the tomb a full hour, after
which he arose and went away, in the utmost distress and the deepest
melancholy. So the Lady Zubaydah saw that her plot had succeeded and
forthright sent for the eunuch and said, “Hither with the chest!” He set
it before her when she bade bring the damsel and locking her up therein,
said to the Eunuch, “Take all pains to sell this chest and make it a
condition with the purchaser that he buy it locked; then give alms with
its price.[233]” So he took it and went forth, to do her bidding. Thus
fared it with these; but as for Khalifah the Fisherman, when morning
morrowed and shone with its light and sheen, he said to himself, “I
cannot do aught better to-day than visit the Eunuch who bought the fish
of me, for he appointed me to come to him in the Palace of the
Caliphate.” So he went forth of his lodging, intending for the palace,
and when he came thither, he found Mamelukes, negro-slaves and eunuchs
standing and sitting; and looking at them, behold, seated amongst them
was the Eunuch who had taken the fish of him, with the white slaves
waiting on him. Presently, one of the Mameluke-lads called out to him;
whereupon the Eunuch turned to see who he was an lo! it was the
Fisherman. Now when Khalifah was ware that he saw him and recognised
him, he said to him, “I have not failed thee, O my little Tulip[234]! On
this wise are men of their word.” Hearing his address Sandal the
Eunuch[235] laughed and replied, “By Allah, thou art right, O
Fisherman,” and put his hand to his pouch, to give him somewhat; but at
that moment there arose a great clamour. So he raised his head to see
what was to do and finding that it was the Wazir Ja’afar the Barmecide
coming forth from the Caliph’s presence, he rose to him and forewent
him, and they walked about, conversing for a longsome time. Khalifah the
Fisherman waited awhile; then, growing weary of standing and finding
that the Eunuch took no heed of him, he set himself in his way and
beckoned to him from afar, saying, “O my lord Tulip, give me my due and
let me go!” The Eunuch heard him, but was ashamed to answer him because
of the Minister’s presence; so he went on talking with Ja’afar and took
no notice whatever of the Fisherman. Whereupon quoth Khalifah, “O Slow
o’ Pay![236] May Allah put to shame all churls and all who take folks’s
goods and are niggardly with them! I put myself under thy protection, O
my lord Bran-belly,[237] to give me my due and let me go!” The Eunuch
heard him, but was ashamed to answer him before Ja’afar; and the
Minister saw the Fisherman beckoning and talking to him, though he knew
not what he was saying; so he said to Sandal, misliking his behaviour,
“O Eunuch, what would yonder beggar with thee?” Sandal replied, “Dost
thou not know him, O my lord the Wazir?”; and Ja’afar answered, “By
Allah, I know him not! How should I know a man I have never seen but at
this moment?” Rejoined the Eunuch, “O my lord, this is the Fisherman
whose fish we seized on the banks of the Tigris. I came too late to get
any and was ashamed to return to the Prince of True Believers,
empty-handed, when all the Mamelukes had some. Presently I espied the
Fisherman standing in mid-stream, calling on Allah, with four fishes in
his hands, and said to him:—Give me what thou hast there and take their
worth. He handed me the fish and I put my hand into my pocket, purposing
to gift him with somewhat, but found naught therein and said:—Come to me
in the Palace, and I will give thee wherewithal to aid thee in thy
poverty. So he came to me to-day and I was putting hand to pouch, that I
might give him somewhat, when thou camest forth and I rose to wait on
thee and was diverted with thee from him, till he grew tired of waiting;
and this is the whole story, how he cometh to be standing here.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Forty-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Sandal
the Eunuch related to Ja’afar the Barmecide the tale of Khalifah the
Fisherman, ending with, “This is the whole story and how he cometh to be
standing here!” the Wazir, hearing this account, smiled and said, “O
Eunuch, how is it that this Fisherman cometh in his hour of need and
thou satisfiest him not? Dost thou not know him, O Chief of the
Eunuchs?” “No,” answered Sandal and Ja’afar said, “This is the Master of
the Commander of the Faithful, and his partner and our lord the Caliph
hath arisen this morning, strait of breast, heavy of heart and troubled
in thought, nor is there aught will broaden his breast save this
fisherman. So let him not go, till I crave the Caliph’s pleasure
concerning him and bring him before him; perchance Allah will relieve
him of his oppression and console him for the loss of Kut al-Kulub, by
means of the Fisherman’s presence, and he will give him wherewithal to
better himself; and thou wilt be the cause of this.” Replied Sandal, “O
my lord, do as thou wilt and may Allah Almighty long continue thee a
pillar of the dynasty of the Commander of the Faithful, whose shadow
Allah perpetuate[238] and prosper it, root and branch!” Then the Wazir
Ja’afar rose up and went in to the Caliph and Sandal ordered the
Mamelukes not to leave the Fisherman; whereupon Khalifah cried, “How
goodly is thy bounty, O Tulip! The seeker is become the sought. I come
to seek my due, and they imprison me for debts in arrears[239]!” When
Ja’afar came in to the presence of the Caliph, he found him sitting with
his head bowed earthwards, breast straitened and mind melancholy,
humming the verses of the poet:—

 My blamers instant bid that I for her become consoled; ✿ But I, what can
    I do, whose heart declines to be controlled?
 And how can I in patience bear the loss of lovely maid, ✿ When fails me
    patience for a love that holds with firmest hold!
 Ne’er I’ll forget her nor the bowl that ’twixt us both went round ✿ And
    wine of glances maddened me with drunkenness ensoul’d.

Whenas Ja’afar stood in the presence, he said, “Peace be upon thee, O
Commander of the Faithful, Defender of the honour of the Faith and
descendant of the uncle of the Prince of the Apostles, Allah assain him
and save him and his family one and all!” The Caliph raised his head and
answered, “And on thee be peace and the mercy of Allah and His
blessings!” Quoth Ja’afar, “With leave of the Prince of True Believers,
his servant would speak without restraint.” Asked the Caliph, “And when
was restraint put upon thee in speech and thou the Prince of Wazirs? Say
what thou wilt.” Answered Ja’afar, “When I went out, O my lord, from
before thee, intending for my house, I saw standing at the door thy
master and teacher and partner, Khalifah the Fisherman, who was
aggrieved at thee and complained of thee saying:—Glory be to God! I
taught him to fish and he went away to fetch me a pair of frails, but
never came back: and this is not the way of a good partner or of a good
apprentice. So, if thou hast a mind to partnership, well and good; and
if not, tell him, that he may take to partner another.” Now when the
Caliph heard these words he smiled and his straitness of breast was done
away with and he said, “My life on thee, is this the truth thou sayest,
that the Fisherman standeth at the door?” and Ja’afar replied, “By thy
life, O Commander of the Faithful, he standeth at the door.” Quoth the
Caliph, “O Ja’afar, by Allah, I will assuredly do my best to give him
his due! If Allah at my hands send him misery, he shall have it; and if
prosperity he shall have it.” Then he took a piece of paper and cutting
it in pieces, said to the Wazir, “O Ja’afar, write down with thine own
hand twenty sums of money, from one dinar to a thousand, and the names
of all kinds of offices and dignities from the least appointment to the
Caliphate; also twenty kinds of punishment from the lightest beating to
death.[240]” “I hear and I obey, O Commander of the Faithful,” answered
Ja’afar and did as he was bidden. Then said the Caliph, “O Ja’afar, I
swear by my holy forefathers and by my kinship to Hamzah[241] and
Akíl,[242] that I mean to summon the fisherman and bid him take one of
these papers, whose contents none knoweth save thou and I; and
whatsoever is written in the paper which he shall choose, I will give it
to him; though it be the Caliphate I will divest myself thereof and
invest him therewith and grudge it not to him; and, on the other hand,
if there be written therein hanging or mutilation or death, I will
execute it upon him. Now go and fetch him to me.” When Ja’afar heard
this, he said to himself, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might
save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! It may be somewhat will fall to
this poor wretch’s lot that will bring about his destruction, and I
shall be the cause. But the Caliph hath sworn; so nothing remains now
but to bring him in, and naught will happen save whatso Allah willeth.”
Accordingly he went out to Khalifah the Fisherman and laid hold of his
hand, to carry him in to the Caliph, whereupon his reason fled and he
said in himself, “What a stupid I was to come after yonder ill-omened
slave, Tulip, whereby he hath brought me in company with Bran-belly!”
Ja’afar fared on with him, with Mamelukes before and behind, whilst he
said, “Doth not arrest suffice, but these must go behind and before me,
to hinder my making off?” till they had traversed seven vestibules, when
the Wazir said to him, “Mark my words, O Fisherman! Thou standest before
the Commander of the Faithful and Defender of the Faith!” Then he raised
the great curtain and Khalifah’s eyes fell on the Caliph, who was seated
on his couch, with the Lords of the realm standing in attendance upon
him. As soon as he knew him, he went up to him and said, “Well come, and
welcome to thee, O piper! ’Twas not right of thee to make thyself a
Fisherman and go away, leaving me sitting to guard the fish, and never
to return! For, before I was aware, there came up Mamelukes on beasts of
all manner colours, and snatched away the fish from me, I standing
alone, and this was all of thy fault; for, hadst thou returned with the
frails forthright, we had sold an hundred dinars’ worth of fish. And now
I come to seek my due, and they have arrested me. But thou, who hath
imprisoned thee also in this place?” The Caliph smiled and raising a
corner of the curtain, put forth his head and said to the Fisherman,
“Come hither and take thee one of these papers.” Quoth Khalifah the
Fisherman, “Yesterday thou wast a fisherman, and to-day thou hast become
an astrologer; but the more trades a man hath, the poorer he waxeth.”
Thereupon Ja’afar, said, “Take the paper at once, and do as the
Commander of the Faithful biddeth thee without prating.” So he came
forward and put forth his hand saying, “Far be it from me that this
piper should ever again be my knave and fish with me!” Then taking the
paper he handed it to the Caliph, saying, “O piper, what hath come out
for me therein? Hide naught thereof.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Forty-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Khalifah
the Fisherman took up one of the papers and handed it to the Caliph he
said, “O piper, what have come out to me therein? Hide naught thereof.”
So Al-Rashid received it and passed it on to Ja’afar and said to him,
“Read what is therein.” He looked at it and said, “There is no Majesty
there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!” Said the
Caliph, “Good news,[243] O Ja’afar? What seest thou therein?” Answered
the Wazir, “O Commander of the Faithful, there came up from the
paper:—Let the Fisherman receive an hundred blows with a stick.” So the
Caliph commanded to beat the Fisherman and they gave him an hundred
sticks: after which he rose, saying, “Allah damn this, O Bran-belly! Are
jail and sticks part of the game?” Then said Ja’afar, “O Commander of
the Faithful, this poor devil is come to the river, and how shall he go
away thirsting? We hope that among the alms-deeds of the Commander of
the Faithful, he may have leave to take another paper, so haply somewhat
may come out wherewithal he may succour his poverty.” Said the Caliph,
“By Allah, O Ja’afar, if he take another paper and death be written
therein, I will assuredly kill him, and thou wilt be the cause.”
Answered Ja’afar, “If he die he will be at rest.” But Khalifah the
Fisherman said to him, “Allah ne’er gladden thee with good news! Have I
made Baghdad strait upon you, that ye seek to slay me?” Quoth Ja’afar,
“Take thee a paper and crave the blessing of Allah Almighty!” So he put
out his hand and taking a paper, gave it to Ja’afar, who read it and was
silent. The Caliph asked, “Why art thou silent, O son of Yahya?”; and he
answered, “O Commander of the Faithful, there hath come out on this
paper:—Naught shall be given to the Fisherman.” Then said the Caliph,
“His daily bread will not come from us: bid him fare forth from before
our face.” Quoth Ja’afar, “By the claims of thy pious forefathers, let
him take a third paper, it may be it will bring him alimony;” and quoth
the Caliph, “Let him take one and no more.” So he put out his hand and
took a third paper, and behold, therein was written, “Let the Fisherman
be given one dinar.” Ja’afar cried to him, “I sought good fortune for
thee, but Allah willed not to thee aught save this dinar.” And Khalifah
answered, “Verily, a dinar for every hundred sticks were rare good luck,
may Allah not send thy body health!” The Caliph laughed at him and
Ja’afar took him by the hand and led him out. When he reached the door,
Sandal the eunuch saw him and said to him, “Hither, O Fisherman! Give us
portion of that which the Commander of the Faithful hath bestowed on
thee, whilst jesting with thee.” Replied Khalifah, “By Allah, O Tulip,
thou art right! Wilt thou share with me, O nigger? Indeed, I have eaten
stick to the tune of an hundred blows and have earned one dinar, and
thou art but too welcome to it.” So saying, he threw him the dinar and
went out, with the tears flowing down the plain of his cheeks. When the
Eunuch saw him in this plight, he knew that he had spoken sooth and
called to the lads to fetch him back: so they brought him back and
Sandal, putting his hand to his pouch, pulled out a red purse, whence he
emptied an hundred golden dinars into the Fisherman’s hand, saying,
“Take this gold in payment of thy fish and wend thy ways.” So Khalifah,
in high good humour, took the hundred ducats and the Caliph’s one dinar
and went his way, and forgot the beating. Now, as Allah willed it for
the furthering of that which He had decreed, he passed by the mart of
the handmaidens and seeing there a mighty ring where many folks were
forgathering, said to himself, “What is this crowd?” So he brake through
the merchants and others, who said, “Make wide the way for Skipper
Rapscallion,[244] and let him pass.” Then he looked and behold, he saw a
chest, with an eunuch seated thereon and an old man standing by it, and
the Shaykh was crying, “O merchants, O men of money, who will hasten and
hazard his coin for this chest of unknown contents from the Palace of
the Lady Zubaydah bint al-Kasim, wife of the Commander of the Faithful?
How much shall I say for you, Allah bless you all!” Quoth one of the
merchants, “By Allah, this is a risk! But I will say one word and no
blame to me. Be it mine for twenty dinars.” Quoth another, “Fifty,” and
they went on bidding, one against other, till the price reached an
hundred ducats. Then said the crier, “Will any of you bid more, O
merchants?” And Khalifah the Fisherman said, “Be it mine for an hundred
dinars and one dinar.” The merchants, hearing these words, thought he
was jesting and laughed at him, saying, “O eunuch sell it to Khalifah
for an hundred dinars and one dinar!” Quoth the eunuch, “By Allah, I
will sell it to none but him! Take it, O Fisherman, the Lord bless thee
in it, and here with thy gold.” So Khalifah pulled out the ducats and
gave them to the eunuch, who, the bargain being duly made, delivered to
him the chest and bestowed the price in alms on the spot; after which he
returned to the Palace and acquainted the Lady Zubaydah with what he had
done, whereat she rejoiced. Meanwhile the Fisherman hove the chest on
shoulder, but could not carry it on this wise for the excess of its
weight; so he lifted it on to his head and thus bore it to the quarter
where he lived. Here he set it down and being weary, sat awhile,
bemusing what had befallen him and saying in himself, “Would Heaven I
knew what is in this chest!” Then he opened the door of his lodging and
haled the chest till he got it into his closet; after which he strove to
open it, but failed. Quoth he, “What folly possessed me to buy this
chest? There is no help for it but to break it open and see what is
herein.” So he applied himself to the lock, but could not open it, and
said to himself, “I will leave it till to-morrow.” Then he would have
stretched him out to sleep, but could find no room; for the chest filled
the whole closet. So he got upon it and lay him down; but, when he had
lain awhile, behold, he felt something stir under him whereat sleep
forsook him and his reason fled.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Khalifah
the Fisherman lay down upon the chest and thus tarried awhile, behold,
something stirred beneath him; whereat he was affrighted and his reason
fled. So he arose and cried, “Meseems there be Jinns in the chest.
Praise to Allah who suffered me not to open it! For, had I done so, they
had risen against me in the dark and slain me, and from them would have
befallen me naught of good.” Then he lay down again when, lo! the chest
moved a second time, more than before; whereupon he sprang to his feet
and said, “There it goes again: but this is terrible!” And he hastened
to look for the lamp, but could not find it and had not the wherewithal
to buy another. So he went forth and cried out, “Ho, people of the
quarter!” Now the most part of the folk were asleep; but they awoke at
his crying and asked, “What aileth thee, O Khalifah?” He answered,
“Bring me a lamp, for the Jinn are upon me.” They laughed at him and
gave him a lamp, wherewith he returned to his closet. Then he smote the
lock of the chest with a stone and broke it and opening it, saw a damsel
like a Houri lying asleep within. Now she had been drugged with Bhang,
but at that moment she threw up the stuff and awoke; then she opened her
eyes and feeling herself confined and cramped, moved. At this sight
quoth Khalifah, “By Allah, O my lady, whence art thou?”; and quoth she,
“Bring me Jessamine, and Narcissus.[245]” And Khalifah answered, “There
is naught here but Henna-flowers.[246]” Thereupon she came to herself
and considering Khalifah, said to him, “What art thou?” presently
adding, “And where am I?” He said, “Thou art in my lodging.” Asked she,
“Am I not in the Palace of the Caliph Harun al-Rashid?” And quoth he,
“What manner of thing is Al-Rashid?[247] O madwoman, Thou are naught but
my slave-girl: I bought thee this very day for an hundred dinars and one
dinar, and brought thee home, and thou wast asleep in this here chest.”
When she heard these words she said to him, “What is thy name?” Said he,
“My name is Khalifah. How comes my star to have grown propitious, when I
know my ascendant to have been otherwise?” She laughed and cried, “Spare
me this talk! Hast thou anything to eat?” Replied he, “No, by Allah, nor
yet to drink! I have not eaten these two days and am now in want of a
morsel.” She asked, “Hast thou no money?”; and he said, “Allah keep this
chest which hath beggared me: I gave all I had for it and am become
bankrupt.” The damsel laughed at him and said, “Up with thee and seek of
thy neighbours somewhat for me to eat, for I am hungry.” So he went
forth and cried out, “Ho, people of the quarter!” Now the folk were
asleep; but they awoke and asked, “What aileth thee, O Khalifah?”
Answered He, “O my neighbours, I am hungry and have nothing to eat.” So
one came down to him with a bannock and another with broken meats and a
third with a bittock of cheese and a fourth with a cucumber; and so on
till his lap was full and he returned to his closet and laid the whole
between her hands, saying, “Eat.” But she laughed at him, saying, “How
can I eat of this, when I have not a mug of water whereof to drink? I
fear to choke with a mouthful and die.” Quoth he, “I will fill thee this
pitcher.[248]” So he took the pitcher and going forth, stood in the
midst of the street and cried out, saying, “Ho, people of the quarter!”
Quoth they, “What calamity is upon thee to-night,[249] O Khalifah!” And
he said, “Ye gave me food and I ate; but now I am athirst; so give me to
drink.” Thereupon one came down to him with a mug and another with an
ewer and a third with a gugglet; and he filled his pitcher and, bearing
it back, said to the damsel, “O my lady, thou lackest nothing now.”
Answered she, “True, I want nothing more at this present.” Quoth he,
“Speak to me and say me thy story.” And quoth she, “Fie upon thee! An
thou knowest me not, I will tell thee who I am. I am Kut al-Kulub, the
Caliph’s handmaiden, and the Lady Zubaydah was jealous of me; so she
drugged me with Bhang and set me in this chest,” presently adding
“Alhamdolillah—praised be God—for that the matter hath come to easy
issue and no worse! But this befel me not save for thy good luck, for
thou wilt certainly get of the Caliph Al-Rashid money galore, that will
be the means of thine enrichment.” Quoth Khalifah, “Is not Al-Rashid he
in whose Palace I was imprisoned?” “Yes,” answered she; and he said, “By
Allah, never saw I more niggardly wight than he, that piper little of
good and wit! He gave me an hundred blows with a stick yesterday and but
one dinar, for all I taught him to fish and made him my partner; but he
played me false.” Replied she, “Leave this unseemly talk, and open thine
eyes and look thou bear thyself respectfully, whenas thou seest him
after this, and thou shalt win thy wish.” When he heard her words, it
was if he had been asleep and awoke; and Allah removed the veil from his
judgment, because of his good luck,[250] and he answered, “On my head
and eyes!” Then said he to her, “Sleep, in the name of Allah.[251]” So
she lay down and fell asleep (and he afar from her) till the morning,
when she sought of him inkcase[252] and paper and, when they were
brought wrote to Ibn al-Kirnas, the Caliph’s friend, acquainting him
with her case and how at the end of all that had befallen her she was
with Khalifah the Fisherman, who had bought her. Then she gave him the
scroll, saying, “Take this and hie thee to the jewel-market and ask for
the shop of Ibn al-Kirnas the Jeweller and give him this paper and speak
not.” “I hear and I obey,” answered Khalifah and going with the scroll
to the market, enquired for the shop of Ibn al-Kirnas. They directed him
thither and on entering it he saluted the merchant, who returned his
salam with contempt and said to him, “What dost thou want?” Thereupon he
gave him the letter and he took it, but read it not, thinking the
Fisherman a beggar, who sought an alms of him, and said to one of his
lads, “Give him half a dirham.” Quoth Khalifah, “I want no alms; read
the paper.” So Ibn al-Kirnas took the letter and read it; and no sooner
knew its import than he kissed it and laying it on his head——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ibn
al-Kirnas read the letter and knew its import, he kissed it and laid it
on his head; then he arose and said to Khalifah, “O my brother, where is
thy house?” Asked Khalifah, “What wantest thou with my house? Wilt thou
go thither and steal my slave-girl?” Then Ibn al-Kirnas answered, “Not
so: on the contrary, I will buy thee somewhat whereof you may eat, thou
and she.” So he said, “My house is in such a quarter;” and the merchant
rejoined, “Thou hast done well. May Allah not give thee health, O
unlucky one[253]!” Then he called out to two of his slaves and said to
them, “Carry this man to the shop of Mohsin the Shroff and say to him,
“O Mohsin, give this man a thousand dinars of gold;” then bring him back
to me in haste.” So they carried him to the money-changer, who paid him
the money, and returned with him to their master, whom they found
mounted on a dapple she-mule worth a thousand dinars, with Mamelukes and
pages about him, and by his side another mule like his own, saddled and
bridled. Quoth the jeweller to Khalifah, “Bismillah, mount this mule.”
Replied he, “I won’t; for by Allah, I fear she throw me;” and quoth Ibn
al-Kirnas, “By God, needs must thou mount.” So he came up and mounting
her, face to crupper, caught hold of her tail and cried out; whereupon
she threw him on the ground and they laughed at him; but he rose and
said, “Did I not tell thee I would not mount this great jenny-ass?”
Thereupon Ibn al-Kirnas left him in the market and repairing to the
Caliph, told him of the damsel; after which he returned and removed her
to his own house. Meanwhile Khalifah went home to look after the
handmaid and found the people of the quarter foregathering and saying,
“Verily, Khalifah is to-day in a terrible pickle[254]! Would we knew
whence he can have gotten this damsel?” Quoth one of them, “He is a mad
pimp: haply he found her lying on the road drunken, and carried her to
his own house, and his absence showeth that he knoweth his offence.” As
they were talking, behold, up came Khalifah, and they said to him, “What
a plight is thine, O unhappy! knowest thou not what is come to thee?” He
replied, “No, by Allah!” and they said, “But just now there came
Mamelukes and took away thy slave-girl whom thou stolest, and sought for
thee, but found thee not.” Asked Khalifah, “And how came they to take my
slave-girl?” and quoth one, “Had he fallen in their way, they had slain
him.” But he, so far from heeding them, returned running to the shop of
Ibn al-Kirnas, whom he met riding, and said to him, “By Allah, ’twas not
right of thee to wheedle me and meanwhile send thy Mamelukes to take my
slave-girl!” Replied the jeweller, “O idiot, come with me and hold thy
tongue.” So he took him and carried him into a house handsomely builded,
where he found the damsel seated on a couch of gold, with ten
slave-girls like moons round her. Sighting her Ibn al-Kirnas kissed
ground before her and she said, “What hast thou done with my new master,
who bought me with all he owned?” He replied, “O my lady, I gave him a
thousand golden dinars;” and related to her Khalifah’s history from
first to last, whereat she laughed and said, “Blame him not; for he is
but a common wight. These other thousand dinars are a gift from me to
him and Almighty Allah willing, he shall win of the Caliph what shall
enrich him.” As they were talking, there came an eunuch from the
Commander of the Faithful, in quest of Kut al-Kulub for, when he knew
that she was in the house of Ibn al-Kirnas, he could not endure the
severance, but bade bring her forthwith. So she repaired to the Palace,
taking Khalifah with her, and going into the presence, kissed ground
before the Caliph, who rose to her, saluting and welcoming her, and
asked her how she had fared with him who had bought her. She replied,
“He is a man, Khalifah the Fisherman hight, and there he standeth at the
door. He telleth me that he hath an account to settle with the Commander
of the Faithful, by reason of a partnership between him and the Caliph
in fishing.” Asked Al-Rashid, “Is he at the door?” and she answered,
“Yes.” So the Caliph sent for him and he kissed ground before him and
wished him endurance of glory and prosperity. The Caliph marvelled at
him and laughed at him and said to him, “O Fisherman, wast thou in very
deed my partner[255] yesterday?” Khalifah took his meaning and
heartening his heart and summoning spirit replied, “By Him who bestowed
upon thee the succession to thy cousin,[256] I know her not in anywise
and have had no commerce with her save by way of sight and speech!” Then
he repeated to him all that had befallen him, since he last saw
him,[257] whereat the Caliph laughed and his breast broadened and he
said to Khalifah, “Ask of us what thou wilt, O thou who bringest to
owners their own!” But he was silent; so the Caliph ordered him fifty
thousand dinars of gold and a costly dress of honour such as great
Sovrans don, and a she-mule, and gave him black slaves of the Súdán to
serve him, so that he became as he were one of the Kings of that time.
The Caliph was rejoiced at the recovery of his favourite and knew that
all this was the doing of his cousin-wife, the Lady Zubaydah,——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
rejoiced at the recovery of Kut al-Kulub and knew that all this was the
doing of the Lady Zubaydah, his cousin-wife; wherefore he was sore
enraged against her and held aloof from her a great while, visiting her
not neither inclining to pardon her. When she was certified of this, she
was sore concerned for his wrath and her face, that was wont to be rosy,
waxed pale and wan till, when her patience was exhausted, she sent a
letter to her cousin, the Commander of the Faithful making her excuses
to him and confessing her offences, and ending with these verses:—

 I long once more the love that was between us to regain, ✿ That I may
    quench the fire of grief and bate the force of bane.

 O lords of me, have ruth upon the stress my passion deals ✿ Enough to me
    is what you doled of sorrow and of pain.
 ’Tis life to me an deign you keep the troth you deigned to plight ✿ ’Tis
    death to me an troth you break and fondest vows profane:
 Given I’ve sinned a sorry sin, yet grant me ruth, for naught ✿ By Allah,
    sweeter is than friend who is of pardon fain.

When the Lady Zubaydah’s letter reached the Caliph, and reading it he
saw that she confessed her offence and sent her excuses to him therefor,
he said to himself, “Verily, all sins doth Allah forgive; aye, Gracious,
Merciful is He!”[258] And he returned her an answer, expressing
satisfaction and pardon and forgiveness for what was past, whereat she
rejoiced greatly. As for Khalifah, the Fisherman, the Caliph assigned
him a monthly solde of fifty dinars, and took him into especial favour,
which would lead to rank and dignity, honour and worship. Then he kissed
ground before the Commander of the Faithful and went forth with stately
gait. When he came to the door, the Eunuch Sandal, who had given him the
hundred dinars, saw him and knowing him, said to him, “O Fisherman,
whence all this?” So he told him all that had befallen him, first and
last, whereat Sandal rejoiced, because he had been the cause of his
enrichment, and said to him, “Wilt thou not give me largesse of this
wealth which is now become thine?” So Khalifah put hand to pouch and
taking out a purse containing a thousand dinars, gave it to the Eunuch,
who said, “Keep thy coins and Allah bless thee therein!” and marvelled
at his manliness and at the liberality of his soul, for all his late
poverty.[259] Then leaving the eunuch, Khalifah mounted his she-mule and
rode, with the slaves’ hands on her crupper, till he came to his lodging
at the Khan, whilst the folk stared at him in surprise for that which
had betided him of advancement. When he alighted from his beast they
accosted him and enquired the cause of his change from poverty to
prosperity, and he told them all that had happened to him from incept to
conclusion. Then he bought a fine mansion and laid out thereon much
money, till it was perfect in all points. And he took up his abode
therein and was wont to recite thereon these two couplets:—

 Behold a house that’s like the Dwelling of Delight;[260] ✿ Its aspect
    heals the sick and banishes despite.
 Its sojourn for the great and wise appointed is, ✿ And Fortune fair
    therein abideth day and night.

Then, as soon as he was settled in his house, he sought him in marriage
the daughter of one of the chief men of the city, a handsome girl, and
went in unto her and led a life of solace and satisfaction, joyaunce and
enjoyment; and he rose to passing affluence and exceeding prosperity.
So, when he found himself in this fortunate condition, he offered up
thanks to Allah (extolled and excelled be He!) for what He had bestowed
on him of wealth exceeding and of favours ever succeeding, praising his
Lord with the praise of the grateful and chanting the words of the
poet:—

 To Thee be praise, O Thou who showest unremitting grace; ✿ O Thou whose
    universal bounties high and low embrace!
 To Thee be praise from me! Then deign accept my praise for I ✿ Accept
    Thy boons and gifts with grateful soul in every case.
 Thou hast with favours overwhelmed me, benefits and largesse ✿ And
    gracious doles my memory ne’er ceaseth to retrace.
 All men from mighty main, Thy grace and goodness, drain and drink; ✿ And
    in their need Thou, only Thou, to them art refuge-place!
 Thou heapest up, O Lord, Thy mercy-signs on mortal men; ✿ Thou pardonest
    man’s every sin though he be high or base:
 So for the sake of him who came to teach mankind in ruth ✿ Prophet,
    pure, truthful-worded scion of the noblest race;
 Ever be Allah’s blessing and His peace on him and all ✿ His aids[261]
    and kin while pilgrims fare his noble tomb to face!
 And on his helpmeets[262] one and all, Companions great and good, ✿
    Through time Eternal while the bird shall sing in shady wood!

And thereafter Khalifah continued to pay frequent visits to the Caliph
Harun al-Rashid, with whom he found acceptance and who ceased not to
overwhelm him with boons and bounty: and he abode in the enjoyment of
the utmost honour and happiness and joy and gladness and in riches more
than sufficing and in rank ever rising; brief, a sweet life and a
savoury, pure as pleasurable, till there came to him the Destroyer of
delights and the Sunderer of societies; and extolled be the perfection
of Him to whom belong glory and permanence and He is the Living, the
Eternal, who shall never die!

-----

Footnote 186:

  This is so rare, even amongst the poorest classes in the East, that it
  is mentioned with some emphasis.

Footnote 187:

  A beauty amongst the Egyptians, not the Arabs.

Footnote 188:

  True Fellah-“chaff.”

Footnote 189:

  Alluding to the well-known superstition, which has often appeared in
  The Nights, that the first object seen in the morning, such as a crow,
  a cripple, or a cyclops determines the fortunes of the day. Notices in
  Eastern literature are as old as the days of the Hitopadesa; and there
  is a something instinctive in the idea to a race of early risers. At
  an hour when the senses are most impressionable the aspect of
  unpleasant spectacles has double effect.

Footnote 190:

  Arab. “Masúkah,” the stick used for driving cattle, _bâton gourdin_
  (Dozy). Lane applies the word to a wooden plank used for levelling the
  ground.

Footnote 191:

  _i.e._ the words I am about to speak to thee.

Footnote 192:

  Arab. “Sahífah,” which may mean “page” (Lane) or “book” (Payne).

Footnote 193:

  Pronounce, “Abussa’ádát” = Father of Prosperities: Lane imagines that
  it came from the Jew’s daughter being called “Sa’adat.” But the latter
  is the Jew’s wife (Night dcccxxxiii) and the word in the text is
  plural.

Footnote 194:

  Arab. “Furkh samak” lit. a fish-chick, an Egyptian vulgarism.

Footnote 195:

  Arab. “Al-Rasíf”; usually a river-quay, levée, an embankment. Here it
  refers to the great dyke which distributed the Tigris-water.

Footnote 196:

  Arab. “Dajlah,” see vol. i, p. 180. It is evidently the origin of the
  biblical “Hid-dekel” “Hid” = fierceness, swiftness.

Footnote 197:

  Arab. “Bayáz” a kind of Silurus (_S. Bajad_, Forsk.) which Sonnini
  calls Bayatto, Saksatt and Hébedé; also Bogar (Bakar, an ox). The skin
  is lubricous, the flesh is soft and insipid and the fish often grows
  to the size of a man. Captain Speke and I found huge specimens in the
  Tanganyika Lake.

Footnote 198:

  Arab. “Mu’allim,” vulg. “M’allim,” prop. = teacher, master esp. of a
  trade, a craft. In Egypt and Syria it is a civil address to a Jew or a
  Christian, as Hájj is to a Moslem.

Footnote 199:

  Arab. “Gharámah,” an exaction, usually on the part of government like
  a corvée etc. The Éuropeo-Egyptian term is _Avania_ (Ital.) or
  _Avanie_ (French.)

Footnote 200:

  Arab. “Sayyib-hu” an Egyptian vulgarism found also in Syria. Hence
  Sáibah, a woman who lets herself go (a-whoring) etc. It is syn. with
  “Dashar,” which Dozy believes to be a softening of Jashar; as Jashsh
  became Dashsh.

Footnote 201:

  The Silurus is generally so called in English on account of the length
  of its feelers acting mustachios.

Footnote 202:

  See Night dcccvii, vol. viii. p. 94.

Footnote 203:

  This extraordinary confusion of two distinct religious mythologies
  cannot be the result of ignorance. Educated Moslems know at least as
  much as Christians do, on these subjects, but the Ráwi or story-teller
  speaks to the “Gallery.” In fact it becomes a mere “chaff” and The
  Nights give some neat specimens of our modern linguistic.

Footnote 204:

  See vol. ii. 197. “Al-Siddíkah” (fem.) is a title of Ayishah, who,
  however, does not appear to have deserved it.

Footnote 205:

  The Jew’s wife.

Footnote 206:

  Here is a double entendre. The fisherman meant a word or two. The Jew
  understood the Shibboleth of the Moslem Creed, popularly known as the
  “Two Words,”—I testify that there is no Ilah (god) but Allah (the God)
  and I testify that Mohammed is the Messenger of Allah. Pronouncing
  this formula would make the Jew a Moslem. Some writers are surprised
  to see a Jew ordering a Moslem to be flogged; but the former was rich
  and the latter was poor. Even during the worst days of Jewish
  persecutions their money-bags were heavy enough to lighten the greater
  part, if not the whole of their disabilities. And the Moslem saying
  is, The Jew is never your (Moslem or Christian) equal: he must be
  either above you or below you. This is high, because unintentional
  praise of the (self-) Chosen People.

Footnote 207:

  He understands by the “two words” (Kalmatáni) the Moslem’s double
  profession of belief; and Khalifah’s reply embodies the popular idea
  that the number of Moslems (who will be saved) is preordained and that
  no art of man can add to it or take from it.

Footnote 208:

  Arab. Mamarr al-Tujjár (passing-place of the traders) which Lane
  renders “A chamber within the place through which the merchants
  passed.” At the end of the tale (Night dcccxlv.) we find him living in
  a Khan and the Bresl. Edit. (see my terminal note) makes him dwell in
  a magazine (_i.e._ ground-floor store-room) of a ruined Khan.

Footnote 209:

  The text is somewhat too concise and the meaning is that the fumes of
  the Hashish he had eaten (“his mind under the influence of hasheesh,”
  says Lane) suggested to him, etc.

Footnote 210:

  Arab. “Mamrak” either a simple aperture in ceiling or roof for light
  and air or a more complicated affair of lattice-work and plaster; it
  is often octagonal and crowned with a little dome. Lane calls it
  “Memrak,” after the debased Cairene pronunciation, and shows its base
  in his sketch of a Ka’áh (M. E. Introduction).

Footnote 211:

  Arab. “Kamar.” This is a practice especially amongst pilgrims. In
  Hindostan the girdle, usually a waist-shawl, is called Kammar-band our
  old “Cummerbund.” Easterns are too sensible not to protect the pit of
  the stomach, that great ganglionic centre, against sun, rain and wind,
  and now our soldiers in India wear flannel-belts on the march.

Footnote 212:

  Arab. “Fa-immá ’alayhá wa-immá bihá,” _i.e._ whether (luck go) against
  it or (luck go) with it.

Footnote 213:

  “O vilest of sinners!” alludes to the thief. “A general plunge into
  worldly pursuits and pleasures announced the end of the
  pilgrimage-ceremonies. All the devotees were now “whitewashed”—the
  book of their sins was a _tabula rasa_: too many of them lost no time
  in making a new departure down South and in opening a fresh account”
  (Pilgrimage iii. 365). I have noticed that my servant at Jeddah would
  carry a bottle of Raki, uncovered by a napkin, through the main
  streets.

Footnote 214:

  The copper cucurbites in which Solomon imprisoned the rebellious
  Jinns, often alluded to in The Nights.

Footnote 215:

  _i.e._ Son of the Chase: it is prob. a corruption of the Persian
  Kurnas, a pimp, a cuckold, and introduced by way of chaff,
  intelligible only to a select few “fast men.”

Footnote 216:

  For the name see vol. i. 61, in the Tale of Ghánim bin ’Ayyúb where
  the Caliph’s concubine is also drugged by the Lady Zubaydah.

Footnote 217:

  We should say, “What is this?” etc. The lines have occurred before so
  I quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 218:

  Zubaydah, I have said, was the daughter of Ja’afar, son of the Caliph
  al-Mansur, second Abbaside. The story-teller persistently calls her
  daughter of Al-Kásim for some reason of his own; and this he will
  repeat in Night dcccxxxix.

Footnote 219:

  Arab. “Shakhs,” a word which has travelled as far as Hindostan.

Footnote 220:

  Arab. “Shamlah” described in dictionaries, as a cloak covering the
  whole body. For Hizám (girdle) the Bresl. Edit. reads “Hirám” vulg.
  “Ehrám,” the waistcloth, the Pilgrim’s attire.

Footnote 221:

  He is described by Al-Siyúti (p. 309) as “very fair, tall, handsome
  and of captivating appearance.”

Footnote 222:

  Arab. “Uzn al-Kuffah” lit. “Ear of the basket,” which vulgar Egyptian
  pronounce “Wizn,” so “Wajh” (face) becomes “Wishsh” and so forth.

Footnote 223:

  Arab. Bi-fardayn = with two baskets, lit. “two singles,” but the
  context shows what is meant. English Frail and French _Fraile_ are
  from Arab. “Farsalah” a parcel (now esp. of coffee-beans) evidently
  derived from the low Lat. “Parcella” (Du Cange, Paris, Firmin Didot,
  1845). Compare “ream,” vol. v. 109.

Footnote 224:

  Arab. Sátúr, a kind of chopper which here would be used for the
  purpose of splitting and cleaning and scaling the fish.

Footnote 225:

  And, consequently, that the prayer he is about to make will find ready
  acceptance.

Footnote 226:

  Arab. “Ruh bilá Fuzúl” (lit. excess, exceeding) still a popular
  phrase.

Footnote 227:

  _i.e._ better give the fish than have my head broken.

Footnote 228:

  Said ironicè, a favourite figure of speech with the Fellah: the day
  began badly and threatened to end unluckily.

Footnote 229:

  The penalty of Theft. See vol. i. 274.

Footnote 230:

  This is the model of a courtly compliment; and it would still be
  admired wherever Arabs are not “frankified.”

Footnote 231:

  Arab. “Shibábah;” Lane makes it a kind of reed-flageolet.

Footnote 232:

  These lines occur in vol. i. 76; I quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 233:

  The instinctive way of juggling with Heaven like our sanding the sugar
  and going to church.

Footnote 234:

  Arab. “Yá Shukayr,” from Shakar, being red (clay etc.): Shukár is an
  anemone or a tulip and Shukayr is its dim. form. Lane’s Shaykh made it
  a dim. of “Ashkar” = tawny, ruddy (of complexion), so the former
  writes, “O Shukeyr.” Mr. Payne prefers “O Rosy cheeks.”

Footnote 235:

  For “Sandal,” see vol. ii. 50. Sandalí properly means an Eunuch clean
  _rasé_, but here Sandal is a P.N. = Sandal-wood.

Footnote 236:

  Arab. “Yá mumátil,” one who retards payment.

Footnote 237:

  Arab. “Kirsh al-Nukhál” = Guts of bran, a term little fitted for the
  handsome and distinguished Persian. But Khalifah is a
  Fellah-_grazioso_ of normal assurance shrewd withal; he blunders like
  an Irishman of the last generation and he uses the first epithet that
  comes to his tongue. See Night dcccxliii. for the sudden change in
  Khalifah.

Footnote 238:

  So the Persian “May your shadow never be less” means, I have said, the
  shadow which you throw over your servant. Shade, cold water and fresh
  breezes are the joys of life in arid Arabia.

Footnote 239:

  When a Fellah demanded money due to him by the Government of Egypt, he
  was at once imprisoned for arrears of taxes and thus prevented from
  being troublesome. I am told that matters have improved under English
  rule, but I “doubt the fact.”

Footnote 240:

  This freak is of course not historical. The tale-teller introduces it
  to enhance the grandeur and majesty of Harun al-Rashid, and the vulgar
  would regard it as a right kingly diversion. Westerns only wonder that
  such things could be.

Footnote 241:

  Uncle of the Prophet: for his death see Pilgrimage ii. 248.

Footnote 242:

  First cousin of the Prophet, son of Abú Tálib, a brother of Al-Abbás
  from whom the Abbasides claimed descent.

Footnote 243:

  _i.e._ I hope thou hast or Allah grant thou have good tidings to tell
  me.

Footnote 244:

  Arab. “Nákhúzah Zulayt.” The former, from the Persian Nákhodá or
  ship-captain which is also used in a playful sense “a godless wight,”
  one owning no (ná) God (Khudá). Zulayt = a low fellow, blackguard.

Footnote 245:

  Yásamín and Narjis, names of slave-girls or eunuchs.

Footnote 246:

  Arab. Tamar-hanná, the cheapest of dyes used ever by the poorest
  classes. Its smell, I have said, is that of newly mown hay, and is
  prized like that of the tea-rose.

Footnote 247:

  The formula (meaning, “What has he to do here?”) is by no means
  complimentary.

Footnote 248:

  Arab. “Jarrah” (pron. “Garrah”) a “jar.” See Lane (M. E. chapt. v.)
  who was deservedly reproached by Baron von Hammer for his superficial
  notices. The “Jarrah” is of pottery, whereas the “Dist” is a large
  copper chauldron and the Khalkínah one of lesser size.

Footnote 249:

  _i.e._ What a bother thou art, etc.

Footnote 250:

  This sudden transformation, which to us seems exaggerated and
  unnatural, appears in many Eastern stories and in the biographies of
  their distinguished men, especially students. A youth cannot master
  his lessons; he sees a spider climbing a slippery wall and after
  repeated falls succeeding. Allah opens the eyes of his mind, his
  studies become easy to him, and he ends with being an Allámah
  (doctissimus).

Footnote 251:

  Arab. “Bismillah, Námí!” here it is not a blessing but a simple
  invitation, “Now please go to sleep.”

Footnote 252:

  The modern inkcase of the Universal East is a lineal descendant of the
  wooden palette with writing reeds. See an illustration of that of
  “Amásis, the good god and lord of the two lands” (circ. B.C. 1350) in
  British Museum (p. 41, “The Dwellers on the Nile,” by E. A. Wallis
  Bridge, London, 56, Paternoster Row, 1885).

Footnote 253:

  This is not ironical, as Lane and Payne suppose, but a specimen of
  inverted speech—Thou art in luck this time!

Footnote 254:

  Arab. Marhúb = terrible: Lane reads Mar’úb = terrified. But the former
  may also mean, threatened with something terrible.

Footnote 255:

  _i.e._ in Kut al-Kulúb.

Footnote 256:

  Lit. to the son of thy paternal uncle, _i.e._ Mohammed.

Footnote 257:

  In the text he tells the whole story beginning with the eunuch and the
  hundred dinars, the chest, etc.; but—“of no avail is a twice-told
  tale.”

Footnote 258:

  Koran xxxix. 54. I have quoted Mr. Rodwell who affects the Arabic
  formula, omitting the normal copulatives.

Footnote 259:

  Easterns find it far easier to “get the chill of poverty out of their
  bones” than Westerns.

Footnote 260:

  Arab. “Dar al-Na’ím.” Name of one of the seven stages of the Moslem
  heaven. This style of inscription dates from the days of the
  hieroglyphs. A papyrus describing the happy town of Raamses ends with
  these lines:—

            Daily is there a supply of food:
            Within it gladness doth ever brood

                   *       *       *       *       *

            Prolonged, increased; abides there Joy, etc., etc.

Footnote 261:

  Arab. Ansár = auxiliaries, the men of Al-Medinah (Pilgrimage ii. 130,
  etc.).

Footnote 262:

  Arab. Asháb = the companions of the Prophet who may number 500
  (Pilgrimage ii. 81, etc.).

                  *       *       *       *       *

  NOTE. I have followed the example of Mr. Payne and have translated
  in its entirety the Tale of Khalifah the Fisherman from the Breslau
  Edit. (Vol. iv. pp. 315–365, Night cccxxi-cccxxxii.) in preference
  to the unsatisfactory process of amalgamating it with that of the
  Mac. Edit. given above.




                    KHALIF THE FISHERMAN OF BAGHDAD.


There was once, in days of yore and in ages and times long gone before,
in the city of Baghdad, a fisherman, by name Khalíf, a man of muckle
talk and little luck. One day, as he sat in his cell,[263] he bethought
himself and said, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great! Would Heaven I knew what is my offence
in the sight of my Lord and what caused the blackness of my fortune and
my littleness of luck among the fishermen, albeit (and I say it who
should not) in the city of Baghdad there is never a fisherman like
myself.” Now he lodged in a ruined place called a Khan, to wit, an
inn,[264] without a door, and when he went forth to fish, he would
shoulder the net, without basket or fish-slicers,[265] and when the folk
would stare at him and say to him, “O Khalif, why not take with thee a
basket, to hold the fish thou catchest?”; he would reply, “Even as I
carry it forth empty, so would it come back, for I never manage to catch
aught.” One night he arose, in the darkness before dawn, and taking his
net on his shoulder, raised his eyes to heaven and said, “Allah mine, O
Thou who subjectedst the sea to Moses son of Imrán, give me this day my
daily bread, for Thou art the best of bread-givers!” Then he went down
to the Tigris and spreading his net, cast it into the river and waited
till it had settled down, when he haled it in and drew it ashore, but
behold, it held naught save a dead dog. So he cast away the carcase,
saying, “O morning of ill doom! What a handsel is this dead hound, after
I had rejoiced in its weight[266]!” Then he mended the rents in the net,
saying, “Needs must there after this carrion be fish in plenty,
attracted by the smell,” and made a second cast. After awhile, he drew
up and found in the net the hough[267] of a camel, that had caught in
the meshes and rent them right and left. When Khalif saw his net in this
state, he wept and said, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might save
in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! I wonder what is my offence and the
cause of the blackness of my fortune and the littleness of my luck, of
all folk, so that I catch neither cat-fish nor sprat,[268] that I may
broil on the embers and eat, for all I dare say there is not in the city
of Baghdad a fisherman like me.” Then with a Bismillah he cast his net a
third time, and presently drawing it ashore found therein an ape scurvy
and one-eyed, mangy, and limping hending an ivory rod in forehand. When
Khalif saw this, he said, “This is indeed a blessed opening! What art
thou, O ape?” “Dost thou not know me?” “No, by Allah, I have no
knowledge of thee!” “I am thine ape!” “What use is there in thee, O my
ape?” “Every day I give thee good-morrow, so Allah may not open to thee
the door of daily bread.” “Thou failest not of this, O one-eye[269] of
ill-omen! May Allah never bless thee! Needs must I pluck out thy sound
eye and cut off thy whole leg, so thou mayst become a blind cripple and
I be quit of thee! But what is the use of that rod thou hendest in
hand?” “O Khalif, I scare the fish therewith, so they may not enter thy
net.” “Is it so?: then this very day will I punish thee with a grievous
punishment and devise thee all manner torments and strip thy flesh from
thy bones and be at rest from thee, sorry bit of goods that thou art!”
So saying, Khalif the Fisherman unwound from his middle a strand of rope
and binding him to a tree by his side, said, “Lookee, O dog of an ape! I
mean to cast the net again and if aught come up therein, well and good;
but, if it come up empty, I will verily and assuredly make an end of
thee, with the cruellest tortures and be quit of thee, thou stinking
lot.” So he cast the net and drawing it ashore, found in it another ape
and said, “Glory be to God the Great! I was wont to pull naught but fish
out of this Tigris, but now it yieldeth nothing but apes.” Then he
looked at the second ape and saw him fair of form and round of face with
pendants of gold in his ears and a blue waistcloth about his middle, and
he was like unto a lighted taper. So he asked him, “What art thou, thou
also, O ape?”; and he answered, saying, “O Khalif, I am the ape of Abú
al-Sa’ádát the Jew, the Caliph’s shroff. Every day, I give Him
good-morrow, and he maketh a profit of ten gold pieces.” Cried the
Fisherman, “By Allah, thou art a fine ape, not like this ill-omened
monkey o’ mine!” So saying, he took a stick[270] and came down upon the
sides of the ape, till he broke his ribs and he jumped up and down. And
the other ape, the handsome one, answered him, saying, “O Khalif, what
will it profit thee to beat him, though thou belabour him till he die?”
Khalif replied, “How shall I do? Shall I let him wend his ways that he
may scare me the fish with his hang-dog face and give me good-even and
good-morrow every day, so Allah may not open to me the door of daily
bread? Nay, I will kill him and be quit of him and I will take thee in
his stead; so shalt thou give me good-morrow and I shall gain ten golden
dinars a day.” Thereupon the comely ape made answer, “I will tell thee a
better way than that, and if thou hearken to me, thou shalt be at rest
and I will become thine ape in lieu of him.” Asked the Fisherman, “And
what dost thou counsel me?”; and the ape answered, saying, “Cast thy net
and thou shalt bring up a noble fish, never saw any its like, and I will
tell thee how thou shalt do with it.” Replied Khalif, “Lookee, thou too!
An I throw my net and there come up therein a third ape, be assured that
I will cut the three of you into six bits.” And the second ape rejoined,
“So be it, O Khalif. I agree to this thy condition.” Then Khalif spread
the net and cast it and drew it up, when behold, in it was a fine young
barbel[271] with a round head, as it were a milking-pail, which when he
saw, his wits fled for joy and he said, “Glory be to God! What is this
noble creature? Were yonder apes in the river, I had not brought up this
fish.” Quoth the seemly ape, “O Khalif, an thou give ear to my rede,
’twill bring thee good fortune”; and quoth the Fisherman, “May God damn
him who would gainsay thee henceforth!” Thereupon the ape said, “O
Khalif, take some grass and lay the fish thereon in the basket[272] and
cover it with more grass and take also somewhat of basil[273] from the
greengrocer’s and set it in the fish’s mouth. Cover it with a kerchief
and push thee through the bazar of Baghdad. Whoever bespeaketh thee of
selling it, sell it not but fare on, till thou come to the market street
of the jewellers and money-changers. Then count five shops on the
right-hand side and the sixth shop is that of Abu al-Sa’adat the Jew,
the Caliph’s Shroff. When thou standest before him, he will say to thee,
What seekest thou?; and do thou make answer, I am a fisher-wight, I
threw my net in thy name and took this noble barbel, which I have
brought thee as a present. If he give thee aught of silver, take it not,
be it little or mickle, for it will spoil that which thou wouldst do,
but say to him, I want of thee naught save one word, that thou say to
me, I sell thee my ape for thine ape and my luck for thy luck. An the
Jew say this, give him the fish and I shall become thine ape and this
crippled, mangy and one-eyed ape will be his ape.” Khalif replied, “Well
said, O ape,” nor did he cease faring Baghdad-wards and observing that
which the ape had said to him, till he came to the Jew’s shop and saw
the Shroff seated, with eunuchs and pages about him, bidding and
forbidding and giving and taking. So he set down his basket, saying, “O
Sultan of the Jews, I am a fisher-wight and went forth to-day to the
Tigris and casting my net in thy name, cried:—This is for the luck of
Abu al-Sa’adat; and there came up to me this Banni which I have brought
thee by way of present.” Then he lifted the grass and discovered the
fish to the Jew, who marvelled at its make and said, “Extolled be the
perfection of the Most Excellent Creator!” Then he gave the fisherman a
dinar, but he refused it and he gave him two. This also he refused and
the Jew stayed not adding to his offer, till he made it ten dinars; but
he still refused and Abu al-Sa’adat said to him, “By Allah, thou art a
greedy one. Tell me what thou wouldst have, O Moslem!” Quoth Khalif, “I
would have of thee but a single word.[274]” When the Jew heard this, he
changed colour and said, “Wouldst thou oust me from my faith? Wend thy
ways;” and Khalif said to him, “By Allah, O Jew, naught mattereth an
thou become a Moslem or a Nazarene!” Asked the Jew, “Then what wouldst
thou have me say?”; and the fisherman answered, “Say, I sell thee my ape
for thy ape and my luck for thy luck.” The Jew laughed, deeming him
little of wit, and said by way of jest, “I sell thee my ape for thy ape
and my luck for thy luck. Bear witness against him, O merchants! By
Allah, O unhappy, thou art debarred from further claim on me!” So Khalif
turned back, blaming himself and saying, “There is no Majesty and there
is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! Alas that I did not
take the gold!” and fared on blaming himself in the matter of the money
till he came to the Tigris, but found not the two apes, whereupon he
wept and slapped his face and strewed dust on his head, saying, “But
that the second ape wheedled me and put a cheat on me, the one-eyed ape
had not escaped.” And he gave not over wailing and weeping, till heat
and hunger grew sore on him: so he took the net, saying, “Come, let us
make a cast, trusting in Allah’s blessing; belike I may catch a cat-fish
or a barbel which I may boil and eat.” So he threw the net and waiting
till it had settled, drew it ashore and found it full of fish, whereat
he was consoled and rejoiced and busied himself with unmeshing the fish
and casting them on the earth. Presently, up came a woman seeking fish
and crying out, “Fish is not to be found in the town.” She caught sight
of Khalif, and said to him, “Wilt thou sell this fish, O Master?”
Answered Khalif, “I am going to turn it into clothes, ’tis all for sale,
even to my beard.[275] Take what thou wilt.” So she gave him a dinar and
he filled her basket. Then she went away and behold, up came another
servant, seeking a dinar’s worth of fish; nor did the folk cease till it
was the hour of mid-afternoon prayer and Khalif had sold ten golden
dinars’ worth of fish. Then, being faint and famisht, he folded and
shouldered his net and, repairing to the market, bought himself a
woollen gown, a calotte with a plaited boarder and a honey-coloured
turband for a dinar, receiving two dirhams by way of change, wherewith
he purchased fried cheese and a fat sheep’s tail and honey and setting
them in the oilman’s platter, ate till he was full and his ribs felt
cold[276] from the mighty stuffing. Then he marched off to his lodgings
in the magazine, clad in the gown and the honey-coloured turband and
with the nine golden dinars in his mouth, rejoicing in what he had never
in his life seen. He entered and lay down, but could not sleep for
anxious thoughts and abode playing with the money half the night. Then
said he in himself, “Haply the Caliph may hear that I have gold and say
to Ja’afar:—Go to Khalif the Fisherman and borrow us some money of him.
If I give it him, it will be no light matter to me, and if I give it
not, he will torment me; but torture is easier to me than the giving up
of the cash.[277] However, I will arise and make trial of myself if I
have a skin proof against stick or not.” So he put off his clothes and
taking a sailor’s plaited whip, of an hundred and sixty strands, ceased
not beating himself, till his sides and body were all bloody, crying out
at every stroke he dealt himself and saying “O Moslems! I am a poor man!
O Moslems, I am a poor man! O Moslems, whence should I have gold, whence
should I have coin?” till the neighbours, who dwelt with him in that
place, hearing him crying and saying, “Go to men of wealth and take of
them,” thought that thieves were torturing him, to get money from him,
and that he was praying for aidance. Accordingly they flocked to him
each armed with some weapon and finding the door of his lodging locked
and hearing him roaring out for help, deemed that the thieves had come
down upon him from the terrace-roof; so they fell upon the door and
burst it open. Then they entered and found him mother-naked and
bareheaded with body dripping blood, and altogether in a sad pickle; so
they asked him, “What is this case in which we find thee? Hast thou lost
thy wits and hath Jinn-madness betided thee this night?” And he answered
them, “Nay; but I have gold with me and I feared lest the Caliph send to
borrow of me and it were no light matter to give him aught; yet, an I
gave not to him ’tis only too sure that he would put me to the torture;
wherefore I arose to see if my skin were stick-proof or not.” When they
heard these words they said to him, “May Allah not assain thy body,
unlucky madman that thou art! Of a surety thou art fallen mad to-night!
Lie down to sleep, may Allah never bless thee! How many thousand dinars
hast thou, that the Caliph should come and borrow of thee?” He replied,
“By Allah, I have naught but nine dinars.” And they all said, “By Allah,
he is not otherwise than passing rich!” Then they left him wondering at
his want of wit, and Khalif took his cash and wrapped it in a rag,
saying to himself, “Where shall I hide all this gold? An I bury it, they
will take it, and if I put it out on deposit, they will deny that I did
so, and if I carry it on my head,[278] they will snatch it, and if I tie
it to my sleeve, they will cut it away.” Presently, he espied a little
breast-pocket in the gown and said, “By Allah, this is fine! ’Tis under
my throat and hard by my mouth: if any put out his hand to hend it, I
can come down on it with my mouth and hide it in my throttle.” So he set
the rag containing the gold in the pocket and lay down, but slept not
that night for suspicion and trouble and anxious thought. On the morrow,
he fared forth of his lodging on fishing intent and, betaking himself to
the river, went down into the water, up to his knees. Then he threw the
net and shook it with might and main; whereupon the purse fell down into
the stream. So he tore off gown and turband and plunged in after it,
saying, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great!” Nor did he give over diving and searching the
stream-bed, till the day was half spent, but found not the purse. Now
one saw him from afar diving and plunging and his gown and turband lying
in the sun at a distance from him, with no one by them; so he watched
him, till he dived again when he dashed at the clothes and made off with
them. Presently, Khalif came ashore and, missing his gown and turband,
was chagrined for their loss with passing cark and care and ascended a
mound, to look for some passer-by, of whom he might enquire concerning
them, but found none. Now the Caliph Harun al-Rashid had gone a-hunting
and chasing that day; and, returning at the time of the noon heat, was
oppressed thereby and thirsted; so he looked for water from afar and
seeing a naked man standing on the mound said to Ja’afar, “Seest thou
what I see?” Replied the Wazir, “Yes, O Commander of the Faithful; I see
a man standing on a hillock.” Al-Rashid asked, “What is he?”; and
Ja’afar answered, “Haply he is the guardian of a cucumber-plot.” Quoth
the Caliph, “Perhaps he is a pious man[279]; I would fain go to him,
alone, and desire of him his prayers; and abide ye where you are.” So he
went up to Khalif and saluting him with the salam said to him, “What art
thou, O man?” Replied the fisherman, “Dost thou not know me? I am Khalif
the Fisherman;” and the Caliph rejoined, “What? The fisherman with the
woollen gown and the honey-coloured turband[280]?” When Khalif heard him
name the clothes he had lost, he said in himself, “This is he who took
my duds: belike he did but jest with me.” So he came down from the knoll
and said, “Can I not take a noon-tide nap[281] but thou must trick me
this trick? I saw thee take my gear and knew that thou wast joking with
me.” At this, laughter got the better of the Caliph and he said, “What
clothes hast thou lost? I know nothing of that whereof thou speakest, O
Khalif.” Cried the Fisherman, “By God the Great, except thou bring me
back the gear, I will smash thy ribs with this staff!” (For he always
carried a quarterstaff.) Quoth the Caliph, “By Allah, I have not seen
the things whereof thou speakest!”; and quoth Khalif, “I will go with
thee and take note of thy dwelling-place and complain of thee to the
Chief of Police, so thou mayst not trick me this trick again. By Allah,
none took my gown and turband but thou, and except thou give them back
to me at once, I will throw thee off the back of that she-ass thou
ridest and come down on thy pate with this quarterstaff, till thou canst
not stir!” Thereupon he tugged at the bridle of the mule so that she
reared up on her hind legs and the Caliph said to himself, “What
calamity is this I have fallen into with this madman?” Then he pulled
off a gown he had on, worth an hundred dinars, and said to Khalif, “Take
this gown in lieu of thine own.” He took it and donning it saw it was
too long; so he cut it short at the knees and turbanded his head with
the cut-off piece; then said to the Caliph, “What art thou and what is
thy craft? But why ask? Thou art none other than a trumpeter.” Al-Rashid
asked, “What showed thee that I was a trumpeter by trade?”; and Khalif
answered, “Thy big nostrils and little mouth.” Cried the Caliph, “Well
guessed! Yes, I am of that craft.” Then said Khalif, “An thou wilt
hearken to me, I will teach thee the art of fishing: ’twill be better
for thee than trumpeting and thou wilt eat lawfully[282].” Replied the
Caliph, “Teach it me so that I may see whether I am capable of learning
it.” And Khalif said, “Come with me, O trumpeter.” So the Caliph
followed him down to the river and took the net from him, whilst he
taught him how to throw it. Then he cast it and drew it up, when,
behold, it was heavy, and the fisherman said, “O trumpeter, an the net
be caught on one of the rocks, drag it not too hard, or ’twill break and
by Allah, I will take thy she-ass in payment thereof!” The Caliph
laughed at his words and drew up the net, little by little, till he
brought it ashore and found it full of fish; which when Khalif saw, his
reason fled for joy and presently he cried, “By Allah, O trumpeter, thy
luck is good in fishing! Never in my life will I part with thee! But now
I mean to send thee to the fish-bazar, where do thou enquire for the
shop of Humayd the fisherman and say to him:—My master Khalif saluteth
thee and biddeth thee send him a pair of frails and a knife, so he may
bring thee more fish than yesterday. Run and return to me forthright!”
The Caliph replied (and indeed he was laughing), “On my head, O master!”
and, mounting his mule, rode back to Ja’afar, who said to him, “Tell me
what hath betided thee.” So the Caliph told him all that had passed
between Khalif the Fisherman and himself, from first to last, adding, “I
left him awaiting my return to him with the baskets and I am resolved
that he shall teach me how to scale fish and clean them.” Quoth Ja’afar,
“And I will go with thee to sweep up the scales and clean out the shop.”
And the affair abode thus, till presently the Caliph cried, “O Ja’afar,
I desire of thee that thou despatch the young Mamelukes, saying to
them:—Whoso bringeth me a fish from before yonder fisherman, I will give
him a dinar; for I love to eat of my own fishing.” Accordingly Ja’afar
repeated to the young white slaves what the Caliph had said and directed
them where to find the man. They came down upon Khalif and snatched the
fish from him; and when he saw them and noted their goodliness, he
doubted not but that they were of the black-eyed Houris of Paradise: so
he caught up a couple of fish and ran into the river, saying, “O Allah
mine, by the secret virtue of these fish, forgive me!” Suddenly, up came
the chief eunuch, questing fish, but he found none; so seeing Khalif
ducking and rising in the water, with the two fish in his hands, called
out to him, saying, “O Khalif, what hast thou there?” Replied the
fisherman, “Two fish,” and the eunuch said, “Give them to me and take an
hundred dinars for them.” Now when Khalif heard speak of an hundred
dinars, he came up out of the water and cried, “Hand over the hundred
dinars.” Said the eunuch, “Follow me to the house of Al-Rashid and
receive thy gold, O Khalif;” and, taking the fish, made off to the
Palace of the Caliphate. Meanwhile Khalif betook himself to Baghdad,
clad as he was in the Caliph’s gown, which reached only to above his
knees,[283] turbanded with the piece he had cut off therefrom and girt
about his middle with a rope, and he pushed through the centre of the
city. The folk fell a-laughing and marvelling at him and saying, “Whence
hadst thou that robe of honour?” But he went on, asking, “Where is the
house of Al-Rashád[284]?;” and they answered, “Say, ‘The house of
Al-Rashíd’;” and he rejoined, “’Tis all the same,” and fared on, till he
came to the Palace of the Caliphate. Now he was seen by the tailor, who
had made the gown and who was standing at the door, and when he noticed
it upon the Fisherman, he said to him, “For how many years hast thou had
admission to the palace?” Khalif replied, “Ever since I was a little
one;” and the tailor asked, “Whence hadest thou that gown thou hast
spoilt on this wise?” Khalif answered, “I had it of my apprentice the
trumpeter.” Then he went up to the door, where he found the Chief Eunuch
sitting with the two fishes by his side: and seeing him sable-black of
hue, said to him, “Wilt thou not bring the hundred dinars, O uncle
Tulip?” Quoth he, “On my head, O Khalif,” when, behold, out came Ja’afar
from the presence of the Caliph and seeing the fisherman talking with
the Eunuch and saying to him, “This is the reward of goodness, O nuncle
Tulip,” went in to Al-Rashid and said to him, “O Commander of the
Faithful, thy master the Fisherman is with the Chief Eunuch, dunning him
for an hundred dinars.” Cried the Caliph, “Bring him to me, O Ja’afar;”
and the Minister answered, “Hearing and obeying.” So he went out to the
Fisherman and said to him, “O Khalif, thine apprentice the trumpeter
biddeth thee to him;” then he walked on, followed by the other till they
reached the presence-chamber, where he saw the Caliph seated, with a
canopy over his head. When he entered, Al-Rashid wrote three scrolls and
set them before him, and the Fisherman said to him, “So thou hast given
up trumpeting and turned astrologer!” Quoth the Caliph to him, “Take
thee a scroll.” Now in the first he had written, “Let him be given a
gold piece,” in the second, “An hundred dinars,” and in the third, “Let
him be given an hundred blows with a whip.” So Khalif put out his hand
and by the decree of the Predestinator, it lighted on the scroll wherein
was written, “Let him receive an hundred lashes,” and Kings, whenas they
ordain aught, go not back therefrom. So they threw him prone on the
ground and beat him an hundred blows, whilst he wept and roared for
succour, but none succoured him, and said, “By Allah, this is a good
joke O trumpeter! I teach thee fishing and thou turnest astrologer and
drawest me an unlucky lot. Fie upon thee,[285] in thee is naught of
good!” When the Caliph heard his speech, he fell fainting in a fit of
laughter and said, “O Khalif, no harm shall betide thee: fear not. Give
him an hundred gold pieces.” So they gave him an hundred dinars, and he
went out, and ceased not faring forth till he came to the trunk-market,
where he found the folk assembled in a ring about a broker, who was
crying out and saying, “At an hundred dinars, less one dinar! A locked
chest!” So he pressed on and pushed through the crowd and said to the
broker, “Mine for an hundred dinars!” The broker closed with him and
took his money, whereupon there was left him nor little nor much. The
porters disputed awhile about who should carry the chest and presently
all said, “By Allah, none shall carry this chest but Zurayk!”[286] And
the folk said, “Blue-eyes hath the best right to it.” So Zurayk
shouldered the chest, after the goodliest fashion, and walked a-rear of
Khalif. As they went along, the Fisherman said in himself, “I have
nothing left to give the porter; how shall I rid myself of him? Now I
will traverse the main streets with him and lead him about, till he be
weary and set it down and leave it, when I will take it up and carry it
to my lodging.” Accordingly, he went round about the city with the
porter from noon-tide to sundown, till the man began to grumble and
said, “O my lord, where is thy house?” Quoth Khalif, “Yesterday I knew
it, but to-day I have forgotten it.” And the porter said, “Give me my
hire and take thy chest.” But Khalif said, “Go on at thy leisure, till I
bethink me where my house is,” presently adding, “O Zurayk, I have no
money with me. ’Tis all in my house and I have forgotten where it is.”
As they were talking, there passed by them one who knew the Fisherman
and said to him, “O Khalif, what bringeth thee hither?” Quoth the
porter, “O uncle, where is Khalif’s house?” and quoth he, “’Tis in the
ruined Khan in the Rawásín Quarter.”[287] Then said Zurayk to Khalif,
“Go to; would Heaven thou hadst never lived nor been!” And the Fisherman
trudged on, followed by the porter, till they came to the place when the
Hammal said, “O thou whose daily bread Allah cut off in this world, have
we not passed this place a score of times? Hadst thou said to me, ’Tis
in such a stead, thou hadst spared me this great toil; but now give me
my wage and let me wend my way.” Khalif replied, “Thou shalt have
silver, if not gold. Stay here, till I bring thee the same.” So he
entered his lodging and taking a mallet he had there, studded with forty
nails (wherewith an he smote a camel, he had made an end of it), rushed
upon the porter and raised his forearm to strike him therewith; but
Zurayk cried out at him, saying, “Hold thy hand! I have no claim on
thee,” and fled. Now having got rid of the Hammal, Khalif carried the
chest into the Khan, whereupon the neighbours came down and flocked
about him, saying, “O Khalif, whence hadst thou this robe and this
chest?” Quoth he, “From my apprentice Al-Rashid who gave them to me,”
and they said, “The pimp is mad! Al-Rashid will assuredly hear of his
talk and hang him over the door of his lodging and hang all in the Khan
on account of the droll. This is a fine farce!” Then they helped him to
carry the chest into his lodging and it filled the whole closet.[288]
Thus far concerning Khalif; but as for the history of the chest, it was
as follows: The Caliph had a Turkish slave-girl, by name Kut al-Kulúb,
whom he loved with love exceeding and the Lady Zubaydah came to know of
this from himself and was passing jealous of her and secretly plotted
mischief against her. So, whilst the Commander of the Faithful was
absent a-sporting and a-hunting, she sent for Kut al-Kulub and, inviting
her to a banquet, set before her meat and wine, and she ate and drank.
Now the wine was drugged with Bhang; so she slept and Zubaydah sent for
her Chief Eunuch and putting her in a great chest, locked it and gave it
to him, saying, “Take this chest and cast it into the river.” Thereupon
he took it up before him on a he-mule and set out with it for the sea,
but found it unfit to carry; so, as he passed by the trunk-market, he
saw the Shaykh of the brokers and salesmen and said to him, “Wilt thou
sell me this chest, O uncle?” The broker replied, “Yes, we will do this
much.” “But,” said the Eunuch, “look thou sell it not except locked;”
and the other, “’Tis well; we will do that also.”[289] So he set down
the chest, and they cried it for sale, saying, “Who will buy this chest
for an hundred dinars?”; and behold, up came Khalif the Fisherman and
bought the chest after turning it over right and left; and there passed
between him and the porter that which hath been before set out. Now as
regards Khalif the Fisherman; he lay down on the chest to sleep, and
presently Kut al-Kulub awoke from her Bhang and finding herself in the
chest, cried out and said, “Alas!” Whereupon Khalif sprang off the
chest-lid and cried out and said, “Ho, Moslems! Come to my help! There
are Ifrits in the chest.” So the neighbours awoke from sleep and said to
him, “What mattereth thee, O madman?” Quoth he, “The chest is full of
Ifrits;” and quoth they, “Go to sleep; thou hast troubled our rest this
night, may Allah not bless thee! Go in and sleep, without madness.” He
ejaculated, “I cannot sleep;” but they abused him and he went in and lay
down once more. And behold, Kut al-Kulub spoke and said, “Where am I?”
Upon which Khalif fled forth the closet and said, “O neighbours of the
hostelry, come to my aid!” Quoth they, “What hath befallen thee? Thou
troublest the neighbours’ rest.” “O folk, there be Ifrits in the chest,
moving and speaking.” “Thou liest: what do they say?” “They say, Where
am I?” “Would Heaven thou wert in Hell? Thou disturbest the neighbours
and hinderest them of sleep. Go to sleep, would thou hadst never lived
nor been!” So Khalif went in fearful because he had no place wherein to
sleep save upon the chest-lid when lo! as he stood, with ears listening
for speech, Kut al-Kulub spake again and said, “I’m hungry.” So in sore
affright he fled forth and cried out, “Ho neighbours! ho dwellers in the
Khan, come aid me!” Said they, “What is thy calamity now?”[290] And he
answered, “The Ifrits in the chest say, We are hungry.” Quoth the
neighbours one to other, “’Twould seem Khalif is hungry; let us feed him
and give him the supper-orts; else he will not let us sleep to-night.”
So they brought him bread and meat and broken victuals and radishes and
gave him a basket full of all kinds of things, saying, “Eat till thou be
full and go to sleep and talk not, else will we break thy ribs and beat
thee to death this very night.” So he took the basket with the provaunt
and entered his lodging. Now it was a moonlight night and the moon shone
in full sheen upon the chest and lit up the closet with its light,
seeing this he sat down on his purchase and fell to eating of the food
with both hands. Presently Kut al-Kulub spake again and said, “Open to
me and have mercy upon me, O Moslems!” So Khalif arose and taking a
stone he had by him, broke the chest open and behold, therein lay a
young lady as she were the sun’s shining light with brow flower-white,
face moon-bright, cheeks of rose-hue exquisite and speech sweeter than
sugar-bite, and in dress worth a thousand dinars and more bedight.
Seeing this his wits flew from his head for joy and he said, “By Allah,
thou art of the fair!” She asked him, “What art thou, O fellow?” and he
answered, “O my lady, I am Khalif the Fisherman.” Quoth she, “Who
brought me hither?”; and quoth he, “I bought thee, and thou art my
slave-girl.” Thereupon said she, “I see on thee a robe of the raiment of
the Caliph.” So he told her all that had betided him, from first to
last, and how he had bought the chest; wherefore she knew that the Lady
Zubaydah had played her false; and she ceased not talking with him till
the morning, when she said to him, “O Khalif, seek me from some one
inkcase and reed-pen and paper and bring them to me.” So he found with
one of the neighbours what she sought and brought it to her, whereupon
she wrote a letter and folded it and gave it to him, saying, “O Khalif,
take this paper and carry it to the jewel-market, where do thou enquire
for the shop of Abu al-Hasan the jeweller and give it to him.” Answered
the Fisherman, “O my lady, this name is difficult to me; I cannot
remember it.” And she rejoined, “Then ask for the shop of Ibn
al-’Ukáb.”[291] Quoth he, “O my lady, what is an ’Ukab?”; and quoth she,
“’Tis a bird which folk carry on fist with eyes hooded.” And he
exclaimed, “O my lady, I know it.” Then he went forth from her and fared
on, repeating the name, lest it fade from his memory; but, by the time
he reached the jewel-market, he had forgotten it. So he accosted one of
the merchants and said to him, “Is there any here named after a bird?”
Replied the merchant, “Yes, thou meanest Ibn al-Ukab.” Khalif cried,
“That’s the man I want,” and making his way to him, gave him the letter,
which when he read and knew the purport thereof, he fell to kissing it
and laying it on his head; for it is said that Abu al-Hasan was the
agent of the Lady Kut al-Kulub and her intendant over all her property
in lands and houses. Now she had written to him, saying, “From Her
Highness the Lady Kut al-Kulub to Sir Abu al-Hasan the jeweller. The
instant this letter reacheth thee, set apart for us a saloon completely
equipped with furniture and vessels and negro-slaves and slave-girls and
what not else is needful for our residence and seemly, and take the
bearer of the missive and carry him to the bath. Then clothe him in
costly apparel and do with him thus and thus.” So he said “Hearing and
obeying,” and locking up his shop, took the Fisherman and bore him to
the bath, where he committed him to one of the bathmen, that he might
serve him, according to custom. Then he went forth to carry out the Lady
Kut al-Kulub’s orders. As for Khalif, he concluded, of his lack of wit
and stupidity, that the bath was a prison and said to the bathman, “What
crime have I committed that ye should lay me in limbo?” They laughed at
him and made him sit on the side of the tank, whilst the bathman took
hold of his legs, that he might shampoo them. Khalif thought he meant to
wrestle with him and said to himself, “This is a wrestling-place[292]
and I knew naught of it.” Then he arose and seizing the bathman’s legs,
lifted him up and threw him on the ground and broke his ribs. The man
cried out for help, whereupon the other bathmen came in a crowd and fell
upon Khalif and overcoming him by dint of numbers, delivered their
comrade from his clutches and tunded him till he came to himself. Then
they knew that the Fisherman was a simpleton and served him till Abu
al-Hasan came back with a dress of rich stuff and clad him therein;
after which he brought him a handsome she-mule, ready saddled, and
taking him by the hand, carried him forth of the bath and said to him,
“Mount.” Quoth he, “How shall I mount? I fear lest she throw me and
break my ribs into my belly.” Nor would he back the mule, save after
much travail and trouble, and they stinted not faring on, till they came
to the place which Abu al-Hasan had set apart for the Lady Kut al-Kulub.
Thereupon Khalif entered and found her sitting, with slaves and eunuchs
about her and the porter at the door, staff in hand, who when he saw the
Fisherman sprang up and kissing his hand, went before him, till he
brought him within the saloon. Here the Fisherman saw what amazed his
wit, and his eye was dazzled by that which he beheld of riches past
count and slaves and servants, who kissed his hand and said, “May the
bath be a blessing to thee!”[293] When he entered the saloon and drew
near unto Kut al-Kulub, she sprang up to him and taking him by the hand,
seated him on a high-mattressed divan. Then she brought him a vase of
sherbet of sugar, mingled with rose-water and willow-water, and he took
it and drank it off and left not a single drop. Moreover, he ran his
finger round the inside of the vessel[294] and would have licked it, but
she forbade him, saying, “That is foul.” Quoth he, “Silence; this is
naught but good honey;” and she laughed at him and set before him a tray
of meats, whereof he ate his sufficiency. Then they brought an ewer and
basin of gold, and he washed his right hand and abode in the gladdest of
life and the most honourable. Now hear what befel the Commander of the
Faithful. When he came back from his journey and found not Kut al-Kulub,
he questioned the Lady Zubaydah of her and she said, “She is verily
dead, may thy head live, O Prince of True Believers!” But she had bidden
dig a grave amiddlemost the Palace and had built over it a mock tomb,
for her knowledge of the love the Caliph bore to Kut al-Kulub: so she
said to him, “O Commander of the Faithful, I made her a tomb amiddlemost
the Palace and buried her there.” Then she donned black,[295] a mere
sham and pure pretence; and feigned mourning a great while. Now Kut
al-Kulub knew that the Caliph was come back from his hunting excursion;
so she turned to Khalif and said to him, “Arise; hie thee to the bath
and come back.” So he rose and went to the Hammam-bath, and when he
returned, she clad him in a dress worth a thousand dinars and taught him
manners and respectful bearing to superiors. Then said she to him, “Go
hence to the Caliph and say to him:—O Commander of the Faithful, ’tis my
desire that this night thou deign be my guest.” So Khalif arose and
mounting his she-mule, rode, with pages and black slaves before him,
till he came to the Palace of the Caliphate. Quoth the wise, “Dress up a
stick and ’twill look _chique_.”[296] And indeed his comeliness was
manifest and his goodliness and the folk marvelled at this. Presently,
the Chief Eunuch saw him, the same who had given him the hundred dinars
that had been the cause of his good fortune; so he went in to the Caliph
and said to him, “O Commander of the Faithful, Khalif the Fisherman is
become a King, and on him is a robe of honour worth a thousand dinars.”
The Prince of True Believers bade admit him; so he entered and said,
“Peace be with thee, O Commander of the Faithful and Vice-regent of the
Lord of the three Worlds and Defender of the folk of the Faith! Allah
Almighty prolong thy days and honour thy dominion and exalt thy degree
to the highmost height!” The Caliph looked at him and marvelled at him
and how fortune had come to him at unawares; then he said to him, “O
Khalif, whence hadst thou that robe which is upon thee?” He replied, “O
Commander of the Faithful, it cometh from my house.” Quoth the Caliph,
“Hast thou then a house?”; and quoth Khalif, “Yea, verily! and thou, O
Commander of the Faithful, art my guest this day.” Al-Rashid said, “I
alone, O Khalif, or I and those who are with me?”; and he replied, “Thou
and whom thou wilt.” So Ja’afar turned to him and said, “We will be thy
guests this night;” whereupon he kissed ground again and withdrawing,
mounted his mule and rode off, attended by his servants and suite of
Mamelukes leaving the Caliph marvelling at this and saying to Ja’afar,
“Sawest thou Khalif, with his mule and dress, his white slaves and his
dignity? But yesterday I knew him for a buffoon and a jester.” And they
marvelled at this much. Then they mounted and rode, till they drew near
Khalif’s house, when the Fisherman alighted and, taking a bundle from
one of his attendants, opened it and pulled out therefrom a piece of
tabby silk[297] and spread it under the hoofs of the Caliph’s she-mule;
then he brought out a piece of velvet-Kimcob[298] and a third of fine
satin and did with them likewise; and thus he spread well nigh twenty
pieces of rich stuffs, till Al-Rashid and his suite had reached the
house; when he came forward and said, “Bismillah,[299] O Commander of
the Faithful!” Quoth Al-Rashid to Ja’afar, “I wonder to whom this house
may belong,” and quoth he, “It belongeth to a man hight Ibn al-Ukab,
Syndic of the Jewellers.” So the Caliph dismounted and entering, with
his courtiers, saw a high-builded saloon, spacious and boon, with
couches on dais and carpets and divans strown in place. So he went up to
the couch that was set for himself on four legs of ivory, plated with
glittering gold and covered with seven carpets. This pleased him and
behold, up came Khalif, with eunuchs and little white slaves, bearing
all manner sherbets, compounded with sugar and lemon and perfumed with
rose and willow-water and the purest musk. The Fisherman advanced and
drank and gave the Caliph to drink, and the cup-bearers came forward and
served the rest of the company with the sherbets. Then Khalif brought a
table spread with meats of various colours and geese and fowls and other
birds, saying, “In the name of Allah!” So they ate their fill; after
which he bade remove the tables and kissing the ground three times
before the Caliph craved his royal leave to bring wine and music.[300]
He granted him permission for this and turning to Ja’afar, said to him,
“As my head liveth, the house and that which is therein is Khalif’s; for
that he is ruler over it and I am in admiration at him, whence there
came to him this passing prosperity and exceeding felicity! However,
this is no great matter to Him who saith to a thing, ‘Be!’ and it
becometh; what I most wonder at is his understanding, how it hath
increased, and whence he hath gotten this loftiness and this lordliness;
but, when Allah willeth weal unto a man, He amendeth his intelligence
before bringing him to worldly affluence.” As they were talking, behold,
up came Khalif, followed by cup-bearer lads like moons, belted with
zones of gold, who spread a cloth of siglaton[301] and set thereon
flagons of chinaware and tall flasks of glass and cups of crystal and
bottles and hanaps[302] of all colours; and those flagons they filled
with pure clear and old wine, whose scent was as the fragrance of virgin
musk and it was even as saith the poet:—

 Ply me and also my mate be plied ✿ With pure wine prest in the olden
    tide.[303]
 Daughter of nobles[304] they lead her forth[305] ✿ In raiment of goblets
    beautified.
 They belt her round with the brightest gems, ✿ And pearls and unions,
    the Ocean’s pride;
 So I by these signs and signets know ✿ Wherefore the Wine is entitled
    “Bride.”[306]

And round about these vessels were confections and flowers, such as may
not be surpassed. When Al-Rashid saw this from Khalif, he inclined to
him and smiled upon him and invested him with an office; so Khalif
wished him continuance of honour and endurance of days and said, “Will
the Commander of the Faithful deign give me leave to bring him a singer,
a lute-player her like was never heard among mortals ever?” Quoth the
Caliph, “Thou art permitted!” So he kissed ground before him and going
to a secret closet, called Kut al-Kulub, who came after she had
disguised and falsed and veiled herself, tripping in her robes and
trinkets; and she kissed ground before the Commander of the Faithful.
Then she sat down and tuning the lute, touched its strings and played
upon it, till all present were like to faint for excess of delight;
after which she improvised these verses:—

 Would Heaven I wot, will ever Time bring our beloveds back again? ✿ And,
    ah! will Union and its bliss to bless two lovers deign?
 Will Time assure to us united days and joinèd joy, ✿ While from the
    storms and stowres of life in safety we remain?
 Then O Who bade this pleasure be, our parting past and gone, ✿ And made
    one house our meeting-stead throughout the Nights contain;
 By him, draw near me, love, and closest cling to side of me ✿ Else were
    my wearied wasted life, a vanity, a bane.

When the Caliph heard this, he could not master himself, but rent his
raiment and fell down a-swoon; whereupon all who were present hastened
to doff their dress and throw it over him, whilst Kut al-Kulub signed to
Khalif and said to him, “Hie to yonder chest and bring us what is
therein;” for she had made ready therein a suit of the Caliph’s wear
against the like of such hour as this. So Khalif brought it to her and
she threw it over the Commander of the Faithful, who came to himself and
knowing her for Kut al-Kulub, said, “Is this the Day of Resurrection and
hath Allah quickened those who are in the tombs; or am I asleep and is
this an imbroglio of dreams?” Quoth Kut al-Kulub, “We are on wake, not
on sleep, and I am alive, nor have I drained the cup of death.” Then she
told him all that had befallen her, and indeed, since he lost her, life
had not been light to him nor had sleep been sweet, and he abode now
wondering, then weeping and anon afire for longing. When she had made an
end of her story, the Caliph rose and took her by the hand, intending
for her palace, after he had kissed her inner lips, and had strained her
to his bosom; whereupon Khalif rose and said, “By Allah, O Commander of
the Faithful! Thou hast already wronged me once, and now thou wrongest
me again.” Quoth Al-Rashid, “Indeed thou speakest sooth, O Khalif,” and
bade the Wazir Ja’afar give him what should satisfy him. So he
straightway gifted him with all for which he wished and assigned him a
village, the yearly revenues whereof were twenty thousand dinars.
Moreover Kut al-Kulub generously presented him the house and all that
was therein of furniture and hangings and white slaves and slave-girls
and eunuchs great and small. So Khalif became possessed of this passing
affluence and exceeding wealth and took him a wife, and prosperity
taught him gravity and dignity, and good fortune overwhelmed him. The
Caliph enrolled him among his equerries and he abode in all solace of
life and its delights till he deceased and was admitted to the mercy of
Allah. Furthermore they relate a tale anent

-----

Footnote 263:

  Arab. “Hásilah” prob. a corner of a “Godown” in some Khan or
  Caravanserai.

Footnote 264:

  Arab. “Funduk” from the Gr. πανδοχεῖον, whence the Italian Fondaco
  _e.g._ at Venice the Fondaco de’ Turchi.

Footnote 265:

  Arab. “Astár” plur. of Satr: in the Mac. Edit. Sátúr, both (says Dozy)
  meaning “Couperet” (a hatchet). Habicht translates it “a measure for
  small fish,” which seems to be a shot and a bad shot as the text talks
  only of means of carrying fish. Nor can we accept Dozy’s emendation
  Astál (plur. of Satl) pails, situlæ. In Petermann’s Reisen (i. 89)
  Satr = assiette.

Footnote 266:

  Which made him expect a heavy haul.

Footnote 267:

  Arab. “Urkúb” = tendon Achilles in man hough or pastern in beast, etc.
  It is held to be an incrementative form of ’Akab (heel); as Kur’úb of
  Ka’b (heel) and Khurtúm of Khatm (snout).

Footnote 268:

  Arab. “Karmút” and Zakzúk. The former (pronounced Garmút) is one of
  the many Siluri (S. Carmoth Niloticus) very common and resembling the
  Shál. It is smooth and scaleless with fleshy lips and soft meat and as
  it haunts muddy bottoms it was forbidden to the Ancient Egyptians. The
  Zakzúk is the young of the Shál (Synodontis Schal: Seetzen); its
  plural form Zakázik (pronounced Zigázig) gave a name to the
  flourishing town which has succeeded to old Bubastis and of which I
  have treated in “Midian” and “Midian Revisited.”

Footnote 269:

  “Yá A’awar” = O one eye! _i.e._ the virile member. So the vulgar
  insult “Ya ibn al-aur” (as the vulgar pronounce it) “O son of a yard!”
  When Al-Mas’údi writes (Fr. Trans. vii. 106), “Udkhul usbu’ak fi
  aynih,” it must not be rendered “Il faut lui faire violence”: thrust
  thy finger into his eye (’Ayn) means “put thy penis up his fundament!”
  (’Ayn being = Dubur). The French remarks, “On en trouverait
  l’équivalent dans les bas-fonds de notre langue.” So in English “pig’s
  eye,” “blind eye.” etc.

Footnote 270:

  Arab. Nabbút = a quarterstaff: see vol. i. 234.

Footnote 271:

  Arab. “Banní,” vulg. Benni and in Lane (Lex. Bunni) the Cyprinus Bynni
  (Forsk.), a fish somewhat larger than a barbel with lustrous silvery
  scales and delicate flesh, which Sonnini believes may be the
  “Lepidotes” (smooth-scaled) mentioned by Athenæus. I may note that the
  Bresl. Edit. (iv. 332) also affects the Egyptian vulgarism
  “Farkh-Banni” of the Mac. Edit. (Night dcccxxxii.)

Footnote 272:

  The story-teller forgets that Khalif had neither basket nor knife.

Footnote 273:

  Arab. “Rayhán” which may here mean any scented herb.

Footnote 274:

  In the text “Fard Kalmah,” a vulgarism. The Mac. Edit. (Night
  dcccxxxv.) more aptly says, “Two words” (Kalmatáni, vulg. Kalmatayn)
  the Twofold Testimonies to the Unity of Allah and the Mission of His
  Messenger.

Footnote 275:

  The lowest Cairene chaff which has no respect for itself or others.

Footnote 276:

  Arab. “Karrat azlá’ hú”: alluding to the cool skin of healthy men when
  digesting a very hearty meal.

Footnote 277:

  This is the true Fellah idea. A peasant will go up to his proprietor
  with the “rint” in gold pieces behind his teeth and undergo an immense
  amount of flogging before he spits them out. Then he will return to
  his wife and boast of the number of sticks he has eaten instead of
  paying at once and his spouse will say, “Verily thou art a man.”
  Europeans know nothing of the Fellah. Napoleon Buonaparte, for
  political reasons, affected great pity for him and horror of his
  oppressors, the Beys and Pashas; and this affectation gradually became
  public opinion. The Fellah must either tyrannise or be tyrannised
  over; he is never happier than under a strong-handed despotism and he
  has never been more miserable than under British rule or rather
  misrule. Our attempts to constitutionalise him have made us the
  laughing-stock of Europe.

Footnote 278:

  The turban is a common substitute for a purse with the lower classes
  of Egyptians; and an allusion to the still popular practice of
  turban-snatching will be found in vol. i. p. 259.

Footnote 279:

  Arab. “Sálih,” a devotee; here, a naked Dervish.

Footnote 280:

  Here Khalif is made a conspicuous figure in Baghdad like Boccaccio’s
  Calandrino and Co. He approaches in type the old Irishman now extinct,
  destroyed by the reflux action of Anglo-America (U.S.) upon the
  miscalled “Emerald Isle.” He blunders into doing and saying funny
  things whose models are the Hibernian “bulls” and acts purely upon the
  impulse of the moment, never reflecting till (possibly) after all is
  over.

Footnote 281:

  Arab. “Kaylúlah,” explained in vol. i. 51.

Footnote 282:

  _i.e._ thy bread lawfully gained. The “Bawwák” (trumpeter) like the
  “Zammár” (piper of the Mac. Edit.) are discreditable craftsmen,
  associating with Almahs and loose women and often serving as their
  panders.

Footnote 283:

  _i.e._ he was indecently clad. Man’s “shame” extends from navel to
  knees. See vol. vi. 30.

Footnote 284:

  Rashád would be = garden-cresses or stones: Rashíd the
  heaven-directed.

Footnote 285:

  Arab. “Uff ’alayka” = fie upon thee! Uff = lit. Sordes Aurium and Tuff
  (a similar term of disgust) = Sordes unguinum. To the English reader
  the blows administered to Khalif appear rather hard measure. But a
  Fellah’s back is thoroughly broken to the treatment and he would take
  ten times as much punishment for a few piastres.

Footnote 286:

  Arab. “Zurayk” dim. of Azrak = blue-eyed. See vol. iii. 104.

Footnote 287:

  Of Baghdad.

Footnote 288:

  Arab. “Hásil,” _i.e._ cell in a Khan for storing goods: elsewhere it
  is called a Makhzan (magazine) with the same sense.

Footnote 289:

  The Bresl. text (iv. 347) abbreviates, or rather omits; so that in
  translation details must be supplied to make sense.

Footnote 290:

  Arab. “Kamán,” vulgar Egyptian, a contraction from Kamá (as) + anna
  (since, because). So “Kamán shuwayh” = wait a bit; “Kamán marrah” =
  once more and “Wa Kamána-ka” = that is why.

Footnote 291:

  _i.e._ Son of the Eagle: See vol. iv. 177. Here, however, as the text
  shows it is hawk or falcon. The name is purely fanciful and made
  mnemonically singular.

Footnote 292:

  The Egyptian Fellah knows nothing of boxing like the Hausá man; but he
  is fond of wrestling after a rude and uncultivated fashion, which
  would cause shouts of laughter in Cumberland and Cornwall. And there
  are champions in this line. See vol. iii. 93.

Footnote 293:

  The usual formula. See vol. ii. 5.

Footnote 294:

  As the Fellah still does after drinking a cuplet (“fingán” he calls
  it) of sugared coffee.

Footnote 295:

  He should have said “white,” the mourning colour under the Abbasides.

Footnote 296:

  Anglicè, “Fine feathers make fine birds”; and in Eastern parlance,
  “Clothe the reed and it will become a bride.” (Labbis al-Búsah tabkí
  ’Arúsah, Spitta Bey, No. 275.) I must allow myself a few words of
  regret for the loss of this Savant, one of the most single-minded men
  known to me. He was vilely treated by the Egyptian Government, under
  the rule of the Jew-Moslem Riyáz; and, his health not allowing him to
  live in Austria, he died shortly after return home.

Footnote 297:

  Arab. “Saub (Tobe) ’Atábi”: see vol. iii. 149.

Footnote 298:

  In text “Kimkhá,” which Dozy also gives Kumkh = chenille, tissu de
  soie veloutee: Damasquète de soie or et argent de Venise, du Levant, à
  fleurs, etc. It comes from Kamkháb or Kimkháb, a cloth of gold, the
  well-known Indian “Kimcob.”

Footnote 299:

  Here meaning = Enter in Allah’s name!

Footnote 300:

  The Arabs have a saying, Wine breeds gladness, music merriment and
  their offspring is joy.

Footnote 301:

  Arab. “Jokh al-Saklát,” rich kind of brocade on broadcloth.

Footnote 302:

  Arab. “Hanabát,” which Dozy derives from O. German Hnapf, Hnap now
  Napf: thence too the Lat. Hanapus and Hanaperium: Ital. Anappo, Nappo;
  Provenc. Enap and French and English “Hanap” = rich bowl, basket, bag.
  But this is known even to the dictionaries.

Footnote 303:

  Arab. “Kirám,” nobles, and “Kurúm,” vines, a word which appears in
  Carmel = Karam-El (God’s vineyard).

Footnote 304:

  Arab. “Suláf al-Khandarísí,” a contradiction. Suláf = the ptisane of
  wine. Khandarísí, from Greek χόνδρος, lit. gruel, applies to old wine.

Footnote 305:

  _i.e._ in bridal procession.

Footnote 306:

  Arab. “Al-’Arús,” one of the innumerable tropical names given to wine
  by the Arabs. Mr. Payne refers to Grangeret de la Grange, Anthologie
  Arabe, p. 190.




                    MASRUR AND ZAYN AL-MAWASIF.[307]


There was once in days of yore and in ages and times long gone before a
man and a merchant Masrúr hight, who was of the comeliest of the folk of
his tide, a wight of wealth galore and in easiest case; but he loved to
take his pleasure in vergiers and flower-gardens and to divert himself
with the love of the fair. Now it fortuned one night, as he lay asleep,
he dreamt that he was in a garth of the loveliest, wherein were four
birds, and amongst them a dove, white as polished silver. That dove
pleased him and for her grew up in his heart an exceeding love.
Presently, he beheld a great bird swoop down on him and snatch the dove
from his hand, and this was grievous to him. After which he awoke and
not finding the bird strave with his yearnings till morning, when he
said in himself, “There is no help but that I go to-day to some one who
will expound to me this vision.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
merchant awoke, he strave with his yearnings till morning when he said
to himself, “There is no help but that I go this day to some one who
will expound to me this vision.” So he went forth and walked right and
left, till he was far from his dwelling-place, but found none to
interpret the dream to him. Then he would have returned, but on his way
behold, the fancy took him to turn aside to the house of a certain
trader, a man of the wealthiest, and when he drew near to it, suddenly
he heard from within a plaintive voice from a sorrowful heart reciting
these couplets:—

 The breeze o’ Morn blows uswards from her trace ✿ Fragrant, and heals
    the love-sick lover’s case.
 I stand like captive on the mounds and ask ✿ While tears make answer for
    the ruined place:
 Quoth I, “By Allah, Breeze o’ Morning, say ✿ Shall Time and Fortune aye
    this stead regrace?
 Shall I enjoy a fawn whose form bewitched ✿ And languorous eyelids
    wasted frame and face?”

When Masrur heard this, he looked in through the doorway and saw a
garden of the goodliest of gardens, and at its farther end a curtain of
red brocade, purfled with pearls and gems, behind which sat four
damsels, and amongst them a young lady over four feet and under five in
height, as she were the rondure of the lune and the full moon shining
boon: she had eyes Kohl’d with nature’s dye and joined eyebrows, a mouth
as it were Solomon’s seal and lips and teeth bright with pearls and
coral’s light; and indeed she ravished all wits with her beauty and
loveliness and symmetry and perfect grace. When Masrur espied her, he
entered the porch and went on entering till he came to the curtain:
whereupon she raised her head and glanced at him. So he saluted her and
she returned his salam with sweetest speech; and, when he considered her
more straitly, his reason was dazed and his heart amazed. Then he looked
at the garden and saw that it was full of jessamine and gilly flowers
and violets and roses and orange blossoms and all manner sweet-scented
blooms and herbs. Every tree was girt about with fruits and there
coursed down water from four daises, which faced one another and
occupied the four corners of the garden. He looked at the first Líwán
and found written around it with vermilion these two couplets:—

 Ho thou the House! Grief never home in thee; ✿ Nor Time work treason on
    thine owner’s head:
 All good betide the House which every guest ✿ Harbours, when sore
    distrest for way and stead!

Then he looked at the second daïs and found written thereon in red gold
these couplets:—

 Robe thee, O House, in richest raiment Time, ✿ Long as the birdies on
    the branchlets chime!
 And sweetest perfumes breathe within thy walls ✿ And lover meet beloved
    in bliss sublime:
 And dwell thy dwellers all in joy and pride ✿ Long as the wandering
    stars Heaven-hill shall climb.

Then he looked at the third, whereon he found written in ultramarine
these two couplets:—

 Ever thy pomp and pride, O House! display ✿ While starkeneth Night and
    shineth sheeny Day!
 Boon Fortune bless all entering thy walls, ✿ And whomso dwell in thee,
    for ever and aye!

Then he looked at the fourth and saw painted in yellow characters this
couplet:—

 This garden and this lake in truth ✿ Are fair sitting-steads, by the
    Lord of Ruth!

Moreover, in that garden were birds of all breeds, ring-dove and cushat
and nightingale and culver, each singing his several song, and amongst
them the lady, swaying gracefully to and fro in her beauty and grace and
symmetry and loveliness and ravishing all who saw her. Presently quoth
she to Masrur, “Hola man! what bringeth thee into a house other than thy
house and wherefore comest thou in unto women other than thy women,
without leave of their owner?” Quoth he, “O my lady, I saw this garden,
and the goodliness of its greenery pleased me and the fragrance of its
flowers and the carolling of its birds; so I entered, thinking to gaze
on it awhile and wend my way.” Said she, “With love and gladness!”; and
Masrur was amazed at the sweetness of her speech and the coquetry of her
glances and the straightness of her shape, and transported by her beauty
and seemlihead and the pleasantness of the garden and the birds. So in
the disorder of his spirits he recited these couplets:—

 As a crescent-moon in the garth her form ✿ ’Mid Basil and Jasmine and
    Rose I scan;
 And Violet faced by the Myrtle-spray ✿ And Nu’umán’s bloom and
    Myrobalan:
 By her perfume the Zephyrs perfumèd breathe ✿ And with scented sighings
    the branches fan.
 O Garden, thou perfect of beauty art ✿ All charms comprising in perfect
    plan;
 And melodious birdies sing madrigals ✿ And the Full Moon[308] shineth in
    branch-shade wan;

 Its ring-dove, its culver, its mocking-bird ✿ And its Philomel sing my
    soul t’ unman;
 And the longing of love all my wits confuseth ✿ For her charms, As the
    man whom his wine bemuseth.

Now when Zayn al-Mawásif heard his verse, she glanced at him with eyes
which bequeathed a thousand sighs and utterly ravished his wisdom and
wits and replied to him in these lines:—

 Hope not of our favours to make thy prey ✿ And of what thou wishest thy
    greed allay:
 And cease thy longing; thou canst not win ✿ The love of the Fair thou’rt
    fain t’ essay,
 My glances to lovers are baleful and naught ✿ I reek of thy speech: I
    have said my say!

“Ho, thou! Begone about thy business, for we are none of the woman-tribe
who are neither thine nor another’s.[309]” And he answered, “O my lady,
I said nothing ill.” Quoth she, “Thou soughtest to divert thyself[310]
and thou hast had thy diversion; so wend thy ways.” Quoth he, “O my
lady, belike thou wilt give me a draught of water, for I am athirst.”
Whereupon she cried, “How canst thou drink of a Jew’s water, and thou a
Nazarene?” But he replied, “O my lady, your water is not forbidden to us
nor ours unlawful to you, for we are all as one creation.” So she said
to her slave-girl, “Give him to drink;” and she did as she was bidden.
Then she called for the table of food, and there came four damsels,
high-bosomed maids, bearing four trays of meats and four gilt flagons
full of strong old-wine, as it were the tears of a slave of love for
clearness, and a table around whose edge were graven these couplets:—

 For eaters a table they brought and set ✿ In the banquet-hall and ’twas
    dight with gold:
 Like th’ Eternal Garden that gathers all ✿ Man wants of meat and wines
    manifold.

And when the high-breasted maids had set all this before him, quoth she,
“Thou soughtest to drink of our drink; so up and at our meat and drink!”
He could hardly credit what his ears had heard and sat down at the table
forthright; whereupon she bade her nurse[311] give him a cup, that he
might drink. Now her slave-girls were called, one Hubúb, another Khutúb
and the third Sukúb,[312] and she who gave him the cup was Hubub. So he
took the cup and looking at the outside there saw written these
couplets:—

 Drain not the bowl but with lovely wight ✿ Who loves thee and wine makes
    brighter bright.
 And ’ware her Scorpions[313] that o’er thee creep ✿ And guard thy tongue
    lest thou vex her sprite.

Then the cup went round and when he emptied it he looked inside and saw
written:—

 And ’ware her Scorpions when pressing them, ✿ And hide her secrets from
    foes’ despight.

Whereupon Masrur laughed her-wards and she asked him, “What causeth thee
to laugh?” “For the fulness of my joy,” quoth he. Presently, the breeze
blew on her and the scarf[314] fell from her head and discovered a
fillet[315] of glittering gold, set with pearls and gems and jacinths;
and on her breast was a necklace of all manner ring-jewels and precious
stones, to the centre of which hung a sparrow of red gold, with feet of
red coral and bill of white silver and body full of Nadd-powder and pure
ambergris and odoriferous musk. And upon its back was engraved:—

 The Nadd is my wine-scented powder, my bread; ✿ And the bosom’s my bed
    and the breasts my stead:
 And my neck-nape complains of the weight of love, ✿ Of my pain, of my
    pine, of my drearihead.

Then Masrur looked at the breast of her shift and behold, thereon lay
wroughten in red gold this verse:—

 The fragrance of musk from the breasts of the fair ✿ Zephyr borrows, to
    sweeten the morning air.

Masrur marvelled at this with exceeding wonder and was dazed by her
charms and amazement gat hold upon him. Then said Zayn al-Mawásif to
him, “Begone from us and go about thy business, lest the neighbours hear
of us and even us with the lewd.” He replied, “By Allah, O my lady,
suffer my sight to enjoy the view of thy beauty and loveliness.” With
this she was wroth with him and leaving him, walked in the garden, and
he looked at her shift-sleeve and saw upon it embroidered these lines:—

 The weaver-wight wrote with gold-ore bright ✿ And her wrists on brocade
    rained a brighter light:
 Her palms are adorned with a silvern sheen; ✿ And favour her fingers the
    ivory’s white:
 For their tips are rounded like priceless pearl; ✿ And her charms would
    enlighten the nightiest night.

And, as she paced the garth, Masrur gazed at her slippers and saw
written upon them these pleasant lines:—

 The slippers that carry these fair young feet ✿ Cause her form to bend
    in its gracious bloom:
 When she paces and waves in the breeze she owns, ✿ She shines fullest
    moon in the murkiest gloom.

She was followed by her women leaving Hubub with Masrur by the curtain,
upon whose edge were embroidered these couplets:—

 Behind the veil a damsel sits with gracious beauty dight, ✿ Praise to
    the Lord who decked her with these inner gifts of sprite!
 Guards her the garden and the bird fain bears her company; ✿ Gladden her
    wine-draughts and the bowl but makes her brighter-bright.
 Apple and Cassia-blossom show their envy of her cheeks; ✿ And borrows
    Pearl resplendency from her resplendent light;
 As though the sperm that gendered her were drop of marguerite[316] ✿
    Happy who kisses her and spends in her embrace the night.

So Masrur entered into a long discourse with Hubub and presently said to
her, “O Hubub, hath thy mistress a husband or not?” She replied, “My
lady hath a husband; but he is actually abroad on a journey with
merchandise of his.” Now whenas he heard that her husband was abroad on
a journey, his heart lusted after her and he said, “O Hubub, glorified
be He who created this damsel and fashioned her! How sweet is her beauty
and her loveliness and her symmetry and perfect grace! Verily, into my
heart is fallen sore travail for her. O Hubub, so do that I come to
enjoy her, and thou shalt have of me what thou wilt of wealth and what
not else.” Replied Hubub, “O Nazarene, if she heard thee speak thus, she
would slay thee, or else she would kill herself, for she is the daughter
of a Zealot[317] of the Jews nor is there her like amongst them: she
hath no need of money and she keepeth herself ever cloistered,
discovering not her case to any.” Quoth Masrur, “O Hubub, an thou wilt
but bring me to enjoy her, I will be to thee slave and foot page and
will serve thee all my life and give thee whatsoever thou seekest of
me.” But quoth she, “O Masrur, in very sooth this woman hath no lust for
money nor yet for men, because my lady Zayn al-Mawasif is of the
cloistered, going not forth her house-door in fear lest folk see her;
and but that she bore with thee by reason of thy strangerhood, she had
not permitted thee to pass her threshold; no, not though thou wert her
brother.” He replied, “O Hubub, be thou our go-between and thou shalt
have of me an hundred gold dinars and a dress worth as much more, for
that the love of her hath gotten hold of my heart.” Hearing this she
said, “O man, let me go about with her in talk and I will return thee an
answer and acquaint thee with what she saith. Indeed, she loveth those
who berhyme her and she affecteth those who set forth her charms and
beauty and loveliness in verse, and we may not prevail over her save by
wiles and soft speech and beguilement.” Thereupon Hubub rose and going
up to her mistress, accosted her with privy talk of this and that and
presently said to her, “O my lady, look at yonder young man, the
Nazarene; how sweet is his speech and how shapely his shape!” When Zayn
al-Mawasif heard this, she turned to her and said, “An thou like his
comeliness love him thyself. Art thou not ashamed to address the like of
me with these words? Go, bid him begone about his business; or I will
make it the worse for him.” So Hubub returned to Masrur, but acquainted
him not with that which her mistress had said. Then the lady bade her
hie to the door and look if she saw any of the folk, lest foul befal
them. So she went and returning, said, “O my lady, without are folk in
plenty and we cannot let him go forth this night.” Quoth Zayn
al-Mawasif, “I am in dole because of a dream I have seen and am fearful
therefrom.” And Masrur said, “What sawest thou? Allah never trouble thy
heart!” She replied, “I was asleep in the middle of the night, when
suddenly an eagle swooped down upon me from the highest of the clouds
and would have carried me off from behind the curtain, wherefore I was
affrighted at him. Then I awoke from sleep and bade my women bring me
meat and drink, so haply, when I had drunken, the dolour of the dream
would cease from me.” Hearing this, Masrur smiled and told her his dream
from first to last and how he had caught the dove, whereat she marvelled
with exceeding marvel. Then he went on to talk with her at great length
and said, “I am now certified of the truth of my dream, for thou art the
dove and I the eagle, and there is no hope but that this must be, for,
the moment I set eyes on thee, thou tookest possession of my vitals and
settest my heart afire for love of thee!” Thereupon Zayn al-Mawasif
became wroth with exceeding wrath and said to him, “I take refuge with
Allah from this! Allah upon thee, begone about thy business ere the
neighbours espy thee and there betide us sore reproach,” adding,
“Harkye, man! Let not thy soul covet that it shall not obtain. Thou
weariest thyself in vain; for I am a merchant’s wife and a merchant’s
daughter and thou art a druggist; and when sawest thou a druggist and a
merchant’s daughter conjoined by such sentiment?” He replied, “O my
lady, never lacked love-liesse between folk[318]; so cut thou not off
from me hope of this and whatsoever thou seekest of me of money and
raiment and ornaments and what not else, I will give thee.” Then he
abode with her in discourse and mutual blaming whilst she still
redoubled in anger, till it was black night, when he said to her, “O my
lady, take this gold piece and fetch me a little wine, for I am athirst
and heavy hearted.” So she said to the slave-girl Hubub, “Fetch him wine
and take naught from him, for we have no need of his dinar.” So she went
whilst Masrur held his peace and bespake not the lady, who suddenly
improvised these lines:—

 Leave this thy design and depart, O man! ✿ Nor tread paths where
    lewdness and crime trepan!
 Love is a net shall enmesh thy sprite, ✿ Make thee rise a-morning sad,
    weary and wan:
 For our spy thou shalt eke be the cause of talk; ✿ And for thee shall
    blame me my tribe and clan:

 Yet scant I marvel thou lovest a Fair:— ✿ Gazelles hunting lions we aye
    shall scan!

And he answered her with these:—

 Joy of boughs, bright branch of Myrobalan! ✿ Have ruth on the heart all
    thy charms unman:
 Death-cup to the dregs thou garrest me drain ✿ And don weed of Love with
    its bane and ban:
 How can soothe I a heart which for stress of pine ✿ Burns with living
    coals which my longings fan?

Hearing these lines she exclaimed, “Away from me! Quoth the saw ‘Whoso
looseth his sight wearieth his sprite.’ By Allah, I am tired of
discourse with thee and chiding, and indeed thy soul coveteth that shall
never become thine; nay, though thou gave me my weight in gold, thou
shouldst not get thy wicked will of me; for, I know naught of the things
of the world, save pleasant life, by the boon of Allah Almighty!” He
answered, “O my lady Zayn al-Mawasif, ask of me what thou wilt of the
goods of the world.” Quoth she, “What shall I ask of thee? For sure thou
wilt fare forth and prate of me in the highway and I shall become a
laughing-stock among the folk and they will make a byword of me in
verse, me who am the daughter of the chief of the merchants and whose
father is known of the notables of the tribe. I have no need of money or
raiment and such love will not be hidden from the people and I shall be
brought to shame, I and my kith and kin.” With this Masrur was
confounded and could make her no answer; but presently she said,
“Indeed, the master-thief, if he steal, stealeth not but what is worth
his neck, and every woman who doth lewdness with other than her husband
is styled a thief; so, if it must be thus and no help[319], thou shalt
give me whatsoever my heart desireth of money and raiment and ornaments
and what not.” Quoth he, “An thou sought of me the world and all its
regions contain from its East to its West, ’twere but a little thing,
compared with thy favour;” and quoth she, “I will have of thee three
suits, each worth a thousand Egyptian dinars, and adorned with gold and
fairly purfled with pearls and jewels and jacinths, the best of their
kind. Furthermore I require that thou swear to me thou wilt keep my
secret nor discover it to any and that thou wilt company with none but
me; and I in turn will swear to thee a true oath that I will never false
thee in love.” So he sware to her the oath she required and she sware to
him, and they agreed upon this; after which she said to her nurse Hubub,
“To-morrow go thou with Masrur to his lodging and seek somewhat of musk
and ambergris and Nadd and rose-water and see what he hath. If he be a
man of condition, we will take him into favour; but an he be otherwise
we will leave him.” Then said she to him, “O Masrur, I desire somewhat
of musk and ambergris and aloes-wood and Nadd; so do thou send it me by
Hubub;” and he answered, “With love and gladness; my shop is at thy
disposal!” Then the wine went round between them and their séance was
sweet; but Masrur’s heart was troubled for the passion and pining which
possessed him; and when Zayn al-Mawasif saw him in this plight, she said
to her slave-girl Sukub, “Arouse Masrur from his stupor; mayhap he will
recover.” Answered Sukub, “Hearkening and obedience,” and sang these
couplets:—

 Bring gold and gear an a lover thou, ✿ And hymn thy love so success
    shalt row;
 Joy the smiling fawn with the black-edged eyne ✿ And the bending lines
    of the Cassia-bough:
 On her look, and a marvel therein shalt sight, ✿ And pour out thy life
    ere thy life-term show:
 Love’s affect be this, an thou weet the same; ✿ But, an gold deceive
    thee, leave gold and go!

Hereupon Masrur understood her and said, “I hear and apprehend. Never
was grief but after came relief, and after affliction dealing He will
order the healing.” Then Zayn al-Mawasif recited these couplets:—

 From Love-stupor awake, O Masrur, ’twere best; ✿ For this day I dread my
    love rend thy breast;
 And to-morrow I fear me folks’ marvel-tale ✿ Shall make us a byword from
    East to West:
 Leave love of my like or thou’lt gain thee blame; ✿ Why turn thee
    uswards? Such love’s unblest!
 For one strange of lineage whose kin repel ✿ Thou shalt wake ill-famed,
    of friends dispossest:
 I’m a Zealot’s child and affright the folk; ✿ Would my life were ended
    and I at rest!

Then Masrur answered her improvisation and began to say these lines:—

 To grief leave a heart that to love ne’er ceased; ✿ Nor blame, for your
    blame ever love increased:
 You misrule my vitals in tyrant-guise; ✿ Morn and Eve I wend not or West
    or East;
 Love’s law forbids me to do me die; ✿ They say Love’s victim is ne’er
    released:
 Well-away! Could I find in Love’s Court a judge ✿ I’d ’plain and win to
    my rights at least.

They ceased not from mutual chiding till morning morrowed, when Zayn
al-Mawasif said, “O Masrur ’tis time for thee to depart, lest one of the
folk see thee and foul befal us twain.” So he arose and accompanied by
nurse Hubub fared on, till they came to his lodging, where he talked
with her and said to her, “All thou seekest of me is ready for thee, so
but thou wilt bring me to enjoy her.” Hubub replied, “Hearten thy
heart;” whereupon he rose and gave her an hundred dinars, saying “O
Hubub, I have by me a dress worth an hundred gold pieces.” Answered she,
“O Masrur, make haste with the trinkets and other things promised her,
ere she change her mind, for we may not take her, save with wile and
guile, and she loveth the saying of verse.” Quoth he, “Hearing and
obeying,” and bringing her the musk and ambergris and lign-aloes and
rose-water, returned with her to Zayn al-Mawasif and saluted her. She
returned his salam with the sweetest speech, and he was dazed by her
beauty and improvised these lines:—

 O thou sheeniest Sun who in night dost shine! ✿ O who stole my soul with
    those large black eyne!
 O slim-shaped fair with the graceful neck! ✿ O who shamest Rose wi’
    those cheeks o’ thine!
 Blind not our sight wi’ thy fell disdain, ✿ Disdain, that shall load us
    with pain and pine;
 Passion homes in our inmost, nor will be quenched ✿ The fire of yearning
    in vitals li’en:
 Your love has housèd in heart of me ✿ And of issue but you see I ne’er a
    sign:
 Then haply you’ll pity this hapless wight ✿ Thy sad lover and then—O the
    Morn divine!

When Zayn al-Mawasif heard his verses, she cast at him a glance of eyes,
that bequeathed him a thousand regrets and sighs and his wits and soul
were ravished in such wise, and answered him with these couplets[320]:—

 Think not from her, of whom thou art enamoured aye ✿ To win delight; so
    put desire from thee away.
 Leave that thou hop’st, for ’gainst her rigours whom thou lov’st ✿ Among
    the fair, in vain is all thou canst essay.
 My looks to lovers bring discomfiture and woe: ✿ Indeed, I make no count
    of that which thou dost say.

When Masrur heard this, he hardened his heart and took patience
concealing his case and saying in himself, “There is nothing for it
against calamity save long-suffering;” and after this fashion they abode
till nightfall when Zayn al-Mawasif called for food and they set before
her a tray, wherein were all manner of dishes, quails and pigeons and
mutton and so forth, whereof they ate their sufficiency. Then she bade
take away the tables and they did so and fetched the lavatory gear; and
they washed their hands, after which she ordered her women to bring the
candlesticks, and they set on candelabra and candles therein of
camphorated wax. Thereupon quoth Zayn al-Mawasif, “By Allah, my breast
is straitened this night and I am a-fevered;” and quoth Masrur “Allah
broaden thy breast and banish thy bane!” Then she said, “O Masrur, I am
used to play at chess: say me, knowest aught of the game?” He replied,
“Yes; I am skilled therein;” whereupon she commanded her handmaid Hubub
fetch her the chessboard. So she went away and presently returning with
the board, set it before her, and behold, it was of ivory-marquetried
ebony with squares marked in glittering gold, and its pieces of pearl
and ruby.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Zayn
al-Mawasif bade the chessboard be brought, they set it between her
hands; and Masrur was amazed at this, when she turned to him and said,
“Wilt have red or white?” He replied, “O Princess of the fair and
adornment of morning air, do thou take the red for they formous are and
fitter for the like of thee to bear and leave the white to my care.”
Answered she, “So be it;” and, taking the red pieces, ranged them
opposite the white, then put out her hand to a piece purposing the first
pass into the battle-plain. Masrur considered her fingers, which were
white as paste, and was confounded at their beauty and shapely shape;
whereupon she turned to him and said, “O Masrur, be not bedazed, but
take patience and calm thyself.” He rejoined, “O thou whose beauty
shameth the moon, how shall a lover look on thee and have
patience-boon?” And while this was doing she cried, “Checkmate[321]!”
and beat him; wherefore she knew that he was Jinn-mad for love of her
and said to him, “O Masrur, I will not play with thee save for a set
stake.” He replied, “I hear and obey,” and she rejoined, “Swear to me
and I will swear to thee that neither of us will cheat[322] the
adversary.” So both sware this and she said, “O Masrur, an I beat thee,
I will have ten dinars of thee, but an thou beat me, I will give thee a
mere nothing.” He expected to win, so he said, “O my lady, be not false
to thine oath, for I see thou art an overmatch for me at this game!”
“Agreed,” said she and they ranged their men and fell again to playing
and pushing on their pawns and catching them up with the queens and
aligning and matching them with the castles and solacing them with the
onslaught of the knights. Now the “Adornment of Qualities” wore on head
a kerchief of blue brocade so she loosed it off and tucking up her
sleeve, showed a wrist like a shaft of light and passed her palm over
the red pieces, saying to him, “Look to thyself.” But he was dazzled at
her beauty, and the sight of her graces bereft him of reason, so that he
became dazed and amazed and put out his hand to the white men, but it
alit upon the red. Said she, “O Masrur, where be thy wits? The red are
mine and the white thine;” and he replied, “Whoso looketh at thee
perforce loseth all his senses.” Then, seeing how it was with him, she
took the white from him and gave him the red, and they played and she
beat him. He ceased not to play with her and she to beat him, whilst he
paid her each time ten dinars, till, knowing him to be distraught for
love of her, she said, “O Masrur, thou wilt never win to thy wish,
except thou beat me, for such was our understanding; and henceforth, I
will not play with thee save for a stake of an hundred dinars a game.”
“With love and gladness,” answered he and she went on playing and ever
beating him and he paid her an hundred dinars each time; and on this
wise they abode till the morning, without his having won a single game,
when he suddenly sprang to his feet. Quoth she, “What wilt thou do, O
Masrur?”; and quoth he, “I mean to go to my lodging and fetch somewhat
of money: it may be I shall come to my desire.” “Do whatso seemeth good
to thee,” said she; so he went home and taking all the money he had,
returned to her improvising these two couplets:—

 In dream I saw a bird o’er speed (meseem’d), ✿ Love’s garden decked with
    blooms that smiled and gleamed:
 But I shall ken, when won my wish and will ✿ Of thee, the truthful sense
    of what I dreamed.

Now when Masrur returned to her with all his monies they fell a-playing
again; but she still beat him and he could not beat her once; and in
such case they abode three days, till she had gotten of him the whole of
his coin; whereupon said she, “O Masrur, what wilt thou do now?”; and he
replied, “I will stake thee a druggist’s shop.” “What is its worth?”
asked she; and he answered, “Five hundred dinars.” So they played five
bouts and she won the shop of him. Then he betted his slave-girls,
lands, houses, gardens, and she won the whole of them, till she had
gotten of him all he had; whereupon she turned to him and said, “Hast
thou aught left to lay down?” Cried he, “By Him who made me fall into
the snare of thy love, I have neither money to touch nor aught else
left, little or much!” She rejoined, “O Masrur, the end of whatso began
in content shall not drive man to repent; wherefore, an thou regret
aught, take back thy good and begone from us about thy business and I
will hold thee quit towards me.” Masrur rejoined, “By Him who decreed
these things to us, though thou sought to take my life ’twere a wee
thing to stake for thine approof, because I love none but thee!” Then
said she, “O Masrur, fare forthright and fetch the Kazi and the
witnesses and make over to me by deed all thy lands and possessions.”
“Willingly,” replied he and, going forth without stay or delay, brought
the Kazi and the witnesses and set them before her. When the judge saw
her, his wits fled and his mind was amazed and his reason was dazed for
the beauty of her fingers, and he said to her, “O my lady, I will not
write out the writ of conveyance, save upon condition that thou buy the
lands and mansions and slave-girls and that they all pass under thy
control and into thy possession.” She rejoined, “We’re agreed upon that.
Write me a deed, whereby all Masrur’s houses and lands and slave-girls
and whatso his right hand possesseth shall pass to Zayn al-Mawasif and
become her property at such a price.” So the Kazi wrote out the writ and
the witnesses set hands thereto; whereupon she took it.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Zayn
al-Mawasif took from the Kazi the deed which made over to her lover’s
property she said to him, “O Masrur, now gang thy gait.” But her
slave-girl Hubub turned to him and said, “Recite us some verses.” So he
improvised upon that game of chess these couplets:—

 Of Time and what befel me I complain, ✿ Mourning my loss by chess and
    eyes of bane.
 For love of gentlest, softest-sided fair ✿ Whose like is not of maids or
    mortal strain:
 The shafts of glances from those eyne who shot ✿ And led her conquering
    host to battle-plain
 Red men and white men and the clashing Knights ✿ And, crying “Look to
    thee!” came forth amain:
 And, when down charging, finger-tips she showed ✿ That gloomed like
    blackest night for sable stain,
 The Whites I could not rescue, could not save ✿ While ecstasy made
    tear-floods rail and rain:
 The Pawns and Castles with their Queens fell low ✿ And fled the Whites
    nor could the brunt sustain:
 Yea, with her shaft of glance at me she shot ✿ And soon that shaft had
    pierced my heart and brain:
 She gave me choice between her hosts, and I ✿ The Whites like moonlight
    first to choose was fain,
 Saying, “This argent folk best fitteth me ✿ I love them, but the Red by
    thee be ta’en!”

 She playèd me for free accepted stake ✿ Yet amorous mercy I could ne’er
    obtain:
 O fire of heart, O pine and woe of me, ✿ Wooing a fair like moon mid
    starry train:
 Burns no my heart O no! nor aught regrets ✿ Of good or land, but ah! her
    eyes’ disdain!
 Amazed I’m grown and dazed for drearihead ✿ And blame I Time who brought
    such pine and pain.
 Quoth she, “Why art thou so bedazed!” quoth I ✿ “Wine-drunken wight
    shall more of wine assain?”
 That mortal stole my sense by silk-soft shape, ✿ Which doth for
    heart-core hardest rock contain.
 I nervèd self and cried, “This day she’s mine” ✿ By bet, nor fear I
    prove she unhumàne:
 My heart ne’er ceased to seek possession, till ✿ Beggared I found me for
    conditions twain:
 Will youth you loveth shun the Love-dealt blow, ✿ Tho’ were he whelmed
    in Love’s high-surging main?
 So woke the slave sans e’en a coin to turn, ✿ Thralled to repine for
    what he ne’er shall gain!

Zayn al-Mawasif hearing these words marvelled at the eloquence of his
tongue and said to him, “O Masrur, leave this madness and return to thy
right reason and wend thy ways; for thou hast wasted all thy moveables
and immoveables at the chess-game, yet hast not won thy wish, nor hast
thou any resource or device whereby thou mayst attain to it.” But he
turned to her and said, “O my lady, ask of me whatso thou wilt and thou
shalt have it; for I will bring it to thee and lay it at thy feet.”
Answered she, “O Masrur, thou hast no money left.” “O goal of all hopes,
if I have no money, the folk will help me.” “Shall the giver turn
asker?” “I have friends and kinsfolk, and whatsoever I seek of them,
they will give me.” “O Masrur, I will have of thee four pods of musk and
four vases of civet[323] and four pounds of ambergris and four thousand
dinars and four hundred pieces of royal brocade, purfled with gold. An
thou bring me these things, O Masrur, I will grant thee my favours.”
“This is a light matter to me, O thou that puttest the moons to shame,”
replied he and went forth to fetch her what she sought. She sent her
maid Hubub after him, to see what worth he had with the folk of whom he
had spoken to her; but, as he walked along the highways he turned and
seeing her afar off, waited till she came up to him and said to her,
“Whither away, O Hubub?” So she said to him, “My mistress sent me to
follow for this and that,” and he replied, “By Allah, O Hubub, I have
nothing to hand!” She asked, “Then why didst thou promise her?”; and he
answered, “How many a promise made is unkept of its maker! Fine words in
love-matters needs must be.” When she heard this from him, she said, “O
Masrur, be of good cheer and eyes clear for, by Allah, most assuredly I
will be the means of thy coming to enjoy her!” Then she left him nor
ceased walking till she stood before her mistress weeping with sore
weeping, and said, “O my lady, indeed he is a man of great
consideration, and good repute among the folk.” Quoth Zayn al-Mawasif,
“There is no device against the destiny of Almighty Allah! Verily, this
man found not in me a pitiful heart, for that I despoiled him of his
substance and he got of me neither affection nor complaisance in
granting him amorous joy; but, if I incline to his inclination, I fear
lest the thing be bruited abroad.” Quoth Hubub, “O my lady, verily,
grievous upon us is his present plight and the loss of his good and thou
hast with thee none save thyself and thy slave-girl Sukub; so which of
us two would dare prate of thee, and we thy handmaids?” With this, she
bowed her head for a while groundwards and the damsels said to her, “O
my lady, it is our rede that thou send after him and show him grace and
suffer him not ask of the sordid; for how bitter is such begging!” So
she accepted their counsel and calling for inkcase and paper, wrote him
these couplets:—

 Joy is nigh, O Masrúr, so rejoice in true rede; ✿ Whenas night shall
    fall thou shalt do kind-deed:
 Crave not of the sordid a loan, fair youth, ✿ Wine stole my wits but
    they now take heed:
 All thy good I reft shall return to thee, ✿ O Masrúr, and I’ll add to
    them amorous meed;
 For indeed th’ art patient, and sweet of soul ✿ When wronged by thy
    lover’s tyrannic greed.
 So haste to enjoy us and luck to thee! ✿ Lest my folk come between us
    speed, love, all speed!
 Hurry uswards thou, nor delay, and while ✿ My mate is far, on Love’s
    fruit come feed.

Then she folded the paper and gave it to Hubub the handmaid, who carried
it to Masrur and found him weeping and reciting in a transport of
passion and love-longing these lines:—

 A breeze of love on my soul did blow ✿ That consumed my liver for stress
    of lowe;
 When my sweetheart went all my longings grew; ✿ And with tears in
    torrent mine eyelids flow:
 Such my doubt and fears, did I tell their tale ✿ To deaf rocks and
    pebbles they’d melt for woe.
 Would Heaven I wot shall I sight delight, ✿ And shall win my wish and my
    friend shall know!
 Shall be folded up nights that doomed us part ✿ And I be healed of what
    harms my heart?

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that while Masrur,
transported by passion and love-longing, was repeating his couplets in
sing-song tone Hubub knocked at his door; so he rose and opened to her,
and she entered and gave him the letter. He read it and said to her, “O
Hubub, what is behind thee of thy lady’s news[324]?” She answered, “O my
lord, verily, in this letter is that dispenseth me from reply, for thou
art of those who readily descry!” Thereat he rejoiced with joy exceeding
and repeated these two couplets:—

 Came the writ whose contents a new joy revealed, ✿ Which in vitals mine
    I would keep ensealed:
 And my longings grew when I kissed that writ, ✿ As were pearl of passion
    therein concealed.

Then he wrote a letter answering hers and gave it to Hubub, who wrote it
and returned with it to her mistress and forthright fell to extolling
his charms to her and expiating on his good gifts and generosity; for
she was become a helper to him, to bring about his union with her lady.
Quoth Zayn al-Mawasif, “O Hubub, indeed he tarrieth to come to us;” and
quoth Hubub, “He will certainly come soon.” Hardly had she made an end
of speaking when behold, he knocked at the door, and she opened to him
and brought him in to her mistress, who saluted him with the salam[325]
and welcomed him and seated him by her side. Then she said to Hubub,
“Bring me a suit of brocade;” so she brought a robe broidered with gold
and Zayn al-Mawasif threw it over him, whilst she herself donned one of
the richest dresses and crowned her head with a net of pearls of the
freshest water. About this she bound a fillet of brocade, purfled with
pearls, jacinths and other jewels, from beneath which she let down two
tresses[326] each looped with a pendant of ruby, charactered with
glittering gold, and she loosed her hair, as it were the sombrest night;
and lastly she incensed herself with aloes-wood and scented herself with
musk and ambergris, and Hubub said to her, “Allah save thee from the
evil eye!” Then she began to walk, swaying from side to side with
gracefullest gait, whilst Hubub who excelled in verse-making, recited in
her honour these couplets:—

 Shamed is the bough of Bán by pace of her; ✿ And harmed are lovers by
    the gaze of her.
 A moon she rose from murks, the hair of her, ✿ A sun from locks the brow
    encase of her:
 Blest he she nights with by the grace of her, ✿ Who dies in her with
    oath by days of her!

So Zayn al-Mawasif thanked her and went up to Masrur, as she were full
moon displayed. But when he saw her, he rose to his feet and exclaimed,
“An my thought deceive me not, she is no human, but one of the brides of
Heaven!” Then she called for food and they brought a table, about whose
marge were written these couplets[327]:—

 Dip thou with spoons in saucers four and gladden heart and eye With many
    a various kind of stew and fricassee and fry.
 Thereon fat quails (ne’er shall I cease to love and tender them) And
    rails and fowls and dainty birds of all the kinds that fly.
 Glory to God for the Kabobs, for redness all aglow, And potherbs,
    steeped in vinegar, in porringers thereby!

 Fair fall the rice with sweet milk dressed, wherein the hands did plunge
    And eke the forearms of the fair were buried, bracelet-high!
 How my heart yearneth with regret over two plates of fish That by two
    manchet-cakes of bread of Tewarij[328] did lie!

Then they ate and drank and made mirth and merriment, after which the
servants removed the table of food and set on the wine service; so cup
and tasse[329] passed round between them and they were gladdened in
soul. Then Masrur filled the cup and saying, “O whose thrall am I and
who is my mistress!”[330] chanted these improvised couplets:—

 Mine eyes I admire that can feed their fill ✿ On charms of a girl rising
    worlds to light:
 In her time she hath none to compare for gifts ✿ Of spirit and body a
    mere delight.
 Her shape breeds envy in Cassia-tree ✿ When fares she forth in her
    symmetry dight:
 With luminous brow shaming moon of dark ✿ And crown-like crescent the
    brightest bright.
 When treads she earth’ surface her fragrance scents ✿ The Zephyr that
    breathes over plain and height.

When he ended his extempore song she said, “O Masrur, whoso religiously
keepeth his faith and hath eaten our bread and salt, it behoveth us to
give him his due; so put away from thee all thought of what hath been
and I will restore thee thy lands and houses and all we have taken from
thee.” He replied, “O my lady, I acquit thee of that whereof thou
speakest, though thou hadst been false to the oath and covenant between
us; for I will go and become a Moslem.” Zayn al-Mawasif protested that
she would follow suit[331] when Hubub cried to her, “O my lady, thou art
young of years and knowest many things, and I claim the intercession of
Almighty Allah with thee for, except thou do my bidding and heal my
heart, I will not lie the night with thee in the house.” And she
replied, “O Hubub, it shall be as thou wilt. Rise and make us ready
another sitting-room.” So she sprang to her feet and gat ready a room
and adorned and perfumed it after fairest fashion even as her lady loved
and preferred; after which she again set on food and wine, and the cup
went round between them and their hearts were glad.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Fiftieth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Zayn
al-Mawasif bade her maid Hubub make ready a private sitting-room she
arose and did her bidding, after which she again set food and wine
before them and cup and tasse went round gladdening their hearts.
Presently quoth Zayn al-Mawasif, “O Masrur, come is the time of Union
and favour; so, as thou studiest my love to savour recite us some verses
surpassing of flavour.” Upon this he recited the following ode[332]:—

       I am taken: my heart burns with living flame
       For Union shorn whenas Severance came,
       In the love of a damsel who forced my soul
       And with delicate cheeklet my reason stole.
       She hath eyebrows united and eyes black-white
       And her teeth are leven that smiles in light:
       The tale of her years is but ten plus four;—
       Tears like Dragon’s blood[333] for her love I pour.
       First I saw that face ’mid parterre and rill,
       Outshining full Lune on horizon-hill;
       And stood like a captive for awe, and cried,
       “Allah’s Peace, O who in demesne[334] doth hide!”
       She returned my salam, gaily answering
       With the sweetest speech likest pearls a-string.
       But when heard my words, she right soon had known
       My want and her heart waxed hard as stone,
       And quoth she, “Be not this a word silly-bold?”
       But quoth I, “Refrain thee nor flyte and scold!
       An to-day thou consent such affair were light;
       Thy like is the loved, mine the lover-wight!”
       When she knew my mind she but smiled in mirth
       And cried, “Now, by the Maker of Heaven and Earth!
       “I’m a Jewess of Jewry’s driest e’er seen
       And thou art naught save a Nazarene.
       “Why seek my favours? Thine’s other caste;
       An this deed thou do thou’lt repent the past.
       “Say, does Love allow with two Faiths to play?
       Men shall blame thee like me, at each break of day!
       “Wilt thou laugh at beliefs and deride their rite,
       And in thine and mine prove thee sinful sprite?
       “An thou lovedest me thou hadst turnèd Jew,
       Losing worlds for love and my favours due;
       “And by the Evangel strong oath hadst sworn
       To keep our secret intact from scorn!”
       So I took the Torah and sware strong oath
       I would hold to the covenant made by both.
       Then by law, religion and creed I sware,
       And bound her by oaths that most binding were;
       And asked her, “Thy name, O my dear delight?”
       And she, “Zayn al-Mawásif at home I’m hight!”
       “O Zayn al-Mawasif!” (cried I) “Hear my call:
       Thy love hath made me thy veriest thrall!”
       Then I peeped ’neath her chin-veil and ’spied such charms
       That the longing of love filled my heart with qualms.
       ’Neath the curtain I ceased not to humble me,
       And complain of my heart-felt misery;
       But when she saw me by Love beguiled
       She raised her face-veil and sweetly smiled:
       And when breeze of Union our faces kiss’d
       With musk-pod she scented fair neck and wrist;
       And the house with her essences seemed to drip,
       And I kissed pure wine from each smiling lip:
       Then like branch of Bán ’neath her robe she swayed
       And joys erst unlawful[335] she lawful made:
       And joined, conjoined through our night we lay
       With clip, kiss of inner lip, _langue fourrée_.
       The world hath no grace but the one loved fere
       In thine arms to clasp with possession sheer!
       With the morn she rose and she bade Good-bye
       While her brow shone brighter than moon a-sky;
       Reciting at parting (while tear-drops hung
       On her cheeks, these scattered and other strung),[336]
       “Allah’s pact in mind all my life I’ll bear
       And the lovely nights and strong oath I sware.”

Zayn al-Mawasif was delighted and said to him, “O Masrur, how goodly are
thy inner gifts! May he live not who would harm thy heart!” Then she
entered her boudoir and called him: so he went in to her and taking her
in his arms, embraced her and hugged her and kissed her and got of her
that which he had deemed impossible and rejoiced in winning the sweet of
amorous will. Then said she, “O Masrur, thy good is unlawful to me and
is lawfully thine again now that we are become lovers.” So she returned
to him all she had taken of him and asked him, “O Masrur, hast thou a
flower-garden whither we may wend and take our pleasure?”; whereto he
answered, “Yes, O my lady, I have a garden that hath not its like.” Then
he returned to his lodgings and bade his slave-girls make ready a
splendid banquet in a handsome room; after which he summoned Zayn
al-Mawasif who came surrounded by her damsels, and they ate and drank
and made mirth and merriment, whilst the cup passed round between them
and their spirits rose high. Then lover withdrew with beloved and Zayn
al-Mawasif said to Masrur, “I have bethought me of some dainty verses,
which I would fain sing to the lute.” He replied, “Do sing them”; so she
took the lute and tuning it, sang to a pleasant air these couplets:—

 Joy from stroke of string doth to me incline, ✿ And sweet is a-morning
    our early wine;
 Whenas Love unveileth the amourist’s heart, ✿ And by rending the veil he
    displays his sign,
 With a draught so pure, so dear, so bright, ✿ As in hand of Moons[337]
    the Sun’s sheeny shine
 O’ nights it cometh with joy to ’rase ✿ The hoar of sorrow by boon
    divine.

Then ending her verse, she said to him, “O Masrur, recite us somewhat of
thy poetry and favour us with the fruit of thy thought.” So he recited
these two couplets:—

 We joy in full Moon who the wine bears round, ✿ And in concert of lutes
    that from gardens sound;
 Where the dove moans at dawn and where bends the bough ✿ To Morn, and
    all pathways of pleasure are found.

When he had finished his recitation she said to him, “Make us some
verses on that which hath passed between us an thou be occupied with
love of me.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Fifty-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Zayn
al-Mawasif said to Masrur, “An thou be occupied with love of me, make us
some verses on that hath passed between us,” “With love and gladness,”
he replied and improvised the following Kasídah[338]:—

 Stand thou and hear what fell to me ✿ For love of you gazelle to dree!
 Shot me a white doe with her shaft ✿ O’ glances wounding woundily.
 Love was my ruin, for was I ✿ Straitened by longing ecstasy:
 I loved and woo’d a young coquette ✿ Girded by strong artillery,
 Whom in a garth I first beheld ✿ A form whose sight was symmetry.
 I greeted her and when she deigned ✿ Greeting return, “Salám,” quoth she
 “What be thy name?” said I, she said, ✿ My name declares my
    quality![339]
 “Zayn al-Mawásif I am hight.” ✿ Cried I, “Oh deign I mercy see,
 “Such is the longing in my heart ✿ No lover claimeth rivalry!”
 Quoth she, “With me an thou ’rt in love ✿ And to enjoy me pleadest plea,
 “I want of thee oh! muchel wealth; ✿ Beyond all compt my wants o’ thee!
 “I want o’ thee full many a robe ✿ Of sendal, silk and damaskry;
 “A quarter quintal eke of musk: ✿ These of one night shall pay the fee.
 “Pearls, unions and carnelian[340]-stones ✿ The bestest best of
    jewelry!”
 Of fairest patience showed I show ✿ In contrariety albe:
 At last she favoured me one night ✿ When rose the moon a crescent wee;
 An stranger blame me for her sake ✿ I say, “O blamers listen ye!
 She showeth locks of goodly length ✿ And black as blackest night its
    blee;
 While on her cheeks the roses glow ✿ Like Lazá-flame incendiary:
 In every eyelash is a sword ✿ And every glance hath archery:
 Her liplets twain old wine contain, ✿ And dews of fount-like purity:
 Her teeth resemble strings o’ pearls, ✿ Arrayed in line and fresh from
    sea:
 Her neck is like the neck of doe, ✿ Pretty and carven perfectly:
 Her bosom is a marble slab ✿ Whence rise two breasts like towers on lea:
 And on her stomach shows a crease ✿ Perfumed with rich perfumery;
 Beneath which same there lurks a Thing ✿ Limit of mine expectancy.”

 A something rounded, cushioned-high ✿ And plump, my lords, to high
    degree:
 To me ’tis likest royal throne ✿ Whither my longings wander free;
 There ’twixt two pillars man shall find ✿ Benches of high-built tracery.
 It hath specific qualities ✿ Drive sanest men t’ insanity;
 Full mouth it hath like mouth of neck ✿ Or well begirt by stony key;
 Firm lips with camelry’s compare ✿ And shows it eye of cramoisie.
 An draw thou nigh with doughty will ✿ To do thy doing lustily,
 Thou’ll find it fain to face thy bout ✿ And strong and fierce in
    valiancy.
 It bendeth backwards every brave ✿ Shorn of his battle-bravery.
 At times imberbe, but full of spunk ✿ To battle with the Paynimry.
 ’Twill show thee liveliness galore ✿ And perfect in its raillery:
 Zayn al-Mawasif it is like ✿ Complete in charms and courtesy.
 To her dear arms one night I came ✿ And won meed given lawfully:
 I passed with her that self-same night ✿ (Best of my nights!) in
    gladdest glee;
 And when the morning rose, she rose ✿ And crescent like her visnomy:
 Then swayed her supple form as sway ✿ The lances lopt from limber tree;
 And when farewelling me she cried, ✿ “When shall such nights return to
    me?”
 Then I replied, “O eyen-light, ✿ When He vouchsafeth His decree!”[341]

Zayn al-Mawasif was delighted with this Ode and the utmost gladness gat
hold of her. Then said she, “O Masrur day-dawn draweth nigh and there is
naught for it save to fly for fear of scandal and spy!” He replied, “I
hear and obey,” and rising led her to her lodging, after which he
returned to his quarters[342] and passed the rest of the night pondering
on her charms. When the morning morrowed with its sheen and shone, he
made ready a splendid present and carried it to her and sat by her side.
And thus they abode awhile, in all solace of life and its delight, till
one day there came to Zayn al-Mawasif a letter from her husband
reporting to her his speedy return. Thereupon she said in herself, “May
Allah not keep him nor quicken him! If he come hither, our life will be
troubled: would Heaven I might despair of him!” Presently entered Masrur
and sat with her at chat, as was his wont, whereupon she said to him, “O
Masrur, I have received a missive from my mate, announcing his speedy
return from his wayfaring. What is to be done, since neither of us
without other can live?” He replied, “I know not; but thou art better
able to judge, being acquainted with the ways of thy man, more by token
that thou art one of the sharpest-witted of women and past mistress of
devices such as devise that whereof fail the wise.” Quoth she, “He is a
hard man and jealous of his household: but, when he shall come home and
thou hearest of his coming, do thou repair to him and salute him and sit
down by his side, saying:—O my brother, I am a druggist. Then buy of him
somewhat of drugs and spices of sorts and call upon him frequently and
prolong thy talks with him and gainsay him not in whatsoever he shall
bid thee; so haply that I would contrive may betide, as it were by
chance.” “I hear and I obey,” quoth Masrur and fared forth from her,
with heart afire for love. When her husband came home, she rejoiced in
meeting him and after saluting him bade him welcome; but he looked in
her face and seeing it pale and sallow (for she had washed it with
saffron, using one of women’s arts), asked her of her case. She answered
that she had been sick, she and her women, from the time of his
wayfaring, adding, “Verily, our hearts have been engrossed with thoughts
of thee because of the length of thine absence.” And she went on to
complain to him of the misery of separation and to pour forth copious
tears, saying, “Hadst thou but a companion with thee, my heart had not
borne all this cark and care for thee. So, Allah upon thee, O my lord,
travel not again without a comrade and cut me not off from news of thee,
that my heart and mind may be at rest concerning thee!”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Fifty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Zayn
al-Mawasif said to her mate, “Travel not without comrade and cut me not
off from news of thee, that my heart and mind may be at rest concerning
thee,” he replied, “With love and gladness! By Allah thy bede is good
indeed and right is thy rede! By thy life, it shall be as thou dost
heed.” Then he unpacked some of his stock-in-trade and carrying the
goods to his shop, opened it and sat down to sell in the Soko.[343] No
sooner had he taken his place than lo and behold! up came Masrur and
saluting him, sat down by his side and began talking and talked with him
awhile. Then he pulled out a purse and taking forth gold, handed it to
Zayn al-Mawasif’s man and said, “Give me the worth of these dinars in
drugs and spices of sorts, that I may sell them in my shop.” The Jew
replied, “I hear and I obey,” and gave him what he sought. And Masrur
continued to pay him frequent visits till, one day, the merchant said to
him, “I have a mind to take me a man to partner in trade.” Quoth Masrur,
“And I also, desire to take a partner; for my father was a merchant in
the land of Al-Yaman and left me great store of money and I fear lest it
fare from me.” Quoth the Jew, turning towards him, “Wilt thou be my
partner, and I will be thy partner and a true friend and comrade to thee
at home and abroad; and I will teach thee selling and buying, giving and
taking.” And Masrur rejoined, “With all my heart.” So the merchant
carried him to his place and seated him in the vestibule, whilst he went
in to his wife and said to her, “I have provided me with a partner and
have bidden him hither as a guest; so do thou get us ready good
guest-cheer.” Whenas she heard this, she rejoiced divining that it was
Masrur, and made ready a magnificent banquet,[344] of her delight in the
success of her device. Then, when the guest drew nigh, her husband said
to her, “Come out with me to him and bid him welcome and say, Thou
gladdenest us[345]!” But Zayn al-Mawasif made a show of anger, crying,
“Wilt thou have me display myself before a strange man? I take refuge
with Allah! Though thou cut me to bits, I will not appear before him!”
Rejoined he, “Why shouldst thou be abashed at him, seeing that he is a
Nazarene and we are Jews and, to boot, we are become chums, he and I?”
Quoth she, “I am not minded to present myself before a strange man, on
whom I have never once set eyes and whom I know not any wise.” Her
husband thought she spoke sooth and ceased not to importune her, till
she rose and veiling herself, took the food and went out to Masrur and
welcomed him; whereupon he bowed his head groundwards, as he were
ashamed, and the Jew, seeing such dejection said in himself, “Doubtless,
this man is a devotee.” They ate their fill and the table being removed,
wine was set on. As for Zayn al-Mawasif, she sat over against Masrur and
gazed on him and he gazed on her till ended day, when he went home, with
a heart to fire a prey. But the Jew abode pondering the grace and the
comeliness of him; and, as soon as it was night, his wife according to
custom served him with supper and they seated themselves before it. Now
he had a mocking-bird which was wont, whenever he sat down to meat, to
come and eat with him and hover over his head; but in his absence the
fowl was grown familiar with Masrur and used to flutter about him as he
sat at meals. Now when Masrur disappeared and the master returned, it
knew him not and would not draw near him, and this made him thoughtful
concerning his case and the fowl’s withdrawing from him. As for Zayn
al-Mawasif, she could not sleep with her heart thinking of Masrur, and
thus it was with her a second and even a third night, till the Jew
became aware of her condition and, watching her while she sat
distraught, began to suspect somewhat wrong. On the fourth night, he
awoke in the middle thereof and heard his wife babbling in her sleep and
naming Masrur, what while she lay on her husband’s bosom, wherefore he
misdoubted her; but he dissembled his suspicions and when morning
morrowed he repaired to his shop and sat therein. Presently, up came
Masrur and saluted him. He returned his salam and said to him, “Welcome,
O my brother!” adding anon, “I have wished for thee;” and he sat talking
with him for an hour or so, after which he said to him, “Rise, O my
brother, and hie with me to my house, that we may enter into the pact of
brotherhood.”[346] Replied Masrur, “With joy and goodly gree,” and they
repaired to the Jew’s house, where the master went in and told his wife
of Masrur’s visit, for the purpose of conditioning their partnership,
and said, “Make us ready a goodly entertainment, and needs must thou be
present and witness our brotherhood.” But she replied, “Allah upon thee,
cause me not show myself to this strange man, for I have no mind to
company with him.” So he held his peace and forbore to press her and
bade the waiting-women bring food and drink. Then he called the
mocking-bird but it knew not its lord and settled upon Masrur’s lap; and
the Jew said to him, “O my master, what is thy name?” He answered, “My
name is Masrur;” whereupon the Jew remembered that this was the name
which his wife had repeated all night long in her sleep. Presently, he
raised his head and saw her making signs[347] with her forefingers to
Masrur and motioning to him with her eyes, wherefore he knew that he had
been completely cozened and cuckolded and said, “O my lord, excuse me
awhile, till I fetch my kinsmen, so they may be present at our swearing
brotherhood.” Quoth Masrur, “Do what seemeth good to thee;” whereupon
the Jew went forth the house and returning privily by a back way——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Zayn
al-Mawasif’s husband said to Masrur, “Excuse me awhile, till I fetch my
cousins to witness the brother-bond between me and thee.” Then he went
forth and, privily returning behind the sitting-room, there took his
station hard by a window which gave upon the saloon and whence he could
watch them without their seeing him. Suddenly quoth Zayn al-Mawasif to
her maid Sukub, “Whither is thy master gone?”; and quoth she, “He is
gone without the house.” Cried the mistress, “Lock the door and bar it
with iron and open thou not till he knock, after thou hast told me.”
Answered Sukub, “So shall it be done.” Then, while her husband watched
them, she rose and filling a cup with wine, flavoured with powdered musk
and rose-water, went close to Masrur, who sprang up to meet her, saying,
“By Allah, the water of thy mouth is sweeter than this wine!” “Here it
is for thee,” said she and filling her mouth with wine, gave him to
drink thereof, whilst he gave her the like to drink; after which she
sprinkled him with rose-water from front to foot, till the perfume
scented the whole place. All this while, the Jew was looking on and
marvelling at the stress of love that was between them, and his heart
was filled with fury for what he saw and he was not only wroth, but
jealous with exceeding jealousy. Then he went out again and coming to
the door found it locked and knocked a loud knock of the excess of his
rage; whereupon quoth Sukub, “O my lady, here is my master;” and quoth
Zayn al-Mawasif, “Open to him; would that Allah had not brought him back
in safety!” So Sukub went and opened the door to the Jew, who said to
her, “What ailed thee to lock the door?” Quoth she, “It hath never
ceased to be locked thus during thine absence; nor hath it been opened
night nor day,” and cried he, “Thou hast done well; this pleaseth me.”
Then he went in to Masrur, laughing and dissembling his chagrin, and
said to him, “O Masrur, let us put off the conclusion of our pact of
brotherhood this day and defer it to another.” Replied Masrur, “As thou
wilt,” and hied him home, leaving the Jew pondering his case and knowing
not what to do; for his heart was sore troubled and he said in himself,
“Even the mocking-bird disowneth me and the slave-girls shut the door in
my face and favour another.” And of his exceeding chagrin, he fell to
reciting these couplets:—

 Masrur joys life made fair by all delight of days, ✿ Fulfilled of boons,
    while mine the sorest grief displays.
 The Days have falsed me in the breast of her I love ✿ And in my heart
    are fires which all-consuming blaze:
 Yea, Time was clear for thee, but now ’tis past and gone ✿ While yet her
    lovely charms thy wit and senses daze:
 Espied these eyes of mine her gifts of loveliness: ✿ Oh, hard my case
    and sore my woe on spirit weighs!
 I saw the maiden of the tribe deal rich old wine ✿ Of lips like Salsabíl
    to friend my love betrays:
 E’en so, O mocking-bird, thou dost betray my breast ✿ And to a rival
    teachest Love and lover-ways:
 Strange things indeed and wondrous saw these eyne of me ✿ Which were
    they sleep-drowned still from Sleep’s abyss would raise:
 I see my best belovèd hath forsworn my love ✿ And eke like my
    mocking-bird fro’ me a-startled strays.
 By truth of Allah, Lord of Worlds who, whatso wills ✿ His Fate, for
    creatures works and none His hest gainsays,
 Forsure I’ll deal to that ungodly wight his due ✿ Who but to sate his
    wicked will her heart withdrew!

When Zayn al-Mawasif heard this, her side-muscles trembled and quoth she
to her handmaid, “Heardest thou those lines?”; whereupon quoth the girl,
“I never heard him in my born days recite the like of these verses; but
let him say what he will.” Then having assured himself of the truth of
his suspicions, the Jew began to sell all his property, saying to
himself, “Unless I part them by removing her from her mother land the
twain will not turn back from this that they are engaged in, no, never!”
So, when he had converted all his possessions into coin, he forged a
letter and read it to Zayn al-Mawasif, declaring that it had come from
his kinsmen, who invited him to visit them, him and his wife. She asked,
“How long shall we tarry with them?” and he answered, “Twelve days.”
Accordingly she consented to this and said, “Shall I take any of my
maids with me?”; whereto he replied, “Take Hubub and Sukub and leave
Khutub here.” Then he made ready a handsome camel-litter[348] for his
spouse and her women and prepared to set out with them; whilst she sent
to her leman, telling him what had betided her and saying, “O Masrur, an
the trysting-time[349] that is between us pass and I come not back, know
that he hath cheated and cozened us and planned a plot to separate us
each from other, so forget thou not the plighted faith betwixt us, for I
fear that he hath found out our love and I dread his craft and perfidy.”
Then, whilst her man was busy about his march she fell a-weeping and
lamenting and no peace was left her, night or day. Her husband saw this,
but took no note thereof; and when she saw there was scant help for it,
she gathered together her clothes and gear and deposited them with her
sister, telling her what had befallen her. Then she farewelled her and
going out from her, drowned in tears, returned to her own house, where
she found her husband had brought the camels and was busy loading them,
having set apart the handsomest dromedary for her riding, and when she
saw this and knew that needs must she be separated from Masrur, she waxt
clean distraught. Presently it chanced that the Jew went out on some
business of his; so she fared forth to the first or outer door and wrote
thereon these couplets:——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Zayn
al-Mawasif saw her spouse summon the camels and knew that the march
needs must be, she waxt clean distraught. Presently it chanced that the
Jew went out on some business so she fared forth to the first door and
wrote thereon these couplets:—

 Bear our salams, O Dove, from this our stead ✿ From lover to beloved far
    severèd!
 Bid him fro’ me ne’er cease to yearn and mourn ✿ O’er happy days and
    hours for ever fled:
 Eke I in grief shall ever mourn and yearn, ✿ Dwelling on days of love
    and lustihead;
 Long was our joyance, seeming aye to last, ✿ When night and morning to
    reunion led;
 Till croaked the Raven[350] of the Wold one day ✿ His cursed croak and
    did our union dead.
 We sped and left the homestead dark and void ✿ Its gates unpeopled and
    its dwellers sped.

Then she went to the second door and wrote thereon these couplets:—

 O who passest this doorway, by Allah, see ✿ The charms of my fere in the
    glooms and make plea
 For me, saying, “I think of the Past and weep ✿ Yet boot me no tears
    flowing full and free.”
 Say, “An fail thee patience for what befel ✿ Scatter earth and dust on
    the head of thee!
 And o’er travel lands East and West, and deem ✿ God sufficeth thy case,
    so bear patiently!”

Then she went to the third door and wept sore and thereon wrote these
couplets:—

 Fare softly, Masrúr! an her sanctuary ✿ Thou seek, and read what a-door
    writ she.
 Ne’er forget Love-plight, if true man; how oft ✿ Hast savoured Nights’
    bitter and sweetest gree!
 O Masrúr! forget not her neighbourhood ✿ For wi’ thee must her gladness
    and joyance flee!
 But beweep those dearest united days ✿ When thou camest veilèd in
    secresy;
 Wend for sake of us over farthest wone; ✿ Span the wold for us, for us
    dive in sea;
 Allah bless the past days! Ah, how glad they were ✿ When in Gardens of
    Fancy the flowers pluckt we!
 The nights of Union from us are fled ✿ And parting-glooms dim their
    radiancy;
 Ah! had this lasted as hopèd we, but ✿ He left only our breasts and the
    rosery.
 Will revolving days on Re-union dawn? ✿ Then our vow to the Lord shall
    accomplisht be.
 Learn thou our lots are in hand of Him ✿ Who on lines of skull[351]
    writes our destiny!

Then she wept with sore weeping and returned to the house, wailing and
remembering what had passed and saying, “Glory be to God who hath
decreed to us this!” And her affliction redoubled for severance from her
beloved and her departure from her mother-land, and she recited these
couplets:—

 Allah’s peace on thee, House of Vacancy! ✿ Ceased in thee all our joys,
    all our jubilee.
 O thou Dove of the homestead, ne’er cease to bemoan ✿ Whose moons and
    full moons[352] sorest severance dree:
 Masrúr, fare softly and mourn our loss; ✿ Loving thee our eyes lose
    their brilliancy:
 Would thy sight had seen, on our marching day, ✿ Tears shed by a heart
    in Hell’s flagrancy!
 Forget not the plight in the garth-shade pledged ✿ When we set enveiléd
    in privacy:

Then she presented herself before her husband, who lifted her into the
litter he had let make for her; and, when she found herself on the
camel’s back, she recited these couplets:—

 The Lord, empty House! to thee peace decree ✿ Long we bore therein
    growth of misery:
 Would my life-thread were shorn in that safe abode ✿ And o’ night I had
    died in mine ecstasy!
 Home-sickness I mourn, and my strangerhood ✿ Irks my soul, nor the
    riddle of future I ree.
 Would I wot shall I ever that house resee ✿ And find it, as erst, home
    of joy and glee!

Said her husband, “O Zayn al-Mawasif grieve not for thy departure from
thy dwelling; for thou shalt return to it ere long Inshallah!” And he
went on to comfort her heart and soothe her sorrow. Then all set out and
fared on till they came without the town and struck into the high road,
whereupon she knew that separation was certain and this was very
grievous to her. And while such things happened Masrur sat in his
quarters, pondering his case and that of his mistress, and his heart
forewarned him of severance. So he rose without stay and delay and
repairing to her house, found the outer door padlocked and read the
couplets she had written thereon; upon which he fell down in a fainting
fit. When he came to himself, he opened the first door and entering,
read what was written upon the second and likewise upon the third doors;
wherefore passion and love-longing and distraction grew on him. So he
went forth and hastened in her track, till he came up with the light
caravan[353] and found her at the rear, whilst her husband rode in the
van, because of his merchandise. When he saw her, he clung to the
litter, weeping and wailing for the anguish of parting, and recited
these couplets:—

 Would I wot for what crime shot and pierced are we ✿ Thro’ the days with
    Estrangement’s archery!
 O my heart’s desire, to thy door I came ✿ One day, when high waxt mine
    expectancy:
 But I found the home waste as the wold and void ✿ And I ’plained my pine
    and groaned wretchedly:
 And I asked the walls of my friends who fared ✿ With my heart in pawn
    and in pendency;

 And they said, “All marched from the camp and left ✿ An ambushed sorrow
    on hill and lea;”
 And a writ on the walls did they write, as write ✿ Folk who keep their
    faith while the Worlds are three.

Now when Zayn al-Mawasif heard these lines, she knew that it was
Masrur——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Zayn
al-Mawasif heard these lines she knew that it was Masrur and wept, she
and her handmaids, and said to him, “O Masrur, I conjure thee by Allah,
turn back, lest my husband see us twain together!” At her words he
swooned away; and when he revived, they took leave each of other and he
recited the following couplets:—

 The Caravan-chief calleth loud o’ night ✿ Ere the Breeze bear his cry in
    the morning-light:
 They girded their loads and prepared to fare, ✿ And hurried while
    murmured the leader-wight.
 They scent the scene on its every side, ✿ As their march through the
    valley they expedite.
 After winning my heart by their love they went ✿ O’ morn when their
    track could deceive my sight.
 O my neighbour fair, I reckt ne’er to part, ✿ Or the ground bedewed with
    my tears to sight!
 Woe betide my heart, now hath Severance hand ✿ To heart and vitals dealt
    bane and blight.

Then he clung to the litter, weeping and wailing, whilst she besought
him to turn back ere morn for fear of scorn. So he came up to her Haudaj
and farewelling her a second time, fell down in a swoon. He lay an hour
or so without life, and when he revived he found the caravan had fared
forth of sight. So he turned in the direction of their wayfare and
scenting the breeze which blew from their quarter, chanted these
improvised lines:—

 No breeze of Union to the lover blows ✿ But moan he maketh burnt with
    fiery woes:
 The Zephyr fans him at the dawn o’ day; ✿ But when he wakes the horizon
    lonely shows:

 On bed of sickness strewn in pain he lies, ✿ And weeps he bloody tears
    in burning throes,
 For the fair neighbour with my heart they bore ✿ ’Mid travellers urging
    beasts with cries and blows
 By Allah from their stead no Zephyr blew ✿ But sniffed I as the wight on
    eyeballs goes;[354]
 And snuff the sweetest South as musk it breathes ✿ And on the longing
    lover scent bestows.

Then Masrur returned, mad with love-longing, to her house, and finding
it lone from end to end[355] and forlorn of friend, wept till he wet his
clothes; after which he swooned away and his soul was like to leave his
body. When he revived, he recited these two couplets:—

 O Spring-camp have ruth on mine overthrowing ✿ My abjection, my
    leanness, my tears aye flowing,
 Waft the scented powder[356] of breezes they breathe ✿ In hope it cure
    heart of a grief e’er growing.

Then he returned to his own lodging confounded and tearful-eyed, and
abode there for the space of ten days. Such was his case; but as regards
the Jew, he journeyed on with Zayn al-Mawasif half a score days, at the
end of which he halted at a certain city and she, being by that time
assured that her husband had played her false, wrote to Masrur a letter
and gave it to Hubub, saying, “Send this to Masrur, so he may know how
foully and fully we have been tricked and how the Jew hath cheated us.”
So Hubub took it and despatched it to Masrur, and when it reached, its
news was grievous to him and he wept till he watered the ground. Then he
wrote a reply and sent it to his mistress, subscribing it with these two
couplets:—

 Where is the way to Consolation’s door ✿ How shall console him flames
    burn evermore?
 How pleasant were the days of yore all gone: ✿ Would we had somewhat of
    those days of yore!

When the missive reached Zayn al-Mawasif, she read it and again gave it
to her handmaid Hubub, saying to her, “Keep it secret!” However, the
husband came to know of their correspondence and removed with her and
her two women to another city, at a distance of twenty days’ march. Thus
it befel Zayn al-Mawasif; but as regards Masrur, sleep was not sweet to
him nor was peace peaceful to him or patience left to him, and he ceased
not to be thus till, one night, his eyes closed for weariness and he
dreamt that he saw Zayn al-Mawasif come to him in the garden and embrace
him; but presently he awoke and found her not: whereupon his reason fled
and his wits wandered and his eyes ran over with tears; love-longing to
the utterest gat hold of his heart and he recited these couplets:—

 Peace be to her, who visits me in sleeping phantasy ✿ Stirring desire
    and growing love to uttermost degree:
 Verily from that dream I rose with passion maddenèd ✿ For sight of
    fairest phantom come in peace to visit me:
 Say me, can dreams declare the truth anent the maid I love, ✿ And quench
    the fires of thirst and heal my love-sick malady?
 Anon to me she is liberal and she strains me to her breast; ✿ Anon she
    soothes mine anxious heart with sweetest pleasantry:
 From off her dark-red damask lips the dew I wont to sip ✿ The fine old
    wine that seemed to reek of musk’s perfumery.
 I wondered at the wondrous things between us done in dreams, ✿ And won
    my wish and all my will of things I hoped to see;
 And from that dreamery I rose, yet ne’er could hope to find ✿ Trace of
    my phantom save my pain and fiery misery:
 And when I looked on her a-morn, ’twas as a lover mad ✿ And every eve
    was drunken yet no wine brought jollity.
 O breathings of the northern breeze, by Allah fro’ me bear ✿ Them-wards
    the greetings of my love and best salams that be:
 Say them, “The wight with whom ye made that plight of fealty ✿ Time with
    his changes made him drain Death’s cup and slain is he!”

Then he went out and ceased not to weep till he came to her house and
looking on it, saw it empty and void. Presently, it seemed to him he
beheld her form before him, whereupon fires flamed in him and his griefs
redoubled and he fell down a-swoon;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Masrur
saw the vision of Zayn al-Mawasif and felt her embrace, he joyed with
passing joy. As soon as he awoke he sought her house, but finding it
empty and void he fell down a-swoon; and when he came to himself, he
recited these couplets:—

 Fro’ them inhale I scent of Ottar and of Bán; ✿ So fare with heart which
    ecstasies of love unman:
 I’d heal thy longings (love-sick lover!) by return ✿ To site of beauty
    void sans friend or mate to scan:
 But still it sickeneth me with parting’s ban and bane ✿ Minding mine
    olden plight with friend and partisan.

When he had made an end of these verses, he heard a raven croak beside
the house and wept, saying, “Glory be to God! The raven croaketh not
save over a ruined homestead.” Then he moaned and groaned and recited
these couplets:—

 What ails the Raven that he croaks my lover’s house hard by, ✿ And in my
    vitals lights a fire that flameth fierce and high?
 For times now past and gone I spent in joyance of their love ✿ With love
    my heart hath gone to waste and I sore pain aby:
 I die of longing love and lowe still in my liver raging ✿ And wrote to
    her but none there is who with the writ may hie:
 Ah well-away for wasted frame! Hath farèd forth my friend ✿ And if she
    will o’ nights return Oh would that thing wot I!
 Then, Ho thou Breeze of East, and thou by morn e’er visit her; ✿ Greet
    her from me and stand where doth her tribe encampèd lie!

Now Zayn al-Mawasif had a sister, by name Nasím—the Zephyr—who stood
espying him from a high place; and when she saw him in this plight, she
wept and sighed and recited these couplets:—

 How oft bewailing the place shall be this coming and going, ✿ While the
    House bemoaneth its builder with tear-flood ever a-flowing?
 Here was bestest joy ere fared my friend with the caravan hieing ✿ And
    its dwellers and brightest-suns[357] ne’er ceased in its walls
    a-glowing:
 Where be those fullest moons that here were alway arising? ✿ Bedimmed
    them the Shafts of Days their charms of spirit unknowing:

 Leave then what is past of the Fair thou wast ever with love espying ✿
    And look; for haply the days may restore them without foreshowing:
 For hadst thou not been, its dwellers had never departed flying ✿ Nor
    haddest thou seen the Crow with ill-omened croak a-crying.

Masrur wept sore hearing these verses and apprehending their
significance. Now Nasim knew that which was between him and her sister
of love and longing, ecstasy and passion; so she said to him, “Allah
upon thee, O Masrur, away from this house, lest any see thee and deem
thou comest on my account! Indeed thou hast caused my sister quit it and
now thou wouldst drive me also away. Thou knowest that, but for thee,
the house would not now be void of its dwellers: so be consoled for her
loss and leave her: what is past is past.” When he heard this, he wept
bitterly and said to her, “O Nasim, if I could, I should fly for longing
after her; so how can I be comforted for her?” Quoth she, “Thou hast no
device save patience;” and quoth he, “I beseech thee, for Allah’s sake,
write me a writ to her, as from thyself, and get me an answer from her,
to comfort my heart and quench the fire in my vitals.” She replied,
“With love and gladness,” and took inkcase and paper, whilst Masrur
began to set out to her the violence of his longing and what tortures he
suffered for the anguish of severance, saying:—This letter is from the
lover despairing and sorrowful ✿ the bereaved, the woeful ✿ with whom no
peace can stay ✿ nor by night nor by day ✿ but he weepeth copious tears
alway. ✿ Indeed, tears his eyelids have ulcerated and his sorrows have
kindled in his liver a fire unsated. His lamentation is lengthened and
restlessness is strengthened and he is as he were a bird unmated ✿ While
for sudden death he awaiteth ✿ Alas, my desolation for the loss of thee
✿ and alas, my yearning affliction for the companionship of thee! ✿
Indeed, emaciation hath wasted my frame ✿ and my tears a torrent became
✿ mountains and plains are straitened upon me for grame ✿ and of the
excess of my distress, I go saying:—

 Still cleaves to this homestead mine ecstasy, ✿ And redoubled pine for
    its dwellers I dree;
 And I send to your quarters the tale of my love ✿ And the cup of your
    love gave the Cup-boy to me.
 And for faring of you and your farness from home ✿ My wounded lids are
    from tears ne’er free:
 O thou leader of litters, turn back with my love ✿ For my heart
    redoubleth its ardency:

 Greet my love and say him that naught except ✿ Those brown-red lips
    deals me remedy:
 They bore him away and our union rent ✿ And my vitals with
    Severance-shaft shot he:
 My love, my lowe and my longing to him ✿ Convey, for of parting no cure
    I see:
 I swear an oath by your love that I ✿ Will keep pact and covenant
    faithfully,
 To none I’ll incline or forget your love ✿ How shall love-sick lover
    forgetful be?
 So with you be the peace and my greeting fair ✿ In letters that perfume
    of musk-pod bear.

Her sister Nasim admired his eloquence of tongue and the goodliness of
his speech and the elegance of the verses he sang, and was moved to ruth
for him. So she sealed the letter with virgin musk and incensed it with
Nadd-scent and ambergris, after which she committed it to a certain of
the merchants saying, “Deliver it not to any save to Zayn al-Mawasif or
to her handmaid Hubub.” Now when the letter reached her sister, she knew
it for Masrur’s dictation and recognised himself in the grace of its
expression. So she kissed it and laid it on her eyes, whilst the tears
streamed from her lids and she gave not over weeping, till she fainted.
As soon as she came to herself, she called for pencase and paper and
wrote him the following answer; complaining the while of her desire and
love-longing and ecstasy and what was hers to endure of pining for her
lover and yearning to him and the passion she had conceived for
him.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Zayn al-Mawasif
wrote the following reply to Masrur’s missive:—“This letter to my lord
and master I indite ✿ the king of my heart and my secret sprite ✿
Indeed, wakefulness agitateth me ✿ and melancholy increaseth on me ✿ and
I have no patience to endure the absence of thee ✿ O thou who excellest
sun and moon in brilliancy ✿ Desire of repose despoileth me ✿ and
passion destroyeth me ✿ and how should it be otherwise with me, seeing
that I am of the number of the dying? ✿ O glory of the world and
Ornament of life, she whose vital spirits are cut off shall her cup be
sweet to quaff? ✿ For that she is neither with the quick nor with the
dead.” And she improvised these couplets and said:—

 Thy writ, O Masrúr, stirred my sprite to pine ✿ For by Allah, all
    patience and solace I tyne:
 When I read thy scripture, my vitals yearned ✿ And watered the herbs of
    the wold these eyne.
 On Night’s wings I’d fly an a bird ✿ And sans thee I weet not the sweets
    of wine:
 Life’s unlawful to me since thou faredst far ✿ To bear parting-lowe is
    no force of mine.

Then she sprinkled the letter with powder of musk and ambergris and,
having sealed it with her signet, committed it to a merchant, saying,
“Deliver it to none save to my sister.” When it reached Nasim she sent
it to Masrur, who kissed it and laid it on his eyes and wept till he
fell into a trance. Such was their case; but as regards the Jew, he
presently heard of their correspondence and began again to travel from
place to place with Zayn al-Mawasif and her damsels, till she said to
him, “Glory to God! How long wilt thou fare with us and bear us afar
from our homes?” Quoth he, “I will fare on with you a year’s journey, so
no more letters may reach you from Masrur. I see how you take all my
monies and give them to him; so all that I miss I shall recover from
you: and I shall see if Masrur will profit you or have power to deliver
you from my hand.” Then he repaired to a blacksmith, after stripping her
and her damsels of their silken apparel and clothing them in raiment of
hair-cloth, and bade him make three pairs of iron shackles. When they
were ready, he brought the smith in to his wife, having said to him,
“Put the shackles on the legs of these three slave-girls.” The first
that came forward was Zayn al-Mawasif, and when the blacksmith saw her,
his sense forsook him and he bit his finger tips and his wit fled forth
his head and his transport grew sore upon him. So he said to the Jew,
“What is the crime of these damsels?” Replied the other, “They are my
slave-girls, and have stolen my good and fled from me.” Cried the smith,
“Allah disappoint thy jealous whims! By the Almighty, were this girl
before the Kazi of Kazis,[358] he would not even reprove her, though she
committed a thousand crimes a day. Indeed, she showeth not thief’s
favour and she cannot brook the laying of irons on her legs.” And he
asked him as a boon not to fetter her, interceding with him to forbear
the shackles. When she saw the blacksmith taking her part in this wise
she said to her husband, “I conjure thee, by Allah, bring me not forth
before yonder strange man!” Said he, “Why then camest thou forth before
Masrur?”; and she made him no reply. Then he accepted the smith’s
intercession, so far as to allow him to put a light pair of irons on her
legs, for that she had a delicate body, which might not brook harsh
usage, whilst he laid her handmaids in heavy bilboes, and they ceased
not, all three, to wear hair-cloth night and day till their bodies
became wasted and their colour changed. As for the blacksmith, exceeding
love had fallen on his heart for Zayn al-Mawasif; so he returned home in
great concern and he fell to reciting extempore these couplets:—

 Wither thy right, O smith, which made her bear ✿ Those iron chains her
    hands and feet to wear!
 Thou hast ensoiled a lady soft and bright, ✿ Marvel of marvels, fairest
    of the fair:
 Hadst thou been just, those anklets ne’er had been ✿ Of iron: nay of
    purest gold they were:
 By Allah! did the Kázis’ Kázi sight ✿ Her charms, he’d seat her in the
    highest chair.

Now it chanced that the Kazi of Kazis passed by the smith’s house and
heard him improvise these lines; so he sent for him and as soon as he
saw him said to him, “O blacksmith, who is she on whom thou callest so
instantly an eloquently and with whose love thy heart is full filled?”
The smith sprang to his feet and kissing the Judge’s hand, answered,
“Allah prolong the days of our lord the Kazi and ample his life!” Then
he described to him Zayn al-Mawasif’s beauty and loveliness, brilliancy
and perfection, and symmetry and grace and how she was lovely faced and
had a slender waist and heavily based; and acquainted him with the sorry
plight wherein she was for abasement and durance vile and lack of
victual. When the Kazi heard this, he said, “O blacksmith, send her to
us and show her that we may do her justice, for thou art become
accountable for the damsel and unless thou guide her to us, Allah will
punish thee at the Day of Doom.” “I hear and obey,” replied the smith
and betook himself without stay and delay to Zayn al-Mawasif’s lodging,
but found the door barred and heard a voice of plaintive tone that came
from heart forlorn and lone; and it was Zayn al-Mawasif reciting these
couplets:—

 I and my love in union were unite; ✿ And filled my friend to me cups
    clearly bright
 Between us reigned high mirth and jollity, ✿ Nor Eve nor Morn brought
    ’noyance or affright
 Indeed we spent most joyous time, with cup ✿ And lute and dulcimer to
    add delight,
 Till Time estranged our fair companionship; ✿ My lover went and blessing
    turned to blight.
 Ah would the Severance-raven’s croak were stilled ✿ And Union-dawn of
    Love show blessèd light!

When the blacksmith heard this, he wept like the weeping of the clouds.
Then he knocked at the door and the women said, “Who is at the door?”
Answered he, “’Tis I, the blacksmith,” and told them what the Kazi had
said and how he would have them appear before him and make their
complaint to him, that he might do them justice on their adversary.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
blacksmith told Zayn al-Mawasif what the Kazi had said, and how he
summoned them that he might apply the Lex Talionis to their adversary,
she rejoined, “How can we go to him, seeing the door is locked on us and
our feet shackled and the Jew hath the keys?” The smith replied, “I will
make the keys for the padlocks and therewith open door and shackles.”
Asked she, “But who will show us the Kazi’s house?”; and he answered, “I
will describe it to you.” She enquired, “But how can we appear before
him, clad as we are in hair-cloth reeking with sulphur?” And the smith
rejoined, “The Kazi will not reproach this to you, considering your
case.” So saying, he went forthright and made keys for the padlocks,
wherewith he opened the door and the shackles, and loosing the irons
from their legs, carried them forth and guided them to the Kazi’s
mansion. Then Hubub did off the hair-cloth garments from her lady’s body
and carried her to the Hammam, where she bathed her and attired her in
silken raiment, and her colour returned to her. Now it happened, by
exceeding good fortune, that her husband was abroad at a bride-feast in
the house of one of the merchants; so Zayn al-Mawasif, the Adornment of
Qualities, adorned herself with the fairest ornaments and repaired to
the Kazi, who at once on espying her rose to receive her. She saluted
him with softest speech and winsomest words, shooting him through the
vitals the while with the shafts of her glances, and said, “May Allah
prolong the life of our lord the Kazi and strengthen him to judge
between man and man!” Then she acquainted him with the affair of the
blacksmith and how he had done nobly by them, whenas the Jew had
inflicted on her and her women heart-confounding torments; and how his
victims deathwards he drave, nor was there any found to save. “O
damsel,” quoth the Kazi, “what is thy name?” “My name is Zayn
al-Mawasif,—Adornment of Qualities—and this my handmaid’s name is
Hubub.” “Thy name accordeth with the named and its sound conformeth with
its sense.” Whereupon she smiled and veiled her face, and he said to
her, “O Zayn al-Mawasif, hast thou a husband or not?” “I have no
husband”; “And what is thy Faith?” “That of Al-Islam, and the religion
of the Best of Men.” “Swear to me by Holy Law replete with signs and
instances that thou ownest the creed of the Best of Mankind.” So she
swore to him and pronounced the profession of the Faith. Then asked the
Kazi, “How cometh it that thou wastest thy youth with this Jew?” And she
answered, “Know, O Kazi (may Allah prolong thy days in contentment and
bring thee to thy will and thine acts with benefits seal!), that my
father left me, after his death, fifteen thousand dinars, which he
placed in the hands of this Jew, that he might trade therewith and share
his gains with me, the head of the property[359] being secured by legal
acknowledgment. When my father died, the Jew coveted me and sought me in
marriage of my mother, who said:—How shall I drive her from her Faith
and cause to become a Jewess? By Allah, I will denounce thee to the
rulers! He was affrighted at her words and taking the money, fled to the
town of Adan.[360] When we heard where he was, we came to Adan in search
of him, and when we foregathered with him there, he told us that he was
trading in stuffs with the monies and buying goods upon goods. So we
believed him and he ceased not to cozen us till he cast us into jail and
fettered us and tortured us with exceeding sore torments; and we are
strangers in the land and have no helper save Almighty Allah and our
lord the Kazi.” When the Judge heard this tale he asked Hubub the nurse,
“Is this indeed thy lady and are ye strangers and is she unmarried?”;
and she answered, “Yes.” Quoth he, “Marry her to me and on me be
incumbent manumission of my slaves and fasting and pilgrimage and
almsgiving of all my good an I do you not justice on this dog and punish
him for that he hath done!” And quoth she, “I hear and obey.” Then said
the Kazi, “Go, hearten thy heart and that of thy lady; and to-morrow,
Inshallah, I will send for this Miscreant and do you justice on him and
ye shall see prodigies of his punishment.” So Hubub called down
blessings upon him and went forth from him with her mistress, leaving
him with passion and love-longing fraught and with distress and desire
distraught. Then they enquired for the house of the second Kazi and
presenting themselves before him, told him the same tale. On like wise
did the twain, mistress and maid with the third and the fourth, till
Zayn al-Mawasif had made her complaint to all the four Kazis, each of
whom fell in love with her and besought her to wed him, to which she
consented with a “Yes”; nor wist any one of the four that which had
happened to the others. All this passed without the knowledge of the
Jew, who spent the night in the house of the bride-feast. And when
morning morrowed, Hubub arose and gat ready her lady’s richest raiment;
then she clad her therewith and presented herself with her before the
four Kazis in the court of justice. As soon as she entered, she veiled
her face and saluted the judges, who returned her salam and each and
every of them recognised her. One was writing, and the reed-pen dropped
from his hand, another was talking, and his tongue became tied, and a
third was reckoning and blundered in his reckoning; and they said to
her, “O admirable of attributes and singular among beauties! be not thy
heart other than hearty, for we will assuredly do thee justice and bring
thee to thy desire.” So she called down blessings on them and farewelled
them and went her ways.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Kazis
said to Zayn al-Mawasif, “O admirable of attributes and singular among
beauties! Be not thy heart other than hearty for our doing thy desire
and thy winning to thy will.” So she called down blessings on them and
farewelled them and went her ways, the while her husband abode with his
friends at the marriage-banquet and knew naught of her doings. Then she
proceeded to beseech the notaries and scribes and the notables and the
Chiefs of Police to succour her against that unbelieving miscreant and
deliver her from the torment she suffered from him. Then she wept with
sore weeping and improvised these couplets:—

 Rain showers of torrent tears, O Eyne and see ✿ An they will quench the
    fires that flame in me:
 After my robes of gold-embroidered silk ✿ I wake to wear the frieze of
    monkery:
 And all my raiment reeks of sulphur-fumes ✿ When erst my shift shed
    musky fragrancy:
 And hadst thou, O Masrúr, my case descried, ✿ Ne’er hadst thou borne my
    shame and ignomy.
 And eke Hubúb in iron chains is laid ✿ By Miscreant who unknows God’s
    Unity.
 The creed of Jewry I renounce and home, ✿ The Moslem’s Faith accepting
    faithfully
 Eastwards[361] I prostrate self in fairest guise ✿ Holding the only True
    Belief that be:

 Masrúr! forget not love between us twain ✿ And keep our vows and troth
    with goodly gree:
 I’ve changed my faith for sake of thee, and I ✿ For stress of love will
    cleave to secrecy:
 So haste to us, an us in heart thou bear, ✿ As noble spirit, nor as
    laggard fare.

After this she wrote a letter to Masrur, describing to him all that the
Jew had done with her from first to last and enclosed the verses
aforesaid. Then she folded the scroll and gave it to her maid Hubub,
saying, “Keep this in thy pocket, till we send it to Masrur.” Upon these
doings lo and behold! in came the Jew and seeing them joyous, said to
them, “How cometh it that I find you merry? Say me, hath a letter
reached you from your bosom friend Masrur?” Replied Zayn al-Mawasif, “We
have no helper against thee save Allah, extolled and exalted be He! He
will deliver us from thy tyranny, and except thou restore us to our
birth-place and homestead, we will complain of thee to-morrow to the
Governor of this town and to the Kazi.” Quoth he, “Who struck off the
shackles from your legs? But needs must I let make for each of you
fetters ten pounds in weight and go round about the city with you.”
Replied Hubub, “All that thou purposest against us thou shall fall into
thyself, so it please Allah the Most High, by token that thou hast
exiled us from our homes, and to-morrow we shall stand, we and thou,
before the Governor of the city.” They nighted on this wise and next
morning the Jew rose up in haste and went out to order new shackles,
whereupon Zayn al-Mawasif arose and repaired with her women to the
court-house, where she found the four Kazis and saluted them. They all
returned her salutation and the Kazi of Kazis said to those about him,
“Verily this damsel is lovely as the Venus-star[362] and all who see her
love her and bow before her beauty and loveliness.” Then he despatched
four sergeants, who were Sharífs,[363] saying, “Bring ye the criminal
after abjectest fashion.” So, when the Jew returned with the shackles
and found none in the house, he was confounded; but, as he abode in
perplexity, suddenly up came the officers and laying hold of him beat
him with a sore beating and dragged him face downwards before the Kazi.
When the judge saw him, he cried out in his face and said to him, “Woe
to thee, O foe of God, is it come to such a pass with thee that thou
doest the deed thou hast done and bringest these women far from their
country and stealest their monies and wouldst make them Jews? How durst
thou seek to make Miscreants of Moslems?” Answered the Jew, “O my lord
this woman is my wife.” Now when the Kazis heard this, they all cried
out, saying, “Throw this hound on the ground and come down on his face
with your sandals and beat him with sore blows, for his offence is
unpardonable.” So they pulled off his silken gear and clad him in his
wife’s raiment of hair-cloth, after which they threw him down and
plucked out his beard and belaboured him about the face with sandals.
Then they sat him on an ass, face to crupper, arsi-versy, and making him
take its tail in his hand, paraded him round about the city, ringing the
bell before him in every street; after which they brought him back to
the Judges in sorriest plight; and the four Kazis with one voice
condemned him to have his feet and hands cut off and lastly to be
crucified. When the accursed heard this sentence his sense forsook him
and he was confounded and said, “O my lords the Kazis, what would ye of
me?” They replied, “Say thou:—This damsel is not my wife and the monies
are her monies, and I have transgressed against her and brought her far
from her country.” So he confessed to this and the Kazis recorded his
confession in legal form and taking the money from him, gave it to Zayn
al-Mawasif, together with the document. Then she went away and all who
saw her were confounded at her beauty and loveliness, whilst each of the
Kazis looked for her committing herself to him. But, when she came to
her lodging, she made ready all matters she needed and waited till
night. Then she took what was light of load and weighty of worth, and
setting out with her maids under cover of the murks three days with
their nights fared on without stopping. Thus it was with her; but as
regards the Kazis they ordered the Jew to prison.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Kazis ordered
the Jew to prison and on the morrow they looked for Zayn al-Mawasif
coming to them, they and their assessors; but she presented herself not
to any of them. Then said the Chief Kazi, “I wish to-day to make an
excursion without the town on business there.” So he mounted his
she-mule and taking his page with him, went winding about the streets of
the town, searching its length and width for Zayn al-Mawasif, but never
finding her. On this errand he came upon the other three Kazis, going
about on the same, each deeming himself the only one to whom she had
given tryst. He asked them whither they were riding and why they were
going about the streets; when they told him their business, whereby he
saw that their plight was as his plight and their quest as his quest. So
they all four rode throughout the city, seeking her, but could hit on no
trace of her and returned to their houses, sick for love, and lay down
on the bed of langour. Presently the Chief Kazi bethought himself of the
blacksmith; so he sent for him and said to him, “O blacksmith, knowest
thou aught of the damsel whom thou didst direct to me? By Allah, an thou
discover her not to me, I will whack thee with whips.” Now when the
smith heard this, he recited these couplets[364]:—

 She who my all of love by love of her hath won ✿ Owns every Beauty and
    for others leaves she none:
 She gazes, a gazelle; she breathes, fresh ambergris ✿ She waves, a lake;
    she sways, a bough; she shines, a Sun.

Then said the blacksmith, “By Allah, O my lord, since she fared forth
from thy worshipful presence,[365] I have not set eyes on her; no, not
once. Indeed she took possession of my heart and wits and all my talk
and thoughts are of her. I went to her lodging but found her not, nor
found I any who could give me news of her, and it is as if she had dived
into the depths of the sea or had ascended to the sky.” Now when the
Kazi heard this, he groaned a groan, that his soul was like to depart
therefor, and he said, “By Allah, well it were had we never seen her!”
Then the smith went away, whilst the Kazi fell down on his bed and
became sick of languor for her sake, and on like wise fared it with the
other three Kazis and assessors. The mediciners paid them frequent
calls, but found in them no ailment requiring a leach: so the
city-notables went in to the Chief Kazi and saluting him, questioned him
of his case; whereupon he sighed and showed them that was in his heart,
reciting these couplets:—

 Stint ye this blame; enough I suffer from Love’s malady ✿ Nor chide the
    Kazi frail who fain must deal to folk decree!
 Who doth accuse my love let him for me find some excuse: ✿ Nor blame;
    for lovers blameless are in lover-slavery!
 I was a Kázi whom my Fate deigned aid with choicest aid ✿ By writ and
    reed and raisèd me to wealth and high degree;
 Till I was shot by sharpest shaft that knows nor leach nor cure ✿ By
    Damsel’s glance who came to spill my blood and murther me.
 To me came she, a Moslemah and of her wrongs she ’plained ✿ With lips
    that oped on Orient-pearls ranged fair and orderly:
 I looked beneath her veil and saw a wending moon at full ✿ Rising below
    the wings of Night engloomed with blackest blee:
 A brightest favour and a mouth bedight with wondrous smiles; ✿ Beauty
    had brought the loveliest garb and robed her cap-à-pie.
 By Allah, ne’er beheld my eyes a face so ferly fair ✿ Amid mankind
    whoever are, Arab or Ajamí.
 My Fair! What promise didst thou make what time to me thou said’st ✿
    “Whenas I promise I perform, O Kazi, faithfully.”
 Such is my stead and such my case calamitous and dire ✿ And ask me not,
    ye men of spunk, what dreadful teen I dree.

When he ended his verse he wept with sore weeping and sobbed one sob and
his spirit departed his body, which seeing they washed him and shrouded
him and prayed over him and buried him graving on his tomb these
couplets:—

 Perfect were lover’s qualities in him was brought a-morn, ✿ Slain by his
    love and his beloved, to this untimely grave:
 Kázi was he amid the folk, and aye ’twas his delight ✿ To foster all the
    folk and keep a-sheath the Justice-glaive:
 Love caused his doom and ne’er we saw among mankind before ✿ The lord
    and master louting low before his thrallèd slave.

Then they committed him to the mercy of Allah and went away to the
second Kazi, in company with the physician, but found in him nor injury
nor ailment needing a leach. Accordingly they questioned him of his case
and what preoccupied him; so he told them what ailed him, whereupon they
blamed him and chid him for his predicament and he answered them with
these couplets:—

 Blighted by her yet am I not to blame; ✿ Struck by the dart at me her
    fair hand threw.
 Unto me came a woman called Hubúb ✿ Chiding the world from year to year
    anew:
 And brought a damsel showing face that shamed ✿ Full moon that sails
    through Night-tide’s blackest hue,
 She showed her beauties and she ’plained her plain ✿ Which tears in
    torrents from her eyelids drew:
 I to her words gave ear and gazed on her ✿ Whenas with smiling lips she
    made me rue.
 Then with my heart she fared where’er she fared ✿ And left me pledged to
    sorrows soul subdue.
 Such is my tale! So pity ye my case ✿ And this my page with Kazi’s gear
    indue.

Then he sobbed one sob and his soul fled his flesh; whereupon they gat
ready his funeral and buried him commending him to the mercy of Allah;
after which they repaired to the third Kazi and the fourth, and there
befel them the like of what befel their brethren.[366] Furthermore, they
found the Assessors also sick for love of her, and indeed all who saw
her died of her love or, an they died not, lived on tortured with the
lowe of passion——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the city folk
found all the Kazis and the Assessors sick for love of her, and all who
saw her died love-sick or, an they died not, lived on tortured with the
lowe of passion for stress of pining to no purpose—Allah have mercy on
them one and all! Meanwhile Zayn al-Mawasif and her women drave on with
all diligence till they were far distant from the city and it so
fortuned that they came to a convent by the way, wherein dwelt a Prior
called Danis and forty monks.[367] When the Prior saw her beauty, he
went out to her and invited her to alight, saying, “Rest with us ten
days and after wend your ways.” So she and her damsels alighted and
entered the convent; and when Danis saw her beauty and loveliness, she
debauched his belief and he was seduced by her: wherefore he fell to
sending the monks, one after other with love-messages; but each who saw
her fell in love with her and sought her favours for himself, whilst she
excused and denied herself to them. But Danis ceased not his
importunities till he had dispatched all the forty, each one of whom
fell love-sick at first sight and plied her with blandishments never
even naming Danis; whilst she refused and rebuffed them with harsh
replies. At last when Danis’s patience was at an end and his passion was
sore on him, he said in himself, “Verily, the sooth-sayer saith:—Naught
scratcheth my skin but my own nail and naught like my own feet for mine
errand may avail.” So up he rose and made ready rich meats, and it was
the ninth day of her sojourn in the convent where she had purposed only
to rest. Then he carried them in to her and set them before her, saying,
“Bismillah, favour us by tasting the best of the food at our command.”
So she put forth her hand, saying, “For the name of Allah the
Compassionating, the Compassionate!” and ate, she and her handmaidens.
When she had made an end of eating, he said to her, “O my lady, I wish
to recite to thee some verses.” Quoth she, “Say on,” and he recited
these couplets:—

 Thou hast won my heart by cheek and eye of thee, ✿ I’ll praise for love
    in prose and poesy.

 Wilt fly a lover, love-sick, love-distraught ✿ Who strives in dreams
    some cure of love to see?
 Leave me not fallen, passion-fooled, since I ✿ For pine have left
    uncared the Monast’ry:
 O Fairest, ’tis thy right to shed my blood, ✿ So rue my case and hear
    the cry of me!

When Zayn al-Mawasif heard his verses, she answered him with these two
couplets:—

 O who suest Union, ne’er hope such delight ✿ Nor solicit my favours, O
    hapless wight!
 Cease to hanker for what thou canst never have: ✿ Next door are the
    greedy to sore despight.

Hearing this he returned to his place, pondering in himself and knowing
not how he should do in her affair, and passed the night in the sorriest
plight. But, as soon as the darkness was darkest Zayn al-Mawasif arose
and said to her handmaids, “Come, let us away, for we cannot avail
against forty men, monks, each of whom requireth me for himself.” Quoth
they, “Right willingly!” So they mounted their beasts and issued forth
the convent gate,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Zayn al-Mawasif
and her handmaids issued forth the convent gate and, under favour of the
night, rode on till they overtook a caravan, with which they mingled and
found it came from the city of ’Adan wherein the lady had dwelt.
Presently, Zayn al-Mawasif heard the people of the caravan discoursing
of her own case and telling how the Kazis and Assessors were dead of
love for her and how the townsfolk had appointed in their stead others
who released her husband from prison. Whereupon she turned to her maids
and asked them, “Heard ye that?”; and Hubub answered, “If the monks were
ravished with love of thee, whose belief it is that shunning women is
worship, how should it be with the Kazis, who hold that there is no
monkery in Al-Islam? But let us make our way to our own country, whilst
our affair is yet hidden.” So they drave on with all diligence. Such was
their case; but as regards the monks, on the morrow, as soon as it was
day they repaired to Zayn al-Mawasif’s lodging, to salute her, but found
the place empty, and their hearts sickened within them. So the first
monk rent his raiment and improvised these couplets:—

 Ho ye, my friends, draw near, for I forthright ✿ From you depart, since
    parting is my lot:
 My vitals suffer pangs o’ fiery love; ✿ Flames of desire in heart burn
    high and hot,
 For sake of fairest girl who sought our land ✿ Whose charms th’
    horizon’s full moon evens not.
 She fared and left me victimed by her love ✿ And slain by shaft those
    lids death-dealing shot.

Then another monk recited the following couplets:—

 O ye who with my vitals fled, have ruth ✿ On this unhappy: haste ye
    homeward-bound:
 They fared, and fared fair Peace on farthest track ✿ Yet lingers in mine
    ear that sweetest sound:
 Fared far, and far their fane; would Heaven I saw ✿ Their shade in
    vision float my couch around:
 And when they went wi’ them they bore my heart ✿ And in my tear-floods
    all of me left drowned.

A third monk followed with these extempore lines:—

 Throne you on highmost stead, heart, ears and sight ✿ Your wone’s my
    heart; mine all’s your dwelling-site:
 Sweeter than honey is your name a-lip, ✿ Running, as ’neath my ribs runs
    vital sprite:
 For Love hath made me as a toothpick[368] lean ✿ And drowned in tears of
    sorrow and despight:
 Let me but see you in my sleep, belike ✿ Shall clear my cheeks of tears
    that lovely sight.

Then a fourth recited the following couplets:—

 Dumb is my tongue and scant my speech for thee ✿ And Love the direst
    torture gars me dree:
 O thou full Moon, whose place is highest Heaven, ✿ For thee but double
    pine and pain in me.

And a fifth these[369]:—

 I love a moon of comely shapely form ✿ Whose slender waist hath title to
    complain:
 Whose lip-dews rival must and long-kept wine; ✿ Whose heavy haunches
    haunt the minds of men:
 My heart each morning burns with pain and pine ✿ And the night-talkers
    note I’m passion-slain;
 While down my cheeks carnelian-like the tears ✿ Of rosy red shower down
    like railing rain.

And a sixth the following:—

 O thou who shunnest him thy love misled! ✿ O Branch of Bán, O star of
    highmost stead!
 To thee of pine and passion I complain, ✿ O thou who fired me with
    cheeks rosy-red.
 Did e’er such lover lose his soul for thee, ✿ Or from prostration and
    from prayers fled?

And a seventh these:—

 He seized my heart and freed my tears to flow ✿ Brought strength to Love
    and bade my Patience go.
 His charms are sweet as bitter his disdain; ✿ And shafts of love his
    suitors overthrow.
 Stint blame, O blamer, and for past repent ✿ None will believe thee who
    dost Love unknow!

And on like wise all the rest of the monks shed tears and repeated
verses. As for Danis, the Prior, weeping and wailing redoubled on him,
for that he found no way to her enjoyment, and he chanted the following
couplets[370]:—

 My patience failed me when my lover went ✿ And fled that day mine aim
    and best intent.
 O Guide o’ litters lead their camels fair, ✿ Haply some day they’ll
    deign with me to tent!
 On parting-day Sleep parted from my lids ✿ And grew my grieving and my
    joy was shent.
 I moan to Allah what for Love I dree’d ✿ My wasted body and my forces
    spent.

Then, despairing of her, they took counsel together and with one mind
agreed to fashion her image and set it up with them, and applied
themselves to this till there came to them the Destroyer of delights and
Severer of societies. Meanwhile, Zayn al-Mawasif fared on, without
ceasing, to find her lover Masrur, till she reached her own house. She
opened the doors, and entered; then she sent to her sister Nasim, who
rejoiced with exceeding joy at the news of her return and brought her
the furniture and precious stuffs left in her charge. So she furnished
the house and dressed it, hanging the curtains over the doors and
burning aloes-wood and musk and ambergris and other essences till the
whole place reeked with the most delightful perfumes: after which the
Adornment of Qualities donned her finest dress and decorations and sat
talking with her maids, whom she had left behind when journeying, and
related to them all that had befallen her first and last. Then she
turned to Hubub and giving her dirhams, bade her fetch them something to
eat. So she brought meat and drink and when they had made an end of
eating and drinking,[371] Zayn al-Mawasif bade Hubub go and see where
Masrur was and how it fared with him. Now he knew not of her return; but
abode with concern overcast and sorrow might not be overpast;——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Zayn
al-Mawasif entered her house she was met by her sister Nasim who brought
her the furniture and stuffs wherewith she furnished the place; and then
she donned her finest dress. But Masrur knew naught of her return and
abode with concern overcast and sorrow might not be overpast; no peace
prevailed with him nor was patience possible to him. Whenas pine and
passion, desire and distraction waxed on him, he would solace himself by
reciting verse and go to the house and set him its walls to buss. It
chanced that he went out that day to the place where he had parted from
his mistress and repeated this rare song:—

 My wrongs hide I, withal they show to sight; ✿ And now mine eyes from
    sleep to wake are dight.
 I cry when melancholy tries my sprite ✿ Last not, O world nor work more
    despight;
           Lo hangs my soul ’twixt hardship and affright.


 Were the Sultan hight Love but fair to me, ✿ Slumber mine eyes’
    companion were to me,
 My Lords, some little mercy spare to me, ✿ Chief of my tribe: be
    debonnair to me,
           Whom Love cast down, erst rich now pauper-wight!

 Censors may blame thee but I look beyond ✿ Mine ears I stop and leave
    their lies unconned
 And keep my pact wi’ those I love so fond: ✿ They say, “Thou lov’st a
    runaway!” I respond,
           “Whist! whenas Fate descends she blinds the sight!”

Then he returned to his lodging and sat there weeping, till sleep
overcame him, when he saw in a dream as if Zayn al-Mawasif were come to
the house, and awoke in tears. So he set off to go thither, improvising
these couplets:—

 Shall I be consoled when Love hath mastered the secret of me ✿ And my
    heart is aglow with more than the charcoal’s ardency?
 I love her whose absence I plain before Allah for parting-stower ✿ And
    the shifts of the days and doom which allotted me Destiny:
 When shall our meeting be, O wish o’ my heart and will? ✿ O favour of
    fullest Moon, when shall we Re-union see?

As he made an end of his recitation, he found himself walking adown in
Zayn al-Mawasif’s street and smelt the sweet savour of the pastiles
wherewithal she had incensed the house; wherefore his vitals fluttered
and his heart was like to leave his breast and desire flamed up in him
and distraction redoubled upon him; when lo, and behold! Hubub, on her
way to do her lady’s errand suddenly appeared at the head of the street
and he rejoiced with joy exceeding. When she saw him, she went up to him
and saluting him, gave him the glad news of her mistress’s return,
saying, “She hath sent me to bid thee to her.” Whereat he was glad
indeed, with gladness naught could exceed; and she took him and returned
with him to the house. When Zayn al-Mawasif saw him, she came down to
him from the couch and kissed him and he kissed her and she embraced him
and he embraced her; nor did they leave kissing and embracing till both
swooned away for stress of affection and separation. They lay a long
while senseless, and when they revived, Zayn al-Mawasif bade Hubub fetch
her a gugglet of sherbet of sugar and another of sherbet of lemons. So
she brought what she desired and they sat eating and drinking nor ceased
before nightfall, when they fell to recalling all that had befallen them
from commencement to conclusion. Then she acquainted him with her return
to Al-Islam, whereat he rejoiced and he also became a Moslem. On like
wise did her women, and they all repented to Allah Almighty of their
infidelity. On the morrow she bade send for the Kazi and the witnesses
and told them that she was a widow and had completed the
purification-period and was minded to marry Masrur. So they drew up the
wedding-contract between them and they abode in all delight of life.
Meanwhile, the Jew, when the people of Adan released him from prison,
set out homewards and fared on nor ceased faring till he came within
three days’ journey of the city. Now as soon as Zayn al-Mawasif heard of
his coming she called for her handmaid Hubub and said to her, “Go to the
Jews’ burial-place and there dig a grave and plant on it sweet basil and
jessamine and sprinkle water thereabout. If the Jew come and ask thee of
me, answer:—My mistress died twenty days ago of chagrin on thine
account. If he say, show me her tomb, take him to the grave and after
weeping over it and making moan and lament before him, contrive to cast
him therein and bury him alive.”[372] And Hubub answered, “I hear and I
obey.” Then they laid up the furniture in the store closets, and Zayn
al-Mawasif removed to Masrur’s lodging, where he and she abode eating
and drinking, till the three days were past; at the end of which the Jew
arrived and knocked at the door of his house. Quoth Hubub, “Who’s at the
door?”; and quoth he, “Thy master.” So she opened to him and he saw the
tears railing down her cheeks and said, “What aileth thee to weep and
where is thy mistress?” She replied, “My mistress is dead of chagrin on
thine account.” When he heard this, he was perplexed and wept with sore
weeping and presently said, “O Hubub, where is her tomb?” So she carried
him to the Jews’ burial-ground and showed him the grave she had dug;
whereupon he shed bitter tears and recited this pair of couplets[373]:—

 Two things there are, for which if eyes wept tear on tear ✿ Of blood,
    till they were like indeed to disappear,
 They never could fulfil the Tithe of all their due: ✿ And these are
    prime of youth and loss of loveling dear.

Then he wept again with bitter tears and recited these also:—

 Alack and Alas! Patience taketh flight; ✿ And from parting of friend to
    sore death I’m dight:
 O how woeful this farness from dear one, and oh ✿ How my heart is rent
    by mine own unright!
 Would Heaven my secret I erst had kept ✿ Nor had told the pangs and my
    liver-blight:
 I lived in all solace and joyance of life ✿ Till she left and left me in
    piteous plight:
 O Zayn al-Mawasif, I would there were ✿ No parting departing my frame
    and sprite:
 I repent me for troth-breach and blame my guilt ✿ Of unruth to her
    whereon hopes I built.

When he had made an end of this verse, he wept and groaned and lamented
till he fell down a-swoon, whereupon Hubub made haste to drag him to the
grave and throw him in, whilst he was insensible yet quick withal. Then
she stopped up the grave on him and returning to her mistress acquainted
her with what had passed, whereat she rejoiced with exceeding joy and
recited these two couplets:—

 The world sware that for ever ’twould gar me grieve: ✿ ’Tis false, O
    world, so thine oath retrieve[374]!
 The blamer is dead and my love’s in my arms: ✿ Rise to herald of joys
    and tuck high thy sleeve[375]!

Then she and Masrur abode each with other in eating and drinking and
sport and pleasure and good cheer, till there came to them the Destroyer
of delights and Sunderer of societies and Slayer of sons and daughters.
And I have also heard tell the following tale of

-----

Footnote 307:

  _i.e._ “Adornment of (good) Qualities.” See the name punned on in
  Night dcccli. Lane omits this tale because it contains the illicit
  “Amours of a Christian and a Jewess who dupes her husband in various
  abominable ways.” The text has been taken from the Mac. and the Bresl.
  Edits. x. 72 etc. In many parts the former is a mere Epitome.

Footnote 308:

  The face of her who owns the garden.

Footnote 309:

  _i.e._ I am no public woman.

Footnote 310:

  _i.e._ with the sight of the garden and its mistress—purposely left
  vague.

Footnote 311:

  Arab. “Dádat.” Night dcclxxvi. vol. vii. p. 372.

Footnote 312:

  Meaning respectively “Awaking” (or blowing hard), “Affairs” (or
  Misfortunes) and “Flowing” (blood or water). They are evidently
  intended for the names of Jewish slave-girls.

Footnote 313:

  _i.e._ the brow-curls, or accroche-cœurs. See vol. i. 168.

Footnote 314:

  Arab. “Wisháh” usually applied to woman’s broad belt, stomacher
  (Al-Hariri Ass. of Rayy).

Footnote 315:

  The old Greek, “Stephane.”

Footnote 316:

  Alluding to the popular fancy of the rain-drop which becomes a pearl.

Footnote 317:

  Arab. “Ghází” = one who fights for the faith.

Footnote 318:

  _i.e._ people of different conditions.

Footnote 319:

  The sudden change appears unnatural to Europeans; but an Eastern girl
  talking to a strange man in a garden is already half won. The beauty,
  however, intends to make trial of her lover’s generosity before
  yielding.

Footnote 320:

  These lines have occurred in the earlier part of the Night: I quote
  Mr. Payne for variety.

Footnote 321:

  Arab. “Al-Sháh mát” = the King is dead, Pers. and Arab. grotesquely
  mixed: Europeans explain “Checkmate” in sundry ways, all more or less
  wrong.

Footnote 322:

  Cheating (Ghadr) is so common that Easterns who have no tincture of
  Western civilisation look upon it not only as venial but laudable when
  one can take advantage of a simpleton. No idea of “honour” enters into
  it. Even in England the old lady whist-player of the last generation
  required to be looked after pretty closely—if Mr. Charles Dickens is
  to be trusted.

Footnote 323:

  Arab. “Al-Gháliyah,” whence the older English Algallia. See vol. i.
  128. The Voyage of Linschoten, etc. Hakluyt Society MDCCCLXXXV., with
  notes by my learned friend the late Arthur Coke Burnell whose early
  death was so sore a loss to Oriental students.

Footnote 324:

  A favourite idiom, “What news bringest thou?” (“O Asám!” Arab. Prov.
  ii. 589) used by Háris bin Amrú, King of Kindah, to the old woman Asám
  whom he had sent to inspect a girl he purposed marrying.

Footnote 325:

  Amongst the Jews the Arab Salám becomes “Shalúm” and a Jewess would
  certainly not address this ceremonial greeting to a Christian. But
  Eastern story-tellers care little for these minutiæ; and the
  “Adornment of Qualities,” was not by birth a Jewess as the sequel will
  show.

Footnote 326:

  Arab. “Sálifah,” the silken plaits used as adjuncts. See vol. iii.
  313.

Footnote 327:

  I have translated these lines in vol. i. 131, and quoted Mr. Torrens
  in vol. iv. 235. Here I borrow from Mr. Payne.

Footnote 328:

  Mr. Payne notes:—Apparently some place celebrated for its fine bread,
  as Gonesse in seventeenth-century France. It occurs also in Bresl.
  Edit. (iv. 203) and Dozy does not understand it. But Arj the root =
  good odour.

Footnote 329:

  Arab. “Tás,” from Pers. Tásah. M. Charbonneau, a Professor of Arabic
  at Constantine and Member of the Asiatic Soc. Paris, who published the
  Histoire de Chams-Eddine et Nour-Eddine with Maghrabi punctuation
  (Paris, Hachette, 1852) remarks the similarity of this word to Tazza
  and a number of other whimsical coincidences as Zauj, ζυγός, jugum;
  Inkár, negare; matrah, matelas; Ishtirá, acheter etc. To which I may
  add wasat, waist; zabad, civet; Bás, buss (kiss); uzrub (pron. Zrub),
  drub; Kat’, cut; Tarík, track; etc., etc.

Footnote 330:

  We should say “To her (I drink)” etc.

Footnote 331:

  This is _ad captandum_. The lovers becoming Moslems would secure the
  sympathy of the audience. In the sequel (Night dccclviii) we learn
  that the wilful young woman was a born Moslemah who had married a Jew
  but had never Judaized.

Footnote 332:

  The doggrel of this Kasidah is not so phenomenal as some we have seen.

Footnote 333:

  Arab. ’Andam = Brazil wood, vol. iii. 263.

Footnote 334:

  Arab. “Himà.” See supra, p. 102.

Footnote 335:

  _i.e._ her favours were not lawful till the union was sanctified by
  heart-whole (if not pure) love.

Footnote 336:

  Arab. “Mansúr wa munazzam” = oratio soluta et ligata.

Footnote 337:

  _i.e._ the cup-bearers.

Footnote 338:

  Which is not worse than usual.

Footnote 339:

  _i.e._ “Ornament of Qualities.”

Footnote 340:

  The ’Akík, a mean and common stone, ranks high in Moslem poetry on
  account of the saying of Mohammed recorded by Ali and Ayishah “Seal
  with seals of Carnelian.” (’Akik).

Footnote 341:

  See note ii. at the end of this volume.

Footnote 342:

  Arab. “Mahall” as opposed to the lady’s “Manzil,” which would be
  better “Makám.” The Arabs had many names for their old habitations,
  _e.g._: Kubbah, of brick; Sutrah, of sun-dried mud; Hazírah, of wood;
  Tiráf, a tent of leather; Khabáa, of wool; Kash’a, of skins; Nakhád,
  of camel’s or goat’s hair; Khaymah, of cotton cloth; Wabar, of soft
  hair as the camel’s undercoat and Fustát (the well-known P.N.), a tent
  of horsehair or any hair (Sha’ar) but Wabar.

Footnote 343:

  This is the Maghribi form of the Arab. Súk = a bazar-street, known
  from Tanjah (Tangiers) to Timbuctoo.

Footnote 344:

  Arab. “Walímah” usually = a wedding-feast. According to the learned
  Nasíf al-Yazají the names of entertainments are as follows: Al-Jafalà
  = a general invitation, opp. to Al-Nakarà, especial; Khurs, a
  childbirth feast; ’Akíkah, when the boy-babe is first shaved; A’zár =
  circumcision-feast; Hizák, when the boy has finished his perlection of
  the Koran; Milák, on occasion of marriage-offer; Wazímah, a mourning
  entertainment; Wakírah = a “house-warming”; Nakí’ah, on returning from
  wayfare; ’Akírah, at beginning of the month Rajab; Kirà = a
  guest-feast and Maadubah, a feast for other cause; any feast.

Footnote 345:

  Arab. “Anistaná” the pop. phrase = thy company gladdens us.

Footnote 346:

  Here “Muákhát” or making mutual brotherhood would be = entering into a
  formal agreement for partnership. For the forms of “making
  brotherhood,” see vol. iii. 15.

Footnote 347:

  Arab. “Ishárah” in classical Arab. signs with the finger (beckoning);
  Aumá, with the hand; Ramz, with the lips; Khalaj, with the eyelids
  (wink); and Ghamz, with the eye. Aumáz is a furtive glance, especially
  of women, and Ilház, a side-glance from lahaza, limis oculis intuitus
  est. See Preston’s Al-Hariri, p. 181.

Footnote 348:

  Arab. “Haudaj” (Hind. Haudah, vulg. Howda = elephant-saddle), the
  women’s camel-litter, a cloth stretched over a wooden frame. See the
  Prize-poem of Lebid, v. 12.

Footnote 349:

  _i.e._ the twelve days’ visit.

Footnote 350:

  See note, vol. vii. 267. So Dryden (Virgil):—

            And the hoarse raven on the blasted bough
            By croaking to the left presaged the coming blow.

  And Gay (Fable xxxvii.):—

                     That raven on the left-hand oak,
                     Curse on his ill-betiding croak!

  In some Persian tales two crows seen together are a good omen.

Footnote 351:

  Vulgar Moslems hold that each man’s fate is written in the sutures of
  his skull but none can read the lines. See vol. iii. 123.

Footnote 352:

  _i.e._ cease not to bemoan her lot whose moon-faced beloved ones are
  gone.

Footnote 353:

  Arab. “Rukb” used of a return caravan; and also meaning travellers on
  camels. The vulgar however apply “Rákib” (a camel-rider) to a man on
  horseback who is properly Fáris plur. “Khayyálah,” while “Khayyál” is
  a good rider. Other names are “Fayyál” (elephant-rider), Baghghál
  (mule-rider) and Hammár (donkey-rider).

Footnote 354:

  A popular exaggeration. See vol. i. 117.

Footnote 355:

  Lit. Empty of tent-ropes (Atnáb).

Footnote 356:

  Arab. “’Abír,” a fragrant powder sprinkled on face, body and clothes.
  In India it is composed of rice flower or powdered bark of the mango,
  Deodar (_uvaria longifolia_), Sandal-wood, lign-aloes or curcuma
  (_zerumbat_ or _zedoaria_) with rose-flowers, camphor, civet and
  anise-seed. There are many of these powders: see in Herklots Chiksá,
  Phul, Ood, Sundul, Uggur, and Urgujja.

Footnote 357:

  _i.e._ fair faced boys and women. These lines are from the Bresl.
  Edit. x. 160.

Footnote 358:

  _i.e._ the Chief Kazi. For the origin of the Office and title see vol.
  ii. 90, and for the Kazi al-Arab who administers justice among the
  Badawin see Pilgrimage iii. 45.

Footnote 359:

  Arab. “Raas al-Mál” = capital, as opposed to Ribá or Ribh = interest.
  This legal expression has been adopted by all Moslem races.

Footnote 360:

  Our Aden which is thus noticed by Abulfeda (A.D. 1331): “Aden in the
  lowlands of Tehámah * * * also called Abyana from a man (who found
  it?), built upon the sea-shore, a station (for land travellers) and a
  sailing-place for merchant ships India-bound, is dry and sunparcht
  (Kashifah, squalid, scorbutic) and sweet water must be imported. * * *
  It lies 86 parasangs from San’á but Ibn Haukal following the
  travellers makes it three stages. The city, built on the skirt of a
  wall-like mountain, has a water-gate and a land-gate known as Bab
  al-Sákayn. But ’Adan Lá’ah (the modest, the timid, the less known as
  opposed to Abyan, the better known?) is a city in the mountains of
  Sabir, Al-Yaman, whence issued the supporters of the Fatimite Caliphs
  of Egypt.” ’Adan etymologically means in Arab. and Heb. pleasure
  (ἥδονη), Eden (the garden), the Heaven in which spirits will see Allah
  and our “Coal-hole of the East,” which we can hardly believe ever to
  have been an Eden. Mr. Badger who supplied me with this note described
  the two Adens in a paper in Ocean Highways, which he cannot now find.
  In the ’Ajáib al-Makhlúkát, Al-Kazwíni (ob. A.D. 1275) derives the
  name from Ibn Sinán bin Ibrahím; and is inclined there to place the
  Bír al-Mu’attal (abandoned well) and the Kasr al-Mashíd (lofty palace)
  of Koran xxii. 44; and he adds “Kasr al-Misyad” to those mentioned in
  the tale of Sayf al-Mulúk and Badí’a al-Jamál.

Footnote 361:

  Meaning that she had been carried to the Westward of Meccah.

Footnote 362:

  Arab. “Zahrawíyah” which contains a kind of double entendre. Fátimah
  the Prophet’s only daughter is titled Al-Zahrá the “bright-blooming”;
  and this is also an epithet of Zohrah the planet Venus. For Fatimah
  see vol. vi. 145. Of her Mohammed said, “Love your daughters, for I
  too am a father of daughters” and, “Love them, they are the
  comforters, the dearlings.” The Lady appears in Moslem history a
  dreary young woman (died æt. 28) who made this world, like Honorius, a
  hell in order to win a next-world heaven. Her titles are Zahrá and
  Batúl (Pilgrimage ii. 90) both signifying virgin. Burckhardt
  translates Zahrá by “bright blooming” (the etymological sense); it
  denotes literally a girl who has not menstruated, in which state of
  purity the Prophet’s daughter is said to have lived and died. “Batúl”
  has the sense of a “clean maid” and is the title given by Eastern
  Christians to the Virgin Mary. The perpetual virginity of Fatimah even
  after motherhood (Hasan and Husayn) is a point of orthodoxy in
  Al-Islam as Juno’s with the Romans and Umá’s with the Hindu
  worshippers of Shiva. During her life Mohammed would not allow Ali a
  second wife, and he held her one of the four perfects, the other three
  being Asia wife of “Pharaoh,” the Virgin Mary and Khadíjah his own
  wife. She caused much scandal after his death by declaring that he had
  left her the Fadak estate (Abulfeda I, 133, 273) a castle with a fine
  palm-orchard near Khaybar. Abu Bakr dismissed the claim quoting the
  Apostle’s Hadis. “We prophets are folk who will away nothing: what we
  leave is alms gift to the poor,” and Shi’ahs greatly resent his
  decision. (See Dabistan iii. 51–52 for a different rendering of the
  words). I have given the popular version of the Lady Fatimah’s death
  and burial (Pilgrimage ii. 315) and have remarked that Moslem
  historians delight in the obscurity which hangs over her last
  resting-place, as if it were an honour even for the receptacle of her
  ashes to be concealed from the eyes of men. Her repute is a curious
  comment on Tom Hood’s

                 “Where woman has never a soul to save.”

Footnote 363:

  For Sharif and Sayyid, descendants of Mohammed, see vol. iv. 170.

Footnote 364:

  These lines have occurred with variants in vol. iii. 257, and iv. 50.

Footnote 365:

  Arab. “Hazrat,” esp. used in India and corresponding with our mediæval
  “_præsentia vostra_.”

Footnote 366:

  This wholesale slaughter by the tale-teller of worshipful and reverend
  men would bring down the gallery like a Spanish tragedy in which all
  the actors are killed.

Footnote 367:

  They are called indifferently “Ruhbán” = monks or “Batárikah” =
  patriarchs. See vol. ii. 89.

Footnote 368:

  Arab. “Khilál.” The toothpick, more esteemed by the Arabs than by us,
  is, I have said, often used by the poets as an emblem of attenuation
  without offending good taste. Nizami (Layla u Majnún) describes a
  lover as “thin as a toothpick.” The “elegant” Hariri (Ass. of Barkaid)
  describes a toothpick with feminine attributes, “shapely of shape,
  attractive, provocative of appetite, delicate as the leanest of
  lovers, polished as a poniard and bending as a green bough.”

Footnote 369:

  From Bresl. Edit. x. 194.

Footnote 370:

  Trébutien (vol. ii. 344 et seq.) makes the seven monks sing as many
  anthems, viz. (1) Congregamini; (2) Vias tuas demonstra mihi; (3)
  Dominus illuminatis; (4) Custodi linguam; (5) Unam petii a Domino; (6)
  Nec adspiciat me visus, and (7) Turbatus est a furore oculus meus.
  Dánis the Abbot chaunts Anima mea turbata est valdè.

Footnote 371:

  A neat and characteristic touch: the wilful beauty eats and drinks
  before she thinks of her lover. Alas for Masrur married.

Footnote 372:

  The unfortunate Jew, who seems to have been a model husband
  (Orientally speaking), would find no pity with a coffee-house audience
  because he had been guilty of marrying a Moslemah. The union was null
  and void therefore the deliberate murder was neither high nor petty
  treason. But, The Nights, though their object is to adorn a tale,
  never deliberately attempt to point a moral and this is one of their
  many charms.

Footnote 373:

  These lines have repeatedly occurred. I quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 374:

  _i.e._ by the usual expiation. See vol. iii. 136.

Footnote 375:

  Arab. “Shammirí” = up and ready!




            ALI NUR AL-DIN AND MIRIAM THE GIRDLE-GIRL.[376]


There was once in days of yore and in ages and times long gone before in
the parts of Cairo, a merchant named Táj al-Dín who was of the most
considerable of the merchants and of the chiefs of the freeborn. But he
was given to travelling everywhere and loved to fare over wild and wold,
waterless lowland and stony waste, and to journey to the isles of the
seas, in quest of dirhams and dinars: wherefore he had in his time
encountered dangers and suffered duresse of the way such as would
grizzle little children and turn their black hair grey. He was possessed
of black slaves and Mamelukes, Eunuchs and concubines, and was the
wealthiest of the merchants of his time and the goodliest of them in
speech, owning horses and mules and Bactrian camels and dromedaries;
sacks great and small of size; goods and merchandise and stuffs such as
muslins of Hums, silks and brocades of Ba’allak, cotton of Mery, stuffs
of India, gauzes of Baghdad, burnouses of Moorland and Turkish white
slaves and Abyssinian castratos and Grecian girls and Egyptian boys; and
the coverings of his bales were silk with gold purfled fair, for he was
wealthy beyond compare. Furthermore he was rare of comeliness,
accomplished in goodliness, and gracious in his kindliness, even as one
of his describers doth thus express:—

 A merchant I spied whose lovers ✿ Were fighting in furious guise:
 Quoth he, “Why this turmoil of people?” ✿ Quoth I, “Trader, for those
    fine eyes!”

And saith another in his praise and saith well enough to accomplish the
wish of him:—

 Came a merchant to pay us a visit ✿ Whose glance did my heart surprise:
 Quoth he, “What surprised thee so?” ✿ Quoth I, “Trader, ’twas those fine
    eyes.”

Now that merchant had a son called Ali Nur al-Din, as he were the full
moon whenas it meeteth the sight on its fourteenth night, a marvel of
beauty and loveliness, a model of form and symmetrical grace, who was
sitting one day as was his wont, in his father’s shop, selling and
buying, giving and taking when the sons of the merchants girt him around
and he was amongst them as moon among stars, with brow flower-white and
cheeks of rosy light in down the tenderest dight, and body like
alabaster-bright even as saith of him the poet:—

 “Describe me!” a fair one said. ✿ Said I, “Thou ’art Beauty’s queen.”
 And, speaking briefest speech, ✿ “All charms in thee are seen.”

And as saith of him one of his describers:—

 His mole upon plain of cheek is like ✿ Ambergrís-crumb on marble plate,
 And his glances likest the sword proclaim ✿ To all Love’s rebels “The
    Lord is Great!”[377]

The young merchants invited him saying, “O my lord Nur al-Din, we wish
thee to go this day a-pleasuring with us in such a garden.” And he
answered, “Wait till I consult my parent, for I cannot go without his
consent.” As they were talking, behold, up came Taj al-Din, and his son
looked to him and said, “O father mine, the sons of the merchants have
invited me to wend a-pleasuring with them in such a garden. Dost thou
grant me leave to go?” His father replied, “Yes, O my son, fare with
them;” and gave him somewhat of money. So the young men mounted their
mules and asses and Nur al-Din mounted a she-mule and rode with them to
a garden, wherein was all that soul desireth and that eye charmeth. It
was high of walls which from broad base were seen to rise; and it had a
gateway vault-wise with a portico like a saloon and a door azure as the
skies, as it were one of the gates of Paradise: the name of the
door-keeper was Rizwán,[378] and over the gate were trained an hundred
trellises which grapes overran; and these were of various dyes, the red
like coralline, the black like the snouts of Súdán[379]-men and the
white like egg of the pigeon-hen. And in it peach and pomegranate were
shown and pear, apricot and pomegranate were grown and fruits with and
without stone hanging in clusters or alone,——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the sons
of the merchants entered the vergier, they found therein all that soul
desireth or eye charmeth, grapes of many hues grown, hanging in bunches
or alone, even as saith of them the poet:—

 Grapes tasting with the taste of wine ✿ Whose coats like blackest
    Raven’s shine:
 Their sheen, amid the leafage shows, ✿ Like women’s fingers henna’d
    fine.

And as saith another on the same theme:—

 Grape-bunches likest as they sway ✿ A-stalk, my body frail and snell:
 Honey and water thus in jar, ✿ When sourness past, make Hydromel.

Then they entered the arbour of the garden and saw there Rizwan the
gate-keeper sitting, as he were Rizwan the Paradise-guardian, and on the
door were written these lines:—

 Garth Heaven-watered wherein clusters waved ✿ On boughs which full of
    sap to bend were fain:
 And, when the branches danced on Zephyr’s palm, ✿ The Pleiads shower’d
    as gifts[380] fresh pearls for rain.

And within the arbour were written these two couplets:—

 Come with us, friend, and enter thou ✿ This garth that cleanses rust of
    grief:
 Over their skirts the Zephyrs trip[381] ✿ And flowers in sleeve to laugh
    are lief.[382]

So they entered and found all manner fruits in view and birds of every
kind and hue, such as ring-dove, nightingale and curlew; and the turtle
and the cushat sang their love lays on the sprays. Therein were rills
that ran with limpid wave and flowers suave; and bloom for whose perfume
we crave and it was even as saith of it the poet in these two couplets:—

 The Zephyr breatheth o’er its branches, like ✿ Fair girls that trip as
    in fair skirts they pace:
 Its rills resemble swords in hands of knights ✿ Drawn from the scabbard
    and containing-case.[383]

And again as singeth the songster:—

 The streamlet swings by branchy wood and aye ✿ Joys in its breast those
    beauties to display;
 And Zephyr noting this, for jealousy ✿ Hastens and bends the branches
    other way.

On the trees of the garden were all manner fruits, each in two
sorts, and amongst them the pomegranate, as it were a ball of
silver-dross,[384] whereof saith the poet and saith right well:—

 Granados of finest skin, like the breasts ✿ Of maid firm-standing in
    sight of male;
 When I strip the skin, they at once display ✿ The rubies compelling all
    sense to quail.

And even as quoth another bard:—

 Close prest appear to him who views th’ inside ✿ Red rubies in brocaded
    skirts bedight:
 Granado I compare with marble dome ✿ Or virgin’s breasts delighting
    every sight:
 Therein is cure for every ill as e’en ✿ Left an Hadís the Prophet pure
    of sprite;
 And Allah (glorify His name) eke deigned ✿ A noble say in Holy Book
    indite.[385]

The apples were the sugared and the musky and the Dámáni, amazing the
beholder, whereof saith Hassán the poet:—

 Apple which joins hues twain, and brings to mind ✿ The cheek of lover
    and beloved combined:
 Two wondrous opposites on branch they show ✿ This dark[386] and that
    with hue incarnadined
 The twain embraced when spied the spy and turned ✿ This red, that yellow
    for the shame designed.[387]

There also were apricots of various kinds, almond and camphor and Jíláni
and ’Antábi,[388] whereof saith the poet:—

 And Almond-apricot suggesting swain ✿ Whose lover’s visit all his wits
    hath ta’en.
 Enough of love-sick lovers’ plight it shows ✿ Of face deep yellow and
    heart torn in twain.[389]

And saith another and saith well:—

 Look at that Apricot whose bloom contains ✿ Gardens with brightness
    gladding all men’s eyne:
 Like stars the blossoms sparkle when the boughs ✿ Are clad in foliage
    dight with sheen and shine.

There likewise were plums and cherries and grapes, that the sick of all
diseases assain and do away giddiness and yellow choler from the brain;
and figs the branches between, vari-coloured red and green, amazing
sight and sense, even as saith the poet:—

 ’Tis as the Figs with clear white skins outthrown ✿ By foliaged trees,
    athwart whose green they peep,
 Were sons of Roum that guard the palace-roof ✿ When shades close in and
    night-long ward they keep.[390]

And saith another and saith well:—

 Welcome[391] the Fig! To us it comes ✿ Ordered in handsome plates they
    bring:
 Likest a Sufrah[392]-cloth we draw ✿ To shape of bag without a ring.

And how well saith a third:—

 Give me the Fig sweet-flavoured, beauty-clad, ✿ Whose inner beauties
    rival outer sheen:
 And when it fruits thou tastest it to find ✿ Chamomile’s scent and
    Sugar’s saccharine:
 And eke it favoureth on platters poured ✿ Puff-balls of silken thread
    and sendal green.

And how excellent is the saying of one of them!—

 Quoth they (and I had trained my taste thereto ✿ Nor cared for other
    fruits whereby they swore),
 “Why lovest so the Fig?” whereto quoth I ✿ “Some men love Fig and others
    Sycamore.”[393]

And are yet goodlier those of another:—

 Pleaseth me more the fig than every fruit ✿ When ripe and hanging from
    the sheeny bough;
 Like Devotee who, when the clouds pour rain, ✿ Sheds tears and Allah’s
    power doth avow.

And in that garth were also pears of various kinds Sinaïtic,[394]
Aleppine and Grecian growing in clusters and alone, parcel green and
parcel golden——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
merchants’ sons went down into the garth they saw therein all the fruits
we mentioned and found pears Sinaïtic, Aleppine and Grecian of every
hue, which here clustering there single grew, parcel green and parcel
yellow to the gazer a marvel-view, as saith of them the poet:—

 With thee that Pear agree, whose hue a-morn ✿ Is hue of hapless lover
    yellow pale;
 Like virgin cloistered strait in strong Harím ✿ Whose face like racing
    steed outstrips the veil.

And Sultani[395] peaches of shades varied, yellow and red, whereof saith
the poet:—

    Like Peach in vergier growing ✿ And sheen of Andam[396] showing:
    Whose balls of yellow gold, ✿ Are dyed with blood-gouts flowing.

There were also green almonds of passing sweetness, resembling the
cabbage[397] of the palm-tree, with their kernels within three tunics
lurking of the Munificent King’s handiworking, even as is said of them:—

 Three coats yon freshest form endue ✿ God’s work of varied shape and
    hue:
 Hardness surrounds it night and day; ✿ Prisoning without a sin to rue.

And as well saith another:—

 Seest not that Almond plucked by hand ✿ Of man from bough where wont to
    dwell:
 Peeling it shows the heart within ✿ As union-pearl in oyster-shell.

And as saith a third better than he:—

 How good is Almond green I view! ✿ The smallest fills the hand of you:
 Its nap is as the down upon ✿ The cheeks where yet no beardlet grew:
 Its kernels in the shell are seen, ✿ Or bachelors or married two,
 As pearls they were of lucent white ✿ Casèd and lapped in Jasper’s hue.

And as saith yet another and saith well:—

 Mine eyes ne’er looked on aught the Almond like ✿ For charms, when
    blossoms[398] in the Prime show bright:

 Its head to hoariness of age inclines ✿ The while its cheek by youth’s
    fresh down is dight.

And jujube-plums of various colours, grown in clusters and alone whereof
saith one, describing them:—

 Look at the Lote-tree, note on boughs arrayed ✿ Like goodly apricots on
    reed-strown floor,[399]
 Their morning-hue to viewer’s eye is like ✿ Cascavels[400] cast of
    purest golden ore.

And as saith another and saith right well:—

       The Jujube-tree each Day ✿ Robeth in bright array.
       As though each pome thereon ✿ Would self to sight display.
       Like falcon-bell of gold ✿ Swinging from every spray.

And in that garth grew blood oranges, as they were the Khaulanján,[401]
whereof quoth the enamoured poet[402]:—

 Red fruits that fill the hand, and shine with sheen ✿ Of fire, albe the
    scarf-skin’s white as snow.
 ’Tis marvel snow on fire doth never melt ✿ And, stranger still, ne’er
    burns this living lowe!

And quoth another and quoth well:—

 And trees of Orange fruiting ferly fair ✿ To those who straitest have
    their charms surveyed;
 Like cheeks of women who their forms have decked ✿ For holiday in robes
    of gold brocade.

And yet another as well:—

 Like are the Orange-hills[403] when Zephyr breathes ✿ Swaying the boughs
    and spray with airy grace,
 Her cheeks that glow with lovely light when met ✿ At greeting-tide by
    cheeks of other face.

And a fourth as fairly:—

 And fairest Fawn, we said to him “Portray ✿ This garth and oranges thine
    eyes survey:”
 And he, “Your garden favoureth my face, ✿ Who gathereth orange gathereth
    fire alwày.”

In that garden too grew citrons, in colour as virgin gold, hanging down
from on high and dangling among the branches, as they were ingots of
growing gold;[404] and saith thereof the ’namoured poet:—

 Hast seen a Citron-copse so weighed adown ✿ Thou fearest bending roll
    their fruit on mould;
 And seemed, when Zephyr passed athwart the tree, ✿ Its branches hung
    with bells of purest gold?

And shaddocks,[405] that among their boughs hung laden as though each
were the breast of a gazelle-like maiden, contenting the most longing
wight, as saith of them the poet and saith aright:—

 And Shaddock mid the garden-paths, on bough ✿ Freshest like fairest
    damsel met my sight;
 And to the blowing of the breeze it bent ✿ Like golden ball to bat of
    chrysolite.

And the lime sweet of scent, which resembleth a hen’s egg, but its
yellowness ornamenteth its ripe fruit, and its fragrance hearteneth him
who plucketh it, as saith the poet who singeth it:—

 Seest not the Lemon, when it taketh form, ✿ Catch rays of light and all
    to gaze constrain;
 Like egg of pullet which the huckster’s hand ✿ Adorneth dyeing with the
    saffron-stain?

Moreover in this garden were all manner of other fruits and
sweet-scented herbs and plants and fragrant flowers, such as jessamine
and henna and water-lilies[406] and spikenard[407] and roses of every
kind and plantain[408] and myrtle and so forth; and indeed it was
without compare, seeming as it were a piece of Paradise to whoso beheld
it. If a sick man entered it, he came forth from it like a raging lion,
and tongue availeth not to its description, by reason of that which was
therein of wonders and rarities which are not found but in Heaven: and
how should it be otherwise when its door-keeper’s name was Rizwan?
Though widely different were the stations of those twain! Now when the
sons of the merchants had walked about gazing at the garden after taking
their pleasure therein, they sat down in one of its pavilions and seated
Nur al-Din in their midst.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the sons
of the merchants sat down in the pavilion they seated Nur al-Din in
their midst on a rug of gold-purfled leather of Al-Táif,[409] leaning on
a pillow[410] of minever, stuffed with ostrich down. And they gave him a
fan of ostrich feathers, whereon were written these two couplets:—

 A fan whose breath is fraught with fragrant scent; ✿ Minding of happy
    days and times forspent,
 Wafting at every time its perfumed air ✿ O’er face of noble youth on
    honour bent.

Then they laid by their turbands and outer clothes and sat talking and
chatting and inducing one another to discourse, while they all kept
their eyes fixed on Nur al-Din and gazed on his beauteous form. After
the sitting had lasted an hour or so, up came a slave with a tray on his
head, wherein were platters of china and crystal containing viands of
all sorts (for one of the youths had so charged his people before coming
to the garden); and the meats were of whatever walketh earth or wingeth
air or swimmeth waters, such as Katá-grouse and fat quails and
pigeon-poults and mutton and chickens and the delicatest fish. So, the
tray being sat before them, they fell to and ate their fill; and when
they had made an end of eating, they rose from meat and washed their
hands with pure water and musk-scented soap, and dried them with napery
embroidered in silk and bugles; but to Nur al-Din they brought a napkin
laced with red gold whereon he wiped his hands. Then coffee[411] was
served up and each drank what he would, after which they sat talking,
till presently the garden-keeper who was young went away and returning
with a basket full of roses, said to them, “What say ye, O my masters,
to flowers?” Quoth one of them, “There is no harm in them,[412]
especially roses, which are not to be resisted.” Answered the gardener,
“’Tis well, but it is of our wont not to give roses but in exchange for
pleasant converse; so whoever would take aught thereof, let him recite
some verses suitable to the situation.” Now they were ten sons of
merchants of whom one said, “Agreed: give me thereof and I will recite
thee somewhat of verse apt to the case.” Accordingly the gardener gave
him a bunch of roses[413] which he took and at once improvised these
three couplets:—

 The Rose in highest stead I rate ✿ For that her charms ne’er satiate;
 All fragrant flow’rs be troops to her ✿ Their general of high estate:
 Where she is not they boast and vaunt; ✿ But, when she comes, they stint
    their prate.

Then the gardener gave a bunch to another and he recited these two
couplets:—

 Take, O my lord, to thee the Rose ✿ Recalling scent by musk be shed.
 Like virginette by lover eyed ✿ Who with her sleeves[414] enveileth
    head.

Then he gave a bunch to a third who recited these two couplets:—

 Choice Rose that gladdens heart to see her sight; ✿ Of Nadd recalling
    fragrance exquisite.
 The branchlets clip her in her leaves for joy, ✿ Like kiss of lips that
    never spake in spite.

Then he gave a bunch to a fourth and he recited these two couplets:—

 Seest not that rosery where Rose a-flowering displays ✿ Mounted upon her
    steed of stalk those marvels manifold?
 As though the bud were ruby-stone and girded all around ✿ With
    chrysolite and held within a little hoard of gold.

Then he gave a posy to a fifth and he recited these two couplets:—

 Wands of green chrysolite bare issue, which ✿ Were fruits like ingots of
    the growing gold.[415]
 And drops, a dropping from its leaves, were like ✿ The tears my
    languorous eyelids railed and rolled.

Then he gave a sixth a bunch and he recited these two couplets:—

 O Rose, thou rare of charms that dost contain ✿ All gifts and Allah’s
    secrets singular,
 Thou’rt like the loved one’s cheek where lover fond ✿ And fain of Union
    sticks the gold dinár.[416]

Then he gave a bunch to a seventh and he recited these two couplets:—

 To Rose quoth I, “What gars thy thorns to be put forth ✿ For all who
    touch thee cruellest injury?”
 Quoth she, “These flowery troops are troops of me ✿ Who be their lord
    with spines for armoury.”

And he gave an eighth a bunch and he recited these two couplets:—

 Allah save the Rose which yellows a-morn ✿ Florid, vivid and likest the
    nugget-ore;
 And bless the fair sprays that displayed such flowers ✿ And mimic suns
    gold-begilded bore.

Then he gave a bunch to a ninth and he recited these two couplets:—

 The bushes of golden-hued Rose excite ✿ In the love-sick lover joys
    manifold:
 ’Tis a marvel shrub watered every day ✿ With silvern lymph and it
    fruiteth gold.

Then he gave a bunch of roses to the tenth and last and he recited these
two couplets:—

 Seest not how the hosts of the Rose display ✿ Red hues and yellow in
    rosy field?
 I compare the Rose and her arming thorn ✿ To emerald lance piercing
    golden shield.

And whilst each one hent bunch in hand, the gardener brought the
wine-service and setting it before them, on a tray of porcelain
arabesqued with red gold, recited these two couplets:—

 Dawn heralds day-light: so wine pass round, ✿ Old wine, fooling sage
    till his wits he tyne:
 Wot I not for its purest clarity ✿ An ’tis wine in cup or ’tis cup in
    wine.[417]

Then the gardener filled and drank and the cup went round, till it came
to Nur al-Din’s turn, whereupon the man filled and handed it to him; but
he said, “This thing I wot it not nor have I ever drunken thereof, for
therein is great offence and the Lord of All-might hath forbidden it in
His Book.” Answered the gardener, “O my Lord Nur al-Din, an thou forbear
to drink only by reason of the sin, verily Allah (extolled and exalted
be He!) is bountiful, of sufferance great, forgiving and compassionate
and pardoneth the mortalest sins: His mercy embraceth all things,
Allah’s ruth be upon the poet who saith:—

 Be as thou wilt, for Allah is bountiful ✿ And when thou sinnest feel
    thou naught alarm:
 But ’ware of twofold sins nor ever dare ✿ To give God partner or mankind
    to harm.”

Then quoth one of the sons of the merchants, “My life on thee, O my lord
Nur al-Din, drink of this cup!” And another conjured him by the oath of
divorce and yet another stood up persistently before him, till he was
ashamed and taking the cup from the gardener, drank a draught, but spat
it out again, crying, “’Tis bitter.” Said the young gardener, “O my lord
Nur al-Din, knowest thou not that sweets taken by way of medicine are
bitter? Were this not bitter, ’twould lack of the manifold virtues it
possesseth; amongst which are that it digesteth food and disperseth cark
and care and dispelleth flatulence and clarifieth the blood and cleareth
the complexion and quickeneth the body and hearteneth the hen-hearted
and fortifieth the sexual power in man; but to name all its virtues
would be tedious.” Quoth one of the poets:—

 We’ll drink and Allah pardon sinners all ✿ And cure of ills by sucking
    cups I’ll find:
 Nor aught the sin deceives me; yet said He ✿ “In it there be
    advantage[418] to mankind.”

Then he sprang up without stay or delay and opened one of the cupboards
in the pavilion and taking out a loaf of refined sugar, broke off a
great slice which he put into Nur al-Din’s cup, saying, “O my lord, an
thou fear to drink wine, because of its bitterness, drink now, for ’tis
sweet.” So he took the cup and emptied it: whereupon one of his comrades
filled him another, saying, “O my lord Nur al-Din, I am thy slave,” and
another did the like, saying, “I am one of thy servants,” and a third
said, “For my sake!” and a fourth, “Allah upon thee, O my lord Nur
al-Din, heal my heart!” And so they ceased not plying him with wine,
each and every of the ten sons of merchants till they had made him drink
a total of ten cups. Now Nur al-Din’s body was virgin of wine-bibbing,
or never in all his life had he drunken vine-juice till that hour,
wherefore its fumes wrought in his brain and drunkenness was stark upon
him and he stood up (and indeed his tongue was thick and his speech
stammering) and said, “O company, by Allah, ye are fair and your speech
is goodly and your place pleasant; but there needeth hearing of sweet
music; for drink without melody lacks the chief of its essentiality,
even as saith the poet:—

 Pass round the cup to the old and the young man, too, And take the bowl
    from the hand of the shining moon,[419]
 But without music, I charge you, forbear to drink; I see even horses
    drink to a whistled tune.”[420]

Therewith up sprang the gardener lad and mounting one of the young men’s
mules, was absent awhile, after which he returned with a Cairene girl,
as she were a sheep’s tail fat and delicate, or an ingot of pure silvern
ore or a dinar on a porcelain plate or a gazelle in the wold forlore.
She had a face that put to shame the shining sun and eyes
Babylonian[421] and brows like bows bended and cheeks rose-painted and
teeth pearly-hued and lips sugared and glances languishing and breasts
ivory white and body slender and slight, full of folds and with dimples
dight and hips like pillows stuffed and thighs like columns of Syrian
stone, and between them what was something like a sachet of spices in
wrapper swathed. Quoth the poet of her in these couplets:—

 Had she shown her shape to idolaters’ sight, ✿ They would gaze on her
    face and their gods detest:
 And if in the East to a monk she’d show’d, ✿ He’d quit Eastern posture
    and bow to West.[422]
 An she crached in the sea and the briniest sea ✿ Her lips would give it
    the sweetest zest.

And quoth another in these couplets:—

 Brighter than Moon at full with kohl’d eyes she came ✿ Like Doe, on
    chasing whelps of Lioness intent:
 Her night of murky locks lets fall a tent on her ✿ A tent of hair[423]
    that lacks no pegs to hold the tent;
 And roses lighting up her roseate cheeks are fed ✿ By hearts and livers
    flowing fire for languishment:
 An ’spied her all the Age’s Fair to her they’d rise ✿ Humbly,[424] and
    cry “The meed belongs to precedent!”

And how well saith a third bard[425]:—

 Three things for ever hinder her to visit us, for fear Of the intriguing
    spy and eke the rancorous envier;
 Her forehead’s lustre and the sound of all her ornaments And the sweet
    scent her creases hold of ambergris and myrrh.
 Grant with the border of her sleeve she hide her brow and doff Her
    ornaments, how shall she do her scent away from her?

She was like the moon when at fullest on its fourteenth night, and was
clad in a garment of blue, with a veil of green, over brow flower-white
that all wits amazed and those of understanding amated——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the gardener
brought a girl whom we have described possessed of the utmost beauty and
loveliness and fine stature and symmetrical grace as it were she the
poet signified when he said[426]:—

           She came apparelled in a vest of blue,
           That mocked the skies and shamed their azure hue;
           I thought thus clad she burst upon my sight,
           Like summer moonshine on a wintry night.

And how goodly is the saying of another and how excellent!—

 She came thick veiled, and cried I, “O display ✿ That face like full
    moon bright with pure-white ray.”
 Quoth she, “I fear disgrace,” quoth I, “Cut short ✿ This talk, no shift
    of days thy thoughts affray.”
 Whereat she raised her veil from fairest face ✿ And crystal spray on
    gems began to stray:
 And I forsooth was fain to kiss her cheek, ✿ Lest she complain of me on
    Judgment-Day.
 And at such tide before the Lord on High ✿ We first of lovers were
    redress to pray:
 So “Lord, prolong this reckoning and review” ✿ (Prayed I) “that longer I
    may sight my may.”

Then said the young gardener to her, “Know thou, O lady of the fair,
brighter than any constellation which illumineth air we sought, in
bringing thee hither naught but that thou shouldst entertain with
converse this comely youth, my lord Nur al-Din, for he hath come to this
place only this day.” And the girl replied, “Would thou hadst told me,
that I might have brought what I have with me!” Rejoined the gardener,
“O my lady, I will go and fetch it to thee.” “As thou wilt,” said she:
and he, “Give me a token.” So she gave him a kerchief and he fared forth
in haste and returned after awhile, bearing a green satin bag with
slings of gold. The girl took the bag from him and opening it shook it,
whereupon there fell thereout two-and-thirty pieces of wood, which she
fitted one into other, male into female and female into male[427] till
they became a polished lute of Indian workmanship. Then she uncovered
her wrists and laying the lute in her lap, bent over it with the bending
of mother over babe, and swept the strings with her finger-tips;
whereupon it moaned and resounded and after its olden home yearned; and
it remembered the waters that gave it drink and the earth whence it
sprang and wherein it grew and it minded the carpenters who cut it and
the polishers who polished it and the merchants who made it their
merchandise and the ships that shipped it; and it cried and called aloud
and moaned and groaned; and it was as if she asked it of all these
things and it answered her with the tongue of the case, reciting these
couplets[428]:—

 A tree whilere was I the Bulbul’s home ✿ To whom for love I bowed my
    grass-green head:
 They moaned on me, and I their moaning learnt ✿ And in that moan my
    secret all men read:
 The woodman felled me falling sans offence, ✿ And slender lute of me (as
    view ye) made:
 But, when the fingers smite my strings, they tell ✿ How man despite my
    patience did me dead;
 Hence boon-companions when they hear my moan ✿ Distracted wax as though
    by wine misled:
 And the Lord softens every heart to me, ✿ And I am hurried to the
    highmost stead:
 All who in charms excel fain clasp my waist; ✿ Gazelles of languid eyne
    and Houri maid:
 Allah ne’er part fond lover from his joy ✿ Nor live the loved one who
    unkindly fled.

Then the girl was silent awhile, but presently taking the lute in lap,
again bent over it, as mother bendeth over child, and preluded in many
different modes; then, returning to the first, she sang these couplets:—

 Would they[429] the lover seek without ado, ✿ He to his heavy grief had
    bid adieu:

 With him had vied the Nightingale[430] on bough ✿ As one far parted from
    his lover’s view:
 Rouse thee! awake! The Moon lights Union-night ✿ As tho’ such Union woke
    the Morn anew.
 This day the blamers take of us no heed ✿ And lute-strings bid us all
    our joys ensue.
 Seest not how four-fold things conjoin in one ✿ Rose, myrtle, scents and
    blooms of golden hue[431].
 Yea, here this day the four chief joys unite ✿ Drink and dinars, beloved
    and lover true:
 So win thy worldly joy, for joys go past ✿ And naught but storied tales
    and legends last.

When Nur al-Din heard the girl sing these lines he looked on her with
eyes of love and could scarce contain himself for the violence of his
inclination to her; and on like wise was it with her, because she
glanced at the company who were present of the sons of the merchants and
she saw that Nur al-Din was amongst the rest as moon among stars; for
that he was sweet of speech and replete with amorous grace, perfect in
stature and symmetry, brightness and loveliness, pure of all defect,
than the breeze of morn softer, than Tasnim blander, as saith of him the
poet[432]:—

 By his cheeks’ unfading damask and his smiling teeth I swear, By the
    arrows that he feathers with the witchery of his air,
 By his sides so soft and tender and his glances bright and keen, By the
    whiteness of his forehead and the blackness of his hair,
 By his arched imperious eyebrows, chasing slumber from my lids With
    their yeas and noes that hold me ’twixt rejoicing and despair,
 By the scorpions that he launches from his ringlet-clustered brows,
    Seeking still to slay his lovers with his rigours unaware,
 By the myrtle of his whiskers and the roses of his cheek, By his lips’
    incarnate rubies and his teeth’s fine pearls and rare,
 By the straight and tender sapling of his shape, which for its fruit
    Doth the twin pomegranates, shining in his snowy bosom, wear,
 By his heavy hips that tremble, both in motion and repose, And the
    slender waist above them, all too slight their weight to bear,
 By the silk of his apparel and his quick and sprightly wit, By all
    attributes of beauty that are fallen to his share;
 Lo, the musk exhales its fragrance from his breath, and eke the breeze
    From his scent the perfume borrows, that it scatters everywhere.
 Yea, the sun in all his splendour cannot with his brightness vie And the
    crescent moon’s a fragment that he from his nails doth pare.

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nur al-Din
was delighted with the girl’s verses and he swayed from side to side for
drunkenness and fell a-praising her and saying:—

 A lutanist to us inclined ✿ And stole our wits bemused with wine:
 And said to us her lute, “The Lord ✿ Bade us discourse by voice divine.”

When she heard him thus improvise the girl gazed at him with loving eyes
and redoubled in passion and desire for him increased upon her, and
indeed she marvelled at his beauty and loveliness, symmetry and grace,
so that she could not contain herself, but took the lute in lap again
and sang these couplets:—

 He blames me for casting on him my sight ✿ And parts fro’ me bearing my
    life and sprite:
 He repels me but kens what my heart endures ✿ As though Allah himself
    had inspired the wight:
 I portrayed his portrait in palm of hand ✿ And cried to mine eyes, “Weep
    your doleful plight.”
 For neither shall eyes of me spy his like ✿ Nor my heart have patience
    to bear its blight:
 Wherefore, will I tear thee from breast, O Heart ✿ As one who regards
    him with jealous spite.
 And when say I, “O heart be consoled for pine,” ✿ ’Tis that heart to
    none other shall e’er incline:

Nur al-Din wondered at the charms of her verse and the elegance of her
expression and the sweetness of her voice and the eloquence of her
speech and his wit fled for stress of love and longing, and ecstasy and
distraction, so that he could not refrain from her a single moment, but
bent to her and strained her to his bosom; and she in like manner bowed
her form over his and abandoned herself to his embrace and bussed him
between the eyes. Then he kissed her on the mouth and played with her at
kisses, after the manner of the billing of doves; and she met him with
like warmth and did with him as she was done by till the others were
distracted and rose to their feet; whereupon Nur al-Din was ashamed and
held his hand from her. Then she took her lute and, preluding thereon in
manifold modes, lastly returned to the first and sang these couplets:—

 A Moon, when he bends him those eyes lay bare ✿ A brand that gars gazing
    gazelle despair:
 A King, rarest charms are the host of him ✿ And his lance-like shape men
    with cane compare:
 Were his softness of sides to his heart transferred ✿ His friend had not
    suffered such cark and care:
 Ah for hardest heart and for softest sides! ✿ Why not that to these
    alter, make here go there?
 O thou who accusest my love excuse: ✿ Take eternal and leave me the
    transient share.[433]

When Nur al-Din heard the sweetness of her voice and the rareness of her
verse, he inclined to her for delight and could not contain himself for
excess of wonderment; so he recited these couplets:—

 Methought she was the forenoon sun until she donned the veil ✿ But lit
    she fire in vitals mine still flaring fierce and high,
 How had it hurt her an she deigned return my poor salám ✿ With
    finger-tips or e’en vouchsafed one little wink of eye?
 The cavalier who spied her face was wholly stupefied ✿ By charms that
    glorify the place and every charm outvie.
 “Be this the Fair who makes thee pine and long for love liesse? ✿ Indeed
    thou art excused!” “This is my fairest she;” (quoth I)
 Who shot me with the shaft of looks nor deigns to rue my woes ✿ Of
    strangerhood and broken heart and love I must aby:
 I rose a-morn with vanquished heart, to longing love a prey ✿ And weep I
    through the live long day and all the night I cry.

The girl marvelled at his eloquence and elegance and taking her lute,
smote thereon with the goodliest of performance, repeating all the
melodies, and sang these couplets:—

 By the life o’ thy face, O thou life o’ my sprite! ✿ I’ll ne’er leave
    thy love for despair or delight:
 When art cruel thy vision stands hard by my side ✿ And the thought of
    thee haunts me when far from sight:
 O who saddenest my glance albe weeting that I ✿ No love but thy love
    will for ever requite?
 Thy cheeks are of Rose and thy lips-dews are wine; ✿ Say, wilt grudge
    them to us in this charming site?

Hereat Nur al-Din was gladdened with extreme gladness and wondered with
the utmost wonder, so he answered her verse with these couplets:—

 The sun yellowed not in the murk gloom li’en ✿ But lay pearl enveiled
    ’neath horizon-chine;
 Nor showed its crest to the eyes of Morn ✿ But took refuge from parting
    with Morning-shine.[434]
 Take my tear-drops that trickle as chain on chain ✿ And they’ll tell my
    case with the clearest sign.
 An my tears be likened to Nile-flood, like ✿ Malak’s[435] flooded flat
    be this love o’ mine.
 Quoth she, “Bring thy riches!” Quoth I, “Come, take!” ✿ “And thy sleep?”
    “Yes, take it from lids of eyne!”

When the girl heard Nur al-Din’s words and noted the beauty of his
eloquence her senses fled and her wit was dazed and love of him gat hold
upon her whole heart. So she pressed him to her bosom and fell to
kissing him like the billing of doves, whilst he returned her caresses
with successive kisses; but preeminence appertaineth to precedence.[436]
When she had made an end of kissing, she took the lute and recited these
couplets:—

 Alas, alack and well-away for blamer’s calumny! ✿ Whether or not I make
    my moan or plead or show no plea:
 O spurner of my love I ne’er of thee so hard would deem ✿ That I of thee
    should be despised, of thee my property.
 I wont at lovers’ love to rail and for their passion chide, ✿ But now I
    fain debase myself to all who rail at thee:
 Yea, only yesterday I wont all amourists to blame ✿ But now I pardon
    hearts that pine for passion’s ecstacy;
 And of my stress of parting-stowre on me so heavy weighs ✿ At morning
    prayer to Him I’ll cry, “In thy name, O Ali!”

And also these two couplets:—

 His lovers said, “Unless he deign to give us all a drink ✿ Of wine, of
    fine old wine his lips deal in their purity;
 We to the Lord of Threefold Worlds will pray to grant our prayer” ✿ And
    all exclaim with single cry “In thy name, O Ali!”

Nur al-Din, hearing these lines and their rhyme, marvelled at the
fluency of her tongue and thanked her, praising her grace and passing
seductiveness; and the damsel, delighted at his praise, arose without
stay or delay and doffing that was upon her of outer dress and trinkets
till she was free of all encumbrance sat down on his knees and kissed
him between the eyes and on his cheek-mole. Then she gave him all she
had put off.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the girl gave
to Nur al-Din all she had doffed, saying, “O beloved of my heart, in
very sooth the gift is after the measure of the giver.” So he accepted
this from her and gave it back to her and kissed her on the mouth and
cheeks and eyes. When this was ended and done, for naught is durable
save the Living, the Eternal, Provider of the peacock and the owl,[437]
Nur al-Din rose from the séance and stood upon his feet, because the
darkness was now fallen and the stars shone out; whereupon quoth the
damsel to him, “Whither away, O my lord?”; and quoth he, “To my father’s
home.” Then the sons of the merchants conjured him to night with them,
but he refused and mounting his she-mule, rode, without stopping, till
he reached his parent’s house, where his mother met him and said to him,
“O my son, what hath kept thee away till this hour? By Allah, thou hast
troubled myself and thy sire by thine absence from us, and our hearts
have been occupied with thee.” Then she came up to him, to kiss him on
his mouth, and smelling the fumes of the wine, said, “O my son, how is
it that, after prayer and worship thou hast become a wine-bibber and a
rebel against Him to whom belong creation and commandment?” But Nur
al-Din threw himself down on the bed and lay there. Presently in came
his sire and said, “What aileth Nur al-Din to lie thus?”; and his mother
answered, “’Twould seem his head acheth for the air of the garden.” So
Taj al-Din went up to his son, to ask him of his ailment, and salute
him, and smelt the reek of wine.[438] Now the merchant loved not
wine-drinkers; so he said to Nur al-Din, “Woe to thee, O my son! Is
folly come to such a pass with thee, that thou drinkest wine?” When Nur
al-Din heard his sire say this, he raised his hand, being yet in his
drunkenness, and dealt him a buffet, when by decree of the Decreer the
blow lit on his father’s right eye which rolled down on his cheek;
whereupon he fell a-swoon and lay therein awhile. They sprinkled
rose-water on him till he recovered, when he would have beaten his son;
but the mother withheld him, and he swore, by the oath of divorce from
his wife that, as soon as morning morrowed, he would assuredly cut off
his son’s right hand.[439] When she heard her husband’s words, her
breast was straitened and she feared for her son and ceased not to
soothe and appease his sire, till sleep overcame him. Then she waited
till moon-rise, when she went in to her son, whose drunkenness had now
departed from him, and said to him, “O Nur al-Din, what is this foul
deed thou diddest with thy sire?” He asked, “And what did I with him?”;
and answered she, “Thou dealtest him a buffet on the right eye and
struckest it out so that it rolled down his cheek; and he hath sworn by
the divorce-oath that, as soon as morning shall morrow he will without
fail cut off thy right hand.” Nur al-Din repented him of that he had
done, whenas repentance profited him naught, and his mother said to him,
“O my son, this penitence will not profit thee; nor will aught avail
thee but that thou arise forthwith and seek safety in flight: go forth
the house privily and take refuge with one of thy friends and there what
Allah shall do await, for he changeth case after case and state upon
state.” Then she opened a chest and taking out a purse of an hundred
dinars said, “O my son, take these dinars and provide thy wants
therewith, and when they are at an end, O my son, send and let me know
thereof, that I may send thee other than these, and at the same time
convey to me news of thyself privily: haply Allah will decree thee
relief and thou shalt return to thy home.” And she farewelled him and
wept passing sore, nought could be more. Thereupon Nur al-Din took the
purse of gold and was about to go forth, when he espied a great purse
containing a thousand dinars, which his mother had forgotten by the side
of the chest. So he took this also and binding the two purses about his
middle,[440] set out before dawn threading the streets in the direction
of Búlák, where he arrived when day broke and all creatures arose,
attesting the unity of Allah the Opener and went forth each of them upon
his several business, to win that which Allah had unto him allotted.
Reaching Bulak he walked on along the river-bank till he sighted a ship
with her gangway out and her four anchors made fast to the land. The
folk were going up into her and coming down from her, and Nur al-Din,
seeing some sailors there standing, asked them whither they were bound,
and they answered, “To Rosetta-city.” Quoth he, “Take me with you;” and
quoth they, “Well come, and welcome to, thee to thee, O goodly one!” So
he betook himself forthright to the market and buying what he needed of
vivers and bedding and covering, returned to the port and went on board
the ship, which was ready to sail and tarried with him but a little
while before she weighed anchor and fared on, without stopping, till she
reached Rosetta,[441] where Nur al-Din saw a small boat going to
Alexandria. So he embarked in it and traversing the sea-arm of Rosetta
fared on till he came to a bridge called Al-Jámí, where he landed and
entered Alexandria by the gate called the Gate of the Lote-tree. Allah
protected him, so that none of those who stood on guard at the gate saw
him, and he walked on till he entered the city.——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Seventieth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Nur al-Din
entered Alexandria he found it a city goodly of pleasaunces, delightful
to its inhabitants and inviting to inhabit therein. Winter had fared
from it with his cold and Prime was come to it with his roses: its
flowers were kindly ripe and welled forth its rills. Indeed, it was a
city goodly of ordinance and disposition; its folk were of the best of
men, and when the gates thereof were shut, its folk were safe.[442] And
it was even as is said of it in these couplets:—

 Quoth I to a comrade one day, ✿ A man of good speech and raré,
 “Describe Alexandria.” ✿ Quoth he, “’Tis a march-town[2] fair.”
 Quoth I, “Is there living therein?” ✿ And he, “An the wind blow there.”

Or as saith one of the poets:—

 Alexandria’s a frontier;[443] ✿ Whose dews of lips are sweet and clear;
 How fair the coming to it is, ✿ So one therein no raven speer!

Nur al-Din walked about the city and ceased not walking till he came to
the merchants’ bazar, whence he passed on to the mart of the
money-changers and so on in turn to the markets of the confectioners and
fruiterers and druggists, marvelling, as he went, at the city, for that
the nature of its qualities accorded with its name.[444] As he walked in
the druggists’ bazar, behold, an old man came down from his shop and
saluting him, took him by the hand and carried him to his home. And Nur
al-Din saw a fair by-street, swept and sprinkled, whereon the zephyr
blew and made pleasantness pervade it and the leaves of the trees
overshaded it. Therein stood three houses and at the upper end a
mansion, whose foundations were firm sunk in the water and its walls
towered to the confines of the sky. They had swept the space before it
and they had sprinkled it freshly; so it exhaled the fragrance of
flowers, borne on the zephyr which breathed upon the place; and the
scent met there who approached it on such wise as it were one of the
gardens of Paradise. And, as they had cleaned and cooled the by-street’s
head, so was the end of it with marble spread. The Shaykh carried Nur
al-Din into the house and setting somewhat of food before him ate with
his guest. When they had made an end of eating, the druggist said to
him, “When camest thou hither from Cairo?”; and Nur al-Din replied,
“This very night, O my father.” Quoth the old man, “What is thy name?”;
and quoth he, “Ali Nur al-Din.” Said the druggist, “O my son, O Nur
al-Din, be the triple divorce incumbent on me, an thou leave me so long
as thou abidest in this city; and I will set thee apart a place wherein
thou mayst dwell.” Nur al-Din asked, “O my lord the Shaykh, let me know
more of thee”; and the other answered, “Know, O my son, that some years
ago I went to Cairo with merchandise, which I sold there and bought
other, and I had occasion for a thousand dinars. So thy sire Taj al-Din
weighed them out[445] for me, all unknowing me, and would take no
written word of me, but had patience with me till I returned hither and
sent him the amount by one of my servants, together with a gift. I saw
thee, whilst thou wast little; and, if it please Allah the Most High, I
will repay thee somewhat of the kindness thy father did me.” When Nur
al-Din heard the old man’s story, he showed joy and pulling out with a
smile the purse of a thousand dinars, gave it to his host the Shaykh and
said to him, “Take charge of this deposit for me, against I buy me
somewhat of merchandise whereon to trade.” Then he abode some time in
Alexandria city taking his pleasure every day in its thoroughfares,
eating and drinking and indulging himself with mirth and merriment till
he had made an end of the hundred dinars he had kept by way of
spending-money; whereupon he repaired to the old druggist, to take of
him somewhat of the thousand dinars to spend, but found him not in his
shop and took a seat therein to await his return. He sat there gazing
right and left and amusing himself with watching the merchants and
passers-by, and as he was thus engaged behold, there came into the bazar
a Persian riding on a she-mule and carrying behind him a damsel; as she
were argent of alloy free or a fish Balti[446] in mimic sea or a
doe-gazelle on desert lea. Her face outshone the sun in shine and she
had witching eyne and breasts of ivory white, teeth of marguerite,
slender waist and sides dimpled deep and calves like tails of fat
sheep[447]; and indeed she was perfect in beauty and loveliness, elegant
stature and symmetrical grace, even as saith one, describing her[448]:—

 ’Twas as by will of her she was create ✿ Nor short nor long, but
    Beauty’s mould and mate:
 Rose blushes reddest when she sees those cheeks ✿ And fruits the bough
    those marvel charms amate:
 Moon is her favour, Musk the scent of her ✿ Branch is her shape:—she
    passeth man’s estate:
 ’Tis e’en as were she cast in freshest pearl ✿ And every limblet shows a
    moon innate.

Presently the Persian lighted down from his she-mule and making the
damsel also dismount loudly summoned the broker and said to him as soon
as he came, “Take this damsel and cry her for sale in the market.” So he
took her and leading her to the middlemost of the bazar disappeared for
a while and presently he returned with a stool of ebony, inlaid with
ivory, and setting it upon the ground, seated her thereon. Then he
raised her veil and discovered a face as it were a Median targe[449] or
a cluster of pearls[450]: and indeed she was like the full moon, when it
filleth on its fourteenth night, accomplished in brilliant beauty. As
saith the poet:—

 Vied the full moon for folly with her face, ✿ But was eclipsed[451] and
    split for rage full sore;
 And if the spiring Bán with her contend ✿ Perish her hands who load of
    fuel bore[452]!

And how well saith another:—

 Say to the fair in the wroughten veil ✿ How hast made that monk-like
    worshipper ail?

 Light of veil and light of face under it ✿ Made the hosts of darkness to
    fly from bale;
 And, when came my glance to steal look at cheek, ✿ With a meteor-shaft
    the Guard made me quail.[453]

Then said the broker to the merchants,[454] “How much do ye bid for the
union-pearl of the diver and prize-quarry of the fowler?” Quoth one,
“She is mine for an hundred dinars.” And another said, “Two hundred,”
and a third, “Three hundred”; and they ceased not to bid, one against
other, till they made her price nine hundred and fifty dinars, and there
the biddings stopped awaiting acceptance and consent.[455]——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Seventy-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the merchants bid
one against other till they made the price of the girl nine hundred and
fifty dinars. Then the broker went up to her Persian master and said to
him, “The biddings for this thy slave-girl have reached nine hundred and
fifty dinars: so say me, wilt thou sell her at that price and take the
money?” Asked the Persian, “Doth she consent to this? I desire to fall
in with her wishes, for I sickened on my journey hither and this
handmaid tended me with all possible tenderness, wherefore I sware not
to sell her but to him whom she should like and approve, and I have put
her sale in her own hand. So do thou consult her and if she say, I
consent, sell her to whom thou wilt: but an she say, No, sell her not.”
So the broker went up to her and asked her, “O Princess of fair ones,
know that thy master putteth thy sale in thine own hands, and thy price
hath reached nine hundred and fifty dinars; dost thou give me leave to
sell thee?” She answered, “Show me him who is minded to buy me before
clinching the bargain.” So he brought her up to one of the merchants a
man stricken with years and decrepit; and she looked at him a long
while, then turned to the broker and said to him, “O broker, art thou
Jinn-mad or afflicted in thy wit?” Replied he, “Why dost thou ask me
this, O Princess of fair ones?”; and said she, “Is it permitted thee of
Allah to sell the like of me to yonder decrepit old man, who saith of
his wife’s case these couplets:—

 Quoth she to me,—and sore enraged for wounded pride was she, ✿ For she
    in sooth had bidden me to that which might not be,—
 “An if thou swive me not forthright, as one should swive his wife, ✿
    Thou be made a cuckold straight, reproach it not to me.
 Meseems thy yard is made of wax, for very flaccidness; ✿ For when I rub
    it with my hand, it softens instantly.”[456]

And said he likewise of his yard:—

 I have a yard that sleeps in base and shameful way ✿ When grants my
    lover boon for which I sue and pray:
 But when I wake o’ mornings[457] all alone in bed, ✿ ’Tis fain o’ foin
    and fence and fierce for futter-play.

And again quoth he thereof of his yard:—

 I have a froward yard of temper ill ✿ Dishonouring him who shows it most
    regard:
 It stands when sleep I, when I stand it sleeps ✿ Heaven pity not who
    pitieth that yard!

When the old merchant heard this ill flouting from the damsel, he was
wroth with wrath exceeding beyond which was no proceeding and said to
the broker, “O most ill-omened of brokers, thou hast not brought into
the market this ill-conditioned wench but to gibe me and make mock of me
before the merchants.” Then the broker took her aside and said to her,
“O my lady, be not wanting in self-respect. The Shaykh at whom thou
didst mock is the Syndic of the bazar and Inspector[458] thereof and a
committee-man of the council of the merchants.” But she laughed and
improvised these two couplets:—

 It behoveth folk who rule in our time, ✿ And ’tis one of the duties of
    magistrateship,
 To hang up the Wali above his door ✿ And beat with a whip the Mohtasib!

Adding, “By Allah, O my lord, I will not be sold to yonder old man; so
sell me to other than him, for haply he will be abashed at me and vend
me again and I shall become a mere servant[459] and it beseemeth not
that I sully myself with menial service; and indeed thou knowest that
the matter of my sale is committed to myself.” He replied, “I hear and I
obey,” and carried her to a man which was one of the chief merchants.
And when standing hard by him the broker asked, “How sayst thou, O my
lady? Shall I sell thee to my lord Sharíf al-Dín here for nine hundred
and fifty gold pieces?” She looked at him and, seeing him to be an old
man with a dyed beard, said to the broker, “Art thou silly, that thou
wouldst sell me to this worn out Father Antic? Am I cotton refuse or
threadbare rags that thou marchest me about from greybeard to greybeard,
each like a wall ready to fall or an Ifrit smitten down of a fire-ball?”
As for the first, the poet had him in mind when he said[460]:—

 “I sought of a fair maid to kiss her lips of coral red, But, “No, by Him
    who fashioned things from nothingness!” she said.
 Unto the white of hoary hairs I never had a mind, And shall my mouth be
    stuffed, forsooth, with cotton, ere I’m dead?”

And how goodly is the saying of the poet:—

 The wise have said that white of hair is light that shines and robes ✿
    The face of man with majesty and light that awes the sight;
 Yet until hoary seal shall stamp my parting-place of hair ✿ I hope and
    pray that same may be black as the blackest night.
 Albe Time-whitened beard of man be like the book he bears[461] ✿ When to
    his Lord he must return, I’d rather ’twere not white.

And yet goodlier is the saying of another:—

 A guest hath stolen on my head and honour may he lack! ✿ The sword a
    milder deed hath done that dared these locks to hack.
 Avaunt, O Whiteness,[462] wherein naught of brightness gladdens sight ✿
    Thou ’rt blacker in the eyes of me than very blackest black!

As for the other, he is a model of wantonness and scurrilousness and a
blackener of the face of hoariness; his dye acteth the foulest of lies:
and the tongue of his case reciteth these lines[463]:—

 Quoth she to me, “I see thou dy’st thy hoariness;” and I, “I do but hide
    it from thy sight, O thou mine ear and eye!”
 She laughed out mockingly and said, “A wonder ’tis indeed! Thou so
    aboundest in deceit that even thy hair’s a lie.”

And how excellent is the saying of the poet:—

 O thou who dyest hoariness with black, ✿ That youth wi’ thee abide, at
    least in show;
 Look ye, my lot was dyèd black whilome ✿ And (take my word!) none other
    hue ’twill grow.

When the old man with dyed beard heard such words from the slave-girl,
he raged with exceeding rage in fury’s last stage and said to the
broker, “O most ill-omened of brokers, this day thou hast brought to our
market naught save this gibing baggage to flout at all who are therein,
one after other, and fleer at them with flyting verse and idle jest?”
And he came down from his shop and smote on the face the broker who took
her an angered and carried her away saying to her, “By Allah, never in
my life saw I a more shameless wench than thyself[464]! Thou hast cut
off my daily bread and thine own this day and all the merchants will
bear me a grudge on thine account.” Then they saw on the way a merchant
called Shihab al-Dín who bid ten dinars more for her, and the broker
asked her leave to sell her to him. Quoth she, “Trot him out that I may
see him and question him of a certain thing, which if he have in his
house, I will be sold to him; and if not, then not.” So the broker left
her standing there and going up to Shihab al-Din, said to him, “O my
lord, know that yonder damsel tells me she hath a mind to ask thee
somewhat, which an thou have, she will be sold to thee. Now thou hast
heard what she said to thy fellows, the merchants,”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


      Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the broker
said to the merchant, “Thou hast heard what this handmaid said to thy
fellows, the traders, and by Allah, I fear to bring her to thee, lest
she do with thee like as she did with thy neighbours and so I fall into
disgrace with thee: but, an thou bid me bring her to thee, I will bring
her.” Quoth the merchant, “Hither with her to me.” “Hearing and
obeying,” answered the broker and fetched for the purchaser the damsel,
who looked at him and said, “O my lord, Shihab al-Din hast thou in thy
house round cushions stuffed with ermine strips?” Replied Shihab al-Din,
“Yes, O Princess of fair ones, I have at home half a score such
cushions; but I conjure thee by Allah, tell me, what will thou do with
them?” Quoth she, “I will bear with thee till thou be asleep, when I
will lay them on thy mouth and nose and press them down till thou die.”
Then she turned to the broker and said to him, “O thou refuse of
brokers, meseemeth thou art mad, in that thou showest me this hour past,
first to a pair of grey-beards, in each of whom are two faults, and then
thou proferrest me to my lord Shihab al-Din wherein be three defects;
firstly, he is dwarfish, secondly, he hath a nose which is big, and
thirdly, he hath a beard which is long.” Of him quoth one of the poets:—

 We never heard of wight nor yet espied ✿ Who amid men three gifts hath
    unified:
 To wit, a beard one cubit long, a snout ✿ Span-long and figure tall a
    finger wide.

And quoth another poet:—

 From the plain of his face springs a minaret ✿ Like a bezel of ring on
    his finger set:
 Did creation enter that vasty nose ✿ No created thing would elsewhere be
    met.

When Shihab al-Din heard this, he came down from his shop and seized the
broker by the collar, saying, “O scurviest of brokers, what aileth thee
to bring us a damsel to flout and make mock of us, one after other, with
her verses and talk that a curse is?” So the broker took her and carried
her away from before him and fared, saying, “By Allah, all my life long,
since I have plied this profession never set I eyes on the like of thee
for unmannerliness nor aught more curst to me than thy star, for thou
hast cut off my livelihood this day and I have gained no profit by thee
save cuffs on the neck-nape and catching by the collar!” Then he brought
her to the shop of another merchant, owner of negro slaves and white
servants, and stationing her before him, said to her, “Wilt thou be sold
to this my lord ’Alá al-Dín?” She looked at him and seeing him
hump-backed, said, “This is a Gobbo,” and quoth the poet of him:—

 Drawn in thy shoulders are and spine thrust out, ✿ As seeking star which
    Satan gave the lout[465];
 Or as he tasted had first smack of scourge ✿ And looked in marvel for a
    second bout.

And saith another on the same theme:—

 As one of you who mounted mule, ✿ A sight for men to ridicule:
 Is’t not a farce? Who feels surprise ✿ An start and bolt with him the
    mule?

And another on a similar subject:—

 Oft hunchback addeth to his bunchy back ✿ Faults which gar folk upon his
    front look black:
 Like branch distort and dried by length of days ✿ With citrons hanging
    from it loose and slack.

With this the broker hurried up to her and, carrying her to another
merchant, said to her, “Wilt thou be sold to this one?” She looked at
him and said, “In very sooth this man is blue-eyed[466]; how wilt thou
sell me to him?” Quoth one of the poets:—

        His eyelids sore and bleared ✿ Weakness of frame denote:
        Arise, ye folk and see ✿ Within his eyes the mote!

Then the broker carried her to another and she looked at him and seeing
that he had a long beard, said to the broker, “Fie upon thee! This is a
ram, whose tail hath sprouted from his gullet. Wilt thou sell me to him,
O unluckiest of brokers? Hast thou not heard say:—All long of beard are
little of wits? Indeed, after the measure of the length of the beard is
the lack of sense; and this is a well-known thing among men of
understanding.” As saith one of the poets:—

 Ne’er was a man with beard grown overlong, ✿ Tho’ be he therefor
    reverenced and fear’d,
 But who the shortness noted in his wits ✿ Added to longness noted in his
    beard.

And quoth another[467]:—

 I have a friend with a beard which God hath made to grow to a useless
    length,
 It is like unto one of the nights of winter long and dark and cold.

With this the broker took her and turned away with her, and she asked,
“Whither goest thou with me?” He answered, “Back to thy master the
Persian; it sufficeth me what hath befallen me because of thee this day;
for thou hast been the means of spoiling both my trade and his by thine
ill manners.” Then she looked about the market right and left, front and
rear till, by the decree of the Decreer her eyes fell on Ali Nur al-Din
the Cairene. So she gazed at him and saw him[468] to be a comely youth
of straight slim form and smooth of face, fourteen years old, rare in
beauty and loveliness and elegance and amorous grace like the full moon
on the fourteenth night with forehead flower-white, and cheeks rosy red,
neck like alabaster and teeth than jewels finer and dews of lips sweeter
than sugar, even as saith of him one of his describers:—

 Came to match him in beauty and loveliness rare ✿ Full moons and
    gazelles, but quoth I, “Soft fare!
 Fare softly, gazelles, nor yourselves compare ✿ With him and, O Moons,
    all your pains forbear!”

And how well saith another bard:—

 Slim-waisted loveling, from his hair and brow ✿ Men wake a-morn in night
    and light renewed.
 Blame not the mole that dwelleth on his cheek ✿ For Nu’uman’s bloom aye
    shows spot negro-hued.

When the slave-girl beheld Nur al-Din he interposed between her and her
wits; she fell in love to him with a great and sudden fall and her heart
was taken with affection for him;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
slave-girl beheld Nur al-Din, her heart was taken with affection for
him; so she turned to the broker and said to him, “Will not yonder young
merchant who is sitting among the traders in the gown of striped
broadcloth bid somewhat more for me?” The broker replied, “O lady of
fair ones, yonder young man is a stranger from Cairo, where his father
is chief of the trader-guild and surpasseth all the merchants and
notables of the place. He is but lately come to this our city and
lodgeth with one of his father’s friends; but he hath made no bid for
thee nor more nor less.” When the girl heard the broker’s words, she
drew from her finger a costly signet-ring of ruby and said to the man,
“Carry me to yonder youth, and if he buy me, this ring shall be thine,
in requital of thy travail with me this day.” The broker rejoiced at
this and brought her up to Nur al-Din, and she considered him straitly
and found him like the full moon, perfect in loveliness and a model of
fine stature and symmetric grace, even as saith of him one of his
describers:—

 Waters of beauty o’er his cheeks flow bright. ✿ And rain his glances
    shafts that sorely smite:
 Choked are his lovers an he deal disdain’s ✿ Bitterest draught denaying
    love-delight.
 His forehead and his stature and my love ✿ Are perfect perfected
    perfection-dight;
 His raiment folds enfold a lovely neck ✿ As crescent moon in collar
    buttoned tight:
 His eyne and twinnèd moles and tears of me ✿ Are night that nighteth to
    the nightliest night.

 His eyebrows and his features and my frame[469] ✿ Crescents on crescents
    are as crescents slight:
 His pupils pass the wine-cup to his friends ✿ Which, albe sweet, tastes
    bitter to my sprite;
 And to my thirsty throat pure drink he dealt ✿ From smiling lips what
    day we were unite:
 Then is my blood to him, my death to him ✿ His right and rightful and
    most righteous right.

The girl gazed at Nur al-Din and said, “O my lord, Allah upon thee, am I
not beautiful?”; and he replied, “O Princess of fair ones, is there in
the world a comelier than thou?” She rejoined, “Then why seest thou all
the other merchants bid high for me and art silent nor sayest a word
neither addest one dinar to my price? ’Twould seem I please thee not, O
my lord!” Quoth he, “O my lady, were I in my own land, I had bought thee
with all that my hand possesseth of monies;” and quoth she, “O my lord,
I said not, Buy me against thy will yet, didst thou but add somewhat to
my price, it would hearten my heart, though thou buy me not, so the
merchants may say:—Were not this girl handsome, yonder merchant of Cairo
had not bidden for her, for the Cairenes are connoisseurs in
slave-girls.” These words abashed Nur al-Din and he blushed and said to
the broker, “How high are the biddings for her?” He replied, “Her price
hath reached nine hundred and sixty dinars,[470] besides brokerage, as
for the Sultan’s dues, they fall on the seller.” Quoth Nur al-Din, “Let
me have her for a thousand dinars, brokerage and price.” And the damsel
hastening to the fore and leaving the broker, said, “I sell myself to
this handsome young man for a thousand dinars.” But Nur al-Din held his
peace. Quoth one, “We sell to him;” and another, “He deserveth her;” and
a third, “Accursed, son of accursed, is he who biddeth and doth not
buy!”; and a fourth, “By Allah, they befit each other!” Then, before Nur
al-Din could think, the broker fetched Kazis and witnesses, who wrote
out a contract of sale and purchase; and the broker handed the paper to
Nur al-Din, saying, “Take thy slave-girl and Allah bless thee in her for
she beseemeth none but thee and none but thou beseemeth her.” And he
recited these two couplets:—

 Boon Fortune sought him in humblest way[471] ✿ And came to him
    draggle-tailed, all a-stir:
 And none is fittest for him but she ✿ And none is fittest but he for
    her.

Hereat Nur al-Din was abashed before the merchants; so he arose without
stay or delay and weighed out the thousand dinars which he had left as a
deposit with his father’s friend the druggist, and taking the girl,
carried her to the house wherein the Shaykh had lodged him. When she
entered and saw nothing but ragged patched carpets and worn out rugs,
she said to him, “O my lord, have I no value to thee and am I not worthy
that thou shouldst bear me to thine own house and home wherein are thy
goods, that thou bringest me into thy servant’s lodging? Why dost thou
not carry me to thy father’s dwelling?” He replied, “By Allah, O
Princess of fair ones, this is my house wherein I dwell; but it
belongeth to an old man, a druggist of this city, who hath set it apart
for me and lodged me therein. I told thee that I was a stranger and that
I am of the sons of Cairo city.” She rejoined, “O my lord, the least of
houses sufficeth till thy return to thy native place; but, Allah upon
thee, O my lord, go now and fetch us somewhat of roast meat and wine and
dried fruit and dessert.” Quoth Nur al-Din, “By Allah, O Princess of
fair ones, I had no money with me but the thousand dinars I paid down to
thy price nor possess I any other good. The few dirhams I owned were
spent by me yesterday.” Quoth she, “Hast thou no friend in the town, of
whom thou mayst borrow fifty dirhams and bring them to me, that I may
tell thee what thou shalt do therewith?” And he said, “I have no
intimate but the druggist.” Then he betook himself forthright to the
druggist and said to him, “Peace be with thee, O uncle!” He returned his
salam and said to him, “O my son, what hast thou bought for a thousand
dinars this day?” Nur al-Din replied, “I have bought a slave-girl;” and
the oldster rejoined, “O my son, art thou mad that thou givest a
thousand dinars for one slave-girl? Would I knew what kind of slave-girl
she is?” Said Nur al-Din, “She is a damsel of the children of the
Franks;”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


      Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nur al-Din said
to the ancient druggist, “The damsel is of the children of the Franks;”
and the Shaykh said, “O my son, the best of the girls of the Franks are
to be had in this our town for an hundred dinars, and by Allah, O my
son, they have cheated thee in the matter of this damsel! However, an
thou have taken a fancy to her, lie with her this night and do thy will
of her and to-morrow morning go down with her to the market and sell
her, though thou lose by her two hundred dinars, and reckon that thou
hast lost them by shipwreck or hast been robbed of them on the road.”
Nur al-Din replied, “Right is thy rede, O uncle, but thou knowest that I
had but the thousand dinars wherewith I purchased the damsel, and now I
have not a single dirham left to spend; so I desire of thy favour and
bounty that thou lend me fifty dirhams, to provide me withal, till
to-morrow, when I will sell her and repay thee out of her price.” Said
the old man, “Willingly, O my son,” and counted out to him the fifty
dirhams. Then he said to him, “O my son, thou art but young in years and
the damsel is fair, so belike thy heart will be taken with her and it
will be grievous to thee to vend her. Now thou hast nothing to live on
and these fifty dirhams will readily be spent and thou wilt come to me
and I shall lend thee once and twice and thrice, and so on up to ten
times; but, an thou come to me after this, I will not return thy
salam[472] and our friendship with thy father will end ill.” Nur al-Din
took the fifty dirhams and returned with them to the damsel, who said to
him, “O my lord, wend thee at once to the market and fetch me twenty
dirhams’ worth of stained silk of five colours and with the other thirty
buy meat and bread and fruit and wine and flowers.” So he went to the
market and purchasing for her all she sought, brought it to her,
whereupon she rose and tucking up her sleeves, cooked food after the
most skilful fashion, and set it before him. He ate and she ate with
him, till they had enough, after which she set on the wine, and she
drank and he drank, and she ceased not to ply him with drink and
entertain him with discourse, till he became drunken and fell asleep.
Thereupon she arose without stay or delay and taking out of her bundle a
budget of Táifí leather[473] opened it and drew forth a pair of knitting
needles, wherewith she fell to work and stinted not till she had made a
beautiful zone, which she folded up in a wrapper after cleaning it and
ironing it and laid it under her pillow. Then she doffed her dress till
she was mother-naked and lying down beside Nur al-Din shampoo’d him till
he awoke from his heavy sleep. He found by his side a maiden like virgin
silver, softer than silk and delicater than a tail of fatted sheep than
standard more conspicuous and goodlier than the red camel,[474] in
height five feet tall with breasts firm and full, brows like bended
bows, eyes like gazelles’ eyes and cheeks like blood-red anemones, a
slender waist with dimples laced and a navel holding an ounce of the
unguent benzoin, thighs like bolsters stuffed with ostrich-down, and
between them what the tongue fails to set forth and at mention whereof
the tears jet forth. Brief it was as it were she to whom the poet
alluded in these two couplets:—

 From her hair is Night, from her forehead Noon ✿ From her side-face
    Rose; from her lip wine boon:
 From her Union Heaven, her Severance Hell: ✿ Pearls from her teeth; from
    her front full Moon.

And how excellent is the saying of another bard[475]:—

 A Moon she rises, Willow-wand she waves ✿ Breathes ambergris and gazeth
    a gazelle.
 Meseems that sorrow wooes my heart and wins ✿ And when she wends makes
    haste therein to dwell.
 Her face is fairer than the Stars of Wealth[476] ✿ And sheeny brows the
    crescent Moon excel.

And quoth a third also:—

 They shine fullest Moons, unveil Crescent-bright; ✿ Sway tenderest
    Branches and turn wild kine;
 ’Mid which is a Dark-eyed for love of whose charms ✿ The Sailors[477]
    would joy to be ground low-li’en.

So Nur al-Din turned to her at once and clasping her to his bosom,
sucked first her upper lip and then her under lip and slid his tongue
between the twain into her mouth. Then he rose to her and found her a
pearl unthridden and a filly none but he had ridden. So he abated her
maidenhead and had of her amorous delight and there was knitted between
them a love-bond which might never know breach nor severance.[478] He
rained upon her cheeks kisses like the falling of pebbles into water,
and struck with stroke upon stroke, like the thrusting of spears in
battle brunt; for that Nur al-Din still yearned after clipping of necks
and sucking of lips and letting down of tress and pressing of waist and
biting of cheek and cavalcading on breast with Cairene buckings and
Yamani wrigglings and Abyssinian sobbings and Hindí pamoisons and Nubian
lasciviousness and Rífí leg-liftings[479] and Damiettan moanings and
Sa’ídí[480] hotness and Alexandrian languishment[481] and this damsel
united in herself all these virtues, together with excess of beauty and
loveliness, and indeed she was even as saith of her the poet:—

 This is she I will never forget till I die ✿ Nor draw near but to those
    who to her draw nigh.
 A being for semblance like Moon at full ✿ Praise her Maker, her Modeller
    glorify!
 Tho’ be sore my sin seeking love-liesse, ✿ On esperance-day ne’er repent
    can I;
 A couplet reciting which none can know ✿ Save the youth who in couplets
    and rhymes shall cry,
 “None weeteth love but who bears its load ✿ Nor passion, save pleasures
    and pains he aby.”

So Nur al-Din lay with the damsel through the night in solace and
delight,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nur al-Din lay
with that damsel through the night in solace and delight, the twain
garbed in the closely buttoned garments of embrace, safe and secure
against the misways of nights and days, and they passed the dark hours
after the goodliest fashion, fearing naught, in their joys love-fraught,
from excess of talk and prate. As saith of them the right excellent
poet[482]:—

       Go, visit her thou lovest, and regard not
       The words detractors utter; envious churls
       Can never favour love. Oh! sure the merciful
       Ne’er make a thing more fair to look upon,
       Then two fond lovers in each other’s arms,
       Speaking their passion in a mute embrace.
       When heart has turned to heart, the fools would part them
       Strike idly on cold steel. So when thou’st found
       One purely, wholly thine, accept her true heart,
       And live for her alone. Oh! thou that blamest
       The love-struck for their love, give o’er thy talk
       How canst thou minister to a mind diseased?

When the morning morrowed in sheen and shone, Nur al-Din awoke from deep
sleep and found that she had brought water:[483] so they made the
Ghusl-ablution, he and she, and he performed that which behoved him of
prayer to his Lord, after which she set before him meat and drink, and
he ate and drank. Then the damsel put her hand under her pillow and
pulling out the girdle which she had knitted during the night, gave it
to Nur al-Din, who asked, “Whence cometh this girdle?”[484] Answered
she, “O my lord, ’tis the silk thou boughtest yesterday for twenty
dirhams. Rise now and go to the Persian bazar and give it to the broker,
to cry for sale, and sell it not for less than twenty gold pieces in
ready money.” Quoth Nur al-Din, “O Princess of fair ones how can a
thing, that cost twenty dirhams and will sell for as many dinars, be
made in a single night?”; and quoth she, “O my lord, thou knowest not
the value of this thing; but go to the market therewith and give it to
the broker, and when he shall cry it, its worth will be made manifest to
thee.” Herewith he carried the zone to the market and gave it to the
broker, bidding him cry it, whilst he himself sat down on a masonry
bench before a shop. The broker fared forth and returning after a while
said to him, “O my lord, rise take the price of thy zone, for it hath
fetched twenty dinars money down.” When Nur al-Din heard this, he
marvelled with exceeding marvel and shook with delight. Then he rose,
between belief and misbelief, to take the money and when he had received
it, he went forthright and spent it all on silk of various colours and
returning home, gave his purchase to the damsel, saying, “Make this all
into girdles and teach me likewise how to make them, that I may work
with thee; for never in the length of my life saw I a fairer craft than
this craft nor a more abounding in gain and profit. By Allah, ’tis
better than the trade of a merchant a thousand times!” She laughed at
his language and said, “O my lord, go to thy friend the druggist and
borrow other thirty dirhams of him, and to-morrow repay him from the
price of the girdle the thirty together with the fifty already loaned to
thee.” So he rose and repaired to the druggist and said to him, “O
Uncle, lend me other thirty dirhams, and to-morrow, Almighty Allah
willing, I will repay thee the whole fourscore.” The old man weighed him
out thirty dirhams, wherewith he went to the market and buying meat and
bread, dried fruits, and flowers as before, carried them home to the
damsel whose name was Miriam,[485] the Girdle-girl. She rose forthright
and making ready rich meats, set them before her lord Nur al-Din; after
which she brought the wine-service and they drank and plied each other
with drink. When the wine began to play with their wits, his pleasant
address and inner grace pleased her, and she recited these two
couplets:—

 Said I to Slim-waist who the wine engraced ✿ Brought in musk-scented
    bowl and a superfine,
 “Was it prest from thy cheek?” He replied “Nay, nay! ✿ When did man from
    Roses e’er press the Wine?”

And the damsel ceased not to carouse with her lord and ply him with cup
and bowl and require him to fill for her and give her to drink of that
which sweeteneth the spirits, and whenever he put forth hand to her, she
drew back from him, out of coquetry. The wine added to her beauty and
loveliness, and Nur al-Din recited these two couplets:

 Slim-waist craved wine from her companeer; ✿ Cried (in meeting of
    friends when he feared for his fere,)
 “An thou pass not the wine thou shalt pass the night, ✿ A-banisht my
    bed!” And he felt sore fear.

They ceased not drinking till drunkenness overpowered Nur al-Din and he
slept; whereupon she rose forthright and fell to work upon a zone, as
was her wont. When she had wrought it to end, she wrapped it in paper
and doffing her clothes, lay down by his side and enjoyed dalliance and
delight till morn appeared.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Miriam the
Girdle-girl, having finished her zone and wrapped it in paper doffed her
dress and lay down by the side of her lord; and then happened to them
what happened of dalliance and delight; and he did his devoir like a
man. On the morrow, she gave him the girdle and said to him, “Carry this
to the market and sell it for twenty dinars, even as thou soldest its
fellow yesterday.” So he went to the bazar and sold the girdle for
twenty dinars, after which he repaired to the druggist and paid him back
the eighty dirhams, thanking him for his bounties and calling down
blessings upon him. He asked, “O my son, hast thou sold the damsel?”;
and Nur al-Din answered, “Wouldst thou have me sell the soul out of my
body?” and told him all that had passed, from commencement to
conclusion, whereat the druggist joyed with joy galore, than which could
be no more and said to him, “By Allah, O my son, thou gladdenest me!
Inshallah, mayst thou ever be in prosperity! Indeed I wish thee well by
reason of my affection for thy father and the continuance of my
friendship with him.” Then Nur al-Din left the Shaykh and straightway
going to the market, bought meat and fruit and wine and all that he
needed according to his custom and returned therewith to Miriam. They
abode thus a whole year in eating and drinking and mirth and merriment
and love and good comradeship, and every night she made a zone and he
sold it on the morrow for twenty dinars, wherewith he bought their needs
and gave the rest to her, to keep against a time of necessity. After the
twelvemonth she said to him one day, “O my lord, whenas thou sellest the
girdle to-morrow, buy for me with its price silk of six colours, because
I am minded to make thee a kerchief to wear on thy shoulders, such as
never son of merchant, no, nor King’s son, ever rejoiced in its like.”
So next day he fared forth to the bazar and after selling the zone
brought her the dyed silks she sought and Miriam the Girdle-girl wrought
at the Kerchief a whole week, for, every night, when she had made an end
of the zone, she would work awhile at the kerchief till it was finished.
Then she gave it to Nur al-Din, who put it on his shoulders and went out
to walk in the market-place, whilst all the merchants and folk and
notables of the town crowded about him, to gaze on his beauty and that
of the kerchief which was of the most beautiful. Now it chanced that one
night, after this, he awoke from sleep and found Miriam weeping passing
sore and reciting these couplets:—

 Nears my parting fro’ my love, nigher draws the Severance-day ✿ Ah
    well-away for parting! and again ah well-away!
 And in tway is torn my heart and O pine I’m doomed to bear ✿ For the
    nights that erst witnessèd our pleasurable play!
 No help for it but Envier the twain of us espy ✿ With evil eye and win
    to us his lamentable way.
 For naught to us is sorer than the jealousy of men ✿ And the backbiter’s
    eyne that with calumny affray.

He said, “O my lady Miriam,[486] what aileth thee to weep?”; and she
replied, “I weep for the anguish of parting for my heart presageth me
thereof.” Quoth he, “O lady of fair ones, and who shall interpose
between us, seeing that I love thee above all creatures and tender thee
the most?”; and quoth she, “And I love thee twice as well as thou me;
but fair opinion of fortune still garreth folk fall into affliction, and
right well saith the poet[487]:—

   Think’st thou thyself all prosperous, in days which prosp’rous be,
   Nor fearest thou impending ill, which comes by Heaven’s decree?
   We see the orbs of heav’n above, how numberless they are,
   But sun and moon alone eclips’d, and ne’er a lesser star!
   And many a tree on earth we see, some bare, some leafy green,
   Of them, not one is hurt with stone save that has fruitful been!
   See’st not th’ refluent ocean, bear carrion on its tide,
   While pearls beneath its wavy flow, fixed in the deep, abide?”

Presently she added, “O my lord Nur al-Din, an thou desire to nonsuit
separation, be on thy guard against a swart-visaged oldster, blind of
the right eye and lame of the left leg; for he it is who will be the
cause of our severance. I saw him enter the city and I opine that he is
come hither in quest of me.” Replied Nur al-Din, “O lady of fair ones,
if my eyes light on him, I will slay him and make an example of him.”
Rejoined she, “O my lord, slay him not; but talk not nor trade with him,
neither buy nor sell with him nor sit nor walk with him nor speak one
word to him, no, not even the answer prescribed by law[488] and I pray
Allah to preserve us from his craft and his mischief?” Next morning, Nur
al-Din took the zone and carried it to the market, where he sat down on
a shop-bench and talked with the sons of the merchants, till the
drowsiness preceding slumber overcame him and he lay down on the bench
and fell asleep. Presently, behold, up came the Frank whom the damsel
had described to him, in company with seven others, and seeing Nur
al-Din lying asleep on the bench, with his head wrapped in the kerchief
which Miriam had made for him and the edge thereof in his grasp, sat
down by him and hent the end of the kerchief in hand and examined it
turning it over for some time. Nur al-Din sensed that there was
something and awoke; then, seeing the very man of whom Miriam had warned
him sitting by his side, cried out at him with a great cry which
startled him. Quoth the Frank, “What aileth thee to cry out thus at us?
Have we taken from thee aught?”; and quoth Nur al-Din, “By Allah, O
accursed, haddest thou taken aught from me, I would carry thee before
the Chief of Police!” Then said the Frank, “O Moslem, I conjure thee by
thy faith and by that wherein thou believest, inform me whence thou
haddest this kerchief;” and Nur al-Din replied, “’Tis the handiwork of
my lady mother,”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


      Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Frank
asked Nur al-Din anent the maker of the kerchief, he answered, saying,
“In very sooth this kerchief is the handiwork of my mother, who made it
for me with her own hand.” Quoth the Frank, “Wilt thou sell it to me and
take ready money for it?” and quoth Nur al-Din, “By Allah, I will not
sell it to thee or to any else, for she made none other than it.” “Sell
it to me and I will give thee to its price this very moment five hundred
dinars, money down; and let her who made it make thee another and a
finer.” “I will not sell it at all, for there is not the like of it in
this city.” “O my lord, wilt thou sell it for six hundred ducats of fine
gold?” And the Frank went on to add to his offer hundred by hundred,
till he bid nine hundred dinars; but Nur al-Din said, “Allah will open
to me otherwise than by my vending it. I will never sell it, not for two
thousand dinars nor more than that; no, never.” The Frank ceased not to
tempt him with money, till he bid him a thousand dinars, and the
merchants present said, “We sell thee the kerchief at that price:[489]
pay down the money.” Quoth Nur al-Din, “I will not see it, I swear by
Allah!”[490] But one of the merchants said to him, “Know thou, O my son,
that the value of this kerchief is an hundred dinars at most and that to
an eager purchaser, and if this Frank pay thee down a thousand for it,
thy profit will be nine hundred dinars, and what gain canst thou desire
greater than this gain? Wherefore ’tis my rede that thou sell him this
kerchief at that price and bid her who wrought it make thee other finer
than it: so shalt thou profit nine hundred dinars by this accursed
Frank, the enemy of Allah and of The Faith.” Nur al-Din was abashed at
the merchants and sold the kerchief to the Frank, who, in their
presence, paid him down the thousand dinars, with which he would have
returned to his handmaid to congratulate her on what had passed; but the
stranger said, “Harkye, O company of merchants, stop my lord Nur al-Din,
for you and he are my guests this night. I have a jar of old Greek wine
and a fat lamb, fresh fruit, flowers and confections; wherefore do ye
all cheer me with your company to-night and not one of you tarry
behind.” So the merchants said, “O my lord Nur al-Din, we desire that
thou be with us on the like of this night, so we may talk together, we
and thou, and we pray thee, of thy favour and bounty, to bear us
company, so we and thou, may be the guests of this Frank, for he is a
liberal man.” And they conjured him by the oath of divorce[491] and
hindered him by main force from going home. Then they rose forthright
and shutting up their shops, took Nur al-Din and fared with the Frank,
who brought them to a goodly and spacious saloon, wherein were two
daïses. Here he made them sit and set before them a scarlet tray-cloth
of goodly workmanship and unique handiwork, wroughten in gold with
figures of breaker and broken, lover and beloved, asker and asked,
whereon he ranged precious vessels of porcelain and crystal, full of the
costliest confections, fruits and flowers, and brought them a flagon of
old Greek wine. Then he bade slaughter a fat lamb and kindling fire,
proceeded to roast of its flesh and feed the merchants therewith and
give them draughts of that wine, winking at them the while to ply Nur
al-Din with drink. Accordingly they ceased not plying him with wine till
he became drunken and took leave of his wits; so when the Frank saw that
he was drowned in liquor, he said to him, “O my lord Nur al-Din, thou
gladdenest us with thy company to-night: welcome, and again welcome to
thee?” Then he engaged him awhile in talk, till he could draw near to
him, when he said, with dissembling speech, “O my lord, Nur al-Din, wilt
thou sell me thy slave-girl, whom thou boughtest in presence of these
merchants a year ago for a thousand dinars? I will give thee at this
moment five thousand gold pieces for her and thou wilt thus make four
thousand ducats profit.” Nur al-Din refused, but the Frank ceased not to
ply him with meat and drink and lure him with lucre, still adding to his
offers, till he bid him ten thousand dinars for her; whereupon Nur
al-Din, in his drunkenness, said before the merchants, “I sell her to
thee for ten thousand dinars: hand over the money.” At this the Frank
rejoiced with joy exceeding and took the merchants to witness the sale.
They passed the night in eating and drinking, mirth and merriment, till
the morning, when the Frank cried out to his pages, saying, “Bring me
the money.” So they brought it to him and he counted out ten thousand
dinars to Nur al-Din, saying, “O my lord, take the price of thy
slave-girl, whom thou soldest to me last night, in the presence of these
Moslem merchants.” Replied Nur al-Din, “O accursed, I sold thee nothing
and thou liest anent me, for I have no slave-girls.” Quoth the Frank,
“In very sooth thou didst sell her to me and these merchants were
witnesses to the bargain.” Thereupon all said, “Yes, indeed! thou
soldest him thy slave-girl before us for ten thousand dinars, O Nur
al-Din and we will all bear witness against thee of the sale. Come, take
the money and deliver him the girl, and Allah will give thee a better
than she in her stead. Doth it irk thee, O Nur al-Din, that thou
boughtest the girl for a thousand dinars and hast enjoyed for a year and
a half her beauty and loveliness and taken thy fill of her converse and
her favours? Furthermore thou hast gained some ten thousand golden
dinars by the sale of the zones which she made thee every day and thou
soldest for twenty sequins, and after all this thou hast sold her again
at a profit of nine thousand dinars over and above her original price.
And withal thou deniest the sale and belittlest and makest difficulties
about the profit! What gain is greater than this gain and what profit
wouldst thou have profitabler than this profit? An thou love her thou
hast had thy fill of her all this time: so take the money and buy thee
another handsomer than she; or we will marry thee to one of our
daughters, lovelier than she, at a dowry of less than half this price,
and the rest of the money will remain in thy hand as capital.” And the
merchants ceased not to ply him with persuasion and specious arguments
till he took the ten thousand dinars, the price of the damsel, and the
Frank straightway fetched Kazis and witnesses, who drew up the contract
of sale by Nur al-Din of the handmaid hight Miriam the Girdle-girl. Such
was his case; but as regards the damsel’s, she sat awaiting her lord
from morning till sundown and from sundown till the noon of night; and
when he returned not, she was troubled and wept with sore weeping. The
old druggist heard her sobbing and sent his wife, who went in to her and
finding her in tears, said to her, “O my lady, what aileth thee to
weep?” Said she, “O my mother, I have sat waiting the return of my lord,
Nur al-Din all day; but he cometh not, and I fear lest some one have
played a trick on him, to make him sell me, and he have fallen into the
snare and sold me.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.


      Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Miriam the
Girdle-girl said to the druggist’s wife, “I am fearful lest some one
have been playing a trick on my lord to make him sell me, and he have
fallen into the snare and sold me.” Said the other, “O my lady Miriam,
were they to give thy lord this hall full of gold as thy price, yet
would he not sell thee, for what I know of his love to thee. But, O my
lady, belike there be a company come from his parents at Cairo and he
hath made them an entertainment in the lodging where they alighted,
being ashamed to bring them hither, for that the place is not spacious
enough for them or because their condition is less than that he should
bring them to his own house; or belike he preferred to conceal thine
affair from them, so passed the night with them; and Inshallah!
to-morrow he will come to thee safe and sound. So burden not thy soul
with cark and care, O my lady, for of a certainty this is the cause of
his absence from thee last night and I will abide with thee this coming
night and comfort thee, until thy lord return to thee.” So the
druggist’s wife abode with her and cheered her with talk throughout the
dark hours and, when it was morning, Miriam saw her lord enter the
street followed by the Frank and amiddlemost a company of merchants, at
which sight her side-muscles quivered and her colour changed and she
fell a-shaking, as ship shaketh in mid-ocean for the violence of the
gale. When the druggist’s wife saw this, she said to her, “O my lady
Miriam what aileth thee that I see thy case changed and thy face grown
pale and show disfeatured?” Replied she, “By Allah, O my lady, my heart
forebodeth me of parting and severance of union!” And she bemoaned
herself with the saddest sighs, reciting these couplets[492]:—

 Incline not to parting, I pray; ✿ For bitter its savour is aye.
 E’en the sun at his setting turns pale ✿ To think he must part from the
    day;
 And so, at his rising, for joy ✿ Of reunion, he’s radiant and gay.

Then Miriam wept passing sore wherethan naught could be more, making
sure of separation, and cried to the druggist’s wife, “O my mother, said
I not to thee that my lord Nur al-Din had been tricked into selling me?
I doubt not but he hath sold me this night to yonder Frank, albeit I
bade him beware of him; but deliberation availeth not against destiny.
So the truth of my words is made manifest to thee.” Whilst they were
talking, behold, in came Nur al-Din, and the damsel looked at him and
saw that his colour was changed and that he trembled and there appeared
on his face signs of grief and repentance: so she said to him, “O my
lord Nur al-Din, meseemeth thou hast sold me.” Whereupon he wept with
sore weeping and groaned and lamented and recited these couplets[493]:—

                When e’er the Lord ’gainst any man,
                Would fulminate some harsh decree,
                And he be wise, and skilled to hear,
                And used to see;
                He stops his ears, and blinds his heart,
                And from his brain ill judgment tears,
                And makes it bald as ’twere a scalp,
                Reft of its hairs[494];
                Until the time when the whole man
                Be pierced by this divine command;
                Then He restores him intellect
                To understand.

Then Nur al-Din began to excuse himself to his handmaid, saying, “By
Allah, O my lady Miriam, verily runneth the Reed with whatso Allah hath
decreed. The folk put a cheat on me to make me sell thee, and I fell
into the snare and sold thee. Indeed I have sorely failed of my duty to
thee; but haply He who decreed our disunion will vouchsafe us reunion.”
Quoth she, “I warned thee against this, for this it was I dreaded.” Then
she strained him to her bosom and kissed him between the eyes, reciting
these couplets:—

 Now, by your love! your love I’ll ne’er forget, ✿ Though lost my life
    for stress of pine and fret:
 I weep and wail through livelong day and night ✿ As moans the dove on
    sandhill-tree beset.
 O fairest friends, your absence spoils my life; ✿ Nor find I
    meeting-place as erst we met.

At this juncture, behold, the Frank came in to them and went up to
Miriam, to kiss her hands; but she dealt him a buffet with her palm on
the cheek, saying, “Avaunt, O accursed! Thou hast followed after me
without surcease, till thou hast cozened my lord into selling me! But O
accursed, all shall yet be well, Inshallah!” The Frank laughed at her
speech and wondered at her deed and excused himself to her, saying, “O
my lady Miriam, what is my offence? Thy lord Nur al-Din here sold thee
of his full consent and of his own free will. Had he loved thee, by the
right of the Messiah, he had not transgressed against thee! And had he
not fulfilled his desire of thee, he had not sold thee.” Quoth one of
the poets:—

 Whom I irk let him fly fro’ me fast and faster ✿ If I name his name I am
    no directer.
 Nor the wide wide world is to me so narrow ✿ That I act expecter to this
    rejecter.[495]

Now this handmaid was the daughter of the King of France, the which is a
wide and spacious city,[496] abounding in manufactures and rarities and
trees and flowers and other growths, and resembleth the city of
Constantinople: and for her going forth of her father’s city there was a
wondrous cause and thereby hangeth a marvellous tale which we will set
out in due order, to divert and delight the hearer[497]——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the cause of
Miriam the Girdle-girl leaving her father and mother was a wondrous and
thereby hangeth a marvellous tale. She was reared with her father and
mother in honour and indulgence and learnt rhetoric and penmanship and
arithmetic and cavalarice and all manner crafts, such as broidery and
sewing and weaving and girdle-making and silk-cord making and
damascening gold on silver and silver on gold, brief all the arts both
of men and women, till she became the union-pearl of her time and the
unique gem of her age and day. Moreover, Allah (to whom belong Might and
Majesty!) had endowed her with such beauty and loveliness and elegance
and perfection of grace that she excelled therein all the folk of her
time, and the Kings of the isles sought her in marriage of her sire, but
he refused to give her to wife to any of her suitors, for that he loved
her with passing love and could not bear to be parted from her a single
hour. Moreover, he had no other daughter than herself, albeit he had
many sons, but she was dearer to him than all of them. It fortuned one
year that she fell sick of an exceeding sickness and came nigh upon
death, wherefore she made a vow that, if she recovered from her malady,
she would make the pilgrimage to a certain monastery, situate in such an
island, which was high in repute among the Franks, who used to make vows
to it and look for a blessing therefrom. When Miriam recovered from her
sickness, she wished to accomplish her vow anent the monastery and her
sire despatched her to the convent in a little ship, with sundry
daughters of the city-notables to wait upon her and patrician Knights to
protect them all. As they drew near the island, there came out upon them
a ship of the ships of the Moslems, champions of The Faith, warring in
Allah’s way, who boarded the vessel and making prize of all therein,
knights and maidens, gifts and monies, sold their booty in the city of
Kayrawán.[498] Miriam herself fell into the hands of a Persian merchant,
who was born impotent[499] and for whom no woman had ever discovered her
nakedness; so he set her to serve him. Presently, he fell ill and
sickened well nigh unto death, and the sickness abode with him two
months, during which she tended him after the goodliest fashion, till
Allah made him whole of his malady, when he recalled her tenderness and
loving-kindness to him and the persistent zeal with which she had nurst
him and being minded to requite her the good offices she had done him,
said to her, “Ask a boon of me?” She said, “O my lord, I ask of thee
that thou sell me not but to the man of my choice.” He answered, “So be
it. I guarantee thee. By Allah, O Miriam, I will not sell thee but to
him of whom thou shalt approve, and I put thy sale in thine own hand.”
And she rejoiced herein with joy exceeding. Now the Persian had
expounded to her Al-Islam and she became a Moslemah and learnt of him
the rules of worship. Furthermore during that period the Persian had
taught her the tenets of The Faith and the observances incumbent upon
her: he had made her learn the Koran by heart and master somewhat of the
theological sciences and the traditions of the Prophet; after which, he
brought her to Alexandria-city and sold her to Nur al-Din, as we have
before set out. Meanwhile, when her father, the King of France, heard
what had befallen his daughter and her company, he saw Doomsday break
and sent after her ships full of knights and champions, horsemen and
footmen; but they fell not in any trace of her whom they sought in the
Islands[500] of the Moslems; so all returned to him, crying out and
saying, “Well-away!” and “Ruin!” and “Well worth the day!” The King
grieved for her with exceeding grief and sent after her that one-eyed
lameter, blind of the left,[501] for that he was his chief Wazir, a
stubborn tyrant and a froward devil,[502] full of craft and guile,
bidding him make search for her in all the lands of the Moslems and buy
her, though with a shipload of gold. So the accursed sought her, in all
the islands of the Arabs and all the cities of the Moslems, but found no
sign of her till he came to Alexandria-city where he made quest for her
and presently discovered that she was with Nur al-Din Ali the Cairene,
being directed to the trace of her by the kerchief aforesaid, for that
none could have wrought it in such goodly guise but she. Then he bribed
the merchants to help him in getting her from Nur al-Din and beguiled
her lord into selling her, as hath been already related. When he had her
in his possession, she ceased not to weep and wail: so he said to her,
“O my lady Miriam, put away from thee this mourning and grieving and
return with me to the city of thy sire, the seat of thy kingship and the
place of thy power and thy home, so thou mayst be among thy servants and
attendants and be quit of this abasement and this strangerhood. Enough
hath betided me of travail, of travel and of disbursing monies on thine
account, for thy father bade me buy thee back, though with a shipload of
gold; and now I have spent nigh a year and a half in seeking thee.” And
he fell to kissing her hands and feet and humbling himself to her; but
the more he kissed and grovelled she only redoubled in wrath against
him, and said to him, “O accursed, may Almighty Allah not vouchsafe thee
to win thy wish!” Presently his pages brought her a she-mule with
gold-embroidered housings and mounting her thereon, raised over her head
a silken canopy, with staves of gold and silver, and the Franks walked
round about her, till they brought her forth the city by the
sea-gate,[503] where they took boat with her and rowing out to a great
ship in harbour embarked therein. Then the monocular Wazir cried out to
the sailors, saying, “Up with the mast!” So they set it up forthright
and spreading the newly bent sails and the colours manned the sweeps and
put out to sea. Meanwhile Miriam continued to gaze upon Alexandria, till
it disappeared from her eyes, when she fell a-weeping in her privacy
with sore weeping——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Eightieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Wazir of the Frankish King put out to sea in the ship bearing Miriam the
Girdle-girl she gazed Alexandria-wards till the city was hidden from her
sight when she wailed and wept copious tears and recited these
couplets:—

 O dwelling of my friends say is there no return ✿ Uswards? But what ken
    I of matters Allah made?
 Still fare the ships of Severance, sailing hastily ✿ And in my wounded
    eyelids tears have ta’en their stead,
 For parting from a friend who was my wish and will ✿ Healed every ill
    and every pain and pang allay’d.
 Be thou, O Allah, substitute of me for him ✿ Such charge some day the
    care of Thee shall not evade.

Then she could not refrain from weeping and wailing. So the
patrician[504] knights came up to her and would have comforted her, but
she heeded not their consoling words, being distracted by the claims of
passion and love-longing. And she shed tears and moaned and complained
and recited these couplets:—

 The tongue of Love within my vitals speaketh ✿ Saying, “This lover boon
    of Love aye seeketh!”
 And burn my liver hottest coals of passion ✿ And parting on my heart
    sore suffering wreaketh.
 How shall I face this fiery love concealing ✿ When fro’ my wounded lids
    the tear aye leaketh?

In this plight Miriam abode during all the voyage; no peace was left her
at all nor would patience come at her call. Such was her case in company
with the Wazir, the monocular, the lameter; but as regards Nur al-Din
the Cairene, when the ship had sailed with Miriam, the world was
straitened upon him and he had neither peace nor patience. He returned
to the lodging where they twain had dwelt, and its aspect was black and
gloomy in his sight. Then he saw the _métier_ wherewith she had been
wont to make the zones and her dress that had been upon her beauteous
body: so he pressed them to his breast, whilst the tears gushed from his
eyes and he recited these couplets:—

 Say me, will Union after parting e’er return to be ✿ After long-lasting
    torments, after hopeless misery?
 Alas! Alas! what wont to be shall never more return ✿ But grant me still
    return of dearest her these eyne may see.
 I wonder me will Allah deign our parted lives unite ✿ And will my dear
    one’s plighted troth preserve with constancy!
 Naught am I save the prey of death since parting parted us; ✿ And will
    my friends consent that I a weird so deadly dree?
 Alas my sorrow! Sorrowing the lover scant avails; ✿ Indeed I melt away
    in grief and passion’s ecstacy:
 Past is the time of my delight when were we two conjoined: ✿ Would
    Heaven I wot if Destiny mine esperance will degree!
 Redouble then, O Heart, thy pains and, O mine eyes, o’erflow ✿ With
    tears till not a tear remain within these eyne of me?
 Again alas for loved ones lost and loss of patience eke! ✿ For helpers
    fail me and my griefs are grown beyond decree.
 The Lord of Threefold Worlds I pray He deign to me return ✿ My lover and
    we meet as wont in joy and jubilee.

Then Nur al-Din wept with weeping galore than which naught could be
more; and peering into every corner of the room, recited these two
couplets:—

 I view their traces and with pain I pine ✿ And by their sometime home I
    weep and yearn;
 And Him I pray who parting deigned decree ✿ Some day He deign vouchsafe
    me their return!

Then Nur al-Din sprang to his feet and locking the door of the house,
fared forth running at speed, to the sea shore whence he fixed his eyes
on the place of the ship which had carried off his Miriam whilst sighs
burst from his breast and tears from his lids as he recited these
couplets:—

 Peace be with you, sans you naught compensateth me ✿ The near, the far,
    two cases only here I see:
 I yearn for you at every hour and tide as yearns ✿ For water-place
    wayfarer plodding wearily.

 With you abide my hearing, heart and eyen-sight ✿ And (sweeter than the
    honeycomb) your memory.
 Then, O my Grief when fared afar your retinue ✿ And bore that ship away
    my sole expectancy.

And Nur al-Din wept and wailed, bemoaned himself and complained, crying
out and saying, “O Miriam! O Miriam! Was it but a vision of thee I saw
in sleep or in the allusions of dreams?” And by reason of that which
grew on him of regrets, he recited these couplets[505]:—

       Mazed with thy love no more I can feign patience,
       This heart of mine has held none dear but thee!
       And if mine eye hath gazed on other’s beauty,
       Ne’er be it joyed again with sight of thee!
       I’ve sworn an oath I’ll ne’er forget to love thee,
       And sad’s this breast that pines to meet with thee!
       Thou’st made me drink a love-cup full of passion,
       Blest time! When I may give the draught to thee!
       Take with thee this my form where’er thou goest,
       And when thou’rt dead let me be laid near thee!
       Call on me in my tomb, my bones shall answer
       And sigh responses to a call from thee!
       If it were asked, “What wouldst thou Heaven should order?”
       “His will,” I answer, “First, and then what pleases thee.”

As Nur al-Din was in this case, weeping and crying out, “O Miriam! O
Miriam!” behold, an old man landed from a vessel and coming up to him,
saw him shedding tears and heard him reciting these verses:—

 O Maryam of beauty[506] return, for these eyne ✿ Are as densest clouds
    railing drops in line:
 Ask amid mankind and my railers shall say ✿ That mine eyelids are
    drowning these eyeballs of mine.

Said the old man, “O my son, meseems thou weepest for the damsel who
sailed yesterday with the Frank?” When Nur al-Din heard these words of
the Shaykh he fell down in a swoon and lay for a long while without
life; then, coming to himself, he wept with sore weeping and improvised
these couplets:—

 Shall we e’er be unite after severance-tide ✿ And return in the
    perfectest cheer to bide?
 In my heart indeed is a lowe of love ✿ And I’m pained by the spies who
    my pain deride:
 My days I pass in amaze distraught, ✿ And her image a-nights I would see
    by side:
 By Allah, no hour brings me solace of love ✿ And how can it when
    makebates vex me and chide?
 A soft-sided damsel of slenderest waist ✿ Her arrows of eyne on my heart
    hath plied?
 Her form is like Bán[507]-tree branch in garth ✿ Shame her charms the
    sun who his face most hide:
 Did I not fear God (be He glorified!) ✿ “My Fair be glorified!” Had I
    cried.

The old man looked at him and noting his beauty and grace and symmetry
and the fluency of his tongue and the seductiveness of his charms, had
ruth on him and his heart mourned for his case. Now that Shaykh was the
captain of a ship, bound to the damsel’s city, and in this ship were a
hundred Moslem merchants, men of the Saving Faith; so he said to Nur
al-Din, “Have patience and all will yet be well; I will bring thee to
her an it be the will of Allah, extolled and exalted be He!”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Eighty-first Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the old
skipper said to Nur al-Din, “I will bring thee to her, Inshallah!” the
youth asked, “When shall we set out?” and the other said, “Come but
three days more and we will depart in peace and prosperity.” Nur al-Din
rejoiced at the captain’s words with joy exceeding and thanked him for
his bounty and benevolence. Then he recalled the days of love-liesse
dear and union with his slave-girl without peer, and he shed bitter
tears and recited these couplets:—

 Say, will to me and you the Ruthful union show ✿ My lords! Shall e’er I
    win the wish of me or no?
 A visit-boon by you will shifty Time vouchsafe? ✿ And seize your image
    eyelids which so hungry grow?
 With you were Union to be sold, I fain would buy; ✿ But ah, I see such
    grace doth all my means outgo!

Then Nur al-Din went forthright to the market and bought what he needed
of vitiacum and other necessaries for the voyage and returned to the
Rais, who said to him, “O my son, what is that thou hast with thee?”
said he, “My provisions and all whereof I have need for the voyage.”
Thereupon quoth the old man, laughing, “O my son, art thou going
a-pleasuring to Pompey’s Pillar[508]? Verily, between thee and that thou
seekest is two months’ journey an the wind be fair and the weather
favourable.” Then he took of him somewhat of money and going to the
bazar, bought him a sufficiency of all that he needed for the voyage and
filled him a large earthen jar[509] with fresh water. Nur al-Din abode
in the ship three days until the merchants had made an end of their
precautions and preparations and embarked, when they set sail and
putting out to sea, fared on one-and-fifty days. After this, there came
out upon them corsairs,[510] pirates who sacked the ship and taking Nur
al-Din and all therein prisoners, carried them to the city of France and
paraded them before the King, who bade cast them into jail, Nur al-Din
amongst the number. As they were being led to prison the galleon[511]
arrived with the Princess Miriam and the one-eyed Wazir, and when it
made the harbour, the lameter landed and going up to the King gave him
the glad news of his daughter’s safe return: whereupon they beat the
kettle-drums for good tidings and decorated the city after the goodliest
fashion. Then the King took horse, with all his guards and lords and
notables and rode down to the sea to meet her. The moment the ship cast
anchor she came ashore, and the King saluted her and embraced her and
mounting her on a blood-steed, bore her to the palace, where her mother
received her with open arms, and asked her of her case and whether she
was a maid as before or whether she had become a woman carnally known by
man.[512] She replied, “O my mother, how should a girl, who hath been
sold from merchant to merchant in the land of Moslems, a slave
commanded, abide a virgin? The merchant who bought me threatened me with
the bastinado and violenced me and took my maidenhead, after which he
sold me to another and he again to a third.” When the Queen heard these
her words, the light in her eyes became night and she repeated her
confession to the King who was chagrined thereat and his affair was
grievous to him. So he expounded her case to his Grandees and
Patricians[513] who said to him, “O King, she hath been defiled by the
Moslems and naught will purify her save the striking off of an hundred
Mohammedan heads.” Whereupon the King sent for the True Believers he had
imprisoned; and they decapitated them, one after another, beginning with
the captain, till none was left save Nur al-Din. They tare off a strip
of his skirt and binding his eyes therewith, led him to the rug of blood
and were about to smite his neck, when behold, an ancient dame came up
to the King at that very moment and said, “O my lord, thou didst vow to
bestow upon each and every church five Moslem captives, to help us in
the service thereof, so Allah would restore thee thy daughter the
Princess Miriam; and now she is restored to thee, so do thou fulfil thy
vow.” The King replied, “O my mother, by the virtue of the Messiah and
the Veritable Faith, there remaineth to me of the prisoners but this one
captive, whom they are about to put to death: so take him with thee to
help in the service of the church, till there come to me more prisoners
of the Moslems, when I will send thee other four. Hadst thou come
earlier, before they hewed off the heads of these, I had given thee as
many as thou wouldest have.” The old woman thanked the King for his boon
and wished him continuance of life, glory and prosperity. Then without
loss of time she went up to Nur al-Din, whom she raised from the rug of
blood; and, looking narrowly at him saw a comely youth and a dainty,
with a delicate skin and a face like the moon at her full; whereupon she
carried him to the church and said to him, “O my son, doff these clothes
which are upon thee, for they are fit only for the service of the
Sultan.[514]” So saying the ancient dame brought him a gown and hood of
black wool and a broad girdle,[515] in which she clad and cowled him;
and, after binding on his belt, bade him do the service of the church.
Accordingly, he served the church seven days, at the end of which time
behold, the old woman came up to him and said, “O Moslem, don thy silken
dress and take these ten dirhams and go out forthright and divert
thyself abroad this day, and tarry not here a single moment, lest thou
lose thy life.” Quoth he, “What is to do, O my mother?”; and quoth she,
“Know, O my son, that the King’s daughter, the Princess Miriam the
Girdle-girl, hath a mind to visit the church this day, to seek a
blessing by pilgrimage and to make oblation thereto, a douceur[516] of
thank-offering for her deliverance from the land of the Moslems and in
fulfilment of the vows she vowed to the Messiah, so he would save her.
With her are four hundred damsels, not one of whom but is perfect in
beauty and loveliness and all of them are daughters of Wazirs and Emirs
and Grandees: they will be here during this very hour and if their eyes
fall on thee in this church, they will hew thee in pieces with swords.”
Thereupon Nur al-Din took the ten dirhams from the ancient dame, and
donning his own dress, went out to the bazar and walked about the city
and took his pleasure therein, till he knew its highways and gates,——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Eighty-second Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nur al-Din,
after donning his own dress and taking the ten dirhams from the ancient
dame, fared forth to the market streets and wandered about a while till
he knew every quarter of the city, after which he returned to the
church[517] and saw the Princess Miriam the Girdle-girl, daughter of the
King of France come up to the fane, attended by four hundred damsels,
high-bosomed maids like moons, amongst whom was the daughter of the
one-eyed Wazir and those of the Emirs and Lords of the realm; and she
walked in their midst as she were moon among stars. When his eyes fell
upon her Nur al-Din could not contain himself, but cried out from the
core of his heart, “O Miriam! O Miriam!” When the damsels heard his
outcry they ran at him with swords shining bright like flashes of
leven-light and would have slain him forthright. But the Princess turned
and looking on him, knew him with fullest knowledge, and said to her
maidens, “Leave this youth; doubtless he is mad, for the signs of
madness be manifest on his face.” When Nur al-Din heard this, he
uncovered his head and rolled his eyes and made signs with his hands and
twisted his legs, foaming the while at the mouth. Quoth the Princess,
“Said I not that the poor youth was mad? Bring him to me and stand off
from him, that I may hear what he saith; for I know the speech of the
Arabs and will look into his case and see if his madness admit of cure
or not.” So they laid hold of him and brought him to her; after which
they withdrew to a distance and she said to him, “Hast thou come hither
on my account and ventured thy life for my sake and feignest thyself
mad?” He replied, “O my lady, hast thou not heard the saying of the
poet[518]?:—

 Quoth they, “Thou’rt surely raving mad for her thou lov’st;” and I,
    “There is no pleasantness in life but for the mad,” reply.
 Compare my madness with herself for whom I rave; if she Accord
    therewith, then blame me not for that which I aby.”

Miriam replied, “By Allah, O Nur al-Din, indeed thou hast sinned against
thyself, for I warned thee of this before it befel thee: yet wouldst
thou not hearken to me, but followedst thine own lust: albeit that
whereof I gave thee to know I learnt not by means of inspiration nor
physiognomy[519] nor dreams, but by eye-witness and very sight; for I
saw the one-eyed Wazir and knew that he was not come to Alexandria but
in quest of me.” Said he, “O my lady Miriam, we seek refuge with Allah
from the error of the intelligent[520]!” Then his affliction redoubled
on him and he recited this saying[521]:—

           Pass o’er my fault, for ’tis the wise man’s wont
           Of other’s sins to take no harsh account;
           And as all crimes have made my breast their site,
           So thine all shapes of mercy should unite.
           Who from above would mercy seek to know,
           Should first be merciful to those below.

Then Nur al-Din and Princess Miriam ceased not from lovers’ chiding
which to trace would be tedious, relating each to other that which had
befallen them and reciting verses and making moan, one to other, of the
violence of passion and the pangs of pine and desire, whilst the tears
ran down their cheeks like rivers, till there was left them no strength
to say a word and so they continued till day departed and night
darkened. Now the Princess was clad in a green dress, purfled with red
gold and broidered with pearls and gems which enhanced her beauty and
loveliness and inner grace; and right well quoth the poet of her[522]:—

 Like the full moon she shineth in garments all of green, With loosened
    vest and collars and flowing hair beseen.
 “What is thy name?” I asked her, and she replied, “I’m she Who roasts
    the hearts of lovers on coals of love and teen.
 I am the pure white silver, ay, and the gold wherewith The bondmen from
    strait prison and dour releasèd been.”
 Quoth I, “I’m all with rigours consumed;” but “On a rock,” Said she,
    “such as my heart is, thy plaints are wasted clean.”
 “Even if thy heart,” I answered, “be rock in very deed, Yet hath God
    caused fair water well from the rock, I ween.”

And when night darkened on them the Lady Miriam went up to her women and
asked them, “Have ye locked the door?”; and they answered, “Indeed we
have locked it.” So she took them and went with them to a place called
the Chapel of the Lady Mary the Virgin, Mother of Light, because the
Nazarenes hold that there are her heart and soul. The girls betook
themselves to prayer for blessings from above and circuited all the
church; and when they had made an end of their visitation, the Princess
turned to them and said, “I desire to pass the night alone in the
Virgin’s chapel and seek a blessing thereof, for that yearning after it
hath betided me, by reason of my long absence in the land of the
Moslems; and as for you, when ye have made an end of your visitation, do
ye sleep whereso ye will.” Replied they, “With love and goodly gree: be
it as thou wilt!”; and leaving her alone in the chapel, dispersed about
the church and slept. The Lady Miriam waited till they were out of sight
and hearing, then went in search of Nur al-Din, whom she found sitting
in a corner on live coals, awaiting her. He rose and kissed her hands
and feet and she sat down and seated him by her side. Then she pulled
off all that was upon her of raiment and ornaments and fine linen and
taking Nur al-Din in her arms strained him to her bosom. And they ceased
not, she and he, from kissing and clipping and strumming to the tune of
“hocus-pocus,[523]” saying the while, “How short are the nights of Union
and the nights of Disunion how long are they!” and reciting these
verses:—

 O Night of Union, Time’s virginal prize, ✿ White star of the Nights with
    auroral dyes,
 Thou garrest Dawn after Noon to rise ✿ Say art thou Kohl in Morning’s
    Eyes,
 Or wast thou Slumber to bleared eye lief?
 O Night of Parting, how long thy stay ✿ Whose latest hours aye the first
    portray,
 This endless circle that noways may ✿ Show breach till the coming of
    Judgment-day,
 Day when dies the lover of parting-grief.[524]

As they were in this mighty delight and joy engrossing they heard one of
the servants of the Saint[525] smite the gong[526] upon the roof, to
call the folk to the rites of their worship, and he was even as saith
the poet: —

 I saw him strike the gong and asked of him straightway, ✿ “Who made the
    Fawn[527] at striking gong so knowing, eh?”
 And to my soul, “What smiting irketh thee the more ✿ Striking the gong
    or striking note of going,[528] say?”

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Eighty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nur al-Din and
Miriam the Girdle-girl rose forthwith and donned her clothes and
ornaments; but this was grievous to Nur al-Din, and his gladness was
troubled; the tears streamed from his eyes and he recited these
couplets:—

 I ceasèd not to kiss that cheek with budding roses dight ✿ And eyes down
    cast and bit the same with most emphatic bite;
 Until we were _in gloria_[529] and lay him down the spy ✿ And sank his
    eyes within his brain declining further sight:
 And struck the gongs as they that had the charge of them were like ✿
    Muezzin crying duty-prayers in Allah’s book indite.
 Then rose she up right hastily and donned the dress she’d doffed ✿ Sore
    fearing lest a shooting-star[530] upon our heads alight.
 And cried, “O wish and will of me, O end of all my hopes! ✿ Behold the
    morning comes to us in brightest whitest light.”
 I swear if but one day of rule were given to my life ✿ And I were made
    an Emperor of majesty and might,
 Adown I’d break the buttresses of churches one and all ✿ And by their
    slaughter rid the earth of every shaveling wight.

Then the Lady Miriam pressed him to her bosom and kissed his cheek and
asked him, “O Nur al-Din, how long hast thou been in this town?” “Seven
days.” “Hast thou walked about in it, and dost thou know its ways and
issues and its sea-gates and land gates?” “Yes!” “Knowest thou the way
to the offertory-chest[531] of the church?” “Yes!” “Since thou knowest
all this, as soon as the first third[532] of the coming night is over,
go to the offertory-chest and take thence what thou wishest and willest.
Then open the door that giveth upon the tunnel[533] leading to the sea,
and go down to the harbour, where thou wilt find a little ship and ten
men therein, and when the Rais shall see thee, he will put out his hand
to thee. Give him thy hand and he will take thee up into the ship, and
do thou wait there till I come to thee. But ’ware and have a care lest
sleep overtake thee this night, or thou wilt repent whenas repentance
shall avail thee naught.” Then the Princess farewelled him and going
forth from Nur al-Din, aroused from sleep her women and the rest of the
damsels, with whom she betook herself to the church door and knocked;
whereupon the ancient dame opened to her and she went forth and found
the knights and varlets standing without. They brought her a dapple
she-mule and she mounted: whereupon they raised over her head a
canopy[534] with curtains of silk, and the knights took hold of the
mule’s halter. Then the guards[535] encompassed her about drawn brand in
hand and fared on with her, followed by her, till they brought her to
the palace of the King her father. Meanwhile, Nur al-Din abode concealed
behind the curtain, under cover of which Miriam and he had passed the
night till it was broad day, when the main door was opened and the
church became full of people. Then he mingled with the folk and accosted
the old Prioress, the guardian[536] of the shrine, who said to him,
“Where didst thou lie last night?” Said he, “In the town as thou badest
me.” Quoth she, “O my son, thou hast done the right thing; for, hadst
thou nighted in the Church, she had slain thee on the foulest wise.” And
quoth he, “Praised be Allah who hath delivered me from the evil of this
night!” Then he busied himself with the service of the church and ceased
not busying till day departed and night with darkness starkened when he
arose and opened the offertory-chest and took thence of jewels whatso
was light of weight and weighty of worth. Then he tarried till the first
watch of the night was past, when he made his way to the postern of the
tunnel and opening it, went forth, calling on Allah for protection, and
ceased not faring on until, after finding and opening the door, he came
to the sea. Here he discovered the vessel moored to the shore near the
gate; and her skipper, a tall old man of comely aspect with a long
beard, standing in the waist, his ten men being ranged before him. Nur
al-Din gave him his hand, as Miriam had bidden him, and the captain took
it and pulling him on board of the ship cried out to his crew, saying,
“Cast off the moorings and put out to sea with us, ere day break.” Said
one of the ten, “O my lord the Captain, how shall we put out now, when
the King hath notified us that to-morrow he will embark in this ship and
go round about the sea, being fearful for his daughter Miriam from the
Moslem thieves?” But the Rais cried out at them saying, “Woe to you, O
accursed; Dare ye gainsay me and bandy words with me?” So saying the old
captain bared his blade and with it dealt the sailor who had spoken a
thrust in the throat, that the steel came out gleaming from his nape,
and quoth another of the sailors, “What hath our comrade done of crime,
that thou shouldst cut his throat?” Thereupon the captain clapped hand
to sword and smote off the speaker’s head, nor did he leave smiting the
rest of the sailors, till he had slain them all, one after other, and
cast the ten bodies ashore. Then he turned to Nur al-Din and cried out
at him with a terrible great cry, that made him tremble, saying, “Go
down and pull up the mooring-stake.” Nur al-Din feared lest he should
strike him also with the sword; so he sprang up and leapt ashore and
pulling up the stake jumped aboard again, swiftlier than the dazzling
leven. The captain ceased not to bid him do this and do that and tack
and wear hither and thither and look at the stars, and Nur al-Din did
all that he bade him, with heart a-quaking for affright; whilst he
himself spread the sails, and the ship fared with the twain into the
dashing sea, swollen with clashing billows.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the old
skipper had made sail he drave the ship, aided by Nur al-Din, into the
dashing sea before a favouring gale. Meanwhile, Nur al-Din held on to
the tackle immersed in deep thought, and drowned in the sea of
solicitude, knowing not what was hidden for him in the future; and
whenever he looked at the captain, his heart quaked and he knew not
whither the Rais went with him. He abode thus, preoccupied with care and
doubt, till it was high day, when he looked at the skipper and saw him
take hold of his long beard and pull at it, whereupon it came off in his
hand and Nur al-Din, examining it, saw that it was but a false beard
glued on. So he straitly considered that same Rais, and behold, it was
the Princess Miriam, his mistress and the dearling of his heart, who had
contrived to waylay the captain and slay him and skinned off his beard,
which she had stuck on to her own face. At this Nur al-Din was
transported for joy, and his breast broadened and he marvelled at her
prowess and the stoutness of her heart and said to her, “Welcome, O my
hope and my desire and the end of mine every wish!” Then love and
gladness agitated him and he made sure of winning to his hopes and his
expectancy; wherefore he broke out into song and chanted these
couplets:—

 To all who unknown my love for the May ✿ From whom Fate disjoins me O
    say, I pray,
 “Ask my kith and kin of my love that aye ✿ Ensweetens my verses to
    lovely lay:
         For the loss of the tribesmen my life o’er sway!”
 Their names when named heal all malady; ✿ Cure and chase from heart
    every pain I dree:
 And my longings for love reach so high degree ✿ That my Sprite is
    maddened each morn I see,
         And am grown of the crowd to be saw and say.
 No blame in them will I e’er espy: ✿ No! nor aught of solace sans them
    descry:
 Your love hath shot me with pine, and I ✿ Bear in heart a flame that
    shall never die,
         But fire my liver with fiery ray.
 All folk my sickness for marvel score ✿ That in darkest night I wake
    evermore
 What ails them to torture this heart forlore ✿ And deem right for loving
    my blood t’ outpour:
         And yet—how justly unjust are they!

 Would I wot who ’twas could obtain of you ✿ To wrong a youth who’s so
    fain of you:
 By my life and by Him who made men of you ✿ And the spy tell aught I
    complain of you
         He lies, by Allah, in foulest way!
 May the Lord my sickness never dispel, ✿ Nor ever my heart of its pains
    be well,
 What day I regret that in love I fell ✿ Or laud any land but wherein ye
    dwell:
         Wring my heart and ye will or make glad and gay!
 I have vitals shall ever be true to you ✿ Though racked by the rigours
    not new to you
 Ere this wrong and this right I but sue to you: ✿ Do what you will to
    thrall who to you
         Shall ne’er grudge his life at your feet to lay.

When Nur al-Din ceased to sing, the Princess Miriam marvelled at his
song and thanked him therefor, saying, “Whoso’s case is thus it behoveth
him to walk the ways of men and never do the deed of curs and cowards.”
Now she was stout of heart and cunning in the sailing of ships over the
salt sea, and she knew all the winds and their shiftings and every
course of the main. So Nur al-Din said, “O my lady, hadst thou prolonged
this case on me,[537] I had surely died for stress of affright and
chagrin, more by token of the fire of passion and love-longing and the
cruel pangs of separation.” She laughed at his speech and rising without
stay or delay brought out somewhat of food and liquor; and they ate and
drank and enjoyed themselves and made merry. Then she drew forth rubies
and other gems and precious stones and costly trinkets of gold and
silver and all manner things of price, light of weight and weighty of
worth, which she had taken from the palace of her sire and his
treasuries, and displayed them to Nur al-Din, who rejoiced therein with
joy exceeding. All this while the wind blew fair for them and merrily
sailed the ship nor ceased sailing till they drew near the city of
Alexandria and sighted its landmarks, old and new, and Pompey’s Pillar.
When they made the port Nur al-Din landed forthright and securing the
ship to one of the Fulling-Stones,[538] took somewhat of the treasures
that Miriam had brought with her, and said to her, “O my lady, tarry in
the ship, against I return and carry thee up into the city in such way
as I should wish and will.” Quoth she, “It behoveth that this be done
quickly, for tardiness in affairs engendereth repentance.” Quoth he,
“There is no tardiness in me;” and, leaving her in the ship, went up
into the city to the house of the druggist his father’s old friend, to
borrow of his wife for Miriam veil and mantilla, and walking boots and
petticoat-trousers after the usage of the women of Alexandria, unknowing
that there was appointed to betide him of the shifts of Time, the Father
of Wonders, that which was far beyond his reckoning. Thus it befel Nur
al-Din and Miriam the Girdle-girl; but as regards her sire the King of
France, when he arose in the morning, he missed his daughter and
questioned her women and her eunuchs of her. Answered they, “O our lord,
she went out last night, to go to Church and after that we have no
tidings of her.” But, as the King talked with them, behold, there arose
so great a clamour of cries below the palace, that the place rang
thereto, and he said, “What may be the news?” The folk replied, “O King,
we have found ten men slain on the sea-shore, and the royal yacht is
missing. Moreover we saw the postern of the Church, which giveth upon
the tunnel leading to the sea, wide open; and the Moslem prisoner, who
served in the Church, is missing.” Quoth the King, “An my ship be lost,
without doubt or dispute.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the King
of France missed his daughter they brought him tidings of her, saying,
“Thy yacht is lost”; and he replied, “An the craft be lost, without
dispute or doubt my daughter is in it.” So he summoned without stay or
delay the Captain of the Port and cried out at him, saying, “By the
virtue[1] of the Messiah and the Faith which is no liar, except thou and
thy fighting men overtake my ship forthright and bring it back to me,
with those who are therein, I will do thee die the foulest of deaths and
make a terrible example of thee!” Thereupon the captain went out from
before him, trembling, and betook himself to the ancient dame of the
Church, to whom said he, “Heardest thou aught from the captive, that was
with thee, anent his native land and what countryman he was?”[539] And
she answered, “He used to say, I come from the town of Alexandria.” When
the captain heard the old woman’s words he returned forthright to the
port and cried out to the sailors, “Make ready and set sail.” So they
did his bidding and straightway putting out to sea, fared night and day
till they sighted the city of Alexandria at the very time when Nur
al-Din landed, leaving the Princess in the ship. They soon espied the
royal yacht and knew her; so they moored their own vessel at a distance
therefrom and putting off in a little frigate they had with them, which
drew but two cubits of water and in which were an hundred fighting-men,
amongst them the one-eyed Wazir (for that he was a stubborn tyrant and a
froward devil and a wily thief, none could avail against his craft, as
he were Abu Mohammed al-Battál[540]), they ceased not rowing till they
reached the bark and boarding her, all at once, found none therein save
the Princess Miriam. So they took her and the ship, and returning to
their own vessel, after they had landed and waited a long while,[541]
set sail forthright for the land of the Franks, having accomplished
their errand, without a fight or even drawing sword. The wind blew fair
for them and they sailed on, without ceasing and with all diligence,
till they reached the city of France and landing with the Princess
Miriam carried her to her father, who received her, seated on the throne
of his Kingship. As soon as he saw her, he said to her, “Woe to thee, O
traitress! What ailed thee to leave the faith of thy fathers and
forefathers and the safeguard of the Messiah, on whom is our reliance,
and follow after the faith of the Vagrants,[542] to wit, the faith of
Al-Islam, the which arose with the sword against the Cross and the
Images?” Replied Miriam, “I am not at fault, I went out by night to the
church, to visit the Lady Mary and seek a blessing of her, when there
fell upon me unawares a band of Moslem robbers, who gagged me and bound
me fast and carrying me on board the barque, set sail with me for their
own country. However, I beguiled them and talked with them of their
religion, till they loosed my bonds; and ere I knew it thy men overtook
me and delivered me. And by the virtue of the Messiah and the Faith
which is no liar and the Cross and the Crucified thereon, I rejoiced
with joy exceeding in my release from them and my bosom broadened and I
was glad for my deliverance from the bondage of the Moslems!” Rejoined
the King, “Thou liest, O whore! O adultress! By the virtue of that which
is revealed of prohibition and permission in the manifest Evangel,[543]
I will assuredly do thee die by the foulest of deaths and make thee the
vilest of examples! Did it not suffice thee to do as thou didst the
first time and put off thy lies upon us, but thou must return upon us
with thy deceitful inventions?” Thereupon the King bade kill her and
crucify her over the palace gate; but, at that moment the one-eyed
Wazir, who had long been enamoured of the Princess, came in to him and
said, “Ho King! slay her not, but give her to me to wife, and I will
watch over her with the utmost warding, nor will I go in unto her, till
I have built her a palace of solid stone, exceeding high of foundation,
so no thieves may avail to climb up to its terrace-roof; and when I have
made an end of building it, I will sacrifice thirty Moslems before the
gate thereof, as an expiatory offering to the Messiah for myself and for
her.” The King granted his request and bade the priests and monks and
patriarchs marry the Princess to him; so they did his bidding, whereupon
he bade set about building a strong and lofty palace, befitting her rank
and the workmen fell to work upon it. On this wise it betided the
Princess Miriam and her sire and the one-eyed Wazir; but as regards Nur
al-Din, when he came back with the petticoat-trousers and mantilla and
walking boots and all the attire of Alexandrian women which he had
borrowed of the druggist’s wife, he “found the air void and the fane
afar[544]”;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Nur
al-Din, “found the air void[545] and the fane afar,” his heart sank
within him and he wept floods of tears and recited these verses[546]:—

 The phantom of Soada came by night to wake me towards morning while my
    companions were sleeping in the desert:
 But when we awoke to behold the nightly phantom, I saw the air vacant,
    and the place of visitation distant.

Then Nur al-Din walked on along the sea-shore and turned right and left,
till he saw folk gathered together on the beach and heard them say, “O
Moslems, there remaineth no honour to Alexandria-city, since the Franks
enter it and snatch away those who are therein and return to their own
land, at their leisure[547] nor pursued of any of the Moslems or
fighters for the Faith!” Quoth Nur al-Din to them, “What is to do?”; and
quoth they, “O my son, one of the ships of the Franks, full of armed
men, came down but now upon the port and carried off a ship which was
moored here, with her that was therein, and made unmolested for their
own land.” Nur al-Din fell down a-swoon, on hearing these words; and
when he recovered they questioned him of his case and he told them all
that had befallen him first and last; whereupon they all took to
reviling him and railing at him, saying, “Why couldst thou not bring her
up into the town without mantilla and muffler?” And all and each of the
folk gave him some grievous word, berating him with sharp speech, and
shooting at him some shaft of reproach, albeit one said, “Let him be;
that which hath befallen him sufficeth him,” till he again fell down in
a fainting-fit. And behold, at this moment, up came the old druggist,
who, seeing the folk gathered together, drew near to learn what was the
matter and found Nur al-Din lying a-swoon in their midst. So he sat down
at his head and arousing him, said to him as soon as he recovered, “O my
son, what is this case in which I see thee?” Nur al-Din said, “O uncle,
I had brought back in a barque my lost slave-girl from her father’s
city, suffering patiently all I suffered of perils and hardships; and
when I came with her to this port, I made the vessel fast to the shore
and leaving her therein, repaired to thy dwelling and took of thy
consort what was needful for her, that I might bring her up into the
town; but the Franks came and capturing barque and damsel made off
unhindered, and returned to their own land.” Now when the Shaykh, the
druggist, heard this, the light in his eyes became night and he grieved
with sore grieving for Nur al-Din and said to him, “O my son, why didst
thou not bring her out of the ship into the city without mantilla? But
speech availeth not at this season; so rise, O my son, and come up with
me to the city; haply Allah will vouchsafe thee a girl fairer than she,
who shall console thee for her. Alhamdolillah—praised be Allah—who hath
not made thee lose aught by her! Nay, thou hast gained by her. And
bethink thee, O my son, that Union and Disunion are in the hands of the
Most High King.” Replied Nur al-Din, “By Allah, O uncle, I can never be
consoled for her loss nor will I ever leave seeking her, though on her
account I drink the cup of death!” Rejoined the druggist, “O my son, and
what art thou minded to do?” Quoth Nur al-Din, “I am minded to return to
the land of the Franks[548] and enter the city of France and emperil
myself there; come what may, loss of life or gain of life.” Quoth the
druggist, “O my son, there is an old saw:—Not always doth the crock
escape the shock; and if they did thee no hurt the first time, belike
they will slay thee this time, more by token that they know thee now
with full knowledge.” Quoth Nur al-Din, “O my uncle, let me set out and
be slain for the love of her straightway and not die of despair for her
loss by slow torments.” Now as Fate determined there was then a ship in
port ready to sail, for its passengers had made an end of their
affairs[549] and the sailors had pulled up the mooring-stakes, when Nur
al-Din embarked in her. So they shook out their canvas and relying on
the Compassionate, put out to sea and sailed many days, with fair wind
and weather, till behold, they fell in with certain of the Frank
cruisers, which were scouring those waters and seizing upon all ships
they saw, in their fear for the King’s daughter from the Moslem
corsairs: and as often as they made prize of a Moslem ship, they carried
all her people to the King of France, who put them to death in
fulfilment of the vow he had vowed on account of his daughter Miriam.
So, seeing the ship wherein was Nur al-Din they boarded her and taking
him and the rest of the company prisoners, to the number of an hundred
Moslems, carried them to the King and set them between his hands. He
bade cut their throats. Accordingly they slaughtered them all forthwith,
one after another, till there was none left but Nur al-Din, whom the
headsman had left to the last, in pity of his tender age and slender
shape. When the King saw him, he knew him right well and said to him,
“Art thou not Nur al-Din, who was with us before?” Said he, “I was never
with thee; and my name is not Nur al-Din, but Ibrahim.” Rejoined the
King; “Thou liest, thou art Nur al-Din, he whom I gave to the ancient
dame the Prioress, to help her in the service of the church.” But Nur
al-Din replied, “O my lord, my name is Ibrahim.” Quoth the King, “Wait a
while,” and bade his knights fetch the old woman forthright, saying,
“When she cometh and seeth thee, she will know an thou be Nur al-Din or
not.” At this juncture, behold, in came the one-eyed Wazir who had
married the Princess and kissing the earth before the King said to him,
“Know, O King, that the palace is finished; and thou knowest now I vowed
to the Messiah that, when I had made an end of building it, I would cut
thirty Moslems’ throats before its doors; wherefore I am come to take
them of thee, that I may sacrifice them and so fulfil my vow to the
Messiah. They shall be at my charge, by way of loan, and whenas there
come prisoners to my hands, I will give thee other thirty in lieu of
them.” Replied the King, “By the virtue of the Messiah and the Faith
which is no liar, I have but this one captive left!” And he pointed to
Nur al-Din, saying, “Take him and slaughter him at this very moment and
the rest I will send thee, when there come to my hands other prisoners
of the Moslems.” Thereupon the one-eyed Wazir arose and took Nur al-Din
and carried him to his palace, thinking to slaughter him on the
threshold of the gate; but the painters said to him, “O my lord, we have
two days’ painting yet to do: so bear with us and delay to cut the
throat of this captive, till we have made an end of our work; haply by
that time the rest of the thirty will come, so thou mayst despatch them
all at one bout and accomplish thy vow in a single day.” Thereupon the
Wazir bade imprison Nur al-Din——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


      Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Eighty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Wazir
bade imprison Nur al-Din, they carried him to the stables and left him
there in chains, hungering and thirsting and making moan for himself;
for indeed he saw death face to face. Now it fortuned, by the ordinance
of Destiny and foreordained Fate, that the King had two stallions, own
brothers,[550] such as the Chosroe Kings might sigh in vain to possess
themselves of one of them; they were called Sábik and Láhik[551] and one
of them was pure silvern white while the other was black as the darksome
night. And all the Kings of the isles had said, “Whoso stealeth us one
of these stallions, we will give him all he seeketh of red gold and
pearls and gems;” but none could avail to steal them. Now one of them
fell sick of a jaundice and there came a whiteness over his eyes[552];
whereupon the King gathered together all the farriers in the city to
treat him; but they all failed of his cure. Presently the Wazir came
into the King; and finding him troubled because of the horse, thought to
do away his concern and said to him, “O King, give me the stallion and I
will cure him.” The King consented and caused carry the horse to the
stable wherein Nur al-Din lay chained; but, when he missed his brother,
he cried out with an exceeding great cry and neighed, so that he
affrighted all the folk. The Wazir, seeing that he did thus but because
he was parted from his brother, went to tell the King, who said, “If
this, which is but a beast, cannot brook to be parted from his brother,
how should it be with those that have reason?” And he bade his grooms
take the other horse and put him with his brother in the Wazir’s
stables, saying, “Tell the Minister that the two stallions be a gift
from me to him, for the sake of my daughter Miriam.” Nur al-Din was
lying in the stable, chained and shackled, when they brought in the two
stallions and he saw that one of them had a film over his eyes. Now he
had some knowledge of horses and of the doctoring of their diseases; so
he said to himself, “This by Allah is my opportunity! I will go to the
Wazir and lie to him, saying, “I will heal thee this horse:” then will I
do with him somewhat that shall destroy his eyes, and he will slay me
and I shall be at rest from this woe-full life.” So he waited till the
Wazir entered the stable, to look upon the steed, and said to him, “O my
lord, what will be my due, an I heal this horse, and make his eyes whole
again?” Replied the Wazir, “As my head liveth, an thou cure him, I will
spare thy life and give thee leave to crave a boon of me!” And Nur
al-Din said, “O my lord, bid my hands be unbound!” So the Wazir bade
unbind him and he rose and taking virgin glass,[553] brayed it and mixed
it with unslaked lime and a menstruum of onion-juice. Then he applied
the whole to the horse’s eyes and bound them up, saying in himself, “Now
will his eyes be put out and they will slay me and I shall be at rest
from this woe-full life.” Then he passed the night with a heart free
from the uncertainty[554] of cark and care, humbling himself to Allah
the Most High and saying, “O Lord, in Thy knowledge is that which
dispenseth with asking and craving!” Now when the morning morrowed and
the sun shone, the Wazir came to the stable and, loosing the bandage
from the horse’s eyes considered them and found them finer than before,
by the ordinance of the King who openeth evermore. So he said to Nur
al-Din, “O Moslem, never in the world saw I the like of thee for the
excellence of thy knowledge. By the virtue of the Messiah and the Faith
which is no liar, thou makest me with wonder to admire, for all the
farriers of our land have failed to heal this horse!” Then he went up to
Nur al-Din and, doing off his shackles with his own hand, clad him in a
costly dress and made him his master of the Horse; and he appointed him
stipends and allowances and lodged him in a story over the stables. So
Nur al-Din abode awhile, eating and drinking and making merry and
bidding and forbidding those who tended the horses; and whoso neglected
or failed to fodder those tied up in the stable wherein was his service,
he would throw down and beat with grievous beating and lay him by the
legs in bilboes of iron. Furthermore, he used every day to descend and
visit the stallions and rub them down with his own hand, by reason of
that which he knew of their value in the Wazir’s eyes and his love for
them; wherefore the Minister rejoiced in him with joy exceeding and his
breast broadened and he was right glad, unknowing what was to be the
issue of his case. Now in the new palace, which the one-eyed Wazir had
bought for the Princess Miriam, was a lattice-window overlooking his old
house and the flat wherein Nur al-Din lodged. The Wazir had a daughter,
a virgin of extreme loveliness, as she were a fleeing gazelle or a
bending branchlet, and it chanced that she sat one day at the lattice
aforesaid and behold, she heard Nur al-Din singing and solacing himself
under his sorrows by improvising these verses:—

 O my Censor who wakest a-morn to see ✿ The joys of life and its jubilee!
 Had the fangs of Destiny bitten thee ✿ In such bitter case thou hadst
    pled this plea:—
                   Ah me, for Love and his case, ah me:
                   My heart is burnt by the fires I dree!
 But from Fate’s despight thou art safe this day;— ✿ From her falsest fay
    and her crying “Nay!”
 Yet blame him not whom his woes waylay ✿ Who distraught shall say in his
    agony,
                   Ah me, for Love and his case, ah me:
                   My heart is burnt by the fires I dree!
 Excuse such lovers in flight abhorr’d ✿ Nor to Love’s distresses thine
    aid afford:
 Lest thy self be bound by same binding cord ✿ And drink of Love’s
    bitterest injury.
                   Ah me, for Love and his case, ah me:
                   My heart is burnt by the fires I dree!
 In His service I wont as the days went by ✿ With freest heart through
    the nights to lie;
 Nor tasted wake, nor of Love aught reckt ✿ Ere my heart to subjection
    summoned he:
                   Ah me, for Love and his case, ah me:
                   My heart is burnt by the fires I dree!
 None weet of Love and his humbling wrong ✿ Save those he sickened so
    sore, so long,
 Who have lost their wits ’mid the lover-throng ✿ Draining bitterest cup
    by his hard decree:
                   Ah me, for Love and his case, ah me:
                   My heart is burnt by the fires I dree!
 How oft in Night’s gloom he cause wake to rue ✿ Lovers’ eyne, and from
    eyelids their sleep withdrew;
 Till tears to the railing of torrents grew, ✿ Overflowing cheeks,
    unconfined and free:
                   Ah me, for Love and his case, ah me:
                   My heart is burnt by the fires I dree!
 How many a man he has joyed to steep ✿ In pain, and for pine hath he
    plundered sleep,—
 Made don garb of mourning the deepest deep ✿ And even his dreaming
    forced to flee:
                   Ah me, for Love and his case, ah me:
                   My heart is burnt by the fires I dree!
 How oft sufferance fails me! How bones are wasted ✿ And down my cheeks
    torrent tear-drops hasted:

 And embittered She all the food I tasted ✿ However sweet it was wont to
    be:
                   Ah me, for Love and his case, ah me:
                   My heart is burnt by the fires I dree!
 Most hapless of men who like me must love, ✿ And must watch when Night
    droops her wing from above,
 Who, Swimming the main where affection drove ✿ Must sigh and sink in
    that gloomy sea:
                   Ah me, for Love and his case, ah me:
                   My heart is burnt by the fires I dree!
 Who is he to whom Love e’er stinted spite ✿ And who scaped his springes
    and easy sleight;
 Who free from Love lived in life’s delight? ✿ Where is he can boast of
    such liberty?
                   Ah me, for Love and his case, ah me:
                   My heart is burnt by the fires I dree!
 Deign Lord such suffering wight maintain ✿ Then best Protector, protect
    him deign!
 Establish him and his life assain ✿ And defend him from all calamity:
                   Ah me, for Love and his case, ah me:
                   My heart is burnt by the fires I dree!

And when Nur al-Din ended his say and ceased to sing his rhyming lay,
the Wazir’s daughter said to herself, “By the virtue of the Messiah and
the Faith which is no liar, verily this Moslem is a handsome youth! But
doubtless he is a lover separated from his mistress. Would Heaven I wot
an the beloved of this fair one is fair like unto him and if she pine
for him as he for her! An she be seemly as he is, it behoveth him to
pour forth tears and make moan of passion; but, an she be other than
fair, his days are wasted in vain regrets and he is denied the taste of
delights.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Eighty-eighth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir’s
daughter said to herself, “An his beloved be fair as he, it behoveth him
to pour forth tears; and, if other than fair, his heart is wasted in
vain regrets!” Now Miriam the Girdle-girl, the Minister’s consort, had
removed to the new palace the day before and the Wazir’s daughter knew
that she was straitened of breast; so she was minded to seek her and
talk with her and tell her the tidings of the young man and the rhymes
and verses she had heard him recite; but, before she could carry out her
design the Princess sent for her to cheer her with her converse. So she
went to her and found her heavy at heart and her tears hurrying down her
cheeks; and whilst she was weeping with sore weeping she recited these
couplets:

 My life is gone but love-longings remain ✿ And my breast is straitened
    with pine and pain:
 And my heart for parting to melt is fain ✿ Yet hoping that union will
    come again,
                     And join us in one who now are twain.
 Stint your blame to him who in heart’s your thrall ✿ With the wasted
    frame which his sorrows gall,
 Nor with aim of arrow his heart appal ✿ For parted lover is saddest of
    all,
                     And Love’s cup of bitters is sweet to drain!

Quoth the Wazir’s daughter to her, “What aileth thee, O Princess, to be
thus straitened in breast and sorrowful of thought?” Whereupon Miriam
recalled the greatness of the delights that were past and recited these
two couplets:—

 I will bear in patience estrangement of friend ✿ And on cheeks rail
    tears that like torrents wend:
 Haply Allah will solace my sorrow, for He ✿ Neath the ribs of unease
    maketh ease at end.

Said the Wazir’s daughter, “O Princess, let not thy breast be
straitened, but come with me straightway to the lattice; for there is
with us in the stable[555] a comely young man, slender of shape and
sweet of speech, and meseemeth he is a parted lover.” Miriam asked, “And
by what sign knowest thou that he is a parted lover?”; and she answered,
“O Queen, I know it by his improvising odes and verses all watches of
the night and tides of the day.” Quoth the Princess in herself, “If what
the Wazir’s daughter says be true, these are assuredly the traits of the
baffled, the wretched Ali Nur al-Din. Would I knew if indeed he be the
youth of whom she speaketh?” At this thought, love-longing and
distraction of passion redoubled on her and she rose at once and walking
with the maiden to the lattice, looked down upon the stables, where she
saw her love and lord Nur al-Din and fixing her eyes steadfastly upon
him, knew him with the bestest knowledge of love, albeit he was sick, of
the greatness of his affection for her and of the fire of passion, and
the anguish of separation and yearning and distraction. Sore upon him
was emaciation and he was improvising and saying:—

 My heart is a thrall; my tears ne’er abate ✿ And their rains the railing
    of clouds amate;
 ’Twixt my weeping and watching and wanting love; ✿ And whining and
    pining for dearest mate.
 Ah my burning heat, my desire, my lowe! ✿ For the plagues that torture
    my heart are eight;
 And five upon five are in suite of them; ✿ So stand and listen to all I
    state:
 Mem’ry, madding thoughts, moaning languishment, ✿ Stress of longing
    love, plight disconsolate;
 In travail, affliction and strangerhood, ✿ And annoy and joy when on her
    I wait.
 Fail me patience and stay for engrossing care ✿ And sorrows my suffering
    soul regrate.
 On my heart the possession of passion grows ✿ O who ask of what fire in
    my heart’s create,
 Why my tears in vitals should kindle flame, ✿ Burning heart with ardours
    insatiate,
 Know, I’m drowned in Deluge[556] of tears and my soul ✿ From Lazá-lowe
    fares to Háwiyah-goal.[557]

When the Princess Miriam beheld Nur al-Din and heard his loquence and
verse and speech, she made certain that it was indeed her lord Nur
al-Din; but she concealed her case from the Wazir’s daughter and said to
her, “By the virtue of the Messiah and the Faith which is no liar, I
thought not thou knewest of my sadness!” Then she arose forthright and
withdrawing from the window, returned to her own place, whilst the
Wazir’s daughter went to her own occupations. The Princess awaited
patiently awhile, then returned to the window and sat there, gazing upon
her beloved Nur al-Din and delighting her eyes with his beauty and inner
and outer grace. And indeed, she saw that he was like unto moon at full
on fourteenth night; but he was ever sighing with tears never drying,
for that he recalled whatso he had been abying. So he recited these
couplets:—

 I hope for Union with my love which I may ne’er obtain ✿ At all, but
    bitterness of life is all the gain I gain:
 My tears are likest to the main for ebb and flow of tide; ✿ But when I
    meet the blamer-wight to staunch my tears I’m fain.
 Woe to the wretch who garred us part by spelling of his spells;[558] ✿
    Could I but hend his tongue in hand I’d cut his tongue in twain:
 Yet will I never blame the days for whatso deed they did ✿ Mingling with
    merest, purest gall the cup they made me drain!
 To whom shall I address myself; and whom but you shall seek ✿ A heart
    left hostage in your Court, by you a captive ta’en?
 Who shall avenge my wrongs on you,[559] tyrant despotical ✿ Whose
    tyranny but grows the more, the more I dare complain?
 I made him regnant of my soul that he the reign assain ✿ But me he
    wasted wasting too the soul I gave to reign.
 Ho thou, the Fawn, whom I so lief erst gathered to my breast ✿ Enow of
    severance tasted I to own its might and main,
 Thou’rt he whose favours joined in one all beauties known to man, ✿ Yet
    I thereon have wasted all my Patience’ fair domain.
 I entertained him in my heart whereto he brought unrest ✿ But I am
    satisfied that I such guest could entertain.
 My tears for ever flow and flood, likest the surging sea ✿ And would I
    wot the track to take that I thereto attain.
 Yet sore I fear that I shall die in depths of my chagrin ✿ And must
    despair for evermore to win the wish I’d win.

When Miriam heard the verses of Nur al-Din the loving-hearted, the
parted; they kindled in her vitals a fire of desire, and, whilst her
eyes ran over with tears, she recited these two couplets:—

 I longed for him I love; but, when we met, ✿ I was amazed nor tongue nor
    eyes I found.
 I had got ready volumes of reproach; ✿ But when we met, could syllable
    no sound.

When Nur al-Din heard the voice of Princess Miriam, he knew it and wept
bitter tears, saying, “By Allah, this is the chanting of the Lady
Miriam.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

NOTE. (p. 93).—There is something wondrous naïve in a lover who, when
asked by his mistress to sing a song in her honour, breaks out into
versical praises of her parts. But even the classical Arab authors did
not disdain such themes. See in Al-Harírí (Ass. of Mayyáfarikín) where
Abú Zayd laments the impotency of old age in form of a Rasy or funeral
oration (Preston p. 484, and Chenery p. 221). It completely deceived Sir
William Jones, who inserted it into the chapter “De Poesi Funebri,” p.
527 (Poeseos Asiaticæ Commentarii) gravely noting, “Hæc Elegia non
admodum dissimilis esse videtur pulcherrimi illius carminis de Sauli et
Jonathani obitu; at que adeò versus iste ’ubi provocant adversarios
nunquam rediit a pugnæ contentione sine spiculo sanguine imbuto,’ ex
Hebræo reddi videtur,

             A sanguine occisorum, a fortium virorum adipe,
             Arcus Jonathani non rediit irritus.”

I need hardly say with Captain Lockett (226) that this “Sabb warrior,”
this Arabian Achilles is the celebrated Bonus Deus or Hellespontiacus of
the Ancients. The oration runs thus:—

         O folk I have a wondrous tale, so rare
         Much shall it profit hearers wise and ware!
         I saw in salad-years a potent Brave
         And sharp of edge and point his warrior glaive;
         Who entered joust and list with hardiment
         Fearless of risk, of victory confident,
         His vigorous onset straitest places oped
         And easy passage through all narrows groped:
         He ne’er encountered foe in single fight
         But came from tilt with spear in blood stained bright;
         Nor stormed a fortress howso strong and stark—
         With fencèd gates defended deep and dark—
         When shown his flag without th’ auspicious cry
         “Aidance from Allah and fair victory nigh!”[560]
         Thuswise full many a night his part he played
         In strength and youth-tide’s stately garb arrayed,
         Dealing to fair young girl delicious joy
         And no less welcome to the blooming boy.
         But Time ne’er ceased to stint his wondrous strength
         (Steadfast and upright as the gallows’ length)
         Until the Nights o’erthrew him by their might
         And friends contemned him for a feckless wight;
         Nor was a wizard but who wasted skill
         Over his case, nor leach could heal his ill.
         Then he abandoned arms abandoned him
         Who gave and took salutes so fierce and grim;
         And now lies prostrate drooping haughty crest;
         For who lives longest him most ills molest.
         Then see him, here he lies on bier for bed:—
         Who will a shroud bestow on stranger dead?

A fair measure of the difference between Eastern and Western manners is
afforded by such a theme being treated by their gravest writers and the
verses being read and heard by the gravest and most worshipful men,
whilst amongst us Preston and Chenery do not dare even to translate
them. The latter, indeed, had all that immodest modesty for which
English professional society is notable in this xix^{th} century. He
spoiled by needlessly excluding from a scientific publication (Mem.
R.A.S.) all of my Proverbia Communia Syriaca (See Unexplored Syria, i.
364) and every item which had a shade of double entendre. But Nemesis
frequently found him out: during his short and obscure rule in Printing
House Square The Thunderer was distinguished by two of the foulest
indecencies that ever appeared in an English paper.

-----

Footnote 376:

  I borrow the title from the Bresl. Edit. x. 204. Mr. Payne prefers
  “Ali Noureddin and the Frank King’s Daughter.” Lane omits also this
  tale because it resembles Ali Shar and Zumurrud (vol. iv. 187) and Alá
  al-Din Abu al-Shámát (vol. iv. 29), “neither of which is among the
  text of the collection.” But he has unconsciously omitted one of the
  highest interest. Dr. Bacher (Germ. Orient. Soc.) finds the original
  in Charlemagne’s daughter Emma and his secretary Eginhardt as given in
  Grimm’s _Deutsche Sagen_. I shall note the points of resemblance as
  the tale proceeds. The correspondence with the King of France may be a
  garbled account of the letters which passed between Harun al-Rashid
  and Nicephorus, “the Roman dog.”

Footnote 377:

  Arab. “Allaho Akbar,” the Moslem slogan or war-cry. See vol. ii. 89.

Footnote 378:

  The gate-keeper of Paradise. See vol. iii. 15, 20.

Footnote 379:

  Negroes. Vol. iii. 75.

Footnote 380:

  Arab. “Nakat,” with the double meaning of to spot and to handsel
  especially dancing and singing women; and, as Mr. Payne notes in this
  acceptation it is practically equivalent to the English phrase “to
  mark (or cross) the palm with silver.” I have translated “Anwá” by
  Pleiads; but it means the setting of one star and simultaneous rising
  of another foreshowing rain. There are seven Anwá (plur. of nawa) in
  the Solar year viz. Al-Badri (Sept.-Oct.); Al-Wasmiyy (late autumn and
  December); Al-Waliyy (to April); Al-Ghamír (June); Al-Busriyy (July);
  Bárih al-Kayz (August) and Ahrák al-Hawá extending to September 8.
  These are tokens of approaching rain, metaphorically used by the poets
  to express “bounty.” See Preston’s Hariri (p. 43) and Chenery upon the
  Ass. of the Banu Haram.

Footnote 381:

  _i.e._ They trip and stumble in their hurry to get there.

Footnote 382:

  Arab. “Kumm” = sleeve or petal. See vol. v. 32.

Footnote 383:

  Arab. “Kiráb” = sword-case of wood, the sheath being of leather.

Footnote 384:

  Arab. “Akr kayrawán,” both rare words.

Footnote 385:

  A doubtful tradition in the Mishkát al-Masábih declares that every
  pomegranate contains a grain from Paradise. See vol. i. 134. The
  Koranic reference is to vi. 99.

Footnote 386:

  Arab. “Aswad,” lit. black but used for any dark colour, here green as
  opposed to the lighter yellow.

Footnote 387:

  The idea has occurred in vol. i. 158.

Footnote 388:

  So called from the places where they grow.

Footnote 389:

  See vol. vii. for the almond-apricot whose stone is cracked to get at
  the kernel.

Footnote 390:

  For Roum see vol. iv. 100: in Morocco “Roumi” means simply a European.
  The tetrastich alludes to the beauty of the Greek slaves.

Footnote 391:

  Arab. “Ahlan” in adverb form lit. = “as one of the household”: so in
  the greeting “Ahlan wa Sahlan” (and at thine ease), wa Marhabá (having
  a wide free place).

Footnote 392:

  For the Sufrah table-cloth see vol. i. 178.

Footnote 393:

  See vol. iii. 302, for the unclean allusion in fig and sycamore.

Footnote 394:

  In the text “of Tor”: see vol. ii. 242. The pear is mentioned by Homer
  and grows wild in South Europe. Dr. Victor Hehn (The Wanderings of
  Plants, etc.) comparing the Gr. ἄπιος with the Lat. pyrus, suggests
  that the latter passed over to the Kelts and Germans amongst whom the
  fruit was not indigenous. Our fine pears are mostly from the East.
  _e.g._ the “bergamot” is the Beg Armud, Prince of Pears, from Angora.

Footnote 395:

  _i.e._ “Royal:” it may or may not come from Sultaníyah, a town near
  Baghdad. See vol. i. 83; where it applies to oranges and citrons.

Footnote 396:

  ’Andam = Dragon’s blood: see vol. iii. 263.

Footnote 397:

  Arab. “Jamár,” the palm-pith and cabbage, both eaten by Arabs with
  sugar.

Footnote 398:

  Arab. “Anwár” = lights, flowers (mostly yellow): hence the Moroccan
  “N’wár,” with its usual abuse of Wakf or quiescence.

Footnote 399:

  Mr. Payne quotes Eugène Fromentin, “Un Eté dans le Sahara,” Paris,
  1857, p. 194. Apricot drying can be seen upon all the roofs at
  Damascus where, however, the season for each fruit is unpleasantly
  short, ending almost as soon as it begins.

Footnote 400:

  Arab. Jalájal = small bells for falcons: in Port. cascaveis, whence
  our word.

Footnote 401:

  Khulanján. Sic all editions; but Khalanj, or Khaulanj adj. Khalanji, a
  tree with a strong-smelling wood which held in hand as a chaplet acts
  as perfume, as is probably intended. In Span. Arabic it is the
  Erica-wood. The “Muhit” tells us that is a tree parcel yellow and red
  growing in parts of India and China, its leaf is that of the Tamarisk
  (Tarfá); its flower is coloured red, yellow and white; it bears a
  grain like mustard-seed (Khardal) and of its wood they make
  porringers. Hence the poet sings:—

  Yut ’amu ’l-shahdu fí ’l-jifáni, wa yuska ✿ Labanu ’l-Bukhti fi Kusá’i
     ’l-Khalanji:
  Honey’s served to them in platters for food; ✿ Camels’ milk in bowls
     of the Khalanj wood.

  The pl. Khalánij is used by Himyán bin Kaháfah in this “bayt”:—

  Hattá izá má qazati ’l-Hawáijá ✿ Wa malaat Halába-há ’l-Khalánijá:
  Until she had done every work of hers ✿ And with sweet milk had filled
     the porringers.

Footnote 402:

  In text Al-Shá’ir Al-Walahán, vol. iii. 226.

Footnote 403:

  The orange I have said is the growth of India and the golden apples of
  the Hesperides were not oranges but probably golden nuggets. Captain
  Rolleston (_Globe_, Feb. 5, ’84, on “Morocco-Lixus”) identifies the
  Garden with the mouth of the Lixus River while M. Antichan would
  transfer it to the hideous and unwholesome Bissagos Archipelago.

Footnote 404:

  Arab. “Ikyán,” the living gold which is supposed to grow in the
  ground.

Footnote 405:

  For the Kubbád or Captain Shaddock’s fruit see vol. ii. 310, where it
  is misprinted Kubád.

Footnote 406:

  Full or Fill in Bresl. Edit. = Arabian Jessamine or cork-tree φελλόν.
  The Bul. and Mac. Edits. read “filfil” = pepper or palm-fibre.

Footnote 407:

  Arab. “Sumbul al-’Anbari”; the former word having been introduced into
  England by patent medicines. “Sumbul” in Arab. and Pers. means the
  hyacinth, the spikenard or the Sign Virgo.

Footnote 408:

  Arab. “Lisán al-Hamal” lit. = Lamb’s tongue.

Footnote 409:

  See in Bresl. Edit. x, 221. Taif, a well-known town in the mountain
  region East of Meccah, and not in the Holy Land, was once famous for
  scented goat’s leather. It is considered to be a “fragment of Syria”
  (Pilgrimage ii. 207) and derives its name = the circumambulator from
  its having circuited pilgrim-like round the Ka’abah (Ibid.)

Footnote 410:

  Arab. “Mikhaddah” = cheek-pillow: Ital. guanciale. In Bresl. Edit.
  Mudawwarah (a round cushion) Sinjabiyah (of Ermine). For “Mudawwarah”
  see vol. iv. 135.

Footnote 411:

  “Coffee” is here evidently an anachronism and was probably inserted by
  the copyist. See vol. v. 169, for its first mention. But “Kahwah” may
  have preserved its original meaning = strong old wine (vol. ii. 261);
  and the amount of wine-drinking and drunkenness proves that the coffee
  movement had not set in.

Footnote 412:

  _i.e._ they are welcome. In Marocco “Lá baas” means, “I am pretty
  well” (in health).

Footnote 413:

  The Rose (Ward) in Arab. is masculine, sounding to us most uncouth.
  But there is a fem. form Wardah = a single rose.

Footnote 414:

  Arab. “Akmám,” pl. of Kumm, a sleeve, a petal. See vol. iv. 107 and
  supra p. 267. The Moslem woman will show any part of her person rather
  than her face, instinctively knowing that the latter may be recognised
  whereas the former cannot. The traveller in the outer East will see
  ludicrous situations in which the modest one runs away with hind parts
  bare and head and face carefully covered.

Footnote 415:

  Arab. Ikyán which Mr. Payne translates “vegetable gold” very
  picturesquely but not quite preserving the idea. See supra p. 272.

Footnote 416:

  It is the custom for fast youths, in Egypt, Syria, and elsewhere to
  stick small gold pieces, mere spangles of metal on the brows, cheeks
  and lips of the singing and dancing girls and the perspiration and
  mask of cosmetics make them adhere for a time till fresh movement
  shakes them off.

Footnote 417:

  See the same idea in vol. i. 132, and 349.

Footnote 418:

  “They will ask thee concerning wine and casting of lots; say:—In both
  are great sin and great advantages to mankind; but the sin of them
  both is greater than their advantage.” See Koran ii. 216. Mohammed
  seems to have made up his mind about drinking by slow degrees; and the
  Koranic law is by no means so strict as the Mullahs have made it. The
  prohibitions, revealed at widely different periods and varying in
  import and distinction, have been discussed by Al-Bayzáwi in his
  commentary on the above chapter. He says that the first revelation was
  in chapt. xvi. 69 but, as the passage was disregarded, Omar and others
  consulted the Apostle who replied to them in chapt. ii. 216. Then, as
  this also was unnoticed, came the final decision in chapt. v. 92,
  making wine and lots the work of Satan. Yet excuses are never wanting
  to the Moslem, he can drink Champagne and Cognac, both unknown in
  Mohammed’s day and he can use wine and spirits medicinally, like
  sundry of ourselves, who turn up the nose of contempt at the idea of
  drinking for pleasure.

Footnote 419:

  _i.e._ a fair-faced cup-bearer. The lines have occurred before: so I
  quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 420:

  It is the custom of the Arabs to call their cattle to water by
  whistling; not to whistle to them, as Europeans do, whilst making
  water.

Footnote 421:

  _i.e._ bewitching. See vol. i. 85. These incompatible metaphors are
  brought together by the Saj’a (prose rhyme) in—“iyah.”

Footnote 422:

  Mesopotamian Christians, who still turn towards Jerusalem, face the
  West, instead of the East, as with Europeans: here the monk is so
  dazed that he does not know what to do.

Footnote 423:

  Arab. “Bayt Sha’ar” = a house of hair (tent) or a couplet of verse.
  Watad (a tent-peg) also is prosodical, a foot when the two first
  letters are “moved” (vowelled) and the last is jazmated (quiescent),
  _e.g._ Lakad. It is termed Majmú’a (united), as opposed to “Mafrúk”
  (separated), _e.g._ Kabla, when the “moved” consonants are disjoined
  by a quiescent.

Footnote 424:

  Lit. standing on their heads, which sounds ludicrous enough in
  English, not in Arabic.

Footnote 425:

  These lines are in vol. iii. 251. I quote Mr. Payne who notes “The
  bodies of Eastern women of the higher classes by dint of continual
  maceration, Esther-fashion, in aromatic oils and essences, would
  naturally become impregnated with the sweet scents of the cosmetics
  used.”

Footnote 426:

  These lines occur in vol. i. 218: I quote Torrens for variety.

Footnote 427:

  So we speak of a “female screw.” The allusion is to the dove-tailing
  of the pieces. This personification of the lute has occurred before:
  but I solicit the reader’s attention to it; it has a fulness of
  Oriental flavour all its own.

Footnote 428:

  I again solicit the reader’s attention to the simplicity, the pathos
  and the beauty of this personification of the lute.

Footnote 429:

  “They” for she.

Footnote 430:

  The Arabs very justly make the “’Andalíb” = nightingale, masculine.

Footnote 431:

  Anwár = lights or flowers: See Night dccclxv. supra p. 270.

Footnote 432:

  These couplets have occurred in vol. i. 168: so I quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 433:

  _i.e._ You may have his soul but leave me his body: company with him
  in the next world and let me have him in this.

Footnote 434:

  Alluding to the Koranic (cxiii. 1.), “I take refuge with the Lord of
  the Daybreak from the mischief of that which He hath created, etc.”
  This is shown by the first line wherein occurs the Koranic word
  “Ghásik” (cxiii. 3) which may mean the first darkness when it
  overspreadeth or the moon when it is eclipsed.

Footnote 435:

  “Malak” = level ground; also tract on the Nile sea. Lane M.E. ii. 417,
  and Burckhardt Nubia 482.

Footnote 436:

  This sentiment has often been repeated.

Footnote 437:

  The owl comes in because “Búm” (pron. boom) rhymes with Kayyúm = the
  Eternal.

Footnote 438:

  For an incident like this see my Pilgrimage (vol. i. 176). How true to
  nature the whole scene is; the fond mother excusing her boy and the
  practical father putting the excuse aside. European paternity,
  however, would probably exclaim, “The beast’s in liquor!”

Footnote 439:

  In ancient times this seems to have been the universal and perhaps
  instinctive treatment of the hand that struck a father. By Nur
  al-Din’s flight the divorce-oath became technically null and void for
  Taj al-Din had sworn to mutilate his son next morning.

Footnote 440:

  So Roderic Random and his companions “sewed their money between the
  lining and the waistband of their breeches, except some loose silver
  for immediate expense on the road.” For a description of these purses
  see Pilgrimage i. 37.

Footnote 441:

  Arab. Rashid (our Rosetta), a corruption of the Coptic Trashit; ever
  famous for the Stone.

Footnote 442:

  For a parallel passage in praise of Alexandria see vol. i. 290, etc.
  The editor or scribe was evidently an Egyptian.

Footnote 443:

  Arab. “Saghr” (Thagr), the opening of the lips showing the teeth. See
  vol. i. p. 156.

Footnote 444:

  Iskandariyah, the city of Iskandar or Alexander the Great, whose
  “Soma” was attractive to the Greeks as the corpse of the Prophet
  Daniel afterwards was to the Moslems. The choice of site, then
  occupied only by the pauper village of Rhacotis, is one proof of many
  that the Macedonian conqueror had the inspiration of genius.

Footnote 445:

  _i.e._ paid them down. See vol. i. 281; vol. ii. 145.

Footnote 446:

  Arab. “Baltiyah,” Sonnini’s “Bolti” and Nébuleux (because it is
  dozid-coloured when fried), the Labrus Niloticus from its labra or
  large fleshy lips. It lives on the “leaves of Paradise” hence the
  flesh is delicate and savoury and it is caught with the épervier or
  sweep-net in the Nile, canals and pools.

Footnote 447:

  Arab. “Liyyah,” not a delicate comparison, but exceedingly apt besides
  rhyming to “Baltiyah.” The cauda of the “five-quarter sheep, whose
  tails are so broad and thick that there is as much flesh upon them as
  upon a quarter of their body,” must not be confounded with the lank
  appendage of Our English muttons. See i. 25, Dr. Burnell’s Linschoten
  (Hakluyt Soc. 1885).

Footnote 448:

  A variant occurs in vol. iv. 191.

Footnote 449:

  Arab. “Tars Daylami,” a small shield of bright metal.

Footnote 450:

  Arab. “Kaukab al-durri,” see Pilgrimage ii. 82.

Footnote 451:

  Arab. “Kusúf” applied to the moon; Khusúf being the solar eclipse.

Footnote 452:

  “May Abú Lahab’s hands perish ... and his wife be a bearer of
  faggots!” Koran cxi. 184. The allusion is neat.

Footnote 453:

  Alluding to the Angels who shoot down the Jinn. See vol. i. 224. The
  index misprints “Shibáh.”

Footnote 454:

  For a similar scene see Ali Shar and Zumurrud, vol. iv. 187.

Footnote 455:

  _i.e._ of the girl whom as the sequel shows, her owner had promised
  not to sell without her consent. This was and is a common practice.
  See vol. iv. 192.

Footnote 456:

  These lines have occurred in vol. iii. p. 303. I quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 457:

  Alluding to the erectio et distensio penis which comes on before dawn
  in tropical lands and which does not denote any desire for women. Some
  Anglo-Indians term the symptom _signum salutis_, others a urine-proud
  pizzle.

Footnote 458:

  Arab. “Mohtasib,” in the Maghrib “Mohtab,” the officer charged with
  inspecting weights and measures and with punishing fraud in various
  ways such as nailing the cheat’s ears to his shop’s shutter, etc.

Footnote 459:

  Every where in the Moslem East the slave holds himself superior to the
  menial freeman, a fact which I would impress upon the several
  Anti-slavery Societies, honest men whose zeal mostly exceeds their
  knowledge, and whose energy their discretion.

Footnote 460:

  These lines, extended to three couplets, occur in vol. iv. 193. I
  quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 461:

  “At this examination (on Judgment Day) Mohammedans also believe that
  each person will have the book, wherein all the actions of his life
  are written, delivered to him; which books the righteous will receive
  in their right hand, and read with great pleasure and satisfaction;
  but the ungodly will be obliged to take them, against their wills, in
  their left (Koran xvii. xviii. lxix. and lxxxiv.), which will be bound
  behind their backs, their right hand being tied to their necks.” Sale,
  Preliminary Discourse; Sect. iv.

Footnote 462:

  “Whiteness” (bayáz) also meaning lustre, honour.

Footnote 463:

  This again occurs in vol. iv. 194. So I quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 464:

  Her impudence is intended to be that of a captive Princess.

Footnote 465:

  _i.e._ bent groundwards.

Footnote 466:

  See vol. iv. 192. In Marocco Za’ar is applied to a man with fair skin,
  red hair and blue eyes (Gothic blood?) and the term is not
  complimentary as “Sultan Yazid Za’ar.”

Footnote 467:

  The lines have occurred before (vol. iv. 194). I quote Mr. Lane ii.
  440. Both he and Mr. Payne have missed the point in “ba’zu layáli” a
  certain night when his mistress had left him so lonely.

Footnote 468:

  Arab. “Raat-hu.” This apparently harmless word suggests one similar in
  sound and meaning which gave some trouble in its day. Says Mohammed in
  the Koran (ii. 98) “O ye who believe! say not (to the Apostle) Rá’iná
  (look at us) but Unzurná (regard us).” “Rá’iná” as pronounced in
  Hebrew means “our bad one.”

Footnote 469:

  By reason of its leanness.

Footnote 470:

  In the Mac. Edit. “Fifty.” For a scene which illustrates this
  mercantile transaction see my Pilgrimage i. 88, and its deduction.
  “How often is it our fate, in the West as in the East, to see in
  bright eyes and to hear from rosy lips an implied, if not an expressed
  ‘Why don’t you buy me?’ or, worse still, ‘Why _can’t_ you buy me?’”

Footnote 471:

  See vol. ii. 165 dragging or trailing the skirts = walking without the
  usual strut or swagger: here it means assuming the humble manners of a
  slave in presence of the master.

Footnote 472:

  This is the Moslem form of “boycotting”: so amongst early Christians
  they refused to give one another God-speed. Amongst Hindús it takes
  the form of refusing “Hukkah (pipe) and water” which practically makes
  a man an outcast. In the text the old man expresses the popular
  contempt for those who borrow and who do not repay. He had evidently
  not read the essay of Elia on the professional borrower.

Footnote 473:

  See note p. 273.

Footnote 474:

  _i.e._ the best kind of camels.

Footnote 475:

  This first verse has occurred three times.

Footnote 476:

  Arab. “Surayyá” in Dictionaries a dim. of Sarwá = moderately rich. It
  may either denote abundance of rain or a number of stars forming a
  constellation. Hence in Job (xxxviii. 31) it is called a heap (kímah).

Footnote 477:

  Pleiads in Gr. the Stars whereby men sail.

Footnote 478:

  This is the Eastern idea of the consequence of satisfactory coition
  which is supposed to be the very seal of love. Westerns have run to
  the other extreme.

Footnote 479:

  “Al-Ríf” simply means lowland: hence there is a Ríf in the Nile-delta.
  The word in Europe is applied chiefly to the Maroccan coast opposite
  Gibraltar (not, as is usually supposed the North-Western seaboard)
  where the Berber-Shilhá race, so famous as the “Rif pirates” still
  closes the country to travellers.

Footnote 480:

  _i.e._ Upper Egypt.

Footnote 481:

  These local excellencies of coition are described jocosely rather than
  anthropologically.

Footnote 482:

  See vol. i. 223: I take from Torrens, p. 223.

Footnote 483:

  For the complete ablution obligatory after copulation before prayers
  can be said. See vol. vi. 199.

Footnote 484:

  Arab. “Zunnár,” the Greek ζωνάριον, for which, see vol. ii. 215.

Footnote 485:

  Miriam (Arabic Maryam), is a Christian name, in Moslem lands. Abú
  Maryam “Mary’s father” (says Motarrazi on Al-Hariri, Ass. of
  Alexandria) is a term of contempt, for men are called after sons
  (_e.g._ Abu Zayd), not after daughters. In more modern authors Abu
  Maryam is the name of ushers and lesser officials in the Kazi’s court.

Footnote 486:

  This formality, so contrary to our Western familiarity after
  possession, is an especial sign of good breeding amongst Arabs and
  indeed all Eastern nations. It reminds us of the “grand manner” in
  Europe two hundred years ago, not a trace of which now remains.

Footnote 487:

  These lines are in Night i. ordered somewhat differently: so I quote
  Torrens (p. 14).

Footnote 488:

  _i.e._ to the return Salám—“And with thee be peace and the mercy of
  Allah and His blessings!” See vol. ii. 146. The enslaved Princess had
  recognised her father’s Wazir and knew that he could have but one
  object, which being a man of wit and her lord a “raw laddie,” he was
  sure to win.

Footnote 489:

  It is quite in Moslem manners for the bystanders to force the sale
  seeing a silly lad reject a most advantageous offer for sentimental
  reasons. And the owner of the article would be bound by their consent.

Footnote 490:

  Arab. “Wa’llahi.” “Bi” is the original particle of swearing, a Harf
  al-jarr (governing the genitive as Bi’lláhi) and suggesting the idea
  of adhesion: “Wa” (noting union) is its substitute in oath-formulæ and
  “Ta” takes the place of Wa as Ta’lláhi. The three-fold forms are
  combined in a great “swear.”

Footnote 491:

  _i.e._ of divorcing their own wives.

Footnote 492:

  These lines have occurred before: I quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 493:

  These lines are in Night xxvi., vol. i. 275: I quote Torrens (p. 277),
  with a correction for “when ere.”

Footnote 494:

  This should be “draws his senses from him as one pulls hairs out of
  paste.”

Footnote 495:

  Rághib and Záhid: see vol. v. 141.

Footnote 496:

  Carolus Magnus then held court in Paris; but the text evidently
  alludes to one of the port-cities of Provence as Marseille which we
  English will miscall Marseilles.

Footnote 497:

  Here the writer, not the young wife, speaks; but as a tale-teller he
  says “hearer” not “reader.”

Footnote 498:

  Kayrawán, the Arab. form of the Greek Cyrene which has lately been
  opened to travellers and has now lost the mystery which enshrouded it.
  In Hafiz and the Persian poets it is the embodiment of remoteness and
  secrecy; as we till the last quarter century spoke of the “deserts of
  Central Africa.”

Footnote 499:

  Arab. “’Innín”: alluding to all forms of impotence, from dislike,
  natural deficiency or fascination, the favourite excuse. Easterns
  seldom attribute it to the true cause, weak action of the heart; but
  the Romans knew the truth when they described one of its symptoms as
  cold feet. “Clino-pedalis, ad venerem invalidus, ab ea antiqua
  opinione, frigiditatem pedum concubituris admodum officere.” Hence St.
  Francis and the bare-footed Friars. See Glossarium Eroticum Linguæ
  Latinæ, Parisiis, Dondey-Dupré, MDCCCXXVI.

Footnote 500:

  I have noted the use of “island” for “land” in general. So in the
  European languages of the sixteenth century, insula was used for
  peninsula, _e.g._ Insula de Cori = the Corean peninsula.

Footnote 501:

  As has been noticed (vol. i. 333), the monocular is famed for mischief
  and men expect the mischief to come from his blinded eye.

Footnote 502:

  Here again we have a specimen of “inverted speech” (vol. ii. 265);
  abusive epithets intended for a high compliment, signifying that the
  man was a tyrant over rebels and a froward devil to the foe.

Footnote 503:

  Arab. “Bab al-Bahr,” see vol. iii. 281.

Footnote 504:

  Arab. “Batárikah” see vol. ii. 89. The Templars, Knights of Malta and
  other orders half ecclesiastic half military suggested the application
  of the term.

Footnote 505:

  These lines have occurred in vol. i. 280—I quote Torrens (p. 283).

Footnote 506:

  Maryam al-Husn containing a double entendre, “O place of the white doe
  (Rím) of beauty!” The girl’s name was Maryam the Arab. form of Mary,
  also applied to the B.V. by Eastern Christians. Hence a common name of
  Syrian women is “Husn Maryam” = (one endowed with the spiritual
  beauties of Mary: vol. iv. 87). I do not think that the name was
  “manufactured by the Arab story-tellers after the pattern of their own
  names (_e.g._ Nur al-Din or Noureddin, light of the faith, Tajeddin,
  crown of faith, etc.) for the use of their imaginary Christian female
  characters.”

Footnote 507:

  I may here remind readers that the Bán, which some Orientalists will
  write “Ben,” is a straight and graceful species of Moringa with
  plentiful and intensely green foliage.

Footnote 508:

  Arab. “Amúd al-Sawári” = the Pillar of Masts, which is still the local
  name of Diocletian’s column absurdly named by Europeans “Pompey’s
  Pillar.”

Footnote 509:

  Arab. “Batiyah,” also used as a wine-jar (amphora), a flagon.

Footnote 510:

  Arab. “Al-Kursán,” evidently from the Ital. “Corsaro,” a runner. So
  the Port. “Cabo Corso,” which we have corrupted to “Cape Coast Castle”
  (Gulf of Guinea), means the Cape of Tacking.

Footnote 511:

  Arab. “Ghuráb,” which Europeans turn to “Grab.”

Footnote 512:

  Arab. “Sayyib” (Thayyib) a rare word: it mostly applies to a woman who
  leaves her husband after lying once with him.

Footnote 513:

  Arab. “Batárikah:” here meaning knights, leaders of armed men as in
  Night dccclxii., supra p. 256, it means “monks.”

Footnote 514:

  _i.e._ for the service of a temporal monarch.

Footnote 515:

  Arab. “Sayr” = a broad strip of leather still used by way of girdle
  amongst certain Christian religions in the East.

Footnote 516:

  Arab. “Haláwat al-Salámah,” the sweetmeats offered to friends after
  returning from a journey or escaping sore peril. See vol. iv. 60.

Footnote 517:

  So Eginhardt was an _Erzcapeilan_ and belonged to the ghostly
  profession.

Footnote 518:

  These lines are in vols. iii. 258 and iv. 204. I quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 519:

  Arab. “Firásah,” lit. = skill in judging of horse flesh (Faras) and
  thence applied, like “Kiyáfah,” to physiognomy. One Kári was the first
  to divine man’s future by worldly signs (Al-Maydáni, Arab. prov. ii.
  132) and the knowledge was hereditary in the tribe Mashíj.

Footnote 520:

  Reported to be a “Hadis” or saying of Mohammed, to whom are attributed
  many such shrewd aphorisms, _e.g._ “Allah defend us from the ire of
  the mild (tempered).”

Footnote 521:

  These lines are in vol. i. 126. I quote Torrens (p. 120).

Footnote 522:

  These lines have occurred before. I quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 523:

  Arab. “Khák-bák,” an onomatopœia like our flip-flap and a host of
  similar words. This profaning a Christian Church which contained the
  relics of the Virgin would hugely delight the coffee-house _habitués_,
  and the Egyptians would be equally flattered to hear that the son of a
  Cairene merchant had made the conquest of a Frankish Princess Royal.
  That he was an arrant poltroon mattered very little, as his cowardice
  only set off his charms.

Footnote 524:

  _i.e._ after the rising up of the dead.

Footnote 525:

  Arab. “Nafísah,” the precious one _i.e._ the Virgin.

Footnote 526:

  Arab. “Nákús,” a wooden gong used by Eastern Christians which were
  wisely forbidden by the early Moslems.

Footnote 527:

  _i.e._ a graceful, slender youth.

Footnote 528:

  There is a complicated pun in this line: made by splitting the word
  after the fashion of punsters. “Zarbu ’l-Nawákísí = the striking of
  the gongs, and “Zarbu ’l Nawà, Kísí = striking the departure signal:
  decide thou” (fem. addressed to the Nafs, soul or self). I have
  attempted a feeble imitation.

Footnote 529:

  The modern Italian term for the venereal finish.

Footnote 530:

  Arab. “Najm al-Munkazzi,” making the envious spy one of the prying
  Jinns at whom is launched the Shiháb or shooting-star by the angels
  who prevent them listening at the gates of Heaven. See vol. i. 224.

Footnote 531:

  Arab. “Sandúk al-Nuzur,” lit. “the box of vowed oblations.” This act
  of sacrilege would find high favour with the auditory.

Footnote 532:

  The night consisting like the day of three watches. See vol. i.

Footnote 533:

  Arab. “Al-Khaukhah,” a word now little used.

Footnote 534:

  Arab. “Námúsiyah,” lit. mosquito curtains.

Footnote 535:

  Arab. “Jáwashiyah,” see vol. ii. 49.

Footnote 536:

  Arab. “Kayyimah,” the fem. of “Kayyim,” misprinted “Kayim” in vol. ii.
  93.

Footnote 537:

  _i.e._ hadst thou not disclosed thyself. He has one great merit in a
  coward of not being ashamed for his cowardice; and this is a
  characteristic of the modern Egyptian, whose proverb is, “_He ran
  away, Allah shame him!_ is better than, _He was slain, Allah bless
  him!_”

Footnote 538:

  Arab. “Ahjar al-Kassárín” nor forgotten. In those days ships anchored
  in the Eastern port of Alexandria which is now wholly abandoned on
  account of the rocky bottom and the dangerous “Levanter,” which as the
  Gibraltar proverb says

                         Makes the stones canter.

Footnote 539:

  Arab. “Hakk” = rights, a word much and variously used. To express the
  possessive “mine” a Badawi says “Hakki” (pron. Haggi) and “Lílí;” a
  Syrian “Shítí” for Shayyati, my little thing or “taba’i” my dependent;
  an Egyptian “Bitá’i” my portion and a Maghribi “M’tá’i” and “diyyáli”
  (di allazí lí = this that is to me). Thus “mine” becomes a shibboleth.

Footnote 540:

  _i.e._ The “Good for nothing,” the, “Bad’un;” not some forgotten
  ruffian of the day, but the hero of a tale antedating The Nights in
  their present form. See Terminal Essay, s. ii.

Footnote 541:

  _i.e._ Hoping to catch Nur al-Din.

Footnote 542:

  Arab. “Sawwáhún” = the Wanderers, Pilgrims, wandering Arabs, whose
  religion, Al-Islam, so styled by its Christian opponents. And yet the
  new creed was at once accepted by whole regions of Christians, and
  Mauritania, which had rejected Roman paganism and Gothic Christianity.
  This was _e.g._ Syria and the so-called “Holy Land,” not because, as
  is fondly asserted by Christians, Al-Islam was forced upon them by the
  sword, but on account of its fulfilling a need, its supplying a higher
  belief, unity as opposed to plurality, and its preaching a more manly
  attitude of mind and a more sensible rule of conduct. Arabic still
  preserves a host of words special to the Christian creed; and many of
  them have been adopted by Moslems but with changes of signification.

Footnote 543:

  _i.e._ of things commanded and things prohibited. The writer is
  thinking of the Koran in which there are not a few abrogated
  injunctions.

Footnote 544:

  See below for the allusion.

Footnote 545:

  Arab. “Kafrá” = desert place. It occurs in this couplet:

                Wa Kabrun Harbin fí-makánin Kafrin;
                Wa laysa Kurba Kabri Harbin Kabrun.
            Harb’s corse is quartered in coarse wold accurst;
            Nor close to corse of Harb is other corse;—

  words made purposely harsh because uttered by a Jinni who killed a
  traveller named “Harb.” So Homer;—

          πολλὰ δ’ ἄναντα, κάταντα, πάραντά τε δόχμιά τ’ ἦλθον.

  and Pope

       O’er hills, o’er dales, o’er crags, o’er rocks they go, etc.

  See Preface (p. v.) to Captain A. Lockett’s learned and whimsical
  volume, “The Miut Amil” etc. Calcutta, 1814.

Footnote 546:

  These lines have occurred vol. iv. 267. I quote Mr. Lane.

Footnote 547:

  The topothesia is here designedly made absurd. Alexandria was one of
  the first cities taken by the Moslems (A.H. 21 = 642) and the
  Christian pirates preferred attacking weaker places, Rosetta and
  Damietta.

Footnote 548:

  Arab. “Bilád al-Rúm,” here and elsewhere applied to France.

Footnote 549:

  Here the last line of p. 324, vol. iv. in the Mac. Edit. is misplaced
  and belongs to the next page.

Footnote 550:

  Arab. Akhawán shakíkán = brothers german (of men and beasts) born of
  one father and mother, sire and dam.

Footnote 551:

  “The Forerunner” and “the Overtaker,” terms borrowed from the Arab
  Epsom.

Footnote 552:

  Known to us as “the web and pin,” it is a film which affects Arab
  horses in the damp hot regions of Malabar and Zanzibar and soon blinds
  them. This equine cataract combined with loin-disease compels men to
  ride Pegu and other ponies.

Footnote 553:

  Arab. “Zujáj bikr” whose apparent meaning would be glass in the lump
  and unworked. Zaj áj bears, however, the meaning of clove-nails (the
  ripe bud of the clove-shrub) and may possibly apply to one of the
  manifold “Alfáz Adwiyah” (names of drugs). Here, however, pounded
  glass would be all sufficient to blind a horse: it is much used in the
  East especially for dogs affected by intestinal vermicules.

Footnote 554:

  Alluding to the Arab saying “The two rests” (Al-ráhatáni) “certainty
  of success or failure,” as opposed to “Wiswás” when the mind
  fluctuates in doubt.

Footnote 555:

  She falls in love with the groom, thus anticipating the noble
  self-devotion of Miss Aurora Floyd.

Footnote 556:

  Arab. “Túfán” see vol. v. 156: here it means the “Deluge of Noah.”

Footnote 557:

  Two of the Hells. See vol. v. 240.

Footnote 558:

  Lit. “Out upon a prayer who imprecated our parting!”

Footnote 559:

  The use of masculine for feminine has frequently been noted. I have
  rarely changed the gender or the number the plural being often
  employed for the singular (vol. i. 98). Such change may avoid
  “mystification and confusion” but this is the very purpose of the
  substitution which must be preserved if “local colour” is to be
  respected.

Footnote 560:

  The well-known Koranic verse, whereby Allah is introduced into an
  indecent tale and “Holy Writ” is punned upon. I have noticed (iii.
  206) that victory Fat’h lit. = opening everything (as _e.g._ a
  maidenhead).




                           END OF VOL. VIII.

[Illustration: والسلام]




                                 INDEX.


 Abáah (vulg. ’Abáyah) = cloak, 42

 Abír (a fragrant powder sprinkled on face, body and clothes), 240

 Abjad (logogriphs derived from it), 93

 Ablution obligatory after copulation, 305

 Abú al-Ruwaysh = little feather, 77

 Abú al-Sa’ádát = Father of Prosperities, 148

 Abú Lahab and his wife, 291

 Abú Maryam (a term of contempt), 306

 Abú Mohammed al-Battál (hero of an older tale), 335

 Adan = our Aden, 248

 Adím = leather (Bulghár, Marocco), 80

 Áhirah = strumpet (_see_ Fájirah), 109

 Ahjár al-Kassárín = Fulling-stones, 334

 Ahlan = as one of the household, 269

 Air (I fear it for her when it bloweth), 53

 Akhawán shakíkán = (two) brothers german, 340

 Akík = carnelian (“Seal with seals of”), 228

 Akíl (son of Abú Tálib), 172

 Akmám (_see_ Kumm)

 Akr Kayrawán = ball of silver-dross, 267

 Akúna fidá-kȧ = may I be thy ransom, 36

 Alchemy (its practice has cost many a life), 11

 Alexandria (praise of), 289

 Allah (I take refuge with Him from gainsaying thee = God forbid that I
    should oppose thee), 53

 Allah (perpetuate his shadow), 170

 Allaho akbar (the Moslem war-cry), 265

 Alwán (pl. of laun, colour) = viands, dishes; 23

 Amazons (of Dahome), 39

 Ambar al-Khám = rude ambergris, 85

 Amúd al-Sawárí = the Pillar of Masts (Diocletian’s column), 323

 Anagnorisis (admirably managed), 104

 Andalíb = nightingale (masc. in Arabic), 282

 ’Andam = Brazil wood, 225

 Angels shooting Jinn, 292

 Anistaná = thy company gladdens us, 231

 Ansár = auxiliaries, 183

 Anwá, pl. of Nau q.v., 266

 Anwár = lights, flowers, 270; 282

 Apricots (various kinds), 268

 Arabian Odyssey, 7

 Arús (Al-) = the bride (tropical name for wine), 203

 Asaf bin Barkhiya (Solomon’s Wazir), 133

 Asháb = companions, 183

 Astár (pl. of Satr) = chopper, 184

 Aswad = black (used for any dark colour), 268

 ’Atb = blame, reproach (for disgrace), 112

 Atheist (Ar. Zindík), 27

 Atnáb = tent-ropes, 240

 Avanie (Ar. Gharámah), 181

 Awák = ounces (pl. of Ukíyah), 12

 Azrak = blue, 4


 Báb al-Bahr and Báb al-Barr, 55; 318

 Babylonian eyes = bewitching ones, 278

 Baghdád (House of Peace), 51

 Bahr al-azrak = blue river, _not_ Blue Nile, 4

 Bahríyah = crew, 17

 Baltiyah = Labrus Niloticus, 290

 Banát = daughters, protégées, 39

 Bán (species of Moringa), 322

 Banní (Bunní) = Cyprinus Bynni, 187

 Baras = leprosy, 24

 Bastardy (a sore offence amongst Moslems), 115

 Batárikah = patriarchs; monks, 256

 —— = knights, 319; 324

 Bath (may it be a blessing to thee), 200

 Batiyah = jar, flagon, 323

 Bawwák = trumpeter (a discreditable character), 192

 Bayáz = Whiteness, 295

 Bayáz = Silurus Bajad (cat-fish), 150

 Bayt Sha’ar = house of hair (for a couplet), 279

 Báz (vulg. for Tabl) = kettle-drum, 18

 Belt (Ar. Kamar), 156

 Better largesse than the mace, 163

 Bí-Fardayn = “with two singles” (meaning baskets), 162

 Bilád al-Rúm (applied to France), 339

 Bilkís (Queen of Sheba), 82

 Bird-girls, 29

 Bisát (Al-) wa’l-masnad = carpet and cushion, 55

 Bismillah Námí = Now please, go to sleep, 178

 Bismillah = enter in Allah’s name, 202

 Books (of the Judgment-day), 294

 Box (Ar. ’Ulbah), 71

 Boycotting (Oriental forms of), 302

 Bread and salt (bond of), 12

 Breslau edition quoted, 7; 18; 66; 98; 113; 197; 242; 264; 273.

 Búdikah (Bútakah) = crucible, 8

 Buhayrah = tank, cistern, 19

 Búm = owl (introduced to rhyme with Kayyúm = the Eternal), 286

 Burckhardt quoted, 23; 285

 Bystanders (forcing on a sale), 310


 Camels (red the best kind), 303

 Carmel = Karam El (God’s vineyard), 203

 Cask in Auerbach’s Keller, 131

 Cat-fish (Ar. Bayáz), 150

 Chaff, 147; 152; 175; 189

 Change (sudden, of disposition), 213

 Cheating (not only venial but laudable under circumstances), 217

 Checkmate (Pers. Ar. Sháh mát) = the King is dead, _ib._

 Chin-veil donned (showing intention to act like a man), 99

 Cloak (Ar. ’Abáah), 42

 Closet (the forbidden and bird-girls), 29

 Coffee (anachronism), 274

 Coition (the seal of love), 304

 —— (local excellencies of), _ib._

 —— (ablution obligatory after it), 305

 Compliment (model of a courtly one), 165

 Composed of seed by all men shed = superfetation of iniquity, 15

 Confusion of religious mythologies (by way of chaff), 152

 Contrition for romancing, 66

 Cowardice (proverb anent), 333

 Crescent-like (for emaciated), 300

 Crew (Ar. Bahríyah, Nawátíyah), 17


 Dáa al-Kabír (Great Evil) = Dáa al-Fíl (Elephantine Evil, _i.e._,
    Elephantiasis), 24

 Dádat = nurse (Pers.), 209

 Dajlah (Dijlah) = Tigris (Heb. Hid-dekel), 150

 Dakkah = settle, 84

 Dár al-Na’ím = Dwelling of Delight, 183

 Daylam (Al-), soldiers of = warlike as the Daylamites, 82

 Demesne (Ar. Himà), 225

 Dijlah (Tigris) River and Valley of Peace, 51

 Dirhams (thousand = £375), 10

 Disposition (sudden change of), 213

 Dist (Dist) = large copper chauldron, 177

 Diversion of an Eastern Potentate, 171

 Doggrel, 225; 228

 Double entendre, 153; 251

 Dreams (play an important part in the Romances of Chivalry), 113

 Drunken son (excused by mother, rebuked by father), 287

 Dues demanded lead to imprisonment for arrears, 170


 Eating and Drinking (before thinking of the lover), 260

 East and West (confounded by a beauty-dazed monk), 279

 Eginhardt (belongs to the clerical profession), 326

 Entertainments (names of), 231

 Euphemistic speech, 173

 Eye (Thou shalt be in mine = I will keep thee as though thou wert the
    apple of my eye), 90

 Eyes (Babylonian) = bewitching, 278


 Fa-immá ’alayhá wa-immá bihá = whether (luck go) against it or (luck
    go) with it, 157

 Faintings and trances (common in Romances of Chivalry), 118

 Fájirah = harlot (often mere abuse without special meaning), 109

 Fard Kalmah = a single word (vulgarism), 188

 Farkh Samak = fish-chick (for young fish), 149

 Farsalah = parcel, 162

 Fate (written in the sutures of the skull), 237

 Fath = opening (_e.g._ of a maidenhead), 348

 Fátimah (daughter of Mohammed), 252

 Favours (not lawful until sanctified by love), 226

 Fawn (for a graceful youth), 329

 Feet (lack the European development of sebaceous glands), 43

 —— (coldness of, a symptom of impotence), 317

 Female (Amazon) Island, 60

 Feminine (persistency of purpose, confirmed by “Consolations of
    religion”), 99

 —— (mind prone to exaggeration), 25

 —— (friend does not hesitate to prescribe fibs), 37

 Festival (Ar. ’Íd), 142

 Fidá = ransom, self-sacrifice, 36

 Fidá’an = instead of, _ib._

 Fig and Sycamore (unclean allusion in), 269

 Fillet = the Greek “Stephane”, 209

 Fine feathers make fine birds, 201

 Fingán (for Finján) = (coffee-) cup, 200

 Finger (run round the inside of a vessel), _ib._

 Finger-tips (making marks in the ground), 72

 Firásah = physiognomy, 326

 Fish changed into apes (true Fellah-“chaff”), 147

 —— (of Paradise, promising acceptance of prayer), 163

 Flattery (more telling if proceeding from the heart), 104

 Formality (a sign of good breeding), 308

 “Forty days” = our honey-moon, 47

 Fourteen (poetically expressed), 70

 Frail (Ar. Farsalah), 162

 Frame (crescent-like by reason of leanness), 300

 Friend (feminine, does not hesitate to prescribe a fib), 37

 Front-teeth wide apart (a beauty amongst the Egyptians, not the Arabs),
    147

 Funduk = Fondaco, 184

 Funeral oration on an Arabian Achilles (after Hariri), 348

 Full (Fill) = Arabian jessamine, 273


 “Gallery” (Speaking to the), 128

 Ghadr = cheating, 217

 Gháliyah (Al-) = older English “Algallia”, 220

 Gharámah = avanie, 151

 Ghayúr = jealous (applied to Time), 67

 Ghází = one who fights for the faith (Zealot), 211

 Ghuráb = galleon (grab), 323

 Gloria (in, Italian term for the venereal finish), 329

 Gold-pieces (stuck on the cheeks of singing-girls, etc.), 275

 Green gown (Anglo-India = white ball-dress with blades of grass
    behind), 32

 Groom (falling in love with), 345

 “Guebre” (introduced by Lord Byron), 8

 Gull-fairs, 90


 Habitations (names given to them by the Arabs), 229

 Habl = cord; cause, 100

 Háfiz quoted, 120

 Hakk = right (Hakkí = mine), 335

 Haláwat al-Salámah = sweetmeat for the returning of a friend, 325

 Haling by the hair (reminiscence of “marriage by capture”), 40

 Hamzah (uncle of the Prophet), 172

 Hanabát = “hanap”, 202

 Hand (cut off in penalty for theft), 164

 —— (cut off for striking a father), 287

 Hárún al-Rashíd (described by Al-Siyúti), 160

 Hashísh (said to him = his mind, under its influence, suggested to
    him), 155

 Hásil, Hásilah = cell in a Khan for storing goods, 184; 196

 Hassún (diminutive of Hasan), 81

 Haudaj (Hind. Howda) = camel-litter for women, 235

 Háwiyah (name of a Hell), 346

 Hazrat = our mediæval “præsentia vostra”, 254

 “Hearer” not “Reader” addressed, 316

 Heavens (names of the seven), 111

 Hells (names of the seven and intended inhabitants), _ib._

 Heroism of a doubtful character, 27

 Hesperides (apples of, probably golden nuggets), 272

 Himà = guarded side, demesne, 102; 225

 “His” for “her”, 50

 Hizám = girdle, 160

 “Holy Writ” punned upon, 348

 “House of Sadness”, 64

 Housewife (looks to the main chance), 144

 Hubúb (Pr. N.) = awaking, blowing hard, 209

 Humbly (expressed by standing on their heads), 279

 Hump-back (graphically described), 297


 Ibn al-Kirnás (Pr. N.) = son of the chase (for Pers. Kurnas = pimp,
    cuckold?), 157

 Ibn al-’Ukáb (Pr. N.) = Son of the Eagle, 198

 ’Íd = festivals (the two of al-Islám), 142

 Ihtílajnámeh = book of palpitations, 25

 Iksír (Al-) = dry drug (from ξηρόν), 9; 12

 Ikyán = living gold, 272; 275

 Ill-treatment (a slave’s plea for a lawful demand to be sold), 54

 Impudence (intended to be that of a captive Princess), 295

 Inadvertency of the tale-teller, 141

 Ink-case (origin of), 178

 Innín = impotence, 317

 Inshallah = D.V., 104

 Inverted speech, 179

 Irishman (the typical in Arab garb), 191

 Ironical speech, 3

 —— (a favourite with the Fellah), 164

 Ishárah = beckoning, 233

 Iskandariyah = city of Alexander, 289

 Island for Land, 317

 Ism al-A’azam = the most Great name of Allah, 133


 Jalájal = small bells for falcons etc., 271

 Jar (ridden by witches), 131

 Jarrah = jar, 177

 Jawáshíyah = guard, 330

 Jew (never your equal, either above or below you), 153

 —— (marrying a Moslemah deserves no pity), 262

 Jokh al-Saklat = rich brocade on broadcloth, 202

 Judad (for Judad) pl. of Jadíd = “new” (_i.e._ old) coin, 121

 Juggling with heaven, 168

 Jamár = palm-pith and cabbage, 270

 Juzám = Elephantiasis, 24


 Kabbát = saucers, 12

 Kafrà = desert place, 337

 Kamán = Kamá (as) + anna (that, since), 197

 Kamar = belt, 156

 Kámil, Basít, Wáfir (names of three popular metres), 91

 Karbús = saddle-bow, 77

 Karmút = Silurus Carmoth Niloticus, 185

 Karrat azlá’hu = his ribs felt cold (after hearty eating), 189

 Kaukab al-Durrí = cluster of pearls, 291

 Kaylúlah = noon-tide nap, 191

 Kayrawán = the Greek Cyrene, 317

 Kayyimah = guardian (fem.), 330

 Káz (Al-) = shears, 9

 Kází of Kázís = Chief Kazi, 245

 Khák-bák = “hocus pocus” etc., 328

 Khalanj (vessels made of it), 271

 Khalkínah = copper chauldron, 177

 Kharajú = they (masc.) went forth (vulg. for kharajna fem.), 144

 Khaukhah = tunnel, 330

 Koran quoted (iii. 90), 51

 —— (xxxix. 54), 182

 —— (vi. 99), 267

 —— xvi. 69; ii. 216; v. 92, 277

 —— (cxiii. 13), 285

 —— (cxi. 184), 291

 —— (xvii.; xviii.; lxix; lxxxiv.), 294

 Khuld = fourth (yellow coral) heaven, 47

 Khutúb (Pr. N.) = affairs, misfortunes, 209

 Khilál (emblem of attenuation), 258

 Kímiyá = Alchemy (from χυμεία = wet drug), 9

 Kimkhá = (velvet of) “Kimcob”, 201

 Kír = bellows, 9

 Kiráb = wooden sword-case, 267

 Kirám = nobles; Kurúm = vines, 203

 Kirsh al-Nukhál = guts of bran, 169

 Kissing (en tout bien et en tout honneur), 25

 Kohls (many kinds of), 10

 Kubbád = Shaddock, 272

 Kúr = furnace, 9

 —— (= forge where children are hammered out), 46

 Kumm = sleeve; petal, 267; 275

 Kurbáj = cravache, 17

 Kurbán = sacrifice, 16

 Kursán = “Corsaro,” a runner, 323

 Kus(s) = Vulva, 93

 Kusúf = eclipse of the moon, 291

 Kút al-Kulúb (Pr. N.) = nourishment of the hearts, 158


 La Baas = (in Marocco) “I am well”, 274

 Labbis al-Búsah tabkí ’Arúsah = clothe the reed and it becomes a bride,
    201

 Láhik = the Overtaker, 341

 Lane quoted, 7; 14; 18; 21; 27; 35; 53; 62; 67; 77; 80; 84; 94; 97;
    102; 122; 124; 128; 131; 147; 148; 155; 156; 166; 177; 179; 180;
    187; 205; 264; 285; 298; 337

 Largesse (better than the mace), 163

 Lazá (name of a Hell), 346

 Liberality (after Poverty), 182

 Libraries (large ones appreciated by the Arabs), 79

 Lisán al-Hamal = Lamb’s tongue (plantain), 273

 Liyyah = fat sheep (calves like tails of), 291

 Logogriphs, 93

 Love (called upon to torment the lover still more), 75

 Love-children (exceedingly rare among Moslems), 115

 Love-liesse (never lacked between folk, _i.e._ people of different
    conditions), 212

 Lovers (becoming Moslems secure the good-will of the audience), 224

 Lute (personification of), 281


 Má al-Mala = water (brilliancy) of beauty, 47

 Maghdád (for Baghdád, as Makkah and Bakkah), 51

 Mahall = (a man’s) quarters, 229

 Mahmudah = praiseworthy; confection of Aloes, 35

 Malak = level ground, 285

 Malakút (Al-) = The world of spirits (Sufi term), 145

 Mamarr al-Tujjár = passing-place of the traders, 155

 Mamrak = sky-window, etc., 156

 Man (one worthier in Allah’s sight than a thousand Jinn), 5; 44

 Manár al-Saná (Pr. N.) = Place of Light, 104

 Manáshif (pl. of Minshafah q.v.), 92

 Mansúr wa Munazzam = oratio soluta et ligata, 226

 Manzil, Makám = (a lady’s) lodgings, 229

 Marhúb = terrible, 180

 Marriage (“by capture”), 40

 —— (one of the institutions of the Apostles), 137

 Married never once (emphasizes poverty), 145

 Marseille (probably alluded to), 315

 Maryam (a Christian name), 306

 Masúkah = stick used for driving cattle, 147

 Maryam al-Husn = place of the white doe (Rím) of beauty, 321

 Mawwál (for Mawálíyah) = short poem, 94; 151

 Menses (coition during and leprosy), 24

 Mikhaddah = cheek-pillow, 273

 Mine (idioms for expressing it), 335

 Minshafah (pl. Manáshif) = drying towel, 92

 Moharram = first month of the Moslem year, 71

 Mohtasib = Inspector of weights and measures, 293

 Money (carried round the waist), 288

 —— (weighed = paid down), 290

 Monkery (none in Al-Islám), 137

 Monoculars (famed for mischief), 318

 Moons (for cup-bearers), 227

 Mortal (one better in Allah’s sight than a thousand Jinn), 5; 44

 Moslem (dignity contrasting with Christian abasement), 5; 44

 —— (can circumcise, marry and bury himself), 22

 Moslems (their number preordained), 154

 Mother (in Arab. tales = ma mère), 27

 Muákhát = entering in a formal agreement of partnership, 232

 Mu’allim = teacher, master (addressing a Jew or Christian), 150

 Muhabbat (Al-) al-gharizíyah = natural affection, 110

 Munkati’ = cut off, 24

 Musáhikah = Tribade, 130

 Mushayyad = lofty, high-built, 23

 Mystification explained by extraordinary likeness, 40


 Nabbút = quarterstaff, 186

 Nafs Ammárah = the Flesh, 31

 —— al-Nátikah = intellectual soul, _ib._

 —— al-Ghazabiyah = animal function, _ib._

 —— al-Shahwaniyah = vegetative property, _ib._

 Najm al-Sabáh (Pr. N.) = Star o’ Morn, 107

 Nákhúzah Zulayt = Skipper Rapscallion, 175

 Nár = fire (fem. like the names of the other elements), 16

 Narjis = Narcissus (name of a slave girl), 176

 Nasím = Zephyr (emendation for Nadím = cup-bearer), 62

 Navel (largeness of much appreciated), 33

 Nawátíyah = crew (nauta, navita), 17

 Nafísah (Pr. N.) = The Precious one, 328

 Najm al-Munkazzi = shooting star, 329

 Nakat = to spot; to handsel, 266

 Nákús = wooden gong, 328

 Nau (pl. Anwá) setting of one star simultaneous with another’s rising,
    266

 Námúsíyah = mosquito curtain, 330

 News (what is behind thee of, O Asám?), 222

 Night (consists of three watches), 330

 Numbering the streets etc., a classical custom, 88

 Núr al-Hudá (Pr. N.) = Light of Salvation, 97


 Oath (retrieved by expiation), 263

 —— (of divorce), 187; 311

 Object first seen in the morning determines the fortunes of the day,
    147

 Orange (a growth of India), 272

 O whose thrall am I = To her (I drink), 224


 Palmerin of England, 64

 Particles of swearing, 310

 Partner in very deed, 181

 Payne quoted, 21; 32; 64; 70; 72; 80; 117; 125; 130; 131; 148; 158;
    168; 179; 216; 223; 224; 262; 264; 271; 275; 278; 279; 282; 293,
    294; 314; 326; 327.

 Peaches (“Sultání,” Andam), 270

 Pears (various kinds), 269

 Persians always suspected, 8

 Person (Ar. Shakhs), 159

 Physiognomy (Ar. Firásah, Kiyáfah), 326

 Pièces de circonstance (mostly mere doggrel), 59

 Pilgrimage quoted (iii. 70), 137

 —— (iii. 365), 157

 —— (ii. 248), 172

 —— (ii. 130, etc.), 183

 —— (ii. 207), 273

 —— (i. 176), 287

 —— (ii. 82), 291

 —— (i. 88), 300

 Pilgrimage (not perfected save by copulation with the camel), 157

 Pleiads (the stars whereby men sail), 304

 Pomegranate (alluded to in Hadís and Korán), 267

 Pouch (Ar Surrah), 71

 Precedence (claims preeminence), 285

 Premier (Le, embellit), 86

 Prognostication from nervous movements, 25

 Prostitution (never wholly abolished in Islam), 115

 Puellæ Wakwakienses, 89

 Pun (on Sabr), 35

 —— (on a name), 228

 —— (complicated), 329


 Queen’s mischief = the mischief which may (or will) come from the
    Queen, 98


 Raas al-Mál = capital, 248

 Raat-hu = she saw him, 298

 Rághib = expecter; Záhid = rejecter, 315

 Raff = shelf running round a room, 122

 Ráhatáni (Al-) = the two rests, 342

 Rakham = aquiline vulture, 20

 Ramazán (moon of), 33

 Rashad = garden-cresses; stones; Rashíd = the heaven-directed, 194

 Rashid = Rosetta, 288

 Rasíf = river-quay, dyke, 150

 Raven of the Wold, 236

 Rayhán = scented herb, 187

 Rest (in Eastern travel before eating and drinking), 142

 Return-Salám, 309

 Revenge (a sacred duty), 26

 Ribá, Ribh = interest, 248

 Riders (names of on various beasts), 238

 Ríf = low land, 304

 Rizwán (door-keeper of Paradise), 265

 Rose (in Arab. masc.), 274

 Roumí (in Marocco = European), 268

 Ruh bilà Fuzúl = Begone and none of your impudence, 163

 Ruhbán = monks, 256

 Rukb = travellers on camels, return caravan, 238


 Sabab = robe; cause, 100

 Sakaba Kúrahá = he pierced her forge, 46

 Sábik = Forerunner, 341

 Sabíkah = bar, lamina, ingot, 10

 Sabr = patience; Aloës (pun on), 35

 Sacrifice (Ar. Kurbán), 16

 Sadness (House of), 64

 Sahífah = page, book, 148

 Sahíkah = Tribade, 130

 Sa’íd = Upper Egypt, 304

 Sáibah = woman who lets herself go (a-whoring, etc.), 151

 Salám (becomes Shalúm with the Jews), 223

 —— (not returned, a Moslem form of Boycotting), 302

 Sale (forced on by the Bystanders), 310

 Sálifah = silken plait, 223

 Sálih = a pious man, 191

 Sandal (Pr. N.) = Sandal-wood, 169

 Sandúk al-Nuzur = box of vowed oblations, 330

 Sátúr = chopper, 162

 Saub (Tobe) ’Atábi = tabby silk, 201

 Sawwáhún = Wanderers, Pilgrims, 326

 Sayf Zú al Yazan (hero of a Persian Romance), 21

 Sayr = broad girdle, 325

 Sayyib-hu = let him go, 151

 Sayyib (Thayyib) = woman who leaves her husband after consummation, 324

 Scorpions (for brow-curls), 209

 Shadow (may yours never be less), 170

 Shafáif = lower labia, 93

 Sháh (Al-) mát = the King is dead (checkmate), 217

 Shakhs = person, 159

 “Shame” (extends from navel to knees), 193

 Shamlah = gaberdine, 160

 Shammirí = up and ready!, 263

 Shams al-Zuhá (Pr. N.) = Sun of Undurn, 107

 Sharaf al-Banát (Pr. N.) = Honour of Maidenhood, _ib._

 Shásh Abyaz = white turband (distinctive sign of the True Believer), 8

 Shawáhí Umm al-Dawáhí = the Fascinator, mother of Calamities, 87

 Shibábah = reed-pipe, 166

 Siddíkah (Al-) = the veridical (apparently undeserved) title of
    Ayishah, 152

 Signing with the hand _not_ our beckoning, 78

 Signs (by various parts of the body), 233

 Signum salutis, 293

 Sindan, Sandan = anvil, 8

 Sister (by adoption), 25

 Sisterhood = companions, suite, 41

 Sixth Abbaside Caliph error for fifth, 56

 Slave (holds himself superior to a menial freeman), 294

 Slave-girl (can be sold only with her consent), 292

 Slaughter (wholesale for the delight of the gallery), 255

 Slaughtering (by cutting the animal’s throat), 44

 Slaves (if ill-treated may claim to be sold), 54

 Soko (Maghribi form for Súk) = Bazar-street, 230

 Soldiers of Al-Daylam = warlike as the Daylamites, 82

 Solomon’s prison (copper cucurbites), 157

 Son of ten years dieth not in the ninth, 70

 Soul (you may have his, but leave me the body), 284

 Spartivento = mountain whereon the clouds split, 19

 Speaking to the “gallery”, 128

 Speech (this my = the words I am about to speak), 147

 —— (inverted form of), 318

 Spells (for prayers deprecating parting), 347

 Sperm (though it were a drop of marguerite), 210

 Súdán-men = Negroes, 266

 Sukúb (Pr. N.) = flowing, pouring, 209

 Sufrah = table-cloth, 269

 Suláf al-Khandarísí (a contradiction), 203

 Sumbul al ’Anbari = spikenard, 273

 Suns (for fair-faced boys and women), 242

 Sultán (fit for the service of = for the service of a temporal
    monarch), 325

 Supernaturalism (has a material basis), 30

 Surayyá = Stars of wealth, 303

 Surrah = purse, pouch, 71

 Swan-maidens, 30

 Sweetmeat for salvation (provided for the returning traveller), 105


 Tabl = kettle-drum, 18

 Táif (Al-), town famous for scented leather, 273

 Táifí leather, 303

 Takiyah = skull-cap, 120

 Tamar Hanna = Henna flowers, 176

 Tarn-Kappe (making invisible), 120

 Tars Daylamí = Median targe, 291

 Tás (from Pers. Tásah) = tasse, 224

 Tawíl (and Abt. Vogler), 94

 Theft (penalty for), 164

 “Them” for her, 35

 “They” for she, 281

 Thou fillest mine eyes = I find thy beauty all-sufficient, 57

 Tigris (Ar-Dijlah, Dajlah), 150

 Tohfah = rarity, present, 55

 Topothesia (designedly made absurd), 338

 Torture easier to bear than giving up cash, 189

 Torrens quoted 280; 305; 309; 314; 321; 327.

 Trailing the skirt (for assuming humble manners), 301

 Trances and faintings (common in Romances of Chivalry), 118

 Transformation (sudden) of character frequent in Eastern stories, 178

 Tribade (Ar. Sahíkah, Musáhikah), 130

 Túfán = Deluge of Noah, 346

 Tuff = Sordes unguinum (fie! see Uff), 195

 Turban (substitute for a purse), 190

 Two Sayings (double entendre), 153


 Uff ’alayka = fie upon thee! (Uff = sordes aurium), 195

 Ulbah = box, 71

 Urkúb = tendon Achilles, bough, 185

 Uzn al-Kuffah = ear (handle) of the basket, 161


 Verses afore-mentioned (distinguishing formula of “Hasan of Bassorah”),
    126

 —— (purposely harsh), 337

 View (gorgeous description of), 30


 Wa al-Salam (used in a variety of senses), 74

 Wákites (number their islands), 88

 Wák Wák (Islands of), 60

 Walahán (Al-) = the love-distraught (abjective, not lakab), 33

 Wa’lláhi = I swear by Allah, 310

 Walímah = a wedding feast, 231

 Ward = rose; Wardah = a single rose, 274

 Watad = tent-peg (also a prosodical term), 279

 Web and pin (eye disease of horses), 341

 What calamity is upon thee = what a bother thou art, 177

 What manner of thing is Al-Rashíd? = What has he to do here?, 176

 Whistling (to call animals to water), 278

 White (not black) mourning colour under the Abbasides, 200

 Whiteness (for lustre, honour), 295

 Whoso beguileth folk, him shall Allah beguile, 143

 “Why don’t (can’t) you buy me?”, 300

 Wisháh = belt, scarf, 209

 Wine (breeds gladness, etc.), 202

 —— (Mohammed’s teaching anent it), 277

 —— (in cup or cup in wine?), ib.

 Witness (bear it against me, meaning of the phrase), 22

 Woman, Women (stealing of their clothes), 30

 —— (her heart the only bond known by her), 54

 —— (reasons for their aging early in the East), 86

 —— (always to be addressed “Ummí” = my mother), 87

 —— (often hide their names from the husband and his family), 100

 —— (semi-maniacal rancour of a good one against an erring sister), 118

 Woman, (when old, the most vindictive of her kind), 137

 —— (who are neither thine nor another’s), 208

 —— (their bodies impregnated with scent), 279

 Wrestling amongst the Egyptian Fellah, 199


 Yá A’awar = O one-eye (obscene meaning of the phrase), 185

 —— Khwájah = O Master, 18

 —— layta = would to heaven, 48

 —— Mumátil = O Slow o’ pay, 169

 —— Salám = O Safety (a vulgar ejaculation), 98

 —— Shukayr = O little tulip, 168

 Yásamín = Jessamine (name of a slave-girl), 176


 Za’ar = a man with fair skin, red hair, and blue eyes, 297

 Zahrawíyah = lovely as the Venus-star, 251

 Zakhmah (Zukhmah) = strap, stirrup-leather, 18

 Zakzúk = young of the Shál, 185

 Zarbu’l Nawákísi = striking of gongs (pun on the word), 329

 Zayn al-Mawásif (Pr.N.) = Adornment of (good) Qualities, 205

 Zinád = fire-sticks, 80

 Zindik = Atheist, 27

 Zubaydah (wife of Harun al-Rashid), 56; 158

 Zujáj bikr = unworked glass, 342

 Zunnár = ζωνάριον, 305

 Zurayk (diminutive of Azrak = blue-eyed), 195

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Added missing footnote anchor after “sacrifice” on p. 16.
 2. Changed “as is does” to “as it does” on p. 31.
 3. Added missing footnote anchor after “recite” on p. 94.
 4. Changed “manner oaths” to “manner of oaths” on p. 104.
 5. Added missing footnote anchor after “Mawwál” on p. 151.
 6. Changed “δαχμία” to “δόχμιά” in footnote 545.
 7. Silently corrected simple spelling, grammar, and typographical
    errors.
 8. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
 9. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
10. Superscripts are denoted by a carat before a single superscript
    character or a series of superscripted characters enclosed in curly
    braces, e.g. M^r. or M^{ister}.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — VOLUME 08 (OF 10) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night — Volume 09 (of 10)
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night — Volume 09 (of 10)

Translator: Sir Richard Francis Burton


        
Release date: September 20, 2017 [eBook #55587]
                Most recently updated: May 23, 2025

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/55587

Credits: Produced by Richard Tonsing, Richard Hulse and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — VOLUME 09 (OF 10) ***

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: لا لابرار كلّ شي تبر]

                   “TO THE PURE ALL THINGS ARE PURE.”
                           (Puris omnia pura)

                                                        —_Arab Proverb._

          “Niuna corrotta mente intese mai sanamente parole.”

                                            —“_Decameron_”—_conclusion_.

              “Erubuit, posuitque meum Lucretia librum
                  Sed coram Bruto. Brute! recede, leget.”

                                                             —_Martial._

            “Mieulx est de ris que de larmes escripre,
                Pour ce que rire est le propre des hommes.”

                                                              —RABELAIS.

“The pleasure we derive from perusing the Thousand-and-One Stories makes
us regret that we possess only a comparatively small part of these truly
enchanting fictions.”

                                      —CRICHTON’S “_History of Arabia_.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

_A PLAIN AND LITERAL TRANSLATION OF THE ARABIAN NIGHTS ENTERTAINMENTS.
NOW ENTITULED_




                           _THE BOOK OF THE_
                      Thousand Nights and a Night

   _WITH INTRODUCTION EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF
    MOSLEM MEN AND A TERMINAL ESSAY UPON THE HISTORY OF THE NIGHTS_

                               VOLUME IX.


                                   BY
                           RICHARD F. BURTON

[Illustration]

        PRINTED BY THE BURTON CLUB FOR PRIVATE SUBSCRIBERS ONLY

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            Shammar Edition

Limited to one thousand numbered sets, of which this is

                              Number _547_




                          PRINTED IN U. S. A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                      TO ALEXANDER BAIRD OF URIE.


  MY DEAR BAIRD,

  I avail myself of a privilege of authorship, not yet utterly
  obsolete, to place your name at the head of this volume. Your long
  residence in Egypt and your extensive acquaintance with its
  “politic,” private and public, make you a thoroughly competent judge
  of the merits and demerits of this volume; and encourage me to hope
  that in reading it you will take something of the pleasure I have
  had in writing it.

                                                    RICHARD F. BURTON.

  TANGIER, _December 31st, 1885_.




                     CONTENTS OF THE NINTH VOLUME.


                                                                    PAGE

 ALI NUR AL-DIN AND MIRIAM THE GIRDLE-GIRL (Continued)                 1

                        (_Lane omits, III. 572._)

 THE MAN OF UPPER EGYPT AND HIS FRANKISH WIFE                         19

                             (_Lane omits._)

 THE RUINED MAN OF BAGHDAD AND HIS SLAVE-GIRL                         24

   (_Lane, Anecdote of a Man of Baghdad and His Slave-Girl, III. 572_)

 KING JALI’AD OF HIND AND HIS WAZIR SHIMAS: FOLLOWED BY THE HISTORY
   OF KING WIRD KHAN, SON OF KING JALI’AD, WITH HIS WOMEN AND
   WAZIRS                                                             32

     _a._ THE MOUSE AND THE CAT                                       35

     _b._ THE FAKIR AND HIS JAR OF BUTTER                             40

     _c._ THE FISHES AND THE CRAB                                     43

     _d._ THE CROW AND THE SERPENT                                    46

     _e._ THE WILD ASS AND THE JACKAL                                 48

     _f._ THE UNJUST KING AND THE PILGRIM PRINCE                      50

     _g._ THE CROWS AND THE HAWK                                      53

     _h._ THE SERPENT-CHARMER AND HIS WIFE                            56

     _i._ THE SPIDER AND THE WIND                                     59

     _j._ THE TWO KINGS                                               65

     _k._ THE BLIND MAN AND THE CRIPPLE                               67

     _l._ THE FOOLISH FISHERMAN                                       93

     _m._ THE BOY AND THE THIEVES                                     95

     _n._ THE MAN AND HIS WIFE                                        98

     _o._ THE MERCHANT AND THE ROBBERS                               100

     _p._ THE JACKALS AND THE WOLF                                   103

     _q._ THE SHEPHERD AND THE ROGUE                                 106

     _r._ THE FRANCOLIN AND THE TORTOISES                            113

 CONCLUSION OF THE HISTORY OF KING WIRD KHAN                         115

 ABU KIR THE DYER AND ABU SIR THE BARBER                             134

        (_Lane, III. 580, The Story of Aboo Seer and Aboo Keer._)

 ABDULLAH THE FISHERMAN AND ABDULLAH THE MERMAN                      165

 (_Lane, III. 627. The Story of ’Abd Allah of the Land and ’Abd Allah of
                               the Sea._)

 HARUN AL-RASHID AND ABU HASAN, THE MERCHANT OF OMAN                 188

 IBRAHIM AND JAMILAH                                                 207

 ABU AL-HASAN OF KHORASAN                                            229

 KAMAR AL-ZAMAN AND THE JEWELLER’S WIFE                              246

 ABDULLAH BIN FAZIL AND HIS BROTHERS                                 304


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Eighty-ninth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Nur al-Din
heard the voice singing these verses he said in himself, “Verily this be
the Lady Miriam chanting without hesitation or doubt or suspicion of one
from without.[1] Would Heaven I knew an my thought be true and if it be
indeed she herself or other self!” And regrets redoubled upon him and he
bemoaned himself and recited these couplets:—

 When my blamer saw me beside my love ✿ Whom I met in a site that lay
    open wide,
 I spake not at meeting a word of reproach ✿ Though oft it comfort sad
    heart to chide;
 Quoth the blamer, “What means this silence that bars ✿ Thy making answer
    that hits his pride?”
 And quoth I, “O thou who as fool dost wake, ✿ To misdoubt of lovers and
    Love deride;
 The sign of lover whose love is true ✿ When he meets his belovèd is mum
    to bide.”

When he had made an end of these verses, the Lady Miriam fetched inkcase
and paper and wrote therein:—“After honour due to the Basmalah,[2] may
the peace of Allah be upon thee and His mercy and blessings be! I would
have thee know that thy slave-girl Miriam saluteth thee, who longeth
sore for thee; and this is her message to thee. As soon as this letter
shall fall into thy hands, do thou arise without stay and delay and
apply thyself to that she would have of thee with all diligence and
beware with all wariness of transgressing her commandment and of
sleeping. When the first third of the night is past, (for that hour is
of the most favourable of times) apply thee only to saddling the two
stallions and fare forth with them both to the Sultan’s Gate.[3] If any
ask thee whither thou wend, answer, I am going to exercise the steeds,
and none will hinder thee; for the folk of this city trust to the
locking of the gates.” Then she folded the letter in a silken kerchief
and threw it out of the latticed window to Nur al-Din, who took it and
reading it, knew it for the handwriting of the Lady Miriam and
comprehended all its contents. So he kissed the letter and laid it
between his eyes; then, calling to mind that which had betided him with
her of the sweets of love-liesse, he poured forth his tears whilst he
recited these couplets:—

 Came your writ to me in the dead of the night ✿ And desire for you
    stirrèd heart and sprite;
 And, remembered joys we in union joyed, ✿ Praised the Lord who placed us
    in parting plight.

As soon as it was dark Nur al-Din busied himself with making ready the
stallions and patiented till the first watch of the night was past;
when, without a moment delay, Nur al-Din the lover full of teen, saddled
them with saddles of the goodliest, and leading them forth of the
stable, locked the door after him and repaired with them to the
city-gate, where he sat down to await the coming of the Princess.
Meanwhile, Miriam returned forthright to her private apartment, where
she found the one-eyed Wazir seated, elbow-propt upon a cushion stuffed
with ostrich-down; but he was ashamed to put forth his hand to her or to
bespeak her. When she saw him, she appealed to her Lord in heart,
saying, “Allahumma—O my God—bring him not to his will of me nor to me
defilement decree after purity!” Then she went up to him and made a show
of fondness for him and sat down by his side and coaxed him, saying, “O
my lord, what is this aversion thou displayest to me? Is it pride or
coquetry on thy part? But the current byword saith:—An the
salam-salutation be little in demand, the sitters salute those who
stand.[4] So if, O my lord, thou come not to me neither accost me, I
will go to thee and accost thee.” Said he, “To thee belong favour and
kindness, O Queen of the earth in its length and breadth; and what am I
but one of thy slaves and the least of thy servants. Indeed, I was
ashamed to intrude upon thine illustrious presence, O unique pearl, and
my face is on the earth at thy feet.” She rejoined, “Leave this talk and
bring us to eat and drink.” Accordingly he shouted to his eunuchs and
women an order to serve food, and they set before them a tray containing
birds of every kind that walk and fly and in nests increase and
multiply, such as sand-grouse and quails and pigeon-poults and lambs and
fatted geese and fried poultry and other dishes of all sorts and
colours. The Princess put out her hand to the tray and began to eat and
feed the Wazir with her fair finger-tips and kiss him on the mouth. They
ate till they had enough and washed their hands, after which the
handmaidens removed the table of food and set on the service of wine. So
Princess Miriam filled the cup and drank and gave the Wazir to drink and
served him with assiduous service, so that he was like to fly for joy
and his breast broadened and he was of the gladdest. When she saw that
the wine had gotten the better of his senses, she thrust her hand into
her bosom and brought out a pastile of virgin Cretan-Bhang, which she
had provided against such an hour, whereof if an elephant smelt a
dirham’s weight, he would sleep from year to year. She distracted his
attention and crumbled the drug into the cup: then, filling it up,
handed it to the Wazir, who could hardly credit his senses for delight.
So he took it and kissing her hand, drank it off, but hardly had it
settled in his stomach when he fell head foremost to the ground. Then
she rose and filling two great pairs of saddle-bags with what was light
of weight and weighty of worth of jewels and jacinths and precious
stones, together with somewhat of meat and drink, donned harness of war
and armed herself for fight. She also took with her for Nur al-Din what
should rejoice him of rich and royal apparel and splendid arms and
armour, and shouldering the bags (for indeed her strength equalled her
valiancy), hastened forth from the new palace to join her lover. On this
wise fared it with the Lady Miriam; but as regards Nur al-Din,——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Ninetieth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Lady
Miriam left the new palace, she went straightways to meet her lover for
indeed she was as valiant as she was strong; but Nur al-Din the
distracted, the full of teen, sat at the city-gate hending the horses’
halters in hand, till Allah (to whom belong Majesty and Might) sent a
sleep upon him and he slept—glory be to Him who sleepeth not! Now at
that time the Kings of the Islands had spent much treasure in bribing
folk to steal the two steeds or one of them; and in those days there was
a black slave, who had been reared in the islands skilled in
horse-lifting; wherefore the Kings of the Franks seduced him with wealth
galore to steal one of the stallions and promised him, if he could avail
to lift the two, that they would give him a whole island and endue him
with a splendid robe of honour. He had long gone about the city of
France in disguise, but succeeded not in taking the horses, whilst they
were with the King; but, when he gave them in free gift to the Wazir and
the monocular one carried them to his own stable, the blackamoor thief
rejoiced with joy exceeding and made sure of success, saying in himself,
“By the virtue of the Messiah and the Faith which is no liar, I will
certainly steal the twain of them!” Now he had gone out that very night,
intending for the stable, to lift them; but, as he walked along, behold,
he caught sight of Nur al-Din lying asleep, with the halters in his
hands. So he went up to the horses and loosing the halters from their
heads, was about to mount one of them and drive the other before him,
when suddenly up came the Princess Miriam, carrying on her shoulders the
couple of saddle-bags. She mistook the black for Nur al-Din and handed
him one pair of bags, which he laid on one of the stallions: after which
she gave him the other and he set it on the second steed, without word
said to discover that it was not her lover. Then they mounted and rode
out of the gate[5] in silence till presently she asked, “O my lord Nur
al-Din, what aileth thee to be silent?” Whereupon the black turned to
her and cried angrily, “What sayst thou, O damsel?” When she heard the
slave’s barbarous accents, she knew that the speech was not of Nur
al-Din; so raising her eyes she looked at him and saw that he was a
black chattel, snub-nosed and wide-mouthed, with nostrils like ewers;
whereupon the light in her eyes became night and she asked him, “Who art
thou, O Shaykh of the sons of Ham and what among men is thy name?” He
answered, “O daughter of the base, my name is Mas’úd, the lifter of
horses, when folk slumber and sleep.” She made him no reply, but
straightway baring her blade, smote him on the nape and the blade came
out gleaming from his throat-tendons, whereupon he fell earthwards,
weltering in his blood, and Allah hurried his soul to the Fire and
abiding-place dire. Then she took the other horse by the bridle and
retraced her steps in search of Nur al-Din, whom she found lying, asleep
and snoring, in the place where she had appointed him to meet her,
hending the halters in hand, yet knowing not his fingers from his feet.
So she dismounted and gave him a cuff,[6] whereupon he awoke in affright
and said to her, “O my lady, praised be Allah for thy safe coming!” Said
she “Rise and back this steed and hold thy tongue!” So he rose and
mounted one of the stallions, whilst she bestrode the other, and they
went forth the city and rode on awhile in silence. Then said she to him,
“Did I not bid thee beware of sleeping? Verily, he prospereth not who
sleepeth.” He rejoined, “O my lady, I slept not but because of the
cooling of my heart by reason of thy promise. But what hath happened, O
my lady?” So she told him her adventure with the black, first and last,
and he said, “Praised be Allah for safety!” Then they fared on at full
speed, committing their affair to the Subtle, the All-wise and
conversing as they went, till they came to the place where the black lay
prostrate in the dust, as he were an Ifrit, and Miriam said to Nur
al-Din, “Dismount; strip him of his clothes and take his arms.” He
answered, “By Allah, O my lady, I dare not dismount nor approach him.”
And indeed he marvelled at the blackamoor’s stature and praised the
Princess for her deed, wondering the while at her valour and
stout-heartedness. They fared on lustily and ceased not so doing all
that night and halted not till the day broke with its shine and sheen
and the sun shone bright upon plain and height when they came to a wide
riverino lea wherein the gazelles were frisking gracefully. Its surface
was clothed with green and on all sides fruit trees of every kind were
seen: its slopes for flowers like serpents’ bellies showed, and birds
sang on boughs aloud and its rills in manifold runnels flowed. And
indeed it was as saith the poet and saith well and accomplisheth the
hearer’s desire:—

 Rosy red Wady hot with summer-glow, ✿ Where twofold tale of common
    growth was piled.
 In copse we halted wherein bent to us ✿ Branches, as bendeth nurse o’er
    weanling-child.
 And pure cold water quenching thirst we sipped: ✿ To cup-mate sweeter
    than old wine and mild:
 From every side it shut out sheen of sun ✿ Screen-like, but wooed the
    breeze to cool the wild:
 And pebbles, sweet as maidens deckt and dight ✿ And soft as threaded
    pearls, the touch beguiled.

And as saith another:—

 And when birdies o’er warble its lakelet, it gars ✿ Longing[7] lover to
    seek it where morning glows;
 For likest to Paradise lie its banks ✿ With shade and fruitage and fount
    that flows.

Presently Princess Miriam and Nur al-Din alighted to rest in this
Wady——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Princess
Miriam and Nur al-Din alighted in that valley, they ate of its fruits
and drank of its streams, after turning the stallions loose to pasture:
then they sat talking and recalling their past and all that had befallen
them and complaining one to other of the pangs of parting and of the
hardships suffered for estrangement and love-longing. As they were thus
engaged, behold, there arose in the distance a dust-cloud which spread
till it walled the world, and they heard the neighing of horses and
clank of arms and armour. Now the reason of this was, that after the
Princess had been bestowed in wedlock upon the Wazir who had gone in to
her that night, the King went forth at daybreak, to give the couple good
morrow, taking with him, after the custom of Kings with their daughters,
a gift of silken stuffs and scattering gold and silver among the eunuchs
and tire-women, that they might snatch at and scramble for it. And he
fared on escorted by one of his pages; but when he came to the new
palace, he found the Wazir prostrate on the carpet, knowing not his head
from his heels; so he searched the place right and left for his
daughter, but found her not; whereat he was troubled sore with concern
galore and his wits forlore. Then he bade bring hot water and virgin
vinegar and frankincense[8] and mingling them together, blew the mixture
into the Wazir’s nostrils and shook him, whereupon he cast the Bhang
forth of his stomach, as it were a bit of cheese. He repeated the
process, whereupon the Minister came to himself and the King questioned
him of his case and that of his daughter. He replied, “O mighty King, I
have no knowledge of her save that she poured me out a cup of wine with
her own hand; and from that tide to this I have no recollection of aught
nor know I what is come of her.” When the King heard this, the light in
his eyes became night, and he drew his scymitar and smote the Wazir on
the head, that the steel came out gleaming from between his grinder
teeth. Then, without an instant delay, he called the grooms and syces
and demanded of them the two stallions: but they said, “O King, the two
steeds were lost in the night and together with them our chief, the
Master of Horse; for, when we awoke in the morning, we found all the
doors wide open.” Cried the King, “By the faith of me and by all wherein
my belief is stablished on certainty, none but my daughter hath taken
the steeds, she and the Moslem captive which used to tend the Church and
which took her aforetime! Indeed I knew him right well and none
delivered him from my hand save this one-eyed Wazir; but now he is
requited his deed.” Then the King called his three sons, who were three
doughty champions, each of whom could withstand a thousand horse in the
field of strife and the stead where cut and thrust are rife; and bade
them mount. So they took horse forthwith and the King and the flower of
his knights and nobles and officers mounted with them and followed on
the trail of the fugitives till Miriam saw them, when she mounted her
charger and baldrick’d her blade and took her arms. Then she said to Nur
al-Din, “How is it with thee and how is thy heart for fight and strife
and fray?” Said he, “Verily, my steadfastness in battle-van is as the
steadfastness of the stake in bran.[9]” And he improvised and said:—

 O Miriam thy chiding I pray, forego; ✿ Nor drive me to death or
    injurious blow:
 How e’er can I hope to bear fray and fight ✿ Who quake at the croak of
    the corby-crow?
 I who shiver for fear when I see the mouse ✿ And for very funk I bepiss
    my clo’!
 I love no foin but the poke in bed, ✿ When coynte well knoweth my
    prickle’s prow;
 This is rightful rede, and none other shows ✿ Righteous as this in my
    sight, I trow.

Now when Miriam heard his speech and the verse he made, she laughed and
smilingly said, “O my lord Nur al-Din, abide in thy place and I will
keep thee from their ill grace, though they be as the sea-sands in
number. But mount and ride in rear of me, and if we be defeated and put
to flight, beware of falling, for none can overtake thy steed.” So
saying, she turned her lance-head towards foe in plain and gave her
horse the rein, whereupon he darted off under her, like the stormy gale
or like waters that from straitness of pipes out-rail. Now Miriam was
the doughtiest of the folk of her time and the unique pearl of her age
and tide; for her father had taught her, whilst she was yet little, on
steeds to ride and dive deep during the darkness of the night in the
battle tide. When the King saw her charging down upon them, he knew her
but too well and turning to his eldest son, said, “O Bartaut,[10] thou
who art surnamed Ras al-Killaut,[11] this is assuredly thy sister Miriam
who chargeth upon us, and she seeketh to wage war and fight fray with
us. So go thou out to give her battle: and I enjoin thee by the Messiah
and the Faith which is no liar, an thou get the better of her, kill her
not till thou have propounded to her the Nazarene faith. An she return
to her old creed, bring her to me prisoner; but an she refuse, do her
die by the foulest death and make of her the vilest of examples, as well
as the accursed which is with her.” Quoth Bartaut, “Hearkening and
obedience”; and, rushing out forthright to meet his sister, said to her,
“O Miriam, doth not what hath already befallen us on thine account
suffice thee, but thou must leave the faith of thy fathers and
forefathers and follow after the faith of the Vagrants in the lands,
that is to say, the faith of Al-Islam? By the virtue of the Messiah and
the Faith which is no liar, except thou return to the creed of the Kings
thy Forebears and walk therein after the goodliest fashion, I will put
thee to an ill death and make of thee the most shameful of ensamples!”
But Miriam laughed at his speech and replied, “Well-away! Far be it that
the past should present stay or that he who is dead should again see
day! I will make thee drink the sourest of regrets! By Allah, I will not
turn back upon the faith of Mohammed son of Abdullah, who made salvation
general; for his is the True Faith; nor will I leave the right road
though I drain the cup of ruin!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Ninety-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Miriam
exclaimed to her brother, “Well-away! Heaven forfend that I turn back
from the faith of Mohammed Abdullah-son who made salvation general; for
his is the Right Road nor will I leave it although I drain the cup of
ruin.” When the accursed Bartaut heard this, the light in his eyes
became night, the matter was great and grievous to him and between them
there befel a sore fight. The twain swayed to and fro battling
throughout the length and breadth of the valley and manfully enduring
the stress of combat singular, whilst all eyes upon them were fixed in
admiring surprise: after which they wheeled about and foined and feinted
for a long bout and as often as Bartaut opened on his sister Miriam a
gate of war,[12] she closed it to and put it to naught, of the
goodliness of her skill and her art in the use of arms and her cunning
of cavalarice. Nor ceased they so doing till the dust overhung their
heads vault-wise and they were hidden from men’s eyes; and she ceased
not to baffle Bartaut and stop the way upon him, till he was weary and
his courage wavered and his resolution was worsted and his strength
weakened; whereupon she smote him on the nape, that the sword came out
gleaming from his throat tendons and Allah hurried his soul to the Fire
and the abiding-place which is dire. Then Miriam wheeled about in the
battle-plain and the stead where cut and thrust are fain; and championed
it and offered battle, crying out and saying, “Who is for fighting? Who
is for jousting? Let come forth to me to-day no weakling or nidering;
ay, let none come forth to me but the champions who the enemies of The
Faith represent, that I may give them to drink the cup of ignominious
punishment. O worshippers of idols, O miscreants, O rebellious folk,
this day verily shall the faces of the people of the True Faith be
whitened and theirs who deny the Compassionate be blackened!” Now when
the King saw his eldest son slain, he smote his face and rent his dress
and cried out to his second son, saying, “O Bartús, thou who art
surnamed Khara al-Sús,[13] go forth, O my son, in haste and do battle
with thy sister Miriam; avenge me the death of thy brother Bartaut and
bring her to me a prisoner, abject and humiliated!” He answered,
“Hearkening and obedience, O my sire,” and charging down drave at his
sister, who met him in mid-career, and they fought, he and she, a sore
fight, yet sorer than the first. Bartus right soon found himself unable
to cope with her might and would have sought safety in flight, but of
the greatness of her prowess could not avail unto this sleight; for, as
often as he turned to flee, she drave after him and still clave to him
and pressed him hard, till presently she smote him with the sword in his
throat, that it issued gleaming from his nape, and sent him after his
brother. Then she wheeled about in the mid-field and plain where cut and
thrust are dealed, crying out and saying, “Where be the Knights? Where
be the Braves? Where is the one-eyed Wazir, the lameter, of the crooked
faith[14] the worthy believer?” Thereupon the King her father cried out
with heart in bleeding guise and tear-ulcerated eyes, saying, “She hath
slain my second son, by the virtue of the Messiah and the Faith which is
no liar!” And he called aloud to his youngest son, saying, “O Fasyán,
surnamed Salh al-Subyán,[15] go forth, O my son, to do battle with thy
sister and take of her the blood-wreak for thy brothers and fall on her,
come what may; and whether thou gain or thou lose the day[16]; and if
thou conquer her, slay her with foulest slaughter!” So he drave out to
Miriam, who ran at him with the best of her skill and charged him with
the goodliness of her cleverness and her courage and her cunning in
fence and cavalarice, crying to him, “O accursed, O enemy of Allah and
the Moslems, I will assuredly send thee after thy brothers and woeful is
the abiding-place of the Miscreants!” So saying, she unsheathed her
sword and smote him and cut off his head and arms and sent him after his
brothers and Allah hurried his soul to the Fire and the abiding-place
dire. Now when the Knights and the riders who rode with her sire saw his
three sons slain, who were the doughtiest of the folk of their day,
there fell on their hearts terror of the Princess Miriam, awe of her
overpowered them; they bowed their heads earthwards and they made sure
of ruin and confusion, disgrace and destruction. So with the flames of
hate blazing in heart they turned their backs forthright and addressed
themselves to flight. When the King saw his sons slain and on his flying
troops cast sight, there fell on him bewilderment and affright, whilst
his heart also was afire for despight. Then quoth he to himself, “In
very sooth Princess Miriam hath belittled us; and if I venture myself
and go out against her alone, haply she will gar me succumb and slay me
without ruth, even as she slew her brothers, and make of me the foulest
of examples, for she hath no longer any desire for us nor have we of her
return any hope. Wherefore it were the better rede that I guard mine
honour and return to my capital.” So he gave reins to his charger and
rode back to his city. But when he found himself in his palace, fire was
loosed in his heart for rage and chagrin at the death of his three
gallant sons and the defeat of his troops and the disgrace to his
honour; nor did he abide half an hour ere he summoned his Grandees and
Officers of state and complained to them of that his daughter Miriam had
done with him of the slaughter of her brothers and all he suffered
therefrom of passion and chagrin, and sought advice of them. They all
counselled him to write to the Vicar of Allah in His earth, the
Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, and acquaint him with his
circumstance. So he wrote a letter to the Caliph, containing, after the
usual salutations, the following words. “We have a daughter, Miriam the
Girdle-girl hight, who hath been seduced and debauched from us by a
Moslem captive, named Nur al-Din Ali, son of the merchant Taj al-Din of
Cairo, and he hath taken her by night and went forth with her to his own
country; wherefore I beg of the favour of our lord the Commander of the
Faithful that he write to all the lands of the Moslems to seize her and
send her back to us by a trusty messenger.”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Ninety-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King of
France wrote to the Caliph and Prince of True Believers, Harun
al-Rashid, a writ humbling himself by asking for his daughter Miriam and
begging of his favour that he write to all the Moslems, enjoining her
seizure and sending back to him by a trusty messenger of the servants of
his Highness the Commander of the Faithful; adding, “And in requital of
your help and aidance in this matter, we will appoint to you half of the
city of Rome the Great, that thou mayst build therein mosques for the
Moslems, and the tribute thereof shall be forwarded to you.” And after
writing this writ, by rede of his Grandees and Lords of the land, he
folded the scroll and calling his Wazir, whom he had appointed in the
stead of the monocular Minister, bade him seal it with the seal of the
kingdom, and the Officers of state also set hands and seals thereto;
after which the King bade the Wazir bear the letter to Baghdad,[17] the
Palace of Peace, and hand it into the Caliph’s own hand, saying, “An
thou bring her back, thou shalt have of me the fiefs of two Emirs and I
will bestow on thee a robe of honour with twofold fringes of gold.” The
Wazir set out with the letter and fared on over hill and dale, till he
came to the city of Baghdad, where he abode three days, till he was
rested from the way, when he sought the Palace of the Commander of the
Faithful and when guided thereto he entered it and craved audience. The
Caliph bade admit him; so he went in and kissing ground before him,
handed to him the letter of the King of France, together with rich gifts
and rare presents beseeming the Commander of the Faithful. When the
Caliph read the writ and apprehended its significance, he commanded his
Wazir to write, without stay or delay, despatches to all the lands of
the Moslems, setting out the name and favour of Princess Miriam and of
Nur al-Din, stating how they had eloped and bidding all who found them
lay hands on them and send them to the Commander of the Faithful, and
warning them on no wise in that matter to use delay or indifference. So
the Wazir wrote the letters and sealing them, despatched them by
couriers to the different Governors, who hastened to obey the Caliph’s
commandment and addressed themselves to make search in all the lands for
persons of such name and favour. On this wise it fared with the
Governors and their subjects; but as regards Nur al-Din and Miriam the
Girdle-girl, they fared on without delay after defeating the King of
France and his force and the Protector protected them, till they came to
the land of Syria and entered Damascus-city. Now the couriers of the
Caliph had foregone them thither by a day and the Emir of Damascus knew
that he was commanded to arrest the twain as soon as found, that he
might send them to the Caliph. Accordingly, when they entered the city,
the secret police[18] accosted them and asked them their names. They
told them the truth and acquainted them with their adventure and all
that had betided them; whereupon they knew them for those of whom they
were in search and seizing them, carried them before the Governor of the
city. He despatched them to the city of Baghdad under escort of his
officers who, when they came thither, craved audience of the Caliph
which he graciously granted; so they came into the presence; and,
kissing ground before him, said, “O Commander of the Faithful, this is
Miriam the Girdle-girl, daughter of the King of France, and this is the
captive Nur al-Din, son of the merchant Taj al-Din of Cairo, who
debauched her from her sire and stealing her from his kingdom and
country fled with her to Damascus, where we found the twain as they
entered the city, and questioned them. They told us the truth of their
case: so we laid hands on them and brought them before thee.” The Caliph
looked at Miriam and saw that she was slender and shapely of form and
stature, the handsomest of the folk of her tide and the unique pearl of
her age and her time; sweet of speech[19] and fluent of tongue, stable
of soul and hearty of heart. Thereupon she kissed the ground between his
hands and wished him permanence of glory and prosperity and surcease of
evil and enmity. He admired the beauty of her figure and the sweetness
of her voice and the readiness of her replies and said to her, “Art thou
Miriam the Girdle-girl, daughter of the King of France?” Answered she,
“Yes, O Prince of True Believers and Priest of those who the Unity of
Allah receive and Defender of the Faith and cousin of the Primate of the
Apostles!” Then the Caliph turned to Nur al-Din Ali and seeing him to be
a shapely youth, as he were the shining full moon on fourteenth night,
said to him, “And thou, art thou Ali Nur al-Din, son of the merchant Taj
al-Din of Cairo?” Said he, “Yes, O Commander of the Faithful and stay of
those who for righteousness are care-full!” The Caliph asked, “How
cometh it that thou hast taken this damsel and fled forth with her of
her father’s kingdom?” So Nur al-Din proceeded to relate to the
Commander of the Faithful all his past, first and last; whereat the
Caliph was astonied with extreme astonishment and diverted and
exclaimed, “How manifold are the sufferings that men suffer!”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Ninety-fourth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Caliph
Harun al-Rashid asked Nur al-Din of his adventure and was told of all
that had passed, first and last, he was astonied with extreme
astonishment and exclaimed, “How manifold are the sufferings that men
suffer!” Then he turned to the Princess and said to her, “Know, O
Miriam, that thy father, the King of France, hath written to me anent
thee. What sayst thou?” She replied, “O Vicar of Allah on His earth and
Executor of the precepts of His prophet and commands to man’s
unworth,[20] may He vouchsafe thee eternal prosperity and ward thee from
evil and enmity! Thou art Viceregent of Allah in His earth and I have
entered thy Faith, for that it is the creed which Truth and
Righteousness inspire; and I have left the religion of the Miscreants
who make the Messiah a liar,[21] and I am become a True Believer in
Allah the Bountiful and in the revelation of His compassionate Apostle.
I worship Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) and acknowledge Him to be
the One God and prostrate myself humbly before Him and glorify Him; and
I say before the Caliph:—Verily, I testify that there is no god but
_the_ God and I testify that Mohammed is the Messenger of God, whom He
sent with the Guidance and the True Faith, that He might make it
victorious over every other religion, albeit they who assign partners to
God be averse from it.[22] Is it therefore in thy competence, O
Commander of the Faithful, to comply with the letter of the King of the
heretics and send me back to the land of the schismatics who deny The
Faith and give partners to the All-wise King, who magnify the Cross and
bow down before idols and believe in the divinity of Jesus, for all he
was only a creature? An thou deal with me thus, O Viceregent of Allah, I
will lay hold upon thy skirts on the Day of Muster before the Lord and
make my complaint of thee to thy cousin the Apostle of Allah (whom God
assain and preserve!) on the Day when wealth availeth not neither
children save one come unto Allah wholehearted[23]!” Answered the
Caliph, “O Miriam, Allah forfend that I should do this ever! How can I
send back a Moslemah believer in the one God and in His Apostle to that
which Allah hath forbidden and eke His Messenger hath forbidden?” Quoth
she, “I testify that there is no God but _the_ God and that Mohammed is
the Apostle of God!” Rejoined the Caliph, “O Miriam, Allah bless and
direct thee in the way of righteousness! Since thou art a Moslemah and a
believer in Allah the One, I owe thee a duty of obligation and it is
that I should never transgress against thee nor forsake thee, though be
lavished unto me on thine account the world full of gold and gems. So be
of good cheer and eyes clear of tear; and be thy breast broadened and
thy case naught save easy. Art thou willing that this youth Ali of Cairo
be to thee man and thou to him wife?” Replied Miriam, “O Prince of True
Believers, how should I be other than willing to take him to husband,
seeing that he bought me with his money and hath entreated me with the
utmost kindness and, for crown of his good offices, he hath ventured his
life for my sake many times?” So the Caliph summoned the Kazi and the
witnesses and married her to him assigning her a dowry and causing the
Grandees of his realm be present and the marriage day was a notable.
Then he turned to the Wazir of the French King, who was present, and
said to him, “Hast thou heard her words? How can I her send back to her
father the Infidel, seeing that she is a Moslemah and a believer in the
Unity? Belike he will evil entreat her and deal harshly with her, more
by token that she hath slain his sons, and I shall bear blame for her on
Resurrection-day. And indeed quoth the Almighty ’Allah will by no means
make a way for the Infidels over the True Believers.[24]’ So return to
thy King and say to him:—Turn from this thing and hope not to come at
thy desire thereof.” Now this Wazir was a Zany: so he said to the
Caliph, “O Commander of the Faithful, by the virtue of the Messiah and
the Faith which is no liar, were Miriam forty times a Moslemah and forty
times thereto, I may not depart from thee without that same Miriam! And
if thou send her not back with me of free will, I will hie me to her
sire and cause him despatch thee an host, wherewith I will come upon you
from the landward and the seaward; and the van whereof shall be at your
capital city whilst the rear is yet on the Euphrates[25] and they shall
lay waste thy realms.” When the Caliph heard these words from the
accursed Wazir of the King of France, the light in his face became night
and he was wroth at his speech with exceeding wrath and said to him, “O
damned one, O dog of the Nazarenes, art thou come to such power that
thou durst assail me with the King of the Franks?” Then quoth he to his
guards, “Take this accursed and do him die”; and he repeated this
couplet[26]:—

 This be his recompense who will ✿ Oppose and thwart his betters’ will.

Then he commanded to cut off the Wazir’s head and burn his body; but
Princess Miriam cried, “O Commander of the Faithful, soil not thy sword
with the blood of this accursed.” So saying, she bared her brand and
smote him and made his head fly from his corpse, and he went to the
house of ungrace; his abode was Gehenna, and evil is the abiding-place.
The Caliph marvelled at the force of her fore-arm and the strength of
her mind, and they carried the dead Wazir forth of the pavilion and
burnt him. Then the Commander of the Faithful bestowed upon Nur al-Din a
splendid robe of honour and assigned to him and her a lodging in his
palace. Moreover, he appointed them solde and rations, and commanded to
transport to their quarters all they needed of raiment and furniture and
vessels of price. They sojourned awhile in Baghdad in all delight of
life and solace thereof till Nur al-Din longed for his mother and
father. So he submitted the matter to the Caliph and sought his leave to
revisit his native land and visit his kinsfolk, and he granted him the
permission he sought and calling Miriam, commended them each to other.
He also loaded them with costly presents and rarities and bade write
letters to the Emirs and Olema and notables of Cairo the God-guarded,
commending Nur al-Din and his wife and parents to their care and
charging them honour them with the highmost honour. When the news
reached Cairo, the merchant Taj al-Din joyed at the return of his son
and Nur al-Din’s mother likewise rejoiced therein with passing joy. The
Emirs and the notables of the city went forth to meet him, in obedience
to the Caliph’s injunctions, and indeed it was for them a right
note-worthy day, wherein foregathered the lover and the beloved and the
seeker attained the sought. Moreover, all the Emirs made them
bride-feasts, each on his own day, and joyed in them with joy exceeding
and vied in doing them honour, one the other succeeding. When Nur al-Din
foregathered with his mother and father, they were gladdened in each
other with the utmost gladness and care and affliction ceased from them,
whilst his parents joyed no less in the Princess Miriam and honoured her
with the highmost honour. Every day, there came to them presents from
all the Emirs and great merchants, and they were in new delight and
gladness exceeding the gladness of festival. Then they ceased not
abiding in solace and pleasance and good cheer and abounding prosperity,
eating and drinking with mirth and merriment, till there came to them
the Destroyer of delights and Sunderer of societies, Waster of houses
and palace-domes and Peopler of the bellies of the tombs. So they were
removed from worldly stead and became of the number of the dead; and
glory be to the Living One, who dieth not and in whose hand are the keys
of the Seen and the Unseen! And a tale was also told by the Emir Shujá’
al-Din,[27] Prefect of Cairo anent

-----

Footnote 1:

  Arab. “Wa lá rajma ghaybin:” lit. = without stone-throwing
  (conjecture) of one latent.

Footnote 2:

  _i.e._ saying Bismillah, etc. See vol. v. 206.

Footnote 3:

  Where he was to await her.

Footnote 4:

  As a rule, amongst Moslems the rider salutes the man on foot and the
  latter those who sit. The saying in the text suggests the Christian
  byword anent Mohammed and the Mountain, which is, I need hardly say,
  utterly unknown to Mahommedans.

Footnote 5:

  The story-teller does not remember that “the city-folk trust to the
  locking of the gates” (dccclxxxix.); and forgets to tell us that the
  Princess took the keys from the Wazir whom she had hocussed. In a
  carefully corrected Arabic Edition of The Nights, a book much wanted,
  the texts which are now in a mutilated state would be supplied with
  these details.

Footnote 6:

  Which probably would not be the last administered to him by the
  Amazonian young person, who after her mate feared to approach the dead
  blackamoor must have known him to be cowardly as Cairenes generally
  are. Moreover, he had no shame in his poltroonery like the recreant
  Fellah-soldiers, in the wretched Sawákin campaign against the noble
  Súdáni negroids, who excused their running away by saying, “We are
  Egyptians” _i.e._ too good men and Moslems to lose our lives as
  becomes you Franks and dog-Christians. Yet under Mohammed Ali the
  Great, Fellah-soldiers conquered the “colligated” Arabs (Pilgrimage
  iii. 48) of Al-Asír (Ophir) at Bissel and in Wahhabi-land and put the
  Turks to flight at the battle of Nazíb, and the late General Jochmus
  assured me that he saved his command, the Ottoman cavalry in Syria, by
  always manœuvring to refuse a pitched battle. But Mohammed Ali knew
  his men. He never failed to shoot a runaway, and all his officers,
  even the lieutenants, were Turks or Albanians. Sa’id Pasha was the
  first to appoint Fellah-officers and under their command the Egyptian
  soldier, one of the best in the East, at once became the worst. We
  have at last found the right way to make them fight, by officering
  them with Englishmen, but we must not neglect the shooting process
  whenever they dare to turn tail.

Footnote 7:

  “Al-walhán” (as it should be printed in previous places, instead of
  Al-walahán) is certainly not a P.N. in this place.

Footnote 8:

  Arab. “Kundur,” Pers. and Arab. manna, mastich, frankincense, the
  latter being here meant.

Footnote 9:

  So Emma takes the lead and hides her lover under her cloak during
  their flight to the place where they intended to lie concealed. In
  both cases the women are the men.

Footnote 10:

  Or “Bartút,” in which we recognise the German Berthold.

Footnote 11:

  _i.e._ Head of Killaut which makes, from the Muhít, “the name of a son
  of the sons of the Jinn and the Satans.”

Footnote 12:

  _i.e._ attacked her after a new fashion: see vol. i. 136.

Footnote 13:

  _i.e._ Weevil’s dung; hence Suez = Suways the little weevil, or
  “little Sus” from the Maroccan town: see The Mines of Midian p. 74 for
  a note on the name. Near Gibraltar is a fiumara called Guadalajara
  _i.e._ Wady al-Khara, of dung. “Bartús” is evidently formed “on the
  weight” of “Bartút;” and his metonym is a caricature, a chaff fit for
  Fellahs.

Footnote 14:

  Arab. “Al-Din al-a’raj,” the perverted or falsified Faith,
  Christianity having been made obsolete and abolished by the Mission of
  Mohammed, even as Christianity claims to have superseded the Mosaic
  and Noachian dispensations. Moslems are perfectly logical in their
  deductions, but logic and truth do not always go together.

Footnote 15:

  The “Breaker of Wind” (faswah = a fizzle, a silent crepitus) “son of
  Children’s dung.”

Footnote 16:

  Arab. “Ammá laka au ’alayk” lit. = either to thee (be the gain) or
  upon thee (be the loss). This truly Arabic idiom is varied in many
  ways.

Footnote 17:

  In addition to what was noted in vol. iii. 100 and viii. 51, I may
  observe that in the “Masnavi” the “Baghdad of Nulliquity” is opposed
  to the Ubiquity of the World. The popular derivation is Bagh (the
  idol-god, the slav “Bog”) and dád a gift, he gave (Persian). It is
  also called Al-Zaurá = a bow, from the bend of the Tigris where it was
  built.

Footnote 18:

  Arab. “Jawásís” plur. of Jásús lit. the spies.

Footnote 19:

  The Caliph could not “see” her “sweetness of speech”; so we must
  understand that he addressed her and found out that she was fluent of
  tongue. But this idiomatic use of the word “see” is also found in the
  languages of Southern Europe: so Camoens (Lus. i. ii.), “Ouvi * * *
  vereis” lit. = “hark, you shall see” which sounds Hibernian.

Footnote 20:

  Here “Farz” (Koranic obligation which it is mortal sin to gainsay)
  follows whereas it should precede “Sunnat” (sayings and doings of the
  Apostle) simply because “Farz” jingles with “Arz” (earth.)

Footnote 21:

  Moslems, like modern Agnostics, hold that Jesus of Nazareth would be
  greatly scandalized by the claims to Godship advanced for him by his
  followers.

Footnote 22:

  Koran ix. 33: See also v. 85. In the passage above quoted Mr. Rodwell
  makes the second “He” refer to the deity.

Footnote 23:

  Koran xxvi. 88, 89. For a very indifferent version (and abridgment) of
  this speech, see Saturday Review, July 9, 1881.

Footnote 24:

  Koran iv. 140.

Footnote 25:

  Arab. “Furát” from the Arab. “Faruta” = being sweet, as applied to
  water. Al-Furátáni = the two sweet (rivers), are the Tigris and
  Euphrates. The Greeks, who in etymology were satisfied with Greek,
  derived the latter from εὐφραινεῖν (to gladden, lætificare, for which
  see Pliny and Strabo, although both are correct in explaining
  “Tigris”) and Selden remarks hereon, “Talibus nugis nugantur Græculi.”
  But not only the “Græculi”; _e.g._ Parkhurst’s good old derivations
  from the Heb. “Farah” of fero, fructus, Freya (the Goddess), frayer
  (to spawn), friand, fry (of fish), etc., etc.

Footnote 26:

  The great Caliph was a poet; and he spoke verses as did all his
  contemporaries: his lament over his slave-girl Haylanah (Helen) is
  quoted by Al-Suyuti, p. 305.

Footnote 27:

  “The Brave of the Faith.”




             THE MAN OF UPPER EGYPT AND HIS FRANKISH WIFE.


We lay one night in the house of a man of the Sa’íd or Upper Egypt, and
he entertained us and entreated us hospitably. Now he was a very old man
swart with exceeding swarthiness, and he had little children, who were
white, of a white dashed with red. So we said to him, “Harkye, such an
one, how cometh it that these thy children are white, whilst thou
thyself art passing swart?” And he said, “Their mother was a Frankish
woman, whom I took prisoner in the days of Al-Malik al-Násir Saláh
al-Dín,[28] after the battle of Hattín,[29] when I was a young man.” We
asked, “And how gottest thou her?” and he answered, “I had a rare
adventure with her.” Quoth we, “Favour us with it;” and quoth he:—With
all my heart! You must know that I once sowed a crop of flax in these
parts and pulled it and scutched it and spent on it five hundred gold
pieces; after which I would have sold it, but could get no more than
this therefor, and the folk said to me, “Carry it to Acre: for there
thou wilt haply make good gain by it.” Now Acre was then in the hands of
the Franks[30]; so I carried my flax thither and sold part of it at six
months’ credit. One day, as I was selling, behold, there came up a
Frankish woman (now ’tis the custom of the women of the Franks to go
about the market streets with unveiled faces), to buy flax of me, and I
saw of her beauty what dazed my wits. So I sold her somewhat of flax and
was easy with her concerning the price; and she took it and went away.
Some days after, she returned and bought somewhat more flax of me and I
was yet easier with her about the price; and she repeated her visits to
me, seeing that I was in love with her. Now she was used to walk in
company of an old woman to whom I said, “I am sore enamoured of thy
mistress. Canst thou contrive for me to enjoy her?” Quoth she, “I will
contrive this for thee; but the secret must not go beyond us three, me,
thee and her; and there is no help but that thou be lavish with money,
to boot.” And I answered, saying, “Though my life were the price of her
favours ’twere no great matter.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old woman said
to the man, “However the secret must not go beyond us three, to wit me,
thee and her; and there is no help but thou be lavish of thy money to
boot.” He replied, “Though my life were the price of her favours ’twere
no great matter.” So it was agreed (continued the man of Upper Egypt),
that I should pay her fifty dinars and that she should come to me;
whereupon I procured the money and gave it to the old woman. She took it
and said, “Make ready a place for her in thy house, and she will come to
thee this night.” Accordingly I went home and made ready what I could of
meat and drink and wax candles and sweetmeats. Now my house overlooked
the sea and ’twas the season of summer; so I spread the bed on the
terrace roof. Presently, the Frank woman came and we ate and drank, and
the night fell dark. We lay down under the sky, with the moon shining on
us, and fell to watching the shimmering of the stars in the sea: and I
said to myself, “Art thou not ashamed before Allah (to whom belong Might
and Majesty!) and thou a stranger, under the heavens and in presence of
the deep waters, to disobey Him with a Nazarene woman and merit the
torment of Fire?” Then said I, “O my God, I call Thee to witness that I
abstain from this Christian woman this night, of shamefastness before
Thee and fear of Thy vengeance!” So I slept till the morning, and she
arose at peep of day full of anger and went away. I walked to my shop
and sat there; and behold, presently she passed, as she were the moon,
accompanied by the old woman who was also angry; whereat my heart sank
within me and I said to myself, “Who art thou that thou shouldst refrain
from yonder damsel? Art thou Sarí al-Sakatí or Bishr Barefoot or Junayd
of Baghdad or Fuzayl bin ’Iyáz[31]?” Then I ran after the old woman and
coming up with her said to her, “Bring her to me again;” and said she,
“By the virtue of the Messiah, she will not return to thee but for an
hundred ducats!” Quoth I, “I will give thee a hundred gold pieces.” So I
paid her the money and the damsel came to me a second time; but no
sooner was she with me than I returned to my whilome way of thinking and
abstained from her and forbore her for the sake of Allah Almighty.
Presently she went away and I walked to my shop, and shortly after the
old woman came up, in a rage. Quoth I to her, “Bring her to me again;”
and quoth she, “By the virtue of the Messiah, thou shalt never again
enjoy her presence with thee, except for five hundred ducats, and thou
shalt perish in thy pain!” At this I trembled and resolved to expend the
whole price of my flax and therewith ransom my life. But, before I could
think, I heard the crier proclaiming and saying, “Ho, all ye Moslems,
the truce which was between us and you is expired, and we give all of
you Mahometans who are here a week from this time to have done with your
business and depart to your own country.” Thus her visits were cut off
from me and I betook myself to getting in the price of my flax which men
had bought upon credit, and to bartering what remained in my hands for
other goods. Then I took with me fair merchandise and departed Acre with
a soul full of affection and love-longing for the Frankish woman, who
had taken my heart and my coin. So I journeyed till I made Damascus,
where I sold the stock in trade I had brought from Acre, at the highest
price, because of the cutting off of communication by reason of the term
of truce having expired; and Allah (extolled and exalted be He!)
vouchsafed me good gain. Then I fell to trading in captive slave-girls,
thinking thus to ease my heart of its pining for the Frankish woman, and
in this traffic engaged I abode three years, till there befel between
Al-Malik al-Násir and the Franks what befel of the action of Hattin and
other encounters and Allah gave him the victory over them, so that he
took all their Kings prisoners and he opened[32] the coast[33] cities by
His leave. Now it fortuned one day after this, that a man came to me and
sought of me a slave-girl for Al-Malik al-Nasir. Having a handsome
handmaid I showed her to him and he bought her of me for an hundred
dinars and gave me ninety thereof, leaving ten still due to me, for that
there was no more found in the royal treasury that day, because he had
expended all his monies in waging war against the Franks. Accordingly
they took counsel with him and he said, “Carry him to the treasury[34]
where are the captives’ lodging and give him his choice among the
damsels of the Franks, so he may take one of them for the ten
dinars.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that whenas
Al-Malik al-Nasir said, “Give him his choice to take one of the girls
for the ten dinars that are due to him;” they brought me to the
captives’ lodging and showed me all who were therein, and I saw amongst
them the Frankish damsel with whom I had fallen in love at Acre and knew
her right well. Now she was the wife of one of the cavaliers of the
Franks. So I said, “Give me this one,” and carrying her to my tent,
asked her, “Dost thou know me?” She answered, “No;” and I rejoined, “I
am thy friend, the sometime flax-merchant with whom thou hadst to do at
Acre and there befel between us what befel. Thou tookest money of me and
saidest, ‘Thou shalt never again see me but for five hundred dinars.’
And now thou art become my property for ten ducats.” Quoth she, “This is
a mystery. Thy faith is the True Faith and I testify that there is no
god but _the_ God and that Mohammed is the Messenger of God!” And she
made perfect profession of Al-Islam. Then said I to myself, “By Allah, I
will not go in unto her till I have set her free and acquainted the
Kazi.” So I betook myself to Ibn Shaddád[35] and told him what had
passed and he married me to her. Then I lay with her that night and she
conceived; after which the troops departed and we returned to Damascus.
But within a few days there came an envoy from the King of the Franks,
to seek the captives and the prisoners, according to the treaty between
the Kings. So Al-Malik al-Nasir restored all the men and women captive,
till there remained but the woman who was with me and the Franks said,
“The wife of such an one the Knight is not here.” Then they asked after
her and making strict search for her, found that she was with me;
whereupon they demanded her of me and I went in to her sore concerned
and with colour changed; and she said to me, “What aileth thee and what
evil assaileth thee?” Quoth I, “A messenger is come from the King to
take all the captives, and they demand thee of me.” Quoth she, “Have no
fear, bring me to the King and I know what to say before and to him.” I
carried her into the presence of the Sultan Al-Malik al-Nasir, who was
seated, with the envoy of the King of the Franks on his right hand, and
I said to him, “This is the woman that is with me.” Then quoth the King
and the envoy to her, “Wilt thou go to thy country or to[36] thy
husband? For Allah hath loosed thy bonds and those of thy fellow
captives.” Quoth she to the Sultan, “I am become a Moslemah and am great
with child, as by my middle ye may see, and the Franks shall have no
more profit of me.” The envoy asked, “Whether is dearer to thee, this
Moslem or thy first husband the knight such an one?;” and she answered
him even as she had answered the Sultan. Then said the envoy to the
Franks with him, “Heard ye her words?” They replied, “Yes.” And he said
to me, “Take thy wife and depart with her.” So I took her and went away;
but the envoy sent after me in haste and cried, “Her mother gave me a
charge for her, saying, My daughter is a captive and naked: and I would
have thee carry her this chest. Take it thou and deliver it to her.”
Accordingly I carried the chest home and gave it to her. She opened it
and found in it all her raiment as she had left it and therein I saw the
two purses of fifty and an hundred dinars which I had given her,
untouched and tied up with my own tying, wherefore I praised Almighty
Allah. These are my children by her and she is alive to this day and
’twas she dressed you this food. We marvelled at his story and at that
which had befallen him of good fortune, and Allah is All-knowing. But
men also tell a tale anent the

-----

Footnote 28:

  _i.e._ Saladin. See vol. iv. p. 116.

Footnote 29:

  Usually called the Horns of Hattin (classically Hittin) North of
  Tiberias where Saladin by good strategy and the folly of the Franks
  annihilated the Latin kingdom of Jerusalem. For details see the
  guide-books. In this action (June 23, 1187), after three bishops were
  slain in its defence, the last fragment of the True Cross (or rather
  the cross verified by Helena) fell into Moslem hands. The Christians
  begged hard for it, but Saladin, a conscientious believer, refused to
  return to them even for ransom “the object of their iniquitous
  superstition.” His son, however, being of another turn, would have
  sold it to the Franks who then lacked money to purchase. It presently
  disappeared and I should not be surprised if it were still lying, an
  unknown and _inutile lignum_ in some Cairene mosque.

Footnote 30:

  ’Akká (Acre) was taken by Saladin on July 29, 1187. The Egyptian
  states that he was at Acre in 1184 or three years before the affair of
  Hattin (Night dcccxcv.).

Footnote 31:

  Famous Sufis and ascetics of the second and third centuries A.H. For
  Bishr Barefoot, see vol. ii. p. 127. Al-Sakati means “the old-clothes
  man;” and the names of the others are all recorded in D’Herbelot.

Footnote 32:

  _i.e._ captured, forced open their gates.

Footnote 33:

  Arab. “Al-Sáhil” _i.e._ the seaboard of Syria; properly Phœnicia or
  the coast-lands of Southern Palestine. So the maritime lowlands of
  continental Zanzibar are called in the plur. Sawáhil = “the shores”
  and the people Sawáhílí = Shore-men.

Footnote 34:

  Arab. “Al-Khizánah” both in Mac. Edit. and Breslau x, 426. Mr. Payne
  has translated “tents” and says, “Saladin seems to have been encamped
  without Damascus and the slave-merchant had apparently come out and
  pitched his tent near the camp for the purposes of his trade.” But I
  can find no notice of tents till a few lines below.

Footnote 35:

  Bahá al-Dín ibn Shaddád, then Kázi al-Askar (of the Army) or
  Judge-Advocate-General under Saladin.

Footnote 36:

  _i.e._ “abide with” thy second husband, the Egyptian.




               RUINED MAN OF BAGHDAD AND HIS SLAVE-GIRL.


There was of old time in Baghdad a man of condition, who had inherited
from his father abounding affluence. He fell in love with a slave-girl;
so he bought her and she loved him as he loved her; and he ceased not to
spend upon her, till all his money was gone and naught remained thereof;
whereupon he sought a means of getting his livelihood, but availed not
to find any. Now this young man had been used, in the days of his
affluence, to frequent the assemblies of those who were versed in the
art of singing and had thus attained to the utmost excellence therein.
Presently he took counsel with one of his intimates, who said to him,
“Meseems thou canst find no better profession than to sing, thou and thy
slave-girl; for on this wise thou wilt get money in plenty and wilt eat
and drink.” But he misliked this, he and the damsel, and she said to
him, “I have bethought me of a means of relief for thee.” He asked,
“What is it?;” and she answered, “Do thou sell me; thus shall we be
delivered of this strait, thou and I, and I shall be in affluence; for
none will buy the like of me save a man of fortune, and with this I will
contrive for my return to thee.” He carried her to the market and the
first who saw her was a Háshimí[37] of Bassorah, a man of good breeding,
fine taste and generosity, who bought her for fifteen hundred dinars.
(Quoth the young man, the damsel’s owner), When I had received the
price, I repented me and wept, I and the damsel; and I sought to cancel
the sale; but the purchaser would not consent. So I took the gold in a
bag, knowing not whither I should wend, now my house was desolate of
her, and buffeted my face and wept and wailed as I had never done
before. Then I entered a mosque and sat shedding tears, till I was
stupefied and losing my senses fell asleep, with the bag of money under
my head by way of pillow. Presently, ere I could be ware, a man plucked
the bag from under my head and ran off with it at speed: whereupon I
started up in alarm and affright and would have arisen to run after him;
but lo! my feet were bound with a rope and I fell on my face. Then I
took to weeping and buffeting myself, saying, “Thou hast parted with thy
soul[38] and thy wealth is lost!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


      Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young man
continued:—So I said to myself, “Thou hast parted with thy soul and thy
wealth is lost.” Then, of the excess of my chagrin, I betook myself to
the Tigris and wrapping my face in my gown, cast myself into the stream.
The bystanders saw me and cried, “For sure, this is because of some
great trouble that hath betided him.” They cast themselves in after me
and bringing me ashore, questioned me of my case. I told them what
misadventure had befallen me and they condoled with me. Then an old man
of them came to me and said, “Thou hast lost thy money, but why goest
thou about to lose thy life and become of the people of The Fire?[39]
Arise, come with me, that I may see thy lodging.” I went with him to my
house and he sat with me awhile, till I waxed calmer, and becoming
tranquil I thanked him and he went away. When he was gone, I was like to
kill myself, but bethought me of the Future and the Fire; so I fared
forth my house and fled to one of my friends and told him what had
befallen me. He wept for pity of me and gave me fifty dinars, saying,
“Take my advice and hie thee from Baghdad forthright and let this
provide thee till thy heart be diverted from the love of her and thou
forget her. Thy forbears were Secretaries and Scribes and thy
handwriting is fine and thy breeding right good: seek out, then, whom
thou wilt of the Intendants[40] and throw thyself on his bounty; thus
haply Allah shall reunite thee with thy slave-girl.” I hearkened to his
words (and indeed my mind was strengthened and I was somewhat comforted)
and resolved to betake myself to Wásit,[41] where I had kinsfolk. So I
went down to the river-side, where I saw a ship moored and the sailors
embarking goods and goodly stuffs. I asked them to take me with them and
carry me to Wasit; but they replied, “We cannot take thee on such wise,
for the ship belongeth to a Hashimi.” However I tempted them with
promise of passage-money and they said, “We cannot embark thee on this
fashion;[42] but, if it must be, doff those fine clothes of thine and
don sailor’s gear and sit with us as thou wert one of us.” I went away
and buying somewhat of sailors’ clothes, put them on; after which I
bought me also somewhat of provisions for the voyage; and, returning to
the vessel, which was bound for Bassorah, embarked with the crew. But
ere long I saw my slave-girl herself come on board, attended by two
waiting-women; whereupon what was on me of chagrin subsided and I said
in myself, “Now shall I see her and hear her singing, till we come to
Bassorah.” Soon after, up rode the Hashimi, with a party of people, and
they embarked aboard the ship, which dropped down the river with them.
Presently the Hashimi brought out food and ate with the damsel, whilst
the rest ate amidships. Then said he to her, “How long this abstinence
from singing and permanence in this wailing and weeping? Thou art not
the first that hath been parted from a beloved!” Wherefore I knew what
she suffered for love of me. Then he hung a curtain before her along the
gunwale and calling those who ate apart, sat down with them without the
curtain; and I enquired concerning them and behold they were his
brethren.[43] He set before them what they needed of wine and dessert,
and they ceased not to press the damsel to sing, till she called for the
lute and tuning it, intoned these two couplets:—

 The company left with my love by night, ✿ Nor forbore to fare with my
    heart’s delight:
 And raged, since their camels off paced, a fire ✿ As of Ghazá[44]-wood
    in the lover’s sprite.

Then weeping overpowered her and she threw down the lute and ceased
singing; whereat the folk were troubled and I slipped down a-swoon. They
thought I was possessed[45] and one of them began reciting exorcisms in
my ear; nor did they cease to comfort her and beseech her to sing, till
she tuned the lute again and chaunted these couplets twain:—

 I stood and bewailed who their loads had bound ✿ And far yode but still
    in my heart are found:
 I drew near the ruins and asked of them ✿ And the camp was void and lay
    waste the ground.

Then she fell down in a fainting-fit and weeping arose amongst the folk;
and I also cried out and fainted away. The sailors were startled by me
and one of the Hashimi’s pages said to them, “How came ye to take this
madman on board?” So they said one to other, “As soon as we come to the
next village, we will set him ashore and rid us of him.” When I heard
this, I was sore troubled but I heartened and hardened myself, saying in
thought, “Nothing will serve me to deliver myself from their hands,
except I make shift to acquaint her with my presence in the ship, so she
may prevent my being set ashore.” Then we sailed when we came hard by a
hamlet[46] and the skipper said, “Come, let us go ashore.” Therewith
they all landed, save myself: and as evening fell I rose and going
behind the curtain took the lute and changed its accord, mode[47] by
mode, and tuning it after a fashion of my own,[48] that she had learnt
of me, returned to my place in the ship;——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Ninety-eighth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young man
continued:—I returned to my place in the ship; and presently the whole
party came on board again and the moon shone bright upon river and
height. Then said the Hashimi to the damsel, “Allah upon thee, trouble
not our joyous lives!” So she took the lute, and touching it with her
hand, gave a sob, that they thought her soul had fled her frame, and
said, “By Allah, my master and teacher is with us in this ship!”
Answered the Hashimi, “By Allah, were this so, I would not forbid him
our conversation! Haply he would lighten thy burthen, so we might enjoy
thy singing: but his being on board is far from possible.” However she
said, “I cannot smite lute-string or sing sundry airs I was wont to sing
whilst my lord is with us.” Quoth the Hashimi, “Let us ask the sailors;”
and quoth she, “Do so.” He questioned them, saying, “Have ye carried
anyone with you?”; and they answered, “No.” Then I feared lest the
enquiry should end there; so I laughed and said, “Yes; I am her master
and taught her whenas I was her lord.” Cried she, “By Allah, that is my
lord’s voice!” Thereupon the pages carried me to the Hashimi, who knew
me at first sight and said to me, “Out on thee! What plight is this in
which I see thee and what hath brought thee to such condition?” I
related to him all that had befallen me of my affair, weeping the while,
and the damsel made loud wail from behind the curtain. The Hashimi wept
with sore weeping, he and his brethren, for pity of me, and he said, “By
Allah, I have not drawn near this damsel nor enjoyed her, nor have I
even heard her sing till this day! I am a man to whom Allah hath been
ample and I came to Baghdad but to hear singing and seek my allowances
of the Commander of the Faithful. I accomplished both my needments and
being about to return home, said to myself, ‘Let us hear some what of
the singing of Baghdad.’ Wherefore I bought this damsel, knowing not
that such was the case with you twain; and I take Allah to witness that,
when I reach Bassorah I will free her and marry her to thee and assign
you what shall suffice you, and more; but on condition that, whenever I
have a mind to hear music, a curtain shall be hung for her and she shall
sing to me from behind it, and thou shalt be of the number of my
brethren and boon-companions.” Hereat I rejoiced and the Hashimi put his
head within the curtain and said to her, “Will that content thee?”;
whereupon she fell to blessing and thanking him. Then he called a
servant and said to him, “Take this young man and do off his clothes and
robe him in costly raiment and incense him[49] and bring him back to
us.” So the servant did with me as his master bade him and brought me
back to him, and served me with wine, even as the rest of the company.
Then the damsel began singing after the goodliest fashion and chanted
these couplets:—

 They blamed me for causing my tears to well ✿ When came my beloved to
    bid farewell:
 They ne’er tasted the bitters of parting nor felt ✿ Fire beneath my ribs
    that flames fierce and fell!
 None but baffled lover knows aught of Love, ✿ Whose heart is lost where
    he wont to dwell.

The folk rejoiced in her song with exceeding joy and my gladness
redoubled, so that I took the lute from the damsel and preluding after
the most melodious fashion, sang these couplets:—

 Ask (if needs thou ask) the Compassionate, ✿ And the generous donor of
    high estate.
 For asking the noble honours man ✿ And asking the churl entails bane and
    bate:
 When abasement is not to be ’scaped by wight ✿ Meet it asking boons of
    the good and great.
 Of Grandee to sue ne’er shall vilify man, ✿ But ’tis vile on the vile of
    mankind to ’wait.

The company rejoiced in me with joy exceeding and they ceased not from
pleasure and delight, whilst anon I sang and anon the damsel, till we
came to one of the landing-places, where the vessel moored and all on
board disembarked and I with them. Now I was drunken with wine and
squatted on my hams to make water; but drowsiness overcame me and I
slept, and the passengers returned to the ship which ran down stream
without any missing me, for that they also were drunken, and continued
their voyage till they reached Bassorah. As for me I awoke not till the
heat of the sun aroused me, when I rose and looked about me, but saw no
one. Now I had given my spending-money to the damsel and had naught
left: I had also forgotten to ask the Hashimi his name and where his
house was at Bassorah and his titles; thus I was confounded and my joy
at meeting the damsel had been but a dream; and I abode in perplexity
till there came up a great vessel wherein I embarked and she carried me
to Bassorah. Now I knew none there much less the Hashimi’s house, so I
accosted a grocer and taking of him inkcase and paper,——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Eight Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Baghdad
man who owned the maid entered Bassorah, he was perplexed for not
knowing the Hashimi’s house. So I accosted (said he) a grocer and,
taking of him inkcase and paper, sat down to write. He admired my
handwriting and seeing my dress stained and soiled, questioned me of my
case, to which I replied that I was a stranger and poor. Quoth he, “Wilt
thou abide with me and order the accounts of my shop and I will give
thee thy food and clothing and half a dirham a day for ordering the
accompts of my shop?”; and quoth I, “’Tis well,” and abode with him and
kept his accounts and ordered his income and expenditure for a month, at
the end of which he found his income increased and his disbursements
diminished; wherefore he thanked me and made my wage a dirham a day.
When the year was out, he proposed to me to marry his daughter and
become his partner in the shop. I agreed to this and went in to my wife
and applied me to the shop. But I was broken in heart and spirit, and
grief was manifest upon me; and the grocer used to drink and invite me
thereto, but I refrained for melancholy. I abode on this wise two years
till, one day, as I sat in the shop, behold, there passed by a parcel of
people with meat and drink, and I asked the grocer what was the matter.
Quoth he, “This is the day of the pleasure-makers, when all the
musicians and dancers of the town go forth with the young men of fortune
to the banks of the Ubullah river[50] and eat and drink among the trees
there.” The spirit prompted me to solace myself with the sight of this
thing and I said in my mind, “Haply among these people I may foregather
with her I love.” So I told the grocer that I had a mind to this and he
said, “Up and go with them an thou please.” He made me ready meat and
drink and I went till I came to the River of Ubullah, when, behold, the
folk were going away: I also was about to follow, when I espied the Rais
of the bark wherein the Hashimi had been with the damsel and he was
going along the river. I cried out to him and his company who knew me
and took me on board with them and said to me, “Art thou yet alive?”;
and they embraced me and questioned me of my case. I told them my tale
and they said, “Indeed, we thought that drunkenness had gotten the
better of thee and that thou hadst fallen into the water and wast
drowned.” Then I asked them of the damsel, and they answered, “When she
came to know of thy loss, she rent her raiment and burnt the lute and
fell to buffeting herself and lamenting and when we returned with the
Hashimi to Bassorah we said to her, “Leave this weeping and wailing.”
Quoth she, “I will don black and make me a tomb beside the house and
abide thereby and repent from singing.[51] We allowed her so to do and
on this wise she abideth to this day.” Then they carried me to the
Hashimi’s house, where I saw the damsel as they had said. When she
espied me, she cried out a great cry, methought she had died, and I
embraced her with a long embrace. Then said the Hashimi to me, “Take
her;” and I said, “’Tis well: but do thou free her and according to thy
promise marry her to me.” Accordingly he did this and gave us costly
goods and store of raiment and furniture and five hundred dinars,
saying, “This is the amount of that which I purpose to allow you every
month, but on condition that thou be my cup-companion and that I hear
the girl sing when I will.” Furthermore, he assigned us private quarters
and bade transport thither all our need; so, when I went to the house, I
found it filled full of furniture and stuffs and carried the damsel
thither. Then I betook me to the grocer and told him all that had
betided me, begging to hold me guiltless for divorcing his daughter,
without offence on her part; and I paid her her dowry[52] and what else
behoved me.[53] I abode with the Hashimi in this way two years and
became a man of great wealth and was restored to the former estate of
prosperity wherein I had been at Baghdad, I and the damsel. And indeed
Allah the Bountiful put an end to our troubles and loaded us with the
gifts of good fortune and caused our patience to result in the
attainment of our desire: wherefore to Him be the praise in this world
and the next whereto we are returning.[54] And among the tales men tell
is that of

-----

Footnote 37:

  A descendant of Háshim, the Apostle’s great-grandfather from whom the
  Abbasides were directly descended. The Ommiades were less directly
  akin to Mohammed, being the descendants of Hashim’s brother, Abd
  al-Shams. The Hashimis were famed for liberality; and the quality
  seems to have been inherited. The first Háshim got his name from
  _crumbling_ bread into the Saríd or brewis of the Meccan pilgrims
  during “The Ignorance.” He was buried at Ghazzah (Gaza) but his tomb
  was soon forgotten.

Footnote 38:

  _i.e._ thy lover.

Footnote 39:

  _i.e._ of those destined to hell; the especial home of Moslem
  suicides.

Footnote 40:

  Arab. “’Ummál” (plur. of ’Ámil) viceroys or governors of provinces.

Footnote 41:

  A town of Irák Arabi (Mesopotamia) between Baghdad and Bassorah built
  upon the Tigris and founded by Al-Hajjaj: it is so called because the
  “Middle” or half-way town between Basrah and Kufah. To this place were
  applied the famous lines:—

             “In good sooth a right noble race are they;
             Whose men “yea” can’t say nor their women “nay.”

Footnote 42:

  _i.e._ robed as thou art.

Footnote 43:

  _i.e._ his kinsfolk of the Hashimis.

Footnote 44:

  See vol. ii. 24.

Footnote 45:

  Arab. “Sur’itu” = I was possessed of a Jinn, the common Eastern
  explanation of an epileptic fit long before the days of the Evangel.
  See vol. iv. 89.

Footnote 46:

  Arab. “Zí’ah,” village, feoff or farm.

Footnote 47:

  Arab. “Taríkah.”

Footnote 48:

  “Most of the great Arab musicians had their own peculiar fashion of
  tuning the lute, for the purpose of extending its register or
  facilitating the accompaniment of songs composed in uncommon keys and
  rhythms or possibly of increasing its sonority, and it appears to have
  been a common test of the skill of a great musician, such as Ishac
  el-Mausili or his father Ibrahim, to require him to accompany a
  difficult song on a lute purposely untuned. As a (partial) modern
  instance of the practice referred to in the text, may be cited
  Paganini’s custom of lowering or raising the G string of the violin in
  playing certain of his own compositions. According to the Kitab
  el-Aghani, Ishac el-Mausili is said to have familiarized himself, by
  incessant practice, with the exact sounds produced by each division of
  the strings of the four course lute of his day, under every imaginable
  circumstance of tuning.” It is regrettable that Mr. Payne does not
  give us more of such notes.

Footnote 49:

  See vol. vii. 363 for the use of these fumigations.

Footnote 50:

  In the Mac. Edit. “Aylah” for Ubullah: the latter is one of the
  innumerable canals, leading from Bassorah to Ubullah-town a distance
  of twelve miles. Its banks are the favourite pleasure-resort of the
  townsfolk, being built over with villas and pavilions (now no more)
  and the orchards seem to form one great garden, all confined by one
  wall. See Jaubert’s translation of Al-Idrisi, vol. i. pp. 368–69. The
  Aylah, a tributary of the Tigris, waters (I have noted) the Gardens of
  Bassorah.

Footnote 51:

  Music having been forbidden by Mohammed who believed with the vulgar
  that the Devil has something to do with it. Even Paganini could not
  escape suspicion in the nineteenth century.

Footnote 52:

  The “Mahr,” or Arab dowry consists of two parts, one paid down on
  consummation and the other agreed to be paid to the wife, contingently
  upon her being divorced by her husband. If she divorce him this
  portion, which is generally less than the half, cannot be claimed by
  her; and I have related the Persian abomination which compels the
  woman to sacrifice her rights. See vol. iii. p. 304.

Footnote 53:

  _i.e._ the cost of her maintenance during the four months of single
  blessedness which must or ought to elapse before she can legally marry
  again.

Footnote 54:

  Lane translates most incompletely, “To Him, then, be praise, first and
  last!”




 KING JALI’AD OF HIND AND HIS WAZIR SHIMAS; FOLLOWED BY THE HISTORY OF
  KING WIRD KHAN, SON OF KING JALI’AD, WITH HIS WOMEN AND WAZIRS.[55]


There was once in days of yore and in ages and times long gone before,
in the land of Hind, a mighty King, tall of presence and fair of favour
and goodly of parts, noble of nature and generous, beneficent to the
poor and loving to his lieges and all the people of his realm. His name
was Jalí’ád and under his hand were two and-seventy Kings and in his
cities three hundred and fifty Kazis. He had three score and ten Wazirs
and over every ten of them he set a premier. The chiefest of all his
ministers was a man called Shimás[56] who was then[57] two-and-twenty
years old, a statesman of pleasant presence and noble nature, sweet of
speech and ready in reply; shrewd in all manner of business, skilful
withal and sagacious, for all his tender age, a man of good counsel and
fine manners versed in all arts and sciences and accomplishments; and
the King loved him with exceeding love and cherished him by reason of
his proficiency in eloquence and rhetoric and the art of government and
for that which Allah had given him of compassion and brooding care[58]
with his lieges for he was a King just in his Kingship and a protector
of his peoples, constant in beneficence to great and small and giving
them that which befitted them of good governance and bounty and
protection and security and a lightener of their loads in taxes and
tithes. And indeed he was loving to them each and every, high and low,
entreating them with kindness and solicitude and governing them in such
goodly guise as none had done before him. But, with all this, Almighty
Allah had not blessed him with a child, and this was grievous to him and
to the people of his reign. It chanced, one night, as Jali’ad[59] lay in
his bed, occupied with anxious thought of the issue of the affair of his
Kingdom, that sleep overcame him and he dreamt that he poured water upon
the roots of a tree,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.


               Now when it was the Nine Hundredth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King saw
himself in his vision pouring water upon the roots of a tree, about
which were many other trees; and lo and behold! there came fire out of
this tree and burnt up every growth which encompassed it; whereupon
Jali’ad awoke affrighted and trembling, and calling one of his pages
said to him, “Go fetch the Wazir Shimas in all haste.” So he betook
himself to Shimas and said to him, “The King calleth for thee forthright
because he hath awoke from his sleep in affright and hath sent me to
bring thee to him in haste.” When Shimas heard this, he arose without
stay or delay and going to the King, found him seated on his bed. He
prostrated himself before him, wishing him permanence of glory and
prosperity, and said, “May Allah not cause thee grieve, O King! What
hath troubled thee this night, and what is the cause of thy seeking me
thus in haste?” The King bade him be seated; and, as soon as he sat
down, began telling his tale and said to him, “I have dreamt this night
a dream which terrified me, and ’twas, that methought I poured water
upon the roots of a tree where about were many other trees and as I was
thus engaged, lo and behold! fire issued therefrom and burnt up all the
growths that were around it; wherefore I was affrighted and fear took
me. Then I awoke and sent to bid thee to me, because of thy knowledge
and skill in the interpretation of dreams and of that which I know of
the vastness of thy wisdom and the greatness of thine understanding.” At
this Shimas the Wazir bowed his head groundwards awhile and presently
raising it, smiled; so the King said to him, “What deemest thou, O
Shimas? Tell me the truth of the matter and hide naught from me.”
Answered Shimas, “O King, verily Allah Almighty granteth thee thy wish
and cooleth thine eyes; for the matter of this dream presageth all good,
to wit, that the Lord will bless thee with a son, who shall inherit the
Kingdom from thee, after thy long life. But there is somewhat else I
desire not to expound at this present, seeing that the time is not
favourable for interpretation.” The King rejoiced in these words with
exceeding joy and great was his contentment; his trouble departed from
him, his mind was at rest and he said, “If the case be thus of the happy
presage of my dream, do thou complete to me its exposition when the
fitting time betideth: for that which it behoveth not to expound to me
now, it behoveth that thou expound to me when its time cometh, so my joy
may be fulfilled, because I seek naught in this save the approof of
Allah extolled and exalted be He!” Now when the Wazir Shimas saw that
the King was urgent to have the rest of the exposition, he put him off
with a pretext; but Jali’ad assembled all the astrologers and
interpreters of dreams of his realm and as soon as they were in the
presence related to them his vision, saying, “I desire you to tell me
the true interpretation of this.” Whereupon one of them came forward and
craved the King’s permission to speak, which being granted, he said,
“Know, O King, that thy Wazir Shimas is nowise unable to interpret this
thy dream; but he shrank from troubling thy repose: wherefore he
disclosed not unto thee the whole thereof: but, an thou suffer me to
speak I will expose to thee that which he concealed from thee.” The King
replied, “Speak without respect for persons, O interpreter, and be
truthful in thy speech.” The interpreter said, “Know then, O King, that
there will be born to thee a boy-child who shall inherit the Kingship
from thee, after thy long life; but he shall not order himself towards
the lieges after thy fashion; nay, he shall transgress thine ordinances
and oppress thy subjects, and there shall befal him what befel the Mouse
with the Cat[60]; and I seek refuge with Almighty Allah[61]!” The King
asked, “But what is the story of the Cat and the Mouse?”; and the
interpreter answered “May Allah prolong the King’s life! They tell the
following tale of


                       _THE MOUSE AND THE CAT_.”

A Grimalkin, that is to say, a Cat, went out one night to a certain
garden, in search of what she might devour, but found nothing and became
weak for the excess of cold and rain that prevailed that night. So she
sought for some device whereby to save herself. As she prowled about in
search of prey, she espied a nest at the foot of a tree, and drawing
near unto it, sniffed thereat and purred till she scented a Mouse within
and went round about it, seeking to enter and seize the inmate. When the
Mouse smelt the Cat, he turned his back to her and scraped up the earth
with his forehand, to stop the nest-door against her; whereupon she
assumed a weakly voice and said, “Why dost thou thus, O my brother? I
come to seek refuge with thee, hoping that thou wilt take pity on me and
harbour me in thy nest this night; for I am weak because of the
greatness of my age and the loss of my strength, and can hardly move. I
have ventured into thy garden to-night, and how many a time have I
called upon death, that I might be at rest from this pain! Behold, here
am I at thy door, prostrate for cold and rain and I beseech thee, by
Allah, take of thy charity my hand and bring me in with thee and give me
shelter in the vestibule of thy nest; for I am a stranger and wretched
and ’tis said:—Whoso sheltereth a stranger and a wretched one in his
home his shelter shall be Paradise on the Day of Doom. And thou, O my
brother, it behoveth thee to earn eternal reward by succouring me and
suffering me abide with thee this night till the morning, when I will
wend my way.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Nine Hundred and First Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the Cat
to the Mouse, “So suffer me to night with thee this night, after which I
will wend my way.” Hearing these words the Mouse replied, “How shall I
suffer thee enter my nest seeing that thou art my natural foe and thy
food is of my flesh? Indeed I fear lest thou false me, for that is of
thy nature and there is no faith in thee, and the byword saith:—It
befitteth not to entrust a lecher with a fair woman nor a moneyless man
with money nor fire with fuel. Neither doth it behove me to entrust
myself to thee; and ’tis said:—Enmity of kind, as the enemy himself
groweth weaker groweth stronger.” The Cat made answer in the faintest
voice, as she were in most piteous case, saying, “What thou advancest of
admonitory instances is the truth and I deny not my offences against
thee; but I beseech thee to pardon that which is past of the enmity of
kind between me and thee; for ’tis said:—Whoso forgiveth a creature like
himself, his Creator will forgive him his sins. ’Tis true that whilome I
was thy foe, but here am I a suitor for thy friendship, and they say,
“An thou wilt have thy foe become thy friend, do with him good. O my
brother, I swear to thee by Allah and make a binding covenant with thee
that I will hurt thee nevermore and for the best of reasons, to wit,
that I have no power thereto; wherefore place thy trust in Allah and do
good and accept my oath and covenant.” Quoth the Mouse, “How can I
accept the covenant of one between whom and me there is a rooted enmity,
and whose wont it is to deal treacherously by me? Were the feud between
us aught but one of blood, this were light to me; but it is an enmity of
kind between souls, and it is said:—Whoso trusteth himself to his foe is
as one who thrusteth hand into a serpent’s[62] mouth.” Quoth the Cat,
full of wrath, “My breast is strait and my soul is faint: indeed I am
_in articulo mortis_ and ere long I shall die at thy door and my blood
will be on thy head, for that thou hadst it in thy power to save me in
mine extremity: and this is my last word to thee.” Herewith the fear of
Allah Almighty overcame the Mouse and ruth gat hold upon his heart and
he said in himself, “Whoso would have the succour of Allah the Most High
against his foe, let him entreat him with compassion and kindness show.
I rely upon the Almighty in this matter and will deliver this Cat from
this her strait and earn the divine reward for her.” So he went forth
and dragged into his nest the Cat, where she abode till she was rested
and somewhat strengthened and restored, when she began to bewail her
weakness and wasted strength and want of gossips. The Mouse entreated
her in friendly guise and comforted her and busied himself with her
service; but she crept along till she got command of the issue of the
nest, lest the Mouse should escape. So when the nest-owner would have
gone out after his wont, he drew near the Cat; whereupon she seized him
and taking him in her claws, began to bite him and shake him and take
him in her mouth and lift him up and cast him down and run after him and
cranch him and torture him.[63] The Mouse cried out for help, beseeching
deliverance of Allah and began to upbraid the Cat, saying, “Where is the
covenant thou madest with me and where are the oaths thou swarest to me?
Is this my reward from thee? I brought thee into my nest and trusted
myself to thee: but sooth he speaketh that saith:—Whoso relieth on his
enemy’s promise desireth not salvation for himself. And again:—Whoso
confideth himself to his foe deserveth his own destruction. Yet do I put
my trust in my Creator, for He will deliver me from thee.” Now as he was
in this condition, with the Cat about to pounce on him and devour him,
behold, up came a huntsman, with hunting dogs trained to the chase. One
of the hounds passed by the mouth of the nest and hearing a great
scuffling, thought that within was a fox tearing somewhat; so he crept
into the hole, to get at him, and coming upon the Cat, seized on her.
When she found herself in the dog’s clutches, she was forced to take
thought anent saving herself and loosed the Mouse alive and whole
without wound. Then the hound brake her neck and dragging her forth of
the hole, threw her down dead: and thus was exemplified the truth of the
saying, “Who hath compassion shall at the last be compassionated. Whoso
oppresseth shall presently be oppressed.” “This, then, O King,” added
the interpreter, “is what befel the Mouse and the Cat and teacheth that
none should break faith with those who put trust in him; for whoever
doth perfidy and treason, there shall befal him the like of that which
befel the Cat. As a man meteth, so shall it be meted unto him, and he
who betaketh himself to good shall gain his eternal reward. But grieve
thou not, neither let this trouble thee, O King, for that assuredly thy
son, after his tyranny and oppression, shall return to the goodliness of
thy policy. And I would that yon learned man, thy Wazir Shimas, had
concealed from thee naught in that which he expounded unto thee; and
this had been well-advised of him, for ’tis said:—Those of the folk who
most abound in fear are the amplest of them in knowledge and the most
emulous of good.” The King received the interpreter’s speech with
submission and gifted him and his fellows with rich gifts; then,
dismissing them he arose and withdrew to his own apartments and fell to
pondering the issue of his affair. When night came, he went in to one of
his women, who was most in favour with him and dearest to him of them
all, and lay with her: and ere some four months had passed over her, the
child stirred in her womb, whereat she rejoiced with joy exceeding and
told the King. Quoth he, “My dream said sooth, by Allah the Helper!”;
and he lodged her in the goodliest of lodgings and entreated her with
all honour, bestowing on her store of rich gifts and manifold boons.
Then he sent one of his pages to fetch his Wazir Shimas and as soon as
he was in the presence told the Minister what had betided, rejoicing and
saying, “My dream is come true and I have won my wish. It may be this
burthen will be a man-child and inherit the Kingship after me; what
sayest thou of this, O Shimas?” But he was silent and made no reply,
whereupon cried the King, “What aileth thee that thou rejoicest not in
my joy and returnest me no answer? Doth the thing mislike thee, O
Shimas?” Hereat the Wazir prostrated himself before him and said, “O
King, may Allah prolong thy life! What availeth it to sit under the
shade of a tree, if there issue fire therefrom, and what is the delight
of one who drinketh pure wine, if he be choked thereby, and what doth it
profit to quench one’s thirst with sweet cool water, if one be drowned
therein? I am Allah’s servant and thine, O King; but there are three
things[64] whereof it besitteth not the understanding to speak, till
they be accomplished; to wit, the wayfarer, till he return from his way,
the man who is in fight, till he have overcome his foe, and the pregnant
woman, till she have cast her burthen.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Second Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after Shimas
had enumerated to the King the three things whereof it besitteth not the
understanding to speak save after they are done, he continued, “For
know, O King, that he, who speaketh of aught before its accomplishment
is like the Fakir who had hung over his head the jar of clarified
butter.[65]” “What is the story of the Fakir,” asked the King, “and what
happened to him?” Answered the Wazir, “O King, they tell this tale anent


                _THE FAKIR AND HIS JAR OF BUTTER_.[66]”

A Fakir[67] abode once with one of the nobles of a certain town, who
made him a daily allowance of three scones and a little clarified butter
and honey. Now such butter was dear in those parts and the Devotee laid
all that came to him together in a jar he had, till he filled it and
hung it up over his head for safe keeping. One night, as he sat on his
bed staff in hand, he fell a-musing upon the butter and the greatness of
its price and said in himself:—Needs must I sell all this butter I have
by me and buy with the price an ewe and take to partner therein a
Fellah[68] fellow who hath a ram. The first year she will bear a male
lamb and a female and the second a female and a male and these in their
turn will bear other males and other females, nor will they give over
bearing females and males, till they become a great matter. Then will I
take my share and vent thereof what I will. The males I will sell and
buy with them bulls and cows, which will also increase and multiply and
become many; after which I will purchase such a piece of land and plant
a garden therein and build thereon a mighty fine[69] palace. Moreover, I
will get me robes and raiment and slaves and slave-girls and hold a
wedding never was seen the like thereof. I will slaughter cattle and
make rich meats and sweetmeats and confections and assemble all the
musicians and mimes and mountebanks and player-folk and after providing
flowers and perfumes and all manner sweet herbs I will bid rich and
poor, Fakirs and Olema, captains and lords of the land, and whoso asketh
for aught, I will cause it to be brought him; and, I will make ready all
manner of meat and drink and send out a crier to cry aloud and say,
“Whoso seeketh aught, let him ask and get it.” Lastly I will go in to my
bride, after her unveiling and enjoy her beauty and loveliness; and I
will eat and drink and make merry and say to myself, “Verily, hast thou
won thy wish,” and will rest from devotion and divine worship. Then in
due time my wife will bear me a boy, and I shall rejoice in him and make
banquets in his honour and rear him daintily and teach him philosophy
and mathematics and polite letters;[70] so that I shall make his name
renowned among men and glory in him among the assemblies of the learned;
and I will bid him do good and he shall not gainsay me, and I will
forbid him from lewdness and iniquity and exhort him to piety and the
practice of righteousness; and, I will bestow on him rich and goodly
gifts; and, if I see him obsequious in obedience, I will redouble my
bounties towards him: but, an I see him incline to disobedience, I will
come down on him with this staff. So saying, he raised his hand, to beat
his son withal but the staff hit the jar of butter which overhung his
head, and brake it; whereupon the shards fell upon him and the butter
ran down upon his head, his rags and his beard. So his clothes and bed
were spoiled and he became a caution to whoso will be cautioned.
“Wherefore, O King,” added the Wazir, “it behoveth not a man to speak of
aught ere it come to pass.” Answered the King, “Thou sayest sooth! Fair
fall thee for a Wazir! Verily the truth thou speakest and righteousness
thou counsellest. Indeed, thy rank with me is such as thou couldst
wish[71] and thou shalt never cease to be accepted of me.” Thereupon the
Wazir prostrated himself before the King and wished him permanence of
prosperity, saying, “Allah prolong thy days and thy rank upraise! Know
that I conceal from thee naught, nor in private nor in public aught; thy
pleasure is my pleasure, and thy displeasure my displeasure. There is no
joy for me save in thy joyance and I cannot sleep o’ nights an thou be
angered against me, for that Allah the Most High hath vouchsafed me all
good through thy bounties to me; wherefore I beseech the Almighty to
guard thee with His angels, and to make fair thy reward whenas thou
meetest Him.” The King rejoiced in this, whereupon Shimas arose and went
out from before him. In due time the King’s wife bare a male child, and
the messengers hastened to bear the glad tidings and to congratulate the
Sovran, who rejoiced therein with joy exceeding and thanked all with
abundant thanks, saying, “Alhamdolillah—laud to the Lord—who hath
vouchsafed me a son, after I had despaired, for He is pitiful and
ruthful to His servants.” Then he wrote to all the lieges of his land,
acquainting them with the good news and bidding them to his capital; and
great were the rejoicings and festivities in all the realm. Accordingly
there came Emirs and Captains, Grandees and Sages, Olema and literati,
scientists and philosophers from every quarter to the palace and all
presenting themselves before the King, company after company, according
to their different degrees, gave him joy, and he bestowed largesse upon
them. Then he signed to the seven chief Wazirs, whose head was Shimas,
to speak, each after the measure of his wisdom, upon the matter which
concerned him the most. So the Grand Wazir Shimas began and sought leave
of the King to speak, which being granted, he spake as follows.[72]
“Praised be Allah who brought us into existence from non-existence and
who favoureth His servants with Kings that observe justice and equity in
that wherewith He hath invested them of rule and dominion, and who act
righteously with that which he appointeth at their hands of provision
for their lieges; and most especially our Sovereign by whom He hath
quickened the deadness of our land, with that which He hath conferred
upon us of bounties, and hath blessed us of His protection with ease of
life and tranquillity and fair dealing! What King did ever with his folk
that which this King hath done with us in fulfilling our needs and
giving us our dues and doing us justice, one of other, and in abundant
carefulness over us and redress of our wrongs? Indeed, it is of the
favour of Allah to the people that their King be assiduous in ordering
their affairs and in defending them from their foes; for the end of the
enemy’s intent is to subdue his enemy and hold him in his hand; and many
peoples[73] bring their sons as servants unto Kings, and they become
with them in the stead of slaves, to the intent that they may repel
ill-willers from them.[74] As for us, no enemy hath trodden our soil in
the days of this our King, by reason of this passing good fortune and
exceeding happiness, that no describer may avail to describe, for indeed
it is above and beyond all description. And verily, O King, thou art
worthy of this highest happiness, and we are under thy safeguard and in
the shadow of thy wings, may Allah make fair thy reward and prolong thy
life![75] Indeed, we have long been diligent in supplication to Allah
Almighty that He would vouchsafe an answer to our prayers and continue
thee to us and grant thee a virtuous son, to be the coolth of thine
eyes: and now Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) hath accepted of us
and replied to our petition”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shimas the Wazir
said to the King, “And now Almighty Allah hath accepted of us and
answered our petition and brought us speedy relief, even as He did to
the Fishes in the pond of water.” The King asked, “And how was that, and
what is the tale?”; and Shimas answered him, “Hear, O King the story of


                      _THE FISHES AND THE CRAB_.”

In a certain place there was a piece of water, wherein dwelt a number of
Fishes, and it befel that the pond dwindled away and shrank and wasted,
till there remained barely enough to suffice them and they were nigh
upon death and said, “What will become of us? How shall we contrive and
of whom shall we seek counsel for our deliverance?” Thereupon arose one
of them, who was the chiefest in wit and age, and cried, “There is
nothing will serve us save that we seek salvation of Allah; but let us
consult the Crab and ask his advice: so come ye all[76] and hie we
himwards and hear his rede for indeed he is the chiefest and wisest of
us all in coming upon the truth.” Each and every approved of the Fish’s
advice and betook themselves in a body to the Crab, whom they found
squatted in his hole, without news or knowledge of their strait. So they
saluted him with the salam and said, “O our lord, doth not our affair
concern thee, who art ruler and the head of us?” The Crab returned their
salutation, replying, “And on you be The Peace! What aileth you and what
d’ye want?” So they told him their case and the strait wherein they were
by reason of the wastage of the water, and that, when it should be dried
up, destruction would betide them, adding, “Wherefore we come to thee,
expecting thy counsel and what may bring us deliverance, for thou art
the chiefest and the most experienced of us.” The Crab bowed his head
awhile and said, “Doubtless ye lack understanding, in that ye despair of
the mercy of Allah Almighty and His care for the provision of His
creatures one and all. Know ye not that Allah (extolled and exalted be
He!) provideth all His creatures without account and that He
fore-ordained their daily meat ere He created aught of creation and
appointed to each of His creatures a fixed term of life and an allotted
provision, of His divine All might? How then shall we burthen ourselves
with concern for a thing which in His secret purpose is indite?
Wherefore it is my rede that ye can do naught better than to seek aid of
Allah Almighty, and it behoveth each of us to clear his conscience with
his Lord, both in public and private, and pray Him to succour us and
deliver us from our difficulties; for Allah the Most High disappointeth
not the expectation of those who put their trust in Him and rejecteth
not the supplications of those who prefer their suit to Him. When we
have mended our ways, our affairs will be set up and all will be well
with us, and when the winter cometh and our land is deluged, by means of
a just one’s prayer, He will not cast down the good He hath built up. So
’tis my counsel that we take patience and await what Allah shall do with
us. An death come to us, as is wont, we shall be at rest, and if there
befal us aught that calleth for flight, we will flee and depart our land
whither Allah will.”[77] Answered all the fishes with one voice “Thou
sayst sooth, O our lord: Allah requite thee for us with weal!” Then each
returned to his stead, and in a few days the Almighty vouchsafed unto
them a violent rain and the place of the pond was filled fuller than
before. “On like wise, O King,” continued Shimas, “we despaired of a
child being born to thee, and now that God hath blessed us and thee with
this well-omened son, we implore Him to render him blessed indeed and
make him the coolth of thine eyes and a worthy successor to thee and
grant us of him the like of that which He hath granted us of thee; for
Almighty Allah disappointeth not those that seek Him and it behoveth
none to cut off hope of the mercy of his God.” Then, rose the second
Wazir and saluting the King with the salam spake, after his greeting was
returned, as follows: “Verily, a King is not called a King save he give
presents and do justice and rule with equity and show munificence and
wisely govern his lieges, maintaining the obligatory laws and apostolic
usages established among them and justifying them, one against other,
and sparing their blood and warding off hurt from them; and of his
qualities should be that he never abide incurious of the poor and that
he succour the highest and lowest of them and give them each the rights
to them due, so that they all bless him and are obedient to his command.
Without doubt, a King who is after this wise of his lieges is beloved
and gaineth of this world eminence and of the next honour and favour
with the Creator thereof. And we, the body politic of thy subjects,
acknowledge in thee, O King, all the attributes of kingship I have
noted, even as it is said:—The best of things is that the King of a
people be just and equitable, their physician skilful and their teacher
experience-full, acting according to his knowledge. Now we enjoy this
happiness, after we had despaired of the birth of a son to thee, to
inherit thy kingship; however, Allah (extolled be His name!) hath not
disappointed thine expectation, but hath granted thy petition, by reason
of the goodliness of thy trust in Him and thy submission of thine
affairs to Him. Then fair fall thy hope! There hath betided thee that
which betided the Crow and the Serpent.” Asked the King, “What was
that?”; and the Wazir answered, “Hear, O King, the tale of


                      _THE CROW AND THE SERPENT_.”

A crow once dwelt in a tree, he and his wife, in all delight of life,
till they came to the time of the hatching of their young, which was the
midsummer season, when a Serpent issued from its hole and crawled up the
tree wriggling around the branches till it came to the Crows’ nest,
where it coiled itself up and there abode all the days of the summer,
whilst the Crow was driven away and found no opportunity to clear his
home nor any place wherein to lie. When the days of heat were past, the
Serpent went away to its own place and quoth the Crow to his wife, “Let
us thank Almighty Allah, who hath preserved us and delivered us from
this Serpent, albeit we are forbidden from increase this year. Yet the
Lord will not cut off our hope; so let us express our gratitude to Him
for having vouchsafed us safety and soundness of body: indeed, we have
none other in whom to confide, and if He will and we live to see the
next year, He shall give us other young in the stead of those we have
missed this year.” Next summer when the hatching-season came round, the
Serpent again sallied forth from its place and made for the Crows’ nest:
but, as it was coiling up a branch, a kite swooped down on it and struck
claws into its head and tare it, whereupon it fell to the ground
a-swoon, and the ants came out upon it and ate it.”[78] So the Crow and
his wife abode in peace and quiet and bred a numerous brood and thanked
Allah for their safety and for the young that were born to them. In like
manner, O King, continued the Wazir, “it behoveth us to thank God for
that wherewith He hath favoured thee and us in vouchsafing us this
blessed child of good omen, after despair and the cutting off of hope.
May He make fair thy future reward and the issue of thine affair!”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Fourth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
second Wazir had ended with the words, “Allah make fair thy future
reward and the issue of thine affair!”; the third Wazir presently rose
and said, “Rejoice, O just King, in the assurance of present prosperity
and future felicity; for him, whom the denizens of Earth love, the
denizens of Heaven likewise love; and indeed Almighty Allah hath made
affection to be thy portion and hath stablished it in the hearts of the
people of thy kingdom; wherefore to Him be thanks and praise from us and
from thee, so He may deign increase His bounty unto thee and unto us in
thee! For know, O King, that man can originate naught but by command of
Allah the Most High and that He is the Giver and all good which
befalleth a creature hath its end and issue in Him. He allotteth His
favours to His creatures, as it liketh Him; to some he giveth gifts
galore while others He doometh barely to win their daily bread. Some He
maketh Lords and Captains, and others Recluses, who abstain from the
world and aspire but to Him, for He it is who saith:—I am the Harmer
with adversity and the Healer with prosperity. I make whole and make
sick. I enrich and impoverish. I kill and quicken: in my hand is
everything and unto Me all things do tend. Wherefore it behoveth all men
to praise Him. Now, especially thou, O King, art of the fortunate, the
pious, of whom it is said:—The happiest of the just is he for whom Allah
uniteth the weal of this world and of the next world; who is content
with that portion which Allah allotteth to him and who giveth Him thanks
for that which He hath stablished. And indeed he that is rebellious and
seeketh other than the dole which God hath decreed unto him and for him,
favoureth the wild Ass and the Jackal.”[79] The King asked, “And what is
the story of the twain?”; the Wazir answered, “Hear, O King, the tale of


                    _THE WILD ASS AND THE JACKAL_.”

A certain Jackal was wont every day to leave his lair and fare forth
questing his daily bread. Now one day, as he was in a certain mountain,
behold, the day was done and he set out to return when he fell in with
another Jackal who saw him on the tramp, and each began to tell his mate
of the quarry he had gotten. Quoth one of them, “The other day I came
upon a wild Ass and I was anhungred, for it was three days since I had
eaten; so I rejoiced in this and thanked Almighty Allah for bringing him
into my power. Then I tear out his heart and ate it and was full and
returned to my home. That was three days ago, since which time I have
found nothing to eat, yet am I still full of meat.” When the other
Jackal heard his fellow’s story, he envied his fulness and said in
himself, “There is no help but that I eat the heart of a wild Ass.” So
he left feeding for some days, till he became emaciated and nigh upon
death and bestirred not himself neither did his endeavour to get food,
but lay coiled up in his earth. And whilst he was thus, behold, one day
there came out two hunters trudging in quest of quarry and started a
wild Ass. They followed on his trail tracking him all day, till at last
one of them shot at him a forked[80] arrow, which pierced his vitals and
reached his heart and killed him in front of the Jackal’s hole. Then the
hunters came up and finding him dead, pulled out the shaft from his
heart, but only the wood came away and the forked head abode in the
Ass’s belly. So they left him where he lay, expecting that others of the
wild beasts would flock to him; but, when it was eventide and nothing
fell to them, they returned to their abiding-places. The Jackal, hearing
the commotion at the mouth of his home, lay quiet till nightfall, when
he came forth of his lair, groaning for weakness and hunger, and seeing
the dead Ass lying at his door, rejoiced with joy exceeding till he was
like to fly for delight and said, “Praised be Allah who hath won me my
wish without toil! Verily, I had lost hope of coming at a wild Ass or
aught else; and assuredly[81] the Almighty hath sent him to me and drave
him fall to my homestead.” Then he sprang on the body and tearing open
its belly, thrust in his head and with his nose rummaged about its
entrails, till he found the heart and tearing a tid-bit swallowed it:
but, as soon as he had so done, the forked head of the arrow struck deep
in his gullet and he could neither get it down into his belly nor bring
it forth of his throttle. So he made sure of destruction and said, “Of a
truth it beseemeth not the creature to seek for himself aught over and
above that which Allah hath allotted to him. Had I been content with
what He appointed to me, I had not come to destruction.” “Wherefore, O
King,” added the Wazir, “it becometh man to be content with whatso Allah
hath distributed to him and thank Him for His bounties to him and cast
not off hope of his Lord. And behold, O King, because of the purity of
thy purpose and the fair intent of thy good works, Allah hath blessed
thee with a son, after despair: wherefore we pray the Almighty to
vouchsafe him length of days and abiding happiness and make him a
blessed successor, faithful in the observance of thy covenant, after thy
long life.” Then arose the fourth Wazir and said, “Verily, an the King
be a man of understanding, a frequenter of the gates of wisdom,”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Fifth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the fourth
Wazir arose and said, “Verily an the King be a man of understanding, a
frequenter of the gates of wisdom, versed in science, government and
policy, and eke upright in purpose and just to his subjects, honouring
those to whom honour is due, revering those who are digne of reverence,
tempering puissance with using clemency whenas it behoveth, and
protecting both governors and governed, lightening all burthens for them
and bestowing largesse on them, sparing their blood and covering their
shame and keeping his troth with them. Such a King, I say, is worthy of
felicity both present and future worldly and otherworldly, and this is
of that which protecteth him from ill-will and helpeth him to the
stablishing of his Kingdom and the victory over his enemies and the
winning of his wish, together with increase of Allah’s bounty to him and
His favouring him for his praise of Him and the attainment of His
protection. But an the King be the contrary of this, he never ceaseth
from misfortunes and calamities, he and the people of his realm; for
that his oppression embraceth both stranger far and kinsman near and
there cometh to pass with him that which befel the unjust King with the
pilgrim Prince.” King Jali’ad asked, “And how was that?” and the Wazir
answered, “Hear, O King, the tale of


               _THE UNJUST KING AND THE PILGRIM PRINCE_.”

There was once in Mauritania-land[82] a King who exceeded in his rule, a
tyrant, violent and over severe, who had no respect for the welfare or
protection of his lieges nor of those who entered his realm; and from
everyone who came within his Kingdom his officers took four-fifths of
his monies, leaving him one-fifth and no more. Now Allah Almighty
decreed that he should have a son, who was fortunate and God-favoured
and seeing the pomps and vanities of this world to be transient as they
are unrighteous, renounced them in his youth and rejected the world and
that which is therein and fared forth serving the Most High, wandering
pilgrim-wise over wolds and wastes and bytimes entering towns and
cities. One day, he came to his father’s capital and the guards laid
hands on him and searched him but found naught upon him save two gowns,
one new and the other old.[83] So they stripped the new one from him and
left him the old, after they had entreated him with contumely and
contempt; whereat he complained and said, “Woe to you, O ye oppressors!
I am a poor man and a pilgrim,[84] and what shall this gown by any means
profit you? Except ye restore it to me, I will go to the King and make
complaint to him of you.” They replied, “We act thus by the King’s
command: so do what seemeth good to thee.” Accordingly he betook himself
to the King’s palace and would have entered; but the chamberlains denied
him admittance, and he turned away, saying in himself, “There is nothing
for me except to watch till he cometh out and complain to him of my case
and that which hath befallen me.” And whilst he waited, behold, he heard
one of the guards announce the King’s faring forth; whereupon he crept
up, little by little, till he stood before the gate; and presently when
the King came out, he threw himself in his way and after blessing him
and wishing him weal, he made his complaint to him informing him how
scurvily he had been entreated by the gatekeepers. Lastly he gave him to
know that he was a man of the people of Allah[85] who had rejected the
world seeking acceptance of Allah and who went wandering over earth and
entering every city and hamlet, whilst all the folk he met gave him alms
according to their competence. “I entered this thy city” (continued he),
“hoping that the folk would deal kindly and graciously with me as with
others of my condition[86]; but thy followers stopped me and stripped me
of one of my gowns and loaded me with blows. Wherefore do thou look into
my case and take me by the hand and get me back my gown and I will not
abide in thy city an hour.” Quoth the unjust King, “Who directed thee to
enter this city, unknowing the custom of its King?”; and quoth the
pilgrim, “Give me back my gown and do with me what thou wilt.” Now when
the King heard this, his temper changed for the worse and he said, “O
fool,[87] we stripped thee of thy gown, so thou mightest humble thyself
to us; but since thou makest this clamour I will strip thy soul from
thee.” Then he commanded to cast him into gaol, where he began to repent
of having answered the King and reproached himself for not having left
him the gown and saved his life. When it was the middle of the night, he
rose to his feet and prayed long and prayerfully, saying, “O Allah, Thou
art the Righteous Judge; Thou knowest my case and that which hath
befallen me with this tyrannical King, and I, Thine oppressed servant,
beseech Thee, of the abundance of Thy mercy, to deliver me from the hand
of this unjust ruler and send down on him Thy vengeance; for Thou art
not unmindful of the unright of every oppressor. Wherefore, if Thou know
that he hath wronged me, loose on him Thy vengeance this night and send
down on him Thy punishment; for Thy rule is just and Thou art the Helper
of every mourner, O Thou to whom belong the power and the glory to the
end of time!” When the gaoler heard the prayer of the poor prisoner he
trembled in every limb, and behold, a fire suddenly broke out in the
King’s palace and consumed it and all that were therein, even to the
door of the prison,[88] and none was spared but the gaoler and the
pilgrim. Now when the gaoler saw this, he knew that it had not befallen
save because of the pilgrim’s prayer; so he loosed him and fleeing with
him forth of the burning, betook himself, he and the King’s son, to
another city. So was the unjust King consumed, he and all his city, by
reason of his injustice, and he lost the goods both of this world and
the next world. “As for us, O auspicious King” continued the Wazir, “we
neither lie down nor rise up without praying for thee and thanking Allah
the Most High for His grace in giving thee to us, tranquil in reliance
on thy justice and the excellence of thy governance; and sore indeed was
our care for thy lack of a son to inherit thy kingdom, fearing lest
after thee there betide us a King unlike thee. But now the Almighty hath
bestowed His favours upon us and done away our concern and brought us
gladness in the birth of this blessed child; wherefore we beseech the
Lord to make him a worthy successor to thee and endow him with glory and
felicity enduring and good abiding.” Then rose the fifth Wazir and said,
“Blessed be the Most High,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Sixth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the fifth Wazir
said, “Blessed be the Most High, Giver of all good gifts and graces the
most precious! But to continue: we are well assured that Allah favoureth
whoso are thankful to Him and mindful of His faith; and thou, O
auspicious King, art far-famed for these illustrious virtues and for
justice and equitable dealing between subject and subject and in that
which is acceptable to Allah Almighty. By reason of this hath the Lord
exalted thy dignity and prospered thy days and bestowed on thee the good
gift of this august child, after despair, wherefrom there hath betided
us gladness abiding and joys which may not be cut off; for we before
this were in exceeding cark and passing care, because of thy lack of
issue, and full of concern bethinking us of all thy justice and gentle
dealing with us and fearful lest Allah decree death to thee and there be
none to succeed thee and inherit the kingdom after thee, and so we be
divided in our counsels and dissensions arise between us and there befal
us what befel the Crows.” Asked the King, “And what befel the Crows?”;
and the Wazir answered saying, “Hear O auspicious King, the tale of


                       _THE CROWS AND THE HAWK_.”

There was once, in a certain desert, a spacious Wady, full of rills and
trees and fruits and birds singing the praises of Allah the One of
All-might, Creator of day and night; and among them was a troop of
Crows, which led the happiest of lives. Now they were under the sway and
government of a Crow who ruled them with mildness and benignity, so that
they were with him in peace and contentment; and by reason of their
wisely ordering their affairs, none of the other birds could avail
against them. Presently it chanced that there befel their chief the doom
irrevocably appointed to all creatures and he departed life[89];
whereupon the others mourned for him with sore mourning, and what added
to their grief was that there abided not amongst them like him one who
should fill his place. So they all assembled and took counsel together
concerning whom it befitted for his goodness and piety to set over them:
and a party of them choose one Crow, saying, “It beseemeth that this be
King over us;” whilst others objected to him and would none of him; and
thus there arose division and dissension amidst them and the strife of
excitement waxed hot between them. At last they agreed amongst
themselves and consented to sleep the night upon it and that none should
go forth at dawn next day to seek his living, but that all must wait
till high morning, when they should gather together all in one place.
“Then,” said they, “we will all take flight at once and whichsoever
shall soar above the rest in his flying, he shall be accepted of us as
ruler and be made King over us.” The fancy pleased them; so they made
covenant together and did as they had agreed and took flight all, but
each of them deemed himself higher than his fellow; wherefore quoth this
one, “I am highest,” and that, “Nay; that am I.” Then said the lowest of
them, “Look up, all of you, and whomsoever ye find the highest of you,
let him be your chief.” So they raised their eyes and seeing the Hawk
soaring over them, said each to other, “We agreed that which bird soever
should be the highest of us we will make king over us, and behold, the
Hawk is the highest of us: what say ye to him?” And they all cried out,
“We accept of him.” Accordingly they summoned the Hawk and said to him,
“O Father of Good,[90] we have chosen thee ruler over us, that thou
mayst look into our affair.” The Hawk consented, saying, “Inshallah, ye
shall win of me abounding weal.” So they rejoiced and made him their
King. But after awhile, he fell to taking a company of them every day
and betaking himself with them afar off to one of the caves, where he
struck them down and eating their eyes and brains, threw their bodies
into the river. And he ceased not doing on this wise, it being his
intent to destroy them all till, seeing their number daily diminishing,
the Crows flocked to him and said, “O our King, we complain to thee
because from the date we made thee Sovran and ruler over us, we are in
the sorriest case and every day a company of us is missing and we know
not the reason of this, more by token that the most part thereof are the
high in rank and of those in attendance on thee. We must now look after
our own safety.” Thereupon the Hawk waxed wroth with them and said to
them, “Verily, ye are the murtherers, and ye forestall me with
accusation!” So saying, he pounced upon them and tearing to pieces half
a score of their chiefs in front of the rest, threatened them and drave
them out sorely cuffed and beaten, from before him. Hereat they repented
them of that which they had done and said, “We have known no good since
the death of our first King especially in the deed of this stranger in
kind; but we deserve our sufferings even had he destroyed us one by one
to the last of us, and there is exemplified in us the saying of him that
saith, “Whoso submitteth him not to the rule of his own folk, the foe
hath dominion over him, of his folly.” And now there is nothing for it
but to flee for our lives, else shall we perish.” So they took flight
and dispersed to various places. “And we also, O King,” continued the
Wazir, “feared lest the like of this befal us and there become ruler
over us a King other than thyself; but Allah hath vouchsafed us this
boon and hath sent us this blessed child, and now we are assured of
peace and union and security and prosperity in our Mother-land. So
lauded be Almighty Allah and to Him be praise and thanks and goodly
gratitude! And may He bless the King and us all his subjects and
vouchsafe unto us and him the acme of felicity and make his life-tide
happy and his endeavour constant!” Then arose the sixth Wazir and said,
“Allah favour thee with all felicity, O King, in this world and in the
next world! Verily, the ancients have left us this saying:—Whoso prayeth
and fasteth and giveth parents their due and is just in his rule meeteth
his Lord and He is well pleased with him. Thou hast been set over us and
hast ruled us justly and thine every step in this hath been blessed;
wherefore we beseech Allah Almighty to make great thy reward eternal and
requite thee thy beneficence. I have heard what this wise man hath said
respecting our fear for the loss of our prosperity, by reason of the
death of the King or the advent of another who should not be his
parallel, and how after him dissensions would be rife among us and
calamity betide from our division and how it behoved us therefore to be
instant in prayer to Allah the Most High, so haply He might vouchsafe
the King a happy son, to inherit the kingship after him. But, after all,
the issue of that which man desireth of mundane goods and wherefor he
lusteth is unknown to him and consequently it behoveth a mortal to ask
not of his Lord a thing whose end he wotteth not; for that haply the
hurt of that thing is nearer to him than its gain and his destruction
may be in that he seeketh and there may befal him what befel the
Serpent-charmer, his wife and children and the folk of his house.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the sixth
Wazir said, “It behoveth not a man to ask of his Lord aught whereof he
ignoreth the issue for that haply the hurt of that thing may be nearer
than its gain, his destruction may be in that he seeketh and there may
befal him what befel the Serpent-charmer, his children, his wife and his
household,” the King asked, “What was that?”; and the Wazir answered,
“Hear, O King the tale of


                  _THE SERPENT-CHARMER AND HIS WIFE_.”

There was once a man, a Serpent-charmer,[91] who used to train serpents,
and this was his trade; and he had a great basket,[92] wherein were
three snakes but the people of his house knew this not. Every day he
used to go round with this pannier about the town gaining his living and
that of his family by showing the snakes, and at eventide he returned to
his house and clapped them back into the basket privily. This lasted a
long while; but it chanced one day, when he came home, as was his wont,
his wife asked him, saying, “What is in this pannier?”; and he replied,
“What wouldest thou with it? Is not provision plentiful with you? Be
thou content with that which Allah hath allotted to thee and ask not of
aught else.” With this the woman held her peace; but she said in
herself, “There is no help but that I search this basket and know what
is there.” So she egged on her children and enjoined them to ask him of
the pannier and importune him with their questions, till he should tell
them what was therein. They presently concluded that it contained
something to eat and sought every day of their father that he should
show them what was therein; and he still put them off with pleasant
pretences and forbade them from asking this. On such wise they abode
awhile, the wife and mother still persisting in her quest till they
agreed with her that they would neither eat meat nor drain drink with
their father, till he granted them their prayer and opened the basket to
them. One night, behold, the Serpent-charmer came home with great plenty
of meat and drink and took his seat calling them to eat with him: but
they refused his company and showed him anger; whereupon he began to
coax them with fair words, saying, “Lookye, tell me what you would have,
that I may bring it you, be it meat or drink or raiment.” Answered they,
“O our father, we want nothing of thee but that thou open this pannier
that we may see what is therein: else we will slay ourselves.” He
rejoined, “O my children, there is nothing good for you therein and
indeed the opening of it will be harmful to you.” Hereat they redoubled
in rage for all he could say, which when he saw, he began to scold them
and threaten them with beating, except they returned from such
condition; but they only increased in anger and persistence in asking,
till at last he waxed wroth and took a staff to beat them, and they fled
from before him within the house. Now the basket was present and the
Serpent-charmer had not hidden it anywhere; so his wife left him
occupied with the children and opened the pannier in haste, that she
might see what was therein. Thereupon behold, the serpents came out and
first struck their fangs into her and killed her; then they hied round
about the house and slew all, great and small, who were therein; except
the Serpent-charmer, who left the place and went his way. “If then, O
auspicious King,” continued the Wazir, “thou consider this, thou wilt be
convinced that it is not for a man to desire aught save that which God
the Great refuseth not to him; nay, he should be content with what He
willeth. And thou, O King, for the overflowing of thy wisdom and the
excellence of thine understanding, Allah hath cooled thine eyes with the
advent of this thy son, after despair, and hath comforted thy heart;
wherefore we pray the Almighty to make him of the just successors
acceptable to Himself and to his subjects.” Then rose the seventh Wazir
and said, “O King, I know and certify all that my brethren, these
Ministers wise and learned, have said in the presence, praising thy
justice and the goodness of thy policy and proving how thou art
distinguished in this from all Kings other than thyself; wherefore they
gave thee the preference over them. Indeed, this be of that which is
incumbent on us, O King, and I say:—Praised be Allah in that He hath
guerdoned thee with His gifts and vouchsafed thee of His mercy, the
welfare of the realm; and hath succoured thee and ourselves, on
condition that we increase in gratitude to Him; and all this no
otherwise than by thine existence! What while thou remainest amongst us,
we fear not oppression neither dread unright, nor can any take
long-handed advantage of our weakness! and indeed it is said, The
greatest good of a people is a just King and their greatest ill an
unjust King; and again, Better dwell with rending lions than with a
tyrannous Sultan. So praised be Almighty Allah with eternal praise for
that He hath blessed us with thy life and vouchsafed thee this blessed
child, whenas thou wast stricken in years and hadst despaired of issue!
For the goodliest of the gifts in this world is a virtuous sire, and it
is said, Whoso hath no progeny his life is without result and he leaveth
no memory. As for thee, because of the righteousness of thy justice and
thy pious reliance on Allah the Most High, thou hast been vouchsafed
this happy son; yea, this blessed[93] child cometh as a gift from the
Most High Lord to us and to thee, for the excellence of thy governance
and the goodliness of thy long-sufferance; and in this thou hast fared
even as fared the Spider and the Wind.” Asked the King, “And what is the
story of the Spider and the Wind?”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Eighth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the King
asked, “And what is the story of the twain?”; the Wazir answered, “Give
ear, O King, to the tale of


                      _THE SPIDER AND THE WIND_.”

A spider once attached herself to a high gate[94] and a retired and span
her web there and dwelt therein in peace, giving thanks to the Almighty,
who had made this dwelling-place easy to her and had set her in safety
from noxious reptiles. On this wise she abode a long while, still giving
thanks to Allah for her ease and regular supply of daily bread, till her
Creator bethought Him to try her and make essay of her gratitude and
patience. So he sent upon her a strong east Wind, which carried her
away, web and all, and cast her into the main. The waves washed her
ashore and she thanked the Lord for safety and began to upbraid the
Wind, saying, “O Wind, why hast thou dealt thus with me and what good
hast thou gotten by bearing me hither from my abiding-place, where
indeed I was in safety, secure in my home on the top of that gate?”
Replied the Wind, saying, “O Spider, hast thou not learnt that this
world is a house of calamities; and, say me, who can boast of lasting
happiness that such portion shall be thine? Wottest thou not that Allah
tempteth His creatures in order to learn by trial what may be their
powers of patience? How, then, doth it beset thee to upbraid me, thou
who hast been saved by me from the vasty deep?” “Thy words are true, O
Wind,” replied the Spider, “yet not the less do I desire to escape from
this stranger land into which thy violence hath cast me.” The Wind
rejoined, “Cease thy blaming; for right soon I will bear thee back and
replace thee in thy place, as thou wast aforetime.” So the Spider waited
patiently, till the north-east Wind left blowing and there arose a
south-west Wind, which gently caught her up and flew with her towards
her dwelling-place; and when she came to her abode, she knew it and
clung to it. “And we,” continued the Wazir, “beseech Allah (who hath
rewarded the King for his singleness of heart and patience and hath
taken pity on his subjects and blessed them with His favour and hath
vouchsafed the King this son in his old age, after he had despaired of
issue and removed him not from the world, till He had blessed him with
coolth of eyes and bestowed on him what He hath bestowed of Kingship and
Empire!) to vouchsafe unto thy son that which He hath vouchsafed unto
thee of dominion and Sultanship and glory! Amen.” Then said the King,
“Praised be Allah over all praise and thanks be to Him over all thanks!
There is no god but He, the Creator of all things, by the light of whose
signs we know the glory of His greatness and who giveth kingship and
command over his own country to whom He willeth of His servants! He
chooseth of them whomso He please to make him His viceroy and viceregent
over His creatures and commandeth him to just and equitable dealing with
them and the maintenance of religious laws and practices and right
conduct and constancy in ordering their affairs to that which is most
acceptable to Him and most grateful to them. Whoso doth thus and obeyeth
the commandment of his Lord, his desire attaineth and the orders of his
God maintaineth; so Providence preserveth him from the perils of the
present world and maketh ample his recompense in the future world; for
indeed He neglecteth not the reward of the righteous. And whoso doth
otherwise than as Allah biddeth him sinneth mortal sin and disobeyeth
his Lord, preferring his mundane to his supra-mundane weal. He hath no
trace in this world and in the next no portion: for Allah spareth not
the unjust and the mischievous, nor doth He neglect any of His servants.
These our Wazirs have set forth how, by reason of our just dealing with
them and our wise governance of affairs, Allah hath vouchsafed us and
them His grace, for which it behoveth us to thank Him, because of the
great abundance of His mercies: each of them hath also spoken that
wherewith the Almighty inspired Him concerning this matter, and they
have vied one with another in rendering thanks to the Most High Lord and
praising Him for His favours and bounties. I also render thanks to Allah
for that I am but a slave commanded; my heart is in His hand and my
tongue in His subjection, accepting that which He adjudgeth to me and to
them, come what may thereof. Each one of them hath said what passed
through his mind on the subject of this boy and hath set forth that
which was of the renewal of divine favour to us, after my years had
reached the term when confidence faileth and despair assaileth. So
praised be Allah who hath saved us from disappointment and from the
alternation of rulers, like to the alternation of night and day! For
verily, this was a great boon both to them and to us; wherefore we
praise Almighty Allah who hath given a ready answer to our prayer and
hath blessed us with this boy and set him in high place, as the
inheritor of the kingship. And we entreat Him, of His bounty and
clemency, to make him happy in his actions, prone to pious works, so he
may become a King and a Sultan governing his people with justice and
equity, guarding them from perilous error and frowardness, of His grace,
goodness and generosity!” When the King had made an end of his speech,
the sages and Olema rose and prostrated themselves before Allah and
thanked the King; after which they kissed his hands and departed, each
to his own house, whilst Jali’ad withdrew into his palace, where, he
looked upon the new-born and offered up prayers for him and named him
Wird Khán.[95] The boy grew up till he attained the age of twelve,[96]
when the King being minded to have him taught the arts and sciences,
bade build him a palace amiddlemost the city, wherein were three hundred
and threescore rooms,[97] and lodged him therein. Then he assigned him
three wise men of the Olema and bade them not be lax in teaching him day
and night and look that there was no kind of learning but they instruct
him therein, so he might become versed in all knowledge. He also
commanded them to sit with him one day in each of the rooms by turn and
write on the door thereof that which they had taught him therein of
various kinds of lore and report to himself, every seven days, whatso
instructions they had imparted to him. So they went in to the Prince and
stinted not from educating him day nor night, nor withheld from him
aught of that they knew; and presently there appeared in him readiness
to receive instruction such as none had shown before him. Every seventh
day his governors reported to the King what his son had learnt and
mastered, whereby Jali’ad became proficient in goodly learning and fair
culture, and the Olema said to him, “Never saw we one so richly gifted
with understanding as is this boy: Allah bless thee in him and give thee
joy of his life!” When the Prince had completed his twelfth year, he
knew the better part of every science and excelled all the Olema and
sages of his day: wherefore his governors brought him to his sire and
said to him, “Allah gladden thine eyes, O King, with this auspicious
youth! We bring him to thee, after he hath learnt all manner knowledge,
and there is not one of the learned men of the time nor a scientist who
hath attained to that whereto he hath attained of science.” The King
rejoiced in this with joy exceeding and thanking the Almighty prostrated
himself in gratitude before Allah (to whom belong Majesty and Might!),
saying, “Laud be to the Lord for His mercies incalculable!” Then he
called his Chief Wazir and said to him, “Know, O Shimas, that the
governors of my son are come to tell me that he hath mastered every kind
of knowledge and there is nothing but they have instructed him therein,
so that he surpasseth in this all who forewent him. What sayst thou, O
Shimas?” Hereat the Minister prostrated himself before Allah (to whom
belong Might and Majesty!) and kissed the King’s hand, saying, “Loath is
the ruby-stone, albe it be bedded in the hardest rock on hill, to do
aught but shine as a lamp, and this thy son is such a gem; his tender
age hath not hindered him from becoming a sage and Alhamdolillah—praised
be Allah—for that which He deigned bestow on him! But to-morrow I will
call an assembly of the flower of the Emirs and men of learning and
examine the Prince and cause him speak forth that which is with him in
their presence, Inshallah!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Ninth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the King
Jali’ad heard the words of his Wazir Shimas, he commanded the
attendance of the keenest-witted[98] of the Olema and most
accomplished of the learned and sages of his dominions, and they all
presented themselves on the morrow at the door of the palace,
whereupon the King bade admit them. Then entered Shimas and kissed the
hands of the Prince, who rose and prostrated himself to the Minister:
but Shimas said, “It behoveth not the lion-whelp to prostrate himself
to any of the wild beasts, nor besitteth it that Light prostrate
itself to shade.” Quoth the Prince, “Whenas the lion-whelp seeth the
leopard,[99] he riseth up to him and prostrateth himself before him,
because of his wisdom, and Light prostrateth itself to shade for the
purpose of disclosing that which is therewithin.” Quoth Shimas, “True,
O my lord; but I would have thee answer me anent whatso I shall ask
thee, by leave of His Highness and his lieges.” And the youth said,
“And I, with permission of my sire, will answer thee.” So Shimas began
and said, “Tell me what is the Eternal, the Absolute, and what are the
two manifestations[100] thereof and whether of the two is the abiding
one?” Answered the Prince, “Allah (to whom belong Might and Majesty!)
is the Eternal, the Absolute; for that He is Alpha, without beginning,
and Omega without end. Now his two manifestations are this world and
the next; and the abiding one of the two is the world to come.” (¿)
“Thou sayst truly and I approve thy reply: but I would have thee tell
me, how knowest thou that one of Allah’s manifestations is this world
and the other the world to come?”—“I know this because this world was
created from nothingness and had not its being from any existing
thing; wherefore its affair is referable to the first essence.
Moreover, it is a commodity swift of ceasing, the works whereof call
for requital of action and this postulateth the reproduction[101] of
whatso passeth away: so the next world is the second manifestation.”
(¿) “Now inform me how knowest thou that the world to come is the
abiding one of the two existences?”—“Because it is the house of
requital for deeds done in this world prepared by the Eternal sans
surcease.” (¿) “Who are the people of this world most to be praised
for their practice?”—“Those who prefer their weal in the world to come
before their weal in this world.” (¿) “And who is he that preferreth
his future to his present welfare?”—“He who knoweth that he dwelleth
in a perishing house, that he was created but to vade away and that,
after vading away, he will be called to account; and indeed, were
there in this world one living and abiding for ever, he would not
prefer it to the next world.” (¿) “Can the future life subsist
permanently without the present?”—“He who hath no present life hath no
future life: and indeed I liken this world and its folk and the goal
to which they fare with certain workmen, for whom an Emir buildeth a
narrow house and lodgeth them therein, commanding each of them to do a
certain task and assigning to him a set term and appointing one to act
as steward over them. Whoso doeth the work appointed unto him, the
steward bringeth him forth of that straitness; but whoso doeth it not
within the stablished term is punished. After awhile, behold, they
find honey exuding from the chinks of the house,[102] and when they
have eaten thereof and tasted its sweetness of savour, they slacken in
their ordered task and cast it behind their backs. So they patiently
suffer the straitness and distress wherein they are, with what they
know of the future punishment whereto they are fast wending, and are
content with this worthless and easily won sweetness: and the Steward
leaveth not to fetch every one of them forth of the house, for ill or
good, when his appointed period shall have come. Now we know the world
to be a dwelling wherein all eyes are dazed, and that each of its folk
hath his set term; and he who findeth the little sweetness that is in
the world and busieth himself therewith is of the number of the lost,
since he preferreth the things of this world to the things of the next
world: but whoso payeth no heed to this poor sweetness and preferreth
the things of the coming world to those of this world, is of those who
are saved.” (¿) “I have heard what thou sayest of this world and the
next and I accept thine answer; but I see they are as two placed in
authority over man; needs must he content them both, and they are
contrary one to other. So, if the creature set himself to seek his
livelihood, it is harmful to his soul in the future: and if he devote
himself to the next world, it is hurtful to his body; and there is no
way for him of pleasing these two contraries at once.”—“Indeed, the
quest of one’s worldly livelihood with pious intent and on lawful wise
is a viaticum for the quest of the goods of the world to come, if a
man spend a part of his days in seeking his livelihood in this world,
for the sustenance of his body, and devote the rest of his day to
seeking the goods of the next world, for the repose of his soul and
the warding off of hurt therefrom; and indeed I see this world and the
other world as they were two Kings, a just and an unjust.” Asked
Shimas, “How so?” and the youth began the tale of


                            _THE TWO KINGS_.

There were once two Kings, a just and an unjust; and this one had a land
abounding in trees and fruits and herbs; but he let no merchant pass
without robbing him of his monies and his merchandise, and the traders
endured this with patience, by reason of their profit from the fatness
of the earth in the means of life and its pleasantness, more by token
that it was renowned for its richness in precious stones and gems. Now
the just King, who loved jewels, heard of this land and sent one of his
subjects thither, giving him much specie and bidding him pass with it
into the other’s realm and buy jewels therefrom. So he went thither;
and, it being told to the unjust King that a merchant was come to his
kingdom with much money to buy jewels withal, he sent for him to the
presence and said to him, “Who art thou and whence comest thou and who
brought thee thither and what is thy errand?” Quoth the merchant, “I am
of such and such a region, and the King of that land gave me money and
bade me buy therewith jewels from this country; so I obeyed his bidding
and came.” Cried the unjust King, “Out on thee! Knowest thou not my
fashion of dealing with the people of my realm and how each day I take
their monies? How then comest thou to my country? And behold, thou hast
been a sojourner here since such a time!” Answered the trader, “The
money is not mine, not a mite of it; nay, ’tis a trust in my hands, till
I bring its equivalent to its owner.” But the King said, “I will not let
thee take thy livelihood of my land or go out therefrom, except thou
ransom thyself with this money all of it.”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


           Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Tenth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the unjust
Ruler said to the trader who came to buy jewels from his country, “’Tis
not possible for thee to take thy livelihood of my land except thou
ransom thy life with this money, all of it; else shalt thou die.” So the
man said in himself, “I am fallen between two Kings, and I know that the
oppression of this ruler embraceth all who abide in his dominions: and
if I satisfy him not, I shall lose both life and money (whereof is no
doubt) and shall fail of my errand; whilst, on the other hand, if I give
him all the gold, it will most assuredly prove my ruin with its owner,
the other King: wherefore no device will serve me but that I give this
one a trifling part thereof and content him therewith and avert from
myself and from the money perdition. Thus shall I get my livelihood of
the fatness of this land, till I buy that which I desire of jewels; and,
after satisfying the tyrant with gifts, I will take my portion of the
profit and return to the owner of the money with his need, trusting in
his justice and indulgence, and unfearing that he will punish me for
that which this unjust King taketh of the treasure, especially if it be
but a little.” Then the trader called down blessings on the tyrant and
said to him, “O King, I will ransom myself and this specie with a small
portion thereof, from the time of my entering thy country to that of my
going forth therefrom.” The King agreed to this and left him at peace
for a year, till he bought all manner jewels with the rest of the money
and returned therewith to his master, to whom he made his excuses,
confessing to having saved himself from the unjust King as before
related. The just King accepted his excuse and praised him for his wise
device and set him on his right hand in his divan and appointed him in
his kingdom an abiding inheritance and a happy life-tide.[103] Now the
just King is the similitude of the future world and the unjust King that
of the present world; the jewels that be in the tyrant’s dominions are
good deeds and pious works. The merchant is man and the money he hath
with him is the provision appointed him of Allah. When I consider this,
I know that it behoveth him who seeketh his livelihood in this world to
leave not a day without seeking the goods of the world to come, so shall
he content this world with that which he gaineth of the fatness of the
earth and satisfy the other world with that which he spendeth of his
life in seeking after it.” (¿) “Are the spirit[104] and the body alike
in reward and retribution, or is the body, as the luster of lusts and
doer of sinful deeds, and especially affected with punishment?” “The
inclination to lusts and sins may be the cause of earning reward by the
withholding of the soul therefrom and the repenting thereof; but the
command[105] is in the hand of Him who doth what He will, and things by
their contraries are distinguished. Thus subsistence is necessary to the
body, but there is no body without soul; and the purification of the
spirit is in making clean the intention in this world and taking thought
to that which shall profit in the world to come. Indeed, soul and body
are like two horses racing for a wager or two foster-brothers or two
partners in business. By the intent are good deeds distinguished and
thus the body and soul are partners in actions and in reward and
retribution, and in this they are like the Blind man and the Cripple
with the Overseer of the garden.” Asked Shimas, “How so?”; and the
Prince said, “Hear, O Wazir, the tale of


                   _THE BLIND MAN AND THE CRIPPLE_.”

A Blind man and a Cripple were travelling-companions and used to beg
alms in company. One day they sought admission into the garden of some
one of the benevolent, and a kind-hearted wight, hearing their talk,
took compassion on them and carried them into his garden, where he left
them after plucking for them some of its produce and went away, bidding
them do no waste nor damage therein. When the fruits became ripe, the
Cripple said to the Blind man, “Harkye, I see ripe fruits and long for
them; but I cannot rise to eat thereof; so go thou arise, for thou art
sound of either leg, and fetch us somewhat that we may eat.” Replied the
Blind, “Fie upon thee! I had no thought of them, but now that thou
callest them to my mind, I long to eat of them and I am impotent unto
this, being unable to see them; so how shall we do to get at them?” At
this moment, behold, up came the Overseer of the garden, who was a man
of understanding, and the Cripple said to him, “Harkye, O Overseer! I
long for somewhat of those fruits; but we are as thou seest; I am a
cripple and my mate here is stone-blind: so what shall we do?” Replied
the Overseer, “Woe to you! Have ye forgotten that the master of the
garden stipulated with you that ye should do nothing whereby waste or
damage befal it: so take warning and abstain from this.” But they
answered, “Needs must we get our portion of these fruits that we may eat
thereof: so tell us some device whereby we shall contrive this.” When
the Overseer saw that they were not to be turned from their purpose, he
said, “This, then, is my device, O Cripple, let the Blind bear thee on
his back and take thee under the tree whose fruit pleaseth thee, so thou
mayst pluck what thou canst reach thereof.” Accordingly the Blind man
took on his back the Cripple who guided him, till he brought him under a
tree, and he fell to plucking from it what he would and tearing at its
boughs till he had despoiled it: after which they went roundabout and
throughout the garden and wasted it with their hands and feet, nor did
they cease from this fashion, till they had stripped all the trees of
the garth. Then they returned to their place and presently up came the
master of the garden, who, seeing it in this plight, was wroth with sore
wrath and coming up to them said, “Woe to you! What fashion is this? Did
I not stipulate with you that ye should do no damage in the garden?”
Quoth they, “Thou knowest that we are powerless to come at any of the
fruit, for that one of us is a cripple and cannot rise and the other is
blind and cannot see that which is before him: so what is our offence?”
But the master answered, “Think ye I know not how ye wrought and how ye
have gone about to do waste in my garden? I know, as if I had been with
thee, O Blind, that thou tookest the Cripple pick-a-back and he showed
thee the way till thou borest him to the trees.” Then he punished them
with grievous punishment and thrust them out of the garden. Now the
Blind is the similitude of the body which seeth not save by the spirit,
and the Cripple that of the soul, for that it hath no power of motion
but by the body; the garden is the works, for which the creature is
rewarded or punished, and the Overseer is the reason which biddeth to
good and forbiddeth from evil. Thus the body and the soul are partners
in reward and retribution.” (¿) “Which of the learned men is most worthy
of praise, according to thee?”—“He who is learned in the knowledge of
Allah and whose knowledge profiteth him.” (¿) “And who is this?”—“Whoso
is intent upon seeking to please his Lord and avoid His wrath.” (¿) “And
which of them is the most excellent?”—“He who is most learned in the
knowledge of Allah.” (¿) “And which is the most experienced of
them?”—“Whoso in doing according to his knowledge is most constant.” (¿)
“And which is the purest-hearted of them?”—“He who is most assiduous in
preparing for death and praising the Lord and least of them in hope, and
indeed he who penetrateth his soul with the awful ways of death is as
one who looketh into a clear mirror, for that he knoweth the truth, and
the mirror still increaseth in clearness and brilliance.” (¿) “What are
the goodliest of treasures?”—“The treasures of heaven.” (¿) “Which is
the goodliest of the treasures of Heaven?”—“The praise of Allah and His
magnification.” (¿) “Which is the most excellent of the treasures of
earth?”—“The practice of kindness.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Eleventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Wazir
Shimas asked the King’s son, saying, “Which is the most excellent of the
treasures of earth?” he answered, “The practice of kindness.” So the
Minister pursued, “Tell me of three several and different things,
knowledge and judgment and wit, and of that which uniteth
them.”—“Knowledge cometh of learning, judgment of experience and wit of
reflection, and they are all stablished and united in reason. Whoso
combineth these three qualities attaineth perfection and he who addeth
thereto the piety and fear of the Lord is in the right course.” (¿)
“Take the case of a man of learning and wisdom, endowed with right
judgment, luminous intelligence and a keen wit and excelling, and tell
me can desire and lust change these his qualities?”—“Yes; for these two
passions, when they enter into a man, alter his wisdom and understanding
and judgment and wit, and he is like the Ossifrage[106] which, for
precaution against the hunters, abode in the upper air, of the excess of
his subtlety; but, as he was thus, he saw a fowler set up his nets and
when the toils were firmly staked down bait them with a bit of meat;
which when he beheld, desire and lust thereof overcame him and he forgot
that which he had seen of springes and of the sorry plight of all birds
that fell into them. So he swooped down from the welkin and pouncing
upon the piece of meat, was meshed in the same snare and could not win
free. When the fowler came up and saw the Ossifrage taken in his toils
he marvelled with exceeding marvel and said, “I set up my nets, thinking
to take therein pigeons and the like of small fowl; how came this
Ossifrage to fall into it?” It is said that when desire and lust incite
a man of understanding to aught, he considereth the end thereof and
refraineth from that which they make fair and represseth with his reason
his lust and his concupiscence; for, when these passions urge him to
aught, it behoveth him to make his reason like unto a horseman skilled
in horsemanship who mounting a skittish horse, curbeth him with a sharp
bit,[107] so that he go aright with him and bear him whither he will. As
for the ignorant man, who hath neither knowledge nor judgment, while all
things are obscure to him and desire and lust lord it over him, verily
he doeth according to his desire and his lust and is of the number of
those that perish; nor is there among men one in worse case than he.”
(¿) “When is knowledge profitable and when availeth reason to ward off
the ill effects of desire and lust?”—“When their possessor useth them in
quest of the goods of the next world, for reason and knowledge are
altogether profitable; but it befitteth not their owner to expend them
in the quest of the goods of this world, save in such measure as may be
needful for gaining his livelihood and defending himself from its
mischief; but to lay them out with a view to futurity.” (¿) “What is
most worthy that a man should apply himself thereto and occupy his heart
withal?”—“Good works and pious.” (¿) “If a man do this it diverteth him
from gaining his living: how then shall he do for his daily bread
wherewith he may not dispense?”—“A man’s day is four-and-twenty hours,
and it behoveth him to employ one-third thereof in seeking his living,
another in prayer and repose and the other in the pursuits of
knowledge;[108] for a reasonable man without knowledge is a barren land,
which hath no place for tillage, tree-planting or grass-growing. Except
it be prepared for tilth and plantation no fruit will profit therein;
but, if it be tilled and planted, it bringeth forth goodly fruits. So
with the man lacking education; there is no profit in him till knowledge
be planted in him: then doth he bear fruit.” (¿) “What sayst thou of
knowledge without understanding?”—“It is as the knowledge of a
brute[109] beast, which hath learnt the hours of its foddering and
waking, but hath no reason.” (¿) “Thou hast been brief in thine answer
here anent; but I accept thy reply. Tell me, how shall I guard myself
against the Sultan?”—“By giving him no way to thee.” (¿) “And how can I
but give him way to me, seeing that he is set in dominion over me and
that the reins of my affair be in his hand?”—“His dominion over thee
lieth in the duties thou owest him; wherefore, an thou give him his due,
he hath no farther dominion over thee.” (¿) “What are a Wazir’s duties
to his King?”—“Good counsel and zealous service both in public and
private, right judgment, the keeping of his secrets and that he conceal
from his lord naught of that whereof he hath a right to be informed,
lack of neglect of aught of his need with the gratifying of which he
chargeth him, the seeking his approval in every guise and the avoidance
of his anger.” (¿) “How should the Wazir do with the King?”—“An thou be
Wazir to the King and wouldst fain become safe from him, let thy hearing
and thy speaking to him surpass his expectation of thee and be thy
seeking of thy want from him after the measure of thy rank in his
esteem, and beware lest thou advance thyself to a dignity whereof he
deemeth thee unworthy, for this would be like presuming against him. So,
if thou take advantage of his mildness and raise thee to a rank beyond
that which he deemeth thy due, thou wilt be like the hunter, whose wont
it was to trap wild beasts for their pelts and cast away the flesh. Now
a lion used to come to that place and eat of the carrion; and in course
of time, he made friendship with the hunter, who would throw meat to him
and wipe his hands on his back, whilst the lion wagged his tail.[110]
But when the hunter saw his tameness and gentleness and submissiveness
to him, he said to himself, “Verily this lion humbleth himself to me and
I am master of him, and I see not why I should not mount him and strip
off his hide, as with the other wild beasts.” So he took courage and
sprang on the lion’s back, presuming on his mildness and deeming himself
sure of him; which when the lion saw, he raged with exceeding rage and
raising his fore paw, smote the hunter, that he drove his claws into his
vitals; after which he cast him under foot and tare him in pieces and
devoured him. By this we may know that it behoveth the Wazir to bear
himself towards the King according to that which he seeth of his
condition and not presume upon the superiority of his own judgment, lest
the King become jealous of him.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Twelfth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the youth,
the son of King Jali’ad, said to Shimas the Wazir, “It behoveth the
Minister to bear himself towards the Monarch according to that which he
seeth of his condition, and not to presume upon the superiority of his
own judgment lest the King wax jealous of him.” Quoth Shimas, “How shall
the Wazir grace himself in the King’s sight?”—“By the performance of the
trust committed to him and of loyal counsel and sound judgment and the
execution of his commands.” (¿) “As for what thou sayest of the Wazir’s
duty to avoid the King’s anger and perform his wishes and apply himself
diligently to the doing of that wherewith he chargeth him, such duty is
always incumbent on him: but how, an the King’s whole pleasure be
tyranny and the practice of oppression and exorbitant extortion; and
what shall the Wazir do, if he be afflicted by intercourse with this
unjust lord? An he strive to turn him from his lust and his desire, he
cannot do this, and if he follow him in his lusts and flatter him with
false counsel, he assumeth the weight of responsibility herein and
becometh an enemy to the people. What sayst thou of this?”—“What thou
speakest, O Wazir, of his responsibility and sinfulness ariseth only in
the case of his abetting the King in his wrong-doing; but it behoveth
the Wazir, when the King taketh counsel with him of the like of this, to
show forth to him the way of justice and equity and warn him against
tyranny and oppression and expound to him the principles of righteously
governing the lieges; alluring him with the future reward that
pertaineth to this and restraining him with warning of the punishment he
otherwise will incur. If the King incline to him and hearken unto his
words, his end is gained, and if not, there is nothing for it but that
he depart from him after courteous fashion, because in parting for each
of them is ease.” (¿) “What are the duties of the King to his subjects
and what are the obligations of the lieges to their lord?”——“They shall
do whatso he ordereth them with pure intent and obey him in that which
pleaseth him and pleaseth Allah and the Apostle of Allah. And the lieges
can claim of the lord that he protect their possessions and guard their
women,[111] even as it is their duty to hearken unto him and obey him
and expend their lives freely in his defence and give him his lawful due
and praise him fairly for that which he bestoweth upon them of his
justice and bounty.” (¿) “Have his subjects any claim upon the King
other than that which thou hast said?”——“Yes: the rights of the subjects
from their Sovran are more binding than the liege lord’s claim upon his
lieges; for that the breach of his duty towards them is more harmful
than that of their duty towards him; because the ruin of the King and
the loss of his kingdom and fortune befal not save by the breach of his
devoir to his subjects: wherefore it behoveth him who is invested with
the kingship to be assiduous in furthering three things, to wit, the
fostering of the faith, the fostering of his subjects and the fostering
of government; for by the ensuing of these three things, his kingdom
shall endure.” (¿) “How doth it behove him to do for his subjects’
weal?”——“By giving them their due and maintaining their laws and
customs[112] and employing Olema and learned men to teach them and
justifying them, one of other, and sparing their blood and defending
their goods and lightening their loads and strengthening their hosts.”
(¿) “What is the Minister’s claim upon the Monarch?”——“None hath a more
imperative claim on the King than hath the Wazir, for three reasons:
firstly, because of that which shall befal him from his liege lord in
case of error in judgment, and because of the general advantage to King
and commons in case of sound judgment: secondly, that folk may know the
goodliness of the degree which the Wazir holdeth in the King’s esteem
and therefore look on him with eyes of veneration and respect and
submission[113]; and thirdly, that the Wazir, seeing this from King and
subjects, may ward off from them that which they hate and fulfil to them
that which they love.” (¿) “I have heard all thou hast said of the
attributes of King and Wazir and liege and approve thereof: but now tell
me what is incumbent in keeping the tongue from lying and folly and
slandering good names and excess in speech.”——“It behoveth a man to
speak naught but good and kindness and to talk not of that which
toucheth him not; to leave detraction nor carry talk he hath heard from
one man to his enemy, neither seek to harm his friend nor his foe with
his Sultan and reck not of any (neither of him from whom he hopeth for
good nor of him whom he feareth for mischief) save of Allah Almighty;
for He indeed is the only one who harmeth or profiteth. Let him not
impute default unto any nor talk ignorantly, lest he incur the weight
and the sin thereof before Allah and earn hate among men; for know thou
that speech is like an arrow which once shot none can avail to recall.
Let him also beware of disclosing his secret to one who shall discover
it, lest he fall into mischief by reason of its disclosure, after
confidence on its concealment; and let him be more careful to keep his
secret from his friend than from his foe; for the keeping a secret with
all folk is of the performance of faithful trust.” (¿) “Tell me how a
man should bear himself with his family and friends.”——“There is no rest
for a son of Adam save in righteous conduct: he should render to his
family that which they deserve and to his brethren whatso is their due.”
(¿) “What should one render to one’s kinsfolk?”——“To parents, submission
and soft speech and affability and honour and reverence. To brethren
good counsel and readiness to expend money for them and assistance in
their undertakings and joyance in their joy and grieving for their grief
and closing of the eyes toward the errors that they may commit; for,
when they experience this from a man, they requite him with the best of
counsel they can command and expend their lives in his defence;
wherefore, an thou know thy brother to be trusty, lavish upon him thy
love and help him in all his affairs.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Thirteenth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the youth, the
son and heir of King Jali’ad, when questioned by the Wazir upon the
subjects aforesaid, returned him satisfactory replies; when Shimas
resumed, “I see that brethren are of two kinds, brethren of trust and
brethren of society.[114] As for the first who be friends, there is due
to them that which thou hast set forth; but now tell me of the others
who be acquaintances.”——“As for brethren of society thou gettest of them
pleasance and goodly usance and fair speech and enjoyable company; so be
thou not sparing to them of thy delights, but be lavish to them thereof,
like as they are lavish to thee, and render to them that which they
render to thee of affable countenance and an open favour and sweet
speech; so shall thy life be pleasant and thy words be accepted of
them.” (¿) “Tell me now of the provision decreed by the Creator to all
creatures. Hath He allotted to men and beasts each his several provision
to the completion of his appointed life-term; and if this allotment be
thus, what maketh him who seeketh his livelihood to incur hardships and
travail in the quest of that which he knoweth must come to him, if it be
decreed to him, albeit he incur not the misery of endeavour; and which,
if it be not decreed to him, he shall not win, though he strive after it
with his uttermost striving? Shall he therefore stint endeavour and in
his Lord put trust and to his body and his soul give rest?”——“Indeed, we
see clearly that to each and every there is a provision distributed and
a term prescribed; but to all livelihood are a way and means, and he who
seeketh would get ease of his seeking by ceasing to seek; withal there
is no help but that he seek his fortune. The seeker is, however, in two
cases; either he gaineth his fortune or he faileth thereof. In the first
case, his pleasure consisteth in two conditions; first, in the having
gained his fortune, and secondly, in the laudable[115] issue of his
quest; and in the other case, his pleasure consisteth, first, in his
readiness to seek his daily bread, secondly, in his abstaining from
being a burthen to the folk, and thirdly, in his freedom from liability
to blame.” (¿) “What sayst thou of the means of seeking one’s
fortune?”——“A man shall hold lawful that which Allah (to whom belong
Might and Majesty) alloweth, and unlawful whatso He forbiddeth.”
Reaching this pass the discourse between them came to an end, and Shimas
and all the Olema present rose and prostrating themselves before the
young Prince, magnified and extolled him, whilst his father pressed him
to his bosom and seating him on the throne of kingship, said, “Praised
be Allah who hath blessed me with a son to be the coolth of mine eyes in
my lifetime!” Then said the King’s son to Shimas in presence of all the
Olema, “O sage that art versed in spiritual questions, albeit Allah have
vouchsafed to me but scanty knowledge, yet do I comprehend thine intent
in accepting from me what I proffered in answer concerning that whereof
thou hast asked me, whether I hit or missed the mark therein, and belike
thou forgavest my errors; but now I am minded to question thee anent a
thing, whereof my judgment faileth and whereto my capacity is
insufficient and which my tongue availeth not to set forth, for that it
is obscure to me, with the obscurity of clear water in a black vessel.
Wherefore I would have thee expound it to me so no iota thereof may
remain doubtful to the like of me, to whom its obscurity may present
itself in the future, even as it hath presented itself to me in the
past; since Allah, even as He hath made life to be in lymph[116] and
strength in food and the cure of the sick in the skill of the leach, so
hath He appointed the healing of the fool to be in the learning of the
wise. Give ear, therefore, to my speech.” Replied the Wazir, “O luminous
of intelligence and master of casuistical questions, thou whose
excellence all the Olema attest, by reason of the goodliness of thy
discretion of things and thy distribution[117] thereof and the justness
of thine answers to the questions I have asked thee, thou knowest that
thou canst enquire of me naught but thou art better able than I to form
a just judgment thereon and expound it truly: for that Allah hath
vouchsafed unto thee such wisdom as He hath bestowed on none other of
men. But inform me of what thou wouldst question me.” Quoth the Prince,
“Tell me from what did the Creator (magnified be His all-might!) create
the world, albeit there was before it naught and there is naught seen in
this world but it is created from something; and the Divine Creator
(extolled and exalted be He!) is able to create things from
nothing,[118] yet hath His will decreed, for all the perfection of His
power and grandeur, that He shall create naught but from something.” The
Wazir replied, “As for those, who fashion vessels of potter’s clay,[119]
and other handicraftsmen, who cannot originate one thing save from
another thing, they are themselves only created entities: but, as for
the Creator, who hath wrought the world after this wondrous fashion, an
thou wouldst know His power (extolled and exalted be He!) of calling
things into existence, extend thy thought and consider the various kinds
of created things, and thou wilt find signs and instances, proving the
perfection of His puissance and that He is able to create the ens from
the non-ens: nay, He called things into being, after absolute
non-existence, for the elements which be the matter of created things
were sheer nothingness. I will expound this to thee, so thou mayst be in
no scepticism thereof, and the marvel-signs of the alternation of Night
and Day shall make this clear to thee. When the light goeth and the
night cometh, the day is hidden from us and we know not the place where
it abideth; and when the night passeth away with its darkness and its
terror, the day cometh and we know not the abiding-place of the
night.[120] In like manner, when the sun riseth upon us, we know not
where it hath laid up its light, and when it setteth, we ignore the
abiding-place of its setting: and the examples of this among the works
of the Creator (magnified be His name and glorified be His might;)
abound in what confoundeth the thought of the keenest-witted of human
beings.” Rejoined the Prince, “O sage, thou hast set before me of the
power of the Creator what is incapable of denial; but tell me how He
called His creatures into existence.” Answered Shimas, “He created them
by the sole power of His one Word,[121] which existed before time, and
wherewith he created all things.” Quoth the Prince, “Then Allah (be His
name magnified and His might glorified!) only willed the existence of
created things, before they came into being?” Replied Shimas, “And of
His will, He created them with His one Word and but for His speech and
that one Word, the creation had not come into existence.”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Fourteenth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after the
King’s son had asked his sire’s Wazir the casuistical questions
aforesaid, and had received a sufficient answer, Shimas said to him, “O
dear my son,[122] there is no man can tell thee other but this I have
said, except he twist the words handed down to us of the Holy Law and
turn the truths thereof from their evident meaning. And such a
perversion is their saying that the Word hath inherent and positive
power and I take refuge with Allah from such a misbelief! Nay, the
meaning of our saying that Allah (to whom belong Might and Majesty)
created the world with His Word is that He (exalted be His name!) is One
in His essence and His attributes and not that His Word hath independent
power. On the contrary, power is one of the attributes of Allah, even as
speech and other attributes of perfection are attributes of Allah
(exalted be His dignity and extolled be His empery!); wherefore He may
not be conceived without His Word, nor may His Word be conceived without
Him; for, with His Word, Allah (extolled be His praise!) created all His
creatures, and without His Word, the Lord created naught. Indeed, He
created all things but by His Word of Truth, and by Truth are we
created.” Quote the Prince, “I comprehend that which thou hast said on
the subject of the Creator and from thee I accept this with
understanding; but I hear thee say that He created the world by His Word
of Truth. Now Truth is the opposite of Falsehood; whence then arose
Falsehood with its opposition unto Truth, and how cometh it to be
possible that it should be confounded therewith and become doubtful to
human beings, so that they need to distinguish between the twain? And
doth the Creator (to whom belong Might and Majesty) love Falsehood or
hate it? An thou say He loveth Truth and by it created all things and
abhorreth Falsehood, how came the False, which the Creator hateth, to
invade the True which He loveth?” Quoth Shimas, “Verily Allah the Most
High created man all Truth[123], loving His name and obeying His word,
and on this wise man had no need of repentance till Falsehood invaded
the Truth whereby he was created by means of the capability[124] which
Allah had placed in him, being the will and the inclination called lust
of lucre.[125] When the False invaded the True on this wise, right
became confounded with wrong, by reason of the will of man and his
capability and greed of gain, which is the voluntary side of him
together with the weakness of human nature: wherefore Allah created
penitence for man, to turn away from him Untruth and stablish him in
Truth; and He created for him also punishment, if he should abide in the
obscurity of Falsehood.” Quoth the Prince, “Tell me how came Untruth to
invade Truth, so as to be confounded therewith and how became man liable
to punishment and so stood in need of repentance.” Replied Shimas, “When
Allah created man with Truth, He made him loving to Himself and there
was for him neither repentance nor punishment; but he abode thus till
Allah put in him the soul, which is of the perfection of humanity,
albeit naturally inclined to lust which is inherent therein. From this
sprang the growth of Untruth and its confusion with Truth, wherewith man
was created and with the love whereof his nature had been made; and when
man came to this pass, he declined from the Truth with disobedience and
whoso declineth from the Truth falleth into Falsehood.” Said the Prince,
“Then Falsehood invaded Truth only by reason of disobedience and
transgression?” Shimas replied, “Yes: and it is thus because Allah
loveth mankind, and of the abundance of His love to man He created him
having need of Himself, that is to say, of the very Truth: but
oftentimes man lapseth from this by cause of the inclination of the soul
to lusts and turneth to frowardness, wherefore he falleth into Falsehood
by the act of disobeying his Lord and thus deserveth punishment; and by
putting away from himself Falsehood with repentance and by the returning
to the love of the Truth, he meriteth future reward.” Quoth the Prince,
“Tell me the origin of sin, whilst all mankind trace their being to
Adam, and how cometh it that he, being created of Allah with truth, drew
disobedience on himself; then was his disobedience coupled with
repentance, after the soul had been set in him, that his issue might be
reward or retribution? Indeed, we see some men constant in sinfulness,
inclining to that which He loveth not and transgressing in this the
original intent and purpose of their creation, which is the love of the
Truth, and drawing on themselves the wrath of their Lord, whilst we see
others constant in seeking the satisfaction of their Creator and obeying
Him and meriting mercy and future recompense. What causeth this
difference prevailing between them?” Replied Shimas, “The origin of
disobedience descending upon mankind is attributable to Iblis, who was
the noblest of all that Allah (magnified be His name!) created of
angels[126] and men and Jinn, and the love of the Truth was inherent in
him, for he knew naught but this; but whenas he saw himself unique in
such dignity, there entered into him pride and conceit, vainglory and
arrogance which revolted from loyalty and obedience to the commandment
of His Creator; wherefore Allah made him inferior to all creatures and
cast him out from love, making his abiding-place to be in disobedience.
So when he knew that Allah (glorified be His name!) loved not
disobedience and saw Adam and the case wherein he was of truth and love
and obedience to his Creator, envy entered into him and he devised some
device to pervert Adam from the truth, that he might be a partaker with
himself in Falsehood; and by this, Adam incurred chastisement for his
inclining to disobedience, which his foe made fair to him, and his
subjection to his lusts, whenas he transgressed the charge of his Lord,
by reason of the appearance of Falsehood. When the Creator (magnified be
the praises of Him and hallowed be the names of Him!) saw the weakness
of man and the swiftness of his inclining to his enemy and leaving the
truth, He appointed to him, of His mercy, repentance, that therewith he
might arise from the slough[127] of inclination to disobedience and
taking the arms and armour of repentance, overcome therewith his foe
Iblis and his hosts and return to the Truth, wherein he was created.
When Iblis saw that Allah (magnified be His praise!) had appointed him a
protracted term,[128] he hastened to wage war upon man and to beset him
with wiles, to the intent that he might oust him from the favour of his
Lord and make him a partaker with himself in the wrath which he and his
hosts had incurred; wherefore Allah (extolled be His praises!) appointed
unto man the capability of penitence and commanded him to apply himself
to the Truth and persevere therein; and forbade him from disobedience
and frowardness and revealed to him that he had on the earth an enemy
warring against him and relaxing not from him night nor day. Thus hath
man a right to future reward, if he adhere to the Truth, in the love of
which his nature was created; but he becometh liable to punishment, if
the flesh master him and incline him to lusts.”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Fifteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the young
Prince had questioned Shimas touching disputed points of olden time and
had been duly answered, he presently said, “Now tell me by what power is
the creature able to transgress against his Creator, seeing that His
omnipotence is without bounds, even as thou hast set forth, and that
naught can overcome Him or depart from His will? Deemest thou not that
He is able to turn His creatures from this disobedience and compel them
eternally to hold the Truth?” Answered Shimas, “In very sooth Almighty
Allah (honoured be His name!) is just and equitable and loving-kind to
the people of His affection.[129] He created His creatures with justice
and equity and of the inspiration of His justice and the overflowing of
His mercy, He gave them kingship over themselves, that they should do
whatever they might design. He showeth them the way of righteousness and
bestoweth on them the power and ability of doing what they will of good:
and if they do the opposite thereof, they fall into destruction and
disobedience.” (¿) “If the Creator, as thou sayest, have granted to
mankind power and ability[130] and they by reason thereof are empowered
to do whatso they will, why then doth He not come between them and that
which they desire of wrong and turn them to the right?”—“This is of the
greatness of His mercy and the goodliness of His wisdom; for, even as
aforetime he showed wrath to Iblis and had no mercy on him, even so he
showed Adam mercy, by means[131] of repentance, and accepted of him,
after He had been wroth with him.” (¿) “He is indeed mere Truth, for He
it is who requiteth every one according to his works, and there is no
Creator save Allah who hath power over all things. But tell me, hath He
created that which He loveth and that which He loveth not or only that
which He loveth?”—“He created all things, but favoureth only that which
he loveth.” (¿) “What reckest thou of two things, one whereof is
pleasing to God and earneth future reward for him who practiseth it and
the other offendeth Allah and entaileth lawful punishment upon the
doer?”—“Expound to me these two things and make me to apprehend them,
that I may speak concerning them.” “They are good and evil, the two
things inherent in the body and in the soul.”—“O wise youth, I see that
thou knowest good and evil to be of the works which the soul and the
body combine to do. Good is named good, because it is in favour with
God, and evil is termed ill, for that in it is His ill-will. Indeed, it
behoveth thee to know Allah and to please Him by the practice of good,
for that He hath bidden us to this and forbidden us to do evil.” (¿) “I
see these two things, to wit, good and evil, to be wrought only by the
five senses familiarly known in the body of man, which be the
sensorium[132] whence proceed speech, hearing, sight, smell and touch.
Now I would have thee tell me whether these five senses were created
altogether for good or for evil.”—“Apprehend, O man, the exposition of
that whereof thou askest and it is a manifest proof; so lay it up in
thine innermost thought and take it to thy heart. And this it is that
the Creator (extolled and exalted be He!) created man with Truth and
impressed him with the love thereof and there proceedeth from it no
created thing save by the puissance of the Most High, whose trace is in
every phenomenon. He[133] (extol we Him and exalt we Him!) is not apt
but to the ordering of justice and equity and beneficence, and He
created man for the love of Him and set in him a soul, wherein the
inclination to lusts was innate and assigned him capability and ableness
and appointed the Five Senses aforesaid to be to him a means of winning
Heaven or Hell.” (¿) “How so?”—“In that He created the Tongue for
speech, the Hands for action, the Feet for walking and the Eyes for
seeing and the Ears for hearing, and upon each bestowed especial power
and incited them to exercise and motion, bidding each of them do naught
save that which pleaseth Him. Now what pleaseth Him in Speech is
truthfulness and abstaining from its opposite, which is falsehood; and
what pleaseth Him in Sight is turning it unto that which He loveth and
leaving the contrary, which is turning it unto that which He hateth,
such as looking unto lusts: and what pleaseth Him in Hearing is
hearkening to naught but the True, such as admonition and that which is
in Allah’s writ and leaving the contrary, which is listening to that
which incurreth the anger of Allah; and what pleaseth Him in the Hands
is not hoarding up that which He entrusteth to them, but expending it in
such way as shall please Him and leaving the contrary, which is avarice
or spending in sinfulness that which He hath committed to them; and what
pleaseth Him in the Feet is that they be constant in the pursuit of
good, such as the quest of instruction, and leave its contrary, which is
the walking in other than the way of Allah. Now respecting the rest of
the lusts which man practiseth, they proceed from the body by command of
the soul. But the lusts which proceed from the body are of two kinds,
the lust of reproduction and the lust of the belly. As for the former,
that which pleaseth Allah thereof is that it be not other than
lawful[134] and He is displeased with it if contrary to His law. As for
the lust of the belly, eating and drinking, what pleaseth Allah thereof
is that each take naught save that which the Almighty hath appointed him
be it little or mickle, and praise the Lord and thank Him: and what
angereth Him thereof is that a man take that which is not his by right.
All precepts other than these are false, and thou knowest that Allah
created every thing and delighteth only in Good and commandeth each
member of the body to do that which He hath made on it incumbent, for
that He is the All-wise, the All-knowing.” (¿) “Was it foreknown unto
Allah Almighty (exalted be His power!) that Adam, by eating of the tree
from which He forbade him and whence befel what befel, would leave
obedience for disobedience?”—“Yes, O sage youth. This was foreknown unto
Allah Almighty ere He created Adam; and the proof and manifestation
attached thereto is the warning He gave him against eating of the tree
and His informing him that, if he ate of the fruit he would be
disobedient. And this was in the way of justice and equity, lest Adam
should have an argument wherewith he might excuse himself against his
Lord. When, therefore, he fell into error and calamity and when disgrace
waxed sore upon him and reproach, this passed to his posterity after
him; wherefore Allah sent Prophets and Apostles and gave to them Books
and they taught us the divine commandments and expounded to us what was
therein of admonitions and precepts and made clear to us and manifest
the way of righteousness and explained to us what it behoved us to do
and what to leave undone. Now we are endowed with Freewill and he who
acteth within these lawful limits winneth his wish and prospereth, while
whoso transgresseth these legal bounds and doeth other than that which
these precepts enjoin, resisteth the Lord and is ruined in both Abodes.
This then is the road of Good and Evil. Thou knowest that Allah over all
things is Omnipotent and created not lusts for us but of His pleasure
and volunty and He bade us use them in the way of lawfulness, so they
might be to us a good; but, when we use them in the way of sinfulness
they are to us an evil. Therefore what of righteous we compass is from
Allah Almighty, and what of wrongous from ourselves[135] His creatures,
not from the Creator, exalted be He herefor with highmost
exaltation!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Sixteenth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
youth, King Jali’ad’s son had questioned Shimas concerning these
subtleties and had been duly answered, he pursued, “That which thou hast
expounded to me concerning Allah and His creatures I understand; but
tell me of one matter, concerning which my mind is perplexed with
extreme wonderment, and that is that I marvel at the sons of Adam, how
careless they are of the life to come and at their lack of taking
thought thereof and their love to this world, albeit they know that they
must needs leave it and depart from it, whilst they are yet young in
years.”—“Yes, verily; and that which thou seest of its changefulness and
traitorousness with its children is a sign that Fortune to the fortunate
will not endure nor to the afflicted affliction; for none of its people
is secure from its changefulness and even if one have power over it and
be content therewith, yet there is no help but that his estate change
and removal hasten unto him. Wherefore man can put no trust therein nor
profit by that which he enjoyeth of its gilding and glitter[136]; and we
knowing this will know that the sorriest of men in condition are those
who are deluded by this world and are unmindful of the other world; for
that whatso of present ease they enjoy will not even the fear and misery
and horrors which will befal them after their removal therefrom. Thus
are we certified that, if the creature knew that which will betide him
with the coming of death[137] and his severance from that which he
enjoyeth of pleasure and delight, he would cast away the world and that
which is therein; for we are certified that the next life is better for
us and more profitable.” Said the Prince, “O sage, thou hast dispelled
the darkness that was upon my heart by the light of thy shining lamp and
hast directed me into the right road I must tread on the track of Truth
and hast given me a lantern whereby I may see.” Then rose one of the
learned men who were in the presence and said, “When cometh the season
of Prime, needs must the hare seek the pasture as well as the elephant;
and indeed I have heard from you twain such questions and solutions as I
never before heard; but now leave that and let me ask you of somewhat.
Tell me, what is the best of the goods of the world?” Replied the
Prince, “Health of body, lawful livelihood and a virtuous son.” (¿)
“What is the greater and what is the less?”—“The greater is that to
which a lesser than itself submitteth and the less that which submitteth
to a greater than itself.” (¿) “What are the four things wherein concur
all creatures?”—“Men concur in meat and drink, the sweet of sleep, the
lust of women and the agonies of death.” (¿) “What are the three things
whose foulness none can do away?”—“Folly, meanness of nature, and
lying.” (¿) “What is the best kind of lie,[138] though all kinds are
foul?”—“That which averteth harm from its utterer and bringeth gain.”
(¿) “What kind of truthfulness is foul, though all kinds are
fair?”—“That of a man glorying in that which he hath and vaunting
himself thereof.” (¿) “What is the foulest of foulnesses?”—“When a man
boasteth himself of that which he hath not.” (¿) “Who is the most
foolish of men?”—“He who hath no thought but of what he shall put in his
belly.” Then said Shimas, “O King, verily thou art our King, but we
desire that thou assign the kingdom to thy son after thee, and we will
be thy servants and lieges.” So the King exhorted the Olema and others
who were in the presence to remember that which they had heard and do
according thereto and enjoined them to obey his son’s commandment, for
that he made him his heir-apparent,[139] so he should be the successor
of the King his sire; and he took an oath of all the people of his
empire, literates and braves and old men and boys, to mention none
other, that they would not oppose him in the succession nor transgress
against his commandment. Now when the Prince was seventeen years old,
the King sickened of a sore sickness and came nigh to die; so, being
certified that his decease was at hand, he said to the people of his
household, “This is disease of Death which is upon me; wherefore do ye
summon my son and kith and kin and gather together the Grandees and
Notables of my empire, so not one of them may remain except he be
present.” Accordingly they fared forth and made proclamation to those
who were near and published the summons to those who were afar off, and
they all assembled and went in to the King. Then said they to him, “How
is it with thee, O King, and how deemest thou for thyself of these thy
dolours?” Quoth Jali’ad, “Verily, this my malady is mortal and the shaft
of death hath executed that which Allah Almighty decreed against me:
this is the last of my days in the world here and the first of my days
in the world hereafter.” Then said he to his son, “Draw near unto me.”
So the youth drew near, weeping with weeping so sore, that he well nigh
drenched the bed, whilst the King’s eyes welled tears and all who were
present wept. Quoth Jali’ad, “Weep not, O my son; I am not the first
whom this Inevitable betideth; nay, it is common to all that Allah hath
created. But fear thou the Almighty and do good deeds which shall
precede thee to the place whither all creatures tend and wend. Obey not
thy lusts, but occupy thy soul with lauding the Lord in thy standing up
and thy sitting down, in thy waking and in thy sleeping. Make the Truth
the aim of thine eyes; this is the last of my speech with thee and—The
Peace.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Seventeenth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Jali’ad charged his son with such injunctions and made him his heir to
succeed him in his reign, the Prince said, “O dear father mine,[140]
thou knowest that I have ever been to thee obedient and thy commandment
carrying out, mindful of thine injunctions and thine approof seeking;
for thou hast been to me the best of fathers; how, then, after thy
death, shall I depart from that which contenteth thee? And now, having
fairly ordered my nurture thou art about to depart from me and I have no
power to bring thee back to me; but, an I be mindful of thy charge, I
shall be blessed therein and great good fortune shall betide me.” Quoth
the King, and indeed he was in the last agony of departing life, “Dear
my son, cleave fast unto ten precepts, which if thou hold, Allah shall
profit thee herewith in this world and the next world, and they are as
follows. Whenas thou art wroth, curb thy wrath; when thou art afflicted,
be patient; when thou speakest be soothfast; when thou promisest,
perform; when thou judgest, do justice; when thou hast power, be
merciful; deal generously by thy governors and lieutenants; forgive thy
foes; be lavish of good offices to thine adversary, and stay thy
mischief from him. Observe also other ten precepts,[141] wherewith Allah
shall profit thee among the people of thy realm, to wit, when thou
dividest, be just; when thou punishest, oppress not; when thou engagest
thyself, fulfil thine engagement; hearken to those that give thee loyal
counsel; when offence is offered to thee, neglect it; abstain from
contention; enjoin thy subjects to the observance of the divine laws and
of praiseworthy practices; abate ignorance with a sharp sword; withhold
thy regard from treachery and its untruth; and, lastly, do equal justice
between the folk, so they may love thee, great and small, and the wicked
and corrupt of them may fear thee.” Then he addressed himself to the
Emirs and Olema which were present when he appointed his son to be his
successor, saying, “Beware ye of transgressing the commandment of your
King and neglecting to hearken to your chief, for therein lieth ruin for
your realm and sundering for your society and bane for your bodies and
perdition for your possessions; and your foe would exult over you. Well
ye wot the covenant ye made with me, and even thus shall be your
covenant with this youth and the troth which plighted between you and me
shall be also between you and him; wherefore it behoveth you to give ear
unto and obey his commandment, for that in this is the well-being of
your conditions. So be ye constant with him anent that wherein ye were
with me and your estate shall prosper and your affairs be fair; for
behold, he hath the Kingship over you and is the lord of your fortune,
and—The Peace?” Then the death-agony[142] seized him and his tongue was
bridled: so he pressed his son to him and kissed him and gave thanks
unto Allah; after which his hour came and his soul fared forth. All his
subjects and the people of his court mourned and keened over him and
they shrouded him and buried him with pomp and honour and reverence;
after which they returned with the Prince and clad him in the royal
robes and crowned him with his father’s crown and put the seal-ring on
his finger, after seating him on the Throne of Sovranship. The young
King ordered himself towards them, after his father’s fashion of
mildness and justice and benevolence, for a little while till the world
waylaid him and entangled him in its lusts, whereupon, its pleasures
made him their prey and he turned to its gilding and gewgaws, forsaking
the engagements which his father had imposed upon him and casting off
his obedience to him, neglecting the affairs of his reign and treading a
road wherein was his own destruction. The love of women waxed stark in
him and came to such a pass that, whenever he heard tell of a beauty, he
would send for her and take her to wife; and after this wise, he
collected women more in number than ever had Solomon, David-son, King of
the children of Israel. Also he would shut himself up with a company of
them for a month at a time, during which he went not forth neither
enquired of his realm or its rule nor looked into the grievances of such
of his subjects as complained to him; and if they wrote to him, he
returned them no reply. Now when they saw this and witnessed his neglect
of their affairs and lack of care for their interests and those of the
state, they were assured that ere long some calamity would betide them
and this was grievous to them. So they met privily one with other and
took counsel together blaming their King, and one of them said to the
rest, “Come, let us go to Shimas, Chief of the Wazirs, and set forth to
him our case and acquaint him with that wherein we are by reason of this
King, so he may admonish him; else, in a little, calamity will dawn upon
us, for the world hath dazzled the Sovran with its delights and seduced
him with its snares.” Accordingly, they repaired to Shimas and said to
him, “O wise man and prudent, the world hath dazed the King with its
delights and taken him in its toils, so that he turneth unto vanity and
worketh for the undoing of the state. Now with the disordering of the
state the commons will be corrupted and our affairs will run to ruin. We
see him not for days and months nor cometh there forth from him any
commandment to us or to the Wazir or any else. We cannot refer aught of
our need to him and he looketh not to the administration of justice nor
taketh thought to the condition of any of his subjects, in his disregard
of them.[143] And behold we are come to acquaint thee with the truth of
things, for that thou art the chiefest and most accomplished of us and
it behoveth not that calamity befal a land wherein thou dwellest, seeing
that thou art most able of any to amend this King. Wherefore go thou and
speak with him: haply he will hearken to thy word and return unto the
way of Allah.”[144] So Shimas arose forthright and repairing to the
palace, foregathered with the first page he could find and said to him,
“Fair my son, I beseech thee ask leave for me to go in to the King, for
I have an affair, concerning which I would fain see his face and
acquaint him therewith and hear what he shall answer me thereanent.”
Answered the page, “O my lord, by Allah, this month past hath he given
none leave to come in to him, nor have I all this time looked upon his
face; but I will direct thee to one who shall crave admission for thee.
Do thou lay hold of such a blackamoor slave who standeth at his head and
bringeth him food from the kitchen. When he cometh forth to go to the
kitchen, ask him what seemeth good to thee; for he will do for thee that
which thou desirest.” So the Wazir repaired to the door of the kitchen
and sat there a little while, till up came the black and would have
entered the kitchen; but Shimas caught hold of him and said to him,
“Dear my son, I would fain stand in presence of the King and speak with
him of somewhat especially concerneth him; so prithee, of thy kindness,
when he hath ended his undurn-meal and his temper is at its best, speak
for me and get me leave to approach him, so I may bespeak him of that
which shall suit him.” “I hear and obey,” answered the black and taking
the food carried it to the King, who ate thereof and his temper was
soothed thereby. Then said the black to him, “Shimas standeth at the
door and craveth admission, so he may acquaint thee with matters that
specially concern thee.” At this the King was alarmed and disquieted and
commanded to admit the Minister.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Eighteenth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the King
bade the blackamoor admit Shimas, the slave went forth to him and bade
him enter; whereupon he went in and falling prone before Allah, kissed
the King’s hands and blessed him. Then said the King, “What hath betided
thee, O Shimas, that thou seekest admission unto me?” He answered, “This
long while have I not looked upon the face of my lord the King and
indeed I longed sore for thee; and now, behold, I have seen thy
countenance and come to thee with a word which I would lief say to thee,
O King stablished in all prosperity!” Quoth the King, “Say what seemeth
good to thee;” and quoth Shimas, “I would have thee bear in mind O King,
that Allah Almighty hath endowed thee with learning and wisdom, for all
the tenderness of thy years, such as He never vouchsafed unto any of the
Kings before thee, and hath fulfilled the measure of his bounties to
thee with the Kingship; and He loveth not that thou depart from that
wherewith He hath endowed thee unto other than it, by means of thy
disobedience to Him; wherefore it behoveth thee not to levy war
against[145] Him with thy hoards but of His injunctions to be mindful
and unto His commandments obedient. Indeed, I have seen thee, this while
past, forget thy sire and his charges and reject his covenant and
neglect his counsel and words of wisdom and renounce his justice and
good governance, remembering not the bounty of Allah to thee neither
requiting it with gratitude and thanks to Him.” The King asked, “How so?
And what is the manner of this?;” and Shimas answered, “The manner of it
is that thou neglectest to administer the affairs of the state and that
which Allah hath committed unto thee of the interests of thy lieges and
surrenderest thyself to thy lower nature in that which it maketh fair to
thee of the slight lusts of the world. Verily it is said that the
welfare of the state and of the Faith and of the folk is of the things
which it behoveth the King to watch; wherefore it is my rede, O King,
that thou look fairly to the issue of thine affair, for thus wilt thou
find the manifest road wherein is salvation, and not accept a trifling
pleasure and a transient which leadeth to the abyss of destruction, lest
there befal thee that which befel the Fisherman.” The King asked, “What
was that?”; and Shimas answered, “There hath reached me this tale of


                       _THE FOOLISH FISHERMAN_.”

A Fisherman went forth to a river for fishing therein as was his wont;
and when he came thither and walked upon the bridge, he saw a great fish
and said in himself, “’Twill not serve me to abide here, but I will
follow yonder fish whitherso it goeth, till I catch it, for it will
relieve me from fishing for days and days.” So he did off his clothes
and plunged into the river after the fish. The current bore him along
till he overtook it and laid hold of it, when he turned and found
himself far from the bank. But albeit he saw what the stream had done
with him, he would not loose the fish and return, but ventured life and
gripping it fast with both hands, let his body float with the flow,
which carried him on till it cast him into a whirlpool[146] none might
enter and come out therefrom. With this he fell to crying out and
saying, “Save a drowning man!” And there came to him folk of the keepers
of the river and said to him, “What ailed thee to cast thyself into this
great peril?” Quoth he, “It was I myself who forsook the plain way
wherein was salvation and gave myself over to concupiscence and
perdition.” Quoth they, “O fellow, why didst thou leave the way of
safety and cast thyself into this destruction, knowing from of old that
none may enter herein and be saved? What hindered thee from throwing
away what was in thy hand and saving thyself? So hadst thou escaped with
thy life and not fallen into this perdition, whence there is no
deliverance; and now not one of us can rescue thee from this thy ruin.”
Accordingly the man cut off all his hopes of life and lost that which
was in his hand and for which his flesh had prompted him to venture
himself, and died a miserable death. “And I tell thee not this parable,
O King,” added Shimas, “but that thou mayest leave this contemptible
conduct that diverteth thee from thy duties and look to that which is
committed to thee of the rule of thy folk and the maintenance of the
order of thy realm, so that none may see fault in thee.” The King asked,
“What wouldst thou have me do?” And Shimas answered, “To-morrow, an thou
be well and in good case,[147] give the folk leave to come in to thee
and look into their affairs and excuse thyself to them and promise them
of thine own accord good governance and prosperity.” Quoth the King, “O
Shimas, thou hast spoken sensibly and rightly; and to-morrow, Inshallah,
I will do that which thou counsellest me.” So the Wazir went out from
him and told the lieges all he had said to him; and, when morning
morrowed, the King came forth of his privacy and bade admit the people,
to whom he excused himself, promising them that thenceforward he would
deal with them as they wished, wherewith they were content and departed
each to his own dwelling.[148] Then one of the King’s wives, who was his
best-beloved of them and most in honour with him, visited him and seeing
him changed of colour and thoughtful over his affairs, by reason of that
which he had heard from his chief Wazir, said to him, “O King, how is it
that I see thee troubled in mind? Hast thou aught to complain of?”
Answered he, “No: but my pleasures have distracted me from my duties.
What right have I to be thus negligent of my affairs and those of my
subjects? If I continue on this wise, soon, very soon, the kingdom will
pass out of my hand.” She rejoined, “I see, O King, that thou hast been
duped by the Wazirs and Ministers, who wish but to torment and entrap
thee, so thou mayst have no joyance of this thy kingship neither feel
ease nor taste delight; nay, they would have thee consume thy life in
warding off trouble from them, till thy days be wasted in travail and
weariness and thou be as one who slayeth himself for the benefit of
another or like the Boy and the Thieves.” Asked the King, “How was
that?” and she answered, “They tell the following tale anent


                      _THE BOY AND THE THIEVES_.”

Seven Thieves once went out to steal, according to their custom, and
fell in with a Boy, poor and orphaned to boot, who besought them for
somewhat to eat. One of them asked him, “Wilt go with us, O Boy, and we
will feed thee and give thee drink, clothe thee and entreat thee
kindly?” And he answered, “Needs must I go with you whitherso ye will
and ye are as my own kith and kin.” So they took him and fared on with
him till they came to a garden, and entering, went round about therein,
till they found a walnut-tree laden with ripe fruit and said to him, “O
Boy, wilt thou enter this garden with us and swarm up this tree and eat
of its walnuts thy sufficiency and throw the rest down to us?” He
consented and entered with them,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Nineteenth Night,

She said. It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Boy
consented and entered with the Thieves, one of them said to other “Look
which is the lightest and smallest of us and make him climb the tree.”
And they said, “None of us is slighter than this Boy.” So they sent him
up into the tree and said to him, “O Boy, touch not aught of the fruit,
lest some one see thee and work thee a mischief.” He asked, “How then
shall I do?”, and they answered, “Sit among the boughs and shake them
one by one with all thy might, so that which is thereon may fall, and we
will pick it up. Then, when thou hast made an end of shaking down the
fruit, come down and take thy share of that which we have gathered.”
Accordingly he began to shake every branch at which he could come, so
that the nuts fell and the thieves picked them up and ate some and hid
other some till all were full, save the Boy who had eaten naught. As
they were thus engaged, behold, up came the owner of the garden who,
standing to witness the spectacle, enquired of them, “What do ye with
this tree?” They replied “We have taken naught thereof; but we were
passing by and seeing yonder Boy on the tree, took him for the owner
thereof and besought him to give us to eat of the fruit. Thereat he fell
to shaking one of the branches, so that the nuts dropped down, and we
are not at fault.” Quoth the master to the Boy, “What sayst thou?”; and
quoth he, “These men lie; but I will tell thee the truth. It is that we
all came hither together and they bade me climb the tree and shake its
boughs that the nuts might fall down to them, and I obeyed their
bidding.” Said the master, “Thou hast cast thyself into sore calamity;
but hast thou profited by eating aught of the fruit?”; and he said, “I
have eaten naught thereof.” Rejoined the owner of the garden, “Now know
I thy folly and thine ignorance in that thou hast wrought to ruin
thyself and profit others.” Then said he to the Thieves, “I have no
resort against you, so wend your ways!” But he laid hands on the Boy and
punished him. “On like wise,” added the favourite, “thy Wazirs and
Officers of state would sacrifice thee to their interests and do with
thee as did the Thieves with the Boy.” Answered the King, “Thou sayst
sooth, and speakest truth: I will not go forth to them nor leave my
pleasures.” Then he passed the night with his wife in all delight till
the morning, when the Grand Wazier arose and, assembling the Officers of
state, together with those of the lieges who were present with them,
repaired with them to the palace-gate, congratulating one another and
rejoicing. But the door opened not nor did the King come forth unto them
nor give them leave to go in to him. So, when they despaired of him,
they said to Shimas, “O excellent Wazir and accomplished sage, seest
thou not the behaviour of this lad, young of years and little of wit,
how he addeth to his offences falsehood? See how he hath broken his
promise to us and hath not performed that for which he engaged unto us,
and this sin it behoveth thee join unto his other sins; but we beseech
thee go in to him yet again and discover what is the cause of his
holding back and refusal to come forth; for we doubt not but that the
like of this action cometh of his corrupt nature, and indeed he is now
hardened to the highest degree.” Accordingly, Shimas went in to the King
and bespake him, saying, “Peace be with thee, O King! How cometh it that
I see thee give thyself up to these slight pleasures and neglect the
great affair whereto it behoveth thee sedulously apply thyself? Thou art
like unto a man who had a milch-camel and, coming one day to milk her,
the goodness of her milk made him neglect to hold fast her halter; which
whenas she felt, she haled herself free and made off into the wold. Thus
the man lost both milk and camel and the loss that betided him surpassed
his gain. Wherefore, O King, do thou look unto that wherein is thy
welfare and the weal of thy subjects; for, even as it behoveth not a man
to sit for ever at the kitchen door, because of his need unto food, so
should he not alway company with women, by reason of his inclination to
them. And as a man should eat but as much food as will guard him from
the pains of hunger and drink but what will ward off the pangs of
thirst, in like manner it behoveth the sensible man to content himself
with passing two of the four-and-twenty hours of his day with women and
expend the rest in ordering his own affairs and those of his people. For
to be longer than this in company with women is hurtful both to mind and
body, seeing that they bid not unto good neither direct thereto:
wherefore it besitteth not a man to accept from them or word or deed,
for indeed it hath reached me that many men have come to ruin through
their women, and amongst others a certain man who perished through
conversation with his wife at her command.” The King asked, “How was
that?” and Shimas answered, saying, “Hear, O King, the tale of


                        _THE MAN AND HIS WIFE_.”

They relate that a certain man had a wife whom he loved and honoured,
giving ear to her speech and doing according to her rede. Moreover, he
had a garden, which he had newly planted with his own hand, and was wont
to go thither every day, to tend it and water it. One day his wife asked
him, “What hast thou planted in thy garden?”: and he answered, “All thou
lovest and desirest, and I am assiduous in tending and watering it.”
Quoth she, “Wilt thou not carry me thither and show it to me, so I may
look upon it and offer thee up a pious prayer for its prosperity, seeing
that my orisons are effectual?” Quoth he, “I will well; but have
patience with me till the morrow, when I will come and take thee.” So
early on the ensuing day, he carried her to the garden which he entered
with her. Now two young men saw them enter from afar and said each to
other, “Yonder man is an adulterer and yonder woman an adulteress, and
they have not entered this garden but to commit adultery.” Thereupon
they followed the couple to see what they would do, and hid themselves
in a corner of the garden. The man and his wife after entering abode
awhile therein, and presently he said to her, “Pray me the prayer thou
didst promise me;” but she replied, saying, “I will not pray for thee,
until thou do away my desire of that which women seek from men.” Cried
he, “Out on thee, O woman! Hast thou not thy fill of me in the house?
Here I fear scandal, especially as thou divertest me from my affairs.
Fearest thou not that some one will see us?” Quoth she, “We need have no
care for that, seeing that we do neither sin nor lewdness; and, as for
the watering of the garden, that may wait, because thou canst water it
when thou wilt.” And she would take neither excuse nor reason from him,
but was instant with him in seeking carnal coition. So he arose and lay
with her, which when the young men aforesaid saw, they ran upon them and
seized them,[149] saying, “We will not let you go, for ye are
adulterers, and except we have carnal knowledge of the woman, we will
report you to the police.” Answered the man, “Fie upon you! This is my
wife and I am the master of the garden.” They paid no heed to him, but
fell upon the woman, who cried out to him for succour, saying, “Suffer
them not to defile me!” Accordingly he came up to them, calling out for
help; but one of them turned on him and smote him with his dagger and
slew him.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


         Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Twentieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after slaying
the husband the two young men returned to the wife and ravished her.
“This I tell thee, O King,” continued the Wazir, “but that thou mayst
know that it becometh not men to give ear unto a woman’s talk neither
obey her in aught nor accept her judgment in counsel. Beware, then, lest
thou don the dress of ignorance, after the robe of knowledge and wisdom,
and follow perverse rede, after knowing that which is righteous and
profitable. Wherefore pursue thou not a paltry pleasure, whose trending
is to corruption and whose inclining is unto sore and uttermost
perdition.” When the King heard this from Shimas he said to him,
“To-morrow I will come forth to them, an it be the will of Allah the
Most High.” So Shimas returned to the Grandees and Notables who were
present and told them what the King had said. But this came to the ears
of the favourite wife; whereupon she went in to the King and said to
him, “The subjects of a King should be his slaves; but I see, O King,
thou art become a slave to thy subjects, because thou standest in awe of
them and fearest their mischief.[150] They do but desire to make proof
of thine inner man; and if they find thee weak, they will disdain thee;
but, if they find thee stout and brave, they will dread thee. On this
wise do ill Wazirs with their King, for that their wiles are many; but I
will make manifest unto thee the truth of their malice. An thou comply
with the conditions they demand, they will cause thee cease ruling and
do their will; nor will they leave leading thee on from affair to
affair, till they cast thee into destruction; and thy case will be as
that of the Merchant and the Robbers.” Asked the King, “How was that?”
and she answered, “I have heard tell this tale anent


                    _THE MERCHANT AND THE ROBBERS_.”

There was once a wealthy Merchant, who set out for a certain city
purposing to sell merchandise there, and when he came thither, he hired
him a lodging wherein he took up his abode. Now certain Robbers saw him,
men wont to lie in wait for merchants, that they might rob their goods;
so they went to his house and sought some device whereby to enter in,
but could find no way thereto, and their Captain said, “I’ll manage you
his matter.” Then he went away and, donning the dress of a leach, threw
over his shoulder a bag containing somewhat of medicines, after which he
set out, crying, “Who lacks a doctor?” and fared on till he came to the
merchant’s lodging and him sitting eating the noonday dinner. So he
asked him, “Dost thou need thee a physician?;” and the trader answered,
“I need naught of the kind; but sit thee down and eat with me.” The
thief sat down facing him and began to eat. Now this merchant was a
_belle fourchette_; and the Robber seeing this, said to himself, “I have
found my chance.” Then he turned to his host and said to him, “’Tis but
right for me to give thee an admonition; and after thy kindness to me, I
cannot hide it from thee. I see thee to be a great eater and the cause
of this is a disorder in thy stomach; wherefore unless thou take speedy
measures for thy cure, thine affair will end in perdition.” Quoth the
merchant, “My body is sound and my stomach speedy of digestion, and
though I be a hearty eater, yet is there no disease in my body, to Allah
be the praise and the thanks!” Quoth the Robber, “It may appear thus
unto thee; but I know thou hast a disease incubating in thy vitals and
if thou hearken to me, thou wilt medicine thyself.” The Merchant asked,
“And where shall I find him who knoweth my remedy?”; and the Robber
answered “Allah is the Healer; but a physician like myself cureth the
sick to the best of his power.” Then the other said, “Show me at once my
remedy and give me thereof.” Hereupon he gave him a powder, wherein was
a strong dose of aloes,[151] saying, “Use this to-night;” and he
accepted it gratefully. When the night came, the Merchant tasted
somewhat of the powder and found it nauseous of gust; nevertheless he
misdoubted not of it, but swallowed it all and therefrom found ease that
night. Next night the thief brought him another powder, wherein was yet
more aloes, and he took it: it purged him that night, but he bore
patiently with this and rejected it not. When the Robber saw that he
gave ear unto his word and put trust in him nor would gainsay him in
aught, he brought him a deadly drug[152] and gave it to him. The
Merchant swallowed it and no sooner had he done this than that which was
in his stomach fell down and his bowels were rent in sunder, and by the
morrow he was a dead man; whereupon the Robbers came and took all the
merchandise and monies that belonged to him. “This I tell thee, O King,”
added the favourite “but that thou mayst not accept one word from these
deluders; else will there befal thee that whereby thou wilt destroy
thyself.” Cried the King, “Thou sayst sooth; I will not go forth to
them.” Now when the morning morrowed, the folk assembled together and
repairing to the King’s door, sat there the most part of the day, till
they despaired of his coming forth, when they returned to Shimas and
said to him, “O sage philosopher and experienced master, seest thou not
that this ignorant lad doth naught but redouble in falsehood to us?
Verily ’twere only reasonable and right to take the Kingdom from him and
give it to another, so our affairs may be ordered and our estates
maintained; but go thou in to him a third time and tell him that naught
hindereth us from rising against him and taking the Kingship from him
but his father’s goodness to us and that which he required from us of
oaths and engagements. However, to-morrow, we will all, to the last of
us, assemble here with our arms and break down the gate of the
citadel[153]; and if he come forth to us and do that which we wish, no
harm is yet done[154]; else we will go in to him and slay him and put
the Kingdom in the hand of other than he.” So the Wazir Shimas went in
to him and said, “O King, that grovellest in thy gusts and thy lusts,
what is this thou dost with thyself? Would Heaven I wot who seduced thee
thereto! An it be thou who sinnest against thyself, there hath ceased
from thee that which we knew in thee aforetime of integrity and wisdom
and eloquence. Could I but learn who hath thus changed thee and turned
thee from wisdom to folly and from fidelity to iniquity and from
mildness to harshness and from acceptation of me to aversion from me!
How cometh it that I admonish thee thrice and thou acceptest not mine
admonition and that I counsel thee rightfully and still thou gainsayest
my counsel? Tell me, what is this child’s play and who is it prompteth
thee thereunto? Know that the people of thy Kingdom have agreed together
to come in to thee and slay thee and give thy Kingdom to another. Art
able to cope with them all and save thyself from their hands or canst
quicken thyself after being killed? If, indeed, thou be potent to do all
this, thou art safe and hast no occasion for my rede; but an thou have
any concern for thy life and thy kingship, return to thy sound sense and
hold fast thy reign and show forth to the folk the power of thy prowess
and persuade the people with thine excuse, for they are minded to tear
away that which is in thy hand and commit it unto other, being resolved
upon revolt and rebellion, led thereto by that which they know of thy
youth and thy self-submission to love-liesse and lusts; for that stones,
albeit they lie long under water, an thou withdraw them therefrom and
smite one upon other, fire will be struck from them. Now thy lieges are
many folk and they have taken counsel together against thee, with a
design to transfer the Kingship from thee to another and accomplish upon
thee whatso they desire of thy destruction. So shalt thou fare as did
the Jackals with the Wolf.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Shimas concluded with saying, “And they shall accomplish upon thee
whatso they desire of thy destruction: so shalt thou fare as fared the
Jackals with the Wolf.” Asked the King, “How was that?” and the Wazir
answered, “They tell the following tale of


                      _THE JACKALS AND THE WOLF_.”

A pack of Jackals[155] went out one day to seek food, and as they
prowled about in quest of this, behold, they happened upon a dead camel
and said in themselves, “Verily we have found wherewithal we may live a
great while; but we fear lest one of us oppress the other and the strong
bear down the weak with his strength and so the puny of us perish.
Wherefore it behoveth us seek one who shall judge between us and appoint
unto each his part, so the force-full may not lord it over the feeble.”
As they consulted together on such subject, suddenly up came a Wolf, and
one of the Jackals said to the others, “Right is your rede; let us make
this Wolf judge between us, for he is the strongest of beasts and his
father was Sultan over us aforetime; so we hope in Allah that he will do
justice between us.” Accordingly they accosted the Wolf and acquainting
him with what they had resolved concerning him said, “We make thee judge
between us, so thou mayst allot unto each of us his day’s meat, after
the measure of his need, lest the strong of us bear down the weak and
some of us destroy other of us.” The Wolf accepted the governance of
their affairs and allotted to each of them what sufficed him that day;
but on the morrow he said in his mind, “An I divide this camel amongst
these weaklings, no part thereof will come to me, save the pittance they
will assign to me, and if I eat it alone, they can do me no harm, seeing
that they are a prey to me and to the people of my house. Who, then, is
the one to hinder me from taking it all for myself? Surely, ’tis Allah
who hath bestowed it on me by way of provision without any obligation to
any of them. It were best that I keep it for myself, and henceforth I
will give them naught.” Accordingly, next morning when the Jackals came
to him, as was their wont, and sought of him their food, saying, “O Abu
Sirhán,[156] give us our day’s provender,[157]” he answered saying, “I
have nothing left to give you.” Whereupon they went away in the sorriest
plight, saying, “Verily, Allah hath cast us into grievous trouble with
this foul traitor, who regardeth not Allah nor feareth Him; but we have
neither stratagem nor strength on our side.” Moreover one of them said,
“Haply ’twas but stress of hunger that moved him to this; so let him eat
his fill to-day, and to-morrow we will go to him again.” Accordingly, on
the morrow, they again betook themselves to the Wolf and said to him, “O
Father of Foray, we gave thee authority over us, that thou mightest
apportion unto each of us his day’s meat and do the weak justice against
the strong of us, and that, when this provaunt is finished, thou
shouldst do thine endeavour to get us other and so we be always under
thy watch and ward. Now hunger is hard upon us, for that we have not
eaten these two days; so do thou give us our day’s ration and thou shalt
be free to dispose of all that remaineth as thou wilt.” But the Wolf
returned them no answer and redoubled in his hardness of heart and when
they strave to turn him from his purpose he would not be turned. Then
said one of the Jackals to the rest, “Nothing will serve us but that we
go to the Lion and cast ourselves on his protection and assign unto him
the camel. If he vouchsafe us aught thereof, ’twill be of his favour,
and if not, he is worthier of it than this scurvy rascal.” So they
betook themselves to the Lion and acquainted him with that which had
betided them from the Wolf, saying, “We are thy slaves and come to thee
imploring thy protection, so thou mayst deliver us from this Wolf, and
we will be thy thralls.” When the Lion heard their story, he was jealous
for Almighty Allah[158] and went with them in quest of the Wolf who,
seeing him approach addressed himself to flight; but the Lion ran after
him and seizing him, rent him in pieces and restored their prey to the
Jackals. “This showeth,” added Shimas, “that it fitteth no King to
neglect the affairs of his subjects; wherefore do thou hearken to my
rede and give credit to the words which I say to thee.” Quoth the King,
“I will hearken to thee and to-morrow, Inshallah, I will go forth to
them.” Accordingly Shimas went from him and returning to the folk, told
them that the King had accepted his advice and promised to come out unto
them on the morrow. But, when the favourite heard this saying reported
of Shimas and was certified that needs must the King go forth to his
subjects, she betook herself to him in haste and said to him, “How great
is my wonder at thy submissiveness and thine obedience to thy slaves!
Knowest thou not that these Wazirs are thy thralls? Why then dost thou
exalt them to this highmost pitch of importance that they imagine them
it was they gave thee this kingship and advanced thee to this rank and
that it is they who confer favours on thee, albeit they have no power to
do thee the least damage? Indeed, ’tis not thou who owest submission to
them; but on the contrary they owe it to thee, and it is their duty to
carry out thine orders. How cometh it then, that thou art so mightily
affrighted at them? It is said:—Unless thy heart be like iron, thou art
not fit to be a Sovran. But thy mildness hath deluded these men, so that
they presume upon thee and cast off their allegiance, although it
behoveth that they be constrained unto thy obedience and enforced to thy
submission. Therefore an thou hasten to accept their words and leave
them as they now are and vouchsafe to them the least thing against thy
will, they will weigh heavily upon thee and require other concessions of
thee, and this will become their habit. But, an thou hearken to me, thou
wilt not advance any one of them to power neither wilt thou accept his
word nor encourage him to presume upon thee; else wilt thou fare with
them as did the Shepherd with the Rogue.” Asked the King, “How was
that?” and she answered, “They relate this adventure of


                   _THE SHEPHERD AND THE ROGUE_.[159]

There was once a Shepherd, who fed a flock of sheep in the wold and kept
over them strait watch. One night, there came to him a Rogue thinking to
steal some of his charges and finding him assiduous in guarding them,
sleeping not by night nor neglecting them by day, prowled about him all
the livelong night, but could plunder nothing from him. So, when he was
weary of striving, he betook himself to another part of the waste and
trapping a lion, skinned him and stuffed his hide with bruised
straw[160]; after which he set it up on a high place in the desert,
where the Shepherd might see it and be assured thereof. Then he accosted
the Shepherd and said to him, “Yonder lion hath sent me to demand his
supper of these sheep.” The Shepherd asked, “Where is the lion?” and the
Rogue answered, “Lift thine eyes: there he standeth.” So the Shepherd
raised his eyes and seeing the semblance deemed it a very lion and was
much affrighted;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Shepherd saw the semblance of the lion, he deemed it a very lion and was
affrighted with the sorest fright, trembling for dread; so he said to
the thief, “O my brother take what thou wilt, I will not gainsay thee.”
Accordingly the Rogue took what he would of the sheep and redoubled in
greed by reason of the excess of the Shepherd’s fear. Accordingly, every
little while, he would hie to him and terrify him, saying, “The lion
hath need of this and requireth that, and his intent is to do thus and
thus,” and take his sufficiency of the sheep; and he stinted not to do
thus with him, till he had wasted the most part of his flock. “This, O
King,” added the favourite, “I tell thee only that thou suffer not the
Grandees of thy realm to be deluded by thy mildness and easiness of
temper and presume on thee; and, in right rede, their death were better
than that they deal thus with thee.” Quoth the King, “I accept this thy
counsel and will not hearken to their admonition neither will I go out
unto them.” On the morrow the Wazirs and Officers of State and heads of
the people assembled; and, taking each with him his weapon, repaired to
the palace of the King, so they might break in upon him and slay him and
seat another in his stead. When they came to the door, they required the
doorkeeper to open to them; but he refused, whereupon they sent to fetch
fire, wherewith to burn down the doors and enter. The doorkeeper,
hearing what they said went in to the King in haste and told him that
the folk were gathered together at the gate, adding, “They required me
to open to them, but I refused; and they have sent to fetch fire to burn
down the doors withal, so they may come into thee and slay thee. What
dost thou bid me do?” Quoth the King in himself, “Verily, I am fallen
into uttermost perdition.” Then he sent for the favourite; and, as soon
as she came, said to her, “Indeed, Shimas never told me aught but I
found it true, and now great and small are come purposing to slay me and
thee: and because the doorkeeper would not open to them, they have sent
to fetch fire, to burn the doors withal: so will the house be burnt and
we therein. What dost thou counsel me to do?” She replied, “No harm
shall betide thee, nor let thine affair affright thee. This is a time
when the simple rise against their Kings.” Quoth he, “What dost thou
counsel me to do and how shall I act in this affair?” Quoth she, “My
rede is that thou fillet thy head and feign thyself sick: then send for
the Wazir Shimas, who will come and see the plight wherein thou art; and
do thou say to him:—Verily I purposed to go forth to the folk this day;
but this malady hindered me. So go thou out to them and acquaint them
with my condition and tell them that to-morrow I will fare forth without
fail to them and do their need and look into their affairs, so they may
be reassured and their rage may subside. Then do thou summon ten of thy
father’s slaves, stalwart men of strength and prowess, to whom thou
canst entrust thyself, hearing to thy best and complying with thy
commandment, surely keeping thy secret and lief to thy love; and charge
them on the morrow to stand at thy head and bid them suffer none of the
folk to enter, save one by one; and all who enter do thou say:—Seize
them and do them die. An they agree with thee upon this, to-morrow set
up thy throne in the Divan[161] and open thy doors. When the folk see
that thou hast opened to them their minds will be set at ease and they
will come to thee with a whole heart, and seek admission to thee. Then
do thou admit them, one after one, even as I said to thee and work with
them thy will; but it behoveth thee begin by slaying Shimas, their chief
and leader; for he is the Grand Wazier and head of the matter. Therefore
do him die first and after put all the rest to death, one after other,
and spare none whom thou knowest to have broken with thee his covenant;
and in like way slaughter all whose violence thou fearest. An thou deal
thus with them, there will be left them no power to make head against
thee; so shalt thou be at rest from them with full repose, and shalt
enjoy thy kingship in peace and do whatso thou wilt; and know that there
is no device that will profit thee more than this.” Quoth the King,
“Verily, this thy counsel is just and that which thou biddest me is to
the point and I will assuredly do as thou directest.” So he called for a
fillet and bound his head therewith and shammed sickness. Then he sent
for the Grand Wazir and said to him, “O Shimas, thou knowest that I love
thee and hearken to the counsel of thee and thou art to me as brother
and father both in one; also thou knowest that I do all thou biddest me
and indeed thou badest me go forth to the lieges and sit to judge
between them. Now I was assured that this was right rede on thy part,
and purposed to go forth to them yesterday; but this sickness assailed
me and I cannot sit up. It hath reached me that the folk are incensed at
my failure to come forth to them and are minded of their mischief to do
with me that which is unmeet for that they know not what ailment aileth
me. So go thou forth to them and acquaint them with my case and the
condition I am in; and excuse me to them, for I am obedient to their
bidding and will do as they desire; wherefore order this affair and
engage thyself for me herefor, even as thou hast been a loyal counsellor
to me and to my sire before me, and it is of thy wont to make peace
between the people. To-morrow, Inshallah, I will without fail come forth
to them, and peradventure my sickness will cease from me this night, by
the blessing of the purest intent and the good I purpose them in my
heart.” So Shimas prostrated himself to Allah and called down blessings
on the King and kissed his hand, rejoicing at this. Then he went forth
to the folk and told them what he had heard from the King and forbade
them from that which they had a mind to do, acquainting them with what
excused the King for his absence and informing them that he had promised
to come forth to them on the morrow and deal with them according to
their desires; whereupon they dispersed and hied them to their
houses.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shimas went from
the presence to the ringleaders of the commons and said to them,
“To-morrow the Sovran will come forth to you and will deal with you as
ye desire.” So they hied them to their homes. On such wise fared it with
them; but as regards the Monarch, he summoned ten slaves of gigantic
stature,[162] men of hard heart and prow of prowess, whom he had chosen
from amongst his father’s body-guards; and said to them, “Ye know the
favour, esteem and high rank ye held with my sire and all the bounties,
benefits and honours he bestowed on you, and I will advance you to yet
higher dignity with me than this. Now I will tell you the reason thereof
and ye are under safeguard of Allah from me. But first I will ask you
somewhat, wherein if ye do my desire, obeying me in that which I shall
bid you and conceal my secret from all men, ye shall have of me largesse
and favour surpassing expectation. But above all things obedience!” The
ten thralls answered him with one mouth and in sequent words, saying,
“Whatso thou biddest us, O our liege, that we will do, nor will we
depart in aught from thy commandment, for thou art our lord and master.”
Quoth the King, “Allah allot you weal! Now will I tell you the reason
why I have chosen you out for increase of honour with me. Ye know how
liberally my father dealt with the folk of his realm and the oath he
took from them on behalf of me and how they promised him that they would
not break faith with me nor gainsay the bidding of me; and ye saw how
they did yesterday, whenas they gathered all together about me and would
have slain me. Now I am minded to do with them somewhat; and ’tis this,
for that I have considered their action of yesterday and see that naught
will restrain them from its like save exemplary chastisement: wherefore
I perforce charge you privily to do to death whom I shall point out to
you, to the intent that I may ward off mischief and calamity from my
realm by slaying their leaders and Chiefs; and the manner thereof shall
be on this wise. To-morrow I will sit on this seat in this chamber and
give them admission to me one by one, coming in at one door and going
out at another; and do ye, all ten, stand before me and be attentive to
my signs: and whoso entereth singly, take him and drag him into yonder
chamber and kill him and hide his corpse.” The slaves answered, “We
hearken to thy hest and obey thy order”: whereupon he gave them gifts
and dismissed them for the night. On the morrow he summoned the thralls
and bade set up the royal seat: then he donned his kingly robes and
taking the Book of law-cases[163] in his hands, posted the ten slaves
before him and commanded to open the doors. So they opened the doors and
the herald proclaimed aloud, saying, “Whoso hath authority, let him come
to the King’s carpet[164]!” Whereupon up came the Wazirs and Prefects
and Chamberlains and stood, each in his rank. Then the King bade admit
them, one after one, and the first to enter was Shimas, according to the
custom of the Grand Wazir; but no sooner had he presented himself before
the King, and ere he could beware, the ten slaves gat about him, and
dragging him into the adjoining chamber, despatched him. On like wise
did they with the rest of the Wazirs and Olema and Notables, slaying
them, one after other, till they made a clean finish.[165] Then the King
called the headsmen and bade them ply sword upon all who remained of the
folk of valour and stowre: so they fell on them and left none whom they
knew for a man of mettle but they slew him, sparing only the proletaires
and the refuse of the people. These they drove away and they returned
each to his folk, whilst the King secluded himself with his pleasures
and surrendered his soul to its lusts, working tyranny, oppression and
violence, till he outraced all the men of evil who had forerun him.[166]
Now this King’s dominion was a mine of gold and silver and jacinths and
jewels and the neighbouring rulers, one and all, envied him this empire
and looked for calamity to betide him. Moreover, one of them, the King
of Outer Hind, said in himself, “I have gotten my desire of wresting the
realm from the hand of yonder silly lad, by reason of that which hath
betided of his slaughter of the Chiefs of his State and of all men of
valour and mettle that were in his country. This is my occasion to
snatch away that which is in his hand, seeing he is young in years and
hath no knowledge of war nor judgment thereto, nor is there any left to
counsel him aright or succour him. Wherefore this very day will I open
on him the door of mischief by writing him a writ wherein I will flyte
him and reproach him with that which he hath done and see what he will
reply.” So he indited him a letter to the following effect:—“In the name
of Allah the Compassionating, the Compassionate * And after * I have
heard tell of that which thou hast done with thy Wazirs and Olema and
men of valiancy * and that whereinto thou hast cast thyself of calamity
* so that there is neither power nor strength left in thee to repel
whoso shall assail thee, more by token that thou transgressest and
orderest thyself tyrannously and profligately * Now Allah hath assuredly
given me the conquering of thee and the mastery over thee and into my
hand hath delivered thee; wherefore do thou give ear to my word and obey
the commandment of me and build me an impregnable castle amiddlemost the
sea * An thou can not do this, depart thy realm and with thy life go
flee * for I will send unto thee, from the farthest ends of Hind, twelve
hordes[167] of horse, each twelve thousand fighting-men strong, who
shall enter thy land and spoil thy goods and slay thy men and carry thy
women into captivity * Moreover, I will make my Wazir, Badí’a captain
over them and bid him lay strait siege to thy capital till the master he
be; * and I have bidden the bearer of this letter that he tarry with
thee but days three * So, an thou do my demand, thou shalt be saved;
else will I send that which I have said unto thee.” Then he sealed the
scroll and gave it to a messenger, who journeyed with it till he came to
the capital of Wird Khan and delivered it to him. When the King read it,
his strength failed him, his breast waxed strait and he made sure of
destruction, having none to whom he might resort for aid or advice.
Presently he rose and went in to his favourite wife who, seeing him
changed of colour, said to him, “What mattereth thee, O King?” Quoth he,
“This day I am no King, but slave to the King.” And he opened the letter
and read it to her, whereupon she fell to weeping and wailing and
rending her raiment. Then he asked her, “Hast thou aught of rede or
resource in this grievous strait?”; but she answered, “Women have no
resource in time of war, nor have women any strength or aught of
counsel. ’Tis men alone who in like of this affair have force and
discourse and resource.” When the King heard her words, there befel him
the utmost regret and repentance and remorse for that he had
transgressed against his Wazirs and Officers and Lords of his land,——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Wird Khan heard the words of his favourite wife there befel him the
utmost regret and repentance for having transgressed against and slain
his Wazirs and the chiefs of his state, and he would that he had died
ere there came to him the like of these shameful tidings. Then he said
to his women, “Verily, there hath betided me from you that which befel
the Francolin and the Tortoises.” Asked they, “What was that?”, and he
answered, “Men tell this tale of


                  _THE FRANCOLIN AND THE TORTOISES_.”

It is said that sundry Tortoises dwelt once in a certain island
abounding in trees and fruiterers and rills, and it fortuned, one day,
that a Francolin, passing over the island, was overcome with the fiery
heat and fatigue and being in grievous suffering stayed his flight
therein. Presently, looking about for a cool place, he espied the resort
of the Tortoises and alighted down near their home. Now they were then
abroad foraging for food, and when they returned from their
feeding-places to their dwelling, they found the Francolin there. His
beauty pleased them and Allah made him lovely in their eyes, so that
they exclaimed “Subhána ’lláh,” extolling their Creator and loved the
Francolin with exceeding love and rejoiced in him, saying one to other,
“Forsure this is of the goodliest of the birds;” and all began to caress
him and entreat him with kindness. When he saw that they looked on him
with eyes of affection, he inclined to them and companioned with them
and took up his abode with them, flying away in the morning whither he
would and returning at eventide to pass the night by side of them. On
this wise he continued a long while until the Tortoises, seeing that his
daily absence from them desolated them and finding that they never saw
him save by night (for at dawn he still took flight in haste and they
knew not what came of him, for all that their love grew to him), said
each to other, “Indeed, we love this Francolin and he is become our true
friend and we cannot bear parting from him, so how shall we devise some
device tending to make him abide with us always? For he flieth away at
dawn and is absent from us all day and we see him not save by night.”
Quoth one of them, “Be easy, O my sisters: I will bring him not to leave
us for the turn of an eye.” and quoth the rest, saying, “An thou do
this, we will all be thy thralls.” So, when the Francolin came back from
his feeding-place and sat down amongst them, that wily Tortoise drew
near unto him and called down blessings on him, giving him joy of his
safe return and saying, “O my lord, know that Allah hath vouchsafed thee
our love and hath in like manner set in thy heart the love of us,
whereby thou art become to us a familiar friend and a comrade in this
desert. Now the goodliest of times for those who love one another is
when they are united and the sorest of calamities for them are absence
and severance. But thou departest from us at peep of day and returnest
not to us till sundown, wherefore there betideth us extreme desolation.
Indeed this is exceeding grievous to us and we abide in sore longing for
such reason.” The Francolin replied, “Indeed, I love you also and yearn
for you yet more than you can yearn for me, nor is it easy for me to
leave you; but my hand hath no help for this, seeing that I am a fowl
with wings and may not wone with you always, because that is not of my
nature. For a bird, being a winged creature, may not remain still, save
it be for the sake of sleep o’ nights; but, as soon as it is day, he
flieth away and seeketh his morning-meal in what place soever pleaseth
him.” Answered the Tortoise, “Sooth thou speakest! Nevertheless he who
hath wings hath no repose at most seasons, for that the good he getteth
is not a fourth part of what ill betideth him, and the highmost aims of
the creature are repose and ease of life. Now Allah hath bred between us
and thee love and fellowship and we fear for thee, lest some of thine
enemies catch thee and thou perish and we be denied the sight of thy
countenance.” Rejoined the Francolin, “True! But what rede hast thou or
resource for my case?” Quoth the Tortoise, “My advice is that thou pluck
out thy wing-feathers, wherewith thou speedest thy flight, and tarry
with us in tranquillity, eating of our meat and drinking of our drink in
this pasturage, that aboundeth in trees rife with fruits yellow-ripe and
we will sojourn, we and thou, in this fruitful stead and enjoy the
company of one another.” The Francolin inclined to her speech, seeking
ease for himself, and plucked out his wing-feathers, one by one, in
accordance with the rede approved of by the Tortoise; then he took up
his abode with them and contented himself with the little ease and
transient pleasure he enjoyed. Presently up came a Weasel[168] and
glancing at the Francolin, saw that his wings were plucked, so that he
could not fly, whereat he rejoiced with joy exceeding and said to
himself, “Verily yonder Francolin is fat of flesh and scant of feather.”
So he went up to him and seized him, whereupon the Francolin called out
to the Tortoises for help; but when they saw the Weasel hend him, they
drew apart from him and huddled together, choked with weeping for him,
for they witnessed how the beast tortured him. Quoth the Francolin, “Is
there aught with you but weeping?”; and quoth they, “O our brother, we
have neither force nor resource nor any course against a Weasel.” At
this the Francolin was grieved and cutting off all his hopes of life
said to them, “The fault is not yours, but mine own fault, in that I
hearkened to you and plucked out my wing-feathers wherewith I used to
fly. Indeed I deserve destruction for having obeyed you, and I blame you
not in aught.” “On like wise,” continued the King, “I do not blame you,
O women; but I blame and reproach myself for that I remembered not that
ye were the cause of the transgression of our father Adam, by reason
whereof he was cast out from the Garden of Eden and for that I forgot ye
are the root of all evil and hearkened to you, in mine ignorance, lack
of sense and weakness of judgment, and slew my Wazirs and the Governors
of my State, who were my loyal advisers in all mine actions and my glory
and my strength against whatsoever troubled me. But at this time find I
not one to replace them nor see I any who shall stand me in their stead;
and I fall into utter perdition.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King blamed
himself saying, “’Twas I that hearkened to you in mine ignorance and
slew my Wazirs so that now I find none to stand in their stead; and
unless Allah succour me with one of sound judgment, who shall guide me
to that wherein is my deliverance, I am fallen into utter perdition.”
Then he arose and withdrew into his bedchamber, bemoaning his Wazirs and
wise men and saying, “Would Heaven those lions were with me at this
time, though but for an hour; so I might excuse myself unto them and
look on them and bemoan to them my case and the travail that hath
betided me after them!” And he abode all his day sunken in the sea of
cark and care neither eating nor drinking. But as soon as the night fell
dark, he arose and changing his raiment, donned old clothes and
disguised himself and went forth at a venture to walk about the city, so
haply he might hear from any some word of comfort. As he wandered about
the main streets, behold, he chanced upon two boys who had sought a
retired seat by a wall and he observed that they were equal in age, or
about twelve years old. As they talked together he drew near them
whereas he might hear and apprehend what they said, unseen of them, and
heard one say to the other, “Listen, O my brother, to what my sire told
me yesternight of the calamity which hath betided him in the withering
of his crops before their time, by reason of the rarity of rain and the
sore sorrow that is fallen on this city.” Quoth the other, “Wottest thou
not the cause of this affliction?”; and quoth the first, “No! and, if
thou ken it, pray tell it me.” Rejoined the other, “Yes, I wot it and
will tell it thee. Know that I have heard from one of my father’s
friends that our King slew his Wazirs and Grandees, not for aught of
offence done of them, but only by reason of his love for women and
inclination to them; for that his Ministers forbade him from this, but
he would not be forbidden and commanded to do them die in obedience to
his wives. Thus he slew Shimas my sire, who was his Wazir and the Wazir
of his father before him and the chief of his council; but right soon
thou shalt see how Allah will do with him by reason of his sins against
them and how He shall avenge them of him.” The other boy asked, “What
can Allah do now that they are dead?”; and his fellow answered, “Know
that the King of Outer Hind[169] maketh light of our monarch, and hath
sent him a letter berating him and saying to him:—Build me a castle
amiddlemost the sea, or I will send unto thee Badi’a my Wazir, with
twelve hordes of horse, each twelve thousand strong, to seize upon thy
kingdom and slay thy men and carry thee and thy women into captivity.
And he hath given him three days’ time to answer after the receipt of
that missive. Now thou must know, O my brother, that this King of Outer
Hind is a masterful tyrant, a man of might and prowess in fight, and in
his realm are much people; so unless our King make shift to fend him off
from himself, he will fall into perdition, whilst the King of Hind,
after slaying our Sovran, will seize on our possessions and massacre our
men and make prize of our women.” When the King heard this their talk,
his agitation increased and he inclined to the boys, saying, “Surely,
this boy is a wizard, in that he is acquainted with this thing without
learning it from me; for the letter is in my keeping and the secret also
and none hath knowledge of such matter but myself. How then knoweth this
boy of it? I will resort to him and talk with him and I pray Allah that
our deliverance may be at his hand.” Hereupon the King approached the
boy softly and said to him, “O thou dear boy, what is this thou sayest
of our King, that he did ill of the evilest in slaying his Wazirs and
the Chiefs of his State? Indeed he sinned against himself and his
subjects and thou art right in that which thou sayest. But tell me, O my
son, whence knowest thou that the King of Outer Hind hath written him a
letter, berating him and bespeaking him with the grievous speech whereof
thou tellest?” The boy replied, “O brother, I know this from the
sand[170] wherewith I take compt of night and day and from the saying of
the ancients:—No mystery from Allah is hidden; for the sons of Adam have
in them a spiritual virtue which discovereth to them the darkest
secrets.” Answered Wird Khan, “True, O my son, but whence learnedest
thou geomancy and thou young of years?” Quoth the boy, “My father taught
it me;” and quoth the King, “Is thy father alive or dead?” “He is dead,”
replied the boy. Then Wird Khan asked, “Is there any resource or device
for our King, whereby to ward off from himself and his kingdom this sore
calamity?” And the boy answered, saying, “It befitteth not that I speak
with thee of this; but, an the King send for me and ask me how he shall
do to baffle his foe and get free of his snares, I will acquaint him
with that wherein, by the power of Allah Almighty, shall be his
salvation.” Rejoined Wird Khan, “But who shall tell the King of this
that he may send for thee and invite thee to him?” The boy retorted, “I
hear that he seeketh men of experience and good counsel, so I will go up
with them to him and tell him that wherein shall be his welfare and the
warding off of this affliction from him; but, an he neglect the pressing
matter and busy himself with his love-liesse among his women and I go to
him of my own accord designing to acquaint him with the means of
deliverance, he will assuredly give orders to slay me, even as he slew
those his Wazirs, and my courtesy to him will be the cause of my
destruction. Wherefore the folk will think slightly of me and belittle
my wit and I shall be of those of whom it is said:—He whose science
excelleth his sense perisheth by his ignorance.” When the King heard the
boy’s words, he was assured of his sagacity; and the excellence of his
merit was manifest and he was certified that deliverance would betide
him and his subjects at the boy’s hands. So presently he resumed the
colloquy and asked him, “Whence art thou and where is thy home?”; and
the boy answered, “This is the wall of our house.” The King took note of
the place and farewelling the boy, returned to his palace in high
spirits. There he changed his clothes and called for meat and wine,
forbidding his women from him; and he ate and drank and returned thanks
to Allah the Most High and besought Him of succour and deliverance; and
he craved His pardon and forgiveness for that which he had done with his
Wazirs and Olema and turned to Him with sincere repentance, imposing on
himself many a prayer and long fasting, by way of discipline-vow. On the
morrow, he called one of his confidential eunuchs and describing to him
the boy’s home, bade him repair thither and bring him to his presence
with all gentleness. Accordingly the slave sought out the boy and said
to him, “The King summoneth thee, that good may betide thee from him and
that he may ask thee a question; then shalt thou return safe and sound
to thy dwelling.” Asked the boy, “What is the King’s need of me that he
biddeth me to him on this wise?”; and the eunuch answered, “My lord’s
occasion with thee is question and answer.” “A thousand times hearkening
and a thousand times obeying the commandment of the King!” replied the
boy and accompanied the slave to the palace. When he came into the
presence, he prostrated himself before Allah and after salaaming, called
down blessings on the King who returned his salutation and bade him be
seated.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the boy
appeared before the King and saluted him with the salam, Wird Khan
returned his salutation and bade him be seated. So he sat down and the
King asked him, “Knowest thou who talked with thee yesternight?”
Answered the boy, “Yes;” and the King said, “And where is he?” “’Tis he
who speaketh with me at this present,” said the boy. Rejoined the King,
“Thou sayst sooth, O friend,” and bade set him a chair beside his own,
whereon he made him sit and called for meat and drink. Then they talked
awhile and the King said, “Ho thou the Wazir,[171] in our talk
yesternight thou toldest me that thou hadst a device whereby thou
couldst defend us from the malice of the King of Hind. What is this
contrivance and how shall we manœuvre to ward off his mischief from us?
Tell me, that I may make thee chief of those who speak with me in the
realm and choose thee to be my Grand Wazir and do according to thy
judgment in all thou counsellest me and assign thee a splendid
honorarium.” Answered the boy, “O King, keep thy honorarium to thyself
and seek counsel and policy of thy women, who directed thee to slay my
father Shimas and the rest of the Wazirs.” When the King heard this, he
was ashamed and sighed and said, “O thou dear boy, was Shimas indeed thy
sire?” The boy replied, “Shimas was indeed my sire, and I am in truth
his son.” Whereupon the King bowed his head, whilst the tears ran from
his eyes, and he craved pardon of Allah. Then said he, “O boy, indeed I
did this of my ignorance and by the evil counsel of the women; for
‘Great indeed is their malice’[172]: but I beseech thee to forgive me
and I will set thee in thy father’s stead and make thy rank higher than
his rank. Moreover, an thou do away from us this retribution sent down
from Heaven, I will deck thy neck with a collar of gold and mount thee
on the goodliest of steeds and bid the crier make proclamation before
thee, saying:—This is the lief[173] boy, the Wazir who sitteth in the
second seat after the King! And touching what thou sayest of the women,
I have it in mind to do vengeance on them at such time as Almighty Allah
shall will it. But tell me now what thou hast with thee of counsel and
contrivance, that my heart may be content.” Quoth the boy, “Swear to me
an oath that thou wilt not gainsay me in whatso I shall say to thee and
that I from that which I fear shall be safe;” and quoth the King, “This
is the covenant of Allah between me and thee, that I will not go from
thy word and that thou shalt be my chief counsellor and whatsoever thou
biddest me, that will I do; and the Almighty Lord is witness betwixt us
twain whatso I say.” Therewith the boy’s breast waxed broad and the
field of speech was opened to him wide and he said, “O King, my rede to
thee is that thou await the expiration of the delay appointed to thee
for answering the courier of the King of Hind; and when he cometh before
thee seeking the reply, do thou put him off to another day. With this he
will excuse himself to thee, on the ground of his master having
appointed him certain fixed days, and importune for an answer; but do
thou rebut him and defer him to another day, without specifying what day
it be. Then will he go forth from thee angered and betake himself into
the midst of the city and speak openly among the folk, saying:—O people
of the city, I am a courier of the King of Outer Hind, who is a monarch
of great puissance and of determination such as softeneth iron. He sent
me with a letter to the King of this city appointing to me certain days,
saying:—An thou be not with me by the time appointed, my vengeance shall
fall on thee. Now, behold, I went in to the King of this city and gave
him the missive, which when he had read, he sought of me a delay of
three days, after which he would return me an answer to the letter and I
agreed to this of courtesy and consideration for him. When the three
days were past, I went to seek the reply of him, but he delayed me to
another day; and now I have no patience to wait longer; so I am about to
return to my lord, the King of Outer Hind, and acquaint him with that
which hath befallen me; and ye, O folk, are witnesses between me and
him. All this will be reported to thee and do thou send for him and
speak him gently and say to him:—O thou who seekest thine own ruin, what
hath moved thee to blame us among our subjects? Verily, thou deservest
present death at our hands; but the ancients say:—Clemency is of the
attributes of nobility. Know that our delay in answering arose not from
helplessness on our part, but from our much business and lack of leisure
to look into thine affair and write a reply to thy King.” Then call for
the scroll and read it again and laugh loud and long and say to the
courier:—Hast thou a letter other than this? If so, we will write thee
an answer to that also. He will say, I have none other than this letter;
but do thou repeat thy question to him a second time and a third time,
and he will reply, I have none other at all. Then say to him, Verily,
this thy King is utterly witless in that he writeth us the like of this
writ seeking to arouse our wrath against him, so that we shall go forth
to him with our forces and domineer over his dominions and capture his
kingdom. But we will not punish him this time for his unmannerly manners
as shown in this letter, because he is wanting in wit and feeble of
foresight, and it beseemeth our dignity that we first warn him not to
repeat the like of these childish extravagances; and if he risk his life
by returning to the like of this, he will deserve speedy destruction.
Indeed, methinks this King of thine who sent thee on such errand must be
an ignorant fool, taking no thought to the issue of things and having no
Wazir of sense and good counsel, with whom he may advise. Were he a man
of mind, he had taken counsel with a Wazir, ere sending us the like of
this laughable letter. But he shall have a reply similar to his script
and surpassing it; for I will give it to one of the boys of the school
to answer. Then send for me; and, when I come to the presence, bid me
read the letter and reply thereto.” When the King heard the boy’s
speech, his breast broadened and he approved his proposal and his device
delighted him. So he conferred gifts upon him and installing him in his
father’s office, sent him away rejoicing. And as soon as expired the
three days of delay which he had appointed, the courier presented
himself and going in to the King, demanded the answer; but he put him
off to another day; whereupon he went to the end of the carpet-room[174]
and spake with unseemly speech, even as the boy had foresaid. Then he
betook himself to the bazar and cried, “Ho, people of this city, I am a
courier of the King of Outer Hind and came with a message to your
monarch who still putteth me off from a reply. Now the term is past
which my master limited to me and your King hath no excuse, and ye are
witnesses unto this.” When these words reached the King, he sent for
that courier and said to him, “O thou that seeketh thine own ruin, art
thou not the bearer of a letter from King to King, between whom are
secrets, and how cometh it that thou goest forth among the folk and
publishest Kings’ secrets to the vulgar? Verily, thou meritest
retribution from us, but this we will forbare, for the sake of returning
an answer by thee to this fool of a King of thine: and it befitteth not
that any return to him reply but the least of the boys of the school.”
Then he sent for the Wazir’s son, who came and prostrating himself
before Allah, offered up prayers for the King’s lasting glory and long
life; whereupon Wird Khan threw him the letter, saying, “Read that
letter and write me an acknowledgment thereof in haste.” The boy took
the letter and read it, smiled; then he laughed; then he laughed aloud
and asked the King, “Didst thou send for me to answer this letter?”
“Yes,” answered Wird Khan, and the boy said, “O King, methought thou
hadst sent for me on some grave occasion; indeed, a lesser than I had
answered this letter but ’tis thine to command, O puissant potentate.”
Quoth the King, “Write the reply forthright, on account of the courier,
for that he is appointed a term and we have delayed him another day.”
Quoth the boy, “With the readiest hearkening and obedience,” and pulling
out paper and inkcase[175] wrote as follows:——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the boy took
the letter and read it, he forthright pulled out inkcase and paper and
wrote as follows:—“In the name of Allah the Compassionating, the
Compassionate! Peace be upon him who hath gotten pardon and deliverance
and the mercy of the Merciful! But after. O thou who pretendest thyself
a mighty King and art but a King in word and not in deed, we give thee
to know that thy letter hath reached us and we have read it and have
taken note of that which is therein of absurdities and peregrine
extravagances, whereby we are certified of thine ignorance and ill-will
to us. Verily, thou hast put out thy hand to that whereunto thou canst
never reach; and, but that we have compassion on Allah’s creatures and
the lieges, we had not held back from thee. As for thy messenger, he
went forth to the market-streets and published the news of thy letter to
great and small, whereby he merited retaliation from us; but we spared
him and remitted his offence, of pity for him, seeing that he is
excusable with thee and not for aught of respect to thyself. As for that
whereof thou makest mention in thy letter of the slaying of my Wazirs
and Olema and Grandees, this is the truth and this I did for a reason
that arose with me, and I slew not one man of learning but there are
with me a thousand of his kind, wiser than he and cleverer and wittier;
nor is there with me a child but is filled with knowledge, and I have,
in the stead of each of the slain, of those who surpass in his kind,
what is beyond count. Each man of my troops also can cope with an horde
of thine, whilst, as for monies I have a manufactory that maketh every
day a thousand pounds of silver, besides gold, and precious stones are
with me as pebbles; and as for the people of my possessions I cannot set
forth to thee their goodliness and abundance of means. How darest thou,
therefore, presume upon us and say to us, Build me a castle amiddlemost
the main? Verily, this is a marvellous thing, and doubtless it ariseth
from the slightness of thy wit; for hadst thou aught of sense, thou
hadst enquired of the beatings of the billows and the waftings of the
winds. But wall it off from the waves and the surges of the sea and
still the winds, and we will build thee the castle. Now as for thy
pretension that thou wilt vanquish me, Allah forfend that such thing
should befal and the like of thee should lord it over us and conquer our
realm! Nay, the Almighty hath given me the victory over thee, for that
thou hast transgressed against me and rebelled without due cause. Know,
therefore, that thou hast merited retribution from the Lord and from me;
but I fear Allah in respect of thee and thy subjects[176] and will not
take horse against thee except after warning. Wherefore, an thou also
fear Allah, hasten to send me this year’s tribute; else will I not turn
from my design to ride forth against thee with a thousand thousand[177]
and an hundred thousand fighting-men, all furious giants on elephants,
and I will range them round about my Wazir and bid him besiege thee
three years, in lieu of the three days’ delay thou appointedst to thy
messenger, and I will make myself master of thy dominion, except that I
will slay none save thyself alone and take captive therefrom none but
thy Harim.” Then the boy drew his own portrait in the margin of the
letter and wrote thereunder the words: “This answer was written by the
least of the boys of the school.” After this he sealed it and handed it
to the King, who gave it to the courier, and the man, after taking it
and kissing the King’s hands went forth from him thanking Allah and the
Sovran for his royal clemency to him and marvelling at the boy’s
intelligence. He arrived at the court of the King, his master, on the
third day after the expiration of the term appointed to him, and found
that he had called a meeting of his council, by reason of the failure of
the courier to return at the time appointed. So he went in to the King
and prostrating himself before him, gave him the letter. The King took
it and questioned him of the cause of his tarrying and how it was with
King Wird Khan. So he told him all he had seen with his own eyes and
heard with his own ears; whereat the King’s wit was confounded and he
said, “Out on thee! What tale is this thou tellest me of the like of
this King?” Answered the courier, “O mighty monarch, here am I in thy
presence,[178] but open the letter and read it, and the truth of my
speech will be manifest to thee.” So the King opened the letter and read
it and seeing the semblance of the boy who had written it, made sure of
the loss of his kingdom and was perplexed anent the end of his affair.
Then, turning to his Wazirs and Grandees, he acquainted them with what
had occurred and read to them the letter, whereat they were affrighted
with the sorest affright and sought to sooth the King’s terror with
words that were only from the tongue, whilst their hearts were torn
piecemeal with palpitations of alarm. But Badi’a (the Chief Wazir)
presently said, “Know, O King, that there is no profit in that which my
brother Wazirs have proffered, and it is my rede that thou write this
King a writ and excuse thyself to him therein, saying:—I love thee and
loved thy father before thee and sent thee not this letter by the
courier except only to prove thee and try thy constancy and see what was
in thee of valiancy and thy proficiency in matters of practick and
theorick and skill in enigmas and that wherewith thou art endowed of all
perfections. So we pray Almighty Allah to bless thee in thy kingdom and
strengthen the defences of thy capital and add to thy dominion, since
thou art mindful of thyself and managest to accomplish every need of thy
subjects. And send it to him by another courier.” Exclaimed the King,
“By Allah of All-might! ’tis a marvel of marvels that this man should be
a mighty King and ready for war, after his slaughter of all the wise men
of his kingdom and his counsellors and the captains of his host and that
his realm should be populous and prosper after this and there should
issue therefrom this prodigious power! But the marvelousest of all is
that the little ones of its schools should return the like of this
answer for its King. Verily, of the vileness of my greed I have kindled
this fire upon myself and lieges, and I know not how I shall quench it,
save by taking the advice of this my Wazir.” Accordingly he gat ready a
costly present, with eunuchs and slaves manifold, and wrote the
following reply:—“In the name of Allah the Compassionating, the
Compassionate! To proceed: O Glorious King Wird Khan, son of my dear
brother, Jali’ad, may the Lord have mercy on thee and continue thee!
Thine answer to our letter hath reached us and we have read it and
apprehended its contents and see therein that which gladdeneth us and
this is the utmost of that which we sought of Allah for thee; so we
beseech Him to exalt thy dignity and stablish the pillars of thy state
and give thee the victory over thy foes and those who purpose thee
frowardness. Know, O King, that thy father was my brother and that there
were between us in his lifetime pacts and covenants, and never saw he
from me aught save weal, nor ever saw I from him other than good; and
when he deceased and thou tookest seat upon the throne of his kingship,
there betided us the utmost joy and gladness; but, when the news reached
us of that which thou didst with thy Wazirs and the Notables of thy
State, we feared lest the report of thee should come to the ears of some
King other than ourselves and he should presume against thee, for that
we deemed thee negligent of thine affairs and of the maintenance of thy
defences and neglectful of the interests of thy kingdom; so we let write
unto thee what should arouse thy spirit. But, when we saw that thou
returnedest us the like of this reply, our heart was set at ease for
thee, may Allah give thee enjoyment[179] of thy kingdom and stablish
thee in thy dignity! And so peace be with thee.” Then he despatched the
letter and the presents to Wird Khan with an escort of an hundred
horse,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the monarch
of Outer Hind, after making ready his presents, despatched them to King
Wird Khan, with an escort of an hundred horse, who fared on till they
came to his court and saluting him, presented letter and gifts. The King
read the writ and lodged the leader of the escort in a befitting place,
entreating him with honour and accepting the presents he presented. So
the news of this was bruited abroad among the folk and the King rejoiced
therein with joy exceeding. Then he sent for the boy, the son of Shimas,
and the Captain of the hundred horse; and, entreating the young Wazir
with honour, gave him the letter to read; whilst he himself blamed the
King’s conduct to the Captain who kissed his hands and made his excuses
to him, offering up prayers for the continuance of his life and the
permanence of his prosperity. The King thanked him for this and bestowed
upon him honours and largesse and gave to all his men what befitted them
and made ready presents to send by them and bade the boy Wazir indite an
answer to their King’s letter. So the boy wrote a reply, wherein, after
an address[180] beautiful exceedingly, he touched briefly on the
question of reconciliation and praised the good breeding of the envoy
and of his mounted men, and showed it, when duly finished, to the King
who said to him, “Read it, O thou dear boy, that we may know what is
written[181] therein.” So the boy read the letter in the presence of the
hundred horse, and the King and all present marvelled at its ordinance
of style and sense. Then the King sealed the letter and delivering it to
the Captain of the hundred horse, dismissed him with some of his own
troops, to escort him as far as the frontier of his country. The Captain
returned, confounded in mind at that which he had seen of the boy’s
knowledge and thanking Allah for the speedy accomplishment of his errand
and the acceptance of peace, to the King of Outer Hind. Then going in to
the presence, he delivered the presents and handed to him the letter,
telling him what he had seen and heard, whereat the King rejoiced with
joy exceeding and rendered lauds to his Lord the Most High and honoured
the Captain commending his care and zeal and advancing him in rank. And
from that hour he woned in peace and tranquillity and all happiness. As
for King Wird Khan, he returned to the paths of righteousness,
abandoning his evil ways and repenting to Allah with sincere penitence;
and he gave up womanising altogether and applied himself wholly to the
ordering of the affairs of his realm and the governance of his people in
the fear of Allah. Furthermore, he made the son of Shimas Wazir in his
father’s stead, and the chief after himself in his realm and keeper of
his secrets and bade decorate his capital for seven days and likewise
the other cities of his kingdom. At this the subjects rejoiced and fear
and alarm ceased from them and they were glad in the prospect of justice
and equity and instant in prayer for the King and for the Minister who
from him and them had done away this trouble. Then said the King to the
Wazir, “What is thy rede for the assuring of the state and the
prospering of the people and the return of the realm to its aforetime
state as regards Captains and Councillors?” Answered the boy, “O King of
high estate, in my judgment it behoveth before all, that thou begin by
rending out from thy heart the root of wickedness and leave thy
debauchery and tyranny and addiction to women; for, an thou return to
the root of transgression, the second backsliding will be worse than the
first.” The King asked, “And what is the root of sinfulness that it
behoveth me to root out from my heart?”; and was answered by the Wazir,
little of years but great of wit, “O King the root of wickedness is
subjection to the desire of women and inclining to them and following
their counsel and contrivance; for the love of them changeth the
soundest wit and corrupteth the most upright nature, and manifest proofs
bear witness to my saying, wherein an thou meditate them and follow
their actions and consequences with eyes intent, thou wilt find a loyal
counsellor against thy own soul and wilt stand in no need whatever of my
rede. Look, then, thou occupy not thy heart with the thought of
womankind and do away the trace of them from thy mind, for that Allah
the Most High hath forbidden excessive use of them by the mouth of His
prophet Moses, so that quoth a certain wise King to his son:—O my son,
when thou succeedest to the kingdom after me, frequent not women
overmuch, lest thy heart be led astray and thy judgment be corrupted;
for that overmuch commerce with them leadeth to love of them, and love
of them to corruption of judgment. And the proof of this is what befel
our Lord Solomon, son of David, (peace be upon the twain of them!) whom
Allah specially endowed with knowledge and wisdom and supreme dominion,
nor vouchsafed He to any one of the Kings his predecessors the like of
that which He gave him; and women were the cause of his father’s
offending. The examples of this are many, O King, and I do but make
mention of Solomon to thee for that thou knowest that to none was given
such dominion as that with which he was invested, so that all the Kings
of the earth obeyed him. Know then, O King, that the love of women is
the root of all evil and none of them hath any judgment: wherefore it
behoveth a man use them according to his need and not incline to them
with utter inclination for that will cast him into corruption and
perdition. An thou hearken to my words, all thine affairs will prosper;
but, an thou neglect them thou wilt repent, whenas repentance will not
profit thee.” Answered the King, “Verily, I have left my whilome
inclination to women——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O mighty monarch, that King Wird Khan
said to his Wazir, “Indeed, I have left my whilome inclination to women
and have altogether renounced my infatuation for them; but how shall I
do to punish them in retaliation of their misdeeds? For the slaying of
thy sire Shimas was of their malice and not of my own will, and I know
not what ailed my reason that I consented with their proposal to slay
him.” Then he cried, “Ah me!” and groaned and lamented, saying,
“Well-away and alas for the loss of my Wazir and his just judgment and
admirable administration and for the loss of his like of the Wazirs and
Heads of the State and of the goodliness of their apt counsels and
sagacious!” “O King,” quoth the boy-minister, “Know that the fault is
not with women alone, for that they are like unto a pleasing stock in
trade, whereto the lusts of the lookers-on incline. To whosoever lusteth
and buyeth, they sell it, but whoso buyeth not, none forceth him to buy;
so that the fault is of him who buyeth, especially if he know the
harmfulness of that merchandise. Now, I warn thee, as did my sire before
me, but thou acceptedest not to his counsel.” Answered the King, “O
Wazir, indeed I have fixed this fault upon myself, even as thou hast
said, and I have no excuse except divine foreordainment.” Rejoined the
Wazir, “O King, know that Almighty Allah hath created us and endowed us
with capability and appointed to us freewill and choice; so, if we will,
we do, and if we will, we do not. The Lord commanded us not to do harm,
lest sin attach to us; wherefore it befitteth us to take compt of whatso
is right to do, for that the Almighty biddeth us naught but good in all
cases and forbiddeth us only from evil; but what we do, we do of our own
design, be it fair or faulty.” Quoth the King, “Thou sayest sooth, and
indeed my fault arose from my surrendering myself to my lusts, albeit
often and often my better self warned me from this and thy sire Shimas
also warned me often and often; but my lusts overcame my wits. Hast thou
then with thee aught that may withhold me from again committing this
error and whereby my reason may be victorious over the desires of my
soul?” Quoth the Wazir, “Yes: I can tell thee what will restrain thee
from relapsing into this fault, and it is that thou doff the garment of
ignorance and don that of understanding, and disobey thy passions and
obey thy Lord and revert to the policy of the just King thy sire, and
fulfil thy duties to Allah the Most High and to thy people and apply
thyself to the defence of thy faith and the promotion of thy subjects’
welfare and rule thyself aright and forbear the slaughter of thy people;
and look to the end of things and sever thyself from tyranny and
oppression and arrogance and lewdness, and practise justice, equity and
humility and bow before the bidding of the Almighty and apply thyself to
gentle dealing with those of His creatures over whom He set thee and be
assiduous as it besitteth thee in fulfilling their prayers unto thee. An
thou be constant herein may thy days be serene and may Allah of His
mercy pardon thee and make thee loved and feared of all who look on
thee; so shall thy foes be brought to naught, for the Omnipotent shall
rout their hosts and thou shalt have acceptance with Him and of His
creatures be dreaded and to them endeared.” Quoth the King, “Indeed thou
hast quickened my vitals and illumined my heart with thy sweet speech
and hast opened the eyes of my clear-seeing after blindness; and I am
resolved to do whatso thou hast set forth to me, with the help of the
Almighty, leaving my former case of lust and sinfulness and bringing
forth my soul from durance vile to deliverance and from fear to safety.
So it behoveth thee to be joyful hereat and contented, for that I am
become to thee as a son, maugre my more of age, and thou to me as a dear
father, despite thy tenderness of years, and it hath become incumbent on
me to do mine utmost endeavour in all thou commandest me. Wherefore I
thank the bounty of Allah and thy bounty because He hath vouchsafed me,
by thee, fair fortune and goodly guidance and just judgment to ward off
my cark and care; and the security of my lieges hath been brought about
by thy hand, through the excellence of thy knowledge and the goodliness
of thy contrivance. And thou, from this hour, shalt be the counsellor of
my kingdom and equal to myself in all but sitting upon the throne; and
whatso thou dost shall be law to me and none shall disobey thy word,
young in years though thou be, for that thou art old in wit and
knowledge. So I thank Allah who deigned grant thee to me, that thou
mayst guide me into the way of salvation and out of the crooked paths of
perdition.” Quoth the Wazir, “O auspicious King, know that no merit is
due to me for giving thee loyal counsel; for that to succour thee by
deed and word is one of the things which is incumbent on me, seeing that
I am but a plant of thy bounty; and not I alone, but one before me was
overwhelmed with thy beneficence; so that we are both alike partakers in
thy honours and favours, and how shall we not acknowledge this? Moreover
thou, O King, art our shepherd and ruler and he who wardeth off from us
our foes, and to whom are committed our protection and our guardian,
constant in endeavour for our safety. Indeed, though we lavished our
lives in thy service, yet should we not fulfil that which is incumbent
on us of gratitude to thee; but we supplicate Allah Almighty, who hath
set thee over us and made thee our ruler, and beseech Him vouchsafe thee
long life and success in all thine enterprises and not to make trial of
thee with afflictions in thy time, but bring thee to thy desire and make
thee to be reverenced till the day of thy death and lengthen thine arms
in generosity, so thou mayst have command over every wise man and subdue
every wicked man and all the wise and brave be found with thee in thy
realm and all the ignorant and cowardly be plucked out from thy reign;
and we pray Him to withhold from thy people scarcity and calamity and
sow among them the seed of love and friendship and cause them to enjoy
of this world its prosperity and of the next felicity, of His grace and
bounty and hidden mercies. Amen![182] For He is over all things
Omnipotent and there is naught difficult unto Him, to Him all things
tend.” When the King heard the Wazir’s prayer, he was mightily rejoiced
and inclined to him with his whole heart, saying, “Know, O Wazir, thou
art to me in lieu of brother and son and father, and naught but death
shall divide me from thee. All that my hand possesseth thou shalt have
the disposal of and, if I have no child to succeed me, thou shalt sit on
my throne in my stead; for thou art the worthiest of all the folk of my
realm, and I will invest thee with my Kingship in the presence of the
Grandees of my state and appoint thee my heir apparent to inherit the
kingdom after me, Inshallah!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Wird Khan
said to the son of Shimas the whilome Wazir, “Presently I will name thee
my successor and make thee my heir apparent: and I will call the
Grandees of mine Empire to witness thereto.” Then he summoned his
Secretary and bade him write to all the Lords of his land, convoking
them at his Court, and caused proclamation to be made in his city to all
the townsfolk great and small, bidding every one of the Emirs and
Governors and Chamberlains and other officers and dignitaries to his
presence as well as the Olema and Literati learned in the law. He held
to boot a grand Divan and made a banquet, never was its like seen
anywhere and thereto he bade all the folk, high and low. So they
assembled and abode in merry making, eating and drinking a month’s
space; after which the King clothed the whole of his household and the
poor of his Kingdom and bestowed on the men of knowledge abundant
largesse. Then he chose out a number of the Olema and wise men who were
known to the son of Shimas, and caused them go in to him, bidding him
choose out of them six that he might make them Wazirs under commandment
of the boy. Accordingly he selected six of the oldest of them in years
and the best in wits and fullest of lore and the quickest of memory and
judgment, and presented them to the King, who clad them in Wazirial
habit saying, “Ye are become my Ministers, under the commandment of this
my Grand Wazir, the son of Shimas. Whatsoever he saith to you or biddeth
you to do, ye shall never and in no wise depart from it, albeit he is
the youngest of you in years; for he is the eldest of you in intellect
and intelligence.” Then he seated them upon chairs, adorned with gold
after the usage of Wazirs, and appointed to them stipends and
allowances, bidding them choose out such of the notables of the kingdom
and officers of the troops present at the banquet as were aptest for the
service of the state, that he might make them Captains of tens and
Captains of hundreds and Captains of thousands and appoint to them
dignities and stipends and assign them provision, after the manner of
Grandees. This they did with entire diligence and he bade them also
handsel all who were present with large gifts and dismiss them each to
his country with honour and renown; he also charged his governors to
rule the people with justice and enjoined them to be tender to the poor
as well as to the rich and bade succour them from the treasury,
according to their several degrees. So the Wazirs wished him permanence
of glory and continuance of life, and he commanded to decorate the city
three days, in gratitude to Allah Almighty for mercies vouchsafed to
him. Such was the case with the King and his Wazir, Ibn Shimas, in the
ordinance of his kingdom through his Emirs and Governors; but as regards
the favourite women, wives, concubines and others who, by their malice
and perfidy, had brought about the slaughter of the Wazirs and had well
nigh ruined the realm, as soon as the Court was dissolved and all the
people had departed, each to his own place, after their affairs had been
set in order, the King summoned his boy-Minister, the son of Shimas, and
the other six Wazirs and taking them apart privily, said to them, “Know,
O Wazirs, that I have been a wanderer from the right way, drowned in
ignorance, opposed to admonition, a breaker of facts and promises and a
gainsayer of good counsellors; and the cause of all this was my being
fooled by these women and the wiles whereby they beset me and the
glozing lure of their speech, whereby they seduced me to sin and my
acceptance of this, for that I deemed the words of them true and loyal
counsel, by reason of their sweetness and softness; but lo, and behold!
they were deadly poison. And now I am certified that they sought but to
ruin and destroy me, wherefore they deserve punishment and retribution
from me, for justice sake, that I may make them a warning to whoso will
be warned. And what say your just judgments anent doing them to die?”
Answered the boy Wazir, “O mighty King, I have already told thee that
women are not alone to blame, but that the fault is shared between them
and the men who hearken to them. However, they deserve punishment and
requital for two reasons: firstly for the fulfilment of thy word,
because thou art the supreme King; and secondly, by reason of their
presumption against thee and their seducing thee and their meddling with
that which concerneth them not and whereof it befitteth them not even to
speak. Wherefore they have right well deserved death; yet let that which
hath befallen them suffice them, and do thou henceforth reduce them to
servants’ estate. But it is thine to command in this and in other than
this.” Then one of the Wazirs seconded the counsel of Ibn Shimas; but
another of them prostrated himself before the King and said to him,
“Allah prolong the King’s life! An thou be indeed resolved to do with
them that which shall cause their death, do with them as I shall say to
thee.” Asked Wird Khan, “And what is that?”; and the Wazir answered,
“’Twere best that thou bid some of thy female slaves carry the women who
played thee false to the apartment, wherein befel the slaughter of thy
Wazirs and wise men and imprison them there; and bid that they be
provided with a little meat and drink, enough to keep life in their
bodies. Let them never be suffered to go forth of that place, and
whenever one of them dies, let her abide among them, as she is, till
they die all, even to the last of them. This is the least of their
desert, because they were the cause of this great avail; ay, and the
origin of all the troubles and calamities that have befallen in our
time; so shall there be verified in them the saying of the Sayer:—Whoso
diggeth his brother a pit shall surely himself fall into it, albeit of
long safety he have benefit.” The King accepted the Wazir’s counsel and
sending for four stalwart female slaves, committed the offending women
to them, bidding them bear them into the place of slaughter and imprison
them there and allow them every day a little coarse food and a little
troubled water. They did with them as he bade; wherefore the women
mourned with sore mourning, repenting them of that which they had done
and lamenting with grievous lamentation. Thus Allah gave them their
reward of abjection in this world and prepared for them torment in the
world to come; nor did they cease to abide in that murky and noisome
place, whilst every day one or other of them died, till they all
perished, even to the last of them;[183] and the report of this event
was bruited abroad in all lands and countries. This is the end of the
story of the King and his Wazirs and subjects, and praise be to Allah
who causeth peoples to pass away, and quickeneth the bones that rot in
decay; Him who alone is worthy to be glorified and magnified alway and
hallowed for ever and aye! And amongst the tales they tell is one of

-----

Footnote 55:

  Lane omits because it is “extremely puerile” this most characteristic
  tale, one of the two oldest in The Nights which Al-Mas’udi mentions as
  belonging to the Hazár Afsáneh (See Terminal Essay). Von Hammer
  (Preface in Trébutien’s translation p. xxv.) refers the fables to an
  Indian (Egyptian?) origin and remarks, “sous le rapport de leur
  antiquité et de la morale qu’ils renferment, elles méritent la plus
  grande attention, mais d’un autre côté elles ne sont rien moins qu’
  amusantes.”

Footnote 56:

  Lane (iii. 579) writes the word “Shemmas”: the Bresl. Edit. (viii. 4)
  “Shímás.”

Footnote 57:

  _i.e._ When the tale begins.

Footnote 58:

  Arab. “Khafz al-jináh” drooping the wing as a brooding bird. In the
  Koran (lvii. 88) “lowering the wing” = demeaning oneself gently.

Footnote 59:

  The Bresl. Edit. (viii. 3) writes “Kil’ád”: Trébutien (iii. 1) “le roi
  Djilia.”

Footnote 60:

  As the sequel shows the better title would be, “The Cat and the Mouse”
  as in the headings of the Mac. Edit. and “What befel the Cat with the
  Mouse,” as a punishment for tyranny. But all three Edits. read as in
  the text and I have not cared to change it. In our European
  adaptations the mouse becomes a rat.

Footnote 61:

  So that I may not come to grief by thus daring to foretell evil
  things.

Footnote 62:

  Arab. “Af’à,” pl. Afá’í = ὄφις, both being derived from O. Egypt. Hfi,
  a worm, snake. Af’à is applied to many species of the larger ophidia,
  all supposed to be venomous, and synonymous with “Sall” (a malignant
  viper) in Al-Mutalammis. See Preston’s Al-Hariri, p. 101.

Footnote 63:

  This apparently needless cruelty of all the feline race is a strong
  weapon in the hand of the Eastern “Dahrí” who holds that the world is
  God and is governed by its own laws, in opposition to the religionists
  believing in a Personal Deity whom, moreover, they style the Merciful,
  the Compassionate, etc. Some Christians have opined that cruelty came
  into the world with “original Sin;” but how do they account for the
  hideous waste of life and the fearful destructiveness of the fishes
  which certainly never learned anything from man? The mystery of the
  cruelty of things can be explained only by a Law without a Law-giver.

Footnote 64:

  The three things not to be praised before death in Southern Europe are
  a horse, a priest and a woman; and it has become a popular saying that
  only fools prophesy before the event.

Footnote 65:

  Arab. “Samn” = butter melted and skimmed. See vol. i. 144.

Footnote 66:

  This is a mere rechauffé of the Barber’s tale of his Fifth Brother
  (vol. i. 335). In addition to the authorities there cited I may
  mention the school reading-lesson in Addison’s Spectator derived from
  Galland’s version of “Alnaschar and his basket of Glass;” the Persian
  version of the Hitopadesa or “Anwár-i-Suhayli” (Lights of Canopes) by
  Husayn Vá’iz; the Foolish Sachali of “Indian Fairy Tales” (Miss
  Stokes); the allusion in Rabelais to the fate of the “Shoemaker and
  his pitcher of milk” and the “Dialogues of creatures moralised”
  (1516), whence probably La Fontaine drew his fable, “La Laitière et le
  Pot au lait.”

Footnote 67:

  Arab. “Násik,” a religious, a man of Allah from Nask, devotion:
  somewhat like Sálik (Dabistan iii. 251).

Footnote 68:

  The well-known Egyptian term for a peasant, a husbandman, extending
  from the Nile to beyond Mount Atlas.

Footnote 69:

  This is again, I note, the slang sense of “’Azím,” which in classical
  Arabic means simply great.

Footnote 70:

  Arab. “Adab”; see vol. i. 132. It also implies mental discipline, the
  culture which leads to excellence, good manners and good morals; and
  it is sometimes synonymous with literary skill and scholarship. “Ilm
  al-Adab,” says Haji Khalfah (Lane’s Lex.), “is the science whereby man
  guards against error in the language of the Arabs spoken or written.”

Footnote 71:

  _i.e._ I esteem thee as thou deservest.

Footnote 72:

  The style is intended to be worthy of the statesman. In my “Mission to
  Dahome” the reader will find many a similar scene.

Footnote 73:

  The Bresl. Edit. (vol viii. 22) reads “Turks” or “The Turk” in lieu of
  “many peoples.”

Footnote 74:

  _i.e._ the parents.

Footnote 75:

  The humour of this euphuistic Wazirial speech, purposely made somewhat
  pompous, is the contrast between the unhappy Minister’s praises and
  the result of his prognostication. I cannot refrain from complimenting
  Mr. Payne upon the admirable way in which he has attacked and mastered
  all the difficulties of its abstruser passages.

Footnote 76:

  Arab. “Halummú” plur. of “Halumma” = draw near! The latter form is
  used by some tribes for all three numbers; others affect a dual and a
  plural (as in the text). Preston (Al-Hariri, p. 210) derives it from
  Heb. הלום but the geographers of Kufah and Basrah (who were not
  etymologists) are divided about its origin. He translates (p. 221)
  “Halumma Jarran” = being the rest of the tale in continuation with
  this, _i.e._ in accordance with it, like our “and so forth.” And in p.
  271, he makes Halumma = Hayya _i.e._ hither! (to prayer, etc).

Footnote 77:

  This is precisely the semi-fatalistic and wholly superstitious address
  which would find favour with Moslems of the present day: they still
  prefer “calling upon Hercules” to putting their shoulders to the
  wheel. Mr. Redhouse had done good work in his day but of late he has
  devoted himself, especially in the “Mesnevi,” to a rapprochement
  between Al-Islam and Christianity which both would reject (see supra,
  vol. vii. p. 135). The Calvinistic predestination as shown in the term
  “vessel of wrath,” is but a feeble reflection of Moslem fatalism. On
  this subject I shall have more to say in a future volume.

Footnote 78:

  The inhabitants of temperate climates have no idea what ants can do in
  the tropics. The Kafirs of South Africa used to stake down their
  prisoners (among them a poor friend of mine) upon an ant-hill and they
  were eaten atom after atom in a few hours. The death must be the
  slowest form of torture; but probably the nervous system soon becomes
  insensible. The same has happened to more than one hapless invalid,
  helplessly bedridden, in Western Africa. I have described an invasion
  of ants in my “Zanzibar,” vol. ii. 169; and have suffered from such
  attacks in many places between that and Dahomey.

Footnote 79:

  Arab. “Sa’lab.” See vol. iii. 132, where it is a fox. I render it
  jackal because that cousin of the fox figures as a carrion-eater in
  Hindu folk-lore, the Hitopadesa, Panchopakhyan, etc. This tale, I need
  hardly say, is a mere translation; as is shown by the Kathá s.s. “Both
  jackal and fox are nicknamed Joseph the Scribe (Tálib Yúsuf) in the
  same principle that lawyers are called landsharks by sailors.” (P. 65,
  Moorish Lotus Leaves, etc., by George D. Cowan and R. L. N. Johnston,
  London, Tinsleys, 1883.)

Footnote 80:

  Arab. “Sahm mush’ab” not “barbed” (at the wings) but with double
  front, much used for birding and at one time familiar in the West as
  in the East. And yet “barbed” would make the fable read much better.

Footnote 81:

  Arab. “la’lla,” usually = haply, belike; but used here and elsewhere =
  forsure, certainly.

Footnote 82:

  Arab. “Maghrib” (or in full Maghrib al-Aksá) lit. = the Land of the
  setting sun for whose relation to “Mauritania” see vol. vii. 220. It
  is almost synonymous with “Al-Gharb” = the West whence Portugal
  borrowed the two Algarves, one being in Southern Europe and the other
  over the straits about Tangier-Ceuta; fronting Spanish Trafalgar,
  _i.e._ Taraf al-Gharb, the edge of the West. I have noted (Pilgrimage
  i. 9) the late Captain Peel’s mis-translation “Cape of Laurels”
  (Al-Ghár).

Footnote 83:

  Even the poorest of Moslem wanderers tries to bear with him a new suit
  of clothes for keeping the two festivals and Friday service in the
  Mosque. See Pilgrimage i. 235; iii. 257, etc.

Footnote 84:

  Arab. “Sáyih” lit. a wanderer, subaudi for religious and ascetic
  objects; and not to be confounded with the “pilgrim” proper.

Footnote 85:

  _i.e._ a Religious, a wandering beggar.

Footnote 86:

  This was the custom of the whole Moslem world and still is where
  uncorrupted by Christian uncharity and contempt for all “men of God”
  save its own. But the change in such places as Egypt is complete and
  irrevocable. Even in 1852 my Dervish’s frock brought me nothing but
  contempt in Alexandria and Cairo.

Footnote 87:

  Arab “Ya jáhil,” lit. = O ignorant. The popular word is Ahmak which,
  however, in the West means a maniac, a madman, a Santon; “Bohlí” being
  = a fool.

Footnote 88:

  The prison according to the practice of the East being in the palace:
  so the Moorish “Kasbah,” which lodges the Governor and his guard,
  always contains the jail.

Footnote 89:

  Arab. “Tuwuffiya,” lit. = was received (into the grace of God), an
  euphemistic and more polite term than “máta” = he died. The latter
  term is avoided by the Founder of Christianity; and our Spiritualists
  now say “passed away to a higher life,” a phrase embodying a theory
  which, to say the least, is “not proven.”

Footnote 90:

  Arab. “Yá Abá al-Khayr” = our my good lord, sir, fellow, etc.

Footnote 91:

  Arab. “Háwi” from “Hayyah,” a serpent. See vol. iii. 145. Most of the
  Egyptian snake-charmers are Gypsies, but they do not like to be told
  of their origin. At Baroda in Guzerat I took lessons in
  snake-catching, but found the sport too dangerous; when the animal
  flies, the tail is caught by the left hand and the right is slipped up
  to the neck, a delicate process, as a few inches too far or not far
  enough would be followed by certain death in catching a Cobra. At last
  certain of my messmates killed one of the captives and the
  snake-charmer would have no more to do with me.

Footnote 92:

  Arab. “Sallah,” also Pers., a basket of wickerwork. This article is
  everywhere used for lodging snakes from Egypt to Morocco.

Footnote 93:

  Arab. “Mubárak.” It is a favourite name for a slave in Morocco; the
  slave-girl being called Mubárakah; and the proverb being, “Blessed is
  the household which hath neither M’bárk nor M’bárkah” (as they
  contract the words).

Footnote 94:

  The Bresl. Edit. (viii. 48) instead of the Gate (Báb) gives a Bádhanj
  = a Ventilator; for which latter rendering see vol. i. 257. The
  spider’s web is Koranic (lxxxi. 40) “Verily frailest of all houses is
  the house of the spider.”

Footnote 95:

  Prob. from the Persian Wird = a pupil, a disciple.

Footnote 96:

  And yet, as the next page shows the youth’s education was complete in
  his twelfth year. But as all three texts agree, I do not venture upon
  changing the number to six or seven, the age at which royal education
  outside the Harem usually begins.

Footnote 97:

  _i.e._ One for each day in the Moslem year. For these object-lessons,
  somewhat in Kindergarten style, see the Book of Sindibad or The Malice
  of Women (vol. vi. 126).

Footnote 98:

  Arab. “Jahábizah” plur. of “Jahbiz” = acute, intelligent (from the
  Pers. Kahbad or Kihbad?).

Footnote 99:

  Arab. “Nimr” in the Bresl. Edit. viii. 58. The Mac. Edit. suggests
  that the leopard is the lion’s Wazir.

Footnote 100:

  Arab. “Kaun” lit. = Being, existence. Trébutien (iii. 20), has it,
  “Qu’est-ce que l’être (God), l’existence (Creation), l’être dans
  l’existence (the world), et la durée de l’être dans l’existence (the
  other world).

Footnote 101:

  _i.e._ for the purpose of requital. All the above is orthodox Moslem
  doctrine, which utterly ignores the dictum “ex nihilo nihil fit;” and
  which would look upon Creation by Law (Darwinism) as opposed to
  Creation by miracle (_e.g._ the Mosaic cosmogony) as rank blasphemy.
  On the other hand the Eternity of Matter and its transcendental
  essence are tenets held by a host of Gnostics, philosophers and
  Eastern Agnostics.

Footnote 102:

  This is a Moslem _lieu commun_; usually man is likened to one
  suspended in a bottomless well by a thin rope at which a rodent is
  continually gnawing and who amuses himself in licking a few drops of
  honey left by bees on the revetement.

Footnote 103:

  A curious pendent to the Scriptural parable of the Unjust Steward.

Footnote 104:

  Arab. “Rúh” Heb. Ruach: lit. breath (spiritus) which in the animal
  kingdom is the surest sign of life. See vol. v. 29. Nothing can be
  more rigidly materialistic than the so-called Mosaic law.

Footnote 105:

  Arab. “Al-Amr” which may also mean the business, the matter, the
  affair.

Footnote 106:

  Arab. “Ukáb al-kásir,” lit. = the breaker eagle.

Footnote 107:

  Arab. “Lijám shadíd:” the ring-bit of the Arabs is perhaps the
  severest form known: it is required by the Eastern practice of pulling
  up the horse when going at full speed and it is too well known to
  require description. As a rule the Arab rides with a “lady’s hand” and
  the barbarous habit of “hanging on by the curb” is unknown to him. I
  never pass by Rotten Row or see a regiment of English Cavalry without
  wishing to leave riders nothing but their snaffles.

Footnote 108:

  We find this orderly distribution of time (which no one adopts) in
  many tongues and many forms. In the Life of Sir W. Jones (vol. i. p.
  193, Poetical Works etc.) the following occurs, “written in India on a
  small piece of paper”:—

  Sir Edward Coke

              “Six hours to sleep, in law’s grave study six!
              Four spend in prayer,—the rest on Heaven fix!”

                        Rather:

             “Seven hours to law, to soothing slumber seven;
             Ten to the world allot, and all to Heaven!”

  But this is not practical. I must prefer the Chartist distribution:

                 Six hours sleep and six hours play:
                 Six hours work and six shillings a day.

  Mr. Froude (Oceana) speaks of New Zealanders having attained that
  ideal of operative felicity:—

                Eight to work, eight to play;
                Eight to sleep and eight shillings a day.

Footnote 109:

  Arab. “Bahímah,” mostly = black cattle: see vol. iv. 54.

Footnote 110:

  As a rule when the felidæ wag their tails, it is a sign of coming
  anger, the reverse with the canidæ.

Footnote 111:

  In India it is popularly said that the Rajah can do anything with the
  Ryots provided he respects their women and their religion—not their
  property.

Footnote 112:

  Arab. “Sunan” for which see vol. v. 36, 167. Here it is = Rasm or
  usage, equivalent to our precedents, and held valid, especially when
  dating from olden time, in all matters which are not expressly
  provided for by Koranic command. For instance a Hindí Moslem (who
  doubtless borrowed the customs from Hindús) will refuse to eat with
  the Kafir and when the latter objects that there is no such
  prohibition in the Koran will reply, “No: but it is our Rasm.” As a
  rule the Anglo-Indian is very ignorant on this essential point.

Footnote 113:

  Lit. “lowering the wings,” see supra p. 33.

Footnote 114:

  _i.e._ friends and acquaintances.

Footnote 115:

  Arab. “Hamídah” = praiseworthy or satisfactory.

Footnote 116:

  Not only alluding to the sperm of man and beast; but also to the
  “Neptunist” doctrine held by the ancient Greeks and Hindus and
  developed in Europe during the last century.

Footnote 117:

  Arab. “Taksím” dividing into parts, analysis.

Footnote 118:

  This is the usual illogical contention of all religions. It is not the
  question whether an Almighty Being can do a given thing: the question
  is whether He has or has not done it.

Footnote 119:

  Upon the old simile of the potter I shall have something to say in a
  coming volume.

Footnote 120:

  A fine specimen of a peculiarity in the undeveloped mind of man, the
  universal confusion between things objective as a dead body and states
  of things as death. We begin by giving a name, for facility of
  intercourse, to phases, phenomena and conditions of matter; and,
  having created the word we proceed to supply it with a fanciful
  entity, _e.g._ “The Mind (a useful term to express the aggregate
  action of the brain, nervous system etc.) of man is immortal.” The
  next step is personification as Time with his forelock, Death with his
  skull and Night (the absence of light) with her starry mantle. For
  poetry this abuse of language is a sine qua non, but it is deadly foe
  to all true philosophy.

Footnote 121:

  Christians would naturally understand this “One Word” to be the λόγος
  of the Platonists, adopted by St. John (comparatively a late writer)
  and by the Alexandrian school, Jewish (as Philo Judæus) and Christian.
  But here the tale-teller alludes to the Divine Word “Kun” (be!)
  whereby the worlds came into existence.

Footnote 122:

  Arab. “Ya bunayyí” a dim. form lit. “O my little son!” an affectionate
  address frequent in Russian, whose “little father” (under “Bog”) is
  his Czar.

Footnote 123:

  Thus in two texts. Mr. Payne has, “Verily God the Most High created
  man after His own image, and likened him to Himself, all of Him truth,
  without falsehood; then He gave him dominion over himself and ordered
  him and forbade him, and it was man who transgressed His commandment
  and erred in his obedience and brought falsehood upon himself of his
  own will.” Here he borrows from the Bresl. Edit. viii. 84 (five first
  lines). But the doctrine is rather Jewish and Christian than Moslem:
  Al-Mas’údi (ii. 389) introduces a Copt in the presence of Ibn Tutún
  saying, “Prince, these people (designing a Jew) pretend that Allah
  Almighty created Adam (_i.e._ mankind) after His own image” (’Alà
  Súrati-h).

Footnote 124:

  Arab. “Istitá’ah” = ableness _e.g._ “Al-hajj ’inda ’l-Istitá’ah” =
  Pilgrimage when a man is able thereto (by easy circumstances).

Footnote 125:

  Arab. “Al-Kasab,” which phrenologists would translate
  “acquisitiveness.” The author is here attempting to reconcile man’s
  moral responsibility, that is Freewill, with Fate by which all human
  actions are directed and controlled. I cannot see that he fails to
  “apprehend the knotty point of doctrine involved”; but I find his
  inability to make two contraries agree as pronounced as that of all
  others, Moslems and Christians, that preceded him in the same path.

Footnote 126:

  The order should be, “men, angels and Jinn,” for which see vol. i. p.
  10. But “angels” here takes precedence because Iblis was one of them.

Footnote 127:

  Arab. “Wartah” = precipice, quagmire, quicksand and hence sundry
  secondary and metaphorical significations, under which, as in the
  “Samitic” (Arabic) tongues generally, the prosaical and material sense
  of the word is clearly evident. I noted this in Pilgrimage iii. 66,
  and was soundly abused for so saying by a host of Sciolists.

Footnote 128:

  _i.e._ Allowing the Devil to go about the world and seduce mankind
  until Doomsday when “auld Sootie’s” occupation will be gone. Surely
  “Providence” might have managed better.

Footnote 129:

  _i.e._ to those who deserve His love.

Footnote 130:

  Here “Istitá’ah” would mean capability of action, _i.e._ freewill,
  which is a mere word like “free trade.”

Footnote 131:

  Arab. “Bi al-taubah” which may also mean “for (on account of his)
  penitence.” The reader will note how the learned Shimas “dodges” the
  real question. He is asked why the “Omnipotent, Omniscient did not
  prevent (_i.e._ why He created) sin?” He answers that He kindly
  permitted (_i.e._ created and sanctioned) it that man might repent.
  Proh pudor! If any one thus reasoned of mundane matters he would be
  looked upon as the merest fool.

Footnote 132:

  Arab. “Mahall al-Zauk,” lit. = seat of taste.

Footnote 133:

  Mr. Payne translates “it” _i.e._ the Truth; but the formula following
  the word shows that Allah is meant.

Footnote 134:

  Moslems, who do their best to countermine the ascetic idea inherent in
  Christianity, are not ashamed of the sensual appetite; but rather the
  reverse. I have heard in Persia of a Religious, highly esteemed for
  learning and saintly life who, when lodged by a disciple at Shiraz,
  came out of his sleeping room and aroused his host with the words
  “Shahwat dáram!” equivalent to our “I want a woman.” He was at once
  married to one of the slave-girls and able to gratify the demands of
  the flesh.

Footnote 135:

  Koran iv. 81, “Whatever good betideth thee is from God, and whatever
  betideth thee of evil is from thyself”: rank manichæism is pronounced
  as any in Christendom.

Footnote 136:

  Arab. “Zukhruf” which Mr. Payne picturesquely renders “painted gawds.”

Footnote 137:

  It is the innate craving in the “Aryan” (Iranian, not the Turanian)
  mind, this longing to know what follows Death, or if nothing follow
  it, which accounts for the marvellous diffusion of the so-called
  Spiritualism which is only Swedenborgianism systematised and carried
  out into action, amongst nervous and impressionable races like the
  Anglo-American. In England it is the reverse; the obtuse sensitiveness
  of a people bred on beef and beer has made the “Religion of the
  Nineteenth Century” a manner of harmless magic, whose miracles are
  table-turning and ghost seeing whilst the prodigious rascality of its
  prophets (the so-called Mediums) has brought it into universal
  disrepute. It has been said that Catholicism must be true to co-exist
  with the priest and it is the same with Spiritualism proper, by which
  I understand the belief in a life beyond the grave, a mere
  continuation of this life; it flourishes (despite the Medium) chiefly
  because it has laid before man the only possible and intelligible idea
  of a future state.

Footnote 138:

  See vol. vi. p. 7. The only lie which degrades a man in his own
  estimation and in that of others, is that told for fear of telling the
  truth. _Au reste_, human society and civilised intercourse are built
  upon a system of conventional lying; and many droll stories illustrate
  the consequences of disregarding the dictum, _la vérité n’est pas
  toujours bonne à dire_.

Footnote 139:

  Arab. “Walí’ahd” which may mean heir-presumptive (whose heirship is
  contingent) or heir-apparent.

Footnote 140:

  Arab. “Yá abati” = O my papa (which here would sound absurd).

Footnote 141:

  All the texts give a decalogue; but Mr. Payne has reduced it to a
  heptalogue.

Footnote 142:

  The Arabs who had a variety of anæsthetics never seem to have studied
  the subject of “euthanasia.” They preferred seeing a man expire in
  horrible agonies to relieving him by means of soporifics and other
  drugs: so I have heard Christians exult in saying that the sufferer
  “kept his senses to the last.” Of course superstition is at the bottom
  of this barbarity; the same which a generation ago made the silly
  accoucheur refuse to give ether because of the divine (?) saying “In
  sorrow shalt thou bring forth children.” (Gen. iii. 16). In the
  Bosnia-Herzegovina campaign many of the Austrian officers carried with
  them doses of poison to be used in case of being taken prisoners by
  the ferocious savages against whom they were fighting. As many
  anecdotes about “Easing off the poor dear” testify, the
  Euthanasia-system is by no means unknown to the lower classes in
  England. I shall have more to say on this subject.

Footnote 143:

  See vol. iii. p. 253 for the consequences of royal seclusion of which
  Europe in the present day can contribute examples. The lesson which it
  teaches simply is that the world can get on very well without
  royalties.

Footnote 144:

  The grim Arab humour in the text is the sudden change for the worse of
  the good young man. Easterns do not believe in the Western saw, “Nemo
  repente fuit turpissimus.” The spirited conduct of the subjects finds
  many parallels in European history, especially in Portugal: see my
  Life of Camoens p. 234.

Footnote 145:

  Arab. “Muhárabah” lit. = doing battle; but is sometimes used in the
  sense of gainsaying or disobeying.

Footnote 146:

  Arab. “Duwámah” (from “duwám” = vertigo, giddiness) also applied to a
  boy’s whip-top.

Footnote 147:

  Arab. “Khayr o (wa) Áfiyah,” a popular phrase much used in
  salutations, &c.

Footnote 148:

  Another instance, and true to life, of the democracy of despotism in
  which the express and combined will of the people is the only absolute
  law. Hence Russian autocracy is forced into repeated wars for the
  possession of Constantinople which, in the present condition of the
  Empire, would be an unmitigated evil to her and would be only too glad
  to see a Principality of Byzantium placed under the united protection
  of the European Powers. I have treated of this in my paper on the
  “Partition of Turkey,” which first appeared, headed the “Future of
  Turkey,” in the _Daily Telegraph_, of March 7, 1880, and subsequently
  by its own name in the _Manchester Examiner_, January 3, 1881. The
  main reason why the project is not carried out appears to be that the
  “politicals” would thereby find their occupation gone and they
  naturally object to losing so fine a field of action. So Turkey still
  plays the rôle of the pretty young lady being courted by a rabble of
  valets.

Footnote 149:

  Good Moslems are bound to abate such scandals; and in a case of the
  kind even neighbours are expected to complain before the Chief of
  Police. This practice forms “Vigilance Committees” all over the
  Mahommedan East: and we may take a leaf out of their books if
  dynamite-outrages continue.

Footnote 150:

  But a Hadis, attributed to Mohammed, says, “The Prince of a people is
  their servant.” See Matth. xx. 26–27.

Footnote 151:

  Easterns are well aware of the value of this drug which has become the
  base of so many of our modern medicines.

Footnote 152:

  The strangest poison is mentioned by Sonnini who, as a rule, is a
  trustworthy writer. Noticing the malignity of Egyptian women he
  declares (p. 628, English trans.) that they prepare a draught
  containing a quant. suff. of menstruous discharge at certain phases of
  the moon, which produces symptoms of scurvy; the gums decay, the
  teeth, beard and hair fall off, the body dries, the limbs lose
  strength and death follows within a year. He also asserts that no
  counterpoison is known and if this be true he confers a boon upon the
  Locustæ and Brinvilliers of modern Europe. In Morocco “Ta’am” is the
  vulgar name for a mixture of dead men’s bones, eyes, hair and similar
  ingredients made by old wives and supposed to cause a wasting disease
  for which the pharmacopœia has no cure. Dogs are killed by needles
  cunningly inserted into meat-balls; and this process is known
  throughout the Moslem world.

Footnote 153:

  Which contained the Palace.

Footnote 154:

  Arab. “Lá baas.” See Night vol. iv. 164.

Footnote 155:

  For Ta’lab (Sa’lab) see supra, p. 48. In Morocco it is undoubtedly the
  red or common fox which, however, is not gregarious as in the text.

Footnote 156:

  See vol. iii. 146.

Footnote 157:

  Arab. “Muunah” which in Morocco applies to the provisions furnished
  gratis by the unfortunate village-people to travellers who have a
  passport from the Sultan: its root is Maun = supplying necessaries.
  “The name is supposed to have its origin in that of _Manna_, the
  miraculous provision bestowed by the bounty of Heaven on the
  Israelites while wandering in the deserts of Arabia.” Such is the
  marvellous information we find in p. 40, “Morocco and the Moors” by
  John Drummond Hay (Murray, 1861).

Footnote 158:

  _i.e._ He resolved to do them justice and win a reward from Heaven.

Footnote 159:

  Arab. “Luss” = thief, robber, rogue, rascal, the Persian “Luti” of
  popular usage. This is one of the many “Simpleton stories” in which
  Eastern folk-lore abounds. I hear that Mr. Clouston is preparing a
  collection, and look forward to it with interest.

Footnote 160:

  Arab. “Tibn”; for which see vol. i. 16.

Footnote 161:

  A fanciful origin of “Díván” (here an audience-chamber) which may mean
  demons (plural of Dív) is attributed to a King of Persia. He gave a
  series of difficult documents and accounts to his scribes and
  surprised at the quickness and cleverness with which they were ordered
  exclaimed, “These men be Divs!” Hence a host of secondary meanings as
  a book of Odes with distichs rhymed in alphabetical order and so
  forth.

Footnote 162:

  In both cases the word “Jabábirah” is used, the plur. of Jabbár, the
  potent, especially applied to the Kings of the Canaanites and giants
  like the mythical Og of Bashan. So the Heb. Jabbúrah is a title of the
  Queens of Judah.

Footnote 163:

  Arab. “Kitáb al-Kazá” = the Book of Judgments, such as the Kazi would
  use when deciding cases in dispute, by legal precedents and the Rasm
  or custom of the country.

Footnote 164:

  _i.e._ sit before the King as referee, etc.

Footnote 165:

  This massacre of refractory chiefs is one of the _grand moyens_ of
  Eastern state-craft, and it is almost always successful because
  circumstances require it; popular opinion approves of it and it is
  planned and carried out with discretion and secrecy. The two familiar
  instances in our century are the massacre of the Mamelukes by Mohammed
  Ali Pasha the Great and of the turbulent chiefs of the Omani Arabs by
  our ancient ally Sayyid Sa’íd, miscalled the “Imám of Maskat.”

Footnote 166:

  The metaphor (Sabaka) is from horse-racing, the Arabs being, I have
  said, a horsey people.

Footnote 167:

  Arab. “Kurdús” = A body of horse.

Footnote 168:

  Arab. “Ibn ’Irs.” See vol. iii. 147.

Footnote 169:

  Arab. “Al-Hind-al-Aksá.” The Sanskrit Sindhu (lands on the Indus
  River) became in Zend “Hendu” and hence in Arabic Sind and Hind, which
  latter I wish we had preserved instead of the classical “India” or the
  poetical “Ind.”

Footnote 170:

  _i.e._ by geomancy: see vol. iii. 269 for a note on Al-Raml. The
  passage is not in the Mac. Edit.

Footnote 171:

  This address gave the boy Wazirial rank. In many parts of Europe,
  England included, if the Sovereign address a subject with a title not
  belonging to him, it is a disputed point if the latter can or cannot
  claim it.

Footnote 172:

  Koran, chapter of Joseph xii. 28, spoken by Potiphar after Joseph’s
  innocence had been proved by a witness in Potiphar’s house or
  according to the Talmud (Sepher Hádjascher) by an infant in the
  cradle. The texts should have printed this as a quotation (with
  vowel-points).

Footnote 173:

  Arab. “Al-’Azíz,” alluding to Joseph the Patriarch entitled in Egypt
  “Azíz al-Misr” = Magnifico of Misraim (Koran xii. 54). It is generally
  believed that Ismail Pasha, whose unwise deposition has caused the
  English Government such a host of troubles and load of obloquy,
  aspired to be named “’Azíz” by the Porte; but was compelled to be
  satisfied with Khadív (vulg. written Khedive, and pronounced even
  “Kédivé”), a Persian title, which simply means prince or Rajah, as
  Khadív-i-Hind.

Footnote 174:

  _i.e._ The Throne room.

Footnote 175:

  For the “Dawát” or wooden inkcase containing reeds see vol. v. 239 and
  viii. 178. I may remark that its origin is the Egyptian “Pes,” of
  which there is a specimen in the British Museum inscribed, “Amásis the
  good god and Lord of the two Lands.”

Footnote 176:

  _i.e._ I am governed by the fear of Allah in my dealings to thee and
  thy subjects.

Footnote 177:

  Arabic has no single word for million although the Moroccans have
  adopted “Milyún” from the Spaniards (see p. 100 of the Rudimentos del
  Árabe vulgar que se habla en el imperio de Marruccos por El P. Fr.
  Josè de Lerchundi, Madrid 1872). This lack of the higher numerals, the
  reverse of the Hindu languages, makes Arabic “arithmology” very
  primitive and almost as cumbrous as the Chinese.

Footnote 178:

  _i.e._ I am thy slave to slay or to pardon.

Footnote 179:

  Arab. “Matta’aka ’llah” = Allah permit thee to enjoy, from the root
  mata’, whence cometh the Maroccan Matá’i = my, mine, which answers to
  Bitá’i in Egypt.

Footnote 180:

  Arab. “Khitáb” = the exordium of a letter preceding its
  business-matter and in which the writer displays all his art. It ends
  with “Ammá ba’d,” lit. = but after, equivalent to our “To proceed.”
  This “Khitáb” is mostly skipped over by modern statesmen who will say,
  “Now after the nonsense let us come to the sense”; but their
  secretaries carefully weigh every word of it, and strongly resent all
  shortcomings.

Footnote 181:

  Strongly suggesting that the King had forgotten how to read and write.
  So not a few of the Amírs of Sind were analphabetic and seemed rather
  proud of it: “a Baloch cannot write, but he always carries a
  signet-ring.” I heard of an old English lady of the past generation in
  Northern Africa who openly declared “A Warrington shall never learn to
  read or write.”

Footnote 182:

  Arab. “Ámin,” of which the Heb. form is Amen from the root Amn =
  stability, constancy. In both tongues it is a particle of affirmation
  or consent = it is true! So be it! The Hebrew has also “Amanah” =
  verily, truly.

Footnote 183:

  To us this seems a case of “hard lines” for the unhappy women; but
  Easterns then believed and still believe in the divinity which doth
  hedge in a King, in his reigning by the “grace of God,” and in his
  being the Viceregent of Allah upon earth; briefly in the old faith of
  loyalty which great and successful republics are fast making obsolete
  in the West and nowhere faster than in England.




                ABU KIR THE DYER AND ABU SIR THE BARBER.


There dwelt once, in Alexandria city, two men, of whom one was a dyer,
by name Abú Kír, and the other a barber Abú Sír;[184] and they were
neighbours in the market-street, where their shops stood side by side.
The dyer was a swindler and a liar, an exceeding wicked wight, as if
indeed his head-temples were hewn out of a boulder rock or fashioned of
the threshold of a Jewish synagogue, nor was he ashamed of any shameful
work he wrought amongst the folk. It was his wont, when any brought him
cloth for staining, first to require of him payment under pretence of
buying dye-stuffs therewith. So the customer would give him the wage in
advance and wend his ways, and the dyer would spend all he received on
meat and drink; after which he would sell the cloth itself as soon as
ever its owner turned his back and waste its worth in eating and
drinking and what not else, for he ate not but of the daintiest and most
delicate viands nor drank but of the best of that which doth away the
wit of man. And when the owner of the cloth came to him, he would say to
him, “Return to me to-morrow before sunrise and thou shalt find thy
stuff dyed.” So the customer would go away, saying to himself, “One day
is near another day,” and return next day at the appointed time, when
the dyer would say to him, “Come to-morrow; yesterday I was not at work,
for I had with me guests and was occupied with doing what their wants
required till they went: but to-morrow before sunrise come and take thy
cloth dyed.” So he would fare forth and return on the third day, when
Abu Kir would say to him, “Indeed yesterday I was excusable, for my wife
was brought to bed in the night and all day I was busy with manifold
matters; but to-morrow, without fail, come and take thy cloth dyed.”
When the man came again at the appointed time, he would put him off with
some other pretence, it mattered little what, and would swear to
him;——Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that every time the
owner of an article came to the dyer he would put him off with any
pretext[185] and would swear to him; nor would he cease to promise and
swear to him, as often as he came, till the customer lost patience and
said, “How often wilt thou say to me, ‘To-morrow?’ Give me my stuff: I
will not have it dyed.” Whereupon the dyer would make answer, “By Allah,
O my brother, I am abashed at thee; but I must tell the truth and may
Allah harm all who harm folk in their goods!” The other would exclaim,
“Tell me what hath happened;” and Abu Kir would reply, “As for thy stuff
I dyed that same on matchless wise and hung it on the drying rope but
’twas stolen and I know not who stole it.” If the owner of the stuff
were of the kindly he would say, “Allah will compensate me;” and if he
were of the ill-conditioned, he would haunt him with exposure and
insult, but would get nothing of him, though he complained of him to the
judge. He ceased not doing thus till his report was noised abroad among
the folk and each used to warn other against Abu Kir who became a byword
amongst them. So they all held aloof from him and none would be
entrapped by him save those who were ignorant of his character; but, for
all this, he failed not daily to suffer insult and exposure from Allah’s
creatures. By reason of this his trade became slack and he used to go to
the shop of his neighbour the barber Abu Sír and sit there, facing the
dyery and with his eyes on the door. Whenever he espied any one who knew
him not standing at the dyery-door, with a piece of stuff in his hand,
he would leave the barber’s booth and go up to him saying, “What seekest
thou, O thou?”; and the man would reply, “Take and dye me this thing.”
So the dyer would ask, “What colour wilt thou have it?” For, with all
his knavish tricks his hand was in all manner of dyes; but he was never
true to any one; wherefore poverty had gotten the better of him. Then he
would take the stuff and say, “Give me my wage in advance and come
to-morrow and take the stuff.” So the stranger would advance him the
money and wend his way; whereupon Abu Kir would carry the cloth to the
market-street and sell it and with its price buy meat and vegetables and
tobacco[186] and fruit and what not else he needed; but, whenever he saw
any one who had given him stuff to dye standing at the door of his shop,
he would not come forth to him or even show himself to him. On this wise
he abode years and years, till it fortuned one day that he received
cloth to dye from a man of wrath and sold it and spent the proceeds. The
owner came to him every day, but found him not in his shop; for,
whenever he espied any one who had claim against him, he would flee from
him into the shop of the barber Abu Sir. At last, that angry man finding
that he was not to be seen and growing weary of such work, repaired to
the Kazi and bringing one of his serjeants to the shop, nailed up the
door, in presence of a number of Moslems, and sealed it, for that he saw
therein naught save some broken pans of earthenware to stand him instead
of his stuff; after which the serjeant took the key, saying to the
neighbours, “Tell him to bring back this man’s cloth then come to
me[187] and take his shop key;” and went his way, he and the man. Then
said Abu Sir to Abu Kir, “What ill business is this?[188] Whoever
bringeth thee aught thou losest it for him. What hath become of this
angry man’s stuff?” Answered the dyer, “O my neighbour, ’twas stolen
from me.” “Prodigious!” exclaimed the barber. “Whenever any one giveth
thee aught, a thief stealeth it from thee! Art thou then the
meeting-place of every rogue upon town? But I doubt me thou liest: so
tell me the truth.” Replied Abu Kir, “O my neighbour, none hath stolen
aught from me.” Asked Abu Sir, “What then dost thou with the people’s
property?”; and the dyer answered, “Whenever any one giveth me aught to
dye, I sell it and spend the price.” Quoth Abu Sir, “Is this permitted
thee of Allah?” and quoth Abu Kir, “I do this only out of poverty,
because business is slack with me and I am poor and have nothing.”[189]
And he went on to complain to him of the dulness of his trade and his
lack of means. Abu Sir in like manner lamented the little profit of his
own calling, saying, “I am a master of my craft and have not my equal in
this city; but no one cometh to me to be polled, because I am a pauper;
and I loathe this art and mystery, O my brother.” Abu Kir replied, “And
I also loathe my own craft, by reason of its slackness; but, O my
brother, what call is there for our abiding in this town? Let us depart
from it, I and thou, and solace ourselves in the lands of mankind,
carrying in our hands our crafts which are in demand all the world over;
so shall we breathe the air and rest from this grievous trouble.” And he
ceased not to commend travel to Abu Sir, till the barber became wishful
to set out; so they agreed upon their route,——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu Kir
ceased not his praises of wayfaring to Abu Sir till the barber became
wishful to depart; so they agreed upon their route, at which decision
Abu Kir rejoiced and improvised these lines:—

 Leave thy home for abroad an wouldst rise on high, ✿ And travel whence
    benefits five-fold rise;
 The soothing of sorrow and winning of bread, ✿ Knowledge, manners and
    commerce with good men and wise.
 An they say that in travel are travail and care, ✿ And disunion of
    friends and much hardship that tries;
 Yet to generous youth death is better than life ✿ In the house of
    contempt betwixt haters and spies.

When they agreed to travel together Abu Kir said to Abu Sir, “O my
neighbour, we are become brethren and there is no difference between us,
so it behoveth us to recite the Fátihah[190] that he of us who gets work
shall of his gain feed him who is out of work, and whatever is left, we
will lay in a chest; and when we return to Alexandria, we will divide it
fairly and equally.” “So be it,” replied Abu Sir, and they repeated the
Opening Chapter of the Koran on this understanding. Then Abu Sir locked
up his shop and gave the key to its owner, whilst Abu Kir left his door
locked and sealed and let the key lie with the Kazi’s serjeant; after
which they took their baggage and embarked on the morrow in a
galleon[191] upon the salt sea. They set sail the same day and fortune
attended them, for, of Abu Sir’s great good luck, there was not a barber
in the ship albeit it carried an hundred and twenty men, besides captain
and crew. So, when they loosed the sails, the barber said to the dyer,
“O my brother, this is the sea and we shall need meat and drink; we have
but little provaunt with us and haply the voyage will be long upon us;
wherefore methinks I will shoulder my budget and pass among the
passengers, and may be some one will say to me:—Come hither, O barber,
and shave me, and I will shave him for a scone or a silver bit or a
draught of water: so shall we profit by this, I and thou too.” “There’s
no harm in that,” replied the dyer and laid down his head and slept,
whilst the barber took his gear and water-tasse[192] and throwing over
his shoulder a rag, to serve as napkin (because he was poor), passed
among the passengers. Quoth one of them, “Ho, master, come and shave
me.” So he shaved him, and the man gave him a half-dirham;[193]
whereupon quoth Abu Sir, “O my brother, I have no use for this bit;
hadst thou given me a scone ’twere more blessed to me in this sea, for I
have a shipmate and we are short of provision.” So he gave him a loaf
and a slice of cheese and filled him the tasse with sweet water. The
barber carried all this to Abu Kir and said, “Eat the bread and cheese
and drink the water.” Accordingly he ate and drank, whilst Abu Sir again
took up his shaving gear and, tasse in hand and rag on shoulder, went
round about the deck among the passengers. One man he shaved for two
scones and another for a bittock of cheese, and he was in demand,
because there was no other barber on board. Also he bargained with every
one who said to him, “Ho, master, shave me!” for two loaves and a
half-dirham, and they gave him whatever he sought, so that, by sundown,
he had collected thirty loaves and thirty silvers with store of cheese
and olives and botargoes.[194] And besides these he got from the
passengers whatever he asked for and was soon in possession of things
galore. Amongst the rest he shaved the Captain,[195] to whom he
complained of his lack of victual for the voyage, and the skipper said
to him, “Thou art welcome to bring thy comrade every night and sup with
me and have no care for that so long as ye sail with us.” Then he
returned to the dyer, whom he found asleep; so he roused him; and when
Abu Kir awoke, he saw at his head an abundance of bread and cheese and
olives and botargoes and said, “Whence gottest thou all this?” “From the
bounty of Allah Almighty,” replied Abu Sir. Then Abu Kir would have
fallen to, but the barber said to him, “Eat not of this, O my brother;
but leave it to serve us another time; for know that I shaved the
Captain and complained to him of our lack of victual: whereupon quoth
he:—Welcome to thee! Bring thy comrade and sup both of ye with me every
night. And this night we sup with him for the first time.” But Abu Kir
replied, “My head goeth round with sea-sickness and I cannot rise from
my stead; so let me sup off these things and fare thou alone to the
Captain.” Abu Sir replied, “There is no harm in that;” and sat looking
at the other as he ate, and saw him hew off gobbets, as the quarryman
heweth stone from the hill-quarries and gulp them down with the gulp of
an elephant which hath not eaten for days, bolting another mouthful ere
he had swallowed the previous one and glaring the while at that which
was before him with the glowering of a Ghul and blowing as bloweth the
hungry bull over his beans and bruised straw. Presently up came a sailor
and said to the barber, “O craftsmaster, the Captain biddeth thee come
to supper and bring thy comrade.” Quoth the barber to the dyer, “Wilt
thou come with us?”; but quoth he, “I cannot walk.” So the barber went
by himself and found the Captain sitting before a tray whereon were a
score or more of dishes and all the company were awaiting him and his
mate. When the Captain saw him he asked, “Where is thy friend?”; and Abu
Sir answered, “O my lord, he is sea-sick.” Said the skipper, “That will
do him no harm; his sickness will soon pass off; but do thou carry him
his supper and come back, for we tarry for thee.” Then he set apart a
porringer of Kabábs and putting therein some of each dish, till there
was enough for ten, gave it to Abu Sir, saying, “Take this to thy chum.”
He took it and carried it to the dyer, whom he found grinding away with
his dog-teeth[196] at the food which was before him, as he were a camel,
and heaping mouthful on mouthful in his hurry. Quoth Abu Sir, “Did I not
say to thee:—Eat not of this? Indeed the Captain is a kindly man. See
what he hath sent thee, for that I told him thou wast sea-sick.” “Give
it here,” cried the dyer. So the barber gave him the platter, and he
snatched it from him and fell upon his food, ravening for it and
resembling a grinning dog or a raging lion or a Rukh pouncing on a
pigeon or one well-nigh dead for hunger who seeing meat falls ravenously
to eat. Then Abu Sir left him and going back to the Captain, supped and
enjoyed himself and drank coffee[197] with him; after which he returned
to Abu Kir and found that he had eaten all that was in the porringer and
thrown it aside, empty.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Abu Sir
returned to Abu Kir he saw that he had eaten all that was in the
porringer and had thrown it aside empty. So he took it up and gave it to
one of the Captain’s servants, then went back to Abu Kir and slept till
the morning. On the morrow he continued to shave, and all he got by way
of meat and drink he gave to his shipmate, who ate and drank and sat
still, rising not save to do what none could do for him, and every night
the barber brought him a full porringer from the Captain’s table. They
fared thus twenty days until the galleon cast anchor in the harbour of a
city; whereupon they took leave of the skipper and landing, entered the
town and hired them a closet in a Khan. Abu Sir furnished it and buying
a cooking pot and a platter and spoons[198] and what else they needed,
fetched meat and cooked it; but Abu Kir fell asleep the moment he
entered the Caravanserai and awoke not till Abu Sir aroused him and set
the tray of food[199] before him. When he awoke, he ate and saying to
Abu Sir, “Blame me not, for I am giddy,” fell asleep again. Thus he did
forty days, whilst, every day, the barber took his gear and making the
round of the city, wrought for that which fell to his lot,[200] and
returning, found the dyer asleep and aroused him. The moment he awoke he
fell ravenously upon the food, eating as one who cannot have his fill
nor be satisfied; after which he went asleep again. On this wise he
passed other forty days and whenever the barber said to him, “Sit up and
be comfortable[201] and go forth and take an airing in the city, for
’tis a gay place and a pleasant and hath not its equal among the
cities,” he would reply, “Blame me not, for I am giddy.” Abu Sir cared
not to hurt his feelings nor give him hard words; but, on the
forty-first day, he himself fell sick and could not go abroad; so he
engaged the porter of the Khan to serve them both, and he did the
needful for them and brought them meat and drink whilst Abu Kir would do
nothing but eat and sleep. The man ceased not to wait upon them on this
wise for four days, at the end of which time the barber’s malady
redoubled on him, till he lost his senses for stress of sickness; and
Abu Kir, feeling the sharp pangs of hunger, arose and sought in his
comrade’s clothes, where he found a thousand silver bits. He took them
and, shutting the door of the closet upon Abu Sir, fared forth without
telling any; and the doorkeeper was then at market and thus saw him not
go out. Presently Abu Kir betook himself to the bazar and clad himself
in costly clothes, at a price of five hundred half-dirhams; then he
proceeded to walk about the streets and divert himself by viewing the
city which he found to be one whose like was not among cities; but he
noted that all its citizens were clad in clothes of white and blue,
without other colour. Presently he came to a dyer’s and seeing naught
but blue in his shop, pulled out to him a kerchief and said, “O master,
take this and dye it and win thy wage.” Quoth the dyer, “The cost of
dyeing this will be twenty dirhams;” and quoth Abu Kir, “In our country
we dye it for two.” “Then go and dye it in your own country! As for me,
my price is twenty dirhams and I will not bate a little thereof.” “What
colour wilt thou dye it?” “I will dye it blue.” “But I want it dyed
red.” “I know not how to dye red.” “Then dye it green.” “I know not how
to dye green.” “Yellow.” “Nor yet yellow.” Thereupon Abu Kir went on to
name the different tints to him, one after other, till the dyer said,
“We are here in this city forty master-dyers, not one more nor one less;
and when one of us dieth, we teach his son the craft. If he leave no
son, we abide lacking one, and if he leave two sons, we teach one of
them the craft, and if he die, we teach his brother. This our craft is
strictly ordered, and we know how to dye but blue and no other tint
whatsoever.” Then said Abu Kir, “Know that I too am a dyer and wot how
to dye all colours; and I would have thee take me into thy service on
hire, and I will teach thee everything of my art, so thou mayst glory
therein over all the company of dyers.” But the dyer answered, “We never
admit a stranger into our craft.” Asked Abu Kir, “And what if I open a
dyery for myself?”; whereto the other answered, “We will not suffer thee
to do that on any wise;” whereupon he left him and going to a second
dyer, made him the like proposal; but he returned him the same answer as
the first; and he ceased not to go from one to other, till he had made
the round of the whole forty masters; but they would not accept him
either to master or apprentice. Then he repaired to the Shaykh of the
Dyers and told him what had passed, and he said, “We admit no strangers
into our craft.” Hereupon Abu Kir became exceeding wroth and going up to
the King of that city, made complaint to him, saying, “O King of the
age, I am a stranger and a dyer by trade”; and he told him whatso had
passed between himself and the dyers of the town, adding, “I can dye
various kinds of red, such as rose-colour and jujube-colour and various
kinds of green, such as grass-green and pistachio-green and olive and
parrot’s wing, and various kinds of black, such as coal-black and
Kohl-black, and various shades of yellow, such as orange[202] and
lemon-colour,” and went on to name to him the rest of the colours. Then
said he, “O King of the age, all the dyers in thy city can not turn out
of hand any one of these tincts, for they know not how to dye aught but
blue; yet will they not admit me amongst them, either to master or
apprentice.” Answered the King, “Thou sayst sooth for that matter, but I
will open to thee a dyery and give thee capital and have thou no care
anent them; for whoso offereth to do thee let or hindrance, I will hang
him over his shop-door.” Then he sent for builders and said to them, “Go
round about the city with this master-dyer, and whatsoever place
pleaseth him, be it shop or Khan or what not, turn out its occupier and
build him a dyery after his wish. Whatsoever he biddeth you, that do ye
and oppose him not in aught.” And he clad him in a handsome suit and
gave him two white slaves to serve him, and a horse with housings of
brocade and a thousand dinars, saying, “Expend this upon thyself against
the building be completed.” Accordingly Abu Kir donned the dress and
mounting the horse, became as he were an Emir. Moreover the King
assigned him a house and bade furnish it; so they furnished it for
him.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King
assigned a house to Abu Kir and bade furnish it and he took up his abode
therein. On the morrow he mounted and rode through the city, whilst the
architects went before him; and he looked about him till he saw a place
which pleased him and said, “This stead is seemly;” whereupon they
turned out the owner and carried him to the King, who gave him as the
price of his holding, what contented him and more. Then the builders
fell to work, whilst Abu Kir said to them, “Build thus and thus and do
this and that,” till they built him a dyery that had not its like;
whereupon he presented himself before the King and informed him that
they had done building the dyery and that there needed but the price of
the dye-stuffs and gear to set it going. Quoth the King, “Take these
four thousand dinars to thy capital and let me see the first fruits of
thy dyery.” So he took the money and went to the market where, finding
dye-stuffs[203] plentiful and well-nigh worthless, he bought all he
needed of materials for dyeing; and the King sent him five hundred
pieces of stuff, which he set himself to dye of all colours and then he
spread them before the door of his dyery. When the folk passed by the
shop, they saw a wonder-sight whose like they had never in their lives
seen; so they crowded about the entrance, enjoying the spectacle and
questioning the dyer and saying, “O master, what are the names of these
colours?” Quoth he, “This is red and that yellow and the other green”
and so on, naming the rest of the colours. And they fell to bringing him
longcloth and saying to him, “Dye it for us like this and that and take
what hire thou seekest.” When he had made an end of dyeing the King’s
stuffs, he took them and went up with them to the Divan; and when the
King saw them he rejoiced in them and bestowed abundant bounty on the
dyer. Furthermore, all the troops brought him stuffs, saying, “Dye for
us thus and thus;” and he dyed for them to their liking, and they threw
him gold and silver. After this his fame spread abroad and his shop was
called the Sultan’s Dyery. Good came in to him at every door and none of
the other dyers could say a word to him, but they used to come to him
kissing his hands and excusing themselves to him for past affronts they
had offered him and saying, “Take us to thine apprentices.” But he would
none of them for he had become the owner of black slaves and handmaids
and had amassed store of wealth. On this wise fared it with Abu Kir; but
as regards Abu Sir, after the closet door had been locked on him and his
money had been stolen, he abode prostrate and unconscious for three
successive days, at the end of which the Concierge of the Khan, chancing
to look at the door, observed that it was locked and bethought himself
that he had not seen and heard aught of the two companions for some
time. So he said in his mind, “Haply they have made off, without paying
rent,[204] or perhaps they are dead, or what is to do with them?” And he
waited till sunset, when he went up to the door and heard the barber
groaning within. He saw the key in the lock; so he opened the door and
entering, found Abu Sir lying, groaning, and said to him, “No harm to
thee: where is thy friend?” Replied Abu Sir, “By Allah, I came to my
senses only this day and called out; but none answered my call. Allah
upon thee, O my brother, look for the purse under my head and take from
it five half-dirhams and buy me somewhat nourishing, for I am sore
anhungered.” The porter put out his hand and taking the purse, found it
empty and said to the barber, “The purse is empty; there is nothing in
it.” Whereupon Abu Sir knew that Abu Kir had taken that which was
therein and had fled and he asked the porter, “Hast thou not seen my
friend?” Answered the doorkeeper, “I have not seen him these three days;
and indeed methought you had departed, thou and he.” The barber cried,
“Not so; but he coveted my money and took it and fled seeing me sick.”
Then he fell a-weeping and a-wailing but the doorkeeper said to him, “No
harm shall befal thee, and Allah will requite him his deed.” So he went
away and cooked him some broth, whereof he ladled out a plateful and
brought it to him; nor did he cease to tend him and maintain him with
his own monies for two months’ space, when the barber sweated[205] and
the Almighty made him whole of his sickness. Then he stood up and said
to the porter, “An ever the Most High Lord enable me, I will surely
requite thee thy kindness to me; but none requiteth save the Lord of His
bounty!” Answered the porter, “Praised be He for thy recovery! I dealt
not thus with thee but of desire for the face of Allah the Bountiful.”
Then the barber went forth of the Khan and threaded the market-streets
of the town, till Destiny brought him to the bazar wherein was Abu Kir’s
dyery, and he saw the vari-coloured stuffs dispread before the shop and
a jostle of folk crowding to look upon them. So he questioned one of the
townsmen and asked him, “What place is this and how cometh it that I see
the folk crowding together?”; whereto the man answered, saying, “This is
the Sultan’s Dyery, which he set up for a foreigner Abu Kir hight; and
whenever he dyeth new stuff, we all flock to him and divert ourselves by
gazing upon his handiwork, for we have no dyers in our land who know how
to stain with these colours; and indeed there befel him with the dyers
who are in the city that which befel.”[206] And he went on to tell him
all that had passed between Abu Kir and the master-dyers and how he had
complained of them to the Sultan who took him by the hand and built him
that dyery and gave him this and that: brief, he recounted to him all
that had occurred. At this the barber rejoiced and said in himself,
“Praised be Allah who hath prospered him, so that he is become a master
of his craft! And the man is excusable, for of a surety he hath been
diverted from thee by his work and hath forgotten thee; but thou actedst
kindly by him and entreatedst him generously, what time he was out of
work; so, when he seeth thee, he will rejoice in thee and entreat thee
generously, even as thou entreatedst him.” According he made for the
door of the dyery and saw Abu Kir seated on a high mattress spread upon
a bench beside the doorway, clad in royal apparel and attended by four
blackamoor slaves and four white Mamelukes all robed in the richest of
raiment. Moreover, he saw the workmen, ten negro slaves, standing at
work; for, when Abu Kir bought them, he taught them the craft of dyeing,
and he himself sat amongst his cushions, as he were a Grand Wazir or a
mighty Monarch putting his hand to naught, but only saying to the men,
“Do this and do that.” So the barber went up to him and stood before
him, deeming he would rejoice in him when he saw him and salute him and
entreat him with honour and make much of him; but, when eye fell upon
eye, the dyer said to him, “O scoundrel, how many a time have I bidden
thee stand not at the door of the workshop? Hast thou a mind to disgrace
me with the folk, thief[207] that thou art? Seize him.” So the
blackamoors ran at him and laid hold of him; and the dyer rose up from
his seat and said, “Throw him.” Accordingly they threw him down and Abu
Kir took a stick and dealt him an hundred strokes on the back; after
which they turned him over and he beat him other hundred blows on his
belly. Then he said to him, “O scoundrel, O villain, if ever again I see
thee standing at the door of this dyery, I will forthwith send thee to
the King, and he will commit thee to the Chief of Police, that he may
strike thy neck. Begone, may Allah not bless thee!” So Abu Sir departed
from him, broken-hearted by reason of the beating and shame that had
betided him; whilst the bystanders asked Abu Kir, “What hath this man
done?” He answered, “The fellow is a thief, who stealeth the stuffs of
folk.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Abu Kir beat
Abu Sir and thrust him forth he said to those present, “He is a thief
who stealeth the stuffs of folk; he hath robbed me of cloth, how many a
time! and I still said in myself:—Allah forgive him! He is a poor man;
and I cared not to deal roughly with him; so I used to give my customers
the worth of their goods and forbid him gently; but he would not be
forbidden: and if he come again, I will send him to the King, who will
put him to death and rid the people of his mischief.” And the bystanders
fell to abusing the barber after his back was turned. Such was the
behaviour of Abu Kir; but as regards Abu Sir, he returned to the Khan,
where he sat pondering that which the dyer had done by him and he
remained seated till the burning of the beating subsided, when he went
out and walked about the markets of the city. Presently, he bethought
him to go to the Hammam-bath; so he said to one of the townsfolk, “O my
brother, which is the way to the Baths?” Quoth the man, “And what manner
of thing may the Baths be?” and quoth Abu Sir, “’Tis a place where
people wash themselves and do away their dirt and defilements, and it is
of the best of the good things of the world.” Replied the townsman, “Get
thee to the sea,” but the barber rejoined, “I want the Hammam-baths.”
Cried the other, “We know not what manner of thing is the Hammam, for we
all resort to the sea; even the King, when he would wash, betaketh
himself to the sea.” When Abu Sir was assured that there was no bath in
the city and that the folk knew not the Baths nor the fashion thereof,
he betook himself to the King’s Divan and kissing ground between his
hands called down blessings on him and said, “I am a stranger and a
Bath-man by trade, and I entered thy city and thought to go to the
Hammam; but found not one therein. How cometh a city of this comely
quality to lack a Hammam, seeing that the bath is of the highest of the
delights of this world?” Quoth the King, “What manner of thing is the
Hammam?” So Abu Sir proceeded to set forth to him the quality of the
bath, saying, “Thy capital will not be a perfect city till there be a
Hammam therein.” “Welcome to thee!” said the King and clad him in a
dress that had not its like and gave him a horse and two blackamoor
slaves, presently adding four handmaids and as many white Mamelukes: he
also appointed him a furnished house and honoured him yet more
abundantly than he had honoured the dyer. After this he sent builders
with him saying to them, “Build him a Hammam in what place soever shall
please him.” So he took them and went with them through the midst of the
city, till he saw a stead that suited him. He pointed it out to the
builders and they set to work, whilst he directed them, and they wrought
till they builded him a Hammam that had not its like. Then he bade them
paint it, and they painted it rarely, so that it was a delight to the
beholders; after which Abu Sir went up to the King and told him that
they had made an end of building and decorating the Hammam, adding,
“There lacketh naught save the furniture.” The King gave him ten
thousand dinars wherewith he furnished the Bath and ranged the napkins
on the ropes; and all who passed by the door stared at it and their mind
was confounded at its decorations. So the people crowded to this
spectacle, whose like they had never in their lives seen, and solaced
themselves by staring at it and saying, “What is this thing?” To which
Abu Sir replied, “This is a Hammam;” and they marvelled thereat. Then he
heated water and set the bath a-working,[208] and he made a jetting
fountain in the great basin, which ravished the wit of all who saw it of
the people of the city. Furthermore, he sought of the King ten Mamelukes
not yet come to manhood, and he gave him ten boys like moons; whereupon
Abu Sir proceeded to shampoo them, saying, “Do in this wise with the
bathers.” Then he burnt perfumes and sent out a crier to cry aloud in
the city, saying, “O creatures of Allah, get ye to the Baths which be
called the Sultan’s Hammam!” So the lieges came thither and Abu Sir bade
the slave-boys wash their bodies. The folk went down into the tank and
coming forth, seated themselves on the raised pavement, whilst the boys
shampooed them, even as Abu Sir had taught them; and they continued to
enter the Hammam and do their need therein gratis and go out, without
paying, for the space of three days. On the fourth day the barber
invited the King, who took horse with his Grandees and rode to the
Baths, where he put off his clothes and entered; then Abu Sir came in to
him and rubbed his body with the bag-gloves, peeling from his skin
dirt-rolls like lamp-wicks and showing them to the King, who rejoiced
therein, and clapping his hand upon his limbs heard them ring again for
very smoothness and cleanliness[209]; after which thorough washing Abu
Sir mingled rose-water with the water of the tank and the King went down
therein. When he came forth, his body was refreshed and he felt a
lightness and liveliness such as he had never known in his life. Then
the barber made him sit on the daïs and the boys proceeded to shampoo
him, whilst the censers fumed with the finest lign-aloes.[210] Then said
the King, “O master is this the Hammam?”; and Abu Sir said, “Yes.” Quoth
the King, “As my head liveth, my city is not become a city indeed but by
this Bath,” presently adding, “But what pay takest thou for each
person?” Quoth Abu Sir, “That which thou biddest will I take;” whereupon
the King cried, “Take a thousand gold pieces for every one who washeth
in thy Hammam.” Abu Sir, however, said, “Pardon, O King of the age! All
men are not alike, but there are amongst them rich and poor, and if I
take of each a thousand dinars, the Hammam will stand empty, for the
poor man cannot pay this price.” Asked the King, “How then wilt thou do
for the price!”; and the barber answered, “I will leave it to their
generosity.[211] Each who can afford aught shall pay that which his soul
grudgeth not to give, and we will take from every man after the measure
of his means. On this wise will the folk come to us and he who is
wealthy shall give according to his station and he who is wealth-less
shall give what he can afford. Under such condition the Hammam will
still be at work and prosper exceedingly; but a thousand dinars is a
Monarch’s gift, and not every man can avail to this.” The Lords of the
Realm confirmed Abu Sir’s words, saying, “This is the truth, O King of
the age! Thinkest thou that all folk are like unto thee, O glorious
King[212]?” The King replied, “Ye say sooth; but this man is a stranger
and poor and ’tis incumbent on us to deal generously with him, for that
he hath made in our city this Hammam whose like we have never in our
lives seen and without which our city were not adorned nor hath gotten
importance; wherefore, an we favour him with increase of fee ’twill not
be much.” But the Grandees said, “An thou wilt guerdon him be generous
with thine own monies, and let the King’s bounty be extended to the poor
by means of the low price of the Hammam, so the lieges may bless thee;
but, as for the thousand dinars, we are the Lords of thy Land, yet do
our souls grudge to pay it; and how then should the poor be pleased to
afford it?” Quoth the King, “O my Grandees, for this time let each of
you give him an hundred dinars and a Mameluke, a slave girl and a
blackamoor;” and quoth they, “’Tis well; we will give it; but after
to-day whoso entereth shall give him only what he can afford, without
grudging.” “No harm in that,” said the King; and they gave him the
thousand gold pieces and three chattels. Now the number of the Nobles
who were washed with the King that day was four hundred souls;——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the number of
the Nobles who were washed with the King that day were four hundred
souls; so that the total of that which they gave him was forty thousand
dinars, besides four hundred Mamelukes and a like number of negroes and
slave-girls.[213] Moreover the King gave him ten thousand dinars,
besides ten white slaves and ten handmaidens and a like number of
blackamoors; whereupon coming forward Abu Sir kissed the ground before
him and said, “O auspicious Sovereign, lord of justice, what place will
contain me all these women and slaves?” Quoth the King, “O weak o’ wit,
I bade not my nobles deal thus with thee but that we might gather
together unto thee wealth galore; for may be thou wilt bethink thee of
thy country and family and repine for them and be minded to return to
thy mother-land; so shalt thou take from our country muchel of money to
maintain thyself withal, what while thou livest in thine own country.”
And quoth Abu Sir, “O King of the age, (Allah advance thee!) these white
slaves and women and negroes befit only Kings and hadst thou ordered me
ready money, it were more profitable to me than this army; for they must
eat and drink and dress, and whatever betideth me of wealth, it will not
suffice for their support.” The King laughed and said, “By Allah thou
speakest sooth! They are indeed a mighty host, and thou hast not the
wherewithal to maintain them; but wilt thou sell them to me for an
hundred dinars a head?” Said Abu Sir, “I sell them to thee at that
price.” So the King sent to his treasurer for the coin and he brought it
and gave Abu Sir the whole of the price without abatement[214] and in
full tale; after which the King restored the slaves to their owners,
saying, “Let each of you who knoweth his slaves take them; for they are
a gift from me to you.” So they obeyed his bidding and took each what
belonged to him; whilst Abu Sir said to the King, “Allah ease thee, O
King of the age, even as thou hast eased me of these Ghuls, whose
bellies none may fill save Allah[215]!” The King laughed, and said he
spake sooth; then, taking the Grandees of his Realm from the Hammam
returned to his palace; but the barber passed the night in counting out
his gold and laying it up in bags and sealing them; and he had with him
twenty black slaves and a like number of Mamelukes and four slave girls
to serve him. Now when morning morrowed, he opened the Hammam and sent
out a crier to cry, saying, “Whoso entereth the Baths and washeth shall
give that which he can afford and which his generosity requireth him to
give.” Then he seated himself by the pay-chest[216] and customers
flocked in upon him, each putting down that which was easy to him, nor
had eventide evened ere the chest was full of the good gifts of Allah
the Most High. Presently the Queen desired to go to the Hammam, and when
this came to Abu Sir’s knowledge, he divided the day on her account into
two parts, appointing that between dawn and noon to men and that between
midday and sundown to women.[217] As soon as the Queen came, he
stationed a handmaid behind the pay-chest; for he had taught four
slave-girls the service of the Hammam, so that they were become expert
bath-women and tire-women. When the Queen entered, this pleased her and
her breast waxed broad and she laid down a thousand dinars. Thus his
report was noised abroad in the city, and all who entered the bath he
entreated with honour, were they rich or poor; good came in upon him at
every door and he made acquaintance with the royal guards and got him
friends and intimates. The King himself used to come to him one day in
every week, leaving with him a thousand dinars and the other days were
for rich and poor alike; and he was wont to deal courteously with the
folk and use them with the utmost respect. It chanced that the King’s
sea-captain came in to him one day in the bath; so Abu Sir did off his
dress and going in with him, proceeded to shampoo him and entreated him
with exceeding courtesy. When he came forth, he made him sherbet and
coffee; and when he would have given him somewhat, he swore that he
would not accept from him aught. So the captain was under obligation to
him, by reason of his exceeding kindness and courtesy and was perplexed
how to requite the bath-man his generous dealing. Thus fared it with Abu
Sir: but as regards Abu Kir, hearing all the people recounting wonders
of the Baths and saying, “Verily, this Hammam is the Paradise of this
world! Inshallah, O such an one, thou shalt go with us to-morrow to this
delightful bath,” he said to himself, “Needs must I fare like the rest
of the world, and see this bath that hath taken folk’s wits.” So he
donned his richest dress and mounting a she-mule and bidding the
attendance of four white slaves and four blacks, walking before and
behind him, he rode to the Hammam. When he alighted at the door, he
smelt the scent of burning aloes-wood and found people going in and out
and the benches full of great and small. So he entered the vestibule and
saw Abu Sir, who rose to him and rejoiced in him: but the dyer said to
him, “Is this the way of well-born men? I have opened me a dyery and am
become master-dyer of the city and acquainted with the King and have
risen to prosperity and authority: yet camest thou not to me nor askest
of me nor saidst, Where’s my comrade? For my part I sought thee in vain
and sent my slaves and servants to make search for thee in all the Khans
and other places; but they knew not whither thou hadst gone, nor could
any one give me tidings of thee.” Said Abu Sir, “Did I not come to thee
and didst thou not make me out a thief and bastinado me and dishonour me
before the world?” At this Abu Kir made a show of concern and asked,
“What manner of talk is this? Was it thou whom I beat?”: and Abu Sir
answered, “Yes, ’twas I.” Whereupon Abu Kir swore to him a thousand
oaths that he knew him not and said, “There was a fellow like thee, who
used to come every day and steal the people’s stuff, and I took thee for
him.” And he went on to pretend penitence, beating hand upon hand and
saying, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great? Indeed we have sinned against thee; but would that
thou hadst discovered thyself to me and said, I am such an one! Indeed
the fault is with thee, for that thou madest not thyself known unto me,
more especially seeing that I was distracted for much business.” Replied
Abu Sir, “Allah pardon thee,[218] O my comrade! This was foreordained in
the Secret Purpose, and reparation is with Allah. Enter and put off thy
clothes and bathe at thine ease.” Said the dyer, “I conjure thee, by
Allah, O my brother, forgive me!”; and said Abu Sir, “Allah acquit thee
of blame and forgive thee! Indeed this thing was decreed to me from all
eternity.” Then asked Abu Kir, “Whence gottest thou this high degree?”;
and answered Abu Sir, “He who prospered thee prospered me; for I went up
to the King and described to him the fashion of the Hammam and he bade
me build one.” And the dyer said, “Even as thou art beknown of the King,
so also am I;”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Abu Kir
and Abu Sir were exchanging reproof and excuse, the dyer said to him,
“Even as thou art beknown of the King, so also am I; and, Inshallah,—God
willing—I will make him love and favour thee more than ever, for my
sake, he knoweth not that thou art my comrade, but I will acquaint him
of this and commend thee to him.” But Abu Sir said, “There needeth no
commendation; for He who moveth man’s heart to love still liveth; and
indeed the King and all his court affect me and have given me this and
that.” And he told him the whole tale and said to him, “Put off thy
clothes behind the chest and enter the Hammam, and I will go in with
thee and rub thee down with the glove.” So he doffed his dress and Abu
Sir, entering the bath with him, soaped him and gloved him and then
dressed him and busied himself with his service till he came forth, when
he brought him dinner and sherbets, whilst all the folk marvelled at the
honour he did him. Then Abu Kir would have given him somewhat; but he
swore that he would not accept aught from him and said to him, “Shame
upon such doings! Thou art my comrade, and there is no difference
between us.” Then Abu Kir observed, “By Allah, O my comrade, this is a
mighty fine Hammam of thine, but there lacketh somewhat in its
ordinance.” Asked Abu Sir, “And what is that?” and Abu Kir answered, “It
is the depilatory,[219] to wit, the paste compounded of yellow arsenic
and quicklime which removeth the hair with comfort. Do thou prepare it
and next time the King cometh, present it to him, teaching him how he
shall cause the hair to fall off by such means, and he will love thee
with exceeding love and honour thee.” Quoth Abu Sir, “Thou speakest
sooth, and Inshallah, I will at once make it.” Then Abu Kir left him and
mounted his mule and going to the King said to him, “I have a warning to
give thee, O King of the age!” “And what is thy warning?” asked the
King; and Abu Kir answered, “I hear that thou hast built a Hammam.”
Quoth the King, “Yes: there came to me a stranger and I builded the
Baths for him, even as I builded the dyery for thee; and indeed ’tis a
mighty fine Hammam and an ornament to my city;” and he went on to
describe to him the virtues of the bath. Quoth the dyer, “Hast thou
entered therein?”; and quoth the King, “Yes.” Thereupon cried Abu Kir,
“Alhamdolillah—praised be God,—who saved thee from the mischief of
yonder villain and foe of the Faith, I mean the bath-keeper!” The King
enquired, “And what of him?”; and Abu Kir replied, “Know, O King of the
age that, an thou enter the Hammam again, after this day, thou wilt
surely perish.” “How so?” said the King; and the dyer said, “This
bath-keeper is thy foe and the foe of the Faith, and he induced thee not
to stablish this Bath but because he designed therein to poison thee. He
hath made for thee somewhat and he will present it to thee when thou
enterest the Hammam, saying:—This is a drug which, if one apply to his
parts below the waist, will remove the hair with comfort. Now it is no
drug, but a drastic dreg and a deadly poison; for the Sultan of the
Christians hath promised this obscene fellow to release to him his wife
and children, an he will kill thee; for they are prisoners in the hands
of that Sultan. I myself was captive with him in their land, but I
opened a dyery and dyed for them various colours, so that they
conciliated the King’s heart to me and he bade me ask a boon of him. I
sought of him freedom and he set me at liberty, whereupon I made my way
to this city and seeing yonder man in the Hammam, said to him, “How
didst thou effect thine escape and win free with thy wife and children?”
Quoth he, “We ceased not to be in captivity, I and my wife and children,
till one day the King of the Nazarenes held a court whereat I was
present, amongst a number of others; and as I stood amongst the folk, I
heard them open out on the Kings and name them, one after other, till
they came to the name of the King of this city, whereupon the King of
the Christians cried out Alas! and said, “None vexeth me[220] in the
world, but the King of such a city![221] Whosoever will contrive me his
slaughter I will give him all he shall ask.” So I went up to him and
said, “An I compass for thee his slaughter, wilt thou set me free, me
and my wife and my children?” The King replied “Yes; and I will give
thee to boot whatso thou shalt desire.” So we agreed upon this and he
sent me in a galleon to this city, where I presented myself to the King
and he built me this Hammam. Now, therefore, I have nought to do but to
slay him and return to the King of the Nazarenes, that I may redeem my
children and my wife and ask a boon of him.” Quoth I:—And how wilt thou
go about to kill him?; and quoth he:—By the simplest of all devices; for
I have compounded him somewhat wherein is poison; so, when he cometh to
the bath, I shall say to him:—Take this paste and anoint therewith thy
parts below the waist for it will cause the hair[222] to drop off. So he
will take it and apply it to himself and the poison will work in him a
day and a night, till it reacheth his heart and destroyeth him; and
meanwhile I shall have made off and none will know that it was I slew
him.” “When I heard this,” added Abu Kir, “I feared for thee, my
benefactor, wherefore I have told thee of what is doing.” As soon as the
King heard the dyer’s story, he was wroth with exceeding wrath and said
to him, “Keep this secret.” Then he resolved to visit the Hammam, that
he might dispel doubt by supplying certainty; and when he entered, Abu
Sir doffed his dress and betaking himself as of wont to the service of
the King, proceeded to glove him; after which he said to him, “O King of
the age, I have made a drug which assisteth in plucking out the lower
hair.” Cried the King, “Bring it to me”: so the barber brought it to him
and the King, finding it nauseous of smell, was assured that it was
poison; wherefore he was incensed and called out to his guards, saying,
“Seize him!” Accordingly they seized him and the King donned his dress
and returned to his palace, boiling with fury, whilst none knew the
cause of his indignation; for, of the excess of his wrath he had
acquainted no one therewith and none dared ask him. Then he repaired to
the audience-chamber and causing Abu Sir to be brought before him, with
his elbows pinioned, sent for his Sea-captain and said to him, “Take
this villain and set him in a sack with two quintals of lime unslacked
and tie its mouth over his head. Then lay him in a cock-boat and row out
with him in front of my palace, where thou wilt see me sitting at the
lattice. Do thou say to me:—Shall I cast him in? and if I answer, “Cast
him!” throw the sack into the sea, so the quicklime may be slaked on him
to the intent that he shall die drowned and burnt.”[223] “Hearkening and
obeying;” quoth the Captain and taking Abu Sir from the presence carried
him to an island facing the King’s palace, where he said to him, “Ho
thou, I once visited thy Hammam and thou entreatedst me with honour and
accomplishedst all my needs and I had great pleasure of thee: moreover,
thou swarest that thou wouldst take no pay of me, and I love thee with a
great love. So tell me how the case standeth between thee and the King
and what abominable deed thou hast done with him that he is wroth with
thee and hath commanded me that thou shouldst die this foul death.”
Answered Abu Sir, “I have done nothing, nor weet I of any crime I have
committed against him which meriteth this!”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Sea-captain asked Abu Sir the cause of the King’s wrath with him, he
replied, “By Allah, O my brother I have committed no crime against him
which meriteth this!” Rejoined the Captain, “Verily, thou wast high in
rank with the King, such as none ever won before thee, and all who are
prosperous are envied. Haply some one was jealous of thy good fortune
and threw out certain hints concerning thee to the King, by reason
whereof he is become enraged against thee with rage so violent: but be
of good cheer; no harm shall befal thee; for, even as thou entreatedst
me generously, without acquaintanceship between me and thee, so now I
will deliver thee. But, an if I release thee, thou must abide with me on
this island till some galleon sail from our city to thy native land,
when I will send thee thither therein.” Abu Sir kissed his hand and
thanked him for that; after which the Captain fetched the quicklime and
set it in a sack, together with a great stone, the size of a man,
saying, “I put my trust in Allah!”[224] Then he gave the barber a net,
saying, “Cast this net into the sea, so haply thou mayst take somewhat
of fish. For I am bound to supply the King’s kitchen with fish every
day; but to-day I have been distracted from fishing by this calamity
which hath befallen thee, and I fear lest the cook’s boys come to me in
quest of fish and find none. So, an thou take aught, they will find it
and thou wilt veil my face,[225] whilst I go and play off my practice in
front of the palace and feign to cast thee into the sea.” Answered Abu
Sir, “I will fish the while; go thou and God help thee!” So the Captain
set the sack in the boat and paddled till he came under the palace,
where he saw the King seated at the lattice and said to him, “O King of
the age, shall I cast him in?” “Cast him!” cried the King, and signed to
him with his hand, when lo and behold!; something flashed like leven and
fell into the sea. Now that which had fallen into the water was the
King’s seal-ring; and the same was enchanted in such way that, when the
King was wroth with any one and was minded to slay him, he had but to
sign to him with his right hand, whereon was the signet-ring, and
therefrom issued a flash of lightning, which smote the object, and
thereupon his head fell from between his shoulders; and the troops
obeyed him not, nor did he overcome the men of might save by means of
the ring. So, when it dropped from his finger, he concealed the matter
and kept silence, for that he dared not say, “My ring is fallen into the
sea,” for fear of the troops, lest they rise against him and slay him.
On this wise it befel the King; but as regards Abu Sir, after the
Captain had left him on the island he took the net and casting it into
the sea presently drew it up full of fish; nor did he cease to throw it
and pull it up full, till there was a great mound of fish before him. So
he said in himself, “By Allah, this long while I have not eaten fish!”;
and chose himself a large fat fish, saying, “When the Captain cometh
back, I will bid him fry it for me, so I may dine on it.” Then he cut
its throat with a knife he had with him; but the knife stuck in its
gills and there he saw the King’s signet-ring; for the fish had
swallowed it and Destiny had driven it to that island, where it had
fallen into the net. He took the ring and drew it on his little
finger,[226] not knowing its peculiar properties. Presently, up came two
of the cook’s boys in quest of fish and seeing Abu Sir, said to him, “O
man, whither is the Captain gone?” “I know not,” said he and signed to
them with his right hand; when, behold, the heads of both underlings
dropped off from between their shoulders. At this Abu Sir was amazed and
said, “Would I wot who slew them!” And their case was grievous to him
and he was still pondering it, when the Captain suddenly returned and
seeing the mound of fishes and two men lying dead and the seal-ring on
Abu Sir’s finger, said to him, “O my brother, move not thy hand whereon
is the signet-ring; else thou wilt kill me.” Abu Sir wondered at this
speech and kept his hand motionless; whereupon the Captain came up to
him and said, “Who slew these two men?” “By Allah, O my brother I wot
not!” “Thou sayst sooth; but tell me whence hadst thou that ring?” “I
found it in this fish’s gills.” “True,” said the Captain, “for I saw it
fall flashing from the King’s palace and disappear in the sea, what time
he signed towards thee,[227] saying, Cast him in. So I cast the sack
into the water, and it was then that the ring slipped from his finger
and fell into the sea, where this fish swallowed it, and Allah drave it
to thee, so that thou madest it thy prey, for this ring was thy lot; but
kennest thou its property?” Said Abu Sir, “I knew not that it had any
properties peculiar to it;” and the Captain said, “Learn, then, that the
King’s troops obey him not save for fear of this signet-ring, because it
is spelled, and when he was wroth with any one and had a mind to kill
him, he would sign at him therewith and his head would drop from between
his shoulders; for there issued a flash of lightning from the ring and
its ray smote the object of his wrath, who died forthright.” At this,
Abu Sir rejoiced with exceeding joy and said to the Captain, “Carry me
back to the city;” and he said, “That will I, now that I no longer fear
for thee from the King; for, wert thou to sign at him with thy hand,
purposing to kill him, his head would fall down between thy hands; and
if thou be minded to slay him and all his host, thou mayst slaughter
them without let or hindrance.” So saying, he embarked him in the boat
and bore him back to the city;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

[Illustration]


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Captain
embarked with Abu Sir he bore him back to the city, so Abu Sir landed
and going up to the palace, entered the council-chamber, where he found
the King seated facing his officers, in sore cark and care by reason of
the seal-ring and daring not tell any of his folk anent its loss. When
he saw Abu Sir, he said to him, “Did we not cast thee into the sea? How
hast thou contrived to come forth of it?” Abu Sir replied, “O King of
the age, whenas thou badest throw me into the sea, thy Captain carried
me to an island and asked me of the cause of thy wrath against me,
saying:—What hast thou done with the King, that he should decree thy
death? I answered, By Allah, I know not that I have wrought him any
wrong! Quoth he:—Thou wast high in rank with the King, and haply some
one envied thee and threw out certain hints concerning thee to him, so
that he is become incensed against thee. But when I visited thee in thy
Hammam, thou entreatedst me honourably, and I will requite thee thy
hospitality to me by setting thee free and sending thee back to thine
own land. Then he set a great stone in the sack in my stead and cast it
into the sea; but, when thou signedst to him to throw me in, thy
seal-ring dropped from thy finger into the main, and a fish swallowed
it. Now I was on the island a-fishing, and this fish came up in the net
with others; whereupon I took it, intending to broil it; but, when I
opened its belly, I found the signet-ring therein; so I took it and put
it on my finger. Presently, up came two of the servants of the kitchen,
questing fish, and I signed to them with my hand, knowing not the
property of the seal-ring, and their heads fell off. Then the Captain
came back, and seeing the ring on my finger, acquainted me with its
spell; and behold, I have brought it back to thee, for that thou
dealtest kindly by me and entreatedst me with the utmost honour, nor is
that which thou hast done me of kindness lost upon me. Here is thy ring;
take it! But an I have done with thee aught deserving of death, tell me
my crime and slay me and thou shalt be absolved of sin in shedding my
blood.” So saying, he pulled the ring from his finger and gave it to the
King who, seeing Abu Sir’s noble conduct, took the ring and put it on
and felt life return to him afresh. Then he rose to his feet and
embracing the barber, said to him, “O man, thou art indeed of the flower
of the well-born! Blame me not, but forgive me the wrong I have done
thee. Had any but thou gotten hold of this ring, he had never restored
it to me.” Answered Abu Sir, “O King of the age, an thou wouldst have me
forgive thee, tell me what was my fault which drew down thine anger upon
me, so that thou commandedst to do me die.” Rejoined the King, “By
Allah, ’tis clear to me that thou art free and guiltless in all things
of offence since thou hast done this good deed; only the dyer denounced
thee to me in such and such words;” and he told him all that Abu Kir had
said. Abu Sir replied, “By Allah, O King of the age, I know no King of
the Nazarenes nor during my days have ever journeyed to a Christian
country, nor did it ever come into my mind to kill thee. But this dyer
was my comrade and neighbour in the city of Alexandria where life was
straitened upon us; therefore we departed thence, to seek our fortunes,
by reason of the narrowness of our means at home, after we had recited
the Opening Chapter of the Koran together, pledging ourselves that he
who got work should feed him who lacked work; and there befel me with
him such and such things.” Then he went on to relate to the King all
that had betided him with Abu Kir the dyer; how he had robbed him of his
dirhams and had left him alone and sick in the Khan-closet and how the
door-keeper had fed him of his own monies till Allah recovered him of
his sickness, when he went forth and walked about the city with his
budget, as was his wont, till he espied a dyery, about which the folk
were crowding; so he looked at the door and seeing Abu Kir seated on a
bench there, went in to salute him, whereupon he accused him of being a
thief and beat him a grievous beating; brief, he told him his whole
tale, from first to last, and added, “O King of the age, ’twas he who
counselled me to make the depilatory and present it to thee, saying:—The
Hammam is perfect in all things but that it lacketh this; and know, O
King of the age, that this drug is harmless and we use it in our land
where ’tis one of the requisites of the bath; but I had forgotten it:
so, when the dyer visited the Hammam I entreated him with honour and he
reminded me of it, and enjoined me to make it forthwith. But do thou
send after the porter of such a Khan and the workmen of the dyery and
question them all of that which I have told thee.” Accordingly the King
sent for them and questioned them one and all and they acquainted him
with the truth of the matter. Then he summoned the dyer, saying, “Bring
him barefooted, bareheaded and with elbows pinioned!” Now he was sitting
in his house, rejoicing in Abu Sir’s death; but ere he could be ware,
the King’s guards rushed in upon him and cuffed him on the nape, after
which they bound him and bore him into the presence, where he saw Abu
Sir seated by the King’s side and the door-keeper of the Khan and
workmen of the dyery standing before him. Quoth the door-keeper to him,
“Is not this thy comrade whom thou robbedst of his silvers and leftest
with me sick in the closet doing such and such by him?” And the workmen
said to him, “Is not this he whom thou badest us seize and beat?”
Therewith Abu Kir’s baseness was made manifest to the King and he was
certified that he merited torture yet sorer than the torments of Munkar
and Nakír.[228] So he said to his guards, “Take him and parade him about
the city and the markets;”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the King
heard the words spoken by the door-keeper of the Caravanserai and the
workmen of the dyery, he was certified of the vileness of Abu Kir; so he
upbraided him with flout and fleer and said to his guards, “Take him and
parade him about the city and the market-streets; then set him in a sack
and cast him into the sea.” Whereupon quoth Abu Sir, “O King of the age,
accept my intercession for him, for I pardon him all he hath done with
me.” But quoth the King, “An thou pardon him all his offences against
thee, I cannot pardon him his offences against me.” And he cried out,
saying, “Take him.” So they took him and paraded him about the city,
after which they set him in a sack with quicklime and cast him into the
sea, and he died, drowned and burnt. Then said the King to the barber,
“O Abu Sir, ask of me what thou wilt and it shall be given thee.” And he
answered, saying, “I ask of thee to send me back to my own country, for
I care no longer to tarry here.” Then the King gifted him great store of
gifts, over and above that which he had whilome bestowed on him; and
amongst the rest a galleon freighted with goods; and the crew of this
galleon were Mamelukes; so he gave him these also, after offering to
make him his Wazir whereto the barber consented not. Presently he
farewelled the King and set sail in his own ship manned by his own crew;
nor did he cast anchor till he reached Alexandria and made fast to the
shore there. Then they landed and one of his Mamelukes, seeing a sack on
the beach, said to Abu Sir, “O my lord, there is a great heavy sack on
the sea-shore, with the mouth tied up and I know not what therein.” So
Abu Sir came up and opening the sack, found therein the remains of Abu
Kir, which the sea had borne thither. He took it forth and burying it
near Alexandria, built over the grave a place of visitation and endowed
it with mortmain writing over the door these couplets:—

 Man is known among men as his deeds attest; ✿ Which make noble origin
    manifest:
 Backbite not, lest other men bite thy back; ✿ Who saith aught, the same
    shall to him be addrest:
 Shun immodest words and indecent speech ✿ When thou speakest in earnest
    or e’en in jest.[229]
 We bear with the dog which behaves itself ✿ But the lion is chained lest
    he prove a pest:
 And the desert carcases swim the main ✿ While union-pearls on the
    sand-bank rest[230]:
 No sparrow would hustle the sparrow-hawk, ✿ Were it not by folly and
    weakness prest:

 A-sky is written on page of air, ✿ “Who doth kindly of kindness shall
    have the best!”
 ’Ware of gathering sugar from bitter gourd:[231] ✿ ’Twill prove to its
    origin like in taste.

After this Abu Sir abode awhile, till Allah took him to Himself, and
they buried him hard by the tomb of his comrade Abu Kir; wherefore that
place was called Abu Kir and Abu Sir; but it is now known as Abu Kir
only. This, then, is that which hath reached us of their history, and
glory be to Him who endureth for ever and aye and by whose will
interchange the night and the day. And of the stories they tell is one
anent

-----

Footnote 184:

  Abú Sír is a manifest corruption of the old Egyptian Pousiri, the
  Busiris of our classics, and it gives a name to sundry villages in
  modern Egypt where it is usually pronounced “Búsír.” Abú Kír lit. =
  the Father of Pitch, is also corrupted to Abou Kir (Bay); and the
  townlet now marks the site of jolly old Canopus, the Chosen Land of
  Egyptian debauchery.

Footnote 185:

  It is interesting to note the superior gusto with which the Eastern,
  as well as the Western tale-teller describes his scoundrels and
  villains whilst his good men and women are mostly colourless and
  unpicturesque. So Satan is the true hero of Paradise-Lost and by his
  side God and man are very ordinary; and Mephistopheles is much better
  society than Faust and Margaret.

Footnote 186:

  Arab. “Dukhán,” lit. = smoke, here tobacco for the Chibouk, “Timbák”
  or “Tumbák” being the stronger (Persian and other) variety which must
  be washed before smoking in the Shíshah or water-pipe. Tobacco is
  mentioned here only and is evidently inserted by some scribe: the
  “weed” was not introduced into the East before the end of the
  sixteenth century (about a hundred years after coffee), when it
  radically changed the manners of society.

Footnote 187:

  Which meant that the serjeant, after the manner of such officials,
  would make him pay dearly before giving up the key. Hence a very
  severe punishment in the East is to “call in a policeman” who
  carefully fleeces all those who do not bribe him to leave them in
  freedom.

Footnote 188:

  Arab. “Má Dáhiyatak?” lit. “What is thy misfortune?” The phrase is
  slighting if not insulting.

Footnote 189:

  Amongst Moslems the plea of robbing to keep life and body together
  would be accepted by a good man like Abu Sir, who still consorted with
  a self-confessed thief.

Footnote 190:

  To make their agreement religiously binding. See vol. iv. 36.

Footnote 191:

  Arab. “Ghaliyún” many of our names for craft seem connected with
  Arabic: I have already noted “Carrack” = harrák; to which add Uskuf in
  Marocco pronounced ’Skuff = skiff; Katírah = a cutter; Bárijah = a
  barge; etc., etc.

Footnote 192:

  The patient is usually lathered in a big basin of tinned brass, a
  “Mambrino’s helmet” with a break in the rim to fit the throat; but the
  poorer classes carry only a small cup with water instead of soap and
  water ignoring the Italian proverb, “Barba ben saponata mezza fatta” =
  well lathered is half shaved. A napkin fringed at either end is
  usually thrown over the Figaro’s shoulder and used to wipe the razor.

Footnote 193:

  Arab. “Nusf.” See vol. ii. 37.

Footnote 194:

  Arab. “Batárikh” the roe (sperm or spawn) of the salted Fasíkh (fish)
  and the Búrí (_mugil cephalus_) a salt-water fish caught in the Nile
  and considered fair eating. Some write Butárghá from the old Egyptian
  town Burát, now a ruin between Tinnis and Damietta (Sonnini).

Footnote 195:

  Arab. “Kaptán,” see vol. iv. 85.

Footnote 196:

  Arab. “Anyáb,” plur. of Náb applied to the grinder teeth but mostly to
  the canines or eye teeth, tusks of animals etc. (See vol. vii. p. 339)
  opp. to Saniyah, one of the four central incisors, a camel in the
  sixth year and horse, cow, sheep and goat in fourth year.

Footnote 197:

  The coffee (see also vol. viii. 274) like the tobacco is probably due
  to the scribe; but the tale appears to be comparatively modern. In The
  Nights men eat, drink and wash their hands but do not smoke and sip
  coffee like the moderns. See my Terminal Essay § 2.

Footnote 198:

  Arab. “Mi’lakah” (Bresl. Edit. x, 456). The fork is modern even in the
  East and the Moors borrow their term for it from fourchette. But the
  spoon, which may have begun with a cockle-shell, dates from the
  remotest antiquity.

Footnote 199:

  Arab. “Sufrah” properly the cloth or leather upon which food is
  placed. See vol. i. 178.

Footnote 200:

  _i.e._ gaining much one day and little another.

Footnote 201:

  Lit. “Rest thyself” _i.e._ by changing posture.

Footnote 202:

  Arab. “’Unnábi” = between dark yellow and red.

Footnote 203:

  Arab. “Nílah” lit. = indigo, but here applied to all the materials for
  dyeing. The word is the Sansk. नील growth probably came from India
  although during the Crusaders’ occupation of Jerusalem it was
  cultivated in the valley of the lower Jordan. I need hardly say that
  it has nothing to do with the word “Nile” whose origin is still sub
  judice. And yet I lately met a sciolist who pompously announced to me
  this philological absurdity as a discovery of his own.

Footnote 204:

  Still a popular form of “bilking” in the Wakálahs or Caravanserais of
  Cairo: but as a rule the Bawwáb (porter or doorkeeper) keeps a sharp
  eye on those he suspects. The evil is increased when women are
  admitted into these places; so periodical orders for their exclusion
  are given to the police.

Footnote 205:

  Natives of Egypt always hold this diaphoresis a sign that the disease
  has abated and they regard it rightly in the case of bilious
  remittents to which they are subject, especially after the hardships
  and sufferings of a sea-voyage with its alternations of fasting and
  over-eating.

Footnote 206:

  Not simply, “such and such events happened to him” (Lane); but, “a
  curious chance befel him.”

Footnote 207:

  Arab. “Harámi,” lit. = one who lives on unlawful gains; popularly a
  thief.

Footnote 208:

  _i.e._ he turned on the water, hot and cold.

Footnote 209:

  Men are often seen doing this in the Hammam. The idea is that the skin
  when free from sebaceous exudation sounds louder under the clapping.
  Easterns judge much by the state of the perspiration, especially in
  horse-training, which consists of hand-gallops for many successive
  miles. The sweat must not taste over salt and when held between thumb
  and forefinger and the two are drawn apart must not adhere in
  filaments.

Footnote 210:

  Lit. “Aloes for making Nadd;” see vol. i. 310. “Eagle-wood” (the Malay
  Aigla and Agallochum the Sansk. Agura) gave rise to many corruptions
  as lignum aloes, the Portuguese Páo d’ Aguila etc. “Calamba” or
  “Calambak” was the finest kind. See Colonel Yule in the “Voyage of
  Linschoten” (vol. i. 120 and 150). Edited for the Hackluyt Soc. (1885)
  by my learned and most amiable friend, the late Arthur Cooke Burnell.

Footnote 211:

  The Hammam is one of those unpleasant things which are left “Alà
  júdi-k” = to thy generosity; and the higher the bather’s rank the more
  he or she is expected to pay. See Pilgrimage i. 103. In 1853 I paid at
  Cairo 3 piastres and twenty paras, something more than sixpence, but
  now five shillings would be asked.

Footnote 212:

  This is something like the mythical duchess in England who could not
  believe that the poor were starving when sponge-cakes were so cheap.

Footnote 213:

  This magnificent “Bakhshish” must bring water into the mouths of all
  the bath-men in the coffee-house assembly.

Footnote 214:

  _i.e._ the treasurer did not, as is the custom of such gentry, demand
  and receive a large “Bakhshish” on the occasion.

Footnote 215:

  A fair specimen of clever Fellah chaff.

Footnote 216:

  In the first room of the Hammam, called the Maslakh or
  stripping-place, the keeper sits by a large chest in which he deposits
  the purses and valuables of his customers and also makes it the
  _caisse_ for the pay. Something of the kind is now done in the
  absurdly called “Turkish Baths” of London.

Footnote 217:

  This is the rule in Egypt and Syria and a clout hung over the door
  shows that women are bathing. I have heard, but only heard, that in
  times and places when eunuchs went in with the women youths managed by
  long practice to retract the testicles so as to pass for castratos. It
  is hard to say what perseverance may not effect in this line; witness
  Orsini and his abnormal development of hearing, by exercising muscles
  which are usually left idle.

Footnote 218:

  This reference to Allah shows that Abu Sir did not believe his
  dyer-friend.

Footnote 219:

  Arab. “Dawá” (lit. remedy, medicine) the vulgar term: see vol. iv.
  256: also called Rasmah, Núrah and many other names.

Footnote 220:

  Arab. “Má Kahara-ní” = or none hath overcome me.

Footnote 221:

  Bresl. Edit. “The King of Isbániya.” For the “Ishbán” (Spaniards) an
  ancient people descended from Japhet son of Noah and who now are no
  more, see Al-Mas’udi (Fr. Transl. i. 361). The “Herodotus of the
  Arabs” recognises only the “Jalálikah” or Gallicians, thus bearing
  witness to the antiquity and importance of the Gallego race.

Footnote 222:

  Arab. “Sha’r,” properly, hair of body, pile, especially the pecten.
  See Burckhardt (Prov. No. 202), “grieving for lack of a cow she made a
  whip of her bush,” said of those who console themselves by building
  Castles in Spain. The “parts below the waist” is the decent Turkish
  term for the privities.

Footnote 223:

  The drowning is a martyr’s death, the burning is a foretaste of
  Hell-fire.

Footnote 224:

  Meaning that if the trick had been discovered the Captain would have
  taken the barber’s place. We have seen (vol. i. 63) the Prime Minister
  superintending the royal kitchen and here the Admiral fishes for the
  King’s table. It is even more naïve than the Court of Alcinöus.

Footnote 225:

  Bresl. Edit. xi. 32: _i.e._ save me from disgrace.

Footnote 226:

  Arab. “Khinsir” or “Khinsar,” the little finger or the middle finger.
  In Arabic each has its own name or names which is also that of the
  corresponding toe _e.g._ Ibhám (thumb); Sabbábah, Musabbah or Da”áah
  (forefinger); Wastá (medius); Binsir (annularis, ring-finger) and
  Khinsar (minimus). There are also names for the several spaces between
  the fingers. See the English Arabic Dictionary (London, Kegan Paul and
  Co., 1881) by the Revd. Dr. Badger, a work of immense labour and
  research but which I fear has been to the learned author a labour of
  love not of profit.

Footnote 227:

  Meaning of course that the King signed towards the sack in which he
  supposed the victim to be, but the ring fell off before it could take
  effect. The Eastern story-teller often balances his multiplicity of
  words and needless details by a conciseness and an elliptical style
  which make his meaning a matter of divination.

Footnote 228:

  See vol. v. iii.

Footnote 229:

  This couplet was quoted to me by my friend the Rev. Dr. Badger when he
  heard that I was translating “The Nights”: needless to say that it is
  utterly inappropriate.

Footnote 230:

  For a similar figure see vol. i. 25.

Footnote 231:

  Arab. “Hanzal”: see vol. v. 19.




          ABDULLAH[232] THE FISHERMAN AND ABDULLAH THE MERMAN.


There was once a Fisherman named Abdullah, who had a large family, to
wit, nine children and their mother, so was he poor, very poor, owning
naught save his net. Every day he used to go to the sea a-fishing, and
if he caught little, he sold it and spent the price on his children,
after the measure of that which Allah vouchsafed him of provision; but,
if he caught much, he would cook a good mess of meat and buy fruit and
spend without stint till nothing was left him, saying to himself, “The
daily bread of to-morrow will come to-morrow.” Presently, his wife gave
birth to another child, making a total of ten, and it chanced that day
that he had nothing at all; so she said to him, “O my master, see and
get me somewhat wherewithal I may sustain myself.” Quoth he, “I am going
(under favour of Almighty Allah) this day seawards to fish on the luck
of this new-born child, that we may see its fair fortune;” and quoth
she, “Put thy trust in Allah!” So he took his net and went down to the
sea-shore, where he cast it on the luck of the little one, saying, “O my
God, make his living of ease not of unease, and abundant, not scant!”
Then he waited awhile and drew in the net, which came up full of rubbish
and sand and pebbles and weeds, and he saw therein no sign of fish
neither muchel nor little. He cast it again and waited, then drew it in,
but found no catch in it, and threw it a third and a fourth and a fifth
time; still not a single fish came up. So he removed to another place
beseeching his daily bread of Allah Almighty and thus he kept working
till the end of the day, but caught not so much as a minnow;[233]
whereat he fell a-marvelling in himself and said self-communing, “Hath
Allah then created this new-born child without lot of provision? This
may never, never be. He who slitteth the corners of the lips hath
pledged Himself for its provision, because Almighty Allah is the
Bountiful, the Provider!”[234] So saying, he shouldered his net and
turned him homewards, broken-spirited and heavy at heart about his
family, for that he had left them without food, more by token that his
wife was in the straw. And as he continued trudging along and saying in
himself, “How shall I do and what shall I say to the children to-night?”
he came to a baker’s oven and saw a crowd about it; for the season was
one of dearth and in those days food was scant with the folk; so people
were proffering the baker money, but he paid no heed to any of them, by
reason of the dense crowd. The fisherman stood looking and snuffing the
smell of the hot bread (and indeed his soul longed for it, by reason of
his hunger), till the baker caught sight of him and cried out to him,
“Come hither, O fisherman!” So he went up to him, and the baker said,
“Dost thou want bread?” But he was silent. Quoth the baker, “Speak out
and be not ashamed, for Allah is bountiful. An thou have no silver, I
will give thee bread and have patience with thee till weal betide thee.”
And quoth the fisherman, “By Allah, O master, I have indeed no money!
But give me bread enough for my family, and I will leave thee this net
in pawn till the morrow.” Rejoined the baker, “Nay, my poor fellow, this
net is thy shop and the door of thy daily subsistence; so an thou pawn
it, wherewithal wilt thou fish? Tell me how much will suffice thee?”;
and replied the fisherman, “Ten half-dirhams’ worth.”[235] So he gave
him ten Nusfs’ worth of bread and ten in silver saying, “Take these ten
Nusfs and cook thyself a mess of meat therewith; so wilt thou owe me
twenty, for which bring me fish to-morrow; but, an thou catch nothing
again, come and take thy bread and thy ten Nusfs, and I will have
patience with thee till better luck betide thee,——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Forty-first Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the baker said
to the fisherman, “Take whatso thou needest and I will have patience
with thee till better luck betide thee, after the which thou shalt bring
me fish for all thou owest me.” Said the fisherman, “Almighty Allah
reward thee, and requite thee for me with all good!” Then he took the
bread and the coins and went away, glad at heart, and buying what he
could returned to his wife whom he found sitting up, soothing the
children, who were weeping for hunger, and saying to them, “At once your
father will be here with what ye may eat.” So he set the bread before
them and they ate, whilst he told his wife what had befallen him, and
she said, “Allah is bountiful.”[236] On the morrow, he shouldered his
net and went forth of his house, saying, “I beseech thee, O Lord, to
vouchsafe me this day that which shall whiten my face with the
baker!”[237] When he came to the sea-shore, he proceeded to cast his net
and pull it in; but there came up no fish therein; and he ceased not to
toil thus till ended day but he caught nothing. Then he set out
homewards, in great concern, and the way to his house lay past the
baker’s oven; so he said in himself, “How shall I go home? But I will
hasten my pace that the baker may not see me.” When he reached the shop,
he saw a crowd about it and walked the faster, being ashamed to face his
creditor; but the baker raised his eyes to him and cried out to him,
saying, “Ho, fisherman! Come and take thy bread and spending-money.
Meseems thou forgettest.” Quoth Abdullah, “By Allah, I had not
forgotten; but I was ashamed to face thee, because I have caught no fish
this day;” and quoth the baker, “Be not ashamed. Said I not to thee, At
thy leisure,[238] till better luck betide thee?” Then he gave him the
bread and the ten Nusfs and he returned and told his wife, who said,
“Allah is bountiful. Better luck shall yet betide thee and thou shalt
give the baker his due, Inshallah.” He ceased not doing on this wise
forty days, betaking himself daily to the sea, from the rising of the
sun to the going down thereof, and returning home without fish; and
still he took bread and spending-money of the baker, who never once
named the fish to him nor neglected him nor kept him waiting like the
folk,[239] but gave him the bread and the ten half-dirhams without
delay. Whenever the fisherman said to him, “O my brother, reckon with
me,” he would say, “Be off:[240] this is no time for reckoning. Wait
till better luck betide thee, and then I will reckon with thee.” And the
fisherman would bless him and go away thanking him. On the
one-and-fortieth day, he said to his wife, “I have a mind to tear up the
net and be quit of this life.” She asked, “Why wilt thou do this?”; and
he answered, “Meseems there is an end of my getting my daily bread from
the waters. How long shall this last? By Allah, I burn with shame before
the baker and I will go no more to the sea, so I may not pass by his
oven, for I have none other way home; and every time I pass he calleth
me and giveth me the bread and the ten silvers. How much longer shall I
run in debt to him?” The wife replied, “Alhamdolillah—lauded be the
Lord, the Most High, who hath inclined his heart to thee, so that he
giveth thee our daily bread! What dislikest thou in this?”; and the
husband rejoined, “I owe him now a mighty great sum of dirhams, and
there is no doubt but that he will demand his due.” “Hath he vexed thee
with words?” “No, on the contrary, he still refuseth to reckon with me,
saying:—Wait till better luck betide thee.” “If he press thee, say to
him:—Wait till there come the good luck for which we hope, thou and I.”
“And when will the good luck come that we hope for?” “Allah is
bountiful.” “Sooth thou speakest!” So saying he shouldered his net and
went down to the sea-side, praying, “O Lord provide thou me, though but
with one fish, that I may give it to the baker!” And he cast his net
into the sea and pulling it in, found it heavy; so he tugged at it till
he was tired with sore travail. But when he got it ashore, he found in
it a dead donkey swollen and stinking; whereat his senses sickened and
he freed it from the net, saying, “There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! Indeed, I can no more! I
say to that wife of mine:—There is no more provision for me in the
waters; let me leave this craft. And she still answereth me:—Allah is
bountiful: good will presently betide thee. Is this dead ass the good
whereof she speaketh?” And he grieved with the sorest grief. Then he
turned to another place, so he might remove from the stench of the dead
donkey, and cast his net there and waited a full hour: then he drew it
in and found it heavy. Thereupon quoth he, “Good; we are hauling up all
the dead donkeys in the sea and ridding it of its rubbish.[241]” However
he gave not over tugging at the net, till blood came from the palms of
his hands, and when he got it ashore, he saw a man[242] in it and took
him for one of the Ifrits of the lord Solomon, whom he was wont to
imprison in cucurbits of brass and cast him into the main, believing
that the vessel had burst for length of years and that the Ifrit had
come forth and fallen into the net; wherefore he fled from him, crying
out and saying, “Mercy, mercy, O Ifrit of Solomon!” But the Adamite
called out to him from within the net and said, “Come hither, O
fisherman, and flee not from me; for I am human like thyself. Release
me, so thou mayst get a recompense for me of Allah.” Whenas he heard
these words, the fisherman took heart and coming up to him, said to him,
“Art thou not an Ifrit of the Jinn?”; and replied the other, “No: I am a
mortal and a believer in Allah and His Apostle.” Asked the fisherman,
“Who threw thee into the sea?”; and the other answered, “I am of the
children of the sea, and was going about therein, when thou castest the
net over me. We are people who obey Allah’s commandments and show
loving-kindness unto the creatures of the Almighty, and but that I fear
and dread to be of the disobedient, I had torn thy net; but I accept
that which the Lord hath decreed unto me; wherefore by setting me free
thou becomest my owner and I thy captive. Wilt thou then set me free for
the love[243] of Almighty Allah and make a covenant with me and become
my comrade? I will come to thee every day in this place, and do thou
come to me and bring me a gift of the fruits of the land. For with you
are grapes and figs and water-melons and peaches and pomegranates and so
forth, and all thou bringest me will be acceptable unto me. Moreover,
with us are coral and pearls and chrysolites and emeralds and rubies and
other gems, and I will fill thee the basket, wherein thou bringest me
the fruit, with precious stones of the jewels of the sea.[244] What
sayst thou to this, O my brother?” Quoth the fisherman, “Be the Opening
Chapter of the Koran between thee and me upon this!” So they recited
together the Fátihah, and the fisherman loosed the Merman from the net
and asked him, “What is thy name?” He replied, “My name is Abdullah of
the sea; and if thou come hither and see me not, call out and say,
“Where art thou, O Abdullah, O Merman?”; and I will be with thee.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

[Illustration]


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Forty-second Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah of the
sea thus enjoined the other, “An thou come hither and see me not, call
out and say, Where art thou, O Abdullah. O Merman? and I will be with
thee forthwith. But thou, what is thy name?” Quoth the fisherman, “My
name also is Abdullah;” and quoth the other, “Thou art Abdullah of the
land and I am Abdullah of the Sea; but tarry here till I go and fetch
thee a present.” And the fisherman repented him of having released him
and said to himself, “How know I that he will come back to me? Indeed,
he beguiled me, so that I loosed him, and now he will laugh at me.[245]
Had I kept him, I might have made a show of him for the diversion of the
city-folk and taken silver from all men and gone with him to the houses
of the great.” And he repented him of having set him free and said,
“Thou hast let thy prey from thy hand away.” But, as he was thus
bemoaning his folly in releasing the prisoner, behold, Abdullah the
merman returned to him, with both hands full of pearls and coral and
smaragds and rubies and other gems, and said to him, “Take these, O my
brother, and excuse me; had I a fish-basket[246] I would have filled it
for thee.” Abdullah the fisherman rejoiced and took the jewels from the
Merman who said to him, “Every day come hither, before sunrise,” and
farewelling him, went down into the sea; whilst the other returned to
the city, rejoicing, and stayed not walking till he came to the baker’s
oven and said to him, “O my brother, good luck is come to us at last; so
do thou reckon with me.” Answered the baker, “There needeth no
reckoning. An thou have aught, give it me: and if thou have naught, take
thy bread and spending-money and begone, against weal betide thee.”
Rejoined the fisherman, “O my friend, indeed weal hath betided me of
Allah’s bounty, and I owe thee much money; but take this.” So saying, he
took for him a handful of the pearls and coral and rubies and other
jewels he had with him (the handful being about half of the whole), and
gave them to the baker, saying, “Give me some ready money to spend this
day, till I sell these jewels.” So the baker gave him all the money he
had in hand and all the bread in his basket and rejoiced in the jewels,
saying, “I am thy slave and thy servant.” Then he set all the bread on
his head and following the fisherman home, gave it to his wife and
children, after which he repaired to the market and brought meat and
greens and all manner fruit. Moreover, he left his oven and abode with
Abdullah all that day, busying himself in his service and fulfilling all
his affairs. Said the fisherman, “O my brother, thou weariest thyself;”
and the baker replied, “This is my duty, for I am become thy servant and
thou hast overwhelmed me with thy boons.” Rejoined the fisherman, “’Tis
thou who wast my benefactor in the days of dearth and distress.” And the
baker passed that night with him enjoying good cheer and became a
faithful friend to him. Then the fisherman told his wife what had
befallen him with the Merman, whereat she rejoiced and said, “Keep thy
secret, lest the government come down upon thee;” but he said, “Though I
keep my secret from all men, yet will I not hide it from the baker.” On
the morrow, he rose betimes and, shouldering a basket which he had
filled in the evening with all manner fruits, repaired before sunrise to
the sea-shore, and setting down the crate on the water-edge called out,
“Where art thou, O Abdullah, O Merman?” He answered, “Here am I, at thy
service;” and came forth to him. The fisherman gave him the fruit and he
took it and plunging into the sea with it, was absent a full hour, after
which time he came up, with the fish-basket full of all kinds of gems
and jewels. The fisherman set it on his head and went away; and, when he
came to the oven, the baker said to him, “O my lord, I have baked thee
forty bunns[247] and have sent them to thy house; and now I will bake
some firsts and as soon as all is done, I will bring it to thy house and
go and fetch thee greens and meat.” Abdullah handed to him three
handsful of jewels out of the fish-basket and going home, set it down
there. Then he took a gem of price of each sort and going to the
jewel-bazar, stopped at the Syndic’s shop and said to him, “Buy these
precious stones of me.” “Show them to me,” said the Shaykh. So he showed
them to him and the jeweller said, “Hast thou aught beside these?”; and
Abdullah replied, “I have a basket-full at home.” The Syndic asked, “And
where is thine house?” and the fisherman answered, “In such a quarter”;
whereupon the Shaykh took the jewels from him and said to his followers,
“Lay hold of him, for he is the thief who stole the jewellery of the
Queen, the wife of our Sultan.” And he bade beat him. So they
bastinadoed him and pinioned him; after which the Syndic and all the
people of the jewel-market arose and set out for the palace, saying, “We
have caught the thief.” Quoth one, “None robbed such an one but this
villain,” and quoth another, “’Twas none but he stole all that was in
such an one’s house;” and some said this and others said that. All this
while he was silent and spake not a word nor returned a reply, till they
brought him before the King, to whom said the Syndic, “O King of the
age, when the Queen’s necklace was stolen, thou sentest to acquaint us
of the theft, requiring of us the discovery of the culprit; wherefore I
strove beyond the rest of the folk and have taken the thief for thee.
Here he standeth before thee, and these be the jewels we have recovered
from him.” Thereupon the King said to the chief eunuch, “Carry these
jewels for the Queen to see, and say to her, Are these thy property thou
hast lost?” So the eunuch took the jewels and went in with them to the
Queen, who seeing their lustre marvelled at them and sent to the King to
say, “I have found my necklace in my own place and these jewels are not
my property; nay, they are finer than those of my necklace. So oppress
not the man;”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the King’s
wife sent to the King to say, “These are not my property; nay, these
gems are finer than those of my necklace. So oppress not this man; but,
if he will sell them, buy them for thy daughter Umm al-Su’úd,[248] that
we may set them in a necklace for her.” When the eunuch returned and
told the King what the Queen said, he damned the Syndic of the
jewellers, him and his company, with the damnation of Ád and
Thamúd,[249] and they said to him, “O King of the age, we knew this man
for a poor fisherman and deemed such things too much for him,[250] so we
supposed that he had stolen them.” Cried the King, “O ye filthy
villains, begrudge ye a True Believer good fortune? Why did ye not make
due enquiry of him? Haply Allah Almighty hath vouchsafed him these
things from a source whereupon he reckoned not. Why did ye make him out
a thief and disgrace him amongst the folk? Begone, and may Allah never
bless you!” So they went out affrighted and the King said to Abdullah,
“O man (Allah bless thee in all He hath bestowed on thee!), no harm
shall befal thee; but tell me truly, whence gottest thou these jewels;
for I am a King yet have I not the like of them.” The fisherman replied,
“O King of the age, I have a fish-basket full of them at home and the
case is thus and thus.” Then he told him of his friendship with the
Merman, adding, “We have made a covenant together that I shall bring him
every day a basket full of fruit and that he shall fill me the basket
with these jewels.” Quoth the King, O man this is thy lucky lot; but
wealth needeth rank,[251] I will defend thee for the present against
men’s domineering; but haply I shall be deposed or die and another rule
in my stead, and he shall slay thee because of his love of the goods of
this world and his covetousness. So I am minded to marry thee to my
daughter and make thee my Wazir and bequeath thee the kingdom after me,
so none may hanker for thy riches when I am gone. Then said he, “Hie
with this man to the Hammam.” So they bore him to the Baths and bathed
his body and robed him in royal raiment, after which they brought him
back to the King, and he made him his Wazir and sent to his house
couriers and the soldiers of his guard and all the wives of the
notables, who clad his wife and children in Kingly costume and mounting
the woman in a horse-litter, with the little child in her lap, walked
before her to the palace, escorted by the troops and couriers and
officers. They also brought her elder children in to the King who made
much of them, taking them in his lap and seating them by his side; for
they were nine children male and the King had no son and heir nor had he
been blessed with any child save this one daughter, Umm al-Su’ud hight.
Meanwhile the Queen entreated Abdullah’s wife with honour and bestowed
favours on her and made her Waziress to her. Then the King bade draw up
the marriage contract between his daughter and Abdullah of the Land[252]
who assigned to her, as her dower, all the gems and precious stones in
his possession, and they opened the gates of festival. The King
commanded by proclamation to decorate the city, in honour of his
daughter’s wedding. Then Abdullah went in unto the Princess and abated
her maidenhead. Next morning the King looked out of the lattice and saw
Abdullah carrying on his head a fish-crate full of fruit. So he called
to him, “What hast thou there, O my son-in-law, and whither wendest
thou?” The fisherman replied, “To my friend Abdullah the Merman;” and
the King said, “O my son-in-law, this is no time to go to thy comrade.”
Quoth Abdullah, “Indeed, I fear to break tryst with him, lest he reckon
me a liar and say:—The things of the world have diverted thee from me;”
and quoth the King, “Thou speakest sooth: go to thy friend and God help
thee!” So he walked through the city on his way to his companion; and,
as he went, he heard the folk who knew him say, “There goeth the King’s
son-in-law to exchange fruit for gems;” whilst those who knew him not
said, “Ho, fellow, how much a pound? Come, sell to me.” And he answered,
saying, “Wait till I come back to thee,” for that he would not hurt the
feelings of any man. Then he fared on till he came to the sea-shore and
foregathered with his friend Abdullah the Merman, to whom he delivered
the fruit, receiving gems in return. He ceased not doing thus till one
day, as he passed by the baker’s oven, he found it closed; and so he did
ten days, during which time the oven remained shut and he saw nothing of
the baker. So he said to himself, “This is a strange thing! Would I wot
whither the baker went!” Then he enquired of his neighbour, saying, “O
my brother, where is thy neighbour the baker and what hath Allah done
with him?”; and the other responded, “O my lord, he is sick and cometh
not forth of his house.” “Where is his house?” asked Abdullah; and the
other answered, “In such a quarter.” So he fared thither and enquired of
him; but, when he knocked at the door, the baker looked out of window
and seeing his friend the fisherman, full basket on head, came down and
opened the door to him. Abdullah entered and throwing himself on the
baker embraced him and wept, saying, “How dost thou, O my friend? Every
day, I pass by thine oven and see it unopened; so I asked thy neighbour,
who told me that thou wast sick; therefore I enquired for thy house,
that I might see thee.” Answered the baker, “Allah requite thee for me
with all good! Nothing aileth me; but it reached me that the King had
taken thee, for that certain of the folk had lied against thee and
accused thee of being a robber, wherefore I feared and shut shop and hid
myself.” “True,” said Abdullah and told him all that had befallen him
with the King and the Shaykh of the jewellers’ bazar, adding “Moreover,
the King hath given me his daughter to wife and made me his Wazir;” and,
after a pause, “So do thou take what is in this fish-basket to thy share
and fear naught.” Then he left him, after having done away from him his
affright, and returned with the empty crate to the King, who said to
him, “O my son-in-law, ’twould seem thou hast not foregathered with thy
friend the Merman to-day.” Replied Abdullah, “I went to him but that
which he gave me I gave to my gossip the baker, to whom I owe kindness.”
“Who may be this baker?” asked the King; and the fisherman answered, “He
is a benevolent man, who did with me thus and thus in the days of my
poverty and never neglected me a single day nor hurt my feelings.” Quoth
the King, “What is his name?”; and quoth the fisherman “His name is
Abdullah the Baker; and my name is Abdullah of the Land and that of my
friend the merman Abdullah of the Sea.” Rejoined the King, “And my name
also is Abdullah; and the servants of Allah[253] are all brethren. So
send and fetch thy friend the baker, that I may make him my Wazir of the
left.”[254] So he sent for the baker who speedily came to the presence,
and the King invested him with the Wazirial uniform and made him Wazir
of the left, making Abdullah of the Land his Wazir of the right.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King made
his son-in-law, Abdullah of the Land, Wazir of the right and Abdullah
the baker Wazir of the left. In such condition the fisherman abode a
whole year, every day carrying for the Merman the crate full of fruit
and receiving it back, full of jewels; and when fruit failed from the
gardens, he carried him raisins and almonds and filberts and walnuts and
figs and so forth; and all that he brought for him the Merman accepted
and returned him the fish-basket full of jewels according to his custom.
Now it chanced one day that he carried him the crate, full of dry[255]
fruits as was his wont, and his friend took them from him. Then they sat
down to converse, Abdullah the fisherman on the beach and Abdullah the
Merman in the water near the shore, and discoursed; and the talk went
round between them, till it fell upon the subject of sepulchres; whereat
quoth the Merman, “O my brother, they say that the Prophet (whom Allah
assain and save!) is buried with you on the land. Knowest thou his
tomb?” Abdullah replied, “Yes; it lieth in a city called Yathrib.[256]”
Asked the Merman, “And do the people of the land visit it?” “Yes,”
answered the fisherman, and the other said, “I give you joy, O people of
the land, of visiting[257] that noble Prophet and compassionate, which
whoso visiteth meriteth his intercession! Hast thou made such
visitation, O my brother?” Replied the fisherman, “No: for I was poor
and had not the necessary sum[258] to spend by the way, nor have I been
in easy case but since I knew thee and thou bestowedst on me this good
fortune. But such visitation behoveth me after I have pilgrimed to the
Holy House of Allah[259] and naught withholdeth me therefrom but my love
to thee, because I cannot leave thee for one day.” Rejoined the Merman,
“And dost thou set the love of me before the visitation of the tomb of
Mohammed (whom Allah assain and save!), who shall intercede for thee on
the Day of Review before Allah and shall save thee from the Fire and
through whose intercession thou shalt enter Paradise? And dost thou, for
the love of the world, neglect to visit the tomb of thy Prophet[260]
Mohammed, whom God bless and preserve?” Replied Abdullah, “No, by Allah,
I set the visitation of the Prophet’s tomb above all else, and I crave
thy leave to pray before it this year.” The Merman rejoined, “I grant
thee leave, on condition that when thou shalt stand by his sepulchre
thou salute him for me with the Salam. Furthermore I have a trust to
give thee; so come thou with me into the sea, that I may carry thee to
my city and entertain thee in my house and give thee a deposit; which
when thou takest thy station by the Prophet’s tomb, do thou lay thereon,
saying:—O apostle of Allah, Abdullah the Merman saluteth thee and
sendeth thee this present, imploring thine intercession to save him from
the Fire.” Said the fisherman, “O my brother, thou wast created in the
water and water is thy abiding-place and doth thee no hurt, but, if thou
shouldst come forth to the land, would any harm betide thee?” The Merman
replied, “Yes; my body would dry up and the breezes of the land would
blow upon me and I should die.” Rejoined the fisherman, “And I, in like
manner, was created on the land and the land is my abiding-place; but,
an I went down into the sea, the water would enter my belly and choke me
and I should die.” Retorted the other, “Have no fear for that, for I
will bring thee an ointment, wherewith when thou hast anointed thy body,
the water will do thee no hurt, though thou shouldst pass the lave of
thy life going about in the great deep: and thou shalt lie down and rise
up in the sea and naught shall harm thee.” Quoth the fisherman, “An the
case be thus, well and good; but bring me the ointment, so that I may
make trial of it;” and quoth the Merman, “So be it;” then, taking the
fish-basket disappeared in the depths. He was absent awhile, and
presently returned with an unguent as it were the fat of beef, yellow as
gold and sweet of savour. Asked the fisherman, “What is this, O my
brother?”; and answered the Merman, “’Tis the liver-fat of a kind of
fish called the Dandán,[261] which is the biggest of all fishes and the
fiercest of our foes. His bulk is greater than that of any beast of the
land, and were he to meet a camel or an elephant, he would swallow it at
a single mouthful.” Abdullah enquired, “O my brother, what doth this
baleful beast?”; and the Merman replied, “He eateth of the beasts of the
sea. Hast thou not heard the saying:—Like the fishes of the sea:
forcible eateth feeble?[262]” “True; but have you many of these Dandans
in the sea?” “Yes, there be many of them with us. None can tell their
tale save Almighty Allah.” “Verily, I fear lest, if I go down with thee
into the deep a creature of this kind fall in with me and devour me.”
“Have no fear: when he seeth thee, he will know thee for a son of Adam
and will fear thee and flee. He dreadeth none in the sea as he dreadeth
a son of Adam; for that an he eateth a man he dieth forthright, because
human fat is a deadly poison to this kind of creature; nor do we collect
its liver-speck save by means of a man, when he falleth into the sea and
is drowned; for that his semblance becometh changed and ofttimes his
flesh is torn; so the Dandan eateth him, deeming him the same of the
denizens of the deep, and dieth. Then we light upon our enemy dead and
take the speck of his liver and grease ourselves so that we can
over-wander the main in safety. Also, wherever there is a son of Adam,
though there be in that place an hundred or two hundred or a thousand or
more of these beasts, all die forthright an they but hear him——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah of the
Sea said to Abdullah of the Land, “And if a thousand or more of this
kind hear an Adamite cry a single cry, forthright all die nor hath one
of them power to remove from his place; so, whenever a son of Adam
falleth into the sea, we take him and anoint him with this fat and go
round about the depths with him, and whenever we see a Dandan or two or
three or more, we bid him cry out and they all die forthright for his
once crying.” Quoth the fisherman, “I put my trust in Allah;” and,
doffing his clothes, buried them in a hole which he dug in the beach;
after which he rubbed his body from head to heels with that ointment.
Then he descended into the water and diving, opened his eyes and the
brine did him no hurt. So he walked right and left, and if he would, he
rose to the sea-face, and if he would, he sank to the base. And he
beheld the water as it were a tent over his head; yet it wrought him no
hurt. Then said the Merman to him, “What seest thou, O my brother?”; and
said he, “O my brother, I see naught save weal[263]; and indeed thou
spakest truth in that which thou saidst to me; for the water doth me no
hurt.” Quoth the Merman, “Follow me.” So he followed him and they ceased
not faring on from place to place, whilst Abdullah discovered before him
and on his right and left mountains of water and solaced himself by
gazing thereon and on the various sorts of fish, some great and some
small, which disported themselves in the main. Some of them favoured
buffaloes[264] others oxen and others dogs and yet others human beings;
but all to which they drew near fled, whenas they saw the fisherman, who
said to the Merman, “O my brother, how is it that I see all the fish, to
which we draw near, flee from us afar?” Said the other, “Because they
fear thee, for all things that Allah hath made fear the son of
Adam.[265]” The fisherman ceased not to divert himself with the marvels
of the deep, till they came to a high mountain and fared on beside it.
Suddenly, he heard a mighty loud cry and turning, saw some black thing,
the bigness of a camel or bigger, coming down upon him from the liquid
mountain and crying out. So he asked his friend, “What is this, O my
brother?”; and the Merman answered, “This is the Dandan. He cometh in
search of me, seeking to devour me; so cry out at him, O my brother, ere
he reach us; else he will snatch me up and devour me.” Accordingly
Abdullah cried out at the beast and behold, it fell down dead; which
when he saw, he said, “Glorified be the perfection of God and His
praise! I smote it not with sword nor knife; how cometh it that, for all
the vastness of the creature’s bulk, it could not bear my cry, but
died?” Replied the Merman, “Marvel not, for, by Allah, O my brother,
were there a thousand or two thousand of these creatures, yet could they
not endure the cry of a son of Adam.” Then they walked on, till they
made a city, whose inhabitants the fisherman saw to be all women, there
being no male among them; so he said to his companion, “O my brother,
what city is this and what are these women?” “This is the city of women;
for its inhabitants are of the women of the sea.” “Are there any males
among them?” “No!” “Then how do they conceive and bear young, without
males[266]?” “The King of the sea banisheth them hither and they
conceive not neither bear children. All the women of the sea, with whom
he is wroth, he sendeth to this city, and they cannot leave it; for,
should one of them come forth therefrom, any of the beasts of the sea
that saw her would eat her. But in other cities of the main there are
both males and females.” Thereupon asked the fisherman, “Are there then
other cities than this in the sea?”; and the Merman answered, “There are
many.” Quoth the fisherman, “And is there a Sultan over you in the sea?”
“Yes,” quoth the Merman. Then said Abdullah “O my brother, I have indeed
seen many marvels in the main!” But the Merman said, “And what hast thou
seen of its marvels[267]? Hast thou not heard the saying:—The marvels of
the sea are more manifold than the marvels of the land?” “True,”
rejoined the fisherman and fell to gazing upon those women, whom he saw
with faces like moons and hair like women’s hair, but their hands and
feet were in their middle and they had tails like fishes’ tails. Now
when the Merman had shown him the people of the city, he carried him
forth therefrom and fore-walked him to another city, which he found full
of folk, both males and females, formed like the women aforesaid and
having tails; but there was neither selling nor buying amongst them, as
with the people of the land, nor were they clothed, but went all naked
and with their shame uncovered. Said Abdullah “O my brother, I see males
and females alike with their shame exposed[268],” and the other said,
“This is because the folk of the sea have no clothes.” Asked the
fisherman, “And how do they when they marry?” The Merman answered, “They
do not marry; but every one who taketh a liking to a female doth his
will of her.” Quoth Abdullah, “This is unlawful! Why doth he not ask her
in marriage and dower her and make her a wedding festival and marry her,
in accordance with that which is pleasing to Allah and His Apostle?”;
and quoth the other, “We are not all of one religion: some of us are
Moslems, believers in The Unity, others Nazarenes and what not else; and
each marrieth in accordance with the ordinances of his creed; but those
of us who marry are mostly Moslems.” The fisherman continued, “Ye are
naked and have neither buying nor selling among you: of what then is
your wives’ dowry? Do ye give them jewels and precious stones?” The
Merman rejoined, “Gems with us are only stones without worth: but upon
the Moslem who is minded to marry they impose a dowry of a certain
number of fishes of various kinds that he must catch, a thousand or two
thousand, more or less, according to the agreement between himself and
the bride’s father. As soon as he bringeth the amount required, the
families of the bride and bridegroom assemble and eat the
marriage-banquet; after which they bring him in to his bride, and he
catcheth fish and feedeth her; or, if he be unable, she catcheth fish
and feedeth him.” Enquired the fisherman, “And how if a woman commit
adultery?”; and the other replied, “If a woman be convicted of this
case, they banish her to the City of Women; and if she be with child by
her gallant, they leave her till she be delivered; then, if she give
birth to a girl, they banish her with her, calling her adulteress,
daughter of adulteress, and she abideth a maid till she die; but, if the
woman give birth to a male child, they carry it to the Sultan of the
Sea, who putteth it to death.” Abdullah marvelled at this and the Merman
carried him to another city and thence to another and yet another, till
he had diverted him with the sight of eighty cities, and he saw the
people of each city unlike those of every other. Then said he to the
Merman, “O my brother, are there yet other cities in the main?”; whereto
said the other, “And what hast thou seen of the cities of the sea and
its wondrous spectacles? By the virtue of the noble Prophet, the benign,
the compassionate, were I to show thee every day a thousand cities for a
thousand years, and in each city a thousand marvels, I should not have
shown thee one carat of the four-and-twenty carats of the cities of the
sea and its miracles! I have but shown thee our own province and
country, nothing more.” The fisherman thus resumed, “O my brother, since
this is the case, what I have seen sufficeth me, for I am a-weary of
eating fish, and these fourscore days I have been in thy company, thou
hast fed me, morning and night, upon nothing but raw fish, neither
broiled nor boiled.” “And what is broiled and boiled?” “We broil fish
with fire and boil it in water and dress it in various ways and make
many dishes of it.” “And how should we come by fire in the sea? We know
not broiled nor boiled nor aught else of the kind.” “We also fry it in
olive-oil and oil of sesame[269].” “How should we come by olive-oil and
oil of sesame in the sea? Verily we know nothing of that thou namest.”
“True, but O my brother, thou hast shown me many cities; yet hast thou
not shown me thine own city.” “As for mine own city, we passed it a long
way, for it is near the land whence we came, and I left it and came with
thee hither, thinking only to divert thee with the sight of the greater
cities of the sea.” “That which I have seen of them sufficeth me; and
now I would have thee show me thine own city.” “So be it,” answered
Abdullah of the Sea; and, returning on his traces, carried him back
thither and said to him, “This is my city.” Abdullah of the Land looked
and saw a city small by comparison with those he had seen; then he
entered with his comrade of the deep and they fared on till they came to
a cave. Quoth the Merman, “This is my house and all the houses in the
city are like this, caverns great and small in the mountains; as are
also those of every other city of the sea. For whoso is minded to make
him a house must repair to the King and say to him, ‘I wish to make me a
house in such a place.’ Whereupon the King sends with him a band of the
fish called ‘Peckers,’[270] which have beaks that crumble the hardest
rock, appointing for their wage a certain quantum of fish. They betake
themselves to the mountain chosen by the intended owner and therein
pierce the house, whilst the owner catcheth fish for them and feedeth
them, till the cave is finished, when they wend their ways and the
house-owner taketh up his abode therein. On such wise do all the people
of the sea; they traffic not one with other nor serve each other save by
means of fish; and their food is fish and they themselves are a kind of
fish[271].” Then he said to him, “Enter!” So Abdullah entered and the
Merman cried out, saying, “Ho, daughter mine!” when behold, there came
to him a damsel with a face like the rondure of the moon and hair long,
hips heavy, eyes black-edged and waist slender; but she was naked and
had a tail. When she saw Abdullah of the Land she said to her sire, “O
my father, what is this No[272]-tail thou hast brought with thee?” He
replied, “O my daughter this is my friend of the land, from whom I used
to bring thee the fruits of the ground. Come hither and salute him with
the salam.” So she came forward and saluted the fisherman with loquent
tongue and eloquent speech; and her father said to her, “Bring meat for
our guest, by whose visit a blessing hath betided us[273]:” whereupon
she brought him two great fishes, each the bigness of a lamb, and the
Merman said to him, “Eat.” So he ate for stress of hunger, despite
himself; because he was tired of eating fish and they had naught else
save fish. Before long, in came the Merman’s wife, who was beautiful of
form and favour and with her two children, each having in his hand a
young fish, which he craunched as a man would craunch a cucumber. When
she saw the fisherman with her husband, she said, “What is this
No-Tail?” And she and her sons and their sister came up to him and fell
to examining the back parts of Abdullah of the Land, and saying, “Yea,
by Allah, he is tailless!”; and they laughed at him. So he said to the
Merman, “O my brother, hast thou brought me hither to make me a butt and
a laughing-stock for thy children and thy consort?”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

[Illustration]


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah of the
Land said to Abdullah of the Sea, “O my brother, hast thou brought me
hither to make me a butt and a laughing-stock for thy children and thy
consort?” Cried the Merman, “Pardon, O my brother! Those who have no
tails are rare among us, and whenever one such is found, the Sultan
taketh him, to make fun of him, and he abideth a marvel amongst us, and
all who see him laugh at him. But, O my brother, excuse these young
children and this woman, for they lack wits.” Then he cried out to his
family, saying, “Silence!”; so they were afraid and held their peace;
whilst he went on to soothe Abdullah’s mind. Presently, as they were
talking, behold, in came some ten Mermen, tall and strong and stout, and
said to him, “O Abdullah, it hath reached the King that thou hast with
thee a No-tail of the No-tails of the earth.” Answered the Merman, “Yes;
and this is he; but he is not of us nor of the children of the sea. He
is my friend of the land and hath come to me as a guest and I purpose to
carry him back to the land.” Quoth they, “We cannot depart but with him;
so, an thou have aught to say, arise and come with him before the King;
and whatso thou wouldst say to us, say thou that same to the King.” Then
quoth the Merman to the fisherman, “O my brother, my excuse is manifest,
and we may not disobey the King: but go thou with me to him and I will
do my best to deliver thee from him, Inshallah! Fear not, for he deemeth
thee of the children of the sea; but, when he seeth thee, he will know
thee to be of the children of the land, and he will surely entreat thee
honourably and restore thee to the land.” And Abdullah of the Land
replied, “’Tis thine to decide, I will trust in Allah and wend with
thee.” So he took him and carried him to the King, who, when he saw him,
laughed at him and said, “Welcome to the No-tail!” And all who were
about the King began to laugh at him and say, “Yea, by Allah, he is
tailless!” Then Abdullah of the Sea came forward and acquainted the King
with the fisherman’s case, saying, “This man is of the children of the
land and he is my comrade and cannot live amongst us, for that he loveth
not the eating of fish, except it be fried or boiled; wherefore I desire
that thou give me leave to restore him to the land.” Whereto the King
replied, “Since the case is so, and he cannot live among us, I give thee
leave to restore him to his place, after due entertainment,” presently
adding, “Bring him the guest-meal.” So they brought him fish of various
kinds and colours and he ate, in obedience to the royal behest; after
which the King said to him, “Ask a boon of me.” Quoth he, “I ask of thee
that thou give me jewels;” and the King said, “Carry him to the
jewel-house and let him choose that whereof he hath need.” So his friend
carried him to the jewel-house and he picked out whatso he would, after
which the Merman brought him back to his own city and pulling out a
purse, said to him, “Take this deposit and lay it on the tomb of the
Prophet, whom Allah save and assain!” And he took it, knowing not what
was therein. Then the Merman went forth with him, to bring him back to
land, and by the way he heard singing and merrymaking and saw a table
spread with fish and folk eating and singing and holding mighty high
festival. So Abdullah of the Land said to his friend, “What aileth these
people to rejoice thus? Is there a wedding among them?” Replied Abdullah
of the Sea, “Nay; one of them is dead.” Asked the fisherman, “Then do
ye, when one dieth amongst you, rejoice for him and sing and feast?”;
and the Merman answered, “Yes: and ye of the land, what do ye?” Quoth
Abdullah of the Land, “When one dieth amongst us, we weep and keen for
him and the women beat their faces and rend the bosoms of their raiment,
in token of mourning for the dead.” But Abdullah the Merman stared at
him with wide eyes and said to him, “Give me the deposit!” So he gave it
to him. Then he set him ashore and said to him, “I have broken off our
companionship and our amity; wherefore from this day forward thou shalt
no more see me, nor I see thee.” Cried the fisherman, “Why sayst thou
this?”; and the other said, “Are ye not, O folk of the land, a deposit
of Allah?” “Yes.” “Why then,” asked the Merman, “is it grievous to you
that Allah should take back His deposit and wherefore weep ye over it?
How can I entrust thee with a deposit for the Prophet (whom Allah save
and assain!), seeing that, when a child is born to you, ye rejoice in
it, albeit the Almighty setteth the soul therein as a deposit; and yet,
when he taketh it again, it is grievous to you and ye weep and mourn?
Since it is hard for thee to give up the deposit of Allah, how shall it
be easy to thee to give up the deposit of the Prophet?[274] Wherefore we
need not your companionship.” Saying thus he left him and disappeared in
the sea. Thereupon Abdullah of the Land donned his dress and taking the
jewels, went up to the King, who met him lovingly and rejoiced at his
return saying, “How dost thou, O my son-in-law, and what is the cause of
thine absence from me this while?” So he told him his tale and
acquainted him with that which he had seen of marvels in the sea,
whereat the King wondered. Then he told him what Abdullah the Merman had
said[275]; and the King replied, “Indeed ’twas thou wast at fault to
tell him this.” Nevertheless, he continued for some time to go down to
the shore and call upon Abdullah of the Sea, but he answered him not nor
came to him; so, at last, he gave up all hope of him and abode, he and
the King his father-in-law and the families of them both in the happiest
of case and the practice of righteous ways, till there came to them the
Destroyer of Delights and the Severer of societies and they died all.
Wherefore glory be to the Living, who dieth not, whose is the empire of
the Seen and the Unseen, who over all things is Omnipotent and is
gracious to His servants and knoweth their every intent! And amongst the
tales they tell is one anent

-----

Footnote 232:

  The tale begins upon the model of “Júdar and his Brethren,” vi. 213.
  Its hero’s full name is Abdu’lláhi = Slave of Allah, which vulgar
  Egyptians pronounce Abdallah and purer speakers, Badawin and others,
  Abdullah: either form is therefore admissible. It is more common among
  Moslems but not unknown to Christians especially Syrians who borrow it
  from the Syriac Alloh. Mohammed is said to have said, “The names most
  approved by Allah are Abdu’llah, Abd al-Rahmán (Slave of the
  Compassionate) and such like” (Pilgrimage i. 20).

Footnote 233:

  Arab. “Sírah” here probably used of the Nile-sprat (_Clupea Sprattus_
  Linn.) or Sardine of which Forsk says, “Sardinn in Al-Yaman is applied
  to a Red Sea fish of the same name.” Hasselquist the Swede notes that
  Egyptians stuff the Sardine with marjoram and eat it fried even when
  half putrid.

Footnote 234:

  _i.e._ by declaring in the Koran (lxvii. 14; lxxiv. 39; lxxviii. 69;
  lxxxviii. 17), that each creature hath its appointed term and lot;
  especially “Thinketh man that he shall be left uncared for?” (xl. 36).

Footnote 235:

  Arab. “Nusf,” see vol. ii. 37.

Footnote 236:

  Arab. “Allah Karím” (which Turks pronounce Kyerím) a consecrated
  formula used especially when a man would show himself resigned to
  “small mercies.” The fisherman’s wife was evidently pious as she was
  poor; and the description of the pauper household is simple and
  effective.

Footnote 237:

  This is repeated in the Mac. Edit. pp. 496–97; an instance amongst
  many of most careless editing.

Footnote 238:

  Arab. “Alà mahlak” (vulg.), a popular phrase, often corresponding with
  our = Take it coolly.

Footnote 239:

  For “He did not keep him waiting, as he did the rest of the folk.”
  Lane prefers “nor neglected him as men generally would have done.” But
  we are told supra that the baker “paid no heed to the folk by reason
  of the dense crowd.”

Footnote 240:

  Arab. “Ruh!” the most abrupt form, whose sound is coarse and offensive
  as the Turkish yell, “Gyel!” = come here!

Footnote 241:

  Bresl. Edit. xi. 50–51.

Footnote 242:

  Arab. “Ádamí” = an Adamite, one descended from the mythical and
  typical Adam for whom see Philo Judæus. We are told in one place a few
  lines further on that the merman is of humankind; and in another that
  he is a kind of fish (Night dccccxlv). This belief in mermen, possibly
  originating with the caricatures of the human face in the intelligent
  seal and stupid manatee, is universal. Al-Kazwini declares that a
  waterman with a tail was dried and exhibited, and that in Syria one of
  them was married to a woman and had by her a son “who understood the
  languages of both his parents.” The fable was refined to perfect
  beauty by the Greeks: the mer-folk of the Arabs, Hindus and
  Northerners (Scandinavians, etc.) are mere grotesques with green hair,
  etc. Art in its highest expression never left the shores of the
  Mediterranean, and there is no sign that it ever will.

Footnote 243:

  Here Lane translates “Wajh” lit. “the desire of seeing the face of
  God,” and explains in a note that a “Muslim holds this to be the
  greatest happiness that can be enjoyed in Paradise.” But I have noted
  that the tenet of seeing the countenance of the Creator, except by the
  eyes of spirit, is a much disputed point amongst Moslems.

Footnote 244:

  Artful enough is this contrast between the squalid condition of the
  starving fisherman and the gorgeous belongings of the Merman.

Footnote 245:

  Lit. “Verily he laughed at me so that I set him free.” This is a fair
  specimen of obscure conciseness.

Footnote 246:

  Arab. “Mishannah,” which Lane and Payne translate basket: I have
  always heard it used of an old gunny-bag or bag of plaited
  palm-leaves.

Footnote 247:

  Arab. “Kaff Shurayk” applied to a single bun. The Shurayk is a bunn,
  an oblong cake about the size of a man’s hand (hence the term “Kaff” =
  palm) with two long cuts and sundry oblique crosscuts, made of
  leavened dough, glazed with egg and Samn (clarified butter) and
  flavoured with spices (cinnamon, curcuma, artemisia and prunes
  _mahalab_), and with aromatic seeds, (Ríhat al-’ajin) of which Lane
  (iii. 641) specifies aniseed, nigella, absinthium, (Artemisia
  arborescens) and Káfúrah (A. camphorata Monspeliensis) etc. The
  Shurayk is given to the poor when visiting the tombs and on certain
  fêtes.

Footnote 248:

  “Mother of Prosperities.”

Footnote 249:

  Tribes of pre-historic Arabs who were sent to Hell for bad behaviour
  to Prophets Sálih and Húd. See vol. iii. 294.

Footnote 250:

  “Too much for him to come by lawfully.”

Footnote 251:

  To protect it. The Arab. is “Jáh” = high station, dignity.

Footnote 252:

  The European reader, especially feminine, will think this a hard fate
  for the pious first wife but the idea would not occur to the Moslem
  mind. After bearing ten children a woman becomes “Umm al-banáti w’
  al-banín” = a mother of daughters and sons, and should hold herself
  unfit for love-disport. The seven ages of womankind are thus described
  by the Arabs and I translate the lines after a well-known (Irish)
  model:—

                      From ten years to twenty—
                      Of beauty there’s plenty.
                      From twenty to thirty—
                      Fat, fair and alert t’ye.
                      From thirty to forty—
                      Lads and lasses she bore t’ye.
                      From forty to fifty—
                      An old ’un and shifty.
                      From fifty to sixty—
                      A sorrow that sticks t’ye.
                      From sixty to seventy—
                      A curse of God sent t’ye.

  For these and other sentiments upon the subject of women and marriage
  see Pilgrimage ii. 285–87.

Footnote 253:

  Abdullah, as has been said, means “servant or rather slave of Allah.”

Footnote 254:

  Again the “Come to my arms, my slight acquaintance,” of the
  Anti-Jacobin.

Footnote 255:

  Arab. “Nukl,” _e.g._ the _quatre mendiants_ as opposed to “Fákihah” =
  fresh fruit. The Persians, a people who delight in gross practical
  jokes, get the confectioner to coat with sugar the droppings of sheep
  and goats and hand them to the bulk of the party. This pleasant
  confection is called “Nukl-i-peshkil”—dung-dragées.

Footnote 256:

  The older name of Madínat al-Nabi, the city of the Prophet; vulg.
  called Al-Medinah _per excellentiam_. See vol. iv. 114. In the Mac.
  and Bul. texts we have “Tayyibah” = the goodly, one of the many titles
  of that Holy City: see Pilgrimage ii. 119.

Footnote 257:

  Not “visiting the tomb of” etc. but visiting the Prophet himself, who
  is said to have declared that “Ziyárah” (visitation) of his tomb was
  in religion the equivalent of a personal call upon himself.

Footnote 258:

  Arab. “Nafakah”; for its conditions see Pilgrimage iii. 224. I have
  again and again insisted upon the Anglo-Indian Government enforcing
  the regulations of the Faith upon pauper Hindi pilgrims who go to the
  Moslem Holy Land as beggars and die of hunger in the streets. To an
  “Empire of Opinion” this is an unmitigated evil (Pilgrimage iii. 256);
  and now, after some thirty-four years, there are signs that the
  suggestions of common sense are to be adopted. England has heard of
  the extraordinary recklessness and inconsequence of the British-Indian
  “fellow subject.”

Footnote 259:

  The Ka’abah of Meccah.

Footnote 260:

  When Moslems apply “Nabí!” to Mohammed it is in the peculiar sense of
  “prophet” (προφήτης) = one who speaks _before_ the people, not one who
  predicts, as such foresight was abjured by the Apostle. Dr. A.
  Neubauer (The Athenæum No. 3031) finds the root of “Nabí!” in the
  Assyrian Nabu and Heb. Noob (occurring in Exod. vii. i. “Aaron thy
  brother shall be thy prophet.” _i.e._ orator, speaker before the
  people), and holds it to be a Canaanite term which supplanted “Roeh”
  (the Seer) _e.g._ 1 Samuel ix. 9. The learned Hebraist traces the cult
  of Nebo, a secondary deity in Assyria to Palestine and Phœnicia,
  Palmyra, Edessa (in the Nebok of Abgar) and Hierapolis in Syria or
  Mabug (Nabog?).

Footnote 261:

  I cannot find “Dandán” even in Lib. Quintus de Aquaticis Animalibus of
  the learned Sam. Bochart’s “Hierozoïcon” (London, 1663) and must
  conjecture that as “Dandán” in Persian means a tooth (vol. ii. 83) the
  writer applied it to a sun-fish or some such well-fanged monster of
  the deep.

Footnote 262:

  A favourite proverb with the Fellah, when he alludes to the Pasha and
  to himself.

Footnote 263:

  An euphemistic answer, _unbernfen_ as the Germans say.

Footnote 264:

  It is a temptation to derive this word from _bœuf à l’eau_, but I fear
  that the theory will not hold water. The “buffaloes” of Alexandria
  laughed it to scorn.

Footnote 265:

  Here the writer’s zoological knowledge is at fault. Animals, which
  never or very rarely see man, have no fear of him whatever. This is
  well-known to those who visit the Gull-fairs at Ascension Island,
  Santos and many other isolated rocks; the hen birds will peck at the
  intruder’s ankles but they do not rise from off their eggs. For
  details concerning the “Gull-fair” of the Summer Islands consult p. 4
  “The History of the Bermudas,” edited by Sir J. H. Lefroy for the
  Hakluyt Society, 1882. I have seen birds on Fernando Po peak quietly
  await a second shot; and herds of antelopes, the most timid of
  animals, in the plains of Somali-land only stared but were not
  startled by the report of the gun. But Arabs are not the only
  moralists who write zoological nonsense; witness the notable verse,

                                  Birds in their little nests agree,

  when the feathered tribes are the most pugnacious of breathing beings.

Footnote 266:

  Lane finds these details “silly and tiresome or otherwise
  objectionable,” and omits them.

Footnote 267:

  Meaning, “Thou hast as yet seen little or nothing.” In most Eastern
  tongues a question often expresses an emphatic assertion. See vol. i.
  37.

Footnote 268:

  Easterns wear as a rule little clothing but it suffices for the
  essential purposes of decency and travellers will live amongst them
  for years without once seeing an accidental “exposure of the person.”
  In some cases, as with the Nubian thong-apron, this demand of modesty
  requires not a little practice of the muscles; and we all know the
  difference in a Scotch kilt worn by a Highlander and a cockney
  sportsman.

Footnote 269:

  Arab. “Shíraj” = oil extracted from rape seed but especially from
  sesame. The Persians pronounce it “Síraj” (apparently unaware that it
  is their own word “Shírah” = juice in Arabic garb) and have coined a
  participle “Musayrij” _e.g._, Bú-imusayrij, taint of sesame-oil
  applied especially to the Jews who very wisely prefer, in Persia and
  elsewhere, oil which is wholesome to butter which is not. The Moslems,
  however, declare that its immoderate use in cooking taints the
  exudations of the skin.

Footnote 270:

  Arab. “Nakkárún,” probably congeners of the redoubtable “Dandán.”

Footnote 271:

  Bresl. Edit. xi. 78. The Mac. says “They are all fish” (Kullu-hum) and
  the Bul. “Their food (aklu-hum) is fish.”

Footnote 272:

  Arab. “Az’ar,” usually = having thin hair. The general term for
  tailless is “abtar.” See Koran cviii. 3, when it means childless.

Footnote 273:

  A common formula of politeness.

Footnote 274:

  Bresl. Edit. xi. 82; meaning, “You will probably keep it for
  yourself.” Abdullah of the Sea is perfectly logical; but grief is not.
  We weep over the deaths of friends mostly for our own sake:
  theoretically we should rejoice that they are at rest; but practically
  we are afflicted by the thought that we shall never again see their
  pleasant faces.

Footnote 275:

  _i.e._ about rejoicing over the newborns and mourning over the dead.




      TALE OF HARUN AL-RASHID AND ABU HASAN, THE MERCHANT OF OMAN.


The Caliph Harun Al-Rashid was one night wakeful exceedingly; so he
called Masrur and said to him as soon as he came, “Fetch me Ja’afar in
haste.” Accordingly, he went out and returned with the Wazir, to whom
said the Caliph, “O Ja’afar wakefulness hath mastered me this night and
forbiddeth sleep from me, nor wot I what shall drive it away from me.”
Replied Ja’afar, “O Commander of the Faithful, the wise say:—Looking on
a mirror, entering the Hammam-bath and hearkening unto song banish care
and chagrin.” He rejoined, “O Ja’afar I have done all this, but it hath
brought me naught of relief, and I swear by my pious forbears unless
thou contrive that which shall abate from me this insomny, I will smite
thy neck.” Quoth Ja’afar, “O Commander of the Faithful, wilt thou do
that which I shall counsel thee?” whereupon quoth the Caliph, “And what
is that thou counselleth?” He replied, “It is that thou take boat with
us and drop down Tigris River with the tide to a place called Karn
al-Sirat, so haply we may hear what we never heard or see what we never
saw, for ’tis said:—The solace of care is in one of three things; that a
man see what he never before saw or hear what he never yet heard or
tread an earth he erst hath never trodden. It may be this shall be the
means of remedying thy restlessness, O Commander of the Faithful,
Inshallah! There, on either sides of the river, are windows and
balconies one facing other, and it may be we shall hear or see from one
of these somewhat wherewith our hearts may be heartened.” Ja’afar’s
counsel pleased the Caliph, so he rose from his place and taking with
him the Wazir and his brother Al-Fazl and Isaac[276] the boon-companion
and Abu Nowas and Abu Dalaf[277] and Masrur the Sworder——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Caliph
arose from his seat with Ja’afar and the rest of the party, all entered
the wardrobe, where they donned merchant’s gear. Then they went down to
the Tigris and embarking in a gilded boat, dropped down with the stream,
till they came to the place they sought, when they heard the voice of a
damsel singing to the lute and chanting these couplets:—

 To him when the wine cup is near I declare, ✿ While in coppice loud
    shrilleth and trilleth Hazár,
 “How long this repining from joys and delight? ✿ Wake up for this life
    is a borrowed ware!”
 Take the cup from the hand of the friend who is dear ✿ With languishing
    eyelids and languorous air.
 I sowed on his cheek a fresh rose, which amid ✿ His side-locks the fruit
    of granado-tree bare.

 Thou wouldst deem that the place where he tare his fair cheek[278] ✿
    Were ashes, while cheeks hues incendiary wear.
 Quoth the blamer, “Forget him! But where’s my excuse ✿ When his
    side-face is growing the downiest hair[279]?”

When the Caliph heard this, he said, “O Ja’afar, how goodly is that
voice!”; and the Wazir replied, “O our lord, never smote my hearing
aught sweeter or goodlier than this singing! But, good my lord, hearing
from behind a wall is only half hearing; how would it be an we heard it
from behind a curtain?” Quoth the Caliph, “Come, O Ja’afar, let us play
the parasites with the master of this house; and haply we shall look
upon the songstress, face to face;” and quoth Ja’afar, “I hear and I
obey.” So they landed and sought admittance; when behold, there came out
to them a young man, fair of favour, sweet of speech and fluent of
tongue, who said to them, “Well come and welcome, O lords that honour me
with your presence! Enter in all comfort and convenience!” So they went
in (and he with them) to a saloon with four faces, whose ceiling was
decorated with gold and its walls adorned with ultramarine.[280] At its
upper end was a daïs, whereon stood a goodly row of seats[281] and
thereon sat an hundred damsels like moons. The house-master cried out to
them and they came down from their seats. Then he turned to Ja’afar and
said to him “O my lord, I know not the honourable of you from the more
honourable: Bismillah! deign he that is highest in rank among you favour
me by taking the head of the room, and let his brethren sit each in his
several stead.” So they sat down, each according to his degree, whilst
Masrur abode standing before them in their service; and the host asked
them, “O my guests, with your leave, shall I set somewhat of food before
you?” and they answered, “Yes.” Hearing this he bade his handmaids bring
food, whereupon four damsels with girded waists placed in front of them
a table, whereon were rare meats of that which flieth and walketh earth
and swimmeth seas, sand-grouse and quails and chickens and pigeons; and
written on the raised edge of the tray were verses such as sorted with
the entertainment. So they ate till they had enough and washed their
hands, after which said the young man, “O my lords, if you have any
want, let us know it, that we may have the honour of satisfying it.”
They replied, “’Tis well: we came not to thy dwelling save for the sake
of a voice we heard from behind the wall of thy house, and we would fain
hear it again and know her to whom it belongeth. So, an thou deem right
to vouchsafe us this favour, it will be of the generosity of thy nature,
and after we will return whence we came.” Quoth the host, “Ye are
welcome;” and, turning to a black slave-girl, said to her, “Fetch me thy
mistress such an one.” So she went away and returning with a chair of
chinaware, cushioned with brocade, set it down: then withdrew again and
presently returned with a damsel, as she were the moon on the night of
its full, who sat down on the chair. Then the black girl gave her a bag
of satin wherefrom she brought out a lute, inlaid with gems and jacinths
and furnished with pegs of gold.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel came forward, she took her seat upon the chair and brought out
from its case a lute and behold, it was inlaid with gems and jacinths
and furnished with pegs of gold. Then she tuned its strings, even as
saith the poet of her and her lute in these lines:—

 She sits it in lap like a mother fond ✿ And she strikes the strings that
    can make it speak:
 And ne’er smiteth her right an injurious touch ✿ But her left repairs of
    her right the wreak.[282]

Then she strained the lute to her bosom, binding over it as mother
bendeth over babe, and swept the strings which complained as child to
mother complaineth; after which she played upon it and began improvising
these couplets:—

 An Time my lover restore me I’ll blame him fain, ✿ Saying, “Pass, O my
    dear, the bowl and in passing drain
 The wine which hath never mixed with the heart of man ✿ But he passes to
    joy from annoy and to pleasure from pain.”
 Then Zephyr arose to his task of sustaining the cup: ✿ Didst e’er see
    full Moon that in hand the star hath ta’en?[283]
 How oft I talked thro’ the night, when its rounded Lune ✿ Shed on
    darkness of Tigris ’bank a beamy rain!
 And when Luna sank in the West ’twas as though she’d wave ✿ O’er the
    length of the watery waste a gilded glaive.

When she had made an end of her verse, she wept with sore weeping and
all who were in the place wept aloud till they were well-nigh dead; nor
was there one of them but took leave of his wits and rent his raiment
and beat his face, for the goodliness of her singing. Then said
Al-Rashid, “This damsel’s song verily denoteth that she is a lover
departed from her beloved.” Quoth her master, “She hath lost father and
mother;” but quoth the Caliph, “This is not the weeping of one who hath
lost mother and father, but the yearning of one who hath lost him she
loveth.” And he was delighted with her singing and said to Isaac, “By
Allah, never saw I her like!”; and Isaac said, “O my lord, indeed I
marvel at her with utterest marvel and am beside myself for delight.”
Now Al-Rashid with all this stinted not to look upon the house-master
and note his charms and the daintiness of his fashion; but he saw on his
face a pallor as he would die; so he turned to him and said, “Ho,
youth!” and the other said, “Adsum!—at thy service, O my lord,” The
Caliph asked, “Knowest thou who we are?”; and he answered, “No.” Quoth
Ja’afar, “Wilt thou that I tell thee the names of each of us?”; and
quoth the young man “Yes;” when the Wazir said, “This is the Commander
of the Faithful, descendant of the uncle of the Prince of the Apostles,”
and named to him the others of the company; after which quoth Al-Rashid,
“I wish that thou acquaint me with the cause of the paleness of thy
face, whether it be acquired or natural from thy birth-tide.” Quoth he,
“O Prince of True Believers, my case is wondrous and my affair
marvellous; were it graven with gravers on the eye-corners it were a
warner to whoso will be warned.” Said the Caliph, “Tell it to me: haply
thy healing may be at my hand.” Said the young man, “O Commander of the
Faithful, lend me thine ears and give me thy whole mind.” And he, “Come;
tell it me, for thou makest me long to hear it.” So the young man
began:—Know then, O Prince of True Believers, that I am a merchant of
the merchants of the sea and come from Oman city, where my sire was a
trader and a very wealthy trader having thirty ships trafficking upon
the main, whose yearly hire was thirty thousand dinars; and he was a
generous man and had taught me writing and all whereof a wight hath
need. When his last hour drew near, he called me to him and gave me the
customary charge; then Almighty Allah took him and admitted him to His
mercy and may He continue the Commander of the Faithful on life! Now my
late father had partners trading with his coin and voyaging on the
ocean. So one day, as I sat in my house with a company of merchants, a
certain of my servants came in to me and said, “O my lord, there is at
the door a man who craveth admittance to thee!” I gave leave and he came
in, bearing on his head a something covered. He set it down and
uncovered it, and behold it was a box wherein were fruits out of season
and herbs conserved in salt and fresh, such as are not found in our
land. I thanked him and gifted him with an hundred dinars, and he went
away grateful. Then I divided these things amongst my friends and guests
who were present and asked them whence they came. Quoth they, “They come
from Bassorah,” and praised them and went on to portray the beauties of
Bassorah and all agreed that there was naught in the world goodlier than
Baghdad and its people. Then they fell to describing Baghdad and the
fine manners of its folk and the excellence of its air and the beauty of
its ordinance, till my soul longed for it and all my hopes clave to
looking upon it. So I arose and selling my houses and lands, ships and
slaves, negroes and handmaids, I got together my good, to wit, a
thousand thousand dinars, besides gems and jewels, wherewith I freighted
a vessel and setting out therein with the whole of the property, voyaged
awhile. Then I hired a barque and embarking therein with all my monies
sailed up the river some days till we arrived at Baghdad. I enquired
where the merchants abode and what part was pleasantest for domicile and
was answered, “The Karkh quarter.” So I went thither and hiring a house
in a thoroughfare called the Street of Saffron, transported all my goods
to it and took up my lodging therein for some time. At last one day
which was a Friday, I sallied forth to solace myself taking with me
somewhat of coin. I went first to a cathedral-mosque, called the Mosque
of Mansur, where the Friday service was held, and when we had made an
end of congregational prayers, I fared forth with the folk to a place
hight Karn al-Sirat, where I saw a tall and goodly mansion, with a
balcony overlooking the river-bank and pierced with a lattice-window. So
I betook myself thither with a company of folk and sighted there an old
man sitting, handsomely clad and exhaling perfumes. His beard forked
upon his breast in two waves like silver-wire, and about him were four
damsels and five pages. So I said to one of the folk, “What is the name
of this old man and what is his business?”; and the man said, “His name
is Táhir ibn al-Aláa, and he is a keeper of girls: all who go into him
eat and drink and look upon fair faces.” Quoth I, “By Allah, this long
while have I wandered about in search of something like this!”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant cried, “By Allah this long while I have gone about in search of
something like this!” So I went up to the Shaykh, O Commander of the
Faithful, and saluting him said to him, “O my lord, I need somewhat of
thee!” He replied, “What is thy need?” and I rejoined, “’Tis my desire
to be thy guest to-night.” He said, “With all my heart; but, O my son,
with me are many damsels, some whose night is ten dinars, some forty and
others more. Choose which thou wilt have.” Quoth I, “I choose her whose
night is ten dinars.” And I weighed out to him three hundred dinars, the
price of a month; whereupon he committed me to a page, who carried me to
a Hammam within the house and served me with goodly service. When I came
out of the Bath he brought me to a chamber and knocked at the door,
whereupon out came a handmaid, to whom said he, “Take thy guest!” She
met me with welcome and cordiality, laughing and rejoicing, and brought
me into a mighty fine room decorated with gold. I considered her and saw
her like the moon on the night of its fulness having in attendance on
her two damsels as they were constellations. She made me sit and seating
herself by my side, signed to her slave-girls who set before us a tray
covered with dishes of various kinds of meats, pullets and quails and
sand-grouse and pigeons. So we ate our sufficiency, and never in my life
ate I aught more delicious than this food. When we had eaten she bade
remove the tray and set on the service of wine and flowers, sweetmeats
and fruits; and I abode with her a month in such case. At the end of
that time, I repaired to the Bath; then, going to the old man, I said to
him, “O my lord, I want her whose night is twenty dinars.” “Weigh down
the gold,” said he. So I fetched money and weighed out to him six
hundred dinars for a month’s hire, whereupon he called a page and said
to him, “Take thy lord here.” Accordingly he carried me to the Hammam
and thence to the door of a chamber, whereat he knocked and there came
out a handmaid, to whom quoth he, “Take thy guest!” She received me with
the goodliest reception and I found in attendance on her four
slave-girls, whom she commanded to bring food. So they fetched a tray
spread with all manner meats, and I ate. When I had made an end of
eating and the tray had been removed, she took the lute and sang thereto
these couplets:—

 O waftings of musk from the Babel-land! ✿ Bear a message from me which
    my longings have planned:
 My troth is pledged to that place of yours, ✿ And to friends there
    ’biding—a noble band;
 And wherein dwells she whom all lovers love ✿ And would hend, but she
    cometh to no man’s hand.

I abode with her a month, after which I returned to the Shaykh and said
to him, “I want the forty dinar one.” “Weigh out the money,” said he. So
I weighed out to him twelve hundred dinars, the mensual hire, and abode
with her one month as it were one day, for what I saw of the comeliness
of her semblance and the goodliness of her converse. After this I went
to the Shaykh one evening and heard a great noise and loud voices; so I
asked him, “What is to do?”; and he answered, saying, “This is the night
of our remarkablest nights, when all souls embark on the river and
divert themselves by gazing one upon other. Hast thou a mind to go up to
the roof and solace thyself by looking at the folk?” “Yes,” answered I,
and went up to the terrace-roof,[284] whence I could see a gathering of
people with flambeaux and cressets, and great mirth and merriment. Then
I went up to the end of the roof and beheld there, behind a goodly
curtain, a little chamber in whose midst stood a couch of
juniper[285]-wood plated with shimmering gold and covered with a
handsome carpet. On this sat a lovely young lady, confounding all
beholders with her beauty and comeliness and symmetry and perfect grace,
and by her side a youth, whose hand was on her neck; and he was kissing
her and she kissing him. When I saw them, O Prince of True Believers, I
could not contain myself nor knew where I was, so dazed and dazzled was
I by her beauty: but, when I came down, I questioned the damsel with
whom I was and described the young lady to her. “What wilt thou with
her?” asked she; and I, “She hath taken my wit.” “O Abu al-Hasan, hast
thou a mind to her?” “Ay, by Allah! for she hath captivated my heart and
soul.” “This is the daughter of Tahir ibn al-Alaa; she is our mistress
and we are all her handmaids; but knowest thou, O Abu al-Hasan, what be
the price of her night and her day?” “No!” “Five hundred dinars, for she
is a regret to the heart of Kings!”[286] “By Allah, I will spend all I
have on this damsel!” So saying I lay, heartsore for desire, through the
livelong night till the morning, when I repaired to the Hammam and
presently donned a suit of the richest royal raiment and betaking myself
to Ibn al-Alaa, said to him, “O my lord, I want her whose night is five
hundred dinars.” Quoth he, “Weigh down the money.” So I weighed out to
him fifteen thousand dinars for a month’s hire and he took them and said
to the page, “Carry him to thy mistress such an one!” Accordingly he
took me and carried me to an apartment, than which my eyes never saw a
goodlier on the earth’s face and there I found the young lady seated.
When I saw her, O Commander of the Faithful, my reason was confounded
with her beauty, for she was like the full moon on its fourteenth
night,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


          Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Fiftieth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young man
continued to describe before the Prince of True Believers the young
lady’s characteristics, saying:—She was like the full moon on her
fourteenth night, a model of grace and symmetry and loveliness. Her
speech shamed the tones of the lute, and it was as it were she whom the
poet meant in these verses:—

 She cried while played in her side Desire, ✿ And Night o’er hung her
    with blackest blee:—
 “O Night shall thy murk bring me ne’er a chum ✿ To tumble and futter
    this coynte of me?”
 And she smote that part with her palm and sighed ✿ Sore sighs and a
    weeping continued she:—
 “As the toothstick beautifies teeth e’en so ✿ Must prickle to coynte as
    a toothstick be.
 O Moslems, is never a stand to your tools, ✿ To assist a woman’s
    necessity?”
 Thereat rose upstanding beneath its clothes ✿ My yard, as crying, “At
    thee! at thee!”
 And I loosed her trouser-string, startling her: ✿ “Who art thou?” and I
    said, “A reply to thy plea!”
 And began to stroke her with wrist-thick yard, ✿ Hurting hinder cheeks
    by its potency:
 And she cried as I rose after courses three ✿ “Suit thy gree the
    stroke!” and I—“suit thy gree!”

And how excellent is the saying of another![287]—

 A fair one, to idolaters if she her face should show, They’d leave their
    idols and her face for only Lord would know.
 If in the Eastward she appeared unto a monk, for sure, He’d cease from
    turning to the West and to the East bend low;
 And if into the briny sea one day she chanced to spit, Assuredly the
    salt sea’s floods straight fresh and sweet would grow.

And that of another:—

 I looked at her one look and that dazed me ✿ Such rarest gifts of mind
    and form to see,
 When doubt inspired her that I loved her, and ✿ Upon her cheeks the
    doubt showed showily.

I saluted her and she said to me, “Well come and welcome, and fair
welcome!”; and taking me by the hand, O Prince of True Believers, made
me sit down by her side; whereupon, of the excess of my desire, I fell
a-weeping for fear of severance and pouring forth the tears of the eye,
recited these two couplets:—

 I love the nights of parting though I joy not in the same ✿ Time haply
    may exchange them for the boons of Union-day:
 And the days that bring Union I unlove for single thought, ✿ Seeing
    everything in life lacking steadfastness of stay.

Then she strave to solace me with soft sweet speech, but I was drowned
in the deeps of passion, fearing even in union the pangs of disunion,
for excess of longing and ecstasy of passion; and I bethought me of the
lowe of absence and estrangement and repeated these two couplets:—


 I thought of estrangement in her embrace     ✿ And my eyes rained tears
                           red as ’Andam-wood.
 So I wiped the drops on that long white neck; ✿ For camphor[288] is wont
                          to stay flow of blood.

Then she bade bring food and there came four damsels, high-bosomed girls
and virginal, who set before us food and fruits and confections and
flowers and wine, such as befit none save kings. So, O Commander of the
Faithful, we ate, and sat over our wine, compassed about with blooms and
herbs of sweet savour, in a chamber suitable only for kings. Presently,
one of her maids brought her a silken bag, which she opened and taking
thereout a lute, laid it in her lap and smote its strings, whereat it
complained as child complaineth to mother, and she sang these two
couplets:—

 Drink not pure wine except from hand of slender youth ✿ Like wine for
    daintiness and like him eke the wine:
 For wine no joyance brings to him who drains the cup ✿ Save bring the
    cup-boy cheek as fair and fain and fine.

So, I abode with her, O Commander of the Faithful, month after month in
similar guise, till all my money was spent; wherefore I began to bethink
me of separation as I sat with her one day and my tears railed down upon
my cheeks like rills, and I became not knowing night from light. Quoth
she, “Why dost thou weep?”; and quoth I, “O light of mine eyes, I weep
because of our parting.” She asked, “And what shall part me and thee, O
my lord?”; and I answered, “By Allah, O my lady, from the day I came to
thee, thy father hath taken of me, for every night, five hundred dinars,
and now I have nothing left. Right soothfast is the saw:—Penury maketh
strangerhood at home and money maketh a home in strangerhood; and indeed
the poet speaks truth when he saith:—

 Lack of good is exile to man at home; ✿ And money shall house him
    where’er he roam.”

She replied, “Know that it is my father’s custom, whenever a merchant
abideth with him and hath spent all his capital, to entertain him three
days; then doth he put him out and he may return to us nevermore. But
keep thou thy secret and conceal thy case and I will so contrive that
thou shalt abide with me till such time as Allah will;[289] for, indeed,
there is in my heart a great love for thee. Thou must know that all my
father’s money is under my hand and he wotteth not its full tale; so,
every morning, I will give thee a purse of five hundred dinars which do
thou offer to my sire, saying:—Henceforth, I will pay thee only day by
day. He will hand the sum to me, and I will give it to thee again, and
we will abide thus till such time as may please Allah.”[289] Thereupon I
thanked her and kissed her hand; and on this wise, O Prince of True
Believers, I abode with her a whole year, till it chanced on a certain
day that she beat one of her handmaids grievously and the slave-girl
said, “By Allah, I will assuredly torture thy heart, even as thou hast
tortured me!” So she went to the girl’s father and exposed to him all
that had passed, first and last, which when Tahir ibn Alaa heard he
arose forthright and coming in to me, as I sat with his daughter, said,
“Ho, such an one!”; and I said, “At thy service.” Quoth he, “’Tis our
wont, when a merchant grow poor with us, to give him hospitality three
days; but thou hast had a year with us, eating and drinking and doing
what thou wouldst.” Then he turned to his pages and cried to them, “Pull
off his clothes.” They did as he bade them and gave me ten dirhams and
an old suit worth five silvers; after which he said to me, “Go forth; I
will not beat thee nor abuse thee; but wend thy ways and if thou tarry
in this town, thy blood be upon thine own head.” So I went forth, O
Commander of the Faithful, in my own despite, knowing not whither to
hie, for had fallen on my heart all the trouble in the world and I was
occupied with sad thought and doubt. Then I bethought me of the wealth
which I had brought from Oman and said in myself, “I came hither with a
thousand thousand dinars, part price of thirty ships, and have made away
with it all in the house of yonder ill-omened man, and now I go forth
from him, bare and broken-hearted! But there is no Majesty and there is
no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!” Then I abode three
days in Baghdad, without tasting meat or drink, and on the fourth day
seeing a ship bound for Bassorah, I took passage in her of the owner,
and when we reached our port, I landed and went into the bazar, being
sore anhungered. Presently, a man saw me, a grocer, whom I had known
aforetime, and coming up to me, embraced me, for he had been my friend
and my father’s friend before me. Then he questioned me of my case,
seeing me clad in those tattered clothes; so I told him all that had
befallen me, and he said, “By Allah, this is not the act of a sensible
man! But after this that hath befallen thee what dost thou purpose to
do?” Quoth I, “I know not what I shall do,” and quoth he, “Wilt thou
abide with me and write my outgo and income and thou shalt have two
dirhams a day, over and above thy food and drink?” I agreed to this and
abode with him, O Prince of True Believers, selling and buying, till I
had gotten an hundred dinars; when I hired me an upper chamber by the
river-side, so haply a ship should come up with merchandise, that I
might buy goods with the dinars and go back with them to Baghdad. Now it
fortuned that one day, there came ships with merchandise, and all the
merchants resorted to them to buy, and I went with them on board, when
behold, there came two men out of the hold and setting themselves chairs
on the deck, sat down thereon. The merchants addressed themselves to the
twain with intent to buy, and the man said to one of the crew, “Bring
the carpet.” Accordingly he brought the carpet and spread it, and
another came with a pair of saddle-bags, whence he took a budget and
emptied it on the carpet; and our sights were dazzled with that which
issued therefrom of pearls and corals and jacinths and carnelians and
other jewels of all sorts and colours.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Fifty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant, after recounting to the Caliph the matter of the bag and its
containing jewels of all sorts, continued:—Presently, O Commander of the
Faithful, said one of the men on the chairs, “O company of merchants, we
will sell but this to-day, by way of spending-money, for that we are
weary.” So the merchants fell to bidding one against other for the
jewels and bid till the price reached four hundred dinars. Then said to
me the owner of the bag (for he was an old acquaintance of mine, and
when he saw me, he came down to me and saluted me), “Why dost thou not
speak and bid like the rest of the merchants?” I said, “O my lord, by
Allah, the shifts of fortune have run against me and I have lost my
wealth and have only an hundred dinars left in the world.” Quoth he, “O
Ománi, after this vast wealth, can only an hundred dinars remain to
thee?” And I was abashed before him and my eyes filled with tears;
whereupon he looked at me and indeed my case was grievous to him. So he
said to the merchants, “Bear witness against me that I have sold all
that is in this bag of various gems and precious stones to this man for
an hundred gold pieces, albeit I know them to be worth so many thousand
dinars, and this is a present from me to him.” Then he gave me the
saddle-bag and the carpet, with all the jewels that were thereon, for
which I thanked him, and each and every of the merchants present praised
him. Presently I carried all this to the jewel-market and sat there to
sell and buy. Now among the precious stones was a round amulet of the
handiwork of the masters,[290] weighing half a pound: it was red of the
brightest, a carnelian on both whose sides were graven characts and
characters, like the tracks of ants; but I knew not its worth. I sold
and bought a whole year, at the end of which I took the amulet[291] and
said, “This hath been with me some while, and I know not what it is nor
what may be its value.” So I gave it to the broker who took it and went
round with it and returned, saying, “None of the merchants will give me
more than ten dirhams for it.” Quoth I, “I will not sell it at that
price;” and he threw it in my face and went away. Another day I again
offered it for sale and its price reached fifteen dirhams; whereupon I
took it from the broker in anger and threw it back into the tray. But a
few days after, as I sat in my shop, there came up to me a man, who bore
the traces of travel, and saluting me, said, “By thy leave, I will turn
over what thou hast of wares.” Said I, “’Tis well,” and indeed, O
Commander of the Faithful, I was still wroth by reason of the lack of
demand for the talisman. So the man fell to turning over my wares, but
took nought thereof save the amulet, which when he saw, he kissed his
hand and cried, “Praised be Allah!” Then said he to me, “O my lord, wilt
thou sell this?”; and I replied, “Yes,” being still angry. Quoth he,
“What is its price?” And I asked, “How much wilt thou give?” He
answered, “Twenty dinars”: so I thought he was making mock of me and
exclaimed, “Wend thy ways.” But he resumed, “I will give thee fifty
dinars for it.” I made him no answer, and he continued, “A thousand
dinars.” But I was silent, declining to reply, whilst he laughed at my
silence and said, “Why dost thou not return me an answer?” “Hie thee
home,” repeated I and was like to quarrel with him. But he bid thousand
after thousand, and I still made him no reply, till he said, “Wilt thou
sell it for twenty thousand dinars?” I still thought he was mocking me;
but the people gathered about me and all of them said, “Sell to him, and
if he buy not, we will all up and at him and drub him and thrust him
forth the city.” So quoth I to him, “Wilt thou buy or dost thou jest?”;
and quoth he, “Wilt thou sell or dost thou joke?” I said, “I will sell
if thou wilt buy;” then he said, “I will buy it for thirty thousand
dinars; take them and make the bargain;” so I cried to the bystanders,
“Bear witness against him,” adding to him, “But on condition that thou
acquaint me with the virtues and profit of this amulet for which thou
payest all this money.” He answered, “Close the bargain, and I will tell
thee this;” I rejoined, “I sell it to thee;” and he retorted, “Allah be
witness of that which thou sayst and testimony!” Then he brought out the
gold and giving it to me took the amulet, and set it in his bosom; after
which he turned to me and asked, “Art thou content?” Answered I, “Yes,”
and he said to the people, “Bear witness against him that he hath closed
the bargain and touched the price, thirty thousand dinars.” Then he
turned to me and said, “Harkye, my poor fellow, hadst thou held back
from selling, by Allah I would have bidden thee up to an hundred
thousand dinars, nay, even to a thousand thousand!” When I heard these
words, O Commander of the Faithful, the blood fled my face, and from
that day there overcame it this pallor thou seest. Then said I to him,
“Tell me the reason of this and what is the use of this amulet.” And he
answered, saying, “Know that the King of Hind hath a daughter, never was
seen a thing fairer than she, and she is possessed with a falling
sickness.[292]” So the King summoned the Scribes and men of science and
Divines, but none of them could relieve her of this. Now I was present
in the assembly; so I said to him, “O King, I know a man called
Sa’adu’lláh the Babylonian, than whom there is not on the face of the
earth one more masterly in these matters, and if thou see fit to send me
to him, do so.” Said he, “Go to him;” and quoth I, “Bring me a piece of
carnelian.” Accordingly he gave me a great piece of carnelian and an
hundred thousand dinars and a present, which I took, and with which I
betook myself to the land of Babel. Then I sought out the Shaykh and
when he was shown to me I delivered to him the money and the present,
which he accepted and sending for a lapidary, bade him fashion the
carnelian into this amulet. Then he abode seven months in observation of
the stars, till he chose out an auspicious time for engraving it, when
he graved upon it these talismanic characters which thou seest, and I
took it and returned with it to the King.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Fifty-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young man
said to the Commander of the Faithful:—So after the Shaykh had spoken, I
took this talisman and returned with it to the King. Now the Princess
was bound with four chains, and every night a slave-girl lay with her
and was found in the morning with her throat cut. The King took the
amulet and laid it upon his daughter who was straightway made whole. At
this he rejoiced with exceeding joy and invested me with a vest of
honour and gave alms of much money; and he caused set the amulet in the
Princess’s necklace. It chanced, one day, that she embarked with her
women in a ship and went for a sail on the sea. Presently, one of her
maids put out her hand to her, to sport with her, and the necklace brake
asunder and fell into the waves. From that hour the possessor[293] of
the Princess returned to her, wherefore great grief betided the King and
he gave me much money, saying, “Go thou to Shaykh Sa’adu’llah and let
him make her another amulet, in lieu of that which is lost.” I journeyed
to Babel, but found the old man dead; whereupon I returned and told the
King, who sent me and ten others to go round about in all countries, so
haply we might find a remedy for her: and now Allah hath caused me
happen on it with thee.” Saying these words, he took from me the amulet,
O Commander of the Faithful, and went his ways. Such, then, is the cause
of the wanness of my complexion. As for me, I repaired to Baghdad,
carrying all my wealth with me, and took up my abode in the lodgings
where I lived whilome. On the morrow, as soon as it was light, I donned
my dress and betook myself to the house of Tahir ibn al-Alaa, that haply
I might see her whom I loved, for the love of her had never ceased to
increase upon my heart. But when I came to his home, I saw the balcony
broken down and the lattice builded up; so I stood awhile, pondering my
case and the shifts of Time, till there came up a serving-man, and I
questioned him, saying, “What hath God done with Tahir ibn al-Alaa?” He
answered, “O my brother, he hath repented to Almighty Allah.[294]” Quoth
I, “What was the cause of his repentance?”; and quoth he, “O my brother,
in such a year there came to him a merchant, by name Abu al-Hasan the
Omani, who abode with his daughter awhile, till his wealth was all
spent, when the old man turned him out, broken-hearted. Now the girl
loved him with exceeding love, and when she was parted from him, she
sickened of a sore sickness and came nigh upon death. As soon as her
father knew how it was with her, he sent after and sought for Abu
al-Hasan through the lands, pledging himself to bestow upon whoso should
produce him an hundred thousand dinars; but none could find him nor come
on any trace of him; and she is now hard upon death.” Quoth I, “And how
is it with her sire?” and quoth the servant, “He hath sold all his
girls, for grief of that which hath befallen him, and hath repented to
Almighty Allah.” Then asked I, “What wouldst thou say to him who should
direct thee to Abu al-Hasan the Omani?”; and he answered, “Allah upon
thee, O my brother, that thou do this and quicken my poverty and the
poverty of my parents[295]!” I rejoined, “Go to her father and say to
him, Thou owest me the reward for good news, for that Abu al-Hasan the
Omani standeth at the door.” With this he set off trotting, as he were a
mule loosed from the mill, and presently came back, accompanied by
Shaykh Tahir himself, who no sooner saw me than he returned to his house
and gave the man an hundred thousand dinars which he took and went away
blessing me. Then the old man came up and embraced me and wept, saying,
“O my lord, where hast thou been absent all this while? Indeed, my
daughter hath been killed by reason of her separation from thee; but
come with me into the house.” So we entered and he prostrated himself in
gratitude to the Almighty, saying, “Praised be Allah who hath reunited
us with thee!” Then he went in to his daughter and said to her, “The
Lord hath healed thee of this sickness;” and said she, “O my papa, I
shall never be whole of my sickness, save I look upon the face of Abu
al-Hasan.” Quoth he, “An thou wilt eat a morsel and go to the Hammam, I
will bring thee in company with him.” Asked she, “Is it true that thou
sayst?”; and he answered, “By the Great God, ’tis true!” She rejoined,
“By Allah, if I look upon his face, I shall have no need of eating!”
Then said he to his page, “Bring in thy lord.” Thereupon I entered, and
when she saw me, O Prince of True Believers, she fell down in a swoon,
and presently coming to herself, recited this couplet:—

 Yea, Allah hath joinèd the parted twain, ✿ When no thought they thought
    e’er to meet again.

Then she sat upright and said, “By Allah, O my lord, I had not deemed to
see thy face ever more, save it were in a dream!” So she embraced me and
wept, and said, “O Abu al-Hasan, now will I eat and drink.” The old man
her sire rejoiced to hear these words and they brought her meat and
drink and we ate and drank, O Commander of the Faithful. After this, I
abode with them awhile, till she was restored to her former beauty, when
her father sent for the Kazi and the witnesses and bade write out the
marriage-contract between her and me and made a mighty great
bride-feast; and she is my wife to this day and this is my son by her.”
So saying he went away and returned with a boy of rare beauty and
symmetry of form and favour to whom said he, “Kiss the ground before the
Commander of the Faithful.” He kissed ground before the Caliph, who
marvelled at his beauty and glorified his Creator; after which Al-Rashid
departed, he and his company, saying, “O Ja’afar, verily, this is none
other than a marvellous thing, never saw I nor heard I aught more
wondrous.” When he was seated in the palace of the Caliphate, he cried,
“O Masrur!” who replied, “Here am I, O my lord!” Then said he, “Bring
the year’s tribute of Bassorah and Baghdad and Khorasan, and set it in
this recess.[296]” Accordingly he laid the three tributes together and
they were a vast sum of money, whose tale none might tell save Allah.
Then the Caliph bade draw a curtain before the recess and said to
Ja’afar, “Fetch me Abu al-Hasan.” Replied Ja’afar, “I hear and obey,”
and going forth, returned presently with the Omani, who kissed ground
before the Caliph, fearing lest he had sent for him because of some
fault that he had committed when he was with him in his house. Then said
Al-Rashid, “Harkye, O Omani!” and he replied, “Adsum, O Prince of True
Believers! May Allah ever bestow his favours upon thee!” Quoth the
Caliph, “Draw back yonder curtain.” Thereupon Abu al-Hasan drew back the
curtain from the recess and was confounded and perplexed at the mass of
money he saw there. Said Al-Rashid, “O Abu al-Hasan, whether is the
more, this money or that thou didst lose by the amulet[297]?”; and he
answered, “This is many times the greater, O Commander of the Faithful!”
Quoth the Caliph, “Bear witness, all ye who are present, that I give
this money to this young man.” So Abu al-Hasan kissed ground and was
abashed and wept before the Caliph for excess of joy. Now when he wept,
the tears ran down from his eyelids upon his cheeks and the blood
returned to its place and his face became like the moon on the night of
its fulness. Whereupon quoth the Caliph, “There is no god but _the_ God!
Glory be to Him who decreeth change upon change and is Himself the
Everlasting who changeth not!” Saying these words, he bade fetch a
mirror and showed Abu al-Hasan his face therein, which when he saw, he
prostrated himself, in gratitude to the Most High Lord. Then the Caliph
bade transport the money to Abu al-Hasan’s house and charged the young
man not to absent himself from him, so he might enjoy his company as a
cup-companion. Accordingly he paid him frequent visits, till Al-Rashid
departed to the mercy of Almighty Allah; and glory be to Him who dieth
not the Lord of the Seen and the Unseen! And among tales they tell is
one touching

-----

Footnote 276:

  _i.e._ Ishak of Mosul, for whom see vol. iv. 119. The Bresl. Edit. has
  Fazíl for Fazl.

Footnote 277:

  Abu Dalaf al-Ijili, a well-known soldier equally famed for liberality
  and culture.

Footnote 278:

  Arab. “Takhmísh,” alluding to the familiar practice of tearing face
  and hair in grief for a loss, a death, etc.

Footnote 279:

  _i.e._ When he is in the very prime of life and able to administer
  _fiers coups de canif_.

        For ladies e’en of most uneasy virtue
        Prefer a spouse whose age is short of thirty.

                                                  Don Juan 1. 62.

Footnote 280:

  Arab. “Lázuward:” see vol. iii. 33

Footnote 281:

  Arab. “Sidillah.” The Bresl. Edit. (v. 99), has, “a couch of ivory and
  ebony, whereon was that which befitted it of mattresses and cushions *
  * * * and on it five damsels.”

Footnote 282:

  _i.e._ As she untunes the lute by “pinching” the strings
  over-excitedly with her right, her other hand retunes it by turning
  the pegs.

Footnote 283:

  _i.e._ The slim cupbearer (Zephyr) and fair-faced girl (Moon) handed
  round the bubbling bowl (star).

Footnote 284:

  Arab. “Al-Sath” whence the Span. Azotea. The lines that follow are
  from the Bresl. Edit. v. 110.

Footnote 285:

  This “’Ar’ar” is probably the Callitris quadrivalvis whose resin
  (“Sandarac”) is imported as varnish from African Mogador to England.
  Also called the Thuja, it is of cypress shape, slow growing and finely
  veined in the lower part of the base. Most travellers are agreed that
  it is the Citrus-tree of Roman Mauritania, concerning which Pliny
  (xiii. 29) gives curious details, a single table costing from a
  million sesterces (£900) to 1,400,000. For other details see p. 95.
  “Morocco and the Moors,” by my late friend Dr. Leared (London: Sampson
  Low, 1876).

Footnote 286:

  _i.e._ Kings might sigh for her in vain.

Footnote 287:

  These lines are in vol. viii. 279. I quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 288:

  A most unsavoury comparison to a Persian who always connects camphor
  with the idea of a corpse.

Footnote 289:

  Arab. “Ilà má sháa’ lláh” _i.e._ as long as you like.

Footnote 290:

  _i.e._ of gramarye.

Footnote 291:

  Arab. “Ta’wíz” = the Arab Tilasm, our Talisman, a charm, an amulet;
  and in India mostly a magic square. The subject is complicated and
  occupies in Herklots some sixty pages, 222–284.

Footnote 292:

  The Bul. and Mac. Edits. give the Princess’s malady, in error, as Dáa
  al-Sudá’ (megrims), instead of Dáa al-Sar’ (epilepsy), as in the
  Bresl. Edit. The latter would mean that she is possessed by a demon,
  again the old Scriptural fancy (see vol. v. 28). The subject is highly
  fitted for romance but not for a “serious” book which ought to know
  better.

Footnote 293:

  Arab Al-’Áriz = the demon who possessed her.

Footnote 294:

  _i.e._ He hath renounced his infamous traffic.

Footnote 295:

  Alluding to the favourite Eastern saying, “The poor man hath no life.”

Footnote 296:

  In this and the following lines some change is necessary for the
  Bresl. and Mac. texts are very defective. The Arabic word here
  translated “recess” is “Aywán,” prop. a hall, an open saloon.

Footnote 297:

  _i.e._ by selling it for thirty thousand gold pieces, when he might
  have got a million for it.




                       IBRAHIM AND JAMILAH.[298]


Al-Khasíb,[299] Wazir of Egypt, had a son named Ibrahím, than whom there
was none goodlier, and of his fear for him, he suffered him not to go
forth, save to the Friday prayers. One day, as the youth was returning
from the mosque, he came upon an old man, with whom were many books; so
he lighted down from his horse and seating himself beside him, began to
turn over the tomes and examine them. In one of them he espied the
semblance of a woman which all but spoke, never was seen on the earth’s
face one more beautiful; and as this captivated his reason and
confounded his wit, he said to the old man, “O Shaykh, sell me this
picture.” The bookseller kissed ground between his hands and said, “O my
lord, ’tis thine without price.[300]” Ibrahim gave him an hundred dinars
and taking the book in which was the picture, fell to gazing upon it and
weeping night and day, abstaining from meat and drink and sleep. Then
said he in his mind, “An I ask the bookseller of the painter of this
picture, haply he will tell me; and if the original be living, I will
seek access to her; but, if it be only a picture, I will leave doting
upon it and plague myself no more for a thing which hath no real
existence.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the youth
Ibrahim said in his mind, “An I ask the bookseller of the painter of
this picture, haply he will tell me; and, if it be only a picture, I
will leave doting upon it and plague myself no more for a thing which
hath no real existence.” So on the next Friday he betook himself to the
bookseller, who sprang up to receive him, and said to him, “Oh uncle,
tell me who painted this picture.” He replied, “O my lord, a man of the
people of Baghdad painted it, by name Abu al-Kásim al-Sandaláni who
dwelleth in a quarter called Al-Karkh; but I know not of whom it is the
portraiture.” So Ibrahim left him without acquainting any of his
household with his case, and returned to the palace, after praying the
Friday prayers. Then he took a bag and filling it with gold and gems to
the value of thirty thousand dinars, waited till the morning, when he
went out, without telling any, and presently overtook a caravan. Here he
saw a Badawi and asked him, “O uncle, what distance is between me and
Baghdad?”; and the other answered, “O my son, where art thou, and where
is Baghdad[301]? Verily, between thee and it is two months’ journey.”
Quoth Ibrahim, “O nuncle, an thou wilt guide me to Baghdad, I will give
thee an hundred dinars and this mare under me that is worth other
thousand gold pieces;” and quoth the Badawi, “Allah be witness of what
we say! Thou shalt not lodge this night but with me.” So Ibrahim agreed
to this and passed the night with him. At break of dawn, the Badawi took
him and fared on with him in haste by a near road, in his greed for the
mare and the promised good; nor did they leave wayfaring till they came
to the walls of Baghdad, when said the wildling, “Praised be Allah for
safety! O my lord, this is Baghdad.” Whereat Ibrahim rejoiced with
exceeding joy and alighting from the mare, gave her to the Desert-man,
together with the hundred dinars. Then he took the bag and entering the
city walked on, enquiring for the quarter Al-Karkh and the station of
the merchants, till Destiny drave him to a by-way, wherein were ten
houses, five fronting five, and at the farther end was a two-leaved door
with a silver ring. By the gate stood two benches of marble, spread with
the finest carpets, and on one of them sat a man of handsome aspect and
reverend, clad in sumptuous clothing and attended by five Mamelukes like
moons. When the youth Ibrahim saw the street, he knew it by the
description the bookseller had given him; so he salamed to the man, who
returned his salutation and bidding him welcome, made him sit down and
asked him of his case. Quoth Ibrahim, “I am a stranger man and desire of
thy favour that thou look me out a house in this street where I may take
up my abode.” With this the other cried out, saying, “Ho,
Ghazálah[302]!”; and there came forth to him a slave-girl, who said, “At
thy service, O my lord!” Said her master, “Take some servants and fare
ye all and every to such a house and clean it and furnish it with whatso
is needful for this handsome youth.” So she went forth and did his
bidding; whilst the old man took the youth and showed him the house; and
he said, “O my lord, how much may be the rent of this house?” The other
answered, “O bright of face, I will take no rent of thee whilst thou
abidest therein.” Ibrahim thanked him for this and the old man called
another slave-girl, whereupon there came forth to him a damsel like the
sun, to whom said he, “Bring chess.” So she brought it and one of the
servants set the cloth;[303] whereupon said the Shaykh to Ibrahim, “Wilt
thou play with me?”; and he answered, “Yes.” So they played several
games and Ibrahim beat him, when his adversary exclaimed, “Well done, O
youth! Thou art indeed perfect in qualities. By Allah, there is not one
in Baghdad can beat me, and yet thou hast beaten me!” Now when they had
made ready the house and furnished it with all that was needful, the old
man delivered the keys to Ibrahim and said to him, “O my lord, wilt thou
not enter my place and eat of my bread?” He assented and walking in with
him, found it a handsome house and a goodly, decorated with gold and
full of all manner pictures and furniture galore and other things, such
as tongue faileth to set out. The old man welcomed him and called for
food, whereupon they brought a table of the make of Sana’a of Al-Yaman
and spread it with all manner rare viands, than which there was naught
costlier nor more delicious. So Ibrahim ate his sufficiency, after which
he washed his hands and proceeded to inspect the house and furniture.
Presently, he turned to look for the leather bag, but found it not and
said in himself, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great! I have eaten a morsel worth a dirham or
two and have lost a bag wherein is thirty thousand dinars’ worth: but I
seek aid of Allah!” And he was silent and could not speak——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the youth
Ibrahim saw that his bag was lost, he was silent and could not speak for
the greatness of his trouble. Presently his host brought the chess and
said to him, “Wilt thou play with me?”; and he said, “Yes.” So they
played and the old man beat him. Ibrahim cried, “Well done!” and left
playing and rose: upon which his host asked him, “What aileth thee, O
youth?” whereto he answered, “I want the bag.” Thereupon the Shaykh rose
and brought it out to him, saying, “Here it is, O my lord. Wilt thou now
return to playing with me?” “Yes,” replied Ibrahim. Accordingly they
played and the young man beat him. Quoth the Shaykh, “When thy thought
was occupied with the bag, I beat thee: but, now I have brought it back
to thee, thou beatest me. But, tell me, O my son, what countryman art
thou:” Quoth Ibrahim, “I am from Egypt,” and quoth the oldster, “And
what is the cause of thy coming to Baghdad?”; whereupon Ibrahim brought
out the portrait and said to him, “Know, O uncle, that I am the son of
Al-Khasib, Wazir of Egypt, and I saw with a bookseller this picture,
which bewildered my wit. I asked him who painted it and he said, “He who
wrought it is a man, Abu al-Kasim al-Sandalani hight, who dwelleth in a
street called the Street of Saffron in the Karkh quarter of Baghdad.” So
I took with me somewhat of money and came hither alone, none knowing of
my case; and I desire of the fulness of thy favour that thou direct me
to Abu al-Kasim, so I may ask him of the cause of his painting this
picture and whose portrait it is. And whatsoever he desireth of me, I
will give him that same.” Said his host, “By Allah, O my son, I am Abu
al-Kasim al-Sandalani, and this is a prodigious thing how Fate hath thus
driven thee to me!” Now when Ibrahim heard these words, he rose to him
and embraced him and kissed his head and hands, saying, “Allah upon
thee, tell me whose portrait it is!” The other replied, “I hear and I
obey,” and rising, opened a closet and brought out a number of books,
wherein he had painted the same picture. Then said he, “Know, O my son,
that the original of this portrait is my cousin, the daughter of my
father’s brother, whose name is Abú al-Lays.[304] She dwelleth in
Bassorah of which city her father is governor, and her name is
Jamílah—the beautiful. There is not on the face of the earth a fairer
than she; but she is averse from men and cannot hear the word ‘man’
pronounced in her presence. Now I once repaired to my uncle, to the
intent that he should marry me to her, and was lavish of wealth to him;
but he would not consent thereto: and when his daughter knew of this she
was indignant and sent to me to say, amongst other things:—An thou have
wit, tarry not in this town; else wilt thou perish and thy sin shall be
on thine own neck.[305] For she is a virago of viragoes. Accordingly I
left Bassorah, broken-hearted, and limned this likeness of her in books
and scattered them abroad in various lands, so haply they might fall
into the hands of a comely youth like thyself and he contrive access to
her and peradventure she might fall in love with him, purposing to take
a promise of him that, when he should have possession of her, he would
show her to me, though I look but for a moment from afar off.” When
Ibrahim son of Al-Khasib heard these words, he bowed his head awhile in
thought and Al-Sandalani said to him, “O my son, I have not seen in
Baghdad a fairer than thou, and meseems that, when she seeth thee, she
will love thee. Art thou willing, therefore, in case thou be united with
her and get possession of her, to show her to me, if I look but for a
moment from afar?” Ibrahim replied, “Yes;” and the painter rejoined,
“This being so, tarry with me till thou set out.” But the youth
retorted, “I cannot tarry longer; for my heart with love of her is all
afire.” “Have patience three days,” said the Shaykh, “till I fit thee
out a ship, wherein thou mayst fare to Bassorah.” Accordingly he waited
whilst the old man equipped him a craft and stored therein all that he
needed of meat and drink and so forth. When the three days were past, he
said to Ibrahim, “Make thee ready for the voyage; for I have prepared
thee a packet-boat furnished with all thou requirest. The craft is my
property and the seamen are of my servants. In the vessel is what will
suffice thee till thy return, and I have charged the crew to serve thee
till thou come back in safety.” Thereupon Ibrahim farewelled his host
and embarking, sailed down the river till he came to Bassorah, where he
pulled out an hundred dinars for the sailors, but they said, “We have
gotten our hire of our lord.” However he replied, “Take this by way of
largesse; and I will not acquaint him therewith.” So they took it and
blessed him. Then the youth landed and entering the town asked, “Where
do the merchants lodge?” and was answered, “In a Khan called the Khan of
Hamadán.”[306] So he walked to the market wherein stood the Khan, and
all eyes were fixed upon him and men’s sight was attracted to him by
reason of his exceeding beauty and loveliness. He entered the
caravanserai, with one of the sailors in his company; and, asking for
the porter, was directed to an aged man of reverend aspect. He saluted
him and the doorkeeper returned his greeting; after which Ibrahim said
to him, “O uncle, hast thou a nice chamber?” He replied, “Yes,” and
taking him and the sailor, opened to them a handsome room decorated with
gold, and said, “O youth, this chamber befitteth thee.” Ibrahim pulled
out two dinars and gave them to him, saying, “Take these to
key-money.”[307] And the porter took them and blessed him. Then the
youth Ibrahim sent the sailor back to the ship and entered the room,
where the doorkeeper abode with him and served him, saying, “O my lord,
thy coming hath brought us joy!” Ibrahim gave him a dinar, and said,
“Buy us herewith bread and meat and sweetmeats and wine.” Accordingly
the doorkeeper went to the market; and, buying ten dirhams’ worth of
victual, brought it back to Ibrahim and gave him the other ten dirhams.
But he cried to him, “Spend them on thyself;” whereat the porter
rejoiced with passing joy. Then he ate a scone with a little
kitchen[308] and gave the rest to the concierge, adding, “Carry this to
the people of thy household.” The porter carried it to his family and
said to them, “Methinketh there is not on the face of the earth a more
generous than the young man who has come to lodge with us this day, nor
yet a pleasanter than he. An he abide with us, we shall grow rich.” Then
he returned to Ibrahim and found him weeping; so he sat down and began
to rub[309] his feet and kiss them, saying, “O my lord, wherefore
weepest thou? May Allah not make thee weep!” Said Ibrahim, “O uncle, I
have a mind to drink with thee this night;” and the porter replied,
“Hearing and obeying!” So he gave him five dinars and said, “Buy us
fresh fruit and wine;” and presently added other five, saying, “With
these buy also for us dessert[310] and flowers and five fat fowls and
bring me a lute.” The doorkeeper went out and, buying what he had
ordered, said to his wife, “Strain this wine and cook us this food and
look thou dress it daintily, for this young man overwhelmeth us with his
bounties.” She did as he bade her, to the utmost of desire; and he took
the victuals and carried them to Ibrahim son of the Sultan.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that then they ate and
drank and made merry, and Ibrahim wept and repeated the following
verses:—

 O my friend! an I rendered my life, my sprite, ✿ My wealth and whatever
    the world can unite;
 Nay, th’ Eternal Garden and Paradise[311] ✿ For an hour of Union my
    heart would buy’t!

Then he sobbed a great sob and fell down a-swoon. The porter sighed, and
when he came to himself, he said to him, “O my lord, what is it gars
thee weep and who is she to whom thou alludest in these verses? Indeed,
she cannot be but as dust to thy feet.” But Ibrahim arose and for all
reply brought out a parcel of the richest raiment that women wear and
said to him, “Take this to thy Harim.” So he carried it to his wife and
she returned with him to the young man’s lodging and behold, she found
him weeping, quoth the doorkeeper to him, “Verily, thou breakest our
hearts! Tell us what fair one thou desirest, and she shall be naught
save thy handmaid.” Quoth he, “O uncle, know that I am the son of
Al-Khasib, Wazir of Egypt, and I am enamoured of Jamilah, daughter of
Abu al-Lays the Governor.” Exclaimed the porters wife, “Allah! Allah! O
my brother, leave this talk, lest any hear of us and we perish. Verily
there is not on earth’s face a more masterful than she, nor may any name
to her the word ‘man,’ for she is averse from men. Wherefore, O my son,
turn from her to other than her.” Now when Ibrahim heard this, he wept
with sore weeping and the doorkeeper said to him, “I have nothing save
my life; but that I will risk for thy love and find thee a means of
winning thy will.” Then the twain went out from him, and on the morrow
he betook himself to the Hammam and donned a suit of royal raiment,
after which he returned to his lodging, when behold, the porter and his
wife came in to him and said, “Know, O my lord, that there is a
humpbacked tailor here who seweth for the lady Jamilah. Go thou to him
and acquaint him with thy case; haply he will show thee the way of
attaining thine aim.” So the youth Ibrahim arose and betaking himself to
the shop of the humpbacked tailor, went in to him and found with him ten
Mamelukes as they were moons. He saluted them with the salam, and they
returned his greeting and bade him welcome and made him sit down; and
indeed they rejoiced in him and were amazed at his charms and
loveliness, especially the hunchback who was confounded at his beauty of
form and favour. Presently he said to the Gobbo, “I desire that thou sew
me up my pocket;” and the tailor took a needleful of silk and sewed up
his pocket which he had torn purposely; whereupon Ibrahim gave him five
dinars and returned to his lodging. Quoth the tailor, “What thing have I
done for this youth, that he should give me five gold pieces?” And he
passed the night, pondering his beauty and generosity. And when morning
morrowed Ibrahim repaired to the shop and saluted the tailor, who
returned his salam and welcomed him and made much of him. Then he sat
down and said to the hunchback, “O uncle, sew up my pocket, for I have
rent it again.” Replied the tailor, “On my head and eyes, O my son,” and
sewed it up; whereupon Ibrahim gave him ten ducats and he took them,
amazed at his beauty and generosity. Then said he, “By Allah, O youth,
for this conduct of thine needs must be a cause, this is no matter of
sewing up a pocket. But tell me the truth of thy case. An thou be in
love with one of these boys,[312] by Allah, there is not among them a
comelier than thou, for they are each and every as the dust at thy feet;
and behold, they are all thy slaves and at thy command. Or if it be
other than this, tell me.” Replied Ibrahim, “O uncle, this is no place
for talk, for my case is wondrous and my affair marvellous.” Rejoined
the tailor, “An it be so, come with me to a place apart.” So saying, he
rose up in haste and took the youth by the hand and carrying him into a
chamber behind the shop, said, “Now tell me thy tale, O youth!”
Accordingly Ibrahim related his story first and last to the tailor, who
was amazed at his speech and cried, “O youth, fear Allah for
thyself:[313] indeed she of whom thou speakest is a virago and averse
from men. Wherefore, O my brother, do thou guard thy tongue, else thou
wilt destroy thyself.” When Ibrahim heard the hunchback’s words, he wept
with sore weeping and clinging to the tailor’s skirts said, “Help me, O
my uncle, or I am a dead man; for I have left my kingdom and the kingdom
of my father and grandfather and am become a stranger in the lands and
lonely; nor can I endure without her.” When the tailor saw how it was
with him, he pitied him and said, “O my son, I have but my life and that
I will venture for thy love, for thou makest my heart ache. But by
to-morrow I will contrive thee somewhat whereby thy heart shall be
solaced.” Ibrahim blessed him and returning to the khan, told the
doorkeeper what the hunchback had said, and he answered, “Indeed, he
hath dealt kindly with thee.” Next morning, the youth donned his richest
dress and taking a purse of gold, repaired to the Gobbo and saluted him.
Then he sat down and said, “O uncle, keep thy word with me.” Quoth the
hunchback, “Arise forthright and take thee three fat fowls and three
ounces[314] of sugar-candy and two small jugs which do thou fill with
wine; also a cup. Lay all these in a budget[315] and to-morrow, after
the morning-prayers, take boat with them, saying to the boatman:—I would
have thee row me down the river below Bassorah. An he say to thee, “I
cannot go farther than a parasang” do thou answer:—As thou wilt; but,
when he shall have come so far, lure him on with money to carry thee
farther; and the first flower-garden thou wilt descry after this will be
that of the lady Jamilah. Go up to the gate as soon as thou espiest it
and there thou wilt see two high steps, carpeted with brocade, and
seated thereon a Quasimodo like me. Do thou complain to him of thy case
and crave his favour: belike he will have compassion on thy condition
and bring thee to the sight of her, though but for a moment from afar.
This is all I can do for thee; and unless he be moved to pity for thee,
we be dead men, I and thou. This then is my rede and the matter rests
with the Almighty.” Quoth Ibrahim, “I seek aid of Allah; whatso He
willeth becometh; and there is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah!” Then he left the hunchback tailor and returned to his lodging
where, taking the things his adviser had named, he laid them in a bag.
On the morrow, as soon as it was day, he went down to Tigris bank, where
he found a boatman asleep; so he awoke him and giving him ten sequins,
bade him row him down the river below Bassorah. Quoth the man, “O my
lord, it must be on condition that I go no farther than a parasang; for
if I pass that distance by a span, I am a lost man, and thou too.” And
quoth Ibrahim, “Be it as thou wilt.” Thereupon he took him and dropped
down the river with him till he drew near the flower-garden, when he
said to him, “O my son, I can go no farther; for, if I pass this limit,
we are both dead men.” Hereat Ibrahim pulled out other ten dinars and
gave them to him, saying, “Take this spending-money and better thy case
therewithal.” The boatman was ashamed to refuse him and fared on with
him crying, “I commit the affair to Allah the Almighty!”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
youth Ibrahim gave the boatman other ten dinars, the man took them,
saying, “I commit the affair to Allah the Almighty!” and fared on with
him down stream. When they came to the flower-garden, the youth sprang
out of the boat, in his joy, a spring of a spear’s cast from the land,
and cast himself down, whilst the boatman turned and fled. Then Ibrahim
fared forward and found all as it had been described by the Gobbo: he
also saw the garden-gate open, and in the porch a couch of ivory,
whereon sat a humpbacked man of pleasant presence, clad in gold-laced
clothes and hending in hand a silvern mace plated with gold. So he
hastened up to him and seizing his hand kissed it; whereupon asked the
hunchback, “Who art thou and whence comest thou and who brought thee
hither, O my son?” And indeed, when the man saw Ibrahim Khasib-son, he
was amazed at his beauty. He answered, “O uncle, I am an ignorant lad
and a stranger;” and he wept. The hunchback had pity on him and taking
him up on the couch, wiped away his tears and said to him, “No harm
shall come to thee. An thou be in debt, may Allah settle thy debt: and
if thou be in fear, may Allah appease thy fear!” Replied Ibrahim, “O
uncle, I am neither in fear nor am I in debt, but have money in plenty,
thanks to Allah.” Rejoined the other, “Then, O my son, what is thy need
that thou venturest thyself and thy loveliness to a place wherein is
destruction?” So he told him his story and disclosed to him his case,
whereupon the man bowed his head earthwards awhile, then said to him,
“Was he who directed thee to me the humpbacked tailor?” “Yes,” answered
Ibrahim, and the keeper said, “This is my brother, and he is a blessed
man!” presently adding, “But, O my son, had not affection for thee sunk
into my heart, and had I not taken compassion on thee, verily thou wert
lost, thou and my brother and the doorkeeper of the Khan and his wife.
For know that this flower-garden hath not its like on the face of the
earth and that it is called the Garden of the Wild Heifer,[316] nor hath
any entered it in all my life long, save the Sultan and myself and its
mistress Jamilah; and I have dwelt here twenty years and never yet saw
any else attain to this stead. Every forty days the Lady Jamilah cometh
hither in a bark and landeth in the midst of her women, under a canopy
of satin, whose skirts ten damsels hold up with hooks of gold, whilst
she entereth, and I see nothing of her. Natheless, I have but my life
and I will risk it for the sake of thee.” Herewith Ibrahim kissed his
hand and the keeper said to him, “Sit by me, till I devise somewhat for
thee.” Then he took him by the hand and carried him into the
flower-garden which, when he saw, he deemed it Eden, for therein were
trees intertwining and palms high towering and waters welling and birds
with various voices carolling. Presently, the keeper brought him to a
domed pavilion and said to him, “This is where the Lady Jamilah
sitteth.” So he examined it and found it of the rarest of pleasances,
full of all manner paintings in gold and lapis lazuli. It had four
doors, whereto man mounted by five steps, and in its centre was a
cistern of water, to which led down steps of gold all set with precious
stones. Amiddlewards the basin was a fountain of gold, with figures,
large and small, and water jetting in gerbes from their mouths; and
when, by reason of the issuing forth of the water, they attuned
themselves to various tones, it seemed to the hearer as though he were
in Eden. Round the pavilion ran a channel of water, turning a Persian
wheel[317] whose buckets[318] were silvern covered with brocade. To the
left of the pavilion[319] was a lattice of silver, giving upon a green
park, wherein were all manner wild cattle and gazelles and hares, and on
the right hand was another lattice, overlooking a meadow full of birds
of all sorts, warbling in various voices and bewildering the hearers’
wits. Seeing all this the youth was delighted and sat down in the
doorway by the gardener, who said to him, “How seemeth to thee my
garden?” Quoth Ibrahim, “’Tis the Paradise of the world!” Whereat the
gardener laughed. Then he rose and was absent awhile and presently
returned with a tray, full of fowls and quails and other dainties
including sweetmeats of sugar, which he set before Ibrahim, saying, “Eat
thy sufficiency.” So he ate his fill, whereat the keeper rejoiced and
cried, “By Allah, this is the fashion of Kings and sons of Kings[320]!”
Then said he, “O Ibrahim, what hast thou in yonder bag?” Accordingly he
opened it before him and the keeper said, “Carry it with thee; ’twill
serve thee when the Lady Jamilah cometh; for when once she is come, I
shall not be able to bring thee food.” Then he rose and taking the youth
by the hand, brought him to a place fronting the pavilion, where he made
him an arbour[321] among the trees and said to him, “Get thee up here,
and when she cometh thou wilt see her and she will not see thee. This is
the best I can do for thee and on Allah be our dependence! Whenas she
singeth, drink thou to her singing, and whenas she departeth thou shalt
return in safety whence thou camest, Inshallah!” Ibrahim thanked him and
would have kissed his hand, but he forbade him. Then the youth laid the
bag in the arbour and the keeper said to him, “O Ibrahim, walk about and
take thy pleasure in the garth and eat of its fruits, for thy mistress’s
coming is appointed to be to-morrow.” So he solaced himself in the
garden and ate of its fruits; after which he nighted with the keeper.
And when morning morrowed and showed its sheen and shone, he prayed the
dawn-prayer and presently the keeper came to him with a pale face, and
said to him, “Rise, O my son, and go up into the arbour: for the
slave-girls are come to order the place, and she cometh after
them;”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the keeper
came to Ibrahim Khasib-son in the Garden he said to him, “Rise, O my
son, and go up into the arbour; for the slave-girls are come to order
the place and she cometh after them. So beware lest thou spit or sneeze
or blow thy nose[322]; else we are dead men, I and thou.” Hereupon
Ibrahim rose and went up into his nest, whilst the keeper fared forth,
saying, “Allah grant thee safety, O my son!” Presently behold, up came
four slave-girls, whose like none ever saw, and entering the pavilion,
doffed their outer dresses and washed it. Then they sprinkled it with
rose-water and incensed it with ambergris and aloes-wood and spread it
with brocade. After these came fifty other damsels, with instruments of
music, and amongst them Jamilah, within a canopy of red brocade, whose
skirts the handmaidens bore up with hooks of gold, till she had entered
the pavilion, so that Ibrahim saw naught of her nor of her raiment. So
he said to himself, “By Allah, all my travail is lost! But needs must I
wait to see how the case will be.” Then the damsels brought meat and
drink and they ate and drank and washed their hands, after which they
set her a royal chair and she sat down; and all played on instruments of
music and with ravishing voices incomparably sang. Presently, out ran an
old woman, a duenna, and clapped hands and danced, whilst the girls
pulled her about, till the curtain was lifted and forth came Jamilah
laughing. Ibrahim gazed at her and saw that she was clad in costly robes
and ornaments, and on her head was a crown set with pearls and gems.
About her long fair neck she wore a necklace of unions and her waist was
clasped with a girdle of chrysolite bugles, with tassels of rubies and
pearls. The damsels kissed ground before her, and, “When I considered
her” (quoth Ibrahim), “I took leave of my senses and wit and I was dazed
and my thought was confounded for amazement at the sight of loveliness
whose like is not on the face of the earth. So I fell into a swoon and
coming to myself, weeping-eyed, recited these two couplets:—

 I see thee and close not mine eyes for fear ✿ Lest their lids prevent me
    beholding thee:
 An I gazed with mine every glance these eyne ✿ Ne’er could sight all the
    loveliness moulding thee.”

Then said the old Kahramánah[323] to the girls, “Let ten of you arise
and dance and sing.” And Ibrahim when looking at them said in himself,
“I wish the lady Jamilah would dance.” When the handmaidens had made an
end of their pavane, they gathered round the Princess and said to her,
“O my lady, we long for thee to dance amongst us, so the measure of our
joy may be fulfilled, for never saw we a more delicious day than this.”
Quoth Ibrahim to himself, “Doubtless the gates of Heaven are open[324]
and Allah hath granted my prayer.” Then the damsels bussed her feet and
said to her, “By Allah, we never saw thee broadened of breast as
to-day!” Nor did they cease exciting her, till she doffed her outer
dress and stood in a shift of cloth of gold,[325] broidered with various
jewels, showing breasts which stood out like pomegranates and unveiling
a face as it were the moon on the night of fulness. Then she began to
dance, and Ibrahim beheld motions he had never in his life seen their
like, for she showed such wondrous skill and marvellous invention, that
she made men forget the dancing of bubbles in wine-cups and called to
mind the inclining of the turbands from head[326]-tops: even as saith of
her the poet[327]:—

 A dancer whose form is like branch of Bán! ✿ Flies my soul well nigh as
    his steps I greet:
 While he dances no foot stands still and meseems ✿ That the fire of my
    heart is beneath his feet.

And as quoth another[328]:—

 A dancer whose figure is like a willow-branch: my soul almost quitteth
    me at the sight of her movements.
 No foot can remain stationary at her dancing, she is as though the fire
    of my heart were beneath her feet.

Quoth Ibrahim:—As I gazed upon her, she chanced to look up and caught
sight of me whereupon her face changed and she said to her women, “Sing
ye till I come back to you.” Then, taking up a knife half a cubit long,
she made towards me, crying, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might
save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!” Now when I saw this, I
well-nigh lost my wits; but, whenas she drew near me and face met face,
the knife dropped from her hand, and she exclaimed, “Glory to Him who
changeth men’s hearts!” Then said she to me, “O youth, be of good cheer,
for thou art safe from what thou dost fear!” Whereupon I fell to
weeping, and she to wiping away my tears with her hand and saying, “O
youth, tell me who thou art, and what brought thee hither.” I kissed the
ground before her and seized her skirt; and she said, “No harm shall
come to thee; for, by Allah, no male hath ever filled mine eyes[329] but
thyself! Tell me, then, who thou art.” So I recited to her my story from
first to last, whereat she marvelled and said to me, “O my lord, I
conjure thee by Allah, tell me if thou be Ibrahim bin al-Khasib?” I
replied, “Yes!” and she threw herself upon me, saying, “O my lord, ’twas
thou madest me averse from men; for, when I heard that there was in the
land of Egypt a youth than whom there was none more beautiful on earth’s
face, I fell in love with thee by report, and my heart became enamoured
of thee, for that which reached me of thy passing comeliness, so that I
was, in respect of thee, even as saith the poet:—

 Mine ear forewent mine eye in loving him; ✿ For ear shall love before
    the eye at times.

“So praised be Allah who hath shown thy face! But, by the Almighty, had
it been other than thou, I had crucified the keeper of the garden and
the porter of the Khan and the tailor and him who had recourse to them!”
And presently she added, “But how shall I contrive for somewhat thou
mayst eat, without the knowledge of my women?” Quoth I, “With me is
somewhat we may eat and drink;” and I opened the bag before her. She
took a fowl and began to morsel me and I to morsel her; which when I
saw, it seemed to me that this was a dream. Then I brought out wine and
we drank, what while the damsels sang on; nor did they leave to do thus
from morn to noon, when she rose and said, “Go now and get thee a boat
and await me in such a place, till I come to thee: for I have no
patience left to brook severance.” I replied, “O my lady, I have with me
a ship of my own, whose crew are in my hire, and they await me.”
Rejoined she, “This is as we would have it,” and returning to her
women,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Lady
Jamilah returned to her women, she said to them, “Come, let us go back
to our palace.” They replied, “Why should we return now, seeing that we
use to abide here three days?” Quoth she, “I feel an exceeding
oppression in myself, as though I were sick, and I fear lest this
increase upon me.”[330] So they answered, “We hear and obey,” and
donning their walking-dresses went down to the river-bank and embarked
in a boat; whereupon behold, the keeper of the garden came up to Ibrahim
and said to him, knowing not what had happened, “O Ibrahim, thou hast
not had the luck to enjoy the sight of her, and I fear lest she have
seen thee, for ’tis her wont to tarry here three days.” Replied Ibrahim,
“She saw me not nor I her; for she came not forth of the pavilion.”[331]
Rejoined the keeper, “True, O my son, for, had she seen thee, we were
both dead men: but abide with me till she come again next week, and thou
shalt see her and take thy fill of looking at her.” Replied the Prince,
“O my lord, I have with me money and fear for it: I also left men behind
me and I dread lest they take advantage of my absence.”[332] He
retorted, “O my son ’tis grievous to me to part with thee;” and he
embraced and farewelled him. Then Ibrahim returned to the Khan where he
lodged, and foregathering with the doorkeeper, took of him all his
property and the porter said, “Good news, Inshallah!”[333] But Ibrahim
said, “I have found no way to my want, and now I am minded to return to
my people.” Whereupon the porter wept; then taking up his baggage, he
carried them to the ship and abade him adieu. Ibrahim repaired to the
place which Jamilah had appointed him and awaited her there till it grew
dark, when, behold, she came up, disguised as a bully-boy with rounded
beard and waist bound with a girdle. In one hand she held a bow and
arrows and in the other a bared blade, and she asked him, “Art thou
Ibrahim, son of Al-Khasib, lord of Egypt?” “He I am,” answered the
Prince; and she said, “What ne’er-do-well art thou, who comest to
debauch the daughters of Kings? Come: speak with the Sultan.”[334]
Therewith (quoth Ibrahim) I fell down in a swoon and the sailors
died[335] in their skins for fear; but, when she saw what had betided
me, she pulled off her beard and throwing down her sword, ungirdled her
waist whereupon I knew her for the Lady Jamilah and said to her, “By
Allah, thou hast rent my heart in sunder!”[336] adding to the boatmen,
“Hasten the vessel’s speed.” So they shook out the sail and putting off,
fared on with all diligence; nor was it many days ere we made Baghdad,
where suddenly we saw a ship lying by the river-bank. When her sailors
saw us, they cried out to our crew, saying, “Ho, such an one and such an
one, we give you joy of your safety!” Then they drave their ship against
our craft and I looked and in the other boat beheld Abu al-Kasim
al-Sandalani who when he saw us exclaimed, “This is what I sought: go ye
in God’s keeping; as for me, I have a need to be satisfied!” Then he
turned to me and said, “Praised be Allah for safety! Hast thou
accomplished thine errand?” I replied, “Yes!” Now Abu al-Kasim had a
flambeau before him; so he brought it near our boat,[337] and when
Jamilah saw him, she was troubled and her colour changed: but, when he
saw her, he said, “Fare ye in Allah’s safety. I am bound to Bassorah, on
business for the Sultan; but the gift is for him who is present.”[338]
Then he brought out a box of sweetmeats, wherein was Bhang and threw it
into our boat: whereupon quoth I to Jamilah, “O coolth of mine eyes, eat
of this.” But she wept and said, “O Ibrahim, wottest thou who that is?”
and said I, “Yes, ’tis such an one.” Replied she, “He is my first
cousin, son of my father’s brother[339] who sought me aforetime in
marriage of my sire; but I would not accept of him. And now he is gone
to Bassorah and most like he will tell my father of us.” I rejoined, “O
my lady he will not reach Bassorah, till we are at Mosul.” But we knew
not what lurked for us in the Secret Purpose. Then (continued Ibrahim) I
ate of the sweetmeat, but hardly had it reached my stomach when I smote
the ground with my head; and lay there till near dawn, when I sneezed
and the Bhang issued from my nostrils. With this, I opened my eyes and
found myself naked and cast out among ruins; so I buffeted my face and
said in myself, “Doubtless this is a trick Al-Sandalani hath played me.”
But I knew not whither I should wend, for I had upon me naught save my
bag-trousers.[340] However, I rose and walked on a little, till I
suddenly espied the Chief of Police coming towards me, with a posse of
men with swords and targes;[341] whereat I took fright and seeing a
ruined Hammam hid myself there. Presently, my foot stumbled upon
something; so I put my hand to it, and it became befouled with blood. I
wiped my hand upon my bag-trousers, unknowing what had befouled it, and
put it out a second time, when it fell upon a corpse whose head came up
in my hand. I threw it down, saying, “There is no Majesty and there is
no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!”; and I took refuge in
one of the corner-cabinets of the Hammam. Presently the Wali stopped at
the bath-door and said, “Enter this place and search.” So ten of them
entered with cressets, and I of my fear retired behind a wall and
looking upon the corpse, saw it to be that of a young lady[342] with a
face like the full moon; and her head lay on one side and her body clad
in costly raiment on the other. When I saw this, my heart fluttered with
affright. Then the Chief of Police entered and said, “Search the corners
of the bath.” So they entered the place wherein I was, and one of them
seeing me, came up hending in hand a knife half a cubit long. When he
drew near me, he cried, “Glory be to God, the Creator of this fair face!
O youth, whence art thou?” Then he took me by the hand and said, “O
youth, why slewest thou this woman?” Said I, “By Allah, I slew her not,
nor wot I who slew her, and I entered not this place but in fear of
you!” And I told him my case, adding, “Allah upon thee, do me no wrong,
for I am in concern for myself!” Then he took me and carried me to the
Wali who, seeing the marks of blood on my hand said, “This needeth no
proof: strike off his head!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ibrahim
continued:—Then they carried me before the Wali and he, seeing the
bloodstains on my hand, cried, “This needeth no proof: strike off his
head!” Now hearing these words, I wept with sore weeping the tears
streaming from my eyes and recited these two couplets[343]:—

 We trod the steps that for us were writ, ✿ And whose steps are written
    he needs must tread;
 And whose death is decreed in one land to be ✿ He ne’er shall perish in
    other stead.

Then I sobbed a single sob and fell a-swoon; and the headsman’s heart
was moved to ruth for me and he exclaimed, “By Allah, this is no
murtherer’s face!” But the Chief said, “Smite his neck.” So they seated
me on the rug of blood and bound my eyes; after which the sworder drew
his sword and asking leave of the Wali, was about to strike off my head,
whilst I cried out, “Alas, my strangerhood!” when lo and behold! I heard
a noise of horse coming up and a voice calling aloud, “Leave him! Stay
thy hand, O Sworder!” Now there was for this a wondrous reason and a
marvellous cause; and ’twas thus. Al-Khasib, Wazir of Egypt, had sent
his Head Chamberlain to the Caliph Harun al-Rashid with presents and a
letter, saying, “My son hath been missing this year past, and I hear
that he is in Baghdad; wherefore I crave of the bounty of the Viceregent
of Allah that he make search for tidings of him and do his endeavour to
find him and send him back to me with the Chamberlain.” When the Caliph
read the missive, he commanded the Chief of Police to search out the
truth of the matter, and he ceased not to enquire after Ibrahim, till it
was told him that he was at Bassorah, whereupon he informed the Caliph,
who wrote a letter to the viceroy and giving it to the Chamberlain of
Egypt, bade him repair to Bassorah and take with him a company of the
Wazir’s followers. So, of his eagerness to find the son of his lord, the
Chamberlain set out forthright and happened by the way upon Ibrahim, as
he stood on the rug of blood. When the Wali saw the Chamberlain, he
recognised him and alighted to him and as he asked, “What young man is
that and what is his case?” The Chief told him how the matter was and
the Chamberlain said (and indeed he knew him not for the son of the
Sultan[344]) “Verily this young man hath not the face of one who
murthereth.” And he bade loose his bonds; so they loosed him and the
Chamberlain said, “Bring him to me!” and they brought him, but the
officer knew him not his beauty being all gone for the horrors he had
endured. Then the Chamberlain said to him, “O youth, tell me thy case
and how cometh this slain woman with thee.” Ibrahim looked at him and
knowing him, said to him, “Woe to thee! Dost thou not know me? Am I not
Ibrahim, son of thy lord? Haply thou art come in quest of me.” With this
the Chamberlain considered him straitly and knowing him right well,
threw himself at his feet; which when the Wali saw, his colour changed;
and the Chamberlain cried to him, “Fie upon thee, O tyrant! Was it thine
intent to slay the son of my master Al-Khasib, Wazir of Egypt?” The
Chief of Police kissed his skirt, saying “O my lord,[345] how should I
know him? We found him in this plight and saw the girl lying slain by
his side.” Rejoined the Chamberlain, “Out on thee! Thou art not fit for
the office. This is a lad of fifteen and he hath not slain a sparrow; so
how should he be a murtherer? Why didst thou not have patience with him
and question him of his case?” Then the Chamberlain and the Wali cried
to the men, “Make search for the young lady’s murtherer.” So they
re-entered the bath and finding him, brought him to the Chief of Police,
who carried him to the Caliph and acquainted him with that which had
occurred. Al-Rashid bade slay the slayer and sending for Ibrahim, smiled
in his face and said to him, “Tell me thy tale and that which hath
betided thee.” So he recounted to him his story from first to last, and
it was grievous to the Caliph, who called Masrur his Sworder, and said
to him, “Go straightway and fall upon the house of Abu al-Kasim
al-Sandalani and bring me him and the young lady.” The eunuch went forth
at once and breaking into the house, found Jamilah bound with her own
hair and nigh upon death; so he loosed her and taking the painter,
carried them both to the Caliph, who marvelled at Jamilah’s beauty. Then
he turned to Al-Sandalani and said, “Take him and cut off his hands,
wherewith he beat this young lady; then crucify him and deliver his
monies and possessions to Ibrahim.” They did his bidding, and as they
were thus, behold, in came Abu al-Lays governor of Bassorah, the Lady
Jamilah’s father, seeking aid of the Caliph against Ibrahim bin
al-Khasib Wazir of Egypt and complaining to him that the youth had taken
his daughter. Quoth Al-Rashid, “He hath been the means of delivering her
from torture and slaughter.” Then he sent for Ibrahim, and when he came,
he said to Abu al-Lays, “Wilt thou not accept of this young man, son of
the Soldan of Egypt, as husband to thy daughter?” Replied Abu al-Lays,
“I hear and I obey Allah and thee, O Commander of the Faithful;”
whereupon the Caliph summoned the Kazi and the witnesses and married the
young lady to Ibrahim. Furthermore, he gave him all Al-Sandalani’s
wealth and equipped him for his return to his own country, where he
abode with Jamilah in the utmost of bliss and the most perfect of
happiness, till there came to them the Destroyer of delights and the
Sunderer of societies; and glory be to the Living who dieth not! They
also relate, O auspicious King, a tale anent

-----

Footnote 298:

  The tale is not in the Bresl. Edit.

Footnote 299:

  Al-Khasíb (= the fruitful) was the son of ’Abd al-Hamíd and intendant
  of the tribute of Egypt under Harun al-Rashid, but neither Lord nor
  Sultan. Lane (iii. 669) quotes three couplets in his honour by Abu
  Nowás from p. 119 of “Elmacini (Al-Makín) Historia Saracenica.”

  If our camel visit not the land of Al-Khasib, what man after Al-Khasib
     shall they visit?
  For generosity is not his neighbour; nor hath it sojourned near him;
     but generosity goeth wherever he goeth:
  He is a man who purchaseth praise with his wealth, and who knoweth
     that the periods of Fortune revolve.

Footnote 300:

  The old story “Alà júdi-k” = upon thy generosity, which means at least
  ten times the price.

Footnote 301:

  _i.e._ The distance is enormous.

Footnote 302:

  A gazelle; but here the slave-girl’s name.

Footnote 303:

  See vol. ii. 104. Herklots (Pl. vii. fig. 2) illustrates the cloth
  used in playing the Indian game, Pachísí. The “board” is rather
  European than Oriental, but it has of late years spread far and wide,
  especially the backgammon board.

Footnote 304:

  _i.e._ “Father of the Lion.”

Footnote 305:

  Or as we should say, “Thy blood will be on thine own head.”

Footnote 306:

  Called after the famous town in Persian Mesopotamia which however is
  spelt with the lesser aspirate. See p. 144. The Geographical works of
  Sádik-i-Ispaháni, London; Oriental Transl. Fund, 1882. Hamdan (with
  the greater aspirate) and Hamdun mean only the member masculine, which
  may be a delicate piece of chaff for the gallery.

Footnote 307:

  Arab. “Hulwán al-miftáh,” for which see vol. vii. 212. Mr. Payne
  compares it with the French denier à Dieu, given to the concierge on
  like occasions.

Footnote 308:

  Arab. ’Udm, a relish, the Scotch “kitchen,” Lat. Opsonium, Ital.
  Companatico and our “by-meat.” See vol. iv. 128.

Footnote 309:

  Arab. “Kabasa” = he shampoo’d. See vol. ii. 17.

Footnote 310:

  Arab. “Nukl.” See supra p. 177.

Footnote 311:

  Arab. Jannat al-Khuld and Firdaus, two of the Heavens repeatedly
  noticed.

Footnote 312:

  The naïveté is purely Horatian, that is South European versus North
  European.

Footnote 313:

  _i.e._ “Have some regard for thy life.”

Footnote 314:

  Arab. “Awák” plur. of Úkiyyah a word known throughout the Moslem East.
  As an ounce it weighs differently in every country and in Barbary
  (Mauritania) which we call Morocco, it is a nominal coin containing
  twelve Flús (fulús) now about = a penny. It is a direct descendant
  from the “Uk” or “Wuk” (ounce) of the hieroglyphs (See Sharpe’s Egypt
  or any other Manual) and first appeared in Europe as the Greek οὐγκία.

Footnote 315:

  Arab. “Kárah” usually a large bag.

Footnote 316:

  Arab. “Lúlúah,” which may mean the Union-pearl; but here used in the
  sense of “wild cow,” the bubalus antelope, alluding to the _farouche_
  nature of Miss Jamilah. We are also told infrà that the park was full
  of “Wuhúsh” = wild cattle.

Footnote 317:

  Arab. “Sákiyah,” the venerable old Persian wheel, for whose music see
  Pilgrimage ii. 198. But “Sakiyah” is also applied, as here, to the
  water-channel which turns the wheel.

Footnote 318:

  Arab. “Kawádís,” plur. of “Kádús,” the pots round the rim of the
  Persian wheel: usually they are of coarse pottery.

Footnote 319:

  In the text “Sákiyah” a manifest error for “Kubbah.”

Footnote 320:

  Easterns greatly respect a _belle fourchette_, especially when the
  eater is a lover.

Footnote 321:

  Arab. “’Aríshah,” a word of many meanings, tent, nest, vine-trellis,
  etc.

Footnote 322:

  To spit or blow the nose in good society is “vulgar.” Sneezing
  (Al-’Atsah) is a complicated affair. For Talmudic traditions of death
  by sneezing see Lane (M. E. chapt. viii). Amongst Hindus sneezing and
  yawning are caused by evil spirits whom they drive away by snapping
  thumb and forefinger as loudly as possible. The pagan Arabs held
  sneezing a bad omen, which often stopped their journeys. Moslems
  believe that when Allah placed the Soul (life?) in Adam, the dry clay
  became flesh and bone and the First Man, waking to life, sneezed and
  ejaculated “Alhamdolillah;” whereto Gabriel replied, “Allah have mercy
  upon thee, O Adam!” Mohammed, who liked sneezing because accompanied
  by lightness of body and openness of pores, said of it, “If a man
  sneeze or eructate and say ‘Alhamdolillah’ he averts seventy diseases
  of which the least is leprosy” (Juzám); also, “If one of you sneeze,
  let him exclaim, ‘Alhamdolillah,’ and let those around salute him in
  return with, ‘Allah have mercy upon thee!’ and lastly let him say,
  ‘Allah direct you and strengthen your condition.’” Moderns prefer,
  “Allah avert what may joy thy foe!” = (our God bless you!) to which
  the answer is “Alhamdolillah!” Mohammed disliked yawning (Suabá or
  Thuabá), because not beneficial as a sneeze and said, “If one of you
  gape and cover not his mouth, a devil leaps into it.” This is still a
  popular superstition from Baghdad to Morocco.

Footnote 323:

  A duenna, nursery governess, etc. See vol. i. 231.

Footnote 324:

  For this belief see the tale called “The Night of Power,” vol. vi.
  180.

Footnote 325:

  The Anglo-Indian “Kincob” (Kimkh’áb); brocade, silk flowered with gold
  or silver.

Footnote 326:

  Lane finds a needless difficulty in this sentence, which is
  far-fetched only because Kuus (cups) requires Ruus (head-tops) by way
  of jingle. It means only “’Twas merry in hall when beards wag all.”

Footnote 327:

  The Mac. Edit. gives two couplets which have already occurred from the
  Bul. Edit. i. 540.

Footnote 328:

  The lines are half of four couplets in vol. iv. 192; so I quote Lane.

Footnote 329:

  _i.e._ none hath pleased me. I have quoted the popular saying, “The
  son of the quarter filleth not the eye.” _i.e._ women prefer stranger
  faces.

Footnote 330:

  Here after the favourite Oriental fashion, she tells the truth but so
  enigmatically that it is more deceptive than an untruth; a good
  Eastern quibble infinitely more dangerous than an honest downright
  lie. The consciousness that the falsehood is part fact applies a salve
  to conscience and supplies a force lacking in the mere fib. When an
  Egyptian lies to you look straight in his eyes and he will most often
  betray himself either by boggling or by a look of injured innocence.

Footnote 331:

  Another true lie.

Footnote 332:

  Arab. “Yastaghíbúní,” lit. = they deem my absence too long.

Footnote 333:

  An euphemistic form of questioning after absence: “Is all right with
  thee?”

Footnote 334:

  Arab. “Kallim al-Sultan!” the formula of summoning which has often
  occurred in The Nights.

Footnote 335:

  Lane translates “Almost died,” Payne “well-nigh died;” but the text
  says “died.” I would suggest to translators

               Be bould, be bould and every where be bould!

Footnote 336:

  He is the usual poltroon contrasted with the manly and masterful girl,
  a conjunction of the lioness and the lamb sometimes seen in real life.

Footnote 337:

  That he might see Jamilah as Ibrahim had promised.

Footnote 338:

  A popular saying, _i.e._, les absents ont toujours tort.

Footnote 339:

  Who had a prior right to marry her, but not against her consent after
  she was of age.

Footnote 340:

  Arab. “Sirwál.” In Al-Hariri it is a singular form (see No. ii. of the
  twelve riddles in Ass. xxiv.); but Mohammed said to his followers
  “Tuakhkhizú” (adopt ye) “Saráwílát.” The latter is regularly
  declinable but the broken form Saráwíl is imperfectly declinable on
  account of its “heaviness,” as are all plurals whose third letter is
  an Alif followed by i or í in the next syllable.

Footnote 341:

  Arab. “Matarik” from mitrak or mitrakah a small wooden shield coated
  with hide. This even in the present day is the policeman’s equipment
  in the outer parts of the East.

Footnote 342:

  “Arab. “Sabíyah” for which I prefer Mr. Payne’s “young lady” to Lane’s
  “damsel”; the latter should be confined to Járiyah as both bear the
  double sense of girl and slave (or servant) girl. “Bint” again is
  daughter, maid or simply girl.

Footnote 343:

  The sense of them is found in vol. ii. 41.

Footnote 344:

  Here the text is defective, but I hardly like to supply the omission.
  Mr. Payne introduces from below, “for that his charms were wasted and
  his favour changed by reason of the much terror and affliction he had
  suffered.” The next lines also are very abrupt and unconnected.

Footnote 345:

  Arab. “Yá Mauláya!” the term is still used throughout Moslem lands;
  but in Barbary where it is pronounced “Mooláee” Europeans have
  converted it to “Muley” as if it had some connection with the mule.
  Even in Robinson Crusoe we find “muly” or “Moly Ismael” (chapt. ii.);
  and we hear the high-sounding name Maulá-i-Idrís, the patron saint of
  the Sunset Land, debased to “Muley Drís.”




                     ABU AL-HASAN OF KHORASAN.[346]


The Caliph Al-Mu’tazid Bi ’llah[347] was a high-spirited Prince and a
noble-minded lord; he had in Baghdad six hundred Wazirs and of the
affairs of the folk naught was hidden from him. He went forth one day,
he and Ibn Hamdún,[348] to divert himself with observing his lieges and
hearing the latest news of the people; and, being overtaken with the
heats of noonday, they turned aside from the main thoroughfare into a
little by-street, at the upper end whereof they saw a handsome and
high-builded mansion, discoursing of its owner with the tongue of
praise. They sat down at the gate to take rest, and presently out came
two eunuchs as they were moons on their fourteenth night. Quoth one of
them to his fellow, “Would Heaven some guest would seek admission this
day! My master will not eat but with guests and we are come to this hour
and I have not yet seen a soul.” The Caliph marvelled at their speech
and said, “This is a proof of the house-master’s liberality: there is no
help but that we go in to him and note his generosity, and this shall be
a means of favour betiding him from us.” So he said to the eunuch, “Ask
leave of thy lord for the admission of a company[349] of strangers.” For
in those days it was the Caliph’s wont, whenas he was minded to observe
his subjects, to disguise himself in merchant’s garb. The eunuch went in
and told his master, who rejoiced and rising, came out to them in
person. He was fair of favour and fine of form and he appeared clad in a
tunic of Níshápúr[350] silk and a gold laced mantle; and he dripped with
scented waters and wore on his hand a signet ring of rubies. When he saw
them, he said to them, “Well come and welcome to the lords who favour us
with the utmost of favour by their coming!” So they entered the house
and found it such as would make a man forget family and fatherland for
it was like a piece of Paradise.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


          Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Caliph entered the mansion, he and the man with him, they saw it to be
such as would make one forget family and fatherland, for it was like a
piece of Paradise. Within it was a flower-garden, full of all kinds of
trees, confounding sight and its dwelling-places were furnished with
costly furniture. They sat down and the Caliph fell to gazing at the
house and the household gear. (Quoth Ibn Hamdún), I looked at the Caliph
and saw his countenance change, and being wont to know from his face
whether he was amused or anangered, said to myself, “I wonder what hath
vexed him.” Then they brought a golden basin and we washed our hands,
after which they spread a silken cloth and set thereon a table of
rattan. When the covers were taken off the dishes, we saw therein meats
rare as the blooms of Prime in the season of their utmost scarcity,
twofold and single, and the host said, “Bismillah, O my lords! By Allah,
hunger pricketh me; so favour me by eating of this food, as is the
fashion of the noble.” Thereupon he began tearing fowls apart and laying
them before us, laughing the while and repeating verses and telling
stories and talking gaily with pleasant sayings such as sorted with the
entertainment. We ate and drank, then removed to another room, which
confounded beholders with its beauty and which reeked with exquisite
perfumes. Here they brought us a tray of fruits freshly-gathered and
sweetmeats the finest flavoured, whereat our joys increased and our
cares ceased. But withal the Caliph (continued Ibn Hamdun) ceased not to
wear a frowning face and smiled not at that which gladdened all souls,
albeit it was his wont to love mirth and merriment and the putting away
of cares, and I knew that he was no envious wight and oppressor. So I
said to myself, “Would Heaven I knew what is the cause of his moroseness
and why we cannot dissipate his ill-humour!” Presently they brought the
tray of wine which friends doth conjoin and clarified draughts in
flagons of gold and crystal and silver, and the host smote with a
rattan-wand on the door of an inner chamber, whereupon behold, it opened
and out came three damsels, high-bosomed virginity with faces like the
sun at the fourth hour of the day, one a lutist, another a harpist and
the third a dancer-artiste. Then he set before us dried fruits and
confections and drew between us and the damsels a curtain of brocade,
with tassels of silk and rings of gold. The Caliph paid no heed to all
this, but said to the host, who knew not who was in his company, “Art
thou noble?”[351] Said he, “No, my lord; I am but a man of the sons of
the merchants and am known among the folk as Abú al-Hasan Ali, son of
Ahmad of Khorasan.” Quoth the Caliph, “Dost thou know me, O man?”; and
quoth he, “By Allah, O my lord, I have no knowledge of either of your
honours!” Then said I to him, “O man, this is the Commander of the
Faithful, Al-Mu’tazid Bi’llah grandson of Al-Mutawakkil alà’llah.”[352]
Whereupon he rose and kissed the ground before the Caliph, trembling for
fear of him, and said, “O Prince of True Believers, I conjure thee, by
the virtue of thy pious forbears, an thou have seen in me any
shortcomings or lack of good manners in thy presence, do thou forgive
me!” Replied the Caliph, “As for that which thou hast done with us of
honouring and hospitality nothing could have exceeded it; and as for
that wherewith I have to reproach thee here, an thou tell me the truth
respecting it and it commend itself to my sense, thou shalt be saved
from me; but, an thou tell me not the truth, I will take thee with
manifest proof and punish thee with such punishment as never yet
punished any.” Quoth the man, “Allah forbid that I tell thee a lie! But
what is it that thou reproachest to me, O Commander of the Faithful?”
Quoth the Caliph, “Since I entered thy mansion and looked upon its
grandeur, I have noted the furniture and vessels therein, nay even to
thy clothes, and behold, on all of them is the name of my grandfather
Al-Mutawakkil ala ’llah.”[353] Answered Abu al-Hasan, “Yes, O Commander
of the Faithful (the Almighty protect thee), truth is thine inner garb
and sincerity is thine outer garment and none may speak otherwise than
truly in thy presence.” The Caliph bade him be seated and said, “Tell
us.” So he began, “Know, O Commander of the Faithful, that my father
belonged to the markets of the money-changers and druggists and
linendrapers and had in each bazar a shop and an agent and all kinds of
goods. Moreover, behind the money-changer’s shop he had an apartment,
where he might be private, appointing the shop for buying and selling.
His wealth was beyond count and to his riches there was none amount; but
he had no child other than myself, and he loved me and was tenderly fain
of me. When his last hour was at hand, he called me to him and commended
my mother to my care and charged me to fear Almighty Allah. Then he
died, may Allah have mercy upon him and continue the Prince of True
Believers on life! And I gave myself up to pleasure and eating and
drinking and took to myself comrades and intimates. My mother used to
forbid me from this and to blame me for it, but I would not hear a word
from her, till my money was all gone, when I sold my lands and houses
and naught was left me save the mansion wherein I now dwell, and it was
a goodly stead, O Commander of the Faithful. So I said to my mother, “I
wish to sell the house;” but she said, “O my son, an thou sell it, thou
wilt be dishonoured and wilt have no place wherein to take shelter.”
Quoth I, “’Tis worth five thousand dinars, and with one thousand of its
price I will buy me another house and trade with the rest.” Quoth she,
“Wilt thou sell it to me at that price?”; and I replied, “Yes.”
Whereupon she went to a coffer and opening it, took out a porcelain
vessel, wherein were five thousand dinars. When I saw this meseemed the
house was all of gold and she said to me, “O my son, think not that this
is of thy father’s good. By Allah, O my son, it was of my own father’s
money and I have treasured it up against a time of need; for, in thy
father’s day I was a wealthy woman and had no need of it.” I took the
money from her, O Prince of True Believers, and fell again to feasting
and carousing and merrymaking with my friends, unheeding my mother’s
words and admonitions, till the five thousand dinars came to an end,
when I said to her, “I wish to sell the house.” Said she, “O my son, I
forbade thee from selling it before, of my knowledge that thou hadst
need of it; so how wilt thou sell it a second time?” Quoth I, “Be not
longsome of speech with me, for I must and will sell it;” and quoth she,
“Then sell it to me for fifteen thousand dinars, on condition that I
take charge of thine affairs.” So I sold her the house at that price and
gave up my affairs into her charge, whereupon she sought out the agents
of my father and gave each of them a thousand dinars, keeping the rest
in her own hands and ordering the outgo and the income. Moreover she
gave me money to trade withal and said to me, “Sit thou in thy father’s
shop.” So I did her bidding, O Commander of the Faithful, and took up my
abode in the chamber behind the shop in the market of the
money-changers, and my friends came and bought of me and I sold to them;
whereby I made good cheape and my wealth increased. When my mother saw
me in this fair way, she discovered to me that which she had treasured
up of jewels and precious stones, pearls, and gold, and I bought back my
houses and lands that I had squandered and my wealth became great as
before. I abode thus for some time, and the factors of my father came to
me and I gave them stock-in-trade, and I built me a second chamber
behind the shop. One day, as I sat there, according to my custom, O
Prince of True Believers, there came up to me a damsel, never saw eyes a
fairer than she of favour, and said, “Is this the private shop of Abu
al-Hasan Ali ibn Ahmad al-Khorasani?” Answered I, “Yes,” and she asked,
“Where is he?” “He am I,” said I, and indeed my wit was dazed at the
excess of her loveliness. She sat down and said to me, “Bid thy page
weigh me out three hundred dinars.” Accordingly I bade him give her that
sum and he weighed it out to her and she took it and went away, leaving
me stupefied. Quoth my man to me, “Dost thou know her?”; and quoth I,
“No, by Allah!” He asked, “Then why didst thou bid me give her the
money?”; and I answered, “By Allah, I knew not what I said, of my
amazement at her beauty and loveliness!” Then he rose and followed her,
without my knowledge, but presently returned, weeping and with the mark
of a blow on his face. I enquired of him what ailed him, and he replied,
“I followed the damsel, to see whither she went; but, when she was aware
of me, she turned and dealt me this blow and all but knocked out my
eye.” After this, a month passed, without her coming, O Commander of the
Faithful, and I abode bewildered for love of her; but, at the end of
this time, she suddenly appeared again and saluted me, whereat I was
like to fly for joy. She asked me how I did and said to me, “Haply thou
saidst to thyself, What manner of trickstress is this, who hath taken my
money and made off?” Answered I, “By Allah, O my lady, my money and my
life are all thy very own!” With this she unveiled herself and sat down
to rest, with the trinkets and ornaments playing over her face and
bosom. Presently, she said to me, “Weigh me out three hundred dinars.”
“Hearkening and obedience,” answered I and weighed out to her the money.
She took it and went away and I said to my servant, “Follow her.” So he
followed her, but returned dumbstruck, and some time passed without my
seeing her. But, as I was sitting one day, behold, she came up to me and
after talking awhile, said to me, “Weigh me out five hundred dinars, for
I have need of them.” I would have said to her, “Why should I give thee
my money?”; but my love immense hindered me from utterance; for, O
Prince of True Believers, whenever I saw her, I trembled in every joint
and my colour paled and I forgot what I would have said and became even
as saith the poet:—

 “’Tis naught but this! When a-sudden I see her ✿ Mumchance I bide nor a
    word can say her.”

So I weighed out for her the five hundred ducats, and she took them and
went away; whereupon I arose and followed her myself, till she came to
the jewel-bazar, where she stopped at a man’s shop and took of him a
necklace. Then she turned and seeing me, said, “Pay him five hundred
dinars for me.” When the jeweller saw me, he rose to me and made much of
me, and I said to him, “Give her the necklace and set down the price to
me.” He replied, “I hear and obey,” and she took it and went away;——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu Hasan the
Khorasani thus pursued his tale:—So I said to the jeweller, “Give her
the necklace and set down the price to me.” Then she took it and went
away; but I followed her, till she came to the Tigris and boarded a boat
there, whereupon I signed with my hand to the ground, as who should say,
“I kiss it before thee.” She went off laughing, and I stood watching
her, till I saw her land and enter a palace, which when I considered, I
knew it for the palace of the Caliph Al-Mutawakkil. So I turned back, O
Commander of the Faithful, with all the cares in the world fallen on my
heart, for she had of me three thousand dinars, and I said to myself,
“She hath taken my wealth and ravished my wit, and peradventure I shall
lose my life for her love.” Then I returned home and told my mother all
that had befallen me, and she said, “O my son, beware how thou have to
do with her after this, or thou art lost.” When I went to my shop, my
factor in the drug-market, who was a very old man, came to me and said,
“O my lord, how is it that I see thee changed in case and showing marks
of chagrin? Tell me what aileth thee.” So I told him all that had
befallen me with her and he said, “O my son, this is indeed one of the
handmaidens of the palace of the Commander of the Faithful and haply she
is the Caliph’s favourite concubine: so do thou reckon the money as
spent for the sake of Almighty Allah[354] and occupy thyself no more
with her. An she come again, beware lest she have to do with thee and
tell me of this, that I may devise thee some device lest perdition
betide thee.” Then he fared forth and left me with a flame of fire in my
heart. At the end of the month behold, she came again and I rejoiced in
her with exceeding joy. Quoth she, “What ailed thee to follow me?”; and
quoth I, “Excess of passion that is in my heart urged me to this,” and I
wept before her. She wept for ruth of me and said, “By Allah, there is
not in thy heart aught of love-longing but in my heart is more! Yet how
shall I do? By Allah, I have no resource save to see thee thus once a
month.” Then she gave me a bill saying, “Carry this to such an one of
such a trade who is my agent and take of him what is named therein.” But
I replied, “I have no need of money; be my wealth and my life thy
sacrifice!” Quoth she, “I will right soon contrive thee a means of
access to me, whatever trouble it cost me.” Then she farewelled me and
fared forth, whilst I repaired to the old druggist and told him what had
passed. He went with me to the palace of Al-Mutawakkil which I knew for
that which the damsel had entered; but the Shaykh was at a loss for a
device. Presently he espied a tailor sitting with his prentices at work
in his shop, opposite the lattice giving upon the river bank and said to
me, “Yonder is one by whom thou shalt win thy wish; but first tear thy
pocket and go to him and bid him sew it up. When he hath done this, give
him ten dinars.” “I hear and obey,” answered I and taking with me two
pieces[355] of Greek brocade, went to the tailor and bade him make of
them four suits, two with long-sleeved coats and two without. When he
had finished cutting them out and sewing them, I gave him to his hire
much more than of wont, and he put out his hand to me with the clothes;
but I said, “Take them for thyself and for those who are with thee.” And
I fell to sitting with him and sitting long: I also bespoke of him other
clothes and said to him, “Hang them out in front of thy shop, so the
folk may see them and buy them.” He did as I bade him, and whoso came
forth of the Caliph’s palace and aught of the clothes pleased him, I
made him a present thereof, even to the doorkeeper. One day of the days
the tailor said to me, “O my son, I would have thee tell me the truth of
thy case; for thou hast bespoken of me an hundred costly suits, each
worth a mint of money, and hast given the most of them to the folk. This
is no merchant’s fashion, for a merchant calleth an account for every
dirham, and what can be the sum of thy capital that thou givest these
gifts and what thy gain every year? Tell me the truth of thy case, that
I may assist thee to thy desire;” presently adding, “I conjure thee by
Allah, tell me, art thou not in love?” “Yes,” replied I; and he said,
“With whom?” Quoth I, “With one of the handmaids of the Caliph’s
palace;” and quoth he, “Allah put them to shame! How long shall they
seduce the folk? Knowest thou her name?” Said I, “No;” and said he,
“Describe her to me.” So I described her to him and he cried, “Out on
it! This is the lutanist of the Caliph Al-Mutawakkil and his pet
concubine. But she hath a Mameluke[356] and do thou make friends with
him; it may be he shall become the means of thy having access to her.”
Now as we were talking, behold, out walked the servant in question from
the palace, as he were a moon on the fourteenth night; and, seeing that
I had before me the clothes which the tailor had made me, and they were
of brocade of all colours, he began to look at them and examine them.
Then he came up to me and I rose and saluted him. He asked, “Who art
thou?” and I answered, “I am a man of the merchants.” Quoth he, “Wilt
thou sell these clothes?”; and quoth I, “Yes.” So he chose out five of
them and said to me, “How much these five?” Said I, “They are a present
to thee from me in earnest of friendship between me and thee.” At this
he rejoiced and I went home and fetching a suit embroidered with jewels
and jacinths, worth three thousand dinars, returned therewith and gave
it to him. He accepted it and carrying me into a room within the palace,
said to me, “What is thy name among the merchants?” Said I, “I am a man
of them.[357]” He continued, “Verily I misdoubt me of thine affair.” I
asked, “Why so?” and he answered, “Because thou hast bestowed on me a
costly gift and won my heart therewith, and I make certain that thou art
Abu al-Hasan of Khorasan the Shroff.” With this I fell a-weeping, O
Prince of True Believers; and he said to me, “Why dost thou weep? By
Allah, she for whom thou weepest is yet more longingly in love with thee
than thou with her! And indeed her case with thee is notorious among all
the palace women. But what wouldst thou have?” Quoth I, “I would have
thee succour me in my calamity.” So he appointed me for the morrow and I
returned home. As soon as I rose next morning, I betook myself to him
and waited in his chamber till he came in and said to me, “Know that
yesternight when, after having made an end of her service by the Caliph,
she returned to her apartment, I related to her all that had passed
between me and thee and she is minded to foregather with thee. So stay
with me till the end of the day.” Accordingly I stayed with him till
dark, when the Mameluke brought me a shirt of gold-inwoven stuff and a
suit of the Caliph’s apparel and clothing me therein, incensed me[358]
and I became like the Commander of the Faithful. Then he brought me to a
gallery with rows of rooms on either side and said to me, “These are the
lodgings of the Chief of the slave-girls; and when thou passest along
the gallery, do thou lay at each door a bean, for ’tis the custom of the
Caliph to do this every night——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Mameluke
said to Abu Hasan, “When thou passest along the gallery set down at each
door a bean for ’tis the custom of the Caliph so to do, till thou come
to the second passage on thy right hand, when thou wilt see a door with
a marble threshold.[359] Touch it with thy hand or, an thou wilt, count
the doors which are so many, and enter the one whose marks are thus and
thus. There thy mistress will see thee and take thee in with her. As for
thy coming forth, verily Allah will make it easy to me, though I carry
thee out in a chest.” Then he left me and returned, whilst I went on,
counting the doors and laying at each a bean. When I had reached the
middle of the gallery, I heard a great clatter and saw the light of
flambeaux coming towards me. As the light drew near me, I looked at it
and behold, the Caliph himself, came surrounded by the slave-girls
carrying waxen lights, and I heard one of the women[360] say to another,
“O my sister, have we two Caliphs? Verily, the Caliph whose perfumes and
essences I smelt, hath already passed by my room and he hath laid the
bean at my door, as his wont; and now I see the light of his flambeaux,
and here he cometh with them.” Replied the other, “Indeed this is a
wondrous thing, for disguise himself in the Caliph’s habit none would
dare.” Then the light drew near me, whilst I trembled in every limb; and
up came an eunuch, crying out to the concubines and saying, “Hither!”
Whereupon they turned aside to one of the chambers and entered. Then
they came out again and walked on till they came to the chamber of my
mistress and I heard the Caliph say, “Whose chamber is this?” They
answered, “This is the chamber of Shajarat al-Durr.” And he said, “Call
her.” So they called her and she came out and kissed the feet of the
Caliph, who said to her, “Wilt thou drink to-night?” Quoth she, “But for
thy presence and the looking on thine auspicious countenance, I would
not drink, for I incline not to wine this night.” Then quoth the
Commander of the Faithful to the eunuch, “Bid the treasurer give her
such necklace;” and he commanded to enter her chamber. So the waxen
lights entered before him and he followed them into the apartment. At
the same moment, behold, there came up a damsel, the lustre of whose
face outshone that of the flambeau in her hand, and drawing near she
said, “Who is this?” Then she laid hold of me and carrying me into one
of the chambers, said to me, “Who art thou?” I kissed the ground before
her saying, “I implore thee by Allah, O my lady, spare my blood and have
ruth on me and commend thyself unto Allah by saving my life!”; and I
wept for fear of death. Quoth she, “Doubtless, thou art a robber;” and
quoth I, “No, by Allah, I am no robber. Seest thou on me the signs of
thieves?” Said she, “Tell me the truth of thy case and I will put thee
in safety.” So I said, “I am a silly lover and an ignorant, whom passion
and my folly have moved to do as thou seest, so that I am fallen into
this slough of despond.” Thereat cried she, “Abide here till I come back
to thee;” and going forth she presently returned with some of her
handmaid’s clothes wherein she clad me and bade me follow her; so I
followed her till she came to her apartment and commanded me to enter. I
went in and she led me to a couch, whereon was a mighty fine carpet, and
said, “Sit down here: no harm shall befal thee. Art thou not Abu
al-Hasan Ali the Khorasani, the Shroff?” I answered, “Yes,” and she
rejoined, “Allah spare thy blood given thou speak truth! An thou be a
robber, thou art lost, more by token that thou art dressed in the
Caliph’s habit and incensed with his scents. But, an thou be indeed Abu
al-Hasan, thou art safe and no hurt shall happen to thee, for that thou
art the friend of Shajarat al-Durr, who is my sister and ceaseth never
to name thee and tell us how she took of thee money, yet wast thou not
chagrined, and how thou didst follow her to the river bank and madest
sign as thou wouldst kiss the earth in her honour; and her heart is yet
more aflame for thee than is thine for her. But how camest thou hither?
Was it by her order or without it? She hath indeed imperilled thy
life[361]. But what seekest thou in this assignation with her?” I
replied, “By Allah, O my lady, ’tis I who have imperilled my own life,
and my aim in foregathering with her is but to look on her and hear her
pretty speech.” She said, “Thou hast spoken well;” and I added, “O my
lady, Allah is my witness when I declare that my soul prompteth me to no
offence against her honour.” Cried she, “In this intent may Allah
deliver thee! Indeed compassion for thee hath gotten hold upon my
heart.” Then she called her handmaid and said to her, “Go to Shajarat
al-Durr and say to her:—Thy sister saluteth thee and biddeth thee to
her; so favour her by coming to her this night, according to thy custom,
for her breast is straitened.” The slave-girl went out and presently
returning, told her mistress that Shajarat al-Durr said, “May Allah
bless me with thy long life and make me thy ransom! By Allah, hadst thou
bidden me to other than this, I had not hesitated; but the Caliph’s
migraine constraineth me and thou knowest my rank with him.” But the
other said to her damsel, “Return to her and say:—Needs must thou come
to my mistress upon a private matter between thee and her!” So the girl
went out again and presently returned with the damsel, whose face shone
like the full moon. Her sister met her and embraced her; then said she,
“Ho, Abu al-Hasan, come forth to her and kiss her hands!” Now I was in a
closet within the apartment; so I walked out, O Commander of the
Faithful, and when my mistress saw me, she threw herself upon me and
strained me to her bosom, saying, “How camest thou in the Caliph’s
clothes and his ornaments and perfumes? Tell me what hath befallen
thee.” So I related to her all that had befallen me and what I had
suffered for affright and so forth; and she said, “Grievous to me is
what thou hast endured for my sake and praised be Allah who hath caused
the issue to be safety, and the fulfilment of safety is in thy entering
my lodging and that of my sister.” Then she carried me to her own
apartment, saying to her sister, “I have covenanted with him that I will
not be united to him unlawfully; but, as he hath risked himself and
incurred these perils, I will be earth for his treading and dust to his
sandals!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the damsel
to her sister, “I have covenanted with him that I will not be united to
him unlawfully; but, as he hath risked himself and incurred these
perils, I will be earth for his treading and dust to his sandals!”
Replied her sister, “In this intent may Allah deliver him!”; and my
mistress rejoined, “Soon shalt thou see how I will do, so I may lawfully
foregather with him and there is no help but that I lavish my heart’s
blood to devise this.” Now as we were in talk, behold, we heard a great
noise and turning, saw the Caliph making for her chamber, so engrossed
was he by the thought of her; whereupon she took me, O Prince of True
Believers and hid me in a souterrain[362] and shut down the trap-door
upon me. Then she went out to meet the Caliph, who entered and sat down,
whilst she stood between his hands to serve him, and commanded to bring
wine. Now the Caliph loved a damsel by name Banjah, who was the mother
of Al-Mu’tazz bi ’llah[363]; but they had fallen out and parted; and in
the pride of her beauty and loveliness she would not make peace with
him, nor would Al-Mutawakkil, for the dignity of the Caliphate and the
kingship, make peace with her neither humble himself to her, albeit his
heart was aflame with passion for her, but sought to solace his mind
from her with her mates among the slave-girls and with going in to them
in their chambers. Now he loved Shajarat al-Durr’s singing: so he bade
her sing, when she took the lute and tuning the strings sang these
verses:—

 The world-tricks I admire betwixt me and her; ✿ How, us parted, the
    World would to me incline:
 I shunned thee till said they, “He knows not Love;” ✿ I sought thee till
    said they, “No patience is mine!”
 Then, O Love of her, add to my longing each night ✿ And, O Solace, thy
    comforts for Doomsday assign!
 Soft as silk is her touch and her low sweet voice ✿ Twixt o’er much and
    o’er little aye draweth the line:
 And eyne whereof Allah said “Be ye!” and they ✿ Became to man’s wit like
    the working of wine.

When the Caliph heard these verses, he was pleasured with exceeding
pleasure, and I also, O Commander of the Faithful, was pleasured in my
hiding-place, and but for the bounty of Almighty Allah, I had cried out
and we had been disgraced. Then she sang also these couplets:—

 I embrace him, yet after him yearns my soul ✿ For his love, but can
    aught than embrace be nigher?
 I kiss his lips to assuage my lowe; ✿ But each kiss gars it glow with
    more flaming fire;
 ’Tis as though my vitals aye thirst unquencht ✿ Till I see two souls
    mixt in one entire.

The Caliph was delighted and said, “O Shajarat al-Durr, ask a boon of
me.” She replied, “O Commander of the Faithful, I ask of thee my
freedom, for the sake of the reward thou wilt obtain therein.[364]”
Quoth he, “Thou art free for the love of Allah;” whereupon she kissed
ground before him. He resumed, “Take the lute and sing me somewhat on
the subject of my slave-girl, of whom I am enamoured with warmest love:
the folk seek my pleasure and I seek hers.” So she took the lute and
sang these two couplets:—

 My charmer who spellest my piety[365] ✿ On all accounts I’ll have thee,
    have thee,
 Or by humble suit which besitteth Love ✿ Or by force more fitting my
    sovranty.

The Caliph admired these verses and said, “Now, take up thy lute and
sing me a song setting out my case with three damsels who hold the reins
of my heart and make rest depart; and they are thyself and that wilful
one and another I will not name, who hath not her like.[366] So she took
the lute and playing a lively measure, sang these couplets:—

 Three lovely girls hold my bridle-rein ✿ And in highest stead my heart
    over-reign.
 I have none to obey amid all mankind ✿ But obeying them I but win
    disdain:
 This is done through the Kingship of Love, whereby ✿ The best of my
    kingship they made their gain.

The Caliph marvelled with exceeding marvel at the aptness of these
verses to his case and his delight inclined him to reconciliation with
the recalcitrant damsel. So he went forth and made for her chamber
whither a slave-girl preceded him and announced to her the coming of the
Caliph. She advanced to meet him and kissed the ground before him; then
she kissed his feet and he was reconciled to her and she was reconciled
to him. Such was the case with the Caliph; but as regards Shajarat
al-Durr, she came to me rejoicing and said, “I am become a free woman by
thy blessed coming! Surely Allah will help me in that which I shall
contrive, so I may foregather with thee in lawful way.” And I said,
“Alhamdolillah!” Now as we were talking, behold her Mameluke-eunuch
entered and we related to him that which had passed, when he said,
“Praised be Allah who hath made the affair to end well, and we implore
the Almighty to crown His favours with thy safe faring forth the
palace!” Presently appeared my mistress’s sister, whose name was Fátir,
and Shajarat al-Durr said to her, “O my sister, how shall we do to bring
him out of the palace in safety; for indeed Allah hath vouchsafed me
manumission and, by the blessing of his coming, I am become a free
woman.” Quoth Fatir, “I see nothing for it but to dress him in woman’s
gear.” So she brought me a suit of women’s clothes and clad me therein;
and I went out forthwith, O Commander of the Faithful; but, when I came
to the midst of the palace, behold, I found the Caliph seated there,
with the eunuchs in attendance upon him. When he saw me, he misdoubted
of me with exceeding doubt, and said to his suite, “Hasten and bring me
yonder handmaiden who is faring forth.” So they brought me back to him
and raised the veil from my face, which when he saw, he knew me and
questioned me of my case. I told him the whole truth, hiding naught, and
when he heard my story, he pondered my case awhile, without stay or
delay, and going into Shajarat al-Durr’s chamber, said to her, “How
couldst thou prefer before me one of the sons of the merchants?” She
kissed ground between his hands and told him her tale from first to
last, in accordance with the truth; and he hearing it had compassion
upon her and his heart relented to her and he excused her by reason of
love and its circumstances. Then he went away and her eunuch came in to
her and said, “Be of good cheer; for, when thy lover was set before the
Caliph, he questioned him and he told him that which thou toldest him,
word by word.” Presently the Caliph returned and calling me before him,
said to me, “What made thee dare to violate the palace of the
Caliphate?” I replied, “O Commander of the Faithful, ’twas my ignorance
and passion and my confidence in thy clemency and generosity that drave
me to this.” And I wept and kissed the ground before him. Then said he,
“I pardon you both,” and bade me be seated. So I sat down and he sent
for the Kazi Ahmad ibn Abi Duwád[367] and married me to her. Then he
commanded to make over all that was hers to me and they displayed her to
me[368] in her lodging. After three days, I went forth and transported
all her goods and gear to my own house; so every thing thou hast seen, O
Commander of the Faithful, in my house and whereof thou misdoubtest, is
of her marriage-equipage. After this, she said to me one day, “Know that
Al-Mutawakkil is a generous man and I fear lest he remember us with ill
mind, or that some one of the envious remind him of us; wherefore I
purpose to do somewhat that may ensure us against this.” Quoth I, “And
what is that?;” and quoth she, “I mean to ask his leave to go the
pilgrimage and repent[369] of singing.” I replied, “Right is this rede
thou redest;” but, as we were talking, behold, in came a messenger from
the Caliph to seek her, for that Al-Mutawakkil loved her singing. So she
went with the officer and did her service to the Caliph, who said to
her, “Sever not thyself from us;”[370] and she answered, “I hear and I
obey.” Now it chanced one day, after this, she went to him, he having
sent for her, as was his wont; but, before I knew, she came back, with
her raiment rent and her eyes full of tears. At this I was alarmed,
misdoubting me that he had commanded to seize upon us, and said, “Verily
we are Allah’s and unto Him shall we return! Is Al-Mutawakkil wroth with
us?” She replied, “Where is Al-Mutawakkil? Indeed Al-Mutawakkil’s rule
is ended and his trace is blotted out!” Cried I, “Tell me what has
happened;” and she, “He was seated behind the curtain, drinking, with
Al-Fath bin Khákán[371] and Sadakah bin Sadakah, when his son
Al-Muntasir fell upon him, with a company of the Turks,[372] and slew
him; and merriment was turned to misery and joy to weeping and wailing
for annoy. So I fled, I and the slave-girl, and Allah saved us.” When I
heard this, O Commander of the Faithful, I arose forthright and went
down stream to Bassorah, where the news reached me of the falling out of
war between Al-Muntasir and Al-Musta’ín bi ’llah;[373] wherefore I was
affrighted and transported my wife and all my wealth to Bassorah. This,
then, is my tale, O Prince of True Believers, nor have I added to or
taken from it a single syllable. So all that thou seest in my house,
bearing the name of thy grandfather Al-Mutawakkil, is of his bounty to
us, and the fount of our fortune is from thy noble sources;[374] for
indeed ye are people of munificence and a mine of beneficence.” The
Caliph marvelled at his story and rejoiced therein with joy exceeding:
and Abu al-Hasan brought forth to him the lady and the children she had
borne him, and they kissed ground before the Caliph, who wondered at
their beauty. Then he called for inkcase and paper and wrote Abu
al-Hasan a patent of exemption from taxes on his lands and houses for
twenty years. Moreover, he rejoiced in him and made him his
cup-companion, till the world parted them and they took up their abode
in the tombs, after having dwelt under palace-domes; and glory be to
Allah, the King Merciful of doom. And they also tell a tale concerning

-----

Footnote 346:

  Lane omits this tale because “it is very similar, but inferior in
  interest, to the Story told by the Sultan’s Steward.” See vol. i. 278.

Footnote 347:

  Sixteenth Abbaside A.H. 279–289 (= A.D. 891–902). “He was comely,
  intrepid, of grave exterior, majestic in presence, of considerable
  intellectual power and the fiercest of the Caliphs of the House of
  Abbas. He once had the courage to attack a lion” (Al-Siyuti). I may
  add that he was a good soldier and an excellent administrator, who was
  called Saffáh the Second because he refounded the House of Abbas. He
  was exceedingly fanatic and died of sensuality, having first kicked
  his doctor to death, and he spent his last moments in versifying.

Footnote 348:

  Hamdún bin Ismá’íl, called the Kátib or Scribe, was the first of his
  family who followed the profession of a Nadím or Cup-companion. His
  son Ahmad (who is in the text) was an oral transmitter of poetry and
  history. Al-Siyúti (p. 390) and De Slane I. Khall (ii. 304) notice
  him.

Footnote 349:

  Probably the Caliph had attendants, but the text afterwards speaks of
  them as two. Mac. Edit. iv. p. 558, line 2; and a few lines below,
  “the Caliph and the man with him.”

Footnote 350:

  Arab. “Naysábúr,” the famous town in Khorasan where Omar-i-Khayyám
  (whom our people will call Omar Khayyám) was buried and where his tomb
  is still a place of pious visitation. A sketch of it has lately
  appeared in the illustrated papers. For an affecting tale concerning
  the astronomer-poet’s tomb, borrowed from the Nigáristán see the
  Preface by the late Mr. Fitzgerald whose admirable excerpts from the
  Rubaiyat (101 out of 820 quatrains) have made the poem popular among
  all the English-speaking races.

Footnote 351:

  Arab. “A-Sharíf anta?” (with the Hamzah-sign of interrogation) = Art
  thou a Sharíf (or descendant of the Apostle)?

Footnote 352:

  Tenth Abbaside (A.H. 234–247 = 848–861), grandson of Al-Rashid and
  born of a slave-concubine. He was famous for his hatred of the Alides
  (he destroyed the tomb of Al-Husayn) and claimed the pardon of Allah
  for having revised orthodox traditionary doctrines. He compelled the
  Christians to wear collars of wood or leather and was assassinated by
  five Turks.

Footnote 353:

  His father was Al-Mu’ tasim bi’llah (A.H. 218–227 = 833–842) the son
  of Al-Rashid by Máridah a slave-concubine of foreign origin. He was
  brave and of high spirit, but destitute of education; and his personal
  strength was such that he could break a man’s elbow between his
  fingers. He imitated the apparatus of Persian kings; and he was called
  the “Octonary” because he was the 8th Abbaside; the 8th in descent
  from Abbas; the 8th son of Al-Rashid; he began his reign in A.H. 218;
  lived 48 years; was born under Scorpio (8th Zodiacal sign); was
  victorious in 8 expeditions; slew 8 important foes and left 8 male and
  8 female children. For his introducing Turks see vol. iii. 81.

Footnote 354:

  _i.e._ as if it were given away in charity.

Footnote 355:

  Arab. “Shukkah,” a word much used in the Zanzibar trade where it means
  a piece of longcloth one fathom long. See my “Lake Regions of Central
  Africa,” vol. i. 147, etc.

Footnote 356:

  He is afterwards called in two places “Khádim” = eunuch.

Footnote 357:

  A courteous way of saying, “Never mind my name: I wish to keep it
  hidden.” The formula is still popular.

Footnote 358:

  Arab. “Bakhkharaní” _i.e._ fumigated me with burning aloes-wood,
  Calumba or similar material.

Footnote 359:

  In sign of honour. The threshold is important amongst Moslems: in one
  of the Mameluke Soldans’ sepulchres near Cairo I found a granite slab
  bearing the “cartouche” (shield) of Khufu (Cheops) with the four
  hieroglyphs hardly effaced.

Footnote 360:

  _i.e._ One of the concubines by whose door he had passed.

Footnote 361:

  Epistasis without the prostasis, “An she ordered thee so to do:” the
  situation justifies the rhetorical figure.

Footnote 362:

  Arab. “Sardáb” see vol. i, 340.

Footnote 363:

  Thirteenth Abbaside A.H. 252–255 (= 866–869). His mother was a Greek
  slave called Kabíhah (Al-Mas’udi and Al-Siyuti); for which “Banjah” is
  probably a clerical error. He was exceedingly beautiful and was the
  first to ride out with ornaments of gold. But he was impotent in the
  hands of the Turks who caused the mob to depose him and kill him—his
  death being related in various ways.

Footnote 364:

  _i.e._ The reward from Allah for thy good deed.

Footnote 365:

  Arab. “Nusk” abstinence from women, a part of the Zahid’s asceticism.

Footnote 366:

  Arab. “Munázirah” the verbal noun of which, “Munázarah,” may also mean
  “dispute.” The student will distinguish between “Munazarah” and
  Munafarah = a contention for precedence in presence of an umpire.

Footnote 367:

  The Mac. Edit. gives by mistake “Abú Dáúd”: the Bul. correctly “Abú
  Duwád.” He was Kázi al-Kuzát (High Chancellor) under Al-Mu’tasim,
  Al-Wasik bi ’llah (Vathek) and Al-Mutawakkil.

Footnote 368:

  Arab. “Zaffú” = they led the bride to the bridegroom’s house; but here
  used in the sense of displaying her as both were in the palace.

Footnote 369:

  _i.e._ renounce the craft which though not sinful (harám) is makrúh or
  religiously unpraiseworthy; Mohammed having objected to music and
  indeed to the arts in general.

Footnote 370:

  Arab. “Lá tankati’í;” do not be too often absent from us. I have
  noticed the whimsical resemblance of “Kat’” and our “cut”; and here
  the metaphorical sense is almost identical.

Footnote 371:

  See Ibn Khallikan ii. 455.

Footnote 372:

  The Turkish body-guard. See vol. iii. 81.

Footnote 373:

  Twelfth Abbaside (A.H. 248–252 = 862–866) the son of a slave-concubine
  Mukhárík. He was virtuous and accomplished, comely, fair-skinned,
  pock-marked and famed for defective pronunciation; and he first set
  the fashion of shortening men’s capes and widening the sleeves. After
  many troubles with the Turks, who were now the Prætorian guard of
  Baghdad, he was murdered at the instigation of Al-Mu’tazz, who
  succeeded him, by his Chamberlain Sa’id bin Salíh.

Footnote 374:

  Arab. “Usúl,” his forbears, his ancestors.




              KAMAR AL-ZAMAN AND THE JEWELLER’S WIFE.[375]


There was once, in time of old, a merchant hight Abd al-Rahmán, whom
Allah had blessed with a son and daughter, and for their much beauty and
loveliness, he named the girl Kaubab al-Sabáh and the boy Kamar
al-Zamán.[376] When he saw what Allah had vouchsafed the twain of beauty
and loveliness, brilliancy and symmetry, he feared for them the evil
eyes[377] of the espiers and the jibing tongues of the jealous and the
craft of the crafty and the wiles of the wicked and shut them up from
the folk in a mansion for the space of fourteen years, during which time
none saw them save their parents and a slave-girl who served them. Now
their father could recite the Koran, even as Allah sent it down, as also
did his wife, wherefore the mother taught her daughter to read and
recite it and the father his son till both had gotten it by heart.
Moreover, the twain learned from their parents writing and reckoning and
all manner of knowledge and polite letters and needed no master. When
Kamar al-Zaman came to years of manhood, the wife said to her husband,
“How long wilt thou keep thy son Kamar al-Zaman sequestered from the
eyes of the folk? Is he a girl or a boy?” He answered, “A boy.” Rejoined
she, “An he be a boy, why dost thou not carry him to the bazar and seat
him in thy shop, that he may know the folk and they know him, to the
intent that it may become notorious among men that he is thy son, and do
thou teach him to sell and to buy. Peradventure somewhat may befal thee;
so shall the folk know him for thy son and he shall lay his hand on thy
leavings. But, an thou die, as the case now is, and he say to the
folk:—I am the son of the merchant Abd al-Rahman, verily they will not
believe him, but will cry, We have never seen thee and we knew not that
he had a son, wherefore the government will seize thy goods and thy son
will be despoiled. In like manner the girl; I mean to make her known
among the folk, so may be some one of her own condition may ask her in
marriage and we will wed her to him and rejoice in her.” Quoth he, “I
did thus of my fear for them from the eyes of the folk——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Merchant’s wife spake to him in such wise, he replied, “I did thus of my
fear for them from the eyes of the folk and because I love them both and
love is jealous exceedingly and well saith he who spoke these verses:—

 Of my sight I am jealous for thee, of me, ✿ Of thyself, of thy stead, of
    thy destiny:
 Though I shrined thee in eyes by the craze of me ✿ In such nearness irk
    I should never see:
 Though thou wert by my side all the days of me ✿ Till Doomsday I ne’er
    had enough of thee.

Said his wife, “Put thy trust in Allah, for no harm betideth him whom He
protecteth, and carry him with thee this very day to the shop.” Then she
clad the boy in the costliest clothes and he became a seduction to all
who on him cast sight and an affliction to the heart of each lover
wight. His father took him and carried him to the market, whilst all who
saw him were ravished with him and accosted him, kissing his hand and
saluting him with the salam. Quoth one, “Indeed the sun hath risen in
such a place and blazeth in the bazar,” and another, “The rising-place
of the full moon is in such a quarter;” and a third, “The new moon of
the Festival[378] hath appeared to the creatures of Allah.” And they
went on to allude to the boy in talk and call down blessings upon him.
But his father scolded the folk for following his son to gaze upon him,
because he was abashed at their talk, but he could not hinder one of
them from talking; so he fell to abusing the boy’s mother and cursing
her because she had been the cause of his bringing him out. And as he
gazed about he still saw the folk crowding upon him behind and before.
Then he walked on till he reached his shop and opening it, sat down and
seated his son before him: after which he again looked out and found the
thoroughfare blocked with people for all the passers-by, going and
coming, stopped before the shop to stare at that beautiful face and
could not leave him; and all the men and women crowded in knots about
him, applying to themselves the words of him who said:—

 Thou madest Beauty to spoil man’s sprite ✿ And saidst, “O my servants,
    fear My reprove:”
 But lovely Thou lovest all loveliness ✿ How, then, shall thy servants
    refrain from Love?

When the merchant Abd al-Rahman saw the folk thus crowding about him and
standing in rows, both women and men, to fix eyes upon his son, he was
sore ashamed and confounded and knew not what to do; but presently there
came up from the end of the bazar a man of the wandering Dervishes, clad
in haircloth, the garb of the pious servants of Allah and seeing Kamar
al-Zaman sitting there as he were a branch of Bán springing from a mound
of saffron, poured forth copious tears and recited these two couplets:—

 A wand uprising from a sandy knoll, ✿ Like full moon shining brightest
    sheen, I saw;
 And said, “What is thy name?” Replied he “Lúlú” ✿ “What (asked I) Lily?”
    and he answered “Lá, lá!”[379]

Then the Dervish fell to walking, now drawing near and now moving
away,[380] and wiping his gray hairs with his right hand, whilst the
heart of the crowd was cloven asunder for awe of him. When he looked
upon the boy, his eyes were dazzled and his wit confounded, and
exemplified in him was the saying of the poet:—

 While that fair-faced boy abode in the place, ✿ Moon of breakfast-fête
    he lit by his face,[381]
 Lo! there came a Shaykh with leisurely pace ✿ A reverend trusting to
    Allah’s grace,
             And ascetic signals his gait display’d.
 He had studied Love both by day and night ✿ And had special knowledge of
    Wrong and Right;
 Both for lad and lass had repined his sprite, ✿ And his form like
    toothpick was lean and slight,
             And old bones with faded skin were o’erlaid.
 In such arts our Shaykh was an Ajamí[382] ✿ With a catamite ever in
    company;
 In the love of woman, a Platonist he[383] ✿ But in either versed to the
    full degree,
             And Zaynab to him was the same as Zayd.[384]
 Distraught by the Fair he adored the Fair ✿ O’er Spring-camp wailed,
    bewept ruins bare.[385]

 Dry branch thou hadst deemed him for stress o’ care, ✿ Which the morning
    breeze swayeth here and there,
             For only the stone is all hardness made!
 In the lore of Love he was wondrous wise ✿ And wide awake with
    all-seeing eyes.
 Its rough and its smooth he had tried and tries ✿ And hugged buck and
    doe in the self-same guise
             And with greybeard and beardless alike he play’d.[386]

Then he came up to the boy and gave him a root[387] of sweet basil,
whereupon his father put forth his hand to his pouch and brought out for
him some small matter of silver, saying, “Take thy portion, O Dervish,
and wend thy ways.” He took the dirhams, but sat down on the
masonry-bench alongside the shop and opposite the boy and fell to gazing
upon him and heaving sigh upon sigh, whilst his tears flowed like
springs founting. The folk began to look at him and remark upon him,
some saying, “All Dervishes are lewd fellows,” and other some, “Verily,
this Dervish’s heart is set on fire for love of this lad.” Now when Abd
al-Rahman saw this case, he arose and said to the boy, “Come, O my son,
let us lock up the shop and hie us home, for it booteth not to sell and
buy this day; and may Almighty Allah requite thy mother that which she
hath done with us, for she was the cause of all this!” Then said he, “O
Dervish, rise, that I may shut my shop.” So the Dervish rose and the
merchant shut his shop and taking his son, walked away. The Dervish and
the folk followed them, till they reached their place, when the boy went
in and his father, turning to the Dervish, said to him, “What wouldst
thou, O Dervish, and why do I see thee weep?” He replied, “O my lord, I
would fain be thy guest this night, for the guest is the guest of
Almighty Allah.” Quoth the merchant, “Welcome to the guest of God:
enter, O Dervish!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
merchant, the father of Kamar al-Zaman, heard the saying of the Dervish,
“I am Allah’s guest,” he replied, “Welcome to the guest of God: enter, O
Dervish!” But he said to himself, “An the beggar be enamoured of the boy
and sue him for sin, needs must I slay him this very night and bury him
secretly. But, an there be no lewdness in him, the guest shall eat his
portion.” Then he brought him into a saloon, where he left him with
Kamar al-Zaman, after he had said privily to the lad, “O my son, sit
thou beside the Dervish when I am gone out and sport with him and
provoke him to love-liesse and if he seek of thee lewdness, I who will
be watching you from the window overlooking the saloon will come down to
him and kill him.” So, as soon as Kamar al-Zaman was alone in the room
with the Dervish, he sat down by his side and the old man began to look
upon him and sigh and weep. Whenever the lad bespake him, he answered
him kindly, trembling the while and would turn to him groaning and
crying, and thus he did till supper was brought in, when he fell to
eating, with his eyes on the boy but refrained not from shedding tears.
When a fourth part of the night was past and talk was ended and
sleep-tide came, Abd al-Rahman said to the lad, “O my son, apply thyself
to the service of thine uncle the Dervish and gainsay him not:” and
would have gone out; but the Dervish cried to him, “O my lord, carry thy
son with thee or sleep with us.” Answered the merchant, “Nay, my son
shall lie with thee: haply thy soul may desire somewhat, and he will
look to thy want and wait upon thee.” Then he went out leaving them both
together, and sat down in an adjoining room which had a window giving
upon the saloon. Such was the case with the merchant; but as to the lad,
as soon as his sire had left them, he came up to the Dervish and began
to provoke him and offer himself to him, whereupon he waxed wroth and
said, “What talk is this, O my son? I take refuge with Allah from Satan
the Stoned! O my Lord, indeed this is a denial of Thee which pleaseth
Thee not! Avaunt from me, O my son!” So saying, the Dervish arose and
sat down at a distance; but the boy followed him and threw himself upon
him, saying, “Why, O Dervish, wilt thou deny thyself the joys of my
possession, and I with a heart that loveth thee?” Hereupon the Dervish’s
anger redoubled and he said, “An thou refrain not from me, I will summon
thy sire and tell him of thy doings.” Quoth the lad, “My father knoweth
my turn for this and it may not be that he will hinder me: so heal thou
my heart. Why dost thou hold off from me? Do I not please thee?”
Answered the Dervish, “By Allah, O my son, I will not do this, though I
be hewn in pieces with sharp-edged swords!”; and he repeated the saying
of the poet:—

 Indeed my heart loves all the lovely boys ✿ As girls; nor am I slow to
    such delight,
 But, though I sight them every night and morn, ✿ I’m neither of Lot’s
    folk[388] nor wencher-wight.

Then he shed tears and said, “Arise, open the door, that I may wend my
way, for I will lie no longer in this lodging.” Therewith he rose to his
feet; but the boy caught hold of him, saying, “Look at the fairness of
my face and the cramoisy of my cheeks and the softness of my sides and
the lusciousness of my lips.” Moreover he discovered to him calves that
would shame wine and cup-carrier[389] and gazed on him with fixed glance
that would baffle enchanter and enchantments; for he was passing of
loveliness and full of blandishment, even as saith of him one of the
poets who sang:—

 I can’t forget him, since he rose and showed with fair design ✿ Those
    calves of legs whose pearly shine make light in nightly gloom:
 Wonder not an my flesh uprise as though ’twere Judgment-day ✿ When every
    shank shall barèd be and that is Day of Doom.[390]

Then the boy displayed to him his bosom, saying, “Look at my breasts
which be goodlier than the breasts of maidens and my lip-dews are
sweeter than sugar-candy. So quit scruple and asceticism and cast off
devoutness and abstinence and take thy fill of my possession and enjoy
my loveliness. Fear naught, for thou art safe from hurt, and leave this
hebetude for ’tis a bad habit.” And he went on to discover to him his
hidden beauties, striving to turn the reins of his reason with his
bendings in graceful guise, whilst the Dervish turned away his face and
said, “I seek refuge with Allah! Have some shame, O my son[391]! This is
a forbidden thing I deem and I will not do it, no, not even in dream.”
The boy pressed upon him, but the Dervish got free from him and turning
towards Meccah addressed himself to his devotions. Now when the boy saw
him praying, he left him till he had prayed a two-bow prayer and
saluted,[392] when he would have accosted him again; but the Dervish
again repeated the intent[393] and prayed a second two-bow prayer, and
thus he did a third and a fourth and a fifth time. Quoth the lad, “What
prayers are these? Art thou minded to take flight upon the clouds? Thou
lettest slip our delight, whilst thou passest the whole night in the
prayer-niche.” So saying, he threw himself upon the Dervish and kissed
him between the eyes; but the Shaykh said, O my son, put Satan away from
thine estate and take upon thee obedience of the Compassionate.” Quoth
the other, “An thou do not with me that which I desire, I will call my
sire and say to him, The Dervish is minded to do lewdness with me.
Whereupon he will come in to thee and beat thee till thy bones be broken
upon thy flesh.” All this while Abd al-Rahman was watching with his eyes
and hearkening with his ears, and he was certified that there was no
frowardness in the Dervish and he said to himself, “Were he a lewd
fellow, he had not stood out against all this importunity.” The boy
continued to beguile the Dervish and every time he expressed purpose of
prayer, he interrupted him, till at last he waxed wroth with passing
wrath and was rough with him and beat him. Kamar al-Zaman wept and his
father came in and having wiped away his tears and comforted him said to
the Dervish, “O my brother, since thou art in such case, why didst thou
weep and sigh when thou sawest my son? Say me, is there a reason for
this?” He replied, “There is;” and Abd al-Rahman pursued, “When I saw
thee weep at his sight, I deemed evil of thee and bade the boy do with
thee thus, that I might try thee, purposing in myself, if I saw thee sue
him for sin, to come in upon thee and kill thee. But, when I saw what
thou didst, I knew thee for one of those who are virtuous to the end.
Now Allah upon thee, tell me the cause of thy weeping!” The Dervish
sighed and said, “O my lord, chafe not a closed[394] wound.” But the
merchant said, “There is no help but thou tell me;” and the other
began:—Know thou that I am a Dervish who wander in the lands and the
countries, and take warning by the display[395] of the Creator of Night
and Day. It chanced that one Friday I entered the city of Bassorah in
the undurn.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Dervish
said to the merchant:—Know, then, that I a wandering mendicant chanced
one Friday to enter the city of Bassorah in the undurn and saw the shops
open and full of all manner of wares and meat and drink; but the place
was deserted and therein was neither man nor woman nor girl nor boy: nor
in the markets and the main streets was there dog or cat nor sounded
sound nor friend was found. I marvelled at this and said to myself, “I
wonder whither the people of the city be gone with their cats and dogs
and what hath Allah done with them?” Now I was anhungred so I took hot
bread from a baker’s oven and going into the shop of an oilman, spread
the bread with clarified butter and honey and ate. Then I entered the
shop of a sherbet-seller and drank what I would; after which, seeing a
coffee-shop open, I went in and found the pots on the fire, full of
coffee;[396] but there was no one there. So I drank my fill and said,
“Verily, this is a wondrous thing! It seemeth as though Death had
stricken the people of this city and they had all died this very hour,
or as if they had taken fright at something which befel them and fled,
without having time to shut their shops.” Now whilst pondering this
matter, lo! I heard a sound of a band of drums beating; whereat I was
afraid and hid myself for a while: then, looking out through a crevice,
I saw damsels, like moons, come walking through the market, two by two,
with uncovered heads and faces displayed. They were in forty pairs, thus
numbering fourscore and in their midst a young lady, riding on a horse
that could hardly move his legs for that which was upon it of silvern
trappings and golden and jewelled housings. Her face was wholly
unveiled, and she was adorned with the costliest ornaments and clad in
the richest of raiment and about her neck she wore a collar of gems and
on her bosom were necklaces of gold; her wrists were clasped with
bracelets which sparkled like stars, and her ankles with bangles of gold
set with precious stones. The slave-girls walked before her and behind
and on her right and left and in front of her was a damsel bearing in
baldric a great sword, with grip of emerald and tassels of
jewel-encrusted gold. When that young lady came to where I lay hid, she
pulled up her horse and said, “O damsels, I hear a noise of somewhat
within yonder shop: so do ye search it, lest haply there be one hidden
there, with intent to enjoy a look at us, whilst we have our faces
unveiled.” So they searched the shop opposite the coffee-house[397]
wherein I lay hid, whilst I abode in terror; and presently I saw them
come forth with a man and they said to her, “O our lady, we found a man
there and here he is before thee.” Quoth she to the damsel with the
sword, “Smite his neck.” So she went up to him and struck off his head;
then, leaving the dead man lying on the ground, they passed on. When I
saw this, I was affrighted; but my heart was taken with love of the
young lady. After an hour or so, the people reappeared and every one who
had a shop entered it; whilst the folk began to come and go about the
bazars and gathered around the slain man, staring at him as a curiosity.
Then I crept forth from my hiding place by stealth, and none took note
of me, but love of that lady had gotten possession of my heart, and I
began to enquire of her privily. None, however, gave me news of her; so
I left Bassorah, with vitals yearning for her love; and when I came upon
this thy son, I saw him to be the likest of all creatures to the young
lady; wherefore he reminded me of her and his sight revived the fire of
passion in me and kindled anew in my heart the flames of love-longing
and distraction. And such is the cause of my shedding tears!” Then he
wept with sore weeping till he could no more and said, “O my lord, I
conjure thee by Allah, open the door to me, so I may gang my gate!”
Accordingly Abd al-Rahman opened the door and he went forth. Thus fared
it with him; but as regards Kamar al-Zaman, when he heard the Dervish’s
story, his heart was taken with love of the lady and passion gat the
mastery of him and raged in him longing and distraction; so, on the
morrow, he said to his sire, “All the sons of the merchants wander about
the world to attain their desire, nor is there one of them but his
father provideth for him a stock-in-trade wherewithal he may travel and
traffic for gain. Why, then, O my father, dost thou not outfit me with
merchandise, so I may fare with it and find my luck?” He replied, “O my
son, such merchants lack money; so they send their sons to foreign parts
for the sake of profit and pecuniary gain and provision of the goods of
the world. But I have monies in plenty nor do I covet more: why then
should I exile thee? Indeed, I cannot brook to be parted from thee an
hour, more especially as thou art unique in beauty and loveliness and
perfect grace and I fear for thee.” But Kamar al-Zaman said, “O my
father, nothing will serve but thou must furnish me with merchandise
wherewithal to travel; else will I fly from thee at unawares though
without money or merchandise. So, an thou wish to solace my heart, make
ready for me a stock-in-trade, that I may travel and amuse myself by
viewing the countries of men.” Abd al-Rahman, seeing his son enamoured
of travel, acquainted his wife with this, saying, “Verily thy son would
have me provide him with goods, so he may fare therewith to far regions,
albeit Travel is Travail.[398]” Quoth she, “What is there to displease
thee in this? Such is the wont of the sons of the merchants and they all
vie one with other in glorifying globe-trotting and gain.” Quoth he,
“Most of the merchants are poor and seek growth of good; but I have
wealth galore.” She replied, “More of a good thing hurteth not; and, if
thou comply not with his wish, I will furnish him with goods of my own
monies.” Quoth Abd al-Rahman, “I fear strangerhood for him, inasmuch as
travel is the worst of trouble;” but she said, “There is no harm in
strangerhood for him when it leadeth to gaining good; and, if we consent
not, our son will go away and we shall seek him and not find him and be
dishonoured among the folk.” The merchant accepted his wife’s counsel
and provided his son with merchandise to the value of ninety thousand
gold pieces, whilst his mother gave him a purse containing forty
bezel-stones, jewels of price, the least of the value of one of which
was five hundred ducats, saying, “O my son, be careful of this jewellery
for ’twill be of service to thee.” Thereupon Kamar al-Zaman took the
jewels and set out for Bassorah,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-Zaman
took the jewels and set out for Bassorah after he had laid them in a
belt, which he buckled about his waist; and he stayed not till there
remained aught but a day’s journey between that city and himself; when
the Arabs came out upon him and stripped him naked and slew his men and
servants; but he lay himself down among the slain and wallowed in their
blood, so that the wildlings took him for dead and left him without even
turning him over and made off with their booty. When the Arabs had gone
their ways, Kamar al-Zaman arose, having naught left but the jewels in
his girdle, and fared on nor ceased faring till he came to Bassorah. It
chanced that his entry was on a Friday and the town was void of folk,
even as the Dervish had informed him. He found the market-streets
deserted and the shops wide open and full of goods; so he ate and drank
and looked about him. Presently, he heard a band of drums beating and
hid himself in a shop, till the slave-girls came up, when he looked at
them; and, seeing the young lady riding amongst them, love and longing
overcame him and desire and distraction overpowered him, so that he had
no force to stand. After awhile, the people reappeared and the bazars
filled. Whereupon he went to the market and repairing to a jeweller and
pulling out one of his forty gems sold it for a thousand dinars,
wherewith he returned to his place and passed the night there; and when
morning morrowed he changed his clothes and going to the Hammam came
forth as he were the full moon. Then he sold other four stones for four
thousand dinars and sauntered solacing himself about the main streets of
Bassorah, clad in the costliest of clothes; till he came to a market,
where he saw a barber’s shop. So he went in to the barber who shaved his
head; and, clapping up an acquaintance with him, said to him, “O my
father, I am a stranger in these parts and yesterday I entered this city
and found it void of folk, nor was there in it any living soul, man nor
Jinni. Then I saw a troop of slave-girls and amongst them a young lady
riding in state:” and he went on to tell him all he had seen. Said the
barber, “O my son, hast thou told any but me of this?”; and he said,
“No.” The other rejoined, “Then, O my son, beware thou mention this
before any but me; for all folk cannot keep a secret and thou art but a
little lad and I fear lest the talk travel from man to man, till it
reach those whom it concerneth and they slay thee. For know, O my son,
that this thou hast seen, none ever kenned nor knew in other than this
city. As for the people of Bassorah they are dying of this annoy; for
every Friday forenoon they shut up the dogs and cats, to hinder them
from going about the market-streets, and all the people of the city
enter the cathedral-mosques, where they lock the doors on them,[399] and
not one of them can pass about the bazar nor even look out of casement;
nor knoweth any the cause of this calamity. But, O my son, to-night I
will question my wife concerning the reason thereof, for she is a
midwife and entereth the houses of the notables and knoweth all the city
news. So Inshallah, do thou come to me to-morrow and I will tell thee
what she shall have told me.” With this Kamar al-Zaman pulled out a
handful of gold and said to him, “O my father, take this gold and give
it to thy wife, for she is become my mother.” Then he gave him a second
handful, saying, “Take this for thyself.” Whereupon quoth the barber, “O
my son, sit thou in thy place, till I go to my wife and ask her and
bring thee news of the true state of the case.” So saying, he left him
in the shop and going home, acquainted his wife with the young man’s
case, saying, “I would have thee tell me the truth of this
city-business, so I may report it to this young merchant, for he hath
set his heart on weeting the reason why men and beasts are forbidden the
market-streets every Friday forenoon; and methinks he is a lover, for he
is open-handed and liberal, and if we tell him what he would trow, we
shall get great good of him.” Quoth she, “Go back and say to him:—Come,
speak with thy mother, my wife, who sendeth her salam to thee and saith
to thee, Thy wish is won.” Accordingly he returned to the shop, where he
found Kamar al-Zaman sitting awaiting him and repeated him the very
words spoken by his spouse. Then he carried him in to her and she
welcomed him and bade him sit down; whereupon he pulled out an hundred
ducats and gave them to her, saying, “O my mother, tell me who this
young lady may be.” Said she, “Know, O my son, that there came a gem to
the Sultan of Bassorah from the King of Hind, and he was minded to have
it pierced. So he summoned all the jewellers in a body and said to them,
I wish you to drill me this jewel. Whoso pierceth it, I will give him
whatsoever he shall ask; but if he break it, I will cut off his head. At
this they were afraid and said, O King of the age, a jewel is soon
spoilt and there are few who can pierce them without injury, for most of
them have a flaw. So do not thou impose upon us a task to which we are
unable; for our hands cannot avail to drill this jewel. However, our
Shaykh[400] is more experienced than we.” Asked the King, “And who is
your Shaykh?”; and they answered, “Master Obayd: he is more versed than
we in this art and hath wealth galore and of skill great store.
Therefore do thou send for him to the presence and bid him pierce thee
this jewel.” Accordingly the King sent for Obayd and bade him pierce the
jewel, imposing on him the condition aforesaid. He took it and pierced
it to the liking of the King, who said to him, “Ask a boon of me, O
master!”; and said he, “O King of the age, allow me delay till
to-morrow.” Now the reason of this was that he wished to take counsel
with his wife, who is the young lady thou sawest riding in procession;
for he loveth her with exceeding love, and of the greatness of his
affection for her, he doth naught without consulting her; wherefore he
put off asking till the morrow. When he went home, he said to her:—“I
have pierced the King a jewel and he hath granted me a boon which I
deferred asking till to-morrow, that I might consult thee. Now what dost
thou wish, that I may ask it?” Quoth she, “We have riches such as fires
may not consume; but, an thou love me, ask of the King to make
proclamation in the streets of Bassorah that all the townsfolk shall
every Friday enter the mosques, two hours before the hour of prayer, so
none may abide in the town at all great or small except they be in the
mosques or in the houses and the doors be locked upon them, and that
every shop of the town be left open. Then will I ride with my
slave-women through the heart of the city and none shall look on me from
window or lattice; and every one whom I find abroad I will kill.”[401]
So he went in to the King and begged of him this boon, which he granted
him and caused proclamation to be made amongst the Bassorites——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Jeweller begged his boon, the King bade proclamation be made amongst the
Bassorites to the effect aforesaid, but the people objected that they
feared for their goods from the cats and dogs; wherefore he commanded to
shut the animals up till the folk should come forth from the Friday
prayers. So the jeweller’s wife fell to sallying forth every Friday, two
hours before the time of congregational prayer, and riding in state
through the city with her women; during which time none dareth pass
through the market-place nor look out of casement or lattice. “This,
then, is what thou wouldest know and I have told thee who she is; but, O
my son, was it thy desire only to have news of her or hast thou a mind
to meet her?” Answered he, “O my mother, ’tis my wish to foregather with
her.” Quoth she, “Tell me what valuables thou hast with thee”; and quoth
he, “O my mother, I have with me precious stones of four sorts, the
first worth five hundred dinars each, the second seven hundred, the
third eight hundred and the fourth a thousand ducats.” She asked, “Art
thou willing to spend four of these?”; and he answered, “I am ready to
spend all of them.” She rejoined, “Then, arise, O my son, and go
straight to thy lodging and take a bezel-gem of those worth five hundred
sequins, with which do thou repair to the jewel market and ask for the
shop of Master Obayd, the Shaykh of the Jewellers. Go thither and thou
wilt find him seated in his shop, clad in rich clothes, with workmen
under his hand. Salute him and sit down on the front shelf of his
shop;[402] then pull out the jewel and give it to him, saying, “O
master, take this stone and fashion it into a seal-ring for me with
gold. Make it not large, a Miskál[403] in weight and no more; but let
the fashion of it be thy fairest.” Then give him twenty dinars and to
each of his prentices a dinar. Sit with him awhile and talk with him and
if a beggar approach thee, show thy generosity by giving him a dinar, to
the intent that he may affect thee, and after this, leave him and return
to thy place. Pass the night there, and next morning, take an hundred
dinars and bring them and give them to thy father the barber, for he is
poor.” Quoth Kamar al-Zaman, “Be it so,” and returning to his
caravanserai, took a jewel worth five hundred gold pieces and went with
it to the jewel-bazar. There he enquired for the shop of Master Obayd,
Shaykh of the Jewellers, and they directed him thereto. So he went
thither and saw the Shaykh, a man of austere aspect and robed in
sumptuous raiment with four journeymen under his hand. He addressed him
with “Peace be upon you!” and the jeweller returned his greeting and
welcoming him, made him sit down. Then he brought out the jewel and
said, “O master, I wish thee to make me this jewel into a seal-ring with
gold. Let it be the weight of a Miskal and no more, but fashion it
excellently.” Then he pulled out twenty dinars and gave them to him,
saying, “This is the fee for chasing and the price of the ring shall
remain.”[404] And he gave each of the apprentices a gold piece,
wherefore they loved him, and so did Master Obayd. Then he sat talking
with the jeweller and whenever a beggar came up to him, he gave him a
gold piece and they all marvelled at his generosity. Now Master Obayd
had tools at home, like those he had in the shop, and whenever he was
minded to do any unusual piece of work, it was his custom to carry it
home and do it there, that his journeymen might not learn the secrets of
his wonderful workmanship.[405] His wife used to sit before him, and
when she was sitting thus and he looking upon her,[406] he would fashion
all manner of marvellously wroughten trinkets, such as were fit for none
but kings. So he went home and sat down to mould the ring with admirable
workmanship. When his wife saw him thus engaged, she asked him, “What
wilt thou do with this bezel-gem?”; and he answered, “I mean to make it
into a ring with gold, for ’tis worth five hundred dinars.” She
enquired, “For whom?”; and he answered, “For a young merchant, who is
fair of face, with eyes that wound with desire, and cheeks that strike
fire and mouth like the seal of Sulaymán and cheeks like the bloom of
Nu’mán and lips red as coralline and neck like the antelope’s long and
fine. His complexion is white dashed with red and he is well-bred,
pleasant and generous and doth thus and thus.” And he went on to
describe to her now his beauty and loveliness and then his perfection
and bounty and ceased not to vaunt his charms and the generosity of his
disposition, till he had made her in love with him; for there is no
sillier cuckold than he who vaunteth to his wife another man’s handsome
looks and unusual liberality in money matters. So, when desire rose high
in her, she said to him, “Is aught of my charms found in him?” Said he,
“He hath all thy beauties; and he is thy counterpart in qualities.
Meseemeth his age is even as thine and but that I fear to hurt thy
feelings, I would say that he is a thousand times handsomer than thou
art.” She was silent, yet the fire of fondness was kindled in her heart.
And the jeweller ceased not to talk with her and to set out Kamar
al-Zaman’s charms before her till he had made an end of moulding the
ring; when he gave it to her and she put it on her finger, which it
fitted exactly. Quoth she, “O my lord, my heart loveth this ring and I
long for it to be mine and will not take it from my finger.” Quoth he,
“Have patience! The owner of it is generous, and I will seek to buy it
of him, and if he will sell it, I will bring it to thee. Or if he have
another such stone, I will buy it and fashion it for thee into a ring
like this.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the jeweller
said to his wife, “Have patience! The owner of it is generous and I will
seek to buy it of him; and, if he will sell it, I will bring it to thee;
or, if he have another such stone I will buy it and fashion it for thee
into a ring like this.” On this wise it fared with the jeweller and his
wife; but as regards Kamar al-Zaman, he passed the night in his lodging
and on the morrow he took an hundred dinars and carried them to the old
woman, the barber’s wife, saying to her, “Accept these gold pieces,” and
she replied, “Give them to thy father.” So he gave them to the barber
and she asked, “Hast thou done as I bade thee?” He answered, “Yes,” and
she said, “Go now to the Shaykh, the jeweller, and if he give thee the
ring, put it on the tip of thy finger and pull it off in haste and say
to him, O master, thou hast made a mistake; the ring is too tight. He
will say, O merchant, shall I break it and mould it again larger? And do
thou say, It booteth not to break it and fashion it anew. Take it and
give it to one of thy slave-women. Then pull out another stone worth
seven hundred dinars and say to him, Take this stone and set it for me,
for ’tis handsomer than the other. Give him thirty dinars and to each of
the prentices two, saying, These gold pieces are for the chasing and the
price of the ring shall remain. Then return to thy lodging for the night
and on the morrow bring me two hundred ducats, and I will complete thee
the rest of the device.” So the youth went to the jeweller, who welcomed
him and made him sit down in his shop; and he asked him, “Hast thou done
my need?” “Yes,” answered Obayd and brought out to him the seal-ring;
whereupon he set it on his finger-tip and pulling it off in haste,
cried, “Thou hast made a mistake, O master;” and threw it to him,
saying, “’Tis too strait for my finger.” Asked the jeweller, “O
merchant, shall I make it larger?” But he answered, “Not so; take it as
a gift and give it to one of thy slave-girls. Its worth is trifling,
some five hundred dinars; so it booteth not to fashion it over again.”
Then he brought out to him another stone worth seven hundred sequins and
said to him, “Set this for me: ’tis a finer gem.” Moreover he gave him
thirty dinars and to each of his workmen two. Quoth Obayd, “O my lord we
will take the price of the ring when we have made it.”[407] But Kamar
al-Zaman said, “This is for the chasing, and the price of the ring
remains over.” So saying, he went away home, leaving the jeweller and
his men amazed at the excess of his generosity. Presently the jeweller
returned to his wife and said, “O Halímah,[408] never did I set eyes on
a more generous than this young man, and as for thee, thy luck is good,
for he hath given me the ring without price, saying, Give it to one of
thy slave-women.” And he told her what had passed, adding, “Methinks
this youth is none of the sons of the merchants, but that he is of the
sons of the Kings and Sultans.” Now the more he praised him, the more
she waxed in love-longing, passion and distraction for him. So she took
the ring and put it on her finger, whilst the jeweller made another one,
a little larger than the first. When he had finished moulding it, she
put it on her finger, under the first, and said, “Look, O my lord, how
well the two rings show on my finger! I wish they were both mine.” Said
he, “Patience! It may be I shall buy thee this second one.” Then he lay
that night and on the morrow he took the ring and went to his shop. As
for Kamar al-Zaman, as soon as it was day, he repaired to the barber’s
wife and gave her two hundred dinars. Quoth she, “Go to the jeweller and
when he giveth thee the ring, put it on thy finger and pull it off again
in haste, saying:—Thou hast made a mistake, O master! This ring is too
large. A master like thee, when the like of me cometh to him with a
piece of work, it behoveth him to take right measure; and if thou hadst
measured my finger, thou hadst not erred. Then pull out another stone
worth a thousand dinars and say to him:—Take this and set it, and give
this ring to one of thy slave-women. Give him forty ducats and to each
of his journeyman three, saying, This is for the chasing, and for the
cost of the ring, that shall remain. And see what he will say. Then
bring three hundred dinars and give them to thy father the barber, that
he may mend his fortune withal, for he is a poor man.” Answered Kamar
al-Zaman, “I hear and obey,” and betook himself to the jeweller, who
welcomed him and making him sit down, gave him the ring. He took it and
put it on his finger; then pulled it off in haste and said, “It behoveth
a master like thee, when the like of me bringeth him a piece of work, to
take his measure. Hadst thou measured my finger, thou hadst not erred;
but take it and give it to one of thy slave-women.” Then he brought out
to him a stone worth a thousand sequins and said to him, “Take this and
set it in a signet-ring for me after the measure of my finger.” Quoth
Obayd, “Thou hast spoken sooth and art in the right;” and took his
measure, whereupon he pulled out forty gold pieces and gave them to him,
saying, “Take these for the chasing and the price of the ring shall
remain.” Cried the jeweller, “O my lord, how much hire have we taken of
thee! Verily, thy bounty to us is great!” “No harm,” replied Kamar
al-Zaman and sat talking with him awhile and giving a dinar to every
beggar who passed by the shop. Then he left him and went away, whilst
the jeweller returned home and said to his wife, “How generous is this
young merchant! Never did I set eyes on a more open-handed or a comelier
than he, no, nor a sweeter of speech.” And he went on to recount to her
his charms and generosity and was loud in his praise. Cried she, “O thou
lack-tact,[409] since thou notest these qualities in him, and indeed he
hath given thee two seal-rings of price, it behoveth thee to invite him
and make him an entertainment and entreat him lovingly. When he seest
that thou affectest him and cometh to our place, we shall surely get
great good of him; and if thou grudge him the banquet do thou bid him
and I will entertain him of my monies.” Quoth he, “Dost thou know me to
be niggardly, that thou sayest this Say?”; and quoth she, “Thou art no
niggard, but thou lackest tact. Invite him this very night and come not
without him. An he refuse, conjure him by the divorce oath and be
persistent with him.” “On my head and eyes,” answered he and moulded the
ring till he had finished it, after which he passed the night and went
forth on the morrow to his shop and sat there. On this wise it was with
him; but as for Kamar al-Zaman, he took three hundred dinars and
carrying them to the old wife, gave them to her for the barber, her
husband. Said she, “Most like he will invite thee to his house this day;
and if he do this and thou pass the night there, tell me in the morning
what befalleth thee and bring with thee four hundred dinars and give
them to thy father.” Answered he, “Hearing and obeying;” and as often as
he ran out of money, he would sell some of his stones. So he repaired to
the jeweller, who rose to him and received him with open arms, greeted
him heartily and clapped up companionship with him. Then he gave him the
ring, and he found it after the measure of his finger and said to the
jeweller, “Allah bless thee, O prince of artists! The setting is
conformable but the stone is not to my liking.”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Seventieth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-Zaman
said to the jeweller, “The setting is conformable to my wishes, but the
stone is not to my liking. I have a handsomer than this: so take the
seal-ring and give it to one of thy slave-women.” Then he gave him a
fourth stone and an hundred dinars, saying, “Take thy hire and excuse
the trouble we have given thee.” Obayd replied, “O merchant, all the
trouble thou hast given us thou hast requited us and hast overwhelmed us
with thy great bounties: and indeed my heart is taken with love of thee
and I cannot brook parting from thee. So, Allah upon thee, be thou my
guest this night and heal my heart.” He rejoined, “So be it; but needs
must I go to my Khan, that I may give a charge to my domestics and tell
them that I shall sleep abroad to-night, so they may not expect me.”
“Where dost thou lodge?” asked the jeweller; and he answered, “In such a
Khan.” Quoth Obayd, “I will come for thee there;” and quoth the other,
“’Tis well.” So the jeweller repaired to the Khan before sundown,
fearing lest his wife should be anangered with him, if he returned home
without his guest; and, carrying Kamar al-Zaman to his house, seated him
in a saloon that had not its match. Halimah saw him, as he entered, and
was ravished with him. They talked till supper was served when they ate
and drank; after which appeared coffee and sherbets, and the jeweller
ceased not to entertain him with talk till eventide, when they prayed
the obligatory prayers. Then entered a handmaid with two cups[410] of
night drink, which when they had drunk, drowsiness overcame them and
they slept. Presently in came the jeweller’s wife and seeing them
asleep, looked upon Kamar al-Zaman’s face and her wit was confounded at
his beauty. Said she, “How can he sleep who loveth the fair?” and,
turning him over on his back, sat astraddle upon his breast. Then, in
the mania of her passion for him, she rained down kisses on his cheeks,
till she left a mark upon them and they became exceeding red and his
cheek bones shone; and, she sucked his lips, till the blood ran out into
her mouth; but with all this, her fire was not quenched nor her thirst
assuaged. She ceased not to kiss and clip him and twine leg with leg,
till the fore-brow of Morn grew white and the dawn broke forth in light;
when she put in his pocket four cockals[411] and went away. Then she
sent her maid with something like snuff, which she applied to their
nostrils and they sneezed and awoke, when the slave-girl said, “O my
lords, prayer is a duty; so rise ye and pray the dawn-prayer.” And she
brought them basin and ewer.[412] Quoth Kaman al-Zamar “O master, ’tis
late and we have overslept ourselves;” and quoth the jeweller, “O my
friend verily the air of this room is heavy; for, whenever I sleep in
it, this happens to me.” Rejoined Kamar al-Zaman, “True,” and proceeded
to make the Wuzu ablution; but, when he put the water to his face, his
cheeks and lips burned him. Cried he, “Prodigious! If the air of the
room be heavy and we have been drowned in sleep, what aileth my cheeks
and lips that they burn me?” And he said to the jeweller, “O master, my
cheeks and lips burn me.” The other replied, “I guess this cometh of the
mosquito-bites.” “Strange!” said Kamar al-Zaman. “Hath this thing
happened to thee?” Replied Obayd, “No! But whenever I have by me a guest
like thee, he complaineth in the morning of the mosquito-bites, and this
happeneth only when he is like thee beardless. If he be bearded the
mosquitoes sting him not, and naught hindereth them from me but my
beard. It seems mosquitoes love not bearded men.”[413] Rejoined Kamar
al-Zaman, “True.” Then the maid brought them early breakfast and they
broke their fast and went out. Kamar al-Zaman betook himself to the old
woman, who exclaimed, when she saw him, “I see the marks of joyance on
thy face: tell me what thou hast seen.” Said he, “I have seen nothing.
Only I supped with the house-master in a saloon and prayed the
night-prayer, after which we fell asleep and woke not till morning.” She
laughed and said, “What be those marks on thy cheeks and lips?” He
answered, “’Twas the mosquitoes of the saloon that did this with me;”
and she rejoined, “’Tis well. But did the same thing betide the house
master?” He retorted, “Nay; but he told me that the mosquitoes of that
saloon molest not bearded men, but sting those only who have no hair on
face, and that whenever he hath for guest one who is beardless, the
stranger awaketh complaining of the mosquito-bites; whereas an he have a
beard, there befalleth him naught of this.” Said she, “Sooth thou
speakest: but say me, sawest thou aught save this?” And he answered, “I
found four cockals in my pocket.” Quoth she, “Show them to me.” So he
gave them to her and she laughed and said, “Thy mistress laid these in
thy pocket.” He asked, “How so?” And she answered, “’Tis as if she said
to thee, in the language of signs:[414]—An thou wert in love, thou
wouldst not sleep, for a lover sleepeth not: but thou has not ceased to
be a child and fit for nothing but to play with these cockals. So what
drave thee to fall in love with the fair? Now she came to thee by night
and finding thee asleep, scored thy cheeks with her kisses and left thee
this sign. But that will not suffice her of thee and she will certainly
send her husband to invite thee again to-night; so, when thou goest home
with him, hasten not to fall asleep, and on the morrow bring me five
hundred dinars and come and acquaint me with what hath passed, and I
will perfect for thee the device.” Answered he, “I hear and obey,” and
went back to the Khan. Thus it befel him; but as regards the jeweller’s
wife, she said to her husband, “Is the guest gone?” Answered he, “Yes,
but, O Halimah,[415] the mosquitoes plagued him last night and scarified
his cheeks and lips, and indeed I was abashed before him.” She rejoined,
“This is the wont of the mosquitoes of our saloon; for they love none
save the beardless. But do thou invite him again to-night.” So he
repaired to the Khan where the youth abode, and bidding him, carried him
to his house, where they ate and drank and prayed the night-prayer in
the saloon, after which the slave-girl entered and gave each of them a
cup of night-drink,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Seventy-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the slave-girl
went in to the twain and gave each of them a cup of night-drink, and
they drank and fell asleep. Presently, in came Halimah and said, “O
good-for-nothing, how canst thou sleep and call thyself a lover? A lover
sleepeth not!” Then she mounted on his breast and ceased not to come
down upon him with kisses and caresses, biting and sucking his lips and
so forth, till the morning, when she put in his pocket a knife and sent
her handmaid to arouse them. And when the youth awoke, his cheeks were
on fire, for excess of redness, and his lips like coral, for dint of
sucking and kissing. Quoth the jeweller, “Did the mosquitoes plague thee
last night?”; and quoth the other, “Nay!”; for he now knew the conceit
and left complaining. Then he felt the knife in his pocket and was
silent; but when he had broken his fast and drunk coffee, he left the
jeweller and going to the Khan; took five hundred dinars of gold and
carried them to the old woman, to whom he related what had passed,
saying, “I slept despite myself, and when I woke at dawn I found nothing
but a knife in my pocket.” Exclaimed the old trot, “May Allah protect
thee from her this next night! For she saith to thee by this sign, An
thou sleep again, I will cut thy throat. Thou wilt once more be bidden
to the jeweller’s house to-night,[416] and if thou sleep, she will slay
thee.” Said he, “What is to be done?”; and said she, “Tell me what thou
atest and drankest before sleeping.” Quoth he, “We supped as was our
wont and prayed the night-prayer, after which there came in to us a
maid, who gave each of us a cup of night-drink, which when I had drunk,
I fell asleep and awoke not till the morning.” Quoth the old woman, “The
mischief is in the cup: so, when the maid giveth it to thee, take it
from her, but drink not and wait till the master of the house have
drunken and fallen asleep; then say to her, Give me a draught of water,
and she will go to fetch thee the gugglet. Then do thou empty the cup
behind the pillow and lie down and feign sleep. So when she cometh back
with the gugglet, she will deem that thou hast fallen asleep, after
having drunk off the cup, and will leave thee; and presently the case
will appear to thee; but beware of disobeying my bidding.” Answered he,
“I hear and I obey,” and returned to the Khan. Meanwhile the jeweller’s
wife said to her husband, “A guest’s due honour is three nights’
entertainment: so do thou invite him a third time”; whereupon he betook
himself to the youth and inviting him, carried him home and sat down
with him in the saloon. When they had supped and prayed the
night-prayer, behold, in came the handmaid and gave each of them a cup.
Her master drank and fell asleep; but Kamar al-Zaman forbore to drink,
whereupon quoth the maid, “Wilt thou not drink, O my lord?” Answered he,
“I am athirst, bring me the gugglet.” Accordingly she went to fetch it,
and he emptied the cup behind the pillow and lay down. When the slave
girl returned, she saw him lying down and going to her mistress said,
“He hath drunk off the cup and fallen asleep;” whereupon quoth Halimah
to herself, “Verily, his death is better than his life.” Then, taking a
sharp knife, she went in to him, saying, “Three times, and thou notedst
not the sign, O fool![417] So now I will rip up thy maw.” When he saw
her making for him knife in hand, he opened his eyes and rose, laughing;
whereupon said she, “’Twas not of thine own wit, that thou camest at the
meaning of the sign, but by the help of some wily cheat; so tell me
whence thou hadst this knowledge.” “From an old woman,” replied he,
“between whom and me befel such and such;” and he told her all that had
passed. Quoth she, “To-morrow go thou forth from us and seek her and
say, Hast thou any further device in store? And if she answer, I have,
do thou rejoin, Then do thy best that I may enjoy her publicly. But, if
she say, I have no means of doing that, and this is the last of my
devices, put her away from thy thought, and to-morrow night my husband
will come to thee and invite thee. Do thou come with him and tell me and
I will consider what remaineth to be done.” Answered he, “There is no
harm in that!” Then he spent the rest of the night with her in embracing
and clipping, plying the particle of copulation in concert[418] and
joining the conjunctive with the conjoined,[419] whilst her husband was
as a cast-out nunnation of construction.[420] And they ceased not to be
thus till morning, when she said to him, “’Tis not a night of thee that
will content me, nor a day; no, nor yet a month nor a year; but it’s my
intent to abide with thee the rest of my life. Wait, however, till I
play my husband a trick which would baffle the keenest-witted and win
for us our wishes. I will cause doubt to enter into him, so that he
shall divorce me, whereupon I will marry thee and go with thee to thine
own country; I will also transport all his monies and hoards to thy
lodging and will contrive thee the ruin of his dwelling-place and the
blotting out of his traces. But do thou hearken to my speech and obey me
in that I shall say to thee and gainsay me not.” He replied, “I hear and
I obey: in me there is none opposition.” Then said she, “Go to the Khan
and, when my husband cometh to thee and inviteth thee, say to him:—O my
brother, a son of Adam is apt to be burdensome, and when his visits grow
over frequent, both generous and niggard loathe him.[421] How then shall
I go with thee every night and lie I and thee, on the saloon? An thou
wax not chagrined with me, thy Harim will bear me grudge, for that I
hinder thee from thine. Therefore if thou have a mind to my company,
take me a house beside thine own and we will abide thus, now I sitting
with thee till the time of sleep, and now with me thou. Then I will go
to my place and thou to thy Harim and this will be a better rede than
that I hinder thee from thy Harim every night. Then will he come to me
and take counsel with me, and I will advise him to turn out our
neighbour, for the house wherein he liveth is our house and he renteth
it of us; and once thou art in the house, Allah will make easy to us the
rest of our scheme.” And presently she added, “Go now and do as I bid
thee.” Answered he, “I hear and obey;” whereupon she left him and went
away, whilst he lay down and feigned to be asleep. Presently, the
handmaid came and aroused them; and when the jeweller awoke, he said to
his guest, “O merchant have the mosquitoes worried thee?” He replied,
“No,” and Obayd said, “Belike thou art grown used to them.” Then they
broke their fast and drank coffee, after which they fared forth to their
affairs, and Kamar al-Zaman betook himself to the old crone, and related
to her what had passed,——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

[Illustration]


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Kamar
al-Zaman betook himself to the old crone, he related to her what had
passed, saying, “She spake to me this and that, and I answered her thus
and thus. Now say me, hast thou any farther device for bringing me to
enjoy her publicly?” Quoth she, “O my son, here endeth my contrivance,
and now I am at the term of my devices.” Upon this he left her and
returned to the Khan where, as eventide evened, the jeweller came to him
and invited him. He said, “I cannot go with thee.” Asked the merchant,
“Why so? I love thee and cannot brook separation from thee. Allah upon
thee come with me!” The other replied, “An it be thy wish to continue
our comradeship and keep up the friendship betwixt thee and me, take me
a house by the side of thine own, and when thou wilt, thou shalt pass
the evening with me and I with thee; but, as soon as the time of sleep
cometh, each of us shall hie him to his own home and lie there.” Quoth
Obayd, “I have a house adjoining mine, which is my own property: so go
thou with me to-night and to-morrow I will have the house untenanted for
thee.” Accordingly he went with him and they supped and prayed the
night-prayer, after which the jeweller drank the cup of drugged[422]
liquor and fell asleep: but in Kamar al-Zaman’s cup there was no trick;
so he drank it and slept not. Then came the jeweller’s wife and sat
chatting with him through the dark hours, whilst her husband lay like a
corpse. When he awoke in the morning as of wont, he sent for his tenant
and said to him, “O man, quit me the house, for I have need of it.” “On
my head and eyes,” answered the other and voided the house to him,
whereupon Kamar al-Zaman took up his abode therein and transported
thither all his baggage. The jeweller passed that evening with him, then
went to his own house. On the next day, his wife sent for a cunning
builder and bribed him with money to make her an underground-way[423]
from her chamber to Kamar al-Zaman’s house, with a trap-door under the
earth. So, before the youth was ware, she came in to him with two bags
of money and he said to her, “Whence comest thou?” She showed him the
tunnel and said to him, “Take these two bags of his money.” Then she sat
with him, the twain toying and tumbling together till the morning, when
she said, “Wait for me, till I go to him and wake him, so he may go to
his shop, and I return to thee.” He sat expecting her, whilst she went
away and awoke her husband, who made the Wuzu-ablution and prayed and
went to his shop. As soon as he was gone, she took four bags and,
carrying them through the Souterrain to Kamar al-Zaman, said to him,
“Store these up;” then she sat with him awhile, after which she retired
to her home and he betook himself to the bazar. When he returned at
sundown, he found in his house ten purses and jewels and much besides.
Presently the jeweller came to him and carried him to his own house,
where they passed the evening in the saloon, till the handmaid came in
according to custom, and brought them the drink. Her master drank and
fell asleep, whilst naught betided Kamar al-Zaman for that his cup was
wholesome and there was no trick therein. Then came Halimah who sat down
a-toying with him, whilst the slave-girl transported the jeweller’s
goods to Kamar al-Zaman’s house by the secret passage. Thus they did
till morning, when the handmaid awoke her lord and gave them to drink
coffee, after which they went each his own way. On the third day the
wife brought out to him a knife of her husband’s, which he had chased
and wrought with his own hand, and which he priced at five hundred
dinars. But there was no knife like it and because of the eagerness with
which folk sought it of him, he had laid it up in a chest and could not
bring himself to sell it to any one in creation. Quoth she, “Take this
knife and set it in thy waist-shawl and go to my husband and sit with
him. Then pull out the knife and say to him, “O master, look at this
knife I bought to-day and tell me if I have the worst or the best of the
bargain. He will know it, but will be ashamed to say to thee, This is my
knife; so he will ask thee, Whence didst thou buy it and for how much?;
and do thou make answer:—I saw two Levantines[424] disputing and one
said to the other, Where hast thou been? Quoth his companion, I have
been with my mistress, and whenever I foregather with her, she giveth me
ten dirhams; but this day she said to me, My hand is empty of silver for
thee to-day, but take this knife of my husband’s. So I took it and
intend to sell it. The knife pleased me and hearing his tale I said to
him, Wilt thou sell it to me? when he replied, Buy. So I got it of him
for three hundred gold pieces and I wonder whether it was cheap or dear.
And note what he will say to thee. Then talk with him awhile and rise
and come back to me in haste. Thou wilt find me awaiting thee at the
tunnel-mouth, and do thou give me the knife.” Replied Kamar al-Zaman, “I
hear and I obey,” and taking the knife set it in his waist-shawl. Then
he went to the shop of the jeweller, who saluted him with the salam and
welcomed him and made him sit down. He spied the knife in his
waist-shawl, at which he wondered and said to himself, “That is my
knife: who can have conveyed it to this merchant?” And he fell a-musing
and saying in his mind, “I wonder an it be my knife or a knife like it!”
Presently Kamar al-Zaman pulled it out and said to him, “Harkye, master;
take this knife and look at it.” Obayd took it and knew it right well,
but was ashamed to say, “This is my knife;”——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say,


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
jeweller took the knife from Kamar al-Zaman, he knew it, but was ashamed
to say, “This is my knife.” So he asked, “Where didst thou buy it?”
Kamar al-Zaman answered as Halimah had charged him, and the jeweller
said, “The knife was cheap at that price, for it is worth five hundred
dinars.” But fire flamed in his heart and his hands were tied from
working at his craft. Kamar al-Zaman continued to talk with him, whilst
he was drowned in the sea of solicitudes, and for fifty words wherewith
the youth bespoke him, he answered him but one; for his heart ached and
his frame was racked and his thoughts were troubled and he was even as
saith the poet:—

 I have no words though folk would have me talk ✿ And who bespeak me find
    me thought-waylaid:
 Plunged in the Care-sea’s undiscovered depths, ✿ Nor aught of difference
    see ’twixt man and maid!

When Kamar al-Zaman saw his case thus changed, he said to him, “Belike
thou art busy at this present,” and leaving him, returned in hottest
haste to his own house, where he found Halimah standing at the
passage-door awaiting him. Quoth she “Hast thou done as I bade thee?”;
and quoth he, “Yes.” She asked, “What said he to thee?”; and he
answered, “He told me that the knife was cheap at that price, for that
it was worth five hundred dinars: but I could see that he was troubled;
so I left him and know not what befel him after that.” Cried she, “Give
me the knife and reck thou not of him.” Then she took the knife and
restoring it to its place, sat down. Now after Kamar al-Zaman’s
departure fire flamed in the jeweller’s heart and suspicion was sore
upon him and he said to himself, “Needs must I get up and go look for
the knife and cut down doubt with certainty.” So he rose and repaired to
his house and went in to his wife, snorting like a dragon;[425] and she
said to him, “What mattereth thee, O my lord?” He asked, “Where is my
knife?” and she answered, “In the chest,” and smote hand upon breast,
saying, “O my grief! Belike thou hast fallen out with some one and art
come to fetch the knife to smite him withal.” Said he, “Give me the
knife. Let me see it.” But said she, “Not till thou swear to me that
thou wilt not smite any one therewith.” So he swore this to her and she
opened the chest and brought out to him the knife and he fell to turning
it over, saying, “Verily, this is a wondrous thing!” Then quoth he to
her, “Take it and lay it back in its place;” and she, “Tell me the
meaning of all this.” He answered, “I saw with our friend a knife like
this,” and told her all that had passed between himself and the youth,
adding, “But, when I saw it in the chest, my suspicion ended in
certainty.” Said she, “Haply thou misdoubtedst of me and deemedst that I
was the Levantine’s mistress and had given him the knife.” He replied,
“Yes; I had my doubts of this; but, when I saw the knife, suspicion was
lifted from my heart.” Rejoined she, “O man, there is now no good in
thee!” And he fell to excusing himself to her, till he appeased her;
after which he fared forth and returned to his shop. Next day, she gave
Kamar al-Zaman her husband’s watch, which he had made with his own hand
and whereof none had the like, saying, “Go to his shop and sit by his
side and say to him:—I saw again to-day him whom I saw yesterday. He had
a watch in his hand and said to me, Wilt thou buy this watch? Quoth I,
Whence hadst thou it?; and quoth he, I was with my mistress and she gave
me this watch. So I bought it of him for eight-and-fifty gold pieces.
Look at it: is it cheap at that price or dear? Note what he shall say to
thee; then return to me in haste and give me the watch.” So Kamar
al-Zaman repaired to the jeweller and did with him as she had charged
him. When Obayd saw the watch, he said, “This is worth seven hundred
ducats;” and suspicion entered into him. Then the youth left him and
returning to the wife, gave her back the watch. Presently, her husband
suddenly came in snorting, and said to her, “Where is my watch?” Said
she, “Here it is;” and he cried, “Give it to me.” So she brought it to
him and he exclaimed, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great!”; and she too exclaimed, “O man, there
is something the matter with thee. Tell me what it is.” He replied,
“What shall I say? Verily, I am bewildered by these chances!” And he
recited these couplets[426]:—

             Although the Merciful be doubtless with me,
             Yet am I sore bewildered, for new griefs
             Have compassed me about, or ere I knew it,
             I have endured till Patience self became
             Impatient of my patience.—I have endured
             Waiting till Heaven fulfil my destiny.—
             I have endured till e’en endurance owned
             How I bore up with her; (a thing more bitter
             Than bitter aloes) yet though a bitterer thing
             Is not, than is that drug, it were more bitter
             To me should Patience leave me unsustained.

Then said he to his wife, “O woman, I saw with the merchant our friend,
first my knife, which I knew, for that its fashion was a device of my
own wit, nor doth its like exist; and he told me of it a story that
troubled the heart: so I came back and found it at home. Again to-day I
see him with the watch, whose fashion also is of my own device, nor is
there the fellow of it in Bassorah, and of this also he told me a story
that saddened my heart. Wherefore I am bewildered in my wit and know not
what is to come to me.” Quoth she, “The purport of thy speech is that
thou suspectedst me of being the friend of that merchant and his leman,
and eke of giving him thy good; so thou camest to question me and make
proof of my perfidy; and, had I not shown thee the knife and the watch,
thou hadst been certified of my treason. But since, O man, thou deemest
me this ill deme, henceforth I will never again break with thee bread
nor drain with thee drink, for I loathe thee with the loathing of
prohibition.[427]” So he gentled her and excused himself till he had
appeased her and returned, repenting him of having bespoken her thus, to
his shop, where he sat——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
jeweller quitted his wife, he repented having bespoken her thus and,
returning to his shop, he sat there in disquiet sore and anxiety galore,
between belief and unbelief. About eventide he went home alone, not
bringing Kamar al-Zaman with him: whereupon quoth his wife, “Where is
the merchant?”; and quoth he, “In his lodgings.” She asked, “Is the
friendship between thee and him grown cold?” and he answered, “By Allah,
I have taken a dislike to him, because of that which hath betided me
from him.”[428] Quoth she, “Go fetch him, to please me.” So he arose and
went in to Kamar al-Zaman in his house; where he saw his own goods
strewn about and knew them. At this sight, fire was kindled in his heart
and he fell a-sighing. Quoth the youth, “How is it that I see thee
melancholy?” Obayd was ashamed to say, “Here are my goods in thy house:
who brought them hither?”; so he replied only, “A vexation hath betided
me; but come thou with me to my house, that we may solace ourselves
there.” The other rejoined, “Let me be in my place: I will not go with
thee.” But the jeweller conjured him to come and took him to his house,
where they supped and passed the evening together, Kamar al-Zaman
talking with the jeweller, who was drowned in the sea of solicitude and
for a hundred words, wherewith the guest bespoke him, answered him only
one word. Presently, the handmaid brought them two cups of drink, as
usual, and they drank; whereupon the jeweller fell asleep, but the youth
abode on wake, because his cup was not drugged. Then came Halimah and
said to her lover, “How deemest thou of yonder cornuted, who is drunken
in his heedlessness and weeteth not the wiles of women? There is no help
for it but that I cozen him into divorcing me. To-morrow, I will
disguise myself as a slave-girl and walk after thee to his shop, where
do thou say to him, O master, I went to-day into the Khan of
Al-Yasirjíyah, where I saw this damsel and bought her for a thousand
dinars. Look at her for me and tell me whether she was cheap at that
price or dear. Then uncover to him my face and breasts and show all of
me to him; after which do thou carry me back to thy house, whence I will
go to my chamber by the secret passage, so I may see the issue of our
affair with him.” Then the twain passed the night in mirth and
merriment, converse and good cheer, dalliance and delight till dawn,
when she returned to her own place and sent the handmaid to arouse her
lawful lord and her lover. Accordingly they arose and prayed the
dawn-prayer and brake their fast and drank coffee, after which Obayd
repaired to his shop and Kamar al-Zaman betook himself to his own house.
Presently, in came Halimah to him by the tunnel, in the guise of a
slave-girl, and indeed she was by birth a slave-girl.[429] Then he went
out and she walked behind him, till he came to the jeweller’s shop and
saluting him, sat down and said, “O master, I went into the Khan of
Al-Yasirjiyah to-day, to look about me, and saw this damsel in the
broker’s hands. She pleased me; so I bought her for a thousand dinars
and I would have thee look upon her and see if she be cheap at that
price or no.” So saying, he uncovered her face and the jeweller saw her
to be his own wife, clad in her costliest clothes, tricked out in her
finest trinkets and kohl’d and henna’d, even as she was wont to adorn
herself before him in the house. He knew with full knowledge her face
and dress and trinkets, for those he had wrought with his own hand, and
he saw on her fingers the seal-rings he had newly made for Kamar
al-Zaman, whereby he was certified with entire assurance that she was
indeed his very wife. So he asked her, “What is thy name, O
slave-girl?”; and she answered, “Halimah,” naming to him her own name;
whereat he was amazed and said to the youth, “For how much didst thou
buy her?” He replied, “For a thousand dinars”; and the jeweller
rejoined, “Thou hast gotten her gratis; for her rings and clothes and
trinkets are worth more than that.” Said Kamar al-Zaman, “May Allah
rejoice thee with good news! Since she pleaseth thee, I will carry her
to my house;” and Obayd said, “Do thy will.” So he took her off to his
house, whence she passed through the secret passage to her own apartment
and sat there. Meanwhile, fire flamed in the jeweller’s heart and he
said to himself, “I will go see my wife. If she be at home, this
slave-girl must be her counterpart, and glory be to Him who alone hath
no counterpart! But, if she be not at home, ’tis she herself without a
doubt.” Then he set off running, and coming to his house, found his wife
sitting in the same clothes and ornaments he had seen upon her in the
shop; whereupon he beat hand upon hand, saying, “There is no Majesty and
there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!” “O man,”
asked she, “art thou mad or what aileth thee? ’Tis not thy wont to do
thus, and needs must it be that something hath befallen thee.” Answered
he, “If thou wilt have me tell thee be not vexed.” Quoth she, “Say on”;
so he said, “Our friend the merchant hath bought a slave-girl, whose
shape is as thy shape and her height as thy height; moreover, her name
is even as thy name and her apparel is the like of thine apparel. Brief,
she resembleth thee in all her attributes, and on her fingers are
seal-rings like thy seal-rings and her trinkets are as thy trinkets. So,
when he displayed her to me, methought it was thyself and I was
perplexed concerning my case. Would we had never seen this merchant nor
companied with him; and would he had never left his own country and we
had not known him, for he hath troubled my life which before was serene,
causing ill-feeling to succeed good faith and making doubt to enter into
my heart.” Said she, “Look in my face, belike I am she who was with him
and he is my lover and I disguised myself as a slave-girl and agreed
with him that he should display me to thee, so he might lay a snare for
thee.” He replied, “What words are these? Indeed, I never suspected that
thou wouldst do the like of this deed.” Now this jeweller was unversed
in the wiles of women and knew not how they deal with men, nor had he
heard the saying of him who said:—

 A heart bore thee off in chase of the fair, ✿ As fled Youth and came Age
    wi’ his hoary hair:
 Laylà troubles me and love-joys are far; ✿ And rival and risks brings us
    cark and care.
 An would’st ask me of woman, behold I am ✿ In physic of womankind wise
    and ware:
 When grizzleth man’s head and his monies fail, ✿ His lot in their love
    is a poor affair.

Nor that of another:[430]—

 Gainsay women; he obeyeth Allah best, who saith them nay And he prospers
    not who giveth them his bridle-rein to sway;
 For they’ll hinder him from winning to perfection in his gifts, Though a
    thousand years he study, seeking after wisdom’s way.

And a third:—

 Women Satans are, made for woe of man: ✿ To Allah I fly from such
    Satanesses!
 Whom they lure by their love he to grief shall come ✿ And lose bliss of
    world and the Faith that blesses.

Said she, “Here am I sitting in my chamber; so go thou to him forthright
and knock at the door and contrive to go in to him quickly. An thou see
the damsel with him ’tis a slave-girl of his who resembleth me (and
Glory be to Him who hath no resemblance![431]) But, an thou see no
slave-girl with him, then am I myself she whom thou sawest with him in
the shop, and thine ill thought of me will be stablished.” “True,”
answered Obayd, and went out leaving her, whereupon she passed through
the hidden passage and seating herself by Kamar al-Zaman, told him what
had passed, saying, “Open the door quickly and show me to him.” Now, as
they were talking, behold, there came a knocking at the door. Quoth
Kamar al-Zaman, “Who is at the door?”; and quoth the jeweller, “I, thy
friend; thou displayedst to me thy slave-girl in the bazar, and I
rejoiced for thee in her, but my joy in her was not completed; so open
the door and let me look at her again.” Rejoined he, “So be it,” and
opened the door to him, whereupon he saw his wife sitting by him. She
rose and kissed their hands; and he looked at her; then she talked with
him awhile and he saw her not to be distinguished from his wife in aught
and said, “Allah createth whatso He will.” Then he went away more
disheartened than before and returned to his own house where he saw his
wife sitting, for she had foregone him thither by the souterrain.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young lady
forewent her spouse by the souterrain as he fared through the door and
sat down in her upper chamber;[432] so as soon as he entered she asked
him, “What hast thou seen?” and he answered, “I found her with her
master; and she resembleth thee.” Then said she, “Off to thy shop and
let this suffice thee of ignoble suspicion and never again deem ill of
me.” Said he, “So be it: accord me pardon for what is past.” And she,
“Allah grant thee grace!”;[433] whereupon he kissed her right and left
and went back to his shop. Then she again betook herself to Kamar
al-Zaman through the underground passage, with four bags of money, and
said to him, “Equip thyself at once for the road and be ready to carry
off the money without delay, against I devise for thee the device I have
in mind.” So he went out and purchased mules and loaded them and made
ready a travelling litter, he also bought Mamelukes and eunuchs and
sending, without let or hindrance, the whole without the city, returned
to Halimah and said to her, “I have made an end of my affairs.” Quoth
she, “And I on my side am ready; for I have transported to thy house all
the rest of his monies and treasures and have left him nor little nor
much, whereof he may avail himself. All this is of my love for thee, O
dearling of my heart, for I would sacrifice my husband to thee a
thousand times. But now it behoveth, thou go to him and farewell him,
saying:—I purpose to depart after three days and am come to bid thee
adieu: so do thou reckon what I owe thee for the hire of the house, that
I may send it to thee and acquit my conscience. Note his reply and
return to me and tell me; for I can no more: I have done my best, by
cozening him, to anger him with me and cause him to put me away, but I
find him none the less infatuated with me. So nothing will serve us but
to depart to thine own country.” And quoth he, “O rare! an but swevens
prove true!”[434] Then he went to the jeweller’s shop and sitting down
by him, said to him, “O master, I set out for home in three days’ time,
and am come to farewell thee. So I would have thee reckon what I owe
thee for the hire of the house, that I may pay it to thee and acquit my
conscience.” Answered Obayd, “What talk is this? Verily, ’tis I who am
indebted to thee. By Allah, I will take nothing from thee for the rent
of the house, for thou hast brought down blessings upon us! However,
thou desolatest me by thy departure, and but that it is forbidden to me,
I would certainly oppose thee and hinder thee from returning to thy
country and kinsfolk.” Then he took leave of him, whilst they both wept
with sore weeping and the jeweller went with him, and when they entered
Kamar al-Zaman’s house, there they found Halimah who stood before them
and served them; but when Obayd returned home, he found her sitting
there; nor did he cease to see her thus in each house in turn, for the
space of three days, when she said to Kamar al-Zaman, “Now have I
transported to thee all that he hath of monies and hoards and carpets
and things of price, and there remaineth with him naught save the
slave-girl, who used to come in to you with the night-drink: but I
cannot part with her, for that she is my kinswoman and she is dear to me
as a confidante. So I will beat her and be wroth with her and when my
spouse cometh home, I will say to him:—I can no longer put up with this
slave-girl nor stay in the house with her; so take her and sell her.
Accordingly he will sell her and do thou buy her, that we may carry her
with us.” Answered he, “No harm in that.” So she beat the girl and when
the jeweller came in, he found her weeping and asked her why she wept.
Quoth she, “My mistress hath beaten me.” He then went in to his wife and
said to her, “What hath that accursed girl done, that thou hast beaten
her?” She replied, “O man, I have but one word to say to thee, and ’tis
that I can no longer bear the sight of this girl; so take her and sell
her, or else divorce me.” Quoth he, “I will sell her that I may not
cross thee in aught;” and when he went out to go to the shop he took her
and passed with her by Kamar al-Zaman. No sooner had he gone out than
his wife slipped through the underground passage to Kamar al-Zaman, who
placed her in the litter, before the Shaykh her husband reached him.
When the jeweller came up and the lover saw the slave-girl with him, he
asked him, “What girl is this?”; and the other answered, “’Tis my
slave-girl who used to serve us with the night-drink; she hath disobeyed
her mistress who is wroth with her and hath bidden me sell her.” Quoth
the youth, “An her mistress have taken an aversion to her, there is for
her no abiding with her; but sell her to me, that I may smell your scent
in her, and I will make her handmaid to my slave Halimah.” “Good,”
answered Obayd: “take her.” Asked Kamar al-Zaman, “What is her price?”;
but the jeweller said, “I will take nothing from thee, for thou hast
been bountiful to us.” So he accepted her from him and said to Halimah,
“Kiss thy lord’s hand.” Accordingly, she came out from the litter and
kissing Obayd’s hand, remounted, whilst he looked hard at her. Then said
Kamar al-Zaman, “I commend thee to Allah, O Master Obayd! Acquit my
conscience of responsibility.[435]” Answered the jeweller, “Allah acquit
thee! and carry thee safe to thy family!” Then he bade him farewell and
went to his shop weeping, and indeed it was grievous to him to part from
Kamar al-Zaman, for that he had been his friend and friendship hath its
debtorship; yet he rejoiced in the dispelling of the doubts which had
befallen him anent his wife, since the young man was now gone and his
suspicions had not been stablished. Such was his case; but as regards
Kamar al-Zaman, the young lady said to him, “An thou wish for safety,
travel with me by other than the wonted way.”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Halimah
said to Kamar al-Zaman, “An thou wish for safety, travel with me by
other than the wonted way,” he replied, “Hearing and obeying;” and,
taking a road other than that used by folk, fared on without ceasing
from region to region till he reached the confines of Egypt-land[436]
and sent his sire a letter by a runner. Now his father the merchant Abd
al-Rahman was sitting in the market among the merchants, with a heart on
fire for separation from his son, because no news of the youth had
reached him since the day of his departure; and while he was in such
case the runner came up and cried, “O my lords, which of you is called
the merchant Abd al-Rahman?” They said, “What wouldst thou of him?”; and
he said, “I have a letter for him from his son Kamar al-Zaman, whom I
left at Al-Arísh.[437]” At this Abd al-Rahman rejoiced and his breast
was broadened and the merchants rejoiced for him and gave him joy of his
son’s safety. Then he opened the letter and read as follows:—“From Kamar
al-Zaman to the merchant Abd al-Rahman. And after Peace be upon thee and
upon all the merchants! An ye ask concerning us, to Allah be the praise
and the thanks. Indeed we have sold and bought and gained and are come
back in health, wealth and weal.” Whereupon Abd al-Rahman opened the
door[438] of rejoicing and made banquets and gave feasts and
entertainments galore, sending for instruments of music and addressing
himself to festivities after rarest fashion. When Kamar al-Zaman came to
Al-Sálihiyah,[439] his father and all the merchants went forth to meet
him, and Abd al-Rahman embraced him and strained him to his bosom and
sobbed till he swooned away. When he came to himself he said, “Oh, ’tis
a boon day O my son, whereon the Omnipotent Protector hath reunited us
with thee!” And he repeated the words of the bard:—

 The return of the friend is the best of all boons, ✿ And the joy-cup
    circles o’ morns and noons:
 So well come, welcome, fair welcome to thee, ✿ The light of the time and
    the moon o’ full moons.

Then, for excess of joy, he poured forth a flood of tears from his eyes
and he recited also these two couplets:—

 The Moon o’ the Time,[440] shows unveilèd light; ✿ And, his journey
    done, at our door doth alight:
 His locks as the nights of his absence are black ✿ And the sun upstands
    from his collar’s[441] white.

Then the merchants came up to him and saluting him, saw with him many
loads and servants and a travelling litter enclosed in a spacious
circle.[442] So they took him and carried him home; and when Halimah
came forth from the litter, his father held her a seduction to all who
beheld her. So they opened her an upper chamber, as it were a treasure
from which the talismans had been loosed;[443] and when his mother saw
her, she was ravished with her and deemed her a Queen of the wives of
the Kings. So she rejoiced in her and questioned her; and she answered,
“I am wife to thy son;” and the mother rejoined, “Since he is wedded to
thee we must make thee a splendid marriage-feast, that we may rejoice in
thee and in my son.” On this wise it befel her; but as regards the
merchant Abd al-Rahman, when the folk had dispersed and each had wended
his way, he foregathered with his son and said to him, “O my son, what
is this slave-girl thou hast brought with thee and for how much didst
thou buy her[444]?” Kamar al-Zaman said, “O my father, she is no
slave-girl; but ’tis she who was the cause of my going abroad.” Asked
his sire, “How so?”; and he answered, “’Tis she whom the Dervish
described to us the night he lay with us; for indeed my hopes clave to
her from that moment and I sought not to travel save on account of her.
The Arabs came out upon me by the way and stripped me and took my money
and goods, so that I entered Bassorah alone and there befel me there
such and such things;” and he went on to relate to his parent all that
had befallen him from commencement to conclusion. Now when he had made
an end of his story, his father said to him, “O my son, and after all
this didst thou marry her?” “No; but I have promised her marriage.” “Is
it thine intent to marry her?” “An thou bid me marry her, I will do so;
otherwise I will not marry her.” Thereupon quoth his father, “An thou
marry her, I am quit of thee in this world and in the next, and I shall
be incensed against thee with sore indignation. How canst thou wed her,
seeing that she hath dealt thus with her husband? For, even as she did
with her spouse for thy sake, so will she do the like with thee for
another’s sake, because she is a traitress and in a traitor there is no
trusting. Wherefore an thou disobey me, I shall be wroth with thee; but,
an thou give ear to my word, I will seek thee out a girl handsomer than
she, who shall be pure and pious, and marry thee to her, though I spend
all my substance upon her; and I will make thee a wedding without equal
and will glory in thee and in her; for ’tis better that folk should say,
Such an one hath married such an one’s daughter, than that they say, He
hath wedded a slave-girl sans birth or worth.” And he went on to
persuade his son to give up marrying her, by citing in support of his
say, proofs, stories, examples, verses and moral instances, till Kamar
al-Zaman exclaimed, “O my father, since the case is thus, ’tis not right
and proper that I marry her.” And when his father heard him speak on
such wise, he kissed him between the eyes, saying, “Thou art my very
son, and as I live, O my son, I will assuredly marry thee to a girl who
hath not her equal!” Then the merchant set Obayd’s wife and her handmaid
in a chamber high up in the house and, before locking the door upon the
twain, he appointed a black slave-girl to carry them their meat and
drink and he said to Halimah, “Ye shall abide imprisoned in this
chamber, thou and thy maid, till I find one who will buy you, when I
will sell you to him. An ye resist, I will slay ye both, for thou art a
traitress, and there is no good in thee.” Answered she, “Do thy will: I
deserve all thou canst do with me.” Then he locked the door upon them
and gave his Harim a charge respecting them, saying, “Let none go up to
them nor speak with them, save the black slave-girl who shall give them
their meat and drink through the casement of the upper chamber.” So she
abode with her maid, weeping and repenting her of that which she had
done with her spouse. Meanwhile Abd al-Rahman sent out the
marriage-brokers to look out a maid of birth and worth for his son, and
the women ceased not to make search, and as often as they saw one girl,
they heard of a fairer than she, till they came to the house of the
Shaykh al-Islam[445] and saw his daughter. In her they found a virgin
whose equal was not in Cairo for beauty and loveliness, symmetry and
perfect grace, and she was a thousand-fold handsomer than the wife of
Obayd. So they told Abd al-Rahman of her and he and the notables
repaired to her father and sought her in wedlock of him. Then they wrote
out the marriage contract and made her a splendid wedding; after which
Abd al-Rahman gave bride-feasts and held open house forty days. On the
first day, he invited the doctors of the law and they held a splendid
nativity[446]: and on the morrow, he invited all the merchants, and so
on during the rest of the forty days, making a banquet every day to one
or other class of folk, till he had bidden all the Olema and Emirs and
Antients[447] and Magistrates, whilst the kettle-drums were drummed and
the pipes were piped and the merchant sat to greet the guests, with his
son by his side, that he might solace himself by gazing on the folk, as
they ate from the trays. Each night Abd al-Rahman illuminated the street
and the quarter with lamps and there came every one of the mimes and
jugglers and mountebanks and played all manner play; and indeed it was a
peerless wedding. On the last day he invited the Fakirs, the poor and
the needy, far and near, and they flocked in troops and ate, whilst the
merchant sat, with his son by his side.[448] And among the paupers,
behold, entered Shaykh Obayd the jeweller and he was naked and weary and
bare on his face the marks of wayfare. When Kamar al-Zaman saw him, he
knew him and said to his sire, “Look, O my father, at yonder poor man
who is but now come in by the door.” So he looked and saw him clad in
worn clothes and on him a patched gown[449] worth two dirhams: his face
was yellow and he was covered with dust and was as he were an offcast of
the pilgrims.[450] He was groaning as groaneth a sick man in need,
walking with a tottering gait and swaying now to the right and then to
the left, and in him was realized his saying who said[451]:—

 Lack-gold abaseth man and doth his worth away, Even as the setting sun
    that pales with ended day.
 He passeth ’mongst the folk and fain would hide his head; And when
    alone, he weeps with tears that never stay.
 Absent, none taketh heed to him or his concerns; Present, he hath no
    part in life or pleasance aye.
 By Allah, whenas men with poverty are cursed, But strangers midst their
    kin and countrymen are they!

And the saying of another:—

 The poor man fares by everything opposed: ✿ On him to shut the door
    Earth ne’er shall fail:
 Thou seest men abhor him sans a sin, ✿ And foes he finds tho’ none the
    cause can tell:
 The very dogs, when sighting wealthy man, ✿ Fawn at his feet and wag the
    flattering tail;
 Yet, an some day a pauper loon they sight, ✿ All at him bark and,
    gnashing fangs, assail.

And how well quoth a third:—

 If generous youth be blessed with luck and wealth, ✿ Displeasures fly
    his path and perils fleet:
 His enviers pimp for him and par’site-wise ✿ E’en without tryst his
    mistress hastes to meet.
 When loud he farts they say “How well he sings!” ✿ And when he
    fizzles[452] cry they, “Oh, how sweet!”

——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


      Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when his son
said to Abd al-Rahman, “Look at yonder pauper!” he asked, “O my son, who
is this?” And Kamar al-Zaman answered, “This is Master Obayd the
jeweller, husband of the woman who is imprisoned with us.” Quoth Abd
al-Rahman, “Is this he of whom thou toldest me?”; and quoth his son,
“Yes; and indeed I wot him right well.” Now the manner of Obayd’s coming
thither was on this wise. When he had farewelled Kamar al-Zaman, he went
to his shop and thence going home, laid his hand on the door, whereupon
it opened and he entered and found neither his wife nor the slave-girl,
but saw the house in sorriest plight, quoting in mute speech his saying
who said[453]:—

 The chambers were like a bee-hive well stocked: when their bees quitted
    it, they became empty.

When he saw the house void, he turned right and left and presently went
round about the place, like a madman, but came upon no one. Then he
opened the door of his treasure-closet, but found therein naught of his
money nor his hoards; whereupon he recovered from the intoxication of
fancy and shook off his infatuation and knew that it was his wife
herself who had turned the tables upon him and outwitted him with her
wiles. He wept for that which had befallen him, but kept his affair
secret, so none of his foes might exult over him nor any of his friends
be troubled, knowing that, if he disclosed his secret, it would bring
him naught but dishonour and contumely from the folk; wherefore he said
in himself, “O Obayd, hide that which hath betided thee of affliction
and ruination; it behoveth thee to do in accordance with his saying who
said:—

 If a man’s breast with bane he hides be straitenèd, ✿ The breast that
    tells its hidden bale is straiter still.”

Then he locked up his house and, making for his shop, gave it in charge
of one of his apprentices to whom said he, “My friend the young merchant
hath invited me to accompany him to Cairo, for solacing ourselves with
the sight of the city, and sweareth that he will not march except he
carry us with him, me and my wife. So, O my son, I make thee my steward
in the shop, and if the King ask for me, say thou to him:—He is gone
with his Harim to the Holy House of Allah[454].” Then he sold some of
his effects and bought camels and mules and Mamelukes, together with a
slave-girl[455], and placing her in a litter, set out from Bassorah
after ten days. His friends farewelled him and none doubted but that he
had taken his wife and gone on the Pilgrimage, and the folk rejoiced in
this, for that Allah had delivered them from being shut up in the
mosques and houses every Friday. Quoth some of them, “Allah grant he may
never return to Bassorah, so we may no more be boxed up in the mosques
and houses every Friday!”; for that this usage had caused the people of
Bassorah exceeding vexation. Quoth another, “Methinks he will not return
from this journey, by reason of the much-praying of the people of
Bassorah against him[456].” And yet another, “An he return, ’twill not
be but in reversed case[457].” So the folk rejoiced with exceeding joy
in the jeweller’s departure, after they had been in mighty great
chagrin, and even their cats and dogs were comforted. When Friday came
round, however, the crier proclaimed as usual that the people should
repair to the mosques two hours before prayer-time or else hide
themselves in their houses, together with their cats and dogs; whereat
their breasts were straitened and they assembled in general assembly and
betaking themselves to the King’s divan, stood between his hands and
said, “O King of the age, the jeweller hath taken his Harim and departed
on the pilgrimage to the Holy House of Allah: so the cause of our
restraint hath ceased to be, and why therefore are we now shut up?”
Quoth the King, “How came this traitor to depart without telling me?
But, when he cometh back from his journey, all will not be save
well[458]: so go ye to your shops and sell and buy, for this vexation is
removed from you.” Thus far concerning the King and the Bassorites; but
as for the jeweller, he fared on ten days’ journey, and as he drew near
Baghdad, there befel him that which had befallen Kamar al-Zaman, before
his entering Bassorah; for the Arabs[459] came out upon him and stripped
him and took all he had and he escaped only by feigning himself dead. As
soon as they were gone, he rose and fared on, naked as he was, till he
came to a village, where Allah inclined to him the hearts of certain
kindly folk, who covered his shame with some old clothes; and he asked
his way, begging from town to town, till he reached the city of Cairo
the God-guarded. There, burning with hunger, he went about alms-seeking
in the market-streets, till one of the townsfolk said to him, “O poor
man, off with thee to the house of the wedding-festival and eat and
drink; for to-day there is open table for paupers and strangers.” Quoth
he, “I know not the way thither”: and quoth the other, “Follow me and I
will show it to thee.” He followed him, till he brought him to the house
of Abd al-Rahman and said to him, “This is the house of the wedding;
enter and fear not, for there is no doorkeeper at the door of the
festival.” Accordingly he entered and Kamar al-Zaman knew him and told
his sire who said, “O my son, leave him at this present: belike he is
anhungered: so let him eat his sufficiency and recover himself and after
we will send for him.” So they waited till Obayd had eaten his fill and
washed his hands and drunk coffee and sherbets of sugar flavoured with
musk and ambergris and was about to go out, when Abd al-Rahman sent
after him a page who said to him, “Come, O stranger, and speak with the
merchant Abd al-Rahman.” “Who is he?” asked Obayd; and the man answered,
“He is the master of the feast.” Thereupon the jeweller turned back,
thinking that he meant to give him a gift, and coming up to Abd
al-Rahman, saw his friend Kamar al-Zaman and went nigh to lose his
senses for shame before him. But Kamar al-Zaman rose to him and
embracing him, saluted him with the salam, and they both wept with sore
weeping. Then he seated him by his side and Abd al-Rahman said to his
son, “O destitute of good taste, this is no way to receive friends! Send
him first to the Hammam and despatch after him a suit of clothes of the
choicest, worth a thousand dinars[460].” Accordingly they carried him to
the bath, where they washed his body and clad him in a costly suit, and
he became as he were Consul of the Merchants. Meanwhile the bystanders
questioned Kamar al-Zaman of him, saying, “who is this and whence
knowest thou him?” Quoth he, “This is my friend, who lodged me in his
house and to whom I am indebted for favours without number, for that he
entreated me with exceeding kindness. He is a man of competence and
condition and by trade a jeweller, in which craft he hath no equal. The
King of Bassorah loveth him dearly and holdeth him in high honour and
his word is law with him.” And he went on to enlarge before them on his
praises, saying, “Verily, he did with me thus and thus and I have shame
of him and know not how to requite him his generous dealing with me.”
Nor did he leave to extol him, till his worth was magnified to the
bystanders and he became venerable in their eyes; so they said, “We will
all do him his due and honour him for thy sake. But we would fain know
the reason why he hath departed his native land and the cause of his
coming hither and what Allah hath done with him, that he is reduced to
this plight?” Replied Kamar al-Zaman, “O folk, marvel not, for a son of
Adam is still subject to Fate and Fortune, and what while he abideth in
this world, he is not safe from calamities. Indeed he spake truly who
said these couplets:—

 The world tears man to shreds, so be thou not ✿ Of those whom lure of
    rank and title draws:
 Nay; ’ware of slips and turn from sin aside ✿ And ken that bane and bale
    are worldly laws:
 How oft high Fortune falls by least mishap ✿ And all things bear inbred
    of change a cause!

Know that I entered Bassorah in yet iller case and worse distress than
this man, for that he entered Cairo with his shame hidden by rags; but I
indeed came into his town with my nakedness uncovered, one hand behind
and another before; and none availed me but Allah and this dear man. Now
the reason of this was that the Arabs stripped me and took my camels and
mules and loads and slaughtered my pages and serving-men; but I lay down
among the slain and they thought that I was dead, so they went away and
left me. Then I arose and walked on, mother-naked, till I came to
Bassorah where this man met me and clothed me and lodged me in his
house; he also furnished me with money, and all I have brought back with
me I owe to none save to Allah’s goodness and his goodness. When I
departed, he gave me great store of wealth and I returned to the city of
my birth with a heart at ease. I left him in competence and condition,
and haply there hath befallen him some bale of the banes of Time, that
hath forced him to quit his kinsfolk and country, and there happened to
him by the way the like of what happened to me. There is nothing strange
in this; but now it behoveth me to requite him his noble dealing with me
and do according to the saying of him who saith:—

 O who praisest Time with the fairest appraise, ✿ Knowest thou what Time
    hath made and unmade?
 What thou dost at least be it kindly done,[461] ✿ For with pay he pays
    shall man be repaid.

As they were talking and telling the tale, behold, up came Obayd as he
were Consul[462] of the Merchants; whereupon they all rose to salute him
and seated him in the place of honour. Then said Kamar al-Zaman to him,
“O my friend, verily, thy day[463] is blessed and fortunate! There is no
need to relate to me a thing that befel me before thee. If the Arabs
have stripped thee and robbed thee of thy wealth, verily our money is
the ransom of our bodies, so let not thy soul be troubled; for I entered
thy city naked and thou clothedst me and entreatedst me generously, and
I owe thee many a kindness. But I will requite thee.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-Zaman
said to Master Obayd the jeweller, “Verily I entered thy city naked and
thou clothedst me and I owe thee many a kindness. But I will requite
thee and do with thee even as thou didst with me; nay, more: so be of
good cheer and eyes clear of tear.” And he went on to soothe him and
hinder him from speech, lest he should name his wife and what she had
done with him; nor did he cease to ply him with saws and moral instances
and verses and conceits and stories and legends and console him, till
the jeweller saw his drift and took the hint and kept silence concerning
the past, diverting himself with the tales and rare anecdotes he heard
and repeating in himself these lines:—

 On the brow of the World is a writ; an thereon thou look, ✿ Its contents
    will compel thine eyes tears of blood to rain:
 For the World never handed to humans a cup with its right, ✿ But with
    left it compelled them a beaker of ruin to drain.

Then Kamar al-Zaman and his father took Obayd and carrying him into the
saloon of the Harim, shut themselves up with him; and Abd al-Rahman said
to him, “We did not hinder thee from speaking before the folk, but for
fear of dishonour to thee and to us: but now we are private; so tell me
all that hath passed between thee and thy wife and my son.” So he told
him all, from beginning to end, and when he had made an end of his
story, Abd al-Rahman asked him, “Was the fault with my son or with thy
wife?” He answered, “By Allah, thy son was not to blame, for men must
needs lust after women, and ’tis the bounden duty of women to defend
themselves from men. So the sin lieth with my wife, who played me false
and did with me these deeds[464].” Then Abd al-Rahman arose and taking
his son aside, said to him, “O my son, we have proved his wife and know
her to be a traitress; and now I mean to prove him and see if he be a
man of honour and manliness, or a wittol.[465]” “How so?” asked Kamar
al-Zaman; and Abd al-Rahman answered, “I mean to urge him to make peace
with his wife, and if he consent thereto and forgive her, I will smite
him with a sword and slay him and kill her after, her and her maid, for
there is no good in the life of a cuckold and a quean[466]; but, if he
turn from her with aversion I will marry him to thy sister and give him
more of wealth than that thou tookest from him.” Then he went back to
Obayd and said to him, “O master, verily, the commerce of women
requireth patience and magnanimity and whoso loveth them hath need of
fortitude, for that they order themselves viper-wise towards men and
evilly entreat them, by reason of their superiority over them in beauty
and loveliness: wherefore they magnify themselves and belittle men. This
is notably the case when their husbands show them affection; for then
they requite them with hauteur and coquetry and harsh dealing of all
kinds. But, if a man be wroth whenever he seeth in his wife aught that
offendeth him, there can be no fellowship between them; nor can any hit
it off with them who is not magnanimous and long-suffering; and unless a
man bear with his wife and requite her foul doing with forgiveness, he
shall get no good of her conversation. Indeed, it hath been said of
them:—Were they in the sky, the necks of men would incline them-wards;
and he who hath the power and pardoneth, his reward is with Allah. Now
this woman is thy wife and thy companion and she hath long consorted
with thee; wherefore it behoveth that thou entreat her with indulgence
which in fellowship is of the essentials of success. Furthermore, women
fail in wit and Faith,[467] and if she have sinned, she repenteth and
Inshallah she will not again return to that which she whilome did. So
’tis my rede that thou make peace with her and I will restore thee more
than the good she took; and if it please thee to abide with me, thou art
welcome, thou and she, and ye shall see naught but what shall joy you
both; but, an thou seek to return to thine own land. For that which
falleth out between a man and his wife is manifold, and it behoveth thee
to be indulgent and not take the way of the violent.” Said the jeweller,
“O my lord, and where is my wife?” and said Abd al-Rahman, “She is in
that upper chamber, go up to her and be easy with her, for my sake, and
trouble her not; for, when my son brought her hither, he would have
married her, but I forbade him from her and shut her up in yonder room,
and locked the door upon her saying in myself:—Haply her husband will
come and I will hand her over to him safe; for she is fair of favour,
and when a woman is like unto this one, it may not be that her husband
will let her go. What I counted on is come about and praised be Allah
Almighty for thy reunion with thy wife! As for my son, I have sought him
another woman in marriage and have married him to her: these banquets
and rejoicings are for his wedding, and to-night I bring him to his
bride. So here is the key of the chamber where thy wife is: take it and
open the door and go in to her and her handmaid and be buxom with her.
There shall be brought you meat and drink and thou shalt not come down
from her till thou have had thy fill of her.” Cried Obayd, “May Allah
requite thee for me with all good, O my lord!” and taking the key, went
up, rejoicing. The other thought his words had pleased him and that he
consented thereto; so he took the sword and following him unseen, stood
to espy what should happen between him and his wife. This is how it
fared with the merchant Abd al-Rahman; but as for the jeweller, when he
came to the chamber-door, he heard his wife weeping with sore weeping
for that Kamar al-Zaman had married another than her, and the handmaid
saying to her, “O my lady, how often have I warned thee and said, Thou
wilt get no good of this youth: so do thou leave his company. But thou
heededst not my words and spoiledst thy husband of all his goods and
gavest them to him. After the which thou forsookest thy place, of thine
fondness and infatuation for him, and camest with him to this country.
And now he hath cast thee out from his thought and married another and
hath made the issue of thy foolish fancy for him to be durance vile.”
Cried Halimah, “Be silent, O accursed! Though he be married to another,
yet some day needs must I occur to his thought. I cannot forget the
nights I have spent in his company and in any case I console myself with
his saying who said:—

 O my lords, shall he to your mind occur ✿ Who recurs to you only sans
    other mate?
 Grant Heaven you ne’er shall forget his state ✿ Who for state of you
    forgot own estate!

It cannot be but he will bethink him of my affect and converse and ask
for me, wherefore I will not turn from loving him nor change from
passion for him, though I perish in prison; for he is my love and my
leach[468] and my reliance is on him that he will yet return to me and
deal fondly with me.” When the jeweller heard his wife’s words, he went
in to her and said to her, “O traitress, thy hope in him is as the hope
of Iblis[469] in Heaven. All these vices were in thee and I knew not
thereof; for, had I been ware of one single vice, I had not kept thee
with me an hour. But now I am certified of this in thee, it behoveth me
to do thee die, although they put me to death for thee, O traitress!”
and he clutched her with both hands and repeated these two couplets:—

 O fair ones forth ye cast my faithful love ✿ With sin, nor had ye aught
    regard for right:
 How long I fondly clung to you, but now ✿ My love is loathing and I hate
    your sight.

Then he pressed hardly upon her windpipe and brake her neck, whereupon
her handmaid cried out “Alas, my mistress!” Said he, “O harlot, ’tis
thou who art to blame for all this, for that thou knewest this evil
inclination to be in her and toldest me not.[470]” Then he seized upon
her and strangled her. All this happened while Abd al-Rahman stood,
brand in hand, behind the door espying with his eyes and hearing with
his ears. Now when Obayd the jeweller had done this, apprehension came
upon him and he feared the issue of his affair and said to himself, “As
soon as the merchant learneth that I have killed them in his house, he
will surely slay me; yet I beseech Allah that He appoint the taking of
my life to be while I am in the True Belief!” And he abode bewildered
about his case and knew not what to do; but, as he was thus behold, in
came Abd al-Rahman from his lurking-place without the door and said to
him, “No harm shall befal thee, for indeed thou deservest safety. See
this sword in my hand. ’Twas in my mind to slay thee, hadst thou made
peace with her and restored her to favour, and I would also have slain
her and the maid. But since thou hast done this deed, welcome to thee
and again welcome! And I will reward thee by marrying thee to my
daughter, Kamar al-Zaman’s sister.” Then he carried him down and sent
for the woman who washed the dead: whereupon it was bruited abroad that
Kamar al-Zaman had brought with him two slave-girls from Bassorah and
that both had deceased. So the people began to condole with him saying,
“May thy head live!” and “May Allah compensate thee!” And they washed
and shrouded them and buried them, and none knew the truth of the
matter. Then Abd al-Rahman sent for the Shaykh al-Islam and all the
notables and said, “O Shaykh, draw up the contract of marriage between
my daughter Kaukab al-Saláh[471] and Master Obayd the jeweller and set
down that her dowry hath been paid to me in full.” So he wrote out the
contract and Abd al-Rahman gave the company to drink of sherbets, and
they made one wedding festival for the two brides the daughter of the
Shaykh al-Islam and Kamar al-Zaman’s sister; and paraded them in one
litter on one and the same night; after which they carried Kamar
al-Zaman and Obayd in procession together and brought them in to their
brides.[472] When the jeweller went in to Abd al-Rahman’s daughter, he
found her handsomer than Halimah and a thousand-fold lovelier. So he
took her maidenhead and on the morrow, he went to the Hammam with Kamar
al-Zaman. Then he abode with them awhile in pleasance and joyance, after
which he began to yearn for his native land: so he went in to Abd
al-Rahman and said to him, “O uncle, I long for my own country, for I
have there estates and effects, which I left in charge of one of my
prentices; and I am minded to journey thither that I may sell my
properties and return to thee. So wilt thou give me leave to go to my
country for that purpose?” Answered the merchant, “O my son, I give thee
leave to do this and there be no fault in thee or blame to thee for
these words, for ‘Love of mother-land is a part of Religion’; and he who
hath not good in his own country hath none in other folks’ country. But,
haply, an thou depart without thy wife, when thou art once come to thy
native place, it may seem good to thee to settle there, and thou wilt be
perplexed between returning to thy wife and sojourning in thine own
home; so it were the righter rede that thou carry thy wife with thee;
and after, an thou desire to return to us, return and welcome to you
both; for we are folk who know not divorce and no woman of us marrieth
twice, nor do we lightly discard a man.”[473] Quoth Obayd, “Uncle, I
fear me thy daughter will not consent to journey with me to my own
country.” Replied Abd al-Rahman, “O my son, we have no women amongst us
who gainsay their spouses, nor know we a wife who is wroth with her
man.” The jeweller cried, “Allah bless you and your women!” and going in
to his wife, said to her, “I am minded to go to my country: what sayst
thou?” Quoth she, “Indeed, my sire had the ordering of me, whilst I was
a maid, and when I married, the ordering all passed into the hands of my
lord and master, nor will I gainsay him.” Quoth Obayd, “Allah bless thee
and thy father, and have mercy on the womb that bare thee and the loins
that begat thee!” Then he cut his thongs[474] and applied himself to
making ready for his journey. His father-in-law gave him much good and
they took leave each of other, after which the jeweller and his wife
journeyed on without ceasing, till they reached Bassorah where his
kinsmen and comrades came out to meet him, doubting not but that he had
been in Al-Hijáz. Some rejoiced at his return, whilst others were vexed,
and the folk said one to another, “Now will he straiten us again every
Friday, as before, and we shall be shut up in the mosques and houses,
even to our cats and our dogs.” On such wise it fared with him; but as
regards the King of Bassorah, when he heard of his return, he was wroth
with him; and sending for him, upbraided him and said to him, “Why didst
thou depart, without letting me know of thy departure? Was I unable to
give thee somewhat wherewith thou mightest have succoured thyself in thy
pilgrimage to the Holy House of Allah?” Replied the jeweller, “Pardon, O
my lord! By Allah, I went not on the pilgrimage! but there have befallen
me such and such things.” Then he told him all that had befallen him
with his wife and with Abd al-Rahman of Cairo and how the merchant had
given him his daughter to wife, ending with these words, “And I have
brought her to Bassorah.” Said the King, “By the Lord, did I not fear
Allah the Most High, I would slay thee and marry this noble lady after
thy death, though I spent on her mints of money, because she befitteth
none but Kings. But Allah hath appointed her of thy portion and may He
bless thee in her! So look thou use her well.” Then he bestowed largesse
on the jeweller, who went out from before him and abode with his wife
five years, after which he was admitted to the mercy of the Almighty.
Presently the King sought his widow in wedlock; but she refused, saying,
“O King, never among my kindred was a woman who married again after her
husband’s death; wherefore I will never take another husband, nor will I
marry thee, no, though thou kill me.” Then he sent to her one who said,
“Dost thou seek to go to thy native land?” And she answered, “An thou do
good, thou shalt be requited therewith.” So he collected for her all the
jeweller’s wealth and added unto her of his own, after the measure of
his degree. Lastly he sent with her one of his Wazirs, a man famous for
goodness and piety, and an escort of five hundred horse, who journeyed
with her, till they brought her to her father; and in his home she
abode, without marrying again, till she died and they died all. So, if
this woman would not consent to replace her dead husband with a Sultan,
how shall she be compared with one who replaced her husband, whilst he
was yet alive, with a youth of unknown extraction and condition, and
especially when this was in lewd carriage and not by way of lawful
marriage? So he who deemeth all women alike,[475] there is no remedy for
the disease of his insanity. And glory be to Him to whom belongeth the
empire of the Seen and the Unseen and He is the Living, who dieth not!
And among the tales they tell, O auspicious King, is one of

-----

Footnote 375:

  Lane rejects this tale because it is “extremely objectionable; far
  more so than the title might lead me to expect.” But he quotes the
  following marginal note by his Shaykh:—“Many persons (women) reckon
  marrying a second time amongst the most disgraceful of actions. This
  opinion is commonest in the country-towns and villages; and my
  mother’s relations are thus distinguished; so that a woman of them,
  when her husband dieth or divorceth her while she is young, passeth in
  widowhood her life, however long it may be, and disdaineth to marry a
  second time.” I fear that this state of things belongs to the good old
  days now utterly gone by; and the loose rule of the stranger,
  especially the English, in Egypt will renew the scenes which
  characterised Sind when Sir Charles Napier hanged every husband who
  cut down an adulterous wife. I have elsewhere noticed the ignorant
  idea that Moslems deny to women souls and seats in Paradise, whilst
  Mohammed canonised two women in his own family. The theory arose with
  the “Fathers” of the Christian Church who simply exaggerated the
  misogyny of St. Paul. St. Ambrose commenting on Corinthians i. ii.,
  boldly says:—“Feminas ad imaginem Dei factas non esse.” St. Thomas
  Aquinas and his school adopted the Aristotelian view, “Mulier est
  erratum naturæ, et mas occasionatus, et per accidens generatur; atque
  idèo est monstrum.” For other instances see Bayle s. v. Gediacus
  (Revd. Simon of Brandebourg) who in 1695 published a “Defensio Sexus
  muliebris,” a refutation of an anti-Socinian satire or squib,
  “Disputatio perjucunda, Mulieres homines non esse,” Parisiis, 1693.
  But when Islam arose in the seventh century, the Christian learned
  cleverly affixed the stigma of their own misogyny upon the Moslems ad
  captandas fœminas and in Southern Europe the calumny still bears
  fruit. Mohammed (Koran, chapt. xxiv.) commands for the first time, in
  the sixth year of his mission, the veiling and, by inference, the
  seclusion of women, which was apparently unknown to the Badawin and,
  if practised in the cities was probably of the laxest. Nor can one but
  confess that such modified separation of the sexes, which it would be
  impossible to introduce into European manners, has great and notable
  advantages. It promotes the freest intercourse between man and man,
  and thus civilises what we call the “lower orders”: in no Moslem land,
  from Morocco to China, do we find the brutals without manners or
  morals which are bred by European and especially by English
  civilisation. For the same reason it enables women to enjoy fullest
  intimacy and friendship with one another, and we know that the best of
  both sexes are those who prefer the society of their own as opposed to
  “quite the lady’s man” and “quite the gentleman’s woman.” It also adds
  an important item to social decorum by abolishing _e.g._ such
  indecencies as the “ballroom _flirtation_”—a word which must be
  borrowed from us, not translated by foreigners. And especially it
  gives to religious meetings, a tone which the presence of women
  modifies and not for the better. Perhaps, the best form is that
  semi-seclusion of the sex, which prevailed in the heroic ages of
  Greece, Rome, and India (before the Moslem invasion), and which is
  perpetuated in Christian Armenia and in modern Hellas. It is a
  something between the conventual strictness of Al-Islam and the
  liberty, or rather licence, of the “Anglo-Saxon” and the
  “Anglo-American.” And when England shall have cast off that peculiar
  insularity which makes her differ from all civilised peoples, she will
  probably abolish three gross abuses, time-honoured scandals, which
  bear very heavily on women and children. The first is the Briton’s
  right to will property away from his wife and offspring. The second is
  the action for “breach of promise,” salving the broken heart with
  pounds, shillings, and pence: it should be treated simply as an
  exaggerated breach of contract. The third is the procedure popularly
  called “Crim. Con.,” and this is the most scandalous of all: the
  offence is against the rights of property, like robbery or burglary,
  and it ought to be treated criminally with fine, imprisonment and in
  cases with corporal punishment after the sensible procedure of Moslem
  law.

Footnote 376:

  “Moon of the age,” a name which has before occurred.

Footnote 377:

  The Malocchio or gettatura, so often noticed.

Footnote 378:

  The crescent of the month Zu ’l-Ka’dah when the Ramazan-fast is
  broken. This allusion is common. Comp. vol. i. 84.

Footnote 379:

  This line contains one of the Yes, Yes and No, No trifles alluded to
  in vol. ii. 60. Captain Lockett (M. A. 103) renders it “I saw a fawn
  upon a hillock whose beauty eclipsed the full moon. I said, What is
  thy name? she answered _Deer_. What my _Dear_ said I, but she replied,
  _no_, no!” To preserve the sound I have sacrificed sense: Lúlú is a
  pearl Lí? lí? (= for me, for me?) and Lá! Lá! = no! no! See vol. i.
  217. I should have explained a line which has puzzled some readers,

  “A sun (face) on wand (neck) in knoll of sand (hips) she showed” etc.

Footnote 380:

  Arab. “Al-huwayná,” a rare term.

Footnote 381:

  Bright in the eyes of the famishing who is allowed to break his fast.

Footnote 382:

  Mr. Payne reads “Maghrabi” = a Mauritanian, Marocean, the Moors (not
  the Moorish Jews or Arabs) being a race of Sodomites from highest to
  lowest. But the Mac. and Bul. Edit. have “Ajami.”

Footnote 383:

  For “Ishk uzri” = platonic love see vol. i. 232; ii. 104.

Footnote 384:

  Zaynab (Zenobia) and Zayd are generic names for women and men.

Footnote 385:

  _i.e._ He wrote “Kasídahs (= odes, elegies) after the fashion of the
  “Suspended Poems” which mostly open with the lover gazing upon the
  traces of the camp where his beloved had dwelt. The exaggerated
  conventionalism of such exordium shows that these early poems had been
  preceded by a host of earlier pieces which had been adopted as canons
  of poetry.

Footnote 386:

  The verses are very mal-à-propos, like many occurring in The Nights,
  for the maligned Shaykh is proof against all the seductions of the
  pretty boy and falls in love with a woman after the fashion of Don
  Quixote. Mr. Payne complains of the obscurity of the original owing to
  abuse of the figure enallage; but I find them explicit enough,
  referring to some debauched elder after the type of Abu Nowás.

Footnote 387:

  Arab. “’Irk” = a root which must here mean a sprig, a twig. The basil
  grows to a comparatively large size in the East.

Footnote 388:

  Arab. “Láit” = one connected with the tribe of Lot, see vol. v. 161.

Footnote 389:

  For the play upon “Sáki” (oblique case of sák, leg-calf) and Sáki a
  cupbearer see vol. ii. 327.

Footnote 390:

  “On a certain day the leg shall be bared and men shall be called upon
  to bow in adoration, but they shall not be able” (Koran, lxviii. 42).
  “Baring the leg” implies a grievous calamity, probably borrowed from
  the notion of tucking up the skirts and stripping for flight. On the
  dangerous San Francisco River one of the rapids is called
  “Tira-calcoens” = take off your trousers (Highlands of the Brazil, ii.
  35). But here the allusion is simply ludicrous and to a Moslem
  blasphemous.

Footnote 391:

  Arab. “Istahi,” a word of every day use in reproof. So the Hindost.
  “Kuchh sharm nahín?” hast thou no shame? Shame is a passion with
  Orientals and very little known to the West.

Footnote 392:

  _i.e._ Angels and men saying, “The Peace (of God) be on us and on all
  righteous servants of Allah!” This ends every prayer.

Footnote 393:

  Arab. “Al-Níyah,” the ceremonial purpose or intent to pray, without
  which prayer is null and void. See vol. v. 163. The words would be “I
  purpose to pray a two-bow prayer in this hour of deadly danger to my
  soul.” Concerning such prayer see vol. i. 142.

Footnote 394:

  Arab. “Sákin” = quiescent, Let a sleeping hound lie.

Footnote 395:

  Arab. “Ásár” lit. traces _i.e._ the works, the mighty signs and
  marvels.

Footnote 396:

  The mention of coffee now frequently occurs in this tale and in that
  which follows; the familiar use of it showing a comparatively late
  date, and not suggesting the copyist’s hand.

Footnote 397:

  Arab. “Al-Kahwah,” the place being called from its produce. See
  Pilgrimage i. 317–18.

Footnote 398:

  Arab. “Al-Ghurbah Kurbah:” the translation in the text is taken from
  my late friend Edward Eastwick, translator of the Gulistan and author
  of a host of works which show him to have been a ripe Oriental
  scholar.

Footnote 399:

  The fiction may have been suggested by the fact that in all Moslem
  cities from India to Barbary the inner and outer gates are carefully
  shut during the noontide devotions, _not_ “because Friday is the day
  on which creation was finished and Mohammed entered Al-Medinah;” but
  because there is a popular idea that in times now approaching the
  Christians will rise up against the Moslems during prayers and will
  repeat the “Sicilian Vespers.”

Footnote 400:

  _i.e._ the syndic of the Guild of Jewellers.

Footnote 401:

  This is an Arab Lady Godiva of the wrong sort.

Footnote 402:

  This is explained in my Pilgrimage i. 99 et seq.

Footnote 403:

  About three pennyweights. It varies, however, everywhere and in
  Morocco the “Mezkal” as they call it is an imaginary value, no such
  coin existing.

Footnote 404:

  _i.e._ over and above the value of the gold, etc.

Footnote 405:

  This was the custom of contemporary Europe and more than one master
  cutler has put to death an apprentice playing Peeping Tom to detect
  the secret of sword-making.

Footnote 406:

  Among Moslems husbands are divided into three species; (1) of “Bahr”
  who is married for love; (2) of “Dahr,” for defence against the world,
  and (3) of “Mahr” for marriage-settlements (money). Master Obayd was
  an unhappy compound of the two latter; but he did not cease to be a
  man of honour.

Footnote 407:

  The Mac. Edit. here is a mass of blunders and misprints.

Footnote 408:

  The Mac. Edit. everywhere calls her “Sabiyah” = the young lady and
  does not mention her name Halímah = the Mild, the Gentle till the
  cmlxxivth Night. I follow Mr. Payne’s example by introducing it
  earlier into the story, as it avoids vagueness and repetition of the
  indefinite.

Footnote 409:

  Arab. “Adím al-Zauk,” = without savour, applied to an insipid
  mannerless man as “bárid” (cold) is to a fool. “Ahl Zauk” is a man of
  pleasure, a voluptuary, a hedonist.

Footnote 410:

  Arab. “Finján” the egg-shell cups from which the Easterns still drink
  coffee.

Footnote 411:

  Arab. “Awáshik” a rare word, which Dozy translates “osselet” (or
  osselle) and Mr. Payne, “hucklebones,” concerning which he has obliged
  me with this note. Chambaud renders osselet by “petit os avec lequel
  les enfants jouent.” Hucklebone is the hip-bone but in the plural it
  applies to our cockals or cockles: Latham gives “hucklebone,” (or
  cockal), one of the small vertebræ of the coccygis, and Littleton
  translates “Talus,” a hucklebone, a bone to play with like a dye, a
  play called cockal. (So also in Rider). Hucklebones and knucklebones
  are syn.: but the latter is modern and liable to give a false idea,
  besides being tautological. It has nothing to do with the knuckles and
  derives from the German “Knöchel” (dialectically Knöchelein) a
  bonelet.

Footnote 412:

  For ablution after sleep and before prayer. The address of the
  slave-girl is perfectly natural; in a Moslem house we should hear it
  this day nor does it show the least sign of “frowardness.”

Footnote 413:

  The perfect stupidity of the old wittol is told with the driest Arab
  humour.

Footnote 414:

  This is a rechauffé of the Language of Signs in “Azíz and Azízah” vol.
  ii. 302.

Footnote 415:

  In the Mac. Edit. “Yá Fulánah” = O certain person.

Footnote 416:

  Arab. “Laylat al-Kábilah,” lit. = the coming night, our to-night; for
  which see vol. iii. 349.

Footnote 417:

  Arab. “Ya Ahmak!” which in Marocco means a madman, a maniac, a Santon.

Footnote 418:

  The whole passage has a grammatical double entendre whose application
  is palpable. Harf al-Jarr = a particle governing the noun in the
  genitive or a mode of thrusting and tumbling.

Footnote 419:

  Arab. Al-Silah = conjunctive (sentence), also coition; Al-Mausúl = the
  conjoined, a grammatical term for relative pronoun or particle.

Footnote 420:

  Arab. “Tanwín al-Izáfah ma’zúl” = the nunnation in construction cast
  out. “Tanwín” (nunnation) is pronouncing the vowels of the
  case-endings of a noun with n—un for u (nominative)—in for i
  (genitive) and—an for a (accusative). This nunnation expresses
  indefiniteness, _e.g._ “Malikun” = a king, any king. When the noun is
  made definite by the Ma’rifah or article (al), the Tanwín must be
  dropped, _e.g._ Al-Maliku = the King; Al-Malikun being a grammatical
  absurdity. In construction or regimen (izáfah) the nunnation must also
  disappear, as Maliku ’l-Hindi = the King of Hind (a King of Hind would
  be Malikun min Mulúki ’l-Hindi = a King from amongst the Kings of
  Hind). Thus whilst the wife and the lover were conjoined as much as
  might be, the hocussed and sleeping husband was dismissed (ma’zúl =
  degraded) like a nunnation dropped in construction. I may add that the
  terminal syllables are invariably dropped in popular parlance and none
  but Mr. G. Palgrave (who afterwards ignored his own assertion) ever
  found an Arab tribe actually using them in conversation although they
  are always pronounced when reading the Koran and poetry.

Footnote 421:

  This was a saying of Mohammed about over-frequency of visits, “Zur
  ghibban, tazid hubban” = call rarely that friendship last fairly. So
  the verse of Al-Mutanabbi,

                  “How oft familiarity breeds dislike.”

  Preston quotes Jesus ben Sirach, μὴ ἔμπιπτε ἵνα μὴ ἐπωσθῇς, καὶ μὴ
  μακρὰν ἀφίστω ἵνα μὴ ἐπιλησθῇς. Also Al-Hariri (Ass. xv. of “The
  Legal”; De Sacy p. 478 l. 2.) “Visit not your friend more than one day
  in a month, nor stop longer than that with him!” Also Ass. xvi. 487,
  8. “Multiply not visits to thy friend.” None so disliked as one
  visiting too often (Preston p. 352). In the Cent nouvelles (52)
  Nouvelles (No. lii.) the dying father says to his son:—Jamais ne vous
  hantez tant en l’ostel de votre voisin que l’on vous y serve de pain
  bis. In these matters Moslems follow the preaching and practice of the
  Apostle, who was about as hearty and genial as the “Great Washington.”
  But the Arab had a fund of dry humour which the Anglo-American lacked
  altogether.

Footnote 422:

  Arab. “’Amal” = action, operation. In Hindostani it is used (often
  with an Alif for an Ayn) as intoxication _e.g._ Amal pání strong
  waters and applied to Sharáb (wine), Bozah (Beer), Tádí (toddy or the
  fermented juice of the Tád, _Borassus flabelliformis_), Naryáli (juice
  of the cocoa-nut tree), Saynddi (of the wild date, _Elate
  Sylvestris_), Afyún (opium and its preparations as post = poppy seeds)
  and various forms of _Cannabis Sativa_, as Ganja, Charas, Madad, Sabzi
  etc. for which see Herklots’ Glossary.

Footnote 423:

  Arab. “Sardáb,” mostly an underground room (vol. i. 340) but here a
  tunnel.

Footnote 424:

  Arab. “Al-Láwandiyah”; this and the frequent mention of coffee and
  presently of a watch (sá’ah) show that the tale in its present state,
  cannot be older than the end of the sixteenth century.

Footnote 425:

  Arab. “Su’bán,” vol. i. 172.

Footnote 426:

  The lines have occurred in vol. i. 238; where I have noted the punning
  “Sabr” = patience or aloes. I quote Torrens: the Templar, however,
  utterly abolishes the pun in the last couplet:—

  The case is not at my command; but in fair Patience hand ✿ I’m set by
     Him who order’th all and doth such case command.

  “Amr” here = case (circumstance) or command (order) with a suspicion
  of reference to Murr = myrrh, bitterness. The reader will note the
  resignation to Fate’s decrees which here and in host of places
  elevates the tone of the book.

Footnote 427:

  _i.e._ as one loathes that which is prohibited, and with a loathing
  which makes it unlawful for me to cohabit with thee.

Footnote 428:

  This is quite natural to the sensitive Eastern.

Footnote 429:

  Hence, according to Moslem and Eastern theory generally her lewd and
  treasonable conduct. But in Egypt not a few freeborn women and those
  too of the noblest, would beat her hollow at her own little game. See
  for instance the booklet attributed to Jalál al-Siyútí and entitled
  Kitáb al-Ízáh (Book of Explanation) fí ’Ilm al-Nikáh (in the Science
  of Carnal Copulation). There is a copy of it in the British Museum;
  and a friend kindly supplied me with a lithograph from Cairo; warning
  me that there are doubts about the authorship.

Footnote 430:

  These lines have occurred in vol. iii. 214: I quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 431:

  This ejaculation, as the waw shows, is parenthetic; spoken either by
  Halimah, by Shahrazad or by the writer.

Footnote 432:

  Arab. “Kasr” here meaning an upper room.

Footnote 433:

  To avoid saying, I pardon thee.

Footnote 434:

  A proverbial saying which here means I could only dream of such good
  luck.

Footnote 435:

  A good old custom amongst Moslems who have had business transactions
  with each other: such acquittance of all possible claims will be
  quoted on “Judgment-Day,” when debts will be severely enquired into.

Footnote 436:

  Arab. “Kutr (tract or quarter) Misr,” vulgarly pronounced “Masr.” I
  may remind the reader that the Assyrians called the Nile-valley
  “Musur” whence probably the Heb. Misraim a dual form denoting Upper
  and Lower Egypt which are still distinguished by the Arabs into Sa’id
  and Misr. The hieroglyphic term is Ta-mera = Land of the Flood; and
  the Greek Aigyptos is probably derived from Kahi-Ptah (region of the
  great God Ptah) or Ma Ka Ptah (House of the soul of Ptah). The word
  “Copt” or “Kopt,” in Egyptian “Kubti” and pronounced “Gubti,” contains
  the same consonants.

Footnote 437:

  Now an unimportant frontier fort and village dividing Syria-Palestine
  from Egypt and famed for the French battle with the Mamelukes (Feb.
  19, 1799) and the convention for evacuating Egypt. In the old times it
  was an important site built upon the “River of Egypt” now a dried up
  Wady; and it was the chief port of the then populous Najab or South
  Country. According to Abulfeda it derived its name (the “boothy,” the
  nest) from a hut built there by the brothers of Joseph when stopped at
  the frontier by the guards of Pharaoh. But this is usual Jewish
  infection of history.

Footnote 438:

  Arab. “Báb” which may also = “Chapter” or category. See vol. i., 136
  and elsewhere (index). In Egypt “Báb” sometimes means a sepulchral
  cave hewn in a rock (plur. Bíbán) from the Coptic “Bíb.”

Footnote 439:

  _i.e._ “The Holy,” a town some three marches (60 miles) N. East of
  Cairo; thus showing the honour done to our unheroic hero. There is
  also a Sálihiyah quarter or suburb of Damascus famous for its cemetery
  of holy men; but the facetious Cits change the name to Zálliniyah =
  causing to stray; in allusion to its Kurdish population. Baron von
  Hammer reads “le faubourg Adelieh” built by Al-Malik Al-Adil and
  founded a chronological argument on a clerical error.

Footnote 440:

  Kamar al-Zaman; the normal pun on the name; a practice as popular in
  the East as in the West, and worthy only of a pickpocket in either
  place.

Footnote 441:

  Arab. “Azrár” plur. of “Zirr” and lit. = “buttons,” _i.e._ of his robe
  collar from which his white neck and face appear shining as the sun.

Footnote 442:

  Arab. “Dáirah” = the usual inclosure of Kanáts or tent-flaps pitched
  for privacy during the halt.

Footnote 443:

  _i.e._ it was so richly ornamented that it resembled an enchanted
  hoard whose spells, hiding it from sight, had been broken by some
  happy treasure seeker.

Footnote 444:

  The merchant who is a “stern parent” and exceedingly ticklish on the
  Pundonor saw at first sight her servile origin which had escaped the
  mother. Usually it is the other way.

Footnote 445:

  Not the head of the Church, or Chief Pontiff, but the Chief of the
  Olema and Fukahá (Fákihs or D.D.’s.) men learned in the Law
  (divinity). The order is peculiarly Moslem, in fact the succedaneum
  for the Christian “hierarchy,” an institution never contemplated by
  the Founder of Christianity. This title shows the modern date of the
  tale.

Footnote 446:

  Arab. “Maulid,” prop. applied to the Birth-feast of Mohammed which
  begins on the 3rd day of Rabí al-Awwal (third Moslem month) and lasts
  a week or ten days (according to local custom), usually ending on the
  12th and celebrated with salutes of cannon, circumcision-feasts,
  marriage banquets, Zikr-litanies, perlections of the Koran and all
  manner of solemn festivities including the “powder-play” (Láb
  al-Bárút) in the wilder corners of Al-Islam. It is also applied to the
  birth-festivals of great Santons (as Ahmad al-Badawi) for which see
  Lane M. E. chapt. xxiv. In the text it is used like the Span.
  “Funcion” or the Hind. “Tamáshá,” any great occasion of merrymaking.

Footnote 447:

  Arab. “Sanájik” plur. of Sanjak (Turk.) = a banner, also applied to
  the bearer (ensign or cornet) and to a military rank mostly
  corresponding with Bey or Colonel.

Footnote 448:

  I have followed Mr Payne’s ordering of the text which, both in the
  Mac. and Bul. Edits., is wholly inconsequent and has not the excuse of
  rhyme.

Footnote 449:

  Arab. “Jilbáb,” a long coarse veil or gown which in Barbary becomes a
  “Jallábiyah,” a striped and hooded cloak of woollen stuff.

Footnote 450:

  _i.e._ a broken down pilgrim left to die on the road.

Footnote 451:

  These lines have occurred in vol. i. 272. I quote Mr. Payne.

Footnote 452:

  Note the difference between “Zirt,” the loud crepitus and “Faswah” the
  susurrus which Captain Grose in his quaint “Lexicum Balatronicum,”
  calls a “fice” or a “foyse” (from the Arabic Fas, faswah?)

Footnote 453:

  These lines have occurred in Night dcxix, vol. vi. 246: where the pun
  on Khaliyah is explained. I quote Lane.

Footnote 454:

  The usual pretext of “God bizness,” as the Comoro men call it. For the
  title of the Ka’abah see my Pilgrimage vol. iii. 149.

Footnote 455:

  This was in order to travel as a respectable man; he could also send
  the girl as a spy into the different Harims to learn news of the lady
  who had eloped.

Footnote 456:

  A polite form of alluding to their cursing him.

Footnote 457:

  _i.e._ on account of the King taking offence at his unceremonious
  departure.

Footnote 458:

  _i.e._ It will be the worse for him.

Footnote 459:

  I would here remind the reader that “’Arabiyyun” pl. ’Urb is a man of
  pure Arab race, whether of the Ahl al-Madar (= people of mortar,
  _i.e._ citizens) or Ahl al-Wabar (= tents of goat or camel’s hair);
  whereas “A’rábiyyun” pl. A’ráb is one who dwells in the Desert whether
  Arab or not. Hence the verse:—

              They name us Al-A’ráb but Al-’Urb is our name.

Footnote 460:

  I would remind the reader that the Dinár is the golden denarius (or
  solidus) of Eastern Rome while the Dirham is the silver denarius,
  whence denier, danaro, dínheiro, etc., etc. The oldest dinars date
  from A. H. 91–92 (= 714–15) and we find the following description of
  one struck in A. H. 96 by Al-Walid the VI. Ommiade:—

 Obverse.│Area. “There is no iláh but Allah: He is one: He hath no
         │  partner.”

         │Circle. “Mohammed is the Messenger of Allah who hath sent him
         │  with the true           Guidance and Religion that he
         │  manifest it above all other Creeds.”

 Reverse.│Area. “Allah is one: Allah is Eternal: He begetteth not, nor is
         │  He begot.”

         │Circle. “Bismillah: This Dinar was struck anno 96.”

  See “’Ilâm-en-Nas” (warnings for Folk) a pleasant little volume by Mr.
  Godfrey Clarke (London, King and Co., 1873), mostly consisting of the
  minor tales from The Nights, especially this group between Nights
  ccxlvii. and cdlxi.; but rendered valuable by the annotations of my
  old friend, the late Frederick Ayrton.

Footnote 461:

  The reader will note the persistency with which the duty of universal
  benevolence is preached.

Footnote 462:

  Arab. from Pers. “Shah-bandar”: see vol. iv. 29.

Footnote 463:

  _i.e._ of thy coming, a popular compliment.

Footnote 464:

  This is the doctrine of the universal East; and it is true concerning
  wives and widows, not girls when innocent or rather ignorant.
  According to Western ideas Kamar al-Zaman was a young scoundrel of the
  darkest dye whose only excuse were his age, his inexperience and his
  passions.

Footnote 465:

  Arab. “Dayyús” prop. = a man who pimps for his own wife and in this
  sense constantly occurring in conversation.

Footnote 466:

  This is taking the law into one’s own hands with a witness; yet
  amongst races who preserve the Pundonor in full and pristine force,
  _e.g._ the Afghans and the Persian Iliyát, the killing so far from
  being considered murder or even justifiable homicide would be highly
  commended by public opinion.

Footnote 467:

  Arab. “Nákisátu ’aklin wa dín”; the words are attributed to the
  Prophet whom we find saying, “Verily in your wives and children ye
  have an enemy, wherefore beware of them” (Koran lxiv. 14); compare 1
  Cor. vii. 28, 32. But Maître Jehan de Meung went farther,

                      Toutes êtez, serez ou fûtes,
                      De faict ou de volonté, putes.

Footnote 468:

  Arab. Habíbí wa tabíbí, the common jingle.

Footnote 469:

  Iblis and his connection with Diabolos has been noticed in vol. i. 13.
  The word is foreign as well as a P.N. and therefore is imperfectly
  declined, although some authorities deduce it from “ablasa” = he
  despaired (of Allah’s mercy). Others call him Al-Háris (the Lion)
  hence Eve’s first-born was named in his honour Abd al-Haris. His
  angelic name was Azázíl before he sinned by refusing to prostrate
  himself to Adam, as Allah had commanded the heavenly host for a trial
  of faith, not to worship the first man, but to make him a Keblah or
  direction of prayer addressed to the Almighty. Hence he was ejected
  from Heaven and became the arch-enemy of mankind (Koran xviii. 48). He
  was an angel but related to the Jinn: Al-Bayzáwi, however (on Koran
  ii. 82), opines that angelic by nature he became a Jinn by act. Ibn
  Abbas held that he belonged to an order of angels who are called Jinn
  and begot issue as do the nasnás, the Ghúl and the Kutrub which,
  however, are male and female, like the pre-Adamite man-woman of
  Genesis, the “bi-une” of our modern days. For this subject see
  Terminal Essay.

Footnote 470:

  As usual in the East and in the West the husband was the last to hear
  of his wife’s ill conduct. But even Othello did not kill Emilia.

Footnote 471:

  _i.e._ Star of the Morning: the first word occurs in Bar Cokba
  Barchocheba = Son of the Star, _i.e._, which was to come out of Jacob
  (Numbers xxiv, 17). The root, which does not occur in Heb., is Kaukab
  to shine. This Rabbi Akilah was also called Bar Cozla = Son of the
  Lie.

Footnote 472:

  Here some excision has been judged advisable as the names of the
  bridegrooms and the brides recur with damnable iteration.

Footnote 473:

  See the note by Lane’s Shaykh at the beginning of the tale. The
  contrast between the vicious wife of servile origin and the virtuous
  wife of noble birth is fondly dwelt upon but not exaggerated.

Footnote 474:

  _i.e._ those of his water skins for the journey, which as usual
  required patching and supplying with fresh handles after long lying
  dry.

Footnote 475:

  A popular saying also applied to men. It is usually accompanied with
  showing the open hand and a reference to the size of the fingers. I
  find this story most interesting from an anthropological point of
  view; suggesting how differently various races regard the subject of
  adultery. In Northern Europe the burden is thrown most unjustly upon
  the man, the woman who tempts him being a secondary consideration; and
  in England he is absurdly termed “a seducer.” In former times he was
  “paraded” or “called out,” now he is called up for damages, a truly
  ignoble and shopkeeper-like mode of treating a high offence against
  private property and public morality. In Anglo-America, where English
  feeling is exaggerated, the lover is revolver’d and the woman is left
  unpunished. On the other hand, amongst Eastern and especially Moslem
  peoples, the woman is cut down and scant reckoning is taken from the
  man. This more sensible procedure has struck firm root amongst the
  nations of Southern Europe where the husband kills the lover only when
  he still loves his wife and lover-like is furious at her affection
  being alienated.

  Practically throughout the civilised world there are only two ways of
  treating women. Moslems keep them close, defend them from all kinds of
  temptations and if they go wrong kill them. Christians place them upon
  a pedestal, the observed of all observers, expose them to every danger
  and if they fall, accuse and abuse them instead of themselves. And
  England is so grandly logical that her law, under certain
  circumstances, holds that Mrs. A. has committed adultery with Mr. B.
  but Mr. B. has not committed adultery with Mrs. A. Can any absurdity
  be more absurd? Only “summum jus, summa injuria.” See my Terminal
  Essay. I shall have more to say upon this curious subject, the
  treatment of women who can be thoroughly guarded only by two things,
  firstly their hearts and secondly by the “Spanish Padlock.”




                ABDULLAH BIN FAZIL AND HIS BROTHERS[476]


The Caliph Harun al-Rashid was one day examining the tributes of his
various provinces and viceroyalties, when he observed that the
contributions of all the countries and regions had come into the
treasury, except that of Bassorah which had not arrived that year. So he
held a Divan because of this and said, “Hither to me with the Wazir
Ja’afar;” and when they brought him into the presence he thus bespoke
him, “The tributes of all the provinces have come into the treasury,
save that of Bassorah, no part whereof hath arrived.” Ja’afar replied,
“O Commander of the Faithful, belike there hath befallen the governor of
Bassorah something that hath diverted him from sending the tribute.”
Quoth the Caliph, “The time of the coming of the tribute was twenty days
ago; what then, can be his excuse for that, in this time, he hath
neither sent it nor sent to show cause for not doing so?” And quoth the
Minister, “O Commander of the Faithful, if it please thee, we will send
him a messenger.” Rejoined the Caliph, “Send him Abu Ishak
al-Mausili,[477] the boon companion,” and Ja’afar, “Hearkening and
obedience to Allah and to thee, O Prince of True Believers!” Then he
returned to his house and summoning Abu Ishak, wrote him a royal writ
and said to him, “Go to Abdullah bin Fazil, Viceroy of Bassorah, and see
what hath diverted him from sending the tribute. If it be ready, do thou
receive it from him in full and bring it to me in haste, for the Caliph
hath examined the tributes of the provinces and findeth that they are
all come in, except that of Bassorah: but an thou see that it is not
ready and he make an excuse to thee, bring him back with thee, that he
may report his excuse to the Caliph with his own tongue.” Answered Abu
Ishak, “I hear and I obey;” and taking with him five thousand horse of
Ja’afar’s host set out for Bassorah. Now when Abdullah bin Fazil heard
of his approach, he went out to meet him with his troops, and led him
into the city and carried him to his palace, whilst the escort encamped
without the city walls, where he appointed to them all whereof they
stood in need. So Abu Ishak entered the audience-chamber and sitting
down on the throne, seated the governor beside himself, whilst the
notables sat round him, according to their several degrees. After
salutation with the salam Abdullah bin Fazil said to him, “O my lord, is
there for thy coming to us any cause?;” and said Abu Ishak, “Yes, I come
to seek the tribute; for the Caliph enquireth of it and the time of its
coming is gone by.” Rejoined Abdullah bin Fazil, “O my lord, would
Heaven thou hadst not wearied thyself nor taken upon thyself the
hardships of the journey! For the tribute is ready in full tale and
complete, and I purpose to despatch it to-morrow. But, since thou art
come, I will entrust it to thee, after I have entertained thee three
days; and on the fourth day I will set the tribute between thine hands.
But it behoveth us now to offer thee a present in part requital of thy
kindness and the goodness of the Commander of the Faithful.” There is no
harm in that,” said Abu Ishak. So Abdullah bin Fazil dismissed the Divan
and carrying him into a saloon that had not its match, bade set a tray
of food before him and his companions. They ate and drank and made merry
and enjoyed themselves; after which the tray was removed and there came
coffee and sherbets. They sat conversing till a third part of the night
was past, when they spread for Abu Ishak bedding on an ivory couch
inlaid with gold glittering sheeny. So he lay down and the viceroy lay
down beside him on another couch; but wakefulness possessed Abu Ishak
and he fell to meditating on the metres of prosody and poetical
composition, for that he was one of the primest of the Caliph’s
boon-companions and he had a mighty fine fore-arm[478] in producing
verses and pleasant stories; nor did he leave to lie awake improvising
poetry till half the night was past. Presently, behold, Abdullah bin
Fazil arose, and girding his middle, opened a locker,[479] whence he
brought out a whip; then, taking a lighted waxen taper, he went forth by
the door of the saloon.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Abdullah bin
Fazil went forth by the door of the saloon deeming Abu Ishak asleep, the
Caliph’s cup-companion, seeing this, marvelled and said in himself,
“Whither wendeth Abdullah bin Fazil with that whip? Perhaps he is minded
to punish some body. But needs must I follow him and see what he will do
this night.” So he arose and went out after him softly, very softly,
that he might not be seen and presently saw him open a closet and take
thence a tray containing four dishes of meat and bread and a gugglet of
water. Then he went on, carrying the tray and secretly followed by Abu
Ishak, till he came to another saloon and entered, whilst the
cup-companion stood behind the door and, looking through the chink, saw
a spacious saloon, furnished with the richest furniture and having in
its midst a couch of ivory plated with gold glittering sheeny, to which
two dogs were made fast with chains of gold. Then Abdullah set down the
tray in a corner and tucking up his sleeves, loosed the first dog, which
began to struggle in his hands and put its muzzle to the floor, as it
would kiss the ground before him, whining the while in a weak voice.
Abdullah tied its paws behind its back and throwing it on the ground,
drew forth the whip and beat it with a painful beating and a pitiless.
The dog struggled, but could not get free, and Abdullah ceased not to
beat it with the same whip till it left groaning and lay without
consciousness. Then he took it and tied it up in its place, and
unbinding the second dog, did with him as he had done with the first;
after which he pulled out a kerchief and fell to wiping away their tears
and comforting them, saying, “Bear me not malice; for by Allah, this is
not of my will, nor is it easy to me! But it may be Allah will grant you
relief from this strait and issue from your affliction.” And he prayed
for the twain what while Abu Ishak the cup-companion stood hearkening
with his ears and espying with his eyes, and indeed he marvelled at his
case. Then Abdullah brought the dogs the tray of food and fell to
morselling them with his own hand, till they had enough, when he wiped
their muzzles and lifting up the gugglet, gave them to drink; after
which he took up the tray, gugglet and candle and made for the door. But
Abu Ishak forewent him and making his way back to his couch, lay down;
so that he saw him not, neither knew that he had walked behind him and
watched him. Then the governor replaced the tray and the gugglet in the
closet and returning to the saloon, opened the locker and laid the whip
in its place; after which he doffed his clothes and lay down. But Abu
Ishak passed the rest of that night pondering this affair neither did
sleep visit him for excess of wonderment, and he ceased not to say in
himself, “I wonder what can be the meaning of this!” Nor did he leave
wondering till day break, when they arose and prayed the dawn-prayer.
Then they set the breakfast[480] before them and they ate and drank
coffee, after which they went out to the divan. Now Abu Ishak’s thought
was occupied with this mystery all day long but he concealed the matter
and questioned not Abdullah thereof. Next night, he again followed the
governor and saw him do with the two dogs as on the previous night,
first beating them and then making his peace with them and giving them
to eat and to drink; and so also he did the third night. On the fourth
day he brought the tribute to Abu Ishak who took it and departed,
without opening the matter to him. He fared on, without ceasing, till he
came to Baghdad, where he delivered the tribute to the Caliph, who
questioned him of the cause of its delay. Replied he, “O Commander of
the Faithful, I found that the governor of Bassorah had made ready the
tribute and was about to despatch it; and had I delayed a day, it would
have met me on the road. But, O Prince of True Believers, I had a
wondrous adventure with Abdullah bin Fazil; never in my life saw I its
like.” “And what was it, O Abu Ishak?” asked the Caliph. So he replied,
“I saw such and such;” and, brief, acquainted him with that which the
governor had done with the two dogs, adding, “After such fashion, I saw
him do three successive nights, first beating the dogs, then making his
peace with them and comforting them and giving them to eat and drink, I
watching him, and he seeing me not.” Asked the Caliph, “Didst thou
question him of the cause of this?”; and the other answered, “No, as thy
head liveth, O Commander of the Faithful.” Then said Al-Rashid, “O Abu
Ishak, I command thee to return to Bassorah and bring me Abdullah bin
Fazil and the two dogs.” Quoth he, “O Commander of the Faithful, excuse
me from this; for indeed Abdullah entertained me with exceedingly
hospitable entertainment and I became ware of this case with chance
undesigned and acquainted thee therewith. So how can I go back to him
and bring him to thee? Verily, if I return to him, I shall find me no
face for shame of him; wherefore ’twere meet that thou send him another
than myself, with a letter under thine own hand, and he shall bring him
to thee, him and the two dogs.” But quoth the Caliph, “If I send him
other than thyself, peradventure he will deny the whole affair and say,
I’ve no dogs. But if I send thee and thou say to him, I saw them with
mine own eyes, he will not be able to deny that. Wherefore nothing will
serve but that thou go and fetch him and the two dogs; otherwise I will
surely slay thee.”[481]——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Eightieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
Harun al-Rashid said to Abu Ishak, “Nothing will serve but that thou go
and fetch him and the two dogs; otherwise I will surely slay thee.” Abu
Ishak replied, “Hearing and obeying, O Commander of the Faithful: Allah
is our aidance and good is the Agent. He spake sooth who said, “Man’s
wrong is from the tongue;[482] and ’tis I who sinned against myself in
telling thee. But write me a royal rescript[483] and I will go to him
and bring him back to thee.” So the Caliph gave him an autograph and he
took it and repaired to Bassorah. Seeing him come in the governor said,
“Allah forfend us from the mischief of thy return, O Abu Ishak! How
cometh it I see thee return in haste? Peradventure the tribute is
deficient and the Caliph will not accept it?” Answered Abu Ishak, “O
Emir Abdullah, my return is not on account of the deficiency of the
tribute, for ’tis full measure and the Caliph accepteth it; but I hope
that thou wilt excuse me, for that I have failed in my duty as thy guest
and indeed this lapse of mine was decreed of Allah Almighty.” Abdullah
enquired, “And what may be the lapse?” and he replied, “Know that when I
was with thee, I followed thee three following nights and saw thee rise
at midnight and beat the dogs and return; whereat I marvelled, but was
ashamed to question thee thereof. When I came back to Baghdad, I told
the Caliph of thine affair, casually and without design, whereupon he
charged me to return to thee, and here is a letter under his hand. Had I
known that the affair would lead to this, I had not told him, but
Destiny foreordained thus.” And he went on to excuse himself to him;
whereupon said Abdullah, “Since thou hast told him this, I will bear out
thy report with him, lest he deem thee a liar, for thou art my friend.
Were it other than thou, I had denied the affair and given him the lie.
But now I will go with thee and carry the two dogs with me, though this
be to me ruin-rife and the ending of my term of life.” Rejoined the
other, “Allah will veil[484] thee, even as thou hast veiled my face with
the Caliph!” Then Abdullah took a present beseeming the Commander of the
Faithful and mounting the dogs with him, each on a camel, bound with
chains[485] of gold, journeyed with Abu Ishak to Baghdad, where he went
in to the Caliph and kissed ground before him. He deigned bid him sit;
so he sat down and brought the two dogs before Al-Rashid, who said to
him, “What be these dogs, O Emir Abdullah?” Whereupon they fell to
kissing the floor between his hands and wagging their tails and weeping,
as if complaining to him. The Caliph marvelled at this and said to the
governor, “Tell me the history of these two dogs and the reason of thy
beating them and after entreating them with honour.” He replied, “O
Vicar of Allah, these be no dogs, but two young men, endowed with beauty
and seemliness, symmetry and shapeliness, and they are my brothers and
the sons of my father and mother.” Asked the Caliph, “How is it that
they were men and are become dogs?”; and he answered, “An thou give me
leave, O Prince of True Believers, I will acquaint thee with the truth
of the circumstance.” Said Al-Rashid, “Tell me and ’ware of leasing, for
’tis of the fashion of the hypocrites, and look thou tell truth, for
that is the Ark[486] of safety and the mark of virtuous men.” Rejoined
Abdullah, “Know then, O viceregent of Allah, when I tell thee the story
of these dogs, they will both bear witness against me: an I speak sooth
they will certify it and if I lie they will give me the lie.” Cried the
Caliph, “These are of the dogs; they cannot speak nor answer; so how can
they testify for thee or against thee?” But Abdullah said to them, “O my
brothers, if I speak a lying word, do ye lift your heads and stare with
your eyes; but, if I say sooth hang down your heads and lower your
eyes.” Then said he to the Caliph:—Know, O Commander of the Faithful,
that we are three brothers by one mother and the same father. Our sire’s
name was Fazil and he was so named because his mother bare two sons at
one birth, one of whom died forthright and the other twin remained
alive, wherefore his sire named him Fazil—the Remainder. His father
brought him up and reared him well, till he grew to manhood when he
married him to our mother and died. Our mother conceived a first time
and bare this my first brother, whom our sire named Mansúr; then she
conceived again and bare this my second brother, whom he named
Násir[487]; after which she conceived a third time and bare me, whom he
named Abdullah. My father reared us all three till we came to man’s
estate, when he died, leaving us a house and a shop full of coloured
stuffs of all kinds, Indian and Greek and Khorásáni and what not,
besides sixty thousand dinars. We washed him and buried him to the ruth
of his Lord, after which we built him a splendid monument and let pray
for him prayers for the deliverance of his soul from the fire and held
perlections of the Koran and gave alms on his behalf, till the forty
days[488] were past; when I called together the merchants and nobles of
the folk and made them a sumptuous entertainment. As soon as they had
eaten, I said to them, “O merchants, verily this world is ephemeral, but
the next world is eternal, and extolled be the perfection of Him who
endureth always after His creatures have passed away! Know ye why I have
called you together this blessed day?” And they answered, “Extolled be
Allah sole Scient of the hidden things.[489]” Quoth I, “My father died,
leaving much of money, and I fear lest any have a claim against him for
a debt or a pledge[490] or what not else, and I desire to discharge my
father’s obligations towards the folk. So whoso hath any demand on him,
let him say:—He oweth me so and so, and I will satisfy it to him, that I
may acquit the responsibility of my sire.[491]” The merchants replied,
“O Abdullah, verily the goods of this world stand not in stead of those
of the world to come, and we are no fraudful folk, but all of us know
the lawful from the unlawful and fear Almighty Allah and abstain from
devouring the substance of the orphan. We know that thy father (Allah
have mercy on him!) still let his money lie with the folk,[492] nor did
he suffer any man’s claim on him to go un-quitted, and we have ever
heard him declare:—I am fearful of the people’s substance. He used
always to say in his prayers, O my God, Thou art my stay and my hope!
Let me not die while in debt. And it was of his wont that, if he owed
any one aught, he would pay it to him, without being pressed, and if any
owed him aught he would not dun him, but would say to him, At thy
leisure. If his debtor were poor, he would release him from his
liability and acquit him of responsibility; and if he were not poor and
died in his debt, he would say, Allah forgive him what he owed me! And
we all testify that he owed no man aught.” Quoth I, “May Allah bless
you!” Then I turned to these my brothers and said, “Our father owed no
man aught and hath left us much money and stuffs, besides the house and
the shop. Now we are three and each of us is entitled to one third part.
So shall we agree to waive division and wone copartners in our wealth
and eat together and drink together, or shall we apportion the stuffs
and the money and take each his part?” Said they, “We will divide them
and take each his share.” (Then Abdullah turned to the two dogs and said
to them, “Did it happen thus, O my brothers?”; and they bowed their
heads and lowered their eyes, as to say, “Yes.”) Abdullah continued:—I
called in a departitor from the Kazi’s court, O Prince of True
Believers, and he distributed amongst us the money and the stuffs and
all our father had left, allotting the house and shop to me in exchange
for a part of the coin and clothes to which I was entitled. We were
content with this; so the house and shop fell to my share, whilst my
brothers took their portion in money and stuffs. I opened the shop and
stocking it with my stuffs bought others with the money apportioned to
me, over and above the house and shop, till the place was full, and I
sat selling and buying. As for my brothers, they purchased stuffs and
hiring a ship, set out on a voyage to the far abodes of folk. Quoth I,
“Allah aid them both! As for me, my livelihood is ready to my hand and
peace is priceless.” I abode thus a whole year, during which time Allah
opened the door of fortune to me and I gained great gains, till I became
possessed of the like of that which our father had left us. One day, as
I sat in my shop, with two fur pelisses on me, one of sable and the
other of meniver,[493] for it was the season of winter and the time of
the excessive cold, behold, there came up to me my two brothers, each
clad in a ragged shirt and nothing more, and their lips were white with
cold, and they were shivering. When I saw them in this plight, it was
grievous to me and I mourned for them——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Eighty-first Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah bin
Fazil continued to the Caliph:—When I saw them in this plight, it was
grievous to me and I mourned for them and my reason fled my head. So I
rose and embraced them and wept over their condition: then I put on one
of them the pelisse of sable and on the other the fur coat of meniver
and, carrying them to the Hammam, sent thither for each of them a suit
of apparel such as befitted a merchant worth a thousand.[494] When they
had washed and donned each his suit, I carried them to my house where,
seeing them well nigh famished, I set a tray of food before them and ate
with them, caressing them and comforting them. (Then he again turned to
the two dogs and said to them, “Was this so, O my brothers?”; and they
bent their heads and lowered their eyes.) So Abdullah continued:—When
they had eaten, O Vicar of Allah, quoth I to them, “What hath befallen
you and where are your goods?”; and quoth they, “We fared up the
river,[495] till we came to a city called Cufa, where we sold for ten
dinars the piece of stuff that had cost half a ducat and that which cost
us a ducat for twenty. So we profited greatly and bought Persian stuffs
at the rate of ten sequins per piece of silk worth forty in Bassorah.
Thence we removed to a city called Al-Karkh[496] where we sold and
bought and made gain galore and amassed of wealth great store.” And they
went on to set forth to me the places and the profits. So I said to
them, “Since ye had such good luck and lot, how cometh it that I see you
return naked?” They sighed and answered, “O our brother, some one must
have evileyed us, and in travel there is no trusting. When we had gotten
together these monies and goods, we freighted a ship therewith and set
sail, intending for Bassorah. We fared on three days and on the fourth
day we saw the sea rise and fall and roar and foam and swell and dash,
whilst the waves clashed together with a crash, striking out sparks like
fire[497] in the darks. The winds blew contrary for us and our craft
struck upon the point of a bill-projected rock, where it brake up and
plunged us into the river, and all we had with us was lost in the
waters. We abode struggling on the surface a day and a night, till Allah
sent us another ship, whose crew picked us up and we begged our way from
town to town, suffering mighty sore hardships and selling our
body-clothes piecemeal, to buy us food, till we drew near Bassorah; nor
did we make the city till we had drained the draught of a thousand
miseries. But, had we come safely off with that which was by us, we had
brought back riches that might be evened with those of the King: but
this was fore ordained to us of Allah.” I said, “O my brothers, let not
your hearts be grieved, for wealth is the ransom of bodies and safety is
property. Since Allah hath written you of the saved, this is the end of
desire, for want and wealth are but as it were illusions of dreams and
God-gifted is he who said:—

 If a man from destruction can save his head ✿ Let him hold his wealth as
    a slice of nail.

I continued, “O my brothers we will suppose that our sire died to-day
and left us all this wealth that is with me, for I am right willing to
share it with you equally.” So I fetched a departitor from the Kazi’s
court and brought out to him all my money, which he distributed into
three equal parts, and we each took one. Then said I to them, “O my
brothers, Allah blesseth a man in his daily bread, if he be in his own
country: so let each of you open him a shop and sit therein to get his
living; and he to whom aught is ordained in the Secret Purpose,[498]
needs must he get it.” Accordingly, I helped each of them to open a shop
and filled it for him with goods, saying to them, “Sell and buy and keep
your monies and spend naught thereof; for all ye need of meat and drink
and so forth I will furnish to you.” I continued to entreat them
generously, and they fell to selling and buying by day and returning at
eventide to my house where they lay the night; nor would I suffer them
to expend aught of their own substance. But, whenever I sat talking with
them, they would praise travel and proclaim its pleasures and vaunt the
gains they had made therein; and they ceased not to urge me to accompany
them in travelling over foreign parts. (Then he said to the dogs, “Was
this so, O my brothers?” and they again bowed their heads and lowered
their eyes in confirmation of his words). He continued:—On such wise, O
Vicar of Allah, they continued to urge me and tempt me to travel by
vaunting the great gains and profit to be obtained thereby till I said
to them, “Needs must I fare with you for your sake!” Then I entered into
a contract of partnership with them and we chartered a ship and packing
up all manner of precious stuffs and merchandise of every kind,
freighted it therewith; after which we embarked in it all we needed and,
setting sail from Bassorah, launched out into the dashing sea, swollen
with clashing surge whereinto whoso entereth is lone and lorn and whence
whoso cometh forth is as a babe new-born. We ceased not sailing on till
we came to a city of the cities, where we sold and bought and made great
cheape. Thence we went on to another place, and we ceased not to pass
from land to land and port to port, selling and buying and profiting,
till we had gotten us great wealth and much advantage. Presently, we
came to a mountain,[499] where the captain cast anchor and said to us,
“O passengers, go ye ashore; ye shall be saved from this day,[500] and
make search; it may be ye shall find water.” So all landed I amongst the
crowd, and dispersed about the island in search of water. As for me, I
climbed to the top of the mountain, and whilst I went along, lo and
behold! I saw a white snake fleeing and followed by a black dragon, foul
of favour and frightful of form, hotly pursuing her. Presently he
overtook her and clipping her, seized her by the head and wound his tail
about her tail, whereupon she cried out and I knew that he purposed to
rape her. So I was moved to ruth for her and taking up a lump of
granite,[501] five pounds or more in weight, hurled it at the dragon. It
smote him on the head and crushed it, and ere I knew, the white snake
changed and became a young girl bright with beauty and loveliness and
brilliancy and perfect grace, as she were the shining full moon, who
came up to me and kissing my hands, said to me, “Allah veil thee with
twofold veils, one from shame in this world and the other from the flame
in the world to come on the day of the Great Upstanding, the day when
neither wealth nor children shall avail save to him who shall come to
Allah with a sound heart!”[502] And presently she continued, “O mortal,
thou hast saved my honour and I am indebted to thee for kindness,
wherefore it behoveth me to requite thee.” So saying, she signed with
her hand to the earth, which opened and she descended thereinto: then it
closed up again over her and by this I knew that she was of the Jinn. As
for the dragon, fire was kindled in him and consumed him and he became
ashes. I marvelled at this and returned to my comrades, whom I
acquainted with whatso I had seen, and we passed the night in the
island. On the morrow the Captain weighed anchor and spread the sails
and coiled the ropes and we sailed till the shore faded from our gaze.
We fared on twenty days, without seeing or land or bird, till our water
came to an end and quoth the Rais to us, “O folk, our fresh water is
spent.” Quoth we, “Let us make for land; haply we shall find water.” But
he exclaimed, “By Allah, I have lost my way and I know not what course
will bring me to the seaboard.” Thereupon betided us sore chagrin and we
wept and besought Almighty Allah to guide us into the right course. We
passed that night in the sorriest case: but God-gifted is he who said:—

 How many a night have I spent in woes ✿ That would grizzle the
    suckling-babe with fear:

 But morrowed not morn ere to me there came ✿ ‘Aidance from Allah and
    victory near.’[503]

But when the day arose in its sheen and shone, we caught sight of a high
mountain and rejoiced therein. When we came to its skirts, the Captain
said to us, “O folk, go ashore and seek for water.” So we all landed and
sought water but found none, whereat we were sore afflicted because we
were suffering for want of it. As for me, I climbed up to the
mountain-top and on the other side thereof I saw a spacious circle[504]
distant from us an hour’s journey or more. Presently I called my
companions and as soon as they all rejoined me, said to them “Look at
yonder basin behind this mountain; for I see therein a city high of base
and a strong-cornered place girt with sconce and rampartry, pasturage
and lea and doubtless it wanteth not water and good things. So hie we
thither and fetch drink therefrom and buy what we need of provisions,
meat and fruit, and return. But they said, “We fear lest the city-folk
be Kafirs ascribing to Allah partners and enemies of The Faith and lay
hand on us and take us captive or else slay us; so should we cause the
loss of our own lives, having cast ourselves into destruction and evil
emprise. Indeed, the proud and presumptuous are never praiseworthy, for
that they ever fare in danger of calamities, even as saith of such an
one a certain poet:—

 Long as earth is earth, long as sky is sky, ✿ The o’erproud is blamed
    tho’ from risk he fly!

So we will not expose ourselves to peril.” I replied, “O folk, I have no
authority over you; so I will take my brothers and go to yonder city.”
But my brothers said to me, “We also fear this thing and will not go
with thee.” Quoth I, “As for me, I am resolved to go thither, and I put
my trust in Allah and accept whatsoever He shall decree to me. Do ye
therefore await me, whilst I wend thither and return to you twain.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Eighty-second Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah said,
“Do ye twain await me whilst I wend thither and return to you.” So I
left them and walked on till I came to the gate of the place and saw it
a city of building wondrous and projection marvellous, with boulevards
high-towering and towers strong-builded and palaces high-soaring. Its
portals were of Chinese iron, rarely gilded and graven on such wise as
confounded the wit. I entered the gateway and saw there a stone bench,
whereon sat a man bearing on his fore-arm a chain of brass, whereto hung
fourteen keys; so I knew him to be the porter of the city and that it
had fourteen gates. I drew near him and said to him, “Peace be with
thee!”; but he returned not my salam and I saluted him a second and a
third time; but he made me no reply. Then I laid my hand on his shoulder
and said to him, “Ho thou, why dost thou not return my salam? Art thou
asleep or deaf or other than a Moslem, that thou refrainest from
exchanging the salutation?” But he answered me not neither stirred; so I
considered him and saw that he was stone. Quoth I, “Verily an admirable
matter! This is a stone wroughten in the semblance of a son of Adam and
wanting in naught save speech!” Then I left him and entering the city,
beheld a man standing in the road: so I went up to him and scrutinised
him and found him stone. Presently, as I walked adown the broadways, and
saw that this was every where the case, I met an old woman bearing on
her head a bundle of clothes ready for washing; so I went up to her and
examining her, saw that she was stone, and the bundle of clothes on her
head was stone also.[505] Then I fared for the market, where I saw an
oilman with his scales set up and fronted by various kinds of wares such
as cheese and so forth, all of stone. Moreover, I saw all manner of
tradesmen seated in their shops and men and women and children, some
standing and some sitting; but they were all stone; and the stuffs were
like spiders’ webs. I amused myself with looking upon them, and as often
as I laid hold upon a piece of stuff, it powdered in my hands like dust
dispread. Presently I saw some chests and opening one of them, found it
full of gold in bags; so I laid hold upon the bags, but they crumbled
away in my grasp, whilst the gold abode unchanged. I carried off of it
what I could carry and said to myself, “Were my brothers with me, they
might take of this gold their fill and possess themselves of these
hoards which have no owner.” Then I entered another shop and found
therein more than this, but could bear away no more than I had borne. I
left this market and went on to another and thence to another and
another, much enjoying the sight of all manner of creatures of various
kinds, all several stones, even to the dogs and the cats, till I came to
the goldsmiths’ bazar, where I saw men sitting in their shops, with
their stock-in-trade about them, some in their hands and others in
crates of wickerwork. When I saw this, O Commander of the Faithful, I
threw down the gold and loaded myself with goldsmiths’ ware, as much as
I could carry. Then I went on to the jewel-market and saw there the
jewellers seated in their shops, each with a tray before him, full of
all sorts of precious stones, jacinths and diamonds and emeralds and
balass rubies and so forth: but all the shop-keepers were stones;
whereupon I threw away the goldsmiths’ ware and carried off as many
jewels as I could carry, regretting that my brothers were not with me,
so they might take what they would of those costly gems. Then I left the
jewel-market and went on till I came to a great door, quaintly gilded
and decorated after the fairest fashion, within which were wooden
benches and in the porch sat eunuchs, and body-guards; horsemen, and
footmen and officers of police each and every robed in the richest of
raiment; but they were all stones. I touched one of them and his clothes
crumbled away from his body like cobwebs. Then I passed through the door
and saw a palace without equal for its building and the goodliness of
the works that were therein. Here I found an audience-chamber, full of
Grandees and Wazirs and Officers and Emirs, seated upon chairs and every
one of them stone. Moreover, I saw a throne of red gold, crusted with
pearls and gems, and seated thereon a son of Adam arrayed in the most
sumptuous raiment and bearing on his head a Chosröan[506] crown,
diademed with the finest stones that shed a light like the light of day;
but, when I came up to him, I found him stone. Then I went on to the
gate of the Harim and entering, found myself in the Queen’s
presence-chamber, wherein I saw a throne of red gold, inlaid with pearls
and gems, and the Queen seated thereon. On her head she wore a crown
diademed with finest jewels, and round about her were women like moons,
seated upon chairs and clad in the most sumptuous clothing of all
colours. There also the eunuchry, with their hands upon their
breasts,[507] were standing in the attitude of service, and indeed this
hall confounded the beholder’s wits with what was therein of quaint
gilding and rare painting and curious carving and fine furniture. There
hung the most brilliant lustres[508] of limpid crystal, and in every
globe[509] of the crystal was an unique jewel, whose price money might
not fulfil. So I threw down that which was with me, O Prince of True
Believers, and fell to taking of these jewels what I could carry,
bewildered as to what I should bear away and what I should leave; for
indeed I saw the place as it were a treasure of the treasures of the
cities. Presently I espied a wicket[510] standing open and within it a
staircase: so I entered and mounting forty steps, heard a human voice
reciting the Koran in a low tone. I walked towards that sound till I
came to the main door hung with a silken curtain, laced with wires of
gold whereon were strung pearls and coral and rubies and cut emeralds
which gave forth a light like the light of stars. The voice came from
behind the curtain: so I raised it and discovered a gilded door, whose
beauty amazed the mind. I passed through the door and found myself in a
saloon as it were a hoard upon earth’s surface[511] and therein a girl
as she were the sun shining fullest sheen in the zenith of a sky serene.
She was robed in the costliest of raiment and decked with ornaments the
most precious that could be and withal she was of passing beauty and
loveliness, a model of symmetry and seemliness, of elegance and perfect
grace, with waist slender and hips heavy and dewy lips such as heal the
sick and eyelids lovely in their langour, as it were she of whom the
sayer spake when he said:—

 My best salam to what that robe enrobes of symmetry, ✿ And what that
    blooming garth of cheek enguards of rosy blee:
 It seems as though the Pleiades depend upon her brow; ✿ And other lights
    of Night in knots upon her breast we see:
 Did she but don a garment weft of Rose’s softest leaf, ✿ The leaf of
    Rose would draw her blood[512] when pluckt that fruit from tree:
 And did she crache in Ocean’s face, next Morn would see a change ✿ To
    sweeter than the honeycomb of what was briny sea:
 And did she deign her favours grant to grey-beard staff-en-propped ✿
    He’d wake and rend the lion’s limbs for might and valiancy.

Then Abdullah continued:—O Prince of True Believers, as soon as I saw
that girl I fell passionately in love with her and going straight up to
her, found her seated on a high couch, reciting by heart and in grateful
memory the Book of Allah, to whom belong honour and glory! Her voice was
like the harmony of the gates of Heaven, when Rizwan openeth them, and
the words came from her lips like a shower of gems; whilst her face was
with beauty dight, bright and blossom-white, even as saith the poet of a
similar sight:—

 O thou who gladdenest man by speech and rarest quality; ✿ Grow longing
    and repine for thee and grow beyond degree!
 In thee two things consume and melt the votaries of Love; ✿ The dulcet
    song of David joined with Joseph’s brilliancy.

When I heard her voice of melody reciting the sublime Koran, my heart
quoted from her killing glances, ‘Peace, a word from a compassionating
Lord;’[513] but I stammered[514] in my speech and could not say the
salam-salutation aright, for my mind and sight were confounded and I was
become as saith the bard:—

 Love-longing urged me not except to trip in speech o’er free; ✿ Nor,
    save to shed my blood I passed the campment’s boundary:
 I ne’er will hear a word from those who love to rail, but I ✿ Will
    testify to love of him with every word of me.

Then I hardened myself against the horrors of repine and said to her,
“Peace be with thee, O noble Lady, and treasured jewel! Allah grant
endurance to the foundation of thy fortune fair and upraise the pillars
of thy glory rare!” Said she, “And on thee from me be peace and
salutation and high honour, O Abdullah, O son of Fazil! Well come and
welcome and fair welcome to thee, O dearling mine and coolth of mine
eyne!” Rejoined I, “O my lady, whence wottest thou my name and who art
thou and what case befel the people of this city, that they are become
stones? I would have thee tell me the truth of the matter, for indeed I
am admiring at this city and its citizens and that I have found none
alive therein save thyself. So, Allah upon thee, tell me the cause of
all this, according to the truth!” Quoth she, “Sit, O Abdullah, and
Inshallah, I will talk with thee and acquaint thee in full with the
facts of my case and of this place and its people; and there is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!”
So I sat me down by her side and she said to me, “Know, O Abdullah, (may
Allah have mercy on thee!) that I am the daughter of the King of this
city and that it is my sire whom thou sawest seated on the high stead in
the Divan, and those who are round about him were the Lords of his land
and the Guards of his empery. He was a King of exceeding prowess and had
under his hand a thousand thousand and sixty thousand troopers. The
number of the Emirs of his Empire was four-and-twenty thousand, all of
them Governors and Dignitaries. He was obeyed by a thousand cities,
besides towns, hamlets and villages; and sconces and citadels, and the
Emirs[515] of the wild Arabs under his hand were a thousand in number,
each commanding twenty thousand horse. Moreover, he had monies and
treasures and precious stones and jewels and things of price, such as
eye never saw nor of which ear ever heard.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Eighty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Princess,
daughter to the King of the Stone-city, thus continued:—Verily, O
Abdullah my father had monies and hoards, such as eye never saw and of
which ear never heard. He used to debel Kings and do to death champions
and braves in battle and in the field of fight, so that the Conquerors
feared him and the Chosroës[516] humbled themselves to him. For all
this, he was a miscreant in creed ascribing to Allah partnership and
adoring idols, instead of the Lord of worship; and all his troops were
of images fain in lieu of the All-knowing Sovereign. One day of the days
as he sat on the throne of his Kingship, compassed about with the
Grandees of his realm, suddenly there came in to him a Personage, whose
face illumined the whole Divan with its light. My father looked at him
and saw him clad in a garb of green,[517] tall of stature and with hands
that reached beneath his knees. He was of reverend aspect and awesome
and the light[518] shone from his face. Said he to my sire, “O rebel, O
idolater, how long wilt thou take pride in worshipping idols and
abandoning the service of the All-knowing King? Say:—I testify that
there is no god but _the_ God and that Mohammed is His servant and His
messenger. And embrace Al-Islam, thou and thy tribe; and put away from
you the worship of idols, for they neither suffice man’s need nor
intercede. None is worshipful save Allah alone, who raised up the
heavens without columns and spread out the earths like carpets in mercy
to His creatures.”[519] Quoth my father, “Who art thou, O man who
rejectest the worship of idols, that thou sayst thus? Fearest thou not
that the idols will be wroth with thee?” He replied, “The idols are
stones; their anger cannot prejudice me nor their favour profit me. So
do thou set in my presence thine idol which thou adorest and bid all thy
folk bring each his image: and when they are all present, do ye pray
them to be wroth with me and I will pray my Lord to be wroth with them,
and ye shall descry the difference between the anger of the creature and
that of the Creator. For your idols, ye fashioned them yourselves and
the Satans clad themselves therewith as with clothing, and they it is
who spake to you from within the bellies of the images,[520] for your
idols are made and the maker is my God to whom naught is impossible. An
the True appear to you, do ye follow it, and if the False appear to you
do ye leave it.” Cried they, “Give us a proof of thy god, that we may
see it;” and quoth he, “Give me proof of _your_ gods.” So the King bade
every one who worshipped his Lord in image-form to bring it, and all the
armies brought their idols to the Divan. Thus fared it with them; but as
for me, I was sitting behind a curtain, whence I could look upon my
father’s Divan, and I had an idol of emerald whose bigness was as the
bigness of a son of Adam. My father demanded it, so I sent it to the
Divan, where they set it down beside that of my sire, which was of
jacinth, whilst the Wazir’s idol was of diamond.[521] As for those of
the Grandees and Notables, some were of balass-ruby and some of
carnelian, others of coral or Comorin aloes-wood and yet others of ebony
or silver or gold; and each had his own idol, after the measure of his
competence; whilst the idols of the common soldiers and of the people
were some of granite, some of wood, some of pottery and some of mud; and
all were of various hues yellow and red; green, black and white. Then
said the Personage to my sire, “Pray your idol and these idols to be
wroth with me.” So they aligned the idols in a Divan,[522] setting my
father’s idol on a chair of gold at the upper end, with mine by its
side, and ranking the others each according to the condition of him who
owned it and worshipped it. Then my father arose and prostrating himself
to his own idol, said to it, “O my god, thou art the Bountiful Lord, nor
is there among the idols a greater than thyself. Thou knowest that this
person cometh to me, attacking thy divinity and making mock of thee;
yea, he avoucheth that he hath a god stronger than thou and ordereth us
leave adoring thee and adore his god. So be thou wrath with him, O my
god!” And he went on to supplicate the idol; but the idol returned him
no reply neither bespoke him with aught of speech; whereupon quoth he,
“O my god, this is not of thy wont, for thou usedst to answer me, when I
addressed thee. How cometh it that I see thee silent and speaking not?
Art thou unheeding or asleep?[523] Awake; succour me and speak to me!”
And he shook it with his hand; but it spake not neither stirred from its
stead. Thereupon quoth the Personage, “What aileth thine idol that it
speaketh not?”; and quoth the King, “Methinks he is absent-minded or
asleep.” Exclaimed the other, “O enemy of Allah, how canst thou worship
a god that speaketh not nor availeth unto aught and not worship my God,
who to prayers deigns assent and who is ever present and never absent,
neither unheeding nor sleeping, whom conjecture may not ween, who seeth
and is not seen and who over all things terrene is omnipotent? Thy god
is powerless and cannot guard itself from harm; and indeed a stoned
Satan had clothed himself therewith as with a coat that he might debauch
thee and delude thee. But now hath its devil departed; so do thou
worship Allah and testify that there is no god but He and that none is
worshipful nor worship-worth but Himself; neither is there any good but
His good. As for this thy god, it cannot ward off hurt from it; so how
shall it ward off harm from thee? See with thine own eyes its
impotence.” So saying, he went up to the idol and dealt it a cuff on the
neck, that it fell to the ground; whereupon the King waxed wroth and
cried to the bystanders, “This froward atheist hath smitten my god. Slay
him!” So they would have arisen to smite him, but none of them could
stir from his place. Then he propounded to them Al-Islam; but they
refused to become Moslems and he said, “I will show you the wroth of my
Lord.” Quoth they, “Let us see it!” So he spread out his hands and said,
“O my God and my Lord, Thou art my stay and my hope; answer Thou my
prayer against these lewd folk, who eat of Thy good and worship other
gods. O Thou the Truth, O Thou of All-might, O Creator of Day and Night,
I beseech Thee to turn these people into stones, for Thou art the
Puissant nor is aught impossible to Thee, and Thou over all things are
omnipotent!” And Allah transformed the people of this city into stones;
but, as for me, when I saw the manifest proof of His deity, I submitted
myself to Him and was saved from that which befel the rest. Then the
Personage drew near me and said “Felicity[524] was fore-ordained of
Allah to thee and in this a purpose had He.” And he went on to instruct
me and I took unto him the oath and covenant.[525] I was then seven
years of age and am now thirty years old. Then said I to him, “O my
lord, all that is in the city and all its citizens are become stones by
thine effectual prayer, and I am saved, for that I embraced Al-Islam at
thy hands. Wherefore thou art become my Shaykh; so do thou tell me thy
name and succour me with thy security and provide me with provision
whereon I may subsist.” Quoth he, “My name is Abu al-’Abbás al-Khizr”;
and he planted me a pomegranate-tree, which forthright grew up and
foliaged, flowered and fruited, and bare one pomegranate; whereupon
quoth he, “Eat of that wherewith Allah the Almighty provideth thee and
worship Him with the worship which is His due.” Then he taught me the
tenets of Al-Islam and the canons of prayer and the way of worship,
together with the recital of the Koran, and I have now worshipped Allah
in this place three-and-twenty years. Each day the tree yieldeth me a
pomegranate which I eat and it sustaineth me from tide to tide; and
every Friday, Al-Khizr (on whom be peace!) cometh to me and ’tis he who
acquainted me with thy name and gave me the glad tidings of thy soon
coming hither, saying to me, “When he shall come to thee, entreat him
with honour and obey his bidding and gainsay him not; but be thou to him
wife and he shall be to thee man, and wend with him whitherso he will.”
So, when I saw thee, I knew thee and such is the story of this city and
of its people, and the Peace!” Then she showed me the pomegranate-tree,
whereon was one granado, which she took and eating one-half thereof
herself, gave me the other to eat, and never did I taste aught sweeter
or more savoury or more satisfying than that pomegranate. After this, I
said to her, “Art thou content, even as the Shaykh Al-Khizr charged
thee, to be my wife and take me to mate; and art thou ready to go with
me to my own country and abide with me in the city of Bassorah?” She
replied, “Yes, Inshallah: an it please Almighty Allah. I hearken to thy
word and obey thy hest without gainsaying.” Then I made a binding
covenant with her and she carried me into her father’s treasury, whence
we took what we could carry and going forth that city, walked on till we
came to my brothers, whom I found searching for me. They asked, “Where
hast thou been? Indeed thou hast tarried long from us, and our hearts
were troubled for thee.” And the captain of the ship said to me, “O
merchant Abdullah, the wind hath been fair for us this great while, and
thou hast hindered us from setting sail.” And I answered, “There is no
harm in that: ofttimes slow[526] is sure and my absence hath wrought us
naught but advantage, for indeed, there hath betided me therein the
attainment of our hopes and God-gifted is he who said:—

[Illustration]

 I weet not, whenas to a land I fare ✿ In quest of good, what I shall
    there obtain;
 Or gain I fare with sole desire to seek; ✿ Or loss that seeketh me when
    seek I gain.

Then said I to them, “See what hath fallen to me in this mine absence;”
and displayed to them all that was with me of treasures and told them
what I had beheld in the City of Stone, adding, “Had ye hearkened to me
and gone with me, ye had gotten of these things great gain.”——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah bin
Fazil said to his shipmates and to his two brothers, “Had ye gone with
me, ye had gotten of these things great gain.” But they said, “By Allah,
had we gone, we had not dared to go in to the King of the city!” Then I
said to my brothers, “No harm shall befal you; for that which I have
will suffice us all and this is our lot.[527]” So I divided my booty
into four parts according to our number and gave one to each of my
brothers and to the Captain, taking the fourth for myself, setting aside
somewhat for the servants and sailors, who rejoiced and blessed me: and
all were content with what I gave them, save my brothers who changed
countenance and rolled their eyes. I perceived that lust of lucre had
gotten hold of them both; so I said to them, “O my brothers, methinketh
what I have given you doth not satisfy you; but we are brothers and
there is no difference between us. My good and yours are one and the
same thing, and if I die none will inherit of me but you.” And I went on
to soothe them. Then I bore the Princess on board the galleon and lodged
her in the cabin, where I sent her somewhat to eat and we sat talking, I
and my brothers. Said they, “O our brother, what wilt thou do with that
damsel of surpassing beauty?” And I replied, “I mean to contract
marriage with her, as soon as I reach Bassorah and make a splendid
wedding and go in to her there.” Exclaimed one of them, “O my brother,
verily, this young lady excelleth in beauty and loveliness and the love
of her is fallen on my heart; wherefore I desire that thou give her to
me and I will espouse her.” And the other cried, “I too desire this:
give her to me, that I may espouse her.” “O my brothers,” answered I,
“indeed she took of me an oath and a covenant that I would marry her
myself; so, if I give her to one of you, I shall be false to my oath and
to the covenant between me and her, and haply she will be
broken-hearted, for she came not with me but on condition that I marry
her. So how can I wed her to other than myself? As for your both loving
her, I love her more than you twain, for she is my treasure-trove, and
as for my giving her to one of you, that is a thing which may not be.
But, if we reach Bassorah in safety, I will look you out two girls of
the best of the damsels of Bassorah and demand them for you in marriage
and pay the dower of my own monies and make one wedding and we will all
three go into our brides on the same night. But leave ye this damsel,
for she is of my portion.” They held their peace, and I thought they
were content with that which I had said. Then we fared onwards for
Bassorah, and every day I sent her meat and drink; but she came not
forth of the cabin, whilst I slept between my brothers on deck. We
sailed thus forty days, till we sighted Bassorah city and rejoiced that
we were come near it. Now I trusted in my brothers and was at my ease
with them, for none knoweth the hidden future save Allah the Most High;
so I lay down to sleep that night; but, as I abode drowned in slumber, I
suddenly found myself caught up by these my brothers, one seizing me by
the legs and the other by the arms, for they had taken counsel together
to drown me in the sea for the sake of the damsel. When I saw myself in
their hands, I said to them, “O my brothers, why do ye this with me?”
And they replied, “Ill-bred that thou art, wilt thou barter our
affection for a girl?: we will cast thee into the sea, because of this.”
So saying, they threw me overboard. (Here Abdullah turned to the dogs
and said to them, “Is this that I have said true O my brothers or not?”;
and they bowed their heads and fell awhining, as if confirming his
speech; whereat the Caliph wondered). Then Abdullah resumed;—O Commander
of the Faithful, when they threw me into the sea, I sank to the bottom;
but the water bore me up again to the surface, and before I could think,
behold a great bird, the bigness of a man, swooped down upon me and
snatching me up, flew up with me into upper air. I fainted and when I
opened my eyes, I found myself in a strong-pillared place, a
high-builded palace, adorned with magnificent paintings and pendants of
gems of all shapes and hues. Therein were damsels standing with their
hands crossed over their breasts and, behold in their midst was a lady
seated on a throne of red gold, set with pearls and gems, and clad in
apparel whereon no mortal might open his eyes, for the lustre of the
jewels wherewith they were decked. About her waist she wore a girdle of
jewels no money could pay their worth and on her head a three-fold tiara
dazing thought and wit and dazzling heart and sight. Then the bird which
had carried me thither shook and became a young lady bright as sun
raying light. I fixed my eyes on her and behold, it was she whom I had
seen in snake form on the mountain and had rescued from the dragon which
had wound his tail around her. Then said to her the lady who sat upon
the throne, “Why hast thou brought hither this mortal?”; and she
replied, “O my mother, this is he who was the means of veiling my
honour[528] among the maidens of the Jinn.” Then quoth she to me,
“Knowest thou who I am?”; and quoth I, “No.” Said she, I am she who was
on such a mountain, where the black dragon strave with me and would have
forced my honour, but thou slewest him.” And I said, “I saw but a white
snake with the dragon.” She rejoined, “’Tis I who was the white snake;
but I am the daughter of the Red King, Sovran of the Jann and my name is
Sa’ídah.[529] She who sitteth there is my mother and her name is
Mubárakah, wife of the Red King. The black dragon who attacked me and
would have done away my honour was Wazir to the Black King, Darfíl by
name, and he was foul of favour. It chanced that he saw me and fell in
love with me; so he sought me in marriage of my sire, who sent to him to
say, “Who art thou, O scum of Wazirs, that thou shouldst wed with Kings’
daughters?” Whereupon he was wroth and sware an oath that he would
assuredly do away my honour, to spite my father. Then he fell to
tracking my steps and following me whithersoever I went, designing to
ravish me; wherefore there befel between him and my parent mighty fierce
wars and bloody jars, but my sire could not prevail against him, for
that he was fierce as fraudful and as often as my father pressed hard
upon him and seemed like to conquer he would escape from him, till my
sire was at his wits’ end. Every day I was forced to take new form and
hue; for, as often as I assumed a shape, he would assume its contrary,
and to whatsoever land I fled he would snuff my fragrance and follow me
thither, so that I suffered sore affliction of him. At last I took the
form of a snake and betook myself to the mountain where thou sawest me;
whereupon he changed himself to a dragon and pursued me, till I fell
into his hands, when he strove with me and I struggled with him, till he
wearied me and mounted me, meaning to have his lustful will of me: but
thou camest and smotest him with the stone and slewest him. Then I
returned to my own shape and showed myself to thee, saying:—I am
indebted to thee for a service such as is not lost save with the son of
adultery.[530] So, when I saw thy brothers do with thee this treachery
and throw thee into the sea, I hastened to thee and saved thee from
destruction, and now honour is due to thee from my mother and my
father.” Then she said to the Queen, “O my mother, do thou honour him as
deserveth he who saved my virtue.” So the Queen said to me, “Welcome, O
mortal! Indeed thou hast done us a kindly deed which meriteth honour.”
Presently she ordered me a treasure-suit,[531] worth a mint of money,
and store of gems and precious stones, and said, “Take him and carry him
in to the King.” Accordingly, they carried me in to the King in his
Divan, where I found him seated on his throne, with his Marids and
guards before him; and when I saw him my sight was blent for that which
was upon him of jewels; but when he saw me, he rose to his feet and all
his officers rose also, to do him worship. Then he saluted me and
welcomed me and entreated me with the utmost honour, and gave me of that
which was with him of good things; after which he said to some of his
followers, “Take him and carry him back to my daughter, that she may
restore him to the place whence she brought him.” So they carried me
back to the Lady Sa’idah, who took me up and flew away with me and my
treasures. On this wise fared it with me and the Princess; but as
regards the Captain of the galleon, he was aroused by the splash of my
fall, when my brothers cast me into the sea, and said, “What is that
which hath fallen overboard?” Whereupon my brothers fell to weeping and
beating of breasts and replied, “Alas, for our brother’s loss! He
thought to do his need over the ship’s side[532] and fell into the
water!” Then they laid their hands on my good, but there befel dispute
between them because of the damsel, each saying, “None shall have her
but I.” And they abode jangling and wrangling each with other and
remembered not their brother nor his drowning and their mourning for him
ceased. As they were thus, behold Sa’idah alighted with me in the midst
of the galleon——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah bin
Fazil continued, “As they were thus, behold, Sa’idah alighted with me in
the midst of the galleon and when my brothers saw me, they embraced me
and rejoiced in me, saying, “O our brother, how hast thou fared in that
which befel thee? Indeed our hearts have been occupied with thee.” Quoth
Sa’idah, “Had ye any heart-yearnings for him or had ye loved him, ye had
not cast him into the sea; but choose ye now what death ye will die.”
Then she seized on them and would have slain them; but they cried out,
saying, “In thy safeguard, O our brother!” Thereupon I interceded and
said to her, “I claim of thine honour not to kill my brothers.” Quoth
she, “There is no help but that I slay them, for they are traitors.” But
I ceased not to speak her fair and conciliate her till she said, “To
content thee, I will not kill them, but I will enchant them.” So saying,
she brought out a cup and filling it with sea-water, pronounced over it
words that might not be understood; then saying, “Quit this human shape
for the shape of a dog;” she sprinkled them with the water, and
immediately they were transmewed into dogs, as thou seest them, O Vicar
of Allah.” Whereupon he turned to the dogs and said to them, “Have I
spoken the truth, O my brothers?” And they bowed their heads, as they
would say, “Thou hast spoken sooth.” At this he continued, “Then she
said to those who were in the galleon:—Know ye that Abdullah bin Fazil
here present is become my brother and I shall visit him once or twice
every day: so, whoso of you crosseth him or gainsayeth his bidding or
doth him hurt with hand or tongue, I will do with him even as I have
done with these two traitors and bespell him to a dog, and he shall end
his days in that form, nor shall he find deliverance.” And they all said
to her, “O our lady, we are his slaves and his servants every one of us
and will not disobey him in aught.” Moreover, she said to me, “When thou
comest to Bassorah, examine all thy property and if there lack aught
thereof, tell me and I will bring it to thee, in whose hands and in what
place soever it may be, and will change him who took it into a dog. When
thou hast magazined thy goods, clap a collar[533] of wood on the neck of
each of these two traitors and tie them to the leg of a couch and shut
them up by themselves. Moreover, every night, at midnight, do thou go
down to them and beat each of them a bout till he swoon away; and if
thou suffer a single night to pass without beating them, I will come to
thee and drub thee a sound drubbing, after which I will drub them.” And
I answered, “To hear is to obey.” Then said she, “Tie them up with ropes
till thou come to Bassorah.” So I tied a rope about each dog’s neck and
lashed them to the mast, and she went her way. On the morrow we entered
Bassorah and the merchants came out to meet me and saluted me, and no
one of them enquired of my brothers. But they looked at the dogs and
said to me, “Ho, such and such,[534] what wilt thou do with these two
dogs thou hast brought with thee?” Quoth I, “I reared them on this
voyage and have brought them home with me.” And they laughed at them,
knowing not that they were my brothers. When I reached my house, I put
the twain in a closet and busied myself all that night with the
unpacking and disposition of the bales of stuffs and jewels. Moreover,
the merchants were with me being minded to offer me the salam; wherefore
I was occupied with them and forgot to beat the dogs or chain them up.
Then without doing them aught of hurt, I lay down to sleep, but suddenly
and unexpectedly there came to me the Red King’s daughter Sa’idah and
said to me, “Did I not bid thee clap chains on their necks and give each
of them a bout of beating?” So saying, she seized me and pulling out a
whip, flogged me till I fainted away, after which she went to the place
where my brothers were and with the same scourge beat them both till
they came nigh upon death. Then said she to me, “Beat each of them a
like bout every night, and if thou let a night pass without doing this,
I will beat thee;” and I replied, “O my lady, to-morrow I will put
chains on their necks, and next night I will beat them nor will I leave
them one night unbeaten.” And she charged me strictly to beat them and
disappeared. When the morning morrowed it being no light matter for me
to put fetters of iron on their necks, I went to a goldsmith and bade
him make them collars and chains of gold. He did this and I put the
collars on their necks and chained them up, as she bade me; and next
night I beat them both in mine own despite. This befel in the Caliphate
of Al-Mahdi,[535] third of the sons of Al-Abbas, and I commended myself
to him by sending him presents, so he invested me with the government
and made me viceroy of Bassorah. On this wise I abode some time and
after a while I said to myself, “Haply her wrath is grown cool;” and
left them a night unbeaten, whereupon she came to me and beat me a bout
whose burning I shall never forget long as I live. So, from that time to
this, I have never left them a single night unbeaten during the reign of
Al-Mahdi; and when he deceased and thou camest to the succession, thou
sentest to me, confirming me in the government of Bassorah. These twelve
years past have I beaten them every night, in mine own despite, and
after I have beaten them, I excuse myself to them and comfort them and
give them to eat and drink; and they have remained shut up, nor did any
of the creatures of Allah know of them, till thou sentest to me Abu
Ishak the boon-companion, on account of the tribute, and he discovered
my secret and returning to thee, acquainted thee therewith. Then thou
sentest him back to fetch me and them; so I answered with ‘Hearkening
and obedience,’ and brought them before thee, whereupon thou
questionedst me and I told thee the truth of the case; and this is my
history.” The Caliph marvelled at the case of the two dogs and said to
Abdullah, “Hast thou at this present forgiven thy two brothers the wrong
they did thee, yea or nay?” He replied, “O my lord, may Allah forgive
them and acquit them of responsibility in this world and the next!
Indeed, ’tis I who stand in need of their forgiveness, for that these
twelve years past I have beaten them a grievous bout every night!”
Rejoined the Caliph, “O Abdullah, Inshallah, I will endeavour for their
release and that they may become men again, as they were before, and I
will make peace between thee and them; so shall you live the rest of
your lives as brothers loving one another; and like as thou hast
forgiven them, so shall they forgive thee. But now take them and go down
with them to thy lodging and this night beat them not, and to-morrow
there shall be naught save weal.” Quoth Abdullah, “O my lord, as thy
head liveth, if I leave them one night unbeaten, Sa’idah will come to me
and beat me, and I have no body to brook beating.” Quoth the Caliph,
“Fear not, for I will give thee a writing under my hand.[536] An she
come to thee, do thou give her the paper and if, when she has read it,
she spare thee, the favour will be hers; but, if she obey not my
bidding, commit thy business to Allah and let her beat thee a bout and
suppose that thou hast forgotten to beat them for one night and that she
beateth thee because of that: and if it fall out thus and she thwart me,
as sure as I am Commander of the Faithful, I will be even with her.”
Then he wrote her a letter on a piece of paper, two fingers broad, and
sealing it with his signet-ring, gave it to Abdullah, saying, “O
Abdullah, if Sa’idah come, say to her:—The Caliph, King of mankind, hath
commanded me to leave beating them and hath written me this letter for
thee; and he saluteth thee with the salam. Then give her the warrant and
fear no harm.” After which he exacted of him an oath and a solemn pledge
that he would not beat them. So Abdullah took the dogs and carried them
to his lodging, saying to himself, “I wonder what the Caliph will do
with the daughter of the Sovran of the Jinn, if she cross him and
trounce me to-night! But I will bear with a bout of beating for once and
leave my brothers at rest this night, though for their sake I suffer
torture.” Then he bethought himself awhile, and his reason said to him,
“Did not the Caliph rely on some great support, he had never forbidden
me from beating them.” So he entered his lodging and doffed the collars
from the dogs’ necks, saying, “I put my trust in Allah,” and fell to
comforting them and saying, “No harm shall befal you; for the Caliph,
fifth[537] of the sons of Al-Abbas, hath pledged himself for your
deliverance and I have forgiven you. An it please Allah the Most High,
the time is come and ye shall be delivered this blessed night; so
rejoice ye in the prospect of peace and gladness.” When they heard these
words, they fell to whining with the whining of dogs,——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

[Illustration]


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah bin
Fazil said to his brothers, “Rejoice ye in the prospect of comfort and
gladness.” And when they heard his words they fell to whining with the
whining of dogs, and rubbed their jowls against his feet, as if blessing
him and humbling themselves before him. He mourned over them and took to
stroking their backs till supper time; and when they set on the trays he
bade the dogs sit. So they sat down and ate with him from the tray,
whilst his officers stood gaping and marvelling at his eating with dogs
and all said, “Is he mad or are his wits gone wrong? How can the Viceroy
of Bassorah city, he who is greater than a Wazir, eat with dogs? Knoweth
he not that the dog is unclean[538]?” And they stared at the dogs, as
they ate with him as servants eat with their lords,[539] knowing not
that they were his brothers; nor did they cease staring at them, till
they had made an end of eating, when Abdullah washed his hands and the
dogs also put out their paws and washed; whereupon all who were present
began to laugh at them and to marvel, saying, one to other, “Never in
our lives saw we dogs eat and wash their paws after eating!” Then the
dogs sat down on the divans beside Abdullah, nor dared any ask him of
this; and thus the case lasted till midnight, when he dismissed the
attendants and lay down to sleep and the dogs with him, each on a couch;
whereupon the servants said one to other, “Verily, he hath lain down to
sleep and the two dogs are lying with him.” Quoth another, “Since he
hath eaten with the dogs from the same tray, there is no harm in their
sleeping with him; and this is naught save the fashion of madmen.”
Moreover, they ate not anything of the food which remained in the tray,
saying, “’Tis unclean.” Such was their case; but as for Abdullah, ere he
could think, the earth clave asunder and out rose Sa’idah, who said to
him, “O Abdullah, why hast thou not beaten them this night and why hast
thou undone the collars from their necks? Hast thou acted on this wise
perversely and in mockery of my commandment? But I will at once beat
thee and spell thee into a dog like them.” He replied, “O my lady, I
conjure thee by the graving upon the seal-ring of Solomon David-son (on
the twain be peace!) have patience with me till I tell thee my cause and
after do with me what thou wilt.” Quoth she, “Say on,” and quoth he,
“The reason of my not punishing them is only this. The King of mankind,
the Commander of the Faithful, the Caliph Harun al-Rashid, ordered me
not to beat them this night and took of me oaths and covenants to that
effect; and he saluteth thee with the salam and hath committed to me a
mandate under his own hand, which he bade me give thee. So I obeyed his
order for to obey the Commander of the Faithful is obligatory; and here
is the mandate. Take it and read it and after work thy will.” She
replied, “Hither with it!” So he gave her the letter and she opened it
and read as follows, “In the name of Allah, the Compassionating, the
Compassionate! From the King of mankind, Harun al-Rashid, to the
daughter of the Red King, Sa’idah! But, after. Verily, this man hath
forgiven his brothers and hath waived his claim against them, and we
have enjoined them to reconciliation. Now, when reconciliation ruleth,
retribution is remitted, and if you of the Jinn contradict us in our
commandments, we will contrary you in yours and traverse your
ordinances; but, an ye obey our bidding and further our orders, we will
indeed do the like with yours. Wherefore I bid thee hurt them no hurt,
and if thou believe in Allah and in His Apostle, it behoveth thee to
obey and us to command.[540] So an thou spare them, I will requite thee
with that whereto my Lord shall enable me; and the token of obedience is
that thou remove thine enchantment from these two men, so they may come
before me to-morrow, free. But an thou release them not, I will release
them in thy despite, by the aid of Almighty Allah.” When she had read
the letter, she said, “O Abdullah, I will do nought till I go to my sire
and show him the mandate of the monarch of mankind and return to thee
with the answer in haste.” So saying, she signed with her hand to the
earth, which clave open and she disappeared therein, whilst Abdullah’s
heart was like to fly for joy and he said, “Allah advance the Commander
of the Faithful!” As for Sa’idah, she went in to her father; and,
acquainting him with that which had passed, gave him the Caliph’s
letter, which he kissed and laid on his head. Then he read it and
understanding its contents said, “O my daughter, verily, the ordinance
of the monarch of mankind obligeth us and his commandments are effectual
over us, nor can we disobey him: so go thou and release the two men
forthwith and say to them:—Ye are freed by the intercession of the
monarch of mankind. For, should he be wroth with us, he would destroy us
to the last of us; so do not thou impose on us that which we are
unable.” Quoth she, “O my father, if the monarch of mankind were wroth
with us, what could he do with us?”; and quoth her sire, “He hath power
over us for several reasons. In the first place, he is a man and hath
thus pre-eminence over us[541]; secondly he is the Vicar of Allah; and
thirdly, he is constant in praying the dawn-prayer of two bows[542];
therefore were all the tribes of the Jinn assembled together against him
from the Seven Worlds they could do him no hurt. But he, should he be
wroth with us would pray the dawn-prayer of two bows and cry out upon us
one cry, when we should all present ourselves before him obediently and
be before him as sheep before the butcher. If he would, he could command
us to quit our abiding-places for a desert country wherein we might not
endure to sojourn; and if he desired to destroy us, he would bid us
destroy ourselves, whereupon we should destroy one another. Wherefore we
may not disobey his bidding for, if we did this, he would consume us
with fire nor could we flee from before him to any asylum. Thus is it
with every True Believer who is persistent in praying the dawn-prayer of
two bows; his commandment is effectual over us: so be not thou the means
of our destruction, because of two mortals, but go forthright and
release them, ere the anger of the Commander of the Faithful fall upon
us.” So she returned to Abdullah and acquainted him with her father’s
words, saying, “Kiss for us the hands of the Prince of True Believers
and seek his approval for us.” Then she brought out the tasse and
filling it with water, conjured over it and uttered words which might
not be understood; after which she sprinkled the dogs with the water
saying, “Quit the form of dogs and return to the shape of men!”
Whereupon they became men as before and the spell of the enchantment was
loosed from them. Quoth they, “I testify that there is no god but _the_
God and I testify that Mohammed is the Apostle of God!” Then they fell
on their brother’s feet and hands, kissing them and beseeching his
forgiveness: but he said, “Do ye forgive me;” and they both repented
with sincere repentance, saying, “Verily, the damned Devil lured us and
covetise deluded us: but our Lord hath requited us after our deserts,
and forgiveness is of the signs of the noble.” And they went on to
supplicate their brother and weep and profess repentance for that which
had befallen him from them[543]. Then quoth he to them, “What did ye
with my wife whom I brought from the City of Stone?” Quoth they, “When
Satan tempted us and we cast thee into the sea, there arose strife
between us, each saying, I will have her to wife. Now when she heard
these words and beheld our contention, she knew that we had thrown thee
into the sea; so she came up from the cabin and said to us:—Contend not
because of me, for I will not belong to either of you. My husband is
gone into the sea and I will follow him. So saying, she cast herself
overboard and died.” Exclaimed Abdullah, “In very sooth she died a
martyr[544]! But there is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great!” Then he wept for her with sore weeping
and said to his brothers, “It was not well of you to do this deed and
bereave me of my wife.” They answered, “Indeed, we have sinned, but our
Lord hath requited us our misdeed and this was a thing which Allah
decreed unto us, ere He created us.” And he accepted their excuse; but
Sa’idah said to him, “Have they done all these things to thee and wilt
thou forgive them?” He replied, “O my sister, whoso hath power[545] and
spareth, for Allah’s reward he prepareth.” Then said she, “Be on thy
guard against them, for they are traitors;” and farewelled him and fared
forth.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Eighty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah, when
Sa’idah warned him and blessed him and went her ways, passed the rest of
the night with his brothers and on the morrow, he sent them to the
Hammam and clad each of them, on his coming forth, in a suit worth a
hoard of money. Then he called for the tray of food and they set it
before him and he ate, he and his brothers. When his attendants saw the
twain and knew them for his brothers they saluted them and said to him,
“O our lord, Allah give thee joy of thy reunion with thy dear brothers!
Where have they been this while?” He replied, “It was they whom ye saw
in the guise of dogs; praise be to Allah who hath delivered them from
prison and grievous torment!” Then he carried them to the Divan of the
Caliph and kissing ground before Al-Rashid wished him continuance of
honour and fortune and surcease of evil and enmity.” Quoth the Caliph,
“Welcome, O Emir Abdullah! Tell me what hath befallen thee.” And quoth
he, “O Commander of the Faithful (whose power Allah increase!) when I
carried my brothers home to my lodging, my heart was at rest concerning
them, because thou hadst pledged thyself to their release and I said in
myself, “Kings fail not to attain aught for which they strain, inasmuch
as the divine favour aideth them.” So I took off the collars from their
necks, putting my trust in Allah, and ate with them from the same tray,
which when my suite saw, they made light of my wit and said each to
other, “He is surely mad! How can the governor of Bassorah who is
greater than the Wazir, eat with dogs?” Then they threw away what was in
the tray, saying, “We will not eat the dogs’ orts.” And they went on
befool my reason, whilst I heard their words, but returned them no reply
because of their unknowing that the dogs were my brothers. When the hour
of sleep came, I sent them away and addressed myself to sleep; but, ere
I was ware, the earth clave in sunder and out came Sa’idah, the Red
King’s daughter, enraged against me, with eyes like fire.” And he went
on to relate to the Caliph all what had passed between him and her and
her father and how she had transmewed his brothers from canine to human
form, adding, “And here they are before thee, O Commander of the
Faithful!” The Caliph looked at them and seeing two young men like
moons, said, “Allah requite thee for me with good, O Abdullah, for that
thou hast acquainted me with an advantage[546] I knew not! Henceforth,
Inshallah, I will never leave to pray these two-bow orisons before the
breaking of the dawn, what while I live.” Then he reproved Abdullah’s
brothers for their past transgressions against him and they excused
themselves before the Caliph, who said, “Join hands[547] and forgive one
another and Allah pardon what is past!” Upon which he turned to Abdullah
and said to him, “O Abdullah, make thy brothers thine assistants and be
careful of them.” Then he charged them to be obedient to their brother
and bade them return to Bassorah after he had bestowed on them abundant
largesse. So they went down from the Caliph’s Divan whilst he rejoiced
in this advantage he had obtained by the action aforesaid, to wit,
persistence in praying two inclinations before dawn, and exclaimed, He
spake truth who said, “The misfortune of one tribe fortuneth another
tribe.”[548] On this wise befel it to them from the Caliph; but as
regards Abdullah, he left Baghdad carrying with him his brothers in all
honour and dignity and increase of quality, and fared on till they drew
near Bassorah, when the notables and chief men of the place came out to
meet them and after decorating the city brought them thereinto with a
procession which had not its match and all the folk shouted out
blessings on Abdullah as he scattered amongst them silver and gold.
None, however, took heed to his brothers; wherefore jealousy and envy
entered their hearts, for all he entreated them tenderly as one tenders
an ophthalmic eye; but the more he cherished them, the more they
redoubled in hatred and envy of him: and indeed it is said on the
subject:—

 I’d win good will of every one, but whoso envies me ✿ Will not be won on
    any wise and makes mine office hard:
 How gain the gree of envious wight who coveteth my good, ✿ When naught
    will satisfy him save to see my good go marr’d?

Then he gave each a concubine that had not her like, and eunuchs and
servants and slaves white and black, of each kind forty. He also gave
each of them fifty steeds all thoroughbreds and they got them guards and
followers; and he assigned to them revenues and appointed them solde and
stipends and made them his assistants, saying to them, “O my brothers, I
and you are equal and there is no distinction between me and you
twain,”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Eighty-eighth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah
assigned stipends to his brothers and made them his assistants, saying,
“O my brothers, I and you are equal and there is no distinction between
me and you twain, and after Allah and the Caliph, the commandment is
mine and yours. So rule you at Bassorah in my absence and in my
presence, and your commandments shall be effectual; but look that ye
fear Allah in your ordinances and beware of oppression, which if it
endure depopulateth; and apply yourselves to justice, for justice, if it
be prolonged, peopleth a land. Oppress not the True Believers, or they
will curse you and ill report of you will reach the Caliph, wherefore
dishonour will betide both me and you. Go not therefore about to
violence any, but whatso ye greed for of the goods of the folk, take it
from my goods, over and above that whereof ye have need; for ’tis not
unknown to you what is handed down in the Koran of prohibition versets
on the subject of oppression and Allah-gifted is he who said these
couplets:—

 Oppression ambusheth in sprite of man ✿ Whom naught withholdeth save the
    lack of might:
 The sage shall ne’er apply his wits to aught ✿ Until befitting time
    direct his sight:
 The tongue of Wisdom woneth in the heart; ✿ And in his mouth the tongue
    of foolish wight.
 Who at occasion’s call lacks power to rise ✿ Is slain by feeblest who
    would glut his spite.
 A man may hide his blood and breed, but aye ✿ His deeds on darkest
    hiddens cast a light.
 Wights of ill strain with ancestry as vile ✿ Have lips which never spake
    one word aright:
 And who committeth case to hands of fool ✿ In folly proveth self as fond
    and light;
 And who his secret tells to folk at large ✿ Shall rouse his foes to work
    him worst despight.
 Suffice the generous what regards his lot ✿ Nor meddles he with aught
    regards him not.

And he went on to admonish his brothers and bid them to equity and
forbid them from tyranny, doubting not but they would love him the
better for his boon of good counsel[549] and he relied upon them and
honoured them with the utmost honour; but notwithstanding all his
generosity to them, they only waxed in envy and hatred of him, till, one
day, the two being together alone, quoth Nasir to Mansur, “O my brother,
how long shall we be mere subjects of our brother Abdullah, and he in
this estate of lordship and worship? After being a merchant, he is
become an Emir, and from being little, he is grown great: but we, we
grow not great nor is there aught of respect or degree left us; for,
behold, he laugheth at us and maketh us his assistants! What is the
meaning of this? Is it not that we are his servants and under his
subjection? But, long as he abideth in good case, our rank will never be
raised nor shall we be aught of repute; wherefore we shall not fulfil
our wish, except we slay him and win to his wealth, nor will it be
possible to get his gear save after his death. So, when we have slain
him, we shall become lords and will take all that is in his treasuries
of gems and things of price and divide them between us. Then will we
send the Caliph a present and demand of him the government of Cufah, and
thou shalt be governor of Cufah and I of Bassorah. Thus each of us shall
have formal estate and condition, but we shall never effect this, except
we put him out of the world!” Answered Mansur, “Thou sayest sooth, but
how shall we do to kill him?” Quoth Nasir, “We will make an
entertainment in the house of one of us and invite him thereto and serve
him with the uttermost service. Then will we sit through the night with
him in talk and tell him tales and jests and rare stories till his heart
melteth with sitting up when we will spread him a bed, that he may lie
down to sleep. When he is asleep, we will kneel upon him and throttle
him and throw him into the river; and on the morrow, we will say:—His
sister the Jinniyah came to him, as he sat chatting with us, and said to
him:—O thou scum of mankind, who art thou that thou shouldst complain of
me to the Commander of the Faithful? Deemest thou that we dread him? As
he is a King, so we too are Kings, and if he mend not his manners in our
regard we will do him die by the foulest of deaths. But meantime I will
slay thee, that we may see what the hand of the Prince of True Believers
availeth to do. So saying, she caught him up and clave the earth and
disappeared with him which when we saw, we swooned away. Then we revived
and we reck not what is become of him. And saying this we will send to
the Caliph and tell him the case and he will invest us with the
government in his room. After awhile, we will send him a sumptuous
present and seek of him the government of Cufah, and one of us shall
abide in Bassorah and the other in Cufah. So shall the land be pleasant
to us and we will be down upon the True Believers and win our wishes.”
And quoth Mansur, “Thou counsellest well, O my brother,” and they agreed
upon the murther. So Nasir made an entertainment and said to Abdullah,
“O my brother, verily I am thy brother, and I would have thee hearten my
heart thou and my brother Mansur and eat of my banquet in my house, so I
may boast of thee and that it may be said, The Emir Abdullah hath eaten
of his brother Nasir’s guest meal; when my heart will be solaced by this
best of boons.” Abdullah replied, “So be it, O my brother; there is no
distinction between me and thee and thy house is my house; but since
thou invitest me, none refuseth hospitality save the churl.” Then he
turned to Mansur and said to him, “Wilt thou go with me to thy brother
Nasir’s house and we will eat of his feast and heal his heart?” Replied
Mansur, “As thy head liveth, O my brother, I will not go with thee,
unless thou swear to me that, after thou comest forth of brother Nasir’s
house, thou wilt enter my house and eat of my banquet! Is Nasir thy
brother and am not I thy brother? So, even as thou heartenest his heart,
do thou hearten mine.” Answered Abdullah, “There is no harm in that:
with love and gladly gree! When I come out from Nasir’s house, I will
enter thine, for thou art my brother even as he.” So he kissed his hand
and going forth of the Divan, made ready his feast. On the morrow,
Abdullah took horse and repaired, with his brother Mansur and a company
of his officers, to Nasir’s house, where they sat down, he and Mansur
and his many. Then Nasir set the trays before them and welcomed them; so
they ate and drank and sat in mirth and merriment; after which the trays
and the platters were removed and they washed their hands. They passed
the day in feasting and wine-drinking and diversion and delight till
nightfall, when they supped and prayed the sundown prayers, and the
night orisons; after which they sat conversing and carousing, and Nasir
and Mansur fell to telling stories whilst Abdullah hearkened. Now they
three were alone in the pavilion, the rest of the company being in
another place, and they ceased not to tell quips and tales and rare
adventures and anecdotes, till Abdullah’s heart was dissolved within him
for watching and sleep overcame him.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Eighty-ninth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Abdullah
was a-wearied with watching and wanted to sleep, they also lay beside
him on another couch and waited till he was drowned in slumber and when
they were certified thereof they arose and knelt upon him: whereupon he
awoke and seeing them kneeling on his breast, said to them, “What is
this, O my brothers?” Cried they, “We are no brothers of thine, nor do
we know thee unmannerly that thou art! Thy death is become better than
thy life.” Then they gripped him by the throat and throttled him, till
he lost his senses and abode without motion; so that they deemed him
dead. Now the pavilion wherein they were overlooked the river; so they
cast him into the water; but, when he fell, Allah sent to his aid a
dolphin[550] who was accustomed to come under that pavilion because the
kitchen had a window that gave upon the stream; and, as often as they
slaughtered any beast there, it was their wont to throw the refuse into
the river and the dolphin came and picked it up from the surface of the
water; wherefore he ever resorted to the place. That day they had cast
out much offal by reason of the banquet; so the dolphin ate more than of
wont and gained strength. Hearing the splash of Abdullah’s fall, he
hastened to the spot, where he saw a son of Adam and Allah guided him so
that he took the man on his back and crossing the current made with him
for the other bank, where he cast his burthen ashore. Now the place
where the dolphin cast up Abdullah was a well-beaten highway, and
presently up came a caravan and finding him lying on the river bank,
said, “Here is a drowned man, whom the river hath cast up;” and the
travellers gathered around to gaze at the corpse. The Shaykh of the
caravan was a man of worth, skilled in all sciences and versed in the
mystery of medicine and, withal, sound of judgment: so he said to them,
“O folk, what is the news?” They answered, “Here is a drowned man;”
whereupon he went up to Abdullah and examining him, said to them, “O
folk, there is life yet in this young man, who is a person of condition
and of the sons of the great, bred in honour and fortune, and Inshallah
there is still hope of him.” Then he took him and clothing him in dry
clothes warmed him before the fire; after which he nursed him and tended
him three days’ march till he revived; but he was passing feeble by
reason of the shock, and the chief of the caravan proceeded to medicine
him with such simples as he knew, what while they ceased not faring on
till they had travelled thirty days’ journey from Bassorah and came to a
city in the land of the Persians, by name ’Aúj.[551] Here they alighted
at a Khan and spread Abdullah a bed, where he lay groaning all night and
troubling the folk with his groans. And when morning morrowed the
concierge of the Khan came to the chief of the caravan and said to him,
“What is this sick man thou hast with thee? Verily, he disturbeth us.”
Quoth the chief, “I found him by the way, on the river-bank and well
nigh drowned; and I have tended him, but to no effect, for he recovereth
not.” Said the porter, “Show him to the Shaykhah[552] Rájihah.” “Who is
this Religious?” asked the chief of the caravan, and the door-keeper
answered, “There is with us a holy woman, a clean maid and a comely,
called Rajihah, to whom they present whoso hath any ailment; and he
passeth a single night in her house and awaketh on the morrow, whole and
ailing nothing.” Quoth the chief, “Direct me to her;” and quoth the
porter, “Take up thy sick man.” So he took up Abdullah and the
doorkeeper forewent him, till he came to a hermitage, where he saw folk
entering with many an ex voto offering and other folk coming forth,
rejoicing. The porter went in, till he came to the curtain,[553] and
said, “Permission, O Shaykhah Rajihah! Take this sick man.” Said she,
“Bring him within the curtain;” and the porter said to Abdullah,
“Enter.” So he entered and looking upon the holy woman, saw her to be
his wife whom he had brought from the City of Stone. And when he knew
her she also knew him and saluted him and he returned her salam. Then
said he, “Who brought thee hither?”; and she answered, “When I saw that
thy brothers had cast thee away and were contending concerning me, I
threw myself into the sea; but my Shaykh Al-Khizr Abu al-’Abbás took me
up and brought me to this hermitage, where he gave me leave to heal the
sick and bade cry in the city:—Whoso hath any ailment, let him repair to
the Shaykhah Rajihah; and he also said to me:—Tarry in this hermitage
till the time betide, and thy husband shall come to thee here. So all
the sick used to flock to me and I rubbed them and shampoo’d them and
they awoke on the morrow whole and sound; whereby the report of me
became noised abroad among the folk, and they brought me votive gifts,
so that I have with me abundant wealth. And now I live here in high
honour and worship, and all the people of these parts seek my prayers.”
Then she rubbed him and by the ordinance of Allah the Most High, he
became whole. Now Al-Khizr used to come to her every Friday night, and
it chanced that the day of Abdullah’s coming was a Thursday.[554]
Accordingly, when the night darkened he and she sat, after a supper of
the richest meats, awaiting the coming of Al-Khizr, who made his
appearance anon and carrying them forth of the hermitage, set them down
in Abdullah’s palace at Bassorah, where he left them and went his way.
As soon as it was day, Abdullah examined the palace and knew it for his
own; then, hearing the folk clamouring without, he looked forth of the
lattice and saw his brothers crucified, each on his own cross. Now the
reason of this was as ensueth. When they had thrown him into the Tigris,
the twain arose on the morrow, weeping and saying, “Our brother! the
Jinniyah hath carried off our brother!” Then they made ready a present
and sent it to the Caliph, acquainting him with these tidings and suing
from him the government of Bassorah. He sent for them and questioned
them and they told him the false tale we have recounted, whereupon he
was exceeding wroth.[555] So that night he prayed a two-bow prayer
before daybreak, as of his wont, and called upon the tribes of the Jinn,
who came before him subject-wise, and he questioned them of Abdullah:
when they sware to him that none of them had done him aught of hurt and
said, “We know not what is become of him.” Then came Sa’idah, daughter
of the Red King, and acquainted the Caliph with the truth of Abdullah’s
case, and he dismissed the Jinn. On the morrow, he subjected Nasir and
Mansur to the bastinado till they confessed, one against other:
whereupon the Caliph was enraged with them and cried, “Carry them to
Bassorah and crucify them there before Abdullah’s palace.” Such was
their case; but as regards Abdullah, when he saw his brothers crucified,
he commanded to bury them, then took horse and repairing to Baghdad,
acquainted the Caliph with that which his brothers had done with him,
from first to last and told him how he had recovered his wife; whereat
Al-Rashid marvelled and summoning the Kazi and the witnesses, bade draw
up the marriage-contract between Abdullah and the damsel whom he had
brought from the City of Stone. So he went in to her and woned with her
at Bassorah till there came to them the Destroyer of Delights and the
Severer of societies; and extolled be the perfection of the Living, who
dieth not! Moreover, O auspicious King, I have heard a tale anent.

-----

Footnote 476:

  Lane owns that this is “one of the most entertaining tales in the
  work,” but he omits it because its chief and best portion is
  essentially the same as “The story of the First of the Three Ladies of
  Baghdad.” The truth is he was straightened for space by his publisher
  and thus compelled to cut out some of the best stories in The Nights.

Footnote 477:

  _i.e._ Ibrahim of Mosul, the musician poet often mentioned in The
  Nights. I must again warn the reader that the name is pronounced
  Is-hák (like Isaac with a central aspirate) not Ishák. This is not
  unnecessary when we hear Tait-shill for Tait’s hill and
  “Frederick-shall” for Friedrich, shall.

Footnote 478:

  _i.e._ He was a proficient, an adept.

Footnote 479:

  Arab. from Pers. Dúláb = a waterwheel, a buttery, a cupboard.

Footnote 480:

  Arab. “Futúr,” the chhotí házirí of Anglo-India or breakfast proper,
  eaten by Moslems immediately after the dawn-prayer except in Ramázán.
  Amongst sensible people it is a substantial meal of bread and boiled
  beans, eggs, cheese, curded milk and the pastry called fatírah,
  followed by coffee and a pipe. See Lane M. E. chapt. v. and my
  Pilgrimage ii. 48.

Footnote 481:

  This “off-with-his-head” style must not be understood literally. As I
  have noted, it is intended by the writer to show the Kingship and the
  majesty of the “Vicar of Allah.”

Footnote 482:

  Lit. “the calamity of man (insán) is from the tongue” (lisán).

Footnote 483:

  For Khatt Sharíf, lit. = a noble letter, see vol. ii. 39.

Footnote 484:

  Arab. “Allah yastura-k” = protect thee by hiding what had better be
  hidden.

Footnote 485:

  Arab. “Janázír” = chains, an Arabised plural of the Pers. Zanjír with
  the metathesis or transposition of letters peculiar to the vulgar;
  “Janázír” for “Zanájír.”

Footnote 486:

  Arab. “Safínah” = (Noah’s) Ark, a myth derived from the Baris of Egypt
  with subsequent embellishments from the Babylonian deluge-legends: the
  latter may have been survivals of the days when the waters of the
  Persian Gulf extended to the mountains of Eastern Syria. Hence I would
  explain the existence of extinct volcanoes within sight of Damascus
  (see Unexplored Syria i. p. 159) visited, I believe, for the first
  time by my late friend Charles F. Tyrwhitt-Drake and myself in May,
  1871.

Footnote 487:

  Mansur and Násir are passive and active participles from the same
  root, Nasr = victory; the former means triumphant and the latter
  triumphing.

Footnote 488:

  The normal term of Moslem mourning, which Mohammed greatly reduced
  disliking the abuse of it by the Jews who even in the present day are
  the strictest in its observance.

Footnote 489:

  An euphuistic and euphemistic style of saying, “No, we don’t know.”

Footnote 490:

  Arab. “Rahan,” an article placed with him in pawn.

Footnote 491:

  A Moslem is bound, not only by honour but by religion, to discharge
  the debts of his dead father and mother and so save them from
  punishment on Judgment-day. Mohammed who enjoined mercy to debtors
  while in the flesh (chapt. ii. 280, etc.) said “Allah covereth all
  faults except debt; that is to say, there will be punishment
  therefor.” Also “A martyr shall be pardoned every fault but debt.” On
  one occasion he refused to pray for a Moslem who died insolvent. Such
  harshness is a curious contrast with the leniency which advised the
  creditor to remit debts by way of alms. And practically this mild view
  of indebtedness renders it highly unadvisable to oblige a Moslem
  friend with a loan.

Footnote 492:

  _i.e._ he did not press them for payment; and, it must be remembered,
  he received no interest upon his monies, this being forbidden in the
  Koran.

Footnote 493:

  Al-Mas’údi (chap. xvii.) alludes to furs of Sable (Samúr), hermelin
  (Al-Farwah) and Bortás (Turkish) furs of black and red foxes. For
  Samúr see vol. iv. 57. Sinjáb is Persian for the skin of the grey
  squirrel (_Mus lemmus_, the lemming), the meniver, erroneously
  miniver, (menu vair) as opposed to the ermine = (_Mus Armenius_, or
  _mustela erminia_.) I never visit England without being surprised at
  the vile furs worn by the rich, and the folly of the poor in not
  adopting the sheepskin with the wool inside and the leather well
  tanned which keeps the peasant warm and comfortable between Croatia
  and Afghanistan.

Footnote 494:

  Arab. “Tájir Alfí” which may mean a thousand dinars (£500) or a
  thousand purses (= £5,000). “Alfí” is not an uncommon P.N., meaning
  that the bearer (Pasha or pauper) had been bought for a thousand left
  indefinite.

Footnote 495:

  Tigris-Euphrates.

Footnote 496:

  Possibly the quarter of Baghdad so called and mentioned in The Nights
  more than once.

Footnote 497:

  For this fiery sea see Sind Revisited i. 19.

Footnote 498:

  Arab. “Al-Ghayb” which may also mean “in the future” (unknown to man).

Footnote 499:

  Arab. “Jabal”; here a mountainous island: see vol. i. 140.

Footnote 500:

  _i.e._ ye shall be spared this day’s miseries. See my Pilgrimage vol.
  i. 314, and the delight with which we glided into Marsá Damghah.

Footnote 501:

  Arab. “Súwán” = “Syenite” (= granite) also used for flint and other
  hard stones. See vol. i. 238.

Footnote 502:

  Koran xxiv. Male children are to the Arab as much prized an object of
  possession as riches, since without them wealth is of no value to him.
  Mohammed, therefore, couples wealth with children as the two things
  wherewith one wards off the ills of this world, though they are
  powerless against those of the world to come.

Footnote 503:

  An exclamation derived from the Surat Nasr (cx. 1) one of the most
  affecting in the Koran. It gave Mohammed warning of his death and
  caused Al-Abbás to shed tears; the Prophet sings a song of victory in
  the ixth year of the Hijrah (he died on the xth) and implores the
  pardon of his Lord.

Footnote 504:

  Arab. “Dáirah,” a basin surrounded by hills. The words which follow
  may mean, “An hour’s journey or more in breadth.”

Footnote 505:

  These petrified folk have occurred in the “Eldest Lady’s Tale” (vol.
  i. 165), where they are of “black stone.”

Footnote 506:

  Arab. “Táj Kisrawi,” such as was worn by the Chosroes Kings. See vol.
  i. 75.

Footnote 507:

  The familiar and far-famed Napoleonic pose, with the arms crossed over
  the breast, is throughout the East the attitude assumed by slave and
  servant in presence of his master. Those who send statues to
  Anglo-India should remember this.

Footnote 508:

  Arab. “Ta’ álík” = hanging lamps, often in lantern shape with coloured
  glass and profuse ornamentation; the Maroccan are now familiar to
  England.

Footnote 509:

  Arab. “Kidrah,” lit. = a pot, kettle: it can hardly mean “an
  interval.”

Footnote 510:

  The wicket or small doorway, especially by the side of a gate or
  portal, is called “the eye of the needle” and explains Matt. xix. 24,
  and Koran vii. 38. In the Rabbinic form of the proverb the camel
  becomes an elephant. Some have preferred to change the Koranic Jamal
  (camel) for Habl (cable) and much ingenuity has been wasted by
  Christian commentators on Mark x. 25, and Luke xviii. 25.

Footnote 511:

  _i.e._ A “Kanz” (enchanted treasury) usually hidden underground but
  opened by a counter-spell and transferred to earth’s face. The reader
  will note the gorgeousness of the picture.

Footnote 512:

  Oriental writers, Indian and Persian, as well as Arab, lay great
  stress upon the extreme delicacy of the skin of the fair ones
  celebrated in their works, constantly attributing to their heroines
  bodies so sensitive as to brook with difficulty the contact of the
  finest shift. Several instances of this will be found in the present
  collection and we may fairly assume that the skin of an Eastern
  beauty, under the influence of constant seclusion and the unremitting
  use of cosmetics and the bath, would in time attain a pitch of
  delicacy and sensitiveness such as would in some measure justify the
  seemingly extravagant statements of their poetical admirers, of which
  the following anecdote (quoted by Ibn Khellikan from the historian Et
  Teberi) is a fair specimen. Ardeshir ibn Babek (Artaxerxes I.), the
  first Sassanian King of Persia (A.D. 226–242), having long
  unsuccessfully besieged El Hedr, a strong city of Mesopotamia
  belonging to the petty King Es Satiroun, at last obtained possession
  of it by the treachery of the owner’s daughter Nezireh and married the
  latter, this having been the price stipulated by her for the betrayal
  to him of the place. “It happened afterwards that, one night, as she
  was unable to sleep and turned from side to side in the bed, Ardeshir
  asked her what prevented her from sleeping. She replied, ‘I never yet
  slept on a rougher bed than this; I feel something irk me.’ He ordered
  the bed to be changed, but she was still unable to sleep. Next
  morning, she complained of her side, and on examination, a myrtle-leaf
  was found adhering to a fold of the skin, from which it had drawn
  blood. Astonished at this circumstance, Ardeshir asked her if it was
  this that had kept her awake and she replied in the affirmative. ‘How
  then,’ asked he, ‘did your father bring you up?’ She answered, ‘He
  spread me a bed of satin and clad me in silk and fed me with marrow
  and cream and the honey of virgin bees and gave me pure wine to
  drink.’ Quoth Ardeshir, ’The same return which you made your father
  for his kindness would be made much more readily to me’; and bade bind
  her by the hair to the tail of a horse, which galloped off with her
  and killed her.” It will be remembered that the true princess, in the
  well-known German popular tale, is discovered by a similar incident to
  that of the myrtle-leaf. I quote this excellent note from Mr. Payne
  (ix. 148), only regretting that annotation did not enter into his plan
  of producing The Nights. Amongst Hindu story-tellers a phenomenal
  softness of the skin is a _lieu commun_: see Vikram and the Vampire
  (p. 285, “Of the marvellous delicacy of their Queens”); and the Tale
  of the Sybarite might be referred to in the lines given above.

Footnote 513:

  “(55) Indeed joyous on that day are the people of Paradise in their
  employ; (56) In shades, on bridal couches reclining they and their
  wives: (57) Fruits have they therein and whatso they desire. (58)
  ‘Peace!’ shall be a word from a compassionating Lord.” Koran xxxvi.
  55–58, the famous Chapt. “Yá Sín;” which most educated Moslems learn
  by heart. See vol. iii. 19. In addition to the proofs there offered
  that the Moslem Paradise is not wholly sensual I may quote, “No soul
  wotteth what coolth of the eyes is reserved (for the good) in
  recompense of their works” (Koran lxx. 17). The Paradise of eating,
  drinking, and copulating which Mr. Palgrave (Arabia, i. 368) calls “an
  everlasting brothel between forty celestial concubines” was preached
  solely to the baser sort of humanity which can understand and
  appreciate only the pleasures of the flesh. To talk of spiritual joys
  before the Badawin would have been a _non-sens_, even as it would be
  to the roughs of our great cities.

Footnote 514:

  Arab. “Lajlaj” lit. = rolling anything round the mouth when eating;
  hence speaking inarticulately, being tongue-tied, stuttering, etc.

Footnote 515:

  The classical “Phylarchs,” who had charge of the Badawin.

Footnote 516:

  “The Jabábirah” (giant-rulers of Syria) and the “Akásirah”
  (Chosroës-Kings of Persia).

Footnote 517:

  This shows (and we are presently told) that the intruder was Al-Khizr,
  the “Green Prophet,” for whom see vol. iv. 175.

Footnote 518:

  _i.e._ of salvation supposed to radiate from all Prophets, esp. from
  Mohammed.

Footnote 519:

  This formula which has occurred from the beginning (vol. i. 1) is
  essentially Koranic: See Chapt. li. 18–19 and passim.

Footnote 520:

  This trick of the priest hidden within the image may date from the
  days of the vocal Memnon, and was a favourite in India esp. at the
  shrine of Somnauth (Soma-náth), the Moon-god, Atergatis Aphrodite,
  etc.

Footnote 521:

  Arab. “Almás” = Gr. Adamas. In opposition to the learned ex-Professor
  Maskelyne I hold that the cutting of the diamond is of very ancient
  date. Mr. W. M. Flinders Patrie (The Pyramids and Temples of Gizah,
  London: Field and Tuer, 1884) whose studies have thoroughly demolished
  the freaks and unfacts, the fads and fancies of the “Pyramidists,” and
  who may be said to have raised measurement to the rank of a fine art,
  believes that the Euritic statues of old Egypt such as that of Khufu
  (Cheops) in the Bulak Museum were drilled by means of diamonds.
  Athenæus tells us (lib. v.) that the Indians brought pearls and
  diamonds to the procession of Ptolemy Philadelphus; and this suggests
  cutting, as nothing can be less ornamental than the uncut stone.

Footnote 522:

  _i.e._ as if they were holding a “Durbar”; the King’s idol in the Sadr
  or place of honour and the others ranged about it in their several
  ranks.

Footnote 523:

  These words are probably borrowed from the taunts of Elijah to the
  priests of Baal (I Kings xviii. 27). Both Jews and Moslems wilfully
  ignored the proper use of the image or idol which was to serve as a
  Keblah or direction of prayer and an object upon which to concentrate
  thought and looked only to the abuse of the ignobile vulgus who
  believe in its intrinsic powers. Christendom has perpetuated the
  dispute: Romanism affects statues and pictures! Greek orthodoxy
  pictures and not statues and the so-called Protestantism ousts both.

Footnote 524:

  Arab. “Sa’ádah” = worldly prosperity and future happiness.

Footnote 525:

  Arab. “Al-’Ahd wa al-Mísák” the troth pledged between the Muríd or
  apprentice-Darwaysh and the Shaykh or Master-Darwaysh binding the
  former to implicit obedience etc.

Footnote 526:

  Arab. “Taakhír,” lit. postponement and meaning acting with
  deliberation as opposed to “Ajal” (haste), precipitate action
  condemned in the Koran lxv. 38.

Footnote 527:

  _i.e._ I have been lucky enough to get this and we will share it
  amongst us.

Footnote 528:

  _i.e._ of saving me from being ravished.

Footnote 529:

  Sa’ídah = the auspicious (fem.): Mubárakah, = the blessed; both names
  showing that the bearers were Moslemahs.

Footnote 530:

  _i.e._ the base-born from whom base deeds may be expected.

Footnote 531:

  Arab. “Badlat Kunúzíyah” = such a dress as would be found in enchanted
  hoards (Kunúz): _e.g._ Prince Esterhazy’s diamond jacket.

Footnote 532:

  The _lieu d’aisance_ in Eastern crafts is usually a wooden cage or
  framework fastened outside the gunwale, very cleanly but in foul
  weather very uncomfortable and even dangerous.

Footnote 533:

  Arab. “Ghull,” a collar of iron or other metal, sometimes made to
  resemble the Chinese Kza or Cangue, a kind of ambulant pillory,
  serving like the old stocks which still show in England the veteris
  vestigia ruris. See Davis, “The Chinese,” i. 241. According to
  Al-Siyúti (p. 362) the Caliph Al-Mutawakkil ordered the Christians to
  wear these Ghulls round the neck, yellow head-gear and girdles, to use
  wooden stirrups and to place figures of devils before their houses.
  The writer of The Nights presently changes Ghull to “chains and
  fetters of iron.”

Footnote 534:

  Arab. “Yá fulán,” O certain person! See vol. iii. 191.

Footnote 535:

  Father of Harun al-Rashid A.H. 158–169 (= 775–785) third Abbaside who
  both in the Mac. and the Bul. Edits. is called “the fifth of the sons
  of Al-Abbas.” He was a good poet and a man of letters, also a fierce
  persecutor of the “Zindiks” (Al-Siyuti 278), a term especially applied
  to those who read the Zend books and adhered to Zoroastrianism,
  although afterwards applied to any heretic or atheist. He made many
  changes at Meccah and was the first who had a train of camels laden
  with snow for his refreshment along a measured road of 700 miles
  (Gibbon, chapt. lii.). He died of an accident when hunting: others say
  he was poisoned after leaving his throne to his sons Musa al-Hadi and
  Harun al-Rashid. The name means “Heaven-directed” and must not be
  confounded with the title of the twelfth Shi’ah Imám Mohammed Abu
  al-Kásim born at Sarramanrai A.H. 255 whom Sale (sect. iv.) calls
  “Mahdi or Director” and whose expected return has caused and will
  cause so much trouble in Al-Islam.

Footnote 536:

  This speciosum miraculum must not be held a proof that the tale was
  written many years after the days of Al-Rashid. Miracles grow apace in
  the East and a few years suffice to mature them. The invasion of
  Abraha the Abyssinia took place during the year of Mohammed’s birth;
  and yet in an early chapter of the Koran (No. cv.) written perhaps
  forty-five years afterwards, the small-pox is turned into a puerile
  and extravagant miracle. I myself became the subject of a miracle in
  Sind which is duly chronicled in the family-annals of a certain Pir or
  religious teacher. See History of Sindh (p. 230) and Sind Revisited
  (i. 156).

Footnote 537:

  In the texts, “Sixth.”

Footnote 538:

  Arab. “Najis” = ceremonially impure especially the dog’s mouth like
  the cow’s mouth amongst the Hindus; and requiring after contact the
  Wuzu-ablution before the Moslem can pray.

Footnote 539:

  Arab. “Akl al-hashamah” (hashamah = retinue; hishmah = reverence,
  bashfulness) which may also mean “decorously and respectfully,”
  according to the vowel-points.

Footnote 540:

  _i.e._ as the Viceregent of Allah and Vicar of the Prophet.

Footnote 541:

  For the superiority of mankind to the Jinn see vol. viii. 5; 44.

Footnote 542:

  According to Al-Siyuti, Harun Al-Rashid prayed every day a hundred
  bows.

Footnote 543:

  As the sad end of his betrothed was still to be accounted for.

Footnote 544:

  For the martyrdom of the drowned see vol. i, 171, to quote no other
  places.

Footnote 545:

  _i.e._ if he have the power to revenge himself. The sentiment is
  Christian rather than Moslem.

Footnote 546:

  _i.e._ the power acquired (as we afterwards learn) by the regular
  praying of the dawn-prayer. It is not often that The Nights condescend
  to point a moral or inculcate a lesson as here; and we are truly
  thankful for the immunity.

Footnote 547:

  Arab. “Musáfahah” which, I have said, serves for our shaking hands:
  and extends over wide regions. They apply the palms of the right hands
  flat to each other without squeezing the fingers and then raise the
  latter to the forehead. Pilgrimage ii. 332, has also been quoted.

Footnote 548:

  Equivalent to our saying about an ill wind, etc.

Footnote 549:

  A proof of his extreme simplicity and bonhomie.

Footnote 550:

  Arab. “Dárfíl” = the Gr. δελφίς later δελφίν suggesting that the
  writer had read of Arion in Herodotus i. 23.

Footnote 551:

  ’Aúj; I can only suggest, with due diffidence, that this is intended
  for Kúch the well-known Baloch city in Persian Carmania (Kirmán) and
  meant by Richardson’s “Koch u buloch.” But as the writer borrows so
  much from Al-Mas’udi it may possibly be Aúk in Sístán where stood the
  heretical city “Shádrak,” chapt. cxxii.

Footnote 552:

  _i.e._ The excellent (or surpassing) Religious. Shaykhah, the fem. of
  Shaykh, is a she-chief, even the head of the dancing-girls will be
  entitled “Shaykhah.”

Footnote 553:

  The curtain would screen her from the sight of men-invalids and
  probably hung across the single room of the “Záwiyah” or hermit’s
  cell. The curtain is noticed in the tales of two other reverend women;
  vols. iv. 155 and v. 257.

Footnote 554:

  Abdullah met his wife on Thursday, the night of which would amongst
  Moslems be Friday night.

Footnote 555:

  _i.e._ with Sa’idah.


                            END OF VOL. IX.

[Illustration: والسلام]




                                 INDEX


 Abá al-Khayr = my good sir, etc., 54

 Abú al-Lays (Pr. N.) = Father of the Lion, 211

 Abú Dalaf al-Ijilí (a soldier famed for liberality and culture), 189

 Abú Kír = Father of the Pitch (Abou Kir), 134

 Abú Sír (corruption of Pousiri = Busiris), 134

 Abú Sirhán = wolf, 104

 Acquittance of all possible claims after business transactions, 285

 Ád and Thamúd (pre-historic tribes), 174

 Adab = scholarship, 41

 Ádamí = an Adamite (opposed to Jinn), 169

 Adím al-Zauk = lack-tact, 206

 Admiral (fishing for the King’s table), 159

 Adultery (son of = base born), 331

 Af’à = ὄφις (a snake), 37

 Ahd (Al-) wa al-Misák = oath and covenant, 327

 Ahmad bin Abí Duwád (High Chancellor to the Abbasides), 244

 “Aidance from Allah and victory are near”, 317

 Akásirah = Chosroës-Kings, 323

 Akl al-Hishmah = eating decorously, 337

 Akka = Acre, 19

 Alà júdi-k = to thy generosity, 150; 208

 Alà mahlak = at thy leisure, 168

 All will not be save well = it will be the worse for him, 293

 Allah (will make no way for the Infidels over the True Believers), 16

 —— (I seek refuge with), 35

 —— (he was jealous for Almighty), 104

 —— (I fear Him in respect of = I am governed by Him in my dealings
    with), 123

 —— (pardon thee, showing that the speaker does not believe in another’s
    tale), 154

 —— (the Provider), 166

 —— (for the love of), 170

 —— (Karím = God is bountiful), 167

 —— (grant thee grace = pardon thee), 283

 —— (yastura-k = will veil thee), 309

 —— (sole Scient of the hidden things be extolled), 311

 —— (raised the heavens without columns), 324

 Almás = Gr. Adamas, 325

 Aloes (well appreciated in Eastern medicine), 100

 —— (the finest used for making Nadd), 150

 ’Amal = action, operation (applied to drugs etc.), 274

 Ámín (Amen) = So it be!, 131

 Ammá laka au ’alayka = either to thee (the gain) or upon thee (the
    loss), 11

 Amr (Al) = command, matter, affair, 67

 Analphabetic Amirs, 126

 Angels (taking precedence in the order of created beings), 81

 Animals (have no fear of man), 181

 Ants (a destructive power in tropic climates), 46

 Anyáb (pl. of Náb) = grinder teeth, 140

 A’ráb = dwellers in the Desert, 293

 ’Arísh (Al-) frontier town between Egypt and Palestine, 286

 ’Aríshah = arbour, etc., 219

 Arithmology (cumbrous in Arabic for the lack of the higher numerals),
    123

 Ásár = traces, 255

 A-Sharíf anta = art thou a noble?, 231

 ’Atsah = sneezing, 220

 ’Aúj = Persian town Kúch (?), 347

 Awák = pl. of Ukíyyah _q.v._, 216

 ’Awáshik = hucklebones, cockles, 268

 Az’ar = having thin hair; tailless, 185

 Azím (in the slang sense of “mighty fine”), 40

 Azíz (Al-) al-Mizr = Magnifico of Misraim, 119


 Báb = gate, etc. (sometimes for a sepulchral cave), 286

 Badlat Kunúzíyah = treasure-suit, 331

 Baghdád of Nullity (opposed to the Ubiquity of the World), 13

 Bahá al-Dín ibn Shaddád (Judge Advocate General under Saladin), 23

 Bahímah = black cattle, 71

 Bakhkharaní = he incensed me, 238

 Bakhshish (to make a bath-man’s mouth water), 151

 Bartaut = Berthold, 8

 Basmalah = saying, Bismilláh, 1

 Batárikh = roe, spawn, 139

 Bath (setting it a-working = turning on the water), 149

 Belle fourchette (greatly respected), 219

 Bilking (popular form of), 145

 Bishr Barefoot (Sufi ascetic), 21

 Breslau edition quoted, 33; 42; 59; 63; 156; 159; 169; 185; 187

 Brethren (for kinsfolk), 26

 —— (of trust and brethren of society = friends and acquaintances), 75

 Bunn = kind of cake, 72

 Buffalo = bœuf à l’eau (?), 181

 Bulak ed. quoted, 185

 Burning (a foretaste of Hell-fire), 158



 Caliphs:—
   Mu’tazid (Al-), 229
   Mutawakkil (Al-), 232
   Mu’tasim (Al-), _ib._

 Carelessness of the story-teller, 4

 Carpet (let him come to the King’s = before the King as referee), 110

 Carpet-room = Throne-room, 121

 Citadel (contains the Palace), 102

 “Cloth” (not “board” for playing chess), 209

 Clothing and decency, 182

 Clout (hung over the door of a bath shows that women are bathing), 153

 Coffee (mention of probably due to the scribe), 141

 —— (its mention shows a comparatively late date), 255

 “Come to my arms, my slight acquaintance”, 177

 Conciseness (verging on obscurity), 171

 Confusion (universal in the undeveloped mind of man), 78

 Contrast (artful, between squalor and gorgeousness), 170

 Cousin (has a prior right to marry a cousin), 225

 Cowardice of the Fellah (how to be cured), 5

 Craft (many names for, connected with Arabic), 138

 Creation from nothing, 77

 Crescent of the breakfast-fête, 250

 Cruelty (the mystery of explained only by a Law without a Law-giver),
    37

 Curtain (screens a reverend woman from the sight of men-invalids), 347


 Dáirah = circle, inclosure, 287

 —— (for a basin surrounded by hills), 317

 Dandán (monstrous fish), 179

 Dárfíl = dolphin, 346

 Dawá = medicine (for a depilatory), 155

 Dawát = wooden inkcase with reed-pens, 122

 Day (when wealth availeth not), 16

 —— (ye shall be saved from its misery), 215

 Dayyús = pimp, wittol, 297

 Debts (of dead parents sacred to the children), 311

 Delicacy of the female skin, 321

 Democracy of despotism, 94

 Devil (allowed to go about the world and seduce mankind), 82

 Diamond (its cutting of very ancient date), 325

 Diaphoresis (a sign of the abatement of a disease), 146

 Dín al-a’raj = the perverted faith, 11

 Dinár = denarius (description of one), 294

 Díván (fanciful origin of the word), 108

 Don Juan quoted, 190

 Drowning (a martyr’s death), 158

 Dukhán = smoke (meaning tobacco for the Chibouk), 156

 Dúláb = waterwheel; buttery; cupboard, 306

 Durbar of idols, 325

 Duwámah = whirlpool, 93


 Egypt (derivation of the name), 286

 Elliptical style of the Eastern story-teller, 160

 Emirs (of the wild Arabs = Phylarchs), 322

 Emma (hides her lover under her cloak), 8

 Epistasis without prostasis, 240

 Euphemistic speech, 180; 224

 Euphuistic speech, 43

 Euthanasia and anæsthetics, 90

 “Eye of the needle” (for wicket-door), 320

 Eyes (no male has ever filled mine = none has pleased me), 222


 Fakír (the, and his jar of butter; congeners of the tale), 40

 Farz (mentioned after Sunnah because jingling with Arz), 15

 Fasyán Salh al-Subyán (Pr. N.) = Fizzle, Dung of Children, 11

 Faswah = susurrus, 291

 Fatalism and predestination, 45

 Fate and Freewill, 80

 Fath (Al-) bin Khakán (boon companion), 245

 Fátihah (pronounced to make an agreement binding), 138

 Fellah = peasant, husbandman, 40

 Fellah chaff, 152

 Fingers (names of), 160

 Finján = egg-shell cup for coffee, 268

 Firdaus = Paradise, 214

 Fire = Hell (home of suicides), 25

 “Forcible eateth feeble”, 179

 Fore-arm (for proficiency), 306

 Freedom (granted to a slave for the sake of reward from Allah), 243

 Fumigations (to exorcise demons, etc.), 29

 Furát = Euphrates (derivation of the name), 17

 Futúr = breakfast, 307

 Fuzayl bin ’Iyáz (Sufi ascetic), 21


 Gate (of war opened), 9

 Gates (of Heaven are open), 221

 —— (shut during Friday devotion), 259

 Ghaliyún = galleon, 138

 Ghazálah = gazelle (a slave-girl’s name), 209

 Ghayb (Al-) = secret purpose; future, 314

 Ghazá-wood, 27

 Ghull = iron collar, 333

 Ghúls (whose bellies none may fill but Allah), 152

 Ghurbah (Al-) Kurbah = “Travel is Travail”, 257

 Gift (is for him who is present), 225

 Godiva (an Arabic of the wrong sort), 261

 Good news, Inshallah = is all right with thee?, 224

 Gourd (Ar. Hanzal), 165

 Grammatical double entendre, 272

 Green garb (distinguishing mark of Al-Khizr), 324

 Guadalajara = Wady al-Khar (of dung), 10


 Habíbí wa tabíbí = my love and leach, 299

 Halímah = the mild, the gentle (fem.), 265

 Halummú = draw near (plur.), 44

 Hamadán (town in Persian Irák), 212

 Hamíd (fem. Hamídah) = praiseworthy, satisfactory, 76

 Hanzal = gourd, 165

 Harámí = one who lives on unlawful gains, 147

 Harf al-Jarr = particle governing the oblique case, mode of thrusting,
    tumbling, 272

 Hark, you shall see, 14

 Harún al-Rashíd (as a poet), 17

 —— (said to have prayed every day a hundred bows), 339

 Háshimí = descendant of Háshim, 24

 Hattín (battle of), 19

 Háwí = Serpent-charmer, 56

 Hazár Afsáneh (tales from the), 32

 Hind (Al-) al-Aksà = Outer Hind or India, 116

 Honey (simile for the delights of the World), 64

 House (the Holy of Allah = Ka’abah), 178

 Hulwán al-miftáh = denier à Dieu, 212

 Huwayná (Al-) = now drawing near and now moving away, 250


 Iblís = Diabolos, 300

 Ibn Hamdún (transmitter of poetry and history), 229

 Ibn ’Irs = weasel, 114

 Ibrahím of Mosul, 304

 ’Irk = root, also sprig, twig, 251

 Ishk ’uzrí (in the sense of platonic love), 250

 Istahi = have some shame, 255

 Istitá’ah = ableness, 80

 —— (= freewill), 83


 Jabábirah (pl. of Jabbár = giants), 109

 —— (= conquerors), 323

 Jabal = mountain (for mountainous island), 315

 Jáh = high station, dignity, 174

 Jahábizah (pl. of Jahbiz) = acute, intelligent, 62

 Jalálikah = Gallicians, 156

 Janázir (for Zanájir) = chains, 309

 Jannat al-Khuld = the Eternal Garden, 214

 Jawásís (pl. of Jásús) = spies (for secret police), 13

 Jilbáb = gown, 290

 Junayd al-Baghdádí (Sufi ascetic), 21


 Kabasa = he shampoo’d, 213

 Kádús (pl. Kawádís) = pot of a water-wheel, 218

 Kaff Shurayk = a single “Bunn” _q.v._, 172

 Kahramánah = duenna etc., 221

 Kahwah (Al-) = coffee-house, 256

 Kallim al-Sultán (formula of summoning), 224

 Kamar al-Zamán = Moon of the Age, 247

 Kanz = enchanted treasure, 320

 Kaptán = Captain, 139

 Kárah = budget, large bag, 216

 Karkh (Al-), quarter of Baghdád, 313

 Kasab (Al-) = acquisitiveness, 80

 Kasídahs (their conventionalism), 250

 Kasr = upper room, 283

 Kaukab al-Saláh = Star of the morning, 301

 Kaun = being, existence, 63

 Khádim = eunuch, 237

 Khadiv (not Kedive), Prince, 119

 Khafz al-Jináh = lowering the wing (demeaning oneself gently), 33

 Kháliyah (pun on), 291

 Khara al-Sús = Weevil’s dung, 10

 Khatt Sharíf = noble letter, 309

 Khayr wa’Áfiyah = well and in good ease, 94

 Khinsir = little (or middle) finger, 160

 Khitáb = exordium, 126

 Khizánah (Al-) = treasury, 22

 Kidrah = pot, kettle, lamp-globe, 320

 Killing (of an unfaithful wife commended by public opinion), 297

 Kimkháb = brocade, 221

 Kitáb al-Kazá = book of law-cases, 110

 Koran quoted (ix. 33), 15

 —— (xxvi. 88, 89; iv. 140), 16

 —— (lvii. 88), 33

 —— (lxxxi. 40), 59

 —— (xii. 28), 119

 —— (xl. 36; lxvii. 14; lxxiv. 39; lxxviii. 69; lxxxviii. 17), 166

 —— (cviii. 3), 185

 —— (xxiv.), 316

 —— (cx. 1), 317

 —— (xxxvi. 55–58), 322

 —— (li. 18–19), 324

 Kundur = frankincense, 7

 Kurdús = body of horse, 111

 Kutr Misr = tract of Egypt, 286


 La’alla = haply, belike; forsure, certainly, 49

 Lá baas = no harm is (yet) done, 102

 Lá rajma ghaybin = without stone-throwing of secrecy, 1

 Lá tankati’í = sever not thyself from us, 245

 Láit = one acting like the tribe of Lot, sodomite, 253

 Lajlaj = rolling in the mouth, stammering, 322

 Lane quoted, 32; 33; 146; 168; 170; 171; 182; 221; 222; 224; 226; 229;
    246; 291; 304; 307

 Láwandiyah (Al-) = Levantines, 275

 Laylat al-Kábilah = to-night, 271

 Lázuward = Ultramarine, 190

 Legs (shall be bared on a certain day), 253

 Lie (only degrading if told for fear of telling the truth), 87

 —— (simulating truth), 223

 Lieu d’aisance (in Eastern crafts), 332

 Light (of salvation shining from the face of Prophets), 324

 Lijám shadíd = sharp bit, 70

 Loathing of prohibition, 279

 Lot (this is ours = I have been lucky and will share with you), 328

 Lúlúah = Union-pearl; wild cow, 218

 Luss = thief, robber, 106

 Lymph (alluding to the “Neptunist” doctrine), 77


 Má Dáhiyatak = What is thy misfortune?, 137

 Mahdí (Al-), Caliph, 334

 Má kahara-ní = none vexeth (or has overcome) me, 156

 Maghrib (al-Aksà) = the land of the setting sun, 50

 Mahall al-Zauk = seat of taste, sensorium, 83

 Mahr = dowry (mode of its payment), 32

 Maintenance (of a divorced woman during ’Iddah), 32

 Male children (as much praised as riches), 316

 Malik (Al-) al-Násir (Sultan Saladin), 19

 Malocchio or Gettatura (evil eye), 247

 Man (created after God’s likeness), 79

 —— (I am one of them = never mind my name), 238

 —— (of the people of Allah = a Religious), 51

 —— (his wrong is from the tongue), 309

 Mankind (superior to the Jinn), 339

 Mansúr (Pr. N.) = triumphant, 310

 Ma’rifah = article, 272

 Martyrdom of the drowned, 340

 Massacre (the _grand moyen_ of Eastern state-craft), 110

 Matárik (pl. of Mitrak) = targes, 225

 Matta’aka ’lláh = Allah permit thee to enjoy, 125

 Maulid = nativity, 289

 Mausúl (Al-) = the conjoined (for relative pronoun or particle), 272

 Meniver = menu vair (Mus lemmus), 312

 Menstruous discharge (made use of as a poison), 101

 Mer-folk (refined with the Greeks, grotesques with other nations), 169

 Messiah (made a liar by miscreants), 15

 Mi’lakah = spoon, 141

 Miracles (growing apace in the East), 336

 Mishannah = old gunny-bag, 171

 Miskál = about three penny weights, 262

 Mohammed (sent with the guidance and True Faith), 15

 Money (let lying with the folk = not dunned for), 311

 Moon (taking in hand the star = girl handing round the cups), 192

 Moslem (on a journey, tries to bear with him a new suit of clothes for
    the festivals and Friday service), 51

 —— (bound to discharge the debts of his dead parents), 311

 —— (doctrine ignores the dictum “ex nihilo nihil”), 63

 Moslems (deal kindly with religious mendicants), 51

 —— (not ashamed of sensual appetite), 84

 —— (bound to abate scandals amongst neighbours), 98

 —— (husbands among them divided into three classes), 263

 Mourning (normal term of forty days), 311

 Mubárak = blessed (a favourite slave-name), 58

 Mubárakah = the blessed (fem.), 330

 Muhárabah = doing battle, 92

 Munázarah = dispute, 243

 Munázirah = like (fem.), _ib._

 Munkar and Nákir, 163

 Musáfahah = joining hands, 342

 Music (forbidden by Mohammed), 31

 Musta’ín bi ’lláh (Caliph), 246

 Mu’tasím (Al-) bi ’lláh (Caliph), 232

 Mutawakkil (Al-) ’alà ’lláh (Caliph), _ib._

 Mu’tazid (Al-) bi ’lláh (Caliph), 229

 Mu’tazz (Al-) bi ’lláh (Caliph), 242

 Muunah = provender, 104


 Nabí = prophet, 178

 Nafakah = sum necessary for the expenses of pilgrimage, 178

 Naïveté (of the Horatian kind), 215

 Najis = ceremonially impure, 337

 Nákisátu ’aklin wa dín = failing in wit and faith, 298

 Nakkár = Pecker (a fabulous fish), 184

 Names (approved by Allah), 165

 Napoleonic pose (attitude assumed by a slave), 320

 Násik = a devotee, 40

 Násir (Pr. N.) = triumphing, 310

 Naysábúr (town in Khorasan), 230

 Nemo repente fuit turpissimus (not believed in by Easterns), 91

 Nílah = indigo, dye-stuff, 144

 New moon of the Festival = Crescent of the breakfast, 249; 250

 Nimr = leopard, 63

 Níyah (Al-) = ceremonial intention of prayer, 254

 Nukl = quatre mendiants, dessert, 177; 213

 Nusf = half-dirham, 139; 167

 Nusk = piety, abstinence from women, 243


 “Off-with-his-head” style (not to be taken literally), 308

 Omar-i-Khayyám (astronomer-poet), 230

 Othello (even he does not kill Emilia), 300


 Paradise (of the Moslem not wholly sensual), 322

 Parent (ticklish on the Pundonor), 288

 Pay-chest (of a Hammám-bath), 152

 Payne quoted, 22; 28; 79; 84; 86; 89; 171; 212; 224; 226; 227; 250;
    251; 265; 268; 282; 290

 Pearls (resting on the sand-bank), 164

 People of His affection = those who deserve His love, 82

 Persians (delighting in practical jokes), 177

 Petrified folk, 318

 Pilgrimage quoted

 —— (i. 9), 50

 —— (i. 235), 51

 —— (iii. 66), 81

 —— (i. 20), 165

 —— (ii. 285–287), 175

 —— (iii. 224, 256), 178

 —— (i. 99), 262

 —— (ii. 48), 307

 —— (i. 314), 315

 Pilgrims (offcast of the = a broken down pilgrim left to die on the
    road), 290

 Poisons in the East, 101

 Policeman (called in, a severe punishment in the East), 137

 Poltroon (contrasted with a female tiger lamb), 224

 Potter (simile of the), 77

 Power (whoso has it and spareth for Allah’s reward he prepareth), 340

 Praying against (polite form of cursing), 293

 Presence (I am in thy = thy slave to slay or pardon), 124

 Price (without abatement = without abstracting a large bakhshish), 152

 —— (shall remain), 262

 Priest hidden within an image (may date from the days of Memnon), 324

 Prince (of a people is their servant), 99

 Prison (in the King’s Palace), 52

 Pun, 278; 287


 Question (expressing emphatic assertion), 182


 Rahan = pledge, 311

 Rank (thine is with me such as thou couldst wish = I esteem thee as
    thou deservest), 41

 —— (conferred by a Sovereign’s addressing a person with a title), 119

 Rás al-Killaut = head of Killaut (a son of the sons of the Jinn), 8

 Ridding the sea of its rubbish, 169

 River (the, = Tigris-Euphrates), 313

 Robbing (to keep life and body together an acceptable plea), 137

 Rúh = spirit, breath of life, 67

 Ruh = be off!, 168


 Sa’ádah = worldly prosperity and future happiness, 327

 Sabaka = he outraced, 111

 Sabíyah = young lady, 226

 Sabr = patience; aloes (pun on), 278

 Safínah = (Noah’s) Ark, 310

 Sáhil (Al-) = the coast (Phœnicia), 22

 Sahm mush’ab = forked (not barbed) arrow, 48

 Sa’ídah = the auspicious (fem.), 330

 Sáki and Sákí, 253

 Sákin = quiescent (applied to a closing wound), 255

 Sákiyah = water-wheel, 218

 Sa’lab = fox, 48; 103

 Sálihiyah = the Holy (name of a town), 287

 Sallah = basket of wickerwork, 56

 Salutation (from a rider to a man on foot and from the latter to one
    sitting), 1

 Saluting after prayer, 254

 Samn = clarified butter, 39

 Sanájik = banners, ensigns, &c., 290

 Sand (knowing from the = geomancy), 117

 Saráwíl = bag-trousers (plural or singular), 225

 Sardáb = souterrain, 241

 —— (tunnel), 274

 Sarí al-Sakatí (Sufi ascetic), 21

 Sawáhílí = shore-men, 22

 Sáyih = wanderer (not “pilgrim”), 51

 Scoundrels (described with superior glee), 135

 Sea (striking out sparks), 314

 Seclusion (royal, and its consequences), 91

 Secrets of workmanship (withheld from Apprentices), 263

 Seeing sweetness of speech = finding it out in converse, 14

 Sha’r = hair of the body, pile, 157

 Shaving (process of), 139

 Shaykh (after the type of Abú Nowás), 251

 —— (for syndic of a Guild), 260

 —— (al-Islam = chief of the Olema), 289

 Shaykhah Rájihah = the excellent Religious, 347

 Shíraj = sesame oil, 184

 Shop (front-shelf of, a seat for visitors), 262

 Shujá’ al-Dín (Pr. N.) = the Brave of the Faith, 18

 Shukkah = piece of cloth, 236

 Sidillah = seats, furniture, 190

 Signs (language of), 269

 Silah = conjunctive sentence; coition, 272

 Sin (permitted that man might repent), 83

 —— (thy shall be on thine own neck), 211

 Singing (not harám = sinful, but makrúh = objectionable), 245

 Sírah = minnow, sprat, 166

 Skin (free from exudation sounds louder under the clapping of the
    hand), 150

 —— (extreme delicacy of the female), 321

 Slave-girl (free, not forward in her address), 268

 —— (lewd and treacherous by birth), 280

 —— (to be sent as a spy into the Harims), 292

 Sneezing (etiquette of), 220

 Sons (brought as servants unto Kings), 43

 “Soul” (for lover), 25

 Spider-web frailest of houses (Koranic), 59

 Spiritualism (the religion of the nineteenth century), 86

 Spoon (Ar. Mi’lakah), 141

 Steward (pendent to the parable of the unjust), 66

 Style (intended to be worthy of a statesman), 42

 Su’bán = dragon, 277

 Submission (Ar. Khafz al-Jináh = lowering the wings), 74

 Sufrah = cloth or leather upon which food is placed, 141

 Sunan (used for Rasm = usage, customs), 74

 Sur’itu = I was possessed of a Jinn, 27

 Suwán = Syenite, 316

 Suways (Suez) = little weevil, or “little Sús”, 10

 Swevens (an they but prove true), 284


 Taakhír = acting with deliberation, 328

 Ta’álík = hanging lamps, 320

 Tail (wagging of, a sign of anger with felidæ), 72

 Táj Kisrawí = Chosroan crown, 319

 Tájir Alfí = a merchant worth a thousand (left indefinite), 313

 Takhmísh = tearing the face in grief, 190

 Taksím = distribution, analysis, 77

 Tanwín al-Izáfah = the nunnation in construction, 272

 Taríkah = musical mode, modulation, 27

 Taubah (Bi al-) = by means or on account of penitence, 83

 Thongs (of the waterskins cut, preparatory to departure), 302

 Three hundred and three score rooms = one for each day of the Moslem
    year, 61

 Three things (not to be praised before death), 39

 Threshold (marble one in sign of honour), 238

 Tibn = bruised straw, 106

 Timbák (Tumbák) = stronger variety of Tobacco, 136

 Time (distribution of), 71

 Title (used by a Sovereign in addressing a person confers the rank),
    119

 Tobacco (its mention inserted by some scribe), 136

 Too much for him (to come by lawfully), 174

 Torrens quoted, 278

 Toutes putes, 298

 Trafalgar = Taraf al-Gharb (edge of the West), 50

 Translators (should be “bould”), 224

 Treasure (resembling one from which the talismans have been loosed),
    287

 Trébutien quoted, 33, 63

 Tribe (the misfortune of one fortuneth another), 342

 Truth (told so as to be more deceptive than a lie), 223

 Tuning (peculiar fashion of Arab musicians with regard to it), 27

 Turbands (inclining from the head-tops), 221

 Turkey (Future of), 94

 Turks (forming the body-guard of the Abbasides), 245

 Tuwuffiya = he was received (into the grace of God), 54


 Ubullah (canal leading from Bassorah to Ubullah-town), 31

 Udm = “kitchen”, 213

 Ukáb al-Kásir = the breaker eagle, 69

 Úkiyyah (pl. Awák) = ounce, 216

 Umm al-banát wa’l-banín = mother of daughters and sons, 175

 Umm al-Su’úd (Pr. N.) = Mother of Prosperities, 173

 ’Ummál (pl. of ’Ámil = governor), 26

 “Unbernfen”, 180

 ’Unnábí = between dark yellow and red (jujube-colour), 143

 ’Urb = Arabs of pure race, 293

 Usúl = forbears, ancestors, 246


 Veiling her honour = saving her from being ravished, 330

 “Vigilance Committees” (for abating scandals), 98

 Visit (confers a blessing in polite parlance), 185

 Visits (should not be over-frequent), 273


 Wa = and (introducing a parenthetic speech), 282

 Walhán (Al-), no Pr. N., 6

 Walí ’ahd = heir presumptive, 87

 Wartah = precipice, quagmire, etc., 81

 Wásit = middle (town of Irák ’Arabí), 26

 Weal (I see naught but), 180

 Weeping (over dead friends), 187

 Wicket (small doorway at the side of a gate), 320

 Wife (contrast between vicious servile and virtuous of noble birth),
    302

 Wird (Pers.) = pupil, disciple, 61

 Wittol (pictured with driest Arab humour), 269

 Women (to be respected by the King), 73

 —— (“great is their malice”), 119

 —— (a case of hard lines for them), 134

 —— (their marrying a second time reckoned disgraceful), 246

 —— (the sin lieth with them), 297

 —— (fail in wit and faith), 298

 —— (practically only two ways of treating them), 303

 —— (delicacy of their skin), 321

 Womankind (seven ages of), 175

 Word (the creative “Kun”), 78


 Yá abati = O dear father mine!, 88

 —— ahmak = O fool!, 271

 —— bunayyí = O dear my son!, 79

 —— fulán = O certain person!, 324

 —— fulánah = O certain person! (fem.), 270

 —— jáhil = O ignorant!, 52

 —— mauláya = O my lord!, 228

 Yastaghíbúní = they take advantage of my absence, 224

 Yathrib (old name of Al-Medinah), 177

 Yes, Yes and No, No trifles, 250


 Zaffú = they conducted her (in the sense of “they displayed her”), 245

 Zaurá (Al-) = the bow (name of Baghdád), 13

 Zaynab and Zayd (generic names for women and men), 250

 Zí’ah = village, hamlet, farm, 27

 Zirt = crepitus ventris, 291

 Ziyárah = visiting the Prophet (’s tomb), 178

 Zukhruf = glitter, tinsel, 86

 Zur ghibban tazid hubban = call rarely that friendship last fairly, 273

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Added missing footnote anchor on p. 143.
 2. Added missing footnote number on p. 318.
 3. Silently corrected simple spelling, grammar, and typographical
    errors.
 4. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
 5. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 6. Superscripts are denoted by a carat before a single superscript
    character or a series of superscripted characters enclosed in curly
    braces, e.g. M^r. or M^{ister}.

A Plain and Literal Translation of the Arabian Nights Entertainments,
Now Entituled the Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — VOLUME 09 (OF 10) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night — Volume 10 (of 10)
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night — Volume 10 (of 10)

Translator: Sir Richard Francis Burton


        
Release date: November 26, 2018 [eBook #58360]
                Most recently updated: February 10, 2026

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/58360

Credits: Produced by Richard Tonsing, Richard Hulse and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — VOLUME 10 (OF 10) ***









[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: ‏‏لا لابرار كلّ شي تبر‎‎]

                   “TO THE PURE ALL THINGS ARE PURE.”
                           (Puris omnia pura)

                                                        —_Arab Proverb._

          “Niuna corrotta mente intese mai sanamente parole.”

                                            —“_Decameron_”—_conclusion_.

              “Erubuit, posuitque meum Lucretia librum
                  Sed coram Bruto. Brute! recede, leget.”

                                                             —_Martial._

            “Mieulx est de ris que de larmes escripre,
                Pour ce que rire est le propre des hommes.”

                                                              —RABELAIS.

“The pleasure we derive from perusing the Thousand-and-One Stories makes
us regret that we possess only a comparatively small part of these truly
enchanting fictions.”

                                      —CRICHTON’S “_History of Arabia_.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

_A PLAIN AND LITERAL TRANSLATION OF THE ARABIAN NIGHTS ENTERTAINMENTS.
NOW ENTITULED_




                           _THE BOOK OF THE_
                      Thousand Nights and a Night

   _WITH INTRODUCTION EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF
    MOSLEM MEN AND A TERMINAL ESSAY UPON THE HISTORY OF THE NIGHTS_

                               VOLUME X.


                                   BY
                           RICHARD F. BURTON

[Illustration]

        PRINTED BY THE BURTON CLUB FOR PRIVATE SUBSCRIBERS ONLY

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            Shammar Edition

Limited to one thousand numbered sets, of which this is

                              Number _547_




                          PRINTED IN U. S. A.




                                   TO

                   HIS EXCELLENCY YACOUB ARTIN PASHA,

             MINISTER OF INSTRUCTION, ETC. ETC. ETC. CAIRO.


  MY DEAR PASHA,

  During the last dozen years, since we first met at Cairo, you have
  done much for Egyptian folk-lore and you can do much more. This
  volume is inscribed to you with a double purpose; first it is
  intended as a public expression of gratitude for your friendly
  assistance; and, secondly, as a memento that the samples which you
  have given us imply a promise of further gift. With this lively
  sense of favours to come I subscribe myself

                                  Ever your friend and fellow worker,

                                                    RICHARD F. BURTON.

  LONDON, _July 12, 1886_.




                     CONTENTS OF THE TENTH VOLUME.


                                                                    PAGE

 MA’ARUF THE COBBLER AND HIS WIFE FATIMAH                              1

              (_Lane, The Story of Ma’aruf, III._ 671–732.)

 CONCLUSION                                                           54

 TERMINAL ESSAY                                                       63

 INDEX OF THE TENTH VOLUME                                           303

 APPENDIX I.—

     I. INDEX TO THE TALES AND PROPER NAMES                          309

     II. ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF THE NOTES (ANTHROPOLOGICAL, &C.)      322

     III. ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF FIRST LINES—

         A. English                                                  393

         B. Arabic                                                   421

     IV. TABLE OF CONTENTS OF THE VARIOUS ARABIC TEXTS—

         A. The Unfinished Calcutta Edition (1814–1818)              448

         B. The Breslau Text                                         450

         C. The Macnaghten Text and the Bulak Edition                457

         D. The same with Mr. Lane’s and my Version                  464

 APPENDIX II.—

     CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE THOUSAND AND ONE
       NIGHTS AND THEIR IMITATIONS, BY W. F. KIRBY                   465




               MA’ARUF THE COBBLER AND HIS WIFE FATIMAH.


There dwelt once upon a time in the God-guarded city of Cairo a cobbler
who lived by patching old shoes.[1] His name was Ma’aruf[2] and he had a
wife called Fatimah, whom the folk had nicknamed “The Dung;”[3] for that
she was a whorish, worthless wretch, scanty of shame and mickle of
mischief. She ruled her spouse and used to abuse him and curse him a
thousand times a day; and he feared her malice and dreaded her
misdoings; for that he was a sensible man and careful of his repute, but
poor-conditioned. When he earned much, he spent it on her, and when he
gained little, she revenged herself on his body that night, leaving him
no peace and making his night black as her book;[4] for she was even as
of one like her saith the poet:—

 How manifold nights have I passed with my wife ✿ In the saddest plight
    with all misery rife:
 Would Heaven when first I went in to her ✿ With a cup of cold poison I’d
    ta’en her life.

Amongst other afflictions which befel him from her one day she said to
him, “O Ma’aruf, I wish thee to bring me this night a vermicelli-cake
dressed with bees’ honey.”[5] He replied, “So Allah Almighty aid me to
its price, I will bring it thee. By Allah, I have no dirhams to-day, but
our Lord will make things easy.”[6] Rejoined she,——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


         Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Ninetieth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ma’aruf the
Cobbler said to his spouse, “If Allah aid me to its price, I will bring
it to thee this night. By Allah, I have no dirhams to-day, but our Lord
will make things easy to me!” She rejoined, “I wot naught of these
words; whether He aid thee or aid thee not, look thou come not to me
save with the vermicelli and bees’ honey; and if thou come without it I
will make thy night black as thy fortune whenas thou marriedst me and
fellest into my hand.” Quoth he, “Allah is bountiful!” and going out
with grief scattering itself from his body, prayed the dawn-prayer and
opened his shop, saying, “I beseech thee, O Lord, to vouchsafe me the
price of the Kunafah and ward off from me the mischief of yonder wicked
woman this night!” After which he sat in the shop till noon, but no work
came to him and his fear of his wife redoubled. Then he arose and
locking his shop, went out perplexed as to how he should do in the
matter of the vermicelli-cake, seeing he had not even the wherewithal to
buy bread. Presently he came up to the shop of the Kunafah-seller and
stood before it distraught, whilst his eyes brimmed with tears. The
pastry-cook glanced at him and said, “O Master Ma’aruf, why dost thou
weep? Tell me what hath befallen thee.” So he acquainted him with his
case, saying, “My wife is a shrew, a virago who would have me bring her
a Kunafah; but I have sat in my shop till past mid-day and have not
gained even the price of bread; wherefore I am in fear of her.” The cook
laughed and said, “No harm shall come to thee. How many pounds wilt thou
have?” “Five pounds,” answered Ma’aruf. So the man weighed him out five
pounds of vermicelli-cake and said to him, “I have clarified butter, but
no bees’ honey. Here is drip-honey,[7] however, which is better than
bees’ honey; and what harm will there be, if it be with drip-honey?”
Ma’aruf was ashamed to object, because the pastry-cook was to have
patience with him for the price, and said, “Give it me with drip-honey.”
So he fried a vermicelli-cake for him with butter and drenched it with
drip-honey, till it was fit to present to Kings. Then he asked him,
“Dost thou want bread[8] and cheese?”; and Ma’aruf answered, “Yes.” So
he gave him four half dirhams worth of bread and one of cheese, and the
vermicelli was ten nusfs. Then said he, “Know, O Ma’aruf, that thou
owest me fifteen nusfs; so go to thy wife and make merry and take this
nusf for the Hammam;[9] and thou shalt have credit for a day or two or
three till Allah provide thee with thy daily bread. And straiten not thy
wife, for I will have patience with thee till such time as thou shalt
have dirhams to spare.” So Ma’aruf took the vermicelli-cake and bread
and cheese and went away, with a heart at ease, blessing the pastry-cook
and saying, “Extolled be Thy perfection, O my Lord! How bountiful art
Thou!” When he came home, his wife enquired of him, “Hast thou brought
the vermicelli-cake?”; and, replying “Yes,” he set it before her. She
looked at it and seeing that it was dressed with cane-honey,[10] said to
him, “Did I not bid thee bring it with bees’ honey? Wilt thou contrary
my wish and have it dressed with cane-honey?” He excused himself to her,
saying, “I bought it not save on credit;” but said she, “This talk is
idle; I will not eat Kunafah save with bees’ honey.” And she was wroth
with it and threw it in his face, saying, “Begone, thou pimp, and bring
me other than this!” Then she dealt him a buffet on the cheek and
knocked out one of his teeth. The blood ran down upon his breast and for
stress of anger he smote her on the head a single blow and a slight;
whereupon she clutched his beard and fell to shouting out and saying,
“Help, O Moslems!” So the neighbours came in and freed his beard from
her grip; then they reproved and reproached her, saying, “We are all
content to eat Kunafah with cane-honey. Why, then, wilt thou oppress
this poor man thus? Verily, this is disgraceful in thee!” And they went
on to soothe her till they made peace between her and him. But, when the
folk were gone, she sware that she would not eat of the vermicelli, and
Ma’aruf, burning with hunger, said in himself, “She sweareth that she
will not eat; so I will e’en eat.” Then he ate, and when she saw him
eating, she said, “Inshallah, may the eating of it be poison to destroy
the far one’s body.”[11] Quoth he, “It shall not be at thy bidding,” and
went on eating, laughing and saying, “Thou swarest that thou wouldst not
eat of this; but Allah is bountiful, and to-morrow night, an the Lord
decree, I will bring thee Kunafah dressed with bees’ honey, and thou
shalt eat it alone.” And he applied himself to appeasing her, whilst she
called down curses upon him; and she ceased not to rail at him and
revile him with gross abuse till the morning, when she bared her forearm
to beat him. Quoth he, “Give me time and I will bring thee other
vermicelli-cake.” Then he went out to the mosque and prayed, after which
he betook himself to his shop and opening it, sat down; but hardly had
he done this when up came two runners from the Kazi’s court and said to
him, “Up with thee, speak with the Kazi, for thy wife hath complained of
thee to him and her favour is thus and thus.” He recognised her by their
description; and saying, “May Allah Almighty torment her!” walked with
them till he came to the Kazi’s presence, where he found Fatimah
standing with her arm bound up and her face-veil besmeared with blood;
and she was weeping and wiping away her tears. Quoth the Kazi, “Ho man,
hast thou no fear of Allah the Most High? Why hast thou beaten this good
woman and broken her forearm and knocked out her tooth and entreated her
thus?” And quoth Ma’aruf, “If I beat her or put out her tooth, sentence
me to what thou wilt; but in truth the case was thus and thus and the
neighbours made peace between me and her.” And he told him the story
from first to last. Now this Kazi was a benevolent man; so he brought
out to him a quarter dinar, saying, “O man, take this and get her
Kunafah with bees’ honey and do ye make peace, thou and she.” Quoth
Ma’aruf, “Give it to her.” So she took it and the Kazi made peace
between them, saying, “O wife, obey thy husband; and thou, O man, deal
kindly with her.[12]” Then they left the court, reconciled at the Kazi’s
hands, and the woman went one way, whilst her husband returned by
another way to his shop and sat there, when, behold, the runners came up
to him and said, “Give us our fee.” Quoth he, “The Kazi took not of me
aught; on the contrary, he gave me a quarter dinar.” But quoth they,
“’Tis no concern of ours whether the Kazi took of thee or gave to thee,
and if thou give us not our fee, we will exact it in despite of thee.”
And they fell to dragging him about the market; so he sold his tools and
gave them half a dinar, whereupon they let him go and went away, whilst
he put his hand to his cheek and sat sorrowful, for that he had no tools
wherewith to work. Presently, up came two ill-favoured fellows and said
to him, “Come, O man, and speak with the Kazi; for thy wife hath
complained of thee to him.” Said he, “He made peace between us just
now.” But said they, “We come from another Kazi, and thy wife hath
complained of thee to our Kazi.” So he arose and went with them to their
Kazi, calling on Allah for aid against her; and when he saw her, he said
to her, “Did we not make peace, good woman?” Whereupon she cried, “There
abideth no peace between me and thee.” Accordingly he came forward and
told the Kazi his story, adding, “And indeed the Kazi Such-an-one made
peace between us this very hour.” Whereupon the Kazi said to her, “O
strumpet, since ye two have made peace with each other, why comest thou
to me complaining?” Quoth she, “He beat me after that;” but quoth the
Kazi, “Make peace each with other, and beat her not again, and she will
cross thee no more.” So they made peace and the Kazi said to Ma’aruf,
“Give the runners their fee.” So he gave them their fee and going back
to his shop, opened it and sat down, as he were a drunken man for excess
of the chagrin which befel him. Presently, while he was still sitting,
behold, a man came up to him and said, “O Ma’aruf, rise and hide
thyself, for thy wife hath complained of thee to the High Court[13] and
Abú Tabak[14] is after thee.” So he shut his shop and fled towards the
Gate of Victory.[15] He had five Nusfs of silver left of the price of
the lasts and gear; and therewith he bought four worth of bread and one
of cheese, as he fled from her. Now it was the winter season and the
hour of mid-afternoon prayer; so, when he came out among the
rubbish-mounds the rain descended upon him, like water from the mouths
of water-skins, and his clothes were drenched. He therefore entered the
‘Ádiliyah,[16] where he saw a ruined place and therein a deserted cell
without a door; and in it he took refuge and found shelter from the
rain. The tears streamed from his eyelids, and he fell to complaining of
what had betided him and saying, “Whither shall I flee from this whore?
I beseech Thee, O Lord, to vouchsafe me one who shall conduct me to a
far country, where she shall not know the way to me!” Now while he sat
weeping, behold, the wall clave and there came forth to him therefrom
one of tall stature, whose aspect caused his body-pile to bristle and
his flesh to creep, and said to him, “O man, what aileth thee that thou
disturbest me this night? These two hundred years have I dwelt here and
have never seen any enter this place and do as thou dost. Tell me what
thou wishest and I will accomplish thy need, as ruth for thee hath got
hold upon my heart”. Quoth Ma’aruf, “Who and what art thou?”; and quoth
he, “I am the Haunter[17] of this place.” So Ma’aruf told him all that
had befallen him with his wife and he said, “Wilt thou have me convey
thee to a country, where thy wife shall know no way to thee?” “Yes,”
said Ma’aruf; and the other, “Then mount my back.” So he mounted on his
back and he flew with him from after supper-tide till daybreak, when he
set him down on the top of a high mountain——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Marid having
taken up Ma’aruf the Cobbler, flew off with him and set him down upon a
high mountain and said to him, “O mortal, descend this mountain and thou
wilt see the gate of a city. Enter it, for therein thy wife cannot come
at thee.” He then left him and went his way, whilst Ma’aruf abode in
amazement and perplexity till the sun rose, when he said to himself, “I
will up with me and go down into the city: indeed there is no profit in
my abiding upon this highland.” So he descended to the mountain-foot and
saw a city girt by towering walls, full of lofty palaces and
gold-adorned buildings which was a delight to beholders. He entered in
at the gate and found it a place such as lightened the grieving heart;
but, as he walked through the streets the townsfolk stared at him as a
curiosity and gathered about him, marvelling at his dress, for it was
unlike theirs. Presently, one of them said to him, “O man, art thou a
stranger?” “Yes.” “What countryman art thou?” “I am from the city of
Cairo the Auspicious.” “And when didst thou leave Cairo?” “I left it
yesterday, at the hour of afternoon-prayer.” Whereupon the man laughed
at him and cried out, saying, “Come look, O folk, at this man and hear
what he saith!” Quoth they, “What doeth he say?” and quoth the townsman,
“He pretendeth that he cometh from Cairo and left it yesterday at the
hour of afternoon-prayer!” At this they all laughed and gathering round
Ma’aruf, said to him, “O man, art thou mad to talk thus? How canst thou
pretend that thou leftest Cairo at mid-afternoon yesterday and foundedst
thyself this morning here, when the truth is that between our city and
Cairo lieth a full year’s journey?” Quoth he, “None is mad but you. As
for me, I speak sooth, for here is bread which I brought with me from
Cairo, and see, ’tis yet new.” Then he showed them the bread and they
stared at it, for it was unlike their country bread. So the crowd
increased about him and they said to one another, “This is Cairo bread:
look at it;” and he became a gazing-stock in the city and some believed
him; whilst others gave him the lie and made mock of him. Whilst this
was going on, behold, up came a merchant riding on a she-mule and
followed by two black slaves, and brake a way through the people,
saying, “O folk, are ye not ashamed to mob this stranger and make mock
of him and scoff at him?” And he went on to rate them, till he drave
them away from Ma’aruf, and none could make him any answer. Then he said
to the stranger, “Come, O my brother, no harm shall betide thee from
these folk. Verily they have no shame.”[18] So he took him and carrying
him to a spacious and richly-adorned house, seated him in a speak-room
fit for a King, whilst he gave an order to his slaves, who opened a
chest and brought out to him a dress such as might be worn by a merchant
worth a thousand.[19] He clad him therewith and Ma’aruf, being a seemly
man, became as he were consul of the merchants. Then his host called for
food and they set before them a tray of all manner exquisite viands. The
twain ate and drank and the merchant said to Ma’aruf, “O my brother,
what is thy name?” “My name is Ma’aruf and I am a cobbler by trade and
patch old shoes.” “What countryman art thou?” “I am from Cairo.” “What
quarter?” “Dost thou know Cairo?” “I am of its children.[20]” “I come
from the Red Street.[21]” “And whom dost thou know in the Red Street?”
“I know such an one and such an one,” answered Ma’aruf and named several
people to him. Quoth the other, “Knowest thou Shaykh Ahmad the
druggist?[22]” “He was my next neighbour, wall to wall.” “Is he well?”
“Yes.” “How many sons hath he?” “Three, Mustafà, Mohammed and Ali.” “And
what hath Allah done with them?” “As for Mustafà, he is well and he is a
learned man, a professor[23]: Mohammed is a druggist and opened him a
shop beside that of his father, after he had married, and his wife hath
borne him a son named Hasan.” “Allah gladden thee with good news!” said
the merchant; and Ma’aruf continued, “As for Ali, he was my friend, when
we were boys, and we always played together, I and he. We used to go in
the guise of the children of the Nazarenes and enter the church and
steal the books of the Christians and sell them and buy food with the
price. It chanced once that the Nazarenes caught us with a book;
whereupon they complained of us to our folk and said to Ali’s father:—An
thou hinder not thy son from troubling us, we will complain of thee to
the King. So he appeased them and gave Ali a thrashing; wherefore he ran
away none knew whither and he hath now been absent twenty years and no
man hath brought news of him.” Quoth the host, “I am that very Ali, son
of Shaykh Ahmad the druggist, and thou art my playmate Ma’aruf.”[24] So
they saluted each other and after the salam Ali said, “Tell me why, O
Ma’aruf, thou camest from Cairo to this city.” Then he told him all that
had befallen him of ill-doing with his wife Fatimah the Dung and said,
“So, when her annoy waxed on me, I fled from her towards the Gate of
Victory and went forth the city. Presently, the rain fell heavy on me;
so I entered a ruined cell in the Adiliyah and sat there, weeping;
whereupon there came forth to me the Haunter of the place, which was an
Ifrit of the Jinn, and questioned me. I acquainted him with my case and
he took me on his back and flew with me all night between heaven and
earth, till he set me down on yonder mountain and gave me to know of
this city. So I came down from the mountain and entered the city, when
the people crowded about me and questioned me. I told them that I had
left Cairo yesterday, but they believed me not, and presently thou
camest up and driving the folk away from me, carriedst me to this house.
Such, then, is the cause of my quitting Cairo; and thou, what object
brought thee hither?” Quoth Ali, “The giddiness[25] of folly turned my
head when I was seven years old, from which time I wandered from land to
land and city to city, till I came to this city, the name whereof is
Ikhtiyán al-Khatan.[26] I found its people an hospitable folk and a
kindly, compassionate for the poor man and selling to him on credit and
believing all he said. So quoth I to them:—I am a merchant and have
preceded my packs and I need a place wherein to bestow my baggage. And
they believed me and assigned me a lodging. Then quoth I to them:—Is
there any of you will lend me a thousand dinars, till my loads arrive,
when I will repay it to him; for I am in want of certain things before
my goods come? They gave me what I asked and I went to the merchants’
bazar, where, seeing goods, I bought them and sold them next day at a
profit of fifty gold pieces and bought others.[27] And I consorted with
the folk and entreated them liberally, so that they loved me, and I
continued to sell and buy, till I grew rich. Know, O my brother, that
the proverb saith, The world is show and trickery: and the land where
none wotteth thee, there do whatso liketh thee. Thou too, an thou say to
all who ask thee, I’m a cobbler by trade and poor withal, and I fled
from my wife and left Cairo yesterday, they will not believe thee and
thou wilt be a laughing-stock among them as long as thou abidest in the
city; whilst, an thou tell them, An Ifrit brought me hither, they will
take fright at thee and none will come near thee; for they will say,
This man is possessed of an Ifrit and harm will betide whoso approacheth
him. And such public report will be dishonouring both to thee and to me,
because they ken I come from Cairo.” Ma’aruf asked:—“How then shall I
do?”; and Ali answered, “I will tell thee how thou shalt do, Inshallah!
To-morrow I will give thee a thousand dinars and a she-mule to ride and
a black slave, who shall walk before thee and guide thee to the gate of
the merchants’ bazar; and do thou go into them. I will be there sitting
amongst them, and when I see thee, I will rise to thee and salute thee
with the salam and kiss thy hand and make a great man of thee. Whenever
I ask thee of any kind of stuff, saying, Hast thou brought with thee
aught of such a kind? do thou answer, “Plenty.[28]” And if they question
me of thee, I will praise thee and magnify thee in their eyes and say to
them, Get him a store-house and a shop. I also will give thee out for a
man of great wealth and generosity; and if a beggar come to thee, bestow
upon him what thou mayst; so will they put faith in what I say and
believe in thy greatness and generosity and love thee. Then will I
invite thee to my house and invite all the merchants on thy account and
bring together thee and them, so that all may know thee and thou know
them,”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

[Illustration]


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Ninety-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the merchant
Ali said to Ma’aruf, “I will invite thee to my house and invite all the
merchants on thy account and bring together thee and them, so that all
may know thee and thou know them, whereby thou shalt sell and buy and
take and give with them; nor will it be long ere thou become a man of
money.” Accordingly, on the morrow he gave him a thousand dinars and a
suit of clothes and a black slave and mounting him on a she-mule, said
to him, “Allah give thee quittance of responsibility for all this,[29]
inasmuch as thou art my friend and it behoveth me to deal generously
with thee. Have no care; but put away from thee the thought of thy
wife’s misways and name her not to any.” “Allah requite thee with good!”
replied Ma’aruf and rode on, preceded by his blackamoor till the slave
brought him to the gate of the merchants’ bazar, where they were all
seated, and amongst them Ali, who when he saw him, rose and threw
himself upon him, crying, “A blessed day, O Merchant Ma’aruf, O man of
good works and kindness[30]!” And he kissed his hand before the
merchants and said to them, “Our brothers, ye are honoured by
knowing[31] the merchant Ma’aruf.” So they saluted him, and Ali signed
to them to make much of him, wherefore he was magnified in their eyes.
Then Ali helped him to dismount from his she-mule and saluted him with
the salam; after which he took the merchants apart, one after other, and
vaunted Ma’aruf to them. They asked, “Is this man a merchant?;” and he
answered, “Yes; and indeed he is the chiefest of merchants, there liveth
not a wealthier than he; for his wealth and the riches of his father and
forefathers are famous among the merchants of Cairo. He hath partners in
Hind and Sind and Al-Yaman and is high in repute for generosity. So know
ye his rank and exalt ye his degree and do him service, and wot also
that his coming to your city is not for the sake of traffic, and none
other save to divert himself with the sight of folk’s countries: indeed,
he hath no need of strangerhood for the sake of gain and profit, having
wealth that fires cannot consume, and I am one of his servants.” And he
ceased not to extol him, till they set him above their heads and began
to tell one another of his qualities. Then they gathered round him and
offered him junkets[32] and sherbets, and even the Consul of the
Merchants came to him and saluted him; whilst Ali proceeded to ask him,
in the presence of the traders, “O my lord, haply thou hast brought with
thee somewhat of such and such a stuff?”; and Ma’aruf answered,
“Plenty.” Now Ali had that day shown him various kinds of costly clothes
and had taught him the names of the different stuffs, dear and cheap.
Then said one of the merchants, “O my lord, hast thou brought with thee
yellow broad cloth?”: and Ma’aruf said, “Plenty”! Quoth another, “And
gazelles’ blood red[33]?”; and quoth the Cobbler, “Plenty”; and as often
as he asked him of aught, he made him the same answer. So the other
said, “O Merchant Ali had thy countryman a mind to transport a thousand
loads of costly stuffs, he could do so”; and Ali said, “He would take
them from a single one of his store-houses, and miss naught thereof.”
Now whilst they were sitting, behold, up came a beggar and went the
round of the merchants. One gave him a half dirham and another a
copper,[34] but most of them gave him nothing, till he came to Ma’aruf
who pulled out a handful of gold and gave it to him, whereupon he
blessed him and went his ways. The merchants marvelled at this and said,
“Verily, this is a King’s bestowal for he gave the beggar gold without
count, and were he not a man of vast wealth and money without end, he
had not given a beggar a handful of gold.” After a while, there came to
him a poor woman and he gave her a handful of gold; whereupon she went
away, blessing him, and told the other beggars, who came to him, one
after other, and he gave them each a handful of gold, till he disbursed
the thousand dinars. Then he struck hand upon hand and said, “Allah is
our sufficient aid and excellent is the Agent!” Quoth the Consul, “What
aileth thee, O Merchant Ma’aruf?”; and quoth he, “It seemeth that the
most part of the people of this city are poor and needy; had I known
their misery I would have brought with me a large sum of money in my
saddle-bags and given largesse thereof to the poor. I fear me I may be
long abroad[35] and ’tis not in my nature to baulk a beggar; and I have
no gold left: so, if a pauper come to me, what shall I say to him?”
Quoth the Consul, “Say, Allah will send thee thy daily bread[36]!”; but
Ma’aruf replied, “That is not my practice and I am care-ridden because
of this. Would I had other thousand dinars, wherewith to give alms till
my baggage come!” “Have no care for that,” quoth the Consul and sending
one of his dependents for a thousand dinars, handed them to Ma’aruf, who
went on giving them to every beggar who passed till the call to
noon-prayer. Then they entered the Cathedral-mosque and prayed the
noon-prayers, and what was left him of the thousand gold pieces he
scattered on the heads of the worshippers. This drew the people’s
attention to him and they blessed him, whilst the merchants marvelled at
the abundance of his generosity and openhandedness. Then he turned to
another trader and borrowing of him other thousand ducats, gave these
also away, whilst Merchant Ali looked on at what he did, but could not
speak. He ceased not to do thus till the call to mid-afternoon prayer,
when he entered the mosque and prayed and distributed the rest of the
money. On this wise, by the time they locked the doors of the bazar,[37]
he had borrowed five thousand sequins and given them away, saying to
every one of whom he took aught, “Wait till my baggage come when, if
thou desire gold I will give thee gold, and if thou desire stuffs, thou
shalt have stuffs; for I have no end of them.” At eventide Merchant Ali
invited Ma’aruf and the rest of the traders to an entertainment and
seated him in the upper end, the place of honour, where he talked of
nothing but cloths and jewels, and whenever they made mention to him of
aught, he said, “I have plenty of it.” Next day, he again repaired to
the market-street where he showed a friendly bias towards the merchants
and borrowed of them more money, which he distributed to the poor: nor
did he leave doing thus twenty days, till he had borrowed threescore
thousand dinars, and still there came no baggage, no, nor a burning
plague.[38] At last folk began to clamour for their money and say, “The
merchant Ma’aruf’s baggage cometh not. How long will he take people’s
monies and give them to the poor?” And quoth one of them, “My rede is
that we speak to Merchant Ali.” So they went to him and said, “O
Merchant Ali, Merchant Ma’aruf’s baggage cometh not.” Said he, “Have
patience, it cannot fail to come soon.” Then he took Ma’aruf aside and
said to him, “O Ma’aruf, what fashion is this? Did I bid thee brown[39]
the bread or burn it? The merchants clamour for their coin and tell me
that thou owest them sixty thousand dinars, which thou hast borrowed and
given away to the poor. How wilt thou satisfy the folk, seeing that thou
neither sellest nor buyest?” Said Ma’aruf, “What matters it[40]; and
what are threescore thousand dinars? When my baggage shall come, I will
pay them in stuffs or in gold and silver, as they will.” Quoth Merchant
Ali, “Allah is Most Great! Hast thou then any baggage?” and he said,
“Plenty.” Cried the other, “Allah and the Hallows[41] requite thee thine
impudence! Did I teach thee this saying, that thou shouldst repeat it to
me? But I will acquaint the folk with thee.” Ma’aruf rejoined, “Begone
and prate no more! Am I a poor man? I have endless wealth in my baggage
and as soon as it cometh, they shall have their money’s worth, two for
one. I have no need of them.” At this Merchant Ali waxed wroth and said,
“Unmannerly wight that thou art, I will teach thee to lie to me and be
not ashamed!” Said Ma’aruf, “E’en work the worst thy hand can do! They
must wait till my baggage come, when they shall have their due and
more.” So Ali left him and went away, saying in himself, “I praised him
whilome and if I blame him now, I make myself out a liar and become of
those of whom it is said:—Whoso praiseth and then blameth lieth
twice.”[42] And he knew not what to do. Presently, the traders came to
him and said, “O Merchant Ali, hast thou spoken to him?” Said he, “O
folk, I am ashamed and, though he owe me a thousand dinars, I cannot
speak to him. When ye lent him your money ye consulted me not; so ye
have no claim on me. Dun him yourselves, and if he pay you not, complain
of him to the King of the city, saying:—He is an impostor who hath
imposed upon us. And he will deliver you from the plague of him.”
Accordingly, they repaired to the King and told him what had passed,
saying, “O King of the age, we are perplexed anent this merchant, whose
generosity is excessive; for he doeth thus and thus, and all he
borroweth, he giveth away to the poor by handsful. Were he a man of
naught, his sense would not suffer him to lavish gold on this wise; and
were he a man of wealth, his good faith had been made manifest to us by
the coming of his baggage; but we see none of his luggage, although he
avoucheth that he hath a baggage-train and hath preceded it. Now some
time hath past, but there appeareth no sign of his baggage-train, and he
oweth us sixty thousand gold pieces, all of which he hath given away in
alms.” And they went on to praise him and extol his generosity. Now this
King was a very covetous man, a more covetous than Ash’ab[43]; and when
he heard tell of Ma’aruf’s generosity and openhandedness, greed of gain
got the better of him and he said to his Wazir, “Were not this merchant
a man of immense wealth, he had not shown all this munificence. His
baggage-train will assuredly come, whereupon these merchants will flock
to him and he will scatter amongst them riches galore. Now I have more
right to this money than they; wherefore I have a mind to make friends
with him and profess affection for him, so that, when his baggage cometh
whatso the merchants would have had I shall get of him; and I will give
him my daughter to wife and join his wealth to my wealth.” Replied the
Wazir, “O King of the age, methinks he is naught but an impostor, and
’tis the impostor who ruineth the house of the covetous;”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

[Illustration]


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Ninety-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Wazir
said to the King, “Methinks he is naught but an impostor, and ’tis the
impostor who ruineth the house of the covetous;” the King said, “O
Wazir, I will prove him and soon know if he be an impostor or a true man
and whether he be a rearling of Fortune or not.” The Wazir asked, “And
how wilt thou prove him?”; and the King answered, “I will send for him
to the presence and entreat him with honour and give him a jewel which I
have. An he know it and wot its price, he is a man of worth and wealth;
but an he know it not, he is an impostor and an upstart and I will do
him die by the foulest fashion of deaths.” So he sent for Ma’aruf, who
came and saluted him. The King returned his salam and seating him beside
himself, said to him, “Art thou the merchant Ma’aruf?” and said he,
“Yes.” Quoth the King, “The merchants declare that thou owest them sixty
thousand ducats. Is this true?” “Yes,” quoth he. Asked the King, “Then
why dost thou not give them their money?”; and he answered, “Let them
wait till my baggage come and I will repay them twofold. An they wish
for gold, they shall have gold; and should they wish for silver, they
shall have silver; or an they prefer for merchandise, I will give them
merchandise; and to whom I owe a thousand I will give two thousand in
requital of that wherewith he hath veiled my face before the poor; for I
have plenty.” Then said the King, “O merchant, take this and look what
is its kind and value.” And he gave him a jewel the bigness of a
hazel-nut, which he had bought for a thousand sequins and not having its
fellow, prized it highly. Ma’aruf took it and pressing it between his
thumb and forefinger brake it, for it was brittle and would not brook
the squeeze. Quoth the King, “Why hast thou broken the jewel?”; and
Ma’aruf laughed and said, “O King of the age, this is no jewel. This is
but a bittock of mineral worth a thousand dinars; why dost thou style it
a jewel? A jewel I call such as is worth threescore and ten thousand
gold pieces and this is called but a piece of stone. A jewel that is not
of the bigness of a walnut hath no worth in my eyes and I take no
account thereof. How cometh it, then, that thou, who art King, stylest
this thing a jewel, when ’tis but a bit of mineral worth a thousand
dinars? But ye are excusable, for that ye are poor folk and have not in
your possession things of price.” The King asked, “O merchant, hast thou
jewels such as those whereof thou speakest?”; and he answered, “Plenty.”
Whereupon avarice overcame the King and he said, “Wilt thou give me real
jewels?” Said Ma’aruf, “When my baggage-train shall come, I will give
thee no end of jewels; and all that thou canst desire I have in plenty
and will give thee, without price.” At this the King rejoiced and said
to the traders, “Wend your ways and have patience with him, till his
baggage arrive, when do ye come to me and receive your monies from me.”
So they fared forth and the King turned to his Wazir and said to him,
“Pay court to Merchant Ma’aruf and take and give with him in talk and
bespeak him of my daughter, Princess Dunyá, that he may wed her and so
we gain these riches he hath.” Said the Wazir, “O King of the age, this
man’s fashion misliketh me and methinks he is an impostor and a liar: so
leave this whereof thou speakest lest thou lose thy daughter for
naught.” Now this Minister had sued the King aforetime to give him his
daughter to wife and he was willing to do so, but when she heard of it
she consented not to marry him. Accordingly, the King said to him, “O
traitor, thou desirest no good for me, because in past time thou
soughtest my daughter in wedlock, but she would none of thee; so now
thou wouldst cut off the way of her marriage and wouldst have the
Princess lie fallow, that thou mayst take her; but hear from me one
word. Thou hast no concern in this matter. How can he be an impostor and
a liar, seeing that he knew the price of the jewel, even that for which
I bought it, and brake it because it pleased him not? He hath jewels in
plenty, and when he goeth in to my daughter and seeth her to be
beautiful, she will captivate his reason and he will love her and give
her jewels and things of price: but, as for thee, thou wouldst forbid my
daughter and myself these good things.” So the Minister was silent, for
fear of the King’s anger, and said to himself, “Set the curs on the
cattle[44]!” Then with show of friendly bias he betook himself to
Ma’aruf and said to him, “His highness the King loveth thee and hath a
daughter, a winsome lady and a lovesome, to whom he is minded to marry
thee. What sayst thou?” Said he, “No harm in that; but let him wait till
my baggage come, for marriage-settlements on Kings’ daughters are large
and their rank demandeth that they be not endowed save with a dowry
befitting their degree. At this present I have no money with me till the
coming of my baggage, for I have wealth in plenty and needs must I make
her marriage-portion five thousand purses. Then I shall need a thousand
purses to distribute amongst the poor and needy on my wedding-night, and
other thousand to give to those who walk in the bridal procession and
yet other thousand wherewith to provide provaunt for the troops and
others[45]; and I shall want an hundred jewels to give to the Princess
on the wedding-morning[46] and other hundred gems to distribute among
the slave-girls and eunuchs, for I must give each of them a jewel in
honour of the bride; and I need wherewithal to clothe a thousand naked
paupers, and alms too needs must be given. All this cannot be done till
my baggage come; but I have plenty and, once it is here, I shall make no
account of all this outlay.” The Wazir returned to the King and told him
what Ma’aruf said, whereupon quoth he, “Since this is his wish, how
canst thou style him impostor and liar?” Replied the Minister, “And I
cease not to say this.” But the King chid him angrily and threatened
him, saying, “By the life of my head, an thou cease not this talk, I
will slay thee! Go back to him and fetch him to me and I will manage
matters with him myself.” So the Wazir returned to Ma’aruf and said to
him, “Come and speak with the King.” “I hear and I obey,” said Ma’aruf
and went in to the King, who said to him, “Thou shalt not put me off
with these excuses, for my treasury is full; so take the keys and spend
all thou needest and give what thou wilt and clothe the poor and do thy
desire and have no care for the girl and the handmaids. When the baggage
shall come, do what thou wilt with thy wife, by way of generosity, and
we will have patience with thee anent the marriage-portion till then,
for there is no manner of difference betwixt me and thee; none at all.”
Then he sent for the Shaykh Al-Islam[47] and bade him write out the
marriage-contract between his daughter and Merchant Ma’aruf, and he did
so; after which the King gave the signal for beginning the wedding
festivities and bade decorate the city. The kettle drums beat and the
tables were spread with meats of all kinds and there came performers who
paraded their tricks. Merchant Ma’aruf sat upon a throne in a parlour
and the players and gymnasts and effeminates[48] and dancing-men of
wondrous movements and posture-makers of marvellous cunning came before
him, whilst he called out to the treasurer and said to him, “Bring gold
and silver.” So he brought gold and silver and Ma’aruf went round among
the spectators and largessed each performer by the handful; and he gave
alms to the poor and needy and clothes to the naked and it was a
clamorous festival and a right merry. The treasurer could not bring
money fast enough from the treasury, and the Wazir’s heart was like to
burst for rage; but he dared not say a word, whilst Merchant Ali
marvelled at this waste of wealth and said to Merchant Ma’aruf, “Allah
and the Hallows visit this upon thy head-sides[49]! Doth it not suffice
thee to squander the traders’ money, but thou must squander that of the
King to boot?” Replied Ma’aruf, “’Tis none of thy concern: whenas my
baggage shall come, I will requite the King manifold.” And he went on
lavishing money and saying in himself, “A burning plague! What will
happen will happen and there is no flying from that which is
fore-ordained.” The festivities ceased not for the space of forty days,
and on the one-and-fortieth day, they made the bride’s cortège and all
the Emirs and troops walked before her. When they brought her in before
Ma’aruf, he began scattering gold on the people’s heads, and they made
her a mighty fine procession, whilst Ma’aruf expended in her honour vast
sums of money. Then they brought him in to Princess Dunya and he sat
down on the high divan; after which they let fall the curtains and shut
the doors and withdrew, leaving him alone with his bride; whereupon he
smote hand upon hand and sat awhile sorrowful and saying, “There is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!”
Quoth the Princess, “O my lord, Allah preserve thee! What aileth thee
that thou art troubled?” Quoth he, “And how should I be other than
troubled, seeing that thy father hath embarrassed me and done with me a
deed which is like the burning of green corn?” She asked, “And what hath
my father done with thee? Tell me!”; and he answered, “He hath brought
me in to thee before the coming of my baggage, and I want at very least
an hundred jewels to distribute among thy handmaids, to each a jewel, so
she might rejoice therein and say, My lord gave me a jewel on the night
of his going in to my lady. This good deed would I have done in honour
of thy station and for the increase of thy dignity; and I have no need
to stint myself in lavishing jewels, for I have of them great plenty.”
Rejoined she, “Be not concerned for that. As for me, trouble not thyself
about me, for I will have patience with thee till thy baggage shall
come, and as for my women have no care for them. Rise, doff thy clothes
and take thy pleasure; and when the baggage cometh we shall get the
jewels and the rest.” So he arose and putting off his clothes sat down
on the bed and sought love-liesse and they fell to toying with each
other. He laid his hand on her knee and she sat down in his lap and
thrust her lip like a tit-bit of meat into his mouth, and that hour was
such as maketh a man to forget his father and his mother. So he clasped
her in his arms and strained her fast to his breast and sucked her lip,
till the honey-dew ran out into his mouth; and he laid his hand under
her left-armpit, whereupon his vitals and her vitals yearned for
coition. Then he clapped her between the breasts and his hand slipped
down between her thighs and she girded him with her legs, whereupon he
made of the two parts proof amain and crying out, “O sire of the
chin-veils twain[50]!” applied the priming and kindled the match and set
it to the touch-hole and gave fire and breached the citadel in its four
corners; so there befel the mystery[51] concerning which there is no
enquiry; and she cried the cry that needs must be cried.[52]——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Ninety-fourth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that while the
Princess Dunya cried the cry which must be cried, Merchant Ma’aruf
abated her maidenhead and that night was one not to be counted among
lives for that which it comprised of the enjoyment of the fair, clipping
and dallying _langue fourrée_ and futtering till the dawn of day, when
he arose and entered the Hammam whence, after donning a suit for sovrans
suitable he betook himself to the King’s Divan. All who were there rose
to him and received him with honour and worship, giving him joy and
invoking blessings upon him; and he sat down by the King’s side and
asked, “Where is the treasurer?” They answered, “Here he is, before
thee,” and he said to him, “Bring robes of honour for all the Wazirs and
Emirs and dignitaries and clothe them therewith.” The treasurer brought
him all he sought and he sat giving to all who came to him and lavishing
largesse upon every man according to his station. On this wise he abode
twenty days, whilst no baggage appeared for him nor aught else, till the
treasurer was straitened by him to the uttermost and going in to the
King, as he sat alone with the Wazir in Ma’aruf’s absence, kissed ground
between his hands and said, “O King of the age, I must tell thee
somewhat, lest haply thou blame me for not acquainting thee therewith.
Know that the treasury is being exhausted; there is none but a little
money left in it and in ten days more we shall shut it upon emptiness.”
Quoth the King, “O Wazir, verily my son-in-law’s baggage-train tarrieth
long and there appeareth no news thereof.” The Minister laughed and
said, “Allah be gracious to thee, O King of the age! Thou art none other
but heedless with respect to this impostor, this liar. As thy head
liveth, there is no baggage for him, no, nor a burning plague to rid us
of him! Nay, he hath but imposed on thee without surcease, so that he
hath wasted thy treasures and married thy daughter for naught. How long
therefore wilt thou be heedless of this liar?” Then quoth the King, “O
Wazir, how shall we do to learn the truth of his case?”; and quoth the
Wazir, “O King of the age, none may come at a man’s secret but his wife;
so send for thy daughter and let her come behind the curtain, that I may
question her of the truth of his estate, to the intent that she may make
question of him and acquaint us with his case.” Cried the King, “There
is no harm in that; and as my head liveth, if it be proved that he is a
liar and an impostor, I will verily do him die by the foulest of
deaths!” Then he carried the Wazir into the sitting-chamber and sent for
his daughter, who came behind the curtain, her husband being absent, and
said, “What wouldst thou, O my father?” Said he “Speak with the Wazir.”
So she asked, “Ho thou, the Wazir, what is thy will?”; and he answered,
“O my lady, thou must know that thy husband hath squandered thy father’s
substance and married thee without a dower; and he ceaseth not to
promise us and break his promises, nor cometh there any tidings of his
baggage; in short we would have thee inform us concerning him.” Quoth
she, “Indeed his words be many, and he still cometh and promiseth me
jewels and treasures and costly stuffs; but I see nothing.” Quoth the
Wazir, “O my lady, canst thou this night take and give with him in talk
and whisper to him:—Say me sooth and fear from me naught, for thou art
become my husband and I will not transgress against thee. So tell me the
truth of the matter and I will devise thee a device whereby thou shalt
be set at rest. And do thou play near and far[53] with him in words and
profess love to him and win him to confess and after tell us the facts
of his case.” And she answered, “O my papa, I know how I will make proof
of him.” Then she went away and after supper her husband came in to her,
according to his wont, whereupon Princess Dunya rose to him and took him
under the armpit and wheedled him with winsomest wheedling (and
all-sufficient[54] are woman’s wiles whenas she would aught of men); and
she ceased not to caress him and beguile him with speech sweeter than
the honey till she stole his reason; and when she saw that he altogether
inclined to her, she said to him, “O my beloved, O coolth of my eyes and
fruit of my vitals, Allah never desolate me by less of thee nor Time
sunder us twain me and thee! Indeed, the love of thee hath homed in my
heart and the fire of passion hath consumed my liver, nor will I ever
forsake thee or transgress against thee. But I would have thee tell me
the truth, for that the sleights of falsehood profit not, nor do they
secure credit at all seasons. How long wilt thou impose upon my father
and lie to him? I fear lest thine affair be discovered to him, ere we
can devise some device and he lay violent hands upon thee? So acquaint
me with the facts of the case for naught shall befal thee save that
which shall begladden thee; and, when thou shalt have spoken sooth, fear
not harm shall betide thee. How often wilt thou declare that thou art a
merchant and a man of money and hast a luggage-train? This long while
past thou sayest, My baggage! my baggage! but there appeareth no sign of
thy baggage, and visible in thy face is anxiety on this account. So an
there be no worth in thy words, tell me and I will contrive thee a
contrivance whereby thou shalt come off safe, Inshallah!” He replied, “I
will tell thee the truth, and then do thou whatso thou wilt.” Rejoined
she, “Speak and look thou speak soothly; for sooth is the ark of safety,
and beware of lying, for it dishonoureth the liar and God-gifted is he
who said:—

 ’Ware that truth thou speak, albe sooth when said ✿ Shall cause thee in
    threatenèd fire to fall:
 And seek Allah’s approof, for most foolish he ✿ Who shall anger his Lord
    to make friends with thrall.

He said, “Know, then, O my lady, that I am no merchant and have no
baggage, no, nor a burning plague; nay, I was but a cobbler in my own
country and had a wife called Fatimah the Dung, with whom there befel me
this and that.” And he told her his story from beginning to end; whereat
she laughed and said, “Verily, thou art clever in the practice of lying
and imposture!” Whereto he answered, “O my lady, may Allah Almighty
preserve thee to veil sins and countervail chagrins!” Rejoined she,
“Know, that thou imposedst upon my sire and deceivedst him by dint of
thy deluding vaunts, so that of his greed for gain he married me to
thee. Then thou squanderedst his wealth and the Wazir beareth thee a
grudge for this. How many a time hath he spoken against thee to my
father, saying, Indeed, he is an impostor, a liar! But my sire hearkened
not to his say, for that he had sought me in wedlock and I consented not
that he be baron and I femme. However, the time grew longsome upon my
sire and he became straitened and said to me, Make him confess. So I
have made thee confess and that which was covered is discovered. Now my
father purposeth thee a mischief because of this; but thou art become my
husband and I will never transgress against thee. An I told my father
what I have learnt from thee, he would be certified of thy falsehood and
imposture and that thou imposest upon Kings’ daughters and squanderest
royal wealth: so would thine offence find with him no pardon and he
would slay thee sans a doubt: wherefore it would be bruited among the
folk that I married a man who was a liar, an impostor, and this would
smirch mine honour. Furthermore an he kill thee, most like he will
require me to wed another, and to such thing I will never consent; no,
not though I die![55] So rise now and don a Mameluke’s dress and take
these fifty thousand dinars of my monies, and mount a swift steed and
get thee to a land whither the rule of my father doth not reach. Then
make thee a merchant and send me a letter by a courier who shall bring
it privily to me, that I may know in what land thou art, so I may send
thee all my hand can attain. Thus shall thy wealth wax great and if my
father die, I will send for thee, and thou shalt return in respect and
honour; and if we die, thou or I and go to the mercy of God the Most
Great, the Resurrection shall unite us. This, then, is the rede that is
right: and while we both abide alive and well, I will not cease to send
thee letters and monies. Arise ere the day wax bright and thou be in
perplexed plight and perdition upon thy head alight!” Quoth he, “O my
lady, I beseech thee of thy favour to bid me farewell with thine
embracement;” and quoth she, “No harm in that.”[56] So he embraced her
and knew her carnally; after which he made the Ghusl-ablution; then,
donning the dress of a white slave, he bade the syces saddle him a
thoroughbred steed. Accordingly, they saddled him a courser and he
mounted and farewelling his wife, rode forth the city at the last of the
night, whilst all who saw him deemed him one of the Mamelukes of the
Sultan going abroad on some business. Next morning, the King and his
Wazir repaired to the sitting-chamber and sent for Princess Dunya who
came behind the curtain; and her father said to her, “O my daughter,
what sayst thou?” Said she, “I say, Allah blacken thy Wazir’s face,
because he would have blackened my face in my husband’s eyes!” Asked the
King, “How so?”; and she answered, “He came in to me yesterday; but,
before I could name the matter to him, behold, in walked Faraj the Chief
Eunuch, letter in hand, and said:—Ten white slaves stand under the
palace window and have given me this letter, saying:—Kiss for us the
hands of our lord, Merchant Ma’aruf, and give him this letter, for we
are of his Mamelukes with the baggage, and it hath reached us that he
hath wedded the King’s daughter, so we are come to acquaint him with
that which befel us by the way. Accordingly I took the letter and read
as follows:—From the five hundred Mamelukes to his highness our lord
Merchant Ma’aruf. But further. We give thee to know that, after thou
quittedst us, the Arabs[57] came out upon us and attacked us. They were
two thousand horse and we five hundred mounted slaves and there befel a
mighty sore fight between us and them. They hindered us from the road
thirty days doing battle with them and this is the cause of our tarrying
from thee.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Princess Dunya
said to her sire, “My husband received a letter from his dependents
ending with:—The Arabs hindered us from the road thirty days which is
the cause of our being behind time. They also took from us of the
luggage two hundred loads of cloth and slew of us fifty Mamelukes. When
the news reached my husband, he cried, Allah disappoint them! What ailed
them to wage war with the Arabs for the sake of two hundred loads of
merchandise? What are two hundred loads? It behoved them not to tarry on
that account, for verily the value of the two hundred loads is only some
seven thousand dinars. But needs must I go to them and hasten them. As
for that which the Arabs have taken, ’twill not be missed from the
baggage, nor doth it weigh with me a whit, for I reckon it as if I had
given it to them by way of an alms. Then he went down from me, laughing
and taking no concern for the wastage of his wealth nor the slaughter of
his slaves. As soon as he was gone, I looked out from the lattice and
saw the ten Mamelukes who had brought him the letter, as they were
moons, each clad in a suit of clothes worth two thousand dinars, there
is not with my father a chattel to match one of them. He went forth with
them to bring up his baggage and hallowed be Allah who hindered me from
saying to him aught of that thou badest me, for he would have made mock
of me and thee, and haply he would have eyed me with the eye of
disparagement and hated me. But the fault is all with thy Wazir,[58] who
speaketh against my husband words that besit him not.” Replied the King,
“O my daughter, thy husband’s wealth is indeed endless and he recketh
not of it; for, from the day he entered our city, he hath done naught
but give alms to the poor. Inshallah, he will speedily return with the
baggage, and good in plenty shall betide us from him.” And he went on to
appease her and menace the Wazir, being duped by her device. So fared it
with the King; but as regards Merchant Ma’aruf he rode on into waste
lands, perplexed and knowing not to what quarter he should betake him;
and for the anguish of parting he lamented and in the pangs of passion
and love-longing he recited these couplets:—

 Time falsed our Union and divided who were one in tway; ✿ And the sore
    tyranny of Time doth melt my heart away:
 Mine eyes ne’er cease to drop the tear for parting with my dear; ✿ When
    shall Disunion come to end and dawn the Union-day?
 O favour like the full moon’s face of sheen, indeed I’m he ✿ Whom thou
    didst leave with vitals torn when faring on thy way.
 Would I had never seen thy sight, or met thee for an hour; ✿ Since after
    sweetest taste of thee to bitters I’m a prey.

 Ma’aruf will never cease to be enthralled by Dunyá’s[59] charms ✿ And
    long live she albe he die whom love and longing slay,
 O brilliance, like resplendent sun of noontide, deign them heal ✿ His
    heart for kindness[60] and the fire of longing love allay!
 Would Heaven I wot an e’er the days shall deign conjoin our lots, ✿ Join
    us in pleasant talk o’ nights, in Union glad and gay:
 Shall my love’s palace hold two hearts that savour joy, and I ✿ Strain
    to my breast the branch I saw upon the sand-hill[61] sway?
 O favour of full moon in sheen, never may sun o’ thee ✿ Surcease to rise
    from Eastern rim with all-enlightening ray!
 I’m well content with passion-pine and all its bane and bate ✿ For luck
    in love is evermore the butt of jealous Fate.

And when he ended his verses, he wept with sore weeping, for indeed the
ways were walled up before his face and death seemed to him better than
dreeing life, and he walked on like a drunken man for stress of
distraction, and stayed not till noontide, when he came to a little town
and saw a plougher hard by, ploughing with a yoke of bulls. Now hunger
was sore upon him; and he went up to the ploughman and said to him,
“Peace be with thee!”; and he returned his salam and said to him,
“Welcome, O my lord! Art thou one of the Sultan’s Mamelukes?” Quoth
Ma’aruf, “Yes;” and the other said, “Alight with me for a guest-meal.”
Whereupon Ma’aruf knew him to be of the liberal and said to him, “O my
brother, I see with thee naught with which thou mayst feed me: how is
it, then, that thou invitest me?” Answered the husbandman, “O my lord,
weal is well nigh.[62] Dismount thee here: the town is near hand and I
will go and fetch thee dinner and fodder for thy stallion.” Rejoined
Ma’aruf, “Since the town is near at hand, I can go thither as quickly as
thou canst and buy me what I have a mind to in the bazar and eat.” The
peasant replied, “O my lord, the place is but a little village[63] and
there is no bazar there, neither selling nor buying. So I conjure thee
by Allah, alight here with me and hearten my heart, and I will run
thither and return to thee in haste.” Accordingly he dismounted and the
Fellah left him and went off to the village, to fetch dinner for him
whilst Ma’aruf sat awaiting him. Presently he said in himself, “I have
taken this poor man away from his work; but I will arise and plough in
his stead, till he come back, to make up for having hindered him from
his work.[64]” Then he took the plough and starting the bulls, ploughed
a little, till the share struck against something and the beasts
stopped. He goaded them on, but they could not move the plough; so he
looked at the share and finding it caught in a ring of gold, cleared
away the soil and saw that it was set centre-most a slab of alabaster,
the size of the nether millstone. He strave at the stone till he pulled
it from its place, when there appeared beneath it a souterrain with a
stair. Presently he descended the flight of steps and came to a place
like a Hammam, with four daïses, the first full of gold, from floor to
roof, the second full of emeralds and pearls and coral also from ground
to ceiling; the third of jacinths and rubies and turquoises and the
fourth of diamonds and all manner other preciousest stones. At the upper
end of the place stood a coffer of clearest crystal, full of union-gems
each the size of a walnut, and upon the coffer lay a casket of gold, the
bigness of a lemon. When he saw this, he marvelled and rejoiced with joy
exceeding and said to himself, “I wonder what is in this casket?” So he
opened it and found therein a seal-ring of gold, whereon were graven
names and talismans, as they were the tracks of creeping ants. He rubbed
the ring and behold, a voice said, “Adsum! Here am I, at thy service, O
my lord! Ask and it shall be given unto thee. Wilt thou raise a city or
ruin a capital or kill a king or dig a river-channel or aught of the
kind? Whatso thou seekest, it shall come to pass, by leave of the King
of All-might, Creator of day and night.” Ma’aruf asked, “O creature of
my lord, who and what art thou?”; and the other answered, “I am the
slave of this seal-ring standing in the service of him who possesseth
it. Whatsoever he seeketh, that I accomplish for him, and I have no
excuse in neglecting that he biddeth me do; because I am Sultan over
two-and-seventy tribes of the Jinn, each two-and-seventy thousand in
number every one of which thousand ruleth over a thousand Marids, each
Marid over a thousand Ifrits, each Ifrit over a thousand Satans and each
Satan over a thousand Jinn: and they are all under command of me and may
not gainsay me. As for me, I am spelled to this seal-ring and may not
thwart whoso holdeth it. Lo! thou hast gotten hold of it and I am become
thy slave; so ask what thou wilt, for I hearken to thy word and obey thy
bidding; and if thou have need of me at any time, by land or by sea rub
the signet-ring and thou wilt find me with thee. But beware of rubbing
it twice in succession, or thou wilt consume me with the fire of the
names graven thereon; and thus wouldst thou lose me and after regret me.
Now I have acquainted thee with my case and—the Peace!”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

[Illustration]


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Slave of the Signet-ring acquainted Ma’aruf with his case, the Merchant
asked him, “What is thy name?” and the Jinni answered, “My name is Abú
al-Sa’ádát.[65]” Quoth Ma’aruf, “O Abu al-Sa’adat what is this place and
who enchanted thee in this casket?”; and quoth he, “O my lord, this is a
treasure called the Hoard of Shaddád son of Ad, him who the base of
‘Many-columned Iram laid, the like of which in the lands was never
made.[66]’ I was his slave in his lifetime and this is his Seal-ring,
which he laid up in his treasure; but it hath fallen to thy lot.”
Ma’aruf enquired, “Canst thou transport that which is in this hoard to
the surface of the earth?”; and the Jinni replied, “Yes! Nothing were
easier.” Said Ma’aruf, “Bring it forth and leave naught.” So the Jinni
signed with his hand to the ground, which clave asunder, and he sank and
was absent a little while. Presently, there came forth young boys full
of grace, and fair of face bearing golden baskets filled with gold which
they emptied out and going away, returned with more; nor did they cease
to transport the gold and jewels, till ere an hour had sped they said,
“Naught is left in the hoard.” Thereupon out came Abu al-Sa’adat and
said to Ma’aruf, “O my lord, thou seest that we have brought forth all
that was in the hoard.” Ma’aruf asked, “Who be these beautiful boys?”
and the Jinni answered, “They are my sons. This matter merited not that
I should muster for it the Marids, wherefore my sons have done thy
desire and are honoured by such service. So ask what thou wilt beside
this.” Quoth Ma’aruf, “Canst thou bring me he-mules and chests and fill
the chests with the treasure and load them on the mules?” Quoth Abu
al-Sa’adat, “Nothing easier,” and cried a great cry; whereupon his sons
presented themselves before him, to the number of eight hundred, and he
said to them, “Let some of you take the semblance of he-mules and others
of muleteers and handsome Mamelukes, the like of the least of whom is
not found with any of the Kings; and others of you be transmewed to
muleteers, and the rest to menials.” So seven hundred of them changed
themselves into bât-mules and other hundred took the shape of slaves.
Then Abu al-Sa’adat called upon his Marids, who presented themselves
between his hands and he commanded some of them to assume the aspect of
horses saddled with saddles of gold crusted with jewels. And when
Ma’aruf saw them do as he bade he cried, “Where be the chests?” They
brought them before him and he said, “Pack the gold and the stones, each
sort by itself.” So they packed them and loaded three hundred he-mules
with them. Then asked Ma’aruf, “O Abu al-Sa’adat, canst thou bring me
some loads of costly stuffs?”; and the Jinni answered, “Wilt thou have
Egyptian stuffs or Syrian or Persian or Indian or Greek?” Ma’aruf said,
“Bring me an hundred loads of each kind, on five hundred mules;” and Abu
al-Sa’adat, “O my lord accord me delay that I may dispose my Marids for
this and send a company of them to each country to fetch an hundred
loads of its stuffs and then take the form of he-mules and return,
carrying the stuffs.” Ma’aruf enquired, “What time dost thou want?”; and
Abu al-Sa’adat replied, “The time of the blackness of the night, and day
shall not dawn ere thou have all thou desirest.” Said Ma’aruf, “I grant
thee this time,” and bade them pitch him a pavilion. So they pitched it
and he sat down therein and they brought him a table of food. Then said
Abu al-Sa’adat to him, “O my lord, tarry thou in this tent and these my
sons shall guard thee: so fear thou nothing; for I go to muster my
Marids and despatch them to do thy desire.” So saying, he departed,
leaving Ma’aruf seated in the pavilion, with the table before him and
the Jinni’s sons attending upon him, in the guise of slaves and servants
and suite. And while he sat in this state behold, up came the
husbandman, with a great porringer of lentils[67] and a nose-bag full of
barley and seeing the pavilion pitched and the Mamelukes standing, hands
upon breasts, thought that the Sultan was come and had halted on that
stead. So he stood open-mouthed and said in himself, “Would I had killed
a couple of chickens and fried them red with clarified cow-butter for
the Sultan!” And he would have turned back to kill the chickens as a
regale for the Sultan; but Ma’aruf saw him and cried out to him and said
to the Mamelukes, “Bring him hither.” So they brought him and his
porringer of lentils before Ma’aruf, who said to him, “What is this?”
Said the peasant, “This is thy dinner and thy horse’s fodder! Excuse me,
for I thought not that the Sultan would come hither; and, had I known
that, I would have killed a couple of chickens and entertained him in
goodly guise.” Quoth Ma’aruf, “The Sultan is not come. I am his
son-in-law and I was vexed with him. However he hath sent his officers
to make his peace with me, and now I am minded to return to city. But
thou hast made me this guest-meal without knowing me, and I accept it
from thee, lentils though it be, and will not eat save of thy cheer.”
Accordingly he bade him set the porringer amiddlemost the table and ate
of it his sufficiency, whilst the Fellah filled his belly with those
rich meats. Then Ma’aruf washed his hands and gave the Mamelukes leave
to eat; so they fell upon the remains of the meal and ate; and, when the
porringer was empty, he filled it with gold and gave it to the peasant,
saying, “Carry this to thy dwelling and come to me in the city, and I
will entreat thee with honour.” Thereupon the peasant took the porringer
full of gold and returned to the village, driving the bulls before him
and deeming himself akin to the King. Meanwhile, they brought Ma’aruf
girls of the Brides of the Treasure,[68] who smote on instruments of
music and danced before him, and he passed that night in joyance and
delight, a night not to be reckoned among lives. Hardly had dawned the
day when there arose a great cloud of dust which presently lifting,
discovered seven hundred mules laden with stuffs and attended by
muleteers and baggage-tenders and cresset-bearers. With them came Abu
al-Sa’adat, riding on a she-mule, in the guise of a caravan-leader, and
before him was a travelling-litter, with four corner-terminals[69] of
glittering red gold, set with gems. When Abu al-Sa’adat came up to the
tent, he dismounted and kissing the earth, said to Ma’aruf, “O my lord,
thy desire hath been done to the uttermost and in the litter is a
treasure-suit which hath not its match among Kings’ raiment: so don it
and mount the litter and bid us do what thou wilt.” Quoth Ma’aruf, “O
Abu al-Sa’adat, I wish thee to go to the city of Ikhtiyan al-Khutan and
present thyself to my father-in-law the King; and go thou not in to him
but in the guise of a mortal courier;” and quoth he, “To hear is to
obey.” So Ma’aruf wrote a letter to the Sultan and sealed it and Abu
al-Sa’adat took it and set out with it; and when he arrived, he found
the King saying, “O Wazir, indeed my heart is concerned for my
son-in-law and I fear lest the Arabs slay him. Would Heaven I wot
whither he was bound, that I might have followed him with the troops!
Would he had told me his destination!” Said the Wazir, “Allah be
merciful to thee for this thy heedlessness! As thy head liveth, the
wight saw that we were awake to him and feared dishonour and fled, for
he is nothing but an impostor, a liar.” And behold, at this moment in
came the courier and kissing ground before the King, wished him
permanent glory and prosperity and length of life. Asked the King, “Who
art thou and what is thy business?” “I am a courier,” answered the
Jinni, “and thy son-in-law who is come with the baggage sendeth me to
thee with a letter, and here it is!” So he took the letter and read
therein these words, “After salutations galore to our uncle[70] the
glorious King! Know that I am at hand with the baggage-train: so come
thou forth to meet me with the troops.” Cried the King, “Allah blacken
thy brow, O Wazir! How often wilt thou defame my son-in-law’s name and
call him liar and impostor? Behold, he is come with the baggage-train
and thou art naught but a traitor.” The Minister hung his head
groundwards in shame and confusion and replied, “O King of the age, I
said not this save because of the long delay of the baggage and because
I feared the loss of the wealth he hath wasted.” The King exclaimed, “O
traitor, what are my riches! Now that his baggage is come he will give
me great plenty in their stead.” Then he bade decorate the city and
going in to his daughter, said to her, “Good news for thee! Thy husband
will be here anon with his baggage; for he hath sent me a letter to that
effect and here am I now going forth to meet him.” The Princess Dunya
marvelled at this and said in herself, “This is a wondrous thing! Was he
laughing at me and making mock of me, or had he a mind to try me, when
he told me that he was a pauper? But Alhamdolillah, Glory to God, for
that I failed not of my duty to him!” On this wise fared it in the
Palace; but as regards Merchant Ali, the Cairene, when he saw the
decoration of the city and asked the cause thereof, they said to him,
“The baggage-train of Merchant Ma’aruf, the King’s son-in-law, is come.”
Said he, “Allah is Almighty! What a calamity is this man![71] He came to
me, fleeing from his wife, and he was a poor man. Whence then should he
get a baggage-train? But haply this is a device which the King’s
daughter hath contrived for him, fearing his disgrace, and Kings are not
unable to do anything. May Allah the Most High veil his fame and not
bring him to public shame!”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Merchant
Ali asked the cause of the decorations, they told him the truth of the
case; so he blessed Merchant Ma’aruf and cried, “May Allah Almighty veil
his fame and not bring him to public shame!” And all the merchants
rejoiced and were glad for that they would get their monies. Then the
King assembled his troops and rode forth, whilst Abu al-Sa’adat returned
to Ma’aruf and acquainted him with the delivering of the letter. Quoth
Ma’aruf, “Bind on the loads;” and when they had done so, he donned the
treasure-suit and mounting the litter became a thousand times greater
and more majestic than the King. Then he set forward; but, when he had
gone half-way, behold, the King met him with the troops, and seeing him
riding in the Takhtrawan and clad in the dress aforesaid, threw himself
upon him and saluted him, and giving him joy of his safety, greeted him
with the greeting of peace. Then all the Lords of the land saluted him
and it was made manifest that he had spoken the truth and that in him
there was no lie. Presently he entered the city in such state procession
as would have caused the gall-bladder of the lion to burst[72] for envy
and the traders pressed up to him and kissed his hands, whilst Merchant
Ali said to him, “Thou hast played off this trick and it hath prospered
to thy hand, O Shaykh of Impostors! But thou deservest it and may Allah
the Most High increase thee of His bounty!”; whereupon Ma’aruf laughed.
Then he entered the palace and sitting down on the throne said, “Carry
the loads of gold into the treasury of my uncle the King and bring me
the bales of cloth.” So they brought them to him and opened them before
him, bale after bale, till they had unpacked the seven hundred loads,
whereof he chose out the best and said, “Bear these to Princess Dunya
that she may distribute them among her slave-girls; and carry her also
this coffer of jewels, that she may divide them among her handmaids and
eunuchs.” Then he proceeded to make over to the merchants in whose debt
he was stuffs by way of payment for their arrears, giving him whose due
was a thousand, stuffs worth two thousand or more; after which he fell
to distributing to the poor and needy, whilst the King looked on with
greedy eyes and could not hinder him; nor did he cease largesse till he
had made an end of the seven hundred loads, when he turned to the troops
and proceeded to apportion amongst them emeralds and rubies and pearls
and coral and other jewels by handsful, without count, till the King
said to him, “Enough of this giving, O my son! There is but little left
of the baggage.” But he said, “I have plenty.” Then indeed, his good
faith was become manifest and none could give him the lie; and he had
come to reck not of giving, for that the Slave of the Seal-ring brought
him whatsoever he sought. Presently, the treasurer came in to the King
and said, “O King of the age, the treasury is full indeed and will not
hold the rest of the loads. Where shall we lay that which is left of the
gold and jewels?” And he assigned to him another place. As for the
Princess Dunya when she saw this, her joy redoubled and she marvelled
and said in herself, “Would I wot how came he by all this wealth!” In
like manner the traders rejoiced in that which he had given them and
blessed him; whilst Merchant Ali marvelled and said to himself, “I
wonder how he hath lied and swindled, that he hath gotten him all these
treasures[73]? Had they come from the King’s daughter, he had not wasted
them on this wise! But how excellent is his saying who said:—

 When the Kings’ King giveth, in reverence pause ✿ And venture not to
    enquire the cause:
 Allah gives His gifts unto whom He will, ✿ So respect and abide by His
    Holy Laws!

So far concerning him; but as regards the King, he also marvelled with
passing marvel at that which he saw of Ma’aruf’s generosity and
openhandedness in the largesse of wealth. Then the Merchant went in to
his wife, who met him, smiling and laughing-lipped and kissed his hand,
saying, “Didst thou mock me or hadst thou a mind to prove me with thy
saying:—I am a poor man and a fugitive from my wife? Praised be Allah
for that I failed not of my duty to thee! For thou art my beloved and
there is none dearer to me than thou, whether thou be rich or poor. But
I would have thee tell me what didst thou design by these words.” Said
Ma’aruf, “I wished to prove thee and see whether thy love were sincere
or for the sake of wealth and the greed of worldly good. But now ’tis
become manifest to me that thine affection is sincere and as thou art a
true woman, so welcome to thee! I know thy worth.” Then he went apart
into a place by himself and rubbed the seal-ring, whereupon Abu
al-Sa’adat presented himself and said to him, “Adsum, at thy service!
Ask what thou wilt.” Quoth Ma’aruf, “I want a treasure-suit and
treasure-trinkets for my wife, including a necklace of forty unique
jewels.” Quoth the Jinni, “To hear is to obey,” and brought him what he
sought, whereupon Ma’aruf dismissed him and carrying the dress and
ornaments in to his wife, laid them before her and said, “Take these and
put them on and welcome!” When she saw this, her wits fled for joy, and
she found among the ornaments a pair of anklets of gold set with jewels
of the handiwork of the magicians, and bracelets and earrings and a
belt[74] such as no money could buy. So she donned the dress and
ornaments and said to Ma’aruf, “O my lord, I will treasure these up for
holidays and festivals.” But he answered, “Wear them always, for I have
others in plenty.” And when she put them on and her women beheld her,
they rejoiced and bussed his hands. Then he left them and going apart by
himself, rubbed the seal-ring whereupon its slave appeared and he said
to him, “Bring me an hundred suits of apparel, with their ornaments of
gold.” “Hearing and obeying,” answered Abu al Sa’adat and brought him
the hundred suits, each with its ornaments wrapped up within it. Ma’aruf
took them and called aloud to the slave-girls, who came to him and he
gave them each a suit: so they donned them and became like the
black-eyed girls of Paradise, whilst the Princess Dunya shone amongst
them as the moon among the stars. One of the handmaids told the King of
this and he came in to his daughter and saw her and her women dazzling
all who beheld them; whereat he wondered with passing wonderment. Then
he went out and calling his Wazir, said to him, “O Wazir, such and such
things have happened; what sayst thou now of this affair?” Said he, “O
King of the age, this be no merchant’s fashion; for a merchant keepeth a
piece of linen by him for years and selleth it not but at a profit. How
should a merchant have generosity such as this generosity, and whence
should he get the like of these monies and jewels, of which but a slight
matter is found with the Kings? So how should loads thereof be found
with merchants? Needs must there be a cause for this; but, an thou wilt
hearken to me, I will make the truth of the case manifest to thee.”
Answered the King, “O Wazir, I will do thy bidding.” Rejoined the
Minister, “Do thou foregather with thy son-in-law and make a show of
affect to him and talk with him and say:—O my son-in-law, I have a mind
to go, I and thou and the Wazir but no more, to a flower-garden that we
may take our pleasure there. When we come to the garden, we will set on
the table wine, and I will ply him therewith and compel him to drink;
for, when he shall have drunken, he will lose his reason and his
judgment will forsake him. Then we will question him of the truth of his
case and he will discover to us his secrets, for wine is a traitor and
Allah-gifted is he who said:—

 When we drank the wine, and it crept its way ✿ To the place of Secrets,
    I cried, “O stay!”
 In my fear lest its influence stint my wits ✿ And my friends spy matters
    that hidden lay.

When he hath told us the truth we shall ken his case and may deal with
him as we will; because I fear for thee the consequences of this his
present fashion: haply he will covet the kingship and win over the
troops by generosity and lavishing money and so depose thee and take the
kingdom from thee.” “True,” answered the King.——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


       Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Ninety-eighth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Wazir
devised this device the King said to him, “Thou hast spoken sooth!”; and
they passed the night on this agreement. And when morning morrowed the
King went forth and sat in the guest-chamber, when lo, and behold! the
grooms and serving-men came in to him in dismay. Quoth he, “What hath
befallen you?”; and quoth they, “O King of the age, the Syces curried
the horses and foddered them and the he-mules which brought the baggage;
but, when we arose in the morning, we found that thy son-in-law’s
Mamelukes had stolen the horses and mules. We searched the stables, but
found neither horse nor mule; so we entered the lodging of the Mamelukes
and found none there, nor know we how they fled.” The King marvelled at
this, unknowing that the horses and Mamelukes were all Ifrits, the
subjects of the Slave of the Spell, and asked the grooms, “O accursed
how could a thousand beasts and five hundred slaves and servants flee
without your knowledge?” Answered they, “We know not how it happened,”
and he cried, “Go, and when your lord cometh forth of the Harim, tell
him the case.” So they went out from before the King and sat down
bewildered, till Ma’aruf came out and, seeing them chagrined enquired of
them, “What may be the matter?” They told him all that had happened and
he said, “What is their worth that ye should be concerned for them? Wend
your ways.” And he sat laughing and was neither angry nor grieved
concerning the case; whereupon the King looked in the Wazir’s face and
said to him, “What manner of man is this, with whom wealth is of no
worth? Needs must there be a reason for this?” Then they talked with him
awhile and the King said to him, “O my son-in-law, I have a mind to go,
I, thou and the Wazir, to a garden, where we may divert ourselves.” “No
harm in that,” said Ma’aruf. So they went forth to a flower-garden,
wherein every sort of fruit was of kinds twain and its waters were
flowing and its trees towering and its birds carolling. There they
entered a pavilion, whose sight did away sorrow from the soul, and sat
talking, whilst the Minister entertained them with rare tales and quoted
merry quips and mirth-provoking sayings and Ma’aruf attentively
listened, till the time of dinner came, when they set on a tray of meats
and a flagon of wine. When they had eaten and washed hands, the Wazir
filled the cup and gave it to the King, who drank it off; then he filled
a second and handed it to Ma’aruf, saying, “Take the cup of the drink to
which Reason boweth neck in reverence.” Quoth Ma’aruf, “What is this, O
Wazir?”; and quoth he, “This is the grizzled[75] virgin and the old maid
long kept at home,[76] the giver of joy to hearts, whereof saith the
poet:—

 The feet of sturdy Miscreants[77] went trampling heavy tread, ✿ And she
    hath ta’en a vengeance dire on every Arab’s head.
 A Káfir youth like fullest moon in darkness hands her round ✿ Whose eyne
    are strongest cause of sin by him inspiritèd.

And Allah-gifted is he who said:-

 ’Tis as if wine and he who bears the bowl, ✿ Rising to show her charms
    for man to see,[78]
 Were dancing undurn-Sun whose face the moon ✿ Of night adorned with
    stars of Gemini.

 So subtle is her essence it would seem ✿ Through every limb like course
    of soul runs she.

And how excellent is the saying of the poet:—

 Slept in mine arms full Moon of brightest blee ✿ Nor did that sun
    eclipse in goblet see:
 I nighted spying fire whereto bow down ✿ Magians, which bowed from
    ewer’s lip to me.

And that of another:—

 It runs through every joint of them as runs ✿ The surge of health
    returning to the sick.

And yet another:—

 I marvel at its pressers, how they died ✿ And left us _aqua vitæ_—lymph
    of life!

And yet goodlier is the saying of Abu Nowas:—

 Cease then to blame me, for thy blame doth anger bring ✿ And with the
    draught that madded me come med’cining:
 A yellow girl[79] whose court cures every carking care; ✿ Did a stone
    touch it would with joy and glee upspring:
 She riseth in her ewer during darkest night ✿ The house with brightest,
    sheeniest light illumining:
 And going round of youths to whom the world inclines[80] ✿ Ne’er, save
    in whatso way they please, their hearts shall wring.
 From hand of coynted[81] lass begarbed like yarded lad,[82] ✿ Wencher
    and Tribe of Lot alike enamouring,
 She comes: and say to him who dares claim lore of love ✿ Something hast
    learnt but still there’s many another thing.

But best of all is the saying of Ibn al-Mu’tazz[83]:—

 On the shaded woody island[84] His showers Allah deign ✿ Shed on Convent
    hight Abdún[85] drop and drip of railing rain:
 Oft the breezes of the morning have awakened me therein ✿ When the Dawn
    shows her blaze,[86] ere the bird of flight was fain;
 And the voices of the monks that with chants awoke the walls ✿
    Black-frocked shavelings ever wont the cup amorn to drain.[87]
 ’Mid the throng how many fair with languour-kohl’d eyes[88] ✿ And lids
    enfolding lovely orbs where black on white was lain,
 In secret came to see me by shirt of night disguised ✿ In terror and in
    caution a-hurrying amain!
 Then I rose and spread my cheek like a carpet on his path ✿ In homage,
    and with skirts wiped his trail from off the plain.
 But threatening disgrace rose the Crescent in the sky ✿ Like the paring
    of a nail yet the light would never wane:
 Then happened whatso happened: I disdain to kiss and tell ✿ So deem of
    us thy best and with queries never mell.

And gifted of God is he who saith:—

  In the morn I am richest of men ✿ And in joy at good news I start up
  For I look on the liquid gold[89] ✿ And I measure it out by the cup.

And how goodly is the saying of the poet:—

 By Allah, this is th’ only alchemy ✿ All said of other science false we
    see!
 Carat of wine on hundredweight of woe ✿ Transmuteth gloomiest grief to
    joy and glee.

And that of another:—

 The glasses are heavy when empty brought ✿ Till we charge them all with
    unmixèd wine.
 Then so light are they that to fly they’re fain ✿ As bodies lightened by
    soul divine.

And yet another:—

 Wine-cup and ruby-wine high worship claim; ✿ Dishonour ’twere to see
    their honour waste:
 Bury me, when I’m dead, by side of vine ✿ Whose veins shall moisten
    bones in clay misplaced;
 Nor bury me in wold and wild, for I ✿ Dread only after death no wine to
    taste.”[90]

And he ceased not to egg him on to the drink, naming to him such of the
virtues of wine as he thought well and reciting to him what occurred to
him of poetry and pleasantries on the subject, till Ma’aruf addressed
himself to sucking the cup-lips and cared no longer for aught else. The
Wazir ceased not to fill for him and he to drink and enjoy himself and
make merry, till his wits wandered and he could not distinguish right
from wrong. When the Minister saw that drunkenness had attained in him
to utterest and the bounds transgressed, he said to him, “By Allah, O
Merchant Ma’aruf, I admire whence thou gottest these jewels whose like
the Kings of the Chosroës possess not! In all our lives never saw we a
merchant that had heaped up riches like unto thine or more generous than
thou, for thy doings are the doings of Kings and not merchants’ doings.
Wherefore, Allah upon thee, do thou acquaint me with this, that I may
know thy rank and condition.” And he went on to test him with questions
and cajole him, till Ma’aruf, being reft of reason, said to him, “I’m
neither merchant nor King,” and told him his whole story from first to
last. Then said the Wazir, “I conjure thee by Allah, O my lord Ma’aruf,
show us the ring, that we may see its make.” So, in his drunkenness, he
pulled off the ring and said, “Take it and look upon it.” The Minister
took it and turning it over, said, “If I rub it, will its slave appear?”
Replied Ma’aruf, “Yes. Rub it and he will appear to thee, and do thou
divert thyself with the sight of him.” Thereupon the Wazir rubbed the
ring and behold forthright appeared the Jinni and said, “Adsum, at thy
service, O my lord! Ask and it shall be given to thee. Wilt thou ruin a
city or raise a capital or kill a king? Whatso thou seekest, I will do
for thee, sans fail.” The Wazir pointed to Ma’aruf and said, “Take up
yonder wretch and cast him down in the most desolate of desert lands,
where he shall find nothing to eat nor drink, so he may die of hunger
and perish miserably, and none know of him.” Accordingly, the Jinni
snatched him up and flew with him betwixt heaven and earth, which when
Ma’aruf saw, he made sure of destruction and wept and said, “O Abu
al-Sa’adat, whither goest thou with me?” Replied the Jinni, “I go to
cast thee down in the Desert Quarter,[91] O ill-bred wight of gross
wits. Shall one have the like of this talisman and give it to the folk
to gaze at? Verily, thou deservest that which hath befallen thee; and
but that I fear Allah, I would let thee fall from a[91] eight of a
thousand fathoms, nor shouldst thou reach the earth, till the winds had
torn thee to shreds.” Ma’aruf was silent[92] and did not again bespeak
him till he reached the Desert Quarter and casting him down there, went
away and left him in that horrible place.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


        Now when it was the Nine Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Slave of the
Seal-ring took up Ma’aruf and cast him down in the Desert Quarter where
he left him and went his ways. So much concerning him; but returning to
the Wazir who was now in possession of the talisman, he said to the
King, “How deemest thou now? Did I not tell thee that this fellow was a
liar, an impostor, but thou wouldst not credit me?” Replied the King,
“Thou wast in the right, O my Wazir, Allah grant thee weal! But give me
the ring, that I may solace myself with the sight.” The Minister looked
at him angrily and spat in his face, saying, “O lack-wits, how shall I
give it to thee and abide thy servant, after I am become thy master? But
I will spare thee no more on life.” Then he rubbed the seal-ring and
said to the Slave, “Take up this ill-mannered churl and cast him down by
his son-in-law the swindler-man.” So the Jinni took him up and flew off
with him, whereupon quoth the King to him, “O creature of my Lord, what
is my crime?” Abu al-Sa’adat replied, “That wot I not, but my master
hath commanded me and I cannot cross whoso hath compassed the enchanted
ring.” Then he flew on with him, till he came to the Desert Quarter and,
casting him down where he had cast Ma’aruf left him and returned. The
King hearing Ma’aruf weeping, went up to him and acquainted him with his
case; and they sat weeping over that which had befallen them and found
neither meat nor drink. Meanwhile the Minister, after driving
father-in-law and son-in-law from the country, went forth from the
garden and summoning all the troops held a Divan, and told them what he
had done with the King and Ma’aruf and acquainted them with the affair
of the talisman, adding, “Unless ye make me Sultan over you, I will bid
the Slave of the Seal-ring take you up one and all and cast you down in
the Desert Quarter where you shall die of hunger and thirst.” They
replied, “Do us no damage, for we accept thee as Sultan over us and will
not anywise gainsay thy bidding.” So they agreed, in their own despite,
to his being Sultan over them, and he bestowed on them robes of honour,
seeking all he had a mind to of Abu al-Sa’adat, who brought it to him
forthwith. Then he sat down on the throne and the troops did homage to
him; and he sent to Princess Dunya, the King’s daughter, saying, “Make
thee ready, for I mean to come in unto thee this night, because I long
for thee with love.” When she heard this, she wept, for the case of her
husband and father was grievous to her, and sent to him saying, “Have
patience with me till my period of widowhood[93] be ended: then draw up
thy contract of marriage with me and go in to me according to law.” But
he sent back to say to her, “I know neither period of widowhood nor to
delay have I a mood; and I need not a contract nor know I lawful from
unlawful; but needs must I go in unto thee this night.” She answered him
saying, “So be it, then, and welcome to thee!”; but this was a trick on
her part. When the answer reached the Wazir, he rejoiced and his breast
was broadened, for that he was passionately in love with her. He bade
set food before all the folk, saying, “Eat; this is my bride-feast; for
I purpose to go in to the Princess Dunya this night.” Quoth the Shaykh
al-Islam, “It is not lawful for thee to go in unto her till her days of
widowhood be ended and thou have drawn up thy contract of marriage with
her.” But he answered, “I know neither days of widowhood nor other
period; so multiply not words on me.” The Shaykh Al-Islam was
silent,[94] fearing his mischief, and said to the troops, “Verily, this
man is a Kafir, a Miscreant, and hath neither creed nor religious
conduct.” As soon as it was evenfall, he went in to her and found her
robed in her richest raiment and decked with her goodliest adornments.
When she saw him, she came to meet him, laughing and said, “A blessed
night! But hadst thou slain my father and my husband, it had been more
to my mind.” And he said, “There is no help but I slay them.” Then she
made him sit down and began to jest with him and make show of love
caressing him and smiling in his face so that his reason fled; but she
cajoled him with her coaxing and cunning only that she might get
possession of the ring and change his joy into calamity on the mother of
his forehead:[95] nor did she deal thus with him but after the rede of
him who said[96]:—

      I attained by my wits ✿ What no sword had obtained,
      And return wi’ the spoils ✿ Whose sweet pluckings I gained.

When he saw her caress him and smile upon him, desire surged up in him
and he besought her of carnal knowledge; but, when he approached her,
she drew away from him and burst into tears, saying, “O my lord, seest
thou not the man looking at us? I conjure thee by Allah, screen me from
his eyes! How canst thou know me what while he looketh on us?” When he
heard this, he was angry and asked, “Where is the man?”; and answered
she, “There he is, in the bezel of the ring! putting out his head and
staring at us.” He thought that the Jinni was looking at them and said
laughing, “Fear not; this is the Slave of the Seal-ring, and he is
subject to me.” Quoth she, “I am afraid of Ifrits; pull it off and throw
it afar from me.” So he plucked it off and laying it on the cushion,
drew near to her, but she dealt him a kick, her foot striking him full
in the stomach[97], and he fell over on his back senseless; whereupon
she cried out to her attendants, who came to her in haste, and said to
them, “Seize him!” So forty slave-girls laid hold on him, whilst she
hurriedly snatched up the ring from the cushion and rubbed it; whereupon
Abu al-Sa’adat presented himself, saying, “Adsum, at thy service O my
mistress.” Cried she, “Take up yonder Infidel and clap him in jail and
shackle him heavily.” So he took him and throwing him into the Prison of
Wrath[98] returned and reported, “I have laid him in limbo.” Quoth she,
“Whither wentest thou with my father and my husband?”; and quoth he, “I
cast them down in the Desert Quarter.” Then cried she, “I command thee
to fetch them to me forthwith.” He replied, “I hear and I obey,” and
taking flight at once, stayed not till he reached the Desert Quarter,
where he lighted down upon them and found them sitting weeping and
complaining each to other. Quoth he, “Fear not, for relief is come to
you”; and he told them what the Wazir had done, adding, “Indeed I
imprisoned him with my own hands in obedience to her, and she hath
bidden me bear you back.” And they rejoiced in his news. Then he took
them both up and flew home with them; nor was it more than an hour
before he brought them in to Princess Dunya, who rose and saluted sire
and spouse. Then she made them sit down and brought them food and
sweetmeats, and they passed the rest of the night with her. On the next
day she clad them in rich clothing and said to the King, “O my papa, sit
thou upon thy throne and be King as before and make my husband thy Wazir
of the Right and tell thy troops that which hath happened. Then send for
the Minister out of prison and do him die, and after burn him, for that
he is a Miscreant, and would have gone in unto me in the way of
lewdness, without the rites of wedlock and he hath testified against
himself that he is an Infidel and believeth in no religion. And do
tenderly by thy son-in-law, whom thou makest thy Wazir of the Right.” He
replied, “Hearing and obeying, O my daughter. But do thou give me the
ring or give it to thy husband.” Quoth she, “It behoveth not that either
thou or he have the ring. I will keep the ring myself, and belike I
shall be more careful of it than you. Whatso ye wish seek it of me and I
will demand it for you of the Slave of the Seal-ring. So fear no harm so
long as I live and after my death, do what ye twain will with the ring.”
Quoth the King, “This is the right rede, O my daughter,” and taking his
son-in-law went forth to the Divan. Now the troops had passed the night
in sore chagrin for Princess Dunya and that which the Wazir had done
with her, in going in to her after the way of lewdness, without
marriage-rites, and for his ill-usage of the King and Ma’aruf, and they
feared lest the law of Al-Islam be dishonoured, because it was manifest
to them that he was a Kafir. So they assembled in the Divan and fell to
reproaching the Shaykh al-Islam, saying, “Why didst thou not forbid him
from going in to the Princess in the way of lewdness?” Said he, “O folk,
the man is a Miscreant and hath gotten possession of the ring and I and
you may not prevail against him. But Almighty Allah will requite him his
deed, and be ye silent, lest he slay you.” And as the host was thus
engaged in talk, behold the King and Ma’aruf entered the Divan.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

[Illustration]


                 Now when it was the Thousandth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
troops sorely chagrined sat in the Divan talking over the ill-deeds done
by the Wazir to their Sovran, his son-in-law and his daughter, behold,
the King and Ma’aruf entered. Then the King bade decorate the city and
sent to fetch the Wazir from the place of duresse. So they brought him,
and as he passed by the troops, they cursed him and abused him and
menaced him, till he came to the King, who commanded to do him dead by
the vilest of deaths. Accordingly, they slew him and after burned his
body, and he went to Hell after the foulest of plights; and right well
quoth one of him:—

 The Compassionate show no ruth to the tomb where his bones shall lie ✿
    And Munkar and eke Nakír[99] ne’er cease to abide thereby!

The King made Ma’aruf his Wazir of the Right and the times were pleasant
to them and their joys were untroubled. They abode thus five years till,
in the sixth year, the King died and Princess Dunya made Ma’aruf Sultan
in her father’s stead, but she gave him not the seal-ring. During this
time she had conceived by him and borne him a boy of passing loveliness,
excelling in beauty and perfection, who ceased not to be reared in the
laps of nurses till he reached the age of five, when his mother fell
sick of a deadly sickness and calling her husband to her, said to him,
“I am ill.” Quoth he, “Allah preserve thee, O dearling of my heart!” But
quoth she, “Haply I shall die and thou needest not that I commend to thy
care thy son: wherefore I charge thee but be careful of the ring, for
thine own sake and for the sake of this thy boy.” And he answered, “No
harm shall befal him whom Allah preserveth!” Then she pulled off the
ring and gave it to him, and on the morrow she was admitted to the mercy
of Allah the Most High,[100] whilst Ma’aruf abode in possession of the
kingship and applied himself to the business of governing. Now it
chanced that one day, as he shook the handkerchief[101] and the troops
withdrew to their places that he betook himself to the sitting-chamber,
where he sat till the day departed and the night advanced with murks
bedight. Then came in to him his cup-companions of the notables
according to their custom, and sat with him by way of solace and
diversion, till midnight, when they craved permission to withdraw. He
gave them leave and they retired to their houses; after which there came
in to him a slave-girl affected to the service of his bed, who spread
him the mattress and doffing his apparel, clad him in his sleeping-gown.
Then he lay down and she kneaded his feet, till sleep overpowered him;
whereupon she withdrew to her own chamber and slept. But suddenly he
felt something beside him in the bed and awaking started up in alarm and
cried, “I seek refuge with Allah from Satan the stoned!” Then he opened
his eyes and seeing by his side a woman foul of favour, said to her,
“Who art thou?” Said she, “Fear not, I am thy wife Fatimah al-Urrah.”
Whereupon he looked in her face and knew her by her loathly form and the
length of her dog-teeth: so he asked her, “Whence camest thou in to me
and who brought thee to this country?” “In what country art thou at this
present?” “In the city of Ikhtiyan al-Khutan. But thou, when didst thou
leave Cairo?” “But now.” “How can that be?” “Know,” said she, “that,
when I fell out with thee and Satan prompted me to do thee a damage, I
complained of thee to the magistrates, who sought for thee and the Kazis
enquired of thee, but found thee not. When two days were past,
repentance gat hold upon me and I knew that the fault was with me; but
penitence availed me not, and I abode for some days weeping for thy
loss, till what was in my hand failed and I was obliged to beg my bread.
So I fell to begging of all, from the courted rich to the contemned
poor, and since thou leftest me, I have eaten of the bitterness of
beggary and have been in the sorriest of conditions. Every night I sat
beweeping our separation and that which I suffered, since thy departure,
of humiliation and ignominy, of abjection and misery.” And she went on
to tell him what had befallen her, whilst he stared at her in amazement,
till she said, “Yesterday, I went about begging all day but none gave me
aught; and as often as I accosted any one and craved of him a crust of
bread, he reviled me and gave me naught. When night came, I went to bed
supperless, and hunger burned me and sore on me was that which I
suffered: and I sat weeping when, behold, one appeared to me and said, O
woman why weepest thou? Said I, erst I had a husband who used to provide
for me and fulfil my wishes; but he is lost to me and I know not whither
he went and have been in sore straits since he left me. Asked he, What
is thy husband’s name? and I answered, His name is Ma’aruf. Quoth he, I
ken him. Know that thy husband is now Sultan in a certain city, and if
thou wilt, I will carry thee to him. Cried I, I am under thy protection:
of thy bounty bring me to him! So he took me up and flew with me between
heaven and earth, till he brought me to this pavilion and said to
me:—Enter yonder chamber, and thou shalt see thy husband asleep on the
couch. Accordingly I entered and found thee in this state of lordship.
Indeed I had not thought thou wouldst forsake me, who am thy mate, and
praised be Allah who hath united thee with me!” Quoth Ma’aruf, “Did I
forsake thee or thou me? Thou complainedst of me from Kazi to Kazi and
endedst by denouncing me to the High Court and bringing down on me Abú
Tabak from the Citadel: so I fled in mine own despite.” And he went on
to tell her all that had befallen him and how he was become Sultan and
had married the King’s daughter and how his beloved Dunya had died,
leaving him a son who was then seven years old. She rejoined, “That
which happened was fore-ordained of Allah; but I repent me and I place
myself under thy protection beseeching thee not to abandon me, but
suffer me eat bread, with thee by way of an alms.” And she ceased not to
humble herself to him and to supplicate him till his heart relented
towards her and he said, “Repent from mischief and abide with me, and
naught shall betide thee save what shall pleasure thee: but, an thou
work any wickedness, I will slay thee nor fear any one. And fancy not
that thou canst complain of me to the High Court and that Abu Tabak will
come down on me from the Citadel; for I am become Sultan and the folk
dread me: but I fear none save Allah Almighty, because I have a
talismanic ring which when I rub, the Slave of the Signet appeareth to
me. His name is Abu al-Sa’adat, and whatsoever I demand of him he
bringeth to me. So, an thou desire to return to thine own country, I
will give thee what shall suffice thee all thy life long and will send
thee thither speedily; but, an thou desire to abide with me, I will
clear for thee a palace and furnish it with the choicest of silks and
appoint thee twenty slave-girls to serve thee and provide thee with
dainty dishes and sumptuous suits, and thou shalt be a Queen and live in
all delight till thou die or I die. What sayest thou of this?” “I wish
to abide with thee,” she answered and kissed his hand and vowed
repentance from frowardness. Accordingly he set apart a palace for her
sole use and gave her slave-girls and eunuchs, and she became a Queen.
The young Prince used to visit her as he visited his sire; but she hated
him for that he was not her son; and when the boy saw that she looked on
him with the eye of aversion and anger, he shunned her and took a
dislike to her. As for Ma’aruf, he occupied himself with the love of
fair handmaidens and bethought him not of his wife Fatimah the Dung, for
that she was grown a grizzled old fright, foul-favoured to the sight, a
bald-headed blight, loathlier than the snake speckled black and white;
the more that she had beyond measure evil entreated him aforetime; and
as saith the adage, “Ill-usage the root of desire disparts and sows hate
in the soil of hearts;” and God-gifted is he who saith:—

 Beware of losing hearts of men by thine injurious deed; ✿ For when
    Aversion takes his place none may dear Love restore:
 Hearts, when affection flies from them, are likest unto glass ✿ Which
    broken, cannot whole be made,—’tis breached for evermore.

And indeed Ma’aruf had not given her shelter by reason of any
praiseworthy quality in her, but he dealt with her thus generously only
of desire for the approval of Allah Almighty.—Here Dunyazad interrupted
her sister Shahrazad, saying, “How winsome are these words of thine
which win hold of the heart more forcibly than enchanters’ eyne; and how
beautiful are these wondrous books thou hast cited and the marvellous
and singular tales thou hast recited!” Quoth Shahrazad, “And where is
all this compared with what I shall relate to thee on the coming night,
an I live and the King deign spare my days?” So when morning morrowed
and the day brake in its sheen and shone, the King arose from his couch
with breast broadened and in high expectation for the rest of the tale
and saying, “By Allah, I will not slay her till I hear the last of her
story;” repaired to his Durbár while the Wazir, as was his wont,
presented himself at the Palace, shroud under arm. Shahriyar tarried
abroad all that day, bidding and forbidding between man and man; after
which he returned to his Harim and, according to his custom went in to
his wife Shahrazad.[102]


             Now when it was the Thousand and First Night,

Dunyazad said to her sister, “Do thou finish for us the History of
Ma’aruf!” She replied, “With love and goodly gree, an my lord deign
permit me recount it.” Quoth the King, “I permit thee; for that I am
fain of hearing it.” So she said:—It hath reached me, O auspicious King,
that Ma’aruf would have naught to do with his wife by way of conjugal
duty. Now when she saw that he held aloof from her bed and occupied
himself with other women, she hated him and jealousy gat the mastery of
her and Iblis prompted her to take the seal-ring from him and slay him
and make herself Queen in his stead. So she went forth one night from
her pavilion, intending for that in which was her husband King Ma’aruf;
and it chanced by decree of the Decreer and His written destiny, that
Ma’aruf lay that night with one of his concubines; a damsel endowed with
beauty and loveliness, symmetry and a stature all grace. And it was his
wont, of the excellence of his piety, that, when he was minded to have
to lie with a woman, he would doff the enchanted seal-ring from his
finger, in reverence to the Holy Names graven thereon, and lay it on the
pillow, nor would he don it again till he had purified himself by the
Ghusl-ablution. Moreover, when he had lain with a woman, he was used to
order her go forth from him before daybreak, of his fear for the
seal-ring; and when he went to the Hammam he locked the door of the
pavilion till his return, when he put on the ring, and after this, all
were free to enter according to custom. His wife Fatimah the Dung knew
of all this and went not forth from her place till she had certified
herself of the case. So she sallied out, when the night was dark,
purposing to go in to him, whilst he was drowned in sleep, and steal the
ring, unseen of him. Now it chanced at this time that the King’s son had
gone out, without light, to the Chapel of Ease for an occasion, and sat
down over the marble slab[103] of the jakes in the dark, leaving the
door open. Presently, he saw Fatimah come forth of her pavilion and make
stealthily for that of his father and said in himself, “What aileth this
witch to leave her lodging in the dead of the night and make for my
father’s pavilion? Needs must there be some reason for this:” so he went
out after her and followed in her steps unseen of her. Now he had a
short sword of watered steel, which he held so dear that he went not to
his father’s Divan, except he were girt therewith; and his father used
to laugh at him and exclaim, “Mahallah![104] This is a mighty fine sword
of thine, O my son! But thou hast not gone down with it to battle nor
cut off a head therewith.” Whereupon the boy would reply, “I will not
fail to cut off with it some head which deserveth[105] cutting.” And
Ma’aruf would laugh at his words. Now when treading in her track, he
drew the sword from its sheath and he followed her till she came to his
father’s pavilion and entered, whilst he stood and watched her from the
door. He saw her searching about and heard her say to herself, “Where
hath he laid the seal-ring?”; whereby he knew that she was looking for
the ring and he waited till she found it and said, “Here it is.” Then
she picked it up and turned to go out; but he hid behind the door. As
she came forth, she looked at the ring and turned it about in her grasp.
But when she was about to rub it, he raised his hand with the sword and
smote her on the neck; and she cried a single cry and fell down dead.
With this Ma’aruf awoke and seeing his wife strown on the ground, with
her blood flowing, and his son standing with the drawn sword in his
hand, said to him, “What is this, O my son?” He replied, “O my father,
how often hast thou said to me, Thou hast a mighty fine sword; but thou
hast not gone down with it to battle nor cut off a head. And I have
answered thee, saying, I will not fail to cut off with it a head which
deserveth cutting. And now, behold, I have therewith cut off for thee a
head well worth the cutting!” And he told him what had passed. Ma’aruf
sought for the Seal-ring, but found it not; so he searched the dead
woman’s body till he saw her hand closed upon it; whereupon he took it
from her grasp and said to the boy, “Thou art indeed my very son,
without doubt or dispute; Allah ease thee in this world and the next,
even as thou hast eased me of this vile woman! Her attempt led only to
her own destruction, and Allah-gifted is he who said:—

 When forwards Allah’s aid a man’s intent, ✿ His wish in every case shall
    find consent:
 But an that aid of Allah be refused, ✿ His first attempt shall do him
    damagement.

Then King Ma’aruf called aloud to some of his attendants, who came in
haste, and he told them what his wife Fatimah the Dung had done and bade
them to take her and lay her in a place till the morning. They did his
bidding, and next day he gave her in charge to a number of eunuchs, who
washed her and shrouded her and made her a tomb[106] and buried her.
Thus her coming from Cairo was but to her grave, and Allah-gifted is he
who said[107]:—

 We trod the steps appointed for us: and he whose steps are appointed
    must tread them.
 He whose death is decreed to take place in our land shall not die in any
    land but that.

And how excellent is the saying of the poet:—

 I wot not, whenas to a land I fare, ✿ Good luck pursuing, what my lot
    shall be.
 Whether the fortune I perforce pursue ✿ Or the misfortune which pursueth
    me.

After this, King Ma’aruf sent for the husbandman, whose guest he had
been, when he was a fugitive, and made him his Wazir of the Right and
his Chief Counsellor.[108] Then, learning that he had a daughter of
passing beauty and loveliness, of qualities nature-ennobled at birth and
exalted of worth, he took her to wife; and in due time he married his
son. So they abode awhile in all solace of life and its delight and
their days were serene and their joys untroubled, till there came to
them the Destroyer of delights and the Sunderer of societies, the
Depopulator of populous places and the Orphaner of sons and daughters.
And glory be to the Living who dieth not and in whose hand are the Keys
of the Seen and the Unseen!”

-----

Footnote 1:

  Arab. “Zarábín” (pl. of zarbún), lit. slaves’ shoes or sandals (see
  vol. iii. p. 336) the chaussure worn by Mamelukes. Here the word is
  used in its modern sense of stout shoes or walking boots.

Footnote 2:

  The popular word means goodness, etc., _e.g._ “A’mil al-Ma’arúf” =
  have the kindness; do me the favour.

Footnote 3:

  Dozy translates “’Urrah” = Une Mégère: Lane terms it a “vulgar word
  signifying a wicked, mischievous shrew.” But it is the fem. form of
  ’Urr = dung; not a bad name for a daughter of Billingsgate; and
  reminds us of the term “Dung-beardlings” applied by the amiable
  Hallgerda to her enemy’s sons. (The Story of Burnt Njal, ii. 47.)

Footnote 4:

  _i.e._ black like the book of her actions which would be shown to her
  on Doomsday. (See Night dccclxxi.) The ungodly hold it in the left
  hand, the right being bound behind their backs and they appear in ten
  foul forms, apes, swine, etc., for which see Sale sect. iv.

Footnote 5:

  The “Kunáfah” (vermicelli-cake) is a favourite dish of wheaten flour,
  worked somewhat finer than our vermicelli, fried with samn (butter
  melted and clarified) and sweetened with honey or sugar. See Lane M.
  E. chapt. v. Bees’ honey is opposed to various syrups which are used
  as sweeteners. See vol. v. 300.

Footnote 6:

  _i.e._ Will send us aid. The Shrew’s rejoinder is highly impious in
  Moslem opinion.

Footnote 7:

  Arab. Asal Katr; “a fine kind of black honey, treacle” says Lane; but
  it is afterwards called cane-honey (’Asal Kasab). I have never heard
  it applied to “the syrup which exudes from ripe dates, when hung up.”

Footnote 8:

  Arab. “’Aysh,” lit. = that on which man lives: “Khubz” being the more
  popular term. “Hubz and Joobn” is well known at Malta.

Footnote 9:

  Insinuating that he had better make peace with his wife by knowing her
  carnally. It suggests the story of the Irishman who brought over to
  the holy Catholic Church three several Protestant wives, but failed
  with the fourth on account of the decline of his “Convarter.”

Footnote 10:

  Arab. “Asal Kasab,” _i.e._ Sugar, possibly made from sorgho-stalks
  _Holcus sorghum_ of which I made syrup in Central Africa.

Footnote 11:

  For this unpleasant euphemy see vol. iv. 215.

Footnote 12:

  This is a true picture of the leniency with which women were treated
  in the Kazi’s court at Cairo; and the effect was simply deplorable. I
  have noted that matters have grown even worse since the English
  occupation, for history repeats herself; and the same was the case in
  Afghanistan and in Sind. We govern too much in these matters, which
  should be directed not changed, and too little in other things,
  especially in exacting respect for the conquerors from the conquered.

Footnote 13:

  Arab. “Báb al-’Áli” = the high gate or Sublime Porte; here used of the
  Chief Kazi’s court: the phrase is a descendant of the Coptic “Per-ao”
  whence “Pharaoh.”

Footnote 14:

  “Abú Tabak,” in Cairene slang, is an officer who arrests by order of
  the Kazi and means “Father of whipping” (= tabaka, a low word for
  beating, thrashing, whopping) because he does his duty with all
  possible violence _in terrorem_.

Footnote 15:

  Bab al-Nasr the Eastern or Desert Gate: see vol. vi. 234.

Footnote 16:

  This is a mosque outside the great gate built by Al-Malik al-’Ádil
  Tuman Bey in A.H. 906 (= 1501). The date is _not_ worthy of much
  remark for these names are often inserted by the scribe—for which see
  Terminal Essay.

Footnote 17:

  Arab. “’Ámir” lit. = one who inhabiteth, a peopler; here used in
  technical sense. As has been seen, ruins and impure places such as
  privies and Hammám-baths are the favourite homes of the Jinn. The
  fire-drake in the text was summoned by the Cobbler’s exclamation and
  even Marids at times do a kindly action.

Footnote 18:

  The style is modern Cairene jargon.

Footnote 19:

  Purses or gold pieces see vol. ix. 313.

Footnote 20:

  _i.e._ I am a Cairene.

Footnote 21:

  Arab. “Darb al-Ahmar,” a street still existing near to and outside the
  noble Bab Zuwaylah, for which see vol. i. 269.

Footnote 22:

  Arab. “’Attár,” perfume-seller and druggist; the word is connected
  with our “Ottar” (’Atr).

Footnote 23:

  Arab. “Mudarris” lit. = one who gives lessons or lectures (dars) and
  pop. applied to a professor in a collegiate mosque like Al-Azhar of
  Cairo.

Footnote 24:

  This thoroughly dramatic scene is told with a charming naïveté. No
  wonder that The Nights has been made the basis of a national theatre
  amongst the Turks.

Footnote 25:

  Arab. “Taysh” lit. = vertigo, swimming of head.

Footnote 26:

  Here Trébutien (iii. 265) reads “la ville de Khaïtan (so the Mac.
  Edit. iv. 708) capital du royaume de Sohatan.” Ikhtiyán Lane suggests
  to be fictitious: Khatan is a district of Tartary east of Káshgar, so
  called by Sádik al-Isfaháni p. 24.

Footnote 27:

  This is a true picture of the tact and _savoir faire_ of the Cairenes.
  It was a study to see how, under the late Khedive they managed to take
  precedence of Europeans who found themselves in the background before
  they knew it. For instance, every Bey, whose degree is that of a
  Colonel was made an “Excellency” and ranked accordingly at Court
  whilst his father, some poor Fellah, was ploughing the ground. Tanfík
  Pasha began his ill-omened rule by always placing natives close to him
  in the place of honour, addressing them first and otherwise snubbing
  Europeans who, when English, were often too obtuse to notice the petty
  insults lavished upon them.

Footnote 28:

  Arab. “Kathír” (pron. Katir) = much: here used in its slang sense, “no
  end.”

Footnote 29:

  _i.e._ “May the Lord soon make thee able to repay me; but meanwhile I
  give it to thee for thy own free use.”

Footnote 30:

  Punning upon his name. Much might be written upon the significance of
  names as ominous of good and evil; but the subject is far too
  extensive for a footnote.

Footnote 31:

  Lane translates “Ánisa-kum” by “he hath delighted you by his arrival”;
  Mr. Payne “I commend him to you.”

Footnote 32:

  Arab. “Fatúrát,” = light food for the early breakfast of which the
  “Fatírah” cake was a favourite item. See vol. i. 300.

Footnote 33:

  A dark red dye (Lane).

Footnote 34:

  Arab. “Jadíd,” see vol. viii. 121.

Footnote 35:

  Both the texts read thus, but the reading has little sense. Ma’aruf
  probably would say, “I fear that my loads will be long coming.”

Footnote 36:

  One of the many formulas of polite refusal.

Footnote 37:

  Each bazar, in a large city like Damascus, has its tall and heavy
  wooden doors which are locked every evening and opened in the morning
  by the Ghafir or guard. The “silver key,” however, always lets one in.

Footnote 38:

  Arab. “Wa lá Kabbata hámiyah,” a Cairene vulgarism meaning, “There
  came nothing to profit him nor to rid the people of him.”

Footnote 39:

  Arab. “Kammir,” _i.e._ brown it before the fire, toast it.

Footnote 40:

  It is insinuated that he had lied till he himself believed the lie to
  be truth—not an uncommon process, I may remark.

Footnote 41:

  Arab. “Rijál” = the Men, equivalent to the Walis, Saints or Santons;
  with perhaps an allusion to the Rijál al-Ghayb, the Invisible Controls
  concerning whom I have quoted Herklots in vol. ii. 211.

Footnote 42:

  A saying attributed to Al-Hariri (Lane). It is good enough to be his:
  the Persians say, “Cut not down the tree thou plantedst,” and the idea
  is universal throughout the East.

Footnote 43:

  A quotation from Al-Hariri (Ass. of the Badawin). Ash’ab (ob. A.H.
  54), a Medinite servant of Caliph Osman, was proverbial for greed and
  sanguine, Micawber-like expectation of “windfalls.” The Scholiast
  Al-Sharíshi (of Xeres) describes him in Theophrastic style. He never
  saw a man put hand to pocket without expecting a present, or a funeral
  go by without hoping for a legacy, or a bridal procession without
  preparing his own house, hoping they might bring the bride to him by
  mistake. * * * When asked if he knew aught greedier than himself he
  said “Yes; a sheep I once kept upon my terrace-roof seeing a rainbow
  mistook it for a rope of hay and jumping to seize it broke its neck!”
  Hence “Ash’ab’s sheep” became a by-word (Preston tells the tale in
  full, p. 288).

Footnote 44:

  _i.e._ “Show a miser money and hold him back, if you can.”

Footnote 45:

  He wants £40,000 to begin with.

Footnote 46:

  _i.e._ Arab. “Sabíhat al-’urs” the morning after the wedding. See vol.
  i. 269.

Footnote 47:

  Another sign of modern composition as in Kamar al-Zaman II.

Footnote 48:

  Arab. “Al-Jink” (from Turk.) are boys and youths mostly Jews,
  Armenians, Greeks and Turks, who dress in woman’s dress with long hair
  braided. Lane (M. E. chapts. xix. and xxv.) gives same account of the
  customs of the “Gink” (as the Egyptians call them) but cannot enter
  into details concerning these catamites. Respectable Moslems often
  employ them to dance at festivals in preference to the Ghawázi-women,
  a freak of Mohammedan decorum. When they grow old they often preserve
  their costume, and a glance at them makes a European’s blood run cold.

Footnote 49:

  Lane translates this, “May Allah and the Rijal retaliate upon thy
  temple!”

Footnote 50:

  Arab. “Yá aba ’l-lithámayn,” addressed to his member. Lathm the root
  means kissing or breaking; so he would say, “O thou who canst take her
  maidenhead whilst my tongue does away with the virginity of her
  mouth.” “He breached the citadel” (which is usually square) “in its
  four corners” signifying that he utterly broke it down.

Footnote 51:

  A mystery to the Author of Proverbs (xxx. 18–19),

           There be three things which are too wondrous for me,
           The way of an eagle in the air;
           The way of a snake upon a rock;
           And the way of a man with a maid.

Footnote 52:

  Several women have described the pain to me as much resembling the
  drawing of a tooth.

Footnote 53:

  As we should say, “play fast and loose.”

Footnote 54:

  Arab. “Náhí-ka” lit. = thy prohibition but idiomatically used = let it
  suffice thee!

Footnote 55:

  A character-sketch like that of Princess Dunya makes ample amends for
  a book full of abuse of women. And yet the superficial say that none
  of the characters have much personal individuality.

Footnote 56:

  This is indeed one of the touches of nature which makes all the world
  kin.

Footnote 57:

  As we are in Tartary “Arabs” here means plundering nomades, like the
  Persian “Iliyát” and other shepherd races.

Footnote 58:

  The very cruelty of love which hates nothing so much as a rejected
  lover. The Princess, be it noted, is not supposed to be merely
  romancing, but speaking with the second sight, the clairvoyance, of
  perfect affection. Men seem to know very little upon this subject,
  though every one has at times been more or less startled by the
  abnormal introvision and divination of things hidden which are the
  property and prerogative of perfect love.

Footnote 59:

  The name of the Princess meaning “The World,” not unusual amongst
  Moslem women.

Footnote 60:

  Another pun upon his name “Ma’aruf.”

Footnote 61:

  Arab. “Naká,” the mound of pure sand which delights the eye of the
  Badawi leaving a town. See vol. i. 217, for the lines and explanation
  in Night cmlxiv. vol. ix. p. 250.

Footnote 62:

  Euphemistic: “I will soon fetch thee food.” To say this bluntly might
  have brought misfortune.

Footnote 63:

  Arab. “Kafr” = a village in Egypt and Syria _e.g._ Capernaum (Kafr
  Nahum).

Footnote 64:

  He has all the bonhomie of the Cairene and will do a kindness whenever
  he can.

Footnote 65:

  _i.e._ the Father of Prosperities: pron. Aboosa’ádát; as in the Tale
  of Hasan of Bassorah.

Footnote 66:

  Koran lxxxix. “The Daybreak” which also mentions Thamud and Pharaoh.

Footnote 67:

  In Egypt the cheapest and poorest of food, never seen at a hotel table
  d’hôte.

Footnote 68:

  The beautiful girls who guard ensorcelled hoards: See vol. vi. 109.

Footnote 69:

  Arab. “Asákir,” the ornaments of litters, which are either plain balls
  of metal or tapering cones based on crescents or on balls and
  crescents. See in Lane (M. E. chapt. xxiv.) the sketch of the Mahmal.

Footnote 70:

  Arab. “Amm” = father’s brother, courteously used for “father-in-law,”
  which suggests having slept with his daughter, and which is indecent
  in writing. Thus by a pleasant fiction the husband represents himself
  as having married his first cousin.

Footnote 71:

  _i.e._ a calamity to the enemy: see vol. ii. 87 and passim.

Footnote 72:

  Both texts read “Asad” (lion) and Lane accepts it: there is no reason
  to change it for “Hásid” (Envier), the Lion being the Sultan of the
  Beasts and the most majestic.

Footnote 73:

  The Cairene knew his fellow Cairene and was not to be taken in by him.

Footnote 74:

  Arab “Hizám”: Lane reads “Khizám” = a nose-ring for which see appendix
  to Lane’s M. E. The untrained European eye dislikes these decorations
  and there is certainly no beauty in the hoops which Hindu women insert
  through the nostrils, camel-fashion, as if to receive the cord-acting
  bridle; But a drop-pearl hanging to the septum is at least as pretty
  as the heavy pendants by which some European women lengthen their
  ears.

Footnote 75:

  Arab. “Shamtá,” one of the many names of wine, the “speckled” alluding
  to the bubbles which dance upon the freshly filled cup.

Footnote 76:

  _i.e._ in the cask. These “merry quips” strongly suggest the dismal
  toasts of our not remote ancestors.

Footnote 77:

  Arab. “A’láj” plur. of “’Ilj” and rendered by Lane “the stout foreign
  infidels.” The next line alludes to the cupbearer who was generally a
  slave and a non-Moslem.

Footnote 78:

  As if it were a bride. See vol. vii. 198. The stars of Jauzá (Gemini)
  are the cupbearer’s eyes.

Footnote 79:

  _i.e._ light-coloured wine.

Footnote 80:

  The usual homage to youth and beauty.

Footnote 81:

  Alluding to the cup.

Footnote 82:

  Here Abu Nowas whose name always ushers in some abomination alluded to
  the “Ghulámiyah” or girl dressed like boy to act cupbearer.
  Civilisation has everywhere the same devices and the Bordels of London
  and Paris do not ignore the “she-boy,” who often opens the door.

Footnote 83:

  Abdallah ibn al-Mu’tazz, son of Al-Mu’tazz bi ’llah, the 13th
  Abbaside, and great-great-grandson of Harun al-Rashid. He was one of
  the most renowned poets of the third century (A.H.) and died A.D. 908,
  strangled by the partisans of his nephew Al-Muktadir bi ’llah, 18th
  Abbaside.

Footnote 84:

  Jazírat ibn Omar, an island and town on the Tigris north of Mosul.
  “Some versions of the poem, from which these verses are quoted,
  substitute El-Mutireh, a village near Samara (a town on the Tigris, 60
  miles north of Baghdad), for El-Jezireh, _i.e._ Jeziret ibn Omar.”
  (Payne.)

Footnote 85:

  The Convent of Abdun on the east bank of the Tigris opposite the
  Jezirah was so called from a statesman who caused it to be built. For
  a variant of these lines see Ibn Khallikan, vol. ii. 42; here we miss
  “the shady groves of Al-Matírah.”

Footnote 86:

  Arab. “Ghurrah” the white blaze on a horse’s brow. In Ibn Khallikan
  the bird is the lark.

Footnote 87:

  Arab. “Táy’i” = thirsty used with Jáy’i = hungry.

Footnote 88:

  Lit. “Kohl’d with Ghunj” for which we have no better word than
  “coquetry.” But see vol. v. 80. It corresponds with the Latin crissare
  for women and cevere for men.

Footnote 89:

  _i.e._ gold-coloured wine, as the Vino d’Oro.

Footnote 90:

  Compare the charming song of Abu Miján translated from the German of
  Dr. Weil in Bohn’s Edit. of Ockley (p. 149),

          When the Death-angel cometh mine eyes to close,
            Dig my grave ’mid the vines on the hill’s fair side;
          For though deep in earth may my bones repose,
            The juice of the grape shall their food provide.
          Ah, bury me not in a barren land,
            Or Death will appear to me dread and drear!
          While fearless I’ll wait what he hath in hand
            An the scent of the vineyard my spirit cheer.

  The glorious old drinker!

Footnote 91:

  Arab. “Rub’a al-Kharáb” in Ibn al-Wardi Central Africa south of the
  Nile-sources, one of the richest regions in the world. Here it prob.
  alludes to the Rub’a al-Khálí or Great Arabian Desert: for which see
  Night dclxxvi. In rhetoric it is opposed to the “Rub’a Maskún,” or
  populated fourth of the world, the rest being held to be ocean.

Footnote 92:

  This is the noble resignation of the Moslem. What a dialogue there
  would have been in a European book between man and devil!

Footnote 93:

  Arab. “Al-’iddah,” the period of four months and ten days which must
  elapse before she could legally marry again. But this was a palpable
  wile: she was not sure of her husband’s death and he had not divorced
  her; so that although a “grass widow,” a “Strohwitwe” as the Germans
  say, she could not wed again either with or without interval.

Footnote 94:

  Here the silence is of cowardice and the passage is a fling at the
  “time-serving” of the Olema, a favourite theme, like “banging the
  bishops” amongst certain Westerns.

Footnote 95:

  Arab. “Umm al-raas,” the poll, crown of the head, here the place where
  a calamity coming down from heaven would first alight.

Footnote 96:

  From Al-Hariri (Lane): the lines are excellent.

Footnote 97:

  When the charming Princess is so ready at the _voie de faits_, the
  reader will understand how common is such energetic action among women
  of lower degree. The “fair sex” in Egypt has a horrible way of
  murdering men, especially husbands, by tying them down and tearing out
  the testicles. See Lane M. E. chapt. xiii.

Footnote 98:

  Arab. “Sijn al-Ghazab,” the dungeons appropriated to the worst of
  criminals where they suffer penalties far worse than hanging or
  guillotining.

Footnote 99:

  According to some modern Moslems Munkar and Nakir visit the graves of
  Infidels (non-Moslems) and Bashshir and Mubashshir (“Givers of glad
  tidings”) those of Mohammedans. Petis de la Croix (Les Mille et un
  Jours vol. iii. 258) speaks of the “Zoubanya,” black angels who
  torture the damned under their chief Dabilah.

Footnote 100:

  Very simple and pathetic is this short sketch of the noble-minded
  Princess’s death.

Footnote 101:

  In sign of dismissal (vol. iv. 62) I have noted that “throwing the
  kerchief” is not an Eastern practice: the idea probably arose from the
  Oriental practice of sending presents in richly embroidered napkins
  and kerchiefs.

Footnote 102:

  Curious to say both Lane and Payne omit this passage which appears in
  both texts (Mac. and Bul.). The object is evidently to prepare the
  reader for the ending by reverting to the beginning of the tale; and
  its prolixity has its effect as in the old Romances of Chivalry from
  Amadis of Ghaul to the Seven Champions of Christendom. If it provoke
  impatience, it also heightens expectation; “it is like the long
  elm-avenues of our forefathers; we wish ourselves at the end; but we
  know that at the end there is something great.”

Footnote 103:

  Arab. “alà malákay bayti ’l-ráhah;” on the two slabs at whose union
  are the round hole and longitudinal slit. See vol. i. 221.

Footnote 104:

  Here the exclamation wards off the Evil Eye from the Sword and the
  wearer: Mr. Payne notes, “The old English exclamation ‘Cock’s ’ill!’
  (_i.e._ God’s will, thus corrupted for the purpose of evading the
  statute of 3 Jac. i. against profane swearing) exactly corresponds to
  the Arabic”—with a difference, I add.

Footnote 105:

  Arab. “Mustahakk” = deserving (Lane) or worth (Payne) the cutting.

Footnote 106:

  Arab. “Mashhad” the same as “Sháhid” = the upright stones at the head
  and foot of the grave. Lane mistranslates, “Made for her a funeral
  procession.”

Footnote 107:

  These lines have occurred before. I quote Lane.

Footnote 108:

  There is nothing strange in such sudden elevations amongst Moslems and
  even in Europe we still see them occasionally. The family in the East,
  however humble, is a model and miniature of the state, and learning is
  not always necessary to wisdom.




                              Conclusion.


Now, during this time, Shahrazad had borne the King three boy children:
so, when she had made an end of the story of Ma’aruf, she rose to her
feet and kissing ground before him, said, “O King of the time and unique
one[109] of the age and the tide, I am thine handmaid and these thousand
nights and a night have I entertained thee with stories of folk gone
before and admonitory instances of the men of yore. May I then make bold
to crave a boon of Thy Highness?” He replied, “Ask, O Shahrazad, and it
shall be granted to thee.[110]” Whereupon she cried out to the nurses
and the eunuchs, saying, “Bring me my children.” So they brought them to
her in haste, and they were three boy children, one walking, one
crawling and one sucking. She took them and setting them before the
King, again kissed the ground and said, “O King of the age, these are
thy children and I crave that thou release me from the doom of death, as
a dole to these infants; for, an thou kill me, they will become
motherless and will find none among women to rear them as they should be
reared.” When the King heard this, he wept and straining the boys to his
bosom, said, “By Allah, O Shahrazad, I pardoned thee before the coming
of these children, for that I found thee chaste, pure, ingenuous and
pious! Allah bless thee and thy father and thy mother and thy root and
thy branch! I take the Almighty to witness against me that I exempt thee
from aught that can harm thee.” So she kissed his hands and feet and
rejoiced with exceeding joy, saying, “The Lord make thy life long and
increase thee in dignity and majesty[111]!”; presently adding, “Thou
marvelledst at that which befel thee on the part of women; yet there
betided the Kings of the Chosroës before thee greater mishaps and more
grievous than that which hath befallen thee, and indeed I have set forth
unto thee that which happened to Caliphs and Kings and others with their
women, but the relation is longsome and hearkening groweth tedious, and
in this is all-sufficient warning for the man of wits and admonishment
for the wise.” Then she ceased to speak, and when King Shahriyar heard
her speech and profited by that which she said, he summoned up his
reasoning powers and cleansed his heart and caused his understanding
revert and turned to Allah Almighty and said to himself, “Since there
befel the Kings of the Chosroës more than that which hath befallen me,
never, whilst I live, shall I cease to blame myself for the past. As for
this Shahrazad, her like is not found in the lands; so praise be to Him
who appointed her a means for delivering His creatures from oppression
and slaughter!” Then he arose from his séance and kissed her head,
whereat she rejoiced, she and her sister Dunyazad, with exceeding joy.
When the morning morrowed, the King went forth and sitting down on the
throne of the Kingship, summoned the Lords of his land; whereupon the
Chamberlains and Nabobs and Captains of the host went in to him and
kissed ground before him. He distinguished the Wazir, Shahrazad’s sire,
with special favour and bestowed on him a costly and splendid robe of
honour and entreated him with the utmost kindness, and said to him,
“Allah protect thee for that thou gavest me to wife thy noble daughter,
who hath been the means of my repentance from slaying the daughters of
folk. Indeed I have found her pure and pious, chaste and ingenuous, and
Allah hath vouchsafed me by her three boy children; wherefore praised be
He for his passing favour.” Then he bestowed robes of honour upon his
Wazirs, and Emirs and Chief Officers and he set forth to them briefly
that which had betided him with Shahrazad and how he had turned from his
former ways and repented him of what he had done and purposed to take
the Wazir’s daughter, Shahrazad, to wife and let draw up the
marriage-contract with her. When those who were present heard this, they
kissed the ground before him and blessed him and his betrothed[112]
Shahrazad, and the Wazir thanked her. Then Shahriyar made an end of his
sitting in all weal, whereupon the folk dispersed to their
dwelling-places and the news was bruited abroad that the King purposed
to marry the Wazir’s daughter, Shahrazad. Then he proceeded to make
ready the wedding gear, and presently he sent after his brother, King
Shah Zaman, who came, and King Shahriyar went forth to meet him with the
troops. Furthermore, they decorated the city after the goodliest fashion
and diffused scents from censers and burnt aloes-wood and other perfumes
in all the markets and thoroughfares and rubbed themselves with
saffron,[113] what while the drums beat and the flutes and pipes sounded
and mimes and mountebanks played and plied their arts and the King
lavished on them gifts and largesse; and in very deed it was a notable
day. When they came to the palace, King Shahriyar commanded to spread
the tables with beasts roasted whole and sweetmeats and all manner of
viands and bade the crier cry to the folk that they should come up to
the Divan and eat and drink and that this should be a means of
reconciliation between him and them. So, high and low, great and small
came up unto him and they abode on that wise, eating and drinking, seven
days with their nights. Then the King shut himself up with his brother
and related to him that which had betided him with the Wazir’s daughter,
Shahrazad, during the past three years and told him what he had heard
from her of proverbs and parables, chronicles and pleasantries, quips
and jests, stories and anecdotes, dialogues and histories and elegies
and other verses; whereat King Shah Zaman marvelled with the uttermost
marvel and said, “Fain would I take her younger sister to wife, so we
may be two brothers-german to two sisters-german, and they on like wise
be sisters to us; for that the calamity which befel me was the cause of
our discovering that which befel thee and all this time of three years
past I have taken no delight in woman, save that I lie each night with a
damsel of my kingdom, and every morning I do her to death; but now I
desire to marry thy wife’s sister Dunyazad.” When King Shahriyar heard
his brother’s words, he rejoiced with joy exceeding and arising
forthright, went in to his wife Shahrazad and acquainted her with that
which his brother purposed, namely that he sought her sister Dunyazad in
wedlock; whereupon she answered, “O King of the age, we seek of him one
condition, to wit, that he take up his abode with us, for that I cannot
brook to be parted from my sister an hour, because we were brought up
together and may not endure separation each from other.[114] If he
accept this pact, she is his handmaid.” King Shahriyar returned to his
brother and acquainted him with that which Shahrazad had said; and he
replied, “Indeed, this is what was in my mind, for that I desire
nevermore to be parted from thee one hour. As for the kingdom, Allah the
Most High shall send to it whomso He chooseth, for that I have no longer
a desire for the kingship.” When King Shahriyar heard his brother’s
words, he rejoiced exceedingly and said, “Verily, this is what I wished,
O my brother. So Alhamdolillah—Praised be Allah—who hath brought about
union between us.” Then he sent after the Kazis and Olema, Captains and
Notables, and they married the two brothers to the two sisters. The
contracts were written out and the two Kings bestowed robes of honour of
silk and satin on those who were present, whilst the city was decorated
and the rejoicings were renewed. The King commanded each Emir and Wazir
and Chamberlain and Nabob to decorate his palace and the folk of the
city were gladdened by the presage of happiness and contentment. King
Shahriyar also bade slaughter sheep and set up kitchens and made
bride-feasts and fed all comers, high and low; and he gave alms to the
poor and needy and extended his bounty to great and small. Then the
eunuchs went forth, that they might perfume the Hammam for the brides;
so they scented it with rose-water and willow-flower-water and pods of
musk and fumigated it with Kákilí[115] eagle-wood and ambergris. Then
Shahrazad entered, she and her sister Dunyazad, and they cleansed their
heads and clipped their hair. When they came forth of the Hammam-bath,
they donned raiment and ornaments; such as men were wont prepare for the
Kings of the Chosroës; and among Shahrazad’s apparel was a dress purfled
with red gold and wrought with counterfeit presentments of birds and
beasts. And the two sisters encircled their necks with necklaces of
jewels of price, in the like whereof Iskander[116] rejoiced not, for
therein were great jewels such as amazed the wit and dazzled the eye;
and the imagination was bewildered at their charms, for indeed each of
them was brighter than the sun and the moon. Before them they lighted
brilliant flambeaux of wax in candelabra of gold, but their faces
outshone the flambeaux, for that they had eyes sharper than unsheathed
swords and the lashes of their eyelids bewitched all hearts. Their
cheeks were rosy red and their necks and shapes gracefully swayed and
their eyes wantoned like the gazelle’s; and the slave-girls came to meet
them with instruments of music. Then the two Kings entered the
Hammam-bath, and when they came forth, they sat down on a couch set with
pearls and gems, whereupon the two sisters came up to them and stood
between their hands, as they were moons, bending and leaning from side
to side in their beauty and loveliness. Presently they brought forward
Shahrazad and displayed her, for the first dress, in a red suit;
whereupon King Shahriyar rose to look upon her and the wits of all
present, men and women, were bewitched for that she was even as saith of
her one of her describers[117]:—

 A sun on wand in knoll of sand she showed, ✿ Clad in her cramoisy-hued
    chemisette:
 Of her lips’ honey-dew she gave me drink ✿ And with her rosy cheeks
    quencht fire she set.

Then they attired Dunyazad in a dress of blue brocade and she became as
she were the full moon when it shineth forth. So they displayed her in
this, for the first dress, before King Shah Zaman, who rejoiced in her
and well-nigh swooned away for love-longing and amorous desire; yea, he
was distraught with passion for her, whenas he saw her, because she was
as saith of her one of her describers in these couplets[118]:-

 She comes apparelled in an azure vest ✿ Ultramarine as skies are deckt
    and dight:
 I view’d th’ unparallel’d sight, which showed my eyes ✿ A Summer-moon
    upon a Winter-night.

Then they returned to Shahrazad and displayed her in the second dress, a
suit of surpassing goodliness, and veiled her face with her hair like a
chin-veil.[119] Moreover, they let down her side-locks and she was even
as saith of her one of her describers in these couplets:—

 O hail to him whose locks his cheeks o’ershade, ✿ Who slew my life by
    cruel hard despight:
 Said I, “Hast veiled the Morn in Night?” He said, ✿ “Nay I but veil Moon
    in hue of Night.”

Then they displayed Dunyazad in a second and a third and a fourth dress
and she paced forward like the rising sun, and swayed to and fro in the
insolence of beauty; and she was even as saith the poet of her in these
couplets[120]:—

 The sun of beauty she to all appears ✿ And, lovely coy she mocks all
    loveliness:
 And when he fronts her favour and her smile ✿ A-morn, the sun of day in
    clouds must dress.

Then they displayed Shahrazad in the third dress and the fourth and the
fifth and she became as she were a Bán-branch snell or a thirsting
gazelle, lovely of face and perfect in attributes of grace, even as
saith of her one in these couplets[121]:—

 She comes like fullest moon on happy night, ✿ Taper of waist with shape
    of magic might:
 She hath an eye whose glances quell mankind, ✿ And ruby on her cheeks
    reflects his light:
 Enveils her hips the blackness of her hair; ✿ Beware of curls that bite
    with viper-bite!
 Her sides are silken-soft, that while the heart ✿ Mere rock behind that
    surface ’scapes our sight:
 From the fringed curtains of her eyne she shoots ✿ Shafts that at
    furthest range on mark alight.

Then they returned to Dunyazad and displayed her in the fifth dress and
in the sixth, which was green, when she surpassed with her loveliness
the fair of the four quarters of the world and outvied, with the
brightness of her countenance, the full moon at rising tide; for she was
even as saith of her the poet in these couplets[122]:—

 A damsel ’twas the tirer’s art had decked with snare and sleight, ✿ And
    robed with rays as though the sun from her had borrowed light:
 She came before us wondrous clad in chemisette of green, ✿ As veilèd by
    his leafy screen Pomegranate hides from sight:
 And when he said, “How callest thou the fashion of thy dress?” ✿ She
    answered us in pleasant way with double meaning dight,
 “We call this garment _crève-cœur_; and rightly is it hight, ✿ For many
    a heart wi’ this we brake and harried many a sprite.”

Then they displayed Shahrazad in the sixth and seventh dresses and clad
her in youth’s clothing, whereupon she came forward swaying from side to
side and coquettishly moving and indeed she ravished wits and hearts and
ensorcelled all eyes with her glances. She shook her sides and swayed
her haunches, then put her hair on sword-hilt and went up to King
Shahriyar, who embraced her as hospitable host embraceth guest, and
threatened her in her ear with the taking of the sword; and she was even
as saith of her the poet in these words:—

 Were not the Murk[123] of gender male, ✿ Than feminines surpassing fair,
 Tirewomen they had grudged the bride, ✿ Who made her beard and whiskers
    wear!

Thus also they did with her sister Dunyazad, and when they had made an
end of the display the King bestowed robes of honour on all who were
present and sent the brides to their own apartments. Then Shahrazad went
in to King Shahriyar and Dunyazad to King Shah Zaman and each of them
solaced himself with the company of his beloved consort and the hearts
of the folk were comforted. When morning morrowed, the Wazir came in to
the two Kings and kissed ground before them; wherefore they thanked him
and were large of bounty to him. Presently they went forth and sat down
upon couches of Kingship, whilst all the Wazirs and Emirs and Grandees
and Lords of the land presented themselves and kissed ground. King
Shahriyar ordered them dresses of honour and largesse and they prayed
for the permanence and prosperity of the King and his brother. Then the
two Sovrans appointed their sire-in-law the Wazir to be Viceroy in
Samarcand and assigned him five of the Chief Emirs to accompany him,
charging them attend him and do him service. The Minister kissed the
ground and prayed that they might be vouchsafed length of life: then he
went in to his daughters, whilst the Eunuchs and Ushers walked before
him, and saluted them and farewelled them. They kissed his hands and
gave him joy of the Kingship and bestowed on him immense treasures;
after which he took leave of them and setting out, fared days and
nights, till he came near Samarcand, where the townspeople met him at a
distance of three marches and rejoiced in him with exceeding joy. So he
entered the city and they decorated the houses and it was a notable day.
He sat down on the throne of his kingship and the Wazirs did him homage
and the Grandees and Emirs of Samarcand and all prayed that he might be
vouchsafed justice and victory and length of continuance. So he bestowed
on them robes of honour and entreated them with distinction and they
made him Sultan over them. As soon as his father-in-law had departed for
Samarcand, King Shahriyah summoned the Grandees of his realm and made
them a stupendous banquet of all manner of delicious meats and exquisite
sweetmeats. He also bestowed on them robes of honour and guerdoned them
and divided the kingdoms between himself and his brother in their
presence, whereat the folk rejoiced. Then the two Kings abode, each
ruling a day in turn, and they were ever in harmony each with other
while on similar wise their wives continued in the love of Allah
Almighty and in thanksgiving to Him; and the peoples and the provinces
were at peace and the preachers prayed for them from the pulpits, and
their report was bruited abroad and the travellers bore tidings of them
to all lands. In due time King Shahriyah summoned chroniclers and
copyists and bade them write all that had betided him with his wife,
first and last; so they wrote this and named it “=The Stories of the
Thousand Nights and A Night=.” The book came to thirty volumes and these
the King laid up in his treasury. And the two brothers abode with their
wives in all pleasance and solace of life and its delights, for that
indeed Allah the Most High had changed their annoy into joy; and on this
wise they continued till there took them the Destroyer of delights and
the Severer of societies, the Desolator of dwelling-places and Garnerer
of grave-yards, and they were translated to the ruth of Almighty Allah;
their houses fell waste and their palaces lay in ruins[124] and the
Kings inherited their riches. Then there reigned after them a wise
ruler, who was just, keen-witted and accomplished and loved tales and
legends, especially those which chronicle the doings of Sovrans and
Sultans, and he found in the treasury these marvellous stories and
wondrous histories, contained in the thirty volumes aforesaid. So he
read in them a first book and a second and a third and so on to the last
of them, and each book astounded and delighted him more than that which
preceded it, till he came to the end of them. Then he admired whatso he
had read therein of description and discourse and rare traits and
anecdotes and moral instances and reminiscences and bade the folk copy
them and dispread them over all lands and climes; wherefore their report
was bruited abroad and the people named them “=The marvels and wonders
of the Thousand Nights and A Night=.” This is all that hath come down to
us of the origin of this book, and Allah is All-knowing.[125] So Glory
be to Him whom the shifts of Time waste not away, nor doth aught of
chance or change affect His sway: whom one case diverteth not from other
case and Who is sole in the attributes of perfect grace. And prayer and
peace be upon the Lord’s Pontiff and Chosen One among His creatures, our
lord MOHAMMED the Prince of mankind through whom we supplicate Him for a
goodly and a godly


                                 FINIS.

-----

Footnote 109:

  Arab. “Fárid” which may also mean “union-pearl.”

Footnote 110:

  Trébutien (iii. 497) cannot deny himself the pleasure of a French
  touch making the King reply, “C’est assez; qu’on lui coupe la tête,
  car ces dernières histoires surtout m’ont causé un ennui mortel.” This
  reading is found in some of the MSS.

Footnote 111:

  After this I borrow from the Bresl. Edit. inserting passages from the
  Mac. Edit.

Footnote 112:

  _i.e._ whom he intended to marry with regal ceremony.

Footnote 113:

  The use of coloured powders in sign of holiday-making is not obselete
  in India. See Herklots for the use of “Huldee” (Haldí) or
  turmeric-powder, pp. 64–65.

Footnote 114:

  Many Moslem families insist upon this before giving their girls in
  marriage, and the practice is still popular amongst many Mediterranean
  peoples.

Footnote 115:

  _i.e._ Sumatran.

Footnote 116:

  _i.e._ Alexander, according to the Arabs; see vol. v. 252.

Footnote 117:

  These lines are in vol i. 217.

Footnote 118:

  I repeat the lines from vol. i. 218.

Footnote 119:

  All these coquetries require as much inventiveness as a cotillon; the
  text alludes to fastening the bride’s tresses across her mouth giving
  her the semblance of beard and mustachios.

Footnote 120:

  Repeated from vol. i. 218.

Footnote 121:

  Repeated from vol. i. 218.

Footnote 122:

  See vol. i. 219.

Footnote 123:

  Arab. Sawád = the blackness of the hair.

Footnote 124:

  Because Easterns build, but never repair.

Footnote 125:

  _i.e._ God only knows if it be true or not.


[Illustration: ‏وٱلسلام‎]




                            Terminal Essay.


                              PRELIMINARY.

The reader who has reached this terminal stage will hardly require my
assurance that he has seen the mediæval Arab at his best and, perhaps,
at his worst. In glancing over the myriad pictures of this panorama,
those who can discern the soul of goodness in things evil will note the
true nobility of the Moslem’s mind in the Moyen Age, and the cleanliness
of his life from cradle to grave. As a child he is devoted to his
parents, fond of his comrades and respectful to his “pastors and
masters,” even schoolmasters. As a lad he prepares for manhood with a
will and this training occupies him throughout youth-tide: he is a
gentleman in manners without awkwardness, vulgar astonishment or
mauvaise-honte. As a man he is high-spirited and energetic, always ready
to fight for his Sultan, his country and, especially, his Faith:
courteous and affable, rarely failing in temperance of mind and
self-respect, self-control and self-command: hospitable to the stranger,
attached to his fellow-citizens, submissive to superiors and kindly to
inferiors—if such classes exist: Eastern despotisms have arrived nearer
the idea of equality and fraternity than any republic yet invented. As a
friend he proves a model to the Damons and Pythiases: as a lover an
exemplar to Don Quijote without the noble old Caballero’s touch of
eccentricity. As a knight he is the mirror of chivalry, doing battle for
the weak and debelling the strong, while ever “defending the honour of
women.” As a husband his patriarchal position causes him to be loved and
fondly loved by more than one wife: as a father affection for his
children rules his life: he is domestic in the highest degree and he
finds few pleasures beyond the bosom of his family. Lastly, his death is
simple, path ethic and edifying as the life which led to it.

Considered in a higher phase, the mediæval Moslem mind displays, like
the ancient Egyptian, a most exalted moral idea, the deepest reverence
for all things connected with his religion and a sublime conception of
the Unity and Omnipotence of the Deity. Noteworthy too is a proud
resignation to the decrees of Fate and Fortune (Kazá wa Kadar), of
Destiny and Predestination—a feature which ennobles the low aspect of
Al-Islam even in these her days of comparative degeneration and local
decay. Hence his moderation in prosperity, his fortitude in adversity,
his dignity, his perfect self-dominance and, lastly, his lofty quietism
which sounds the true heroic ring. This again is softened and tempered
by a simple faith in the supremacy of Love over Fear, an unbounded
humanity and charity for the poor and helpless: an unconditional
forgiveness of the direst injuries (“which is the note of the noble”); a
generosity and liberality which at times seem impossible and an
enthusiasm for universal benevolence and beneficence which, exalting
kindly deeds done to man above every form of holiness, constitute the
root and base of Oriental, nay, of all, courtesy. And the whole is
crowned by pure trust and natural confidence in the progress and
perfectability of human nature, which he exalts instead of degrading;
this he holds to be the foundation-stone of society and indeed the very
purpose of its existence. His Pessimism resembles far more the optimism
which the so-called Books of Moses borrowed from the Ancient Copt than
the mournful and melancholy creed of the true Pessimist, as Solomon the
Hebrew, the Indian Buddhist and the esoteric European imitators of
Buddhism. He cannot but sigh when contemplating the sin and sorrow, the
pathos and bathos of the world; and feel the pity of it, with its shifts
and changes ending in nothingness, its scanty happiness and its copious
misery. But his melancholy is expressed in—

                “A voice divinely sweet, a voice no less
                Divinely sad.”

Nor does he mourn as they mourn who have no hope: he has an absolute
conviction in future compensation; and, meanwhile, his lively poetic
impulse, the poetry of ideas, not of formal verse, and his radiant
innate idealism breathe a soul into the merest matter of squalid
work-a-day life and awaken the sweetest harmonies of Nature epitomised
in Humanity.

Such was the Moslem at a time when “the dark clouds of ignorance and
superstition hung so thick on the intellectual horizon of Europe as to
exclude every ray of learning that darted from the East and when all
that was polite or elegant in literature was classed among the _Studia
Arabum_.”[126]

Nor is the shady side of the picture less notable. Our Arab at his worst
is a mere barbarian who has not forgotten the savage. He is a model
mixture of childishness and astuteness, of simplicity and cunning,
concealing levity of mind under solemnity of aspect. His stolid
instinctive conservatism grovels before the tyrant rule of routine,
despite that turbulent and licentious independence which ever suggests
revolt against the ruler: his mental torpidity, founded upon physical
indolence, renders immediate action and all manner of exertion
distasteful: his conscious weakness shows itself in overweening
arrogance and intolerance. His crass and self-satisfied ignorance makes
him glorify the most ignoble superstitions, while acts of revolting
savagery are the natural results of a malignant fanaticism and a furious
hatred of every creed beyond the pale of Al-Islam.

It must be confessed that these contrasts make a curious and interesting
tout ensemble.


                                  § I
                       THE ORIGIN OF THE NIGHTS.


                           A.—THE BIRTHPLACE.

Here occur the questions, Where and When was written and to Whom do we
owe a prose-poem which, like the dramatic epos of Herodotus, has no
equal?

I proceed to lay before the reader a procès-verbal of the sundry
pleadings already in court as concisely as is compatible with
intelligibility, furnishing him with references to original authorities
and warning him that a fully-detailed account would fill a volume. Even
my own reasons for decidedly taking one side and rejecting the other
must be stated briefly. And before entering upon this subject I would
distribute the prose-matter of our Recueil of Folk-lore under three
heads.

  1. The Apologue or Beast-fable proper, a theme which may be of any
  age, as it is found in the hieroglyphs and in the cuneiforms.

  2. The Fairy-tale, as for brevity we may term the stories based upon
  supernatural agency: this was a favourite with olden Persia; and
  Mohammed, most austere and puritanical of the “Prophets,” strongly
  objected to it because preferred by the more sensible of his
  converts to the dry legends of the Talmud and the Koran, quite as
  fabulous without the halo and glamour of fancy.

  3. The Histories and historical anecdotes, analects, and acroamata,
  in which the names, when not used anachronistically by the editor or
  copier, give unerring data for the earliest date à quo and which, by
  the mode of treatment, suggest the latest.

Each of these constituents will require further notice when the
subject-matter of the book is discussed. The metrical portion of The
Nights may also be divided into three categories, viz.:—

  1. The oldest and classical poetry of the Arabs, _e.g._ the various
  quotations from the “Suspended Poems.”

  2. The mediæval, beginning with the laureates of Al-Rashid’s court,
  such as Al-Asma’í and Abú Nowás; and ending with Al-Harírí A.H.
  446–516 = 1030–1100.

  3. The modern quotations and the _pièces de circonstance_ by the
  editors or copyists of the Compilation.[127]

Upon the metrical portion also further notices must be offered at the
end of this Essay.

In considering the unde derivatur of The Nights we must carefully
separate subject-matter from language-manner. The neglect of such
essential difference has caused the remark, “It is not a little curious
that the origin of a work which has been known to Europe and has been
studied by many during nearly two centuries, should still be so
mysterious, and that students have failed in all attempts to detect the
secret.” Hence also the chief authorities at once branched off into two
directions. One held the work to be practically Persian: the other as
persistently declared it to be purely Arab.

Professor Galland, in his Epistle Dedicatory to the Marquise d’O,
daughter of his patron M. de Guillerague, showed his literary acumen and
unfailing sagacity by deriving The Nights from India viâ _Persia_; and
held that they had been reduced to their present shape by an _Auteur
Arabe inconnu_. This reference to India, also learnedly advocated by M:
Langlès, was inevitable in those days: it had not then been proved that
India owed all her literature to far older civilisations and even that
her alphabet the Nágari, erroneously called Devanágari, was derived
through Phœnicia and Himyar-land from Ancient Egypt. So Europe was
contented to compare The Nights with the Fables of Pilpay for upwards of
a century. At last the Pehlevi or old Iranian origin of the work found
an able and strenuous advocate in Baron von Hammer-Purgstall[128] who
worthily continued what Galland had begun: although a most inexact
writer, he was extensively read in Oriental history and poetry. His
contention was that the book is an Arabisation of the Persian Hazár
Afsánah or Thousand Tales and he proved his point.

Von Hammer began by summoning into Court the “Herodotus of the Arabs,
(Ali Abú al-Hasan) Al-Mas’údi who, in A.H. 333 (= 944) about one
generation before the founding of Cairo, published at Bassorah the first
edition of his far-famed Murúj al-Dahab wa Ma’ádin al-Jauhar, Meads of
Gold and Mines of Gems. The Styrian Orientalist[129] quotes with sundry
misprints[130] an ampler version of a passage in Chapter lxviii., which
is abbreviated in the French translation of M. C. Barbier de
Meynard.[131]

“And, indeed, many men well acquainted with their (Arab) histories[132]
opine that the stories above mentioned and other trifles were strung
together by men who commended themselves to the Kings by relating them,
and who found favour with their contemporaries by committing them to
memory and by reciting them. Of such fashion[133] is the fashion of the
books which have come down to us translated from the Persian
(Fárasiyah), the Indian (Hindíyah),[134] and the Græco-Roman
(Rúmíyah)[135]: we have noted the judgment which should be passed upon
compositions of this nature. _Such is the book entituled Hazár Afsánah
or The Thousand Tales, which word in Arabic signifies Khuráfah
(Facetiæ): it is known to the public under the name of The Book of a
Thousand Nights and a Night, (Kitab Alf Laylah wa Laylah)._[136] This is
an history of a King and his Wazir, the minister’s daughter and a
slave-girl (járiyah) who are named Shírzád (lion-born) and Dínár-zád
(ducat-born).[137] Such also is the Tale of Farzah,[138] (alii Firza),
and Simás, containing details concerning the Kings and Wazirs of Hind:
the Book of Al-Sindibád[139] and others of a similar stamp.”

Von Hammer adds, “quoting chapt. cxvi, of Al-Mas’údi that Al-Mansúr
(second Abbaside A.H. 136–158 = 754–775, and grandfather of Al-Rashíd)
caused many translations of Greek and Latin, Syriac and Persian
(Pehlevi) works to be made into Arabic, specifying the Kalílah wa
Damnah,”[140] the Fables of Bidpái (Pilpay), the Logic of Aristotle, the
Geography of Ptolemy and the Elements of Euclid. Hence he concludes
“L’original des Mille et une Nuits * * * selon toute vraisemblance, a
été traduit au temps du Khalife Mansur, c’est-à-dire trente ans avant le
règne du Khalife Haroun al-Raschid, qui, par la suite, devait lui-même
jouer un si grand rôle dans ces histoires.” He also notes that, about a
century after Al-Mas’udi had mentioned the Hazár Afsánah, it was
versified and probably remodelled by one “Rásti,” the Takhallus or nom
de plume of a bard at the Court of Mahmúd, the Ghaznevite Sultan who,
after a reign of thirty-three years, ob. A.D. 1030.[141]

Von Hammer some twelve years afterwards (Journ. Asiat. August, 1839)
brought forward, in his “Note sur l’origine Persane des Mille et une
Nuits,” a second and an even more important witness: this was the famous
Kitab al-Fihrist,[142] or Index List of (Arabic) works, written (in A.H.
387 = 987) by Mohammed bin Is’hák al-Nadím (cup-companion or equerry),
“popularly known as Ebou Yacoub el-Werrek.”[143] The following is an
extract (p. 304) from the Eighth Discourse which consists of three arts
(funún).[144] “The first section on the history of the confabulatores
nocturni (tellers of night tales) and the relaters of fanciful
adventures, together with the names of books treating upon such
subjects. Mohammed ibn Is’hák saith:—The first who indited themes of
imagination and made books of them, consigning these works to the
libraries, and who ordered some of them as though related by the tongues
of brute beasts, were the palæo-Persians (and the Kings of the First
Dynasty). The Ashkanian Kings of the Third Dynasty appended others to
them and they were augmented and amplified in the days of the
Sassanides” (the fourth and last royal house). “The Arabs also
translated them into Arabic, and the loquent and eloquent polished and
embellished them and wrote others resembling them. The first work of
such kind was entituled ‘The Book of Hazár Afsán,’ signifying Alf
Khuráfah, the argument whereof was as follows. A King of their Kings was
wont, when he wedded a woman and had lain one night with her, to slay
her on the next morning. Presently he espoused a damsel of the daughters
of the Kings, Shahrázád[145] hight, one endowed with intellect and
erudition and, whenas she lay with him, she fell to telling him tales of
fancy; moreover she used to connect the story at the end of the night
with that which might induce the King to preserve her alive and to ask
her of its ending on the next night until a thousand nights had passed
over her. Meanwhile he cohabited with her till she was blest by boon of
child of him, when she acquainted him with the device she had wrought
upon him; wherefore he admired her intelligence and inclined to her and
preserved her life. That King had also a Kahramánah (nurse and duenna,
not _entremetteuse_), hight Dínárzád (Dunyázád?), who aided the wife in
this (artifice). It is also said that this book was composed for (or,
by) Humái daughter of Bahman[146] and in it were included other matters.
Mohammed bin Is’hak adds:—And the truth is, Inshallah,[147] that the
first who solaced himself with hearing night-tales was Al-Iskandar (he
of Macedon) and he had a number of men who used to relate to him
imaginary stories and provoke him to laughter: he, however, designed not
therein merely to please himself, but that he might thereby become the
more cautious and alert. After him the Kings in like fashion made use of
the book entitled ‘Hazár Afsán.’ It containeth a thousand nights, but
less than two hundred night-stories, for a single history often occupied
several nights. I have seen it complete sundry times; and it is, in
truth, a corrupted book of cold tales.”[148]

A writer in _The Athenæum_,[149] objecting to Lane’s modern date for The
Nights, adduces evidence to prove the greater antiquity of the work.
(Abu al-Hasan) Ibn Sa’id (bin Musa al-Gharnáti = of Granada) born in
A.H. 615 = 1218 and ob. Tunis A.H. 685 = 1286, left his native city and
arrived at Cairo in A.H. 639 = 1241. This Spanish poet and historian
wrote Al-Muhallá bi al-Ash’ár (The Adorned with Verses), a Topography of
Egypt and Africa, which is apparently now lost. In this he quotes from
Al-Kurtubi, the Cordovan;[150] and he in his turn is quoted by the Arab
historian of Spain, Abú al-Abbás Ahmad bin Mohammed al-Makkári, in the
“Windwafts of Perfume from the Branches of Andalusia the Blooming”[151]
(A.D. 1628–29). Mr. Payne (x. 301) thus translates from Dr. Dozy’s
published text.

“Ibn Said (may God have mercy upon him!) sets forth in his book, El
Muhella bi-s-Shaar, quoting from El Curtubi the story of the building of
the Houdej in the Garden of Cairo, the which was of the magnificent
pleasaunces of the Fatimite Khalifs, the rare of ordinance and
surpassing, to wit that the Khalif El Aamir bi-ahkam-illah[152] let
build it for a Bedouin woman, the love of whom had gotten the mastery of
him, in the neighbourhood of the ‘Chosen Garden’[153] and used to resort
often thereto and was slain as he went thither; and it ceased not to be
a pleasuring-place for the Khalifs after him. The folk abound in stories
of the Bedouin girl and Ibn Meyyah[154] of the sons of her uncle
(cousin?) and what hangs thereby of the mention of El-Aamir, so that the
tales told of them on this account became like unto the story of El
Bettál[155] and the _Thousand Nights and a Night_ and what resembleth
them.”

The same passage from Ibn Sa’id, corresponding in three MSS., occurs in
the famous Khitat[156] attributed to Al-Makrizi (ob. A.D. 1444) and was
thus translated from a MS. in the British Museum by Mr. John Payne (ix.
303).

“The Khalif El-Aamir bi-ahkam-illah set apart, in the neighbourhood of
the Chosen Garden, a place for his beloved the Bedouin maid
(Aaliyah)[157] which he named El Houdej. Quoth Ibn Said, in the book
El-Muhella bi-l-ashar, from the History of El Curtubi, concerning the
traditions of the folk of the story of the Bedouin maid and Ibn Menah
(Meyyah) of the sons of her uncle and what hangs thereby of the mention
of the Khalif El Aamír bi-ahkam-illah, so that their traditions (or
tales) upon the garden became like unto El Bettál[158] and the _Thousand
Nights_ and what resembleth them.”

This evidently means either that The Nights existed in the days of
Al-’Ámir (xiith cent.) or that the author compared them with a work
popular in his own age. Mr. Payne attaches much importance to the
discrepancy of titles, which appears to me a minor detail. The change of
names is easily explained. Amongst the Arabs, as amongst the wild Irish,
there is divinity (the proverb says luck) in odd numbers and
consequently the others are inauspicious. Hence as Sir Wm. Ouseley says
(Travels ii. 21), the number Thousand and One is a favourite in the East
(Olivier, Voyages vi. 385, Paris 1807), and quotes the Cistern of the
“Thousand and One Columns” at Constantinople. Kæmpfer (Amœn, Exot. p.
38) notes of the Takiyahs or Dervishes’ convents and the Mazárs or
Santons’ tombs near Koníah (Iconium), “Multa seges sepulchralium quæ
virorum ex omni ævo doctissimorum exuvias condunt, mille et unum
recenset auctor Libri qui inscribitur Hassaaer we jek mesaar (Hazár ve
yek Mezár), _i.e._, mille et unum mausolea.” A book, The Hazar o yek Rúz
(= 1001 Days), was composed in the mid-xviith century by the famous
Dervaysh Mukhlis, Chief Sofi of Isfahan: it was translated into French
by Petis de la Croix, with a preface by Cazotte, and was Englished by
Ambrose Phillips. Lastly, in India and throughout Asia where Indian
influence extends, the number of cyphers not followed by a significant
number is indefinite: for instance, to determine hundreds the Hindus
affix the required figure to the end and for 100 write 101; for 1000,
1001. But the grand fact of the Hazár Afsánah is its being the archetype
of The Nights, unquestionably proving that the Arab work borrows from
the Persian bodily its cadre or frame-work, the principal
characteristic; its exordium and its dénoûement, whilst the two heroines
still bear the old Persic names.

Baron Silvestre de Sacy[159]—clarum et venerabile nomen—is the chief
authority for the Arab provenance of The Nights. Apparently founding his
observations upon Galland,[160] he is of opinion that the work, as now
known, was originally composed in Syria[161] and written in the vulgar
dialect; that it was never completed by the author, whether he was
prevented by death or by other cause; and that imitators endeavoured to
finish the work by inserting romances which were already known but which
formed no part of the original recueil, such as the Travels of Sindbad
the Seaman, the Book of the Seven Wazirs and others. He accepts the
Persian scheme and cadre of the work, but no more. He contends that no
considerable body of præ-Mohammedan or non-Arabic fiction appears in the
actual texts[162]; and that all the tales, even those dealing with
events localised in Persia, India, China and other infidel lands and
dated from ante-islamitic ages, mostly with the naïvest anachronism,
confine themselves to depicting the people, manners and customs of
Baghdad and Mosul, Damascus and Cairo, during the Abbaside epoch; and he
makes a point of the whole being impregnated with the strongest and most
zealous spirit of Mohammedanism. He points out that the language is the
popular or vulgar dialect, differing widely from the classical and
literary; that it contains many words in common modern use and that
generally it suggests the decadence of Arabian literature. Of one tale
he remarks:—The History of the loves of Camaralzaman and Budour,
Princess of China, is no more Indian or Persian than the others. The
prince’s father has Moslems for subjects, his mother is named Fatimah
and when imprisoned he solaces himself with reading the Koran. The Genii
who interpose in these adventures are, again, those who had dealings
with Solomon. In fine, all that we here find of the City of the Magians,
as well as of the fire-worshippers, suffices to show that one should not
expect to discover in it anything save the production of a Moslem
writer.

All this, with due deference to so high an authority, is very
superficial. Granted, which nobody denies, that the archetypal Hazár
Afsánah was translated from Persic into Arabic nearly a thousand years
ago, it had ample time and verge enough to assume another and a foreign
dress, the corpus however remaining untouched. Under the hands of a host
of editors, scribes and copyists, who have no scruples anent changing
words, names and dates, abridging descriptions and attaching their own
decorations, the florid and rhetorical Persian would readily be
converted into the straight-forward, business-like, matter of fact
Arabic. And what easier than to islamise the old Zoroasterism, to
transform Ahrimán into Iblís the Shaytán, Ján bin Ján into Father Adam,
and the Divs and Peris of Kayomars and the olden Guebre Kings into the
Jinns and Jinniyahs of Sulayman? Volumes are spoken by the fact that the
Arab adapter did not venture to change the Persic names of the two
heroines and of the royal brothers or to transfer the mise-en-scène any
whither from Khorasan or outer Persia. Where the story has not been too
much worked by the literato’s pen, for instance the “Ten Wazirs” (in the
Bresl. Edit. vi. 191–343) which is the Guebre Bakhtiyár-námah, the names
and incidents are old Iranian and with few exceptions distinctly
Persian. And at times we can detect the process of transition, _e.g._
when the Mázin of Khorásán[163] of the Wortley Montagu MS. becomes the
Hasan of Bassorah of the Turner Macan MS. (Mac. Edit.).

Evidently the learned Baron had not studied such works as the
Totá-kaháni or Parrot-chat which, notably translated by Nakhshabi from
the Sanskrit Suka-Saptati,[164] has now become as orthodoxically Moslem
as The Nights. The old Hindu Rajah becomes Ahmad Sultan of Balkh, the
Prince is Maymún and his wife Khujisteh. Another instance of such
radical change is the later Syriac version of Kalílah wa Dimnah,[165]
old “Pilpay” converted to Christianity. We find precisely the same
process in European folk-lore; for instance the Gesta Romanorum in
which, after five hundred years, the life, manners and customs of the
Romans lapse into the knightly and chivalrous, the Christian and
ecclesiastical developments of mediæval Europe. Here, therefore, I hold
that the Austrian Arabist has proved his point whilst the Frenchman has
failed.

Mr. Lane, during his three years’ labour of translation, first accepted
Von Hammer’s view and then came round to that of De Sacy; differing,
however, in minor details, especially in the native country of The
Nights. Syria had been chosen because then the most familiar to
Europeans: the “Wife of Bath” had made three pilgrimages to Jerusalem;
but few cared to visit the barbarous and dangerous Nile-Valley. Mr.
Lane, however, was an enthusiast for Egypt or rather for Cairo, the only
part of it he knew; and, when he pronounces The Nights to be of purely
“Arab,” that is, of Nilotic origin, his opinion is entitled to no more
deference than his deriving the sub-African and negroid Fellah from
Arabia, the land per excellentiam of pure and noble blood. Other authors
have wandered still further afield. Some finding Mosul idioms in the
Recueil, propose “Middlegates” for its birth-place and Mr. W. G. P.
Palgrave boldly says “The original of this entertaining work appears to
have been composed in Baghdad about the eleventh century; another less
popular but very spirited version is probably of Tunisian authorship and
somewhat later.”[166]


                              B.—THE DATE.

The next point to consider is the date of The Nights in its present
form; and here opinions range between the tenth and the sixteenth
centuries. Professor Galland began by placing it arbitrarily in the
middle of the thirteenth. De Sacy, who abstained from detailing reasons
and who, forgetting the number of editors and scribes through whose
hands it must have passed, argued only from the nature of the language
and the peculiarities of style, proposed le milieu du neuvième siècle de
l’hégire (= A.D. 1445–6) as its latest date. Mr. Hole, who knew The
Nights only through Galland’s version, had already advocated in his
“Remarks” the close of the fifteenth century; and M. Caussin (de
Perceval), upon the authority of a supposed note in Galland’s MS.[167]
(vol. iii. fol. 20, verso), declares the compiler to have been living in
A.D. 1548 and 1565. Mr. Lane says “Not begun earlier than the last
fourth of the fifteenth century nor ended before the first fourth of the
sixteenth,” _i.e._ soon after Egypt was conquered by Selim, Sultan of
the Osmanli Turks in A.D. 1517. Lastly the learned Dr. Weil says in his
far too scanty Vorwort (p. ix. 2nd Edit.):—“Das wahrscheinlichste dürfte
also sein, das im 15. Jahrhundert ein Egyptier nach altern Vorbilde
Erzählungen für 1001 Nächte theils erdichtete, theils nach mündlichen
Sagen, oder frühern schriftlichen Aufzeichnungen, bearbeitete, dass er
aber entweder sein Werk nicht vollendete, oder dass ein Theil desselben
verloren ging, so dass das Fehlende von Andern bis ins 16. Jahrhundert
hinein durch neue Erzählungen ergänzt wurde.”

But, as justly observed by Mr. Payne, the first step when enquiring into
the original date of The Nights is to determine the nucleus of the
Repertory by a comparison of the four printed texts and the dozen MSS.
which have been collated by scholars.[168] This process makes it evident
that the tales common to all are the following thirteen:—

  1. The Introduction (with a single incidental story “The Bull and the
       Ass”).

  2. The Trader and the Jinni (with three incidentals).

  3. The Fisherman and the Jinni (with four).

  4. The Porter and the three Ladies of Baghdad.

  5. The Tale of the Three Apples.

  6. The Tale of Núr al-Dín Ali and his son Badr al-Dín Hasan.

  7. The Hunchback’s Tale (with eleven).

  8. Nur al-Dín and Anís al-Jalís.

  9. Tale of Ghánim bin ’Ayyúb (with two).

 10. Alí bin Bakkár and Shams al-Nahár (with two).

 11. Tale of Kamar al-Zamán.

 12. The Ebony Horse; and

 13. Julnár the Sea-born.

These forty-two tales, occupying one hundred and twenty Nights, form
less than a fifth part of the whole collection which in the Mac.
Edit.[169] contains a total of two hundred and sixty-four. Hence Dr.
Patrick Russell,[170] the Natural Historian of Aleppo,[171] whose
valuable monograph amply deserves study even in this our day, believed
that the original Nights did not outnumber two hundred, to which
subsequent writers added till the total of a thousand and one was made
up. Dr. Jonathan Scott,[172] who quotes Russell, “held it highly
probable that the tales of the original Arabian Nights did not run
through more than two hundred and eighty Nights, if so many.” So this
suggestion I may subjoin, “habent sua fata libelli.” Galland, who
preserves in his Mille et une Nuits only about one fourth of The Nights,
ends them in No. cclxiv[173] with the seventh voyage of Sindbad: after
that he intentionally omits the dialogue between the sisters and the
reckoning of time, to proceed uninterruptedly with the tales. And so his
imitator, Petis de la Croix,[174] in his Mille et un Jours, reduces the
thousand to two hundred and thirty-two.

The internal chronological evidence offered by the Collection is useful
only in enabling us to determine that the tales were not written _after_
a certain epoch: the actual dates and, consequently, all deductions from
them, are vitiated by the habits of the scribes. For instance we find
the Tale of the Fisherman and the Jinni (vol. i. 41) placed in A.H. 169
= A.D. 785,[175] which is hardly possible. The immortal Barber in the
“Tailor’s Tale” (vol. i. 304) places his adventure with the unfortunate
lover on Safar 10, A.H. 653 (= March 25th, 1255) and 7,320 years of the
era of Alexander.[176] This is supported in his Tale of Himself (vol. i.
pp. 317–348), where he dates his banishment from Baghdad during the
reign of the penultimate Abbaside, Al-Mustansir bi ’llah[177] (A.H.
623–640 = 1225–1242), and his return to Baghdad after the accession of
another Caliph who can be no other but Al-Muntasim bi ’llah (A.H.
640–656 = A.D. 1242–1258). Again at the end of the tale (vol. i. 350) he
is described as “an ancient man, past his ninetieth year” and “a very
old man” in the days of Al-Mustansir (vol. i. 318); so that the
Hunchback’s adventure can hardly be placed earlier than A.D. 1265 or
seven years after the storming of Baghdad by Huláku Khan, successor of
Janghíz Khan, a terrible catastrophe which resounded throughout the
civilised world. Yet there is no allusion to this crucial epoch and the
total silence suffices to invalidate the date.[178] Could we assume it
as true, by adding to A.D. 1265 half a century for the composition of
the Hunchback’s story and its incidentals, we should place the earliest
date in A.D. 1315.

As little can we learn from inferences which have been drawn from the
body of the book: at most they point to its several editions or
redactions. In the Tale of the “Ensorcelled Prince” (vol. i. 77) Mr.
Lane (i. 135) conjectured that the four colours of the fishes were
suggested by the sumptuary laws of the Mameluke Soldan, Mohammed ibn
Kala’un, “subsequently to the commencement of the eighth century of the
Flight, or fourteenth of our era.” But he forgets that the same
distinction of dress was enforced by the Caliph Omar after the capture
of Jerusalem in A.D. 636; that it was revived by Harun al-Rashid, a
contemporary of Carolus Magnus and that it was noticed as a long
standing grievance by the so-called Mandeville in A.D. 1322. In the Tale
of the Porter and the Ladies of Baghdad the “Sultáni oranges” (vol. i.
83) have been connected with Sultáníyah city in Persian Irák, which was
founded about the middle of the thirteenth century: but “Sultáni” may
simply mean “royal,” a superior growth. The same story makes mention
(vol. i. 94) of Kalandars or religious mendicants, a term popularly
corrupted, even in writing, to Karandal.[179] Here again “Kalandar” may
be due only to the scribes as the Bresl. Edit, reads Sa’alúk = asker,
beggar. The Khan al-Masrúr in the Nazarene Broker’s story (i. 265) was a
ruin during the early ninth century A.H. = A.D. 1420; but the Báb
Zuwaylah (i. 269) dates from A.D. 1087. In the same tale occurs the Darb
al-Munkari (or Munakkari) which is probably the Darb al-Munkadi of
Al-Makrizi’s careful topography, the Khitat (ii. 40). Here we learn that
in his time (about A.D. 1430) the name had become obsolete, and the
highway was known as Darb al-Amír Baktamír al-Ustaddar from one of two
high officials who both died in the fourteenth century (circ. A.D.
1350). And lastly we have the Khan al-Jáwali built about A.D. 1320. In
Badr al-Din Hasan (vol. i. 237) “Sáhib” is given as a Wazirial title and
it dates only from the end of the fourteenth century.[180] In Sindbad
the Seaman, there is an allusion (vol. vi. 67) to the great Hindu
Kingdom, Vijayanagar of the Narasimha,[181] the great power of the
Deccan; but this may be due to editors or scribes as the despotism was
founded only in the fourteenth century (A.D. 1320). The Ebony Horse
(vol. v. 1) apparently dates before Chaucer; and “The Sleeper and The
Waker” (Bresl. Edit. iv. 134–189) may precede Shakespeare’s “Taming of
the Shrew”: no stress, however, can be laid upon such resemblances, the
nouvelles being world-wide. But when we come to the last stories,
especially to Kamar al-Zaman II. and the tale of Ma’arúf, we are
apparently in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. The first contains
(Night cmlxxvii.) the word Láwandiyah = Levantine, the mention of a
watch = Sá’ah in the next Night[182]; and, further on (cmlxxvi.), the
“Shaykh Al-Islam,” an officer invented by Mohammed II. after the capture
of Stambul in A.D. 1453. In Ma’arúf the ’Ádiliyah is named; the mosque
founded outside the Bab al-Nasr by Al-Malik al-’Ádil, Túmán Bey in A.H.
906 = A.D. 1501. But, I repeat, all these names may be mere
interpolations.

On the other hand, a study of the vie intime in Al-Islam and of the
manners and customs of the people proves that the body of the work, as
it now stands, must have been written before A.D. 1400. The Arabs use
wines, ciders and barley-beer, not distilled spirits; they have no
coffee or tobacco and, while familiar with small-pox (judrí), they
ignore syphilis. The battles in The Nights are fought with bows and
javelins, swords, spears (for infantry) and lances (for cavalry); and,
whenever fire-arms are mentioned, we must suspect the scribe. Such is
the case with the Madfa’ or cannon by means of which Badr al-Din Hasan
breaches the bulwarks of the Lady of Beauty’s virginity (i. 223). This
consideration would determine the work to have been written before the
fourteenth century. We ignore the invention-date and the inventor of
gunpowder, as of all old discoveries which have affected mankind at
large: all we know is that the popular ideas betray great ignorance and
we are led to suspect that an explosive compound, having been discovered
in the earliest ages of human society, was utilised by steps so gradual
that history has neglected to trace the series. According to
Demmin[183], bullets for stuffing with some incendiary composition, in
fact bombs, were discovered by Dr. Keller in the Palafites or Crannogs
of Switzerland; and the Hindu’s Agni-Astar (“fire-weapon”), Agni-bán
(“fire-arrow”) and Shatagni (“hundred-killer”), like the Roman
Phalarica, and the Greek fire of Byzantium, suggest explosives. Indeed,
Dr. Oppert[184] accepts the statement of Flavius Philostratus that when
Appolonius of Tyana, that grand semi-mythical figure, was travelling in
India, he learned the reason why Alexander of Macedon desisted from
attacking the Oxydracæ who live between the Ganges and the Hyphasis
(Satadru or Sutledge):—“These holy men, beloved by the gods, overthrow
their enemies with tempests and thunderbolts shot from their walls.”
Passing over the Arab sieges of Constantinople (A.D. 668) and Meccah
(A.D. 690) and the disputed passage in Firishtah touching the Tufang or
musket during the reign of Mahmúd the Ghaznevite[185] (ob. A.D. 1030),
we come to the days of Alphonso the Valiant, whose long and short guns,
used at the Siege of Madrid in A.D. 1084, are preserved in the Armeria
Real. Viardot has noted that the African Arabs first employed cannon in
A.D. 1200, and that the Maghribis defended Algeciras near Gibraltar with
great guns in A.D. 1247, and utilised them to besiege Seville in A.D.
1342. This last feat of arms introduced the cannon into barbarous
Northern Europe, and it must have been known to civilised Asia for many
a decade before that date.

The mention of wine in The Nights, especially the Nabíz or fermented
infusion of raisins well known to the præ-Mohammedan Badawis,
perpetually recurs. As a rule, except only in the case of holy
personages and mostly of the Caliph Al-Rashid, the “service of wine”
appears immediately after the hands are washed; and women, as well as
men, drink, like true Orientals, for the honest purpose of getting
drunk—la recherche de l’idéal, as the process has been called. Yet
distillation became well known in the fourteenth century. Amongst the
Greeks and Romans it was confined to manufacturing aromatic waters, and
Nicander the poet (B.C. 140) used for a still the term ἄμβιξ, like the
Irish “pot” and its produce “poteen.” The simple art of converting salt
water into fresh, by boiling the former and passing the steam through a
cooled pipe into a recipient, would not have escaped the students of the
Philosopher’s “stone;” and thus we find throughout Europe the Arabic
modifications of Greek terms Alchemy, Alembic (Al-ἄμβιξ), Chemistry and
Elixir; while “Alcohol” (Al-Kohl), originally meaning “extreme tenuity
or impalpable state of pulverulent substances,” clearly shows the origin
of the article. Avicenna, who died in A.H. 428 = 1036, nearly two
hundred years before we read of distillation in Europe, compared the
human body with an alembic, the belly being the cucurbit and the head
the capital:—he forgot one important difference but n’importe. Spirits
of wine were first noticed in the xiiith century, when the Arabs had
overrun the Western Mediterranean, by Arnaldus de Villa Nova, who dubs
the new invention a universal panacea; and his pupil, Raymond Lully
(nat. Majorca A.D. 1236), declared this essence of wine to be a boon
from the Deity. Now The Nights, even in the latest adjuncts, never
allude to the “white coffee” of the “respectable” Moslem, the Ráki
(raisin-brandy) or Ma-hayát (_aqua vitæ_) of the modern Mohametan: the
drinkers confine themselves to wine like our contemporary Dalmatians,
one of the healthiest and the most vigorous of seafaring races in
Europe.

Syphilis also, which at the end of the xvth century began to infect
Europe, is ignored by The Nights. I do not say it actually began:
diseases do not begin except with the dawn of humanity; and their
history, as far as we know, is simple enough. They are at first sporadic
and comparatively non-lethal: at certain epochs which we can determine,
and for reasons which as yet we cannot, they break out into epidemics
raging with frightful violence: they then subside into the endemic state
and lastly they return to the milder sporadic form. For instance,
“English cholera” was known of old: in 1831 (Oct. 26) the Asiatic type
took its place and now, after sundry violent epidemics, the disease is
becoming endemic on the Northern seaboard of the Mediterranean, notably
in Spain and Italy. So small-pox (Al-judrí, vol. i. 254) passed over
from Central Africa to Arabia in the year of Mohammed’s birth (A.D. 570)
and thence overspread the civilised world, as an epidemic, an endemic
and a sporadic successively. The “Greater Pox” has appeared in human
bones of prehistoric graves and Moses seems to mention gonorrhœa (Levit.
xv. 12). Passing over allusions in Juvenal and Martial,[186] we find
Eusebius relating that Galerius died (A.D. 302) of ulcers on the
genitals and other parts of his body; and, about a century afterwards,
Bishop Palladius records that one Hero, after conversation with a
prostitute, fell a victim to an abscess on the penis (phagedænic
shanker?). In 1347 the famous Joanna of Naples founded (æt. 23), in her
town of Avignon, a bordel whose inmates were to be medically inspected—a
measure to which England (proh pudor!) still objects. In her Statuts du
Lieu-publique d’Avignon, No. iv. she expressly mentions the _Mal vengut
de paillardise_. Such houses, says Ricord who studied the subject since
1832, were common in France after A.D. 1200; and sporadic venereals were
known there. But in A.D. 1493–94 an epidemic broke out with alarming
intensity at Barcelona, as we learn from the “Tractado llamado fructo de
todos los Sanctos contra el mal serpentino, venido de la Isla espanola,”
of Rodrigo Ruiz Días, the specialist. In Santo Domingo the disease was
common under the names Hipas, Guaynaras and Taynastizas: hence the
opinion in Europe that it arose from the mixture of European and
“Indian” blood.[187] Some attributed it to the Gypsies who migrated to
Western Europe in the xvth century:[188] others to the Moriscos expelled
from Spain. But the pest got its popular name after the violent outbreak
at Naples in A.D. 1493–4, when Charles VIII. of Anjou with a large army
of mercenaries, Frenchmen, Spaniards, and Germans, attacked Ferdinand
II. Thence it became known as the Mal de Naples and Morbus Gallicus—una
gallica being still the popular term in neo-Latin lands—and the “French
disease” in England. As early as July 1496 Marin Sanuto (Journal i. 171)
describes with details the “Mal Franzoso.” The scientific “syphilis”
dates from Fracastori’s poem (A.D. 1521) in which Syphilus the Shepherd
is struck like Job, for abusing the sun. After crippling a Pope (Sixtus
IV.[189]) and killing a King (Francis I.) the Grosse Vérole began to
abate its violence, under the effects of mercury it is said; and became
endemic, a stage still shown at Scherlievo near Fiume, where legend says
it was implanted by the Napoleonic soldiery. The Aleppo and other
“buttons” also belong apparently to the same grade. Elsewhere it settled
as a sporadic and now it appears to be dying out while gonorrhœa is on
the increase.[190]

The Nights, I have said, belongs to the days before coffee (A.D. 1550)
and tobacco (A.D. 1650) had overspread the East. The former, which
derives its name from the Káfá or Káffá province, lying south of
Abyssinia proper and peopled by the Sidáma Gallas, was introduced to
Mokha of Al-Yaman in A.D. 1429–30 by the Shaykh al-Sházili who lies
buried there, and found a congenial name in the Arabic Kahwah = old
wine.[191] In The Nights (Mac. Edit.) it is mentioned twelve times[192];
but never in the earlier tales: except in the case of Kamar al-Zaman II.
it evidently does not belong to the epoch and we may fairly suspect the
scribe. In the xvith century coffee began to take the place of wine in
the nearer East; and it gradually ousted the classical drink from daily
life and from folk-tales.

It is the same with tobacco, which is mentioned only once by The Nights
(cmxxxi.), in conjunction with meat, vegetables and fruit and where it
is called “Tábah.” Lane (iii. 615) holds it to be the work of a copyist;
but in the same tale of Abu Kir and Abu Sir, sherbet and coffee appear
to have become en vogue, in fact to have gained the ground they now
hold. The result of Lord Macartney’s Mission to China was a suggestion
that smoking might have originated spontaneously in the Old World.[193]
This is undoubtedly true. The Bushmen and other wild tribes of Southern
Africa threw their Dakhá (_cannabis indica_) on the fire and sat round
it inhaling the intoxicating fumes. Smoking without tobacco was easy
enough. The North American Indians of the Great Red Pipe Stone Quarry
and those who lived above the line where nicotiana grew, used the
kinni-kinik or bark of the red willow and some seven other
succedanea.[194] But tobacco proper, which soon superseded all materials
except hemp and opium, was first adopted by the Spaniards of Santo
Domingo in A.D. 1496 and reached England in 1565. Hence the word, which,
amongst the so-called Red Men, denoted the pipe, the container, not the
contained, spread over the Old World as a generic term with additions,
like “Tutun,”[195] for especial varieties. The change in English manners
brought about by the cigar after dinner has already been noticed; and
much of the modified sobriety of the present day may be attributed to
the influence of the Holy Herb en cigarette. Such, we know from history
was its effect amongst Moslems; and the normal wine-parties of The
Nights suggest that the pipe was unknown even when the latest tales were
written.


                                   C.

We know absolutely nothing of the author or authors who produced our
marvellous Recueil. Galland justly observes (Epist. Dedic.), “probably
this great work is not by a single hand; for how can we suppose that one
man alone could own a fancy fertile enough to invent so many ingenious
fictions?” Mr. Lane, and Mr. Lane alone, opined that the work was
written in Egypt by one person or at most by two, one ending what the
other had begun, and that he or they had re-written the tales and
completed the collection by new matter composed or arranged for the
purpose. It is hard to see how the distinguished Arabist came to such a
conclusion: at most it can be true only of the editors and scribes of
MSS. evidently copied from each other, such as the Mac. and the Bul.
texts. As the Reviewer (Forbes Falconer?) in the “Asiatic Journal” (vol.
xxx., 1839) says, “Every step we have taken in the collation of these
agreeable fictions has confirmed us in the belief that the work called
the _Arabian Nights_ is rather a vehicle for stories, partly fixed and
partly arbitrary, than a collection fairly deserving, from its constant
identity with itself, the name of a distinct work, and the reputation of
having wholly emanated from the same inventive mind. To say nothing of
the improbability of supposing that one individual, with every license
to build upon the foundation of popular stories, a work which had once
received a definite form from a single writer, would have been
multiplied by the copyist with some regard at least to his arrangement
of words as well as matter. But the various copies we have seen bear
about as much mutual resemblance as if they had passed through the
famous process recommended for disguising a plagiarism: ‘Translate your
English author into French and again into English.’”

Moreover, the style of the several Tales, which will be considered in a
future page (§ iii.), so far from being homogeneous, is heterogeneous in
the extreme. Different nationalities show themselves; West Africa, Egypt
and Syria are all represented and, while some authors are intimately
familiar with Baghdad, Damascus and Cairo, others are equally ignorant.
All copies, written and printed, absolutely differ in the last tales and
a measure of the divergence can be obtained by comparing the Bresl.
Edit. with the Mac. text: indeed it is my conviction that the MSS.
preserved in Europe would add sundry volumes full of tales to those
hitherto translated; and here the Wortley Montagu copy can be taken as a
test. We may, I believe, safely compare the history of The Nights with
the so-called Homeric poems, the Iliad and the Odyssey, a collection of
immortal ballads and old Epic formulæ and verses traditionally handed
down from rhapsode to rhapsode, incorporated in a slowly-increasing body
of poetry and finally welded together about the age of Pericles.

To conclude. From the data above given I hold myself justified in
drawing the following deductions:—

  1. The framework of the book is purely Persian perfunctorily
  Arabised; the archetype being the Hazár Afsánah.[196]

  2. The oldest tales, such as Sindibad (the Seven Wazirs) and King
  Jili’ád, may date from the reign of Al-Mansur, eighth century A.D.

  3. The thirteen tales mentioned above (p. 81) as the nucleus of the
  Repertory, together with “Dalilah the Crafty,”[197] may be placed in
  our tenth century.

  4. The latest tales, notably Kamar al-Zaman the Second and Ma’aruf
  the Cobbler, are as late as the sixteenth century.

  5. The work assumed its present form in the thirteenth century.

  6. The author is unknown for the best reason; there never was one:
  for information touching the editors and copyists we must await the
  fortunate discovery of some MSS.


                                 § II.
                         THE NIGHTS IN EUROPE.

The history of The Nights in Europe is one of slow and gradual
development. The process was begun (1704–17) by Galland, a Frenchman,
continued (1823) by Von Hammer, an Austro-German, and finished by Mr.
John Payne (1882–84) an Englishman. But we must not forget that it is
wholly and solely to the genius of the Gaul that Europe owes The
“Arabian Nights’ Entertainments” over which Western childhood and youth
have spent so many spelling hours. Antoine Galland was the first to
discover the marvellous fund of material for the story-teller buried in
the Oriental mine; and he had in a high degree that art of telling a
tale which is far more captivating than culture or scholarship. Hence
his delightful version (or perversion) became one of the world’s
classics and at once made Sheherazade and Dinarzarde, Haroun Alraschid,
the Calendars and a host of other personages as familiar to the home
reader as Prospero, Robinson Crusoe, Lemuel Gulliver and Dr. Primrose.
Without the name and fame won for the work by the brilliant paraphrase
of the learned and single-minded Frenchman, Lane’s curious hash and
latinized English, at once turgid and emasculated, would have found few
readers. Mr. Payne’s admirable version appeals to the Orientalist and
the “stylist,” not to the many-headed; and mine to the anthropologist
and student of Eastern manners and customs. Galland did it and alone he
did it: his fine literary _flaire_, his pleasing style, his polished
taste and perfect tact at once made his work take high rank in the
republic of letters nor will the immortal fragment ever be superseded in
the infallible judgment of childhood. As the Encyclopædia Britannica has
been pleased to ignore this excellent man and admirable Orientalist,
numismatologist and littérateur, the reader may not be unwilling to see
a short sketch of his biography.[198]

Antoine Galland was born in A.D. 1646 of peasant parents “poor and
honest” at Rollot, a little bourg in Picardy some two leagues from
Montdidier. He was a seventh child and his mother, left a widow in early
life and compelled to earn her livelihood, saw scant chance of educating
him when the kindly assistance of a Canon of the Cathedral and President
of the Collége de Noyon relieved her difficulties. In this establishment
Galland studied Greek and Hebrew for ten years, after which the “strait
thing at home” apprenticed him to a trade. But he was made for letters;
he hated manual labour and he presently removed en cachette to Paris,
where he knew only an ancient kinswoman. She introduced him to a
priestly relative of the Canon of Noyon, who in turn recommended him to
the “Sous-principal” of the Collége Du Plessis. Here he made such
notable progress in Oriental studies, that M. Petitpied, a Doctor of the
Sorbonne, struck by his abilities, enabled him to study at the Collége
Royal and eventually to catalogue the Eastern MSS. in the great
ecclesiastical Society. Thence he passed to the Collége Mazarin, where a
Professor, M. Godouin, was making an experiment which might be revived
to advantage in our present schools. He collected a class of boys, aged
about four, and proposed to teach them Latin speedily and easily by
making them converse in the classical language as well as read and write
it.[199] Galland, his assistant, had not time to register success or
failure before he was appointed attaché-secretary to M. de Nointel named
in 1660 Ambassadeur de France for Constantinople. His special province
was to study the dogmas and doctrines and to obtain official
attestations concerning the articles of the Orthodox (or Greek)
Christianity which had then been a subject of lively discussion amongst
certain Catholics, especially Arnauld (Antoine) and Claude the Minister,
and which even in our day occasionally crops up amongst
“Protestants.”[200] Galland, by frequenting the cafés and listening to
the tale-teller, soon mastered Romaic and grappled with the religious
question, under the tuition of a deposed Patriarch and of sundry Matráns
or Metropolitans, whom the persecutions of the Pashas had driven for
refuge to the Palais de France. M. de Nointel, after settling certain
knotty points in the Capitulations, visited the harbour-towns of the
Levant and the “Holy Places,” including Jerusalem, where Galland copied
epigraphs, sketched monuments and collected antiques, such as the
marbles in the Baudelot Gallery of which Père Dom Bernard de Montfaucon
presently published specimens in his “Palæographia Græca,” etc.
(Parisiis, 1708).

In Syria Galland was unable to buy a copy of The Nights: as he expressly
states in his Epistle Dedicatory, _il a fallu le faire venir de Syrie_.
But he prepared himself for translating it by studying the manners and
customs, the religion and superstitions of the people; and in 1675,
leaving his chief, who was ordered back to Stambul, he returned to
France. In Paris his numismatic fame recommended him to MM. Vaillant,
Carcary and Giraud who strongly urged a second visit to the Levant, for
the purpose of collecting, and he set out without delay. In 1691 he made
a third journey, travelling at the expense of the Compagnie des
Indes-Orientales, with the main object of making purchases for the
Library and Museum of Colbert the magnificent. The commission ended
eighteen months afterwards with the changes of the Company, when Colbert
and the Marquis de Louvois caused him to be created “Antiquary to the
King,” Louis le Grand, and charged him with collecting coins and medals
for the royal cabinet. As he was about to leave Smyrna, he had a narrow
escape from the earthquake and subsequent fire which destroyed some
fifteen thousand of the inhabitants: he was buried in the ruins; but,
his kitchen being cold as becomes a philosopher’s, he was dug out
unburnt.[201]

Galland again returned to Paris where his familiarity with Arabic and
Hebrew, Persian and Turkish recommended him to MM. Thevenot and Bignon:
this first President of the Grand Council acknowledged his services by a
pension. He also became a favourite with D’Herbelot whose Bibliothèque
Orientale, left unfinished at his death, he had the honour of completing
and prefacing.[202] President Bignon died within the twelvemonth, which
made Galland attach himself in 1697 to M. Foucault, Councillor of State
and Intendant (governor) of Caen in Lower Normandy, then famous for its
academy: in his new patron’s fine library and numismatic collection he
found materials for a long succession of works, including a translation
of the Koran.[203] They recommended him strongly to the literary world
and in 1701 he was made a member of the Académie des Inscriptions et
Belles Lettres.

At Caen Galland issued in 1704,[204] the first part of his Mille et une
Nuits, Contes Arabes traduits en François which at once became famous as
“The Arabian Nights’ Entertainments.” Mutilated, fragmentary and
paraphrastic though the tales were, the glamour of imagination, the
marvel of the miracles and the gorgeousness and magnificence of the
scenery at once secured an exceptional success: it was a revelation in
romance, and the public recognised that it stood in presence of a
monumental literary work. France was a-fire with delight at a something
so new, so unconventional, so entirely without purpose, religious, moral
or philosophical: the Oriental wanderer in his stately robes was a
startling surprise to the easy-going and utterly corrupt Europe of the
_ancien régime_ with its indecently tight garments and perfectly loose
morals. “Ils produisirent,” said Charles Nodier, a genius in his way,
“dès le moment de leur publication, cet effet qui assure aux productions
de l’esprit une vogue populaire, quoiqu’ils appartinssent à une
littérature peu connue en France; et que ce genre de composition admît
ou plutôt exigeât des détails de moeurs, de caractère, de costume et de
localités absolument étrangers à toutes les idées établies dans nos
contes et nos romans. On fut étonné du charme qui résultait de leur
lecture. C’est que la vérité des sentimens, la nouveauté des tableaux,
une imagination féconde en prodiges, un coloris plein de chaleur,
l’attrait d’une sensibilité sans prétention, et le sel d’un comique sans
caricature, c’est que l’esprit et le naturel enfin plaisent partout, et
plaisent à tout le monde.”[205]

The Contes Arabes at once made Galland’s name and a popular tale is told
of them and him known to all reviewers who, however, mostly mangle it.
In the Biographie Universelle of Michaud[206] we find:—Dans les deux
premiers volumes de ces contes l’exorde était toujours, “Ma chère sœur,
si vous ne dormez pas, faites-nous un de ces contes que vous savez.”
Quelques jeunes gens, ennuyés de cette plate uniformité, allèrent une
nuit qu’il faisait très-grand froid, frapper à la porte de l’auteur, qui
courut en chemise à sa fenêtre. Après l’avoir fait morfondre quelque
temps par diverses questions insignifiantes, ils terminèrent en lui
disant, “Ah, Monsieur Galland, si vous ne dormez pas, faites-nous un de
ces beaux contes que vous savez si bien.” Galland profita de la leçon,
et supprima dans les volumes suivants le préambule qui lui avait attiré
la plaisanterie. This legend has the merit of explaining why the
Professor so soon gave up the Arab framework which he had deliberately
adopted.

The Nights was at once translated from the French[207] though when,
where and by whom no authority seems to know. In Lowndes’
“Bibliographer’s Manual” the English Editio Princeps is thus noticed,
“Arabian Nights’ Entertainments translated from the French, London,
1724, 12mo, 6 vols.” and a footnote states that this translation, very
inaccurate and vulgar in its diction, was often reprinted. In 1712
Addison introduced into the Spectator (No. 535, Nov. 13) the Story of
Alnaschar (= Al-Nashshár, the Sawyer) and says that his remarks on Hope
“may serve as a moral to an Arabian tale which I find translated into
French by Monsieur Galland.” His version appears, from the tone and
style, to have been made by himself, and yet in that year a second
English edition had appeared. The nearest approach to the Edit. Princeps
in the British Museum[208] is a set of six volumes bound in three and
corresponding with Galland’s first half dozen. Tomes i. and ii. are from
the fourth edition of 1713, Nos. iii. and iv. are from the second of
1712 and v. and vi. are from the third of 1715. It is conjectured that
the two first volumes were reprinted several times apart from their
subsequents, as was the fashion of the day; but all is mystery. We (my
friends and I) have turned over scores of books in the British Museum,
the University Library and the Advocates’ Libraries of Edinburgh and
Glasgow: I have been permitted to put the question in “Notes and
Queries” and in the “Antiquary”; but all our researches hitherto have
been in vain.

The popularity of The Nights in England must have rivalled their vogue
in France, judging from the fact that in 1713, or nine years after
Galland’s Edit. Prin. appeared they had already reached a fourth issue.
Even the ignoble national jealousy which prompted Sir William Jones
grossly to abuse that valiant scholar, Auquetil du Perron, could not mar
their popularity. But as there are men who cannot read Pickwick, so they
were not wanting who spoke of “Dreams of the distempered fancy of the
East.”[209] “When the work was first published in England,” says Henry
Webber,[210] “it seems to have made a considerable impression upon the
public.” Pope in 1720 sent two volumes (French? or English?) to Bishop
Atterbury, without making any remark on the work; but, from his very
silence, it may be presumed that he was not displeased with the perusal.
The bishop, who does not appear to have joined a relish for the flights
of imagination to his other estimable qualities, expressed his dislike
of these tales pretty strongly and stated it to be his opinion, formed
on the frequent descriptions of female dress, that they were the work of
some Frenchman (Petis de la Croix, a mistake afterwards corrected by
Warburton). The _Arabian Nights_, however, quickly made their way to
public favour. “We have been informed of a singular instance of the
effect they produced soon after their first appearance. Sir James
Stewart, Lord Advocate for Scotland, having one Saturday evening found
his daughters employed in reading these volumes, seized them with a
rebuke for spending the evening before the ‘Sawbbath’ in such worldly
amusement; but the grave advocate himself became a prey to the
fascination of the tales, being found on the morning of the Sabbath
itself employed in their perusal, from which he had not risen the whole
night.” As late as 1780 Dr. Beattie professed himself uncertain whether
they were translated or fabricated by M. Galland; and, while Dr. Pusey
wrote of them “Noctes Mille et Una dictæ, quæ in omnium firmè populorum
cultiorum linguas conversæ, in deliciis omnium habentur, manibusque
omnium terentur,”[211] the amiable Carlyle, in the gospel according to
Saint Froude, characteristically termed them “downright lies” and
forbade the house to such “unwholesome literature.” What a sketch of
character in two words!

The only fault found in France with the Contes Arabes was that their
style is _peu correcte_; in fact they want classicism. Yet all Gallic
imitators, Trébutien included, have carefully copied their leader and
Charles Nodier remarks:—“Il me semble que l’on n’a pas rendu assez de
justice au style de Galland. Abondant sans être prolixe, naturel et
familier sans être lâche ni trivial, il ne manque jamais de cette
élégance qui résulte de la facilité, et qui présente je ne sais quel
mélange de la naïveté de Perrault et de la bonhomie de La Fontaine.”

Our Professor, with a name now thoroughly established, returned in 1706
to Paris, where he was an assiduous and efficient member of the Société
Numismatique and corresponded largely with foreign Orientalists. Three
years afterwards he was made Professor of Arabic at the Collége de
France, succeeding Pierre Dippy; and, during the next half decade, he
devoted himself to publishing his valuable studies. Then the end came.
In his last illness, an attack of asthma complicated with pectoral
mischief, he sent to Noyon for his nephew Julien Galland[212] to assist
him in ordering his MSS. and in making his will after the simplest
military fashion: he bequeathed his writings to the Bibliothèque du Roi,
his Numismatic Dictionary to the Academy and his Alcoran to the Abbé
Bignon. He died, aged sixty-nine on February 17, 1715, leaving his
second Part of The Nights unpublished.[213]

Professor Galland was a French littérateur of the good old school which
is rapidly becoming extinct. Homme vrai dans les moindres choses (as his
Éloge stated); simple in life and manners and single-hearted in his
devotion to letters, he was almost childish in worldly matters, while
notable for penetration and acumen in his studies. He would have been as
happy, one of his biographers remarks, in teaching children the elements
of education as he was in acquiring his immense erudition. Briefly,
truth and honesty, exactitude and indefatigable industry characterised
his most honourable career.

Galland informs us (Epist. Ded.) that his MS. consisted of four volumes,
only three of which are extant,[214] bringing the work down to Night
cclxxxii., or about the beginning of “Camaralzaman.” The missing
portion, if it contained like the other volumes 140 pages, would end
that tale together with the Stories of Ghánim and the Enchanted (Ebony)
Horse; and such is the disposition in the Bresl. Edit. which mostly
favours in its ordinance the text used by the first translator. But this
would hardly have filled more than two-thirds of his volumes; for the
other third he interpolated, or is supposed to have interpolated, the
ten[215] following tales.

  1. Histoire du prince Zeyn Al-asnam et du Roi des Génies.[216]

  2. Histoire de Codadad et de ses frères.

  3. Histoire de la Lampe merveilleuse (Aladdin).

  4. Histoire de l’aveugle Baba Abdalla.

  5. Histoire de Sidi Nouman.

  6. Histoire de Cogia Hassan Alhabbal.

  7. Histoire d’Ali Baba, et de Quarante Voleurs exterminés par une
       Esclave.

  8. Histoire d’Ali Cogia, marchand de Bagdad.

  9. Histoire du prince Ahmed et de la fée Peri-Banou.

 10. Histoire de deux Sœurs jalouses de leur Cadette.[217]

Concerning these interpolations which contain two of the best and most
widely known stories in the work, Aladdin and the Forty Thieves,
conjectures have been manifold but they mostly run upon three lines. De
Sacy held that they were found by Galland in the public libraries of
Paris. Mr. Chenery, whose acquaintance with Arabic grammar was ample,
suggested that the Professor had borrowed them from the recitations of
the Rawis, rhapsodists or professional story-tellers in the bazars of
Smyrna and other ports of the Levant. The late Mr. Henry Charles Coote
(in the “Folk-Lore Record,” vol. iii. Part ii. p. 178 et seq.), “On the
source of some of M. Galland’s Tales,” quotes from popular Italian,
Sicilian and Romaic stories incidents identical with those in Prince
Ahmad, Aladdin, Ali Baba and the Envious Sisters, suggesting that the
Frenchman had heard these _paramythia_ in Levantine coffee-houses and
had inserted them into his unequalled _corpus fabularum_. Mr. Payne (ix.
268) conjectures the probability “of their having been composed at a
comparatively recent period by an inhabitant of Baghdad, in imitation of
the legends of Haroun er Rashid and other well-known tales of the
original work;” and adds, “It is possible that an exhaustive examination
of the various MS. copies of the Thousand and One Nights known to exist
in the public libraries of Europe might yet cast some light upon the
question of the origin of the interpolated Tales.” I quite agree with
him, taking “The Sleeper and the Waker” and “Zeyn Al-asnam” as cases in
point; but I should expect, for reasons before given, to find the
stories in a Persic rather than an Arabic MS. And I feel convinced that
all will be recovered: Galland was not the man to commit a literary
forgery.

As regards Aladdin, the most popular tale of the whole work, I am
convinced that it is genuine, although my unfortunate friend, the late
Professor Palmer, doubted its being an Eastern story. It is laid down
upon all the lines of Oriental fiction. The mise-en-scène is China,
“where they drink a certain warm liquor” (tea); the hero’s father is a
poor tailor; and, as in “Judar and his Brethren,” the Maghribi Magician
presently makes his appearance, introducing the Wonderful Lamp and the
Magical Ring. Even the Sorcerer’s cry, “New lamps for old lamps!”—a
prime point—is paralleled in the Tale of the Fisherman’s son,[218] where
the Jew asks in exchange only old rings and the Princess, recollecting
that her husband kept a shabby, well-worn ring in his writing-stand, and
he being asleep, took it out and sent it to the man. In either tale the
palace is transported to a distance and both end with the death of the
wicked magician and the hero and heroine living happily together ever
after.

All Arabists have remarked the sins of omission and commission, of
abridgment, amplification and substitution, and the audacious distortion
of fact and phrase in which Galland freely indulged, whilst his
knowledge of Eastern languages proves that he knew better. But literary
license was the order of his day and at that time French, always the
most bégueule of European languages, was bound by a rigorisme of the
narrowest and the straightest of lines from which the least écart
condemned a man as a barbarian and a _tudesque_. If we consider Galland
fairly we shall find that he errs mostly for a purpose, that of
popularising his work; and his success indeed justified his means. He
has been derided (by scholars) for “Hé Monsieur!” and “Ah Madame!”; but
he could not write “O mon sieur” and “O ma dame;” although we can borrow
from biblical and Shakespearean English, “O my lord!” and “O my lady!”
“Bon Dieu! ma sœur” (which our translators english by “O heavens,” Night
xx.) is good French for Wa ’lláhi—by Allah; and “cinquante cavaliers
bien faits” (“fifty handsome gentlemen on horseback”) is a more familiar
picture than fifty knights. “L’officieuse Dinarzade” (Night lxi.), and
“Cette plaisante querelle des deux frères” (Night lxxii.) become
ridiculous only in translation—“the officious Dinarzade” and “this
pleasant quarrel;” while “ce qu’il y de remarquable” (Night lxxiii.)
would relieve the Gallic mind from the mortification of “Destiny
decreed.” “Plusieurs sortes de fruits et de bouteilles de vin” (Night
ccxxxi. etc.) europeanises flasks and flaggons; and the violent
convulsions in which the girl dies (Night cliv., her head having been
cut off by her sister) is mere Gallic squeamishness: France laughs at
“le shoking” in England but she has only to look at home especially
during the reign of Galland’s contemporary—Roi Soleil. The terrible “Old
man” (Shaykh) “of the Sea” (-board) is badly described by “l’incommode
vieillard” (“the ill-natured old fellow”): “Brave Maimune” and “Agréable
Maimune” are hardly what a Jinni would say to a Jinniyah (ccxiii.); but
they are good Gallic. The same may be noted of “Plier les voiles pour
marque qu’il se rendait” (Night ccxxxv.), a European practice; and of
the false note struck in two passages. “Je m’estimais heureuse d’avoir
fait une si belle conquête” (Night lxvii.) gives a Parisian turn; and,
“Je ne puis voir sans horreur cet abominable barbier que voilà:
quoiqu’il soit né dans un pays où tout le monde est blanc, il ne laisse
pas à ressembler à un Éthiopien; mais il a l’âme encore plus noire et
horrible que le visage” (Night clvii.), is a mere affectation of
Orientalism. Lastly, “Une vieille dame de leur connaissance” (Night
clviii.) puts French polish upon the matter of fact Arab’s “an old
woman.”

The list of absolute mistakes, not including violent liberties, can
hardly be held excessive. Professor Weil and Mr. Payne (ix. 271) justly
charge Galland with making the Trader (Night i.) throw away the _shells_
(_écorces_) of the date which has only a pellicle, as Galland certainly
knew; but dates were not seen every day in France, while almonds and
walnuts were of the quatre mendiants. He preserves the écorces, which
later issues have changed to noyaux, probably in allusion to the jerking
practice called Inwá. Again in the “First Shaykh’s Story” (vol. i. 27)
the “maillet” is mentioned as the means of slaughtering cattle, because
familiar to European readers: at the end of the tale it becomes “le
couteau funeste.” In Badr al-Din a “tarte à la crême,” so well known to
the West, displaces, naturally enough, the outlandish “mess of
pomegranate-seeds.” Though the text especially tells us the hero removed
his bag-trousers (not only “son habit”) and placed them under the
pillow, a crucial fact in the history, our Professor sends him to bed
fully dressed, apparently for the purpose of informing his readers in a
footnote that Easterns “se couchent en caleçon” (Night lxxx). It was
mere ignorance to confound the arbalète or cross-bow with the stone-bow
(Night xxxviii.), but this has universally been done, even by Lane who
ought to have known better; and it was an unpardonable carelessness or
something worse to turn Nár (fire) and Dún (in lieu of) into “le faux
dieu Nardoun” (Night lxv.): as this has been untouched by De Sacy, I
cannot but conclude that he never read the text with the translation.
Nearly as bad also to make the Jewish physician remark, when the youth
gave him the left wrist (Night cl.), “voilà une grande ignorance de ne
savoir pas que l’on presente la main droite à un médecin et non pas la
gauche”—whose exclusive use all travellers in the East must know. I have
noticed the incuriousness which translates “along the Nile-shore” by “up
towards Ethiopia” (Night cli.), and the “Islands of the _Children_ of
Khaledan” (Night ccxi.) instead of the Khálidatáni or Khálidát, the
Fortunate Islands. It was by no means “des petits soufflets” (“some tips
from time to time with her fingers”) which the sprightly dame
administered to the Barber’s second brother (Night clxxi.), but sound
and heavy “cuffs” on the nape; and the sixth brother (Night clxxx.) was
not “aux lèvres fendues” (“he of the hair-lips”), for they had been cut
off by the Badawi jealous of his fair wife. Abu al-Hasan would not greet
his beloved by saluting “le tapis à ses pieds:” he would kiss her hands
and feet. Haïatalnefous (Hayat al-Nufús, Night ccxxvi.) would not “throw
cold water in the Princess’s face:” she would sprinkle it with
eau-de-rose. “Camaralzaman” I addresses his two abominable wives in
language purely European (ccxxx.), “et de la vie il ne s’approcha
d’elles,” missing one of the fine touches of the tale which shows its
hero a weak and violent man, hasty and lacking the pundonor. “La belle
Persienne,” in the Tale of Nur al-Din, was no Persian; nor would her
master address her, “Venez çà, impertinente!” (“come hither,
impertinence”). In the story of Badr, one of the Comoro Islands becomes
“L’île de la Lune.” “Dog” and “dog-son” are not “injures atroces et
indignes d’un grand roi:” the greatest Eastern kings allow themselves
far more energetic and significant language. Fitnah[219] is by no means
“Force de cœurs.” Lastly the _dénoûement_ of The Nights is widely
different in French and in Arabic; but that is probably not Galland’s
fault, as he never saw the original, and indeed he deserves high praise
for having invented so pleasant and sympathetic a close, inferior only
to the Oriental device.[220]

Galland’s fragment has a strange effect upon the Orientalist and those
who take the scholastic view, be it wide or narrow. De Sacy does not
hesitate to say that the work owes much to his fellow-countryman’s hand;
but I judge otherwise: it is necessary to dissociate the two works and
to regard Galland’s paraphrase, which contains only a quarter of The
Thousand Nights and a Night, as a wholly different book. Its attempts to
amplify beauties and to correct or conceal the defects and the
grotesqueness of the original, absolutely suppress much of the local
colour, clothing the bare body in the best of Parisian suits. It ignores
the rhymed prose and excludes the verse, rarely and very rarely
rendering a few lines in a balanced style. It generally rejects the
proverbs, epigrams and moral reflections which form the pith and marrow
of the book; and, worse still, it disdains those finer touches of
character which are often Shakespearean in their depth and delicacy, and
which, applied to a race of familiar ways and thoughts, manners and
customs, would have been the wonder and delight of Europe. It shows only
a single side of the gem that has so many facets. By deference to public
taste it was compelled to expunge the often repulsive simplicity, the
childish indecencies and the wild orgies of the original, contrasting
with the gorgeous tints, the elevated morality and the religious tone of
passages which crowd upon them. We miss the odeur du sang which taints
the parfums du harem; also the humouristic tale and the Rabelaisian
outbreak which relieve and throw out into strong relief the splendour of
Empire and the havoc of Time. Considered in this light it is a caput
mortuum, a magnificent texture seen on the wrong side; and it speaks
volumes for the genius of the man who could recommend it in such blurred
and caricatured condition to readers throughout the civilised world. But
those who look only at Galland’s picture, his effort to “transplant into
European gardens the magic flowers of Eastern fancy,” still compare his
tales with the sudden prospect of magnificent mountains seen after a
long desert-march: they arouse strange longings and indescribable
desires; their marvellous imaginativeness produces an insensible
brightening of mind and an increase of fancy-power, making one dream
that behind them lies the new and unseen, the strange and unexpected—in
fact, all the glamour of the unknown.

The Nights has been translated into every far-extending Eastern tongue,
Persian, Turkish and Hindostani. The latter entitles them Hikáyát
al-Jalílah or Noble Tales, and the translation was made by Munshi Shams
al-Din Ahmad for the use of the College of Fort George in A.H. 1252 =
1836.[221] All these versions are direct from the Arabic: my search for
a translation of Galland into any Eastern tongue has hitherto been
fruitless.

I was assured by the late Bertholdy Seemann that the “language of
Hoffmann and Heine” contained a literal and complete translation of The
Nights; but personal enquiries at Leipzig and elsewhere convinced me
that the work still remains to be done. The first attempt to improve
upon Galland and to show the world what the work really is was made by
Dr. Max Habicht and was printed at Breslau (1824–25), in fifteen small
square volumes.[222] Thus it appeared before the “Tunis Manuscript”[223]
of which it purports to be a translation. The German version is, if
possible, more condemnable than the Arabic original. It lacks every
charm of style; it conscientiously shirks every difficulty; it abounds
in the most extraordinary blunders and it is utterly useless as a
picture of manners or a book of reference. We can explain its lâches
only by the theory that the eminent Professor left the labour to his
collaborateurs and did not take the trouble to revise their careless
work.

The next German translation was by Aulic Councillor J. von
Hammer-Purgstall[224] who, during his short stay at Cairo and
Constantinople, turned into French the tales neglected by Galland. After
some difference with M. Caussin (de Perceval) in 1810, the Styrian
Orientalist entrusted his MS. to Herr Cotta the publisher of Tubingen.
Thus a German version appeared, the translation of a translation, at the
hand of Professor Zinserling,[224] while the French version was
unaccountably lost en route to London. Finally the “Contes inédits,”
etc., appeared in a French translation by G. S. Trébutien (Paris,
mdcccxxviii.). Von Hammer took liberties with the text which can compare
only with those of Lane: he abridged and retrenched till the likeness in
places entirely disappeared; he shirked some difficult passages and he
misexplained others. In fact the work did no honour to the amiable and
laborious historian of the Turks.

The only good German translation of The Nights is due to Dr. Gustav Weil
who, born on April 24, 1808, is still (1886) professing at
Heidelburg.[225] His originals (he tells us) were the Breslau Edition,
the Bulak text of Abd al-Rahman al-Safati and a MS. in the library of
Saxe Gotha. The venerable savant, who has rendered such service to
Arabism, informs me that Aug. Lewald’s “Vorhalle” (pp. i.-xv.)[226] was
written without his knowledge. Dr. Weil neglects the division of days
which enables him to introduce any number of tales: for instance,
Galland’s eleven occupy a large part of vol. iii. The Vorwort wants
development; the notes, confined to a few words, are inadequate and
verse is everywhere rendered by prose, the Saj’a or assonance being
wholly ignored. On the other hand the scholar shows himself by a correct
translation, contrasting strongly with those which preceded him, and by
a strictly literal version, save where the treatment required to be
modified in a book intended for the public. Under such circumstances it
cannot well be other than longsome and monotonous reading.

Although Spain and Italy have produced many and remarkable Orientalists,
I cannot find that they have taken the trouble to translate The Nights
for themselves: cheap and gaudy versions of Galland seem to have
satisfied the public.[227] Notes on the Romaic, Icelandic, Russian (?)
and other versions, will be found in a future page.

Professor Galland has never been forgotten in France where, amongst a
host of editions, four have claims to distinction;[228] and his success
did not fail to create a host of imitators and to attract what De Sacy
justly terms “une prodigieuse importation de marchandise de
contrebande.” As early as 1823 Von Hammer numbered seven in France
(Trébutien, Préface xviii.) and during later years they have grown
prodigiously. Mr. William F. Kirby, who has made a special study of the
subject, has favoured me with detailed bibliographical notes on
Galland’s imitators which are printed in Appendix No. II.


                                 § III.
                THE MATTER AND THE MANNER OF THE NIGHTS.


                             A.—THE MATTER.

Returning to my threefold distribution of this Prose Poem (§ I) into
Fable, Fairy Tale and historical Anecdote,[229] let me proceed to
consider these sections more carefully.

The Apologue or Beast-fable, which apparently antedates all other
subjects in The Nights, has been called “One of the earliest creations
of the awakening consciousness of mankind.” I should regard it, despite
a monumental antiquity, as the offspring of a comparatively civilised
age, when a jealous despotism or a powerful oligarchy threw difficulties
and dangers in the way of speaking “plain truths.” A hint can be given
and a friend or foe can be lauded or abused as Belins the sheep or
Isengrim the wolf, when the Author is debarred the higher enjoyment of
praising them or dispraising them by name. And, as the purposes of
fables are twofold—

               Duplex libelli dos est: quod risum movet,
               Et quod prudenti vitam consilio monet—

The speaking of brute beasts would give a piquancy and a pleasantry to
moral design as well as to social and political satire.

The literary origin of the fable is not Buddhistic: we must especially
shun that “Indo-Germanic” school which goes to India for its origins,
when Pythagoras, Solon, Herodotus, Plato, Aristotle and possibly Homer
sat for instruction at the feet of the Hir-seshtha, the learned
grammarians of the pharaohnic court. Nor was it Æsopic, evidently Æsop
inherited the hoarded wealth of ages. As Professor Lepsius taught us,
“In the olden times within the memory of man, we know only of _one_
advanced culture; of only _one_ mode of writing, and of only _one_
literary development, viz. those of Egypt.” The invention of an
alphabet, as opposed to a syllabary, unknown to Babylonia, to Assyria
and to that extreme bourne of their civilising influences, China, would
for ever fix their literature—poetry, history and criticism,[230] the
apologue and the anecdote. To mention no others The Lion and the Mouse
appears in a Leyden papyrus dating from B.C. 1200–1166 the days of
Rameses III. (Rhampsinitus) or Hak On, not as a rude and early attempt,
but in a finished form, postulating an ancient origin and illustrious
ancestry. The dialogue also is brought to perfection in the discourse
between the Jackal Koufi and the Ethiopian Cat (Revue Égyptologique
ivme. année Part i.). Africa therefore was the home of the Beast-fable
not, as Professor Mahaffy thinks, because it was the chosen land of
animal worship, where

             Oppida tota canem venerantur nemo Dianam;[231]

but simply because the Nile-land originated every form of literature
between Fabliau and Epos.

From Kemi the Black-land it was but a step to Phœnicia, Judæa,[232]
Phrygia and Asia Minor, whence a ferry led over to Greece. Here the
Apologue found its populariser in Αἴσωπος, Æsop, whose name, involved in
myth, possibly connects with Αἰθίοψ:—“Æsopus et Aithiops idem sonant”
says the sages. This would show that the Hellenes preserved a legend of
the land whence the Beast-fable arose, and we may accept the fabulist’s
æra as contemporary with Crœsus and Solon (B.C. 570), about a century
after Psammeticus (Psamethik 1st) threw Egypt open to the restless
Greek.[233] From Africa too the Fable would in early ages migrate
eastwards and make for itself a new home in the second great focus of
civilisation formed by the Tigris-Euphrates Valley. The late Mr. George
Smith found amongst the cuneiforms fragmentary Beast-fables, such as
dialogues between the Ox and the Horse, the Eagle and the Sun. In after
centuries, when the conquests of Macedonian Alexander completed what
Sesostris and Semiramis had begun, and mingled the manifold families of
mankind by joining the eastern to the western world, the Orient became
formally hellenised. Under the Seleucidæ and during the life of the
independent Bactrian kingdom (B.C. 255–125), Grecian art and science,
literature and even language overran the old Iranic reign and extended
eastwards throughout northern India. Porus sent two embassies to
Augustus in B.C. 19 and in one of them the herald Zarmanochagas
(Shramanáchárya) of Bargosa, the modern Baroch in Guzerat, bore an
epistle upon vellum written in Greek (Strabo xv. 1 § 78). “Videtis
gentes populosque mutasse sedes” says Seneca (De Cons. ad Helv. c. vi.).
“Quid sibi volunt in mediis barbarorum regionibus Græcæ artes? Quid
inter Indos Persasque Macedonicus sermo? Atheniensis in Asia turba est.”
Upper India, in the Macedonian days would have been mainly Buddhistic,
possessing a rude alphabet borrowed from Egypt through Arabia and
Phœnicia, but still in a low and barbarous condition: her buildings were
wooden and she lacked, as far as we know, stone-architecture—the main
test of social development. But the Bactrian Kingdom gave an impulse to
her civilisation and the result was classical opposed to vedic Sanskrit.
From Persia Greek letters, extending southwards to Arabia, would find
indigenous imitators and there Æsop would be represented by the sundry
sages who share the name Lokman.[234] One of these was of servile
condition, tailor, carpenter or shepherd; and a “Habashi” (Æthiopian)
meaning a negro slave with blubber lips and splay feet, so far showing a
superficial likeness to the Æsop of history.

The Æsopic fable, carried by the Hellenes to India, might have fallen in
with some rude and fantastic barbarian of Buddhistic “persuasion” and
indigenous origin: so Reynard the Fox has its analogue amongst the
Kafirs and the Vái tribe of Mandengan negroes in Liberia[235] amongst
whom one Doalu invented or rather borrowed a syllabarium. The modern
Gypsies are said also to have beast-fables which have never been traced
to a foreign source (Leland). But I cannot accept the refinement of
difference which Professor Benfey, followed by Mr. Keith-Falconer,
discovers between the Æsopic and the Hindu apologue:—“In the former
animals are allowed to act as animals: the latter makes them act as men
in the form of animals.” The essence of the beast-fable is a
reminiscence of Homo primigenius with erected ears and hairy hide, and
its expression is to make the brother brute behave, think and talk like
him with the superadded experience of ages. To early man the “lower
animals,” which are born, live and die like himself, showing all the
same affects and disaffects, loves and hates, passions, prepossessions
and prejudices, must have seemed quite human enough and on an equal
level to become his substitutes. The savage, when he began to reflect,
would regard the carnivore and the serpent with awe, wonder and dread;
and would soon suspect the same mysterious potency in the brute as in
himself: so the Malays still look upon the Uran-utan, or Wood-man, as
the possessor of superhuman wisdom. The hunter and the herdsman, who had
few other companions, would presently explain the peculiar relations of
animals to themselves by material metamorphosis, the bodily
transformation of man to brute giving increased powers of working him
weal and woe. A more advanced stage would find the step easy to
metempsychosis, the beast containing the Ego (_alias_ soul) of the
human: such instinctive belief explains much in Hindu literature, but it
was not wanted at first by the Apologue.

This blending of blood, this racial baptism would produce a fine robust
progeny; and, after our second century, Ægypto-Græco-Indian stories
overran the civilized globe between Rome and China. Tales have wings and
fly farther than the jade hatchets of proto-historic days. And the
result was a book which has had more readers than any other except the
Bible. Its original is unknown.[236] The volume, which in Pehlevi became
the Jávidán Khirad (“Wisdom of Ages”) or the Testament of Hoshang, that
ancient guebre King, and in Sanskrit the Panchatantra (“Five Chapters”),
is a recueil of apologues and anecdotes related by the learned Brahman,
Vishnu Sharmá, for the benefit of his pupils the sons of an Indian
Rajah. The Hindu original has been adapted and translated into a number
of languages; Arabic, Hebrew and Syriac, Greek and Latin, Persian and
Turkish, under a host of names.[237] Voltaire[238] wisely remarks of
this venerable production:—Quand on fait réflexion que presque toute la
terre a été enfatuée de pareils contes, et qu’ils ont fait l’éducation
du genre humain, on trouve les fables de Pilpay, de Lokman,[239]
d’Ésope, bien raisonables. But methinks the sage of Ferney might have
said far more. These fables speak with the large utterance of early man;
they have also their own especial beauty—the charms of well-preserved
and time-honoured old age. There is in their wisdom a perfume of the
past, homely and ancient-fashioned like a whiff of _pot pourri_,
wondrous soothing withal to olfactories agitated by the patchoulis and
jockey clubs of modern pretenders and petit-maîtres, with their grey
young heads and pert intelligence, the motto of whose ignorance is
“Connu!” Were a dose of its antique, mature experience adhibited to the
Western before he visits the East, those few who could digest it might
escape the normal lot of being twisted round the fingers of every rogue
they meet from Dragoman to Rajah. And a quotation from them tells at
once: it shows the quoter to be a man of education, not a “Jangalí,” a
sylvan or savage, as the Anglo-Indian official is habitually termed by
his more civilised “fellow-subject.”

The main difference between the classical apologue and the fable in The
Nights is that while Æsop and Gabrias write laconic tales with a single
event and a simple moral, the Arabian fables are often “long-continued
novelle involving a variety of events, each characterised by some social
or political aspect, forming a narrative highly interesting in itself,
often exhibiting the most exquisite moral, and yet preserving, with rare
ingenuity, the peculiar characteristics of the actors.”[240] And the
distinction between the ancient and the mediæval apologue, including the
modern which, since “Reineke Fuchs,” is mainly German, appears equally
pronounced. The latter is humorous enough and rich in the wit which
results from superficial incongruity; but it ignores the deep underlying
bond which connects man with beast. Again, the main secret of its
success is the strain of pungent satire, especially in the Renardine
Cycle, which the people could apply to all unpopular “lordes and
prelates, gostly and worldly.”

Our Recueil contains two distinct sets of apologues.[241] The first
(vol. iii.) consists of eleven, alternating with five anecdotes (Nights
cxlvi.-cliii.), following the lengthy and knightly romance of King Omar
bin al Nu’man and followed by the melancholy love tale of Ali bin
Bakkár. The second series in vol. ix., consisting of eight fables, not
including ten anecdotes (Nights cmi.-cmxxiv.), is injected into the
romance of King Jali’ad and Shimas mentioned by Al-Mas’udi as
independent of The Nights. In both places the Beast-fables are
introduced with some art and add variety to the subject-matter,
obviating monotony—the deadly sin of such works—and giving repose to the
hearer or reader after a climax of excitement such as the murder of the
Wazirs. And even these are not allowed to pall upon the mental palate,
being mingled with anecdotes and short tales, such as the Hermits (iii.
125), with biographical or literary episodes, acroamata, table-talk and
analects where humorous Rabelaisian anecdote finds a place; in fact the
fabliau or novella. This style of composition may be as ancient as the
apologues. We know that it dates as far back as Rameses III., from the
history of the Two Brothers in the Orbigny papyrus,[242] the prototype
of Yusuf and Zulaykha, the Koranic Joseph and Potiphar’s wife. It is
told with a charming naïveté and such sharp touches of local colour as,
“Come, let us make merry an hour and lie together! _Let down thy hair!_”

Some of the apologues in The Nights are pointless enough, rien moins
qu’amusants; but in the best specimens, such as the Wolf and the
Fox[243] (the wicked man and the wily man), both characters are
carefully kept distinct and neither action nor dialogue ever flags.
Again The Flea and the Mouse (iii. 151), of a type familiar to students
of the Pilpay cycle, must strike the home-reader as peculiarly quaint.

Next in date to the Apologue comes the Fairy Tale proper, where the
natural universe is supplemented by one of purely imaginative existence.
“As the active world is inferior to the rational soul,” says Bacon with
his normal sound sense, “so Fiction gives to Mankind what History denies
and in some measure satisfies the Mind with Shadows when it cannot enjoy
the Substance. And as real History gives us not the success of things
according to the deserts of vice and virtue, Fiction corrects it and
presents us with the fates and fortunes of persons rewarded and punished
according to merit.” But I would say still more. History paints or
attempts to paint life as it is, a mighty maze with or without a plan:
Fiction shows or would show us life as it should be, wisely ordered and
laid down on fixed lines. Thus Fiction is not the mere handmaid of
History: she has a household of her own and she claims to be the triumph
of Art which, as Goëthe remarked, is “Art because it is not Nature.”
Fancy, _la folle du logis_, is “that kind and gentle portress who holds
the gate of Hope wide open, in opposition to Reason, the surly and
scrupulous guard.”[244] As Palmerin of England says and says well, “For
that the report of noble deeds doth urge the courageous mind to equal
those who bear most commendation of their approved valiancy; this is the
fair fruit of Imagination and of ancient histories.” And, last but not
least, the faculty of Fancy takes count of the cravings of man’s nature
for the marvellous, the impossible, and of his higher aspirations for
the Ideal, the Perfect: she realises the wild dreams and visions of his
generous youth and portrays for him a portion of that “other and better
world,” with whose expectation he would console his age.

The imaginative varnish of The Nights serves admirably as a foil to the
absolute realism of the picture in general. We enjoy being carried away
from trivial and common-place characters, scenes and incidents; from the
matter of fact surroundings of a work-a-day world, a life of eating and
drinking, sleeping and waking, fighting and loving, into a society and a
mise-en-scène which we suspect can exist and which we know does not.
Every man at some turn or term of his life has longed for supernatural
powers and a glimpse of Wonderland. Here he is in the midst of it. Here
he sees mighty spirits summoned to work the human mite’s will, however
whimsical, who can transport him in an eye-twinkling whithersoever he
wishes; who can ruin cities and build palaces of gold and silver, gems
and jacinths; who can serve up delicate viands and delicious drinks in
priceless chargers and impossible cups and bring the choicest fruits
from farthest Orient: here he finds magas and magicians who can make
kings of his friends, slay armies of his foes and bring any number of
beloveds to his arms. And from this outraging probability and
outstripping possibility arises not a little of that strange fascination
exercised for nearly two centuries upon the life and literature of
Europe by The Nights, even in their mutilated and garbled form. The
reader surrenders himself to the spell, feeling almost inclined to
enquire “And why may it not be true?”[245] His brain is dazed and
dazzled by the splendours which flash before it, by the sudden
procession of Jinns and Jinniyahs, demons and fairies, some hideous,
others preternaturally beautiful; by good wizards and evil sorcerers,
whose powers are unlimited for weal and for woe; by mermen and mermaids,
flying horses, talking animals, and reasoning elephants; by magic rings
and their slaves and by talismanic couches which rival the carpet of
Solomon. Hence, as one remarks, these Fairy Tales have pleased and still
continue to please almost all ages, all ranks and all different
capacities.

Dr. Hawkesworth[246] observes that these Fairy Tales find favour
“because even their machinery, wild and wonderful as it is, has its
laws; and the magicians and enchanters perform nothing but what was
naturally to be expected from such beings, after we had once granted
them existence.” Mr. Heron “rather supposes the very contrary is the
truth of the fact. It is surely the strangeness, the unknown nature, the
anomalous character of the supernatural agents here employed, that makes
them to operate so powerfully on our hopes, fears, curiosities,
sympathies, and, in short, on all the feelings of our hearts. We see men
and women, who possess qualities to recommend them to our favour,
subjected to the influence of beings, whose good or ill will, power or
weakness, attention or neglect, are regulated by motives and
circumstances which we cannot comprehend: and hence, we naturally
tremble for their fate, with the same anxious concern, as we should for
a friend wandering, in a dark night, amidst torrents and precipices; or
preparing to land on a strange island, while he knew not whether he
should be received, on the shore, by cannibals waiting to tear him
piecemeal, and devour him, or by gentle beings, disposed to cherish him
with fond hospitality.” Both writers have expressed themselves well, but
meseems each has secured, as often happens, a fragment of the truth and
holds it to be the whole Truth. Granted that such spiritual creatures as
Jinns walk the earth, we are pleased to find them so very human, as wise
and as foolish in word and deed as ourselves: similarly we admire in a
landscape natural forms like those of Staffa or the Palisades which
favour the works of architecture. Again, supposing such
preternaturalisms to be around and amongst us, the wilder and more
capricious they prove, the more our attention is excited and our
forecasts are baffled to be set right in the end. But this is not all.
The grand source of pleasure in Fairy Tales is the natural desire to
learn more of the Wonderland which is known to many as a word and
nothing more, like Central Africa before the last half century: thus the
interest is that of the “Personal Narrative” of a grand exploration to
one who delights in travels. The pleasure must be greatest where faith
is strongest; for instance amongst imaginative races like the Kelts and
especially Orientals, who imbibe supernaturalism with their mother’s
milk. “I am persuaded,” writes Mr. Bayle St. John,[247] “that the great
scheme of preternatural energy, so fully developed in The Thousand and
One Nights, is believed in by the majority of the inhabitants of all the
religious professions both in Syria and Egypt.” He might have added “by
every reasoning being from prince to peasant, from Mullah to Badawi,
between Marocco and Outer Ind.”

The Fairy Tale in The Nights is wholly and purely Persian. The gifted
Iranian race, physically the noblest and the most beautiful of all known
to me, has exercised upon the world-history an amount of influence which
has not yet been fully recognised. It repeated for Babylonian art and
literature what Greece had done for Egyptian, whose dominant idea was
that of working for eternity a κτῆμα εἰς ἀεί. Hellas and Iran
instinctively chose as their characteristic the idea of Beauty,
rejecting all that was exaggerated and grotesque; and they made the
sphere of Art and Fancy as real as the world of Nature and Fact. The
innovation was hailed by the Hebrews. The so-called Books of Moses
deliberately and ostentatiously ignored the future state of rewards and
punishments, the other world which ruled the life of the Egyptian in
this world: the lawgiver, whoever he may have been, Osarsiph or Moshe,
apparently held the tenet unworthy of a race whose career he was
directing to conquest and isolation in dominion. But the Jews, removed
to Mesopotamia, the second cradle of the creeds, presently caught the
infection of their Asiatic media; superadded Babylonian legend to
Egyptian myth; stultified The Law by supplementing it with the
“absurdities of foreign fable” and ended, as the Talmud proves, with
becoming the most wildly superstitious and “otherworldly” of mankind.

The same change befel Al-Islam. The whole of its supernaturalism is
borrowed bodily from Persia, which had “imparadised Earth by making it
the abode of angels.” Mohammed, a great and commanding genius, blighted
and narrowed by surroundings and circumstance to something little higher
than a Covenanter or a Puritan, declared to his followers,

           “I am sent to ’stablish the manners and customs;”

and his deficiency of imagination made him dislike everything but
“women, perfumes, and prayers,” with an especial aversion to music and
poetry, plastic art and fiction. Yet his system, unlike that of Moses,
demanded thaumaturgy and metaphysical entities, and these he perforce
borrowed from the Jews who had borrowed them from the Babylonians: his
soul and spirit, his angels and devils, his cosmogony, his heavens and
hells, even the Bridge over the Great Depth are all either Talmudic or
Iranian. But there he stopped and would have stopped others. His enemies
among the Koraysh were in the habit of reciting certain Persian fabliaux
and of extolling them as superior to the silly and equally fictitious
stories of the “Glorious Koran.” The leader of these scoffers was one
Nazr ibn Háris who, taken prisoner after the Battle of Bedr, was
incontinently decapitated, by apostolic command, for what appears to be
a natural and sensible preference. It was the same furious fanaticism
and one-idea’d intolerance which made Caliph Omar destroy all he could
find of the Alexandrian Library and prescribe burning for the Holy Books
of the Persian Guebres. And the taint still lingers in Al-Islam: it will
be said of a pious man, “He always studies the Koran, the Traditions and
other books of Law and Religion; and he never reads poems nor listens to
music or to stories.”

Mohammed left a dispensation or rather a reformation so arid, jejune and
material that it promised little more than the “Law of Moses,” before
this was vivified and racially baptised by Mesopotamian and Persic
influences. But human nature was stronger than the Prophet and, thus
outraged, took speedy and absolute revenge. Before the first century had
elapsed, orthodox Al-Islam was startled by the rise of Tasawwuf or
Sufyism[248] a revival of classic Platonism and Christian Gnosticism,
with a mingling of modern Hylozoism; which, quickened by the glowing
imagination of the East, speedily formed itself into a creed the most
poetical and impractical, the most spiritual and the most transcendental
ever invented; satisfying all man’s hunger for “belief” which, if placed
upon a solid basis of fact and proof, would forthright cease to be
belief.

I will take from The Nights, as a specimen of the true Persian romance,
“The Queen of the Serpents” (vol. v. 298), the subject of Lane’s
Carlylean denunciation. The first gorgeous picture is the Session of the
Snakes which, like their Indian congeners the Nága kings and queens,
have human heads and reptile bodies, an Egyptian myth that engendered
the “old serpent” of Genesis. The Sultánah welcomes Hásib Karím al-Dín,
the hapless lad who had been left in a cavern to die by the greedy
woodcutters; and, in order to tell him her tale, introduces the
“Adventures of Bulúkiyá”: the latter is an Israelite converted by editor
and scribe to Mohammedanism; but we can detect under his assumed faith
the older creed. Solomon is not buried by authentic history “beyond the
Seven (mystic) Seas,” but at Jerusalem or Tiberias; and his seal-ring
suggests the Jám-i-Jam, the crystal cup of the great King Jamshíd. The
descent of the Archangel Gabriel, so familiar to Al-Islam, is the
manifestation of Bahman, the First Intelligence, the mightiest of the
Angels who enabled Zarathustra-Zoroaster to walk like Bulukiya over the
Dálatí or Caspian Sea.[249] Amongst the sights shown to Bulukiya, as he
traverses the Seven Oceans, is a battle royal between the believing and
the unbelieving Jinns, true Magian dualism, the eternal duello of the
Two Roots or antagonistic Principles, Good and Evil, Hormuzd and
Ahriman, which Milton has debased into a common-place modern combat
fought also with cannon. Sakhr the Jinni is Eshem chief of the Divs, and
Kaf, the encircling mountain, is a later edition of Persian Alborz. So
in the Mantak al-Tayr (Colloquy of the Flyers) the Birds, emblems of
souls, seeking the presence of the gigantic feathered biped Simurgh,
their god, traverse seven Seas (according to others seven Wadys) of
Search, of Love, of Knowledge, of Competence, of Unity, of Stupefaction,
and of Altruism (_i.e._ annihilation of self), the several stages of
contemplative life. At last, standing upon the mysterious island of the
Simurgh and “casting a clandestine glance at him they saw thirty
birds[250] in him; and when they turned their eyes to themselves the
thirty birds seemed one Simurgh: they saw in themselves the entire
Simurgh; they saw in the Simurgh the thirty birds entirely.” Therefore
they arrived at the solution of the problem “_We_ and _Thou_;” that is,
the identity of God and Man; they were for ever annihilated in the
Simurgh and the shade vanished in the sun (Ibid. iii. 250). The wild
ideas concerning Khalít and Malít (vol. v. 319) are again Guebre. “From
the seed of Kayomars (the androgyne, like pre-Adamite man) sprang a tree
shaped like two human beings and thence proceeded Meshia and Meshianah,
first man and woman, progenitors of mankind;” who, though created for
“Shídistán, Lightland,” were seduced by Ahriman. This “two-man-tree” is
evidently the duality of Physis and Anti-physis, Nature and her
counterpart, the battle between Mihr, Izad or Mithra with his Surush and
Feristeh (Seraphs and Angels) against the Divs who are the children of
Time led by the arch-demon Eshem. Thus when Hormuzd created the planets,
the dog, and all useful animals and plants, Ahriman produced the comets,
the wolf, noxious beasts and poisonous growths. The Hindus represent the
same metaphysical idea by Bramhá the Creator and Visvakarma, the
Anti-creator,[251] miscalled by Europeans Vulcan: the former fashions a
horse and a bull and the latter caricatures them with an ass and a
buffalo,—evolution turned topsy turvy. After seeing nine angels and
obtaining an explanation of the Seven Stages of Earth which is supported
by the Gav-i-Zamín, the energy, symbolised by a bull, implanted by the
Creator in the mundane sphere, Bulukiya meets the four Archangels, to
wit Gabriel who is the Persian Rawánbakhsh or Life-giver; Michael or
Beshter, Raphael or Israfil alias Ardibihisht, and Azazel or Azrail who
is Dumá or Mordad, the Death-giver; and the four are about to attack the
Dragon, that is, the demons hostile to mankind who were driven behind
Alborz-Kaf by Tahmuras the ancient Persian king. Bulukiya then recites
an episode within an episode, the “Story of Jánsháh,” itself a Persian
name and accompanied by two others (vol. v. 329), the _mise-en-scène_
being Kabul and the King of Khorasan appearing in the proem. Janshah,
the young Prince, no sooner comes to man’s estate than he loses himself
out hunting and falls in with cannibals whose bodies divide
longitudinally, each moiety going its own way: these are the Shikk
(split ones) which the Arabs borrowed from the Persian Ním-chihrah or
Half-faces. They escape to the Ape-island whose denizens are human in
intelligence and speak articulately, as the universal East believes they
can: these Simiads are at chronic war with the Ants, alluding to some
obscure myth which gave rise to the gold-diggers of Herodotus and other
classics, “emmets in size somewhat less than dogs but bigger than
foxes.”[252] The episode then falls into the banalities of Oriental
folk-lore. Janshah, passing the Sabbation river and reaching the Jews’
city, is persuaded to be sewn up in a skin and is carried in the normal
way to the top of the Mountain of Gems where he makes acquaintance with
Shaykh Nasr, Lord of the Birds: he enters the usual forbidden room;
falls in love with the pattern Swan-maiden; wins her by the popular
process; loses her and recovers her through the Monk Yaghmús, whose
name, like that of King Teghmús, is a burlesque of the Greek; and,
finally, when she is killed by a shark, determines to mourn her loss
till the end of his days. Having heard this story Bulukiya quits him;
and, resolving to regain his natal land, falls in with Khizr; and the
Green Prophet, who was Wazir to Kay Kobad (vith century B.C.) and was
connected with Macedonian Alexander (!) enables him to win his wish. The
rest of the tale calls for no comment.

Thirdly and lastly we have the histories, historical stories and the
“Ana” of great men in which Easterns as well as Westerns delight: the
gravest writers do not disdain to relieve the dullness of chronicles and
annals by means of such discussions, humorous or pathetic, moral or
grossly indecent. The dates must greatly vary: some of the anecdotes
relating to the early Caliphs appear almost contemporary; others, like
Ali of Cairo and Abu al-Shamat, may be as late as the Ottoman Conquest
of Egypt (sixteenth century). All are distinctly Sunnite and show fierce
animus against the Shi’ah heretics, suggesting that they were written
after the destruction of the Fatimite dynasty (twelfth century) by Salah
al-Din (Saladin the Kurd) one of the latest historical personages and
the last king named in The Nights.[253] These anecdotes are so often
connected with what a learned Frenchman terms the “regne féerique de
Haroun er-Réschid,”[254] that the Great Caliph becomes the hero of this
portion of The Nights. Aaron the Orthodox was the central figure of the
most splendid empire the world had seen, the Viceregent of Allah
combining the powers of Cæsar and Pope, and wielding them right worthily
according to the general voice of historians. To quote a few: Ali bin
Talib al-Khorásáni described him, in A.D. 934, a century and-a-half
after his death when flattery would be tongue-tied, as, “one devoted to
war and pilgrimage, whose bounty embraced the folk at large.” Sa’adi
(ob. A.D. 1291) tells a tale highly favourable to him in the “Gulistan”
(lib. i. 36). Fakhr al-Din[255] (xivth century) lauds his merits,
eloquence, science and generosity; and Al-Siyuti (nat. A.D. 1445)
asserts “He was one of the most distinguished of Caliphs and the most
illustrious of the Princes of the Earth” (p. 290). The Shaykh
al-Nafzáwi[256] (sixteenth century) in his Rauz al-’Átir fí Nazáh
al-Khátir = Scented Garden-site for Heart-delight, calls Harun (chapt.
vii.) the “Master of munificence and bounty, the best of the generous.”
And even the latest writers have not ceased to praise him. Says Alí Azíz
Efendi the Cretan, in the Story of Jewád[257] (p. 81), “Harun was the
most bounteous, illustrious and upright of the Abbaside Caliphs.”

The fifth Abbaside was fair and handsome, of noble and majestic
presence, a sportsman and an athlete who delighted in polo and archery.
He showed sound sense and true wisdom in his speech to the
grammarian-poet Al-Asma’í, who had undertaken to teach him:—“Ne
m’enseignez jamais en public, et ne vous empressez pas trop de me donner
des avis en particulier. Attendez ordinairement que je vous interroge,
et contentez-vous de me donner une response précise à ce que je vous
demanderai, sans y rien ajouter de superflu. Gardez vous surtout de
vouloir me préoccuper pour vous attirer ma créance, et pour vous donner
de l’autorité. Ne vous étendez jamais trop en long sur les histoires et
les traditions que vous me raconterez, si je ne vous en donne la
permission. Lorsque vous verrai que je m’eloignerai de l’équité dans mes
jugements, ramenez-moi avec douceur, sans user de paroles fâcheuses ni
de réprimandes. Enseignez-moi principalement les choses qui sont les
plus nécessaires pour les discours que je dois faire en public, dans les
mosquées et ailleurs; et ne parlez point en termes obscurs, ou
mystérieux, ni avec des paroles trop recherchées.”[258]

He became well read in science and letters, especially history and
tradition, for “his understanding was as the understanding of the
learned;” and, like all educated Arabs of his day, “he was a connoisseur
of poetry which at times he improvised with success.”[259] He made the
pilgrimage every alternate year and sometimes on foot, while “his
military expeditions almost equalled his pilgrimages.” Day after day
during his Caliphate he prayed a hundred “bows,” never neglecting them,
save for some especial reason, till his death; and he used to give from
his privy purse alms to the extent of a hundred dirhams per diem. He
delighted in panegyry and liberally rewarded its experts, one of whom,
Abd al-Sammák the Preacher, fairly said of him, “Thy humility in thy
greatness is nobler than thy greatness.” “No Caliph,” says Al-Niftawayh,
“had been so profusely liberal to poets, lawyers and divines, although
as the years advanced he wept over his extravagance amongst other sins.”
There was vigorous manliness in his answer to the Grecian Emperor who
had sent him an insulting missive:—“In the name of Allah! From the
Commander of the Faithful Harun al-Rashid, to Nicephorus the Roman dog.
I have read thy writ, O son of a miscreant mother! Thou shalt not hear,
thou shalt see my reply.” Nor did he cease to make the Byzantine feel
the weight of his arm till he “nakh’d”[260] his camel in the imperial
Court-yard; and this was only one instance of his indomitable energy and
hatred of the Infidel. Yet, if the West is to be believed, he forgot his
fanaticism in his diplomatic dealings and courteous intercourse with
Carolus Magnus.[261] Finally, his civilised and well regulated rule
contrasted as strongly with the barbarity and turbulence of occidental
Christendom, as the splendid Court and the luxurious life of Baghdad and
its carpets and hangings devanced the quasi-savagery of London and Paris
whose palatial halls were spread with rushes.

The great Caliph ruled twenty-three years and a few months (A.H. 170–193
= A.D. 786–808); and, as his youth was chequered and his reign was
glorious, so was his end obscure.[262] After a vision foreshadowing his
death,[263] which happened, as becomes a good Moslem, during a military
expedition to Khorasan, he ordered his grave to be dug and himself to be
carried to it in a covered litter: when sighting the fosse he exclaimed,
“O son of man thou art come to this!” Then he commanded himself to be
set down and a perlection of the Koran to be made over him in the litter
on the edge of the grave. He was buried (æt. forty-five) at Sanábád, a
village near Tús.

Aaron the Orthodox appears in The Nights as a headstrong and violent
autocrat, a right royal figure according to the Moslem ideas of his day.
But his career shows that he was not more tyrannical or more sanguinary
than the normal despot of the East, or the contemporary Kings of the
West: in most points, indeed, he was far superior to the historic
misrulers who have afflicted the world from Spain to furthest China. But
a single great crime, a tragedy whose details are almost incredibly
horrible, marks his reign with the stain of infamy, with a blot of blood
never to be washed away. This tale, “full of the waters of the eye,” as
Firdausi sings, is the massacre of the Barmecides; a story which has
often been told and which cannot here be passed over in silence. The
ancient and noble Iranian house, belonging to the “Ebná” or Arabised
Persians, had long served the Ommiades till, early in our eighth
century, Khálid bin Bermek,[264] the chief, entered the service of the
first Abbaside and became Wazir and Intendant of Finance to Al-Saffah.
The most remarkable and distinguished of the family, he was in office
when Al-Mansur transferred the capital from Damascus, the head-quarters
of the hated Ommiades, to Baghdad, built ad hoc. After securing the
highest character in history by his personal gifts and public services,
he was succeeded by his son and heir Yáhyá (John), a statesman famed
from early youth for prudence and profound intelligence, liberality and
nobility of soul.[265] He was charged by the Caliph Al-Mahdi with the
education of his son Harun, hence the latter was accustomed to call him
father; and, until the assassination of the fantastic tyrant Al-Hádi,
who proposed to make his own child Caliph, he had no little difficulty
in preserving the youth from death in prison. The Orthodox, once seated
firmly on the throne, appointed Yahya his Grand Wazir. This great
administrator had four sons, Al-Fazl, Ja’afar, Mohammed, and Musa,[266]
in whose time the house of Bermek rose to that height from which decline
and fall are, in the East, well nigh certain and immediate. Al-Fazl was
a foster-brother of Harun, an exchange of suckling infants having taken
place between the two mothers for the usual object, a tightening of the
ties of intimacy: he was a man of exceptional mind, but he lacked the
charm of temper and manner which characterised Ja’afar. The poets and
rhetoricians have been profuse in their praises of the cadet who appears
in The Nights as an adviser of calm sound sense, an intercessor and a
peace-maker, and even more remarkable than the rest of his family for an
almost incredible magnanimity and generosity—une générosité effrayante.
Mohammed was famed for exalted views and nobility of sentiment and Musa
for bravery and energy: of both it was justly said, “They did good and
harmed not.”[267]

For ten years (not including an interval of seven) from the time of
Al-Rashid’s accession (A.D. 786) to the date of their fall, (A.D. 803),
Yahya and his sons, Al-Fazl and Ja’afar, were virtually rulers of the
great heterogeneous empire, which extended from Mauritania to Tartary,
and they did notable service in arresting its disruption. Their downfall
came sudden and terrible like “a thunderbolt from the blue.” As the
Caliph and Ja’afar were halting in Al-’Umr (the convent) near Anbár-town
on the Euphrates, after a convivial evening spent in different
pavilions, Harun during the dead of the night called up his page Yásir
al-Rikhlah[268] and bade him bring Ja’afar’s head. The messenger found
Ja’afar still carousing with the blind poet Abú Zakkár and the Christian
physician Gabriel ibn Bakhtiashú, and was persuaded to return to the
Caliph and report his death; the Wazir adding, “An he express regret I
shall owe thee my life; and, if not, whatso Allah will be done.” Ja’afar
followed to listen and heard only the Caliph exclaim, “O sucker of thy
mother’s clitoris, if thou answer me another word, I will send thee
before him!” whereupon he at once bandaged his own eyes and received the
fatal blow. Al-Asma’í, who was summoned to the presence shortly after,
recounts that when the head was brought to Harun he gazed at it, and
summoning two witnesses commanded them to decapitate Yasir, crying, “I
cannot bear to look upon the slayer of Ja’afar!” His vengeance did not
cease with the death: he ordered the head to be gibbetted at one end and
the trunk at the other abutment of the Tigris bridge where the corpses
of the vilest malefactors used to be exposed; and, some months
afterwards, he insulted the remains by having them burned—the last and
worst indignity which can be offered to a Moslem. There are indeed pity
and terror in the difference between two such items in the
Treasury-accounts as these: “Four hundred thousand dinars (£200,000) to
a robe of honour for the Wazir Ja’afar bin Yahya;” and, “Ten kírát, (5
shill.) to naphtha and reeds for burning the body of Ja’afar the
Barmecide.”

Meanwhile Yahya and Al-Fazl, seized by the Caliph Harun’s command at
Baghdad, were significantly cast into the prison “Habs al-Zanádikah”—of
the Guebres—and their immense wealth which, some opine, hastened their
downfall, was confiscated. According to the historian, Al-Tabari, who,
however, is not supported by all the annalists, the whole Barmecide
family, men, women, and children, numbering over a thousand, were
slaughtered with only three exceptions; Yahya, his brother Mohammed, and
his son Al-Fazl. The Caliph’s foster-father, who lived to the age of
seventy-four, was allowed to die in jail (A.H. 805) after two years’
imprisonment at Rukkah. Al-Fazl, after having been tortured with two
hundred blows in order to make him produce concealed property, survived
his father three years and died in Nov. A.H. 808, some four months
before his terrible foster-brother. A pathetic tale is told of the son
warming water for the old man’s use by pressing the copper ewer to his
stomach.

The motives of this terrible massacre are variously recounted, but no
sufficient explanation has yet been, or possibly ever will be, given.
The popular idea is embodied in The Nights.[269] Harun, wishing Ja’afar
to be his companion even in the Harem, had wedded him, pro formâ, to his
eldest sister Abbásah, “the loveliest woman of her day,” and brilliant
in mind as in body; but he had expressly said, “I will marry thee to
her, that it may be lawful for thee to look upon her but thou shalt not
touch her.” Ja’afar bound himself by a solemn oath; but his mother
Attábah was mad enough to deceive him in his cups and the result was a
boy (Ibn Khallikan) or, according to others, twins. The issue was sent
under the charge of a confidential eunuch and a slave-girl to Meccah for
concealment; but the secret was divulged to Zubaydah who had her own
reasons for hating husband and wife and cherished an especial grievance
against Yahya.[270] Thence it soon found its way to head-quarters.
Harun’s treatment of Abbásah supports the general conviction: according
to the most credible accounts she and her child were buried alive in a
pit under the floor of her apartment.

But, possibly, Ja’afar’s perjury was only “the last straw.” Already
Al-Fazl bin Rabí’a, the deadliest enemy of the Barmecides, had been
entrusted (A.D. 786) with the Wazirate which he kept seven years.
Ja’afar had also acted generously but imprudently in abetting the escape
of Yahya bin Abdillah, Sayyid and Alide, for whom the Caliph had
commanded confinement in a close dark dungeon: when charged with
disobedience the Wazir had made full confession and Harun had (they say)
exclaimed, “Thou hast done well!” but was heard to mutter, “Allah slay
me an I slay thee not.”[271] The great house seems at times to have
abused its powers by being too peremptory with Harun and Zubaydah,
especially in money matters;[272] and its very greatness would have
created for it many and powerful enemies and detractors who plied the
Caliph with anonymous verse and prose. Nor was it forgotten that, before
the spread of Al-Islam, they had presided over the Naubehár or Pyræthrum
of Balkh; and Harun is said to have remarked anent Yahya, “The zeal for
magianism, rooted in his heart, induces him to save all the monuments
connected with his faith.”[273] Hence the charge that they were
“Zanádakah,” a term properly applied to those who study the Zend
scripture, but popularly meaning Mundanists, Positivists, Reprobates,
Atheists; and it may be noted that, immediately after Al-Rashid’s death,
violent religious troubles broke out in Baghdad. Ibn Khallikan[274]
quotes Sa’íd ibn Sálim, a well-known grammarian and traditionist who
philosophically remarked, “Of a truth the Barmecides did nothing to
deserve Al-Rashid’s severity, but the day (of their power and
prosperity) had been long and whatso endureth long waxeth longsome.”
Fakhr al-Din says (p. 27), “On attribue encore leur ruine aux manières
fières et orgueilleuses de Djafar (Ja’afar) et de Fadhl (Al-Fazl),
manières que les rois ne sauroient supporter.” According to Ibn Badrún,
the poet, when the Caliph’s sister ’Olayyah[275] asked him, “O my lord,
I have not seen thee enjoy one happy day since putting Ja’afar to death:
wherefore didst thou slay him?” he answered, “My dear life, an I thought
that my shirt knew the reason I would rend it in pieces!” I therefore
hold with Al-Mas’udi, “As regards the intimate cause (of the
catastrophe) it is unknown and Allah is Omniscient.”

Aaron the Orthodox appears sincerely to have repented his enormous
crime. From that date he never enjoyed refreshing sleep: he would have
given his whole realm to recall Ja’afar to life; and, if any spoke
slightingly of the Barmecides in his presence, he would exclaim, “God
damn your fathers! Cease to blame them or fill the void they have left.”
And he had ample reason to mourn the loss. After the extermination of
the wise and enlightened family, the affairs of the Caliphate never
prospered: Fazl bin Rabí’a, though a man of intelligence and devoted to
letters, proved a poor substitute for Yahya and Ja’afar; and the Caliph
is reported to have applied to him the couplet:—

 No sire to your sire,[276] I bid you spare ✿ Your calumnies or their
    place replace.

His unwise elevation of his two rival sons filled him with fear of
poison, and, lastly, the violence and recklessness of the popular
mourning for the Barmecides,[277] whose echo has not yet died away, must
have added poignancy to his tardy penitence. The crime still “sticks
fiery off” from the rest of Harun’s career: it stands out in ghastly
prominence as one of the most terrible tragedies recorded by history,
and its horrible details make men write passionately on the subject to
this our day.[278]

As of Harun so of Zubaydah it may be said that she was far superior in
most things to contemporary royalties, and she was not worse at her
worst than the normal despot-queen of the Morning-land. We must not take
seriously the tales of her jealousy in The Nights, which mostly end in
her selling off or burying alive her rivals; but, even were all true,
she acted after the recognised fashion of her exalted sisterhood. The
secret history of Cairo, during the last generation, tells of many a
viceregal dame who committed all the crimes, without any of the virtues
which characterised Harun’s cousin-spouse. And the difference between
the manners of the Caliphate and the “respectability” of the nineteenth
century may be measured by the Tale called, “Al-Maamun and
Zubaydah.”[279] The lady, having won a game of forfeits from her
husband, and being vexed with him for imposing unseemly conditions when
he had been the winner, condemned him to lie with the foulest and
filthiest kitchen-wench in the palace; and thus was begotten the Caliph
who succeeded and destroyed her son.

Zubaydah was the grand-daughter of the second Abbaside Al-Mansur, by his
son Ja’afar whom The Nights persistently term Al-Kasim: her name was
Amat al-Azíz or Handmaid of the Almighty; her cognomen was Umm Ja’afar
as her husband’s was Abú Ja’afar; and her popular name “Creamkin”
derives from Zubdah,[280] cream or fresh butter, on account of her
plumpness and freshness. She was as majestic and munificent as her
husband; and the hum of prayer was never hushed in her palace.
Al-Mas’udi[281] makes a historian say to the dangerous Caliph Al-Káhir,
“The nobleness and generosity of this Princess, in serious matters as in
her diversions, place her in the highest rank”; and he proceeds to give
ample proof. Al-Siyuti relates how she once filled a poet’s mouth with
jewels which he sold for twenty thousand dinars. Ibn Khallikan (i. 523)
affirms of her, “Her charity was ample, her conduct virtuous, and the
history of her pilgrimage to Meccah and of what she undertook to execute
on the way is so well-known that it were useless to repeat it.” I have
noted (Pilgrimage iii. 2) how the Darb al-Sharki or Eastern road from
Meccah to Al-Medinah was due to the piety of Zubaydah who dug wells from
Baghdad to the Prophet’s burial place and built not only cisterns and
caravanserais, but even a wall to direct pilgrims over the shifting
sands. She also supplied Meccah, which suffered severely from want of
water, with the chief requisite for public hygiene by connecting it,
through levelled hills and hewn rocks, with the Ayn al-Mushásh in the
Arafat subrange; and the fine aqueduct, some ten miles long, was erected
at a cost of 1,700,000 to 2,000,000 of gold pieces.[282] We cannot
wonder that her name is still famous among the Badawin and the “Sons of
the Holy Cities.” She died at Baghdad, after a protracted widowhood, in
A.H. 216 and her tomb, which still exists, was long visited by the
friends and dependents who mourned the loss of a devout and most liberal
woman.

The reader will bear with me while I run through the tales and add a few
remarks to the notices given in the notes: the glance must necessarily
be brief, however extensive be the theme. The admirable introduction
follows, in all the texts and MSS. known to me, the same main lines but
differs greatly in minor details as will be seen by comparing Mr.
Payne’s translation with Lane’s and mine. In the Tale of the Sage Dúbán
appears the speaking head which is found in the Kámil, in Mirkhond and
in the Kitáb al-Uyún: M. C. Barbier de Meynard (v. 503) traces it back
to an abbreviated text of Al-Mas’udi. I would especially recommend to
students The Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad (i. 82), whose
mighty orgie ends so innocently in general marriage. Lane (iii. 746)
blames it “because it represents Arab _ladies_ as acting like Arab
_courtesans_”; but he must have known that during his day the indecent
frolic was quite possible in some of the highest circles of his beloved
Cairo. To judge by the style and changes of person, some of the most
“archaic” expressions suggest the hand of the Ráwi or professional
tale-teller; yet as they are in all the texts they cannot be omitted in
a loyal translation. The following story of The Three Apples perfectly
justifies my notes concerning which certain carpers complain. What
Englishman would be jealous enough to kill his cousin-wife because a
blackamoor in the streets boasted of her favours? But after reading what
is annotated in vol. i. 6, and purposely placed there to give the
key-note of the book, he will understand the reasonable nature of the
suspicion; and I may add that the same cause has commended these “skunks
of the human race” to debauched women in England.

The next tale, sometimes called “The Two Wazírs” is notable for its
regular and genuine drama-intrigue which, however, appears still more
elaborate and perfected in other pieces. The richness of this Oriental
plot-invention contrasts strongly with all European literatures except
the Spaniard’s, whose taste for the theatre determined his direction,
and the Italian, which in Boccaccio’s day had borrowed freely through
Sicily from the East. And the remarkable deficiency lasted till the
romantic movement dawned in France, when Victor Hugo and Alexander Dumas
showed their marvellous powers of faultless fancy, boundless imagination
and scenic luxuriance, “raising French Poetry from the dead and _not_
mortally wounding French prose.”[283] The Two Wazirs is followed by the
gem of the volume, The Adventure of the Hunchback-jester (i. 225), also
containing an admirable surprise and a fine development of character,
while its “wild but natural simplicity” and its humour are so abounding
that it has echoed through the world to the farthest West. It gave to
Addison the Story of Alnaschar[284] and to Europe the term “Barmecide
Feast,” from the “Tale of Shacabac” (vol. i. 343). The adventures of the
corpse were known in Europe long before Galland, as shown by three
fabliaux in Barbazan. I have noticed that the Barber’s Tale of himself
(i. 317) is historical and I may add that it is told in detail by
Al-Mas’udi (chapt. cxiv).

Follows the tale of Núr al-Dín Alí, and what Galland miscalls “The Fair
Persian,” a brightly written historiette with not a few touches of true
humour. Noteworthy are the Slaver’s address (vol. ii. 15), the fine
description of the Baghdad garden (vol. ii. 21–24), the drinking-party
(vol. ii. 25), the Caliph’s frolic (vol. ii. 31–37) and the happy end of
the hero’s misfortunes (vol. ii. 44). Its brightness is tempered by the
gloomy tone of the tale which succeeds, and which has variants in the
Bágh o Bahár, a Hindustani version of the Persian “Tale of the Four
Darwayshes;” and in the Turkish Kirk Vezir or “Book of the Forty
Vezirs.” Its dismal péripéties are relieved only by the witty indecency
of Eunuch Bukhayt and the admirable humour of Eunuch Káfur, whose
“half-lie” is known throughout the East. Here also the lover’s agonies
are piled upon him for the purpose of unpiling at last: the Oriental
tale-teller knows by experience that, as a rule, doleful endings “don’t
pay.”

The next is the long romance of chivalry, “King Omar bin al-Nu’man”
etc., which occupies an eighth of the whole repertory and the best part
of two volumes. Mr. Lane omits it because “obscene and tedious,” showing
the license with which he translated; and he was set right by a learned
reviewer,[285] who truly declared that “the omission of half-a-dozen
passages out of four hundred pages would fit it for printing in any
language[286] and the charge of tediousness could hardly have been
applied more unhappily.” The tale is interesting as a picture of
mediæval Arab chivalry and has many other notable points; for instance,
the lines (iii. 86) beginning “Allah holds the kingship!” are a lesson
to the manichæanism of Christian Europe. It relates the doings of three
royal generations and has all the characteristics of Eastern art: it is
a phantasmagoria of Holy Places, palaces and Harems; convents, castles
and caverns, here restful with gentle landscapes (ii. 240) and there
bristling with furious battle-pictures (ii. 117, 221–8, 249) and tales
of princely prowess and knightly derring-do. The characters stand out
well. King Nu’man is an old lecher who deserves his death; the ancient
Dame Zát al-Dawáhí merits her title Lady of Calamities (to her foes);
Princess Abrízah appears as a charming Amazon, doomed to a miserable and
pathetic end; Zau al-Makán is a wise and pious royalty; Nuzhat al-Zamán,
though a longsome talker, is a model sister; the Wazir Dandán, a sage
and sagacious counsellor, contrasts with the Chamberlain, an ambitious
miscreant; Kánmakán is the typical Arab knight, gentle and brave:—

             Now managing the mouthes of stubborne steedes
             Now practising the proof of warlike deedes;

And the kind-hearted, simple-minded Stoker serves as a foil to the
villains, the kidnapping Badawi and Ghazbán the detestable negro. The
fortunes of the family are interrupted by two episodes, both equally
remarkable. Taj al-Mulúk[287] is the model lover whom no difficulties or
dangers can daunt. In Azíz and Azízah (ii. 291) we have the beau idéal
of a loving woman: the writer’s object was to represent a “softy” who
had the luck to win the love of a beautiful and clever cousin and the
mad folly to break her heart. The poetical justice which he receives at
the hands of women of quite another stamp leaves nothing to be desired.
Finally the plot of “King Omar” is well worked out; and the gathering of
all the actors upon the stage before the curtain drops may be improbable
but it is highly artistic.

The long Crusading Romance is relieved by a sequence of sixteen
fabliaux, partly historiettes of men and beasts and partly apologues
proper—a subject already noticed. We have then (iii. 162) the saddening
and dreary love-tale of Ali bin Bakkár, a Persian youth and the Caliph’s
concubine Shams al-Nahár. Here the end is made doleful enough by the
deaths of the “two martyrs,” who are killed off, like Romeo and
Juliet,[288] a lesson that the course of true Love is sometimes troubled
and that men as well as women _can_ die of the so-called “tender
passion.” It is followed (iii. 212) by the long tale of Kamar al-Zamán,
or Moon of the Age, the first of that name, the “Camaralzaman” whom
Galland introduced into the best European society. Like “The Ebony
Horse” it seems to have been derived from a common source with “Peter of
Provence” and “Cleomades and Claremond”; and we can hardly wonder at its
wide diffusion: the tale is brimful of life, change, movement,
containing as much character and incident as would fill a modern
three-volumer and the Supernatural pleasantly jostles the Natural;
Dahnash the Jinn and Maymúnah daughter of Al-Dimiryát,[289] a renowned
King of the Jann, being as human in their jealousy about the virtue of
their lovers as any children of Adam, and so their metamorphosis to
fleas has all the effect of a surprise. The _troupe_ is again drawn with
a broad firm touch. Prince Charming, the hero, is weak and wilful,
shifty and immoral, hasty and violent: his two spouses are rivals in
abominations as his sons, Amjad and As’ad, are examples of a fraternal
affection rarely found in half-brothers by sister-wives. There is at
least one fine melodramatic situation (iii. 228); and marvellous feats
of indecency, a practical joke which would occur only to the canopic
mind (iii. 300–305), emphasise the recovery of her husband by that
remarkable “blackguard,” the Lady Budúr. The interpolated tale of
Ni’amah and Naomi (iv. 1), a simple and pleasing narrative of youthful
amours, contrasts well with the boiling passions of the incestuous and
murderous Queens and serves as a pause before the grand _dénoûement_
when the parted meet, the lost are found, the unwedded are wedded and
all ends merrily as a xixth century novel.

The long tale of Alá al-Din, our old friend “Aladdin,” is wholly out of
place in its present position (iv. 29): it is a counterpart of Ali Núr
al-Dín and Miriam the Girdle-girl (vol. ix. 1); and the mention of the
Shahbandar or Harbour-master (iv. 29), the Kunsúl or Consul (p. 84), the
Kaptán (Capitano), the use of cannon at sea and the choice of Genoa-city
(p. 85) prove that it belongs to the xvth or xvith century and should
accompany Kamar al-Zamán II. and Ma’aruf at the end of The Nights.
Despite the lutist Zubaydah being carried off by the Jinn, the Magic
Couch, a modification of Solomon’s carpet, and the murder of the King
who refused to islamize, it is evidently a European tale and I believe
with Dr. Bacher that it is founded upon the legend of “Charlemagne’s”
daughter Emma and his secretary Eginhardt, as has been noted in the
counterpart (vol. ix. 1).

This quasi-historical fiction is followed by a succession of fabliaux,
novelle and historiettes which fill the rest of vol. iv. and the whole
of vol. v. till we reach the terminal story, The Queen of the Serpents
(vol. v. pp. 304–329). It appears to me that most of them are historical
and could easily be traced. Not a few are in Al-Mas’udi; for instance
the grim Tale of Hatim of Tayy (vol. iv. 94) is given bodily in “Meads
of Gold” (iii. 327); and the two adventures of Ibrahim al-Mahdi with the
barber-surgeon (vol. iv. 103) and the Merchant’s sister (vol. iv. 176)
are in his pages (vol. vii. pp. 68 and 18). The City of Lubtayt (vol.
iv. 99) embodies the legend of Don Rodrigo, last of the Goths, and may
have reached the ears of Washington Irving; Many-columned Iram (vol. iv.
113) is held by all Moslems to be factual and sundry writers have
recorded the tricks played by Al-Maamun with the Pyramids of Jízah which
still show his handiwork.[290] The germ of Isaac of Mosul (vol. iv. 119)
is found in Al-Mas’udi who (vii. 65) names “Burán” the poetess (Ibn
Khall. i. 268); and Harun al-Rashid and the Slave-girl (vol. iv. 153) is
told by a host of writers. Ali the Persian is a rollicking tale of fun
from some Iranian jest-book: Abu Mohammed hight Lazybones belongs to the
cycle of “Sindbad the Seaman,” with a touch of Whittington and his Cat;
and Zumurrud (“Smaragdine”) in Ali Shar (vol. iv. 187) shows at her sale
the impudence of Miriam the Girdle-girl and in bed the fescennine device
of the Lady Budur. The “Ruined Man who became Rich,” etc. (vol. iv. 289)
is historical and Al-Mas’udi (vii. 281) relates the coquetry of Mahbúbah
the concubine (vol. iv. 291): the historian also quotes four couplets,
two identical with Nos. 1 and 2 in The Nights (vol. iv. 292) and
adding:—

 Then see the slave who lords it o’er her lord ✿ In lover privacy and
    public site:
 Behold these eyes that one like Ja’afar saw: ✿ Allah on Ja’afar reign
    boons infinite!

Uns al-Wujúd (vol. v. 32) is a love-tale which has been translated into
a host of Eastern languages; and The Lovers of the Banu Ozrah belong to
Al-Mas’udí’s “Martyrs of Love” (vii. 355), with the ozrite “Ozrite love”
of Ibn Khallikan (iv. 537). “Harun and the Three Poets” (vol. v. 77) has
given to Cairo a proverb which Burckhardt (No. 561) renders “The day
obliterates the word or promise of the Night,” for

                The promise of night is effaced by day.

It suggests Congreve’s Doris:—

                 For who o’er night obtain’d her grace,
                     She can next day disown, etc.

“Harun and the three Slave-girls” (vol. v. 81) smacks of Gargantua (lib.
i. c. II): “It belongs to me, said one: ’Tis mine, said another”; and so
forth. The Simpleton and the Sharper (vol. v. 83) like the Foolish
Dominie (vol. v. 118) is an old Joe Miller in Hindu as well as Moslem
folk-lore. “Kisra Anushirwán” (vol. v. 87) is “The King, the Owl and the
Villages of Al-Mas’údi” (iii. 171), who also notices the Persian
monarch’s four seals of office (ii. 204); and “Masrur the Eunuch and Ibn
Al-Káribi” (vol. v. 109) is from the same source as Ibn al-Magházili the
Reciter and a Eunuch belonging to the Caliph Al-Mu’tazad (vol. viii.
161). In the Tale of Tawaddud (vol. v. 139) we have the fullest
development of the disputations and displays of learning then so common
in Europe, teste the “Admirable Crichton”; and these were affected not
only by Eastern tale-tellers but even by sober historians. To us it is
much like “padding” when Nuzhat al-Zamán (vol. ii. 156 etc.) fags her
hapless hearers with a discourse covering sixteen mortal pages; when the
Wazir Dandan (vol. ii. 195 etc.) reports at length the cold speeches of
the five high-bosomed maids and the Lady of Calamities and when Wird
Khan, in presence of his papa (Nights cmxiv-xvi.) discharges his
patristic exercitations and heterogeneous knowledge. Yet Al-Mas’udi also
relates, at dreary extension (vol. vi. 369) the disputation of the
twelve sages in presence of Barmecide Yahya upon the origin, the
essence, the accidents and the omnes res of Love; and in another place
(vii. 181) shows Honayn, author of the Book of Natural Questions,
undergoing a long examination before the Caliph Al-Wásik (Vathek) and
describing, amongst other things, the human teeth. See also the dialogue
or catechism of Al-Hajjáj and Ibn Al-Kirríya in Ibn Khallikan (vol. i.
238–240).

These disjecta membra of tales and annals are pleasantly relieved by the
seven voyages of Sindbad the Seaman (vol. vi. 1–83). The “Arabian
Odyssey” may, like its Greek brother, descend from a noble family, the
“Shipwrecked Mariner,” a Coptic travel-tale of the twelfth dynasty (B.C.
3500) preserved on a papyrus at St. Petersburg. In its actual condition
“Sindbad” is a fanciful compilation, like De Foe’s “Captain Singleton,”
borrowed from travellers’ tales of an immense variety and extracts from
Al-Idrísi, Al-Kazwíni and Ibn al-Wardi. Here we find the Polyphemus, the
Pygmies and the cranes of Homer and Herodotus; the escape of
Aristomenes; the Plinian monsters well known in Persia; the magnetic
mountain of Saint Brennan (Brandanus); the aeronautics of “Duke Ernest
of Bavaria”[291] and sundry cuttings from Moslem writers dating between
our ninth and fourteenth centuries.[292] The “Shaykh of the Seaboard”
appears in the Persian romance of Kámarupa translated by Francklin, all
the particulars absolutely corresponding. The “Odyssey” is valuable
because it shows how far Eastward the mediæval Arab had extended:
already in The Ignorance he had reached China and had formed a centre of
trade at Canton. But the higher merit of the cento is to produce one of
the most charming books of travel ever written, like Robinson Crusoe the
delight of children and the admiration of all ages.

The hearty life and realism of Sindbad are made to stand out in strong
relief by the deep melancholy which pervades “The City of Brass” (vol.
vi. 83), a dreadful book for a dreary day. It is curious to compare the
doleful verses (pp. 103, 105) with those spoken to Caliph Al-Mutawakkil
by Abu al-Hasan Ali (Al-Mas’udi, vii. 246). We then enter upon the
venerable Sindibad-nameh, the Malice of Women (vol. vi. 122), of which,
according to the Kitab al-Fihrist, (vol. i. 305) there were two
editions, a Sinzibád al-Kabír and a Sinzibád al-Saghír, the latter being
probably an epitome of the former. This bundle of legends, I have shown,
was incorporated with The Nights as an editor’s addition; and as an
independent work it has made the round of the world. Space forbids any
detailed notice of this choice collection of anecdotes for which a
volume would be required. I may, however, note that the “Wife’s device”
(vol. vi. 152) has its analogues in the Kathá (chapt. xiii.) in the
Gesta Romanorum (No. xxviii.) and in Boccaccio (Day iii. 6 and Day vi.
8), modified by La Fontaine to Richard Minutolo (Contes lib. i. tale 2):
it is quoted almost in the words of The Nights by the Shaykh al-Nafzáwi
(p. 207). That most witty and indecent tale The Three Wishes (vol. vi.
180) has forced its way disguised as a babe into our nurseries. Another
form of it is found in the Arab proverb “More luckless than Basús”
(Kamus), a fair Israelite who persuaded her husband, also a Jew, to wish
that she might become the loveliest of women. Jehovah granted it,
spitefully as Jupiter; the consequence was that her contumacious
treatment of her mate made him pray that the beauty might be turned into
a bitch; and the third wish restored her to her original state.

The Story of Júdar (vol. vi. 207) is Egyptian, to judge from its local
knowledge (pp. 217 and 254) together with its ignorance of Marocco (p.
223). It shows a contrast, in which Arabs delight, of an almost
angelical goodness and forgiveness with a well-nigh diabolical
malignity, and we find the same extremes in Abú Sír the noble-minded
Barber and the hideously inhuman Abú Kír. The excursion to Mauritania is
artfully managed and gives a novelty to the _mise-en-scène_. Gharíb and
Ajíb (vi. 207, vii. 91) belongs to the cycle of Antar and King Omar bin
Nu’man: its exaggerations make it a fine type of Oriental Chauvinism,
pitting the superhuman virtues, valour, nobility and success of all that
is Moslem, against the scum of the earth which is non-Moslem. Like the
exploits of Friar John of the Chopping-knives (Rabelais i. c. 27) it
suggests ridicule cast on impossible battles and tales of giants,
paynims and paladins. The long romance is followed by thirteen
historiettes all apparently historical: compare “Hind, daughter of
Al-Nu’man” (vol. viii. 7–145) and “Isaac of Mosul and the Devil” (vol.
vii. 136–139) with Al-Mas’udi v. 365 and vi. 340. They end in two long
detective-tales like those which M. Gaboriau has popularised, the
Rogueries of Dalilah and the Adventures of Mercury Ali, based upon the
principle, “One thief wots another.” The former, who has appeared before
(vol. ii. 329), seems to have been a noted character: Al-Mas’udi says
(viii. 175) “in a word this Shaykh (Al-’Ukáb) outrivalled in his
rogueries and the ingenuities of his wiles _Dállah_ (Dalilah?) the
_Crafty_ and other tricksters and coney-catchers, ancient and modern.”

The Tale of Ardashir (vol. vii. 209–264) lacks originality: we are now
entering upon a series of pictures which are replicas of those
preceding. This is not the case with that charming Undine, Julnár the
Sea-born (vol. vii. 264–308) which, like Abdullah of the Land and
Abdullah of the Sea (vol. ix. Night cmxl.), describes the vie intime of
mermen and merwomen. Somewhat resembling Swift’s inimitable creations,
the Houyhnhnms for instance, they prove, amongst other things, that
those who dwell in a denser element can justly blame and severely
criticise the contradictory and unreasonable prejudices and
predilections of mankind. Sayf al-Mulúk (vol. viii. Night dcclviii.),
the romantic tale of two lovers, shows by its introduction that it was
originally an independent work and it is known to have existed in Persia
during the eleventh century: this novella has found its way into every
Moslem language of the East even into Sindi, which calls the hero
“Sayfal.” Here we again meet the Old Man of the Sea or rather the Shaykh
of the Seaboard and make acquaintance with a Jinn whose soul is outside
his body: thus he resembles Hermotimos of Klazamunæ in Apollonius, whose
spirit left his mortal frame à discretion. The author, philanthropically
remarking (vol. viii. 4) “Knowest thou not that a single mortal is
better, in Allah’s sight, than a thousand Jinn?” brings the wooing to a
happy end which leaves a pleasant savour upon the mental palate.

Hasan of Bassorah (vol. viii. 7–145) is a Master Shoetie on a large
scale like Sindbad, but his voyages and travels extend into the
supernatural and fantastic rather than the natural world. Though long
the tale is by no means wearisome and the characters are drawn with a
fine firm hand. The hero with his hen-like persistency of purpose, his
weeping, fainting and versifying is interesting enough and proves that
“Love can find out the way.” The charming adopted sister, the model of
what the feminine friend should be; the silly little wife who never
knows that she is happy till she loses happiness; the violent and
hardhearted queen with all the cruelty of a good woman, and the manners
and customs of Amazon-land are outlined with a life-like vivacity.
Khalífah the next tale (vol. viii. 145–184) is valuable as a study of
Eastern life, showing how the fisherman emerges from the squalor of his
surroundings and becomes one of the Caliph’s favourite cup-companions.
Ali Nur al-Din (vol. viii. 264) and King Jali’ad (vol. ix., Night
dcccxciv.) have been noticed elsewhere and there is little to say of the
concluding stories which bear the evident impress of a more modern date.

Dr. Johnson thus sums up his notice of The Tempest. “Whatever might have
been the intention of their author, these tales are made instrumental to
the production of many characters, diversified with boundless invention,
and preserved with profound skill in nature, extensive knowledge of
opinions, and accurate observation of life. Here are exhibited princes,
courtiers and sailors, all speaking in their real characters. There is
the agency of airy spirits and of earthy goblin, the operations of
magic, the tumults of a storm, the adventures of a desert island, the
native effusion of untaught affection, the punishment of guilt, and the
final happiness of those for whom our passions and reason are equally
interested.”

We can fairly say this much and far more for our Tales. Viewed as a tout
ensemble in full and complete form, they are a drama of Eastern life,
and a Dance of Death made sublime by faith and the highest emotions, by
the certainty of expiation and the fulness of atoning equity, where
virtue is victorious, vice is vanquished and the ways of Allah are
justified to man. They are a panorama which remains ken-speckle upon the
mental retina. They form a phantasmagoria in which archangels and
angels, devils and goblins, men of air, of fire, of water, naturally
mingle with men of earth; where flying horses and talking fishes are
utterly realistic: where King and Prince meet fisherman and pauper,
lamia and cannibal; where citizen jostles Badawi, eunuch meets knight;
the Kazi hob-nobs with the thief; the pure and pious sit down to the
same tray with the bawd and the pimp; where the professional
religionist, the learned Koranist and the strictest moralist consort
with the wicked magician, the scoffer and the debauchee-poet like Abu
Nowas; where the courtier jests with the boor and where the sweep is
bedded with the noble lady. And the characters are “finished and
quickened by a few touches swift and sure as the glance of sunbeams.”
The work is a kaleidoscope where everything falls into picture; gorgeous
palaces and pavilions; grisly underground caves and deadly wolds;
gardens fairer than those of the Hesperid; seas dashing with clashing
billows upon enchanted mountains; valleys of the Shadow of Death;
air-voyages and promenades in the abysses of ocean; the duello, the
battle and the siege; the wooing of maidens and the marriage-rite. All
the splendour and squalor, the beauty and baseness, the glamour and
grotesqueness, the magic and the mournfulness, the bravery and the
baseness of Oriental life are here: its pictures of the three great Arab
passions, love, war and fancy, entitle it to be called “Blood, Musk and
Hashish.”[293] And still more, the genius of the story-teller quickens
the dry bones of history, and by adding Fiction to Fact revives the dead
past: the Caliphs and the Caliphate return to Baghdad and Cairo, whilst
Asmodeus kindly removes the terrace-roof of every tenement and allows
our curious glances to take in the whole interior. This is perhaps the
best proof of their power. Finally, the picture-gallery opens with a
series of weird and striking adventures and shows as a tail-piece, an
idyllic scene of love and wedlock in halls before reeking with lust and
blood.

I have noticed in my Foreword that the two main characteristics of The
Nights are Pathos and Humour, alternating with highly artistic contrast,
and carefully calculated to provoke tears and smiles in the coffee-house
audience which paid for them. The sentimental portion mostly breathes a
tender passion and a simple sadness: such are the Badawi’s dying
farewell (vol. i. 75); the lady’s broken heart on account of her lover’s
hand being cut off (vol. i. 277); the Wazir’s death, the mourner’s song
and the “tongue of the case” (vol. ii. 10); the murder of Princess
Abrízah with the babe sucking its dead mother’s breast (vol. ii. 128);
and, generally, the last moments of good Moslems (_e.g._ vol. v. 167),
which are described with inimitable terseness and naïveté. The sad and
the gay mingle in the character of the good Hammamstoker who becomes Roi
Crotte; and the melancholy deepens in the Tale of the Mad Lover (vol. v.
138); the Blacksmith who could handle fire without hurt (vol. v. 271);
the Devotee Prince (vol. v. 111) and the whole Tale of Azízah (vol. ii.
298), whose angelic love is set off by the sensuality and selfishness of
her more fortunate rivals. A new note of absolutely tragic dignity seems
to be struck in the Sweep and the Noble Lady (vol. iv. 125), showing the
piquancy of sentiment which can be evolved from the common and the
unclean. The pretty conceit of the Lute (vol. v. 244) is afterwards
carried out in the Song (vol. viii. 281), which is a masterpiece of
originality[294] and (in the Arabic) of exquisite tenderness and poetic
melancholy, the wail over the past and the vain longing for reunion. And
the very depths of melancholy, of majestic pathos and of true sublimity
are reached in Many-columned Iram (vol. iv. 113) and the City of Brass
(vol. vi. 83): the metrical part of the latter shows a luxury of woe; it
is one long wail of despair which echoes long and loud in the hearer’s
heart.

In my Foreword I have compared the humorous vein of the comic tales with
our northern “wut,” chiefly for the dryness and slyness which pervade
it. But it differs in degree as much as the pathos varies. The staple
article is Cairene “chaff,” a peculiar banter possibly inherited from
their pagan forefathers: instances of this are found in the Cock and Dog
(vol. i. 22), the Eunuch’s address to the Cook (vol. i. 244), the
Wazir’s exclamation, “Too little pepper!” (vol. i. 246), the
self-communing of Judar (vol. vi. 219), the Hashish-eater in Ali Shár
(vol. iv. 213), the scene between the brother-Wazirs (vol. i. 197), the
treatment of the Gobbo (vol. i. 221, 228), the Water of Zemzem (vol. i.
284), and the Eunuchs Bukhayt and Kafur[295] (vol. ii. 49, 51). At times
it becomes a masterpiece of fun, of rollicking Rabelaisian humour
underlaid by the caustic mother-wit of Sancho Panza, as in the orgie of
the Ladies of Baghdad (vol. i. 92, 93); the Holy Ointment applied to the
beard of Luka the Knight—“unxerunt regem Salomonem” (vol. ii. 222); and
Ja’afar and the Old Badawi (vol. v. 98), with its reminiscence of
“chaffy” King Amasis. This reaches its acme in the description of ugly
old age (vol. v. 3); in The Three Wishes, the wickedest of satires on
the alter sexus (vi. 180); in Ali the Persian (vol. iv. 139); in the
Lady and her Five Suitors (vol. vi. 172), which corresponds and
contrasts with the dully told Story of Upakosa and her Four Lovers of
the Kathá (p. 17); and in The Man of Al-Yaman (vol. iv. 245) where we
find the true Falstaffian touch. But there is sterling wit, sweet and
bright, expressed without any artifice of words, in the immortal
Barber’s tales of his brothers, especially the second, the fifth and the
sixth (vol. i. 324, 325 and 343). Finally, wherever the honest and
independent old debauchee Abu Nowas makes his appearance the fun becomes
fescennine and milesian.


                      B.—THE MANNER OF THE NIGHTS.

And now, after considering the matter, I will glance at the language and
style of The Nights. The first point to remark is the peculiarly happy
framework of the Recueil, which I cannot but suspect set an example to
the Decamerone and its host of successors.[296] The admirable
Introduction, a perfect _mise-en-scène_, gives the amplest raison d’être
of the work, which thus has all the unity required for a great romantic
recueil. We perceive this when reading the contemporary Hindu work the
Kathá Sarit Ságara,[297] which is at once so like and so unlike The
Nights: here the preamble is insufficient; the whole is clumsy for want
of a thread upon which the many independent tales and fables should be
strung[298]; and the consequent disorder and confusion tell upon the
reader, who cannot remember the sequence without taking notes.

As was said in my Foreword “without the Nights no Arabian Nights!” and
now, so far from holding the pauses “an intolerable interruption to the
narrative,” I attach additional importance to these pleasant and restful
breaks introduced into long and intricate stories. Indeed beginning
again I should adopt the plan of the Cal. Edit. opening and ending every
division with a dialogue between the sisters. Upon this point, however,
opinions will differ and the critic will remind me that the consensus of
the MSS. would be wanting: The Bresl. Edit. in many places merely
interjects the number of the night without interrupting the tale; the
MS. in the Bibliothèque Nationale used by Galland contains only cclxxxii
and the Frenchman ceases to use the division after the ccxxxvith Night
and in some editions after the cxcviith.[299] A fragmentary MS.,
according to Scott whose friend J. Anderson found it in Bengal, breaks
away after Night xxix; and in the Wortley Montagu, the Sultan relents at
an early opportunity, the stories, as in Galland, continuing only as an
amusement. I have been careful to preserve the balanced sentences with
which the tales open; the tautology and the prose-rhyme serving to
attract attention, _e.g._, “In days of yore and in times long gone
before there was a King,” etc.; in England where we strive not to waste
words this becomes “Once upon a time.” The closings also are artfully
calculated, by striking a minor chord after the rush and hurry of the
incidents, to suggest repose: “And they led the most pleasurable of
lives and the most delectable, till there came to them the Destroyer of
delights and the Severer of societies and they became as though they had
never been”. Place this by the side of Boccaccio’s favourite
formulæ:—Egli conquistò poi la Scozia, e funne re coronato (ii, 3); Et
onorevolmente visse infino àlla fine (ii, 4),; Molte volte goderono del
loro amore: Iddio faccia noi goder del nostro (iii, 6): E cosi nella sua
grossezza si rimase e ancor vi si sta (vi, 8). We have further docked
this tail into: “And they lived happily ever after.”

I cannot take up the Nights, in their present condition, without feeling
that the work has been written down from the Ráwi or Nakkál,[300] the
conteur or professional story-teller, also called Kassás and Maddáh,
corresponding with the Hindu Bhat or Bard. To these men my learned
friend Baron A. von Kremer would attribute the Mu’allakát vulgarly
called the Suspended Poems, as being “indited from the relation of the
Ráwi.” Hence in our text the frequent interruption of the formula Kál’
al-Ráwi = quotes the reciter; _dice Turpino_. Moreover, The Nights read
in many places like a hand-book or guide for the professional, who would
learn them by heart; here and there introducing his “gag” and “patter.”
To this “business” possibly we may attribute much of the ribaldry which
starts up in unexpected places: it was meant simply to provoke a laugh.
How old the custom is and how unchangeable is Eastern life is shown, a
correspondent suggests, by the Book of Esther which might form part of
The Alf Laylah. “On that night (we read in Chap. vi. 1) could not the
King sleep, and he commanded to bring the book of records of the
chronicles; and they were read before the King.” The Ráwi would declaim
the recitative somewhat in conversational style; he would intone the
Saj’a or prose-rhyme and he would chant to the twanging of the Rabáb, a
one-stringed viol, the poetical parts. Dr. Scott[301] borrows from the
historian of Aleppo a life-like picture of the Story-teller. “He recites
walking to and fro in the middle of the coffee-room, stopping only now
and then, when the expression requires some emphatical attitude. He is
commonly heard with great attention; and not unfrequently in the midst
of some interesting adventure, when the expectation of his audience is
raised to the highest pitch, he breaks off abruptly and makes his
escape, leaving both his hero or heroine and his audience in the utmost
embarrassment. Those who happen to be near the door endeavour to detain
him, insisting upon the story being finished before he departs; but he
always makes his retreat good[302]; and the auditors suspending their
curiosity are induced to return at the same time next day to hear the
sequel. He has no sooner made his exit than the company in separate
parties fall to disputing about the characters of the drama or the event
of an unfinished adventure. The controversy by degrees becomes serious
and opposite opinions are maintained with no less warmth than if the
fall of the city depended upon the decision.”

At Tangier, where a murder in a “coffee-house” had closed these hovels,
pending a sufficient payment to the Pasha; and where, during the hard
winter of 1885–86, the poorer classes were compelled to puff their Kayf
(Bhang, _cannabis indica_) and sip their black coffee in the muddy
streets under a rainy sky, I found the Ráwi active on Sundays and
Thursdays, the market-days. The favourite place was the “Soko de barra,”
or large bazar, outside the town whose condition is that of Suez and
Bayrut half a century ago. It is a foul slope; now slippery with viscous
mud, then powdery with fetid dust, dotted with graves and decaying
tombs, unclean booths, gargottes and tattered tents, and frequented by
women, mere bundles of unclean rags, and by men wearing the haik or
burnús, a Franciscan frock, tending their squatting camels and
chaffering over cattle for Gibraltar beef-eaters. Here the market-people
form ring about the reciter, a stalwart man affecting little raiment
besides a broad waist-belt into which his lower chiffons are tucked, and
noticeable only for his shock hair, wild eyes, broad grin and generally
disreputable aspect. He usually handles a short stick; and, when drummer
and piper are absent, he carries a tiny tom-tom shaped like an
hour-glass, upon which he taps the periods. This Scealuidhe, as the
Irish call him, opens the drama with extempore prayer, proving that he
and the audience are good Moslems: he speaks slowly and with emphasis,
varying the diction with breaks of animation, abundant action and the
most comical grimace: he advances, retires and wheels about,
illustrating every point with pantomime; and his features, voice and
gestures are so expressive that even Europeans who cannot understand a
word of Arabic divine the meaning of his tale. The audience stands
breathless and motionless surprising strangers[303] by the ingenuousness
and freshness of feeling hidden under their hard and savage exterior.
The performance usually ends with the embryo actor going round for alms
and flourishing in air every silver bit, the usual honorarium being a
few “f’lús,” that marvellous money of Barbary, big coppers worth
one-twelfth of a penny. All the tales I heard were purely local, but
Fakhri Bey, a young Osmanli domiciled for some time in Fez and Mequinez,
assured me that The Nights are still recited there.

Many travellers, including Dr. Russell, have complained that they failed
to find a complete MS. copy of The Nights. Evidently they never heard of
the popular superstition which declares that no one can read through
them without dying—it is only fair that my patrons should know this.
Yacoub Artín Pasha declares that the superstition dates from the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries and he explains it in two ways.
Firstly, it is a facetious exaggeration, meaning that no one has leisure
or patience to wade through the long repertory. Secondly, the work is
condemned as futile. When Egypt produced savants and legists like Ibn
al-Hajar, Al-’Ayni, and Al-Kastalláni, to mention no others, the taste
of the country inclined to dry factual studies and positive science;
nor, indeed, has this taste wholly died out: there are not a few who,
like Khayri Pasha, contend that the mathematic is more useful even for
legal studies than history and geography, and at Cairo the chief of the
Educational Department has always been an engineer, _i.e._, a
mathematician. The Olema declared war against all “futilities,” in which
they included not only stories but also what is politely entitled
Authentic History. From this to the fatal effect of such lecture is only
a step. Society, however, cannot rest without light literature; so the
novel-reading class was thrown back upon writings which had all the
indelicacy and few of the merits of The Nights.

Turkey is the only Moslem country which has dared to produce a regular
drama[304] and to arouse the energies of such brilliant writers as Muníf
Pasha, statesman and scholar; Ekrem Bey, literato and professor; Kemál
Bey held by some to be the greatest writer in modern Osmanli-land and
Abd al-Hakk Hamíd Bey, first Secretary of the London Embassy. The
theatre began in its ruder form by taking subjects bodily from The
Nights; then it annexed its plays as we do—the Novel having ousted the
Drama—from the French; and lastly it took courage to be original. Many
years ago I saw Harun al-Rashid and the Three Kalandars, with deer-skins
and all their properties de rigueur, in the courtyard of Government
House, Damascus, declaiming to the extreme astonishment and delight of
the audience. It requires only to glance at The Nights for seeing how
much histrionic matter they contain.

In considering the style of The Nights we must bear in mind that the
work has never been edited according to our ideas of the process.
Consequently there is no just reason for translating the whole verbatim
et literatim, as has been done by Torrens, Lane and Payne in his “Tales
from the Arabic.”[305] This conscientious treatment is required for
versions of an author like Camoens whose works were carefully corrected
and arranged by a competent littérateur, but it is not merited by The
Nights as they now are. The Macnaghten, the Bulak and the Bayrut texts,
though printed from MSS. identical in order, often differ in minor
matters. Many friends have asked me to undertake the work: but, even if
lightened by the aid of Shaykhs, Munshis and copyists, the labour would
be severe, tedious and thankless: better leave the holes open than patch
them with fancy work or with heterogeneous matter. The learned, indeed,
as Lane tells us (i. 74; iii. 740), being thoroughly dissatisfied with
the plain and popular, the ordinary and “vulgar” note of the language,
have attempted to refine and improve it and have more than once
threatened to remodel it, that is, to make it odious. This would be to
dress up Robert Burns in plumes borrowed from Dryden and Pope.

The first defect of the texts is in the distribution and arrangement of
the matter, as I have noticed in the case of Sindbad the Seaman (vol.
vi. 77). Moreover, many of the earlier Nights are overlong and not a few
of the others are overshort: this, however, has the prime recommendation
of variety. Even the vagaries of editor and scribe will not account for
all the incoherences, disorder and inconsequence, and for the vain
iterations which suggest that the author has forgotten what he said. In
places there are dead allusions to persons and tales which are left
dark, _e.g._ vol. i. pp. 43, 57, 61, etc. The digressions are abrupt and
useless, leading nowhere, while sundry pages are wearisome for excess of
prolixity or hardly intelligible for extreme conciseness. The perpetual
recurrence of mean colloquialisms and of words and idioms peculiar to
Egypt and Syria[306] also takes from the pleasure of the perusal. Yet we
cannot deny that it has its use: this unadorned language of familiar
conversation in its day, adapted for the understanding of the people, is
best fitted for the Rawi’s craft in the camp and caravan, the Harem, the
bazar and the coffee-house. Moreover, as has been well said, The Nights
is the only written half-way house between the literary and colloquial
Arabic which is accessible to all, and thus it becomes necessary to the
students who would qualify themselves for service in Moslem lands from
Mauritania to Mesopotamia. It freely uses Turkish words like “Khátún”
and Persian terms as “Sháhbandar,” thus requiring for translation not
only a somewhat archaic touch, but also a vocabulary borrowed from
various sources: otherwise the effect would not be reproduced. In
places, however, the style rises to the highly ornate approaching the
pompous; _e.g._ the Wazirial addresses in the tale of King Jali’ad. The
battle-scenes, mostly admirable (vol. v. 365), are told with the
conciseness of a despatch and the vividness of an artist; the two
combining to form perfect “word-pictures.” Of the Badí’a or euphuistic
style, “parleying euphuism,” and of Al-Saj’a, the prose rhyme, I shall
speak in a future page.

The characteristics of the whole are naïveté and simplicity, clearness
and a singular concision. The gorgeousness is in the imagery not in the
language; the words are weak while the sense, as in the classical
Scandínavian books, is strong; and here the Arabic differs diametrically
from the florid exuberance and turgid amplifications of the Persian
story-teller, which sound so hollow and unreal by the side of a chaster
model. It abounds in formulæ such as repetitions of religious phrases
which are unchangeable. There are certain stock comparisons, as Lokman’s
wisdom, Joseph’s beauty, Jacob’s grief, Job’s patience, David’s music,
and Maryam the Virgin’s chastity. The eyebrow is a Nún; the eye a Sád,
the mouth a Mím. A hero is more prudent than the crow, a better guide
than the Katá grouse, more generous than the cock, warier than the
crane, braver than the lion, more aggressive than the panther,
finer-sighted than the horse, craftier than the fox, greedier than the
gazelle, more vigilant than the dog, and thriftier than the ant. The
cup-boy is a sun rising from the dark underworld symbolised by his
collar; his cheek-mole is a crumb of ambergris, his nose is a scymitar
grided at the curve; his lower lip is a jujube; his teeth are the
Pleiades, or hailstones; his browlocks are scorpions; his young hair on
the upper lip is an emerald; his side beard is a swarm of ants or a Lám
(l-letter) enclosing the roses or anemones of his cheek. The cup-girl is
a moon who rivals the sheen of the sun; her forehead is a pearl set off
by the jet of her “idiot-fringe;” her eyelashes scorn the sharp sword;
and her glances are arrows shot from the bow of the eyebrows. A mistress
necessarily belongs, though living in the next street, to the Wady Liwá
and to a hostile clan of Badawin whose blades are ever thirsting for the
lover’s blood and whose malignant tongues aim only at the “defilement of
separation.” Youth is upright as an Alif, or slender and bending as a
branch of the Bán-tree which we should call a willow-wand,[307] while
Age, crabbed and crooked, bends groundwards vainly seeking in the dust
his lost juvenility. As Baron de Slane says of these stock comparisons
(Ibn Khall. i. xxxvi.), “The figurative language of Moslem poets is
often difficult to be understood. The _narcissus_ is the eye; the
_feeble_ stem of that plant bends _languidly_ under its flower, and thus
recalls to mind the languor of the eyes. _Pearls_ signify both _tears_
and _teeth_; the latter are sometimes called _hailstones_, from their
whiteness and moisture; the _lips_ are _cornelians_ or _rubies_; the
_gums_, a _pomegranate flower_; the dark _foliage_ of the _myrtle_ is
synonymous with the _black hair_ of the beloved, or with the first down
on the cheeks of puberty. The _down_ itself is called the _izâr_, or
head-stall of the bridle, and the curve of the izar is compared to the
letters lâm (‏ل‎) and nûn (‏ن‎).[308] Ringlets trace on the cheek or
neck the letter Wâw (‏و‎); they are called _Scorpions_ (as the Greek
σκορπίος), either from their dark colour or their agitated movements;
the _eye_ is a _sword_; the _eyelids scabbards_; the _whiteness_ of the
complexion, _camphor_; and a _mole_ or _beauty-spot_, _musk_, which term
denotes also _dark hair_. A _mole_ is sometimes compared also to an
_ant_ creeping on the cheek towards the _honey_ of the mouth; a
_handsome face_ is both a _full moon_ and _day_; _black hair_ is
_night_; the _waist_ is a _willow-branch_ or a _lance_; the _water of
the face_ is _self-respect_: a poet _sells the water of his face_[309]
when he bestows mercenary praises on a rich patron.”

This does not sound promising: yet, as has been said of Arab music, the
persistent repetition of the same notes in the minor key is by no means
monotonous and ends with haunting the ear, occupying the thought and
touching the soul. Like the distant frog-concert and chirp of the
cicada, the creak of the water-wheel and the stroke of hammers upon the
anvil from afar, the murmur of the fountain, the sough of the wind and
the plash of the wavelet, they occupy the sensorium with a soothing
effect, forming a barbaric music full of sweetness and peaceful
pleasure.


                                 § IV.
                           SOCIAL CONDITION.

I here propose to treat of the Social Condition which The Nights
discloses, of Al-Islam at the earlier period of its development,
concerning the position of women and about the pornology of the great
Saga-book.


                              A.—AL-ISLAM.

A splendid and glorious life was that of Baghdad in the days of the
mighty Caliph,[310] when the Capital had towered to the zenith of
grandeur and was already trembling and tottering to the fall. The centre
of human civilization, which was then confined to Greece and Arabia, and
the metropolis of an Empire exceeding in extent the widest limits of
Rome, it was essentially a city of pleasure, a Paris of the ixth
century. The “Palace of Peace” (Dár al-Salám), worthy successor of
Babylon and Nineveh, which had outrivalled Damascus, the “Smile of the
Prophet,” and Kufah, the successor of Hira and the magnificent creation
of Caliph Omar, possessed unrivalled advantages of site and climate. The
Tigris-Euphrates Valley, where the fabled Garden of Eden has been
placed, in early ages succeeded the Nile-Valley as a great centre of
human development; and the prerogative of a central and commanding
position still promises it, even in the present state of decay and
desolation under the unspeakable Turk, a magnificent future,[311] when
railways and canals shall connect it with Europe. The city of palaces
and government offices, hotels and pavilions, mosques and colleges,
kiosks and squares, bazars and markets, pleasure grounds and orchards,
adorned with all the graceful charms which Saracenic architecture had
borrowed from the Byzantines, lay couched upon the banks of the
Dijlah-Hiddekel under a sky of marvellous purity and in a climate which
makes mere life a “Kayf”—the luxury of tranquil enjoyment. It was
surrounded by far-extending suburbs, like Rusáfah on the Eastern side
and villages like Baturanjah, dear to the votaries of pleasure; and with
the roar of a gigantic capital mingled the hum of prayer, the trilling
of birds, the thrilling of harp and lute, the shrilling of pipes, the
witching strains of the professional Almah, and the minstrel’s lay.

The population of Baghdad must have been enormous when the smallest
number of her sons who fell victims to Huláku Khan in 1258 was estimated
at eight hundred thousand, while other authorities more than double the
terrible “butcher’s bill.” Her policy and polity were unique. A
well-regulated routine of tribute and taxation, personally inspected by
the Caliph; a network of waterways, canaux d’arrosage; a noble system of
highways, provided with viaducts, bridges and caravanserais, and a
postal service of mounted couriers enabled it to collect as in a
reservoir the wealth of the outer world. The facilities for education
were upon the most extended scale; large sums, from private as well as
public sources, were allotted to Mosques, each of which, by the
admirable rule of Al-Islam, was expected to contain a school: these
establishments were richly endowed and stocked with professors collected
from every land between Khorasan and Marocco[312]; and immense
libraries[313] attracted the learned of all nations. It was a golden age
for poets and panegyrists, koranists and literati, preachers and
rhetoricians, physicians and scientists who, besides receiving high
salaries and fabulous presents, were treated with all the honours of
Chinese Mandarins; and, like these, the humblest Moslem—fisherman or
artizan—could aspire through knowledge or savoir faire to the highest
offices of the Empire. The effect was a grafting of Egyptian, and old
Mesopotamian, of Persian and Græco-Latin fruits, by long Time
deteriorated, upon the strong young stock of Arab genius; and the
result, as usual after such imping, was a shoot of exceptional
luxuriance and vitality. The educational establishments devoted
themselves to the three main objects recognized by the Moslem world,
Theology, Civil Law and Belles Lettres; and a multitude of trained
Councillors enabled the ruling powers to establish and enlarge that
complicated machinery of government, at once concentrated and
decentralized, a despotism often fatal to the wealthy great but never
neglecting the interests of the humbler lieges, which forms the beau
idéal of Oriental administration. Under the Chancellors of the empire
the Kazis administered law and order, justice and equity; and from their
decisions the poorest subject, Moslem or miscreant, could claim with the
general approval of the lieges, access and appeal to the Caliph who, as
Imám or Antistes of the Faith was High President of a Court of
Cassation.

Under wise administration Agriculture and Commerce, the twin pillars of
national prosperity, necessarily flourished. A scientific canalisation,
with irrigation-works inherited from the ancients, made the Mesopotamian
Valley a rival of Kemi the Black Land, and rendered cultivation a
certainty of profit, not a mere speculation as it must ever be to those
who perforce rely upon the fickle rains of Heaven. The remains of
extensive mines prove that this source of public wealth was not
neglected; navigation laws encouraged transit and traffic; and
ordinances for the fisheries aimed at developing a branch of industry
which is still backward even during the xixth century. Most substantial
encouragement was given to trade and commerce, to manufactures and
handicrafts, by the flood of gold which poured in from all parts of
earth; by the presence of a splendid and luxurious court, and by the
call for new arts and industries which such a civilization would
necessitate. The crafts were distributed into guilds and syndicates
under their respective chiefs, whom the government did not “govern too
much”: these Shahbandars, Mukaddams and Nakíbs regulated the several
trades, rewarded the industrious, punished the fraudulent and were
personally answerable, as we still see at Cairo, for the conduct of
their constituents. Public order, the sine quâ non of stability and
progress, was preserved first, by the satisfaction of the lieges who,
despite their characteristic turbulence, had few if any grievances; and,
secondly, by a well-directed and efficient police, an engine of
state-craft which in the West seems most difficult to perfect. In the
East, however, the Wali or Chief Commissioner can reckon more or less
upon the unsalaried assistance of society: the cities are divided into
quarters shut off one from other by night, and every Moslem is expected,
by his law and religion, to keep watch upon his neighbours, to report
their delinquencies and, if necessary, himself to carry out the penal
code. But in difficult cases the guardians of the peace were assisted by
a body of private detectives, women as well as men: these were called
Tawwábún = the Penitents, because like our Bow-street runners, they had
given up an even less respectable calling. Their adventures still
delight the vulgar, as did the Newgate Calendar of past generations; and
to this class we owe the Tales of Calamity Ahmad, Dalilah the Wily One,
Saladin with the three Chiefs of Police (vol. iv. 271), and Al-Malik
al-Záhir with the Sixteen Constables (Bresl. Edit. xi. pp. 321–99). Here
and in many other places we also see the origin of that “picaresque”
literature which arose in Spain and overran Europe; and which begat Le
Moyen de Parvenir.[314]

I need say no more on this heading, the civilisation of Baghdad
contrasting with the barbarism of Europe then Germanic, The Nights
itself being the best expositor. On the other hand the action of the
state-religion upon the state, the condition of Al-Islam during the
reign of Al-Rashid, its declension from the primitive creed and its
relation to Christianity and Christendom, require a somewhat extended
notice. In offering the following observations it is only fair to
declare my standpoints.

  1. All forms of “faith,” that is, belief in things unseen, not
  subject to the senses and therefore unknown and (in our present
  stage of development) unknowable, are temporary and transitory; no
  religion hitherto promulgated amongst men shows any prospect of
  being final or otherwise than finite.

  2. Religious ideas, which are necessarily limited, may all be traced
  home to the old seat of science and art, creeds and polity in the
  Nile-valley and to this day they retain the clearest signs of their
  origin.

  3. All so-called “revealed” religions consist mainly of three
  portions, a cosmogony more or less mythical, a history more or less
  falsified and a moral code more or less pure.

Al-Islam, it has been said, is essentially a fighting faith and never
shows to full advantage save in the field. The exceeding luxury of a
wealthy capital, the debauchery and variety of vices which would spring
up therein, naturally as weeds in a rich fallow, and the cosmopolitan
views which suggest themselves in a meeting-place of nations, were sore
trials to the primitive simplicity of the “Religion of Resignation”—the
saving faith. Harun and his cousin-wife, as has been shown, were
orthodox and even fanatical; but the Barmecides were strongly suspected
of heretical leanings; and while the many-headed showed itself, as
usual, violent, and ready to do battle about an Azan-call, the learned,
who sooner or later leaven the masses, were profoundly dissatisfied with
the dryness and barrenness of Mohammed’s creed, so acceptable to the
vulgar, and were devising a series of schisms and innovations.

In the Tale of Tawaddud (vol. v. 189) the reader has seen a fairly
extended catechism of the Creed (Dín), the ceremonial observances
(Mazhab) and the apostolic practices (Sunnat) of the Shafi’í school
which, with minor modifications, applies to the other three orthodox.
Europe has by this time clean forgotten some tricks of her former
bigotry, such as “Mawmet” (an idol!) and “Mahommerie” (mummery[315]), a
place of Moslem worship: educated men no longer speak with Ockley of the
“great impostor Mahomet,” nor believe with the learned and violent Dr.
Prideaux that he was foolish and wicked enough to dispossess “certain
poor orphans, the sons of an inferior artificer” (the Banú Najjár!). A
host of books has attempted, though hardly with success, to enlighten
popular ignorance upon a crucial point; namely, that the Founder of
Al-Islam, like the Founder of Christianity, never pretended to establish
a new religion. His claims, indeed, were limited to purging the “School
of Nazareth” of the dross of ages and of the manifold abuses with which
long use had infected its early constitution: hence to the unprejudiced
observer his reformation seems to have brought it nearer the primitive
and original doctrine than any subsequent attempts, especially the
Judaizing tendencies of the so-called “Protestant” churches. The Meccan
Apostle preached that the Hanafíyyah or orthodox belief, which he
subsequently named Al-Islam, was first taught by Allah, in all its
purity and perfection, to Adam and consigned to certain inspired volumes
now lost; and that this primal Holy Writ received additions in the days
of his descendants Shís (Seth) and Idris (Enoch?), the founder of the
Sabian (not “Sabæan”) faith. Here, therefore, Al-Islam at once avoided
the deplorable assumption of the Hebrews and the Christians,—an error
which has been so injurious to their science and their progress,—of
placing their “first man” in circa B.C. 4000 or somewhat subsequent to
the building of the Pyramids: the Pre-Adamite[316] races and dynasties
of the Moslems remove a great stumbling-block and square with the
anthropological views of the present day. In process of time, when the
Adamite religion demanded a restoration and a supplement, its pristine
virtue was revived, restored and further developed by the books
communicated to Abraham, whose dispensation thus takes the place of the
Hebrew Noah and his Noachidæ. In due time the Torah, or Pentateuch,
superseded and abrogated the Abrahamic dispensation; the “Zabúr” of
David (a book not confined to the Psalms) reformed the Torah; the Injíl
or Evangel reformed the Zabur and was itself purified, quickened and
perfected by the Koran which means κατ’ἐξοχήν the Reading or the
Recital. Hence Locke, with many others, held Moslems to be unorthodox,
that is anti-Trinitarian Christians who believe in the immaculate
Conception, in the Ascension and in the divine mission of Jesus; and
when Priestley affirmed that “Jesus was sent from God,” all Moslems do
the same. Thus they are, in the main point of doctrine connected with
the Deity, simply Arians as opposed to Athanasians. History proves that
the former was the earlier faith which, though formally condemned in
A.D. 325 by Constantine’s Council of Nice,[317] overspread the Orient
beginning with Eastern Europe, where Ulphilas converted the Goths; which
extended into Africa with the Vandals, claimed a victim or martyr as
late as in the sixteenth century[318] and has by no means died out in
this our day.

The Talmud had been completed a full century before Mohammed’s time and
the Evangel had been translated into Arabic; moreover travel and
converse with his Jewish and Christian friends and companions must have
convinced the Meccan apostle that Christianity was calling as loudly for
reform as Judaism had done.[319] An exaggerated Trinitarianism or rather
Tritheism, a “Fourth Person” and Saint-worship had virtually dethroned
the Deity; whilst Mariolatry had made the faith a religio muliebris, and
superstition had drawn from its horrid fecundity an incredible number of
heresies and monstrous absurdities. Even ecclesiastic writers draw the
gloomiest pictures of the Christian Church in the fourth and seventh
centuries, and one declares that the “Kingdom of Heaven had become a
Hell.” Egypt, distracted by the blood-thirsty religious wars of Copt and
Greek, had been covered with hermitages by a gens æterna of
semi-maniacal superstition. Syria, ever “feracious of heresies,” had
allowed many of her finest tracts to be monopolised by monkeries and
nunneries.[320] After many a tentative measure Mohammed seems to have
built his edifice upon two bases, the unity of the Godhead and the
priesthood of the paterfamilias. He abolished for ever the “sacerdos
alter Christus” whose existence, as some one acutely said, is the best
proof of Christianity, and whom all know to be its weakest point. The
Moslem family, however humble, was to be the model in miniature of the
State, and every father in Al-Islam was made priest and pontiff in his
own house, able unaided to marry himself, to circumcise (to baptise as
it were) his children, to instruct them in the law and canonically to
bury himself (vol. viii. 22). Ritual, properly so called, there was
none; congregational prayers were merely those of the individual en
masse and the only admitted approach to a sacerdotal order were the
Olema or scholars learned in the legistic and the Mullah or
schoolmaster. By thus abolishing the priesthood Mohammed reconciled
ancient with modern wisdom. “Scito dominum,” said Cato, “pro totâ
familiâ rem divinam facere”: “No priest at a birth, no priest at a
marriage, no priest at a death,” is the aspiration of the present
Rationalistic School.

The Meccan apostle wisely retained the compulsory sacrament of
circumcision and the ceremonial ablutions of the Mosaic law; and the
five daily prayers not only diverted man’s thoughts from the world but
tended to keep his body pure. These two institutions had been practised
throughout life by the Founder of Christianity; but the followers who
had never even seen him, abolished them for purposes evidently political
and propagandist. By ignoring the truth that cleanliness is next to
godliness they paved the way for such saints as Simon Stylites and Sabba
who, like the lowest Hindu orders of ascetics, made filth a concominant
and an evidence of piety: even now English Catholic girls are at times
forbidden by Italian priests a frequent use of the bath as a signpost to
the sin of “luxury.” Mohammed would have accepted the morals contained
in the Sermon on the Mount much more readily than did the Jews from whom
its matter was borrowed.[321] He did something to abolish the use of
wine, which in the East means only its abuse; and he denounced games of
chance, well knowing that the excitable races of sub-tropical climates
cannot play with patience, fairness or moderation. He set aside certain
sums for charity to be paid by every Believer and he was the first to
establish a poor-rate (Zakát): thus he avoided the shame and scandal of
mendicancy which, beginning in the Catholic countries of Southern
Europe, extends to Syria and as far East as Christianity is found. By
these and other measures of the same import he made the ideal Moslem’s
life physically clean, moderate and temperate.

But Mohammed the “master mind of the age,” had, we must own, a “genuine
prophetic power, a sinking of self in the Divine, not distinguishable in
kind from the inspiration of the Hebrew prophets,” especially in that
puritanical and pharisaic narrowness which, with characteristic
simplicity, can see no good outside its own petty pale. He had insight
as well as outsight, and the two taught him that personal and external
reformation were mean matters compared with elevating the inner man. In
the “purer Faith,” which he was commissioned to abrogate and to quicken,
he found two vital defects equally fatal to its energy and to its
longevity. These were (and are) its egoism and its degradation of
humanity. Thus it cannot be a “pleroma”: it needs a Higher Law.[322] As
Judaism promised the good Jew all manner of temporal blessings, issue,
riches, wealth, honour, power, length of days, so Christianity offered
the good Christian, as a bribe to lead a godly life, personal salvation
and a future state of happiness, in fact, the Kingdom of Heaven, with an
alternative threat of Hell. It never rose to the height of the Hindu
Brahmans and Lao-Tse (the “Ancient Teacher”); of Zeno the Stoic and his
disciples the noble Pharisees[323] who believed and preached that Virtue
is its own reward. It never dared to say, “Do good for Good’s
sake[324];” even now it does not declare with Cicero, “The sum of all is
that what is right, should be sought for its own sake, because it is
right, and not because it is enacted.” It does not even now venture to
say with Philo Judæus, “The good man seeks the day for the sake of the
day, and the light for the light’s sake; and he labours to acquire what
is good for the sake of the good itself, and not of anything else.” So
far for the egotism, naïve and unconscious, of Christianity, whose
burden is, “Do good to escape Hell and gain Heaven.”

A no less defect in the “School of Galilee” is its low view of human
nature. Adopting as sober and authentic history an Osirian-Hebrew myth
which Philo and a host of Rabbis explain away, each after his own
fashion, Christianity dwells, lovingly as it were, upon the “Fall” of
man[325] and seems to revel in the contemptible condition to which
“original sin” condemned him; thus grovelling before God ad majorem Dei
gloriam. To such a point was and is this carried that the Synod of Dort
declared, Infantes infidelium morientes in infantiâ reprobatos esse
statuimus; nay, many of the orthodox still hold a Christian babe dying
unbaptised to be unfit for a higher existence, and some have even
created a “limbo” expressly to domicile the innocents “of whom is the
kingdom of Heaven.” Here, if any where, the cloven foot shows itself and
teaches us that the only solid stratum underlying priestcraft is one
composed of £ s. d.

 And I never can now believe it, my Lord! (Bishop) we come to this earth
 Ready damned, with the seeds of evil sown quite so thick at our birth,

sings Edwin Arnold.[326] We ask, can infatuation or hypocrisy—for it
must be the one or the other—go farther? But the Adamical myth is
opposed to all our modern studies. The deeper we dig into the Earth’s
“crust,” the lower are the specimens of human remains which occur; and
hitherto not a single “find” has come to revive the faded glories of

              Adam the goodliest man of men since born (!)
              His sons, the fairest of her daughters Eve.

Thus Christianity, admitting, like Judaism, its own saints and santons,
utterly ignores the progress of humanity, perhaps the only belief in
which the wise man can take unmingled satisfaction. Both have proposed
an originally perfect being with hyacinthine locks, from whose type all
the subsequent humans are degradations physical and moral. We on the
other hand hold, from the evidence of our senses, that early man was a
savage very little superior to the brute; that during man’s millions of
years upon earth there has been a gradual advance towards perfection, at
times irregular and even retrograde, but in the main progressive; and
that a comparison of man in the xixth century with the caveman[327]
affords us the means of measuring past progress and of calculating the
future of humanity.

Mahommed was far from rising to the moral heights of the ancient sages:
he did nothing to abate the egotism of Christianity; he even exaggerated
the pleasures of its Heaven and the horrors of its Hell. On the other
hand he did much to exalt human nature. He passed over the “Fall” with a
light hand; he made man superior to the angels: he encouraged his
fellow-creatures to be great and good by dwelling upon their nobler not
their meaner side; he acknowledged, even in this world, the
perfectability of mankind, including womankind, and in proposing the
loftiest ideal he acted unconsciously upon the grand dictum of
chivalry—Honneur oblige.[328] His prophets were mostly faultless men;
and, if the “Pure of Allah” sinned, he “sinned against himself.” Lastly,
he made Allah predetermine the career and fortunes, not only of empires,
but of every created being; thus inculcating sympathy and tolerance of
others, which is true humanity, and a proud resignation to evil as to
good fortune. This is the doctrine which teaches the vulgar Moslem a
dignity observed even by the “blind traveller,” and which enables him to
display a moderation, a fortitude, and a self-command rare enough
amongst the followers of the “purer creed.”

Christian historians explain variously the portentous rise of Al-Islam
and its marvellous spread over vast regions, not only of pagans and
idolators but of Christians. Prideaux disingenuously suggests that it
“seems to have been purposely raised up by God, to be a scourge to the
Christian church for not living in accordance with their most holy
religion.” The popular excuse is by the free use of the sword; this,
however, is mere ignorance: in Mohammed’s day and early Al-Islam only
actual fighters were slain[329]: the rest were allowed to pay the
Jizyah, or capitation-tax, and to become tributaries, enjoying almost
all the privileges of Moslems. But even had forcible conversion been
most systematically practised, it would have afforded an insufficient
explanation of the phenomenal rise of an empire which covered more
ground in eighty years than Rome had gained in eight hundred. During so
short a time the grand revival of Monotheism had consolidated into a
mighty nation, despite their eternal blood-feuds, the scattered Arab
tribes; a six-years’ campaign had conquered Syria, and a lustre or two
utterly overthrew Persia, humbled the Græco-Roman, subdued Egypt and
extended the Faith along northern Africa as far as the Atlantic. Within
three generations the Copts of Nile-land had formally cast out
Christianity, and the same was the case with Syria, the cradle of the
Nazarene, and Mesopotamia, one of his strongholds, although both were
backed by all the remaining power of the Byzantine empire. Northwestern
Africa, which had rejected the idolatro-philosophic system of pagan and
imperial Rome, and had accepted, after lukewarm fashion, the Arian
Christianity imported by the Vandals, and the “Nicene mystery of the
Trinity,” hailed with enthusiasm the doctrines of the Koran and has
never ceased to be most zealous in its Islam. And while Mohammedanism
speedily reduced the limits of Christendom by one-third, while
throughout the Arabian, Saracenic and Turkish invasions whole Christian
peoples embraced the monotheistic faith, there are hardly any instances
of defection from the new creed and, with the exception of Spain and
Sicily, it has never been suppressed in any land where once it took
root. Even now, when Mohammedanism no longer wields the sword, it is
spreading over wide regions in China, in the Indian Archipelago, and
especially in Western and Central Africa, propagated only by
self-educated individuals, trading travellers, while Christianity makes
no progress and cannot exist on the Dark Continent without strong
support from Government. Nor can we explain this honourable reception by
the “licentiousness” ignorantly attributed to Al-Islam, one of the most
severely moral of institutions; or by the allurements of polygamy and
concubinage, slavery,[330] and a “wholly sensual Paradise” devoted to
eating, drinking[331] and the pleasures of the sixth sense. The true and
simple explanation is that this grand Reformation of Christianity was
urgently wanted when it appeared, that it suited the people better than
the creed which it superseded and that it has not ceased to be
sufficient for their requirements, social, sexual and vital. As the
practical Orientalist, Dr. Leitner, well observes from his own
experience, “The Mohammedan religion can adapt itself better than any
other and has adapted itself to circumstances and to the needs of the
various races which profess it, in accordance with the spirit of the
age.”[332] Hence, I add, its wide diffusion and its impregnable
position. “The dead hand, stiff and motionless” is a forcible simile for
the present condition of Al-Islam; but it results from limited and
imperfect observation and it fails in the sine quâ non of similes and
metaphors, a foundation of fact.

I cannot quit this subject without a passing reference to an admirably
written passage in Mr. Palgrave’s travels[333] which is essentially
unfair to Al-Islam. The author has had ample opportunities of comparing
creeds: of Jewish blood and born a Protestant, he became a Catholic and
a Jesuit (Père Michel Cohen)[334] in a Syrian convent; he crossed Arabia
as a good Moslem and he finally returned to his premier amour,
Anglicanism. But his picturesque depreciation of Mohammedanism, which
has found due appreciation in more than one popular volume,[335] is a
notable specimen of special pleading, of the ad captandum in its modern
and least honest form. The writer begins by assuming the arid and barren
Wahhabi-ism, which he had personally studied, as a fair expression of
the Saving Faith. What should we say to a Moslem traveller who would
make the Calvinism of the sourest Covenanter, model, genuine and ancient
Christianity? What would sensible Moslems say to these propositions of
Professor Maccovius and the Synod of Dort:—Good works are an obstacle to
salvation. God does by no means will the salvation of all men: he does
will sin and he destines men to sin, as sin? What would they think of
the Inadmissible Grace, the Perseverance of the Elect, the
Supralapsarian and the Sublapsarian and, finally, of a Deity the author
of man’s existence, temptation and fall, who deliberately pre-ordains
sin and ruin? “Father Cohen” carries out into the regions of the extreme
his strictures on the one grand vitalising idea of Al-Islam, “There is
no god but God”;[336] and his deduction concerning the Pantheism of
Force sounds unreal and unsound, compared with the sensible remarks upon
the same subject by Dr. Badger[337] who sees the abstruseness of the
doctrine and does not care to include it in hard and fast lines or to
subject it to mere logical analysis. Upon the subject of
“predestination” Mr. Palgrave quotes, not from the Koran, but from the
Ahádís or Traditional Sayings of the Apostle; but what importance
attaches to a legend in the Mischnah, or Oral Law, of the Hebrews
utterly ignored by the Written Law? He joins the many in complaining
that even the mention of “the love of God” is absent from Mohammed’s
theology, burking the fact that it never occurs in the Jewish scriptures
and that the genius of Arabic, like Hebrew, does not admit the
expression: worse still, he keeps from his reader such Koranic passages
as, to quote no other, “Allah loveth you and will forgive your sins”
(iii. 29). He pities Allah for having “no son, companion or counsellor”
and, of course, he must equally commiserate Jehovah. Finally his views
of the lifelessness of Al-Islam are directly opposed to the opinions of
Dr. Leitner and the experience of all who have lived in Moslem lands.
Such are the ingenious but not ingenuous distortions of fact, the fine
instances of the pathetic fallacy, and the noteworthy illustrations of
the falsehood of extremes, which have engendered “Mohammedanism a
Relapse: the worst form of Monotheism,”[338] and which have been eagerly
seized upon and further deformed by the authors of popular books, that
is, volumes written by those who know little for those who know less.

In Al-Rashid’s day a mighty change had passed over the primitive
simplicity of Al-Islam, the change to which faiths and creeds, like
races and empires and all things sublunary, are subject. The proximity
of Persia and the close intercourse with the Græco-Romans had polished
and greatly modified the physiognomy of the rugged old belief: all
manner of metaphysical subtleties had cropped up, with the usual
disintegrating effect, and some of these threatened even the unity of
the Godhead. Musaylimah and Karmat had left traces of their handiwork:
the Mutazilites (separatists or secessors) actively propagated their
doctrine of a created and temporal Koran. The Khárijí or Ibázi, who
rejects and reviles Abú Turáb (Caliph Ali), contended passionately with
the Shí’ah who reviles and rejects the other three “Successors;” and
these sectarians, favoured by the learned, and by the Abbasides in their
jealous hatred of the Ommiades, went to the extreme length of the
Ali-Iláhi—the God-makers of Ali—whilst the Dahrí and the Zindík, the
Mundanist and the Agnostic, proposed to sweep away the whole edifice.
The neo-Platonism and Gnosticism which had not essentially affected
Christendom,[339] found in Al-Islam a rich fallow and gained strength
and luxuriance by the solid materialism and conservatism of its basis.
Such were a few of the distracting and resolving influences which Time
had brought to bear upon the True Believer and which, after some half a
dozen generations, had separated the several schisms by a wider breach
than that which yawns between Orthodox, Romanist and Lutheran. Nor was
this scandal in Al-Islam abated until the Tartar sword applied to it the
sharpest remedy.


                               B.—WOMAN.

The next point I propose to consider is the position of womanhood in The
Nights, so curiously at variance with the stock ideas concerning the
Moslem home and domestic policy still prevalent, not only in England,
but throughout Europe. Many readers of these volumes have remarked to me
with much astonishment that they find the female characters more
remarkable for decision, action and manliness than the male; and are
wonderstruck by their masterful attitude and by the supreme influence
they exercise upon public and private life.

I have glanced at the subject of the sex in Al-Islam to such an extent
throughout my notes that little remains here to be added. Women, all the
world over, are what men make them; and the main charm of Amazonian
fiction is to see how they live and move and have their being without
any masculine guidance. But it is the old ever-new fable

              “Who drew the Lion vanquished? ’Twas a man!”

The books of the Ancients, written in that stage of civilisation, when
the sexes are at civil war, make women even more than in real life the
creatures of their masters: hence from the dawn of literature to the
present day the sex has been the subject of disappointed abuse and
eulogy almost as unmerited. Ecclesiastes, perhaps the strangest specimen
of an “inspired volume” the world has yet produced, boldly declares “One
(upright) man among a thousand I have found; but a woman among all have
I not found” (vol. vii. 28), thus confirming the pessimism of
Petronius:—

            Femina nulla bona est, et si bona contigit ulla
            Nescio quo fato res mala facta bona est.

In the Psalms again (xxx. 15) we have the old sneer at the three
insatiables, Hell, Earth and the Parts feminine (_os vulvæ_); and
Rabbinical learning has embroidered these and other texts, producing a
truly hideous caricature. A Hadis attributed to Mohammed runs, “They
(women) lack wits and faith. When Eve was created Satan rejoiced
saying:—Thou art half of my host, the trustee of my secret and my shaft
wherewith I shoot and miss not!” Another tells us, “I stood at the gate
of Heaven, and lo! most of its inmates were poor, and I stood at the
gate of Hell, and lo! most of its inmates were women.”[340] “Take care
of the glass-phials!” cried the Prophet to a camel-guide singing with a
sweet voice. Yet the Meccan apostle made, as has been seen, his own
household produce two perfections. The blatant popular voice follows
with such “dictes” as, “Women are made of nectar and poison”; “Women
have long hair and short wits” and so forth. Nor are the Hindus behind
hand. Woman has fickleness implanted in her by Nature like the flashings
of lightning (Kathá s.s. i. 147); she is valueless as a straw to the
heroic mind (169); she is hard as adamant in sin and soft as flour in
fear (170) and, like the fly, she quits camphor to settle on compost
(ii. 17). “What dependence is there in the crowing of a hen?” (women’s
opinions) says the Hindi proverb; also “A virgin with grey hairs!”
(_i.e._ a monster) and, “Wherever wendeth a fairy face a devil wendeth
with her.” The same superficial view of holding woman to be lesser (and
very inferior) man is taken generally by the classics; and Euripides
distinguished himself by misogyny, although he drew the beautiful
character of Alcestis. Simonides, more merciful than Ecclesiastes, after
naming his swine-women, dog-women, cat-women, etc., ends the decade with
the admirable bee-woman thus making ten per cent. honest. In mediæval or
Germanic Europe the doctrine of the Virgin mother gave the sex a status
unknown to the ancients except in Egypt, where Isis was the help-mate
and completion of Osiris, in modern parlance “The Woman clothed with the
Sun.” The kindly and courtly Palmerin of England, in whose pages
“gentlemen may find their choice of sweet inventions and gentlewomen be
satisfied with courtly expectations,” suddenly blurts out, “But in truth
women are never satisfied by reason, being governed by accident or
appetite” (chapt. xlix).

The Nights, as might be expected from the emotional East, exaggerate
these views. Women are mostly “Sectaries of the god Wünsch”; beings of
impulse, blown about by every gust of passion; stable only in
instability; constant only in inconstancy. The false ascetic, the
perfidious and murderous crone and the old hag-procuress who pimps like
Umm Kulsum[341], for mere pleasure, in the luxury of sin, are drawn with
an experienced and loving hand. Yet not the less do we meet with
examples of the dutiful daughter, the model lover matronly in her
affection, the devoted wife, the perfect mother, the saintly devotee,
the learned preacher, Univira the chaste widow and the self-sacrificing
heroic woman. If we find (vol. iii. 216) the sex described as:—

               An offal cast by kites where’er they list,

and the studied insults of vol. iii. 318, we also come upon an admirable
sketch of conjugal happiness (vol. vii. ? 43); and, to mention no other,
Shahryar’s attestation to Shahrazad’s excellence in the last charming
pages of The Nights.[342] It is the same with the Kathá whose praise and
dispraise are equally enthusiastic; _e.g._, “Women of good family are
guarded by their own virtue, the sole efficient chamberlain; but the
Lord himself can hardly guard the unchaste. Who can stem a furious
stream and a frantic woman?” (i. 328). “Excessive love in woman is your
only hero for daring” (i. 339). “Thus fair ones, naturally feeble, bring
about a series of evil actions which engender discernment and aversion
to the world; but here and there you will find a virtuous woman who
adorneth a glorious house as the streak of the moon arrayeth the breadth
of the Heavens” (i. 346). “So you see, King, honourable matrons are
devoted to their husbands and ’tis not the case that women are always
bad” (ii. 624). And there is true wisdom in that even balance of
feminine qualities advocated by our Hindu-Hindi class-book the
Toti-námeh or Parrot volume. The perfect woman has seven requisites. She
must not always be merry (1) nor sad (2); she must not always be talking
(3) nor silently musing (4); she must not always be adorning herself (5)
nor neglecting her person (6); and, (7) at all times she must be
moderate and self-possessed.

The legal status of womankind in Al-Islam is exceptionally high, a fact
of which Europe has often been assured, although the truth has not even
yet penetrated into the popular brain. Nearly a century ago one Mirza
Abú Tálib Khán, an Amildár or revenue collector, after living two years
in London, wrote an “apology” for, or rather a vindication of, his
countrywomen which is still worth reading and quoting.[343] Nations are
but superficial judges of one another: where customs differ they often
remark only the salient distinctive points which, when examined, prove
to be of minor importance. Europeans seeing and hearing that women in
the East are “cloistered” as the Grecian matron was wont ἔνδον μένειν
and οἰκουρεῖν; that wives may not walk out with their husbands and
cannot accompany them to “balls and parties”; moreover, that they are
always liable, like the ancient Hebrew, to the mortification of the
“sister-wife,” have most ignorantly determined that they are mere
serviles and that their lives are not worth living. Indeed, a learned
lady, Miss Martineau, once visiting a Harem went into ectasies of pity
and sorrow because the poor things knew nothing of—say trigonometry and
the use of the globes. Sonnini thought otherwise, and my experience,
like that of all old dwellers in the East, is directly opposed to this
conclusion.

I have noted (Night cmlxii.) that Mohammed, in the fifth year of his
reign,[344] after his ill-advised and scandalous marriage[345] with his
foster-daughter Zaynab, established the Hijáb or veiling of women. It
was probably an exaggeration of local usage: a modified separation of
the sexes, which extended and still extends even to the Badawi, must
long have been customary in Arabian cities, and its object was to
deliver the sexes from temptation, as the Koran says (xxxii. 32), “purer
will this (practice) be for your hearts and their hearts.”[346] The
women, who delight in restrictions which tend to their honour, accepted
it willingly and still affect it; they do not desire a liberty or rather
a licence which they have learned to regard as inconsistent with their
time-honoured notions of feminine decorum and delicacy, and they would
think very meanly of a husband who permitted them to be exposed, like
hetairæ, to the public gaze.[347] As Zubayr Pasha, exiled to Gibraltar
for another’s treason, said to my friend, Colonel Buckle, after visiting
quarters evidently laid out by a jealous husband, “We Arabs think that
when a man has a precious jewel, ’tis wiser to lock it up in a box than
to leave it about for anyone to take.” The Eastern adopts the
instinctive, the Western prefers the rational method. The former
jealously guards his treasure, surrounds it with all precautions, fends
off from it all risks and if the treasure go astray, kills it. The
latter, after placing it _en evidence_ upon an eminence in ball dress
with back and bosom bared to the gaze of society, a bundle of charms
exposed to every possible seduction, allows it to take its own way, and
if it be misled, he kills or tries to kill the misleader. It is a fiery
trial; and the few who safely pass through it may claim a higher
standpoint in the moral world than those who have never been sorely
tried. But the crucial question is whether Christian Europe has done
wisely in offering such temptations.

The second and main objection to Moslem custom is the marriage-system
which begins with a girl being wedded to a man whom she knows only by
hearsay. This was the habit of our forbears not many generations ago,
and it still prevails amongst noble houses in Southern Europe, where a
lengthened study of it leaves me doubtful whether the “love-marriage,”
as it is called, or wedlock with an utter stranger, evidently the two
extremes, is likely to prove the happier. The “sister-wife” is or would
be a sore trial to monogamic races like those of Northern Europe, where
Caia, all but the equal of Caius in most points mental and physical and
superior in some, not unfrequently proves herself the “man of the
family,” the “only man in the boat.” But in the East, where the sex is
far more delicate, where a girl is brought up in polygamy, where
religious reasons separate her from her husband, during pregnancy and
lactation, for three successive years; and where often enough like the
Mormon damsel she would hesitate to “nigger it with a one-wife-man,” the
case assumes a very different aspect and the load, if burden it be,
falls comparatively light. Lastly, the “patriarchal household” is mostly
confined to the grandee and the richard, whilst Holy Law and public
opinion, neither of which can openly be disregarded, assign command of
the household to the _equal_ or first wife and jealously guard the
rights and privileges of the others.

Mirza Abu Talib “the Persian Prince”[348] offers six reasons why “the
liberty of the Asiatic women appears less than that of the Europeans,”
ending with,

                    I’ll fondly place on either eye
                    The man that can to this reply.

He then lays down eight points in which the Moslem wife has greatly the
advantage over her Christian sisterhood; and we may take his first as a
specimen. Custom, not contrary to law, invests the Mohammedan mother
with despotic government of the homestead, slaves, servants and
children, especially the latter: she alone directs their early
education, their choice of faith, their marriage and their establishment
in life; and in case of divorce she takes the daughters, the sons going
to the sire. She has also liberty to leave her home, not only for one or
two nights, but for a week or a fortnight, without consulting her
husband; and whilst she visits a strange household, the master and all
males above fifteen are forbidden the Harem. But the main point in
favour of the Moslem wife is her being a “legal sharer”: inheritance is
secured to her by Koranic law; she must be dowered by the bridegroom to
legalise marriage and all she gains is secured to her; whereas in
England a “Married Woman’s Property Act” was completed only in 1882
after many centuries of the grossest abuses.

Lastly, Moslems and Easterns in general study and intelligently study
the art and mystery of satisfying the physical woman. In my Foreword I
have noticed among barbarians the system of “making men”[349] that is,
of teaching lads first arrived at puberty the nice conduct of the
instrumentum paratum plantandis civibus; a branch of the knowledge-tree
which our modern education grossly neglects, thereby entailing untold
miseries upon individuals, families and generations. The mock virtue,
the most immodest modesty of England and of the United States in the
xix^{th} century, pronounces the subject foul and fulsome: “Society”
sickens at all details; and hence it is said abroad that the English
have the finest women in Europe and least know how to use them.
Throughout the East such studies are aided by a long series of volumes,
many of them written by learned physiologists, by men of social standing
and by religious dignitaries high in office. The Egyptians especially
delight in aphrodisiac literature treating, as the Turks say, de la
partie au-dessous de la taille; and from fifteen hundred to two thousand
copies of a new work, usually lithographed in cheap form, readily sell
off. The pudibund Lane makes allusion to and quotes (A. N. i. 216) one
of the most outspoken, a 4to of 464 pages, called the Halbat al-Kumayt
or “Race-Course of the Bay Horse,” a poetical and horsey term for
grape-wine. Attributed by D’Herbelot to the Kazi Shams al-Din Mohammed,
it is wholly upon the subject of wassail and women till the last few
pages, when his reverence exclaims:—“This much, O reader, I have
recounted, the better thou mayst know what to avoid;” and so forth,
ending with condemning all he had praised.[350] Even the divine and
historian Jalál al-Dín al-Siyuti is credited with having written, though
the authorship is much disputed, a work entitled, “Kitáb al-Ízáh fi ’ilm
al-Nikáh” = The Book of Exposition in the Science of Coition: my copy, a
lithograph of 33 pages, undated, but evidently Cairene, begins with
exclaiming “Alhamdolillah—Laud to the Lord who adorned the virginal
bosom with breasts and who made the thighs of women anvils for the
spear-handles of men!” To the same amiable theologian are also ascribed
the “Kitáb Nawázir al-Ayk fi al-Nayk” = Green Splendours of the Copse in
Copulation, an abstract of the Kitáb al-Wisháh fí fawáid al-Nikáh = Book
of the Zone on Coitionboon. Of the abundance of pornographic literature
we may judge from a list of the following seven works given in the
second page of the “Kitáb Rujú’a al-Shaykh ila Sabáh fi ’l-Kuwwat
al-Báh”[351] = Book of Age-rejuvenescence in the power of Concupiscence:
it is the work of Ahmad bin Sulayman, surnamed Ibn Kamál Pasha.

  1. Kitáb al-Báh by Al-Nahli.

  2. Kitáb al-’Ars wa al-’Aráis (Book of the Bridal and the Brides) by
  Al-Jáhiz.

  3. Kitáb al-Kiyán (Maiden’s Book) by Ibn Hájib al-Nu’mán.

  4. Kitáb al-Ízáh fí asrár al-Nikáh (Book of the Exposition on the
  Mysteries of married Fruition).

  5. Kitáb Jámi’ al-Lizzah (The Compendium of Pleasure) by Ibn
  Samsamáni.

  6. Kitáb Barján (Yarján?) wa Janáhib (??)[352]

  7. Kitáb al-Munákahah wa al-Mufátahah fí Asnáf al-Jimá’ wa Álátih
  (Book of Carnal Copulation and the Initiation into the modes of
  Coition and its Instrumentation), by Aziz al-Din al-Masíhí.[353]

To these I may add the Lizzat al-Nisá (Pleasures of Women), a text-book
in Arabic, Persian and Hindostani: it is a translation and a very poor
attempt, omitting much from, and adding naught to, the famous Sanskrit
work Ananga-Ranga (Stage of the Bodiless One _i.e._ Cupido) or Hindu Art
of Love (Ars Amoris Indica).[354] I have copies of it in Sanskrit and
Maráthi, Guzrati and Hindostani: the latter is an unpaged 8vo of p. 66,
including eight pages of most grotesque illustrations showing the
various Ásan (the Figuræ Veneris or positions of copulation), which seem
to be the triumphs of contortionists. These pamphlets lithographed in
Bombay are broad cast over the land.[355]

It must not be supposed that such literature is purely and simply
aphrodisiacal. The learned Sprenger, a physician as well as an Arabist,
says (Al-Mas’údi p. 384) of a tractate by the celebrated Rhazes in the
Leyden Library “The number of curious observations, the correct and
practical ideas and the novelty of the notions of Eastern nations on
these subjects, which are contained in this book, render it one of the
most important productions of the medical literature of the Arabs.” I
can conscientiously recommend to the Anthropologist a study of the
“Kutub al-Báh.”


                            C.—PORNOGRAPHY.

Here it will be advisable to supplement what was said in my Foreword (p.
xv.) concerning the _turpiloquium_ of The Nights. Readers who have
perused the ten volumes will probably agree with me that the naïve
indecencies of the text are rather _gaudisserie_ than prurience; and,
when delivered with mirth and humour, they are rather the “excrements of
wit” than designed for debauching the mind. Crude and indelicate with
infantile plainness; even gross and, at times, “nasty” in their terrible
frankness, they cannot be accused of corrupting suggestiveness or subtle
insinuation of vicious sentiment. Theirs is a coarseness of language,
not of idea; they are indecent, not depraved; and the pure and perfect
naturalness of their nudity seems almost to purify it, showing that the
matter is rather of manners than of morals. Such throughout the East is
the language of every man, woman and child, from prince to peasant, from
matron to prostitute: all are as the naïve French traveller said of the
Japanese; “si grossiers qu’ils ne sçavent nommer les choses que par leur
nom.” This primitive stage of language sufficed to draw from Lane and
Burckhardt strictures upon the “most immodest freedom of conversation in
Egypt,” where, as all the world over, there are three several stages for
names of things and acts sensual. First we have the _mot cru_, the
popular term, soon followed by the technical and scientific, and,
lastly, the literary or figurative nomenclature, which is often much
more immoral because more attractive, suggestive and seductive than the
“raw word.” And let me observe that the highest civilization is now
returning to the language of nature. In La Glu of M. J. Richepin, a
triumph of the realistic school, we find such “archaic” expressions as
la petée, putain, foutue à la six-quatre-dix; une facétieuse pétarade;
tu t’es foutue de, etc. Eh vilain bougre! and so forth.[356] To those
critics who complain of these raw vulgarisms and puerile indecencies in
The Nights I can reply only by quoting the words said to have been said
by Dr. Johnson to the lady who complained of the naughty words in his
dictionary—“You must have been looking for them, Madam!”

But I repeat (p. xvi.) there is another element in The Nights and that
is one of absolute obscenity utterly repugnant to English readers, even
the least prudish. It is chiefly connected with what our neighbours call
_Le vice contre nature_—as if anything can be contrary to nature which
includes all things.[357] Upon this subject I must offer details, as it
does not enter into my plan to ignore any theme which is interesting to
the Orientalist and the Anthropologist. And they, methinks, do abundant
harm who, for shame or disgust, would suppress the very mention of such
matters: in order to combat a great and growing evil deadly to the
birth-rate—the main-stay of national prosperity—the first requisite is
careful study. As Albert Bollstoedt, Bishop of Ratisbon, rightly
says:—Quia malum non evitatum nisi cognitum, ideo necesse est cognoscere
immundiciem coitus et multa alia quæ docentur in isto libro. Equally
true are Professor Mantegazza’s words:[358] Cacher les plaies du cœur
humain au nom de la pudeur, ce n’est au contraire qu’hypocrisie ou peur.
The late Mr. Grote had reason to lament that when describing such
institutions as the far-famed ἱερὸς λόχος of Thebes, the Sacred Band
annihilated at Chaeroneia, he was compelled to a reticence which
permitted him to touch only the surface of the subject. This was
inevitable under the present rule of Cant[359] in a book intended for
the public: but the same does not apply to my version of The Nights, and
now I proceed to discuss the matter sérieusement, honnêtement,
historiquement; to show it in decent nudity not in suggestive fig-leaf
or feuille de vigne.


                             D.—PEDERASTY.

The “execrabilis familia pathicorum” first came before me by a chance of
earlier life. In 1845, when Sir Charles Napier had conquered and annexed
Sind, despite a fraction (mostly venal) which sought favour with the now
defunct “Court of Directors to the Honourable East India Company,” the
veteran began to consider his conquest with a curious eye. It was
reported to him that Karáchi, a townlet of some two thousand souls and
distant not more than a mile from camp, supported no less than three
lupanars or bordels, in which not women but boys and eunuchs, the former
demanding nearly a double price,[360] lay for hire. Being then the only
British officer who could speak Sindi, I was asked indirectly to make
enquiries and to report upon the subject; and I undertook the task on
express condition that my report should not be forwarded to the Bombay
Government, from whom supporters of the Conqueror’s policy could expect
scant favour, mercy or justice. Accompanied by a Munshi, Mirza Mohammed
Hosayn of Shiraz, and habited as a merchant, Mirza Abdullah the
Bushiri[361] passed many an evening in the townlet, visited all the
porneia and obtained the fullest details which were duly despatched to
Government House. But the “Devil’s Brother” presently quitted Sind
leaving in his office my unfortunate official: this found its way with
sundry other reports[362] to Bombay and produced the expected result. A
friend in the Secretariat informed me that my summary dismissal from the
service had been formally proposed by one of Sir Charles Napier’s
successors, whose decease compels me parcere sepulto. But this excess of
outraged modesty was not allowed.

Subsequent enquiries in many and distant countries enabled me to arrive
at the following conclusions:—

  1. There exists what I shall call a “Sotadic Zone,” bounded
  westwards by the northern shores of the Mediterranean (N. Lat. 43°)
  and by the southern (N. Lat. 30°). Thus the depth would be 780 to
  800 miles including meridional France, the Iberian Peninsula, Italy
  and Greece, with the coast-regions of Africa from Marocco to Egypt.

  2. Running eastward the Sotadic Zone narrows, embracing Asia Minor,
  Mesopotamia and Chaldæa, Afghanistan, Sind, the Punjab and Kashmir.

  3. In Indo-China the belt begins to broaden, enfolding China, Japan
  and Turkistan.

  4. It then embraces the South Sea Islands and the New World where,
  at the time of its discovery, Sotadic love was, with some
  exceptions, an established racial institution.

  5. Within the Sotadic Zone the Vice is popular and endemic, held at
  the worst to be a mere peccadillo, whilst the races to the North and
  South of the limits here defined practise it only sporadically amid
  the opprobrium of their fellows who, as a rule, are physically
  incapable of performing the operation and look upon it with the
  liveliest disgust.

Before entering into topographical details concerning Pederasty, which I
hold to be geographical and climatic, not racial, I must offer a few
considerations of its cause and origin. We must not forget that the love
of boys has its noble sentimental side. The Platonists and pupils of the
Academy, followed by the Sufis or Moslem Gnostics, held such affection,
pure as ardent, to be the beau idéal which united in man’s soul the
creature with the Creator. Professing to regard youths as the most
cleanly and beautiful objects in this phenomenal world, they declared
that by loving and extolling the chef-d’œuvre, corporeal and
intellectual, of the Demiurgus, disinterestedly and without any
admixture of carnal sensuality, they are paying the most fervent
adoration to the Causa causans. They add that such affection, passing as
it does the love of women, is far less selfish than fondness for and
admiration of the other sex which, however innocent, always suggest
sexuality[363]; and Easterns add that the devotion of the moth to the
taper is purer and more fervent than the Bulbul’s love for the Rose.
Amongst the Greeks of the best ages the system of boy-favourites was
advocated on considerations of morals and politics. The lover undertook
the education of the beloved through precept and example, while the two
were conjoined by a tie stricter than the fraternal. Hieronymus the
Peripatetic strongly advocated it because the vigorous disposition of
youths and the confidence engendered by their association often led to
the overthrow of tyrannies. Socrates declared that “a most valiant army
might be composed of boys and their lovers; for that of all men they
would be most ashamed to desert one another.” And even Virgil, despite
the foul flavour of Formosum pastor Corydon, could write:—

                         Nisus amore pio pueri.

The only physical cause for the practice which suggests itself to me and
that must be owned to be purely conjectural, is that within the Sotadic
Zone there is a blending of the masculine and feminine temperaments, a
crasis which elsewhere occurs only sporadically. Hence the male
_féminisme_ whereby the man becomes patiens as well as agens, and the
woman a tribade, a votary of mascula Sappho,[364] Queen of Frictrices or
Rubbers.[365] Prof. Mantegazza claims to have discovered the cause of
this pathological love, this perversion of the erotic sense, one of the
marvellous list of amorous vagaries which deserve, not prosecution but
the pitiful care of the physician and the study of the psychologist.
According to him the nerves of the rectum and the genitalia, in all
cases closely connected, are abnormally so in the pathic who obtains, by
intromission, the venereal orgasm which is usually sought through the
sexual organs. So amongst women there are tribads who can procure no
pleasure except by foreign objects introduced a posteriori. Hence his
threefold distribution of sodomy; (1) Peripheric or anatomical, caused
by an unusual distribution of the nerves and their hyperæsthesia; (2)
Luxurious, when love a tergo is preferred on account of the narrowness
of the passage; and (3) the Psychical. But this is evidently
superficial: the question is what causes this neuropathy, this abnormal
distribution and condition of the nerves.[366]

As Prince Bismarck finds a moral difference between the male and female
races of history, so I suspect a mixed physical temperament effected by
the manifold subtle influences massed together in the word climate.
Something of the kind is necessary to explain the fact of this
pathological love extending over the greater portion of the habitable
world, without any apparent connection of race or media, from the
polished Greek to the cannibal Tupi of the Brazil. Walt Whitman speaks
of the ashen grey faces of onanists: the faded colours, the puffy
features and the unwholesome complexion of the professed pederast with
his peculiar cachetic expression, indescribable but once seen never
forgotten, stamp the breed, and Dr. G. Adolph is justified in declaring
“Alle Gewohnneits-paederasten erkennen sich einander schnell, oft met
einen Blick.” This has nothing in common with the féminisme which
betrays itself in the pathic by womanly gait, regard and gesture: it is
a something sui generis; and the same may be said of the colour and look
of the young priest who honestly refrains from women and their
substitutes. Dr. Tardieu, in his well-known work, “Étude Médico-légale
sur les Attentats aux Mœurs,” and Dr. Adolph note a peculiar
infundibuliform disposition of the “After” and a smoothness and want of
folds even before any abuse has taken place, together with special forms
of the male organs in confirmed pederasts. But these observations have
been rejected by Caspar, Hoffman, Brouardel and Dr. J. H. Henry Coutagne
(Notes sur la Sodomie, Lyon, 1880), and it is a medical question whose
discussion would here be out of place.

The origin of pederasty is lost in the night of ages; but its historique
has been carefully traced by many writers, especially Virey,[367]
Rosenbaum[368] and M. H. E. Meier.[369] The ancient Greeks who, like the
modern Germans, invented nothing but were great improvers of what other
races invented, attributed the formal apostolate of Sotadism to Orpheus,
whose stigmata were worn by the Thracian women;

                         —Omnemque refugerat Orpheus
     Fœmineam venerem;—
     Ille etiam Thracum populis fuit auctor, amorem
     In teneres transferre mares: citraque juventam
     Ætatis breve ver, et primos carpere flores.

                                               Ovid, Met. x. 79–85.

Euripides proposed Laïus father of Oedipus as the inaugurator, whereas
Timæus declared that the fashion of making favourites of boys was
introduced into Greece from Crete, for Malthusian reasons said Aristotle
(Pol. ii. 10) attributing it to Minos. Herodotus, however, knew far
better, having discovered (ii. c. 80) that the Orphic and Bacchic rites
were originally Egyptian. But the Father of History was a traveller and
an annalist rather than an archæologist and he tripped in the following
passage (i. c. 135), “As soon as they (the Persians) hear of any luxury,
they instantly make it their own, and hence, among other matters, they
have learned from the Hellenes a passion for boys” (“unnatural lust”
says modest Rawlinson). Plutarch (De Malig. Herod. xiii.)[370] asserts
with much more probability that the Persians used eunuch boys according
to the _Mos Græciæ_, long before they had seen the Grecian main.

In the Holy Books of the Hellenes, Homer and Hesiod, dealing with the
heroic ages, there is no trace of pederasty, although, in a long
subsequent generation, Lucian suspected Achilles and Patroclus as he did
Orestes and Pylades, Theseus and Pirithous. Homer’s praises of beauty
are reserved for the feminines, especially his favourite Helen. But the
Dorians of Crete seem to have commended the abuse to Athens and Sparta
and subsequently imported it into Tarentum, Agrigentum and other
colonies. Ephorus in Strabo (x. 4 § 21) gives a curious account of the
violent abduction of beloved boys (παρασταθέντες) by the lover
(ἐραστής); of the obligations of the ravisher (φιλήτωρ) to the favourite
(κλεινός)[371] and of the “marriage-ceremonies” which lasted two months.
See also Plato Laws i. c. 8. Servius (Ad Æneid. x. 325) informs us “De
Cretensibus accepimus, quod in amore puerorum intemperantes fuerunt,
quod postea in Laconas et in totam Græciam translatum est.” The Cretans
and afterwards their apt pupils the Chalcidians held it disreputable for
a beautiful boy to lack a lover. Hence Zeus the national Doric god of
Crete loved Ganymede[372]; Apollo, another Dorian deity, loved Hyacinth,
and Hercules, a Doric hero who grew to be a sun-god, loved Hylas and a
host of others: thus Crete sanctified the practice by the examples of
the gods and demigods. But when legislation came, the subject had
qualified itself for legal limitation and as such was undertaken by
Lycurgus and Solon, according to Xenophon (Lac. ii. 13), who draws a
broad distinction between the honest love of boys and dishonest
(αἴχιστος) lust. They both approved of pure pederastía, like that of
Harmodius and Aristogiton; but forbade it with serviles because
degrading to a free man. Hence the love of boys was spoken of like that
of women (Plato: Phædrus; Repub. VI. c. 19 and Xenophon, Synop. iv. 10)
_e.g._, “There was once a boy, or rather a youth, of exceeding beauty
and he had very many lovers”—this is the language of Hafiz and Sa’adi.
Æschylus, Sophocles and Euripides were allowed to introduce it upon the
stage, for “many men were as fond of having boys for their favourites as
women for their mistresses; and this was a frequent fashion in many
well-regulated cities of Greece.” Poets like Alcæus, Anacreon, Agathon
and Pindar affected it and Theognis sang of a “beautiful boy in the
flower of his youth.” The statesmen Aristides and Themistocles
quarrelled over Stesileus of Teos; and Pisistratus loved Charmus who
first built an altar to Puerile Eros, while Charmus loved Hippias son of
Pisistratus. Demosthenes the Orator took into keeping a youth called
Cnosion greatly to the indignation of his wife. Xenophon loved Clinias
and Autolycus; Aristotle, Hermeas, Theodectes[373] and others;
Empedocles, Pausanias; Epicurus, Pytocles; Aristippus, Eutichydes and
Zeno with his Stoics had a philosophic disregard for women, affecting
only pederastía. A man in Athenæus (iv. c. 40) left in his will that
certain youths he had loved should fight like gladiators at his funeral;
and Charicles in Lucian abuses Callicratidas for his love of “sterile
pleasures.” Lastly there was the notable affair of Alcibiades and
Socrates, the “sanctus pæderasta”[374] being violemment soupçonné when
under the mantle:—non semper sine plagâ ab eo surrexit. Athenæus (v. c.
13) declares that Plato represents Socrates as absolutely intoxicated
with his passion for Alcibiades.[375] The ancients seem to have held the
connection impure, or Juvenal would not have written—

               Inter Socraticos notissima fossa cinædos,

followed by Firmicus (vii. 14) who speaks of “Socratici pædicones.” It
is the modern fashion to doubt the pederasty of the master of Hellenic
Sophrosyne, the “Christian before Christianity;” but such a world-wide
term as Socratic love can hardly be explained by the lucus-a-non-lucendo
theory. We are overapt to apply our nineteenth century prejudices and
prepossessions to the morality of the ancient Greeks who would have
specimen’d such squeamishness in Attic salt.

The Spartans, according to Agnon the Academic (confirmed by Plato,
Plutarch and Cicero), treated boys and girls in the same way before
marriage: hence Juvenal (xi. 173) uses “Lacedæmonius” for a pathic and
other writers apply it to a tribade. After the Peloponnesian War, which
ended in B.C. 404, the use became merged in the abuse. Yet some purity
must have survived, even amongst the Bœotians who produced the famous
Narcissus,[376] described by Ovid (Met. iii. 339):—

            Multi illum juvenes, multæ cupiere puellæ;
            Nulli illum juvenes, nullæ tetigere puellæ:[377]

for Epaminondas, whose name is mentioned with three beloveds,
established the Holy Regiment composed of mutual lovers, testifying the
majesty of Eros and preferring to a discreditable life a glorious death.
Philip’s reflections on the fatal field of Chaeroneia form their fittest
epitaph. At last the Athenians, according to Æschines, officially
punished Sodomy with death; but the threat did not abolish bordels of
boys, like those of Karáchi; the Porneia and Pornoboskeia, where slaves
and pueri venales “stood,” as the term was, near the Pnyx, the city
walls and a certain tower, also about Lycabettus (Æsch. contra Tim.);
and paid a fixed tax to the state. The pleasures of society in civilised
Greece seem to have been sought chiefly in the heresies of
love—Hetairesis[378] and Sotadism.

It is calculated that the French of the sixteenth century had four
hundred names for the parts genital and three hundred for their use in
coition. The Greek vocabulary is not less copious and some of its
pederastic terms, of which Meier gives nearly a hundred, and its
nomenclature of pathologic love are curious and picturesque enough to
merit quotation.

To live the life of Abron (the Argive) _i.e._ that of a πάσχων, pathic
or passive lover.

The Agathonian song.

Aischrourgía = dishonest love, also called Akolasía, Akrasía,
Arrenokoitía, etc.

Alcinoan youths, or “non-conformists,”

              In cute curandâ plus æquo operata Juventus.

Alegomenos, the “unspeakable,” as the pederast was termed by the Council
of Ancyra: also the Agrios, Apolaustus and Akolastos.

Androgyne, of whom Ansonius wrote (Epig. lxviii. 15):—

                  Ecce ego sum factus femina de puero.

Badas and badízein = clunes torquens: also Bátalos = a catamite.

Catapygos, Katapygosyne = puerarius and catadactylium from Dactylion,
the ring, used in the sense of Nerissa’s, but applied to the corollarium
puerile.

Cinædus (Kínaidos), the active lover (ποιῶν) derived either from his
kinetics or quasi κύων αἴδως = dog-modest. Also Spatalocinædus (lasciviâ
fluens) = a fair Ganymede.

Chalcidissare (Khalkidizein), from Chalcis in Eubœa, a city famed for
love à posteriori; mostly applied to le léchement des testicules by
children.

Clazomenæ = the buttocks, also a sotadic disease, so called from the
Ionian city devoted to Aversa Venus; also used of a pathic,

                     —et tergo femina pube vir est.

Embasicoetas, prop. a link-boy at marriages, also a “night-cap” drunk
before bed and lastly an effeminate; one who perambulavit omnium cubilia
(Catullus). See Encolpius’ pun upon the Embasicete in Satyricon, cap.
iv.

Epipedesis, the carnal assault.

Geiton lit. “neighbour” the beloved of Encolpius, which has produced the
Fr. Giton = Bardache, Ital. bardascia from the Arab. Baradaj, a captive,
a slave; the augm. form is Polygeiton.

Hippias (tyranny of) when the patient (woman or boy) mounts the agent.
Aristoph. Vesp. 502. So also Kelitizein = peccare superne or equum
agitare supernum of Horace.

Mokhthería, depravity with boys.

Paidika, whence pædicare (act) and pædicari (pass): so in the Latin
poet:—

                PEnelopes primam DIdonis prima sequatur,
                Et primam CAni, syllaba prima REmi.

Pathikos, Pathicus, a passive, like Malakos (malacus, mollis, facilis),
Malchio, Trimalchio (Petronius), Malta, Maltha and in Hor. (Sat. ii. 25)

                  Malthinus tunicis demissis ambulat.

Praxis = the malpractice.

Pygisma = buttockry, because most actives end within the nates, being
too much excited for further intromission.

Phœnicissare (φοινικίζειν) = cunnilingere in tempore menstruum, quia hoc
vitium in Phœnicia generata solebat (Thes. Erot. Ling. Latinæ); also
irrumer en miel.

Phicidissare, denotat actum per canes commissum quando lambunt cunnos
vel testiculos (Suetonius): also applied to pollution of childhood.

Samorium flores (Erasmus, Prov. xxiii.) alluding to the androgynic
prostitutions of Samos.

Siphniassare (σιφνιάζειν, from Siphnos, hod. Sifanto Island) = digito
podicem fodere ad pruriginem restinguendam, says Erasmus (see Mirabeau’s
Erotika Biblion, Anoscopie).

Thrypsis = the rubbing.

Pederastía had in Greece, I have shown, its noble and ideal side: Rome,
however, borrowed her malpractices, like her religion and polity, from
those ultra-material Etruscans and debauched with a brazen face. Even
under the Republic Plautus (Casin. ii. 21) makes one of his characters
exclaim, in the utmost sang-froid, “Ultro te, amator, apage te a dorso
meo!” With increased luxury the evil grew and Livy notices (xxxix. 13),
at the Bacchanalia, plura virorum inter sese quam fœminarum stupra.
There were individual protests; for instance, S. Q. Fabius Maximus
Servilianus (Consul U.C. 612) punished his son for dubia castitas; and a
private soldier, C. Plotius, killed his military Tribune, Q. Luscius,
for unchaste proposals. The Lex Scantinia (Scatinia?), popularly derived
from Scantinius the Tribune and of doubtful date (B.C. 226?), attempted
to abate the scandal by fine and the Lex Julia by death; but they were
trifling obstacles to the flood of infamy which surged in with the
Empire. No class seems then to have disdained these “sterile pleasures:”
l’on n’attachoit point alors à cette espèce d’amour une note d’infamie,
comme en païs de chrétienté, says Bayle under “Anacreon.” The great
Cæsar, the Cinædus calvus of Catullus, was the husband of all the wives
and the wife of all the husbands in Rome (Suetonius, cap. lii.); and his
soldiers sang in his praise Gallias Cæsar subegit, Nicomedes Cæsarem
(Suet. cies. xlix.); whence his sobriquet “Fornix Birthynicus.” Of
Augustus the people chaunted

               Videsne ut Cinædus orbem digito temperet?

Tiberius, with his pisciculi and greges exoletorum, invented the
Symplegma or nexus of Sellarii, agentes et patientes, in which the
spinthriæ (lit. women’s bracelets) were connected in a chain by the bond
of flesh[379] (Seneca Quæst. Nat.). Of this refinement, which in the
earlier part of the nineteenth century was renewed by sundry Englishmen
at Naples, Ausonius wrote (Epig. cxix. 1),

              Tres uno in lecto: stuprum duo perpetiuntur;

And Martial had said (xii. 43)

                  Quo symplegmate quinque copulentur;
                  Qua plures teneantur a catena; etc.

Ausonius recounts of Caligula he so lost patience that he forcibly
entered the priest M. Lepidus, before the sacrifice was completed. The
beautiful Nero was formally married to Pythagoras (or Doryphoros) and
afterwards took to wife Sporus who was first subjected to castration of
a peculiar fashion; he was then named Sabina after the deceased spouse
and claimed queenly honours. The “Othonis et Trajani pathici” were
famed; the great Hadrian openly loved Antinoüs and the wild debaucheries
of Heliogabalus seem only to have amused, instead of disgusting, the
Romans.

Uranopolis allowed public lupanaria where adults and meritorii pueri,
who began their career as early as seven years, stood for hire: the
inmates of these cauponæ wore sleeved tunics and dalmatics like women.
As in modern Egypt pathic boys, we learn from Catullus, haunted the
public baths. Debauchees had signals like freemasons whereby they
recognised one another. The Greek Skematízein was made by closing the
hand to represent the scrotum and raising the middle finger as if to
feel whether a hen had eggs, tâter si les poulettes ont l’œuf: hence the
Athenians called it Catapygon or sodomite and the Romans digitus
impudicus or infamis, the “medical finger[380]” of Rabelais and the
Chiromantists. Another sign was to scratch the head with the
minimus—digitulo caput scabere (Juv. ix. 133).[381] The prostitution of
boys was first forbidden by Domitian; but Saint Paul, a Greek, had
formally expressed his abomination of Le Vice (Rom. i. 26; i. Cor. vi.
8); and we may agree with Grotius (de Verit. li. c. 13) that early
Christianity did much to suppress it. At last the Emperor Theodosius
punished it with fire as a profanation, because sacrosanctum esse
debetur hospitium virilis animæ.

In the pagan days of imperial Rome her literature makes no difference
between boy and girl. Horace naïvely says (Sat. ii. 118):—

                   Ancilla aut verna est præsto puer;

and with Hamlet, but in a dishonest sense:—

                               —Man delights me not
                     Nor woman neither.

Similarly the Spaniard Martial, who is a mine of such pederastic
allusions (xi. 46):—

                  Sive puer arrisit, sive puella tibi.

That marvellous Satyricon which unites the wit of Molière[382] with the
debaucheries of Piron, whilst the writer has been described, like
Rabelais, as purissimus in impuritate, is a kind of Triumph of
Pederasty. Geiton the hero, a handsome curly-pated hobbledehoy of
seventeen, with his câlinerie and wheedling tongue, is courted like one
of the sequor sexus: his lovers are inordinately jealous of him and his
desertion leaves deep scars upon the heart. But no dialogue between man
and wife in extremis could be more pathetic than that in the scene where
shipwreck is imminent. Elsewhere every one seems to attempt his
neighbour: a man alte succinctus assails Ascyltos; Lycus, the Tarentine
skipper, would force Encolpius and so forth: yet we have the neat and
finished touch (cap. vii.):—“The lamentation was very fine (the dying
man having manumitted his slaves) albeit his wife wept not as though she
loved him. _How were it had he not behaved to her so well?_”

Erotic Latin glossaries[383] give some ninety words connected with
Pederasty and some, which “speak with Roman simplicity,” are peculiarly
expressive. “Aversa Venus” alludes to women being treated as boys: hence
Martial, translated by Piron, addresses Mistress Martial (x. 44):—

                 Teque puta, cunnos, uxor, habere duos.

The capillatus or comatus is also called calamistratus, the darling
curled with crisping-irons; and he is an Effeminatus _i.e._ qui
muliebria patitur; or a Delicatus, slave or eunuch for the use of the
Draucus, Puerarius (boy-lover) or Dominus (Mart. xi. 71). The Divisor is
so called from his practice Hillas dividere or cædere, something like
Martial’s cacare mentulam or Juvenal’s Hesternæ occurrere cænæ. Facere
vicibus (Juv. vii. 238), incestare se invicem or mutuum facere (Plaut.
Trin. ii. 437), is described as “a puerile vice,” in which the two take
turns to be active and passive: they are also called Gemelli and Fratres
= compares in pædicatione. Illicita libido is = præpostera seu postica
Venus, and is expressed by the picturesque phrase indicare (seu
incurvare) aliquem. Depilatus, divellere pilos, glaber, lævis and nates
pervellere are allusions to the Sotadic toilette. The fine distinction
between demittere and dejicere caput are worthy of a glossary, while
Pathica puella, puera, putus, pullipremo, pusio, pygiaca sacra,
quadrupes, scarabæus and smerdalius explain themselves.

From Rome the practice extended far and wide to her colonies especially
the Provincia now called Provence. Athenæus (xii. 26) charges the people
of Massilia with “acting like women out of luxury”; and he cites the
saying “May you sail to Massilia!” as if it were another Corinth. Indeed
the whole Keltic race is charged with Le Vice by Aristotle (Pol. ii.
66), Strabo, (iv. 199) and Diodorus Siculus (v. 32). Roman civilisation
carried pederasty also to Northern Africa, where it took firm root,
while the negro and negroid races to the South ignore the erotic
perversion, except where imported by foreigners into such kingdoms as
Bornu and Haussa. In old Mauritania, now Marocco,[384] the Moors proper
are notable sodomites; Moslems, even of saintly houses, are permitted
openly to keep catamites, nor do their disciples think worse of their
sanctity for such license: in one case the English wife failed to banish
from the home “that horrid boy.”

Yet pederasty is forbidden by the Koran. In chapter iv. 20 we read; “And
if two (men) among you commit the crime, then punish them both,” the
penalty being some hurt or damage by public reproach, insult or
scourging. There are four distinct references to Lot and the Sodomites
in chapters vii. 78; xi. 77–84; xxvi. 160–174 and xxix. 28–35. In the
first the prophet commissioned to the people says, “Proceed ye to a
fulsome act wherein no creature hath foregone ye? Verily ye come to men
in lieu of women lustfully.” We have then an account of the rain which
made an end of the wicked and this judgment on the Cities of the Plain
is repeated with more detail in the second reference. Here the angels,
generally supposed to be three, Gabriel, Michael and Raphael, appeared
to Lot as beautiful youths, a sore temptation to the sinners and the
godly man’s arm was straitened concerning his visitors because he felt
unable to protect them from the erotic vagaries of his fellow townsmen.
He therefore shut his doors and from behind them argued the matter:
presently the riotous assembly attempted to climb the wall when Gabriel,
seeing the distress of his host, smote them on the face with one of his
wings and blinded them so that all moved off crying for aid and saying
that Lot had magicians in his house. Hereupon the “cities” which, if
they ever existed, must have been Fellah villages, were uplifted:
Gabriel thrust his wing under them and raised them so high that the
inhabitants of the lower heaven (the lunar sphere) could hear the dogs
barking and the cocks crowing. Then came the rain of stones: these were
clay pellets baked in hell-fire, streaked white and red, or having some
mark to distinguish them from the ordinary and each bearing the name of
its destination like the missiles which destroyed the host of Abrahat
al-Ashram.[385] Lastly the “Cities” were turned upside down and cast
upon earth. These circumstantial unfacts are repeated at full length in
the other two chapters; but rather as an instance of Allah’s power than
as a warning against pederasty, which Mohammed seems to have regarded
with philosophic indifference. The general opinion of his followers is
that it should be punished like fornication unless the offenders made a
public act of penitence. But here, as in adultery, the law is somewhat
too clement and will not convict unless four credible witnesses swear to
have seen rem in re. I have noticed (vol. i. 211) the vicious opinion
that the Ghilmán or Wuldán, the beautiful boys of Paradise, the
counterparts of the Houris, will be lawful catamites to the True
Believers in a future state of happiness: the idea is nowhere
countenanced in Al-Islam; and, although I have often heard debauchees
refer to it, the learned look upon the assertion as scandalous.

As in Marocco so the Vice prevails throughout the old regencies of
Algiers, Tunis and Tripoli and all the cities of the South Mediterranean
seaboard, whilst it is unknown to the Nubians, the Berbers and the
wilder tribes dwelling inland. Proceeding Eastward we reach Egypt, that
classical region of all abominations which, marvellous to relate,
flourished in closest contact with men leading the purest of lives,
models of moderation and morality, of religion and virtue. Amongst the
ancient Copts Le Vice was part and portion of the Ritual and was
represented by two male partridges alternately copulating (Interp. in
Priapi Carm. xvii). The evil would have gained strength by the invasion
of Cambyses (B.C. 524), whose armies, after the victory over
Psammenitus, settled in the Nile-Valley, and held it, despite sundry
revolts, for some hundred and ninety years. During these six generations
the Iranians left their mark upon Lower Egypt and especially, as the
late Rogers Bey proved, upon the Fayyum the most ancient Delta of the
Nile.[386] Nor would the evil be diminished by the Hellenes who, under
Alexander the Great, “liberator and saviour of Egypt” (B.C. 332),
extinguished the native dynasties: the love of the Macedonian for Bagoas
the Eunuch being a matter of history. From that time and under the rule
of the Ptolemies the morality gradually decayed; the Canopic orgies
extended into private life and the debauchery of the men was equalled
only by the depravity of the women. Neither Christianity nor Al-Islam
could effect a change for the better; and social morality seems to have
been at its worst during the past century when Sonnini travelled (A.D.
1717). The French officer, who is thoroughly trustworthy, draws the
darkest picture of the widely-spread criminality, especially of the
bestiality and the sodomy (chapt. xv.) which formed the “delight of the
Egyptians.” During the Napoleonic conquest Jaubert in his letter to
General Bruix (p. 19) says, “Les Arabes et les Mamelouks ont traité
quelques-uns de nos prisonniers comme Socrate traitait, dit-on,
Alcibiade. Il fallait périr ou y passer.” Old Anglo-Egyptians still
chuckle over the tale of Sa’id Pasha and M. de Ruyssenaer, the
high-dried and highly respectable Consul-General for the Netherlands,
who was solemnly advised to make the experiment, active and passive,
before offering his opinion upon the subject. In the present age
extensive intercourse with Europeans has produced not a reformation but
a certain reticence amongst the upper classes: they are as vicious as
ever, but they do not care for displaying their vices to the eyes of
mocking strangers.

Syria and Palestine, another ancient focus of abominations, borrowed
from Egypt and exaggerated the worship of Androgynic and hermaphroditic
deities. Plutarch (De Iside) notes that the old Nilotes held the moon to
be of “male-female sex,” the men sacrificing to Luna and the women to
Lunus.[387] Isis also was a hermaphrodite, the idea being that Æther or
Air (the lower heavens) was the menstruum of generative nature; and
Damascius explained the tenet by the all-fruitful and prolific powers of
the atmosphere. Hence the fragment attributed to Orpheus, the song of
Jupiter (Air)—

                    All things from Jove descend
              Jove was a male, Jove was a deathless bride;
              For men call Air, of two-fold sex, the Jove.

Julius Firmicus relates that “The Assyrians and part of the Africans”
(along the Mediterranean seaboard?) “hold Air to be the chief element
and adore its fanciful figure (imaginata figura), consecrated under the
name of Juno or the Virgin Venus. * * * Their companies of priests
cannot duly serve her unless they effeminate their faces, smooth their
skins and disgrace their masculine sex by feminine ornaments. You may
see men in their very temples amid general groans enduring miserable
dalliance and becoming passives like women (viros muliebria pati) and
they expose, with boasting and ostentation, the pollution of the impure
and immodest body.” Here we find the religious significance of eunuchry.
It was practised as a religious rite by the Tympanotribas or
Gallus,[388] the castrated votary of Rhea or Bona Mater, in Phrygia
called Cybele, self-mutilated but _not_ in memory of Atys; and by a host
of other creeds: even Christianity, as sundry texts show,[389] could not
altogether cast out the old possession. Here too we have an explanation
of Sotadic love in its second stage, when it became, like cannibalism, a
matter of superstition. Assuming a nature-implanted tendency, we see
that like human sacrifice it was held to be the most acceptable offering
to the God-goddess in the Orgia or sacred ceremonies, a something set
apart for peculiar worship. Hence in Rome as in Egypt the temples of
Isis (Inachidos limina, Isiacæ sacraria Lunæ) were centres of sodomy and
the religious practice was adopted by the grand priestly castes from
Mesopotamia to Mexico and Peru.

We find the earliest written notices of the Vice in the mythical
destruction of the Pentapolis (Gen. xix.), Sodom, Gomorrah (= ’Ámirah,
the cultivated country), Adama, Zeboïm and Zoar or Bela. The legend has
been amply embroidered by the Rabbis who make the Sodomites do
everything _à l’envers_: _e.g._ if a man were wounded he was fined for
bloodshed and was compelled to fee the offender; and if one cut off the
ear of a neighbour’s ass he was condemned to keep the animal till the
ear grew again. The Jewish doctors declare the people to have been a
race of sharpers with rogues for magistrates, and thus they justify the
judgment which they read literally. But the traveller cannot accept it.
I have carefully examined the lands at the North and at the South of
that most beautiful lake, the so-called Dead Sea, whose tranquil
loveliness, backed by the grand plateau of Moab, is an object of
admiration to all save patients suffering from the strange disease “Holy
Land on the Brain.”[390] But I found no traces of craters in the
neighbourhood, no signs of vulcanism, no remains of “meteoric stones”:
the asphalt which named the water is a mineralised vegetable washed out
of the limestones, and the sulphur and salt are brought down by the
Jordan into a lake without issue. I must therefore look upon the history
as a myth which may have served a double purpose. The first would be to
deter the Jew from the Malthusian practices of his pagan predecessors,
upon whom obloquy was thus cast, so far resembling the scandalous and
absurd legend which explained the names of the children of Lot by Pheiné
and Thamma as “Moab” (Mu-ab) the water or semen of the father, and
“Ammon” as mother’s son, that is, bastard. The fable would also account
for the abnormal fissure containing the lower Jordan and the Dead Sea,
which the late Sir R. I. Murchison used wrong-headedly to call a
“Volcano of Depression”: this geological feature, that cuts off the
river-basin from its natural outlet the Gulf of Eloth (Akabah), must
date from myriads of years before there were “Cities of the Plains.” But
the main object of the ancient lawgiver, Osarsiph, Moses or the Moseidæ,
was doubtless to discountenance a perversion prejudicial to the increase
of population. And he speaks with no uncertain voice, Whoso lieth with a
beast shall surely be put to death (Exod. xxii. 19): If a man lie with
mankind as he lieth with a woman, both of them have committed an
abomination: they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be
upon them (Levit. xx. 13; where v.v. 15–16 threaten with death man and
woman who lie with beasts). Again, There shall be no whore of the
daughters of Israel nor a sodomite of the sons of Israel (Deut. xxii.
5).

The old commentators on the Sodom-myth are most unsatisfactory _e.g._
Parkhurst, _s.v._ Kadesh. “From hence we may observe the peculiar
propriety of this punishment of Sodom and of the neighbouring cities. By
their sodomitical impurities they meant to acknowledge the Heavens as
the cause of fruitfulness independently upon, and in opposition to
Jehovah[391]; therefore Jehovah, by raining upon them not genial showers
but brimstone from heaven, not only destroyed the inhabitants, but also
changed all that country, which was before as the garden of God, into
brimstone and salt that is not sown nor beareth, neither any grass
groweth therein.” It must be owned that to this Pentapolis was dealt
very hard measure for religiously and diligently practising a popular
rite which a host of cities even in the present day, as Naples and
Shiraz, to mention no others, affect for simple luxury and affect with
impunity. The myth may probably reduce itself to very small proportions,
a few Fellah villages destroyed by a storm, like that which drove
Brennus from Delphi.

The Hebrews entering Syria found it religionised by Assyria and
Babylonia, whence Accadian Ishtar had passed west and had become
Ashtoreth, Ashtaroth or Ashirah,[392] the Anaitis of Armenia, the
Phœnician Astarte and the Greek Aphrodite, the great Moon-goddess,[393]
who is queen of Heaven and Love. In another phase she was Venus Mylitta
= the Procreatrix, in Chaldaic Mauludatá and in Arabic Moawallidah, she
who bringeth forth. She was worshipped by men habited as women and vice
versâ; for which reason in the Torah (Deut. xx. 5) the sexes are
forbidden to change dress. The male prostitutes were called Kadesh the
holy, the women being Kadeshah, and doubtless gave themselves up to
great excesses. Eusebius (De bit. Const. iii. c. 55) describes a school
of impurity at Aphac, where women and “men who were not men” practised
all manner of abominations in honour of the Demon (Venus). Here the
Phrygian symbolism of Kybele and Attis (Atys) had become the Syrian
Ba’al Tammuz and Astarte, and the Grecian Dionæa and Adonis, the
anthropomorphic forms of the two greater lights. The site, Apheca, now
Wady al-Afik on the route from Bayrut to the Cedars, is a glen of wild
and wondrous beauty, fitting frame-work for the loves of goddess and
demigod: and the ruins of the temple destroyed by Constantine contrast
with Nature’s work, the glorious fountain, splendidior vitro, which
feeds the River Ibrahim and still at times Adonis runs purple to the
sea.[394]

The Phœnicians spread this androgynic worship over Greece. We find the
consecrated servants and votaries of Corinthian Aphrodite called
Hierodouli (Strabo viii. 6), who aided the ten thousand courtesans in
gracing the Venus-temple: from this excessive luxury arose the proverb
popularised by Horace. One of the head-quarters of the cult was Cyprus
where, as Servius relates (Ad Æn. ii. 632), stood the simulacre of a
bearded Aphrodite with feminine body and costume, sceptered and mitred
like a man. The sexes when worshipping it exchanged habits and here the
virginity was offered in sacrifice: Herodotus (i. c. 199) describes this
defloration at Babylon but sees only the shameful part of the custom
which was a mere consecration of a tribal rite. Everywhere girls before
marriage belong either to the father or to the clan and thus the maiden
paid the debt due to the public before becoming private property as a
wife. The same usage prevailed in ancient Armenia and in parts of
Ethiopia; and Herodotus tells us that a practice very much like the
Babylonian “is found also in certain parts of the Island of Cyprus:” it
is noticed by Justin (xviii. c. 5) and probably it explains the “Succoth
Benoth” or Damsels’ booths which the Babylonians transplanted to the
cities of Samaria.[395] The Jews seem very successfully to have copied
the abominations of their pagan neighbours, even in the matter of the
“dog.”[396] In the reign of wicked Rehoboam (B.C. 975) “There were also
sodomites in the land and they did according to all the abominations of
the nations which the Lord cast out before the children of Israel” (1
Kings xiv. 20). The scandal was abated by zealous King Asa (B.C. 958)
whose grandmother[397] was high-priestess of Priapus (princeps in sacris
Priapi): he “took away the sodomites out of the land” (1 Kings xv. 12).
Yet the prophets were loud in their complaints, especially the so-called
Isaiah (B.C. 760), “except the Lord of Hosts had left to us a very small
remnant, we should have been as Sodom” (i. 9); and strong measures were
required from good King Josiah (B.C. 641) who amongst other things,
“brake down the houses of the sodomites that were by the house of the
Lord, where the women wove hangings for the grove” (2 Kings xxiii. 7).
The bordels of boys (pueris alienis adhæseverunt) appear to have been
near the Temple.

Syria has not forgotten her old “praxis.” At Damascus I found some
noteworthy cases amongst the religious of the great Amawi Mosque. As for
the Druses we have Burckhardt’s authority (Travels in Syria, etc., p.
202) “unnatural propensities are very common amongst them.”

The Sotadic Zone covers the whole of Asia Minor and Mesopotamia now
occupied by the “unspeakable Turk,” a race of born pederasts; and in the
former region we first notice a peculiarity of the feminine figure, the
mammæ inclinatæ, jacentes et pannosæ, which prevails over all this part
of the belt. Whilst the women to the North and South have, with local
exceptions, the mammæ stantes of the European virgin,[398] those of
Turkey, Persia, Afghanistan and Kashmir lose all the fine curves of the
bosom, sometimes even before the first child; and after it the
hemispheres take the form of bags. This cannot result from climate only;
the women of Marathá-land, inhabiting a damper and hotter region than
Kashmir, are noted for fine firm breasts even after parturition. Le Vice
of course prevails more in the cities and towns of Asiatic Turkey than
in the villages; yet even these are infected; while the nomad Turcomans
contrast badly in this point with the Gypsies, those Badawin of India.
The Kurd population is of Iranian origin, which means that the evil is
deeply rooted: I have noted in The Nights that the great and glorious
Saladin was a habitual pederast. The Armenians, as their national
character is, will prostitute themselves for gain but prefer women to
boys: Georgia supplied Turkey with catamites whilst Circassia sent
concubines. In Mesopotamia the barbarous invader has almost obliterated
the ancient civilisation which is ante-dated only by the Nilotic: the
mysteries of old Babylon nowhere survive save in certain obscure tribes
like the Mandæans, the Devil-worshippers and the Alí-iláhi. Entering
Persia we find the reverse of Armenia; and, despite Herodotus, I believe
that Iran borrowed her pathologic love from the peoples of the
Tigris-Euphrates Valley and not from the then insignificant Greeks. But
whatever may be its origin, the corruption is now bred in the bone. It
begins in boyhood and many Persians account for it by paternal severity.
Youths arrived at puberty find none of the facilities with which Europe
supplies fornication. Onanism[399] is to a certain extent discouraged by
circumcision, and meddling with the father’s slave-girls and concubines
would be risking cruel punishment if not death. Hence they use each
other by turns, a “puerile practice” known as Alish-Takish, the Lat.
facere vicibus or mutuum facere. Temperament, media, and atavism
recommend the custom to the general; and after marrying and begetting
heirs, Paterfamilias returns to the Ganymede. Hence all the odes of
Hafiz are addressed to youths, as proved by such Arabic exclamations as
’Afáka ’llah = Allah assain thee (masculine)[400]: the object is often
fanciful but it would be held coarse and immodest to address an
imaginary girl.[401] An illustration of the penchant is told at Shiraz
concerning a certain Mujtahid, the head of the Shi’ah creed,
corresponding with a prince-archbishop in Europe. A friend once said to
him, “There is a question I would fain address to your Eminence but I
lack the daring to do so.” “Ask and fear not,” replied the Divine. “It
is this, O Mujtahid! Figure thee in a garden of roses and hyacinths with
the evening breeze waving the cypress-heads, a fair youth of twenty
sitting by thy side and the assurance of perfect privacy. What, prithee,
would be the result?” The holy man bowed the chin of doubt upon the
collar of meditation; and, too honest to lie, presently whispered,
“Allah defend me from such temptation of Satan!” Yet even in Persia men
have not been wanting who have done their utmost to uproot the Vice: in
the same Shiraz they speak of a father who, finding his son in flagrant
delict, put him to death like Brutus or Lynch of Galway. Such isolated
cases, however, can effect nothing. Chardin tells us that houses of male
prostitution were common in Persia whilst those of women were unknown:
the same is the case in the present day and the boys are prepared with
extreme care by diet, baths, depilation, unguents and a host of artists
in cosmetics.[402] Le Vice is looked upon at most as a peccadillo and
its mention crops up in every jest-book. When the Isfahan man mocked
Shaykh Sa’adi by comparing the bald pates of Shirazian elders to the
bottom of a lotá, a brass cup with a wide-necked opening used in the
Hammam, the witty poet turned its aperture upwards and thereto likened
the well-abused podex of an Isfahani youth. Another favourite piece of
Shirazian “chaff” is to declare that when an Isfahan father would set up
his son in business he provides him with a pound of rice, meaning that
he can sell the result as compost for the kitchen-garden, and with the
price buy another meal: hence the saying Khakh-i-pái káhú = the soil at
the lettuce-root. The Isfahanis retort with the name of a station or
halting-place between the two cities where, under pretence of making
travellers stow away their riding-gear, many a Shirázi had been raped:
hence “Zín o takaltú tú bi-bar” = carry within saddle and saddle-cloth!
A favourite Persian punishment for strangers caught in the Harem or
Gynæceum is to strip and throw them and expose them to the embraces of
the grooms and negro-slaves. I once asked a Shirazi how penetration was
possible if the patient resisted with all the force of the sphincter
muscle: he smiled and said, “Ah, we Persians know a trick to get over
that; we apply a sharpened tent-peg to the crupper-bone (os coccygis)
and knock till he opens.” A well-known missionary to the East during the
last generation was subjected to this gross insult by one of the Persian
Prince-governors, whom he had infuriated by his conversion-mania: in his
memoirs he alludes to it by mentioning his “dishonoured person;” but
English readers cannot comprehend the full significance of the
confession. About the same time Shaykh Nasr, Governor of Bushire, a man
famed for facetious blackguardism, used to invite European youngsters
serving in the Bombay Marine and ply them with liquor till they were
insensible. Next morning the middies mostly complained that the
champagne had caused a curious irritation and soreness in la
parte-poste. The same Eastern “Scrogin” would ask his guests if they had
ever seen a man-cannon (Ádami-top); and, on their replying in the
negative, a grey-beard slave was dragged in blaspheming and struggling
with all his strength. He was presently placed on all fours and firmly
held by the extremities; his bag-trousers were let down and a dozen
peppercorns were inserted ano suo: the target was a sheet of paper held
at a reasonable distance; the match was applied by a pinch of cayenne in
the nostrils; the sneeze started the grapeshot and the number of hits on
the butt decided the bets. We can hardly wonder at the loose conduct of
Persian women perpetually mortified by marital pederasty. During the
unhappy campaign of 1856–57 in which, with the exception of a few
brilliant skirmishes, we gained no glory, Sir James Outram and the
Bombay army showing how badly they could work, there was a formal
outburst of the Harems; and even women of princely birth could not be
kept out of the officers’ quarters.

The cities of Afghanistan and Sind are thoroughly saturated with Persian
vice, and the people sing

 Kadr-i-kus Aughán dánad, kadr-i-kunrá Kábuli:
 The worth of coynte the Afghan knows: Cabul prefers the other
    _chose_![403]

The Afghans are commercial travellers on a large scale and each caravan
is accompanied by a number of boys and lads almost in woman’s attire
with kohl’d eyes and rouged cheeks, long tresses and henna’d fingers and
toes, riding luxuriously in Kajáwas or camel-panniers: they are called
Kúch-i safari, or travelling wives, and the husbands trudge patiently by
their sides. In Afghanistan also a frantic debauchery broke out amongst
the women when they found incubi who were not pederasts; and the scandal
was not the most insignificant cause of the general rising at Cabul
(Nov. 1841), and the slaughter of Macnaghten, Burnes and other British
officers.

Resuming our way Eastward we find the Sikhs and the Moslems of the
Panjab much addicted to Le Vice, although the Himalayan tribes to the
north and those lying south, the Rájputs and Marathás, ignore it. The
same may be said of the Kashmirians who add another Kappa to the tria
Kakista, Kappadocians, Kretans, and Kilicians: the proverb says,

       Agar kaht-i-mardum uftad, az ín sih jins kam gírí;
       Eki Afghán, dovvum Sindí,[404] siyyum badjins-i-Kashmírí:

       Though of men there be famine yet shun these three—
       Afghan, Sindi and rascally Kashmírí.

M. Louis Daville describes the infamies of Lahore and Lakhnau where he
found men dressed as women, with flowing locks under crowns of flowers,
imitating the feminine walk and gestures, voice and fashion of speech,
and ogling their admirers with all the coquetry of bayadères. Victor
Jacquemont’s Journal de Voyage describes the pederasty of Ranjít Singh,
the “Lion of the Panjáb,” and his pathic Guláb Singh whom the English
inflicted upon Cashmir as ruler by way of paying for his treason. Yet
the Hindus, I repeat, hold pederasty in abhorrence and are as much
scandalised by being called Gánd-márá (anus-beater) or Gándú (anuser) as
Englishmen would be. During the years 1843–44 my regiment, almost all
Hindu Sepoys of the Bombay Presidency, was stationed at a purgatory
called Bandar Ghárrá,[405] a sandy flat with a scatter of
verdigris-green milk-bush some forty miles north of Karáchi the
head-quarters. The dirty heap of mud-and-mat hovels, which represented
the adjacent native village, could not supply a single woman; yet only
one case of pederasty came to light and that after a tragical fashion
some years afterwards. A young Brahman had connection with a soldier
comrade of low caste and this had continued till, in an unhappy hour,
the Pariah patient ventured to become the agent. The latter, in Arab.
Al-Fá’il = the “doer,” is not an object of contempt like Al-Mafúl = the
“done”; and the high-caste sepoy, stung by remorse and revenge, loaded
his musket and deliberately shot his paramour. He was hanged by court
martial at Hyderabad and, when his last wishes were asked he begged in
vain to be suspended by the feet; the idea being that his soul, polluted
by exiting “below the waist,” would be doomed to endless transmigrations
through the lowest forms of life.

Beyond India, I have stated, the Sotadic Zone begins to broaden out
embracing all China, Turkistan and Japan. The Chinese, as far as we know
them in the great cities, are omnivorous and omnifutuentes: they are the
chosen people of debauchery and their systematic bestiality with ducks,
goats, and other animals is equalled only by their pederasty. Kæmpfer
and Orlof Torée (Voyage en Chine) notice the public houses for boys and
youths in China and Japan. Mirabeau (L’Anandryne) describes the
tribadism of their women in hammocks. When Pekin was plundered the
Harems contained a number of balls a little larger than the old
musket-bullet, made of thin silver with a loose pellet of brass inside
somewhat like a grelot[406]: these articles were placed by the women
between the labia and an up-and-down movement on the bed gave a pleasant
titillation when nothing better was to be procured. They have every
artifice of luxury, aphrodisiacs, erotic perfumes and singular
applications. Such are the pills which, dissolved in water and applied
to the glans penis, cause it to throb and swell: so according to Amerigo
Vespucci American women could artificially increase the size of their
husbands’ parts.[407] The Chinese bracelet of caoutchouc studded with
points now takes the place of the Herisson, or Annulus hirsutus,[408]
which was bound between the glans and prepuce. Of the penis succedaneus,
that imitation of the Arbor vitæ or Soter Kosmou, which the Latins
called phallus and fascinum,[409] the French godemiché and the Italians
passatempo and diletto (whence our “dildo”), every kind abounds, varying
from a stuffed “French letter” to a cone of ribbed horn which looks like
an instrument of torture. For the use of men they have the
“merkin,”[410] a heart-shaped article of thin skin stuffed with cotton
and slit with an artificial vagina: two tapes at the top and one below
lash it to the back of a chair. The erotic literature of the Chinese and
Japanese is highly developed and their illustrations are often facetious
as well as obscene. All are familiar with that of the strong man who by
a blow with his enormous phallus shivers a copper pot; and the ludicrous
contrast of the huge-membered wights who land in the Isle of Women and
presently escape from it, wrinkled and shrivelled, true Domine
Dolittles. Of Turkistan we know little, but what we know confirms my
statement. Mr. Schuyler in his Turkistan (i. 132) offers an illustration
of a “Batchah” (Pers. bachcheh = catamite), “or singing-boy surrounded
by his admirers.” Of the Tartars Master Purchas laconically says (v.
419), “They are addicted to Sodomie or Buggerie.” The learned casuist
Dr. Thomas Sanchez the Spaniard had (says Mirabeau in Kadhésch) to
decide a difficult question concerning the sinfulness of a peculiar
erotic perversion. The Jesuits brought home from Manilla a tailed man
whose moveable prolongation of the os coccygis measured from 7 to 10
inches: he had placed himself between two women, enjoying one naturally
while the other used his tail as a penis succedaneus. The verdict was
incomplete sodomy and simple fornication. For the islands north of
Japan, the “Sodomitical Sea,” and the “nayle of tynne” thrust through
the prepuce to prevent sodomy, see Lib. ii. chap. 4 of Master Thomas
Caudish’s Circumnavigation, and vol. vi. of Pinkerton’s Geography
translated by Walckenaer.

Passing over to America we find that the Sotadic Zone contains the whole
hemisphere from Behring’s Straits to Magellan’s. This prevalence of
“mollities” astonishes the anthropologist, who is apt to consider
pederasty the growth of luxury and the especial product of great and
civilised cities, unnecessary and therefore unknown to simple savagery
where the births of both sexes are about equal and female infanticide is
not practised. In many parts of the New World this perversion was
accompanied by another depravity of taste—confirmed cannibalism.[411]
The forests and campos abounded in game from the deer to the
pheasant-like penelope, and the seas and rivers produced an unfailing
supply of excellent fish and shell-fish[412]; yet the Brazilian Tupis
preferred the meat of man to every other food.

A glance at Mr. Bancroft[413] proves the abnormal development of sodomy
amongst the savages and barbarians of the New World. Even his
half-frozen Hyperboreans “possess all the passions which are supposed to
develop most freely under a milder temperature” (i. 58). “The
voluptuousness and polygamy of the North American Indians, under a
temperature of almost perpetual winter is far greater than that of the
most sensual tropical nations” (Martin’s Brit. Colonies iii. 524). I can
quote only a few of the most remarkable instances. Of the Koniagas of
Kadiak Island and the Thinkleets we read (i. 81–82), “The most repugnant
of all their practices is that of male concubinage. A Kadiak mother will
select her handsomest and most promising boy, and dress and rear him as
a girl, teaching him only domestic duties, keeping him at women’s work,
associating him with women and girls, in order to render his effeminacy
complete. Arriving at the age of ten or fifteen years, he is married to
some wealthy man who regards such a companion as a great acquisition.
These male concubines are called Achnutschik or Schopans” (the
authorities quoted being Holmberg, Langsdorff, Billing, Choris,
Lisiansky and Marchand). The same is the case in Nutka Sound and the
Aleutian Islands, where “male concubinage obtains throughout, but not to
the same extent as amongst the Koniagas.” The objects of “unnatural”
affection have their beards carefully plucked out as soon as the
face-hair begins to grow, and their chins are tattooed like those of the
women. In California the first missionaries found the same practice, the
youths being called Joya (Bancroft, i. 415 and authorities Palon,
Crespi, Boscana, Mofras, Torquemada, Duflot and Fages). The Comanches
unite incest with sodomy (i. 515). “In New Mexico according to Arlegui,
Ribas, and other authors, male concubinage prevails to a great extent,
these loathsome semblances of humanity, whom to call beastly were a
slander upon beasts, dress themselves in the clothes and perform the
functions of women, the use of weapons being denied them” (i. 585).
Pederasty was systematically practised by the peoples of Cueba, Careta,
and other parts of Central America. The Caciques and some of the headmen
kept harems of youths who, as soon as destined for the unclean office,
were dressed as women. They went by the name of Camayoas, and were hated
and detested by the goodwives (i. 773–74). Of the Nahua nations Father
Pierre de Gand (alias de Musa) writes, “Un certain nombre de prêtres
n’avaient point de femmes, _sed eorum loco pueros quibus abutebantur_.
Ce péché était si commun dans ce pays que, jeunes ou vieux, tous étaient
infectés; ils y étaient si adonnés que mêmes les enfants de six ans s’y
livraient” (Ternaux-Campans, Voyages, Série i. Tom. x. p. 197). Among
the Mayas of Yucatan Las Casas declares that the great prevalence of
“unnatural” lust made parents anxious to see their progeny wedded as
soon as possible (Kingsborough’s Mex. Ant. viii. 135). In Vera Paz a
god, called by some Chin and by others Cavial and Maran, taught it by
committing the act with another god. Some fathers gave their sons a boy
to use as a woman, and if any other approached this pathic he was
treated as an adulterer. In Yucatan images were found by Bernal Diaz
proving the sodomitical propensities of the people (Bancroft v. 198). De
Pauw (Recherches Philosophiques sur les Américains, London, 1771) has
much to say about the subject in Mexico generally: in the northern
provinces men married youths who, dressed like women, were forbidden to
carry arms. According to Gomara there were at Tamalipas houses of male
prostitution; and from Diaz and others we gather that the _pecado
nefando_ was the rule. Both in Mexico and in Peru it might have caused,
if it did not justify, the cruelties of the Conquistadores. Pederasty
was also general throughout Nicaragua, and the early explorers found it
amongst the indigenes of Panama.

We have authentic details concerning Le Vice in Peru and its adjacent
lands, beginning with Cieza de Leon, who must be read in the original or
in the translated extracts of Purchas (vol. v. 942, etc.), not in the
cruelly castrated form preferred by the Council of the Hakluyt Society.
Speaking of the New Granada Indians he tells us that “at Old Port (Porto
Viejo) and Puna, the Deuill so farre prevayled in their beastly
Deuotions that there were Boyes consecrated to serue in the Temple; and
at the times of their Sacrifices and Solemne Feasts, the Lords and
principal men abused them to that detestable filthinesse;” _i.e._
performed their peculiar worship. Generally in the hill-countries the
Devil, under the show of holiness, had introduced the practice; for
every temple or chief house of adoration kept one or two men or more
which were attired like women, even from the time of their childhood,
and spake like them, imitating them in everything; with these, under
pretext of holiness and religion, their principal men on principal days
had commerce. Speaking of the arrival of the Giants[414] at Point Santa
Elena, Cieza says (chap. lii.), they were detested by the natives,
because in using their women they killed them, and their men also in
another way. All the natives declare that God brought upon them a
punishment proportioned to the enormity of their offence. When they were
engaged together in their accursed intercourse, a fearful and terrible
fire came down from Heaven with a great noise, out of the midst of which
there issued a shining Angel with a glittering sword, wherewith at one
blow they were all killed and the fire consumed them.[415] There
remained a few bones and skulls which God allowed to bide unconsumed by
the fire, as a memorial of this punishment. In the Hakluyt Society’s
bowdlerisation we read of the Tumbez Islanders being “very vicious, many
of them committing the abominable offence” (p. 24); also, “If by the
advice of the Devil any Indian commit the abominable crime, it is
thought little of and they call him a woman.” In chapters lii. and
lviii. we find exceptions. The Indians of Huancabamba, “although so near
the peoples of Puerto Viejo and Guayaquil, do not commit the abominable
sin;” and the Serranos, or island mountaineers, as sorcerers and
magicians inferior to the coast peoples, were not so much addicted to
sodomy.

The Royal Commentaries of the Yncas show that the evil was of a
comparatively modern growth. In the early period of Peruvian history the
people considered the crime “unspeakable:” if a Cuzco Indian, not of
Yncarial blood, angrily addressed the term pederast to another, he was
held infamous for many days. One of the generals having reported to the
Ynca Ccapacc Yupanqui that there were some sodomites, not in all the
valleys, but one here and one there, “nor was it a habit of all the
inhabitants but only of certain persons who practised it privately,” the
ruler ordered that the criminals should be publicly burnt alive and
their houses, crops and trees destroyed: moreover, to show his
abomination, he commanded that the whole village should so be treated if
one man fell into this habit (Lib. iii. cap. 13). Elsewhere we learn,
“There were sodomites in some provinces, though not openly nor
universally, but some particular men and in secret. In some parts they
had them in their temples, because the Devil persuaded them that the
Gods took great delight in such people, and thus the Devil acted as a
traitor to remove the veil of shame that the Gentiles felt for this
crime and to accustom them to commit it in public and in common.”

During the times of the Conquistadores male concubinage had become the
rule throughout Peru. At Cuzco, we are told by Nuno de Guzman in 1530,
“The last which was taken, and which fought most couragiously, was a man
in the habite of a woman, which confessed that from a childe he had
gotten his liuing by that filthinesse, for which I caused him to be
burned.” V. F. Lopez[416] draws a frightful picture of pathologic love
in Peru. Under the reigns which followed that of Inti-Kapak (Ccapacc)
Amauri, the country was attacked by invaders of a giant race coming from
the sea: they practised pederasty after a fashion so shameless that the
conquered tribes were compelled to fly (p. 271). Under the pre-Yncarial
Amauta, or priestly dynasty, Peru had lapsed into savagery and the kings
of Cuzco preserved only the name. “Toutes ces hontes et toutes ces
misères provenaient de deux vices infâmes, la bestialité et la sodomie.
Les femmes surtout étaient offensées de voir la nature frustrée de tous
ses droits. Elles pleuraient ensemble en leurs réunions sur le misérable
état dans lequel elles étaient tombées, sur le mépris avec lequel elles
étaient traitées. * * * * Le monde était renversé, les hommes s’aimaient
et étaient jaloux les uns des autres. * * * Elles cherchaient, mais en
vain, les moyens de remédier au mal; elles employaient des herbes et des
recettes diaboliques qui leur ramenaient bien quelques individus, mais
ne pouvaient arrêter les progrès incessants du vice. Cet état de choses
constitua un véritable moyen âge, qui dura jusqu’à l’établissement du
gouvernement des Incas” (p. 277).

When Sinchi Roko (the xcvth of Montesinos and the xcist of Garcilazo)
became Ynca, he found morals at the lowest ebb. “Ni la prudence de
l’Inca, ni les lois sévères qu’il avait promulguées n’avaient pu
extirper entièrement le péché contre nature. Il reprit avec une nouvelle
violence, et les femmes en furent si jalouses qu’un grand nombre d’elles
tuèrent leurs maris. Les devins et les sorciers passaient leurs journées
à fabriquer, avec certaines herbes, des compositions magiques qui
rendaient fous ceux qui en mangeaient, et les femmes en faisaient
prendre, soit dans les aliments, soit dans la chicha, à ceux dont elles
étaient jalouses” (p. 291).

I have remarked that the Tupi races of the Brazil were infamous for
cannibalism and sodomy; nor could the latter be only racial as proved by
the fact that colonists of pure Lusitanian blood followed in the path of
the savages. Sr. Antonio Augusto da Costa Aguiar[417] is outspoken upon
this point. “A crime which in England leads to the gallows, and which is
the very measure of abject depravity, passes with impunity amongst us by
the participating in it of almost all or of many (_de quasi todos, ou de
muitos_). Ah! if the wrath of Heaven were to fall by way of punishing
such crimes (_delictos_), more than one city of this Empire, more than a
dozen, would pass into the category of the Sodoms and Gomorrahs” (p.
30). Till late years pederasty in the Brazil was looked upon as a
peccadillo; the European immigrants following the practice of the wild
men who were naked but not, as Columbus said, “clothed in innocence.”
One of Her Majesty’s Consuls used to tell a tale of the hilarity
provoked in a “fashionable” assembly by the open declaration of a young
gentleman that his mulatto-“patient” had suddenly turned upon him,
insisting upon becoming agent. Now, however, under the influences of
improved education and respect for the public opinion of Europe,
pathologic love amongst the Luso-Brazilians has been reduced to the
normal limits.

Outside the Sotadic Zone, I have said, Le Vice is sporadic, not endemic:
yet the physical and moral effect of great cities where puberty, they
say, is induced earlier than in country sites, has been the same in most
lands, causing modesty to decay and pederasty to flourish. The Badawi
Arab is wholly pure of Le Vice; yet San’á the capital of Al-Yaman and
other centres of population have long been and still are thoroughly
infected. History tells us of Zú Shanátir, tyrant of “Arabia Felix,” in
A.D. 478, who used to entice young men into his palace and cause them
after use to be cast out of the windows: this unkindly ruler was at last
poinarded by the youth Zerash, known from his long ringlets as “Zú
Nowás.” The negro race is mostly untainted by sodomy and tribadism. Yet
Joan dos Sanctos[418] found in Cacongo of West Africa certain “Chibudi,
which are men attyred like women and behaue themselves womanly, ashamed
to be called men; are also married to men, and esteem that vnnaturale
damnation an honor.” Madagascar also delighted in dancing and singing
boys dressed as girls. In the Empire of Dahomey I noted a corps of
prostitutes kept for the use of the Amazon-soldieresses.

North of the Sotadic Zone we find local but notable instances. Master
Christopher Burrough[419] describes on the western side of the Volga “a
very fine stone castle, called by the name Oueak, and adioyning to the
same a Towne called by the _Russes_, _Sodom_, * * * which was swallowed
into the earth by the iustice of God, for the wickednesse of the
people.” Again: although as a rule Christianity has steadily opposed
pathologic love both in writing and preaching, there have been
remarkable exceptions. Perhaps the most curious idea was that of certain
medical writers in the middle ages: “Usus et amplexus pueri, bene
temperatus, salutaris medicina” (Tardieu). Bayle notices (under “Vayer”)
the infamous book of Giovanni della Casa, Archbishop of Benevento, “De
laudibus Sodomiæ,”[420] vulgarly known as “Capitolo del Forno.” The same
writer refers (under “Sixte iv”) to the report that the Dominican Order,
which systematically decried Le Vice, had presented a request to the
Cardinal di Santa Lucia that sodomy might be lawful during three months
per annum, June to August; and that the Cardinal had underwritten the
petition “Be it done as they demand.” Hence the Fæda Venus of Battista
Mantovano. Bayle rejects the history for a curious reason, venery being
colder in summer than in winter, and quotes the proverb “Aux mois qui
n’ont pas d’ R, peu embrasser et bien boire.” But in the case of a
celibate priesthood such scandals are inevitable: witness the famous
Jesuit epitaph Ci-gît un Jésuite, etc.

In our modern capitals, London, Berlin and Paris for instance, the Vice
seems subject to periodical outbreaks. For many years, also, England
sent her pederasts to Italy, and especially to Naples whence originated
the term “Il vizio Inglese.” It would be invidious to detail the
scandals which of late years have startled the public in London and
Dublin: for these the curious will consult the police reports. Berlin,
despite her strong flavour of Phariseeism, Puritanism and Chauvinism in
religion, manners and morals, is not a whit better than her neighbours.
Dr. Gaspar,[421] a well-known authority on the subject, adduces many
interesting cases especially an old Count Cajus and his six accomplices.
Amongst his many correspondents one suggested to him that not only Plato
and Julius Cæsar but also Winckelmann and Platen (?) belonged to the
Society; and he had found it flourishing in Palermo, the Louvre, the
Scottish Highlands and St. Petersburg, to name only a few places.
Frederick the Great is said to have addressed these words to his nephew,
“Je puis vous assurer, par mon expérience personnelle, que ce plaisir
est peu agréable à cultiver.” This suggests the popular anecdote of
Voltaire and the Englishman who agreed upon an “experience” and found it
far from satisfactory. A few days afterwards the latter informed the
Sage of Ferney that he had tried it again and provoked the exclamation,
“Once a philospher: twice a sodomite!” The last revival of the kind in
Germany is a society at Frankfort and its neighbourhood, self-styled Les
Cravates Noires in opposition, I suppose, to Les Cravates Blanches of A.
Belot.

Paris is by no means more depraved than Berlin and London; but, whilst
the latter hushes up the scandal, Frenchmen do not: hence we see a more
copious account of it submitted to the public. For France of the xviith
century consult the “Histoire de la Prostitution chez tous les Peuples
du Monde,” and “La France devenue Italienne,” a treatise which generally
follows “L’Histoire Amoureuse des Gaules” by Bussy, Comte de
Rabutin.[422] The head-quarters of male prostitution were then in the
Champ Flory, _i.e._, Champ de Flore, the privileged rendezvous of low
courtesans. In the xviiith century, “quand le Français à tête folle,” as
Voltaire sings, invented the term “Péché philosophique,” there was a
temporary recrudescence; and, after the death of Pidauzet de Mairobert
(March, 1779), his “Apologie de la Secte Anandryne” was published in
L’Espion Anglais. In those days the Allée des Veuves in the Champs
Elysees had a “fief reservé des Ebugors”[423]—“veuve” in the language of
Sodom being the maîtresse en titre, the favourite youth.

At the decisive moment of monarchical decomposition Mirabeau[424]
declares that pederasty was reglementée and adds, Le goût des
pédérastes, quoique moins en vogue que du temps de Henri III. (the
French Heliogabalus), sous le règne desquel les hommes se provoquaient
mutuellement[425] sous les portiques du Louvre, fait des progrès
considérables. On sait que cette ville (Paris) est un chef-d’œuvre de
police; en conséquence, il y a des lieux publics autorisés à cet effet.
Les jeunes gens qui se destinent à la profession, sont soigneusement
enclassés; car les systèmes réglementaires s’étendent jusques-là. On les
examine; ceux qui peuvent être agents et patients, qui sont beaux,
vermeils, bien faits, potelés, sont réservés pour les grands seigneurs,
ou se font payer très-cher par les évêques et les financiers. Ceux qui
sont privés de leurs testicules, ou en termes de l’art (car notre langue
est plus chaste que nos mœurs), qui n’ont pas le _poids du tisserand_,
mais qui donnent et reçoivent, forment la seconde classe; ils sont
encore chers, parceque les femmes en usent tandis qu’ils servent aux
hommes. Ceux qui ne sont plus susceptibles d’érection tant ils sont
usés, quoiqu’ils aient tous ces organes nécessaires au plaisir,
s’inscrivent comme _patiens purs_, et composent la troisième classe:
mais celle qui préside à ces plaisirs, vérifie leur impuissance. Pour
cet effet, on les place tout nus sur un matelas ouvert par la moitié
inférieure; deux filles les caressent de leur mieux, pendant qu’une
troisième frappe doucement avec des orties naissantes le siège des
désirs vénériens. Après un quart d’heure de cet essai, on leur introduit
dans l’anus un poivre long rouge qui cause une irritation considérable;
on pose sur les échauboulures produites par les orties, de la moutarde
fine de Caudebec, et l’on passe le _gland_ au camphre. Ceux qui
résistent à ces épreuves et ne donnent aucun signe d’érection, servent
comme patiens à un tiers de paie seulement.[426]

The Restoration and the Empire made the police more vigilant in matters
of politics than of morals. The favourite club, which had its mot de
passe, was in the Rue Doyenne, old quarter St. Thomas des Louvre; and
the house was a hôtel of the xviith century. Two street-doors, on the
right for the male gynæceum and the left for the female, opened at 4
p.m. in winter and 8 p.m. in summer. A decoy-lad, charmingly dressed in
women’s clothes, with big haunches and small waist, promenaded outside;
and this continued till 1826 when the police put down the house.

Under Louis Philippe, the conquest of Algiers had evil results,
according to the Marquis de Boissy. He complained without ambages of
mœurs Arabes in French regiments, and declared that the result of the
African wars was an éffrayable débordement pédérastique, even as the
vérole resulted from the Italian campaigns of that age of passion, the
xvith century. From the military the fléau spread to civilian society
and the Vice took such expansion and intensity that it may be said to
have been democratised in cities and large towns; at least so we gather
from the Dossier des Agissements des Pédérastes. A general gathering of
“La Sainte Congrégation des glorieux Pédérastes” was held in the old
Petite Rue des Marais where, after the theatre, many resorted under
pretext of making water. They ranged themselves along the walls of a
vast garden and exposed their podices: bourgeois, richards and nobles
came with full purses, touched the part which most attracted them and
were duly followed by it. At the Allée des Veuves the crowd was
dangerous from 7 to 8 p.m.: no policeman or ronde de nuit dared venture
in it; cords were stretched from tree to tree and armed guards drove
away strangers amongst whom, they say, was once Victor Hugo. This
nuisance was at length suppressed by the municipal administration.

The Empire did not improve morals. Balls of sodomites were held at No. 8
Place de la Madeleine where, on Jan. 2, ’64, some one hundred and fifty
men met, all so well dressed as women that even the landlord did not
recognise them. There was also a club for sotadic debauchery called the
Cent Gardes and the Dragons de l’Impératrice.[427] They copied the
imperial toilette and kept it in the general wardrobe: hence “faire
l’Impératrice” meant to be used carnally. The site, a splendid hotel in
the Alleé des Veuves, was discovered by the Procureur-Général who
registered all the names; but, as these belonged to not a few senators
and dignitaries, the Emperor wisely quashed proceedings. The club was
broken up on July 16, ’64. During the same year La Petite Revue, edited
by M. Loredan Larchy, son of the General, printed an article, “Les
échappés de Sodome”: it discusses the letter of M. Castagnary to the
Progrès de Lyons and declares that the Vice had been adopted by
plusieurs corps de troupes. For its latest developments as regards the
_chantage_ of the _tantes_ (pathics), the reader will consult the last
issues of Dr. Tardieu’s well-known Études.[428] He declares that the
servant-class is most infected; and that the Vice is commonest between
the ages of fifteen and twenty-five.

The pederasty of The Nights may briefly be distributed into three
categories. The first is the funny form, as the unseemly practical joke
of masterful Queen Budúr (vol. iii. 300–306) and the not less hardi jest
of the slave-princess Zumurrud (vol. iv. 226). The second is in the
grimmest and most earnest phase of the perversion, for instance where
Abu Nowas[429] debauches the three youths (vol. v. 64–69); whilst in the
third form it is wisely and learnedly discussed, to be severely blamed,
by the Shaykhah or Reverend Woman (vol. v. 154).

To conclude this part of my subject, the éclaircissement des obscénités.
Many readers will regret the absence from The Nights of that modesty
which distinguishes “Amadis de Gaul;” whose author when leaving a man
and a maid together says, “And nothing shall be here related; for these
and suchlike things which are conformable neither to good conscience nor
nature, man ought in reason lightly to pass over, holding them in slight
esteem as they deserve.” Nor have we less respect for Palmerin of
England who after a risqué scene declares, “Herein is no offence offered
to the wise by wanton speeches, or encouragement to the loose by
lascivious matter.” But these are not oriental ideas and we must e’en
take the Eastern as we find him. He still holds “Naturalia non sunt
turpia,” together with “Mundis omnia munda”; and, as Bacon assures us
the mixture of a lie doth add to pleasure, so the Arab enjoys the
startling and lively contrast of extreme virtue and horrible vice placed
in juxtaposition.

Those who have read through these ten volumes will agree with me that
the proportion of offensive matter bears a very small ratio to the mass
of the work. In an age saturated with cant and hypocrisy, here and there
a venal pen will mourn over the “Pornography” of The Nights, dwell upon
the “Ethics of Dirt” and the “Garbage of the Brothel;” and will lament
the “wanton dissemination (!) of ancient and filthy fiction.” This
self-constituted Censor morum reads Aristophanes and Plato, Horace and
Virgil, perhaps even Martial and Petronius, because “veiled in the
decent obscurity of a learned language;” he allows men Latinè loqui; but
he is scandalised at stumbling-blocks much less important in plain
English. To be consistent he must begin by bowdlerising not only the
classics, with which boys’ and youths’ minds and memories are soaked and
saturated at schools and colleges, but also Boccaccio and Chaucer,
Shakespeare and Rabelais; Burton, Sterne, Swift and a long list of works
which are yearly reprinted and republished without a word of protest.
Lastly, why does not this inconsistent puritan purge the Old Testament
of its allusions to human ordure and the pudenda; to carnal copulation
and impudent whoredom, to adultery and fornication, to onanism, sodomy
and bestiality? But this he will not do, the whited sepulchre! To the
interested critic of the _Edinburgh Review_ (No. 335 of July, 1886), I
return my warmest thanks for his direct and deliberate falsehoods:—lies
are one-legged and short-lived, and venom evaporates.[430] It appears to
me that when I show to such men, so “respectable” and so impure, a
landscape of magnificent prospects whose vistas are adorned with every
charm of nature and art, they point their unclean noses at a little heap
of muck here and there lying in a field-corner.


                                  § V
            ON THE PROSE-RHYME AND THE POETRY OF THE NIGHTS.


                             A.—THE SAJ’A.

According to promise in my Foreword (p. xiv.), I here proceed to offer a
few observations concerning the Saj’a or rhymed prose and the Shi’r, or
measured sentence, that is, the verse of The Nights. The former has in
composition, metrical or unmetrical, three distinct forms. Saj’a
mutawázi (parallel), the most common, is when the ending words of
sentences agree in measure, assonance and final letter, in fact our full
rhyme: next is Saj’a mutarraf (the affluent), when the periods,
hemistichs or couplets end in words whose terminal letters correspond,
although differing in measure and number; and thirdly, Saj’a muwázanah
(equilibrium) is applied to the balance which affects words
corresponding in measure but differing in final letters.[431]

Al-Saj’a, the fine style or style fleuri, also termed Al-Badí’a, or
euphuism, is the basis of all Arabic euphony. The whole of the Koran is
written in it; and the same is the case with the Makámát of Al-Hariri
and the prime master-pieces of rhetorical composition: without it no
translation of the Holy Book can be satisfactory or final, and where it
is not the Assemblies become the prose of prose. Thus universally used
the assonance has necessarily been abused, and its excess has given rise
to the saying “Al-Saj’a faj’a”—prose rhyme’s a pest. English translators
have, unwisely I think, agreed in rejecting it, while Germans have not.
Mr. Preston assures us that “rhyming prose is extremely ungraceful in
English and introduces an air of flippancy”: this was certainly not the
case with Friedrich Rückert’s version of the great original, and I see
no reason why it should be so or become so in our tongue. Torrens (Pref.
p. vii.) declares that “the effect of the irregular sentence with the
iteration of a jingling rhyme is not pleasant in our language:” he
therefore systematically neglects it and gives his style the semblance
of being “scamped” with the object of saving study and trouble. Mr.
Payne (ix. 379) deems it an “excrescence born of the excessive
facilities for rhyme afforded by the language,” and of Eastern delight
in antithesis of all kinds whether of sound or of thought; and, aiming
elaborately at grace of style, he omits it wholly, even in the proverbs.

The weight of authority was against me but my plan compelled me to
disregard it. The dilemma was simply either to use the Saj’a or to
follow Mr. Payne’s method and “arrange the disjecta membra of the
original in their natural order;” that is to remodel the text. Intending
to produce a faithful copy of the Arabic, I was compelled to adopt the
former and still hold it to be the better alternative. Moreover I
question Mr. Payne’s dictum (ix. 383) that “the Seja-form is utterly
foreign to the genius of English prose and that its preservation would
be fatal to all vigour and harmony of style.” The English translator of
Palmerin of England, Anthony Munday, attempted it in places with great
success as I have before noted (vol. viii. 60); and my late friend
Edward Eastwick made artistic use of it in his Gulistan. Had I rejected
the “Cadence of the cooing-dove” because un-English, I should have
adopted the balanced periods of the Anglican marriage service[432] or
the essentially English system of alliteration, requiring some such
artful aid to distinguish from the vulgar recitative style the elevated
and classical tirades in The Nights. My attempt has found with reviewers
more favour than I expected; and a kindly critic writes of it, “These
melodious fragments, these little eddies of song set like gems in the
prose, have a charming effect on the ear. They come as dulcet surprises
and mostly recur in highly-wrought situations, or they are used to
convey a vivid sense of something exquisite in nature or art. Their
introduction seems due to whim or caprice, but really it arises from a
profound study of the situation, as if the Tale-teller felt suddenly
compelled to break into the rhythmic strain.”


                             B.—THE VERSE.

The Shi’r or metrical part of The Nights is considerable, amounting to
not less than ten thousand lines and these I could not but render in
rhyme or rather in monorhyme. This portion has been a bugbear to
translators. De Sacy noticed the difficulty of the task (p. 283). Lane
held the poetry untranslatable because abounding in the figure Tajnís,
our paronomasia or paragram, of which there are seven distinct
varieties,[433] not to speak of other rhetorical flourishes. He
therefore omitted the greater part of the verse as tedious and, through
the loss of measure and rhyme, “generally intolerable to the reader.” He
proved his position by the bald literalism of the passages which he
rendered in truly prosaic prose and succeeded in changing the facies and
presentment of the work. For the Shi’r, like the Saj’a, is not
introduced arbitrarily; and its unequal distribution throughout The
Nights may be accounted for by rule of art. Some tales, like Omar bin
al-Nu’man and Tawaddud, contain very little because the theme is
historical or realistic; whilst in stories of love and courtship, as
that of Rose-in-hood, the proportion may rise to one-fifth of the whole.
And this is true to nature. Love, as Addison said, makes even the
mechanic (the British mechanic!) poetical, and Joe Hume of material
memory once fought a duel about a fair object of dispute.

Before discussing the verse of The Nights it may be advisable to enlarge
a little upon the prosody of the Arabs. We know nothing of the origin of
their poetry, which is lost in the depths of antiquity, and the oldest
bards of whom we have any remains belong to the famous epoch of the war
Al-Basús, which would place them about A.D. 500. Moreover, when the Muse
of Arabia first shows she is not only fully developed and mature, she
has lost all her first youth, her beauté du diable, and she is assuming
the characteristics of an age beyond “middle age.” No one can study the
earliest poetry without perceiving that it results from the cultivation
of centuries and that it has already assumed that artificial type and
conventional process of treatment which presages inevitable decay. Its
noblest period is included in the century preceding the Apostolate of
Mohammed and the oldest of that epoch is the prince of Arab songsters,
Imr al-Kays, “The Wandering King.” The Christian Fathers
characteristically termed poetry Vinum Dæmonorum. The stricter Moslems
called their bards “enemies of Allah;” and when the Prophet, who hated
verse and could not even quote it correctly, was asked who was the best
poet of the Peninsula he answered that the “Man of Al-Kays,” _i.e._ the
worshipper of the Priapus-idol, would usher them all into Hell. Here he
only echoed the general verdict of his countrymen who loved poetry and,
as a rule, despised poets. The earliest complete pieces of any volume
and substance saved from the wreck of old Arabic literature and familiar
in our day are the seven Kasídahs (purpose-odes or tendence-elegies)
which are popularly known as the Gilded or the Suspended Poems; and in
all of these we find, with an elaboration of material and formal art
which can go no further, a subject-matter of trite imagery and stock
ideas which suggest a long ascending line of model ancestors and
predecessors.

Scholars are agreed upon the fact that many of the earliest and best
Arab poets were, as Mohammed boasted himself, unalphabetic[434] or
rather could neither read nor write. They addressed the ear and the
mind, not the eye. They “spoke verse,” learning it by rote and dictating
it to the Ráwi, and this reciter again transmitted it to the musician
whose pipe or zither accompanied the minstrel’s song. In fact the
general practice of writing began only at the end of the first century
after The Flight.

The rude and primitive measure of Arab song, upon which the most
complicated system of metres subsequently arose, was called Al-Rajaz,
literally “the trembling,” because it reminded the highly imaginative
hearer of a pregnant she-camel’s weak and tottering steps. This was the
carol of the camel-driver, the lover’s lay and the warrior’s chaunt of
the heroic ages; and its simple, unconstrained flow adapted it well for
extempore effusions. Its merits and demerits have been extensively
discussed amongst Arab grammarians and many, noticing that it was not
originally divided into hemistichs, make an essential difference between
the Shá’ir who speaks poetry and the Rájiz who speaks Rajaz. It
consisted, to describe it technically, of iambic dipodia (⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑), the
first three syllables being optionally long or short. It can generally
be read like our iambs and, being familiar, is pleasant to the English
ear. The dipodia are repeated either twice or thrice; in the former case
Rajaz is held by some authorities, as Al-Akhfash (Sa’íd ibn Másadah), to
be mere prose. Although Labíd and Antar composed in iambics, the first
Kásídah or regular poem in Rajaz was by Al-Aghlab al-Ajibi temp.
Mohammed: the Alfíyah-grammar of Ibn Málik is in Rajaz Muzdawij, the
hemistichs rhyming and the assonance being confined to the couplet.
Al-Hariri also affects Rajaz in the third and fifth Assemblies. So far
Arabic metre is true to Nature: in impassioned speech the movement of
language is iambic: we say “I _will_, I _will_,” not “I will.”

For many generations the Sons of the Desert were satisfied with Nature’s
teaching; the fine perceptions and the nicely trained ear of the bard
needing no aid from art. But in time came the inevitable prosodist under
the formidable name of Abu Abd al-Rahmán al-Khalíl, i. Ahmad, i. Amrú,
i. Tamím al-Faráhidi (of the Faráhid sept), al-Azdi (of the Azd clan),
al-Yahmadi (of the Yahmad tribe), popularly known as Al-Khalíl ibn Ahmad
al-Basri, of Bassorah, where he died æt. 68, scanning verses they say,
in A.H. 170 (= 786–87). Ibn Khallikán relates (i. 493) on the authority
of Hamzah al-Isfaháni how this “father of Arabic grammar and discoverer
of the rules of prosody” invented the science as he walked past a
coppersmith’s shop on hearing the strokes of a hammer upon a metal
basin: “two objects devoid of any quality which could serve as a proof
and an illustration of anything else than their own form and shape and
incapable of leading to any other knowledge than that of their own
nature.”[435] According to others he was passing through the Fullers’
Bazar at Basrah when his ear was struck by the Dak-dak (‏دق دق‎) and the
Dakak-dakak (‏دقق دقق‎) of the workmen. In these two onomatopoetics we
trace the expression which characterises the Arab tongue: all syllables
are composed of consonant and vowel, the latter long or short as Bā and
Bă; or of a vowelled consonant followed by a consonant as Bal, Bau (‏بو‎).

The grammarian, true to the traditions of his craft which looks for all
poetry to the Badawi,[436] adopted for metrical details the language of
the Desert. The distich, which amongst Arabs is looked upon as one line,
he named “Bayt,” nighting-place, tent or house; and the hemistich
Misrá’ah, the one leaf of a folding door. To this “scenic” simile all
the parts of the verse were more or less adapted. The metres, our feet,
were called “Arkán,” the stakes and stays of the tent; the syllables
were “Usúl” or roots divided into three kinds: the first or “Sabab” (the
tent-rope) is composed of two letters, a vowelled and a quiescent
consonant as “Lam.”[437] The “Watad” or tent-peg of three letters is of
two varieties; the Majmú’, or united, a foot in which the two first
consonants are moved by vowels and the last is jazmated or made
quiescent by apocope as “Lakad;” and the Mafrúk, or disunited, when the
two moved consonants are separated by one jazmated, as “Kabla.” And
lastly the “Fásilah” or intervening space, applied to the main pole of
the tent, consists of four letters.

The metres were called Buhúr or “seas” (plur. of Bahr), also meaning the
space within the tent-walls, the equivoque alluding to pearls and other
treasures of the deep. Al-Khalil, the systematiser, found in general use
only five Dáirah (circles, classes or groups of metre); and he
characterised the harmonious and stately measures, all built upon the
original Rajaz, as Al-Tawíl (the long)[438], Al-Kámil (the complete),
Al-Wáfir (the copious), Al-Basít (the extended) and Al-Khafíf (the
light).[439] These embrace all the Mu’allakát and the Hamásah, the great
Anthology of Abú Tammám; but the crave for variety and the extension of
foreign intercourse had multiplied wants and Al-Khalil deduced, from the
original five Dáirah, fifteen, to which Al-Akhfash (ob. A.D. 830) added
a sixteenth, Al-Khabab. The Persians extended the number to nineteen:
the first four were peculiarly Arab; the fourteenth, the fifteenth and
seventeenth peculiarly Persian and all the rest were Arab and
Persian.[440]

Arabic metre so far resembles that of Greece and Rome that the value of
syllables depends upon the “quantity” or position of their consonants,
not upon accent as in English and the Neo-Latin tongues. Al-Khalil was
doubtless familiar with the classic prosody of Europe but he rejected it
as unsuited to the genius of Arabic and like a true Eastern Gelehrte he
adopted a process devised by himself. Instead of scansion by pyrrhics
and spondees, iambs and trochees, anapaests and similar simplifications
he invented a system of weights (“wuzún”). Of these there are nine[441]
memorial words used as quantitive signs, all built upon the root “fa’l”
which has rendered such notable service to Arabic and Hebrew[442]
grammar and varying from the simple “fa’ál,” in Persian “fa’úl,” (⏓ ‑)
to the complicated “Mutafá’ilun” (⏑ ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑), anapaest + iamb. Thus the
prosodist would scan the Shahnámeh of Firdausi as

                   Fa’úlun, fa’úlun, fa’úlun, fa’úl.

                       ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ |⏒ ‑

These weights also show another peculiarity of Arabic verse. In English
we have few if any spondees: the Arabic contains about three longs to
one short; hence its gravity, stateliness and dignity. But these longs
again are peculiar, and sometimes strike the European ear as shorts,
thus adding a difficulty for those who would represent Oriental metres
by western feet, ictus and accent. German Arabists can register an
occasional success in such attempts: Englishmen none. My late friend
Professor Palmer of Cambridge tried the tour de force of dancing on one
leg instead of two and notably failed: Mr. Lyall also strove to imitate
Arabic metre and produced only prose bewitched.[443] Mr. Payne appears
to me to have wasted trouble in “observing the exterior form of the
stanza, the movement of the rhyme and (as far as possible) the identity
in number of the syllables composing the beits.” There is only one part
of his admirable version concerning which I have heard competent readers
complain; and that is the metrical, because here and there it sounds
strange to their ears.

I have already stated my conviction that there are two and only two ways
of translating Arabic poetry into English. One is to represent it by
good heroic or lyric verse as did Sir William Jones; the other is to
render it after French fashion, by measured and balanced Prose, the
little sister of Poetry. It is thus and thus only that we can preserve
the peculiar _cachet_ of the original. This old-world Oriental song is
spirit-stirring as a “blast of that dread horn,” albeit the words be
thin. It is heady as the “Golden Wine” of Libanus, to the tongue water
and brandy to the brain—the clean contrary of our nineteenth century
effusions. Technically speaking, it can be vehicled only by the verse of
the old English ballad or by the prose of the Book of Job. And Badawi
poetry is a perfect expositor of Badawi life, especially in the good and
gladsome old Pagan days ere Al-Islam, like the creed which it abolished,
overcast the minds of men with its dull grey pall of realistic
superstition. They combined to form a marvellous picture—those contrasts
of splendour and squalor amongst the sons of the sand. Under airs pure
as æther, golden and ultramarine above and melting over the horizon into
a diaphanous green which suggested a reflection of Kaf, that unseen
mountain-wall of emerald, the so-called Desert changed face twice a
year; now brown and dry as summer-dust; then green as Hope, beautified
with infinite verdure and broad sheetings of rain-water. The vernal and
autumnal shiftings of camp, disruptions of homesteads and partings of
kith and kin, friends and lovers, made the life many-sided as it was
vigorous and noble, the outcome of hardy frames, strong minds and
spirits breathing the very essence of liberty and independence. The day
began with the dawn-drink, “generous wine bought with shining ore,”
poured into the crystal goblet from the leather bottle swinging before
the cooling breeze. The rest was spent in the practice of weapons; in
the favourite arrow-game known as Al-Maysar, gambling which at least had
the merit of feeding the poor; in racing for which the Badawin had a
mania, and in the chase, the foray and the fray which formed the serious
business of his life. And how picturesque the hunting scenes; the
greyhound, like the mare, of purest blood; the falcon cast at francolin
and coney; the gazelle standing at gaze; the desert ass scudding over
the ground-waves; the wild cows or bovine antelopes browsing with their
calves and the ostrich-chickens flocking round the parent bird! The
Musámarah or night-talk round the camp-fire was enlivened by the
lute-girl and the gleeman, whom the austere Prophet described as “roving
distraught in every vale” and whose motto in Horatian vein was, “To-day
we shall drink, to-morrow be sober; wine this day, that day work.”
Regularly once a year, during the three peaceful months when war and
even blood revenge were held sacrilegious, the tribes met at Ukádh
(Ocaz) and other fairsteads, where they held high festival and the bards
strave in song and prided themselves upon doing honour to women and to
the successful warriors of their tribe. Brief, the object of Arab life
was to _be_—to be free, to be brave, to be wise; while the endeavours of
other peoples was and is to _have_—to have wealth, to have knowledge, to
have a name; and while moderns make their “epitome of life” to be, to do
and to _suffer_. Lastly the Arab’s end was honourable as his life was
stirring: few Badawin had the crowning misfortune of dying “the
straw-death.”

The poetical forms in The Nights are as follows:—The Misrá’ah or
hemistich is half the “Bayt” which, for want of a better word I have
rendered couplet: this, however, though formally separated in MSS. is
looked upon as one line, one verse; hence a word can be divided, the
former part pertaining to the first and the latter to the second moiety
of the distich. As the Arabs ignore blank verse, when we come upon a
rhymeless couplet we know that it is an extract from a longer
composition in monorhyme. The Kit’ah is a fragment, either an occasional
piece or more frequently a portion of a Ghazal (ode) or Kasídah (elegy),
other than the Matlá, the initial Bayt with rhyming distichs. The Ghazal
and Kasídah differ mainly in length: the former is popularly limited to
eighteen couplets: the latter begins at fifteen and is of indefinite
number. Both are built upon monorhyme, which appears twice in the first
couplet and ends all the others, _e.g._, aa + ba + ca, etc.; nor may the
same assonance be repeated, unless at least seven couplets intervene. In
the best poets, as in the old classic verse of France, the sense must be
completed in one couplet and not run on to a second; and, as the parts
cohere very loosely, separate quotation can generally be made without
injuring their proper effect. A favourite form is the Rubá’í or
quatrain, made familiar to English ears by Mr. Fitzgerald’s masterly
adaptation of Omar-i-Khayyám: the movement is generally aa + ba; but it
also appears as ab + cb, in which case it is a Kit’ah or fragment. The
Murabbá, tetrastichs or four-fold song, occurs once only in The Nights
(vol. i. 98); it is a succession of double Bayts or of four-lined
stanzas rhyming aa + bc + dc + ec: in strict form the first three
hemistichs rhyme with one another only, independently of the rest of the
poem, and the fourth with that of every other stanza, _e.g._, aa + ab +
cb + db. The Mukhammas, cinquains or pentastichs (Night cmlxiv.),
represents a stanza of two distichs and a hemistich in monorhyme, the
fifth line being the “bob” or burden: each succeeding stanza affects a
new rhyme, except in the fifth line, _e.g._, aaaab + ccccb + ddddb and
so forth. The Muwwál is a simple popular song in four to six lines;
specimens of it are given in the Egyptian grammar of my friend the late
Dr. Wilhelm Spitta.[444] The Muwashshah, or ornamented verse, has two
main divisions: one applies to our acrostics in which the initials form
a word or words; the other is a kind of Musaddas, or sex-tines, which
occurs once only in The Nights (cmlxxxvii.) It consists of three
couplets or six-line strophes: all the hemistichs of the first are in
monorhyme; in the second and following stanzas the three first
hemistichs take a new rhyme, but the fourth resumes the assonance of the
first set and is followed by the third couplet of No. 1, serving as bob
or refrain, _e.g._, aaaaaa + bbbaaa + cccaaa and so forth. It is the
most complicated of all the measures and is held to be of Morisco or
Hispano-Moorish origin.

Mr. Lane (Lex.) lays down, on the lines of Ibn Khallikan (i. 476, etc.)
and other representative literati, as our sole authorities for pure
Arabic, the precedence in following order. First of all ranks the Jáhili
(Ignoramus) of The Ignorance, the Ἀραβίας ἄρειον ἔθνος: these pagans
left hemistichs, couplets, pieces and elegies which once composed a
large corpus and which is now mostly forgotten. Hammád al-Ráwiyah, the
Reciter, a man of Persian descent (ob. A.H. 160 = 777) who first
collected the Mu’allakát, once recited by rote in a séance before Caliph
Al-Walid two thousand poems of præ-Mohammedan bards.[445] After the
Jáhili stands the Mukhadram or Muhadrim, the “Spurious,” because half
Pagan half Moslem, who flourished either immediately before or soon
after the preaching of Mohammed. The Islámi or full-blooded Moslem at
the end of the first century A.H. (= 720) began the process of
corruption in language; and, lastly, he was followed by the Muwallad of
the second century who fused Arabic with non-Arabic and in whom purity
of diction disappeared.

I have noticed (1 § A.) that the versical portion of The Nights may be
distributed into three categories. First are the olden poems which are
held classical by all modern Arabs; then comes the mediæval poetry, the
effusions of that brilliant throng which adorned the splendid Court of
Harun al-Rashid and which ended with Al-Haríri (ob. A.H. 516); and,
lastly, are the various _pièces de circonstance_ suggested to editors or
scribes by the occasion. It is not my object to enter upon the
historical part of the subject: a mere sketch would have neither value
nor interest whilst a finished picture would lead too far: I must be
contented to notice a few of the most famous names.

Of the præ-islamites we have Ádi bin Zayd al-Ibadi the “celebrated poet”
of Ibn Kkallikán (i. 188); Nábighat (the full-grown) al-Zubyáni who
flourished at the Court of Al-Nu’man in A.D. 580–602, and whose poem is
compared with the “Suspendeds,”[446] and Al-Mutalammis the
“pertinacious” satirist, friend and intimate with Tarafah of the “Prize
Poem.” About Mohammed’s day we find Imr al-Kays “with whom poetry
began,” to end with Zú al-Rummah; Amrú bin Mádi Karab al-Zubaydi, Labíd;
Ka’b ibn Zuhayr, the father one of the Mu’allakah-poets, and the son
author of the Burdah or Mantle-poem (see vol. iv. 115), and Abbás bin
Mirdás who lampooned the Prophet and had “his tongue cut out” _i.e._
received a double share of booty from Ali. In the days of Caliph Omar we
have Alkamah bin Olátha followed by Jamíl bin Ma’mar of the Banu Ozrah
(ob. A.H. 82), who loved Azzá. Then came Al-Kuthayyir (the dwarf,
_ironicè_), the lover of Buthaynah, “who was so lean that birds might be
cut to bits with her bones:” the latter was also a poetess (Ibn Khall.
i. 87), like Hind bint al-Nu’man who made herself so disagreeable to
Al-Hajjáj (ob. A.H. 95). Jarír al-Khatafah, the noblest of the Islami
poets in the first century, is noticed at full length by Ibn Khallikan
(i. 294) together with his rival in poetry and debauchery, Abú Firás
Hammám or Homaym bin Ghalib al-Farazdak, the Tamími, the Ommiade poet
“without whose verse half Arabic would be lost[447]:” he exchanged
satires with Jarír and died forty days before him (A.H. 110). Another
contemporary, forming the poetical triumvirate of the period, was the
debauched Christian poet Al-Akhtal al-Taghlibi. They were followed by
Al-Ahwas al-Ansári whose witty lampoons banished him to Dahlak Island in
the Red Sea (ob. A.H. 179 = 795); by Bashshár ibn Burd and by Yúnus ibn
Habib (ob. A.H. 182).

The well-known names of the Harun-cycle are Al-Asma’i, rhetorician and
poet, whose epic with Antar for hero is not forgotten (ob. A.H. 216);
Isaac of Mosul (Ishak bin Ibrahim of Persian origin); Al-’Utbi “the
Poet” (ob. A.H. 228); Abu al-Abbás al-Rakáshi; Abu al-Atahiyah, the
lover of Otbah; Muslim bin al-Walíd al-Ansari; Abú Tammám of Tay,
compiler of the Hamásah (ob. A.H. 230), “a Muwallad of the first class”
(says Ibn Khallikan i. 392); the famous or infamous Abu Nowás; Abu
Mus’ab (Ahmad ibn Ali) who died in A.H. 242; the satirist Dibil
al-Khuzáí (ob. A.H. 246) and a host of others quos nunc perscribere
longum est. They were followed by Al-Bohtori “the Poet” (ob. A.H. 286);
the royal author Abdullah ibn al-Mu’tazz (ob. A.H. 315); Ibn Abbád the
Sahib (ob. A.H. 334); Mansúr al-Halláj the martyred Sufi; the Sahib ibn
Abbad; Abu Faras al-Hamdáni (ob. A.H. 357); Al-Námi (ob. A.H. 399) who
had many encounters with that model Chauvinist Al-Mutanabbi, nicknamed
Al-Mutanabbih (the “wide-awake”), killed A.H. 354; Al-Manázi of
Manazjird (ob. A.H. 427); Al-Tughrai author of the Lámiyat al-’Ajam (ob.
A.H. 375); Al-Haríri the model rhetorician (ob. A.H. 516); Al-Hájiri
al-Irbili, of Arbela (ob. A.H. 632); Bahá al-Din al-Sinjari, (ob. A.H.
622); Al-Kátib or the Scribe (ob. A.H. 656); Abdun al-Andalúsi the
Spaniard (our xiith century) and about the same time Al-Náwaji, author
of the Halbat al-Kumayt or “Race-course of the Bay-horse”—poetical slang
for wine.[448]

Of the third category, the pièces d’occasion, little need be said: I may
refer readers to my notes on the doggrels in vol. ii. 34, 35, 56, 179,
182, 186 and 261; in vol. v. 55 and in vol. viii. 50.

Having a mortal aversion to the details of Arabic prosody I have
persuaded my friend Dr. Steingass, to undertake in the following pages
the subject as far as concerns the poetry of The Nights. He has been
kind enough to collaborate with me from the beginning, and to his minute
lexicographical knowledge I am deeply indebted for discovering not a few
blemishes which would have been “nuts to the critic.” The learned
Arabist’s notes will be highly interesting to students: mine (§ V.) are
intended to give a superficial and popular idea of the Arab’s
verse-mechanism.

“The principle of Arabic Prosody” (called ’Arúz, pattern standard, or
’Ilm al-’Arúz, science of the ’Arúz), in so far resembles that of
classical poetry, as it chiefly rests on metrical weight, not on accent,
or in other words a verse is measured by short and long quantities,
while the accent only regulates its rhythm. In Greek and Latin, however,
the quantity of the syllables depends on their vowels, which may be
either naturally short or long, or become long by position, _i.e._ if
followed by two or more consonants. We all remember from our school-days
what a fine string of rules had to be committed to and kept in memory,
before we were able to scan a Latin or Greek verse, without breaking its
neck by tripping over false quantities. In Arabic, on the other hand,
the answer to the question, what is metrically long or short, is
exceedingly simple, and flows with stringent cogency from the nature of
the Arabic Alphabet. This, strictly speaking, knows only consonants
(Harf, pl. Hurúf). The vowels which are required, in order to articulate
the consonants, were at first not represented in writing at all. They
had to be supplied by the reader, and are not improperly called
“motions” (Harakát), because they move or lead on as it were, one letter
to another. They are three in number, a (Fathah), i (Kasrah), u
(Zammah), originally sounded as the corresponding English vowels in bat,
bit and butt respectively, but in certain cases modifying their
pronunciation under the influence of a neighbouring consonant. When the
necessity made itself felt to represent them in writing, especially for
the sake of fixing the correct reading of the Koran, they were rendered
by additional signs, placed above or beneath the consonant, after which
they are pronounced, in a similar way as it is done in some systems of
English shorthand. A consonant followed by a short vowel is called a
“moved letter” (Muharrakah); a consonant without such vowel is called
“resting” or “quiescent” (Sákinah), and can stand only at the end of a
syllable or word.

And now we are able to formulate the _one_ simple rule, which determines
the prosodical quantity in Arabic: any moved letter, as ta, li, mu, is
counted short; any moved letter followed by a quiescent one, as taf,
lun, mus, _i.e._ any closed syllable beginning and terminating with a
consonant and having a short vowel between, forms a long quantity. This
is certainly a relief in comparison with the numerous rules of classical
Prosody, proved by not a few exceptions, which for instance in Dr.
Smith’s elementary Latin Grammar fill eight closely printed pages.

Before I proceed to show how from the prosodical unities, the moved and
the quiescent letter, first the metrical elements, then the feet and
lastly the metres are built up, it will be necessary to obviate a few
misunderstandings, to which our mode of transliterating Arabic into the
Roman character might give rise.

The line:

     “Love in my heart they lit and went their ways,” (vol. i. 232)

runs in Arabic:

         “Akámú al-wajda fí kalbí wa sárú.” (Mac. Ed. i. 179).

Here, according to our ideas, the word akámú would begin with a short
vowel a, and contain two long vowels á and ú; according to Arabic views
neither is the case. The word begins with “Alif,” and its second
syllable ká closes in Alif after Fathah (a), in the same way, as the
third syllable mú closes in the letter Wáw (w) after Zammah (u).

The question, therefore, arises, what is “Alif.” It is the first of the
twenty-eight Arabic letters, and has through the medium of the Greek
Alpha nominally entered into our alphabet, where it now plays rather a
misleading part. Curiously enough, however, Greek itself has preserved
for us the key to the real nature of the letter. In Ἀλφα the initial a
is preceded by the so-called spiritus lenis (᾿), a sign which must be
placed in front or at the top of any vowel beginning a Greek word, and
which represents that slight aspiration or soft breathing almost
involuntarily uttered, when we try to pronounce a vowel by itself. We
need not go far to find how deeply rooted this tendency is and to what
exaggerations it will sometimes lead. Witness the gentleman, who after
mentioning that he had been visiting his “favourite haunts” on the
scenes of his early life, was sympathetically asked, how the dear old
ladies were. This spiritus lenis is the silent h of the French “homme”
and the English “honour,” corresponding exactly to the Arabic Hamzah,
whose mere prop the Alif is, when it stands at the beginning of a word:
a native Arabic Dictionary does not begin with Báb al-Alif (Gate or
Chapter of the Alif), but with Báb al-Hamzah. What the Greeks call Alpha
and have transmitted to us as a name for the vowel a, is in fact nothing
else but the Arabic Hamzah-Alif (‏أ‎), moved by Fathah, _i.e._ bearing
the sign ‏َ‎ for a at the top (‏أَ‎), just as it might have the sign
Zammah (‏ُ‎) superscribed to express u (‏أُ‎), or the sign Kasrah (‏ِ‎)
subjoined to represent i (‏إِ‎). In each case the Hamzah-Alif, although
scarcely audible to our ear, is the real letter and might fitly be
rendered in transliteration by the above-mentioned silent h, wherever we
make an Arabic word begin with a vowel not preceded by any other sign.
This latter restriction refers to the sign ’, which in Sir Richard
Burton’s translation of The Nights, as frequently in books published in
this country, is used to represent the Arabic letter ‏ع‎ in whose very
name ’Ayn it occurs. The ’Ayn is “described as produced by a smart
compression of the upper part of the windpipe and forcible emission of
breath,” imparting a guttural tinge to a following or preceding
vowel-sound; but it is by no means a mere guttural vowel, as Professor
Palmer styles it. For Europeans, who do not belong to the Israelitic
dispensation, as well as for Turks and Persians, its exact pronunciation
is most difficult, if not impossible to acquire.

In reading Arabic from transliteration for the purpose of scanning
poetry, we have therefore in the first instance to keep in mind that no
Arabic word or syllable can begin with a vowel. Where our mode of
rendering Arabic in the Roman character would make this appear to be the
case, either Hamzah (silent h), or ’Ayn (represented by the sign ’) is
the real initial, and the only element to be taken in account as a
_letter_. It follows as a self-evident corollary that wherever a single
consonant stands between two vowels, it never closes the previous
syllable, but always opens the next one. Our word “Akámú,” for instance,
can only be divided into the syllables: A (properly Ha)-ká-mú, never
into Ak-á-mú or Ak-ám-ú.

It has been stated above that the syllable ká is closed by the letter
Alif after Fathah, in the same way as the syllable mú is closed by the
letter Wáw, and I may add now, as the word fí is closed by the letter Yá
(y). To make this perfectly clear, I must repeat that the Arabic
Alphabet, as it was originally written, deals only with consonants. The
signs for the short vowel-sounds were added later for a special purpose,
and are generally not represented even in printed books, _e.g._ in the
various editions of The Nights, where only quotations from the Koran or
poetical passages are provided with the vowel-points. But among those
consonants there are three, called weak letters (Hurúf al-’illah), which
have a particular organic affinity to these vowel-sounds: the guttural
Hamzah, which is akin to a, the palatal Yá, which is related to _i_, and
the labial Wáw, which is homogeneous with u. Where any of the weak
letters follows a vowel of its own class, either at the end of a word or
being itself followed by another consonant, it draws out or lengthens
the preceding vowel and is in this sense called a letter of prolongation
(Harf al-Madd). Thus, bearing in mind that the Hamzah is in reality a
silent h, the syllable ká might be written kah, similarly to the German
word “sah,” where the h is not pronounced either, but imparts a
lengthened sound to the a. In like manner mú and fí are written in
Arabic muw and fiy respectively, and form long quantities not because
they contain a vowel long by nature, but because their initial
“Muharrakah” is followed by a “Sákinah,” exactly as in the previously
mentioned syllables taf, lun, mus.[449] In the Roman transliteration,
Akámú forms a word of five letters, two of which are consonants, and
three vowels; in Arabic it represents the combination H(a)k(a)hm(u)w,
consisting also of five letters but all consonants, the intervening
vowels being expressed in writing either merely by superadded external
signs, or more frequently not at all. Metrically it represents one short
and two long quantities (⏑ ‑ ‑), forming in Latin a trisyllabic foot,
called Bacchíus, and in Arabic a quinqueliteral “Rukn” (pillar) or “Juz”
(part, portion), the technical designation for which we shall introduce
presently.

There is one important remark more to be made with regard to the Hamzah:
at the beginning of a word it is either conjunctive, Hamzat al-Wasl, or
disjunctive, Hamzat al Kat’. The difference is best illustrated by
reference to the French so-called aspirated h, as compared with the
above mentioned silent h. If the latter, as initial of a noun, is
preceded by the article, the article loses its vowel, and, ignoring the
silent h altogether, is read with the following noun almost as one word:
le homme becomes l’homme (pronounced lomme) as le ami becomes l’ami.
This resembles very closely the Arabic Hamzah Wasl. If, on the other
hand, a French word begins with an aspirated h, as for instance héros,
the article does not drop its vowel before the noun, nor is the h
sounded as in the English word “hero,” but the effect of the aspirate is
simply to keep the two vowel sounds apart, so as to pronounce le éros
with a slight hiatus between, and this is exactly what happens in the
case of the Arabic Hamzah Kat’.

With regard to the Wasl, however, Arabic goes a step further than
French. In the French example, quoted above, we have seen it is the
silent h and the _preceding_ vowel, which are eliminated; in Arabic both
the Hamzah and its own Harakah, _i.e._ the short vowel _following_ it,
are supplanted by their antecedent. Another example will make this
clear. The most common instance of the Hamzah Wasl is the article al
(for h(a)l = the Hebrew hal), where it is moved by Fathah. But it has
this sound only at the beginning of a sentence or speech, as in
“Al-hamdu” at the head of the Fatihah, or in “Alláhu” at the beginning
of the third Surah. If the two words stand in grammatical connection, as
in the sentence “Praise be to God,” we cannot say “Al-Hamdu li-Alláhi,”
but the junction (Wasl) between the dative particle li and the noun
which it governs must take place. According to the French principle,
this junction would be effected at the cost of the preceding element and
li Alláhi would become l’Alláhí; in Arabic, on the contrary, the
kasrated l of the particle takes the place of the following fathated
Hamzah and we read li ’lláhi instead. Proceeding in the Fatihah we meet
with the verse “Iyyáka na’budu wa iyyáka nasta’ínu,” Thee do we worship
and of Thee do we ask aid. Here the Hamzah of iyyáka (properly hiyyáka
with silent h) is disjunctive, and therefore its pronunciation remains
the same at the beginning and in the middle of the sentence, or to put
it differently, instead of coalescing with the preceding wa into
wa’yyáka, the two words are kept separate, by the Hamzah reading wa
iyyáka, just as it was the case with the French Le héros.

If the conjunctive Hamzah is preceded by a quiescent letter, this takes
generally Kasrah: “Tálat al-Laylah,” the night was longsome, would
become Tálati ’l-Laylah. If, however, the quiescent letter is one of
prolongation, it mostly drops out altogether, and the Harakah of the
next preceding letter becomes the connecting vowel between the two
words, which in our parlance would mean, that the end-vowel of the first
word is shortened before the elided initial of the second. Thus “fí
al-bayti,” in the house, which in Arabic is written f(i)y h(a)lb(a)yt(i)
and which we transliterate fí ’l-bayti, is in poetry read fil-bayti,
where we must remember, that the syllable fil, in spite of its short
vowel, represents a long quantity, because it consists of a moved letter
followed by a quiescent one. Fíl would be overlong and could, according
to Arabic prosody, stand only in certain cases at the end of a verse,
_i.e._ in pause, where a natural tendency prevails to prolong a sound.

The attentive reader will now be able to fix the prosodical value of the
line quoted above with unerring security. For metrical purposes it
syllabifies into: A-ká-mul-vaj-da fí kal-bí wa sá-rú, containing three
short and eight long quantities. The initial unaccented a is short, for
the same reason why the syllables da and wa are so, that is, because it
corresponds to an Arabic letter, the Hamzah or silent h, moved by
Fathah. The syllables ká, fí, bí, sá, rú, are long for the same reason,
why the syllables mul, waj, kal are so, that is, because the accent in
the transliteration corresponds to a quiescent Arabic letter, following
a moved one. The same simple criterion applies to the whole list, in
which I give in alphabetical order the first lines and the metre of all
the poetical pieces contained in the Mac. edition, and which will be
found at the end of this volume.

The prosodical unities, then, in Arabic are the moved and the quiescent
letter, and we are now going to show how they combine into metrical
elements, feet, and metres.

i. The metrical elements (Usúl) are:

1. The Sabab,[450] which consists of _two_ letters and is either khafíf
(light) or sakíl (heavy). A moved letter followed by a quiescent, _i.e._
a closed syllable, like the aforementioned taf, lun, mus, to which we
may now add fá = fah, ’í = ’iy, ’ú = ’uw, form a Sabab khafíf,
corresponding to the classical long quantity (‑). Two moved letters in
succession, like muta, ’ala, constitute a Sabab sakíl, for which the
classical name would be Pyrrhic (⏑ ⏑). As in Latin and Greek, they are
equal in weight and can frequently interchange, that is to say, the
Sabab khafíf can be evolved into a sakíl by moving its second Harf, or
the latter contracted into the former, by making its second letter
quiescent.

2. The Watad, consisting of _three_ letters, one of which is quiescent.
If the quiescent follows the two moved ones, the Watad is called majmú’
(collected or joined), as fa’ú (= fa’uw), mafá (= mafah), ’ilun, and it
corresponds to the classical Iambus (⏑ ‑). If, on the contrary, the
quiescent intervenes or separates between the two moved letters, as in
fá’i (= fah’i), látu (= lahtu), taf’i, the Watad is called mafrúk
(separated), and has its classical equivalent in the Trochee (‑ ⏑).

3. The Fásilah,[451] containing _four_ letters, _i.e._ three moved ones
followed by a quiescent, and which, in fact, is only a shorter name for
a Sabab sakíl followed by a Sabab khafíf, as muta + fá, or ’ala + tun,
both of the measure of the classical Anapaest (⏑ ‑ ⏑).

ii. These three elements, the Sabab, Watad and Fásilah, combine further
into feet Arkán, pl. of Rukn, or Ajzá, pl. of Juz, two words explained
supra p. 275. The technical terms by which the feet are named, are
derivatives of the root fa’l, to do, which as the student will remember,
serves in Arabic Grammar to form the Auzán or weights, in accordance
with which words are derived from roots. It consists of the three
letters Fá (f), ’Ayn (’), Lám (l), and, like any other Arabic root,
cannot strictly speaking be pronounced, for the introduction of any
vowel-sound would make it cease to be a root and change it into an
individual word. The above fa’l, for instance, where the initial Fá is
moved by Fathah (a), is the Infinitive or verbal noun, “to do,” “doing.”
If the ’Ayn also is moved by Fathah, we obtain fa’al, meaning in
colloquial Arabic “he did” (the classical or literary form would be
fa’ala). Pronouncing the first letter with Zammah (u), the second with
Kasrah (i), _i.e._, fu’il, we say “it was done” (classically fu’ila).
Many more forms are derived by prefixing, inserting or subjoining
certain additional letters called Hurúf al-Ziyádah (letters of increase)
to the original radicals: fá’il, for instance, with an Alif of
prolongation in the first syllable, means “doer;” maf’úl (= maf’uwl),
where the quiescent Fá is preceded by a fathated Mím (m), and the
zammated ’Ayn followed by a lengthening Waw, means “done”; Mufá’alah,
where in addition to a prefixed and inserted letter, the feminine
termination ah is subjoined after the Lám means “to do a thing
reciprocally.” Since these and similar changes are with unvarying
regularity applicable to all roots, the grammarians use the derivatives
of Fa’l as model-forms for the corresponding derivations of any other
root, whose letters are in this case called its Fá, ’Ayn and Lám. From a
root, _e.g._, which has Káf (k) for its first letter or Fá, Tá (t) for
its second letter or ’Ayn, and Bá (b) for its third letter or Lám

 fa’l would be katb = to write, writing;
 fa’al would be katab = he wrote;
 fu’il would be kutib = it was written;
 fá’il would be kátib = writer, scribe;
 maf’úl would be maktúb = written, letter;
 mufá’alah would be mukátabah = to write reciprocally, correspondence.

The advantage of this system is evident. It enables the student, who has
once grasped the original meaning of a root, to form scores of words
himself, and in his readings, to understand hundreds, nay thousands, of
words, without recourse to the Dictionary, as soon as he has learned to
distinguish their radical letters from the letters of increase, and
recognises in them a familiar root. We cannot wonder, therefore, that
the inventor of Arabic Prosody, readily availed himself of the same plan
for his own ends. The Taf’íl, as it is here called, that is the
representation of the metrical feet by current derivatives of fa’l, has
in this case, of course, nothing to do with the etymological meaning of
those typical forms. But it proves none the less useful in another
direction: in simply naming a particular foot it shows at the same time
its prosodical measure and character, as will now be explained in
detail.

We have seen supra p. 275 that the word Akámú consists of a short
syllable followed by two long ones (⏑ ‑ ‑), and consequently forms a
foot, which the classics would call Bacchíus. In Latin there is no
connection between this name and the metrical value of the foot: we must
learn both by heart. But if we are told that its Taf’íl in Arabic is
Fa’úlun, we understand at once that it is composed of the Watad majmú’
fa’ú (⏑ ‑) and the Sabab khafíf lun (‑), and as the Watad contains
three, the Sabab two letters, it forms a quinqueliteral foot or Juz
khamásí.

In combining into feet, the Watad has the precedence over the Sabab and
the Fásilah, and again the Watad majmú’ over the Watad mafrúk. Hence the
Prosodists distinguish between Ajzá aslíyah or primary feet (from Asl,
root), in which this precedence is observed, and Ájzá far’íyah or
secondary feet (from Far’ = branch), in which it is reversed. The former
are four in number:—

1. Fa’ú.lun, consisting, as we have just seen of a Watad majmú’ followed
by a Sabab khafíf, = the Latin Bacchíus (⏑ ‑ ‑).

2. Mafá.’í.lun, _i.e._ Watad majmú’ followed by two Sabab khafíf = the
Latin Epitritus primus (⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑).

3. Mufá.’alatun, _i.e._ Watad majmú’ followed by Fásilah = the Latin
Iambus followed by Anapaest (⏑ ‑ ⏑ ⏑ ‑).

4. Fá’i.lá.tun, _i.e._ Watad mafrúk followed by two Sabab khafíf = the
Latin Epitritus secundus (‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑).

The number of the secondary feet increases to six, for as No. 2 and 4
contain two Sabab, they “branch out” into two derived feet each,
according to both Sabab or only one changing place with regard to the
Watad. They are:

5. Fá.’ilun, _i.e._ Sabab khafíf followed by Watad majmú’, = the Latin
Creticus (‑ ⏑ ‑). The primary Fa’ú.lun becomes by transposition
Lun.fa’ú. To bring this into conformity with a current derivative of
fa’l, the initial Sabab must be made to contain the first letter of the
root, and the Watad the two remaining ones in their proper order. Fá is
therefore substituted for lun, and ’ilun for fa’ú, forming together the
above Fá.’ilun. By similar substitutions, which it would be tedious to
specify in each separate case, Mafá.’í.lun becomes:

6. Mus.taf.’ilun, for ’Í.lun.mafá, _i.e._ two Sabab khafíf, followed by
Watad majmú’ = the Latin Epitritus tertius (‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑), or:

7. Fá.’ilá.tun, for Lun.mafá.’í, _i.e._ Watad majmú’ between two Sabab
khafíf = the Latin Epitritus secundus (‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑).

8. Mutafá.’ilun (for ’Alatun.mufá, the reversed Mufá.’alatun) _i.e._
Fásilah followed by Watad majmú’ = the Latin Anapaest succeeded by
Iambus (⏑ ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑). The last two secondary feet are transpositions of
No. 4, Fá’.i lá.tun, namely:

9. Maf.’ú.látu, for Lá.tun.fá’i, _i.e._ two Sabab khafíf, followed by
Watad mafrúk = the Latin Epitritus quartus (‑ ‑ ‑ ⏑).

10. Mus.taf’i.lun, for Tun.fá’i.lá, _i.e._ Watad mafrúk between two
Sabab khafíf = the Latin Epitritus tertius (‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑).[452]

The “branch”-foot Fá.’ilun (No. 5), like its “root” Fa’úlun (No. 1), is
quinqueliteral. All other feet, primary or secondary, consist
necessarily of seven letters, as they contain a triliteral Watad (see
supra i. 2) with either two biliteral Sabab khafíf (i. 1,) or a
quadriliteral Fásilah (i. 3). They are, therefore, called Sabá’í = seven
lettered.

iii. The same principle of the Watad taking precedence over Sabab and
Fásilah, rules the arrangement of the Arabic metres, which are divided
into five circles (Dawáir, pl. of Dáirah) so called for reasons
presently to be explained. The first is named:

A. Dáirat al-Mukhtalif, circle of “the varied” metre, because it is
composed of feet of various length, the five-lettered Fa’úlun (supra ii.
1) and the seven-lettered Mafá’ílun (ii. 2) with their secondaries
Fá’ilun, Mustaf.’ilun and Fá.’ilátun (ii. 5–7), and it comprises three
Buhúr or metres (pl. of Bahr, sea), the Tawíl, Madíd and Basít.

1. Al-Tawíl, consisting of twice

                Fa’ú.lun Mafá.’ílun Fa’ú.lun Mafá.’ílun,

the classical scheme for which would be

                  ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑ |

If we transfer the Watad Fa’ú from the beginning of the line to the end,
it would read:

Lun.mafá’í Lun.fa’ú Lun.mafá’í Lun.fa’ú which, after the substitutions
indicated above (ii. 7 and 5) becomes:

2. Al-Madíd, consisting of twice

                Fá.’ilátun Fá.’ilun Fá.’ilátun Fá.’ilun,

which may be represented by the classical scheme

                  ‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ |

If again, returning to the Tawíl, we make the break after the Watad of
the second foot we obtain the line:

’Ílun.fa’ú Lun.mafá ’Ílun.fa’u Lun.mafá, and as metrically ’Ílun.fa’ú
(two Sabab followed by Watad) and Lun.mafá (one Sabab followed by Watad)
are = ’Ílun.mafá and Lun.fa’ú respectively, their Taf’il is effected by
the same substitutions as in ii. 5 and 6, and they become:

3. Basít, consisting of twice

              Mustaf.’ilun Fá.’ilun Mustaf.’ilun Fá.’ilun,

in conformity with the classical scheme:

                  ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ |

Thus one metre evolves from another by a kind of rotation, which
suggested to the Prosodists an ingenious device of representing them by
circles (hence the name Dáirah), round the circumference of which on the
outside the complete Taf’íl of the original metre is written, while each
moved letter is faced by a small loop, each quiescent by a small
vertical stroke[453] inside the circle. Then, in the case of this
present Dáirat al-Mukhtalif for instance, the loop corresponding to the
initial f of the first Fa’úlun is marked as the beginning of the Tawíl,
that corresponding to its l (of the Sabab lun) as the beginning of the
Madid, and that corresponding to the ’Ayn of the next Mafá’ílun as the
beginning of the Basít. The same process applies to all the following
circles, but our limited space compels us simply to enumerate them,
together with their Buhúr, without further reference to the mode of
their evolution.

[Illustration]

B. Dairat al-Mútalif, circle of “the agreeing” metre, so called because
all its feet agree in length, consisting of seven letters each. It
contains:

1. Al-Wáfir, composed of twice

             Mufá.’alatun Mufá.’alatun Mufá’alatun (ii. 3).

                 = ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ⏑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ⏑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ⏑ ‑ |

where the Iambus in each foot precedes the Anapaest, and its reversal:

2. Al-Kámil, consisting of twice

             Mutafá.’ilun Mutafá.’ilun Mutafá.’ilun (ii. 8)

           = ⏑ ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ⏑ ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ⏑ ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ⏑ ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ |

where the Anapaest takes the first place in every foot.

C. Dáirat al-Mujtalab, circle of “the brought on” metre, so called
because its seven-lettered feet are brought on from the first circle.

1. Al-Hazaj, consisting of twice

                Mafá.’ílun Mafá.’ílun Mafá.’ílun (ii. 2)

               = ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑ |

2. Al-Rajaz, consisting of twice

                Mustaf.’ilun Mustaf.’ilun Mustaf.’ilun,

and, in this full form, almost identical with the Iambic Trimeter of the
Greek Drama:

                     ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ |

3. Al-Ramal, consisting of twice

                   Fá.’ilátun Fá.’ilátun Fá.’ilátun,

the trochaic counterpart of the preceding metre

                    = ‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ |

D. Dáirat al-Mushtabih, circle of “the intricate” metre, so called from
its intricate nature, primary mingling with secondary feet, and one foot
of the same verse containing a Watad majmú’, another a Watad mafrúk,
_i.e._ the iambic rhythm alternating with the trochaic and _vice versa_.
Its Buhúr are:

1. Al-Sarí’, twice

           Mustaf.’ilun Mustaf.’ilun Maf’ú.látu (ii. 6 and 9)

                     = ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ‑ ⏑

2. Al-Munsarih, twice

           Mustaf.’ilun Mafú.látu Mustaf.’ilun (ii. 6. 9. 6)

                    = ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ‑ ⏑ | ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ |

3. Al-Khafíf, twice

           Fá.’ílátun Mustaf’i.lun Fá.’ílátun (ii. 7. 10. 7)

                    = ‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ |

4. Al-Muzári’, twice

             Mafá.’ílun Fá’i.látun Mafá.’ílun (ii. 2. 4. 2)

                    = ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑ |

5. Al-Muktazib, twice

            Maf’ú.látu Mustaf.’ilun Maf’ú.látu (ii. 9. 6. 9)

                    = ‑ ‑ ‑ ⏑ | ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ‑ ⏑ |

6. Al-Mujtass, twice

          Mustaf’i.lun Fá.’ilátun Mustaf’i.lun (ii. 10. 7. 10)

                    = ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ |

E. Dáirat al-Muttafik, circle of “the concordant” metre, so called for
the same reason why circle B is called “the agreeing,” _i.e._ because
the feet all harmonise in length, being here, however quinqueliteral,
not seven-lettered as in the Mútalif. Al-Khalíl, the inventor of the
’Ilm al-’Arúz, assigns to it only one metre:

1. Al-Mutakárib, twice

                Fa’úlun Fa’úlun Fa’úlun Fa’úlun (ii. 1)

                   = ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ |

Later Prosodists added:

2. Al-Mutadárak, twice

                Fá’ilun Fá’ilun Fá’ilun Fá’ilun (ii. 5)

                   = ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ |

The feet and metres as given above, are however to a certain extent
merely theoretical; in practice the former admit of numerous licenses
and the latter of variations brought about by modification or partial
suppression of the feet final in a verse. An Arabic poem (Kasídah, or if
numbering less than ten couplets, Kat’ah) consists of Bayts or couplets,
bound together by a continuous rhyme, which connects the first two lines
and is repeated at the end of every second line throughout the poem. The
_last_ foot of every odd line is called ’Arúz (fem. in contradistinction
of Arúz in the sense of Prosody which is masc.) pl. A’áiriz, that of
every even line is called Zarb, pl. Azrub, and the remaining feet may be
termed Hashw (stuffing), although in stricter parlance a further
distinction is made between the _first_ foot of every odd and even line
as well.

Now with regard to the Hashw on the one hand, and the ’Aruz and Zarb on
the other, the changes which the normal feet undergo, are of two kinds:
Zuháf (deviation) and ’Illah (defect). Zuháf applies, as a rule,
occasionally and optionally to the second letter of a Sabab in those
feet which compose the Hashw or body-part of a verse, making a long
syllable short by suppressing its quiescent final, or contracting two
short quantities in a long one, by rendering quiescent a moved letter
which stands second in a Sabab sakíl. In Mustaf’ilun (ii. 6. = ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑),
for instance, the s of the first syllable, or the f of the second, or
both may be dropped and it will become accordingly Mutaf’ilun, by
substitution Mafá’ilun, (⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑) or Musta’ilun, by substitution,
Mufta’ilun (‑ ⏑ ⏑ ‑), or Muta’ilun, by substitution Fa’ilatun (⏑ ⏑ ⏑
‑).[454] This means that wherever the foot Mustaf.’ilun occurs in the
Hashw of a poem, we can represent it by the scheme ⏓ ⏓ ⏑ ‑ _i.e._ the
Epitritus tertius can, by poetical license change into Diiambus,
Choriambus or Paeon quartus. In Mufá’alatun (ii. 3. = ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ⏑ ‑) and
Mutafá’ilun (ii. 8. = ⏑ ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑), again, the Sabab ’ala and muta may
become khafíf by suppression of their final Harakah and thus turn into
Mufá’altun, by substitution Mafá’ílun (ii. 2. = ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑), and
Mutfá’ilun, by substitution Mustaf’ilun (ii. 6. = ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ as above). In
other words the two feet correspond to the schemes ⏑ _ ⏑ ‑ ⏑ _ and ⏑ ‑ ⏑
_ ⏑ _, where a Spondee can take the place of the Anapaest after or
before the Iambus respectively.

’Illah, the second way of modifying the primitive or normal feet,
applies to both Sabab and Watad, but only in the ’Aruz and Zarb of a
couplet, being at the same time constant and obligatory. Besides the
changes already mentioned, it consists in adding one or two letters to a
Sabab or Watad, or curtailing them more or less, even to cutting them
off altogether. We cannot here exhaust this matter any more than those
touched upon until now, but must be satisfied with an example or two, to
show the proceeding in general and indicate its object.

We have seen that the metre Basít consists of the two lines:

               Mustaf.’ilun Fá.’ilun Mustaf’ilun Fá’ilun
               Mustaf’ilun Fá’ilun Mustaf’ilun Fá’ilun.

This complete form, however, is not in use amongst Arab poets. If by the
Zuháf Khabn, here acting as ’Illah, the Alif in the final Fá’ilun is
suppressed, changing it into Fa’ilun (⏑ ⏑ ‑), it becomes the first
’Aruz, called makhbúnah, of the Basít, the first Zarb of which is
obtained by submitting the final Fá’ilun of the second line to the same
process. A second Zarb results, if in Fá’ilun the final n of the Watad
’ilun is _cut_ off and the preceding l made quiescent by the ’Illah Kat’
thus giving Fá’il and by substitution Fa’lun (‑ ‑). Thus the formula
becomes:—

               Mustaf’ilun Fá’ilun Mustaf’ilun  Fa’ilun

               Mustaf’ilun Fá’ilun Mustaf’ilun  { Fa’ilun
                                                { Fa’lun

As in the Hashw, _i.e._ the first three feet of each line, the Khabn can
likewise be applied to the medial Fá’ilun, and for Mustaf’ilun the
poetical licenses, explained above, may be introduced, this first ’Arúz
or Class of the Basít with its two Zarb or subdivisions will be
represented by the scheme

                   ⏑ ⏑     │ ⏑     │ ⏑ ⏑     │
                   ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ │ ‑ ⏑ ‑ │ ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ │ ⏑ ⏑ ‑

                   ⏑ ⏑     │ ⏑     │ ⏑ ⏑     { ⏑ ⏑ ‑
                   ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ │ ‑ ⏑ ‑ │ ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ {  ‑ ‑

that is to say in the first subdivision of this form of the Basít both
lines of each couplet end with an Anapaest and every second line of the
other subdivision terminates in a Spondee.

The Basít has four more A’áriz, three called majzúah, because each line
is shortened by a Juz or foot, one called mashtúrah (halved), because
the number of feet is reduced from four to two, and we may here notice
that the former kind of lessening the number of feet is frequent with
the hexametrical circles (B. C. D.), while the latter kind can naturally
only occur in those circles, whose couplet forms an octameter (A. E.).
Besides being majzúah, the second ’Aruz is sahíhah (perfect) consisting
of the normal foot Mustaf’ilun. It has three Azrub: 1. Mustaf’ilán (‑ ‑
⏑ ‑, with an overlong final syllable, see supra p. 277), produced by the
’Illah Tazyíl, _i.e._ addition of a quiescent letter at the end
(Mustaf’ilunn, by substitution Mustaf’ilán); 2. Mustaf’ilun, like the
’Aruz; 3. Maf’úlun (‑ ‑ ‑), produced by the ’Illah Kat’ (see the
preceding page; Mustaf’ilun, by dropping the final n and making the l
quiescent becomes Mustaf’il and by substitution Maf’úlun). Hence the
formula is:

                 Mustaf’ilun Fá’ilun Mustaf’ilun
                                         { Mustaf’ilán
                     Mustaf’ilun Fá’ilun { Mustaf’ilun
                                         { Maf’úlun,

which, with its allowable licenses, may be represented by the scheme:

                       ⏑ ⏑     │ ⏑     │
                       ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ │ ‑ ⏑ ‑ │ ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑
                                       { ⏑ ⏑
                                       { ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑
                       ⏑ ⏑     │ ⏑     { ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑
                       ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ │ ‑ ⏑ ‑ { ⏑
                                       { ‑ ‑ ‑

The above will suffice to illustrate the general method of the
Prosodists, and we must refer the reader for the remaining classes and
subdivisions of the Basít as well as the other metres to more special
treatises on the subject, to which this Essay is intended merely as an
introduction, with a view to facilitate the first steps of the student
in an important, but I fear somewhat neglected field of Arabic learning.

If we now turn to the poetical pieces contained in The Nights, we find
that out of the fifteen metres, known to al-Khalíl, or the sixteen of
later Prosodists, instances of thirteen occur in the Mac. N. edition,
but in vastly different proportions. The total number amounts to 1,385
pieces (some, however, repeated several times), out of which 1,128
belong to the first two circles, leaving only 257 for the remaining
three. The same disproportionality obtains with regard to the metres of
each circle. The Mukhtalif is represented by 331 instances of Tawíl and
330 of Basít against 3 of Madíd; the Mutalif by 321 instances of Kámil
against 143 of Wáfir; the Mujtalab by 32 instances of Ramal and 30 of
Rajaz against 1 of Hazaj; the Mushtabih by 72 instances of Khafíf and 52
of Sarí’ against 18 of Munsarih and 15 of Mujtass; and lastly the
Muttafik by 37 instances of Mutakárib. Neither the Mutadárak (E. 2), nor
the Muzári’ and Muktazib (D. 4. 5) are met with.

Finally it remains for me to quote a couplet of each metre, showing how
to scan them, and what relation they bear to the theoretical formulas
exhibited on p. 282 to p. 286.

It is characteristic for the preponderance of the Tawíl over all the
other metres, that the first four lines, with which my alphabetical list
begins, are written in it. One of these belongs to a poem which has for
its author Bahá al-Dín Zuhayr (born A.D. 1186 at Mekkah or in its
vicinity, ob. 1249 at Cairo), and is to be found in full in Professor
Palmer’s edition of his works, p. 164. Sir Richard Burton translates the
first Bayt (vol. i. 290):

 An I quit Cairo and her pleasances ✿ Where can I hope to find so
    gladsome ways?

Professor Palmer renders it:

               Must I leave Egypt where such joys abound?
                   What place can ever charm me so again

In Arabic it scans:

               ⏑ ‑ ⏑  |  ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑  |  ‑ ⏑ ‑  |  ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑
               A-arhalu ’an Misrin wa tíbi na’ímihi[455]
               ⏑ ‑ ⏑  |  ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑  |  ‑ ⏑ ‑  |  ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑
               Fa-ayyu makánin ba’dahá li-ya sháiku.

In referring to iii. A. I. p. 282, it will be seen that in the Hashw
Fa’úlun (⏑ ‑ ‑) has become Fa’úlu (⏑ ‑ ⏑) by a Zuháf called Kabz
(suppression of the fifth letter of a foot if it is quiescent), and that
in the ’Arúz and Zarb Mafá’ílun (⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑) has changed into Mafá’ilun (⏑
‑ ⏑ ‑) by the same Zuháf acting as ’Illah. The latter alteration shows
the couplet to be of the second Zarb of the first ’Arúz of the Tawíl. If
the second line did terminate in Mafá’ílun, as in the original scheme,
it would be the first Zarb of the same ’Arúz; if it did end in Fa’úlun
(⏑ ‑ ‑) or Mafá’íl (⏑ ‑ ‑) it would represent the third or fourth
subdivision of this first class respectively. The Tawíl has one other
’Arúz, Fa’úlun, with a twofold Zarb, either Fa’úlun also, or Mafá’ilun.

The first instance of the Basít occurring in The Nights are the lines
translated vol. i. p. 25:

 Containeth Time a twain of days, this of blessing, that of bane ✿ And
    holdeth Life a twain of halves, this of pleasure, that of pain.

In Arabic (Mac. N. i. 11):

             ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ⏑ ⏑ ‑ |
             Al-Dahru yaumáni zá amnun wa zá hazaru
             ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ⏑ ⏑ ‑ |
             Wa ’l-’Ayshu shatráni zá safwun wa zá kadaru.

Turning back to p. 283, where the A’áríz and Azrub of the Basít are
shown, the student will have no difficulty to recognise the Bayt as one
belonging to the first Zarb of the first ’Arúz.

As an example of the Madíd we quote the original of the lines (vol. v.
131):—

 I had a heart, and with it lived my life ✿ ’Twas seared with fire and
    burnt with loving-lowe.

They read in Arabic:—

                     ‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ⏑ ⏑ ‑ |
                     Kána lí kalbun a’íshu bihi
                     ‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ |
                     Fa’ktawà bi’l-nári wa’htarak.

If we compare this with the formula (iii. A. 2 p. 283), we find that
either line of the couplet is shortened by a foot; it is, therefore,
majzú. The first ’Arúz of this abbreviated metre is Fá’ilátun (‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑),
and is called sahíhah (perfect) because it consists of the normal third
foot. In the second ’Arúz Fá’ilátun loses its end syllable tun by the
’Illah Hafz (suppression of a final Sabab khafíf), and becomes Fá’ilá (‑
⏑ ‑), for which Fá’ilun is substituted. Shortening the first syllable of
Fá’ilun, _i.e._ eliminating the Alif by Khabn, we obtain the third ’Arúz
Fa’ilun (⏑ ⏑ ‑) as that of the present lines, which has two Azrub:
Fa’ilun, like the ’Arúz, and Fa’lun (‑ ‑), here, again by Khabn, further
reduced to Fa’al (⏑ ‑).

Ishak of Mosul, who improvises the piece, calls it “so difficult and so
rare, that it went nigh to deaden the quick and to quicken the dead;”
indeed, the native poets consider the metre Madíd as the most difficult
of all, and it is scarcely ever attempted by later writers. This
accounts for its rare occurrence in The Nights, where only two more
instances are to be found, Mac. N. ii. 244 and iii. 404.

The second and third circle will best be spoken of together, as the
Wáfir and Kámil have a natural affinity to the Hazaj and Rajaz. Let us
revert to the line:—

                    ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ |
                    Akámú ’l-wajda fí kalbí wa sárú.

Translated, as it were, into the language of the Prosodists it will be:—

                   Mafá’ílun[456] ’Mafá’ílun Fa’úlun,

and this, standing by itself, might prima facie be taken for a line of
the Hazaj (iii. C. 1), with the third Mafá’ílun shortened by Hafz (see
above) into Mafá’í for which Fa’úlun would be substituted. We have seen
(p. 287) that and how the foot Mufá’alatun can change into Mafá’ílun,
and if in any poem which otherwise would belong to the metre Hazaj, the
former measure appears even in one foot only along with the latter, it
is considered to be the original measure, and the poem counts no longer
as Hazaj but as Wáfir. In the piece now under consideration, it is the
second Bayt where the characteristic foot of the Wáfir first appears:—

                 ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ⏑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ |
                 Naat ’anní’l-rubú’u wa sákiníhá

                 ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ⏑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ⏑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ |
                 Wa kad ba’uda ’l-mazáru fa-lá mazáru.

Anglicè (vol. iii. 296):—

 Far lies the camp and those who camp therein; ✿ Far is her tent-shrine
    where I ne’er shall tent.

It must, however, be remarked that the Hazaj is not in use as a
hexameter, but only with an ’Arúz majzúah or shortened by one foot.
Hence it is only in the second ’Arúz of the Wáfir, which is likewise
majzúah, that the ambiguity as to the real nature of the metre can
arise[457]; and the isolated couplet:—

                    ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ |
                    Yarídu ’l-mar-u an yu’tà munáhu

                    ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ |
                    Wa yabà ’lláhu illá má yurídu

 Man wills his wish to him accorded be, ✿ But Allah naught accords save
    what he wills (vol. iv. 157),

being hexametrical, forms undoubtedly part of a poem in Wáfir although
it does not contain the foot Mufá’alatun at all. Thus the solitary
instance of Hazaj in The Nights is Abú Nuwás’ abomination, beginning
with:—

             ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑ |
             Fa-lá tas’au ilà ghayrí

             ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑ |
             Fa-’indí ma’dinu ’l-khayri (Mac. N. ii. 377).

 Steer ye your steps to none but me ✿ Who have a mine of luxury (vol. v.
    65).

If in the second ’Arúz of the Wáfir Maf’áílun (⏑ ‑ ‑ ‑) is further
shortened to Mafá’ilun (⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑), the metre resembles the second ’Arúz
of Rajaz, where, as we have seen, the latter foot can, by license, take
the place of the normal Mustaf’ilun (‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑).

The Kámil bears a similar relation to the Rajaz, as the Wáfir bears to
the Hazaj. By way of illustration we quote from Mac. N. ii. 8 the first
two Bayts of a little poem taken from the 23rd Assembly of Al-Hariri:—

                ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ⏑ ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ |
                Yá khátiba ’l-dunyá ’l-daniyyati innahá

                ⏑ ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ⏑ ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ‑ |
                Sharaku ’l-radà wa karáratu ’l-akdári

                ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ |
                Dárun matà má azhakat fí yaumihá

                ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ‑ |
                Abkat ghadan bu’dan lahá min dári.

In Sir Richard Burton’s translation (vol. iii. 319):—

 O thou who woo’st a World unworthy, learn ✿ ’Tis house of evils, ’tis
    Perdition’s net:
 A house where whoso laughs this day shall weep ✿ The next; then perish
    house of fume and fret.

The ’Arúz of the first couplet is Mutafá’ilun, assigning the piece to
the first or perfect (sahíhah) class of the Kámil. In the Hashw of the
opening line and in that of the whole second Bayt this normal
Mutafá’ilun has, by license, become Mustaf’ilun, and the same change has
taken place in the ’Arúz of the second couplet; for it is a peculiarity
which this metre shares with a few others, to allow certain alterations
of the kind Zuháf in the ’Arúz and Zarb as well as in the Hashw. This
class has three subdivisions: the Zarb of the first is Mutafá’ilun, like
the ’Arúz; the Zarb of the second is Fa’alátun (⏑ ⏑ ‑ ‑), a substitution
for Mutafá’il which latter is obtained from Mutafá’ilun by suppressing
the final _n_ and rendering the _l_ quiescent; the Zarb of the third is
Fa’lun (‑ ‑) for Mútfá, derived from Mutafá’ilun by cutting off the
Watad ’ilun and dropping the medial _a_ of the remaining Mutafá.

If we make the ’Ayn of the second Zarb Fa’alátun also quiescent by the
permitted Zuháf Izmár, it changes into Fa’látun, by substitution
Maf’úlun (‑ ‑ ‑) which terminates the rhyming lines of the foregoing
quotation. Consequently the two couplets taken together, belong to the
second Zarb of the first ’Arúz of the Kámil, and the metre of the poem
with its licenses may be represented by the scheme:

                    ‑        │ ‑        │ ‑        │
                   ⏑ ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ │⏑ ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ │⏑ ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ │

                    ‑        │ ‑        │ ‑        │
                   ⏑ ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ │⏑ ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ │⏑ ⏑ ‑ ‑   │

Taken isolated, on the other hand, the second Bayt might be of the metre
Rajaz, whose first ’Arúz Mustaf’ilun has two Azrub: one equal to the
Arúz, the other Maf’úlun as above, but here substituted for Mustaf’il
after applying the ’Illah Kat’ (see p. 288) to Mustaf’ilun. If this were
the metre of the poem throughout, the scheme with the licenses peculiar
to the Rajaz would be:

                   ⏑ ⏑       │⏑ ⏑       │⏑ ⏑       │
                   ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑   │‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑   │‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑   │

                   ⏑ ⏑       │⏑ ⏑       │⏑         │
                   ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑   │‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑   │‑ ‑ ‑     │

The pith of Al-Hariri’s Assembly is that the knight errant, not to say
the arrant wight of the Romance, Abú Sayd of Sarúj, accuses before the
Wáli of Baghdad his pretended pupil, in reality his son, to have
appropriated a poem of his by lopping off two feet of every Bayt. If
this is done in the quoted lines, they read:

                      ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ |
                      Yá khátiba ’l-dunyá ’l-daniy

                      ⏑ ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ⏑ ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ |
                      Yati innahá sharaku ’l-radà

                      ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ |
                      Dárun matà má azhakat

                      ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ |
                      Fí yaumihá abkat ghadá,

with a different rhyme and of a different variation of metre. The
amputated piece belongs to the fourth Zarb of the third ’Aruz of Kámil,
and its second couplet tallies with the second subdivision of the second
class of Rajaz.

The Rajaz, a iambic metre pure and simple, is the most popular, because
the easiest, in which even the Prophet was caught napping sometimes, at
the dangerous risk of following the perilous leadership of Imru ’l-Kays.
It is the metre of improvisation, of ditties, and of numerous didactic
poems. In the latter case, when the composition is called Urjúzah, the
two lines of every Bayt rhyme, and each Bayt has a rhyme of its own.
This is the form in which for instance, Ibn Málik’s Alfíyah is written,
as well as the remarkable grammatical work of the modern native scholar,
Nasíf al-Yazijí, of which a notice will be found in Chenery’s
Introduction to his Translation of Al-Hariri.

While the Hazaj and Rajaz connect the third circle with the first and
second, the Ramal forms the link between the third and fourth Dáirah.
Its measure Fá’ilátun (‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑) and the reversal of it, Maf’úlátu (‑ ‑ ‑
⏑), affect the trochaic rhythm, as opposed to the iambic of the two
first-named metres. The iambic movement has a ring of gladness about it,
the trochaic a wail of sadness: the former resembles a nimble
pedestrian, striding apace with an elastic step and a cheerful heart;
the latter is like a man toiling along on the desert path, where his
foot is ever and anon sliding back in the burning sand (Raml, whence
probably the name of the metre). Both combined in regular alternation,
impart an agitated character to the verse, admirably fit to express the
conflicting emotions of a passion-stirred mind.

Examples of these more or less plaintive and pathetic metres are
numerous in the Tale of Uns al-Wujúd and the Wazir’s Daughter, which,
being throughout a story of love, as has been noted, vol. v. 33, abounds
in verse, and, in particular, contains ten out of the thirty-two
instances of Ramal occurring in The Nights. We quote:

Ramal, first Zarb of the first ’Arúz (Mac. N. ii. 361):

 ‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ |
 Inna li ’l-bulbuli sautan fí ’l-sahar

 ‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ |
 Ashghala ’l-’áshika ’an husni ’l-watar

 The Bulbul’s note, whenas dawn is nigh ✿ Tells the lover from strains of
    strings to fly (vol. v. 48).

Sarí’, second Zarb of the first ’Arúz (Mac. N. ii. 359):

 ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ |
 Wa fákhitin kad kála fí nauhihi

 ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ |
 Yá Dáiman shukran ’alà balwatí

 I heard a ringdove chanting soft and plaintively, ✿ “I thank Thee, O
    Eternal, for this misery” (vol. v. 47).

Khafíf, full or perfect form (sahíh), both in Zarb and ’Arúz (Mac. N.
ii. 356):

 ‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ |
 Yá li-man ashtakí ’l-gharáma ’llazí bí

 ⏑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ |
 Wa shujúní wa furkatí ’an habíbí

 O to whom now of my desire complaining sore shall I ✿ Bewail my parting
    from my fere compellèd thus to fly (vol. v. 44).

Mujtass, the only ’Arúz (majzúah sahíhah, _i.e._ shortened by one foot
and perfect) with equal Zarb (Mac. N. ii. 367):

     ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ⏑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ |
     Ruddú ’alayya habíbí

     ‑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ ‑ |
     Lá hajatan lí bi-málin

     To me restore my dear ✿ I want not wealth untold (vol. v. 55).

As an instance of the Munsarih, I give the second occurring in The
Nights, because it affords me an opportunity to show the student how
useful a knowledge of the laws of Prosody frequently proves for
ascertaining the correct reading of a text. Mac. N. i. 33 we find the
line:

                   ‑ ⏑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ⏑ ‑ |
                   Arba’atun má ’jtama’at kattu izá.

This would be Rajaz with the license Mufta’ilun for Mustaf’ilun. But the
following lines of the fragment evince, that the metre is Munsarih;
hence, a clerical error must lurk somewhere in the second foot. In fact,
on page 833 of the same volume, we find the piece repeated, and here the
first couplet reads

 ‑ ⏑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ ⏑ | ‑ ⏑ ⏑ ‑ |
 Arba’atun má ’jtama’na kattu siwà

 ⏑ ‑ ⏑ ‑ | ‑ ⏑ ‑ ⏑ | ‑ ⏑ ⏑ ‑ |
 Alà azá mujhatí wa safki damí

 Four things which ne’er conjoin unless it be ✿ To storm my vitals and to
    shed my blood (vol. iii. 237).

The Mutakárib, the last of the metres employed in The Nights, has gained
a truly historical importance by the part which it plays in Persian
literature. In the form of trimetrical double-lines, with a several
rhyme for each couplet, it has become the “Nibelungen-” stanza of the
Persian epos: Firdausí’s immortal “Book of Kings” and Nizámi’s
Iskander-námah are written in it, not to mention a host of Masnawis in
which Sufic mysticism combats Mohammedan orthodoxy. On account of its
warlike and heroical character, therefore, I choose for an example the
knightly Jamrakán’s challenge to the single fight in which he conquers
his scarcely less valiant adversary Kaurajan, Mac. N. iii. 296:

                   ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ⏑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑
                   Aná ’l-Jamrakánu kawiyyn ’l-janáni

                   ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ⏑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑
                   Jamí’u ’l-fawárisi takhshà kitálí.

Here the third syllable of the second foot in each line is shortened by
license, and the final Kasrah of the first line, standing in pause, is
long, the metre being the full form of the Mutakárib as exhibited p.
286, iii. E. i. If we suppress the Kasrah of al-Janáni, which is also
allowable in pause, and make the second line to rhyme with the first,
saying, for instance:

                   ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ⏑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑
                   Aná ’l-Jamrakánu kawiyyu ’l-janán

                   ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑ ‑ | ⏑ ‑
                   La-yakshà kitálí shijá’u ’l-zamán,

we obtain the powerful and melodious metre in which the Sháhnámah sings
of Rustam’s lofty deeds, of the tender love of Rúdabah and the tragic
downfall of Siyawush.

Shall I confess that in writing the foregoing pages it has been my
ambition to become a conqueror, in a modest way, myself: to conquer, I
mean, the prejudice frequently entertained, and shared even by my
accomplished countryman, Rückert, that Arabic Prosody is a clumsy and
repulsive doctrine. I have tried to show that it springs naturally from
the character of the language, and, intimately connected, as it is, with
the grammatical system of the Arabs, it appears to me quite worthy of
the acumen of a people, to whom, amongst other things, we owe the
invention of Algebra, the stepping-stone of our whole modern system of
Mathematics. I cannot refrain, therefore, from concluding with a little
anecdote anent al-Khalíl, which Ibn Khallikán tells in the following
words. His son went one day into the room where his father was, and on
finding him scanning a piece of poetry by the rules of prosody, he ran
out and told the people that his father had lost his wits. They went in
immediately and related to al-Khalíl what they had heard, on which he
addressed his son in these terms:

“Had you known what I was saying, you would have excused me, and had you
known what you said, I should have blamed you. But you did not
understand me, so you blamed me, and I knew that you were ignorant, so I
pardoned you.”


                                L’Envoi.

Here end, to my sorrow, the labours of a quarter-century and here I must
perforce say with the “poets’ Poet,”

             “Behold! I see the haven nigh at hand,
             To which I mean my wearie course to bend;
             Vere the main shete, and bear up with the land
             The which afore is fairly to be ken’d.”

Nothing of importance now indeed remains for me but briefly to estimate
the character of my work and to take cordial leave of my readers,
thanking them for the interest they have accorded to these volumes and
for enabling me thus successfully to complete the decade.

Without pudor malus or over-diffidence I would claim to have fulfilled
the promise contained in my Foreword. The anthropological notes and
notelets, which not only illustrate and read between the lines of the
text, but assist the student of Moslem life and of Arabo-Egyptian
manners, customs and language in a multitude of matters shunned by
books, form a repertory of Eastern knowledge in its esoteric phase,
sexual as well as social.

To assert that such lore is unnecessary is to state, as every traveller
knows, an “absurdum.” Few phenomena are more startling than the vision
of a venerable infant, who has lived half his long life in the midst of
the wildest anthropological vagaries and monstrosities, and yet who
absolutely ignores all that India or Burmah enacts under his very eyes.
This is crass ignorance, not the naive innocence of Saint Francis who,
seeing a man and a maid in a dark corner, raised his hands to Heaven and
thanked the Lord that there was still in the world so much of Christian
Charity.

Against such lack of knowledge my notes are a protest; and I may claim
success despite the difficulty of the task. A traveller familiar with
Syria and Palestine, Herr Landberg, writes, “La plume refuserait son
service, la langue serait insuffisante, si celui qui connaît la vie de
tous les jours des Orientaux, surtout des classes élevées, voulait la
devoiler. L’Europe est bien loin d’en avoir la moindre idée.”

In this matter I have done my best, at a time too when the hapless
English traveller is expected to write like a young lady for young
ladies, and never to notice what underlies the most superficial stratum.
And I also maintain that the free treatment of topics usually taboo’d
and held to be “alekta”—unknown and unfitted for publicity—will be a
national benefit to an “Empire of Opinion,” whose very basis and
buttresses are a thorough knowledge by the rulers of the ruled. Men have
been crowned with gold in the Capitol for lesser services rendered to
the Respublica.

That the work contains errors, shortcomings and many a lapsus, I am the
first and foremost to declare. Yet in justice to myself I must also
notice that the maculæ are few and far between; even the most unfriendly
and interested critics have failed to point out an abnormal number of
slips. And before pronouncing the “Vos plaudite!” or, as Easterns more
politely say, “I implore that my poor name may be raised aloft on the
tongue of praise, let me invoke the fair field and courteous favour
which the Persian poet expected from his readers.

                      ‏بپوش گر بخطای رسی و طعنه مزن
                      که هيج بشر خالی از خطا نبود‎

           (Veil it, an fault thou find, nor jibe nor jeer:—
           None may be found of faults and failings clear!)

                                                      RICHARD F. BURTON.

 ATHENÆUM CLUB, _September 30, ’86_.

-----

Footnote 126:

  Ouseley’s Orient. Collect. I, vii.

Footnote 127:

  This threefold distribution occurred to me many years ago and when far
  beyond reach of literary authorities: I was, therefore, much pleased
  to find the subjoined threefold classification with minor details made
  by Baron von Hammer-Purgstall (Preface to Contes Inédits etc. of G. S.
  Trébutien, Paris, mdcccxxviii.). (1) The older stories which serve as
  a base to the collection, such as the Ten Wazirs (“Malice of Women”)
  and Voyages of Sindbad (?) which may date from the days of Mahommed.
  These are distributed into two sub-classes; (_a_) the marvellous and
  purely imaginative (_e.g._ Jamasp and the Serpent Queen) and (_b_) the
  realistic mixed with instructive fables and moral instances. (2) The
  stories and anecdotes peculiarly Arab, relating to the Caliphs and
  especially to Al-Rashíd; and (3) The tales of Egyptian provenance,
  which mostly date from the times of the puissant “Aaron the Orthodox.”
  Mr. John Payne (Villon Translation, vol. ix. pp. 367–73) distributes
  the stories roughly under five chief heads as follows: (1) Histories
  or long Romances, as King Omar bin Al-Nu’man. (2) Anecdotes or short
  stories dealing with historical personages and with incidents and
  adventures belonging to the every-day life of the period to which they
  refer: _e.g._ those concerning Al-Rashíd and Hátim of Tayy. (3)
  Romances and romantic fictions comprising three different kinds of
  tales; (_a_) purely romantic and supernatural; (_b_) fictions and
  nouvelles with or without a basis and background of historical fact
  and (_c_) Contes fantastiques. (4) Fables and Apologues; and (5) Tales
  proper, as that of Tawaddud.

Footnote 128:

  Journal Asiatique (Paris, Dondey-Dupré, 1826) “Sur l’origine des Mille
  et une Nuits.”

Footnote 129:

  Baron von Hammer-Purgstall’s château is near Styrian Graz; and, when I
  last saw his library, it had been left as it was at his death.

Footnote 130:

  At least, in Trébutien’s Preface, pp. xxx.-xxxi., reprinted from the
  Journ. Asiat. August, 1839: for corrections see De Sacy’s “Mémoire.”
  p. 39.

Footnote 131:

  Vol. iv. pp. 89–90, Paris mdccclxv. Trébutien quotes, chapt. lii. (for
  lxviii.), one of Von Hammer’s manifold inaccuracies.

Footnote 132:

  Alluding to Iram the Many-columned, etc.

Footnote 133:

  In Trébutien “Síhá,” for which the Editor of the Journ. Asiat. and De
  Sacy rightly read “Sabíl-há.”

Footnote 134:

  For this some MSS. have “Fahlawíyah” = Pehlevi.

Footnote 135:

  _i.e._ Lower Roman, Grecian, of Asia Minor, etc., the word is still
  applied throughout Marocco, Algiers and Northern Africa to Europeans
  in general.

Footnote 136:

  De Sacy (Dissertation prefixed to the Bourdin Edition) notices the
  “thousand and one,” and in his Mémoire “a thousand:” Von Hammer’s MS.
  reads a thousand, and the French translation a thousand and one.
  Evidently no stress can be laid upon the numerals.

Footnote 137:

  These names are noticed in my vol. i. 14, and vol. ii. 3. According to
  De Sacy some MSS. read “History of the Wazir and his Daughters.”

Footnote 138:

  Lane (iii. 735) has Wizreh or Wardeh which guide us to Wird Khan, the
  hero of the tale. Von Hammer’s MS. prefers Djilkand (Jilkand), whence
  probably the Isegil or Isegild of Langlès (1814), and the Tséqyl of De
  Sacy (1833). The mention of “Simás” (Lane’s Shemmas) identifies it
  with “King Jali’ád of Hind,” etc. (Night dcccxcix.) Writing in A.D.
  961 Hamzah Isfaháni couples with the libri Sindbad and Schimas, the
  libri Baruc and Barsinas, four nouvelles out of nearly seventy. See
  also Al-Makri’zi’s Khitat or Topography (ii. 485) for a notice of the
  Thousand or Thousand and one Nights.

Footnote 139:

  Alluding to the “Seven Wazirs” alias “The Malice of Women” (Night
  dlxxviii.), which Von Hammer and many others have carelessly
  confounded with Sindbad the Seaman. We find that two tales once
  separate have now been incorporated with The Nights, and this suggests
  the manner of its composition by accretion.

Footnote 140:

  Arabised by a most “elegant” stylist, Abdullah ibn al-Mukaffá (the
  shrivelled), a Persian Guebre named Roz-bih (Day good), who islamised
  and was barbarously put to death in A.H. 158 (= 775) by command of the
  Caliph al-Mansur (Al-Siyuti p. 277). “He also translated from Pehlevi
  the book entitled _Sekiserán_, containing the annals of Isfandiyar,
  the death of Rustam, and other episodes of old Persic history,” says
  Al-Mas’udi chapt. xxi. See also Ibn Khallikan (1, 43) who dates the
  murder in A.H. 142 (= 759–60).

Footnote 141:

  “Notice sur Le Schah-namah de Firdoussi,” a posthumous publication of
  M. de Wallenbourg, Vienna, 1810, by M. A. de Bianchi. In sect. iii. I
  shall quote another passage of Al-Mas’udi (viii. 175) in which I find
  a distinct allusion to the “Gaboriau-detective tales” of The Nights.

Footnote 142:

  Here Von Hammer shows his customary inexactitude. As we learn from Ibn
  Khallikan (Fr. Tr. I. 630), the author’s name was Abu al-Faraj
  Mohammed ibn Is’hak, pop. known as Ibn Ali Ya’kúb al-Warrák, the
  bibliographe, librarian, copyist. It was published (vol. i. Leipzig,
  1871) under the editorship of G. Fluegel, J. Roediger, and A. Müller.

Footnote 143:

  See also the Journ. Asiat., August, 1839, and Lane iii. 736–37.

Footnote 144:

  Called “Afsánah” by Al-Mas’udi, both words having the same sense =
  tale, story, parable, “facetiæ.” Moslem fanaticism renders it by the
  Arab. “Khuráfah” = silly fables, and in Hindostan it = a jest:—“Bát-kí
  bát; khurafát-ki khurafát (a word for a word, a joke for a joke.)

Footnote 145:

  Al-Mas’údi (chapt. xxi.) makes this a name of the Mother of Queen
  Humáí or Humáyah, for whom see below.

Footnote 146:

  The preface of a copy of the Shah-nameh (by Firdausi, ob. A.D. 1021),
  collated in A.H. 829 by command of Bayisunghur Bahadur Khán (Atkinson
  p. x.), informs us that the Hazar Afsanah was composed for or by Queen
  Humái whose name is Arabised to Humáyah. This Persian Marguerite de
  Navarre was daughter and wife to (Ardashir) Bahman, sixth Kayanian and
  surnamed Diraz-dast (Artaxerxes Longimanus), Abu Sásán from his son,
  the Eponymus of the Sassanides who followed the Kayanians when these
  were extinguished by Alexander of Macedon. Humai succeeded her husband
  as seventh Queen, reigned thirty-two years and left the crown to her
  son Dárá or Dáráb 1st = Darius Codomanus. She is better known to
  Europe (through Herodotus) as Parysatis = Peri-zádeh or the
  Fairy-born.

Footnote 147:

  _i.e._ If Allah allow me to say sooth.

Footnote 148:

  _i.e._ of silly anecdotes: here speaks the good Moslem!

Footnote 149:

  No. 622 Sept. 29, ’39; a review of Torrens which appeared shortly
  after Lane’s vol. i. The author quotes from a MS. in the British
  Museum, No. 7334 fol. 136.

Footnote 150:

  There are many Spaniards of this name: Mr. Payne (ix. 302) proposes
  Abu Ja’afar ibn Abd al-Hakk al-Khazraji, author of a History of the
  Caliphs about the middle of the twelfth century.

Footnote 151:

  The well-known Rauzah or Garden-island, of old Al-Saná’ah (Al-Mas’udi
  chapt. xxxi.), which is more than once noticed in The Nights. The name
  of the pavilion Al-Haudaj = a camel-litter, was probably intended to
  flatter the Badawi girl.

Footnote 152:

  He was the Seventh Fatimite Caliph of Egypt: regn. A.H. 495–524 (=
  1101–1129).

Footnote 153:

  Suggesting a private pleasaunce in Al-Rauzah which has ever been and
  is still a succession of gardens.

Footnote 154:

  The writer in _The Athenæum_ calls him Ibn Miyyah, and adds that the
  Badawiyah wrote to her cousin certain verses complaining of her
  thraldom, which the youth answered, abusing the Caliph. Al-’Ámir found
  the correspondence and ordered Ibn Miyah’s tongue to be cut out, but
  he saved himself by a timely flight.

Footnote 155:

  In Night dccclxxxv. we have the passage “He was a wily thief: none
  could avail against his craft as he were Abu Mohammed Al-Battál”: the
  word etymologically means The Bad; but see infra.

Footnote 156:

  Amongst other losses which Orientalists have sustained by the death of
  Rogers Bey, I may mention his proposed translation of Al-Makrízí’s
  great topographical work.

Footnote 157:

  The name appears only in a later passage.

Footnote 158:

  Mr. Payne notes (viii. 137) “apparently some famous brigand of the
  time” (of Charlemagne). But the title may signify The Brave, and the
  tale may be much older.

Footnote 159:

  In his “Mémoire sur l’origine du Recueil des Contes intitulé Les Mille
  et une Nuits” (Mém. d’Hist. et de Littér. Orientale, extrait des tomes
  ix. et x. des Mémoires de l’Inst. Royal Acad. des Inscriptions et
  Belles Lettres, Paris, Imprimerie Royale, 1833). He read the Memoir
  before the Royal Academy on July 31, 1829. Also in his Dissertation
  “Sur les Mille et une Nuits” (pp. i.-viii.) prefixed to the Bourdin
  Edit. When the first Arabist in Europe landed at Alexandria he could
  not exchange a word with the people: the same is told of Golius the
  lexicographer at Tunis.

Footnote 160:

  Lane, Nights ii. 218.

Footnote 161:

  This origin had been advocated a decade of years before by Shaykh
  Ahmad al-Shirawání; Editor of the Calc. text (1814–18): his Persian
  preface opines that the author was an Arabic-speaking Syrian who
  designedly wrote in a modern and conversational style, none of the
  purest withal, in order to instruct non-Arabists. Here we find the
  genus “Professor” pure and simple.

Footnote 162:

  Such an assertion makes us enquire, Did De Sacy ever read through The
  Nights in Arabic?

Footnote 163:

  Dr. Jonathan Scott’s “translation” vi. 283.

Footnote 164:

  For a note on this world-wide Tale see vol. i. 52.

Footnote 165:

  In the annotated translation by Mr. I. G. N. Keith-Falconer, Cambridge
  University Press. I regret to see the wretched production called the
  “Fables of Pilpay” in the “Chandos Classics” (London, F. Warne). The
  words are so mutilated that few will recognise them, _e.g._ Carchenas
  for Kár-shínás, Chaschmanah for Chashmey-e-Máh (Fountain of the Moon),
  etc.

Footnote 166:

  Article Arabia in Encyclop. Brit., 9th Edit., p. 263, col. 2. I do not
  quite understand Mr. Palgrave, but presume that his “other version” is
  the Bresl. Edit., the MS. of which was brought from Tunis; see its
  Vorwort (vol. i. p. 3).

Footnote 167:

  There are three distinct notes according to De Sacy (Mém., p. 50). The
  first (in MS. 1508) says “This blessed book was read by the weak
  slave, etc. Wahabah son of Rizkallah the Kátib (secretary, scribe) of
  Tarábulus al-Shám (Syrian Tripoli,) who prayeth long life for its
  owner (li máliki-h). This tenth day of the month First Rabí’a A.H. 955
  (= 1548).” A similar note by the same Wahabah occurs at the end of
  vol. ii. (MS. 1507) dated A.H. 973 (= 1565) and a third (MS. 1506) is
  undated. Evidently M. Caussin has given undue weight to such evidence.
  For further information see “Tales of the East” to which is prefixed
  an Introductory Dissertation (vol. i. pp. 24–26, note) by Henry
  Webber, Esq., Edinburgh, 1812, in 3 vols.

Footnote 168:

  “Notice sur les douze manuscrits connus des Milles et une Nuits, qui
  existent en Europe.” Von Hammer in Trébutien, Notice, vol. i.

Footnote 169:

  Printed from the MS. of Major Turner Macan, Editor of the Shahnamah:
  he bought it from the heirs of Mr. Salt, the historic Consul-General
  of England in Egypt and after Macan’s death it became the property of
  the now extinct Allens, then of Leadenhall Street (Torrens, Preface,
  i.). I have vainly enquired about what became of it.

Footnote 170:

  The short paper by “P. R.” in the Gentleman’s Magazine (Feb. 19th,
  1799, vol. lxix. p. 61) tells us that MSS. of The Nights were scarce
  at Aleppo and that he found only two vols. (280 Nights) which he had
  great difficulty in obtaining leave to copy. He also noticed (in 1771)
  a MS., said to be complete, in the Vatican and another in the “King’s
  Library” (Bibliothèque Nationale), Paris.

Footnote 171:

  Aleppo has been happy in finding such monographers as Russell and
  Maundrell while poor Damascus fell into the hands of Mr. Missionary
  Porter, and suffered accordingly.

Footnote 172:

  Vol. vi. Appendix, p. 452.

Footnote 173:

  The numbers, however, vary with the Editions of Galland: some end the
  formula with Night cxcvii; others with the ccxxxvi.: I adopt that of
  the De Sacy Edition.

Footnote 174:

  Contes Persans; suivis des Contes Turcs. Paris; Béchet Ainé, 1826.

Footnote 175:

  In the old translation we have “eighteen hundred years since the
  prophet Solomon died,” (B.C. 975) = A.D. 825.

Footnote 176:

  Meaning the era of the Seleucides. Dr. Jonathan Scott shows (vol. ii.
  324) that A.H. 653 and A.D. 1255 would correspond with 1557 of that
  epoch; so that the scribe has here made a little mistake of 5,763
  years. Ex uno disce.

Footnote 177:

  The _Saturday Review_ (Jan. 2nd ’86) writes, “Captain Burton has
  fallen into a mistake by not distinguishing between the names of the
  by no means identical Caliphs Al-Muntasir and Al-Mustansir.” Quite
  true: it was an ugly confusion of the melancholy madman and parricide
  with one of the best and wisest of the Caliphs. I can explain (not
  extenuate) my mistake only by a misprint in Al-Siyúti (p. 554).

Footnote 178:

  In the Galland MS. and the Bresl. Edit. (ii. 253), we find the Barber
  saying that the Caliph (Al-Mustansir) was _at that time_ (yaumaizin)
  in Baghdad; and this has been held to imply that the Caliphate had
  fallen. But such conjecture is evidently based upon insufficient
  grounds.

Footnote 179:

  De Sacy makes the “Kalandar” order originate in A.D. 1150; but the
  Shaykh Sharíf bú Ali Kalandar died in A.D. 1323–24. In Sind the first
  Kalandar, Osmán-i-Marwándí surnamed Lál Sháhbáz, the Red Goshawk, from
  one of his miracles, died and was buried at Sehwán in A.D. 1274: see
  my “History of Sindh” chapt. viii. for details. The dates therefore
  run wild.

Footnote 180:

  In this same tale H. H. Wilson observes that the title of Sultan of
  Egypt was not assumed before the middle of the xiith century.

Footnote 181:

  Popularly called Vidyanagar of the Narsingha.

Footnote 182:

  Time-measurers are of very ancient date. The Greeks had clepsydræ and
  the Romans gnomons, portable and ring-shaped, besides large standing
  town-dials as at Aquileja and San Sabba near Trieste. The “Saracens”
  were the perfecters of the clepsydra: Bosseret (p. 16) and the
  Chronicon Turense (Beckmann ii. 340 _et seq._) describe the
  water-clock sent by Al-Rashid to Karl the Great as a kind of
  “cuckoo-clock.” Twelve doors in the dial opened successively and
  little balls dropping on brazen bells told the hour: at noon a dozen
  mounted knights paraded the face and closed the portals. Trithonius
  mentions an horologium presented in A.D. 1232 by Al-Malik al-Kámil the
  Ayyubite Soldan to the Emperor Frederick II: like the Strasbourg and
  Padua clocks it struck the hours, told the day, month and year, showed
  the phases of the moon, and registered the position of the sun and the
  planets. Towards the end of the fifteenth century Gaspar Visconti
  mentions in a sonnet the watch proper (certi orologii piccioli e
  portativi); and the “animated eggs” of Nurembourg became famous. The
  earliest English watch (Sir Ashton Lever’s) dates from 1541: and in
  1544 the portable chronometer became common in France.

Footnote 183:

  An illustrated History of Arms and Armour etc. (p. 59); London: Bell
  and Sons, 1877. The best edition is the Guide des Amateurs d’Armes;
  Paris: Renouard, 1879.

Footnote 184:

  Chapt. iv. Dr. Gustav Oppert “On the Weapons etc. of the Ancient
  Hindus;” London: Trübner and Co., 1880.

Footnote 185:

  I have given other details on this subject in pp. 631–637 of “Camoens,
  his Life and his Lusiads.”

Footnote 186:

  The morbi venerei amongst the Romans are obscure because “whilst the
  satirists deride them the physicians are silent.” Celsus, however,
  names (De obscenarum partium vitiis, lib. xviii.) inflammatio coleorum
  (swelled testicle), tubercula circa glandem (warts on the glans
  penis), cancri carbunculi (chancre or shanker) and a few others. The
  rubigo is noticed as a lues venerea by Servius in Virg. Georg.

Footnote 187:

  According to David Forbes, the Peruvians believed that syphilis arose
  from connection of man and alpaca; and an old law forbade bachelors to
  keep these animals in the house. Francks explains by the introduction
  of syphilis wooden figures found in the Chinchas guano; these
  represented men with a cord round the neck or a serpent devouring the
  genitals.

Footnote 188:

  They appeared before the gates of Paris in the summer of 1427, not
  “about July, 1422”: in Eastern Europe, however, they date from a much
  earlier epoch. Sir J. Gilbert’s famous picture has one grand fault,
  the men walk and the women ride: in real life the reverse would be the
  case.

Footnote 189:

  Rabelais ii. c. 30.

Footnote 190:

  I may be allowed to note that syphilis does not confine itself to man:
  a charger infected with it was pointed out to me at Baroda by my late
  friend, Dr. Arnott (18th Regiment, Bombay N.I.) and Tangier showed me
  some noticeable cases of this hippic syphilis, which has been studied
  in Hungary. Eastern peoples have a practice of “passing on” venereal
  and other diseases, and transmission is supposed to cure the patient;
  for instance a virgin heals (and catches) gonorrhœa. Syphilis varies
  greatly with climate. In Persia it is said to be propagated without
  contact: in Abyssinia it is often fatal and in Egypt it is readily
  cured by sand baths and sulphur-unguents. Lastly in lands like
  Unyamwezi, where mercurials are wholly unknown, I never saw caries of
  the nasal or facial bones.

Footnote 191:

  For another account of the transplanter and the casuistical questions
  to which coffee gave rise, see my “First Footsteps in East Africa” (p.
  76).

Footnote 192:

  The first mention of coffee proper (not of Kahwah or old wine in vol.
  ii. 260) is in Night cdxxvi. vol. v. 169, where the coffee-maker is
  called Kahwahjiyyah, a mongrel term showing the modern date of the
  passage in Ali the Cairene. As the work advances notices become
  thicker, _e.g._ in Night dccclxvi. where Ali Nur al-Din and the Frank
  King’s daughter seems to be a modernisation of the story “Ala al-Din
  Abu al-Shámát” (vol. iv. 29); and in Abu Kir and Abu Sir (Nights
  cmxxx. and cmxxxvi.) where coffee is drunk with sherbet after present
  fashion. The use culminates in Kamar al-Zaman II. where it is
  mentioned six times (Nights cmlxvi. cmlxx. cmlxxi. twice; cmlxxiv. and
  cmlxxvii.), as being drunk after the dawn-breakfast and following the
  meal as a matter of course. The last notices are in Abdullah bin
  Fazil, Nights cmlxxviii. and cmlxxix.

Footnote 193:

  It has been suggested that Japanese tobacco is an indigenous growth
  and sundry modern travellers in China contend that the potato and the
  maize, both white and yellow, have there been cultivated from time
  immemorial.

Footnote 194:

  For these see my “City of the Saints,” p. 136.

Footnote 195:

  Lit. meaning smoke: hence the Arabic “Dukhán,” with the same
  signification.

Footnote 196:

  Unhappily the book is known only by name: for years I have vainly
  troubled friends and correspondents to hunt for a copy. Yet I am
  sanguine enough to think that some day we shall succeed; Mr. Sidney
  Churchill, of Teheran, is ever on the look-out.

Footnote 197:

  In § 3 I shall suggest that this tale also is mentioned by Al-Mas’udi.

Footnote 198:

  I have extracted it from many books, especially from Hoeffer’s
  Biographie Générale, Paris, Firmin Didot, mdccclvii.; Biographie
  Universelle, Paris, Didot, 1816, etc. etc. All are taken from the work
  of M. de Boze, his “Bozzy.”

Footnote 199:

  As learning a language is an affair of pure memory, almost without
  other exercise of the mental faculties, it should be assisted by the
  ear and the tongue as well as the eyes. I would invariably make pupils
  talk, during lessons, Latin and Greek, no matter how badly at first;
  but unfortunately I should have to begin with teaching the pedants
  who, as a class, are far more unwilling and unready to learn than are
  those they teach.

Footnote 200:

  The late Dean Stanley was notably trapped by the wily Greek who had
  only political purposes in view. In religions as a rule the minimum of
  difference breeds the maximum of disputation, dislike and disgust.

Footnote 201:

  See in Trébutien (Avertissement iii.) how Baron von Hammer escaped
  drowning by the blessing of The Nights.

Footnote 202:

  He signs his name to the Discours pour servir de Préface.

Footnote 203:

  I need not trouble the reader with their titles, which fill up nearly
  a column and a half in M. Hoeffer. His collection of maxims from
  Arabic, Persian and Turkish authors appeared in English in 1695.

Footnote 204:

  Galland’s version was published in 1704–1717 in 12 vols. 12mo.
  (Hoeffer’s Biographie; Graesse’s Trésor de Livres rares and Encyclop.
  Britannica, ixth Edit.)

Footnote 205:

  See also Leigh Hunt “The Book of the Thousand Nights and one Night,”
  etc., etc. London and Westminster Review Art. iii., No. lxiv.
  mentioned in Lane, iii, 746.

Footnote 206:

  Edition of 1856, vol. xv.

Footnote 207:

  To France England also owes her first translation of the Koran, a poor
  and mean version by Andrew Ross of that made from the Arabic (No. iv.)
  by André du Reyer, Consul de France for Egypt. It kept the field till
  ousted in 1734 by the learned lawyer George Sale whose conscientious
  work, including Preliminary Discourse and Notes (4to London), brought
  him the ill-fame of having “turned Turk.”

Footnote 208:

  Catalogue of Printed Books, 1884, p. 159, col. i. I am ashamed to
  state this default in the British Museum, concerning which Englishmen
  are apt to boast and which so carefully mulcts modern authors in
  unpaid copies. But it is only a slight specimen of the sad state of
  art and literature in England, neglected equally by Conservatives,
  Liberals and Radicals. What has been done for the endowment of
  research? What is our equivalent for the Prix de Rome? Since the death
  of Dr. Birch who can fairly deal with a Demotic papyrus? Contrast the
  Société Anthropologique and its palace and professors in Paris with
  our “Institute” _au second_ in a corner of Hanover Square and its
  skulls in the cellar!

Footnote 209:

  Art. vii. pp. 139–168, “On the Arabian Nights and translators, Weil,
  Torrens and Lane (vol. i.) with the Essai of A. Loisseleur
  Deslongchamps.” The Foreign Quarterly Review, vol. xxiv., Oct.
  1839–Jan. 1840. London, Black and Armstrong, 1840.

Footnote 210:

  Introduction to his Collection “Tales of the East,” 3 vols. Edinburgh,
  1812. He was the first to point out the resemblance between the
  introductory adventures of Shahryar and Shah Zaman and those of
  Astolfo and Giacondo in the Orlando Furioso (Canto xxviii.). M. E.
  Lévêque in Les Mythes et les Légendes de l’Inde et la Perse (Paris,
  1880), gives French versions of the Arabian and Italian narratives,
  side by side in p. 543 ff. (Clouston).

Footnote 211:

  Notitiæ Codicis MI. Noctium. Dr. Pusey studied Arabic to familiarise
  himself with Hebrew, and was very different from his predecessor at
  Oxford in my day, who, when applied to for instruction in Arabic,
  refused to lecture except to a class.

Footnote 212:

  This nephew was the author of “Recueil des Rits et Cérémonies des
  Pilgrimages de La Mecque,” etc. etc. Paris and Amsterdam, 1754, in
  12mo.

Footnote 213:

  The concluding part did not appear, I have said, till 1717: his
  “Contes et Fables Indiennes de Bidpaï et de Lokman,” were first
  printed in 1724, 2 vols. in 12mo. Hence, I presume, Lowndes’ mistake.

Footnote 214:

  M. Caussin (de Perceval), Professeur of Arabic at the Imperial
  Library, who edited Galland in 1806, tells us that he found there only
  two MSS., both imperfect. The first (Galland’s) is in three small
  vols. 4to. each of about pp. 140. The stories are more detailed and
  the style, more correct than that of other MS., is hardly intelligible
  to many Arabs, whence he presumes that it contains the original (an
  early?) text which has been altered and vitiated. The date is supposed
  to be circa A.D. 1600. The second Parisian copy is a single folio of
  some 800 pages, and is divided into 29 sections and cmv. Nights, the
  last two sections being reversed. The MS. is very imperfect, the 12th,
  15th, 16th, 18th, 20th, 21st–23rd, 25th and 27th parts are wanting;
  the sections which follow the 17th contain sundry stories repeated,
  there are anecdotes from Bidpai, the Ten Wazirs and other popular
  works, and lacunæ everywhere abound.

Footnote 215:

  Mr. Payne (ix. 264) makes eleven, including the Histoire du Dormeur
  éveillé = The Sleeper and the Waker, which he afterwards translated
  from the Bresl. Edit. in his “Tales from the Arabic” (vol. i. 5,
  etc.).

Footnote 216:

  Mr. E. J. W. Gibb informs me that he has come upon this tale in a
  Turkish storybook, the same from which he drew his “Jewád.”

Footnote 217:

  A littérateur lately assured me that Nos. ix. and x. have been found
  in the Bibliothèque Nationale (du Roi), Paris; but two friends were
  kind enough to enquire and ascertained that it was a mistake. Such
  Persianisms as Codadad (Khudadad), Baba Cogia (Khwájah) and Peri
  (fairy) suggest a Persic MS.

Footnote 218:

  Vol. vi. 212. “The Arabian Nights’ Entertainments (London: Longmans,
  1811) by Jonathan Scott, with the Collection of New Tales from the
  Wortley Montagu MS. in the Bodleian.” I regret to see that Messieurs
  Nimmo in reprinting Scott have omitted his sixth Volume.

Footnote 219:

  Dr. Scott who uses Fitnah (iv. 42) makes it worse by adding “Alcolom
  (Al-Kulúb?) signifying Ravisher of Hearts” and his names for the six
  slave-girls (vol. iv. 37) such as “Zohorob Bostan” (Zahr al-Bústán),
  which Galland rightly renders by “Fleur du Jardin,” serve only to heap
  blunder upon blunder. Indeed the Anglo-French translations are below
  criticism: it would be waste of time to notice them. The
  characteristic is a servile suit paid to the original _e.g._ rendering
  hair “accomodé en boucles” by “hair festooned in buckles” (Night
  ccxiv.), and Île d’Ébène (Jazírat al-Abnús, Night xliii.) by “the Isle
  of Ebene.” A certain surly old littérateur tells me that he prefers
  these wretched versions to Mr. Payne’s. Padrone! as the Italians say:
  I cannot envy his taste or his temper.

Footnote 220:

  De Sacy (Mémoire p. 52) notes that in some MSS., the Sultan, ennuyé by
  the last tales of Shahrázad, proposes to put her to death, when she
  produces her three children and all ends merrily without
  marriage-bells. Von Hammer prefers this version as the more dramatic,
  the Frenchman rejects it on account of the difficulties of the
  _accouchements_. Here he strains at the gnat—a common process.

Footnote 221:

  See Journ. Asiatique, iii. série, vol. viii., Paris, 1839.

Footnote 222:

  “Tausend und Eine Nacht: Arabische Erzählungen. Zum ersten mal aus
  einer Tunisischen Handschrift ergänzt und vollständig übersetzt,” Von
  Max Habicht, F. H. von der Hagen und Karl Schatte (the offenders?)

Footnote 223:

  Dr. Habicht informs us (Vorwort iii., vol. ix. 7) that he obtained his
  MS. with other valuable works from Tunis, through a personal
  acquaintance, a learned Arab, Herr M. Annagar (Mohammed Al-Najjár?)
  and was aided by Baron de Sacy, Langlès and other savants in filling
  up the lacunæ by means of sundry MSS. The editing was a prodigy of
  negligence: the corrigenda (of which brief lists are given) would fill
  a volume; and, as before noticed, the indices of the first four tomes
  were printed in the fifth, as if the necessity of a list of tales had
  just struck the dense editor. After Habicht’s death in 1839 his work
  was completed in four vols. (ix.-xii.) by the well-known Prof. H. J.
  Fleischer, who had shown some tartness in his “Dissertatio Critica de
  Glossis Habichtianis.” He carefully imitated all the shortcomings of
  his predecessor and even omitted the Verzeichniss, etc., the Varianten
  and the Glossary of Arabic words not found in Golius, which formed the
  only useful part of the first eight volumes.

Footnote 224:

  Die in Tausend und Eine Nacht noch nicht übersetzten Nächte,
  Erzählungen und Anekdoten, zum erstenmal aus dem Arabischen in das
  Französische übersetzt von J. von Hammer, und aus dem Französichen in
  das Deutsche von A. E. Zinserling, Professor, Stuttgart und Tubingen,
  1823. Drei Bde. 8^o. Trébutien’s, therefore, is the translation of a
  translation of a translation.

Footnote 225:

  Tausend und Eine Nacht Arabische Erzählungen. Zum erstenmale aus dem
  Urtexte vollständig und treu uebersetze von Dr. Gustav Weil. He began
  his work on return from Egypt in 1836 and completed his first version
  of the Arabische Meisterwerk in 1838–42 (3 vols. roy. oct.). I have
  the Zweiter Abdruck der dritten (2d reprint of 3d) in 4 vols. 8vo.,
  Stuttgart, 1872. It has more than a hundred woodcuts, but all of that
  art fashionable in Europe till Lane taught what Eastern illustrations
  should be.

Footnote 226:

  My learned friend Dr. Wilhelm Storck, to whose admirable translations
  of Camoens I have often borne witness, notes that this Vorhalle, or
  Porch to the first edition, a rhetorical introduction addressed to the
  general public, is held in Germany to be valueless and that it was
  noticed only for the Bemerkung concerning the offensive passages which
  Professor Weil had toned down in his translation. In the Vorwort of
  the succeeding editions (Stuttgart) it is wholly omitted.

Footnote 227:

  The most popular are now “Mille ed una notte. Novelle Arabe.” Napoli,
  1867, 8vo. illustrated, 4 francs; and “Mille ed una notte. Novelle
  Arabe, versione italiana nuovamente emendata e corredata di note”; 4
  vols. in 32 (dateless), Milano, 8vo., 4 francs.

Footnote 228:

  These are: (1) by M. Caussin (de Perceval), Paris, 1806, 9 vols. 8vo.
  (2) Edouard Gauttier, Paris, 1822–24: 7 vols. 12mo.; (3) M. Destain,
  Paris, 1823–25, 6 vols. 8vo., and (4) Baron de Sacy, Paris, 1838 (?),
  3 vols. large 8vo., illustrated (and vilely illustrated).

Footnote 229:

  The number of fables and anecdotes varies in the different texts, but
  may be assumed to be upwards of four hundred, about half of which were
  translated by Lane.

Footnote 230:

  I have noticed these points more fully in the beginning of chapt. iii.
  “The Book of the Sword.”

Footnote 231:

  A notable instance of Roman superficiality, incuriousness and
  ignorance. Every old Egyptian city had its idols (images of metal,
  stone or wood), in which the Deity became incarnate as in the Catholic
  host; besides its own symbolic animal used as a Kiblah or
  prayer-direction (Jerusalem or Meccah), the visible means of fixing
  and concentrating the thoughts of the vulgar, like the crystal of the
  hypnotist or the disk of the electro-biologist. And goddess Diana was
  in no way better than goddess Pasht. For the true view of idolatry see
  Koran xxxix. 4. I am deeply grateful to Mr. P. le Page Renouf (Soc. of
  Biblic. Archæology, April 6, 1886) for identifying the Manibogh,
  Michabo or Great Hare of the American indigenes with Osiris Unnefer
  (“Hare God”). These are the lines upon which investigation should run.
  And of late years there is a notable improvement of tone in treating
  of symbolism or idolatry: the Lingam and the Yoni are now described as
  “mystical representations, and perhaps the best possible impersonal
  representatives, of the abstract expressions paternity and maternity”
  (Prof. Monier Williams in “Folk-lore Record” vol. iii. part i. p.
  118).

Footnote 232:

  See Jotham’s fable of the Trees and King Bramble (Judges lxi. 8) and
  Nathan’s parable of the Poor Man and his little ewe Lamb (2 Sam. ix.
  1).

Footnote 233:

  Herodotus (ii. c. 134) notes that “Æsop the fable-writer (ὁ λογόποιος)
  was one of her (Rhodopis) fellow slaves.” Aristophanes (Vespæ, 1446)
  refers to his murder by the Delphians and his fable beginning, “Once
  upon a time there was a fight;” while the Scholiast finds an allusion
  to The Serpent and the Crab in Pax 1084; and others in Vespæ 1401, and
  Aves 651.

Footnote 234:

  There are three distinct Lokmans who are carefully confounded in Sale
  (Koran chapt. xxxi.) and in Smith’s Dict. of Biography etc. art.
  Æsopus. The first or eldest Lokman, entitled Al-Hakím (the Sage) and
  the hero of the Koranic chapter which bears his name, was son of
  Bá’úrá of the Children of Azar, sister’s son to Job or son of Job’s
  maternal aunt; he witnessed David’s miracles of mail-making and when
  the tribe of ’Ád was destroyed, he became King of the country. The
  second, also called the Sage, was a slave, an Abyssinian negro, sold
  to the Israelites during the reign of David or Solomon, synchronous
  with the Persian Kay Káús and Kay Khusrau, also Pythagoras the
  Greek(!). His physique is alluded to in the saying, “Thou resemblest
  Lokman (in black ugliness) but not in wisdom” (Ibn Khallikan i. 145).
  This negro or negroid, after a godly and edifying life, left a volume
  of “Amsál,” proverbs and exempla (not fables or apologues); and
  Easterns still say, “One should not pretend to teach Lokmán”—in
  Persian, “Hikmat ba Lokman ámokhtan.” Three of his apothegms dwell in
  the public memory: “The heart and the tongue are the best and worst
  parts of the human body.” “I learned wisdom from the blind who make
  sure of things by touching them” (as did St. Thomas); and, when he ate
  the colocynth offered by his owner, “I have received from thee so many
  a sweet that ’twould be surprising if I refused this one bitter.” He
  was buried (says the Tárikh Muntakhab) at Ramlah in Judæa, with the
  seventy Prophets stoned in one day by the Jews. The youngest Lokman
  “of the vultures” was a prince of the tribe of Ad who lived 3,500
  years, the age of seven vultures (Tabari). He could dig a well with
  his nails; hence the saying, “Stronger than Lokman” (A. P. i. 701);
  and he loved the arrow-game, hence “More gambling than Lokman” (ibid.
  ii. 938). “More voracious than Lokman” (ibid. i. 134) alludes to his
  eating one camel for breakfast and another for supper. His wife
  Barákish also appears in proverb, _e.g._ “Camel us and camel thyself”
  (ibid. i. 295) _i.e._ give us camel flesh to eat, said when her son by
  a former husband brought her a fine joint which she and her husband
  relished. Also, “Barákish hath sinned against her kin” (ibid. ii. 89).
  More of this in Chenery’s Al-Hariri p. 422; but the three Lokmans are
  there reduced to two.

Footnote 235:

  I have noticed them in vol. ii. 47–49. “To the Gold Coast for Gold.”

Footnote 236:

  I can hardly accept the dictum that the Katha Sarit Sagara, of which
  more presently, is the “earliest representation of the first
  collection.”

Footnote 237:

  The Pehlevi version of the days of King Anushirwan (A.D. 531–72)
  became the Humáyun-námeh (“August Book”) turned into Persian for
  Bahram Shah the Ghaznavite: the Hitopadesa (“Friendship-boon”) of
  Prakrit, avowedly compiled from the “Panchatantra,” became the Hindu
  Panchopakhyan, the Hindostani Akhlák-i-Hindi (“Moralities of Ind”) and
  in Persia and Turkey the Anvar-i-Suhayli (“Lights of Canopus”).
  Arabic, Hebrew and Syriac writers entitle their version Kalílah wa
  Damnah, or Kalilaj wa Damnaj, from the name of the two jackal-heroes,
  and Europe knows the recueil as the Fables of Pilpay or Bidpay
  (Bidyá-pati, Lord of learning?) a learned Brahman reported to have
  been Premier at the Court of the Indian King Dabishlím.

Footnote 238:

  Dict. Philosoph. S. V. Apocrypha.

Footnote 239:

  The older Arab writers, I repeat, do not ascribe fables or
  beast-apologues to Lokman; they record only “dictes” and proverbial
  sayings.

Footnote 240:

  Professor Taylor Lewis: Preface to Pilpay.

Footnote 241:

  In the Katha Sarit Sagara the beast-apologues are more numerous, but
  they can be reduced to two great nuclei; the first in chapter lx.
  (Lib. x.) and the second in the same book chapters lxii.-lxv. Here too
  they are mixed up with anecdotes and acroamata after the fashion of
  The Nights, suggesting great antiquity for this style of composition.

Footnote 242:

  Brugsch, History of Egypt, vol. i. 266 _et seq._ The fabliau is
  interesting in more ways than one. Anepu the elder (Potiphar)
  understands the language of cattle, an idea ever cropping up in
  Folk-lore; and Bata (Joseph), his “little brother,” who becomes a
  “panther of the South (Nubia) for rage” at the wife’s impudique
  proposal, takes the form of a bull—metamorphosis full blown. It is
  not, as some have called it, the “oldest book in the world;” that name
  was given by M. Chabas to a MS. of Proverbs, dating from B.C. 2200.
  See also the “Story of Saneha,” a novel earlier than the popular date
  of Moses, in the Contes Populaires of Egypt.

Footnote 243:

  The fox and the jackal are confounded by the Arabic dialects not by
  the Persian, whose “Rubáh” can never be mistaken for “Shaghál.”
  “Sa’lab” among the Semites is locally applied to either beast and we
  can distinguish the two only by the fox being solitary and rapacious,
  and the jackal gregarious and a carrion-eater. In all Hindu tales the
  jackal seems to be an awkward substitute for the Grecian and classical
  fox, the Giddar or Kolá (_Canis aureus_) being by no means sly and
  wily as the Lomri (_Vulpes vulgaris_). This is remarked by Weber
  (Indische Studien) and Prof. Benfey’s retort about “King Nobel” the
  lion is by no means to the point. See Katha Sarit Sagara, ii. 28.

  I may add that in Northern Africa jackal’s gall, like jackal’s grape
  (_Solanum nigrum_ = black nightshade), ass’s milk and melted
  camel-hump, is used aphrodisiacally as an unguent by both sexes. See
  p. 239, etc. of Le Jardin parfumé du Cheikh Nefzaoui, of whom more
  presently.

Footnote 244:

  Rambler, No. lxvii.

Footnote 245:

  Some years ago I was asked by my old landlady if ever in the course of
  my travels I had come across Captain Gulliver.

Footnote 246:

  In “The Adventurer” quoted by Mr. Heron, “Translator’s Preface to the
  Arabian Tales of Chaves and Cazotte.”

Footnote 247:

  “Life in a Levantine Family” chapt. xi. Since the able author found
  his “family” firmly believing in The Nights, much has been changed in
  Alexandria; but the faith in Jinn and Ifrit, ghost and vampire is
  lively as ever.

Footnote 248:

  The name dates from the second century A.H. or before A.D. 815.

Footnote 249:

  Dabistan i. 231 etc.

Footnote 250:

  Because Sí = thirty and Murgh = bird. In McClenachan’s Addendum to
  Mackay’s Encyclopædia of Freemasonry we find the following definition:
  “Simorgh. A monstrous griffin, guardian of the Persian mysteries.”

Footnote 251:

  For a poor and inadequate description of the festivals commemorating
  this “Architect of the Gods” see vol. iii. 177, “View of the History
  etc. of the Hindus” by the learned Dr. Ward, who could see in them
  only the “low and sordid nature of idolatry.” But we can hardly expect
  better things from a missionary in 1822, when no one took the trouble
  to understand what “idolatry” means.

Footnote 252:

  Rawlinson (ii. 491) on Herod. iii. c. 102. Nearchus saw the skins of
  these formicæ Indicæ, by some rationalists explained as “jackals,”
  whose stature corresponds with the text, and by others as “pengolens”
  or ant-eaters (_manis pentedactyla_). The learned Sanskritist, H. H.
  Wilson, quotes the name Pippilika = ant-gold, given by the people of
  Little Thibet to the precious dust thrown up in the emmet heaps.

Footnote 253:

  A writer in the _Edinburgh Review_ (July, ’86), of whom more
  presently, suggests that The Nights assumed essentially their present
  shape during the general revival of letters, arts and requirements
  which accompanied the Kurdish and Tartar irruptions into the Nile
  Valley, a golden age which embraced the whole of the thirteenth,
  fourteenth and fifteenth centuries and ended with the Ottoman Conquest
  in A.D. 1527.

Footnote 254:

  Let us humbly hope not again to hear of the golden prime of

                 “The good (fellow?) Haroun Alrasch´id,”

  a mispronunciation which suggests only a rasher of bacon. Why will not
  poets mind their quantities, in lieu of stultifying their lines by
  childish ignorance? What can be more painful than Byron’s

        “They laid his dust in Ar´qua (for Arqua´) where he died?”

Footnote 255:

  See De Sacy’s Chrestomathie Arabe (Paris, 1826), vol. i.

Footnote 256:

  See Le Jardin Parfumé du Cheikh Nefzaoui Manuel d’Erotologie Arabe
  Traduction revue et corrigée Edition privée, imprimé à deux
  cent.-vingt exemplaires, par Isidore Liseux et ses Amis, Paris, 1866.
  The editor has forgotten to note that the celebrated Sidi Mohammed
  copied some of the tales from The Nights and borrowed others (I am
  assured by a friend) from Tunisian MSS. of the same work. The book has
  not been fairly edited: the notes abound in mistakes, the volume lacks
  an index, &c., &c. Since this was written the Jardin Parfumé has been
  twice translated into English as “The Perfumed Garden of the Cheikh
  Nefzaoui, a Manual of Arabian Erotology (sixteenth century). Revised
  and corrected translation, Cosmopoli: mdccclxxxvi.: for the Kama
  Shastra Society of London and Benares and for private circulation
  only.” A rival version will be brought out by a bookseller whose
  Committee, as he calls it, appears to be the model of literary
  pirates, robbing the author as boldly and as openly as if they picked
  his pocket before his face.

Footnote 257:

  Translated by a well-known Turkish scholar, Mr. E. J. W. Gibb,
  (Glasgow, Wilson and McCormick, 1884).

Footnote 258:

  D’Herbelot (s. v. “Asmai”): I am reproached by a dabbler in
  Orientalism for using this admirable writer who shows more knowledge
  in one page than my critic does in a whole volume.

Footnote 259:

  For specimens see Al-Siyutí, pp. 301 and 304; and the Shaykh al
  Nafzawi, pp. 134–35.

Footnote 260:

  The word “nakh” (to make a camel kneel) is explained in vol. ii. 139.

Footnote 261:

  The present of the famous horologium-clepsydra-cuckoo clock, the dog
  Becerillo and the elephant Abu Lubabah sent by Harun to Charlemagne is
  not mentioned by Eastern authorities and consequently no reference to
  it will be found in my late friend Professor Palmer’s little volume
  “Haroun Alraschid,” London, Marcus Ward, 1881. We have allusions to
  many presents, the clock and elephant, tent and linen hangings, silken
  dresses, perfumes, and candelabra of auricalch brought by the Legati
  (Abdalla, Georgius Abba et Felix) of Aaron Amiralmumminim Regis
  Persarum who entered the Port of Pisa (A.D. 801) in (vol. v. 178)
  Recueil des Histor. des Gaules et de la France, etc., par Dom Martin
  Bouquet, Paris, mdccxliv. The author also quotes the lines:—

               Persarum Princeps illi devinctus amore
                   Præcipuo fuerat, nomen habens Aaron.
               Gratia cui Caroli præ cunctis Regibus atque
                   Illis Principibus tempora cara fuit.

Footnote 262:

  Many have remarked that the actual date of the decease is unknown.

Footnote 263:

  See Al-Siyuti (p. 305) and Dr. Jonathan Scott’s “Tales, Anecdotes, and
  Letters,” (p. 296).

Footnote 264:

  I have given (vol. i. 188) the vulgar derivation of the name; and
  D’Herbelot (s.v. Barmakian) quotes some Persian lines alluding to the
  “supping up.” Al-Mas’udi’s account of the family’s early history is
  unfortunately lost. This Khálid succeeded Abu Salámah, first entitled
  Wazir under Al-Saffah (Ibn Khallikan i. 468).

Footnote 265:

  For his poetry see Ibn Khallikan iv. 103.

Footnote 266:

  Their flatterers compared them with the four elements.

Footnote 267:

  Al-Mas’udi, chapt. cxii.

Footnote 268:

  Ibn Khallikan (i. 310) says the eunuch Abú Háshim Masrúr, the Sworder
  of Vengeance, who is so pleasantly associated with Ja’afar in many
  nightly disguises; but the Eunuch survived the Caliph. Fakhr al-Din
  (p. 27) adds that Masrur was an enemy of Ja’afar; and gives further
  details concerning the execution.

Footnote 269:

  Bresl. Edit., Night dlxvii. vol. vii. pp. 258–260; translated in the
  Mr. Payne’s “Tales from the Arabic,” vol. i. 189 and headed “Al-Rashid
  and the Barmecides.” It is far less lively and dramatic than the
  account of the same event given by Al-Mas’udi, chapt. cxii., by Ibn
  Khallikan and by Fakhr al-Din.

Footnote 270:

  Al-Mas’udi, chapt. cxi.

Footnote 271:

  See Dr. Jonathan Scott’s extracts from Major Ouseley’s
  “Tarikh-i-Barmaki.”

Footnote 272:

  Al-Mas’udi, chapt. cxii. For the liberties Ja’afar took see Ibn
  Khallikan, i. 303.

Footnote 273:

  Ibid. chapt. xxiv. In vol. ii. 29 of The Nights, I find signs of
  Ja’afar’s suspected heresy. For Al-Rashid’s hatred of the Zindiks see
  Al-Siyuti, pp. 292, 301; and as regards the religious troubles ibid.
  p. 362 and passim.

Footnote 274:

  Biogr. Dict. i. 309.

Footnote 275:

  This accomplished princess had a practice that suggests the Dame aux
  Camélias.

Footnote 276:

  _i.e._ Perdition to your fathers, Allah’s curse on your ancestors.

Footnote 277:

  See vol. iv. 159, “Ja’afar and the Beanseller;” where the great Wazir
  is said to have been “crucified;” and vol. iv. pp. 179, 181. Also
  Roebuck’s Persian Proverbs, i. 2, 346, “This also is through the
  munificence of the Barmecides.”

Footnote 278:

  I especially allude to my friend Mr. Payne’s admirably written account
  of it in his concluding Essay (vol. ix.). From his views of the Great
  Caliph and the Lady Zubaydah I must differ in every point except the
  destruction of the Barmecides.

Footnote 279:

  Bresl. Edit., vol. vii. 261–62.

Footnote 280:

  Mr. Grattan Geary, in a work previously noticed, informs us (i. 212)
  “The Sitt al-Zobeide, or the Lady Zobeide, was so named from the great
  Zobeide tribe of Arabs occupying the country East and West of the
  Euphrates near the Hindi’ah Canal; she was the daughter of a powerful
  Sheik of that tribe.” Can this explain the “Kásim?”

Footnote 281:

  Vol. viii. 296.

Footnote 282:

  Burckhardt, “Travels in Arabia,” vol. i. 185.

Footnote 283:

  The reverse has been remarked by more than one writer; and
  contemporary French opinion seems to be that Victor Hugo’s influence
  on French prose was, on the whole, not beneficial.

Footnote 284:

  Mr. W. S. Clouston, the “Storiologist,” who is preparing a work to be
  entitled “Popular Tales and Fictions; their Migrations and
  Transformations,” informs me the first to adapt this witty anecdote
  was Jacques de Vitry, the crusading bishop of Accon (Acre) who died at
  Rome in 1240, after setting the example of “Exempla” or instances in
  his sermons. He had probably heard it in Syria, and he changed the
  day-dreamer into a Milkmaid and her Milk-pail to suit his “flock.” It
  then appears as an “Exemplum” in the Liber de Donis or de Septem Donis
  (or De Dono Timoris from Fear the first gift) of Stephanus de Borbone,
  the Dominican, ob. Lyons, 1261: it treated of the gifts of the Holy
  Spirit (Isaiah xi. 2 and 3), Timor, Pietas, Scientia, Fortitudo,
  Consilium, Intellectus et Sapientia; and was plentifully garnished
  with narratives for the use of preachers.

Footnote 285:

  The Asiatic Journal and Monthly Register (new series, vol. xxx.
  Sept.-Dec. 1830, London, Allens, 1839); p. 69 Review of the Arabian
  Nights, the Mac. Edit. vol. i., and H. Torrens.

Footnote 286:

  As a household edition of the “Arabian Nights” is now being prepared,
  the curious reader will have an opportunity of verifying this
  statement.

Footnote 287:

  It has been pointed out to me that in vol. ii. p. 285, line 18 “Zahr
  Shah” is a mistake for Sulayman Shah.

Footnote 288:

  I have lately found these lovers at Schloss Sternstein near Cilli in
  Styria, the property of my excellent colleague, Mr. Consul Faber,
  dating from A.D. 1300 when Jobst of Reichenegg and Agnes of Sternstein
  were aided and abetted by a Capuchin of Seikkloster.

Footnote 289:

  In page 226 Dr. Steingass sensibly proposes altering the last
  hemistich (lines 11–12) to

                  At one time showing the Moon and Sun.

Footnote 290:

  Omitted by Lane for some reason unaccountable as usual. A
  correspondent sends me his version of the lines which occur in The
  Nights (vol. v. 106 and 107):—

         Behold the Pyramids and hear them teach
             What they can tell of Future and of Past:
         They would declare, had they the gift of speech,
             The deeds that Time hath wrought from first to last.

                *       *       *       *       *

         My friends, and is there aught beneath the sky
             Can with th’ Egyptian Pyramids compare?
         In fear of them strong Time hath passèd by;
             And everything dreads Time in earth and air.

Footnote 291:

  A rhyming Romance by Henry of Waldeck (flor. A.D. 1160) with a Latin
  poem on the same subject by Odo and a prose version still popular in
  Germany. (Lane’s Nights iii. 81; and Weber’s “Northern Romances.”)

Footnote 292:

  _e.g._ ’Ajáib al-Hind (= Marvels of Ind) ninth century, translated by
  J. Marcel Devic, Paris, 1878; and about the same date the Two
  Mohammedan Travellers, translated by Renaudot. In the eleventh century
  we have the famous Sayyid al-Idrisi; in the thirteenth the ’Ajáib
  al-Makhlúkát of Al-Kazwíni and in the fourteenth the Kharídat al-Ajáib
  of Ibn Al-Wardi. Lane (in loco) traces most of Sindbad to the two
  latter sources.

Footnote 293:

  So Hector France proposed to name his admirably realistic volume “Sous
  le Burnous” (Paris, Charpentier, 1886).

Footnote 294:

  I mean in European literature, not in Arabic where it is a lieu
  commun. See three several forms of it in one page (505) of Ibn
  Kallikan, vol. iii.

Footnote 295:

  My attention has been called to the resemblance between the half-lie
  and Job (i. 13–19).

Footnote 296:

  Boccaccio (ob. Dec. 2, 1375), may easily have heard of The Thousand
  Nights and a Night or of its archetype the Hazár Afsánah. He was
  followed by the Piacevoli Notti of Giovan Francisco Straparola (A.D.
  1550), translated into almost all European languages but English: the
  original Italian is now rare. Then came the Heptameron ou Histoire des
  amans fortunez of Marguerite d’Angoulême, Reyne de Navarre and only
  sister of Francis I. She died in 1549 before the days were finished:
  in 1558 Pierre Boaistuan published the Histoire des amans fortunez and
  in 1559 Claude Guiget the “Heptameron.” Next is the Hexameron of A. de
  Torquemada, Rouen, 1610; and, lastly, the Pentamerone or El Cunto de
  li Cunte of Giambattista Basile (Naples, 1637), known by the meagre
  abstract of J. E. Taylor and the caricatures of George Cruikshank
  (London, 1847–50). I propose to translate this Pentamerone direct from
  the Neapolitan and have already finished half the work.

Footnote 297:

  Translated and well annotated by Prof. Tawney, who, however, affects
  asterisks and has considerably bowdlerised sundry of the tales, _e.g._
  the Monkey who picked out the Wedge (vol. ii. 28). This tale, by the
  by, is found in the Khirad Afroz (i. 128) and in the Anwar-i-Suhayli
  (chapt. i.) and gave rise to the Persian proverb, “What has a monkey
  to do with carpentering?” It is curious to compare the Hindu with the
  Arabic work whose resemblances are as remarkable as their differences,
  while even more notable is their correspondence in impressionising the
  reader. The Thaumaturgy of both is the same: the Indian is profuse in
  demonology and witchcraft; in transformation and restoration; in
  monsters as wind-men, fire-men and water-men; in air-going elephants
  and flying horses (i. 541–43); in the wishing cow, divine goats and
  laughing fishes (i. 24); and in the speciosa miracula of magic
  weapons. He delights in fearful battles (i. 400) fought with the same
  weapons as the Moslem and rewards his heroes with a “turband of
  honour” (i. 266) in lieu of a robe. There is a quaint family likeness
  arising from similar stages and states of society: the city is adorned
  for gladness; men carry money in a robe-corner and exclaim “Ha! good!”
  (for “Good, by Allah!”); lovers die with exemplary facility; the
  “soft-sided” ladies drink spirits (i. 61) and princesses get drunk (i.
  476); whilst the Eunuch, the Hetaira and the bawd (Kuttini) play the
  same preponderating parts as in The Nights. Our Brahman is strong in
  love-making; he complains of the pains of separation in this
  phenomenal universe; he revels in youth, “twin-brother to mirth,” and
  beauty which has illuminating powers; he foully reviles old age and he
  alternately praises and abuses the sex, concerning which more
  presently. He delights in truisms, the fashion of contemporary Europe
  (see Palmerin of England chapt. vii), such as “It is the fashion of
  the heart to receive pleasure from those things which ought to give
  it,” etc. etc. What is there the wise cannot understand? and so forth.
  He is liberal in trite reflections and frigid conceits (i. 19, 55, 97,
  103, 107, in fact everywhere); and his puns run through whole lines:
  this in fine Sanskrit style is inevitable. Yet some of his expressions
  are admirably terse and telling, _e.g._ Ascending the swing of Doubt:
  Bound together (lovers) by the leash of gazing: Two babes looking like
  Misery and Poverty: Old Age seized me by the chin: (A lake) first
  assay of the Creator’s skill: (A vow) difficult as standing on a
  sword-edge: My vital spirits boiled with the fire of woe: Transparent
  as a good man’s heart: There was a certain convent full of fools:
  Dazed with scripture-reading: The stones could not help laughing at
  him: The Moon kissed the laughing forehead of the East: She was like a
  wave of the Sea of Love’s insolence (ii. 127), a wave of the Sea of
  Beauty tossed up by the breeze of Youth: The King played dice, he
  loved slave-girls, he told lies, he sat up o’ nights, he waxed wroth
  without reason, he took wealth wrongously, he despised the good and
  honoured the bad (i. 562); with many choice bits of the same kind.
  Like the Arab the Indian is profuse in personification; but the
  doctrine of preexistence, of incarnation and emanation and an
  excessive spiritualism, ever aiming at the infinite, makes his imagery
  run mad. Thus we have Immoral Conduct embodied; the God of Death;
  Science; the Svarga-heaven; Evening; Untimeliness; and the
  Earth-bride, while the Ace and Deuce of dice are turned into a brace
  of Demons. There is also that grotesqueness which the French detect
  even in Shakespeare, _e.g._ She drank in his ambrosial form with
  thirsty eyes like partridges (i. 476) and it often results from the
  comparison of incompatibles, _e.g._ a row of birds likened to a garden
  of nymphs; and from forced allegories, the favourite figure of
  contemporary Europe. Again, the rhetorical Hindu style differs greatly
  from the sobriety, directness and simplicity of the Arab, whose motto
  is Brevity combined with precision, except where the latter falls into
  “fine writing.” And, finally, there is a something in the atmosphere
  of these Tales which is unfamiliar to the West and which makes them,
  as more than one has remarked to me, very hard reading.

Footnote 298:

  The Introduction (i. 1–5) leads to the Curse of Pushpadanta and
  Mályaván who live on Earth as Vararúchi and Gunádhya and this runs
  through lib. i. Lib. ii. begins with the Story of Udáyana to whom we
  must be truly grateful as our only guide: he and his son
  Naraváhanadatta fill up the rest and end with lib. xviii. Thus the
  want of the clew or plot compels a division into books, which begin
  for instance with “We worship the elephantine proboscis of Ganesha”
  (lib. x. 1), a reverend and awful object to a Hindu but to Englishmen
  mainly suggesting the “Zoo.” The “Bismillah” of The Nights is much
  more satisfactory.

Footnote 299:

  See pp. 5–6 Avertissement des Éditeurs, Le Cabinet des Fées, vol.
  xxxviii: Geneva, 1788. Galland’s Edit. of mdccxxvi ends with Night
  ccxxxiv and the English translations with ccxxxvi and cxcvii. See
  retro p. 82.

Footnote 300:

  There is a shade of difference in the words; the former is also used
  for Reciters of Traditions—a serious subject. But in the case of
  Hammád surnamed Al-Ráwiyah (the Rhapsode) attached to the Court of
  Al-Walíd, it means simply a conteur. So the Greeks had Homeristæ =
  reciters of Homer, as opposed to the Homeridæ or School of Homer.

Footnote 301:

  Vol. i. Preface p. v. He notes that Mr. Dallaway describes the same
  scene at Constantinople, where the Story-teller was used, like the
  modern “Organs of Government” in newspaper shape, for “reconciling the
  people to any recent measure of the Sultan and Vizier.” There are
  women Ráwiyahs for the Harems and some have become famous like the
  Mother of Hasan al-Basri (Ibn Khall. i, 370).

Footnote 302:

  Hence the Persian proverb, “Báki-e-dastán fardá” = the rest of the
  tale to-morrow, said to askers of silly questions.

Footnote 303:

  The scene is excellently described in “Morocco: Its People and
  Places,” by Edmondo de Amicis (London: Cassell, 1882), a most
  refreshing volume after the enforced platitudes and commonplaces of
  English travellers.

Footnote 304:

  It began, however, in Persia where the celebrated Darwaysh Mukhlis,
  Chief Sofi of Isfahan in the xviith century, translated into Persian
  tales certain Hindu plays of which a MS. entitled Alfaraga
  Badal-Schidda (Al-faraj ba’d al-shiddah = Joy after annoy) exists in
  the Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris. But to give an original air to his
  work, he entitled it “Hazár o yek Ruz” = Thousand and One Days, and in
  1675 he allowed his friend Petis de la Croix, who happened to be at
  Isfahan, to copy it. Le Sage (of Gil Blas) is said to have converted
  many of the tales of Mukhlis into comic operas, which were performed
  at the Théâtre Italien. I still hope to see The Nights at the Lyceum.

Footnote 305:

  This author, however, when hazarding a change of style which is, I
  think, regretable, has shown abundant art by filling up the frequent
  deficiencies of the text after the fashion of Baron McGuckin de Slane
  in Ibn Khallikan. As regards the tout ensemble of his work, a noble
  piece of English, my opinion will ever be that expressed in my
  Foreword. A carping critic has remarked that the translator, “as may
  be seen in every page, is no Arabic scholar.” If I be a judge, the
  reverse is the case: the brilliant and beautiful version thus traduced
  is almost entirely free from the blemishes and carelessness which
  disfigure Lane’s, and thus it is far more faithful to the original.
  But it is no secret that on the staff of that journal the translator
  of Villon has sundry enemies, _vrais diables enjupponés_, who take
  every opportunity of girding at him because he does not belong to the
  clique and because he does good work when theirs is mostly sham. The
  sole fault I find with Mr. Payne is that his severe grace of style
  treats an unclassical work as a classic, when the romantic and
  irregular would have been a more appropriate garb. But this is a mere
  matter of private judgment.

Footnote 306:

  Here I offer a few, but very few, instances from the Breslau text
  which is the greatest sinner in this respect. Mas. for fem., vol. i.
  p. 9, and three times in seven pages. Ahná and nahná for nahnú, (iv.
  370, 372); Aná ba-ashtarí = I will buy (iii. 109): and Aná ’Ámíl = I
  will do (v. 367). Alaykí for Alayki (i. 18), Antí for Anti (iii. 66)
  and generally long í for short ĭ. ’Ammál (from ’amala = he did) tahlam
  = certainly thou dreamest, and ’Ammálín yaakulú = they were about to
  eat (ix. 315): Aywá for Ay wa’lláhí = yes, by Allah (passim). Bitá’ =
  belonging to, _e.g._ Sára bitá’k = it is become thine (ix. 352) and
  Matá’ with the same sense (iii. 80). Dá ’l-khurj = this saddle-bag
  (ix. 336) and Dí (for hazah) = this woman (iii. 79) or this time (ii.
  162). Fayn as ráha fayn = whither is he gone? (iv. 323): Kamá badri =
  he rose early (ix. 318): Kamán = also, a word known to every European
  (ii. 43): Katt = never (ii. 172): Kawám (pronounced ’awám) = fast, at
  once (iv. 385) and Rih ásif kawí (pron. ’awí) = a wind, strong very.
  Laysh, _e.g._ bi-tasalní laysh (ix. 324) = why do you ask me? a
  favourite form for li ayya shayyin: so Máfish = má fihi shayyun (there
  is no thing) in which Herr Landberg (p. 425) makes “Sha, le présent de
  pouvoir.” Min ajalí = for my sake; and Li-ajal al-taudí’a = for the
  sake of taking leave (Mac. Edit. i. 384). Rijál nautiyah = men sailors
  when the latter word would suffice: Shuwayh (dim. of shayy) = a small
  thing, a little (iv. 309) like Moyyah (dim. of Má) a little water:
  Waddúni = they carried me (ii. 172) and lastly the abominable Wáhid
  gharíb = one (for a) stranger. These few must suffice: the tale of
  Judar and his brethren, which in style is mostly Egyptian, will supply
  a number of others. It must not, however, be supposed, as many have
  done, that vulgar and colloquial Arabic is of modern date: we find it
  in the first century of Al-Islam, as is proved by the tale of
  Al-Hajjáj and Al-Shabi (Ibn Khallikan, ii. 6). The former asked “Kam
  ataa-k?” (= how much is thy pay?) to which the latter answered,
  “Alfayn!” (= two thousand!). “Tut,” cried the Governor, “Kam atau-ka?”
  to which the poet replied as correctly and classically, “Alfáni.”

Footnote 307:

  In Russian folk-songs a young girl is often compared with this tree
  _e.g._—

                     Ivooshka, ivooshka zelonaia moia
                     (O Willow, O green Willow mine!)

Footnote 308:

  So in Hector France (“La vache enragée”) “Le sourcil en accent
  circonflexe et l’œil en point d’interrogation.”

Footnote 309:

  In Persian “Áb-i-rú” in India pronounced Ábrú.

Footnote 310:

  For further praises of his poetry and eloquence see the extracts from
  Fakhr al-Din of Rayy (an annalist of the xivth century A.D.) in De
  Sacy’s Chrestomathie Arabe, vol i.

Footnote 311:

  After this had been written I received “Babylonien, das reichste Land
  in der Vorzeit und das lohnendste Kolonisationsfeld für die
  Gegenwart,” by my learned friend Dr. Aloys Sprenger, Heidelberg, 1886.

Footnote 312:

  The first school for Arabic literature was opened by Ibn Abbas who
  lectured to multitudes in a valley near Meccah, this rude beginning
  was followed by public teaching in the great Mosque of Damascus. For
  the rise of the “Madrasah,” Academy or College, see Introduct. to Ibn
  Khallikan pp. xxvii.-xxxii.

Footnote 313:

  When Ibn Abbád the Sáhib (Wazir) was invited to visit one of the
  Samanides, he refused, one reason being that he would require 400
  camels to carry only his books.

Footnote 314:

  This “Salmagondis” by Francois Beroalde de Verville was afterwards
  worked by Tabarin, the pseudo-Bruscambille d’Aubigné and Sorel.

Footnote 315:

  I prefer this derivation to Strutt’s adopted by the popular, “_mumm_
  is said to be derived from the Danish word _mumme_, or _momme_ in
  Dutch (Germ. = larva) and signifies disguise in a mask, hence a
  mummer.” In the Promptorium Parvulorum we have “Mummynge, mussacio,
  vel mussatus”: if was a pantomime in dumb show, _e.g._ “I mumme in a
  mummynge;” “Let us go mumme (mummer) to nyghte in women’s apparayle.”
  “Mask” and “Mascarade,” for persona, larva or vizard, also derive, I
  have noticed, from an Arabic word—Maskharah.

Footnote 316:

  The Pre-Adamite doctrine has been preached but with scant success in
  Christendom. Peyrère, a French Calvinist, published (A.D. 1655) his
  “Præadamitæ, sive exercitatio supra versibus 12, 13, 14, cap. v.
  Epist. Paul. ad Romanos,” contending that Adam was called the first
  man because with him the law began. It brewed a storm of wrath and the
  author was fortunate to escape with only imprisonment.

Footnote 317:

  According to Socrates the verdict was followed by a free fight of the
  Bishop-voters over the word “consubstantiality.”

Footnote 318:

  Servetus burnt (in A.D. 1553 for publishing his Arian tractate) by
  Calvin, whom half educated Roman Catholics in England firmly believe
  to have been a pederast. This arose, I suppose, from his meddling with
  Rabelais who, in return for the good joke Rabie læsus, presented a
  better anagram, “Jan (a pimp or cuckold) Cul” (Calvinus).

Footnote 319:

  There is no more immoral work than the “Old Testament.” Its deity is
  an ancient Hebrew of the worst type, who condones, permits or commands
  every sin in the Decalogue to a Jewish patriarch, _quâ_ patriarch. He
  orders Abraham to murder his son and allows Jacob to swindle his
  brother; Moses to slaughter an Egyptian and the Jews to plunder and
  spoil a whole people, after inflicting upon them a series of plagues
  which would be the height of atrocity if the tale were true. The
  nations of Canaan are then extirpated. Ehud, for treacherously
  disembowelling King Eglon, is made judge over Israel. Jael is blessed
  above women (Joshua v. 24) for vilely murdering a sleeping guest; the
  horrid deeds of Judith and Esther are made examples to mankind; and
  David, after an adultery and a homicide which deserved ignominious
  death, is suffered to massacre a host of his enemies, cutting some in
  two with saws and axes and putting others into brick-kilns. For
  obscenity and impurity we have the tales of Onan and Tamar, Lot and
  his daughters, Amnon and his fair sister (2 Sam. xiii.), Absalom and
  his father’s concubines, the “wife of whoredoms” of Hosea and, capping
  all, the Song of Solomon. For the horrors forbidden to the Jews, who,
  therefore, must have practised them, see Levit. viii. 24; xi. 5; xvii.
  7; xviii. 7, 9, 10, 12, 15, 17, 21, 23, and xx. 3. For mere filth what
  can be fouler than 1st Kings, xviii. 27; Tobias ii. 11; Esther xiv. 2;
  Eccl. xxii. 2; Isaiah xxxvi. 12; Jeremiah iv. 5, and (Ezekiel iv.
  12–15), where the Lord changes human ordure into “Cow-chips!” Ce qui
  excuse Dieu, said Henri Beyle, c’est qu’il n’existe pas,—I add, as man
  has made him.

Footnote 320:

  It was the same in England before the “Reformation,” and in France
  where, during our days, a returned priesthood collected in a few years
  “Peter-pence” to the tune of five hundred millions of francs. And
  these men wonder at being turned out!

Footnote 321:

  Deutsch on the Talmud: Quarterly Review, 1867.

Footnote 322:

  Evidently. Its cosmogony is a myth read literally: its history is, for
  the most part, a highly immoral distortion, and its ethics are those
  of the Talmudic Hebrews. It has done good work in its time; but now it
  shows only decay and decrepitude in the place of vigour and progress.
  It is dying hard, but it is dying of the slow poison of science.

Footnote 323:

  These Hebrew Stoics would justly charge the Founder of Christianity
  with preaching a more popular and practical doctrine, but a
  degradation from their own far higher and more ideal standard.

Footnote 324:

  Dr. Theodore Christlieb (“Modern Doubt and Christian Relief,”
  Edinburgh: Clark, 1874) can even now write;—“So then the ‘full age’ to
  which humanity is at present supposed to have attained, consists in
  man’s doing good purely for goodness sake! Who sees not the hollowness
  of this bombastic talk. _That_ man has yet to be born whose practice
  will be regulated by this insipid theory (_dieser grauen Theorie_).
  What is the idea of goodness per se? * * * The abstract idea of
  goodness is not an effectual motive for well-doing” (p. 104). My only
  comment is _c’est ignoble!_ His reverence acts the part of Satan in
  Holy Writ, “Does Job serve God for naught?” Compare this selfish,
  irreligious, and immoral view with Philo Judæus (On the Allegory of
  the Sacred Laws, cap. lviii.), to measure the extent of the fall from
  Pharisaism to Christianity. And the latter is still infected with the
  “bribe-and-threat doctrine:” I once immensely scandalised a Consular
  Chaplain by quoting the noble belief of the ancients, and it was some
  days before he could recover mental equanimity. The degradation is now
  inbred.

Footnote 325:

  Of the doctrine of the Fall the heretic Marcion wrote: “The Deity must
  either be deficient in goodness if he willed, in prescience if he did
  not foresee, or in power if he did not prevent it.”

Footnote 326:

  In his charming book, “India Revisited.”

Footnote 327:

  This is the answer to those who contend with much truth that the
  moderns are by no means superior to the ancients of Europe: they look
  at the results of only 3000 years instead of 30,000 or 300,000.

Footnote 328:

  As a maxim the saying is attributed to the Duc de Lévis, but it is
  much older.

Footnote 329:

  There are a few, but only a few, frightful exceptions to this rule,
  especially in the case of Khálid bin Walíd, the Sword of Allah, and
  his ferocious friend, Darár ibn al-Azwar. But their cruel excesses
  were loudly blamed by the Moslems, and Caliph Omar only obeyed the
  popular voice in superseding the fierce and furious Khalid by the mild
  and merciful Abú Obaydah.

Footnote 330:

  This too when St. Paul sends the Christian slave Onesimus back to his
  unbelieving (?) master, Philemon; which in Al-Islam would have created
  a scandal.

Footnote 331:

  This too when the Founder of Christianity talks of “Eating and
  drinking at his table!” (Luke xxii. 29). My notes have often touched
  upon this inveterate prejudice, the result, like the soul-less woman
  of Al-Islam, of ad captandum, pious fraud. “No soul knoweth what joy
  of the eyes is reserved for the good in recompense for their works”
  (Koran xxxii. 17) is surely as “spiritual” as St. Paul (I Cor. ii.,
  9.) Some lies, however, are very long-lived, especially those begotten
  by self-interest.

Footnote 332:

  I have elsewhere noted its strict conservatism which, however, it
  shares with all Eastern faiths in the East. But progress, not
  quietism, is the principle which governs humanity and it is favoured
  by events of most different nature. In Egypt the rule of Mohammed Ali
  the Great and in Syria the Massacre of Damascus (1860) have greatly
  modified the constitution of Al-Islam throughout the nearer East.

Footnote 333:

  Chapt. viii. “Narrative of a Year’s Journey through Central and
  Eastern Arabia;” London, Macmillan, 1865.

Footnote 334:

  The Soc. Jesu has, I believe, a traditional conviction that converts
  of Israelitic blood bring only misfortune to the Order.

Footnote 335:

  I especially allude to an able but most superficial book, the “Ten
  Great Religions” by James F. Clarke (Boston, Osgood, 1876), which
  caricatures and exaggerates the false portraiture of Mr. Palgrave.
  The writer’s admission that, “Something is always gained by learning
  what the believers in a system have to say in its behalf,” clearly
  shows us the man we have to deal with and the “depths of his
  self-consciousness.”

Footnote 336:

  But how could the Arabist write such hideous grammar as “La Ilāh illa
  Allāh” for “Lá iláha (accus.) ill’ Allah?”

Footnote 337:

  p. 996 “Muhammad” in vol. iii. Dictionary of Christian Biography. See
  also the Illustration of the Mohammedan Creed, etc. from Al-Ghazáli
  introduced (pp. 72–77) into Bell and Sons’ “History of the Saracens”
  by Simon Ockley, B.D. (London, 1878). I regret that some Orientalist
  did not correct the proofs: everybody will not detect “Al-Lauh
  al-Mahfúz” (the Guarded Tablet) in “Allauh ho’hnehphoud” (p. 171); and
  this but a pinch out of a camel-load.

Footnote 338:

  The word should have been Arianism. This “heresy” of the early
  Christians was much aided by the “Discipline of the Secret,” supposed
  to be of apostolic origin, which concealed from neophytes, catechumens
  and penitents all the higher mysteries, like the Trinity, the
  Incarnation, the Metastoicheiosis (transubstantiation), the Real
  Presence, the Eucharist and the Seven Sacraments; when Arnobius could
  ask, Quid Deo cum vino est? and when Justin, fearing the charge of
  Polytheism, could expressly declare the inferior nature of the Son to
  the Father. Hence the creed was appropriately called Symbol, _i.e._
  Sign of the Secret. This “mental reservation” lasted till the Edict of
  Toleration, issued by Constantine in the fourth century, held
  Christianity secure when divulging her “mysteries”; and it allowed
  Arianism to become _the_ popular creed.

Footnote 339:

  The Gnostics played rather a fantastic rôle in Christianity with their
  Demiurge, their Æonogony, their Æons by syzygies or couples, their
  Maio and Sabscho and their beatified bride of Jesus, Sophia Achamoth;
  and some of them descended to absolute absurdities _e.g._ the
  Tascodrugitæ and the Pattalorhinchitæ who during prayers placed their
  fingers upon their noses or in their mouths, &c., reading Psalm cxli.
  3.

Footnote 340:

  “Kitáb al-’Unwán fí Makáid al-Niswán” = The Book of the Beginnings on
  the Wiles of Womankind (Lane i. 38.)

Footnote 341:

  This person was one of the Amsál or Exampla of the Arabs. For her
  first thirty years she whored; during the next three decades she
  pimped for friend and foe; and, during the last third of her life,
  when bed-ridden by age and infirmities, she had a buck-goat and a
  nanny tied up in her room and solaced herself by contemplating their
  amorous conflicts.

Footnote 342:

  And modern Moslem feeling upon the subject has apparently undergone a
  change. Ashraf Khan, the Afghan poet, sings,

   Since I, the parted one, have come the secrets of the world to ken,
   Women in hosts therein I find, but few (and very few) of men.

  And the Osmanli proverb is, “Of ten men nine are women!”

Footnote 343:

  His Persian paper “On the Vindication of the Liberties of the Asiatic
  Women” was translated and printed in the Asiatic Annual Register for
  1801 (pp. 100–107); it is quoted by Dr. Jon. Scott (Introd. vol. i. p.
  xxxiv. _et seq._) and by a host of writers. He also wrote a book of
  Travels translated by Prof. Charles Stewart in 1810 and re-issued (3
  vols. 8vo.) in 1814.

Footnote 344:

  The beginning of which I date from the Hijrah, lit. = the separation,
  popularly “The Flight.” Stating the case broadly, it has become the
  practice of modern writers to look upon Mohammed as an honest
  enthusiast at Meccah and an unscrupulous despot at Al-Medinah, a view
  which appears to me eminently unsound and unfair. In a private station
  the Meccan Prophet was famed as a good citizen, _teste_ his title
  Al-Amín = the Trusty. But when driven from his home by the pagan
  faction, he became de facto as de jure a king: nay, a royal pontiff;
  and the preacher was merged in the Conqueror of his foes and the
  Commander of the Faithful. His rule, like that of all Eastern rulers,
  was stained with blood; but, assuming as true all the crimes and
  cruelties with which Christians charge him and which Moslems confess,
  they were mere blots upon a glorious and enthusiastic life, ending in
  a most exemplary death, compared with the tissue of horrors and havock
  which the Law and the Prophets attribute to Moses, to Joshua, to
  Samuel and to the patriarchs and prophets by express commandment of
  Jehovah.

Footnote 345:

  It was not, however, incestuous: the scandal came from its ignoring
  the Arab “pundonor.”

Footnote 346:

  The “opportunism” of Mohammed has been made a matter of obloquy by
  many who have not reflected and discovered that time-serving is the
  very essence of “Revelation.” Says the Rev. W. Smith (“Pentateuch”
  chapt. xiii.), “As the journey (Exodus) proceeds, so laws originate
  from the accidents of the way,” and he applies this to successive
  decrees (Numbers xxvi. 32–36; xxvii. 8–11 and xxxvi. 1–9) holding it
  indirect internal evidence of Mosaic authorship (?) Another tone,
  however, is used in the case of Al-Islam. “And now, that he might not
  stand in awe of his wives any longer, _down comes a revelation_” says
  Ockley in his bluff and homely style, which admits such phrases as,
  “the imposter has the impudence to say.” But why, in common honesty,
  refuse to the Koran the concessions freely made to the Torah? It is a
  mere petitio principii to argue that the latter is “inspired” while
  the former is not; moreover, although we may be called upon to believe
  things _beyond_ Reason, it is hardly fair to require our belief in
  things _contrary_ to Reason.

Footnote 347:

  This is noticed in my wife’s volume on The Inner Life of Syria, chapt.
  xii. vol. i. 155.

Footnote 348:

  Mirza preceding the name means Mister and following it Prince.
  Addison’s “Vision of Mirza,” (Spectator, No. 159) is therefore “The
  Vision of Mister.”

Footnote 349:

  And women. The course of instruction lasts from a few days to a year
  and the period of puberty is fêted by magical rites and often by some
  form of mutilation. It is described by Waitz, Réclus and Schoolcraft,
  Péchuel-Loecksa, Collins, Dawson, Thomas, Brough Smyth, Reverends
  Bulmer and Taplin, Carlo Wilhelmi, Wood, A. W. Howitt, C. Z. Muhas
  (Mem. de la Soc. Anthrop. Allemande, 1882, p. 265) and by Professor
  Mantegazza (chapt. i.) for whom see infra.

Footnote 350:

  Similarly certain Australian tribes act scenes of rape and pederasty
  saying to the young, If you do this you will be killed.

Footnote 351:

  “Báh,” is the popular term for the amatory appetite: hence such works
  are called Kutub al-Báh, lit. = Books of Lust.

Footnote 352:

  I can make nothing of this title nor can those whom I have consulted:
  my only explanation is that they may be fanciful names proper.

Footnote 353:

  Amongst the Greeks we find erotic specialists (1) Aristides of the
  Libri Milesii; (2) Astyanassa the follower of Helen who wrote on
  androgenization; (3) Cyrene the artist of amatory Tabellæ or ex-votos
  offered to Priapus; (4) Elephantis the poetess who wrote on Varia
  concubitus genera; (5) Evemerus whose Sacra Historia, preserved in a
  fragment of Q. Eunius, was collected by Hieronymus Columna; (6)
  Hemitheon of the Sybaritic books; (7) Musæus the lyrist; (8) Niko the
  Samian girl; (9) Philænis, the poetess of Amatory Pleasures, in Athen.
  viii. 13, attributed to Polycrates the Sophist; (10) Protagorides,
  Amatory Conversations; (11) Sotades the Mantinæan who, says Suidas,
  wrote the poem “Cinædica”; (12) Sphodrias the Cynic, his Art of Love;
  and (13) Trepsicles, Amatory Pleasures. Amongst the Romans we have
  Aedituus, Annianus (in Ausonius), Anser, Bassus Eubius, Helvius Cinna,
  Lævius (of Io and the Erotopægnion), Memmius, Cicero (to Cerellia),
  Pliny the Younger, Sabellus (de modo coeundi); Sisenna, the pathic
  Poet and translator of Milesian Fables and Sulpitia the modest
  erotist. For these see the Dictionnaire Érotique of Blondeau pp. ix.
  and x. (Paris, Liseux, 1885).

Footnote 354:

  It has been translated from the Sanscrit and annotated by A.F.F. and
  B.F.R. Reprint: Cosmopoli: mdccclxxxv: for the Kama Shastra Society,
  London and Benares, and for private circulation only. The first print
  has been exhausted and a reprint will presently appear.

Footnote 355:

  The local press has often proposed to abate this nuisance of erotic
  publication which is most debasing to public morals already perverted
  enough. But the “Empire of Opinion” cares very little for such matters
  and, in the matter of the “native press,” generally seems to seek only
  a quiet life. In England if erotic literature were not forbidden by
  law, few would care to sell or to buy it, and only the legal pains and
  penalties keep up the phenomenally high prices.

Footnote 356:

  The Spectator (No. 119) complains of an “infamous piece of good
  breeding,” because “men of the town, and particularly those who have
  been polished in France, make use of the most coarse and uncivilised
  words in our language and utter themselves often in such a manner as a
  clown would blush to hear.”

Footnote 357:

  See the Novelle of Bandello the Bishop (Tome I; Paris, Liseux, 1879,
  small in 18), where the dying fisherman replies to his confessor “Oh!
  Oh! your reverence, to amuse myself with boys was natural to me as for
  man to eat and drink; yet you asked me if I sinned against nature!”
  Amongst the wiser ancients sinning contra naturam was not marrying and
  begetting children.

Footnote 358:

  Avis au Lecteur, “L’Amour dans l’Humanité,” par P. Mantegazza, traduit
  par Emilien Chesneau, Paris, Fetscherin et Chuit, 1886.

Footnote 359:

  See “H. B.” (Henry Beyle, French Consul at Civita Vecchia) par un des
  Quarante (Prosper Mérimée), Elutheropolis, An mdccclxiv. De
  l’Imposture du Nazaréen.

Footnote 360:

  This detail especially excited the veteran’s curiosity. The reason
  proved to be that the scrotum of the unmutilated boy could be used as
  a kind of bridle for directing the movements of the animal. I find
  nothing of the kind mentioned in the Sotadical literature of Greece
  and Rome; although the same cause might be expected everywhere to have
  the same effect. But in Mirabeau (Kadhésch) a grand seigneur moderne,
  when his valet-de-chambre de confiance proposes to provide him with
  women instead of boys, exclaims, “Des femmes! eh! c’est comme si tu me
  servais un gigot sans manche.” See also infra for “Le poids du
  tisserand.”

Footnote 361:

  See Falconry in the Valley of the Indus, London, John Van Voorst,
  1852.

Footnote 362:

  Submitted to Government on Dec. 31, ’47 and March 2, ’48, they were
  printed in “Selections from the Records of the Government of India.”
  Bombay. New Series. No. xvii. Part 2, 1855. These are (1) Notes on the
  Population of Sind, etc. and (2) Brief Notes on the Modes of
  Intoxication, etc. written in collaboration with my late friend
  Assistant-Surgeon John E. Stocks, whose early death was a sore loss to
  scientific botany.

Footnote 363:

  Glycon the Courtesan in Athen. xiii. 84 declares that “boys are
  handsome only when they resemble women;” and so the Learned Lady in
  The Nights (vol. v. 160) declares “Boys are likened to girls because
  folks say, Yonder boy is like a girl.” For the superior physical
  beauty of the human male compared with the female, see The Nights,
  vol. iv. 15; and the boy’s voice before it breaks excels that of any
  diva.

Footnote 364:

  “Mascula,” from the priapiscus, the over-development of clitoris (the
  veretrum muliebre, in Arabic Abu Tartúr, habens cristam) which enabled
  her to play the man. Sappho (nat. B.C. 612) has been retoillée like
  Mary Stuart, La Brinvilliers, Marie Antoinette and a host of feminine
  names which have a savour not of sanctity. Maximus of Tyre (Dissert.
  xxiv.) declares that the Eros of Sappho was Socratic and that Gyrinna
  and Atthis were as Alcibiades and Chermides to Socrates: Ovid, who
  could consult documents now lost, takes the same view in the Letter of
  Sappho to Phaon and in Tristia ii. 265.

              Lesbia quid docuit Sappho nisi amare puellas?

  Suidas supports Ovid. Longinus eulogises the ἐρωτικὴ μανία (a term
  applied only to carnal love) of the far-famed Ode to Atthis:—

          Ille mî par esse Deo videtur * * *
          (Heureux! qui près de toi pour toi seule soupire * * *
          Blest as th’ immortal gods is he, etc.)

  By its love symptoms, suggesting that possession is the sole cure for
  passion, Erasistratus discovered the love of Antiochus for Stratonice.
  Mure (Hist. of Greek Literature, 1850) speaks of the Ode to Aphrodite
  (Frag. 1) as “one in which the whole volume of Greek literature offers
  the most powerful concentration into one brilliant focus of the modes
  in which amatory concupiscence can display itself.” But Bernhardy,
  Bode, Richter, K. O. Müller and esp. Welcker have made Sappho a model
  of purity, much like some of our dull wits who have converted
  Shakespeare, that most debauched genius, into a good British
  bourgeois.

Footnote 365:

  The Arabic Sahhákah, the Tractatrix or Subigitatrix, who has been
  noticed in vol. iv. 134. Hence to Lesbianise (λεσβίζειν) and
  tribassare (τρίβεσθαι); the former applied to the love of woman for
  woman and the latter to its mécanique: this is either natural, as
  friction of the labia and insertion of the clitoris when unusually
  developed; or artificial by means of the fascinum, the artificial
  penis (the Persian “Mayájang”); the patte de chat, the banana-fruit
  and a multitude of other succedanea. As this feminine perversion is
  only glanced at in The Nights I need hardly enlarge upon the subject.

Footnote 366:

  Plato (Symp.) is probably mystical when he accounts for such passions
  by there being in the beginning three species of humanity, men, women
  and men-women or androgynes. When the latter were destroyed by Zeus
  for rebellion, the two others were individually divided into equal
  parts. Hence each division seeks its other half in the same sex; the
  primitive man prefers men and the primitive woman women. C’est beau,
  but—is it true? The idea was probably derived from Egypt which
  supplied the Hebrews with androgynic humanity; and thence it passed to
  extreme India, where Shiva as Ardhanárí was male on one side and
  female on the other side of the body, combining paternal and maternal
  qualities and functions. The first creation of humans (Gen. i. 27) was
  hermaphrodite (= Hermes and Venus) masculum et fœminam creavit
  eos—male and female created He them—on the sixth day, with the command
  to increase and multiply (ibid. v. 28) while Eve the woman was created
  subsequently. Meanwhile, say certain Talmudists, Adam carnally
  copulated with all races of animals. See L’Anandryne in Mirabeau’s
  Erotika Biblion, where Antoinette Bourgnon laments the undoubling
  which disfigured the work of God, producing monsters incapable of
  independent self-reproduction like the vegetable kingdom.

Footnote 367:

  De la Femme, Paris, 1827.

Footnote 368:

  Die Lustsuche des Alterthum’s, Halle, 1839.

Footnote 369:

  See his exhaustive article on (Grecian) “Paederastie” in the
  Allgemeine Encyclopædie of Ersch and Gruber, Leipzig, Brockhaus, 1837.
  He carefully traces it through the several states, Dorians, Æolians,
  Ionians, the Attic cities and those of Asia Minor. For these details I
  must refer my readers to M. Meier; a full account of these would fill
  a volume not the section of an essay.

Footnote 370:

  Against which see Henri Estienne, Apologie pour Hérodote, a society
  satire of xvi^{th} century, lately reprinted by Liseux.

Footnote 371:

  In Sparta the lover was called εἰσπνήλας or εἴσπνηλος and the beloved
  as in Thessaly ἀΐτας or ἀΐτης.

Footnote 372:

  The more I study religions the more I am convinced that man never
  worshipped anything but himself. Zeus, who became Jupiter, was an
  ancient king, according to the Cretans, who were entitled liars
  because they showed his burial-place. From a deified ancestor he would
  become a local god, like the Hebrew Jehovah as opposed to Chemosh of
  Moab; the name would gain amplitude by long time and distant travel
  and the old island chieftain would end in becoming the Demiurgus.
  Ganymede (who possibly gave rise to the old Lat. “Catamitus”) was
  probably some fair Phrygian boy (“son of Tros”) who in process of time
  became a symbol of the wise man seized by the eagle (perspicacity) to
  be raised amongst the Immortals; and the chaste myth simply signified
  that only the prudent are loved by the gods. But it rotted with age as
  do all things human. For the Pederastía of the Gods see Bayle under
  Chrysippe.

Footnote 373:

  See Dissertation sur les idées morales des Grecs et sur les danger de
  lire Platon. Par M. Audé, Bibliophile, Rouen, Lemonnyer, 1879. This is
  the pseudonym of the late Octave Delepierre, who published with Gay,
  but not the Editio Princeps—which, if I remember rightly, contains
  much more matter.

Footnote 374:

  The phrase of J. Matthias Gesner, Comm. Reg. Soc. Gottingen i. 1–32.
  It was founded upon Erasmus’ “Sancte Socrate, ora pro nobis,” and the
  article was translated by M. Alcide Bonmaire, Paris, Liseux, 1877.

Footnote 375:

  The subject has employed many a pen, _e.g._ Alcibiade Fanciullo a
  Scola, D. P. A. (supposed to be Pietro Aretino—ad captandum?),
  Oranges, par Juann VVart, 1652: small square 8vo. of pp. 102,
  including 3 preliminary pp. and at end an unpaged leaf with 4 sonnets,
  almost Venetian, by V. M. There is a re-impression of the same date, a
  small 12mo. of longer format, pp. 124 with pp. 2 for sonnets: in 1862
  the Imprimerie Raçon printed 102 copies in 8vo. of pp. iv.–108, and in
  1863 it was condemned by the police as a liber spurcissimus atque
  execrandus de criminis sodomici laude et arte. This work produced
  “Alcibiade Enfant à l’école,” traduit pour la première fois de
  l’Italien de Ferrante Pallavicini, Amsterdam, chez l’Ancien Pierre
  Marteau, mdccclxvi. Pallavicini (nat. 1618), who wrote against Rome,
  was beheaded, æt. 26 (March 5, 1644) at Avignon in 1644 by the
  vengeance of the Barberini: he was a bel esprit déréglé, nourri
  d’études antiques and a Memb. of the Acad. Degl’ Incogniti. His
  peculiarities are shown by his “Opere Scelte,” 2 vols. 12mo,
  Villafranca, mdclxiii.; these do not include Alcibiade Fanciullo, a
  dialogue between Philotimus and Alcibiades which seems to be a mere
  skit at the Jesuits and their Péché philosophique. Then came the
  “Dissertation sur l’Alcibiade fanciullo a scola,” traduit de l’Italien
  de Giambattista Baseggio et accompagnée de notes et d’une post-face
  par un bibliophile français (M. Gustave Brunet, Librarian of
  Bordeaux), Paris. J. Gay, 1861—an octavo of pp. 78 (paged), 254
  copies. The same Baseggio printed in 1850 his Disquisizioni (23
  copies) and claims for F. Pallavicini the authorship of Alcibiades
  which the Manuel du Libraire wrongly attributes to M. Girol. Adda in
  1859. I have heard of but not seen the “Amator fornaceus, amator
  ineptus” (Palladii, 1633) supposed by some to be the origin of
  Alcibiade Fanciullo; but most critics consider it a poor and insipid
  production.

Footnote 376:

  The word is from νάρκη, numbness, torpor, narcotism: the flowers,
  being loved by the infernal gods, were offered to the Furies.
  Narcissus and Hippolytus are often assumed as types of morosa
  voluptas, masturbation and clitorisation for nymphomania: certain
  mediæval writers found in the former a type of the Saviour; and
  Mirabeau a representation of the androgynous or first Adam: to me
  Narcissus suggests the Hindu Vishnu absorbed in the contemplation of
  his own perfections.

Footnote 377:

  The verse of Ovid is parallel’d by the song of Al-Záhir al-Jazari (Ibn
  Khall. iii. 720).

             Illum impuberem amaverunt mares; puberem feminæ.
             Gloria Deo! nunquam amatoribus carebit.

Footnote 378:

  The venerable society of prostitutes contained three chief classes.
  The first and lowest were the Dicteriads, so called from Diete (Crete)
  who imitated Pasiphaë, wife of Minos, in preferring a bull to a
  husband; above them was the middle class, the Aleutridæ who were the
  Almahs or professional musicians, and the aristocracy was represented
  by the Hetairai, whose wit and learning enabled them to adorn more
  than one page of Grecian history. The grave Solon, who had studied in
  Egypt, established a vast Dicterion (Philemon in his Delphica), or
  bordel, whose proceeds swelled the revenue of the Republic.

Footnote 379:

  This and Saint Paul (Romans i. 27) suggested to Caravaggio his picture
  of St. Rosario (in the museum of the Grand Duke of Tuscany), showing a
  circle of thirty men turpiter ligati.

Footnote 380:

  Properly speaking “Medicus” is the third or ring-finger, as shown by
  the old Chiromantist verses,

              Est pollex Veneris; sed Jupiter indice gaudet,
              Saturnus medium; Sol _medicumque_ tenet.

Footnote 381:

  So Seneca uses digito scalpit caput. The modern Italian does the same
  by inserting the thumb-tip between the index and medius to suggest the
  clitoris.

Footnote 382:

  What can be wittier than the now trite Tale of the Ephesian Matron,
  whose dry humour is worthy of The Nights? No wonder that it has made
  the grand tour of the world. It is found in the neo-Phædrus, the tales
  of Musæus and in the Septem Sapientes as the “Widow which was
  comforted.” As the “Fabliau de la Femme qui se fist putain sur la
  fosse de son Mari,” it tempted Brantôme and La Fontaine; and Abel
  Rémusat shows in his Contes Chinois that it is well known to the
  Middle Kingdom. Mr. Walter K. Kelly remarks, that the most singular
  place for such a tale is the “Rule and Exercise of Holy Dying” by
  Jeremy Taylor, who introduces it into his chapt. v.—“Of the
  Contingencies of Death and Treating our Dead.” But in those days
  divines were not mealy-mouthed.

Footnote 383:

  Glossarium eroticum linguæ Latinæ, sive theogoniæ, legum et morum
  nuptialium apud Romanos explanatio nova, auctore P. P. (Parisiis,
  Dondey-Dupré, 1826, in 8vo). P. P. is supposed to be Chevalier Pierre
  Pierrugues, an engineer who made a plan of Bordeaux and who annotated
  the Erotica Biblion. Gay writes, “On s’est servi pour cet ouvrage des
  travaux inédits de M. le Baron de Schonen, etc. Quant au Chevalier
  Pierre Pierrugues, qu’on désignait comme l’auteur de ce savant volume,
  son existence n’est pas bien avérée, et quelques bibliographes
  persistent à penser que ce nom cache la collaboration du Baron de
  Schonen et d’Éloi Johanneau. Other glossicists as Blondeau and Forberg
  have been printed by Liseux, Paris.

Footnote 384:

  This magnificent country which the petty jealousies of Europe condemn,
  like the glorious regions about Constantinople, to mere barbarism, is
  tenanted by three Moslem races. The Berbers, who call themselves
  Tamazight (plur. of Amazigh), are the Gætulian indigenes speaking an
  Africo-Semitic tongue (see Essai de Grammaire Kabyle, etc. par A.
  Hanoteau, Paris, Benjamin Duprat). The Arabs, descended from the
  conquerors in our eighth century, are mostly nomades and
  camel-breeders. Third and last are the Moors proper, the race dwelling
  in towns, a mixed breed originally Arabian but modified by six
  centuries of Spanish residence and showing by thickness of feature and
  a parchment-coloured skin, resembling the American Octaroon’s, a negro
  innervation of old date. The latter are well described in “Morocco and
  the Moors,” etc. (Sampson Low and Co., 1876), by my late friend Dr.
  Arthur Leared, whose work I should like to see reprinted.

Footnote 385:

  Thus somewhat agreeing with one of the multitudinous modern theories
  that the Pentapolis was destroyed by discharges of meteoric stones
  during a tremendous thunderstorm. Possible, but where are the stones?

Footnote 386:

  To this Iranian domination I attribute the use of many Persic words
  which are not yet obsolete in Egypt. “Bakhshísh,” for instance, is not
  intelligble in the Moslem regions west of the Nile-Valley and for a
  present the Moors say Hadíyah, regalo or favor.

Footnote 387:

  Arnobius and Tertullian, with the arrogance of their caste and its
  miserable ignorance of that symbolism which often concealed from
  vulgar eyes the most precious mysteries, used to taunt the heathen for
  praying to deities whose sex they ignored: “Consuistis in precibus
  ‘Seu tu Deus seu tu Dea,’ dicere!” These men would know everything;
  they made God the merest work of man’s brains and armed him with a
  despotism of omnipotence which rendered their creation truly dreadful.

Footnote 388:

  Gallus lit. = a cock, in pornologic parlance is a capon, a castrato.

Footnote 389:

  The texts justifying or conjoining castration are Matt. xviii. 8–9;
  Mark ix. 43–47; Luke xxiii. 29 and Col. iii. 5. St. Paul preached (1
  Corin. vii. 29) that a man should live with his wife as if he had
  none. The Abelian heretics of Africa abstained from women because Abel
  died virginal. Origen mutilated himself after interpreting too
  rigorously Matth. xix. 12, and was duly excommunicated. But his
  disciple, the Arab Valerius founded (A.D. 250) the castrated sect
  called Valerians who, persecuted and dispersed by the Emperors
  Constantine and Justinian, became the spiritual fathers of the modern
  Skopzis. These eunuchs first appeared in Russia at the end of the xith
  century, when two Greeks, John and Jephrem, were metropolitans of
  Kiew: the former was brought thither in A.D. 1089 by Princess Anna
  Wassewolodowna and is called by the chronicles Nawjè or the Corpse.
  But in the early part of the last century (1715–1733) a sect arose in
  the circle of Uglitseh and in Moscow, at first called Clisti or
  flagellants which developed into the modern Skopzi. For this extensive
  subject see De Stein (Zeitschrift für Ethn. Berlin, 1875) and
  Mantegazza, chapt. vi.

Footnote 390:

  See the marvellously absurd description of the glorious “Dead Sea” in
  the Purchas v. 84.

Footnote 391:

  Jehovah here is made to play an evil part by destroying men instead of
  teaching them better. But, “Nous faisons les Dieux à notre image et
  nous portons dans le ciel ce que nous voyons sur la terre.” The idea
  of Yahweh, or Yah is palpably Egyptian, the Ankh or ever-living One:
  the etymon, however, was learned at Babylon and is still found amongst
  the cuneiforms.

Footnote 392:

  The name still survives in the Shajarát al-Ashará, a clump of trees
  near the village Al-Ghájar (of the Gypsies?) at the foot of Hermon.

Footnote 393:

  I am not quite sure that Astarte is not primarily the planet Venus;
  but I can hardly doubt that Prof. Max Müller and Sir G. Cox are
  mistaken in bringing from India Aphrodite the Dawn and her attendants,
  the Charites identified with the Vedic Harits. Of Ishtar in Accadia,
  however, Roscher seems to have proved that she is distinctly the Moon
  sinking into Amenti (the west, the Underworld) in search of her lost
  spouse Izdubar, the Sun-god. This again is pure Egyptianism.

Footnote 394:

  In this classical land of Venus the worship of Ishtar-Ashtaroth is by
  no means obsolete. The Metáwali heretics, a people of Persian descent
  and Shiite tenets, and the peasantry of “Bilád B’sharrah,” which I
  would derive from Bayt Ashirah, still pilgrimage to the ruins and
  address their vows to the Sayyidat al-Kabírah, the Great Lady.
  Orthodox Moslems accuse them of abominable orgies and point to the
  lamps and rags which they suspend to a tree entitled Shajarat
  al-Sitt—the Lady’s tree—an Acacia Albida which, according to some
  travellers, is found only here and at Sayda (Sidon) where an avenue
  exists. The people of Kasrawán, a Christian province in the Libanus,
  inhabited by a peculiarly prurient race, also hold high festival under
  the far-famed Cedars and their women sacrifice to Venus like the
  Kadashah of the Phœnicians. This survival of old superstition is
  unknown to missionary “Handbooks,” but amply deserves the study of the
  anthropologist.

Footnote 395:

  Some commentators understand “the tabernacles sacred to the
  reproductive powers of women;” and the Rabbis declare that the emblem
  was the figure of a setting hen.

Footnote 396:

  “Dog” is applied by the older Jews to the Sodomite and the Catamite;
  and thus they understand the “price of a dog” which could not be
  brought into the Temple (Deut. xxiii. 18). I have noticed it in one of
  the derivations of cinædus and can only remark that it is a vile libel
  upon the canine tribe.

Footnote 397:

  Her name was Maachah and her title, according to some, “King’s
  mother”: she founded the sect of Communists who rejected marriage and
  made adultery and incest part of worship in their splendid temple.
  Such were the Basilians and the Carpocratians, followed in the xith
  century by Tranchelin, whose sectarians, the Turlupins, long infested
  Savoy.

Footnote 398:

  A noted exception is Vienna remarkable for the enormous development of
  the virginal bosom which soon becomes pendulent.

Footnote 399:

  Gen. xxxviii. 2–11. Amongst the classics Mercury taught the “Art of le
  Thalaba” to his son Pan who wandered about the mountains distraught
  with love for the Nymph Echo and Pan passed it on to the pastors. See
  Thalaba in Mirabeau.

Footnote 400:

  The reader of The Nights has remarked how often the “he” in Arabic
  poetry denotes a “she”; but the Arab, when uncontaminated by travel,
  ignores pederasty, and the Arab poet is a Badawi.

Footnote 401:

  So Mohammed addressed his girl-wife Ayishah in the masculine.

Footnote 402:

  So amongst the Romans we have the Iatroliptæ, youths or girls who
  wiped the gymnast’s perspiring body with swan-down, a practice renewed
  by the professors of “Massage”; Unctores who applied perfumes and
  essences; Fricatrices and Tractatrices or shampooers; Dropacistæ,
  corn-cutters; Alipilarii who plucked the hair, etc., etc., etc.

Footnote 403:

  It is a parody on the well-known song (Roebuck i. sect. 2, No. 1602):

   The goldsmith knows the worth of gold, jewellers worth of jewelry;
   The worth of rose Bulbul can tell and Kambar’s worth his lord, Ali.

Footnote 404:

  For “Sindí” Roebuck (Oriental Proverbs Part i. p. 99) has Kunbu
  (Kumboh) a Panjábi peasant and others vary the saying ad libitum. See
  vol. vi. 156.

Footnote 405:

  See “Sind Revisited” i. 133–35.

Footnote 406:

  They must not be confounded with the _grelots lascifs_, the little
  bells of gold or silver set by the people of Pegu in the prepuce-skin,
  and described by Nicolo de Conti who however refused to undergo the
  operation.

Footnote 407:

  Relation des découvertes faites par Colomb etc. p. 137: Bologna 1875:
  also Vespucci’s letter in Ramusio (i. 131) and Paro’s Recherches
  philosophiques sur les Américains.

Footnote 408:

  See Mantegazza loc. cit. who borrows from the Thèse de Paris of Dr.
  Abel Hureau de Villeneuve, “Frictiones per coitum productæ magnum
  mucosæ membranæ vaginalis turgorem, ac simul hujus cuniculi
  coarctationem tam maritis salacibus quæritatam afferunt.”

Footnote 409:

  Fascinus is the Priapus-god to whom the Vestal Virgins of Rome,
  professed tribades, sacrificed; also the neck-charm in phallus-shape.
  Fascinum is the male member.

Footnote 410:

  Captain Grose (Lexicon Balatronicum) explains merkin as “counterfeit
  hair for women’s privy parts. See Bailey’s Dict.” The Bailey of 1764,
  an “improved edition,” does not contain the word which is now
  generally applied to a cunnus succedaneus.

Footnote 411:

  I have noticed this phenomenal cannibalism in my notes to Mr. Albert
  Tootle’s excellent translation of “The Captivity of Hans Stade of
  Hesse:” London, Hakluyt Society, mdccclxxiv.

Footnote 412:

  The Ostreiras or shell mounds of the Brazil, sometimes 200 feet high,
  are described by me in Anthropologia No. i. Oct. 1873.

Footnote 413:

  The Native Races of the Pacific States of South America, by Herbert
  Howe Bancroft, London, Longmans, 1875.

Footnote 414:

  All Peruvian historians mention these giants, who were probably the
  large-limbed Caribs (Caraíbes) of the Brazil: they will be noticed in
  page 244.

Footnote 415:

  This sounds much like a pious fraud of the missionaries, a
  Europeo-American version of the Sodom legend.

Footnote 416:

  Les Races Aryennes du Pérou, Paris, Franck, 1871.

Footnote 417:

  O Brazil e os Brazileiros, Santos, 1862.

Footnote 418:

  Æthiopia Orientalis, Purchas ii. 1558.

Footnote 419:

  Purchas iii. 243.

Footnote 420:

  For a literal translation see 1^{re} Série de la Curiosité Littéraire
  et Bibliographique, Paris, Liseux, 1880.

Footnote 421:

  His best known works are (1) Praktisches Handbuch der Gerechtlichen
  Medecin, Berlin, 1860; and (2) Klinische Novellen zur gerechtlichen
  Medecin, Berlin, 1863.

Footnote 422:

  The same author printed another imitation of Petronius Arbiter, the
  “Larissa” story of Théophile Viand. His cousin, the Sévigné, highly
  approved of it. See Bayle’s objections to Rabutin’s delicacy and
  excuses for Petronius’ grossness in his “Éclaircissement sur les
  obscénités” (Appendice au Dictionnaire Antique).

Footnote 423:

  The Boulgrin of Rabelais, which Urquhart renders Ingle for Boulgre, an
  “indorser,” derived from the Bulgarus or Bulgarian, who gave to Italy
  the term bugiardo—liar. Bougre and Bougrerie date (Littré) from the
  xiiith century. I cannot however, but think that the trivial term
  gained strength in the xvith when the manners of the Bugres or
  indigenous Brazilians were studied by Huguenot refugees in La France
  Antartique and several of these savages found their way to Europe. A
  grand Fête in Rouen on the entrance of Henri II. and Dame Katherine de
  Medicis (June 16, 1564) showed, as part of the pageant, three hundred
  men (including fifty “Bugres” or Tupis) with parroquets and other
  birds and beasts of the newly explored regions. The procession is
  given in the four-folding woodcut “Figure des Brésiliens” in Jean de
  Prest’s Edition of 1551.

Footnote 424:

  Erotika Biblion chapt. Kadésch (pp. 93 et seq.) Edition de Bruxelles
  with notes by the Chevalier P. Pierrugues of Bordeaux, before noticed.

Footnote 425:

  Called Chevaliers de Paille because the sign was a straw in the mouth,
  à la Palmerston.

Footnote 426:

  I have noticed that the eunuch in Sind was as meanly paid and have
  given the reason.

Footnote 427:

  Centuria Librorum Absconditorum (by Pisanus Fraxi) 4to, p. lx. and
  593. London. Privately printed, mdccclxxix.

Footnote 428:

  A friend learned in these matters supplies me with the following list
  of famous pederasts. Those who marvel at the wide diffusion of such
  erotic perversion, and its being affected by so many celebrities, will
  bear in mind that the greatest men have been some of the worst:
  Alexander of Macedon, Julius Cæsar and Napoleon Buonaparte held
  themselves high above the moral law which obliges common-place
  humanity. All three are charged with the Vice. Of Kings we have Henri
  iii., Louis xiii. and xviii., Frederick ii. of Prussia, Peter the
  Great, William ii. of Holland and Charles ii. and iii. of Parma. We
  find also Shakespeare (i., xv., Edit. Francois. Hugo) and Molière,
  Theodorus Beza, Lully (the Composer), D’Assoucy, Count Zintzendorff,
  the Grand Condé, Marquis de Villette, Pierre Louis Farnèse, Duc de la
  Vallière, De Soleinne, Count D’Avaray, Saint Mégrin, D’Epernon,
  Admiral de la Susse, La Roche-Pouchin Rochfort. S. Louis, Henne (the
  Spiritualist), Comte Horace de Viel Castel, Lerminin, Fievée, Théodore
  Leclerc, Archi-Chancellier Cambacèrés, Marquis de Custine,
  Sainte-Beuve and Count D’Orsay. For others refer to the three Volumes
  of Pisanus Fraxi; Index Librorum Prohibitorum (London, 1877), Centuria
  Librorum Absconditorum (before alluded to) and Catena Librorum
  Tacendorum, London, 1885. The indices will supply the names.

Footnote 429:

  Of this peculiar character Ibn Khallikan remarks (ii. 43), “There were
  four poets whose works clearly contraried their character. Abu
  al-Atahíyah wrote pious poems himself being an atheist; Abú Hukayma’s
  verses proved his impotence, yet he was more salacious than a he-goat;
  Mohammed ibn Házim praised contentment, yet he was greedier than a
  dog; and Abú Nowás hymned the joys of sodomy, yet he was more
  passionate for women than a baboon.”

Footnote 430:

  A virulently and unjustly abusive critique never yet injured its
  object: in fact it is generally the greatest favour an author’s
  unfriends can bestow upon him. But to notice in a popular Review books
  which have been printed and not published is hardly in accordance with
  the established courtesies of literature. At the end of my work I
  propose to write a paper “The Reviewer Reviewed” which will, amongst
  other things, explain the motif of the writer of the critique and the
  editor of the Edinburgh.

Footnote 431:

  For detailed examples and specimens see p. 10 of Gladwin’s
  “Dissertations on Rhetoric,” etc., Calcutta, 1801.

Footnote 432:

  For instance: I, M. | take thee N. | to my wedded wife, | to have and
  to hold | from this day forward, | for better for worse, | for richer
  for poorer, | in sickness and in health, | to love and to cherish, |
  till death do us part, etc. Here it becomes mere blank verse which is,
  of course, a defect in prose style. In that delightful old French the
  Saj’a frequently appeared when attention was solicited for the titles
  of books: _e.g._ Le Romant de la Rose, ou tout lart damours est
  enclose.

Footnote 433:

  See Gladwin loc. cit. p. 8: it also is = alliteration (Ibn Khall. ii.,
  316).

Footnote 434:

  He called himself “Nabiyun ummí” = illiterate prophet; but only his
  most ignorant followers believe that he was unable to read and write.
  His last words, accepted by all traditionists, were “Aatíní dawáta wa
  kalam” (bring me ink-case and pen); upon which the Shi’ah or Persian
  sectaries base, not without probability, a theory that Mohammed
  intended to write down the name of Ali as his Caliph or successor when
  Omar, suspecting the intention, exclaimed, “The Prophet is delirious;
  have we not the Koran?” thus impiously preventing the precaution.
  However that may be, the legend proves that Mohammed could read and
  write even when not “under inspiration.” The vulgar idea would arise
  from a pious intent to add miracle to the miraculous style of the
  Koran.

Footnote 435:

  I cannot but vehemently suspect that this legend was taken from much
  older traditions. We have Jubal the semi-mythical who, “by the
  different falls of his hammer on the anvil, discovered by the ear the
  first rude music that pleased the antediluvian fathers.” Then came
  Pythagoras, of whom Macrobius (lib. ii.) relates how this
  Græco-Egyptian philosopher, passing by a smithy, observed that the
  sounds were grave or acute according to the weights of the hammers;
  and he ascertained by experiment that such was the case when different
  weights were hung by strings of the same size. The next discovery was
  that two strings of the same substance and tension, the one being
  double the length of the other, gave the diapason-interval or an
  eighth; and the same was effected from two strings of similar length
  and size, the one having four times the tension of the other.
  Belonging to the same cycle of invention-anecdotes are Galileo’s
  discovery of the pendulum by the lustre of the Pisan Duomo; and the
  kettle-lid, the falling apple and the copper hook which inspired Watt,
  Newton and Galvani.

Footnote 436:

  To what an absurd point this has been carried we may learn from Ibn
  Khallikán (i. 114). A poet addressing a single individual does not say
  “My friend!” or “My friends!” but “My two friends!” (in the dual)
  _because_ a Badawi required a pair of companions, one to tend the
  sheep and the other to pasture the camels.

Footnote 437:

  For further details concerning the Sabab, Watad and Fasilah, see at
  the end of this Essay the learned remarks of Dr. Steingass.

Footnote 438:

  _e.g._ the Mu’allakats of “Amriolkais,” Tarafah and Zuhayr compared by
  Mr. Lyall (Introduction to Translations) with the metre of Abt Vogler,
  _e.g._

      Ye know why the forms are fair, ye hear how the tale is told.

Footnote 439:

  _e.g._ the Poem of Hareth which often echoes the hexameter.

Footnote 440:

  Gladwin p. 80.

Footnote 441:

  Gladwin (p. 77) gives only eight, omitting Fă’ūl which he or his
  author probably considers the Muzáhaf, imperfect or apocopêd form of
  Fă’ūlūn, as Măfā’īl of Măfā’īlūn. For the infinite complications of
  Arabic prosody the Khafíf (soft breathing) and Sahíh (hard breathing);
  the Sadr and Arúz (first and last feet), the Ibtidá and Zarb (last
  foot of every line); the Hashw (cushion-stuffing) or body-part of
  verse; the ’Amúd al-Kasídah or Al-Musammat (the strong) and other
  details I must refer readers to such specialists as Freytag and Sam.
  Clarke (Prosodia Arabica), and to Dr. Steingass’s notes infra.

Footnote 442:

  The Hebrew grammarians of the Middle Ages wisely copied their Arab
  cousins by turning Fa’la into Pael and so forth.

Footnote 443:

  Mr. Lyall, whose “Ancient Arabic Poetry” (Williams and Norgate, 1885)
  I reviewed in _The Academy_ of Oct. 3, ’85, did the absolute reverse
  of what is required: he preserved the metre and sacrificed the rhyme
  even when it naturally suggested itself. For instance in the last four
  lines of No. xli. what would be easier than to write,

  Ah sweet and soft wi’ thee her ways: bethink thee well! The day shall
     be
  When some one favoured as thyself shall find her fair and fain and
     free;
  And if she swear that parting ne’er shall break her word of constancy,
  When did rose-tinted finger-tip with pacts and pledges e’er agree?

Footnote 444:

  See p. 439 Grammatik des Arabischen Vulgär Dialekts von Ægyptien, by
  Dr. Wilhelm Spitta Bey, Leipzig, 1880. In pp. 489–493 he gives
  specimens of eleven Mawáwíl varying in length from four to fifteen
  lines. The assonance mostly attempts monorhyme: in two tetrastichs it
  is aa + ba, and it does not disdain alternates, ab + ab + ab.

Footnote 445:

  Al-Siyuti, p. 235, from Ibn Khallikan. Our knowledge of oldest Arab
  verse is drawn chiefly from the Kitáb al-Aghání (Song-book) of Abu
  al-Faraj the Isfaháni who flourished A.H. 284–356 (= 897–967): it was
  printed at the Butak Press in 1868.

Footnote 446:

  See Lyall loc. cit. p. 97.

Footnote 447:

  His Diwán has been published with a French translation, par R.
  Boucher, Paris, Labitte, 1870.

Footnote 448:

  I find also minor quotations from the Imám Abu al-Hasan al-Askari (of
  Sarra man raa) ob. A.D. 868; Ibn Makúla (murdered in A.D. 862?); Ibn
  Durayd (ob. A.D. 933); Al-Zahr the Poet (ob. A.D. 963); Abu Bakr
  al-Zubaydi (ob. A.D. 989); Kábús ibn Wushmaghir (murdered in A.D.
  1012–13); Ibn Nabatah the Poet (ob. A.D. 1015); Ibn al-Sa’ati (ob.
  A.D. 1028); Ibn Zaydun al-Andalusi who died at Hums (Emessa, the Arab
  name for Seville) in A.D. 1071; Al-Mu’tasim ibn Sumadih (ob. A.D.
  1091); Al-Murtaza ibn al-Shahrozuri the Sufi (ob. A.D. 1117); Ibn Sara
  al-Shantaráni (of Santarem) who sang of Hind and died A.D. 1123; Ibn
  al-Kházin (ob. A.D. 1124); Ibn Kalakis (ob. A.D. 1172); Ibn al-Ta’wizi
  (ob. A.D. 1188); Ibn Zabádah (ob. A.D. 1198); Bahá al-Dín Zuhayr (ob.
  A.D. 1249); Muwaffak al-Din Muzaffar (ob. A.D. 1266) and sundry
  others. Notices of Al-Utayyah (vol. i. 11), of Ibn al-Sumám (vol. i.
  87) and of Ibn Sáhib al-Ishbíli, of Seville, (vol. i. 100) are
  deficient. The most notable point in Arabic verse is its savage
  satire, the language of excited “destructiveness” which characterises
  the Badawi: he is “keen for satire as a thirsty man for water;” and
  half his poetry seems to consist of foul innuendo, of lampoons, and of
  gross personal abuse.

Footnote 449:

  If the letter preceding Wáw or Yá is moved by Fathah, they produce the
  diphthongs au (aw), pronounced like ou in “bout,” and ai, pronounced
  as i in “bite.”

Footnote 450:

  For the explanation of this name and those of the following terms, see
  Terminal Essay, p. 261.

Footnote 451:

  This Fásilah is more accurately called sughrà, the smaller one; there
  is another Fásilah kubrà, the greater, consisting of four moved
  letters followed by a quiescent, or of a Sabab sakíl followed by a
  Watad majmú’. But it occurs only as a variation of a normal foot, not
  as an integral element in its composition, and consequently no mention
  of it was needed in the text.

Footnote 452:

  It is important to keep in mind that the seemingly identical feet 10
  and 6, 7 and 3, are distinguished by the relative positions of the
  constituting elements in either pair. For as it will be seen, that
  Sabab and Watad are subject to _different_ kinds of alterations, it is
  evident that the effect of such alteration upon a foot will vary, if
  Sabab and Watad occupy _different_ places with regard to each other.

Footnote 453:

  _i.e._ vertical to the circumference.

Footnote 454:

  This would be a Fásilah kubrà spoken of in the note p. 278.

Footnote 455:

  In pause that is at the end of a line, a short vowel counts either as
  long or is dropped, according to the exigencies of the metre. In the
  Hashw the u or i of the pronominal affix for the third person sing.
  masc., and the final u of the enlarged pronominal plural forms, humu
  and kumu may be either short or long, according to the same
  exigencies. The end-vowel of the pronoun of the first person aná, I,
  is generally read short, although it is written with Alif.

Footnote 456:

  On p. 275 the word akámú, as read by itself, was identified with the
  foot Fa’úlun. Here it must be read together with the following
  syllable as “akámulwaj,” which is Mafá’ílun.

Footnote 457:

  Prof. Palmer, p. 328 of his Grammar, identifies this form of the
  Wáfir, when every Mufá’alatun of the Hashw has become Mafá’ílun, with
  the second form of the Rajaz. It should be Hazaj. Professor Palmer was
  misled, it seems, by an evident misprint in one of his authorities,
  the Muhít al-Dáirah by Dr. Van Dayk, p. 52.




                                 INDEX.


 Abdallah ibn al-Mu’tazz (poet-prince), 39

 Abdún (convent of), 40

 Abú al-Sa’ádát (Pr. N.) = Father of Prosperities, 29

 Abú Miján (song of), 41

 Abú Tabak = Father of whipping, 5

 ’Ádilíyah (Mosque in Cairo), 6

 Aesop (the fable-writer), 117

 ’Ajáib al-Hind = Marvels of Ind, 153

 A’láj = sturdy miscreants, 38

 Allah (will make things easy = will send us aid), 2

 —— (give thee quittance of responsibility), 11

 —— (will send thee thy daily bread), 13

 Alnashar (story of), 146

 ’Ámir = one who inhabiteth, haunter, 6

 ’Amm = uncle (polite address to a father-in-law), 32

 Ánasa-kum = ye are honoured by knowing him, 11

 Arabs (for plundering nomades), 25

 Arianism and early Christianity, 190

 Arms and Armour, 86

 Artists in cosmetics, 234

 ’Asákir = corner-terminals of a litter, 32

 Asal Kasab = cane-honey, 3

 —— Katr = drip-honey, 2

 Ash’ab (proverbial for greed), 15

 Astarte (primarily the planet Venus?), 229

 ’Attár = perfume-seller, druggist, 8

 ’Aysh = that on which man lives (for bread), 3


 Báb (Al-) al-’Ali = Sublime Porte, 5

 Báb al-Nasr = Gate of Victory, 6

 Barmakís (history of the family), 137

 Battál (Al-), story of, 74

 Bazar (locked at night), 13

 Betrothed (for “intended to be married with regal ceremony”), 55

 Boccaccio and The Nights, 160

 Book (black as her), 1

 Boulgrin, Bougre, Bougrerie (derivations of the terms), 249

 Bresl. Edit. quoted, 54. _seqq._

 —— (mean colloquialism thereof), 169

 Brides of the Treasure, 31

 Burckhardt quoted, 144


 Cairene jargon, 8

 —— (savoir faire), 10

 —— (bonhomie), 28

 —— (knows his fellow-Cairene), 35

 Calamity (_i.e._ to the enemy), 33

 Cannibalism in the New World, 240

 Caravaggio (picture of St. Rosario), 219

 Castration (texts justifying or enjoining it), 227

 Character-sketch (making amends for abuse of women), 24

 Cask (for “home” of the maiden wine), 38

 Children (one of its = a native of), 8

 Clairvoyance of perfect affection, 26

 Coffee (mention of), 90

 Coquetries (requiring as much inventiveness as a cotillon), 58

 Cruelty (of the “fair sex” in Egypt), 45

 Cry (that needs must be cried), 21

 Curs (set them on the cattle = show a miser money, etc.), 18


 Darb al-Ahmar = Red Street (in Cairo), 8

 Death (simply and pathetically sketched), 47

 Drama (in Turkey and Persia), 167

 Dramatic scene (told with charming naïveté), 9

 Dunyá (Pr. N.) = the World, 27


 Elevation (nothing strange in sudden), 53

 Ephesus (the Matron of), 220

 Ernest (Duke of Bavaria, Romance of), 153

 Erotic specialists among the Ancients, 201

 Euphemism, 4; 27


 Faríd = unique; union-pearl, 54

 Fatúrát = light food for early breakfast, 12

 Fox and jackal (confounded by the Arabic dialects), 123


 Galland, Antoine (memoir of), 96, _seqq._

 Garden (the Perfumed of the Cheikh Nefzaoui), 133

 Gazelle’s blood red (dark red dye), 12

 German Translations of The Nights, 112, _seqq._

 Ghulámíyah = girl dressed as a boy to act cup-bearer, 39

 Ghurrah = white blaze on a horse’s brow, 40

 Giants (marrying in Peru, probably the Caribs of the Brazil), 243

 Glossarium eroticum, 221

 Gnostic absurdities, 191

 Gold (liquid = Vino d’Oro), 40

 Grelots lascifs, 238

 Gypsies (their first appearance in Europe), 89


 Handkerchief of dismissal, 47

 Haríri (lines quoted from), 44

 Harím al-Rashid and Charlemagne, 135

 Hazár Afsánah, 72, _seqq._; 93

 Hippic Syphilis, 90

 Hetairesis and Sotadism (the heresies of love), 215

 Hizám = belt (not Khizám = nose-ring), 36


 ’Iddah (Al-) = period of widowhood, 43

 Ikhtíyán al-Khutan = Khaitán (?), 9

 Iram (the many-columned), 29

 Irishman (and his “convarter”), 3

 Ishtar-Ashtaroth (her worship not obsolete in Syria), 230

 Iskander = Alexander (according to the Arabs), 57

 Italian Translations of The Nights, 114


 Ja’afar the Barmecide (his suspected heresy), 141

 Jackal’s gall (used aphrodisiacally), 123

 Jadíd = new (coin), copper, 12

 Jauzá = Gemini, 38

 Jazírat ibn Omar (island and town on the Tigris), 40

 Jink (Al-) = effeminates, 19


 Kafr = village (in Egypt and Syria), 27

 Kákilí = Sumatran (eagle-wood), 57

 Kalandars (order of), 84

 Kammir (Imper) = brown (thé bread), 14

 Kathá Sarit Ságara, 160, _seqq._

 Kathír = much, “no end”, 10

 Kitáb al-Fihrist (and its author), 71

 Kohl’d with Ghunj = languor-kohl’d, 40

 Koran quoted (lxxxix), 29

 Koran (first English Translation owing to France), 100

 Kunáfah = Vermicelli-cake, 1

 Kutub al-Báh = Books of Lust, 201


 Lá Kabbata hámiyah = (no burning plague), 14

 Lane quoted, 1; 11, 12; 19; 34, 36; 50; 52; 53; 70, 115

 Languages (study of should be assisted by ear and tongue), 96

 Lentils (cheapest and poorest food in Egypt), 31

 Lesbianism, 209

 Libraries (much appreciated by the Arabs), 175

 Lion (as Sultan of the beasts jealous of a man’s power), 34

 Lokman (three of the name), 118

 Love (cruelty of), 26

 Lying (until one’s self believes the lie to be truth), 14


 Ma’arúf = kindness, favour, 1

 Macnaghten’s Edition, 81

 Malákay bayti ’l-ráhah = slabs of the jakes, 51

 “Making men” (and women), 199

 Marocco (tenanted by three Moslem races), 222

 Mashallah = the English “cock’s ’ill” with a difference, 52

 Mashhad = head-and-foot stone of a grave, 53

 Merchant (worth a thousand), 8

 Metrical portion of The Nights (threefold distribution of), 67

 Mohammed (before and after the Hijrah), 196

 Morbi venerei, 88

 Moslem resignation (noble instance of), 42

 Mudarris = professor, 8

 Mummery = “Mahommerie”, 178

 Munkar and Nakír, 47

 Mustahakk = deserving, 52


 Náhí-ka = let it suffice thee, 22

 Naká = sand-hill, 27

 Narcissus and Hippolytus (assumed as types of morosa voluptas), 215


 Olema (time-serving ones), 44

 Onanisms (discouraged by circumcision), 233


 Pain (resembling the drawing of a tooth), 21

 Palaces in ruins (for want of repair), 61

 Palgrave and Al-Islam, 189

 Parisian MS. of The Nights, 104

 Payne quoted 40; 50; 52; 74; 104; 140; 142; 167.

 Péché philosophique (The, in France), 249

 Pederasts (list of famous), 252

 Pehlevi version of the Panchatantra, 120

 Penis (and its succedanea), 239

 Plato (his theory of love), 209

 Play “near and far” = “fast and loose”, 22

 Powders (coloured in sign of holiday-making), 56

 Pre-Adamite doctrine, 179

 Poets (four whose works contraried their character), 253

 Prolixity (heightening the effect of the tale), 50

 Pun (on a name), 11, 27

 Pyramids (verses on the), 150


 Ráwí = story-teller (also used for reciter of Traditions), 163

 Resignation (noble instance of), 42

 Rijál = Hallows, 14

 Roman superficiality (notable instance of), 116

 Rub’ al-Kharáb (probably for the great Arabian Desert), 42


 Sabíhat al-’Urs = gift on the wedding-morning, 18

 Sacy, Sylvestre de (on the origin of The Nights), 76

 Sappho (the “Masculine”), 208

 Sawád = blackness of the hair, 60

 Schools (attached to Mosques), 174

 Shamtá = the grizzled (name for wine), 38

 Shaykh al-Islám (his mention sign of modern composition), 19

 Signals of Debauchees, 219

 Sijn al-Ghazab = Prison of Wrath, 45

 Símurgh (guardian of the Persian mysteries), 130

 Sisters (their abiding together after marriage frequently insisted
    upon), 56

 Socrates (“sanctus pæderasta”), 213, _seqq._

 Sotadic zone, 206, _seqq._

 Sodomy (abnormally developed amongst the savages of the New World), 240

 Story-teller (picture of the), 164

 Sufyism (rise of), 128

 Sun (likened to a bride displaying her charms to man), 38

 Syphilis (origin of), 89

 —— (hippic), 90


 Tasawwuf (rise of), 128

 Taysh = vertigo, giddiness, 9

 Time-measurers (of very ancient date), 85

 Tobacco (mention of), 91

 Touch of nature (making all the world kin), 24

 Trébutien quoted, 9; 54; 69; 80; 98


 Umm al-Raas = crown of the head, 44

 Umm Kulsum (one of the Amsál of the Arabs for debauchery), 194

 ’Urrah = dung, 1


 Visvakarma = the Anti-creator, 131


 Whoso praiseth and then blameth lieth twice, 15

 Woman, women (treated leniently in a Kazi’s court), 4

 Womankind (their status in Al-Islam), 195


 Yá Abú al-Lithámayn = “O sire of the chin-veils twain”, 20

 Yellow-girl (for light-coloured wine), 39


 Zarábín = slaves’ shoes, 1




                                Appendix




                              MEMORANDUM.


I make no apology for the number and extent of bibliographical and other
lists given in this Appendix: they may cumber the book but they are
necessary to complete my design. This has been to supply throughout the
ten volumes the young Arabist and student of Orientalism and
Anthropology with such assistance as I can render him; and it is my
conviction that if with the aid of this version he will master the
original text of the “Thousand Nights and a Night,” he will find himself
at home amongst educated men in Egypt and Syria, Najd and Mesopotamia
and be able to converse with them like a gentleman; not, as too often
happens in Anglo-India, like a “Ghoráwálá” (groom). With this object he
will learn by heart what instinct and inclination suggest of the
proverbs and instances, the verses, the jeux d’esprit and especially the
Koranic citations scattered about the text; and my indices will enable
him to hunt up the tale or the verses which he may require for quotation
even when writing an ordinary letter to a “native” correspondent. Thus
he will be spared the wasted labour of wading through volumes in order
to pick up a line.

The following is the list of Indices:—


                              APPENDIX I.

  I. Index to the Tales in the ten Volumes.

  II. Alphabetical Table of the Notes (Anthropological, etc.) prepared
    by F. Steingass, Ph.D.

  III. Alphabetical Table of First Lines (metrical portion) in English
    and Arabic, prepared by Dr. Steingass.

  IV. Tables of Contents of the various Arabic texts.

      A. The Unfinished Calcutta Edition (1814–18).

      B. The Breslau Text (1825–43) from Mr. Payne’s Version.

      C. The Macnaghten or Turner-Macan Text (A.D. 1839–42), and the
        Bulak Edition (A.H. 1251 = A.D. 1835–36), from Mr. Payne’s
        Version.

      D. The same with Mr. Lane’s and my Version.


                              APPENDIX II.

  Contributions to the Bibliography of the Thousand and One Nights,
  and their Imitations, with a Table shewing the contents of the
  principal editions and translations of the Nights. By W. F. Kirby,
  Author of “Ed-Dimiryaht, an Oriental Romance;” “The New Arabian
  Nights,” &c.




                              Appendix I.


                               _INDEX I._
                 _INDEX TO THE TALES AND PROPER NAMES._

   N.B.—_The Roman numerals denote the volume, the Arabic the page._

 Abdullah the Fisherman and Abdullah the Merman, ix. 165.

 —— bin Fazl and his brothers, ix. 304.

 —— bin Ma’amar with the Man of Bassorah and his slave-girl, v. 69.

 Abd al-Rahman the Moor’s story of the Rukh, v. 122.

 Abu Hasan al-Ziyadi and the Khorasan Man, iv. 285.

 Abu Hasan, how he brake Wind, v. 135.

 Abu Isa and Kurrat al-Ayn, The Loves of, v. 145.

 Abu Ja’afar the Leper, Abu al-Hasan al-Durraj and, v. 294.

 Abu Kir the Dyer and Abu Sir the Barber, ix. 134.

 Abu al-Aswad and his squinting slave-girl, v. 80.

 Abu al-Husn and his slave-girl Tawaddud, v. 189.

 Abu al-Hasan al-Durraj and Abu Ja’afar the Leper, v. 294.

 Abu al-Hasan of Khorasan, ix. 229.

 Abu Mohammed hight Lazybones, iv. 162.

 Abu Nowas, Harun al-Rashid with the damsel and, iv. 261.

 Abu Nowas and the Three Boys, v. 64.

 Abu Sir the Barber, Abu Kir the Dyer and, ix. 134.

 Abu Suwayd and the handsome old woman, v. 163.

 Abu Yusuf with Harun al-Rashid and his Wazir Ja’afar, The Imam, iv. 1.

 Abu Yusuf with Al-Rashid and Zubaydah, The Imam, iv. 153.

 Adam, The Birds and Beasts and the Son of, iii. 114.

 Adi bin Zayd and the Princess Hind, v. 124.

 Ajib, The History of Gharib and his brother, vi. 257.

 Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat, iv. 29.

 Alexandria (The Sharper of) and the Master of Police, iv. 269.

 Ali bin Bakkar and Shams al-Nahar, iii. 162.

 Ali of Cairo, The Adventures of Mercury, vii. 172.

 Ali Nur al-Din and Miriam the Girdle-Girl, viii. 264.

 Ali the Persian and the Kurd Sharper, iv. 149.

 Ali Shar and Zumurrud, iv. 187.

 Ali bin Tahir and the girl Muunis, v. 164.

 Al-Malik al-Nasir (Saladin) and the Three Chiefs of Police, iv. 271.

 Almsgiving, The Woman whose hands were cut off for, iv. 281.

 Amin (Al-) and his uncle Ibrahim bin al-Mahdi, v. 152.

 Anushirwan, Kisra, and the village damsel, v. 87.

 Anushirwan, The Righteousness of King, v. 254.

 Angel of Death and the King of the Children of Israel, The, v. 250.

 —— with the Proud King and the Devout Man, The, v. 246.

 —— and the Rich King, The, v. 248.

 Anis al-Jalis, Nur al-Din Ali and the damsel, ii. 1.

 Ape, The King’s daughter and the, iv. 297.

 Apples, The Three, i. 186.

 Arab Girl, Harun al-Rashid and the, vii. 108.

 Arab Youth, The Caliph Hisham and the, iv. 101.

 Ardashir and Hayat al-Nufus, vii. 209.

 Asma’i (Al-) and the three girls of Bassorah, vii. 110.

 Ass, The Ox and the, i. 16.

 Ass, The Wild, The Fox and, ix. 48.

 Ayishah, Musab bin al-Zubayr and his wife, v. 79.

 Aziz and Azizah, Tale of, ii. 298.

 Azizah, Aziz and, ii. 298.


 Badawi, Ja’afar the Barmecide and the old, v. 98.

 ——, Omar bin al-Khattab and the young, v. 99.

 —— and his Wife, The, vii. 124.

 Badi’a al-Jamal, Sayf al-Muluk and, vii. 314.

 Badr Basim of Persia, Julnar the Sea-born, and her Son King, vii. 264.

 Badr al-Din Hasan, Nur al-Din Ali of Cairo and his son, i. 195.

 Baghdad, The Haunted House in, v. 166.

 ——, Khalifah the Fisherman of, viii. 145.

 ——, The Porter and the Three Ladies of, i. 82.

 ——, (The ruined man of) and his slave-girl, ix. 24.

 ——, The Sweep and the noble Lady of, iv. 125.

 Bakun’s Story of the Hashish-Eater, iii. 91.

 Banu Tayy, The Lovers of the, v. 137.

 Banu Ozrah, The Lovers of the, v. 70.

 Barber’s Tale of himself, The, i. 317.

 Barber’s First Brother, Story of the, i. 319.

 Barber’s Second Brother, Story of the, i. 324.

 Barber’s Third Brother, Story of the, i. 328.

 Barber’s Fourth Brother, Story of the, i. 331.

 Barber’s Fifth Brother, Story of the, i. 335.

 Barber’s Sixth Brother, Story of the, i. 343.

 Barber, Abu Kir the Dyer and Abu Sir the, ix. 134.

 Barber-Surgeon, Ibrahim bin al-Mahdi and the, iv. 103.

 Barmecide, Ja’afar the, and the old Badawi, v. 98.

 Bassorah (the man of) and his slave-girl, Abdullah bin Ma’amar with, v.
    69.

 ——, Al-Asma’i and the three girls of, vii. 110.

 ——, (Hasan of) and the King’s daughter of the Jinn, viii. 7.

 ——, The Lovers of, vii. 130.

 Bath, Harun al-Rashid and Zubaydah in the, v. 75.

 Bathkeeper’s Wife, The Wazir’s Son and the, vi. 150.

 Beanseller, Ja’afar the Barmecide and the, iv. 159.

 Bear, Wardan the Butcher’s adventure with the Lady and the, iv. 293.

 Beasts and the Son of Adam, The Birds and, iii. 16.

 Behram, Prince of Persia, and the Princess Al-Datma, vi. 184.

 Belvedere, The House with the, vi. 188.

 Birds and Beasts and the Carpenter, The, iii. 114.

 Birds, The Falcon and the, iii. 154.

 Birds (the Speech of), The page who feigned to know, vi. 169.

 Black Slave, The pious, v. 261.

 Blacksmith who could handle fire without hurt, The, v. 271.

 Blind Man and the Cripple, The, ix. 67.

 Boys, Abu Nowas and the Three, v. 64.

 Boy and Girl at School, The Loves of the, v. 73.

 Boy and the Thieves, The, ix. 95.

 Boy (The woman who had to lover a) and the other who had to lover a
    man, v. 165.

 Brass, The City of, vi. 83.

 Broker’s Story, The Christian, i. 262.

 Budur and Jubayr bin Umayr, The Loves of, iv. 228.

 Budur, Kamar al-Zaman and, iii. 212.

 Bukhayt, Story of the Eunuch, ii. 49.

 Bulak Police, Story of the Chief of the, iv. 273.

 Bull and the Ass (Story of), i. 16.

 Bulukiya, Adventures of, v. 304.

 Butcher’s adventure with the Lady and the Bear, Wardan the, iv. 293.

 Butter, The Fakir and his pot of, ix. 40.


 Cairo (New) Police, Story of the Chief of the, iv. 271.

 —— (Old) Police, Story of the Chief of the, iv. 274.

 ——, The Adventures of Mercury Ali of, vii. 172.

 Caliph Al-Ma’amun and the Strange Doctor, iv. 185.

 Caliph, The mock, iv. 130.

 Cashmere Singing-girl, The Goldsmith and the, vi. 156.

 Cat and the Crow, The, iii. 149.

 —— and the Mouse, The, ix. 35.

 Champion (The Moslem) and the Christian Lady, v. 277.

 Chaste Wife, The Lover’s Trick against the, vi. 135.

 Christian Broker’s Story, The, i. 262.

 City of Labtayt, The, vi. 83.

 Cloud (The saint to whom Allah gave a) to serve him, v. 274.

 Cobbler (Ma’aruf the) and his wife Fatimah, x. 1.

 Confectioner, his Wife and the Parrot, The, vi. 132.

 Crab, The Fishes and the, ix. 34.

 Craft and Malice of Women, The, vi. 122.

 Cripple, The Blind Man and the, ix. 67.

 Crow, the Fox and the, iii. 150.

 —— and the Serpent, The, ix. 46.

 Crow, The Cat and the, iii. 149.

 Crows and the Hawk, The, ix. 53.


 Dalilah the Crafty and her daughter Zaynab the Coney-catcher, The
    Rogueries of, vii. 144.

 Datma (The Princess Al-), Prince Behram of Persia and, vi. 184.

 Death (The Angel of) and the King of the Children of Israel, v. 250.

 —— —— with the Proud King and the Devout Man, v. 246.

 —— —— and the Rich King, v. 248.

 Debauchee and the Three-year-old Child, The, vi. 208.

 Desert (The old woman who dwelt in the) and the pilgrim, v. 186.

 Device (The Wife’s) to cheat her husband, vi. 152.

 Devil, Ibrahim of Mosul and the, vii. 113.

 ——, Isaac of Mosul and his mistress and the, vii. 136.

 Devout Israelite, The, iv. 283.

 —— Tray-maker and his wife, The, v. 264.

 —— Prince, The, v. 111.

 —— woman and the two wicked elders, The, v. 97.

 Dibil al-Khuzai and Muslim bin al-Walid, v. 127.

 Dish of Gold, The man who stole the Dog’s, iv. 265.

 Doctor (The strange) and the Caliph Al-Maamun, iv. 185.

 Dog’s Dish of Gold, The man who stole the, iv. 265.

 Dream, The ruined man who became rich through a, iv. 289.

 Drop of Honey, The, vi. 142.

 Duban, The Physician, i. 45.

 Dunya, Taj al-Muluk and the Princess, ii. 283.

 Durraj (Abu al-Hasan al-) and Abu Ja’afar the Leper, v. 294.

 Dust, The woman who made her husband sift, vi. 143.

 Dyer, Abu Sir the Barber and Abu Kir the, ix. 134.


 Eagle, The Sparrow and the, iii. 155.

 Ebony Horse, The, v. 1.

 Egypt (The man of Upper) and his Frank wife, ix. 19.

 Elders, The Devout woman and the two wicked, v. 97.

 Eldest Lady’s Story, The, i. 162.

 Enchanted Spring, The, vi. 145.

 —— Youth, The, i. 69.

 Envied, The Envier and the, i. 123.

 Envier and the Envied, The, i. 123.

 Eunuch Bukhayt, Tale of the, ii. 49.

 —— Kafur, Tale of the, ii. 51.


 Fakir and his jar of butter, The, ix. 40.

 Falcon and the Partridge, The, iii. 138.

 Falcon, King Sindibad and his, i. 50.

 Fatimah, Ma’aruf the Cobbler and his wife, x. 1.

 Fath bin Khakan (Al) and Al-Mutawakkil, v. 153.

 Ferryman of the Nile and the Hermit, The, v. 288.

 First Old man’s Story, i. 27.

 Fisherman, Abdullah the Merman and Abdullah the, ix. 165.

 —— of Baghdad, Khalifah the, viii. 145.

 ——, The Foolish, ix. 93.

 —— and the Jinni, The, i. 38.

 ——, Khusrau and Shirin and the, v. 91.

 Fishes and the Crab, The, ix. 43.

 Five Suitors, The Lady and her, vi. 172.

 Flea and the Mouse, The, iii. 151.

 Folk, The Fox and the, vi. 211.

 Forger, Yahya bin Khalid and the, iv. 181.

 Fox and the Crow, The, iii. 150.

 Fox and the Folk, The, vi. 211.

 Fox, The Wolf and the, iii. 132.

 Francolin and the Tortoises, The, ix. 113.

 Frank King’s Daughter, Ali Nur al-Din and the, viii. 264.

 Frank wife, The man of Upper Egypt and his, ix. 19.

 Fuller and his son, The, vi. 134.


 Generous friend, The poor man and his, iv. 288.

 Ghanim bin Ayyub the Thrall o’ Love, ii. 45.

 Gharib and his brother Ajib, The History of, vi. 257.

 Girl, Harun al-Rashid and the Arab, vii. 108.

 Girl at School, The Loves of the Boy and, v. 73.

 Girls of Bassorah, Al-Asma’i and the three, vii. 110.

 Girls, Harun al-Rashid and the three, vi. 81.

 —— ——, and the two, v. 81.

 Goldsmith and the Cashmere Singing-Girl, The, vi. 156.

 Goldsmith’s wife, The water-carrier and the, v. 89.


 Hajjaj (Al-) Hind daughter of Al-Nu’uman and, vii. 96.

 —— and the pious man, v. 269.

 Hakim (The Caliph Al-) and the Merchant, v. 86.

 Hammad the Badawi, Tale of, ii. 104.

 Hariri (Al-) Abu Zayd’s lament for his impotency. Final Note to vol.
    viii.

 Harun al-Rashid and the Arab girl, vii. 108.

 —— and the Slave-Girl and the Imam Abu Yusuf, iv. 153.

 —— with the Damsel and Abu Nowas, iv. 261.

 —— and Abu Hasan the Merchant of Oman, ix. 188.

 —— and the three girls, v. 81.

 —— and the two girls, v. 81.

 —— and the three poets, v. 77.

 —— and Zubaydah in the Bath, v. 75.

 Hashish-Eater, Bakun’s tale of the, ii. 91.

 Hasan of Bassorah and the King’s daughter of the Jinn, viii. 7.

 Hasan, King Mohammed bin Sabaik and the Merchant, vii. 308.

 Hatim al-Tayyi: his generosity after death, iv. 94.

 Haunted House in Baghdad, The, v. 166.

 Hawk, The Crows and the, ix. 53.

 Hayat al-Nufus, Ardashir and, vii. 209.

 Hedgehog and the wood Pigeons, The, iii. 156.

 Hermit, The Ferryman of the Nile and the, v. 288.

 Hermits, The, iii. 125.

 Hind, Adi bin Zayd and the Princess, v. 124.

 Hind daughter of Al-Nu’uman and Al-Hajjaj, vii. 96.

 Hind (King Jali’ad of) and his Wazir Shimas, ix. 32.

 Hisham and the Arab Youth, The Caliph, iv. 101.

 Honey, The Drop of, vi. 142.

 Horse, The Ebony, v. 1.

 House with the Belvedere, The, vi. 188.

 Hunchback’s Tale, The, i. 255.

 Husband and the Parrot, The, i. 52.


 Ibn al-Karibi, Masrur and, v. 109.

 Ibrahim al-Khawwas and the Christian King’s Daughter, v. 283.

 —— bin al-Khasib and Jamilah, ix. 207.

 —— of Mosul and the Devil, vii. 113.

 —— bin al-Mahdi and Al-Amin, v. 152.

 —— bin al-Mahdi and the Barber-Surgeon, iv. 103.

 —— —— and the Merchant’s Sister, iv. 278.

 Ifrit’s mistress and the King’s Son, The, vi. 199.

 Ignorant man who set up for a Schoolmaster, The, v. 119.

 Ikrimah al-Fayyaz, Khuzaymah bin Bishr and, vii. 99.

 Imam Abu Yusuf with Al-Rashid and Zubaydah, The, iv. 153.

 Introduction. Story of King Shariyar and his brother, i. 1.

 Iram, The City of, iv. 113.

 Isaac of Mosul’s Story of Khadijah and the Caliph Maamun, iv. 119.

 Isaac of Mosul and the Merchant, v. 129.

 Isaac of Mosul and his Mistress and the Devil, vii. 113.

 Island, The King of the, v. 290.

 Iskandar Zu Al-Karnayn and a certain Tribe of poor folk, v. 252.

 Israelite, The Devout, iv. 283.


 Jackals and the Wolf, The, ix. 103.

 Ja’afar the Barmecide and the Beanseller, iv. 159.

 —— —— and the old Badawi, v. 98.

 Ja’afar bin al-Hadi, Mohammed al-Amin, and, v. 93.

 Jamilah, Ibrahim bin al-Khasib, and, ix. 207.

 Janshah, The Story of, v. 329.

 Jali’ad of Hind and his Wazir Shimas, King, ix. 32.

 Jeweller’s Wife, Kamar al-Zaman and the, ix. 246.

 Jewish Kazi and his pious Wife, The, v. 256.

 Jewish Doctor’s Tale, The, i. 288.

 Jinni, The Fisherman and the, i. 38.

 Jinni, The Trader and the, i. 24.

 Jubayr bin Umayr and Budur, The Loves of, iv. 228.

 Judar and his brethren, vi. 213.

 Julnar the Sea-born and her son King Badr Basim of Persia, vii. 264.

 Justice of Providence, The, v. 286.


 Kafur, Story of the Eunuch, ii. 51.

 Kalandar’s Tale, The first, i. 104.

 ——, The second, i. 113.

 ——, The third, i. 130.

 Kamar al-Zaman and Budur, iii. 211.

 —— and the Jeweller’s Wife, ix. 246.

 Kazi, the Jewish, and his pious wife, v. 256.

 Khadijah and the Caliph Maamun, Isaac of Mosul’s Story of, iv. 119.

 Khalif the Fisherman of Baghdad (note from Bresl. Edit.), viii. 184.

 Khalifah the Fisherman of Baghdad, viii. 145.

 Khawwas (Ibrahim al-) and the Christian King’s daughter, v. 283.

 Khorasan, Abu Hasan al-Ziyadi and the man from, iv. 285.

 ——, Abu al-Hasan of, ix. 229.

 Khusrau and Shirin and the Fisherman, v. 91.

 Khuzaymah bin Bishr and Ikrimah al-Fayyaz, vii. 99.

 King Jali’ad, Shimas his Wazir and his son Wird Khan, ix. 32.

 King of the Island, The, v. 290.

 —— and the Pilgrim Prince, The Unjust, ix. 50.

 —— and the virtuous wife, The, v. 121.

 —— and his Wazir’s wife, The, vi. 129.

 King’s Daughter and the Ape, The, iv. 297.

 —— Son and the Ifrit’s Mistress, The, vi. 199.

 —— —— and the Merchant’s Wife, The, vi. 167.

 —— —— and the Ghulah, The, vi. 139.

 Kings, The Two, ix. 65.

 Kisra Anushirwan and the Village Damsel, v. 87.

 Kurd Sharper, Ali the Persian and the, iv. 149.

 Kurrat al-Ayn and Abu Isa, v. 145.

 Kus Police and the Sharper, Chief of the, iv. 276.


 Labtayt, The City of, iv. 99.

 Lady of Baghdad, The Sweep and the noble, iv. 125.

 Lady’s Story, The Eldest, i. 162.

 Lady and her five suitors, The, vi. 172.

 —— and her two Lovers, The, vi. 138.

 Ladies of Baghdad, The Porter and the Three, i. 82.

 Laughed again, The man who never, vi. 160.

 Lazybones, Abu Mohammed hight, iv. 162.

 Leper, Abu al-Hasan al-Durraj and Abu Ja’afar the, v. 294.

 Lover, The mad, v. 138.

 Lover who feigned himself a thief (to save his mistress honour), The,
    iv. 155.

 Lover’s trick against the chaste Wife, The, vi. 135.

 Lovers of Bassorah, The, vii. 130.

 —— of the Banu Tayy, The, v. 137.

 —— of the Banu Ozrah, The, v. 70.

 ——, The Lady and her two, vi. 138.

 —— of Al-Medinah, The, vii. 139.

 ——, The Three unfortunate, v. 133.

 Loves of the Boy and Girl at School, The, v. 73.

 Loves of Abu Isa and Kurrat al-Ayn, The, v. 145.


 Maamun, Isaac of Mosul’s Story of Khadijah and the Caliph, iv. 119.

 —— (Al-) and the Pyramids of Egypt, v. 105.

 —— and the strange Scholar, The Caliph, iv. 185.

 Ma’an bin Zaidah and the Badawi, iv. 97.

 Ma’an the son of Zaidah and the Three Girls, iv. 96.

 Mad Lover, The, vii. 139.

 Madinah (Al-), The Lovers of, vii. 139.

 Magic Horse, The, v. 1.

 Mahbubah, Al-Mutawakkil and his favourite, iv. 291.

 Malik al-Nasir (Al-) and the three Masters of Police, iv. 271.

 —— and his Wazir, vii. 142.

 Man and his Wife, The, ix. 98.

 Man who never laughed during the rest of his days, The, vi. 160.

 Man (The Woman who had to lover a) and the other who had to lover a
    boy, v. 165.

 Man of Upper Egypt and his Frankish Wife, ix. 19.

 Man of Al-Yaman and his six Slave-girls, iv. 245.

 Man who stole the dog’s dish of gold, iv. 268.

 Man who saw the Night of Power (Three Wishes), vi. 180.

 Man’s dispute with the learned Woman about boys and girls, v. 154.

 Maruf the Cobbler and his wife Fatimah, x. 1.

 Mansur, Yahya bin Khalid and, iv. 179.

 Masrur and Ibn al-Karibi, v. 109.

 Masrur and Zayn al-Mawasif, viii. 205.

 Merchant of Oman, The, ix. 188.

 —— and the Robbers, The, ix. 100.

 —— and the two Sharpers, The, iii. 158.

 Merchant’s Sister, Ibrahim bin al-Mahdi and the, iv. 278.

 —— Wife, The King’s son and the, vi. 167.

 —— Wife and the Parrot, The, i. 52.

 Mercury Ali of Cairo, The Adventures of, vii. 172.

 Merman, and Abdullah the Fisherman, Abdullah the, ix. 165.

 Miller and his wife, The, v. 82.

 Miriam, Ali Nur al-Din and, viii. 264.

 Miser and Loaves of Bread, The, vi. 137.

 Mock Caliph, The, iv. 130.

 Mohammed al-Amin and Ja’afar bin al-Hadi, v. 93.

 Mohammed bin Sabaik and the Merchant Hasan, King, vii. 308.

 Money-changer, The Thief and the, iv. 275.

 Monkey, The Thief and his, iii. 159.

 Moslem Champion and the Christian Lady, The, v. 277.

 Mouse, The, and the Cat, ix. 35.

 Mouse and the Flea, The, iii. 151.

 Mouse and the Ichneumon, The, iii. 147.

 Muunis, Ali bin Tahir and the girl, v. 164.

 Musab bin al-Zubayr and Ayishah his wife, v. 79.

 Muslem bin al-Walid and Dibil al-Khuzai, v. 127.

 Mutawakkil (Al-) and Al-Fath bin Khakan, v. 153.

 —— and his favourite Mahbubah, iv. 291.

 Mutalammis (Al-) and his wife Umaymah, v. 74.


 Naomi, Ni’amah bin al-Rabi’a and his Slave-girl, iv. 1.

 Nazarene Broker’s Story, The, i. 262.

 Necklace, The Stolen, vi. 182.

 Niggard and the Loaves of Bread, The, vi. 137.

 Night of Power, The man who saw the, vi. 180.

 Nile (The Ferryman of the) and the Hermit, v. 288.

 Ni’amah bin al-Raby’a and Naomi his Slave-girl, iv. 1.

 Nur al-Din Ali and the damsel Anis al-Jalis, ii. 1.

 Nur al-Din of Cairo and his son Badr al-Din Hasan, i. 195.


 Ogress, The King’s Son and the, vi. 139.

 Old Man’s Story, The First, i. 27.

 —— —— The Second, i. 32.

 —— —— The Third, i. 36.

 Old Woman, Abu Suwayd and the handsome, v. 163.

 Omar bin al-Nu’uman and his Sons Sharrkan and Zau al-Makan, The Tale of
    King, ii. 77.

 Omar bin al-Khattab and the young Badawi, v. 99.

 Oman, The Merchant of, ix. 188.

 Otbah and Rayya, vii. 91.


 Page who feigned to know the speech of birds, The, vi. 169.

 Paradise, The Apples of, v. 141.

 Parrot, The Merchant’s wife and the, i. 52.

 Partridge, The Hawk and the, iii. 138.

 Peacock, The Sparrow and the, iii. 161.

 Persian and the Kurd Sharper, Ali the, iv. 149.

 Physician Duban, The, i. 45.

 Physician’s Story, The Jewish, i. 288.

 Pilgrim and the old woman who dwelt in the desert, The, v. 186.

 Pilgrim Prince, The Unjust King and the, ix. 50.

 Pious black slave, The, v. 261.

 Pigeons, The Hedgehog and the, iii. 156.

 Pigeons, The Two, vi. 183.

 Platter-maker and his wife, The devout, v. 264.

 Poets, Harun al-Rashid and the three, v. 77.

 Police of Bulak, Story of the Chief of the, iv. 273.

 —— of Kus and the Sharper, the Chief of the, iv. 276.

 —— of New Cairo, Story of the Chief of the, iv. 271.

 —— of Old Cairo, Story of the Chief of the, iv. 274.

 —— (The Three Masters of), Al-Malik, al-Nasir and, iv. 271.

 Poor man and his friend in need, The, iv. 288.

 Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad, The, i. 82.

 Portress, The Tale of the, i. 173.

 Prince Behram and the Princess Al-Datma, vi. 184.

 ——, the Ensorcelled, i. 69.

 —— and the Ghulah, The, i. 54.

 ——, The Devout, v. 111.

 —— (the Pilgrim), The Unjust King and, ix. 50.

 Prior who became a Moslem, The, v. 141.

 Providence, The justice of, v. 286.

 Purse, The Stolen, vi. 209.

 Pyramids of Egypt, Al-Maamun and the, v. 105.


 Queen of the Serpents, The, v. 298.


 Rake’s trick against the chaste Wife, The, vi. 135.

 Rayya, Otbah and, vii. 91.

 Reeve’s Tale, The, i. 278.

 Rogueries of Dalilah the Crafty and her daughter Zaynab the
    Coney-catcher, The, vii. 144.

 Rose-in-Hood, Uns al-Wujud and the Wazir’s Daughter, v. 12.

 Ruined Man of Baghdad and his Slave-girl, The, ix. 24.

 —— who became rich again through a dream, The, iv. 189.

 Rukh, Abd al-Rahman the Moor’s Story of the, v. 122.


 Sa’id bin Salim and the Barmecides, v. 94.

 Saint to whom Allah gave a cloud to serve him, The, v. 274.

 Saker and the Birds, The, iii. 154.

 Sandal-wood Merchant and the Sharpers, The, vi. 202.

 Sayf al-Muluk and Badi’a al-Jamal, vii. 314.

 School, The Loves of the Boy and the Girl at, v. 73.

 Schoolmaster who fell in love by report, The, v. 117.

 ——, The Foolish, v. 118.

 ——, The ignorant man who set up for a, v. 119.

 Serpent, The Crow and the, ix. 46.

 Serpent-charmer and his Wife, ix. 56.

 Serpents, The Queen of the, v. 298.

 Sexes, Relative excellence of the, v. 154.

 Shahryar and his brother, King (Introduction), i. 1.

 Shahryar (King) and his brother, i. 2.

 Shams al-Nahar, Ali bin Bakkar and, iii. 162.

 Sharper of Alexandria and the Chief of Police, The, iv. 269.

 Sharper, Ali the Persian and the Kurd, iv. 149.

 ——, The Chief of the Kus Police and the, iv. 276.

 ——, The Simpleton and the, v. 83.

 Sharpers, The Merchant and the Two, iii. 158.

 ——, The Sandal-wood Merchant and the, vi. 202.

 Sharrkan and Zau al-Makan, The History of King Omar bin Al-Nu’uman and
    his Sons, ii. 277.

 Shaykh’s Story (The First), i. 27.

 —— (The Second), i. 32.

 —— (The Third), i. 36.

 Shepherd and the Thief, The, ix. 106.

 Shimas, King Jali’ad of Hind and his Wazir, ix. 32.

 Shipwrecked Woman and her child, The, v. 259.

 Shirin and the Fisherman, Khusrau and, v. 91.

 Simpleton and the Sharper, The, v. 83.

 Sindibad and his Falcon, King, i. 50.

 Sindbad the Seaman and Sindbad the Porter, vi. 1.

 ——, First Voyage of, vi. 4.

 ——, Second Voyage of, vi. 14.

 ——, Third Voyage of, vi. 22.

 ——, Fourth Voyage of, vi. 34.

 ——, Fifth Voyage of, vi. 48.

 ——, Sixth Voyage of, vi. 58.

 ——, Seventh Voyage of, vi. 68.

 —— (note from Cal. Edit.), vi. 78.

 Singing-girl, The Goldsmith and the Cashmere, vi. 156.

 Six Slave-girls, The Man of Al-Yaman and his, iv. 245.

 Slave, The pious black, v. 261.

 Slave-girl, The ruined man of Baghdad and his, ix. 24.

 Slave-girls, The Man of Al-Yaman and his six, iv. 245.

 Sparrow and the Eagle, The, iii. 155.

 —— and the Peacock, The, iii. 161.

 Spider and the Wind, The, ix. 59.

 Spring, The Enchanted, vi. 145.

 Squinting slave-girl, Abu al-Aswad and his, v. 80.

 Stolen Necklace, The, vi. 182.

 —— Purse, The, vi. 209.

 Suitors, The Lady and her five, vi. 172.

 Sweep and Noble Lady of Baghdad, The, iv. 125.


 Tailor’s Tale, The, i. 300.

 Taj al-Muluk and the Princess Dunya, The Tale of, ii. 263.

 Tawaddud, Abu al-Hasan and his slave-girl, v. 189.

 Thief, The Lover who feigned himself a, iv. 155.

 —— and the Shroff, The, iv. 275.

 —— and his Monkey, The, iii. 159.

 ——, The Shepherd and the, ix. 106.

 —— turned Merchant and the other Thief, The, v. 107.

 Thieves, The Boy and the, ix. 95.

 ——, The Merchant and the, ix. 100.

 ——, The Two, v. 107.

 Three-year-old-child, The Debauchee and the, vi. 208.

 Three Apples, The, i. 186.

 Three unfortunate Lovers, v. 133.

 Three Wishes, or the Man who longed to see the Night of Power, The, vi.
    180.

 Tortoise, The Water-fowl and the, iii. 129.

 Tortoises, The Heathcock and the, ix. 113.

 Trader (the) and the Jinni, i. 24.

 Trick (The Lover’s) against the chaste wife, vi. 135.

 —— (The Wife’s) against her husband, vi. 152.

 Two Kings, The, ix. 56.

 Two Pigeons, The, vi. 183.


 Umaymah, Al-Mutalammis and his wife, v. 74.

 Unfortunate Lovers, The Three, v. 133.

 Unjust King and the Pilgrim Prince, The, ix. 50.

 Uns al-Wujud and the Wazir’s Daughter Rose-in-Hood, v. 32.

 Upper Egypt (The man of) and his Frank wife, ix. 19.


 Walid bin Sahl, Yunus the Scribe and the Caliph, vii. 104.

 Wardan, the Butcher, Adventure with the Lady and the Bear, iv. 293.

 Water-carrier and the Goldsmith’s Wife, The, v. 89.

 Water-fowl and the Tortoise, The, iii. 129.

 Wazir and the Sage Duban, The, i. 45.

 Wazir, Al-Malik al-Nasir and his, vii. 142.

 —— of Al-Yaman and his young brother, The, v. 71.

 Wazir’s Son and the Hammam-Keeper’s Wife, The, vi. 152.

 —— Wife, The King and his, vi. 129.

 Weasel, The Mouse and the, iii. 147.

 Weaver, The Foolish, iii. 159.

 Wife, The Badawi and his, vii. 124.

 —— (the Chaste) The Lover’s Trick against, vi. 135.

 ——, The King and his Wazir’s, vi. 129.

 ——, The Man and his Wilful, ix. 98.

 —— (The Merchant’s) and the Parrot, i. 52.

 —— (The Virtuous) and the King, v. 121.

 Wife’s device to cheat her husband, The, vi. 152.

 —— trick against her husband, The, v. 96.

 Wild Ass, The Jackal and the, ix. 48.

 Wilful Wife, The Man and his, ix. 98.

 Wind, The Spider and the, ix. 59.

 Wird Khan (King) and his Women and Wazirs, ix. 90.

 Wolf and the Fox, The, iii. 132.

 Wolf, The Foxes and the, ix. 103.

 Woman (The shipwrecked) and her child, v. 259.

 Woman’s trick against her husband, v. 96.

 Woman who made her husband sift dust, The, iv. 281.

 Woman whose hands were cut off for Almsgiving, The, iv. 281.

 Women, The Malice of, vi. 122.

 ——, The Two, v. 165.


 Yahya bin Khalid and the Forger, iv. 181.

 —— and Mansur, iv. 179.

 —— and the Poor Man, v. 92.

 Yaman (The Man of Al-) and his six slave-girls, iv. 245.

 —— (The Wazir of Al-) and his young brother, v. 71.

 Yunus the Scribe and the Caliph Walid bin Sahl, vii. 104.


 Zau al-Makan, The History of King Omar bin al-Nu’uman and his Sons
    Sharrkan and, ii. 77.

 Zayn al-Mawasif, Masrur and, viii. 205.

 Zaynab the Coney-Catcher, The Rogueries of Dalilah the Wily, and her
    Daughter, vii. 144.

 Zubaydah in the Bath, Harun al-Rashid and, v. 75.

 Zumurrud, Ali Shar and, iv. 187.


                              _INDEX II._

                   _ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF THE NOTES_
                        (_ANTHROPOLOGICAL, &c._)

                   _Prepared by_ F. STEINGASS, Ph.D.

 A’amash (Al-), traditionist, v. 81.

 A’amash (Al-) = one with watering eyes, vi. 96.

 A’aráf (Al-) = partition-wall (chapter of the Koran), v. 217.

 A’araj (Al-), traditionist, v. 81.

 Aaron’s rod, ii. 242.

 —— (becomes with Moslems Moses’ staff), v. 238.

 Abá, Abáah = cloak of hair, ii. 133; viii. 42.

 Abá al-Khayr = my good sir, etc., ix. 54.

 Abad = eternity, without end, ii. 205.

 Abbás “hero eponymus” of the Abbasides, i. 188.

 —— (= the grim-faced) iv. 138.

 Abbasides (descendants of the Prophet’s uncle), ii. 61.

 —— (black banners and dress), ii. 64, 292.

 ’Abd = servile, iii. 44.

 Abd al-Ahad = slave of the One (God), vi. 222.

 Abd al-Azíz (Caliph), ii. 166.

 Abd al-Malik (Caliph), ii. 77, 167.

 Abd al-Kádir of Gilán (founder of the Kádiri order), iv. 41.

 Abd al-Malik ibn Marwán (Caliph), iii. 319; iv. 7.

 Abd al-Rahím = slave of the Compassionate, vi. 221.

 Abd al-Salám = slave of salvation, vi. 211.

 Abd al-Samad = slave of the Eternal, vi. 221.

 Abd al-Samad al-Samúdí (for Samanhúdí?), vi. 87.

 Abdallah (a neutral name), v. 141.

 Abdallah bin Abbás, companion and traditioner, i. 304.

 Abdallah bin Abí Kilábah, iv. 113.

 Abdallah bin al-Zubayr, iii. 318.

 Abdallah bin Málik al-Khuzá’í, iv. 181.

 Abdallah bin Mas’úd (traditionist), v. 81.

 Abdallah bin Sálim (traditionist), v. 81.

 Abdallah ibn al-Mu’tazz (poet-prince), x. 39.

 Abdún (convent of) x. 40.

 Abhak = Allah bless him and keep (see Sal’am), ii. 24.

 ’Abír (a fragrant powder sprinkled on face, body and clothes), viii.
    240.

 Abjad (Hebrew-Arabic alphabet), v. 229.

 —— (logogriphs derived from it), viii. 93.

 Ablution (difference of fashion in performing it), v. 112.

 —— (obligatory after copulation), viii. 305.

 Abraham (an Imám to mankind), ii. 203.

 —— (place of) ii. 272; iv. 148.

 —— (the Friend = mediæval St. Abraham), v. 205; vi. 270.

 Abtan (Al-) = the most profound (_see_ Bátiní), vi. 221.

 Abú al-Abbás al-Mubarrad (grammarian), v. 138.

 Abú al-Abbás al-Rakáshí (poet), v. 77.

 Abú al-Ayná, v. 164.

 Abú al-Hamlát = father of assaults, burdens, pregnancies, vii. 149.

 Abú al-Hasan (not Husn), iii. 162.

 Abú al-Husn = Father of Beauty (a fancy-name), v. 189.

 Abú al-Hosayn (Father of the Fortlet) = fox, iii. 132.

 Abú al-Lays (Pr. N.) = Father of the Lion, ix. 211.

 Abú al-Muzaffir = Father of the Conqueror, iv. 166.

 Abú al-Nowás (Pr. N.) = Father of the Sidelocks, iv. 55, 264.

 Abú al-Ruwaysh = Father of the Feather-kin, viii. 77.

 Abú al-Sa’ádát = Father of Prosperities, viii. 148; x. 29.

 Abú al-Sakhá = Father of Munificence, vii. 133.

 Abú Alí, _see_ Di’ibil al-Khuzá’i.

 Abú Alí al-Husayn the Wag, vii. 130.

 Abú Ámir bin Marwán (Wazir to Saladin), vii. 142.

 Abú Bakr (Caliph) ii. 167, 197; v. 235.

 Abú Bakr Mohammed al-Anbárí (grammarian), v. 141.

 Abú Dalaf al-Ijili (a soldier famed for liberality and culture), ix.
    189.

 Abú Fáris = Father of Spoils (lion), v. 40.

 Abú Hanífah (founder of the Senior School), ii. 207.

 —— (scourged for refusing to take office), ii. 210.

 Abú Hassán al-Ziyadí, iv. 258.

 Abú Házim, ii. 205.

 Abú Horayrah (uncle of Mohammed), v. 81.

 Abú Hosayn = Father of the Fortlet (fox), vi. 211.

 Abú Ishak (Hárún’s cup-companion), ii. 302.

 Abú Karn = Father of the Horn (unicorn?), vi. 21.

 Abú Kidr = Father of the Cooking-pot, i. 304.

 Abú Kír = Father of the Pitch (Abou Kir), ix. 134.

 Abú Kurrat = Father of Coolness (Chamæleon), iii. 165.

 Abú Lahab and his wife, viii. 291.

 Abú Lúlúah (murderer of Caliph Omar), ii. 162.

 Abú Maryam (a term of contempt), viii. 306.

 Abú Miján (song of), x. 41.

 Abú Mohammed al-Battál (hero of an older tale), viii. 335.

 Abú Músà al-Ashárí, ii. 162.

 Abú Riyáh = Father of Winds (a toy), ii. 93.

 Abú Shámah = Father of the Cheek-mole, i. 269.

 Abú Shámmah = Father of a Smeller or nose, i. 269.

 Abú Shawárib = Father of Mustachios, i. 269.

 Abú Shiháb, Father of the Shooting-star = evil spirit, i. 221.

 Abú Sír (corruption of Pousiri = Busiris), ix. 134.

 Abú Sirhán = Father of (going out to pray by) Morning, iii. 146; ix.
    104.

 Abú Tabak = Father of Whipping, x. 5.

 Abú Tammám (poet), v. 157.

 Abú Yakzán = awakener (ass, cock), i. 16, 18.

 Abú Yúsuf (the Lawyer), iv. 153.

 Abú Zanád (traditionist), v. 81.

 Abú Zarr (companion of the Prophet), ii. 200; v. 102.

 Abyssinians (hardly to be called blackamoors), vi. 63.

 Account asked from outgoing Governors, vii. 102.

 Account of them will be presently given = “we leave them for the
    present,” vii. 157.

 Acids applied as counter-inebriants, viii. 32.

 Acquit me of responsibility = pardon me, ii. 76.

 —— (formula of dismissing a servant), vi. 243.

 Acquittance of all possible claims after business transactions (quoted
    on Judgment-Day), ix. 285.

 ’Ád (tribe of the prehistoric Arabs) i. 65; iii. 294; ix. 174.

 ’Ád bin Zayd (poet), v. 124.

 Adab = anything between good education and good manners, i. 132; ix.
    41.

 Adam’s loins, iv. 111.

 Adam’s Peak (Ar. Jabal al-Ramun), vi. 65.

 Ádamí = an Adamite (opposed to Jinn), ix. 169.

 Adan = our Aden, viii. 248.

 Address without vocative particle more emphatic, vii. 125.

 Addressing by the name not courteous, vii. 114.

 Adí (son of Hátim al-Táyyí), iv. 95.

 Ádil (Al-) = the Just (Caliph Omar), v. 103.

 ’Ádilíyah (Mosque in Cairo), x. 6.

 Adím = leather (Bulghár, Morocco), viii. 80.

 Adím al-Zauk = lack-tact, ix. 206.

 Adites (first and second), vi. 269.

 Adl = just (ironically), iv. 271.

 Adm (Udm) = any relish, iv. 128.

 Admiral (fishing for the King’s table), ix. 159.

 Adnán (Arab genealogy begins with), v. 100.

 —— (land of Arabia), vi. 94.

 Adolescent (Un, aime toutes les femmes), vii. 299.

 Adultery (none without an adulterer), v. 90.

 —— (to be proved by four witnesses), v. 97.

 —— (son of = base-born), ix. 331.

 —— (son of, to one’s own child), iii. 219.

 Æolipyla, ii. 101.

 Æsop the fable-writer, x. 117.

 Af’à = ὄφις (a snake), ix. 37.

 Affirmative and negative particles, vii. 195.

 Afridun (Furaydun) absurd name for a Greek king, ii. 82.

 Africa (suggested derivation of the name), vii. 60.

 Aftah (Al-) = Broad-’o-Brow, i. 17.

 Aghá = master, sir, gentleman (politely applied to a Eunuch), i. 235;
    ii. 50.

 —— (Al-) for chief police officer, vii. 156.

 Ahassa bi ’l-shurbah = “he smelt a rat,” vii. 144.

 Ahd (Al-) wa al-Mísák = oath and covenant, ix. 327.

 Ahdab = hunchback (opposed to Ak’as), i. 213.

 Áhirah = strumpet (_see_ Fájirah), viii. 109.

 Ahjár al-Kassárín = falling-stones, viii. 334.

 Ahl al-Bayt = the person of the house (euphemistic for wife), vi. 199.

 Ahlan = as one of the household, viii. 269.

 Ahmad = the praised one, Mohammed, ii. 226.

 Ahmad al-Danaf (Pr. N.) = Calamity Ahmad, iv. 75.

 —— bin Abí Dawád (High Chancellor to the Abbasides), ix. 244.

 —— bin Hanbal (founder of the fourth Moslem School), ii. 204.

 Ahnaf (Al-) bin Kays, ii. 160.

 Ahr (ihr) = fornication, in the sense of irreligion, ii. 258.

 Ahrám (Al-) = the Pyramids, v. 105.

 Ahwáz (city and province of Khuzistan), vi. 287.

 “Aidance from Allah and victory are near,” ix. 317.

 ’Áin = Smiter with the evil eye, i. 123.

 Air (I fear it for her when it bloweth), viii. 53.

 ’Ajáib al-Hind = marvels of Ind, x. 153.

 Ajal = appointed time of life, i. 74.

 —— = yes verily, vii. 195.

 ’Ajam (Al-) = region not Arab, Persia, i. 2.

 ’Ajami = foreigner, esp. Persian, i. 120.

 Ajíb (Pr. N.) = wonderful, vi. 257.

 Ajúz, for old woman, highly insulting, i. 174.

 ’Ajwah = dates pressed into a solid mass and deified, vii. 14.

 Akabah (mountain pass near Meccah), v. 295.

 Akákír = drugs, spices, vii. 147.

 Akásirah (= Kisra-Kings), i. 75; ix. 323.

 —— (= sons of the royal Chosroës), v. 10.

 Akh = brother (wide signification of the word), vi. 243.

 Akh al-Jahálah = Brother of Ignorance, iii. 162.

 Akhawán shakíkán = (two) brothers german, viii. 340.

 Ákhir al-Zamán = the latter days, v. 304.

 Akhlát (town in Armenia), vii. 88.

 Akhzar = green, grey, fresh (applied to cheek-down), ii. 292.

 Akík (Al-), two of the name, vii. 140.

 ’Akík = carnelian (“seal with seals of”), viii. 228.

 Akíl (son of Abú Tálib), viii. 172.

 ’Akká = Acre, ix. 19.

 Akkám = Cameleer, Caravan-manager, iv. 40.

 Akl al-hishmah = eating decorously, ix. 337.

 Akmám, pl. of Kumm = sleeve, petal, viii. 275.

 Akr Kayrawán = ball of silver-dross, viii. 267.

 Akún fidá-ka = I may be thy ransom, viii. 36.

 Akyál, title of the Himyarite Kings, vii. 60.

 Akrás = cakes, i. 83.

 Al (the Article with Proper Names), iii. 309.

 Alà júdi-k = to thy generosity, ix. 150.

 Alá al-Din (Aladdin) = Glory of the Faith, iv. 29, 33.

 Alà kulli hál = in any case, any how, viii. 272.

 Alà mahlak = at thy leisure, ix. 168.

 Alà raghm = in spite of, vii. 121.

 A’láj = sturdy miscreants, x. 38.

 Alak = clotted blood, iii. 26.

 Alam = way-mark etc., v. 191.

 —— (not Ilm) al-Din = flag of the faith, ii. 19.

 Aláma = alá-má = upon what? wherefore? iv. 201.

 Alas for his chance of escaping = there is none, vii. 183.

 Alast (day of), iv. 111.

 Albatross (supposed never to touch land), vi. 33.

 Alchemy (its practice has cost many a life), viii. 11.

 Alcinous (of the Arabian Odyssy), vi. 65.

 Alcove (corruption of Al-Kubbah), v. 18.

 Ál Dáud (David’s family), iv. 50.

 Aleppo (noted for debauchery), v. 64.

 Alexander (of the Koran) not to be confounded with the Macedonian, ii.
    199.

 Alexandria (praise of), viii. 289.

 Alfí = one who costs a thousand, iv. 225.

 Alhambra = (Dár) al-Hamrá, the Red, vii. 49.

 Alhamdulillah (pronounced to avert the evil eye), v. 7.

 Alí bin Abí Tálib (Caliph), v. 213; 225.

 —— (his deeds of prowess), ii. 108.

 —— (murder of), iii. 319.

 —— bin Mohammed bin Abdallah bin Táhír (Governor), v. 164.

 —— al-Mulúk = high of (among the Kings), vii. 354.

 —— al-Zaybak (Pr. N. = Mercury Ali), iv. 75; vii. 172.

 —— Shár (Pr. N.), iv. 187.

 Alif (stature like one), iii. 236; iv. 249.

 —— Há, Wáw as tests of calligraphy, vii. 112.

 Alish Takish (acting woman and man alternately), v. 65.

 All will not be save well = it will be the worse for him, ix. 293.

 Allah (will open thee) a formula of refusal, i. 32.

 —— (hath said) formula of quoting the Koran, i. 61.

 —— (names, by Edwin Arnold), ii. 28.

 —— Wa’llahi tayyib (exclamation of the Egyptian Moslem), _ib._ 34.

 —— (His name pronounced against the evil eye), iv. 34.

 —— (is all-knowing, swearing by, forbidden), _ib._ ~gutenberg 53254 .

 —— = (I don’t know), _ib._ ~gutenberg 53254 .

 —— (give thee profit), iii. 17.

 —— (unto, we are returning), _ib._ 317.

 —— (desire unto), v. 104.

 —— (corporality of?), _ib._ 104.

 —— (requite you abundantly = “thank you”), _ib._ 171.

 —— (seeking refuge with), _ib._ 200.

 —— (names of), _ib._ 214.

 —— (be praised whatso be our case), vi. 3.

 —— (the “Manifest Truth”), _ib._ 93.

 —— (is omniscient), formula used when telling an improbable tale, _ib._
    210.

 —— (the Opener), _ib._ 216.

 —— (it is He who gives by our means), _ib._ 233.

 —— (sight comprehendeth Him not), _ib._ 283.

 —— (confound the far One, hard swearing), vii. 155.

 —— (succour the Caliph against thee), _ib._ 159.

 —— (is All-knowing for our tale is no “Gospel truth”), _ib._ 209.

 —— (I take refuge with—from gainsaying thee = God forbid that I should
    oppose thee), viii. 53.

 —— (perpetuate his shadow), _ib._ 170.

 —— (we seek refuge with him from the error of the intelligent), _ib._
    327.

 —— (will make no way for the Infidels over the True Believers), ix. 16.

 —— (I seek refuge with), _ib._ 35.

 —— (He was jealous for Almighty), _ib._ 104.

 —— (I fear him in respect of = I am governed by Him in my dealings
    with), _ib._ 123.

 —— (pardon thee, showing that the speaker does not believe in another’s
    tale), _ib._ 154.

 —— (the Provider), _ib._ 166.

 —— (for the love of), _ib._ 170.

 —— (Karím = God is bountiful), _ib._ 167.

 —— (grant thee grace = pardon thee), _ib._ 283.

 —— (yasturak = will veil thee), _ib._ 309.

 —— (sole Scient of the hidden things, be extolled), _ib._ 311.

 —— (raised the heavens without columns, etc.), _ib._ 324.

 —— (will make things easy = will send us aid), x. 2.

 —— (give thee quittance of responsibility), _ib._ 11.

 —— (will send thee thy daily bread), _ib._ 13.

 Allah! Allah! = I conjure thee by God, i. 346.

 Alláh Karím = Allah is all beneficent, i. 32.

 Allaho a’alam = God is all knowing, i. 2, 50.

 Allaho akbar (as a war cry), ii. 89; v. 196; vii. 8; viii. 265.

 Allahumma = Yá Allah with emphasis, i. 39.

 Allusions (far-fetched, fanciful and obscure), iii. 58, 169, 176, 263.

 Almá = brown- (not “damask-”) lipped, v. 66.

 Almás = Gr. Adamas, ix. 325.

 Almenichiaka, vi. 124.

 Almond-apricot, vi. 277.

 Alms to reverend men to secure their prayers, ii. 71.

 Alnashar (Story of), x. 146.

 Aloes, _see_ Sabr.

 —— (well appreciated in Eastern medicine), ix. 100.

 —— (the finest used for making Nadd), ix. 150.

 Alpinism (unknown), iii. 324.

 Al-Safar Zafar = voyaging is victory, i. 250.

 Alwán (pl. of Laun, colour) = viands, dishes, viii. 23.

 Amáim (pl. of Imamah) = turbands, iv. 100.

 ’Amal = action, operation (applied to drugs etc.), ix. 274.

 ’Amala hilah for tricking, a Syro-Egyptian vulgarism, vii. 43.

 Amalekites, vii. 264, 265.

 Amám-ak = before thee, vii. 94.

 Amán = quarter, mercy, i. 342.

 ’Amáriah (Pr. N. of a town), vii. 353.

 Amazon (a favourite in folk-lore), ii. 96.

 Amazons (of Dahome), viii. 39.

 Ambar al-Khám = rude Ambergris, viii. 85.

 Ambiguousity, v. 44.

 Amend her case = bathe her, etc., vii. 266.

 Amid (Amidah) town in Mesopotamia, vi. 106.

 Amín (Al-) = the Trusted of Allah, iv. 261.

 —— —— son and successor of Hárún al-Rashíd, i. 185; v. 93, 152.

 Ámín (Amen) = So be it! ix. 131.

 Amír = military commander, i. 259.

 ’Ámir = one who inhabiteth, haunter, x. 6.

 Amír and Samúl = Jones, Brown and Robinson, iv. 106.

 Amír al-Muuminín = Prince of the Faithful, i. 112.

 Ammá ba’ad = but after (initiatory formula), ii. 37.

 ’Amm = uncle (polite address to a father-in-law), x. 32.

 Ammá laka au ’alayka = either to thee (the gain) or upon thee (the
    loss), ix. ii.

 Amor discende non ascende, iii. 240.

 Amr (Al-) = command, matter, affair, ix. 67.

 Amrad = beardless and handsome, effeminate, i. 327.

 Amrú (pronounced Amr) or Zayd = Tom, Dick or Harry, iv. 2.

 —— bin Ma’adi Karib (poet), v. 147.

 —— bin Masa’dah (Pr. N.), v. 145.

 Amsá = he passed the evening, etc., iii. 239.

 Amsár (pl. of Misr) = cities, i. 11.

 —— = settled provinces, vii. 371.

 Amshát (combs) perhaps = Kanáfah (vermicelli), i. 83.

 Amtár, pl. of Matr, _q.v._, iii. 295.

 Amúd al-Sawári = the Pillar of Masts (Diocletian’s column), viii. 323.

 Amúríyah = the classical Amorium, v. 141.

 “Ana” (from Night ccclxxxi. to ccccxxiv.), v. 64.

 Ana a’amil = I will do it (Egypto-Syrian vulgarism), v. 367.

 Ana fí jíratak = I crave thy intercession (useful phrase), iv. 83.

 Anagnorisis, admirably managed, viii. 104.

 Analphabetic Amírs, ix. 126.

 Ánasa-kum = ye are honoured by knowing him, x. 11.

 Anbár (pronounced Ambár), town on the Euphrates, iv. 152.

 Anbar (Ambar) = ambergris, vi. 60.

 Andalíb = nightingale (masc. in Arab.), viii. 282.

 Andalusian = Spanish (_i.e._ of Vandal-land), vi. 101.

 Andam = the gum called dragon’s blood; brazil-wood, i. 176; iii. 263;
    viii. 225.

 Anemone on a tomb, ii. 325.

 Angels (taking precedence in the order of created beings), ix. 81.

 —— (appearing to Sodomites), iii. 301.

 —— (ride piebalds), vi. 146.

 —— (shooting down the Jinn), viii. 292.

 Anís al-Jalís = the Cheerer of the Companion, ii. 5.

 Animals (have no fear of man), ix. 181.

 Anista-ná = thy company gladdens us, viii. 231.

 Anklet-ring and ear drops (erotic meaning of), ii. 318.

 Ansár = Medinite auxiliaries, vii. 92; viii. 183.

 Ant (chapter ix. of the Koran), v. 213.

 Antar (Romance quoted), iv. 41.

 —— (and the Chosroë), vi. 285.

 —— (contest with Khosrewan), vii. 289.

 Anthropophagy (allowed when it saves life), v. 186.

 Antiochus and Stratonice, iv. 10.

 Ants (a destructive power in tropic climates), ix. 46.

 Anúshírwán = Anúshín-rawán = Sweet of Soul, v. 87.

 Anwá, pl. of Nau, _q.v._, viii. 266.

 Anwár = lights, flowers, viii. 270; 282.

 Anyáb (pl. of Náb) = grinder teeth, ix. 140.

 Ape-names (expressing auspiciousness), iii. 159.

 Apes (isle of) vi. 23.

 —— (and their lustful propensities), vi. 54.

 —— (gathering fruits), vi. 56.

 —— (remnant of some ancient tribe), vii. 346.

 Apodosis omitted, vi. 203, 239.

 Apple (wine), iv. 134.

 —— (many a goodly one rotten at the core), iv. 187.

 Apricots (various kinds), viii. 268.

 ’Ár (Al-) = shame, v. 138.

 Arab al-Arbá = prehistoric tribes of the Arabs, i. 112; v. 101.

 —— al-Musta’ajimah = barbarised Arabs, _ib._

 —— al-Musta’aribah = naturalised Arabs, _ib._

 —— al-Muta’arribah = Arabised Arabs, _ib._

 —— (exaggerates generosity), ii. 36.

 —— (shouting under his ruler’s palace), _ib._ 39.

 —— temperament, _ib._ 54, 101, 181.

 —— cap (Turtúr), _ib._ 143.

 —— (Derivation of the name), _ib._ 140.

 —— (pathos), iii. 55.

 —— (the noble merciful), _ib._ 88.

 —— (shop), _ib._ 163.

 —— (style compared with Persian), vi. 125.

 A’ráb = dwellers in the desert, ix. 293.

 Arab horses (breeds of), v. 246.

 Arab-land and Ajam = all the world over, v. 136.

 Arabian Night converted into an Arabian Note, vii. 314.

 Arabian Odyssey, viii. 7.

 Arabs (for plundering nomades), x. 25.

 Arafat (Mount, where the victims are _not_ slaughtered), v. 295.

 —— (day of), ii. 169.

 Arák (capparis shrub), ii. 54.

 —— (tooth-stick of the wild caper-tree; Aráka = I see thee), iii. 275.

 Arakíyah = white scull-cap, i. 215.

 Ar’ar = Juniper-tree, “heath,” iii. 254; vi. 95.

 Ardabb (Irdabb) = five bushels, i. 263.

 Ardeshir (Artaxerxes), three Persian Kings of the name, ii. 156; vii.
    209.

 Ardhanárí = the half-woman, iii. 306.

 Arianism and early Christianity, x. 190.

 Aríf (Al-) = monitor, i. 231.

 Arísh (Al-), frontier town between Egypt and Palestine, ix. 286.

 ’Aríshah = arbour, etc., ix. 219.

 Aristomenes and his fox, vi. 45.

 Arithmetic (not mastered by Moslems), v. 236.

 Arithmology (cumbrous in Arabic for lack of the higher numerals), ix.
    123.

 Ark al-Haláwat = vein of sweetness, for penis, iv. 51.

 Arman = Armenia, ii. 273.

 Armaníyah (Armenia), iv. 182.

 Armenians (porters of Constantinople), vi. i.

 Arm-pits (taking a dismounting person under the, a sign of respect),
    iv. 24.

 Arms and armour, x. 86.

 Army (divided into six divisions), iii. 290.

 Arsh = the ninth Heaven, v. 167.

 Artál, _see_ Rotl.

 Artists in cosmetics, x. 234.

 Arúbah (Al-) = Friday, vi. 190.

 Arún (Heb.) = in his shirt, i. 78.

 ’Arús (Al-) = the bride (tropical name for wine), viii. 203.

 As’ad = more (or most) fortunate, iii. 346.

 Asaf bin Barkhiya (Solomon’s Wazir), vi. 99; vii. 318; viii. 133.

 Asáfírí = sparrow-olives, iii. 295.

 ’Asákír = corner-terminals of a litter, x. 32.

 Asal Kasab = cane-honey, x. 3.

 Asal Katr = drip-honey, x. 2.

 Asal Nahl = bee’s honey, i. 271.

 Ásár = traces, ix. 255.

 Ash’ab (proverbial for greed), x. 15.

 Asháb = companions, vii. 92; viii. 183.

 Asháb al-Ráy (epithet of the Hanafi school), vi. 146.

 Asháb al-Suffah, v. 102.

 Asháb al-Ziyá = Feudatories, vii. 327.

 Ashhab = grey-white, ii. 116.

 A-Sharíf anta = art thou a noble, ix. 231.

 Ashírah = clan, vii. 121.

 Ashjár = door-posts or wooden bolts, vi. 191.

 Ashkánián, race of Persian Kings, i. 78.

 Asídah (custard, pap), iv. 37.

 Ásim = defending, vii. 314.

 Askar jarrár = drawing (_i.e._ conquering) army, vii. 85.

 Aslah = head-kerchief, ii. 59.

 Aslán (Pr. N., probably for Arslan = lion), iv. 78.

 Asma’í (Al-), author of Antar, iv. 159; vii. 110.

 Asoka’s wife and Kunála, vi. 127.

 Ass (held ill-omened), ii. 25.

 —— (-goad), iii. 116.

 —— (voice “most ungrateful”), iii. 117.

 —— (the wild, “handy” with his hoof), iii. 235.

 Asr (Al-) = time or prayer of mid-afternoon, i. 240.

 Astár (pl. of Satr = chopper?), viii. 184.

 Astarte (primarily the planet Venus?), x. 229.

 Astrolabe, father of our sextant, i. 304.

 Aswad = black (used for any dark colour), viii. 268.

 ’Atb = blame, reproach (for disgrace), viii. 112.

 Atbák = trays, v. 264.

 Atheist (Ar. Zindík), viii. 27.

 Atmár = rags (for travelling clothes), vii. 114.

 Atnáb = tent-ropes, viii. 240.

 Atr = any perfume, i. 355.

 Atsah (Al-) = sneezing, ix. 220.

 ’Attár = perfume-seller, druggist, x. 8.

 Attraction of like to like, ii. 296.

 Auhashtaní = thou hast made me desolate, i. 62.

 ’Aúj = Persian town, Kúch (?), ix. 347.

 Aun (of Jinns, etc.), iv. 88.

 Aurat = shame, nakedness (woman, wife), vi. 30.

 —— (of man and woman), vi. 118.

 Avanie (Ar. Gharámah), viii. 151.

 Avaunt = Ikhsa, be chased like a dog, vii. 45.

 Awáh! Awáh! = Alas! Alas!, ii. 321.

 Awák = ounces (pl. Ukíyah, _q.v._), viii. 12.

 ’Awálim, pl. of ’Álimah = dancing girls, i. 214.

 ’Awáshik = hucklebones, cockles, ix. 268.

 Awwá (name of Satan’s wife), iii. 229.

 Awwádah = lute-player, iv. 142.

 Áyat = Coranic verses, ii. 242; iii. 307; iv. 142.

 Áyát al-Naját = Verses of Safety, vi. 108.

 Áyishah bint Talhah (grand-daughter of Abú Bakr), v. 79.

 Aylúlah = slumbering after morning prayers, ii. 178.

 Ayn = eye (for helper), v. 60.

 Ayns (verset of the 140), v. 217.

 Aysh (Egypt.) = Ayyu Shayyin for classical “Má” what, i. 79.

 ’Aysh = that on which man lives (for bread), x. 3.

 Ayshat al-durrah murrah = the sister-wife has a bitter life, iii. 308.

 Aywá (Ay wa’lláhi) = Ay, by Allah, i. 303; vii. 195.

 Aywan = saloon with estrades, vii. 347.

 Ayyás (Issus of Cilicia), iv. 76.

 Ayyúb = Job, ii. 45.

 Azal = eternity without beginning (opposed to Abad = infinity) ii. 205;
    v. 390.

 Azán (call to prayer), ii. 306; v. 209.

 Az’ar = having thin hair; tail-less, ix. 185.

 Azarbiján = Kohistán, vii. 104.

 Azdashír, misprint for Ardashir, vii. 209.

 Azghán = camel litters, ii. 282.

 Azím = “deuced” or “mighty fine,” i. 178; ix. 40.

 Azíz (fem. Azízah) = dear, excellent, highly prized, ii. 298.

 ’Azíz (Al-) al-Misr = Magnifico of Misraim, ix. 119.

 Azrak = blue-eyed (so is the falcon!), vii. 164; viii. 4.

 Azrár (buttons), ii. 318.


 Ba’albak = Ba’al’s city, v. 51.

 Báb = gate, chapter, i. 136; vii. 3.

 —— (sometimes for a sepulchral cave), ix. 286.

 Báb (Al-) al-’Ali = Sublime Porte, x. 5.

 Báb al-Bahr and Báb al-Barr, viii. 55, 318.

 Báb al-Farádís = gate of the gardens at Damascus, i. 240.

 Báb al-Lúk (of Fostat), iv. 259.

 Báb al-Nasr = Gate of Victory (at Cairo), vi. 234; x. 6.

 Báb al-Salám (of the Al-Medínah Mosque), iv. 288.

 Babel = Gate of God, i. 85.

 Babes of the eye = pupils, i. 100; iv. 246.

 Baboon (Kird) has a natural penchant for women, iv. 297.

 Bábúnaj = white camomile, iii. 58.

 Babylonian eyes = bewitching ones, viii. 278.

 Bachelor not admitted in Arab quarters, iii. 191.

 Back-parts compared to revolving heavens, iii. 18.

 Bactrian camel, v. 371.

 Badal = substitute, v. 249.

 Badawí (not used in the Koran for Desert Arab), ii. 140.

 —— (bonnet), _ib._ 143.

 —— (a fool as well as a rogue), _ib._ 146.

 —— (cannot swim), iii. 69.

 —— (baser sort), _ib._ 70.

 —— (shifting camp in spring), _ib._

 —— (noble), _ib._ 88.

 —— (bluntness and plain-speaking of), iv. 102; v. 98.

 Badawi’s dying farewell, i. 75.

 Bádhanj = windshaft, ventilator, i. 257.

 Bád-i-Sabá = breeze o’ the morn, ii. 181.

 Badinján = Solanum pomiferum or S. Melongena, v. 4.

 Badlah Kunúzíyah = treasure-suit, ix. 331.

 Badmasti = le vin mauvais, i. 88.

 Badrah = 10,000 dirhams, iv. 281.

 Badr Básim = full moon smiling, vii. 274.

 Bághdád = Garden of Justice, iii. 100.

 —— (House of Peace), viii. 51.

 —— (of Nullity, opposed to the Ubiquity of the World), ix. 13.

 Baghlah = she-mule, i. 129.

 Bahá al-Dín ibn Shaddád (Judge Advocate-General under Saladin), ix. 23.

 Bahádur = the brave, iii. 334.

 Baháim (pl. of Bahímah = Behemoth) applied to cattle, iv. 54.

 Bahak = white leprosy, v. 294.

 Bahímah, mostly = black cattle, ix. 71.

 Bahr = water cut or trenched in the earth, sea, large river, i. 44.

 Bahr (Al-) al-azrak = Blue River, not “Blue Nile,” viii. 4.

 Bahr al-Kunúz = Sea of Treasures, v. 37.

 Bahr al-Muhít = circumambient ocean, i. 133.

 Bahrám (Varanes) = planet Mars, iii. 339.

 Bahramání = Brahman, iv. 101.

 Bahríyah = crew, viii. 17.

 Bahrwán (Pr. N. for Bihrún?), v. 329.

 Bakh! Bakh! = bravo! brava!, ii. 151; iv. 121.

 Bakhkharaní = he incensed me, ix. 238.

 Bakhshish naturalized as Anglo-Egyptian, iii. 45.

 —— (such as to make a bath-man’s mouth water), ix. 151.

 Bakk = bug, iii. 328.

 Bakkát = greengrocer, vii. 295.

 Baklámah = almond-pastry, ii. 311.

 Balábil pl. of bulbul (nightingale) and of balbalah (grief) v. 244.

 Balah = green date, ii. 314.

 Baldricks (Ar. Hamáil) v. 158.

 Balíd = simpleton i. 17.

 Ballán = body-servant, i. 311.

 Ballánah = tire-woman, i. 311.

 Ballúr (Billaur) = crystal, etc., iii. 194.

 Baltiyah = Labrus Niloticus (fish) viii. 290.

 Bán = myrobolan, vii. 247; viii. 322.

 Banát = daughters, protégées, viii. 39.

 Banát al-Na’ash = the Great Bear, iii. 28, 221.

 Bandaged eyes (before beheading) iv. 145.

 Bands of bandits, iii. 101.

 Bandukáníyah (quarter of Cairo) vi. 254.

 Banj = Nibanj = Nepenthe, i. 70.

 Banner (bound to a spear sign of investiture) iii. 307; vii. 101.

 Banní (Bunní) = Cyprinus Bynni, viii. 189.

 Banquets (royal) iv. 212.

 —— (daintily deviced) iv. 226.

 Banú Abbás (their colours black) vi. 86.

 —— al-Asfar (people of the yellow faces) ii. 220.

 —— Isráíl, iv. 283.

 —— Kahtán, vi. 260.

 —— Nabhán, vi. 262.

 —— Shaybán (tribe) iv. 233.

 —— Tamim (tribe) vii. 125.

 —— Umayyah (their colours white) vi. 86.

 —— ’Uzzah (tribe famous for love passion) ii. 304; v. 70.

 Banyán = Ficus Indica, vi. 81.

 Baradiyah = wide-mouthed jug, i. 36.

 Baras = white leprosy, v. 294; viii. 24.

 Barge (Ar. Bárijah) vi. 24.

 Bárid = cold (vain, foolish, insipid) i. 213; iii. 7.

 Baríd = Post, vii. 340.

 Bárijah (pl. bawárij) = Jarm, barge, vi. 24.

 Barley, food for horses, i. 345.

 Barmahát (seventh Coptic month) v. 231.

 Barmecides (Ar. Barámikah) i. 188.

 Barr al- (history of the family) x. 137.

 Barmúdah (eighth Coptic month) v. 232.

 Barr al-Manákhah in Al-Medinah, ii. 139.

 Barsh = matting, ii. 18.

 Barsh (Bars) commonest form of Bhang, iv. 31.

 Bartaut = Berthold, ix. 8.

 Barzakh = bar, partition, Hades, ii. 325.

 Basaltic statues in Hauranic ruins give rise to the idea of men
    transformed into black stones, i. 170.

 Bashárah (al-) = gift of good tidings, guerdon, i. 30.

 Báshik (small sparrow-hawk) iii. 61.

 Basil = the Indian Tulsi, i. 19.

 Basil of the bridges = Ocymum basilicum, pennyroyal, i. 91.

 Basmalah = pronouncing the formula Bismillah, v. 206; ix. 1.

 —— (commonly pronounced Bismillah) v. 213.

 Bastardy (a sore offence amongst Moslems) viii. 115.

 Bastinado of women, i. 183.

 Bat (has seed like a man’s) v. 85.

 Batáikh (Batátíkh) = water melons, vi. 208.

 Batánah = lining, vii. 330.

 Batárikah (half ecclesiastic half military term) viii. 256, 319.

 Batárikh = roe, spawn, ix. 139.

 Bath (first, after sickness) iii. 266.

 —— (coming out of, shows that consummation has taken place) iv. 244.

 —— (suggesting freshness from coition) vi. 135.

 —— (and privy, favourite haunts of the Jinns) vi. 141.

 —— (not to be entered by men without drawers) vi. 150.

 —— (may it be a blessing to thee) viii. 200.

 —— (setting it a-working, turning on the water, hot and cold) ix. 149.

 Bathers pay on leaving the Hammám, ii. 332.

 Bathsheba and Uriah (congeners of) vi. 129.

 Bátiní = gnostic; a reprobate, ii. 29; vi. 221.

 Batíyah = jar, flagon, viii. 323.

 Batrak (Batrik) = patriarch, ii. 89.

 Batrík (Bitrík) = patricius, ii. 89.

 Batshat al-Kubrá = the great disaster (battle of Badr) vii. 55.

 Battál (Al-), story of, x. 74, 75.

 Battásh al-Akrán = he who assaults his peers, vii. 55.

 Battle-pieces, vii. 61.

 Bawd (admirably portrayed) iv. 4.

 Bawwáb = door-keeper, vi. 189.

 Bawwák = trumpeter (a discreditable character) viii. 192.

 Bayáz = Silurus Bajad (cat-fish) viii. 150.

 Bayáz = whiteness (lustre, honour) viii. 295.

 Bayáz al-Sultáni = the best kind of gypsum, i. 270.

 Baydah (Al-) = pawn in chess, v. 243.

 Bayt (Al-) = the house (for cage) v. 269.

 Bayt al-Mukaddas = Jerusalem, ii. 132.

 Bayt Sha’r = house of hair; Bayt Shi’r = a couplet, viii. 279.

 Bayzatán = testicles (egg-story) ii. 55.

 Báz (vulg. for Tabl) = kettledrum, viii. 18.

 Bazar (locked at night) x. 13.

 Bazar of Damascus famous in the Middle Ages, i. 2.

 Bází (Pers. Báz) = F. peregrinator, hawk, falcon, iii. 138.

 BE! and IT IS (the creative word) v. 240, 286.

 Bead thrown into a cup (signal of delivery) vii. 324.

 Bean-eating in Egypt, iv. 160.

 Beard (long, and short wits) iii. 247.

 —— (forked, characteristic of a Persian) iii. 325.

 —— (combed by the fingers in the Wuzú) v. 198, 209.

 Beast with two backs (Eastern view of) vii. 35.

 Beast-stories (oldest matter in The Nights) iii. 114.

 Beauties of nature provoke hunger in Orientals, iii. 32.

 Beckoning (Eastern fashion the reverse of ours) vi. 109.

 Before the face of Allah = for the love of God, i. 135.

 Beheading or sacking of a faithless wife unlawful but connived at, i.
    181.

 Belle fourchette (greatly respected) ix. 219.

 Belle passion in the East, ii. 62.

 Belt (Ar. Kamar) viii. 156.

 “Ben” of an Arab shop as opposed to “but,” iv. 93.

 Benches (in olden Europe more usual than chairs) vi. 26.

 Berbers from the Upper Nile (the “Paddies” of Egypt) vi. 189.

 Bestiality (fatally common amongst Egyptians) iv. 299.

 Betrothed (for “intended to be married with regal ceremony”) x. 55.

 Better largesse than the mace, viii. 163.

 Bhang (its kinds and uses) ii. 123.

 —— (properties of the drug) iii. 91.

 —— (preparation of) iv. 31.

 —— (drugging with = tabannuj) iv. 71.

 Bida’ah = innovation, v. 167.

 Bier (the bulging = hadbá) iv. 63.

 Bi-fardayn = “with two singles” (for with two baskets) viii. 162.

 Biká’a (= low-land) ii. 109.

 —— (= convents, pilgrimages to) v. 125.

 Bilád al-Filfil = home of pepper (Malabar) vi. 38.

 Bilád al-Rúm (applied to France) viii. 339.

 Bilád al-Súdán = Land of the Blacks (our Soudan) iii. 75.

 Bilál (first Muazzin) ii. 306; iii. 106.

 “Bilking” (popular form of) ix. 145.

 Bilkís and her throne, ii. 79; viii. 82.

 Bi ’l-Salámah = in safety (to avert the evil eye) i. 288.

 Bint ’arús = daughter of the bridegroom (Ichneumon) iii. 147.

 Bint Shumúkh (Pr. N.) = Daughter of Pride v. 382.

 Bir (Al-) al-Mu’utallal = the Ruined Well, vii. 346.

 Bird (created by Jesus) v. 211.

 —— seen by Abú Bakr in the cave, v. 235.

 Bird-girls, viii. 29.

 Birds (sing only in the pairing season) vi. 15.

 —— (huge ones discovered on the African coast) vi. 17.

 —— (left to watch over wives) vi. 132.

 —— (pretended understanding of their language) vi. 169.

 —— (songs and cries of) v. 50.

 Birkah = pool of standing wafer, iv. 270; vi. 75.

 Birkat al-Habash = Abyssinian pond, i. 391.

 Birth-stool (Ar. Kursí al-Wiládah) ii. 80.

 Bishr (al-Háfí = Barefoot) ii. 203; ix. 21.

 Bisát (Al-) wa ’l-masnad = carpet and cushion, viii. 55.

 Bismillah = in the name of God, i. 40; v. 206.

 —— (said before taking action) i. 80.

 —— (civil form of dismissal) i. 98.

 —— (= fall to) i. 264.

 —— (= enter in Allah’s name) viii. 202.

 —— (parodied) ii. 223.

 Bismillah Námí = Now please go to sleep, viii. 178.

 Biting the finger ends (not nails) sign of confusion, etc., ii. 38.

 Biunes, bisexuals and women robed with the sun, vi. 168.

 Bizá’at = capital, business concern, v. 81.

 Black (colour of the Abbaside banner) ii. 292; vi. 86.

 Blackamoors preferred by debauched women, i. 6.

 Black-mail (paid to the Badawin of Ramlah) iv. 76.

 Blast (of the last trumpet) v. 310.

 Blaze (Ar. Ghurrah, _q.v._) iii. 118.

 Blessings at the head of letters, vii. 133.

 Blind (The, notorious for insolence) i. 330.

 Blinding a common practice in the East, now done, i. 108.

 Blue and yellow turbans prescribed to Christians and Jews, i. 77.

 Blue-eyed (frequently = fierce-eyed) iv. 192.

 Blue-eyes = blind with cataract or staring, glittering, hungry, vii.
    164.

 Boasting of one’s tribe, iii. 80.

 Boccaccio quoted: i. 12, 174, 202, 251, 305; ii. 82, 112; iv. 36, 155;
    v. 134.

 Boccaccio and The Nights, x. 160.

 Body-guard (consists of two divisions) iv. 62.

 Boils and pimples supposed to be caused by broken hair-roots, i. 275.

 Book (black as her) x. 1.

 Books (of the Judgment-day) viii. 294.

 Bostán (female Pr. N.) = flower-garden, iii. 345.

 Bostáni = gardener, family name from original occupation, i. 266.

 Boulgrin, Bougre, Bougrerie (derivations of the terms) x. 249.

 Bow, a cowardly weapon, vii. 123.

 Box (Ar. ’Ulbah) viii. 71.

 Box-trick (and Lord Byron) vi. 168.

 Boycotting (Oriental forms of) viii. 302.

 Brain (fons veneris in man) v. 46.

 Brasier (Kánún, Minkal) v. 273.

 Brass (Ar. Nuhás asfar) vi. 83.

 Braying of the ass, iii. 117.

 Bread and salt (to be taken now “cum grano salis”) iv. 200.

 Bread and salt (bond of) viii. 12.

 Breast broadening with delight, i. 48.

 —— straitened, the converse of the previous, i. 119.

 Breast-bone (Taráib) v. 132.

 Breath (healing by the) v. 29.

 —— (of crocodiles, serpents, etc.) vi. 29.

 Breeze (rude but efficacious refrigerator) iv. 199.

 Breslau Edition quoted, i. 14, 52, 53, 54, 203, 217, 234, 245, 255,
    345; ii. 77; iii. 162, 181, 211, 259; iv. 96, 113, 181; v. 9, 17,
    24, 27, 32, 42; vi. 27, 30, 37, 44, 46, 56, 57, 84, 100, 129, 138,
    148, 168, 180, 196, 207, 211, 213, 242, 247; vii. 145, 150, 168,
    172, 173, 177, 202, 262, 315, 316, 320, 321, 324, 326, 327, 329,
    331, 341, 342, 343, 350, 353, 354, 362, 363, 367; viii. 7, 18, 66,
    98, 113, 197, 242, 264, 273; ix. 33, 42, 59, 63, 156, 159, 169, 185,
    187; x. 54, etc.

 Breslau Edition (mean colloquialisms thereof) x. 169.

 Brethern (for kinsfolk) ix. 26.

 —— (of trust and brethren of society = friends and acquaintances) ix.
    75.

 Bridal couch (attitudinising thereon) v. 75.

 Bride of the Hoards, vi. 109; vii. 147; x. 31.

 Bride-night, rarely conceived in, i. 227.

 Bride’s throne, i. 215.

 Bridle (not to be committed to another) vii. 304.

 Brother (has a wide signification amongst Moslems) vi. 243.

 —— (of Folly = a very fool) ii. 279.

 —— (of Purity) iii. 150.

 —— (of Ignorance = Ignoramus) iii. 163.

 —— (“of the Persians”) iv. 12.

 Brotherhood (forms of making) iii. 151.

 —— (sworn in Allah Almighty) v. 43.

 —— of Futurity = lookers out for a better world, ii. 197.

 Brow (like the letter Nún) iv. 249.

 Bruising the testicles a feminine mode of murdering men, iii. 3.

 Búdakak (Bútakah) = crucible, viii. 8.

 Budúr (Badoura) = full moons, iii. 228; iv. 249.

 Buffalo = bœuf á l’eau (?) ix. 181.

 Buhayrah = tank, cistern, viii. 29.

 Buka’ah = Cœlesyria, ii. 109.

 Buka’at al-dam = place of blood (where it stagnates) iv. 68.

 Bukhayt = little good luck, ii. 48.

 Bukhtí (dromedary) ii. 177; iii. 67.

 Bukjah = bundle, vi. 226.

 Bulád (Pers. Pulád) = steel, vi. 115.

 Bulak Edition quoted, i. 11, 45, 68, 117, 145, 203; ii. 1, 83, 185,
    187; iii. 181, 211, 212; vi. 5, 11, 21, 27; vii. 18, 57, 139, 173,
    269, 359; ix. 185.

 Bulbul (departed with Tommy Moor, Englished by “Nightingale”) v. 48.

 Bull (followers preceding) ii. 98.

 Bull (of the Earth = Gáw-i-Zamín) v. 324.

 Búm = owl (introduced to rhyme with Kayyúm = the Eternal) viii. 286.

 Bunn = kind of cake, ix. 172.

 Burckhardt quoted, i. 66, 214; ii. 18, 143; iii. 59, 101, 138, 147,
    179, 278, 308; iv. 31, 48, 112, 217, 259; v. 77, 80, 119; vii. 91,
    93, 136, 147, 156; viii. 23, 91, 93, 156, 285; x. 144.

 —— (fable anent his death) iv. 78.

 Burdah = mantle or plaid of striped stuff, vii. 95.

 —— (poem of the) iv. 115.

 Burká = nose-bag, ii. 52; vi. 131, 192.

 Burning (a foretaste of Hell-fire) ix. 158.

 Bursting of the gall-bladder = our breaking of the heart, ii. 322.

 Burying a rival, ii. 58.

 Buttons (Ar. Azrár) ii. 318.

 Búzah = beer, i. 72.

 Byron (depreciated where he ought to be honoured most) vii. 268.

 Bystanders forcing on a sale, viii. 310.


 Cabbala = Spiritual Sciences, ii. 151.

 Cæsarea, ii. 77.

 —— “of Armenia,” ii. 273.

 Cairene (vulgarism) vi. 278.

 —— (chaff) iv. 215.

 —— (slang) iv. 75.

 —— (jargon) x. 8.

 —— (savoir faire) x. 10.

 —— (bohomie) x. 28.

 —— (knows his fellow Cairene) x. 35.

 Cairenes held exceedingly debauched, i. 298.

 Cairo, _see_ Misr.

 —— (nothing without the Nile) i. 295.

 Caitiff = Captivus, ii. 109.

 Calamity (i.e., to the enemy) x. 33.

 Calcutta Edition quoted, i. 17, 52; iii. 181, 211; iv. 274; v. 80, 325,
    383; vi. 27, 29, 77, 116.

 Caliphate (defective title to) v. 116.

 Caliphs ’Abd al-’Azíz, ii. 166.

 —— ’Abd al-Malík, ii. 77, 167; iii. 319; iv. 7.

 —— Abú Bakr, ii. 167, 197.

 —— Alí, ii. 108.

 —— Amin (Al-) i. 185; v. 93, 152.

 —— Hakim (Al-) bi-Amri ’lláh, iv. 296.

 —— Harún al-Rashíd, viii. 160; ix. 17.

 —— Hishám bin ’Abd al-Malik, ii. 170; vii. 104.

 —— Maamun (Al-) i. 185; iv. 109.

 —— Mahdí (Al-) vii. 136.

 —— Mansúr (Al-) ii. 142, 153, 210.

 —— Mu’áwiyah, ii. 160, 161.

 —— Musta’ín (Al-) bi ’lláh, ix. 246.

 —— Mustansir (Al-) bi ’lláh i. 317.

 —— Mu’tasim (Al-) bi ’llah, iii. 81; ix. 232.

 —— Mutawakhil (Al-) ’alà ’lláh, iv. 291; v. 153; ix. 232.

 —— Mu’tazid (Al-) ix. 229.

 —— Mu’tazz (Al-) ix. 242.

 —— ’Omar, ii. 158, 159, 162, 164; v. 103.

 —— ’Othmán, ii. 163; v. 215.

 —— Sulaymán bin ’Abd al-Malik, ii. 167; vii. 99.

 —— Tá’í (Al-) li ’lláh, iii. 51, 307.

 —— Walíd (Al-) ii. 167; iii. 69; iv. 100; vii. 106.

 —— Wásik (Al-) iii. 81.

 —— Záhir (Al-) bi ’lláh, i. 317.

 Calligraphy, iv. 196.

 Camel (how slaughtered) i. 347; iv. 95.

 Camel-load = 300 lbs., for long journeys 250 lbs., ii. 45.

 —— (-men do not accept drafts on futurity) ii. 69.

 —— (-colts roasted whole) v. 135.

 —— (feeding on and vindictiveness) v. 135.

 —— (Bactrian) v. 371.

 —— (seen in a dream is an omen of death; why?) vi. 92.

 Camels (breeds of) iii. 67, 110.

 —— (names) iii. 110.

 —— (haltered; nose-ring used for dromedaries) iii. 120.

 —— (Mehari, Mehríyah) iii. 277.

 —— (red the best kind) viii. 303.

 Camphor (simile for a fair face) iii. 174.

 —— (primitive way of extracting it) vi. 21.

 Camphor-apricot, vi. 277.

 Cannibal tribes in Central Africa, ii. 48.

 Cannibalism in the New World, x. 243.

 Cannibals and cannibalism, vi. 36.

 Canton (city of) vii. 334.

 Capo bianco, coda verde, iv. 36.

 Capotes melancholiques, vii. 190.

 Carat (= Kirát) iii. 239.

 —— (= 1/24 of a dinar or miskal, something under 5d.) v. 277.

 Caravaggio (picture of St. Rosario) x. 219.

 Caravan (each one has to keep his place in a) ii. 184.

 Carelessness of the story-teller, ix. 4.

 Carmel = Karam-El (God’s vineyard) viii. 203.

 Carnelion stone bit with pearls = lips bit with teeth in sign of anger,
    iii. 179.

 Carpet (let him come to the King’s = before the King as referee) ix.
    110.

 Carpet-room = throne-room, ix. 121.

 Carob (Cassia fistularis) ii. 241.

 —— bean, emblem of constancy, iii. 315.

 Carpet-beds, i. 294.

 Carrier-pigeons, ii. 247.

 Castration (texts justifying or enjoining it) x. 227.

 Cat (puss, etc.) iii. 149.

 Cat-fish (Ar. Bayáz) viii. 150, 151.

 Catamites (rising to highest rank in Turkey) iv. 225.

 —— (in Turkish baths) iv. 226.

 Cask (for “home” of the maiden wine) x. 38.

 —— in Auerbach’s Keller, viii. 131.

 Ceruse (Ar. Isfídáj) vi. 126.

 Cervantes and Arab romance, iii. 66.

 Ceylon (Ar. Sarandib) vi. 64, 81.

 Chaff, ii. 15; iii. 23; viii. 147, 152, 157, 189.

 —— or banter allowed even to modest women, i. 267.

 Chameleon (Father of Coolness) iii. 165.

 Champing, sign of good breeding, i. 345.

 Change (sudden, of disposition) viii. 213.

 Character-sketch (making amends for abuse of women) x. 24.

 Chaste forbearance towards a woman frequently causes love, vii. 189.

 Chastity (merchandise in trust from Allah) iv. 43.

 Chawáshiyah = Chamberlains, vii. 327.

 Cheating (not only venial but laudable under circumstances) viii. 217.

 Checkmate (Pers. Ar.) = the King is dead, viii. 217.

 Cheese a styptic, iii. 3.

 Chess and chessmen, ii. 104; v. 243.

 Chess anecdote, i. 132.

 Chewing a document that none may see it after, ii. 39.

 Child of the nurse, etc. = delicately reared, iv. 34.

 Children (carried astraddle upon hip or shoulder) i. 308.

 —— (one of its = a native of) x. 8.

 China (kingdom) iv. 175.

 China-ware displayed on shelves, ii. 52.

 Chinese shadows, iv. 193.

 Chin-veil donned (showing intention to act like a man) viii. 99.

 Cider (Ar. Sharáb al-tuffáh) iv. 134.

 Circumcision (how practised) v. 209.

 —— (female) v. 279.

 Citadel (contains the Palace) ix. 102.

 Cities (two-mosqued, for large and consequently vicious ones) v. 66.

 City of Brass (Copper) iv. 176; vi. 83.

 Claimant of blood-revenge, iv. 109.

 —— and Defendant, iv. 150.

 Claims of maidenhead, i. 190.

 Clairvoyance of perfect affection, x. 26.

 Clapping hands preliminary to a wrestling-bout, ii. 91.

 Clapping of hands to summon servants, i. 177; iii. 173.

 Clerical error of Bulak Edition, ii. 114.

 Clever young ladies dangerous in the East, i. 15.

 Climate (water and air) ii. 4.

 Clitoris (Ar. Zambúr) and its excision, v. 279.

 Cloak (Ar. Abáah) viii. 42.

 Clogs = Kubkáb, iii. 92.

 Closet (the forbidden and the bird-girls) viii. 29.

 Cloth of frieze and cloth of gold, iv. 145.

 “Cloth” (_not_ “board” for playing chess) ix. 209.

 Clothes (tattered, sign of grief) iv. 158.

 Clothing and decency, ix. 182.

 Clout (hung over the door of a bath shows that women are bathing) ix.
    153.

 Cocoa-nut (Ar. Jauz al-Hindí) vi. 55.

 Coffee (see Kahwah) ii. 261.

 —— (first mention of) v. 169; x. 90.

 —— (anachronism) viii. 274.

 —— (mention of probably due to the scribe) ix. 141.

 —— (its mention shows a comparatively late date) ix. 255.

 Cohen (Káhin) = diviner priest, esp. Jewish, ii. 221.

 Coition (postures of) iii. 93.

 —— (the seal of love) viii. 304.

 —— (local excellences of) viii. 304.

 —— (ablution obligatory after it) viii. 305.

 Cold-of-countenance = a fool, iii. 7.

 Cold speech = a silly or abusive tirade, iii. 7.

 Colocasia (Ar. Kallakás) viii. 151.

 Coloquintida (Ar. Hanzal) v. 19.

 Colossochelys = colossal tortoise, vi. 33.

 Colours (of the Caliphs) vi. 86.

 —— (names of) vi. 111.

 Combat reminding of that of Rustam and Sohráb, vii. 89.

 “Come to my arms my slight acquaintance,” ix. 177.

 Commander of the Faithful (title introduced by Omar) vi. 247.

 Commune (Ar. Jamá’ah) v. 205.

 Comorin (derivation of the name) vi. 57.

 “Compelleth” in the sense of “burdeneth,” vii. 285.

 Compliment (model of a courtly one) viii. 165.

 Composed of seed by all men shed = superfetation of iniquity, viii. 15.

 Comrades of the Cave, iii. 128.

 Conception on the bride-night rare, i. 227.

 Conciseness (verging on obscurity) ix. 171.

 Confession after concealment, a characteristic of the servile class, i.
    53.

 —— on the criminal’s part required by Moslem law, i. 274.

 Confusion (of metaphors characteristic of The Nights) i. 86.

 —— (of religious mythologies by way of “chaff”) viii. 152.

 —— (universal in the undeveloped mind of men) ix. 78.

 Conjugal affection (striking picture of) vii. 243.

 Conjunctiva in Africans seldom white, vii. 184.

 Connection (tribal, seven degrees of) vii. 121.

 Consecrated ground (unknown to Moslems) vi. 161.

 Constipation (La) rend rigoureux, iii. 242.

 Consul (Sháh-bandar) iv. 29.

 —— (Kunsul) iv. 84.

 Contemplation of street-scenery, one of the pleasures of the Harem, i.
    319.

 Continuation in dignities requested by office-holders from a new ruler,
    ii. 192.

 Contract (artful between squalor and gorgeousness) ix. 170.

 Contrition for romancing, viii. 66.

 Converts, theoretically respected and practically despised, vii. 43.

 Copa d’agua, apology for a splendid banquet, vii. 168.

 Coptic convents, ii. 86.

 —— visitations to, still customary, ii. 110.

 Copulation (praying before or after) ii. 161.

 —— (postures of) iii. 93.

 Coquetries (requiring as much inventiveness as a cotillon) x. 58.

 Coral (name of a slave-girl) ii. 101.

 Corpse pollutes the toucher, i. 295.

 Cousin (term of familiarity = our “coz”) ii. 43.

 —— (first, affronts an Arab if she marries any save him without his
    leave) vi. 145.

 —— (has a prior right to marry a cousin) ix. 225.

 Covered (The, chapter of the Koran) v. 215.

 Cow (chapter ii. of the Koran) v. 211.

 Cowardice equally divided, iii. 173.

 —— (proverb anent) viii. 333.

 —— (of the Fellah, how to be mended) ix. 5.

 Cowrie (shells, etc., for small change) iv. 77.

 Craft (many names for, connected with Arabic) ix. 138.

 Creases in the stomach insisted upon, 130.

 Created for a mighty matter (_i.e._ for worship and to prepare for
    futurity) vi. 91.

 Creation (is it and its Empire not His?) v. 269.

 —— (from nothing) ix. 77.

 Crenelles = Sharáríf, iv. 165.

 Crepitus ventris and ethnology, v. 137.

 Crescent of the breakfast-fête, ix. 250.

 Crescent-like = emaciated, viii. 300.

 Crew (Ar. Bahríyah, Nawátíyah) viii. 17.

 Criss-cross row, iii. 236.

 Crocodiles (breath of) vi. 29.

 Cross-bows, vii. 62.

 Crow (an ill-omened bird) vi. 170.

 Crow-claw and camel-hoof, iv. 217.

 Cruelty (the mystery of) explained only by a law without law-giver, ix.
    37.

 —— (of the “fair sex” in Egypt) x. 45.

 Cry (that needs must be cried) x. 21.

 Cubit (the Háshimí = 18 inches) v. 371.

 Cuirasses against pleasure, cobwebs against infection, vii. 190.

 Cundums (French letters) vii. 190.

 Cup and cup-bearer, ii. 327.

 Curs (set them on the cattle = show a miser money, etc.) x. 18.

 Cursing intelligible, swearing meaningless, although English, ii. 312.

 Curtain (screening a reverend woman from the sight of men-invalids) ix.
    347.

 Cutting (alluding to the scymitar) ii. 231.

 —— (bones before flesh = “sharp as a razor”) iv. 295.

 —— (off the right hand, Koranic punishment for theft) i. 274.

 —— (of the navel string preliminary to naming the babe) i. 231.

 —— the rope = breaking bounds, i. 349.

 Cynocephalus (kills men and rapes women) vii. 344.


 Dáa al-Kabír (Great Evil) = Dáa al-Fíl (Elephantine Evil, _i.e._
    Elephantiasis) viii. 24.

 Dabbús = mace, vi. 249.

 Dádat = nurse (Pers.) viii. 209.

 Dáhish (Al-) = the Amazed, vi. 96.

 Dáirah = circle, inclosure, ix. 287.

 —— (for a basin surrounded by hills) ix. 317.

 Dajláh (Dijlah) = Tigris (Heb. Hid-dekel) i. 180; viii. 150.

 Dajjál (Al-) = Moslem Anti-Christ, vi. 11.

 Dakhíl-ak = under thy protection, i. 61.

 Dakiánús = Decianus, ii. 244.

 Dakkah = settle, vii. 111; viii. 84.

 Dalak = foot-rasp, iv. 254.

 Dalhamah (Romance of) iii. 112.

 Dalíl = guide; f. Dalílah = _mis_guiding woman, bawd, ii. 329.

 Damascus women famed for sanguinary jealousy, i. 295.

 Damon and Pythias, v. 104.

 Damsel of the tribe = daughter of the chief, vii. 95.

 Danaf (Al-) = distressing sickness, iv. 75.

 Dandán (N.P.) = tooth, ii. 83.

 Dandán (a monstrous fish), ix. 179.

 Dání wa Gharíb = friend and foe, v. 42.

 Dánik = sixth of drachma or dirham, ii. 204; v. 112.

 Dár al-Na’ím = Dwelling of Delight, viii. 183.

 Dara’ (dira’) = habergeon, coat of ringmail, etc. iii. 109.

 Darabukka = tom-tom, i. 311.

 Darakah = target, vi. 9.

 Darb al-Ahmar = Red Street (in Cairo) x. 8.

 Darb al-Asfar = the Street called Yellow, iv. 93.

 Darbar = public audience, i. 29.

 Dárfíl = dolphin, ix. 346.

 Darr al-Káil = divinely he spoke who said, iv. 20.

 Darrij = Let them slide, iv. 220.

 Dastúr = leave, permission, i. 66.

 Datura Stramonium (the insane herb) vi. 36.

 Dáúd = David, ii. 286.

 Daughter of my uncle = my wife, i. 69.

 “Daughters of God” (the three) vi. 282.

 —— (of Sa’adah = zebras) iii. 65.

 —— (of the bier = Ursa major) iii. 28, 221.

 Daulat (Pr. N.) = fortune, empire, kingdom, vii. 347.

 Daurak = narrow-mouthed jug, i. 36.

 David (makes coats of mail) ii. 286; vi. 113.

 Dawá’ = medicine (for a depilatory) ix. 155.

 Dawát = wooden inkcase with reed-pens, ix. 122.

 Dawn-breeze, ii. 181.

 Day of Doom (mutual retaliation) iii. 128.

 —— (length of) iii. 299.

 —— (when wealth availeth not, etc.) ix. 16.

 —— (ye shall be saved from its misery) ix. 315.

 Daylam (Al-), soldiers of = warlike as the Daylamites, viii. 82.

 Daylamites, ii. 94.

 Dayyús = pimp, wittol, ix. 297.

 Dead (buried at once) v. 190.

 Death (from love) v. 134.

 —— (every soul shall taste of it) v. 166.

 —— (of a good Moslem) v. 167.

 —— (manners of, symbolised by colours) vi. 250.

 —— (simply and pathetically sketched) x. 47.

 “Death in a crowd as good as a feast” (Persian proverb) iii. 141.

 Death-prayer (usually a two-bow prayer) vi. 70.

 Debts (of dead parents sacred to the children) ix. 311.

 Deeds of prowess not exaggerated, ii. 108.

 Deity of the East despotic, iv. 118.

 —— after the fashion of each race, iv. 267.

 Delicacy of the female skin, ix. 321.

 “Delight of the Intelligent” (fancy title of a book) vi. 80.

 Demesne (Ar. Himà) viii. 225.

 Democracy of despotism, ix. 94.

 Depilation (Solomon and Bilkis) iv. 256.

 Deposits are not lost with Him = He disappointeth not, etc., vii. 334.

 Despite his nose = against his will, i. 26.

 Despotism (tempered by assassination) vi. 206.

 Destiny blindeth human sight, i. 67.

 Destructiveness of slaves, ii. 55.

 Devil (was sick, etc.) ii. 264.

 —— (stoned at Mina) v. 203, 212.

 —— (allowed to go about the world and seduce mankind) ix. 82.

 Devotees (address Allah as a lover would his beloved) v. 263.

 —— (white woollen raiment of) vii. 214.

 Dhámí = the Trenchant (sword of Antar) vi. 271.

 Diamond (its cutting of very ancient date) ix. 325.

 Diamonds (occurring in alluvial lands) vi. 18.

 Diaphoresis (a sign of the abatement of a disease) ix. 146.

 Dihlíz = passage, vi. 10.

 Di’ibil al-Khuzá’í (poet) v. 127.

 Dijlah (Tigris), River and Valley of Peace, viii. 51.

 Dimágh = brain, meningx (for head) vii. 178.

 Dimyat (vulg. Dumíyat) = Damietta, v. 171.

 Dín (Al-) al-a’raj = the perverted Faith, ix. 11.

 Dínár = gold-piece, Daric, Miskál, i. 32.

 —— (description of one) ix. 294.

 Dinghy (Kárib) iv. 168.

 Dirás = thrashing sled, ii. 108.

 Dirham = silver-piece, i. 33.

 Dirham-weight = 48 grains avoir., ii. 316.

 Dirhams (50,000 = about £1,250) vii. 105.

 —— (thousand = £375) viii. 10.

 Disposition (sudden change of) viii. 213.

 Dissection (practised on simiads) v. 220.

 Dist (Dast) = large copper cauldron, viii. 177.

 Diversion of an Eastern Potentate, viii. 171.

 Divining rod (dowsing rod) iv. 73.

 Divorce (triple) iii. 292.

 Díwán (fanciful origin of the word) ix. 108.

 Díwán al-Baríd = Post-office, vii. 340.

 Diyár-i-Bakr = maid-land, v. 66.

 Do not to others what thou wouldest not they do unto thee, vi. 125.

 “Dog” and “hog” popular terms of abuse, i. 188.

 Doggrel (royal) v. 55.

 —— (phenomenal) v. 288.

 —— (sad) v. 297.

 —— (not worse than usual) viii. 225, 228.

 Dogs (clothed in hot-damp countries) iv. 266.

 —— (in Eastern cities) vii. 202.

 Don Juan quoted, ix. 190.

 Donánmá (rejoicings for the pregnancy of a Sultana) vii. 324.

 Donkey-boy, like our “post-boy,” of any age, vii. 160.

 Donning woman’s attire in token of defeat, vii. 188.

 Doomsday (horrors of, come upon a man) ii. 232.

 Door (behind it the door-keeper’s seat) v. 173.

 Door-hinges, ii. 214.

 Door-keepers (in Egypt mostly Berbers) vi. 189.

 Doors (usually shut with a wooden bolt) iii. 198.

 —— (pulled up = raised from the lower hinge-pins) vii. 352.

 Double entendre, iii. 234; viii. 153, 251.

 Dove and turtle-dove female, ii. 23.

 Down (of the cheek) ii. 246.

 Dozd o Kázi (Persian book) ii. 55.

 Drama (in Turkey and Persia) x. 167.

 Dramatic scene (told with charming naïveté) x. 9.

 Draught of air (Zug) feared by Orientals, ii. 9.

 Drawbridges in Coptic convents, ii. 94.

 Dream (Speaker in a) iv. 239.

 Dreams (true at later night) iii. 258.

 —— (lovers meet in) v. 47.

 —— (play an important part in the romances of chivalry) viii. 113.

 Dress (scarlet, of a King in anger) iv. 72.

 Drinking at dawn, iii. 20.

 —— their death-agony = suffering similar pain, iii. 315.

 —— (before or after dinner) vii. 132.

 —— (in the dark disliked) ii. 59.

 —— first to show the absence of poison, i. 88, 295.

 —— bouts (attended in bright dresses) vi. 175.

 Dromedary (_see_ Camel).

 —— (guided by a nose-ring) iii. 120.

 “Drop” unknown to the Eastern gallows, i. 260.

 Drop (black, of the heart) iv. 251.

 Drowning (a martyr’s death) ix. 158.

 “Drugging” not a Badawi sentiment, ii. 122.

 Drugs (is this an art of ——?) vii. 147.

 Drunk with the excess of his beauty, iv. 34; vii. 162.

 Drunken habits of Central African races, vii. 357.

 Drunken son (excused by mother, rebuked by father) viii. 287.

 Dúbarah (Dubárá) = Dubrornik, Ragusa, ii. 219.

 Due demanded leads to imprisonment for arrears, viii. 170.

 Dukhán = smoke (meaning tobacco for the Chibouk) ix. 156.

 Dukhúl = going in to the bride, iv. 30.

 Dúláb = waterwheel; buttery; cupboard, ix. 306.

 Dung (used as fuel, etc.) ii. 149.

 Dunyá (Pr. N.) = world, iii. 7, 319; x. 27.

 Dunyázad = world free (?) i. 14.

 Durbar of idols, ix. 325.

 Durká’ah = lower part of the floor (opposed to Liwán) iv. 71.

 Durrah (vulg. for Zarrah, _q.v._)

 Dust-storm in tropical lands, i. 111.

 Duwámah = whirlpool, ix. 93.


 Ear-drop = penis, ii. 318.

 “Early to bed,” etc. (modern version of the same) vii. 217.

 East and West (confounded by a beauty-dazed monk) viii. 279.

 Easterns sleep with covered heads, iii. 345.

 Eatables (their exchange must be equal) v. 204.

 Eating (together makes friends) iii. 71.

 —— (gives rights of guest-ship) iv. 214.

 —— (superstitious belief in its power) iv. 218.

 —— (how it should be done) v. 206.

 Eating and drinking (before thinking of the lover) viii. 260.

 Eedgáh (_see_ Idgáh) ii. 202.

 Effendi (Turkish title = our esquire) iv. 53.

 Eggs for testicles, ii. 55.

 Eginhardt (belonged to the clerical profession) viii. 326.

 Egypt (derivation of the name) ix. 286.

 Egyptian (= archi-) polisonnerie, iii. 243.

 Egyptian vulgarism, iv. 107.

 —— characteristic, iv. 260.

 Elephant (derivation of the word) ii. 104.

 Elephant-faced, Vetála, vii. 34.

 Elephant’s roll = swaying and graceful gait, i. 217.

 Elephants frightening horses, vii. 61.

 Elevation (nothing strange in sudden), x. 53.

 Eli-Fenioun = Polyphemus, vii. 361.

 Elliptical expression, vi. 288.

 Elliptical style of the Eastern storys-teller, ix. 160.

 Emancipation (the greater = pardon for sins or holy death), ii. 105.

 Embracing (like the Lám embraceth the Alif), iv. 243.

 Emerald (white?), iv. 164.

 —— (mace-head of), vi. 67.

 —— (-rods in lattice windows), vi. 117.

 Emirs (of the wild Arabs) = “Phylarchs” ix. 323.

 Emma (hides her lover under her cloak), ix. 8.

 Empire (endureth with infidelity but not with tyranny), v. 187.

 Enemy (his offered hand to be kissed or cut off), ii. 142.

 “Enfants terribles” in Eastern guise, vi. 211.

 Entertainments (names of), viii. 231.

 Envying another’s wealth wrongs him, vi. 77.

 Ephesus (The Matron of), x. 220.

 —— (The Seven Sleepers of), iii. 128.

 Epistasis without prostasis, ix. 240.

 Ernest (Duke of Bavaria, Romance of), x. 153.

 Erotic inferences drawn from parts of the body, i. 350.

 —— specialists amongst the Ancients, x. 201.

 Eternal truths of The Nights, i. 7.

 Eunuch best go-between, i. 282.

 —— employed as porter, i. 343.

 —— different kinds of, i. 132.

 —— (if without testes only, highly prized), ii. 90.

 —— (driving the people out of a lady’s way), iv. 126.

 —— (who have studied the Harím), iv. 228.

 —— (and their wives), v. 46.

 —— (avoid allusion to their misfortune), v. 47.

 Eunuch-in-Chief a most important Jack-in-Office, i. 283.

 Euphemisms, i. 31; iii. 68, 102, 209, 267, 338; vi. 75, 145; vii. 134,
    142; viii. 173; ix. 180, 224; x. 4, 27.

 Euphemy (announcing death), iv. 61.

 —— (thou shalt die), iv. 90.

 —— (all is well), iv. 138.

 —— (the far one is a Nazarene), iv. 215.

 Euphuistic speech, vii. 285; ix. 43.

 Euthanasia and anæsthetics, ix. 90.

 Evacuation (and constipation), iii. 242.

 Eve (Ar. Hawwá), v. 139.

 —— (the true seducer), iii. 166.

 Evil (befalling thee is from thyself), vi. 138.

 Exaggeration part of humour, i. 12.

 —— characteristic of The Nights, iv. 273; v. 306.

 Expiation of oaths, ii. 186.

 Eye (darkening from vine or passion), iii. 224.

 —— (orbits slit up and down the face of a hideous Jinn), iii. 235.

 —— (man of the = pupil), iii. 286.

 —— (white = blind), iii. 323.

 —— (the evil), on children, iv. 37.

 —— (babes of the), iv. 246.

 —— (likened to the letter Sád, the brow to Nún), v. 34.

 —— (for helper), v. 60.

 —— (Thou shalt be in mine = I will keep thee as though thou wert the
    apple of my eye), viii. 90.

 “Eye of the needle” (for wicket), ix. 320.

 Eyebrows joined a great beauty in Arabia, i. 227.

 Eyes (of me = my dears), i. 163.

 —— (hot = full of tears), ii. 99.

 —— (becoming white = blind), ii. 283.

 —— (bandaged before beheading), iv. 145.

 —— (blue ones), iv. 129.

 —— (one-eyed men), iv. 194.

 —— (plucking or tearing out of, a Persian practice), vii. 359.

 —— (“sunk” into the head for our “starting” from it), vii. 36.

 —— (Babylonian = bewitching), viii. 278.

 —— (no male has ever filled mine = none hath pleased me), ix. 222.


 Fables proper (oldest part of The Nights), iii. 114.

 Face-veil = “nose-bag” i. 82.

 Faces (on the Day of Judgment), iv. 249.

 Fadaises of a blue stocking, ii. 156.

 Faghfúr (Mosl. title for the Emperor of China), vii. 335.

 Fá’il = agent, active (Sodomite), v. 156.

 Fa-immá ’alayhá wa-immá bihá = whether (luck go) against it or (luck
    go) with it, viii. 157.

 Faintings and trances (common in romances of chivalry), viii. 118.

 Fairer to-day than fair of yesterday = ever increasing in beauty, iii.
    331.

 Fájirah = harlot (often mere abuse without special meaning), viii. 109.

 Fakíh = divine, vii. 325.

 Fakír = religious mendicant generally, i. 95; v. 39.

 —— (the, and his jar of butter; congeners of the tale), ix. 40.

 Fakru (Al-) fakhrí = poverty is my pride (saying of Mohammed), v. 268.

 Fál = omen, v. 136.

 Falak (clearing) = breaking forth of light from darkness, iii. 22.

 Falastín, degraded to “Philister,” vii. 101.

 Falcon (_see_ Hawk, Bází).

 Falcon (blinding the quarry), i. 51.

 Falling on the back (a fair fall in wrestling), ii. 92.

 —— (with laughter), iii. 306.

 Fals ahmar = a red cent, i. 321.

 Familiarity between the great and paupers, ii. 32.

 —— of girls with black slave-boys, ii. 49.

 Family (euphemistically for wife), vi. 75.

 Far off one (the, shall die), iv. 90.

 Faráis (pl. of farísah) = shoulder-muscles, vii. 219.

 Faráiz = orders expressly given in the Koran, i. 169.

 Farajíyah = a long-sleeved robe, i. 210, 321.

 Faránik (Al-) = letter-carrier, vii. 340.

 Faranj (Al-) = European, i. 296.

 Faráshah, noun of unity of Farásh = butterfly-moth, vii. 305.

 Fard Kalmah = a single word (vulgarism), viii. 188.

 Faríd = unique; union-pearl, x. 54.

 Fárikí, adjective of Mayyáfárikín, vii. 1.

 Fárikín for Mayyáfárikín (city in Diyar-bakr), vi. 107.

 Fáris = rider, knight, vii. 314.

 Farj = slit; Zawí ’l-Furúj = slit ones, ii. 49.

 Farkh Akrab (vulgarism for Ukayrib) = a young scorpion, iv. 46.

 Farkh Samak = fish-chick (for young fish), viii. 149.

 Farrásh, a man of general utility, tent-pitcher, etc., vii. 4.

 Fars = Persia, v. 26.

 Farsakh = parasang, iv. 230.

 —— = three English miles, ii. 114.

 Farsalah = parcel, viii. 162.

 Fart (in return for chaff), v. 99.

 —— (and Badawí “pundonor”), v. 137.

 Farting for fear, iii. 118.

 Farz = obligatory prayer, vi. 193.

 —— (mentioned after Sunnat because jingling with Arz), ix. 15.

 Fás = city of Fez, vi. 222.

 Fass = bezel of a ring, gem cut en cabochon, contenant for contenu, i.
    165; ii. 97.

 Fast (and its break), v. 201.

 —— (when forbidden), v. 265.

 Faswah = susurrus, ix. 291.

 Faswán Salh al-Subyán (Pr. N.) = Fizzler, Dung of children, ix. 11.

 Fat and Thin (dispute between), iv. 254.

 Fatà = a youth; generous man, etc., i. 67.

 Fatalism and Predestination, ix. 45.

 Fate (written in the sutures of the skull), viii. 237.

 —— (and Freewill), ix. 60.

 Fath = opening (_e.g._ of a maidenhead), viii. 348.

 —— (Al-) bin Khákán (boon companion of Al-Mutawakkil), ix. 245.

 Father of Bitterness = the Devil, vii. 116.

 Fátihah (the opening chapter of the Koran), iv. 36.

 —— (position of the hands in reciting it), v. 80.

 —— (recited seven times for greater solemnity), v. 184.

 —— (repeated to confirm an agreement), vi. 217.

 —— (quoted), vii. 286.

 —— (pronounced to make an agreement binding), ix. 138.

 Fátimah (Pr. N.), = the Weaner, vi. 145.

 —— (daughter of Mohammed), viii. 252.

 Fatimite (Caliphs, their colours green), vi. 86.

 Fátin = tempter, seducer, iii. 82.

 Fátir = Creator (chapter of the Koran), vii. 366.

 Fatís = carrion, corps crévé, vii. 181.

 Fatúrát = light food for early breakfast, x. 12.

 Fausta and Crispus, vi. 127.

 Favours foreshadowing downfall, i. 48.

 —— (not lawful until sanctified by love), viii. 226.

 Fawn (for a graceful youth), viii. 329.

 Faylasúf = philosopher, v. 234.

 Flaylasúfíyah = philosopheress, vii. 145.

 Faylúlah = slumbering after sunset, ii. 178.

 Fayyáz (Al-) = the overflowing (with benefits), vii. 99.

 Fazl = grace, exceeding goodness, vii. 220.

 Fealty of the Steep, v. 295.

 Fearing for the lover first, vii. 256.

 Fee delicately offered, vii. 162.

 Feet (lack the European development of sebaceous glands), viii. 43.

 —— (coldness of, a symptom of impotence), viii. 317.

 Fellah = peasant, husbandman, ix. 40.

 Fellah chaff, ix. 152.

 Female depravity going hand in hand with perversity of taste, i. 73.

 Female (Amazon) Island, viii. 60.

 Feminine mind prone to exaggeration, viii. 25.

 —— friend does not hesitate to prescribe fibs, viii. 37.

 —— persistency of purpose (confirmed by “consolations of religion”),
    viii. 99.

 Festival (Ar. ’Íd), viii. 142.

 Fí al-Khawáfik = among the flags, etc., v. 61.

 Fí al-Kamar = in the moonshine (perhaps allusion to the Comorin
    Islands), vii. 269.

 Fiat _in_justitia ruat Cœlum, i. 253.

 Fidá = ransom, self-sacrifice, viii. 36.

 Fidáan = instead of, viii. 36.

 Fig and sycamore (unclean allusion in), viii. 269.

 Fig = anus, vii. 151.

 Fights easily provoked at funerals or wedding processions, vii. 190.

 Fikh = theology, vii. 325.

 Fillet = the Greek “Stephane,” viii. 209.

 Fillets hung on trees to denote an honoured tomb, vii. 96.

 Fine feathers make fine birds, viii. 201.

 Fingán (for Finján) = (coffee-) cup, viii. 200.

 Finger in mouth (sign of grief), ii. 302.

 —— (run round the inside of a vessel), viii. 200.

 Finger-tips (making marks in the ground), viii. 72.

 Fingers (names of), ix. 160.

 Fingers and toes (separated to wash between them), v. 198.

 Finján = egg-shell cup for coffee, ix. 268.

 Firásah = physiognomy, viii. 326.

 Firdaus = Paradise, ix. 214.

 Firdausi, the Persian Homer, quoted, iii. 83.

 Fire (and sickness cannot cohabit), iii. 59.

 —— (worshippers slandered), iii. 326.

 —— (of Hell, but not shame), v. 138.

 —— (handled without injury, a common conjuring trick), v. 271.

 —— (there is no blower of = utter desolation), vi. 15.

 —— (forbidden as punishment), vi. 26.

 —— (none might warm himself at their), vi. 261.

 —— = Hell (home of suicides), ix. 25.

 Fire-arms mentioned, vii. 62.

 Fire-sticks (Zand, Zandah), v. 52.

 Firmán = Wazirial order, iv. 61.

 First at the feast and last at the fray, iii. 81.

 First personal pronoun placed first for respect, i. 237.

 Fí sabíli ’llahi = on Allah’s path (martyrdom), iv. 247.

 Fish (begins to stink at the head), ii. 168.

 —— (-island), vi. 6.

 —— (the ass-headed), vi. 33.

 —— (great = Hút, common = Samák), vi. 69.

 —— (changed into apes, true Fellah “chaff”), viii. 147.

 —— (of Paradise, promising acceptance of prayer), viii. 163.

 Fishár = squeeze of the tomb, v. 111.

 Fisherman (Arab contrasted with English), v. 51.

 Fist (putting into fist = putting one’s self at another’s mercy), iii.
    155.

 Fitnah = revolt, seduction, mischief, beautiful girl, aphrodisiac
    perfume, i. 219; ii. 76.

 Fits of religious enthusiasm, ii. 132.

 Flatterers (the worst of foes), ii. 11.

 Flattery (more telling because proceeding from the heart), viii. 104.

 Flatulence produced by bean-eating, iv. 160.

 Flea (still an Egyptian plague), vi. 205.

 Flirtation impossible in the East, vii. 181.

 Floor (sitting upon the, sign of deepest dejection), vii. 314.

 Flowers of speech, ii. 88.

 Flying for delight, iii. 26.

 Food-tray of Sulayman, vi. 80.

 Folk follow their King’s faith, ii. 157.

 Following one’s face = at random, i. 347.

 Food (partaken gives rights of protection), iv. 214.

 —— (superstitious belief in its power), iv. 218.

 Foot (smallness of, sign of blood), iii. 227.

 —— (prehensile powers of the Eastern), vii. 179.

 “Forbid not yourselves the good things which Allah hath allowed you,”
    v. 216.

 “Forcible eateth feeble,” ix. 179.

 Fore-arm (for proficiency), ix. 306.

 Formality (a sign of good breeding), viii. 308.

 Formication (accompanying a paralytic stroke), v. 251.

 Formula of praise pronounced to avert the evil eye, iii. 224.

 Fortune makes kneel her camel by some other one = encamps with a
    favourite, iii. 141.

 “Forty days” = our “honeymoon,” viii. 47.

 Foster-brother (dearer than kith and kin), iii. 256.

 Fountain-bowl (ornamented with mosaic, etc.), ii. 310.

 Fourteen (expressed by seven and seven, or five and five plus four),
    viii. 70.

 Fox (Ar. Abú Hosayn, Salab), vi. 211.

 —— (cunning man), iii. 132.

 —— and jackal (confounded by the Arabic dialects), x. 123.

 Frail (Ar. Farsalah), viii. 162.

 Frame (crescent-like by reason of its leanness), viii. 300.

 Freedom (granted to a slave for the sake of reward from Allah), ix.
    243.

 Freeing slaves for the benefit of the souls of the departed, iii. 211.

 Freewill (and the Korán), iv. 275.

 French letters (all about them), vii. 190.

 Friday night = our Thursday night, i. 269.

 Friday service described, i. 313.

 Friend (feminine, does not hesitate to prescribe a fib), viii. 37.

 Friends (weeping when they meet after long parting), iv. 26.

 —— (“damned ill-natured ones”), iv. 137.

 Frolics of high-born ladies, i. 328.

 Front-teeth wide apart (a beauty amongst the Egyptians, not the Arabs),
    viii. 147.

 Fruit of two kinds, vi. 277.

 Fruits (fresh and dry), v. 314.

 Fulán (fulano in Span. and Port.) = a certain person, iii. 191; iv.
    278.

 Fulk = boat, vi. 62.

 Full, Fill = Arabian jessamine, viii. 273.

 Fumigations to cite Jinnís, etc., vii. 363; ix. 29.

 “Fun” = practical jokes of the largest, i. 220.

 “Fundamentals (Usúl), remembered” = the business is not forgotten, ii.
    15.

 Funduk = Fondaco, viii. 184.

 Funeral oration on an Arabian Achilles (after Haríri), viii. 348.

 Funerals (meritorious to accompany), ii. 46.

 Furát = Euphrates (derivation of the name), ix. 17.

 Furaydun, _see_ Afridun, ii. 82.

 Furkán = Korán, iv. 90.

 Fustát = Old Cairo, vi. 87.

 Fútah = napkin, waistcloth, vii. 345.

 Futúh = openings, victories, benefits, iii. 304.

 —— (openings, victories), iv. 51.

 Futúr = breakfast, i. 300; ix. 307.

 Fuzayl bin ’Iyáz (Sufí ascetic), ix. 21.


 Galactophagi (use milk always in the soured form), vi. 201; vii. 360.

 Gall-bladder and liver allusions, i. 219.

 Galland, Antoine (memoir of), x. 96 _seqq._

 “Gallery” (speaking to the), viii. 128.

 Gamin (faire le), iii. 304.

 Garden (in the Prophet’s tomb at Al-Medinah), vii. 91.

 —— (the Perfumed of the Cheikh Nefzaoui), x. 133.

 Gardeners touchy on the point of mated visitors, ii. 22.

 Gardens (with rivers flowing underneath, Koranic phrase), v. 356.

 Gate (of war opened), ix. 9.

 Gates (two to port towns), iii. 281.

 —— (of Heaven are open), ix. 221.

 —— (shut during Friday devotions from fear of “Sicilian Vespers”), ix.
    259.

 Gaw-i-Zamín = the Bull of the Earth, v. 324.

 Gazelles’ blood red (dark red dye), x. 12.

 Gems and their mines, vi. 18.

 Genealogy (Arab, begins with Adnán), v. 100.

 Generosity (an Arab’s ideal because the reverse of his nature), ii. 36.

 —— (peculiar style of), vii. 323.

 Geography in its bearings on morality, iii. 241.

 Geomantic process, iii. 269.

 German translations of The Nights, x. 112, _seqq._

 Ghábah = thicket, ii. 85; iv. 40.

 Ghadir = a place where water sinks, low land, i. 233.

 Ghadr = cheating, viii. 217.

 Gháliyah (Al-) = older English Algallia, viii. 220.

 Ghalyun = galleon, ix. 138.

 Ghamz = winking, signing with the eyes, i. 292.

 Ghandúr = a gallant, vii. 181.

 Gharám (Pr. N.) = eagerness, desire, love-longing, iii. 172.

 Gharámah = avanie, viii. 151.

 Gharíb = foreigner, i. 95.

 Ghashím = “Johnny Raw,” ii. 330.

 Gháshiyah = étui, scabbard; sleeved cloak, iv. 131.

 Ghatrafán (Pr. N.) = proud, petulant, v. 361.

 Ghaut = Sarídah, _q.v._, v. 223.

 Ghawási = singing girls, i. 214.

 Ghaylúlah = slumbering in the morning, ii. 178.

 Ghayúr = jealous (applies to Time), viii. 67.

 Ghazá = Artemisia (a desert shrub), ii. 24; iii. 220; vi. 192; ix. 27.

 Ghazálah = gazelle (a slave-girl’s name), ix. 209.

 Ghazanfar ibn Kamkhíl = Lion son of (?), v. 363.

 Ghayb (Al-) = secret purpose; future, ix. 314.

 Ghazbán (N.P.) = an angry, violent man, ii. 125.

 Ghází = fighter for the faith, ii. 240; viii. 211.

 Ghazl al-banát (girls’ spinning) = vermicelli, i. 83.

 Ghazwah = raid, foray, razzia, ii. 217.

 Ghilmán = Wuldán, the beautiful youths of Paradise, i. 211.

 —— (counterpart of the Houris), v. 64.

 Ghimd (Ghamad) = scabbard, v. 158.

 Ghoonj (Ghunj) = art of motitation in coition, v. 80.

 Ghost (phantom = Tayf), iii. 252.

 Ghúl = ogre, cannibal, vi. 36.

 Ghúlah = ogress, i. 55.

 Ghulámíyah = girl dressed like a boy to act cup-bearer, x. 39.

 Ghull = iron collar, ix. 333.

 Ghúls (whose bellies none may fill but Allah), ix. 152.

 Ghuráb al-Bayn = raven of parting, iv. 52; vii. 226.

 Ghuráb = galleon (grab), viii. 323.

 Ghurbah (Al-) Kurbah = “Travel is Travail,” ix. 257.

 Gurrah = blaze on a horse’s forehead, iii. 118; x. 40.

 Ghusl = complete ablution, v. 80.

 Ghusl al-Sihhah = washing of health, iii. 266.

 Ghussah = calamity which chokes, wrath, ii. 147.

 Ghútah = thickly grown lowland, i. 115.

 Giants (arriving in Peru, probably the Caribs of the Brazil), x. 243.

 “Gift (from me to” etc. = “I leave it to you, sir”), vii. 292.

 —— (is for him who is present), ix. 225.

 Giraffe, exceedingly timid, vii. 54.

 —— unfit for riding, vii. 62.

 Girding the Sovereign (found in the hieroglyphs), vii. 328.

 Girl (of nine plus five = in her prime), v. 192.

 Give a man luck and throw him into the sea, iii. 341.

 Glance compared with a Yamáni sword, ii. 127.

 Gloom = black hair of youth, vii. 277.

 Glooms gathering and full moons dawning, for hands and eyes, vii. 247.

 Gloria (in = the Italian term for the venereal finish), viii. 329.

 Glossarium eroticum, x. 221.

 Gnostic absurdities, x. 191.

 Goad (of the donkey-boy), iii. 116.

 Godiva (an Arabic lady—of the wrong sort), ix. 261.

 Going straight to the point preferred to filer le parfait amour, i.
    268.

 Gold (makes bold), i. 340.

 —— (different names of, required by Arabic rhetoric), iv. 97.

 —— (when he looked at it, his life seemed a light thing to him), vii.
    240.

 —— (liquid = Vino d’Oro), x. 40.

 Gold-pieces (stuck on the cheeks of singing-girls, etc.), viii. 275.

 Goody-goody preachments, iv. 187.

 Gong (Ar. Mudawwarah), iv. 135.

 Good news, Inshallah = is all right with thee?, ix. 224.

 Gospel of Infancy, ii. 228.

 Gossamer (names for), iii. 217.

 Gourd (Ar. Hanzal), ix. 165.

 Grammatical double entendres, ix. 272.

 Grandfather’s name given familiarly, ii. 15.

 Grapes (bunch of, weighing twenty pounds no exaggeration), vii. 358.

 Grave (levelling slave and sovereign), iii. 323.

 “Greatness belongeth to God alone” (used elliptically), vi. 288.

 Green (colour of the Fatimite Caliphs), vi. 86.

 Green gown (Anglo-Indicè = white ball-dress with blades of grass
    behind), viii. 32.

 Green garb (distinguishing mark of Al-Khizr), ix. 324.

 Greetings before the world, v. 34.

 Grelots lascifs, x. 238.

 Grim joke (showing elation of spirits), vii. 324.

 Grimm’s “Household Tales” quoted, vi. 230.

 Groom (falling in love with), viii. 345.

 Ground (really kissed), vii. 257.

 Ground-floor usually let for shops, i. 319.

 Guadalajara = Wady al-Khara (of dung), ix. 10.

 “Guebre” introduced by Lord Byron, viii. 8.

 Guest-rite, vii. 121.

 Gull-fairs, viii. 90.

 Gypsies (their first appearance in Europe), x. 89.


 Habáb (Habá) = motes, iv. 257.

 Habash = Abyssinia and something more, v. 395.

 Habb = grain of the heart, i. 250.

 Habb al ’ubb (a woman’s ornament), vii. 205.

 Habbániyah = grain-seller’s quarter, i. 269.

 Habba-zá! = good this!, v. 52.

 Habíb, euphemism for lover, i. 223.

 Habíbí wa tabíbí = my love and leach, ix. 299.

 Habitations (names given to them by the Arabs), viii. 229.

 Habl = cord; cause, viii. 100.

 Habzalam (Pr. N. = seed of tyranny; “Absalom”?), iv. 66.

 Hadas = surmise, vii. 302.

 Hadbá (the bulging bier), iv. 63.

 Hádí (Al-), Caliph, v. 93.

 Hadíd = iron, ii. 310.

 Hadís = tradition of the Prophet, iv. 207; v. 201.

 Hadís = saying of the Apostle, tradition, v. 201.

 Háfiz (f. Háfizah) = 1. traditionist; 2. one who can recite the Koran
    by rote, vi. 195.

 Háfiz quoted, viii. 120.

 Hafsah (Caliph Omar’s daughter and wife of Mohammed), ii. 165.

 Hafsites (Dynasty in Mauritania), ii. 165.

 Hail (within sight of the Equator), vii. 336.

 Hair (should be allowed all to grow or be shaven off), i. 308.

 Hair-dyes (all vegetable matter), i. 326.

 —— (Mohammed on), iv. 194.

 Hair-strings (of black silk), iii. 311.

 —— (significance of), iii. 313.

 Hájah = a needful thing (for something, somewhat), vii. 349.

 Hajar-coinage, vii. 95.

 Hajar Jahannam = hell-stone, lava, basalt, v. 378.

 Hájib = groom, chamberlain, ii. 304; iii. 233.

 Hajín (tall camel), iii. 67.

 Hajj = Pilgrimage, v. 202.

 Hájj (or Hájí, not Hajji), iv. 215.

 Hajj al-Akbar and Hajj al-Asgar, ii. 169.

 Hajjáj (Al-), bin Yúsuf, Governor of Al-Hijáz and Al-Irák, iv. 3; vii.
    97.

 Hajjám = barber-surgeon, cupper, bleeder, iv. 112.

 Hákim = ruler, not to be confounded with Hakím, doctor, etc., vii. 29.

 Ha’kim (Al-) bi-amri ’llah (Caliph), iv. 296.

 —— (not to be confounded with the Fatimite), v. 86.

 Hakk (Al-) = the Truth (Allah), v. 284.

 Hakk = right (Hakkí = mine), viii. 335.

 Halab = Aleppo, i. 292.

 Halabí Shalabí = the Aleppine is a fellow fine, v. 64.

 Haláwah = sweetmeat, iv. 60; vii. 205.

 Haláwat al-Salámah = sweetmeat for the returning of a friend, viii.
    325.

 Halfah-grass (Poa), ii. 18.

 Halíb = fresh milk, vi. 201.

 Halímah = the mild, gentle (fem.), ix. 265.

 Haling by the hair a reminiscence of “marriage by capture,” viii. 40.

 Hallaling, Anglo-Indian term for the Moslem rite of killing animals for
    food, vii. 9.

 Halumma = bring! vii. 117.

 Halummú = drew near (plur.), ix. 44.

 Halwá = sweetmeats, ii. 47, 212.

 Hamadán (town in Persian Mesopotamia), ix. 212.

 Hámah (soul of a murdered man in form of a bird sprung from his head),
    iii. 293.

 Hamáil = baldricks, v. 158.

 Hamám = wood-pigeon, v. 49.

 —— (al-Ayk) = culver of the copse, v. 49.

 Hamath = Hightown, ii. 178.

 Hamíd (fem. Hamidah) = praiseworthy, satisfactory, ix. 76.

 Hammál al-Hatabi = one who carries fuel, vii. 59.

 Hammám (going to the = convalescence), i. 288.

 —— (ditto, showing that women’s courses are over), i. 286.

 —— (hired for private parties), v. 63.

 Hammám-bath (a luxury as well as necessity), iii. 19.

 Hamzah (uncle of the Prophet), viii. 172.

 Hanabát = “hanap” viii. 202.

 Hanbal, _see_ Ahmad bin Hanbal, ii. 204.

 Hand (left, how used), iv. 129.

 —— (white, symbol of generosity; black of niggardness), iv. 185.

 —— (his for her), iv. 279.

 —— (cut off in penalty for theft), viii. 164.

 —— (cut off for striking a father), viii. 287.

 Handfuls (the two), v. 207.

 Handkerchief of dismissal, x. 47.

 Hands (behind the back, posture of submission), iii. 218.

 —— (stained in stripes like ring-rows of a chain armour), iii. 176.

 —— (how held in reciting the Fátihah), v. 80.

 —— (bitten in repentance), v. 191.

 —— (their feel guides the physician), v. 220.

 Hanien = pleasant to thee! after drinking, ii. 5.

 Hanífah, _see_ Abú Hanífah, ii. 207.

 Hanút = tavern, booth, etc., v. 142.

 Hanzal = gourd, v. 19; ix. 165.

 Harámí = one who lives on unlawful gains, ix. 147.

 Harbak = javelin, vii. 45.

 Hard of heart and soft of sides, ii. 5.

 Hardly he (equivalent for), vii. 333.

 Harf = letter, syllable, ii. 307.

 Harf al-Jarr = a particle governing the oblique case; mode of thrusting
    and tumbling, ix. 272.

 Harím = Harem, used for the inmates, i. 165.

 —— double entendre (= Harem and Honour), iv. 9.

 —— (= wife), iv. 126.

 —— (hot-bed of Sapphism and Tribadism), iv. 334.

 Harírí (Al-), = the silk-man (poet), v. 158.

 —— (lines quoted from), x. 44.

 Harísah, a favourite dish, i. 131.

 Harjáh = (a man of), any place, v. 27.

 Hark, you shall see, ix. 14.

 Harrák (ship = Carrack?), iv. 130.

 Harrákát = carracks (also used for cockboat), vii. 336.

 Hárún al-Rashíd (described by Al-Siyúti), viii. 160.

 —— (as a poet), ix. 17.

 —— (said to have prayed every day a hundred bows), ix. 339.

 —— (and Charlemagne), x. 135.

 Hárút and Márút (sorcerer angels), iii. 217.

 Harwalah = pas gymnastique, iii. 121.

 Hasá (Al-) = plain of pebbles, west of Damascus, i. 234.

 Hasab = quantity opposed to Nasab = birth, iv. 171.

 Hasab wa nasab = inherited degree and acquired dignity, iv. 171; vii.
    279.

 Hasan al-Basri (theologian), ii. 165.

 Hasan bin Sahl (Wazir of Al-Maamún), iv. 124.

 Hasanta yá Hasan = bene detto, Benedetto!, i. 251.

 Háshimí = descendant of Háshim (Mohammed’s great-grandfather), ix. 24.

 —— cubit = 18 inches, v. 371.

 —— vein, ii. 19.

 Hashísh (intoxicant prepared of hemp), i. 225; iii. 91.

 —— (orgie in London), iii. 91.

 —— (said to him = his mind, under its influence, suggested to him),
    viii. 155.

 Hashsháshún = assassins, iii. 91.

 Hásib Karím al-Dín (Pr. N.), v. 298.

 Hásid = an envier, iv. 137.

 Hásil, Hásilah = cell, viii. 184, 196.

 Hassún (diminutive of Hasan), viii. 81.

 Haste ye to salvation, part of the Azán, i. 224.

 Hátif = mysterious voice, i. 142.

 Hatím = broken wall (at Meccah), vii. 219.

 Hátim (Pr. N.) = black crow, vii. 350.

 Hátim al-Asamm (the Deaf), ii. 207.

 Hátim of Tayy (proverbial for liberality), iv. 94.

 Hattín (battle of), ix. 19.

 Haudaj (Hind. Howda) = camel-litter for women, viii. 235.

 Hauk! Hauk! = hee haw! i. 221.

 “Haunted” = inhabited by Jinns, v. 175.

 Haurání towns (weird aspect of), vi. 102.

 —— —— (their survival accounted for by some protracted drought), iv.
    116.

 Hawá al-Uzri = platonic love, ii. 304.

 Hawar = intensity of black and white in the eyes, iii. 233.

 Háwi = juggler playing tricks with snakes, iii. 145; ix. 56.

 Háwiyah (name of a Hell), viii. 346.

 Hawk, iii. 61, 138.

 Hawwá = Eve, v. 139.

 Hayát al-Nufús = Life of Souls, iii. 283.

 Hayhát, onomatopoetic for lover, i. 76.

 Haykal = temple, chapel, v. 192.

 Hazár = (the bird of) a thousand (songs), v. 48.

 Hazár Afsáneh (tales from the), ix. 32; x. 72, 93.

 Házir and Bádí = townsman and nomad, iii. 234.

 Hazramaut (Hazarmaveth), iv. 118; v. 136.

 Hazrat = our mediæval “presentia vostra,” viii. 254.

 Hazza-hu = he made it (the javelin) quiver, vii. 45.

 “He” for “she” out of delicacy, ii. 179.

 Head (must always be kept covered), iii. 275.

 Head in the poke = into the noose, i. 179.

 Head-kerchief (déshabillé), ii. 328.

 Headsman delaying execution, iii. 42.

 “Hearer” not “reader” addressed, viii. 316.

 Heart (black drop in the), iv. 256.

 —— (from one full of wrath = in spite of himself), v. 68.

 Heart-ache (for stomach-ache = mal au cœur), vi. 194.

 Heaven (Ar. Na’ím), iv. 143.

 Heavens (names of the seven), viii. 111.

 Hell (Sa’ír), iv. 143.

 —— (cold as well as hot), iv. 253.

 Hells (names of the seven and their intended inhabitants), viii. 111.

 Hemistichs divided, iii. 166.

 Henna-flower (its spermatic odour), vii. 250.

 Herb (the insane), vi. 36.

 Hermaphrodites (Ar. Khunsá), iii. 306.

 Heroes and heroines of love-tales are bonnes fourchettes, vii. 300.

 Heroine of Eastern romance eats well, iii. 168.

 Heroism of a doubtful character, viii. 27.

 Hesperides (apples of the, probably golden nuggets), viii. 272.

 Hetairesis and Sotadism (the heresies of love), x. 215.

 Hibá = cords, garters, ii. 236.

 Hibál = ropes, iv. 193.

 High-bosomed damsel a favourite with Arab tale-tellers, i. 84.

 Hijáz (Al-) = Moslem Holy Land, ii. 306.

 Hijl = partridge, iii. 138.

 “Him” for “her,” iii. 78.

 Himà = guarded side, demesne, viii. 102, 225.

 Himalayan brothers, ii. 211, 260.

 Hind (Al-) al-Aksà = Outer Hind or India, ix. 116.

 Hind bint Asmá and the poet Jarír, vii. 96.

 Hindí = Indian Moslem opposed to Hindú, v. 1.

 Hindibà = endive, v. 226.

 Hinges (of ancient doors), iii. 41.

 Hippic syphilis, x. 90.

 Hippopotamus, vi. 33.

 Hips (their volume admired), ii. 285.

 —— (leanness of, “anti-pathetic” to Easterns), iii. 226.

 Hírah (Christian city in Mesopotamia), v. 124.

 Hirakl (monastery of), v. 138.

 “His” for “her,” viii. 50.

 Hisham bin Abd al-Malik (Caliph), ii. 170; vii. 104.

 Hishám ibn Orwah (traditionist), v. 81.

 Hisn al-Fákihat = Fortalice of Fruits, vii. 75.

 Hiss = (sensual) perception, vii. 302.

 Hizám = girdle, viii. 160; x. 36.

 Hizb = section of the Koran, v. 217.

 Hobbling a camel (how done), vii. 119.

 Hog, popular term of abuse, i. 188.

 Holiness supposed to act as talisman, ii. 251.

 Holy Writ (punned upon), viii. 348.

 Homme acheté = de bonne famille, iv. 225.

 Honayn (scene of one of Mohammed’s battles), v. 66.

 Honey (of bees as distinguished from cane honey), v. 300.

 —— (simile for the delights of the world), ix. 64.

 “Honeymoon” (lasts a week), v. 62.

 Honour amongst thieves, ii. 159.

 Hoof (of the wild ass), iii. 235.

 Horoscopes, etc., i. 213.

 Horripilation = goose flesh, iii. 2.

 Horse (names of), iii. 72.

 Horse-stealing honourable, iii. 73.

 Horseplay frequently ending in bastinado, i. 325.

 Horses (not taught to leap), ii. 89.

 —— (Arab breeds), v. 246.

 Hosh = mean courts at Cairo, v. 170.

 Hospitals hated, ii. 70.

 Host (enters first as safeguard against guet-apens) iii. 208.

 Hour (of Judgment), v. 235.

 Houris, iii. 233.

 House (haunted = inhabited by Jinns), v. 175.

 —— (the Holy of Allah = Ka’abah), ix. 178.

 House of Peace = Baghdad, i. 139.

 “House of Sadness,” viii. 64.

 House-breaking (four modes of), vi. 247.

 Houses of Lamentation in Moslem burial-grounds, i. 94.

 Housewife (looks to the main chance), viii. 144.

 Hubb al-Watan = patriotism, ii. 183.

 Hubkah = doubling of a woman’s waistcloth, vii. 180.

 Hubúb (Pr. N.) = awaking; blowing hard, viii. 209.

 Húd (prophet = Heber?), iv. 118.

 Hudhud = hoopoe, iii. 128.

 Hudúd al-Haram = bounds of the Holy Places, v. 148.

 Hullah = dress, vii. 180.

 Hulwán al-miftáh = dénier à Dieu, ix. 212.

 Huwayná (Al-) = now drawing near and now moving away, ix. 250.

 Humbly (expressed by “standing on their heads”), viii. 279.

 Humility of the lovelorn Princess artfully contrasted with her previous
    furiosity, vii. 261.

 Humming not a favourite practice with Moslems, i. 311.

 Humours (of Hippocrates), v. 218.

 Hump-back (graphically described), viii. 297.

 Hunchback looked upon with fear and aversion, i. 258.

 Hunger (burns), ii. 144.

 Hungry judges, “hanging judges,” ii. 198.

 Húr, pl. = Houris, iii. 233.

 Húr al-Ayn = with eyes of lively white and black, i. 90.

 Hurák = tinder, iv. 108.

 Hurr = gentleman, i. 254.

 —— = free, noble, independent, opp. to ’Abd = servile, iii. 44.

 Hurry is from Hell, i. 264.

 —— (in a newly married couple indecent), iv. 244.

 Hurúf al-mutabbakát = the flattened sounds, iv. 223.

 Hút = great fish, vi. 69.

 Hydropathic treatment of wounds held dangerous, v. 200.

 Hymeneal blood resembles that of pigeon-poult, ii. 50.

 Hypocrite (Ar. Munáfik), v. 207.

 Hysterical Arab temperament, ii. 54, 101, 181.


 Ibáziyah sect, vii. 125.

 Iblís (diabolus) = Despairer, i. 13; iii. 22; ix. 300.

 —— (Cherubim cherished by Allah), v. 319.

 —— (cursed and expelled), v. 320.

 Ibn Abbás (Companion), v. 212.

 Ibn Abdún al-Andalúsí (poet), iii. 319.

 Ibn Abí Anfa, ii. 200.

 Ibn al-Kirnás = son of the chase (for Persian Kurnas = pimp, cuckold?),
    viii. 157.

 Ibn al-’Ukáb (Pr. N.) = Son of the Eagle, viii. 198.

 Ibn Hamdún (transmitter of poetry and history), ix. 229.

 Ibn Harám = son of adultery, abuse not necessarily reflecting on the
    parent, i. 231.

 Ibn ’Irs = weasel, ix. 114.

 Ibn Muljam (murderer of the Caliph Ali), iii. 319.

 Ibn Síná = Avicenna, iii. 34.

 Ibráhím bin Adham, ii. 203.

 Ibrahím bin al-Mahdí (Pretender to the Caliphate) iv. 103.

 Ibrahim al-Mausilí, iv. 108; ix. 304.

 Ibrat = needle graver and ’Ibrat = warning, a favourite jingle, i. 104.

 Ibrík = ewer, and Tisht = basin, used for washing the hands, i. 241;
    vii. 146.

 Ibrísam = raw silk, floss, vii. 352.

 Ichneumon (mongoose), iii. 147.

 Ichthyological marvels, vi. 33.

 ’Íd = festivals (the two of Al-Islám), viii. 142.

 Id al-Kabír = the Great Festival, i. 28.

 Iddat = months of a woman’s enforced celibacy after divorce, iii. 292.

 —— (of widowhood), vi. 256; x. 43.

 Ídgáh (place of prayer), ii. 202.

 Ifrít, divided into two races like mankind, i. 11.

 Ifrítah = she-Ifrit, i. 34.

 Ihdak = encompassing, as the white encloses the black of the eye, i.
    49.

 Ihtiláj-námah = Book of palpitations, viii. 25.

 Ihtilám = wet dream as a sign of puberty, vii. 183.

 Ihtizáz = shaking with delight, i. 50.

 I’itikáf (Al-) = retreat, v. 202.

 Ijtilá = displaying of the bride on her wedding night, vii. 198.

 Ikálat (Al-) = cancelling, “resiliation,” v. 204.

 Ikh! Ikh! (cry to a camel to make it kneel down), ii. 139.

 Ikhlás (Al-) = Chapter of Unity, iii. 307.

 Ikhtiyán al Khutan = Khaitan (?), x. 9.

 Ikhwán al-Safá = Brethren of Purity, iii. 150.

 Iklíl = diadem, now obsolete, i. 270.

 Iklím = the seven climates of Ptolemy, i. 233.

 Iksah = plait, etc., vii. 150.

 Iksír (Al-) = dry drug (from ξηρον), v. 315; viii. 9.

 Ikyán = living gold, viii. 272, 275.

 Iláh = God, v. 196.

 Iláh al-Arsh = the God of the Empyrean, iii. 106.

 Iliad and Pentaur’s Epic, vii. 362.

 Ill is thy abiding place, iii. 137.

 Ill-treatment (a plea for a lawful demand to be sold), viii. 55.

 Ilm al-Káf = K-science for Alchemy, v. 307.

 Ilm al-Rúhání = Spiritualism, i. 305.

 Images of living beings forbidden, v. 3.

 —— (= statues), v. 223.

 Imám = leader, antistes, ii. 203.

 —— (the Seventh = Caliph al-Maamún), iv. 111.

 —— (the fugleman at the prayer-niche), iv. 227.

 Imámah = turband, iv. 100.

 Imlik (great-grandson of Shem), vi. 264.

 Improvising still common among the Badawin, i. 39.

 Impudence (intended to be that of a captive Princess), viii. 295.

 Impurity (ceremonial different from dirtiness), v. 209.

 Imsák = retention (prolongatio veneris), v. 76.

 Inadvertency of the tale-teller, viii. 141.

 In’ásh = raising from the bier (a “pick-me-up”), v. 67.

 Incest (lawful amongst ancient peoples), i. 110.

 —— (repugnant to Moslem taste), ii. 172.

 Inconsequence (of the Author of The Nights), iv. 155.

 —— (characteristic of the Eastern Saga), vi. 61.

 —— (of writer of The Nights), vi. 205.

 Incuriousness of the Eastern story-teller vii. 57.

 Index finger (Sháhid), ii. 300.

 Indian realm, vii. 336.

 Indrajál = white magic, v. 307.

 Infidel should not be killed unless refusing to become a Moslem or a
    tributary, vii. 64.

 Infirmity (and infirm letters), iv. 243.

 Inheritance, law of, settled by the Koran, i. 174.

 Inkcase (descendant of the wooden palette with writing reeds), viii.
    178.

 ’Innín = impotence, viii. 317.

 Innovation (Ar. Bida’ah), v. 167.

 Insane (treatment of the), iii. 256.

 Inscriptions (on trays, plates, etc.), iv. 235.

 Inshád = conjuring by Allah, i. 11.

 —— = reciting, improvising, ii. 126.

 Inshallah (Allah willing) = D.V., iv. 286; viii. 104.

 Inshallah bukrah = to-morrow D.V., ii. 324.

 Insolence and licence of palace-girls, i. 286.

 Insomnia (curious treatment of), iv. 229.

 Insula (for peninsula), vi. 57.

 Intellect of man stronger than a Jinní’s, i. 43.

 Intention (of prayer, Niyat), v. 163, 196.

 Intercession-doctrine disputed amongst Moslems, ii. 40; v. 241.

 Internally wounded = sick at heart, i. 5.

 Inverted speech (forms of), ii. 265; vi. 262; viii. 179.

 Inwá = jerking the date-stone, i. 25.

 Irádah = Sultan’s order, iv. 61.

 Irák = level country beside river banks, ii. 132.

 —— (etc., used always with the article), vi. 291.

 —— (for Al-Irák in verse), vii. 20.

 Iram (the many-columned), iv. 113; x. 29.

 Irán = hearse; Moses’ ark, vii. 207.

 Irdabb, _see_ Ardabb.

 Irishman (the typical, in Arab garb), viii. 191.

 —— and his “convarter,” x. 3.

 ’Irk = root, also sprig, twig, ix. 251.

 Iron (conjures away friends), ii. 316.

 Iron padlock (instead of the usual wooden bolt), iii. 198.

 Irony, iii. 291; iv. 271; viii. 3, 164.

 Irreverence (Egyptian), iv. 47.

 Isaak (Ishák) of Mosul, iv. 119.

 Isbánír = Ctesiphon (?), vi. 279.

 Isengrim (wolf), iii. 146.

 Isfídáj = ceruse, vi. 126.

 Ishá = the first watch of the night, i. 175.

 Ishárah = signing, beckoning, vi. 109; viii. 233.

 Ishk ’uzrí (in the sense of platonic love), vii. 121; ix. 250.

 Ishmael (place of his sacrifice), iv. 75.

 Ishtar-Ashtaroth (her worship not obsolete in Syria), x. 230.

 Iskandar Zú al-Karnayn (= Alexander Matagrobolised), v. 252; x. 57.

 Iskandaríyah = city of Alexander, viii. 289.

 Island for land, viii. 317.

 Ism al-A’azam = the Most Great Name of Allah, viii. 133.

 Ismid = (Ithmid) stibium (eye-powder), iii. 307.

 Israfíl (blows the last trumpet), v. 310.

 Istahi = have some shame, ix. 255.

 Istikbál = coming forth to greet, ii. 287.

 Istikhárah = praying for direction by omens, etc., v. 44.

 Istinjá = washing the fundament after stool, iv. 129.

 Istinsháh = snuffing water through the nostrils, v. 198.

 Istitá’ah (= ableness), ix. 80.

 —— (= freewill), ix. 83.

 Ithmid (stibium antimone) = Sp. Althimod, ii. 103.

 “I told you so” (even more common in East than West), iv. 69.

 Italian Translations of The Nights, x. 114.

 Izár = sheet worn as veil, i. 163; vi. 50.


 J (How it came to take the place of Y in the English Bible), ii. 43.

 Ja’afar contrasting strongly with his master, i. 102.

 —— (mode of his death), iv. 159.

 —— (his suspected heresy), x. 141.

 —— (river or rivulet), iv. 292.

 Ja’afar bin Musà al-Hádí (Caliph), v. 93.

 Jabábirah = tyrants, giants, conquerors, vii. 84; ix. 109, 323.

 Jabal = mountain (for mountainous island), ix. 315.

 Jabal al-Ramun = Adam’s Peak, vi. 65.

 Jabal al-Saklá (Thaklá) = mount of the woman bereft of children, v. 37.

 Jabal al-Tárik = Gibraltar, iv. 100.

 Jabal Mukattam (sea-cliff upon which Cairo is built), v. 383.

 Jabal Núr, v. 215.

 Jabarsá, the city of Japhet, vii. 40, 43.

 Jabarti = Moslem Abyssinian, ii. 15.

 Jábír Atharát al-Kirám = Repairer of the slips of the generous, vii.
    100.

 Jábir bin Abdallah (disciple of Mohammed), v. 215.

 Jackal’s gall (used aphrodisiacally), x. 123.

 Jacob’s daughters, iv. 14.

 Jadíd = new (coin), copper, x. 12.

 Jáh = high station, dignity, ix. 174.

 Jahábiz pl. of Jahbaz = acute, intelligent, ix. 62.

 Jahannam = Hell, v. 306, 318.

 Jahárkas = Pers. Chehárkas, four persons, i. 266.

 Jalájil = small bells for falcons, viii. 271.

 Jalálah = saying “Jalla Jalálu-hu” = magnified be His Majesty, v. 217.

 Jalálikah = Gallicians, ix. 156.

 Jaland, not Julned, vii. 16.

 Jalláb = slave dealer, iii. 340.

 Jallábiyah = gaberdine, v. 265.

 Jamá’at = community, v. 205.

 Jamal (Gamal) = camel, iii. 110.

 Jámi’ = cathedral mosque, v. 261.

 Jámi’án = two cathedrals, v. 66.

 Jamíl ibn Ma’amar (poet), ii. 102; vii. 117.

 Jamíz (Jummayz) = sycamore fig, iii. 302.

 Jamm = ocean, v. 93.

 Janázah = bier with corpse, ii. 46.

 Janázir for Zanájír = chains, ix. 309.

 Jannat al-Khuld = the Eternal Garden, ix. 214.

 Jannat al-Na’ím = The Garden of Delights, _i.e._ Heaven, i. 98; iii.
    19.

 Jánsháh (Pr. N.) = King of Life, v. 329; vii. 82.

 Japhet (Ar. Yáfis or Yáfat), vii. 40.

 —— his sword, vii. 41.

 Jar (ridden by witches), viii. 131.

 Jarír (poet), v. 148.

 Jarm (Ar. Bárijah), vi. 24.

 Jarrah = jar, viii. 177.

 Jars for cooling water, ii. 21.

 Jásalik (Al-) = Καθολικὸς, Primate, ii. 228.

 Jauharah (Pr. N. = Jewel), vii. 307.

 Jauz al-Hindi = cocoa-nut, vi. 55.

 Jauzá = Gemini, x. 38.

 Jauzar = Bubalus (Ariel), v. 130.

 Javelines, vi. 263.

 Jawáb-club, vi. 262.

 Jawámard for Jawanmard = un giovane, a brave, vii. 17.

 Jawán (Pr. N.) Pers. = a youth, juvenis, iv. 208.

 Jawárí = slave-girls rhyming with dam’a jári = flowing tears, v. 160.

 Jawarnah (Júrnah) = Zara, ii. 219.

 Jawáshiyah = guards, viii. 330.

 Jawásís, pl. of Jásús, = spies (for secret police), ix. 13.

 Jáwish = apparitor, sergeant, royal messenger, ii. 49.

 Jazírah = Peninsula, Arabia, i. 2; vii. 333.

 Jazírah (Al-) = Mesopotamia, vii. 100.

 Jazírát al-Khalidát = Eternal Isles = Canaries, i. 141.

 Jazirat ibn Omar (island and town on the Tigris), x. 40.

 Jesus (bird of), v. 211.

 —— (crucified in effigy), v. 238.

 —— (compared with Adam), v. 238.

 Jew (prefers dying on the floor, not in bed), v. 248.

 —— (never your equal, either above or below you), viii. 153.

 —— (marrying a Moslemah deserves no pity), viii. 262.

 Jeweller (in Eastern tales generally a rascal), iii. 186.

 Jews (adepts in magic), ii. 233.

 Jihád = fighting for the Faith, iii. 39.

 Jilá = displaying the bride before the bridegroom, i. 174.

 Jíbbáb = habergeon, buff-jacket, gown, vii. 156; ix. 290.

 Jink (Al-) = effeminates, x. 19.

 Jinn = the French génie, the Hindu Rakshasa or Yaksha, i. 10.

 Jinnís (names of), iii. 225.

 Job (a Syrian), iv. 221.

 Joining prayers, iii. 174.

 Jokh = broadcloth, ii. 111.

 Jokh al-Saklát = rich brocade on broadcloth, viii. 202.

 Joseph of the Koran very different from him of Genesis, i. 13.

 —— (and Potiphar’s wife), vi. 127.

 “Joyance is three things,” etc., iv. 254.

 Judad (for Judud) pl. of Jadíd = new coin, viii. 121.

 Júdar (classical Arab name), vi. 213.

 —— (and his brethren, version of a Gotha MS.), vi. 257.

 Júdariyah (quarter of Cairo), vi. 254.

 Judgment (hour of), v. 235.

 Judri = small-pox, i. 256.

 Jufún = eyebrows or eyelashes, iv. 260.

 Juggling with heaven, viii. 168.

 Jugular vein (from — to —), iv. 92.

 Jujube-sherbet, ii. 317.

 Julnár = Pers. Gul-i-anár (pomegranate flower), vii. 268.

 Jum’ah = assembly (Friday), vi. 120, 190.

 Jumblat (for Ján-pulád, Life o’ Steel, Pr. N.), vi. 115.

 Jummár = palm-pith and cabbage, viii. 270.

 Junayd al-Baghdádí (Sufi ascetic), ix. 21.

 Junún = madness, i. 10.

 Juráb mi’adat-hu (bag of his belly = scrotum), ii. 233.

 Justice (poetical, not done), iv. 28.

 —— (poetical in The Nights), vi. 255.

 Juzám = (black) leprosy, iv. 51; v. 294; viii. 24.


 Ka’ab al-Ahbár (of the Scribes, two of the name), iv. 115.

 Ka’abah (Pilgrims clinging to its curtain), iv. 125.

 Ká’ah = ground-floor hall, i. 85.

 —— = fine house, mansion, i. 292.

 —— (= messroom, barracks), vii. 167.

 Ka’ak al ’Íd = buns (cake?), vii. 196.

 Kaannahu huwa = as he (was), he, vii. 233.

 Ka’b = heel, ankle, metaph. for fortune, vii. 177.

 Kabáb (mutton or lamb grilled in small squares), vi. 225.

 Kabasa = he shampoo’d, ix. 213.

 Kabbát = saucers, viii. 12.

 Kabbázah = a “holding woman,” iv. 127.

 Kábul men noted for Sodomy, i. 299.

 Kadisíyah (Al-) city in Irák, v. 294.

 Kádús pl. Kawádís = pot of a waterwheel, ix. 218.

 Káf, popularly = Caucasus, i. 72, 133.

 Kaff Shurayk = a single “Bunn,” _q.v._, ix. 172.

 Káfir = Infidel, Giaur, ii. 292.

 Kafr = village (in Egypt and Syria), x. 27.

 Káfs (verset of the three-and-twenty), v. 217.

 Kafúr (Pr. N.) = Camphor, ii. 47.

 Kafrà = desert place, viii. 337.

 Kahánah (Al-) = the craft of a Káhin or soothsayer, i. 28.

 Kahbah = whore, i. 70.

 Kahíl = whose eyes are kohl’d by nature, iii. 346.

 Kahílat al-Taraf = having the eyelids lined with kohl, i. 63.

 Káhirah = City of Mars (Cairo), iv. 271.

 Kahkahah = horse-laughter, i. 350.

 Kahlá (fem.) = nature-kohl’d, iii. 232.

 Kahramán (Pers.) = braves, heroes, iv. 115; vi. 257.

 Kahramánat = nursery governess, i. 231; ix. 221.

 Kahtán (sons of), vi. 260.

 Kahwah (Kihwah) = strong old wine, ii. 261.

 —— (Al-), used for coffee-house, ix. 256.

 Kahwajíyah = coffee-makers, v. 169.

 Káid = leader, i. 330.

 Ka’ka’at = jangling noise, vii. 21.

 Kákilí = Sumatran (eagle-wood), x. 57.

 Kala (island), vi. 47.

 Kalak = raft, vii. 342.

 Kalam = reed-pen, i. 128.

 —— = leg-cut, ii. 107.

 Kalám al-Mubáh = the permitted say, i. 29.

 Kalám wáti = vulgarism, ii. 113.

 Kalam-dán = reed-box (ink-case), iv. 167; v. 239.

 Kalandar = mendicant monk, i. 94.

 Kalandars (order of), x. 84.

 Kallá = prorsus non, iv. 257.

 Kalla-má = it is seldom, v. 150.

 Kallim al-Sultán (formula of summoning), ix. 224.

 Kámah = fathom, ii. 56.

 Kamán = Kamá (as)-anna (that, since, because), viii. 197.

 Kamar = belt, viii. 156.

 Kamar al-Zamán (Pr. N.) = Moon of the Age, iii. 213; ix. 247.

 Kamaráni (Al-) = the two moons for sun and moon, iii. 300.

 Káma-Shástra (Ars Amoris Indica), iii. 93.

 Kámat Alfiyyah = straight figure, i. 85; iii. 236.

 Kámil wa Basít wa Wáfir = the names of three popular metres, viii. 91.

 Kamín al-Bahrayn = lurking-place of the two seas, vii. 353.

 Kamís = shift, etc., i. 293.

 Kammir (Imp.) = brown (the bread), x. 14.

 Kanát = subterranean water-course, iii. 141.

 Kanjifah = pack of cards, v. 243.

 Kánmákán (Pr. N.) = “was that which was,” ii. 280.

 Kantar (quintal) = 98·99 lbs. avoir. ii. 233.

 Kánún (dulcimer, “zither”), iii. 211.

 Kánún = brasier, v. 272; vi. 5.

 Kanz = enchanted treasure, ix. 320.

 Kapoteshwara and Kapoteshí, iii. 126.

 Kaptán = Capitano, iv. 85; ix. 139.

 Kara Gyuz, _see_ Khiyál.

 Kárah = budget, large bag, ix. 216.

 Karaj (town in Persian Irak), vii. 77.

 Karawán = Charadrius œdicnemus, vi. 1.

 Karbús = saddle-bow, viii. 77.

 Kári = Koran-reader, v. 216.

 Kárib (pl. Kawárib) = dinghy, iv. 168.

 Karím = generous (cream of men), ii. 35.

 Kárizán (Al-) = the two mimosa-gatherers, vii. 93.

 Karkadán, etc. = rhinoceros, vi. 21.

 Karkar (Carcer?), Sea of Al-, vi. 101.

 Karkh (Al-), quarter of Baghdad, v. 127; ix. 313.

 Karmút = Silurus Carmoth Niloticus, viii. 185.

 Karr’aynan = keep thine eye cool, vii. 229.

 Karrat azlá ’hu = his ribs felt cold (from hearty eating), viii. 189.

 Kárún = Korah of the Bible, v. 225.

 —— (lake), vi. 217.

 Karúrah = bottle for urine, iv. 11.

 Kasa’ah = wooden bowl, porringer, iv. 283.

 Kasab (Al-) = acquisitiveness, ix. 80.

 Kasabah = rod (measurement), ii. 328.

 Kasabát = canes; bugles, ii. 298.

 Kásid = Anglo-Indian Cossid, vii. 340.

 Kasídah = ode, elegy, iii. 262.

 Kasídahs (their conventionalism), ix. 250.

 Kasr (= palace, one’s house), vi. 240.

 —— (= upper room), ix. 283.

 Kasr al-Nuzhat = palace of delights, ii. 22.

 Kasr (Al-) al-Mashíd = the high-built castle, vii. 346.

 Kasrí (Al-) Governor of the two Iráks; iv. 155.

 Kat’a = bit of leather, i. 20.

 Katá = sand-grouse, i. 131; iv. 111.

 Kataba (for tattooing), vii. 250.

 Kátala-k Allah = Allah strike thee dead (facetiously), iv. 264, 265.

 Katf = pinioning, i. 106.

 Kathá-Sarit-Ságara, poetical version of the Vrihat-Kathá, i. 12; x.
    160, etc.

 Kathír = much, “no end,” x. 10.

 Katíl = the Irish “kilt,” iv. 139.

 Katúl (Al-) = the slayer, iii. 72.

 Kashmír people (have a bad name in Eastern tales), vi. 156.

 Kassara ’llah Khayrak = Allah increase thy weal, vi. 233.

 Kaukab al-durrí = cluster of pearls, viii. 291.

 Kaukab al-Saláh = Star of the Morning, ix. 301.

 Kaum = razzia; tribe, vi. 266.

 Kaun = being, existence, ix. 63.

 Kaus al-Banduk = pellet-bow, i. 10.

 Kausaj = man with a thin, short beard, cunning, tricksy, iii. 246.

 Kausar, lieu commun of poets, i. 241; ii. 186; iv. 196.

 Kawáid (pl. of Káid = governor), v. 145.

 Kawárib, _see_ Kárib.

 Kawwád = pimp, i. 316; vii. 98.

 Kawwás = archer, janissary, vi. 241.

 Káyánián, race of Persian kings, i. 75.

 Kayf hálak = how de doo? vii. 336.

 Kayim (professional wrestler, names of such), ii. 93.

 Kaylúlah = siesta, i. 51; ii. 178; viii. 191.

 Kayrawán = the Greek Cyrene, viii. 317.

 Kaysaríyah = superior kind of Bazar, i. 266.

 Kaysúm = yellow camomile, iii. 58.

 Kaywán (Persian for Saturn), ii. 75.

 Kayy (Al-) = cautery, the end of medicine-cure, iii. 59.

 Kayyimah = guardian (fem.), viii. 330.

 Káz (Al-) = shears, viii. 9.

 Kazá, Kismat and “Providence,” vii. 135.

 Kazdír = Skr. Kastíra (tin), iv. 274; vi. 39.

 Kází = judge in religious matters, i. 21.

 Kázi al Kuzát = Chief Justice, ii. 90; viii. 245.

 Kází of the army (the great legal authority of a country), vi. 131.

 Kazíb al-Bán = willow-wand, ii. 66.

 Kazis (the four of the orthodox schools), ii. 39.

 Kerchief (of mercy), i. 343.

 —— (of dismissal), iii. 295.

 —— (shaking and throwing the), iv. 62.

 “Key” = fee paid on the keys being handed to a lodger, vii. 212.

 Khabál = pus flowing from the damned, v. 162.

 Khadd = cheek, vii. 277.

 Khádim = servant, politely applied to a castrato, i. 235; ix. 237.

 Khadiv (_not_ Kédivé), ix. 119.

 Kháfiyah = concealed; Kháinah = perfidy, vii. 320.

 Khafz al-Jináh = lowering the wing (demeaning oneself gently), ix. 33.

 Khák-bák = “hocus pocus,” etc., viii. 328.

 Khal’a al-’izár = stripping of jaws or side-beard, vii. 248.

 Khalanj = a hard kind of wood, i. 154; ii. 269; viii. 271.

 Khalbús = buffoon, ii. 143; vii. 195.

 Khalí’a = worn out; wit, i. 311; iv. 229; vii. 130.

 Khálid bin al-Walíd, ii. 203.

 —— bin Safwán, ii. 107.

 Khálidán (for Khálidát) = the Canaries, iii. 212.

 Khalífah = Vicar of Allah; successor of a Santon, i. 184.

 Khalílu ’llah (friend of Allah = Abraham), ii. 132; v. 205.

 Khalíyah = bee-hive; empty (pun on), vi. 246; ix. 291.

 Khalkínah = copper cauldron, viii. 177.

 Khammárah = wine-shop, tavern, “hotel,” iv. 79.

 Khán = caravanserai, i. 92; iii. 14.

 Khán al-Masrúr, in Cairo, famous in the 15th century, i. 265.

 Khánakah = Dervishes’ convent, vii. 177.

 Khanjar = hanger, i. 232; iii. 90.

 Khara = dung (lowest insult), ii. 56.

 —— (holy merde), ii. 223.

 Khara al-Sús = weevil’s dung, ix. 10.

 Kharajú = they (masc.) went forth (vulgarism for Kharajna) (fem.),
    viii. 144.

 Khassat-hu = she gelded him, iii. 47.

 Khatmah = reading or reciting of the whole Koran, i. 277.

 Khatt Sharíf = royal hand letter, ii. 39; ix. 309.

 Khattíyah = writer, &c., spear, from Khatt Hajar, ii. 1.

 Khátún (Turk. lady), iv. 66; vii. 146.

 —— (follows the name), vii. 323, 347.

 Khauf (Al-) maksúm = fear (cowardice) is equally apportioned, iii. 173.

 Khaukhah = tunnel, viii. 330.

 Khayál (Al-) = phantom ghost, v. 348.

 Khayr = good news by euphemy, iv. 138.

 Khayr wa ’Áfiyah = well and in good ease, ix. 94.

 Khaysamah (traditionist), v. 81.

 Khayt hamayán = threads of vanity (gossamer), iii. 217.

 Khayzáran = rattan, ii. 66; iv. 255.

 Kháwí (skin of), vi. 66.

 Khawwás (Al-) = basket-maker, v. 283.

 Khaznah (Khazinah) = 1,000 kís of £5 each, ii. 84; iii. 278.

 Khazrá (al-) = the Green, palace of Mu’áwiyah, vii. 124.

 Khiláf (Khaláf) = Salix Ægyptiaca, ii. 66.

 Khilál = toothpick (emblem of attenuation), v. 44; viii. 258.

 Khinsir = little (or middle) finger, ix. 160.

 Khinzír = hog, i. 108.

 Khirad Shah = King of Intelligence, vii. 73.

 Khishkhánah = cupboard, vii. 199.

 Khitáb = exordium of a letter, ix. 126.

 Khizáb (dye used by women), iii. 105.

 Khizánah (Al-) = treasury, ix. 22.

 Khizr (the Green Prophet), iv. 175; v. 384.

 Khiyál (Chinese shadows), iv. 193.

 Khubz = scones, i. 131.

 Khuff = walking shoes, i. 82; iv. 107.

 Khuffásh = bat (animal), v. 226.

 Khuld = fourth heaven (of yellow coral), viii. 47.

 Khumásíyah = five feet high, iv. 191.

 Khunsa = flexible, flaccid (hermaphrodite, also catamite), iii. 306; v.
    91.

 Khurj (Al-) = saddle-bag (las Alforjas), vi. 224.

 Khusrau Parwiz and Shírín, v. 91.

 —— (his wealth), v. 91.

 Khusyatán = testicles, ii. 55.

 Khutnah = circumcision, v. 209.

 Khutúb (Pr. N.) = affairs, misfortunes, viii. 209.

 Khwájah (Howajee) = schoolmaster, man of letters, &c., vi. 46.

 Khwárazm = land of the Chorasmioi, vi. 113.

 Khyas! Khyas! onomatopoetic, used in a sea-spell, i. 228.

 Kiblah (turning towards it in mortal danger), v. 39.

 —— (anything opposite) applied to the Ka’abah, v. 196.

 Kiblatayn = the two Kiblahs (Meccah and Jerusalem), v. 196.

 Kidrah = pot, kettle, lamp-globe, ix. 320.

 Kíl wa Kál = it was said and he said (chitchat), iv. 207.

 Killed = Hibernicè “kilt,” v. 5; vi. 171.

 Killing (of an unfaithful wife commended by public opinion), ix. 297.

 Kímiyá = Alchemy (from χυμεία = wet drug), viii. 9.

 Kimkhab = (velvet of) “Kimcob,” viii. 201; ix. 221.

 Kiná’ = veil, vi. 192.

 Kinchin lay (Arab form of), iii. 102.

 King (dressing in scarlet when wroth), iv. 72.

 —— (the, and the Virtuous Wife), v. 122.

 Kingfisher (Lucian’s), vi. 49.

 King’s barber a man of rank, i. 351.

 Kintár = a hundredweight (quintal), vi. 94.

 Kír = bellows, viii. 9.

 Kiráb = wooden sword-case, viii. 267.

 Kirám = nobles; Kurám = vines, viii. 203.

 Kirámat = prodigy, ii. 237; iv. 45.

 Kirát (bean of Abrus precatorius), vii. 289.

 —— (weight = 2–3 grains; length = one finger-breadth), iii. 239.

 Kird = baboon, iv. 297.

 Kirsh al-Nukhál = Guts of bran, viii. 169.

 Kisás (Al-) = lex talionis, vii. 170.

 Kishk (Kashk) = porridge, iv. 214.

 Kisrà = the Chosroë, (applied to Anushirwan) v. 87.

 Kiss (without mustachio = bread without salt), v. 165.

 “Kiss key to Kitty,” i. 323.

 “Kiss ground” not to be taken literally vii. 210.

 Kissing (the eyes, a paternal salute), i. 125.

 —— (like a pigeon feeding its young), iii. 275.

 —— (names for), iv. 259.

 —— (en tout bien et en tout honneur), viii. 25.

 —— the ground of obedience (Persian metaphorical phrase), vii. 354.

 Kissis = ecclesiast, ii. 228.

 Kit (of the traveller in the East), v. 174.

 Kitáb al-Kazá = book of law-cases, ix. 110.

 Kitáb al-Fihrist (and its author), x. 71.

 Kitf al-Jamal = camel shoulder-blade, vii. 167.

 Kitfír (Itfír), = Potiphar, vi. 172.

 Kiyakh (fourth Coptic month), v. 231.

 Kízán fukká’a = jars for fukká’a (a kind of beer), vi. 88.

 Kneeling in prayer (exclusively Christian), v. 196.

 Knife, “bravest of arms,” vii. 123.

 Knight-errant of the East, ii. 77.

 Knuckle-bone, ii. 314.

 Kohl = powdered antimony for the eyelids, i. 89.

 —— proverbially used, i. 278.

 —— (-powder keeps the eyes from inflammation), ii. 291.

 —— (applying of = takhíl), iii.57.

 —— (-eyed = Kahlá), f. iii. 232.

 —— (he would steal it off the eye-ball = he is a very expert thief),
    iv. 68.

 Kohl’d with Ghunj = languour-kohl’d, x. 40.

 Kohl-needle in the Kohl-case = res in re, v. 97.

 Kohls (many kinds of), viii. 10.

 Koka Pandit (Hindú Ars Amandi), iii. 93.

 Korah (Kárún), v. 225.

 Koran quoted: (xx.), i. 2.

 —— (ii. 34; xxv. 31; xix. 69), i. 13.

 —— (xxvi.), i. 39.

 —— (xxvii.), i. 42.

 —— (v.; xx.), i. 119.

 —— (vii.; xviii.), i. 169.

 —— (i.), i. 208.

 —— (lvi. 9), i. 211.

 —— (lx.), i. 220.

 —— (v.), i. 240.

 —— (cviii.), i. 241.

 —— (xvii.), i. 249.

 —— (xxxvi. 69), i. 251.

 —— (cv.), i. 256.

 —— (ii.; ix.), i. 257.

 —— (v.; viii. 17), i. 274.

 —— (iii.), i. 298.

 —— (iii. 128), i. 307.

 —— (xxxviii. 19), ii. 37.

 —— (xciv. 11; cv. 59), ii. 38.

 —— (iv.), ii. 64, 78.

 —— (iii. 57), ii. 79.

 —— (vii.; lxxvi.; lxxxvi.), ii. 91.

 —— (iv.; xxii.), ii. 95.

 —— (iii. 89), ii. 132.

 —— (ix.; xxxiii.), ii. 140.

 —— (iv. 88), ii. 146.

 —— (v.), ii. 186.

 —— (ii. etc.), ii. 198.

 —— (ii. 185), ii. 199.

 —— (lxxiv. 1, 8; xcvi.), ii. 201.

 —— (xvi. 74; ii. 118), ii. 203.

 —— (lvi. 6; xxviii.; vii.; ix.), ii. 205.

 —— (xxviii. 22–27), ii. 207.

 —— (xiv. 34), ii. 225.

 —— (lxi.), ii. 226.

 —— (ii.; iii. 141), ii. 228.

 —— (x. 25), ii. 239.

 —— (ii. 149; xcv.), ii. 242.

 —— (xix. 170), ii. 281.

 —— (xviii.), ii. 293.

 —— (xcvi. 5), ii. 298.

 —— (xxiv.), ii. 312.

 —— (vii. 21.), ii. 316.

 —— (x. 10, 12; lvi. 24, 26; lxxxviii. 17, 20), iii. 19.

 —— (xii. 31), iii. 21.

 —— (cxiii. 1), iii. 22.

 —— (ii. 186; lx. 1), iii. 39.

 —— (lxxvi.), iii. 57.

 —— (ii. 23), iii. 65.

 —— (xxxi. 18; lxvii. 7), iii. 117.

 —— (ii. 191), iii. 123.

 —— (xviii.; xxii. 20; lxxxvii.), iii. 128.

 —— (ii. 96, 256), iii. 217.

 —— (ii.; iii.; xxxvi.; lv.; lxvii.; cxiii.; cxiv.), iii. 222.

 —— (ii. 32; xviii. 48), iii. 223.

 —— (xxiii. 20; xcv. 1), iii. 276.

 —— (xxvi.), iii. 294.

 —— (xi.), iii. 301.

 —— (xxiii. 38), iii. 302.

 —— (ii.; li. 9; xxxv. 11), iii. 304.

 —— (cxii.), iii. 307.

 —— (xxiv. 39), iii. 319.

 —— (xxi.), iii. 323.

 —— (iv. 38), iii. 332.

 —— (xxv. 70), iv. 5.

 —— (xii. 84, 93, 96; xvi.), iv. 14.

 —— (opening chapter), iv. 36.

 —— (xiii. 14), iv. 43.

 —— (chapter Yá Sín), iv. 50.

 —— (xvii. 85), iv. 80.

 —— (xlix. Inner Apartments), iv. 102.

 —— (xvi. 112), iv. 102.

 —— (xii. 92), iv. 111.

 —— (lxxxix. 6, 7), iv. 115.

 —— (iii. 178), iv. 156.

 —— (xvi.), iv. 174.

 —— (ii. 224), iv. 175.

 —— (xxi. 38), iv. 244.

 —— (iii. 103; vii. 105; xxvii. 12), iv. 249.

 —— (cxiv. 1), iv. 251.

 —— (ii. 26), iv. 254.

 —— (ii. 64; xxvii.), iv. 256.

 —— (xvii. 62; xxxvi. 16), iv. 259.

 —— (xli. 46), iv. 275.

 —— (xxvi. 5, 6), v. 78.

 —— (xxxiii. 48), v. 101.

 —— (xxxviii. 2), v. 102.

 —— (vii. 195), v. 143.

 —— (x. 36), v. 145.

 —— (xxvi. 165), v. 161.

 —— (xxi. 36), v. 166.

 —— (vii. 148), v. 191.

 —— (iv. 38, 175; ii. 282), v. 155.

 —— (xii. 51), v. 159.

 —— (iv. 160), vi. 194.

 —— (viii. 66), v. 203.

 —— (xxxix. 67; lxxviii. 19), v. 207.

 —— (vii. 63, 71, 83), v. 210.

 —— (chapt. of The Cow), v. 211.

 —— (xvi. 92; xxxix. 54; lxx. 38), v. 211.

 —— (ii. 28, 137; xii. 18; xvi. 100; li. 57), v. 212.

 —— (ix.; xxvi. 30; xcvi. 1, 2), v. 213.

 —— (ii. 158; xvii. 110), v. 214.

 —— (v. 4; xxx.; lxxiv; cx. 1), v. 215.

 —— (iv. 124; v. 89, 116), v. 216.

 —— (vii. 154; xi. 50), v. 217.

 —— (xvii. 39), v. 221.

 —— (ii. 216; v. 92), v. 223.

 —— (x. 5; xxii. 60; xxxvi. 40; lxx. 40), v. 228.

 —— (xxxi. 34), v. 231.

 —— (xxxvii. 5), v. 233.

 —— (xxxvi. 37, 38), v. 234.

 —— (xx. 57; xxii. 7), v. 235.

 —— (lxxxi. 18), v. 236.

 —— (iii.; vii. 110), v. 238.

 —— (xii. 10), v. 239.

 —— (xxxvi. 82), v. 240.

 —— (vi. 44), v. 250.

 —— (vii. 52), v. 269.

 —— (xxxvi. 82), v. 286.

 —— (v. 108), v. 287.

 —— (xiii. 41), v. 290.

 —— (xxxviii. 34), v. 310.

 —— (vii.), v. 320.

 —— (xxvii.), v. 337.

 —— (xxvii. 16), v. 355.

 —— (liii. 14), v. 393.

 —— (xxiv. 39), vi. 93.

 —— (lii. 21), vi. 95.

 —— (ix. 51; xiv. 15), vi. 108.

 —— (xxxviii. 11), vi. 115.

 —— (iv. 81), vi. 138.

 —— (iv. 78; xli. 28), vi. 144.

 —— (ix. 51), vi. 191.

 —— (iii. 17), vi. 270.

 —— (xiii. 3), vi. 277.

 —— (vi. 103), vi. 282.

 —— (iii. 11; i. 42; viii. 9), vii. 55.

 —— (cxi.), vii. 59.

 —— (xxxiii.), vii. 92.

 —— (xx. 102), vii. 164.

 —— (ii. 286), vii. 285.

 —— (ii. 61; xxii. 44), vii. 346.

 —— (xxxv.), vii. 366.

 —— (iii. 90), viii. 51.

 —— (xxxix. 54), viii. 182.

 —— (vi. 99), viii. 267.

 —— (xvi. 69; ii. 216; v. 92), viii. 277.

 —— (cxiii. 1, 3), viii. 285.

 —— (cxi. 184), viii. 291.

 —— (xvii.; xviii.; lxix; lxxxiv.), viii. 294.

 —— (ix. 33), ix. 15.

 —— (xxvi. 88, 89; iv. 140), ix. 16.

 —— (lvii. 88), ix. 33.

 —— (lxxxi. 40), ix. 59.

 —— (xii. 28), ix. 119.

 —— (xl. 36; lxvii. 14; lxxiv. 39; lxxviii. 69; lxxxviii. 17), ix. 166.

 —— (cviii. 3), ix. 185.

 —— (xxiv.), ix. 316.

 —— (cx. 1), ix. 317.

 —— (xxxvi. 55, 58), ix. 322.

 —— (li. 18, 19), ix. 324.

 —— (lxxxix.), x. 29.

 Koran (abrogating and abrogated passages), v. 194.

 —— (most excellent chapter of), v. 211.

 —— (eminent and curious verses of), v. 211.

 —— (first English translation owing to France), x. 100.

 Koss ibn Sa’idah (Bishop of Najrán), ii. 37.

 Kubád = shaddock, ii. 310; viii. 272.

 Kubbah (Al-) = alcove, v. 18.

 Kubkáb = bath-clogs, iii. 92.

 Kuds (Al-), _see_ Bayt al-Mukaddas, ii. 132.

 Kúfah (Al-) founded by Omar, iv. i.

 —— (revolutionary spirit of), iv. 3.

 Kúfiyah = coif, etc., ii. 230.

 Kufr = rejecting the True Religion, i. 169.

 Kuhaylat (breed of Arab horses), iii. 346.

 Kulayb allows no one to approach his camp-fire, ii. 77; vi. 261.

 Kulkasá = colocasia roots, i. 272.

 Kullah = gugglet, i. 36.

 Kulzum (Al-), old name of Suez-town, vii. 348.

 Kumasrá (Kummasrá), = pear, vii. 357.

 Kumayt (Al-) = bay horse with black points, vii. 128.

 Kumkum (cucurbite, gourd-shaped vessel), i. 42; iv. 68, 178.

 Kumm = sleeve (used as a bag), iv. 107; viii. 267.

 Kun = Be (the creative word), iii. 317.

 Kunáfah = vermicelli cake, x. 1.

 Kundur = frankincense, ix. 7.

 Kunfuz = hedgehog, ii. 88.

 Kunsul = Consul, iv. 84.

 Kunyat = patro- or matro-nymic, iv. 287.

 Kúr = furnace, viii. 9.

 —— = forge where children are hammered out (?), viii. 46.

 Kurbáj = cravache, viii. 17.

 Kurbán = sacrifice, viii. 16.

 Kurds (Xenophon’s and Strabo’s Carduchi), iii. 100.

 Kurdús = body of horse, ix. 111.

 Kurrá = teachers of the correct pronunciation of the Koran, i. 113.

 Kurrah = ball in the Polo game, ii. 329.

 Kurrat al-Ayn = coolness of the eye, i. 72; v. 145.

 Kurs (has taken the place of Iklíl), i. 270.

 Kursán (Al-) = “Corsaro,” a runner, viii. 323.

 Kursí (choir, throne) = desk or stool for the Koran, i. 167; vii. 311.

 Kursí al-wiládah = birth-stool, ii. 80.

 Kús (town in Upper Egypt), iv. 276.

 Kus(s) = vulva, viii. 93.

 Kush’arírah = horripilation, symptom of great joy, i. 251.

 Kussá’a = curling cucumber, iv. 98.

 Kusúf = eclipse of the moon, viii. 291.

 Kút al-Kulúb, viii. 158.

 Kutá’ah = a bit cut off, etc., vi. 272.

 Kutayt = little tom-cat, ii. 39.

 Kutb = axle, pole; hence prince, doyen in sainthood, v. 384.

 Kuthayyir (poet), ii. 102.

 Kutr Misr = tract of Egypt, ix. 286.

 Kutub al-Báh = Books of Lust, x. 201.

 Kuzía Fakán (Pr. N.) = “it was decreed by destiny, so it came to pass,”
    ii. 175.


 Lá adamnak = Heaven deprive us not of thee, i. 268.

 Lá Bás (bi-zálik = there is no harm in that), iv. 164.

 —— (in Marocco) = “I am pretty well,” viii. 274.

 —— (= no harm is [yet] done), ix. 102.

 Lá haula, etc. = there is no Majesty, etc., i. 65.

 La iláha illá ’lláh = there is no God but _the_ God (tahlíl), ii. 336.

 Lá kabbata hámíyah = no burning plague, x. 14.

 Lá rajma ghaybin = without stone-throwing of secrecy, ix. 1.

 Lá rayba fí-hi, ii. 210.

 Lá tankati’í = sever not thyself from us, ix. 245.

 Lá tuwáhishná = do not make me desolate, i. 62.

 Lá tuwákhizná = do not chastise us = excuse us, i. 164.

 La’alla = haply, belike; forsure, certainly, ix. 49.

 La’ab = (sword-) play, vii. 44.

 La’abah = a plaything, a puppet, a lay figure, i. 245.

 La’al = ruby, v. 342.

 La’an = curse, v. 250; vi. 178.

 Láb (Old Pers. for Sun), vii. 296.

 Laban (= milk artificially soured), vi. 201.

 —— (= sweet milk), vii. 360.

 —— halíb = fresh milk, vi. 201.

 Labbayka (= Here am I, called Talbiyah), i. 226; ii. 227.

 —— (pronounced on sighting Meccah), v. 203.

 Labbis al-Búsah tabkí ’Arúsah = clothe the reed and it will become a
    bride, viii. 201.

 Labtayt (Pr. N. = Toledo), iv. 99.

 Lactation (term of), v. 299.

 —— (no cohabitation during), v. 299.

 Ladies of the family (waiting upon the guests), vi. 237.

 Láhik = the Overtaker, viii. 341.

 Láit = one acting like the tribe of Lot, sodomite, ix. 253.

 Lajlaj = rolling anything in the mouth; stammering, ix. 322.

 Lájuward, _see_ Lázuward, iii. 33.

 Lake Kárún, vi. 217.

 Lakít = fœtus, foundling, contemptible fellow, vii. 145.

 Lámí (Al-) = the l-shaped, forked (os hyoïdes), v. 219.

 Lámíyat = poem rhyming in L, iii. 143.

 Lane quoted: i. 1, 36, 42, 74, 77, 83, 93, 100, 104, 131, 147, 163,
    201, 210, 213, 215, 217, 223, 245, 259, 269, 270, 291, 311, 314,
    317, 340; ii. 5, 38, 41, 46, 56, 77, 80, 89, 93, 131, 167, 206, 215,
    243, 292, 304, 314, 315, 328, 332; iii. 20, 30, 44, 112, 114, 116,
    117, 141, 162, 176, 181, 191, 211, 212, 222, 259, 322, 331, 341; iv.
    2, 12, 46, 55, 63, 66, 82, 95, 96, 107, 110, 124, 136, 144, 152,
    160, 164, 171, 181, 187, 189, 191, 196, 199, 200, 202, 204, 205,
    209, 212, 214, 219, 222, 228, 231, 233, 244, 254, 268, 271, 273,
    279, 287, 297; v. 2, 32, 33, 37, 44, 45, 64, 104, 112, 120, 121,
    144, 145, 189, 201, 231, 259, 273, 286, 298; vi. 1, 8, 11, 17, 33,
    49, 57, 61, 66, 80, 180, 191, 196, 214, 216, 247, 257, 282; vii. 95,
    96, 111, 113, 118, 119, 123, 124, 135, 136, 139, 144, 172, 182, 195,
    196, 209, 250, 269, 275, 280, 282, 303, 306, 309, 314, 322, 328,
    346, 354, 357; viii. 14, 18, 21, 27, 35, 53, 62, 68, 77, 80, 84, 94,
    97, 102, 122, 124, 128, 131, 147, 148, 155, 156, 166, 177, 179, 180,
    187, 205, 264, 285, 298, 337; ix. 32, 33, 146, 168, 170, 182, 221,
    222, 224, 226, 229, 246, 291, 304, 307; x. 1, 11, 12, 19, 34, 36,
    50, 52, 70, 115.

 Language of signs, ii. 304.

 Languages (study of, should be assisted by ear and tongue), x. 96.

 Largesse (better than the mace), viii. 163.

 Lasm (Lathm) = kissing the lower face, iv. 259.

 Lasting calamity = furious knight, vi. 290.

 Latter night = hours between the last sleep and dawn, i. 24.

 Laughing in one’s face not meant for an affront, i. 320.

 Laughter rare and sign of a troubled mind, i. 248.

 Lauh = tablet used as slate, v. 73.

 Lauh al-Mahfúz = the Preserved Tablet (of Allah’s decrees), v. 322.

 Lauláka = but for thee, for thy sake, v. 306.

 Laun = colour, hue (for dish), vii. 185.

 Láwandiyah (Al-) = Levantines, ix. 275.

 Layálí = nights, future, fate, iii. 318.

 Layl (night) frequently = the interval between sunset and sunset, ii.
    260.

 Laylá (female Pr. N.), iii. 135.

 —— wa Majnún (love poem), iii. 183.

 Laylat al-Kábilah = to-night, ix. 271.

 Laylat al-Kadr = Night of Power, vi. 180.

 Laylat al-Wafá = the night of completion of the Nile-flood, i. 291.

 Laylat ams = yesternight, vii. 186.

 Lazá (Hell for Jews), ii. 140; viii. 346.

 Lázuward = lapis lazuli, azure, iii. 33; ix. 190.

 Leaving one standing (pour se faire valoir), vi. 252.

 Leg-cut (severs horse’s leg), ii. 220.

 Legs (making mute the anklets), vii. 131.

 —— (shall be bared on a certain day), ix. 253.

 Lentils (cheapest and poorest food in Egypt), x. 31.

 Leprosy (white = bahak or baras, black = juzám), v. 294.

 —— (thickens voice), iv. 50.

 —— (shows first at the wrist), iv. 51.

 Lesbianism, x. 209.

 Letter (reading _not_ always understanding), ii. 112.

 —— (model specimen), iv. 57.

 —— (toren tears a kingdom), vii. 2.

 Letters and letter-writing, iii. 24.

 —— (French), vii. 190.

 Li-ajal = for the sake of, low Egyptian, ii. 113.

 Libdah (skull-cap of felt) sign of a religious mendicant, iii. 62.

 Liberality (men proverbial for their), iv. 96.

 —— (after poverty), viii. 182.

 Libraries (large ones known by the Arabs), viii. 79.

 —— (much appreciated by the Arabs), x. 175.

 Lice bred by perspiration, ii. 69.

 Lie (only degrading if told for fear of telling the truth), ix. 87.

 —— (simulating truth), ix. 223.

 Lieu d’aisance (in Eastern crafts), ix. 332.

 Líf = fibre of palm-fronds, v. 45; vi. 50.

 Life (by the, of thy youth) oath of women, iv. 49.

 —— (cheap in hot countries), iv. 275.

 Life-breath in the nostrils = heart in the mouth, i. 42.

 Light (of salvation shining from the face of Prophets), ix. 324.

 Light-worshippers (are liars), iv. 252.

 Lijám shadíd = sharp bit, ix. 70.

 Like mother, like daughter, i. 299.

 Li ’lláhi darru-ka = the Lord has been copious to thee, iv. 20.

 Lion (beguiled by flattery), v. 40.

 —— (as Sultan of the beasts jealous of a man’s power), x. 34.

 —— at home, lamb abroad, ii. 183.

 Lisám (mouth-band for men, chin-veil) = Tasmak for women, ii. 31, 230;
    iii. 283.

 Lisán al-Hamal = lamb’s tongue (plantain), viii. 273.

 Listening not held dishonourable, vii. 279.

 Litholatry of the old Arabs, vi. 269.

 Liver = seat of passion, i. 27.

 —— (for heart), iii. 240.

 —— (and spleen held to be congealed blood), v. 220.

 Living (the, who dieth not), vi. 67.

 Liwá = Arab Tempe, vii. 115.

 Liwán = Al-Aywán, iv. 71; vii. 347.

 Liyyah = fat sheep (calves like tails of), viii. 291.

 Lizzat al-Nisá (erotic poem), iii. 93.

 Loathing of prohibition, ix. 279.

 Locks (Mohammed’s), ii. 230.

 Logah = Arabic language, also a vocabulary, dictionary, i. 251.

 Logogriphs, viii. 93.

 Lokman (three of the name), x. 118.

 Loosening the hair an immodesty in women sanctioned only by a great
    calamity, i. 314.

 Lord for Lady = she, v. 60.

 —— (of the East and West), v. 228.

 Lost on Allah’s way = martyr, ii. 330.

 Lot (this is ours = I have been lucky and will share with you), ix.
    328.

 Lot, _see_ Lútí.

 Lote-tree (beyond which there is no passing), v. 393.

 Lots = games of chance, v. 223.

 Love (pure, becomes prophetical), iii. 6.

 —— (the ear conceiveth it before the eye), iii. 9.

 —— (ten stages of), iii. 36.

 —— (martyrs of), iii. 211.

 —— (platonic, _see_ vol. ii. 104), iii. 232.

 —— (ousting affection), iii. 240.

 —— (martyrs of), iv. 205.

 —— (clairvoyance), iv. 238.

 —— (excess of), iv. 238.

 —— (strange chances of), v. 71.

 —— (deaths from), v. 134.

 —— (made public disgraces), v. 151.

 —— (man and woman with regard to), vii. 299.

 —— (called upon to torment the lover still more), viii. 75.

 —— (cruelty of), x. 26.

 Love-children (exceedingly rare amongst Moslems), viii. 115.

 Love-liesse (never lacked between folk, _i.e._ people of different
    conditions), viii. 212.

 Lovers in Lazá (hell) as well as in Na’ím (heaven), iii. 58.

 —— (parting of, a stock-topic in poetry), iii. 58.

 —— (buried together), v. 71.

 —— (model ones, becoming an ordinary married couple), v. 92.

 —— (becoming Moslems secure the good will of the audience), viii. 224.

 Loving folk = something more than benevolence, ii. 2.

 Lúk-Gate (proverb referring to), iv. 259.

 Lukmah = mouthful, i. 261; vii. 367.

 Lukmán (Æsop of the Arabs), ii. 199.

 Lukmán (three of the name), iii. 264; x. 118.

 Lullilooing (Tahlíl Zagrútah, Kil), ii. 80.

 Lúlúah = union pearl; wild cow, ix. 218.

 Lumá = dark hue of the inner lips, iv. 251.

 Lupin-flour used as soap, ii. 136.

 Luss = thief, robber, ix. 106.

 Lute (personification of), viii. 281.

 Lutf (servile name = elegance, delicacy), iv. 232.

 Lútí (of the people of Lot = Sodomite), v. 161.

 Lying (until one’s self believes the lie to be truth), x. 14.

 Lynch-law (the modern form of Jus talionis), v. 103.

 Lymph (alluding to the “Neptunist” doctrine), ix. 77.

 Lynx (trained for hunting), ii. 293.


 Má al-Khalaf, _see_ Khiláf, ii. 136.

 Má al-Maláhah = water (brilliancy) of beauty, viii. 47.

 Má Dáhiyatak = what is thy misfortune? (for “what ill business is
    this?”), ix. 137.

 Má kaharaní ahadun = none vexeth (or has overcome) me, ix. 156.

 Ma’abíd (singer and composer), v. 147.

 Maamún (Al), son and successor of Hárún al-Rashíd, i. 185; iv. 109.

 Ma’an bin Záidah, iii. 236; iv. 96.

 Ma’áni-há (her meanings = her inner woman), iv. 146.

 Ma’arúf = kindness, favour, x. 1.

 Mace (Ar. Dabbús), vi. 249.

 —— (a dangerous weapon), vii. 24.

 Macnaghten’s Edition, x. 81.

 Madfá = cannon, showing modern date, i. 223.

 Madinat al-Nabí (Al-Medínah) = City of the Prophet, iv. 114.

 Madness (there is a pleasure in), iv. 204.

 Mafárik (Al-) = partings of the hair, vii. 222.

 Mafa’úl = patient, passive (Catamite), v. 156.

 Magazine (as one wherein wheat is heaped up = unmarried), vii. 372.

 Magháribah (pl. of Maghribí = Western man, Moor, “Maurus”), vi. 220.

 Maghdád (for Baghdád, as Makkah and Bakkah), viii. 51.

 Maghrib (al-Aksà) = the land of the setting sun, ix. 50.

 Magic studied by Jews, ii. 234.

 Magic Horse (history of the fable), v. 2.

 Magnet Mountains, fable probably based on the currents, i. 140.

 Mahá = wild cattle, vii. 280.

 Mahall = (a man’s) quarters, viii. 229.

 Mahall al-Zauk = seat of taste, sensorium, ix. 83.

 Maháráj = great Rajah, vi. 8, 67.

 Mahayá = Má al-Hayát = _aqua vitæ_, vii. 132.

 Mahdí (Al-) Caliph, vii. 136; ix. 334.

 Mahmil (mahmal) = litter, ii. 131.

 Mahmúdah = praiseworthy; confection of aloes, viii. 35.

 Mahr = marriage dowry, settlement, vii. 126; ix. 32.

 Mahríyah (Mehari) = blood-dromedary, iii. 277.

 Maid and Magpie, vi. 182.

 Mail-coat and habergeon, simile for a glittering stream, i. 291.

 Ma’ín, Ma’ún = smitten with the evil eye, i. 123.

 Maintenance (of a divorced woman during Iddah), ix. 32.

 Majájah = saliva, vii. 280.

 Ma’janah (a place for making bricks), ii. 17.

 Majlis = sitting (to a woman), iii. 92.

 Majnún = madman, i. 10; iii. 72.

 Majzúb = drawn, attracted (Sufí term for ecstatic), v. 57.

 Maka’ad = sitting-room, iv. 78.

 Makhaddah = pillow, ii. 70.

 Makkamah = Kazí’s Court, i. 21.

 Making water, i. 259.

 Mál = Badawi money, flocks, “fee,” vi. 267.

 Malak = level ground, viii. 285.

 Malak or Malik = Seraph or Sovran, i. 253.

 Malákay bayti ’l-ráhah = slabs of the jakes, x. 51.

 “Making men” (and women), x. 199.

 Malakút (Al-) = the world of spirits (Sufi term), viii. 145.

 Male children (as much prized as riches), ix. 316.

 Malíhah (al-) = salt-girl; beautiful, i. 340.

 Malik (used as “king” in our story-books), ii. 1.

 —— bin Dínár (theologian) ii. 204; vii. 261.

 —— (taken as title), iii. 51.

 —— (traditionist), v. 81.

 —— al-Khuzá’i (intendant of the palace), v. 95.

 —— (Al-) al-Násir = the conquering King, iv. 271; vii. 142; ix. 19.

 Málik (door-keeper of Hell), iii. 20.

 Malik Kawí = very handsome (Cairene vulgarism), vii. 150.

 Malikhulíyà (Al-) = melancholy, v. 221.

 Malocchio or Gettatura (evil), ix. 247.

 Mamlúk (white slave trained to arms), i. 81.

 Mamarr al-Tujjár = passing place of the traders, viii. 155.

 Mamrak = sky-window, etc. viii. 156.

 Man (extract of despicable water), iii. 16.

 —— (is fire, woman tinder), iii. 59.

 —— (shown to disadvantage in beast-stories), iii. 115.

 —— (his destiny written on his skull), iii. 123.

 —— (pre-eminence above women), iii. 332.

 —— (handsomer than woman), iv. 15.

 —— (his advantages above woman), v. 155.

 —— (one’s evidence = two women’s), v. 155.

 —— (one’s portion = two women’s), v. 155.

 —— (created of congealed blood), v. 213.

 —— (one worthier in Allah’s sight than a thousand Jinn), viii. 5, 44.

 —— (created after God’s likeness, rather a Jewish-Christian than a
    Moslem doctrine), ix. 79.

 —— (I am a man of them = never mind my name), ix. 238.

 —— (of the people of Allah = a Religious), ix. 51.

 —— (his wrong is from the tongue), ix. 309.

 Manáf (idol), v. 129.

 Manár al-Saná = Place of Light, viii. 104.

 Manáshif (pl. of Minshafah, _q.v._), viii. 92.

 Manázil (stations of the Moon), v. 228.

 Mandíl = kerchief, ii. 301.

 Maniyat = death; muniyat = desire, iii. 291.

 Manjanikát (Al-) = Mangonels, vii. 335.

 Mankind (creates its analogues in all the elements), iv. 121.

 —— (superior to Jinn), ix. 339.

 Mann = from two to six pounds, vi. 80.

 Man’s creation, ii. 91.

 Mansúr (Pr. N.) = triumphant, ix. 310.

 Mansúr (Al-) Caliph, ii. 142, 153, 210.

 —— bin Ammár, ii. 204.

 —— al-Nimrí (poet), iv. 179.

 Mansúr wa Munazzam = oratio soluta et ligata, viii. 226.

 Manumission of slaves, ii. 55.

 Manzil (Makám) = (a lady’s) lodgings, viii. 229.

 Maragha = he rubbed his face, ii. 60.

 Marba’ = summer quarters, iii. 79.

 Mardán-i-Ghayb (Himalayan brothers), ii. 211.

 Mares (impregnated by the wind), vi. 9.

 Marhúb = terrible, viii. 180.

 Marhúm (f. Marhúmah) = late lamented, ii. 129, 196.

 Márid = contumacious, i. 41.

 Máridúna = rebels (against Allah), vii. 39.

 Ma’rifah = article, ix. 272.

 Máristán (from Pers. Bímáristán = place of sickness), i. 288.

 Marján = Coral-branch (slave name), iii. 169.

 Marjánah (Pr. N.) = Coral-branch, ii. 100.

 —— (Morgante, Urganda, Morgain), vii. 373.

 Markúb = shoe, vi. 207.

 Marmar = marble, i. 295; vi. 95.

 Marocco (tenanted by three Moslem races), x. 222.

 Marriage (not valid without receipt of settlement), i. 276.

 —— (if consummated demands Ghusl), iii. 286.

 —— (by capture), viii. 40.

 —— (one of the institutions of the Apostles), viii. 137.

 Marriage-sheet inspected, ii. 50.

 Married men profit nothing, iii. 2.

 —— never once (emphasises poverty), viii. 145.

 Marseille (probably alluded to), viii. 315.

 Marsín = myrtle, vii. 290.

 Martyrdom, iv. 247.

 —— (of the drowned), ix. 340.

 Martyrs (still alive), ii. 242.

 —— (of love), iii. 211; iv. 205.

 Marwah (ground-wave in Meccah), v. 203.

 Marwazí = of Marw (Margiana), iii. 222.

 Marwán bin al-Hakam (Governor of al-Medinah), vii. 125.

 Maryam (a Christian name), viii. 306.

 Maryam al-Husn = place of the White doe (Rím) of beauty, viii. 321.

 Marz-bán = Warden of the Marches, Margrave, iii. 256.

 Masculine for feminine, vii. 140.

 Má sháa ’llah (as Allah willeth) = well done, iii. 92.

 Mashallah = the English “Cock’s ’ill” with a difference, x. 52.

 Mashhad = head and foot stone of a grave, x. 53.

 Mashá’ilí = cresset-bearer, for public crier, hangman, i. 259; iv. 61.

 Masíhí = follower of the Messiah, i. 258.

 Maskharah = buffoon, ii. 143; vii. 195.

 Maskhút = transformed (mostly in something hideous), a statue, i. 165.

 Maslamah bin Abd al-Malik. ii. 167.

 Massacre (the _grand moyen_ of Eastern state-craft), ix. 110.

 Massage, i. 172.

 Mastabah = bench of masonry, vi. 26.

 Masúkah = stick used for driving cattle, viii. 147.

 Matáf = place of Tawáf, _q.v._

 Matárik (pl. of mitrak) = targes, ix. 225.

 Matmúrah = underground cell, ii. 39.

 Matr (pl. amtár) = large vessel of leather or wood, iii. 295.

 Matta’aka ’llah = Allah permit thee to enjoy, ix. 125.

 Matting (of Sind, famous), v. 146.

 Maukab (Al-) = Procession-day, iv. 287.

 Maulid = nativity, ix. 289.

 Maund, _see_ Mann, vi. 80.

 Maurid = desert well and road to such, iii. 33.

 Mausil (_Mosul_) alluding to the junction of Assyria and Babylonia, i.
    82.

 Mausúl (Al-) = the conjoined (for relative pronoun or particle), ix.
    272.

 Maut = death, vii. 147.

 Mauz = Musa (Banana), iv. 201.

 Mawwál (for Mawálíyah) = short poem, viii. 94; 151.

 “May thy life be prolonged,” iv. 62.

 Mayázib (pl. of mízáb) = gargoyles, vii. 136.

 Maydán = parade-ground, i. 46.

 Maydán al-Fíl = race-course of the Elephant, vii. 326.

 Maymúnah (proverbial noun now forgotten), i. 57.

 Maysir = game of arrows, v. 223.

 Maysúm (Badawi wife of Caliph Mu’áwiyah), ii. 160.

 Maysum’s song, vii. 97.

 Mayyáfárikín, ancient capital of Diyár Bakr, vii. 1.

 Meat rarely coloured in modern days, i. 310.

 Medicine (rules and verses bearing on domestic), v. 222.

 Melancholy (chronic under the brightest skies), iv. 239.

 Men (is there a famine of?) = are men so few? iv. 295.

 Meniver = menu vair (Mus lemmus), ix. 321.

 Menses (coition during, and leprosy), viii. 34.

 Menstruous discharge (made use of as a poison), ix. 101.

 Merchant (worth a thousand), x. 8.

 Merchants and shopkeepers carrying swords, i. 54.

 Mercury Ali (his story sequel to that of Dalílah), vii. 172.

 Mercy (quality of the noble Arab), iii. 88.

 Mer-folk (refined with the Greeks, grotesques with other nations), ix.
    169.

 Messiah (made a liar by the Miscreants), ix. 15.

 Metamorphosis (terms of), vii. 294.

 Metempsychosis and sharpers’ tricks, v. 84.

 Metrical portion of the Nights (threefold distribution of), x. 67.

 Miao or Mau = cat, i. 220.

 Mihráb and Minaret (symbols of Venus and Priapus?), i. 166.

 Mihráj = Maháráj, _q.v._; vi. 67.

 Mikashshah = broom, iv. 208.

 Mihrgán = Sun-fête, degraded into Michaelmas, v. 1.

 Mikbas (pot of lighted charcoal), iv. 246.

 Mikhaddah = cheek-pillow, viii. 273.

 Mikmarah = cover for a brasier, extinguisher, v. 120.

 Miknás = town Mequinez, vi. 223.

 Miknasah = broom, vi. 158.

 Mi’lakah = spoon, ix. 141.

 Milh = salt, i. 340.

 Military and Police sneered at, iv. 270.

 Milk (white as, opposed to black as mud), iv. 140.

 —— (soured), v. 225.

 —— (Ar. Laban, Halíb), vi. 201.

 —— (by nomades always used in the soured form), vi. 201.

 Milk-drinking races prefer the soured milk to the sweet, vii. 360.

 Million (no Arabic word for, expressed by a thousand thousand), vi. 98.

 Mím-like mouth, iv. 249.

 Míms (verset of the sixteen), v. 217.

 Mina (and the stoning of the Devil), v. 203.

 Minaret (simile for a fair young girl), iii. 69.

 Mind (one by vinegar, another by wine = each goes its own way), iv. 72.

 “Mine” (various idioms for expressing it), iii. 335.

 Minínah = biscuit, iv. 86.

 Minshafah (pl. Manáshif) = drying towel, viii. 92.

 Mikra’ah = palm-rod, i. 99.

 Miracle (minor, known to Spiritualism), v. 144.

 Miracles (performed by Saints’ tombs), i. 241.

 —— (disclaimed by Mohammed but generally believed in), iii. 346.

 —— (growing apace in the East), ix. 336.

 Mirage = Saráb, iii. 319.

 Mirbad (Al-) market-place at Bassorah, vii. 130.

 Mirzà ’Abdullah-i-Híchmakání = Master Abdullah of Nowhere, v. 27.

 “Mis”-conformation (prized by women), vi. 156.

 Mishammah = an old gunny-bag, ix. 171.

 Miskál = 71–72 grams in gold, used for dinar, i. 126; ix. 262.

 Misr, Masr = Capital (applied to Memphis, Fostat and Cairo), vii. 172.

 —— (for Egypt), vii. 370.

 Misra (twelfth Coptic month), v. 232.

 Misrayn (Al-) = Basrah and Kúfah, vii. 371.

 Mitrahinna (Minat-ro-hinnu) = port at mouth of canal, ii. 237.

 Mizr, Mizar = beer, i. 72.

 Modesty (behind a curtain), v. 162.

 Mohammed (best of the first and last), ii. 11.

 —— (Mustafa), ii. 40.

 —— (his letter to the Mukaukis), ii. 79.

 —— (Periclytus and Paracletus), ii. 226.

 —— (abhors the shaveling), ii. 248.

 —— (bearer of glad and bad tidings), ii. 257.

 —— (Congratulator and Commiserator), ii. 260.

 —— (Best of Mankind), ii. 263.

 —— (“born with Kohl’d eyes”), iii. 232.

 —— (his uncles), iv. 22.

 —— (traditional saying of), iv. 35.

 —— (cleanses the Ka’abah of idols), iv. 80.

 —— (on dyeing the hair, etc.), iv. 194.

 —— (on lovers), iv. 205.

 —— (on his being seen in sleep), iv. 287.

 —— (places the “black stone”), iv. 261.

 —— (mentioned in the Koran), v. 210.

 —— (Allah’s right hand), vii. 366.

 —— (sent with the guidance and True Faith), ix. 15.

 —— (before and after the Hijrah), x. 196.

 Mohammed al-Amín (Caliph), v. 93.

 Mohammed bin Sulaymán al-Rabi’í (Governor of Bassorah), vii. 130.

 Moharram = first month of the Moslem year, viii. 71.

 Mohr = signet, vii. 329.

 Mohtasib = inspector of weights and measures, etc., viii. 293.

 Mole on cheek (black as Bilál), iv. 142.

 Moles compared with pearls, i. 177.

 Monasteries (best wine made in), v. 65.

 —— (Ar. Biká’a), v. 125.

 —— (places of confinement for madmen), v. 139.

 Monday = second day reckoning from Sabbath, i. 266.

 Money (carried in the corner of a handkerchief), i. 271.

 —— (large sums weighed), i. 281; ii. 145.

 —— (carried round the waist), viii. 288.

 —— (let lie with the folk = not dunned for), ix. 311.

 Monkery (abhorred by Mohammed), ii. 248.

 —— (none in Al-Islam), viii. 137.

 Monoculars (unlucky to meet), i. 333.

 —— (famed for mischief), iv. 194; viii. 318.

 Monsters (abounding in Persian literature), vii. 399.

 Months (of peace), v. 54.

 —— (Coptic names of), v. 221, 232.

 —— (Arabic names explained), v. 233.

 Moon (blighting effect of its rays), ii. 4.

 —— masculine in Semitic, ii. 45.

 —— (masc., Sun fem.), iii. 28; iv. 261.

 —— (simile for female beauty), v. 8.

 —— (shall be cloven in twain), v. 217.

 —— (its stations), v. 228.

 —— (taking in hand the star = girl handing round the cup), ix. 192.

 Moon-faced (not absurd), iv. 192.

 Moons (for cup-bearers), viii. 227.

 Moore (Thomas, anticipated), iii. 305.

 Morality (geographical and chronological), iii. 241.

 —— (want of, excused by passion), iii. 269.

 Morbi venerei, x. 88.

 Morning draught, iii. 20.

 “Morosa voluptas,” vii. 132.

 Mortal (one better in Allah’s sight than a thousand Jinn), viii. 5, 44.

 Moses (derivation of the name), ii. 205.

 —— and Jethro, ii. 205.

 —— and the next world, ii. 206.

 —— and Al-Khizr, ii. 263.

 —— (describes his own death and burial), vi. 116.

 Moslem (model Conservative), ii. 13.

 —— (external), ii. 29.

 —— (familiarity between high and low), ii. 32.

 —— (peasants kind-hearted), ii. 69.

 —— (kind feeling shown to a namesake), vi. 13.

 —— (corpses should be burnt under certain circumstances), vi. 26.

 —— (commonplaces of condolence), vi. 41.

 —— (sales, formula of), vi. 73.

 —— (consecrated ground unknown to them), vi. 161.

 —— (a free-born’s sale is felony), vi. 240.

 —— (dignity contrasting with Christian abasement), viii. 5, 44.

 —— (can circumcise, marry and bury himself), viii. 22.

 —— (on a journey tries to bear with him a new suit of clothes for the
    festivals and Friday service), ix. 51.

 —— (bound to discharge the debts of his dead parents), ix. 311.

 —— (doctrine ignores the dictum, “ex nihilo nihil fit”), ix. 63.

 —— (resignation, noble instance of), x. 42.

 Moslems (their number preordained), viii. 154.

 —— (deal kindly with religious mendicants), ix. 51.

 —— (not ashamed of sensual appetite), ix. 84.

 —— (bound to abate scandals amongst neighbours), ix. 98.

 —— (husbands among them divided into three classes), ix. 263.

 Mosque al-Ahzáb = mosque of the troops, vii. 92.

 Mosques serving as lodgings for poor travellers, ii. 69.

 Mosul (exempted from idolatrous worship), v. 64.

 —— stuff = muslin, i. 229.

 Mother (waiting upon the adult sons) vi. 237.

 —— (in Arab tales = ma mère), viii. 27.

 Mother’s milk = nature, ii. 44.

 Mounds = rubbish heaps outlying Eastern cities, i. 71.

 Mountain (coming from the = being a clodhopper), iii. 324.

 —— (sit upon the = turn anchorite), iii. 324.

 —— (the, at Cairo), iv. 294.

 Mountains (the pegs of the earth), iv. 174.

 Mourning (perfumes not used during), iii. 63.

 —— (normal term of forty days), ix. 311.

 Moustachio (salt to a kiss), v. 165.

 Mouth compared to the ring of Sulayman, i. 84.

 Mrigatrishná = the thirst of the deer (mirage), vi. 93.

 MS. copy of The Nights (price of one in Egypt), vii. 312.

 Muákhát = entering in a formal agreement for partnership, viii. 232.

 Mu’allim = teacher, master (address to a Jew or Christian), viii. 150.

 Mu’arras = pimp, i. 338.

 Mu’attik al-Rikáb = Liberator of Necks, vii. 331.

 Mu’áwiyah (Caliph), ii. 160, 161.

 —— (his Moses-like “mildness”), iii. 286.

 Muayyad (Sultan and calligrapher), ii. 32.

 Muazzin (who calls to prayer), ii. 306.

 Mubárak (f. mubárakah) = blessed (a favourite slave-name), ix. 58.

 Mubárakah = the blessed (fem.), ix. 330.

 Mudarris = professor, x. 8.

 Mudawwarah (a gong?), iv. 135.

 Muftí (Doctor of Law), vi. 254.

 Muhabbat (Al-) al-gharizíyah = natural affection, viii. 110.

 Muháfiz = district-governor, i. 259.

 Muhájirún = companions in Mohammed’s flight, vii. 92.

 Muhakkah = “Court-hand,” i. 129.

 Muhallil, _see_ Mustahall.

 Muhammad, Ahmad and Mahmúd, vi. 273.

 Muhammarah = fricandoed, i. 286.

 Muhárabah = doing battle, ix. 92.

 Muharramát (the three forbidden things), iii. 340; v. 148.

 Mu’ín al-Din = Aider of the Faith, vii. 354.

 Mujáhid (Al-) = fighter in Holy War, iii. 51.

 Mujáhidún, plur. of the previous, iii. 39.

 Mujauhar = damascened, vii. 84.

 Mujáwirún = lower servants, sweepers, etc. v. 119.

 Mujtabá = the Accepted, i. 77.

 Mukaddam (Anglo-Indicè Muccudum) = overseer, iv. 42.

 Mukarrabún = those near Allah, v. 319.

 Mukhammas = cinquains, iii. 280.

 Mukri = Koranist, v. 216.

 Mulabbas = dragées, vii. 205.

 Mulákát = going to meet an approaching guest, v. 330.

 Mulberry-fig (for anus), iii. 302.

 Mummery = “Mahommerie” x. 178.

 Munádamah = table-talk, “conversation over the cup,” vii. 309.

 Munáfik = hypocrite, v. 207.

 Munakkishah = woman who applies the dye to a face, i. 270.

 Munawwarah (Al-) = the Illumined (title of Al-Medinah), vii. 95.

 Munázarah = dispute, ix. 243.

 Munázirah = like (fem.), ix. 243.

 Munkar and Nakír (the questioning angels), v. 111; ix. 163; x. 47.

 Munkasir (broken) = languid, iv. 195.

 Munkati’ = cut off, viii. 24.

 Muráhanah = game at forfeits, vi. 204.

 Murder (to be punished by the family), v. 103.

 —— (to save one’s life approved of), vi. 44.

 Murjiyy (sect and tenets), iii. 341.

 Murtazà = the Elect, i. 77.

 Músà = Moses, ii. 205.

 Músá bin Nusayr (conqueror of Spain), vi. 86.

 Mus’ab bin al-Zubayr, v. 79.

 Musáfahah = joining palms for “shaking hand,” vi. 287; vii. 52; ix.
    342.

 Musáhakah = tribadism, vii. 132.

 Musáhikah = tribade, viii. 130.

 Musakhkham (Al-) = the defiled Cross, ii. 220.

 Musallà = place of prayer, oratory, v. 261.

 Musámarah = chatting at night, iv. 237; vii. 217.

 Music (forbidden by Mohammed), ix. 31.

 Musk (scent of heaven), ii. 300.

 —— (sherbet flavoured with), v. 66.

 Mushayyad = lofty, high-builded, viii. 23.

 Muslim bin al-Walíd (poet), v. 128.

 Musquito caught between the toes, vii. 179.

 Musrán (Al-) guts, vii. 190.

 Mustafà (the chosen) = Mohammed, i. 77; ii. 40.

 Mustahakk = deserving, x. 52.

 Mustahall (Mustahill) = one who marries a thrice divorced woman and
    divorces her to make her lawful for her first husband, iv. 48.

 Musta’ín (Al-) bi ’lláh (Caliph), ix. 246.

 Mutalammis (Al-), the poet and his fatal letter, v. 74.

 Mustansir bi ’llah (Al-) = one seeking help in Allah, i. 317.

 Mutanakkir = disguised, proud, reserved, vii. 101.

 Mu’tasim (Al-) bi ’llah (Caliph), iii. 81; ix. 232.

 Mutawakkil (Al-) Caliph, iv. 291; v. 153; ix. 232.

 Mutawallí = Prefect of Police, i. 259.

 Mutawwif = leader in the Tawáf, _q.v._ v. 203.

 Mu’tazid (Al-) bi ’lláh (Caliph), ix. 229.

 Mu’tazz (Al-) bi ’lláh (Caliph), ix. 242.

 Mu’ujizah = miracle of a prophet, ii. 237.

 Muunah = provisions, vii. 232; ix. 104.

 Muunis (Pr. N. = Companion), v. 164.

 Muwaffak = well-notched, v. 33.

 Muwallad = a slave born in a Moslem land, iv. 291.

 Muwashshah (stanza), iv. 54.

 Muzaní (Al-), ii. 208.

 Muzayyin (Figaro of the East), i. 304.

 Myrtle-bush = young beard, iv. 143.

 Mystification explained by extraordinary likeness, viii. 40.


 Na’al = sandal, shoe, horse-shoe, vi. 207.

 Náb (pl. Anyáb) = canine tooth, tusk, vii. 339.

 Nabbút = quarter-staff, i. 234; viii. 186.

 Nabhán (sons of), vi. 262.

 Nabí = prophet, ix. 178.

 Nábighah al-Zubyání (pre-Islamitic poet), vi. 85.

 Nadd (a compound perfume), i. 310.

 Naddábah = mourning woman, i. 311.

 Nadím = cup-companion, i. 46.

 Nafahát = breathings, benefits, v. 29.

 Nafakah = sum necessary for the expenses of the pilgrimage, ix. 178.

 Nafas = breath, i. 107.

 Nafs = soul, life, i. 107.

 Náfi’ (traditionist), v. 204.

 Náfilah = supererogatory Koran recitation, iii. 222.

 Nafísah (great-grand-daughter of the Imám Hasan), iv. 46.

 Nafísah (Pr. N.) = the Precious one, viii. 328.

 Nafs-í = my soul for “the flesh,” vii. 118.

 Nafs Ammárah = “the Flesh,” viii. 31.

 —— al-Nátikah = intellectual soul, viii. 31.

 —— al-Ghazabíyah = animal function, viii. 31.

 —— al-Shahwáníyah = vegetative property, viii. 31.

 Nága-kings (of Hinduism), v. 302.

 Nahás (vulg. for Nuhás, _q.v._), ii. 327; iv. 178.

 Náhí-ka = let it suffice thee, x. 22.

 Nahnu málihín = we are on term of salt, i. 344.

 Nahr = slaughtering a camel by stabbing, iv. 95.

 Nahr = river, vi. 163.

 Nahs = nasty, i. 301.

 Ná’i al-maut = messenger of death, vii. 226.

 Náihah = keener, hired mourner, i. 311.

 Na’ím = delight (name for Heaven), iii. 19; iv. 143.

 Na’íman = may it benefit thee! after bathing, etc., ii. 5.

 Naïveté (of the Horatian kind), ix. 215.

 Najásah = nastiness (anything unclean), vi. 178.

 Najíb (al-taraf = son of a common Moslemah by a Sayyid, _q.v._), v.
    259.

 Najíb (al-tarafayn = whose parents are both of Apostolic blood), v.
    259.

 Najis = ceremonially impure, ix. 337.

 Nájiyah = Salvadora, ii. 145.

 Najm al-Munkazzi = shooting star, viii. 329.

 Najm al-Sabáh (Pr. N.) = Star o’ Morn, viii. 107.

 Najrán (in Syria), ii. 232.

 Naká = sand-hill, x. 27.

 Nakat = to spot; to handsel, viii. 266.

 Naked = without veil or upper clothing, vii. 151.

 Nakedness (Ar. Aurat), vi. 30.

 —— (paraphrased), i. 327.

 Nakfúr = Nicephorus, ii. 77.

 Nakh = make a camel kneel down by the cry Ikh! Ikh! ii. 139.

 Nákhúzah Zulayt = skipper rapscallion, viii. 175.

 Nakíb, a caravan-leader, chief, syndic, i. 269.

 Nákisátu ’aklin wa dín = failing in wit and faith, ix. 298.

 Nakkár = Pecker (a fabulous fish), ix. 184.

 Nakl-i-safar (move preliminary to a journey), ii. 84.

 Nákús = wooden gong (used as bell), vi. 47; viii. 328.

 Name of Allah introduced into an indecent tale essentially Egyptian, i.
    12.

 Names (of God), v. 214.

 —— (= magical formula), v. 369.

 —— (frequently do not appear till near the end of a tale), vii. 43, 75,
    274.

 —— (approved by Allah), ix. 165.

 Naming of a child, ii. 174.

 Naming a girl by name offensive, vii. 286.

 Naml (ant) simile for a young beard, iii. 58.

 Námúsiyah = mosquito curtains, viii. 330.

 Napoleonic pose (attitude assumed by a slave), ix. 320.

 Nár (fire), ii. 163.

 —— (fem., like the names of other elements), viii. 16.

 Narcissus (with negro eyes = yellowish white), ii. 24.

 Narcissus and Hippolytus (assumed as types of morosa voluptas, etc.),
    x. 215.

 Narjis = Narcissus, i. 294.

 —— (name of a slave-girl), viii. 176.

 Nashshár (Al-) = the sawer, i. 335.

 Násik = a devotee, ix. 40.

 Naskh = copying hand, i. 128.

 Nasím = Zephyr (emendation for Nadím = cup-companion), viii. 62.

 Násir (Pr. N.) = triumphing, ix. 310.

 Nasrání = follower of Him of Nazareth, i. 258.

 Nat’a = leather used by way of table-cloth, i. 20.

 Nat’a al-dam = the leather of blood, i. 318; ii. 41.

 Nation (its power consists in its numbers of fighting men), v. 255.

 Nau (pl. Anwá) = setting of one star simultaneous with another’s
    rising, viii. 266.

 Naurúz = new (year’s) day, iv. 244.

 Navel, as to beauty and health, i. 84.

 —— (largeness of, much appreciated), viii. 33.

 Nawá = date-stone; Nawáyah = severance, ii. 315.

 Nawátíyah = crew (navigata, nauta), viii. 17.

 Nay = reed-pipe, v. 50.

 Naysábúr (town in Khorasan), ix. 230.

 Názih = travelled far and wide, v. 52.

 Názir = overseer, ii. 304; iii. 233.

 Nearness of seat a mark of honour, i. 250.

 Negro (Legend of his origin), iv. 250.

 Negroes preferred by debauched women, i. 6.

 —— (familiarity of boys with white girls), ii. 49.

 —— (their skin assumes dust-colour in cold, etc.), ii. 127.

 Negrofied races like “walking tun-butts,” iv. 255.

 Neighbour before the house, companion before the journey, ii. 207.

 Neighbours (frequently on the worst of terms), vi. 236.

 Nemo repente fuit turpissimus (not believed in by Easterns), ix. 91.

 “New Arabian Nights,” vi. 257.

 New-moon of Ramazán watched for, i. 84.

 New moon of the Festival = Crescent of the breakfast, ix. 249, 250.

 News (what is behind thee of, O Asám), viii. 222.

 Ni’am = yes in answer to a negative, vii. 195.

 Ni’amat = a blessing, iv. 1.

 Night (and day, not day and night, with the Arabs), iii. 121.

 —— (-cap), iii. 222.

 —— (“this” = our “last”), iii. 249.

 —— (for day), iii. 318.

 —— (its promise spread with butter that melteth with day-rise), v. 77.

 —— (its last the bitter parting), vii. 243.

 —— (consists of three watches), i. 175; viii. 330.

 Níl (Al-) = flood season corresponding to summer, i. 290.

 Nílah = indigo, dye-stuff, ix. 144.

 Nile-water sweet and light, i. 290.

 Nímchahrah = half-face (Pers., a kind of demon), v. 333.

 Nimr = leopard, ix. 63.

 Nimrod of the desert, ii. 291.

 Nimsá = Cermans, ii. 219.

 Nimshah (Namshah?) = dagger of state, ii. 193.

 Nineteen the age of an oldish old maid in Egypt, i. 212.

 Nisáb (Al-), smallest sum for stealing which the hand is mutilated, iv.
    157.

 Niták, a woman’s waistcloth, vii. 180.

 Níyah (Al-) = ceremonial intention of prayer, v. 163; x. 254.

 Nizámí (Persian poet), iii. 183.

 Noachian dispensation (revived Al-Islam as revealed to Adam), v. 372.

 Noisy merriment scandalous to Moslem “respectability,” i. 95.

 Nostrils (his life-breath was in his, = his heart was in his mouth),
    vii. 258.

 Nostrums for divining the sex of the unborn child, vii. 268.

 Nothing for nothing a sexual point d’honneur, i. 87.

 Nuhás (vulg. Nahás) = copper, brass, i. 40; ii. 327; iv. 178, 230; vi.
    83.

 Nukl = quatre mendiants, ix. 177, 213.

 Numbering the streets, etc. a classical custom, viii. 88.

 Nún (simile for the eyebrow), v. 34.

 Nún-like brow, iv. 249.

 Nuptial sheet (inspection of), iii. 289.

 Nur al-Huda (Pr. N.) = Light of Salvation, iii. 17; viii. 97.

 Núrayn = two lights (town in Turkestan), vii. 88.

 Nusf = half-dirham, ii. 37; vi. 214; ix. 139, 167.

 Nusk = piety, abstinence from women, ix. 243.

 Nu’umán (Al-) bin Munzir (tyrant of Hírah), v. 74.

 Nu’umán’s flower = anemone, ii. 325.

 Nuzhat al-Zamán = delight of the age, ii. 81.

 Nymphomania (ascribed to worms in the vagina), iv. 298.


 Oath (a serious thing amongst Moslems), i. 179.

 —— (inconsiderately taken), ii. 136.

 —— (kept to the letter), iv. 70.

 —— (retrieved by expiation), viii. 263.

 —— (of divorce), viii. 287, 311.

 Obayd Allah (Pr. N.), v. 164.

 Obayd ibn Táhir (Under-Prefect of Baghdad), iv. 291.

 Object first seen in the morning determines the fortunes of the day,
    viii. 147.

 Obscene abuse meant as familiarity, not insult, ii. 88.

 O Camphor (antiphrase = O snowball), iii. 40.

 Ocean (Jamm), v. 93.

 —— (of darkness), v. 309.

 “Off-with-his-head” style (not to be taken literally), ix. 308.

 Offering for naught = closing with the offer, ii. 4.

 Offerings (pious = ex votos, etc.), vii. 150.

 Oftentimes the ear loveth before the eye, iii. 9.

 Ohod (battle of), ii. 165.

 Old age (graphically described), v. 3.

 “Old maids” ignored in the East, vii. 286.

 “Old Man of the Sea” (a Márid or evil Jinn), vii. 338.

 Old woman (polite equivalents for), v. 163.

 Oldest matter in The Nights the beast-stories, iii. 114.

 Olemá (pl. of ’Álim) = the learned in the law, v. 183.

 —— (Time-serving), x. 44.

 Omán = Eastern Arabia, i. 83.

 —— (with capital Maskat = Omana Moscha), vii. 24.

 Omar bin al-Khattáb (Caliph), ii. 158, 159, 162, 164; v. 103.

 Omar-i-Khayyám (astronomer-poet), ix. 230.

 Omen (Fál), v. 136.

 Onanism (discouraged by circumcision), x. 233.

 One-eyed men considered rascals, iv. 194.

 Opener (of the door of daily bread), vi. 216.

 Opening doors without a key is the knavish trick of a petty thief, vii.
    182.

 Ophidia (of monstrous size), vi. 29.

 Orange (a growth of India), viii. 272.

 Oriental orgie different from European, i. 93.

 Othello (even he does not kill Emilia), ix. 300.

 Othmán (Caliph), ii. 163.

 —— (Kátib al-Kuran), v. 215.

 Oubliettes (in old Eastern houses), iii. 327.

 Out of the sight of my friend is better and pleasanter, iii. 315.

 O whose thrall am I, etc. = To her (I drink), viii. 224.


 Pain (resembling the drawing of a tooth), x. 21.

 Palace (of the Caliph at Baghdad), vi. 189.

 Palaces (avoided by the pious), vi. 182.

 —— (in ruins for want of repair), x. 61.

 Palgrave and Al-Islam, x. 189.

 Palmerin of England, viii. 64.

 Palm-stick (a salutary rod), ii. 22.

 Palsy (creeps over him), v. 251.

 Pander-dodge to get more money, i. 302.

 Panel-dodge fatally common, i. 323.

 Paper (his = the whiteness of his skin), v. 161.

 Paradise (of the Moslem not wholly sensual), iii. 19; ix. 322.

 Parapets (on terrace-roofs made obligatory by Moses), v. 72.

 Parasite (Ar. Tufaylí), v. 130.

 Parent (ticklish on the Pundonor), ix. 288.

 Paris Jockey-club scene anticipated, i. 327.

 Parisian MSS. of The Nights, x. 104.

 Parody on the testification of Allah’s Unity, i. 177; iii. 215.

 Parrot-story a world-wide folk-lore, i. 52.

 Particles of swearing, viii. 310.

 Partner in very deed, viii. 181.

 Partridge (Ar. Hijl), iii. 138.

 Partridges (story of the two), vi. 183.

 Pashas’ agents for bribery in Constantinople, iv. 183.

 Passengers in difficulties take command, i. 140.

 Pathos (touch of), iii. 55.

 Patience (cutting the cords of), iii. 178.

 Pausing as long as Allah pleased = musing a long time, vi. 109.

 Pay-chest (of a Hammám bath), ix. 152.

 Payne quoted, i. 129, 150, 167, 209, 217; ii. 19, 185, 304; iii. 58,
    130, 162, 172, 193, 252, 275, 291; iv. 50, 54, 66, 197, 221, 222; v.
    44, 49, 65, 86, 112, 161, 192, 204, 346; vii. 16, 18, 57, 123, 178,
    277, 337; viii. 21, 32, 64, 70, 72, 80, 117, 125, 130, 131, 148,
    158, 168, 179, 216, 223, 224, 262, 264, 271, 275, 278, 279, 282,
    293, 294, 298, 314, 326, 327; ix. 22, 28, 79, 84, 86, 89, 171, 212,
    224, 226, 227, 250, 251, 265, 268, 290; x. 50, 52, 74, 104, 140,
    142, 167.

 Peaches (Sultani and Andam), viii. 270.

 Pearl supposed to lose 1 per cent. per ann. of its lustre, i. 165.

 Pearl-fisheries, vi. 60.

 Pearls (shaded by hair = teeth under mustachio), v. 157.

 —— (fresh from water), vii. 240.

 —— (resting on the sand-bank), ix. 164.

 Pears (various kinds of), viii. 269.

 Peccadillo in good olden days (murder), iv. 275.

 “Péché philosophique” (the, in France), x. 249.

 Pederasts (list of famous), x. 252.

 Pehlevi version of the Panchatantra, x. 120.

 Pen and Preserved Tablet, ii. 68.

 Pencilling the eyes with Kohl, vii. 250.

 Penis (as to anus and cunnus), iii. 303.

 —— (Ark al-Halawat), iv. 51.

 —— (correspondence of size), iv. 52.

 —— (and its succedanea), x. 239.

 Pens (gilded = reeds washed with gold), vii. 112.

 People of His affection = those who deserve His love, ix. 92.

 Pepper (and the discovery of the Cape route), vi. 38.

 —— (-plantations shaded by bananas), vi. 57.

 Perfumes (not used during mourning), iii. 63.

 —— (natural), iii. 231.

 Periphrase containing a negative adds emphasis, ii. 83.

 Persian (“I am a, but not lying now”), v. 26.

 —— (poets mostly addressing youths), v. 156.

 Persians always suspected, viii. 8.

 Persians (delighting in practical jokes), ix. 177.

 Person (Ar. Shakhs), iv. 97; viii. 159.

 Peshadians (race of Persian Kings), i. 75.

 Petrified folk, ix. 318.

 Phaedra and Hippolytus, vi. 127.

 Pharao (signs to), iv. 249.

 “Philippi” and “Alexanders” in Sidon, ii. 82.

 Philosophic (used in a bad sense), vi. 257.

 Physical prognostication familiar to Mesmerists, ii. 72.

 Physiognomy (Ar. Firásah, Kiyáfah), viii. 326.

 Physiologists (practise on the simiads), v. 220.

 Physis and Anti-physis, v. 320.

 Picnics (on the Rauzah island), v. 169.

 Pidar-sokhtah = (son of a) burnt father (Persian insult), vi. 26.

 Pièces de circonstance (mostly mere doggrel), ii. 261; viii. 59.

 Pigeon (language, etc.), iii. 126.

 —— (blood of the young), _ib._ 289.

 Pilgrimage quoted, i. 28.

 —— (iii. 11), _ib._ 46.

 —— (i. 5; ii. 196), _ib._ 51.

 —— (ii. 71), _ib._ 74.

 —— (ii. 309), _ib._ 77.

 —— (iii. 126), _ib._ 97.

 —— (i. 86), _ib._ 107.

 —— (iii. 31, etc.), _ib._ 112.

 —— (i. 327), _ib._ 120.

 —— (ii. 198), _ib._ 123.

 —— (iii. 104), _ib._ 134.

 —— (iii. 350), _ib._ 138.

 —— (i. chapt. xi.), _ib._ 140.

 —— (iii. 137), _ib._ 170.

 —— (iii. 200), _ib._ 174.

 —— (iii. 60, 62) _ib._ 208.

 —— (i. 202), _ib._ 214.

 —— (ii. 275), _ib._ 215.

 —— (i. 118), _ib._ 219.

 —— (ii. 215), _ib._ 220.

 —— (iii. 125, 232), _ib._ 226.

 —— (i. 313), _ib._ 228.

 —— (iii. 63), _ib._ 230.

 —— (i. 84; iii. 43), _ib._ 245.

 —— (i. 127), _ib._ 250.

 —— (ii. 175), _ib._ 256.

 —— (i. 160), _ib._ 258.

 —— (i. 255; i. 60), _ib._ 266.

 —— (iii. 263), _ib._ 269.

 —— (iii. 201, 202), _ib._ 284.

 —— (i. 53), _ib._ 294.

 —— (i. 240; iii. 35, 36), _ib._ 308.

 —— (i. 11; iii. 285), ii. 5.

 —— (i. 261; iii. 7), _ib._ 15.

 —— (i. 210; 346), _ib._ 31.

 —— (ii. 77), _ib._ 40.

 —— (iii. 330), _ib._ 113.

 —— (ii. 113), _ib._ 114.

 —— (i. 99), _ib._ 316.

 —— (ii. 274), _ib._ 326.

 —— (ii. 176; i. 174), _ib._ 330.

 —— (i. 276), _ib._ 338.

 —— (iii. 333), _ib._ 124.

 —— (iii. 12), _ib._ 131.

 —— (iii. 254), _ib._ 132.

 —— (i. 222; ii. 91), _ib._ 139.

 —— (ii. 118), _ib._ 140.

 —— (i. 121), _ib._ 163.

 —— (ii. 227), _ib._ 165.

 —— (iii. 226, 342, 344), _ib._ 169.

 —— (ii. 49), _ib._ 178.

 —— (i. 305), _ib._ 180.

 —— (iii. 322), _ib._ 203.

 —— (ii. 89), _ib._ 220.

 —— (iii. 115), _ib._ 224.

 —— (iii. 232), _ib._ 227.

 —— (i. 346), _ib._ 230.

 —— (iii. 78), _ib._ 236.

 —— (ii. 110), _ib._ 242.

 —— (iii. 171–175; 203), _ib._ 272.

 —— (iii. 113), _ib._ 286.

 —— (iii. 71), _ib._ 293.

 —— (ii. 105, 205), _ib._ 317.

 —— (ii. 58; iii. 343), _ib._ 327.

 —— (i. 110), _ib._ 330.

 —— (ii. 22), iii. 7.

 —— (iii. 77), _ib._ 65.

 —— (iii. 14), _ib._ 67.

 —— (i. 216), _ib._ 81.

 —— (i. 64), _ib._ 91.

 —— (iii. 185), _ib._ 107.

 —— (iii. 270), _ib._ 118.

 —— (iii. 208), _ib._ 121.

 —— (iii. 218), _ib._ 126.

 —— (i. 52), _ib._ 151.

 —— (iii. 307), _ib._ 159.

 —— (i. 99), _ib._ 163.

 —— (iii. 239), _ib._ 174.

 —— (iii. 22), _ib._ 226.

 —— (ii. 282), _ib._ 241.

 —— (iii. 144), _ib._ 252.

 —— (ii. 213, 321), _ib._ 304.

 —— (iii. 192–194), _ib._ 319.

 —— (i. 106), _ib._ 324.

 —— (i. 75–77), iv. 6.

 —— (i. 285; ii. 78), _ib._ 36.

 —— (iii. 306), _ib._ 75.

 —— (i. 123), _ib._ 78.

 —— (iii. 295), _ib._ 80.

 —— (iii. 303), _ib._ 95.

 —— (ii. 119), _ib._ 114.

 —— (i. 213), _ib._ 115.

 —— (iii. 156, 162, 216, 220), _ib._ 125.

 —— (iii. 168, 174, 175), _ib._ 148.

 —— (ii. 329), _ib._ 254.

 —— (iii. 192), _ib._ 261.

 —— (i. 43), _ib._ 293.

 —— (i. 22), v. 39.

 —— (ii. 287), _ib._ 44.

 —— (iii. 218), _ib._ 49.

 —— (i. 16), _ib._ 97.

 —— (ii. 344), _ib._ 100.

 —— (i. 10), _ib._ 112.

 —— (ii. 161), _ib._ 119.

 —— (i. 352), _ib._ 158.

 —— (ii. 320), _ib._ 196.

 —— (i. 110), _ib._ 201.

 —— (iii. 193, 205, 226, 282), _ib._ 203.

 —— (iii. 248), _ib._ 212.

 —— (iii. 92), _ib._ 220.

 —— (ii. 322), _ib._ 224.

 —— (i. 362), _ib._ 225.

 —— (ii. 288), _ib._ 236.

 —— (i. 297), vi. 57.

 —— (i. 180), _ib._ 61.

 —— (i. 349; iii. 73), _ib._ 263.

 —— (ii. 116; iii. 190), _ib._ 264.

 —— (i. 370), _ib._ 276.

 —— (i. 298), _ib._ 277.

 —— (ii. 332), _ib._ 287.

 —— (iii. 90), vii. 3, 4.

 —— (i. 377), _ib._ 9.

 —— (iii. 191), _ib._ 21.

 —— (i. 14), _ib._ 80.

 —— (ii. 62–69), _ib._ 91.

 —— (ii. 130, 138, 325), _ib._ 92.

 —— (ii. 3), _ib._ 95.

 —— (iii. 336), _ib._ 104.

 —— (i. 59), _ib._ 171.

 —— (i. 120), _ib._ 172.

 —— (ii. 300), _ib._ 124.

 —— (ii. 24), _ib._ 140.

 —— (i. 124), _ib._ 177.

 —— (iii. 66), _ib._ 181.

 —— (ii. 52–54), _ib._ 202.

 —— (i. 62), _ib._ 212.

 —— (iii. 165), _ib._ 219.

 —— (iii. 70), viii. 137.

 —— (iii. 365), _ib._ 157.

 —— (ii. 248), _ib._ 172.

 —— (ii. 130, etc.), _ib._ 183.

 —— (ii. 207), _ib._ 273.

 —— (i. 176), _ib._ 287.

 —— (ii. 82), _ib._ 291.

 —— (i. 88), _ib._ 300.

 —— (i. 9), ix. 50.

 —— (i. 235), _ib._ 51.

 —— (iii. 66), _ib._ 81.

 —— (i. 20), _ib._ 165.

 —— (ii. 285–287), _ib._ 175.

 —— (iii. 224, 256), _ib._ 178.

 —— (i. 99), _ib._ 262.

 —— (ii. 48), _ib._ 307.

 —— (i. 314), _ib._ 315.

 Pilgrimage not perfected save by copulation with the camel, viii. 157.

 Pilgrims (offcast of the = a broken down pilgrim left to die on the
    road), ix. 290.

 Pillow (wisádah, makhaddah), taking to = taking to one’s bed, ii. 70.

 Pistachio-nut (tight-fitting shell of), iv. 216.

 Pitching tents within dog-bark from Royalty disrespectful, ii. 294.

 Plain (ground), synonyms for, i. 46.

 Plain-speaking (of the Badawí), iv. 102.

 Plaisirs de la petite oie (practised by Eunuchs), v. 46.

 Plates as armature, iii. 216.

 Plato (his theory of love), x. 209.

 Play “near and far” = “fast and loose,” x. 22.

 Pleasure prolonged (en pensant à sa pauvre mère, etc.), v. 76.

 Pleiads (the stars whereby men sail), viii. 304.

 Plunder sanctioned by custom, ii. 68.

 Plur. masc. used by way of modesty by a girl addressing her lover, i.
    98.

 Plural of Majesty, iii. 16; iv. 156.

 Poetical justice (administered with vigour in The Nights), vi. 25.

 Poetry of the Arabs requires knowledge of the Desert to be understood,
    i. 230.

 Poets (four, whose works contraried their character), x. 253.

 Poison (deadly only in contact with abraded skin), vi. 202.

 Poisons in the East, ix. 101.

 Poke (counterfeit), iii. 302.

 Policeman (called in, a severe punishment in the East; why?), ix. 137.

 Police-master legally answerable for losses, vii. 161.

 Polissonnerie (Egyptian), iii. 243; iv. 226.

 Polo (“Goff”), v. 32.

 Poltroon (contrasted with a female tiger-lamb), ix. 224.

 Polygamy and Polyandry in relation to climate, iii. 241.

 Polyphemus (in Arab garb), vi. 24.

 —— (no Mrs. P. accepted), vi. 27.

 Pomegranate fruit supposed to contain seed from Eden garden, i. 134.

 —— (Hadís referring to), viii. 267.

 Porcelain (not made in Egypt or Syria), iv. 164.

 Postillon (Le), iii. 304.

 Postures of coition, iii. 93.

 Potter (simile of the), ix. 77.

 Pouch (Ar. Surrah), viii. 71.

 Poverty (Holy), v. 269.

 Powders (coloured in sign of holiday making), x. 51.

 Power (whoso has it and spareth, for Allah’s reward he prepareth), ix.
    340.

 Prayer (for the dead lack the Sijdah), ii. 10.

 —— (of Ramazan), ii. 202.

 —— (rules for joining in), iii. 174.

 —— (two-bow), iii. 213.

 —— (-niche = way-side chapel), iii. 324.

 —— (without intention, Ar. Niyat, is valueless), v. 163.

 —— (offered standing or prostrating), v. 196.

 —— (of a sick person as he best can), v. 200.

 —— (intonation of the voice in), v. 200.

 —— (call to, Azán), v. 201.

 —— (is a collector of all folk), v. 201.

 Praying against (polite form for cursing), ix. 293.

 Pre-Adamite doctrine, x. 179.

 Preachments (to Eastern despots), v. 254.

 Precautions (thwarted by Fate and Fortune), vi. 167.

 Precedence (claims pre-eminence), viii. 285.

 Precedent (merit appertains to), iii. 264.

 Predestination (not Providence, a Moslem belief), vi. 202.

 Pre-eminence (appertaineth to precedence), viii. 285.

 Preliminaries of a wrestling bout, ii. 92.

 Premier (Le, embellit), viii. 86.

 Preposterous venery, iii. 304.

 Presence (I am _in thy_ = _thy slave to slay or pardon_), ix. 124.

 Preserved tablet, ii. 68.

 Preventives (the two), iii. 222.

 Price (without abatement = without abstracting a large bakhshish), ix.
    152.

 —— (shall remain), ix. 262.

 Pride of beauty intoxicates, iv. 34.

 Priest hidden within an image (may date from the days of Memnon), ix.
    324.

 Prima Venus debet esse cruenta, iii. 289.

 Prime Minister carrying fish to the cookmaid, i. 63.

 Prince (of a people is their servant), ix. 99.

 Prin´cess, English; Prince´ss, French, vii. 245.

 Prison (in the King’s Palace), ix. 52.

 Prisons (Moslem), vi. 244.

 Privy, a slab with slit in front and a round hole behind, i. 221.

 —— and bath favourite haunts of the Jinns, vi. 141.

 Procès verbal (customary with Moslems), iv. 73.

 Prognostication frequently mentioned, ii. 72.

 —— (from nervous movements), viii. 25.

 Prolixity (heightening the effect of a tale), x. 50.

 Prolongatio veneris (Imsák), v. 76.

 Prominence of the pugaeic muscles insisted upon, ii. 98.

 Property (of the heirless lapses to the treasury), iv. 62.

 —— (left by will), vi. 213.

 Prophets (have some manual trade), ii. 286.

 —— (named in the Koran), v. 210.

 —— (and their agnomina), vi. 270.

 Proportion of horse and foot in Arab and Turcoman armies, vii. 1.

 Prostitution (never wholly abolished in Al-Islam), viii. 115.

 Prostration (must be made to Allah only), vi. 136.

 Protestants (four great _Sommités_), vii. 124.

 Prothesis without apodosis (a favourite style in Arabic), vi. 203, 239.

 Proverbs true to nature, i. 307.

 Providence (and Justice), v. 286.

 Province (“some” = Sancho Panza’s “insula”), ii. 188.

 Puellæ Wakwakienses, viii. 89.

 Puns (wretched and otherwise), ii. 64, 179, 182; iv. 258; vii. 53, 288,
    307; viii. 35, 228, 329; ix. 278, 289; x. 11, 27.

 Punctilios of the Desert, vi. 264.

 Purgation (Easterns most careful during), v. 154.

 Purifying (after evacuation), ii. 326.

 Purity of love attains a prophetic strain, iii. 6.

 Pyramidennarren, v. 106.

 Pyramids (Ar. Al-Ahrám), v. 105.

 —— (containing unopened chambers?), v. 106.

 —— (verses on the), x. 150.


 Qanoon-e-Islam quoted on the subject of horoscopes, etc. i. 213.

 Quarter (son of the = neighbour), vi. 236.

 Queen’s mischief = the mischief which may (or will) come from the
    Queen, viii. 98.

 Question (expressing emphatic assertion), ix. 182.

 Questions (indiscreet, the rule throughout Arabia), iii. 105.

 Quibbling away (a truly diplomatic art), v. 86.


 Ra’ad al-Kásif (Pr. N.) = the loud-pealing Thunder, vi. 221.

 Ra’ad Sháh A. P. = thunder-king, vii. 55.

 Raas al-Mál = capital, viii. 248.

 Raat-hu = she saw him, viii. 298.

 Ra’áyá (pl. of Ra’íyat) = Ryot, iii. 215.

 Rabbatí = my she-Lord, applied to the fire, vii. 36.

 Rabelaisian humour of the richest, iv. 152.

 Rabite, classical term for a noble Arab horse, iii. 72.

 Racing a favourite pastime, ii. 273.

 Raff = shelf running round a room, viii. 122.

 Ráfisi = denier, Shí’ah, iv. 44.

 Rafw = artistic style of darning, vi. 198.

 Rag (burnt, used as styptic), iv. 108.

 Rághib = the Desirous, v. 145.

 —— (= expecter; Záhid = rejecter), viii. 315.

 Ráh = pure old wine, iv. 186.

 Rahan = pledge, ix. 311.

 Ráhatáni (Al-) = the two rests, viii. 342.

 Rahíl (small dromedary), iii. 67.

 Rahim, Rihm = womb for uterine relations, vii. 123.

 Rahmah (Pr. N.) = the puritanical “Mercy,” vi. 226.

 Raiment of devotees (white wool), vii. 214.

 Rais = captain, master (not owner) of a ship, i. 127; vi. 12.

 Raising the tail, sign of excitement in the Arab blood-horse, iii. 84.

 Rajab = worshipping (seventh Arab month), v. 54.

 Rajaz = the seventh Bahr of Arabic prosody, i. 251.

 Rajul ikhtiyár = a middle-aged man, i. 55.

 Rakham = aquiline vulture, viii. 20.

 Rákí (distilled from raisins), v. 65.

 Rakb = fast-going caravan, iv. 254.

 Ramazán (moon of), viii. 33.

 Ramlah (half-way house between Jaffa and Jerusalem), vi. 103.

 Rank (derived from Pers. rang = colour), ii. 192.

 —— (thine is with me such as thou couldst wish = I esteem thee as thou
    deservest), ix. 41.

 —— (conferred by a Sovereign’s addressing a person by a title), ix.
    119.

 Rape (rendered excusable by wilfulness), vi. 187.

 Rás al Killaut = Head of Killaut, a son of the sons of the Jinn, ix. 8.

 Rás al-Tín = Headland of Clay (not Figs), v. 112.

 Rashaa = fawn beginning to walk, v. 149.

 Rashád = garden-cresses or stones; viii. 194.

 Rashíd = the heaven-directed, viii. 194.

 Rashid (Pasha, etc.), iv. 202.

 Rashid = Rosetta, viii. 288.

 Rasíf (Al-) river-quay, dyke, viii. 150.

 Rasm = usage (justifies a father killing his son), ii. 7.

 Rasúl = one sent, “apostle,” not prophet, iv. 284.

 Rasy = praising in a funeral sermon, iii. 291.

 Ratánah = a jargon, iii. 200.

 Raushan = window, iii. 171.

 Raushaná (splendour) = Roxana, iii. 171.

 Rauzah (Al-) = the gardens, i. 291.

 —— (at Cairo), v. 169.

 Raven of the waste or the parting, iv. 52; viii. 236.

 Ráwí = story-teller (also used for Reciter of Traditions), x. 163.

 Ráy = rede (“private judgment”), vi. 146.

 Ráyah káímah = pennons flying (not “beast standing”), vii. 118.

 Raydaníyah (camping ground near Cairo), i. 245.

 Rayhán = scented herb, viii. 187.

 Rayhání = a curved character, i. 128; ii. 301.

 Ráyí = rationalist, vi. 146.

 Rayy (old city of Media), iv. 104.

 Ready to fly for delight, iii. 26.

 Ream (It. risma, Ar. rizmah), v. 108.

 Red dress (sign of wrath), iv. 72; vi. 250.

 Red Sea (cleaves in twelve places), v. 236.

 Reed = pen (title of the Koranic chapt. lxviii), ii. 68.

 Reed-pipe (Nay), v. 50.

 Refusal of a gift, greatest affront, i. 336.

 —— (of a demand in marriage a sore insult), vi. 262.

 Relations between Badawi tribes, vi. 267.

 Rending of garments as sign of sorrow or vexation, i. 308.

 “Renowning it” (boasting of one’s tribe), iii. 80, 108.

 —— (naïve style of), vii. 347.

 Repentance (a strong plead for granting aid with a Moslem), iv. 277.

 —— (acquits the penitent), vii. 72.

 Repetition, vii. 293, 301.

 —— (of an address in token of kindness), v. 370.

 Resignation (noble instance of), x. 42.

 Respect shown to parts of the body, exuviæ, etc., i. 276.

 Rest (in Eastern travel before eating and drinking), viii. 142.

 Retorts (of a sharp Fellah), vi. 232.

 Return unto Allah, iii. 317.

 Return-Salám, viii. 309.

 Revenge (a sacred duty), viii. 26.

 Ribá = interest, usury, v. 201; viii. 248.

 Ridding the sea of its rubbish, ix. 169.

 Riddle “surprise” (specimen of), v. 239.

 Riders (names of such on various beasts), viii. 239.

 Riding on the ass an old Biblical practice, i. 262.

 Riding on men as donkeys (facetious exaggeration of African practice),
    vii. 357.

 Ríf (Al-) = lowland, viii. 304.

 Rihl = wooden saddle, iii. 117.

 Rijál al-Ghayb (invisible controls), ii. 211; x. 14.

 Rims cars, i. 131.

 Rind (rand) = willow, bay, aloes-wood, iii. 172.

 Ring (in memoriam), vi. 199.

 —— (lost in the Hárím raises jealous suspicion), vi. 200.

 Rings in the East, iv. 24.

 Rising up and sitting down sign of agitation, ii. 112.

 River (the = Tigris-Euphrates), ix. 313.

 Rivers (underground), vi. 63.

 Rizam (pl. of rizmah) = bales, reams, v. 108.

 Rizwán (approbation) = key-keeper of Paradise, iii. 15, 20; iv. 195;
    viii. 265.

 Robbing (to keep life and body together, an acceptable plea), ix. 137.

 Robe (the hidden, story of), vi. 188.

 Robing one’s self in rags = becoming a Fakír, ii. 171.

 Robinson Crusoe (with a touch of Arabic prayerfulness), v. 291.

 Rod (divining or dowsing), iv. 73.

 Roman superficiality (notable instance of), x. 116.

 Rosary, iii. 123.

 Rose (in Arab. masculine), viii. 274.

 Rose-water (for “nobility and gentry,” even in tea), v. 357.

 Rotl (pl. Artál) = rotolo, pound weight, iv. 124.

 Roum = Græco-Roman Empire, iv. 100.

 Roumi (in Marocco = European), viii. 268.

 Royalty in the guise of merchants, iii. 12.

 Rozistán = day-station, i. 29.

 Rub’ al-Kharáb (probably for the Great Arabian Desert), vii. 80; x. 42.

 Rubb = syrup, “Rob,” ii. 3.

 Rubbamá = perhaps, sometimes (more emphatic than rubba), vii. 218.

 Rubber (shampooer), iii. 17.

 Rubhah (townlet on the frontier of Syria), iii. 52.

 Ruby (La’al, Yákút), v. 342.

 —— (of exceptional size), vi. 66.

 Rudaynah and Rudaynian lances, ii. 1.

 Rudaynian lance (like a), vii. 265.

 Rúh = spirit, breath of life, ix. 67.

 Ruh = be off, ix. 168.

 Ruh bilá Fuzúl = Begone and none of your impudence, viii. 163.

 Ruhbán = monks, viii. 256.

 Ruká’í = correspondence hand, i. 128.

 Ruk’atayn = two-bow prayer, i. 142.

 Rukb = travellers on camels, return caravan, viii. 238.

 Rukh (Roc and “Roc’s” feathers), v. 122.

 —— (the world-wide “Wundervogel”), vi. 16.

 —— (study of, by Prof. Bianconi), vi. 49.

 Rukhám = alabaster, i. 295.

 Rumourers (the two) = basin and ewer, vii. 146.

 Rustak (Al-), city of Oman, vi. 289.

 Rustam (not Rustum or Rustem), iv. 219.

 Rutub (applying to pearls = fresh from water), vii. 240.

 Ryot = liege, subject; Fellah, peasant, iii. 215.


 Sá’a (measure of corn, etc.), vi. 203.

 Sa’ad = auspiciousness, prosperity; derivatives, i. 9.

 Sa’adah (female Pr. N.), iii. 65.

 Sa’ádah = worldly prosperity and future happiness, ix. 327.

 Sa’alab = fox, iii. 132.

 Sa’alabah (name of a tribe), iii. 107.

 Sabá = Biblical Sheba, iv. 113; vii. 316.

 Sabab = rope (hence a cause), ii. 14; viii. 100.

 Sabaj (not Sabah) a black shell, vii. 131.

 Sabaka = he out-raced, ix. 111.

 Sabaka Kúrahá = he pierced her forge, viii. 46.

 Sabb = low abuse, iii. 311.

 Sabbágh = dyer, ii. 305.

 Sabbáh bin Rammáh bin Humám = the Comely, son of the Spearman, son of
    the Lion, iii. 67.

 Sabbahaka ’llah bi-’l-Khayr = Allah give thee good morning, vi. 196.

 Sabbath (kept in silence), v. 339.

 Sabbation (River), v. 337.

 Sabíhat al-’Urs = gift on the wedding morning, x. 18.

 Sábik = forerunner, viii. 341.

 Sabíkah = bar, lamina, ingot, viii. 10.

 Sabíyah = young lady, ix. 226.

 Sabr = patience and aloes, source of puns, i. 138; viii. 35; ix. 278.

 Sabt = Sabbath, ii. 305.

 Sabúr = Sapor II., vi. 274.

 Sacrifice (Ar. Kurbán), viii. 16.

 Sacy, Silvestre de (on the origin of The Nights), x. 76.

 Sád (Letter, simile for the eye), v. 34.

 Sadaf = cowrie, i. 19.

 Sadakah = voluntary alms, opposed to Zakát, i. 339.

 Sadd = wall, dyke, i. 114; ii. 128.

 Sádir = returning from the water (_see_ Wárid), iii. 56.

 Sadness (House of), viii. 64.

 Sady = Hámah, _q.v._; iii. 293.

 Safà (ground-wave _in_ Meccah), v. 203.

 Safe-guard (I am in thy = I appeal to thy honour), vi. 158.

 Saffron (aphrodisiac), ii. 234.

 Safínah = (Noah’s) Ark, ix. 310.

 Safíyu ’llah (Adam) = pure of Allah, ii. 124.

 Safwán (Pr. N.) = clear, cold, vii. 314.

 Saghr (Thagr), the opening of the lips showing the teeth, i. 156; viii.
    289.

 Sahákah = tribadism, ii. 234.

 Sáhib = companion, used as a Wazirial title, i. 237; iv. 139; v. 71.

 Sáhib al-Shartah = chief of the watch (Prefect of Police), i. 259.

 Sáhib Nafas = master of breath, a minor saint healing by expiration, i.
    107.

 Sahífah = page, book, viii. 148.

 Sahíkah = Tribade, viii. 130.

 Sáhil (Al-) = the coast (Phœnicia), ix. 22.

 Sáhil Masr = the river side (at Cairo), i. 291.

 Sahím al-Layl (Pr. N.) = he who shooteth an arrow by night, vi. 261.

 Sáhirah = place for the gathering of souls on Doom-day, iii. 323.

 Sahm-hu = his shaft, vi. 100.

 Sahm mush ab = forked (not barbed) arrow, ix. 48.

 Sá’í = running between Safá and Marwah, ii. 327.

 Sáibah = she-camel freed from labour, iii. 78.

 —— = a woman who lets herself go (a-whoring, etc.), viii. 151.

 Sa’íd = Upper Egypt, viii. 304.

 Sa’íd bin Jubayr, ii. 201.

 Sa’íd bin Sálim (Governor of Khorasan), v. 94.

 Sa’íd bin Zayd (traditionist), v. 81.

 Sa’ídah = the auspicious (fem.), ix. 330.

 Sá’ik = the Striker (Pr. N.), vii. 35.

 Sá’ikah = thunderbolt, vi. 271.

 Sailor (Ar. equivalents for), vi. 242.

 Sáim al-dahr = perennial faster, v. 112.

 Saint, Santon (Walí), v. 112.

 Saint and Sinner, v. 115.

 Sa’ír = Hell, iv. 143.

 Sáis = groom, horsekeeper (Syce), vi. 9.

 Saj’a (= rhymed prose), i. 116.

 —— (instance of), v. 160.

 —— (bald in translation), vii. 2.

 —— (answerable for galimatias), vii. 36.

 Sajjádah = prayer-rug, vi. 193.

 Sák = calf of the leg, ii. 327.

 Sakatí = second hand dealer, iv. 77.

 Sakhr al-Jinní alluded to, i. 41; v. 316.

 Sákí = cup bearer, ii. 27, 327.

 —— (and Sák-í), ix. 253.

 Sákin = quiescent (applied to a closing wound), ix. 255.

 Sákiyah = the Persian water-wheel, i. 123; ix. 218.

 Sakká (Anglo-Indian Bihishti) = water-carrier, iv. 44; v. 89.

 Sakr = hawk, ii. 293.

 Saksar (Pers. Sag-sar = dog’s head), vi. 37.

 Sa’lab = fox, jackal, vi. 211; ix. 48, 103.

 Salaf (Al-) = ancestry (referring to Mohammed), v. 90.

 Saláhitah (Al-) island, vi. 30.

 Sal’am = S(allà) Al(lah) ’A(layhi wa, salla) M, _see_ Abhak, ii. 24.

 Salám (to be answered by a better salutation), ii. 146.

 —— (of prayers), ii. 243.

 —— (becomes Shalúm with the Jews), viii. 223.

 —— (not returned, a Moslem form of Boycotting), viii. 302.

 Salámát = Welcome! vi. 232.

 Salát (blessing, prayer), iv. 60.

 Salát mamlúkíyah = praying without ablution, vii. 148.

 Salátah (how composed), vii. 132.

 Salb = crucifying, iii. 25.

 Sale (forced on by the bystanders), viii. 310.

 Sales (formula of), vi. 73.

 Sálifah = silken plait, viii. 223.

 Sálih = a pious man, vii. 314; viii. 191.

 —— prophet sent to Thámúd, i. 169.

 —— (grandson of Shem?), v. 210.

 —— (his she-camel), v. 235.

 —— al-Mazani (theologian), v. 261.

 Sálihiyah = the Holy (name of a town), ix. 287.

 Salím (Pr. N. = the “Safe and Sound”), iv. 58.

 Sallah = basket of wickerwork, ix. 56.

 Salli ’alà ’l-Nabí = bless the prophet (imposing silence), v. 65.

 Salmá and Laylá = our “Mary and Martha,” i. 265.

 Salsabíl (fountain of Paradise), iii. 57; iv. 195.

 Salutation (the first), v. 200.

 —— (Salám, unwillingly addressed to a Christian), v. 284.

 —— (from a rider to a man who stands, and from the latter to one who
    sits), ix. 1.

 Saluting after prayer, ix. 254.

 Sama’an wa Tá’atan to be translated variously, i. 96.

 Samak = common fish, vi. 69.

 Samandal (Al-) = Salamander, vii. 280.

 Samar = night-story, vii. 312.

 Samáwah (Al-), visitation place in Babylonian Irak, vii. 93.

 Samharí = lance of Samhar (place or maker), iv. 258.

 Samír = night-talker, vii. 217.

 Samn = melted butter, Ghi, i. 144; iv. 53; ix. 39.

 —— = clarified butter, ix. 39.

 Samsam (sword of the Tobba Amru bin Ma’ad Kurb), ii. 127.

 Samúm = poisonous wind (Simoon), vi. 88.

 Samúr (applied to cats and dogs, also to Admiral Seymour), iv. 57.

 Sana’á (capital of Al-Yaman), v. 16.

 —— (famed for leather and other work), vii. 130.

 Sanájik = banners, ensigns, etc., ix. 290.

 Sand (knowing by the = geomancy), ix. 117.

 Sandal (Pr. N.) = Sandal-wood, viii. 169.

 —— (scented with), v. 192.

 —— (Ar. Na’al), vi. 209.

 Sandalí (eunuch deprived of penis and testes), v. 46.

 Sandals (kissed and laid on the head in token of submission), vii. 370.

 Sandúk al-Nuzur = box of vowed oblations, viii. 330.

 Sapphic venery, ii. 234.

 Sapphism (practised in wealthy Haríms), iv. 234.

 Sappho (the “Mascula”), x. 208.

 Sar’ (epilepsy, falling sickness, possession), iv. 89; v. 28.

 Sár = vendetta, i. 101, 114.

 Saráb = mirage, iii. 319; vi. 93.

 Sarandíb = Selan-dvípa (Ceylon), vi. 64.

 Saráwíl = bag or petticoat trousers, i. 222.

 —— (plural or singular?), ix. 225.

 Sardáb = underground room, souterrain, tunnel, i. 340; v. 128; ix. 241,
    274.

 Sarí al-Sakatí (Sufi ascetic), ix. 21.

 Sarídah (Tharídah) = brewis, v. 223.

 Sarír = bier (empty), ii. 46.

 Sarmújah = leggings, sandals, slippers, vii. 370.

 Sarráf = Anglo-Indian “Shroff,” i. 210; iv. 270.

 Sásá bin Shays, vi. 274.

 Sassanides, i. 75.

 Satan (his malice weak in comparison with women’s), vi. 144.

 Satl = kettle, bucket (situla?), vii. 182.

 Sátúr = chopper, viii. 162.

 Saub (Tobe) ’Atábi = tabby silk, viii. 201.

 Saudá = black bile, melancholia, iv. 251.

 Saudawí = of a melancholic temperament, vii. 238.

 Sauf (particle to express future), ii. 269, 296.

 Saulajan = bat in “bat and ball,” ii. 329.

 Sawáb = reward in Heaven, i. 96.

 Sawád = blackness of the hair, x. 60.

 Sawáhílí = shore-men, ix. 22.

 Sawálif = tresses, locks, v. 158.

 Sawík = parched corn, vii. 303.

 Sawwáhún = wanderers, pilgrims, viii. 336.

 Sawwán = Syenite, iii. 324.

 Sayd wa Kanas = hunting and coursing, i. 9.

 Sayf (ξίφος) al-Mulúk = Sword of the Kings, vii. 325.

 Sayf Zu al-Yazan (hero of a Persian romance), viii. 21.

 Sayhún and Jayhún = Jaxartes and Bactrus, ii. 78; v. 41.

 Sáyih = wanderer (not “pilgrim”), ix. 51.

 Sayl = torrent, vi. 164.

 Sayr = broad girdle, viii. 325.

 Sayyib (Thayyib) = woman who leaves her husband after lying once with
    him, viii. 324.

 Sayyib-hu = let him go, viii. 151.

 Sayyid (descendant from Mohammed through Al-Hasan), v. 259.

 Scabbard (Ar. Ghimd), v. 158.

 Scalding a stump in oil a common surgery practice, i. 297.

 Schoolmaster (derided in East and West), v. 118.

 Schools (attached to mosques), x. 174.

 Scorpions of the brow = accroche-cœurs, etc., i. 168; viii. 209.

 Scoundrels (described with superior gusto), ix. 135.

 Scrotum (curdling in fear), ii. 233.

 Sea of Al-Karkar, vi. 101.

 Sea (striking out sparks), ix. 314.

 Sea-stallion (myth of the), vi. 6.

 Seal (and sealing-wax), iii. 189.

 —— (affixed to make an act binding), v. 184.

 —— (breaking the = taking the maidenhead), v. 154.

 Sealing a covered dish (a necessary precaution against poison), i. 244.

 Seal-ring of Solomon (oath by), vii. 317.

 Seas (the two = the Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean), i. 173.

 —— (fresh = lakes and rivers), v. 326.

 Seclusion (royal, and its consequences), ix. 91.

 Secrets (instances and sayings with regard to their keeping), v. 83.

 Secrets (of workmanship, withheld from apprentices), ix. 263.

 Seditions in Kúfah caused by Caliph Othman’s nepotism, ii. 163.

 Seduction (the truth about it), iii. 166.

 Seeing sweetness of speech = finding it out in converse, ix. 14.

 Separation (spoken of as a defilement), iv. 211.

 Seeking refuge with Allah, v. 200.

 Septentriones (four oxen and their wain), ii. 3.

 Sepulchre, erroneously called a little Wali, i. 105.

 Serpent does not sting or bite, but strikes, iii. 160.

 —— (breaks the bones of its devoured prey by winding round a tree or
    rock), vi. 29.

 —— (breath of), vi. 29.

 —— (preserving from sickness), vi. 66.

 —— (in Ar. mostly feminine), vi. 75.

 Serving the Lord by sinning against one’s body, ii. 208.

 Set-off for abuse of women, vii. 130.

 Seven deadly sins, ii. 175.

 Seven schools or editions of the Koran, i. 113.

 Seven sleepers, iii. 128.

 Sévigné of pearls, iv. 249.

 Sha’abán (moon of), v. 191.

 Shább = youth between puberty and forty, i. 55.

 Shabistán = night station, i. 29.

 Shadow (may yours never be less), viii. 170.

 Shafáif = lower labia, viii. 93.

 Sháfi’i (school of theology), ii. 151.

 Shahádatayn = the two Testimonies, ii. 10; iii. 346.

 Shah-bandar = lord of the port (Consul), iv. 29.

 Shah (Al-) mát = the King is dead (checkmate), viii. 217.

 Sháhid = index, pointer, ii. 300.

 Sháhmiyah (large tent), ii. 194.

 Sháh-púr = Kings son, Σαβὼρ, Sapor, v. 2.

 Shahrazád (various explanations of the name), i. 14; ii. 3.

 Shahrimán _not_ Shah Zemán, iii. 7, 212.

 Shahryár = city friend, i. 2.

 Shahyál bin Shárukh (Pr. N.), vii. 331.

 Shah Zamán = King of the Age, i. 2.

 Sháib al-Ingház = grey beard shaking with disapproval, iii. 307.

 Sha’ilah = link (also lamp, wick, etc.), i. 259.

 Shakespear and musical glasses, ii. 3.

 Shakespearean “topothesia” out-Shakespeared, iii. 212.

 Shakhs = a person; a black spot, iii. 26; viii. 159.

 Shakhtúr = dinghy, vii. 362.

 Shaking and nodding the head, universal items of gesture language, i.
    300.

 Shakiriyah = Kshatriya caste, vi. 10.

 Shákuríyah = chicoré, v. 226.

 Shám (Sysia) = land on the left, opposed to al-Yaman = land on the
    right, i. 83.

 Shámah = Khál, mole on the cheek, i. 167.

 Shamardal (Al-) = the Tall One, vi. 221.

 Shambar = Cassia fistularis, ii. 241.

 “Shame” alluded to in cursing parents of an abused person, i. 227.

 —— (extends from navel to knees), viii. 193.

 Shamlah = gaberdine, viii. 160.

 Shammara = he tucked up (sleeve or gown), vii. 133.

 Shammir = up and ready! viii. 263.

 Shampooer (rubber) = Mukayyis or bagman, iii. 17.

 Shampooing the feet, i. 117.

 Shams al-Daulah (imaginary king of Egypt), vi. 241.

 Shams al-Nahár (Pr. N.) = Sun of the Day, v. 9.

 Shams al-Zuhà (Pr. N.) = Sun of Undurn, viii. 107.

 Shamtá = the grizzled (name for wine), x. 38.

 Shanak = hanging, iii. 25.

 Shanfarà (poet), iii. 143.

 Shár, Sher and Shír, iv. 187.

 Sha’r = hair of the body, pile, ix. 157.

 Shara (Al-) mountain in Arabia, vii. 23.

 Shar’a = holy law, vii. 170.

 Sharáb al-Tuffáh = cider, iv. 134.

 Sharaf al-Banát (Pr. N.) = Honour of Maidenhood, viii. 107.

 Sharáríf = trefoil-shaped crenelles, iv. 165.

 Sharít = chopper, sword, vii. 178.

 Sharmútah = rags, tatters; a strumpet; shreds of meat = Kadíd, i. 163.

 Sharrkán (Sharrun kána) = bane to the foe, ii. 78.

 Shart = a single Talbiyah or cry Labbayka, i. 226.

 Shásh Abyaz = white turband (distinctive sign of the True Believer),
    viii. 8.

 Shatm = obscene abuse, i. 182.

 Shaukat = sting; pride, ii. 106.

 Shaving and depilation (process of), ii. 160; ix. 139.

 Shaybán (Arab tribe), v. 100.

 Shaykh = an old man, elder, chief, i. 26, 55; ii. 144.

 —— (attended by a half-witted lunatic), vii. 152.

 —— (after the type of Abú Nowás), ix. 251.

 —— (for syndic of a guild), ix. 260.

 —— (of the thieves one of the worthies of a Moslem capital), vi. 204.

 —— al-Bahr = Chief of the Sea (-coast), vi. 51, 53; vii. 357.

 Shaykh al-Islám = Chief of the Olema, ix. 289.

 —— (his mention sign of modern composition), x. 19.

 Shaykh Nasr (Pr. N. = Elder of Victory), v. 343.

 Shaykhah Rájihah = the excellent Religious, ix. 347.

 Shaykhs (five, doubtful allusion), iii. 30.

 Shays = Ab Seth, vi. 283.

 Shaytán (Satan) term of abuse, iii. 25.

 —— (his wife and nine sons), iii. 229.

 Shayyun li ’lláhi = per amor di Dio, i. 329.

 Shawáhi (from Shauh) = having fascinating eyes, ii. 269.

 Shawáhí Umm al-Dawáhí = the Fascinator, Mother of Calamities, viii. 87.

 Shazarwán = Pers. Shadurwán, palace, cornice, etc., vii. 51.

 Shedding tears no disgrace for a man, i. 68.

 Shem hamphorash = the hundredth name of God engraved on the seal-ring
    of Solomon, i. 173.

 Sheríf = a descendant of Mohammed, iv. 170.

 Shibábah = reed-pipe, viii. 166.

 Shiháb = shooting stars, i. 224.

 Shikk = split man (a kind of demon), v. 333.

 Shinf = gunny-bag, v. 45.

 Shíraj = sesame oil, ix. 184.

 Shirk (partnership) = Polytheism, Dualism, Trinitarianism, i. 181; ii.
    202.

 —— (= syntheism), of love, v. 9.

 —— of the Mushrik, v. 142.

 Shiyár (old name for Saturday), ii. 305.

 Shoe (Ar. Markúb, Na’al), vi. 207.

 Shop (front shelf of, a seat for visitors), ix. 262.

 Shops composed of a “but” and a “ben,” i. 316; iii. 163.

 “Short and thick is never quick,” iv. 194.

 Shouting under a ruler’s palace to attract attention, ii. 38.

 Shovel-iron stirrup, iii. 119.

 Shower (how delightful in rainless lands), vii. 141.

 Shroud (joined in one = shrouded together?), v. 71.

 Shrouds (carried by the pilgrims to Meccah), vi. 61.

 Shu’ayb = Jethro, ii. 205; v. 210.

 Shúbash = bravo! vii. 195.

 Shudder preceding the magnetic trance, i. 44.

 Shuhadá = martyrs (extensive category), i. 171.

 Shuhúd = accessors of the Kazi’s court, i. 21.

 Shujá’ al-Dín (Pr. N.) = the Brave of the Faith, ix. 18.

 Shukkah = piece of cloth, ix. 236.

 Shúm (a tough wood used for staves), viii. 354.

 Shuraih (a Kazi of Kufah in the seventh century), i. 252.

 Shúshah = top-knot of hair, i. 308.

 Shuumán = pestilent fellow, iv. 75.

 Sibawayh (grammarian), vii. 233.

 Siddík = true friend, ii. 197.

 Siddíkah (Al-) = the veridical (apparently undeserved title of
    Ayishah), viii. 152.

 Side-muscles (her, quiver) = she trembles in every nerve, vii. 219.

 Sídí (from Sayyidí) = my lord, v. 283.

 Sídí Ibrahím bin al-Khawwás (Pr. N.), v. 283.

 Sidillah = seats, furniture, ix. 190.

 Sifr = whistling, iv. 206; v. 333.

 Sight comprehendeth Him not, etc., vi. 282.

 Sign of the cross on the forehead, ii. 224.

 Signals of debauchees, x. 219.

 Signet-rings, iv. 24.

 Signing with the hand _not_ our beckoning, viii. 78.

 Signs (of a Shaykh’s tent), iii. 104.

 —— (lucky in a horse), iii. 118.

 —— (to Pharao), iv. 249.

 —— (of Allah = Koranic versets), vi. 144.

 —— (by various parts of the body), viii. 233.

 —— (language of), ix. 269.

 Signum salutis, viii. 293.

 Sihr (Al-) = magic, black art, i. 305.

 Sijdah = prostration, ii. 10.

 Sijn al-Ghazab = Prison of Wrath, x. 45.

 Sikankúr = Σκίγκος, _see_ Aphrodisiacs, iv. 32.

 Silah = conjunctive sentence, coition, ix. 272.

 Siláh-dár = armour-bearer, ii. 215.

 Simát = dinner table, i. 178.

 Simiyá = white magic, i. 305, 332.

 Simoon (Ar. Samúm = poisonous wind), vi. 88.

 Símurgh (guardian of the Persian mysteries), x. 130.

 Sin (permitted that men might repent), ix. 83.

 —— (thy, shall be on thine own neck), ix. 211.

 Sín = China, ii. 77.

 Sinai (convent famous for Ráki), v. 65.

 Sind (matting of), v. 145.

 Sindán, Sandán = anvil, viii. 8.

 Sindbád (not to be confounded with the eponym of the Sindibád-námah),
    vi. 4.

 Sindibád the Sage, vi. 124.

 Sindibád-námah (Persian romance), vi. 122.

 —— quoted: vi. 129, 132, 134, 139, 143, 145, 150, 152, 169, 180, 183,
    188, 202.

 Singing (not harám = sinful, but makrúh = objectionable), ix. 245.

 Sinnaur = cat, prince, iii. 149.

 Sinning (for the pleasure of being pardoned), iv. 111.

 Sins (seven deadly), ii. 175.

 Sírah (small fish, fry, sprat), vi. 216; ix. 166.

 Sisters (their abiding together after marriage frequently insisted
    upon), x. 56.

 Sitt al-Masháíkh = Lady of Shaykhs, v. 154.

 Skin (free from exudation sounds louder under the clapping of the
    hand), ix. 150.

 —— (extreme delicacy of the female), ix. 321.

 Sirát (Al-), the bridge of Hell, iv. 223.

 Sister (by adoption), viii. 25.

 Sisterhood = companions, suite, viii. 41.

 Sitting on shins and knees, a trying posture, i. 130.

 Siwák = tooth-stick; Siwá-ka = other than thou, iii. 275.

 Sixth Abbaside Caliph, error for Fifth, viii. 56.

 Siyágosh, _see_ Tufah.

 Slain were those who were slain = many were slain, v. 364.

 Slander (poisoned = fatal), ii. 264.

 Slapping on the nape of the neck = boxing the ears, iv. 193.

 Slate (Ar. Lauh), v. 73.

 Slaughter (wholesale, for the delight of the gallery), viii. 255.

 Slaughtering (ritual for), v. 391.

 —— (by cutting the animal’s throat), viii. 44.

 Slave (holds himself superior to a menial freeman), viii. 294.

 Slave-girl (Moslemah can compel an infidel master who has attempted her
    seduction to sell her), vii. 203.

 —— (when newly bought frequently pretentious and coquettish), vii. 266.

 —— (can only be sold with her consent), viii. 292.

 —— (free, not forward in her address), ix. 268.

 —— (lewd and treacherous by birth), ix. 280.

 —— (to be sent as a spy into the Harims), ix. 292.

 Slaves (fancied by debauched women), i. 191.

 —— (cannibals), ii. 48.

 —— (familiarity), ii. 49.

 —— (called “Camphor,” like “Snowball”), ii. 47.

 —— (refuse to be set free), ii. 55.

 —— (manumission of), ii. 55.

 —— (destructiveness), ii. 55.

 —— (girls’ names), ii. 57.

 —— (returning from a journey), ii. 65.

 —— (Christian girls sent to Moslems), ii. 79.

 —— (girls examined as to virginity), ii. 147.

 —— (Behaving like one), ii. 270.

 —— (O Camphor), iii. 40.

 —— (set free for the benefit of the dead), iii. 211.

 —— (dealer in = Jalláb), iii. 349.

 —— (ambitious to have slaves of their own), v. 12.

 —— (if ill-treated may demand to be sold), viii. 54.

 Sledge (thrashing = tribulum), ii. 23.

 Sleeper and Waker (tale of the), iv. 96.

 Sleepers (the Seven of Ephesus), iii. 128.

 Sleeping (and slumbering), ii. 178.

 —— (with covered head and face), iii. 345.

 —— (naked), v. 8.

 —— (with head and body covered by a sheet), v. 18.

 —— (with a sword between them), vii. 352.

 Sleeplessness (contrivance against), iv. 228.

 Slice of the moon = digit of the moon, i. 91.

 Smile (like Mím), iv. 249.

 —— (and laughter), v. 193.

 Smoking out (a common practice), ii. 255.

 Smothering a rival (common in Harims), ii. 58.

 Smuggling men into the Harim, i. 282.

 Snatching off the turband, a paying industry, i. 259.

 Sneezing (etiquette of), ix. 220.

 Socrates (“sanctus pæderasta”), x. 213 _seqq._

 Sodomite (Ar. Lútí), v. 161.

 —— (punished if detected), v. 160.

 Sodomites (angels appear to), iii. 301, 304.

 Sodomy (abnormally developed amongst the savages of the New World), x.
    240.

 —— with women, iii. 304.

 Softness of skin highly prized, ii. 295.

 Soft-sided, attribute of beauty, i. 168.

 Soko (Maghribi form for Súk = bazar-street), viii. 230.

 Sold to thee for monies received (formula of Moslem sales), vi. 73.

 Soldiers of Al-Daylam = warlike as the Daylamites, viii. 82.

 Sole of a valley often preferred to encamp in, ii. 85.

 Solomon (his carpet), iii. 267.

 —— (his food-tray), vi. 80.

 —— (his seal-ring), vi. 84.

 —— (the Apostle of Allah), vi. 99.

 —— (his Wazir Asaf), vi. 99.

 —— (his trick upon Bilkis), vi. 113.

 —— (oath by his seal-ring), vii. 317.

 —— and David (their burial-place), v. 310.

 —— and Al-Sakhr, ii. 97.

 Solomon’s death fixing the date of a tale, i. 41.

 —— prison (the copper cucurbites in which he imprisoned the rebellious
    Jinns), viii. 157.

 “Son” used for “grandson” as more affectionate, i. 243.

 —— (the lamp of a dark house), ii. 280.

 —— (of a century = hundred years old), i. 126.

 —— (of Persian Kings, not Prince but descendant), iii. 163.

 —— (of ten years dieth not in the ninth), viii. 70.

 Sons of Adam = men, i. 130.

 —— of Sásán = Sassanides, i. 2.

 —— (brought as servants unto Kings), ix. 43.

 —— of the road = wayfarers, ii. 23.

 Sophia (Pr. N. and Mosque), ii. 79.

 Sortes Virgilianæ, v. 44.

 Soul (Thou knowest what is in mine and I know not what is in Thine), v.
    216.

 —— (you may have his, but leave me his body), viii. 284.

 —— (for lover), ix. 25.

 Souls (doctrine of the three), v. 218.

 Spartivento = mountain whereon the clouds split, viii. 19.

 Speaker puts himself first, i. 33.

 Speaking _en prince_, ii. 184.

 Speaking to the “gallery,” viii. 128.

 Spears and javelines, vi. 263.

 Speech (this my = the words I am about to speak), viii. 147.

 Speech (inverted), viii. 318.

 Speech (for prayers imprecating parting), viii. 347.

 Sperm (though it were a drop of marguerite), viii. 210.

 Spider-web, frailest of houses (Koranic), ix. 59.

 Spindle (thinner than a), iii. 260.

 Spiritual Sciences (Moslem form of Cabbala), ii. 151.

 Spiritualism (the religion of the nineteenth century), ix. 86.

 Spittle dried up from fear, i. 285.

 Spoon (Ar. Mi’lakah), ix. 141.

 Spurring = kicking with the shovel-stirrup ii. 89.

 Squatting against a wall, iv. 119.

 Squeeze of the tomb (Fishás), v. 111.

 Staff broken in the first bout = failure in the first attempt, i. 64.

 Stages (ten, of love-sickness), iii. 36.

 Stallion (I am not one to be struck on the nose), vi. 262.

 Standards reversed in sign of defeat, ii. 259.

 Stations of the Moon (Ar. Manázil), v. 228.

 Stature (Alif-like), iv. 249.

 Steel (Ar. Bulád), vi. 115.

 Steward (pendant to the parable of the unjust), ix. 66.

 St. George (posture), iii. 304.

 Stirrup (walking by the), vi. 234.

 “Stone-bow” _not_ “cross-bow,” iii. 116.

 Stoning (of the devil at Mina), v. 203.

 Stones (precious), v. 312.

 —— (ditto, and their mines), vi. 18.

 —— (removed from the path by the pious), vi. 190.

 Story-teller (picture of the), x. 164.

 Strangers (treated with kindly care), v. 171.

 “Strangers yet” (Lord Houghton quoted), v. 284.

 Street (the, called Yellow), iv. 93.

 —— (-watering), iv. 107.

 Street-cries of Cairo, vii. 172.

 Street-melodies changing with fashion, i. 311.

 Striking the right hand upon the left in sign of vexation, i. 298.

 Striking with the shoe, the pipe-stick, etc. highly insulting, i. 110.

 Stuff his mouth with jewels (reward for poetry), iv. 103.

 Stuff a dead man’s mouth with cotton, iv. 193.

 Style (of a Cairene public scribe) vii. 134.

 —— (intended to be worthy of a statesman) ix. 42.

 Su’adá = Beatrice, iv. 267.

 Subán = dragon, ix. 277.

 Subhán a’llah pronounced to keep off the evil eye, iii. 224.

 Subhat-hu = in company with him, vii. 262.

 Subh-i-kázib = false dawn, i. 78.

 Subh-i-sádik = true dawn, i. 78.

 Submission (Ar. Khafz al-Jináh = lowering the wings) ix. 74.

 Sucking the tongue = “kissing with th’ inner lip” i. 270.

 Sucking the dead mother’s breast, touch of Arab pathos, ii. 128.

 Súdán = our Soudan, iii. 75.

 Súdán-men = Negroes, viii. 266.

 Suez (Ar. Al-Suways) vi. 80.

 Súf (wool); Súfí (Gnostic) iii. 140.

 Sufiism (rise of) x. 128.

 Súfís (stages of their journey) v. 264.

 —— (address Allah as a lover would his beloved) iv. 263, 298.

 Suffah = “sofa” (shelf) iv. 275.

 Sufrah (provision-bag and table-cloth) i. 178; v. 8; viii. 269; ix.
    141.

 Sufyán al-Thaurí, ii. 202; v. 81.

 Sugar-stick = German Zuckerpüppchen, i. 167.

 Sughr (Thughr) _see_ Saghr.

 Suha, star in the Great Bear, i. 167; iii. 28.

 Sujúd = prostration, iv. 248.

 Sukát (pl. of Sákí = cup-bearer) v. 66.

 Sukita fí aydíhim = it repented them, v. 191.

 Sukúb (Pr. N.) = flowing, pouring, viii. 209.

 Suláf al-Khandarísí (a contradiction) viii. 203.

 Suláfah = ptisane of wine, must, iv. 258; v. 158.

 Sulamí = belonging to the Banu Sulaym tribe, vii. 93.

 Sulaymá, dim. of Salma = any beautiful woman, iii. 263.

 Sulaymán and Sakhr al-Jinní, i. 42.

 Sulaymán bin Abd al-Malik (Caliph) ii. 167; vii. 99.

 Sulaymáníyah = Afgháns, vii. 171.

 Sullam = ladder; whipping-post, i. 331.

 Sultán (anachronistic use of the title) v. 88, 179.

 —— (fit for the service of = for the service of a temporal monarch)
    viii. 325.

 Sulus = engrossing hand, i. 128.

 Sumbul al-’Anbari = spikenard, viii. 273.

 Sumr = brown, black, iv. 251.

 Sums of large amount weighed, i. 281.

 Sun (greeting Mohammed) i. 45.

 —— (likened to a bride displaying her charms to man) x. 38.

 Sun and Moon (luminaries for day and night) v. 228.

 —— (do not outstrip each other) v. 228.

 Sunan (used for Rasm) = usage, customs, ix. 74.

 Sundus = brocade, v. 57.

 Sunnah = practice of the Prophet, etc., v. 36, 167.

 Sunni (versus Shí’ah) iv. 82.

 Suns (for fair-faced boys and women) viii. 242.

 Superiority of man above woman, iii. 332.

 Supernaturalismus (has a material basis) viii. 31.

 Superstitious practices not confined to the lower orders, i. 40.

 Suráhíyah (vulg. Suláhíyah) = glass-bottle, vii. 370.

 Surayyá = Stars of Wealth (lit. moderately rich) viii. 303.

 Suritu = I was possessed of a Jinn, ix. 27.

 Surrah = purse, pouch, viii. 71.

 Surriyah = concubine, i. 27.

 Susannah and the Elders in Moslem garb, v. 97.

 Sutures of the skull, iii. 123.

 Su’ubán = dragon, cockatrice = Tammím, i. 172; vii. 322.

 Su’ud used as a counter-odour, i. 279.

 Suwán = syenite, i. 238; ix. 316.

 Suways (Al-) = Suez, vi. 80; ix. 10.

 Swan-maidens, v. 346; viii. 30.

 Swearing (on Blade and Book) ii. 332.

 —— (by Allah, forbidden) iv. 175.

 Sweet (the, slang for fire) ii. 163.

 Sweetmeat of Safety, iv. 60; viii. 105.

 Swevens (an they but prove true) ix. 284.

 Swimming (studied in Baghdad) vi. 134.

 Sword (making invisible) iv. 176; vi. 230.

 —— (between sleepers represents only the man’s honour) vii. 353.

 Sycamore fig (for anus) iii. 302.

 Syene (town on the Nile) iv. 152.

 Syphilis (origin of) x. 89.

 —— (hippic) x. 90.

 Syria (Shám) = left-hand land, ii. 224.


 Taakhír = acting with deliberation, ix. 328.

 Ta’álík = hanging lamps, ix. 320.

 Ta’ám = meat; millet, ii. 67.

 Táb (game) = tip-cat, ii. 314.

 Tabannuj = drugging with Bhang, iv. 71.

 Tabban lahu = perdition on him! iv. 142.

 Tábik = coffer, vii. 350.

 Tabl = kettledrum, viii. 18.

 Tablet (Ar. Lauh) v. 37.

 —— (the Preserved), v. 322.

 Tábút = bier, ark, etc., ii. 46; vii. 207, 350.

 Tabzír = female circumcision, ii. 234.

 Tadmúrah (founds Tadmur or Palmyra) vi. 116.

 Tafazzal = favorisca (have the kindness) ii. 103.

 Taggáa, ii. 88.

 Taghaddá = he dined, vii. 180.

 Taghúm, a kind of onomatopoetic grunt, i. 228.

 Tághút (idol) iii. 217.

 Tahlíl = Refrain of Unity, ii. 236.

 Táif (Al-), town famous for scented leather, viii. 273.

 Táifí leather, viii. 303.

 Tail (wagging of, a sign of anger with felidæ) ix. 72.

 Tái’li ’llah (Caliph) iii. 51, 307.

 Tailor made to cut out the cloth in owner’s presence, i. 321.

 Táír al-bayn = parting-bird, vii. 226.

 Táj al-Mulúk Khárán = crown of the kings of amorous blandishment, ii.
    291.

 Táj Kisrawí = Chosroan crown, ix. 319.

 Tájír Alfí = a merchant worth a thousand (left indefinite) ix. 313.

 Takaddum and Takádum (difference between) iv. 171.

 Tákah = arched hollow in the wall, niche, vii. 361.

 Takhíl = adorning with Kohl, iii. 57.

 Takhmísh = tearing the face in grief, ix. 10.

 Takht (sitting accommodation from a throne to a saddle, capital), v.
    322; vii. 55.

 —— (more emphatical than Sarír), vii. 328.

 Takht-rawán = moving throne (mule-litter), ii. 180; v. 175.

 Tákiyah = calotte worn under the Fez, skull-cap, i. 224; viii. 120.

 Taklíd = baldricking, not girding, a sword, vii. 3.

 Takliyah = onion-sauce, vii. 322.

 Takrúrí = Moslem from Central and Western North Africa, ii. 15.

 Taksím = distribution, analysis, ix. 77.

 Takwím = Tacuíno (for Almanac), vii. 296.

 Talák bi ’l-Salásah = triple divorce, iii. 292.

 Talbiyah = the cry Labbayka, i. 226; ii. 227.

 Talking birds (watching over wives), vi. 132.

 Tamar al-Hindí (Tamarind) = the Indian date, iii. 297.

 Tamar Hanná = flower of privet, i. 83; viii. 176.

 Tam Múz = July, i. 53.

 Ta’mím = crowning with turband or tiara; covering, wetting, v. 199.

 Tamsír (derived from Misr) = founding a military cantonment, vii. 371.

 Tanjah = Tanjiers, vi. 106.

 Tanwín al-Izáfah = the nunnation in construction, ix. 272.

 Tár = tambourine, i. 215.

 Taráib = breast-bone, v. 132.

 Tarbúsh = Pers. Sar-púsh, head cover, i. 215.

 Target (Ar. Darakah), vi. 9.

 Tárhah = head-veil, ii. 52.

 Tárík = clear the way, i. 66.

 Tárik (Jabal al-) = Gibraltar, iv. 100.

 Taríkah = musical mode, modulation, ix. 27.

 Taríkat = (mystic) path to knowledge, v. 111.

 Ta’rís-ak = thy going between (pimping), vi. 196.

 Tarjumán = truchman, i. 100.

 Tarn-Kappe (Siegfried’s), iv. 176; viii. 120.

 Tars Daylamí = Median Targe, viii. 291.

 Tás (from Pers. Tásah), = tasse, viii. 224.

 Tasawwuf (rise of), x. 128.

 Tasbíh = saying Subhán Allah; Rosary, i. 258; iii. 125.

 Tasmeh-pá = strap-legs, vi. 51.

 Tasním (from sanam) = a fountain in Paradise, ii. 100; v. 264.

 Tásúmah = sandal, slipper, ii. 197.

 Taswíf = saying “Sauf,” _q.v._, ii. 296.

 Taub (Saub, Tobe) = loose garment, ii. 206.

 Taubah (Bi’l-) = by means or on account of penitence, ix. 83.

 Taufík (Pr. N. = causing to be prosperous), iv. 1.

 Taur (Thaur, Saur), a venerable remnant of an un-split speech, i. 16.

 Taverns, vii. 324.

 Tawáf = circumambulation of the Ka’abah, ii. 327; vi. 242.

 Tawáshí, obnoxious name for a Eunuch, i. 235.

 Tawashshuh = shoulder-cut, ii. 107.

 Tawáf = Ka’abah-circuit, v. 203.

 Tawakkul ’alà ’llah = trust in Allah, v. 208.

 Tawíl (and Abt Vogler), viii. 96.

 Tawílan jiddan, now a Cairenism, vii. 13.

 Tayammum = washing with sand, v. 197.

 Tayf = ghost, phantom, iii. 252.

 Taylasán (turband worn by a preacher), iv. 286.

 Tayr = any flying thing, bird, vii. 227.

 Tayrab (Al-) a city, iii. 259.

 Taysh = vertigo, giddiness, x. 9.

 Tayy (noble Arab tribe), iv. 94.

 Tazríb = quilting, vii. 330.

 Tears shed over past separation, i. 283.

 —— (pouring blood like red wine), iii. 169.

 Teeth (their cleansing enjoined by Mohammed), v. 44.

 “Tell the truth!” way of taking an Eastern liar, vii. 183.

 Ten stages of love-sickness, iii. 36.

 Tent (signs of a Shaykh’s), iii. 104.

 —— (how constructed), vii. 109.

 Testicles (names for), ii. 55.

 —— (curdling in fear), ii. 233.

 —— (beating and bruising of, female mode of killing a man), iii. 3.

 Testimonies (the two = Shahádatayn), ii. 10.

 Thakílata-k Ummak = be thy mother bereaved of thee, iv. 156.

 Thamúd (prehistoric Arab tribe), iii. 294.

 Thank you (Eastern equivalent for), iv. 6; v. 171.

 Theft (penalty of), viii. 164.

 “Them” for “her,” viii. 35.

 “There is no Majesty,” etc. as ejaculation of impatience, vii. 73.

 “They” for “she,” v. 41, 140; viii. 281.

 Thigh-bite allowed in wrestling, ii. 93.

 Third = Tuesday, vii. 349.

 Thirst (affecting plea; why?), iv. 199.

 Thongs (of the water skins cut, preparatory to departure), ix. 302.

 Thorn of lance = eyelash, iii. 331.

 Thou fillest mine eyes = I find thy beauty all-sufficient, viii. 57.

 Thousand dinárs and five thousand dirhams = £500 and £125 respectively,
    i. 281.

 Thousand thousand = a million, vi. 98.

 Three days, term of hospitality, i. 3.

 Three hundred and three score rooms = one for each day of the Moslem
    year, ix. 61.

 Three things (are better than other three), vi. 5.

 —— (not to be praised before death), ix. 39.

 Threshold (of marble in sign of honour), ix. 238.

 Throne-verse, v. 211.

 Throwing one = bastinado on the back, i. 243.

 “Throwing the handkerchief,” vi. 285.

 Thrusting (applied to spear and lance), ii. 231.

 Thursday night (in Moslem parlance = Friday night), v. 324.

 Tibn = crushed straw, i. 16; ix. 106.

 Tigris (Ar. Dajlah, Dijlah), viii. 150.

 Timbák (Tumbák) = stronger variety of Tobacco, ix. 136.

 Time (distribution of), ix. 71.

 Time-measurers (of very ancient date), x. 85.

 Timsah = crocodile, vii. 343.

 Tin (Kazdír) iv. 274; vi. 39.

 Tín = fig, simile for a woman’s parts, iii. 302.

 —— = clay puddled with chaff, v. 112.

 Tinder (a styptic), iv. 108.

 Tingis = Tanjah (Tangiers), vi. 106.

 Tip-cat stick, ii. 314.

 Tíryák = theriack, treacle (antidote), iii. 65.

 Title (used by a Sovereign in addressing a person confers the rank),
    ix. 119.

 Tob = Span. Adobe (unbaked brick), ii. 17.

 Tobacco (its mention inserted by some scribe), ix. 136.

 —— (first mention of), x. 91.

 Tobba (Himyaritic) = the Great or Chief, i. 216.

 Tohfah = rarity, present, viii. 55.

 Tongue (of the case = words suggested by circumstances), i. 121.

 —— (made to utter (?) what is in the heart of man), v. 218.

 —— (my, is under thy feet), vii. 239.

 Too much for him (to come by lawfully), ix. 174.

 Tooth-pick (Ar. Khilál), v. 44.

 Topothesia (designedly made absurd), viii. 338.

 Tor (Mount Sinai), ii. 242.

 —— (its shaking), ii. 281.

 Torrens quoted, i. 56, 147, 203, 206, 225, 228, 251, 271; ii. 4, 19,
    38, 93; iii. 218, 235, 249, 289; iv. 187, 189, 236; v. 80, 96, 188;
    viii. 280, 305, 309, 319, 321, 327; ix. 278.

 Torrents (Ar. Sayl), a dangerous feature in Arabia, vi. 164.

 Tortoise (the colossal), vi. 33.

 Torture easier than giving up cash, viii. 189.

 Tossing upon coals of fire, iii. 61.

 Touch of nature (making all the world kin), x. 24.

 Toujours perdrix, vi. 130.

 Toutes putes, ix. 298.

 Traditionists:
   Al-Zuhrí, ii. 198.
   Ibn Abí Aufá, _ib._ 200.
   Sa’id bin Jubayr, _ib._ 201.
   Sufyán al-Thaurí, _ib._ 202.
   Bishr al-Háfí, _ib._ 203.
   Mansúr bin Ammár, _ib._ 204.

 Trafalgar = Taraf al-Gharb (edge of the West), ix. 50.

 Trailing the skirts = humbly, ii. 165; viii. 301.

 Trances and faintings (common in romances of chivalry), viii. 118.

 Transformation (sudden of character frequent in Eastern stories), viii.
    178.

 Translators (should be “bould”), ix. 244.

 Traveller (a model one tells the truth when an untruth would not serve
    him), vi. 7.

 Travelling at night, ii. 286.

 Treasure (resembling one from which the talismans had been loosed), ix.
    287.

 Treasures (enchanted in some one’s name and nature), iv. 296.

 Trébutien quoted, iv. 268; vii. 91, 98, 139, 314, 318, 324, 331, 346,
    353, 361; ix. 33, 63; x. 9, 54, 69, 80, 98.

 Tree of Paradise (Ar. Túbà), v. 237.

 Tribade (Ar. Sahíkah, Musáhikah), viii. 130.

 Tribadism, iv. 234.

 Tribe (one fortuneth another), ix. 342.

 Tribes (relations between), vi. 267.

 Tribulum (thrashing sledge), ii. 108.

 Tricks (two = before and behind), v. 161.

 Triregno (denoted by the Papal Tiara), ii. 236.

 Trouser-string, ii. 60.

 Truth (most worthy to be followed), v. 145.

 —— (is becoming manifest), v. 159.

 —— (told so as to be more deceptive than a lie), ix. 223.

 —— prevailing, falsehood failing, iv. 80.

 Túbà (tree of Paradise), v. 237.

 Tubah (fifth Coptic month), v. 231.

 Tufah = felis caracal, lynx, vi. 260.

 Túfán (Typhoon, etc.), iv. 156.

 Túfán = Deluge of Noah, viii. 346.

 Tufayl (proverbial intruder), iv. 123.

 Tufaylí = parasite, v. 130.

 Tulf = Sordes unguinum (fie!), viii. 195.

 Tughrà = imperial cypher, v. 184.

 Tughrái (Al-), poet, iii. 143.

 Tughyán = Kufr, rejection of the True Religion, i. 169.

 Túmár = uncial letters, i. 129.

 Tuning (peculiar fashions of Arab musicians with regard to it), ix. 27.

 Turband (not put upon the ground out of respect), i. 223.

 —— (white, distinctive of Moslems), iv. 214.

 —— (substitute for a purse), viii. 190.

 —— (worn large by the learned), v. 120.

 —— (inclining from the head-tops), ix. 221.

 “Turk” probably a late addition, i. 52.

 Turk (= Turkoman, nomade), ii. 218.

 —— (= plunderer, robber), ii. 304.

 —— (provoked to hunger by beauties of nature), iii. 32.

 —— (appears under the Abbasides), iii. 81.

 Turkey (Future of), ix. 94.

 Turks (fair boy-slaves abounding in Baghdád), v. 66.

 —— (forming the body-guard of the Abbasides), ix. 245.

 Turning round in despair against an oppressor, i. 246.

 Turtúr (an Arab’s bonnet), ii. 143.

 Tusks (of elephants, not teeth), vi. 82.

 Tuwuffiya = he was received (into the grace of God), ix. 54.

 Two sayings (double entendre), viii. 153.

 Tyrant (from, to tyrant = from official to official), vi. 214.


 ’Ubb = breast-pocket (poche au sein), viii. 205.

 Ubi aves ibi angeli, iii. 280.

 Ubullah (canal leading from Bassorah to Ubullah-town), ix. 31.

 ’Úd Jalakí = Damascus lute, ii. 100.

 Udah, properly Uta = private room of a concubine, i. 286.

 Udm = “kitchen” (see Adm), ix. 213.

 Uff ’alayka = fie upon thee (Uff = sordes aurium), viii. 195.

 Uhnúkh = Enoch (Idris?), v. 210.

 Ujb = arrogance (in the Spanish sense of gaiety, etc.), vi. 164.

 Ukáb = eagle, vulture, iv. 177.

 Ukáb al-kásir = the breaker eagle, ix. 69.

 Ukayl (Akíl?), iv. 22.

 Ukhuwán = camomile, iii. 58.

 Ukiyyah (pl. Awák) = ounce, ix. 216.

 ’Ulbah = box, viii. 71.

 Ultra-Shakespearean geography “Fars of Roum,” i. 45.

 Ulysses (the Arabian), vi. 40.

 Umámah and ’Ásikah, tale of two women now forgotten, i. 61.

 Umm al-banát wa ’l-banín = mother of daughters and sons, ix. 175.

 Umm al-raas = crown of the head, x. 44.

 Umm al Su’úd (Pr. N.) = Mother of Prosperities, ix. 173.

 Umm ’Ámir = mother of Amir, nickname for the hyena, i. 43.

 Umm Amru (mother of ’Amr) and the ass, v. 118.

 Umm Kulsum (one of the Amsál of the Arabs for debauchery), x. 194.

 ’Ummál (pl. of ’Ámil = governor), ix. 26.

 ’Umrah = lesser Pilgrimage, ii. 169; v. 205.

 “Unberufen,” ix. 180.

 Underground rivers, vi. 63.

 Unguinum fulgor, iv. 252.

 Unhappy thou! vi. 285.

 ’Unnábí = between dark yellow and red (jujube-colour), ix. 143.

 Union opposed to “Severance,” vii. 120.

 Uns al-Wujúd (Pr. N.) = Delight of existing things, v. 33.

 Unveiling the face a sign of being a Christian, ii. 119.

 Upakoshá (Vararuchi’s wife), vi. 172.

 ’Urb = Arabs of pure race, ix. 293.

 ’Urbán = wild Arabs, i. 112.

 Urine (pollutes), iii. 229.

 Urining, ii. 326.

 —— (wiping after), iii. 229.

 Urkúb = tendon Achilles, hough, viii. 185.

 ’Urrah = dung, x. 1.

 Urwah = handle, button-hole, v. 227.

 “Use this” (_i.e._ for thy daily expenses), vii. 298.

 Usfúr = safflower, i. 219.

 Ushári = camel travelling ten days, iii. 67.

 Usirát (Al-), island, vi. 57.

 Usúl (= fundamentals), ii. 15.

 —— (= forbears, ancestors), ix. 246.

 Usury (Ar. Ribá), v. 201.

 —— (verset of), v. 215.

 Usus = os sacrum, v. 219.

 ’Utbí (Al-), poet, v. 133.

 Uzayr = Esdras, i. 257.

 Uzn al-Kuffah = ear (handle) of the basket, viii. 161.

 Uzrah = Azariyah, vii. 158.


 Varieties of handwriting, i. 129.

 Veil, _see_ Lisám, ii. 31.

 Veiling her honour = saving her from being ravished, ix. 330.

 Vellication, iv. 256.

 Vengeance (of a disappointed suitor apprehended), vi. 286.

 Verses (purposely harsh), viii. 337.

 —— (aforementioned, distinguishing formula of “Hasan of Bassorah”),
    viii. 126.

 Versets (number of the Koranic), v. 110.

 View (gorgeous description of), viii. 30.

 “Vigilance Committees” (for abating scandals), ix. 98.

 Vile water (Koranic term for semen), vii. 213.

 Violent temper (frequent amongst Eastern princesses), vii. 254.

 Virgil (a magician), v. 44.

 Virginity of slave-girls (respected by the older slave-trader, rarely
    by the young), vii. 267.

 Visit (confers a blessing in polite parlance), ix. 185.

 Visits (in dreamland), v. 47.

 —— (to the tombs), vii. 124.

 —— (should not be overfrequent), ix. 273.

 Visvakarma = anti-creator, v. 320; x. 131.

 Vivisepulture, vi. 41.

 Voice (thickened by leprosy), iv. 50.


 Wa = and (introducing a parenthetic speech), ix. 282.

 Wa’ar = rough (ground unfit for riding), vi. 140.

 Wa ba’ad (_see_ Ammá ba’ad, vol. ii. 34) = and afterwards, iii. 181.

 Wada’a, _see_ Cowrie, iv. 77.

 Wadd, Suwá’a and Yagús (idols), vi. 282.

 Waddle of “Arab ladies,” iii. 37.

 Wády = valley; slayer, i. 51; ii. 85; iii. 234.

 Wády al-Naml = Valley of the Emmets, v. 337.

 Wady al-Ward = Vale of Roses, vi. 276.

 Wády Zahrán = Valley Flowery, v. 360.

 Waggid (Hebr. speaker in a dream), iv. 289.

 Wahk, Wahak = Lasso, vii. 61.

 Wahsh = wild beast and synonyms, i. 242.

 Wahtah (Al-) = quasi-epileptic fit, vii. 127.

 Wailing over the past, iv. 239.

 Waist (slender, hips large), iii. 278.

 Wakálah, described in Pilgrimage (i. 60), i. 266.

 Wakíl = agent (_see_ Pashas), iv. 182.

 Wakites (number their islands), viii. 88.

 Wakkád = stoker, i. 312; ii. 134.

 Wák Wák (Islands of), viii. 60.

 Walad = son (more ceremonious than “ibn”), v. 386.

 Walgh = lapping of a dog, iii. 319.

 Walhán (Al-) = the distracted, iii. 226; viii. 33; ix. 6.

 Wáli = (civil) Governor, i. 259.

 Walí = Saint, Santon, v. 112.

 —— ’ahd = heir-presumptive, ix. 87.

 Walíd (Al-) bin Abd al-Malik, Caliph, iv. 100.

 —— bin Marwán (Caliph), ii. 167; iii. 69.

 —— bin Sahl (Caliph), vii. 106.

 Wálidati = my mother, speaking to one not of the family, iii. 208.

 Walímah = marriage-feast, vi. 74; viii. 231.

 Walking afoot (not dignified), vi. 227.

 Wa ’lláhi = I swear by Allah, viii. 310.

 —— tayyib = by Allah, good! ii. 34.

 Wa ’l-Salám = and here ends the matter, i. 102.

 —— (used in a variety of senses), viii. 74.

 Wanderer in the mountains = a recluse avoiding society, vi. 158.

 Wárahmatáh = Alas, the pity of it, v. 42.

 Ward = rose; Wardah = a single rose, viii. 274.

 —— (Al-) fí ’l-Akmám (Pr. N.) = Rose in Hood, v. 32.

 —— Shah = Rose King, vii. 70.

 Wardán (a Fellah name, also of a village), iv. 293.

 Wárid = resorting to the water, iii. 56.

 Waríd (jugular vein), iv. 92.

 Warm one’s self at a man’s fire, ii. 76.

 Wars (caused by trifles, frequent in Arab history), vi. 142.

 —— (Al-) = carthamus tinctorius, vii. 92.

 Wartah = precipice, quagmire, etc., x. 81.

 Washing the dead _without doors_ only in case of poverty, ii. 10.

 Washings after evacuation, i. 220.

 Wasíf = servant; fem. Wasífah = concubine, iii. 171.

 Wásik (Al-) Caliph, iii. 81.

 Wásit = Middle (town of Irák Arabi), ix. 26.

 Wasm = tribal sign, vi. 163.

 Watad = tent-peg (also a prosodical term), viii. 279.

 Water (sight of running, makes a Persian long for strong drink), iv.
    75.

 —— (had no taste in his mouth), v. 39.

 —— (-carrier = Sakká), v. 89.

 Watering the streets, iv. 107.

 Water-melons (eaten with rice and meat), vi. 208.

 Waters flowing in Heaven, iii. 65.

 Watwát = bat, v. 226.

 Way of Allah = common property, i. 91.

 Waybah = six to seven English gallons, iv. 86.

 Wayha = Alas! v. 258.

 Wayha-k, equivalent to Wayla-k, vii. 127.

 Wayla-k = Woe to thee! iii. 82.

 Wazír = Minister, i. 2.

 —— (the sharp-witted in the tales), ii. 246.

 Weal (I see naught but), ix. 180.

 Weapons (carried under the thigh), vii. 56.

 —— magic, vii. 59.

 —— new forms of, vii. 62.

 Web and pin (eye-disease of horses), viii. 341.

 Week-days (only two names for), iii. 249.

 —— (old names for), vi. 190.

 Weeping (not for form and face alone), iii. 318.

 —— (over dead friends), ix. 187.

 Whale (still common off the East African coast), vi. 11.

 What calamity is upon thee = what a bother thou art, viii. 177.

 What happened, happened = fortune so willed it, iii. 68.

 “What is it compared with,” popular way of expressing great difference,
    i. 37.

 What manner of thing is Al-Rashíd? = What has he to do here? viii. 176.

 “Whatso thou wouldest do, that do,” = Do what thou wilt, vii. 324.

 Where is—and where? = What a difference is there between, etc., v. 65.

 “Where lies China-land?” = it is a far cry to Loch Awe, vii. 344.

 Whistling (Sifr), iv. 206.

 —— (held to be the devil’s speech), v. 333.

 —— (to call animals to water), viii. 278.

 White as milk (opposed to black as mud, etc.), iv. 140.

 —— (hand, symbol of generosity, etc.), iv. 185.

 —— (turband, distinctive of Moslems), iv. 214.

 —— hand of Moses (sign to Pharao), iv. 249.

 —— and black faces on the Day of Judgment, iv. 249.

 —— (colour of the Ommiades), vi. 86.

 —— robes (denote grace and mercy), vi. 250.

 —— (mourning colour under the Abbasides), viii. 200.

 Whiteness (for lustre, honour), viii. 295.

 Whitening and blackening of the faces on Judgment-Day, ii. 312.

 “Who art thou?” etc. (meaning “you are nobodies”), vii. 286.

 “Whoso beguileth folk, him shall Allah beguile,” viii. 143.

 “Whoso loveth me, let him bestow largesse upon this man,” vii. 323.

 “Whoso praiseth and then blameth lieth twice,” x. 15.

 “Why don’t (_can’t_) you buy me?” viii. 300.

 Wicket (small doorway at the side of a gate), ix. 320.

 Wife (euphemistically spoken of in the masculine), i. 67.

 —— (Aurat), vi. 30.

 —— (called “Family”), vi. 75.

 —— (contrast between vicious servile and virtuous of noble birth), ix.
    302.

 Will he not care? = he shall answer for this! vi. 245.

 Window-gardening, old practice in the East, i. 301.

 Windows (looking out of, a favourite occupation in the East and South),
    vi. 167.

 Wine (why strained), i. 27.

 —— (boiled) = vinum coctum, i. 132.

 —— (flying to the head, effect of the cold after a heated room), i.
    224.

 —— (kahwah), ii. 261.

 —— (table and service), ii. 122.

 —— (a sun, with cupbearer for East and the drinker’s mouth for West),
    iii. 263.

 —— (its prohibition not held absolute), v. 224.

 —— (breeds gladness, etc.), viii. 202.

 —— (in cup, or cup in wine?), viii. 276.

 —— (Mohammed makes up his mind about it by slow degrees), viii. 277.

 Wird = the last twenty-five chapters of the Koran, v. 185.

 —— (Pers.) = pupil, disciple, ix. 61.

 Wisádah = pillow, ii. 70.

 Wisháh = belt, scarf, viii. 209.

 Wishes (tale of the three), vi. 180.

 Wiswás = diabolical temptation or suggestion, i. 106.

 Witches (and their vehicles), vi. 158.

 Witness (bear, against me, _i.e._ in case of my denial), vi. 286; viii.
    22.

 Witnesses (one man = two women), v. 155.

 Wittol (pictured with driest Arab humour), ix. 269.

 Wives have their night in turns, ii. 78.

 —— (why four, _see_ Women), iii. 212.

 —— (a man’s tillage), iii. 304.

 —— (and their suitors), vi. 172.

 Wolf (wicked man); fox (cunning one), iii. 132.

 Woman, Women (debauched prefer Blackamoors), i. 6.

 —— (their depravity goes hand in hand with perversity of taste), i. 73.

 —— (old must not be called Ajúz but Shaybah), i. 174.

 —— (bastinadoed), i. 183.

 —— (chaff and banter allowed to), i. 267.

 —— (of Damascus famed for sanguinary jealousy), i. 295.

 —— (Cairene held exceedingly debauched), i. 298.

 —— mourning, i. 311.

 —— (high-born and their frolics), i. 328.

 —— (cries of), ii. 6.

 —— weeping and wailing before cenotaphs, ii. 68.

 —— maltreated under the Caliphate, ii. 69.

 —— Women captives, ii. 94.

 —— of the blue-stocking type, ii. 156.

 —— created of a crooked rib, ii. 161.

 —— (consult them and do the contrary), ii. 184.

 —— (peculiar waddle of), iii. 37.

 —— (proposing extreme measures), iii. 39.

 —— (are tinder, men fire), iii. 59.

 —— (monkish horror of), iii. 126.

 —— (Laylah, name of), iii. 135.

 —— (true seducers), iii. 166.

 —— (Wálidatí = my mother), iii. 208.

 —— (four wives, and why), iii. 212.

 —— (compared to an inn), iii. 216.

 —— (large hips and thighs), iii. 226.

 —— (small fine foot), iii. 227.

 —— (names of), iii. 239; 263.

 —— (more passionate than men), iii. 241.

 —— (head must always be kept covered), iii. 275.

 —— (slender-waisted but full of hips, etc.), iii. 278.

 —— (Sodomy with), iii. 304.

 —— (all charges laid upon them), iii. 335.

 —— (old bawd), iv. 4.

 —— (names of), iv. 12.

 —— (less handsome than man), iv. 15.

 —— (walk and gait), iv. 16.

 —— (bride night), iv. 30.

 —— (oath of a), iv. 49.

 —— (insolence of princesses), iv. 145.

 —— (inner, her meanings), iv. 146.

 —— (answering question by counterquestion), iv. 148.

 —— (Abyssinian famous as “holders”), iv. 227.

 —— (slave-names), iv. 232.

 —— (intercourse between), iv. 234.

 —— (white-skinned supposed to be heating and unwholesome), iv. 253.

 —— (sleep naked in hot weather), v. 8.

 —— (making the first advances), v. 34.

 —— (and secrets), v. 35, 83.

 —— (wives of eunuchs), v. 46.

 —— (visiting their lovers in a dream), v. 47.

 —— (thought to be Jinn or Ghúl), v. 51.

 —— (called Zaurà, the crooked), v. 66.

 —— (allowed to absent themselves from the house of father or husband),
    v. 96.

 —— (instructed in “motitations”), v. 80.

 —— (apt for two tricks), v. 161.

 —— (old, polite equivalents for), v. 163.

 —— (in their prime at fourteen to fifteen), v. 192.

 —— (inferior to man), v. 155.

 —— (unveiling to a man, if not slaves, insult him), v. 194.

 —— (in Hindostaní jargon = Aurat), vi. 30.

 —— (her shame extends from head to toes), vi. 118.

 —— (their cunning and malice), vi. 144.

 —— (corrupts woman more than men do), vi. 152.

 —— (knowing enough without learning to read and write), vi. 168.

 —— (of Kashmír), vi. 156.

 —— (her female visitors unknown to the husband except by hearsay), vi.
    199.

 —— (words used only by them, not by men), vi. 233.

 —— (blue-eyed of good omen), vii. 164.

 —— (stealing of their clothes), viii. 30.

 —— (her heart the only bond known by her), viii. 54.

 —— (reasons for their ageing in the East), viii. 86.

 —— (always to be addressed Ummí = my mother), viii. 87.

 —— (often hide their names from the husband), viii. 100.

 —— (semi-maniacal rancour of a good one against an erring sister),
    viii. 118.

 —— (when old, the most vindictive of her kind), viii. 137.

 —— (who are neither thine nor another’s), viii. 208.

 —— (their bodies impregnated with scents), viii. 279.

 —— (to be respected by the King), ix. 73.

 —— (“great is their malice”), ix. 119.

 —— (a case of “hard lines” for them), ix. 134.

 —— (their marrying a second time reckoned disgraceful), ix. 246.

 —— (the sin lieth with them), ix. 297.

 —— (fail in wit and faith), ix. 298.

 —— (practically only two ways of treating them), ix. 303.

 —— (delicacy of their skin), ix. 321.

 —— (treated leniently in a Kázi’s court), x. 4.

 Womankind (seven ages of), ix. 175.

 —— (their status in Al-Islam), x. 195.

 Wonder (= cause) in every death, i. 351.

 Word (the creative “Kun”), ix. 78.

 Words (divided in a couplet), iii. 166.

 Worlds (the three = Triloka), ii. 236.

 Wreckers, ii. 111.

 Wrestling and Wrestlers, ii. 93.

 —— (amongst the Egyptian Fellah), viii. 199.

 Writer of The Nights careless, iv. 155.

 Writing (styles of), iv. 196.

 Writing without fingers = (being unable to answer for what is written),
    iii. 181.

 Wuldán = Ghilmán, the beautiful youths of Paradise, i. 211.

 Wuzu-ablution = lesser ablution, i. 142.

 —— (necessary before joining in prayers), ii. 46.

 —— (Koranic order for), v. 198.

 —— (angels and devils at the side of a man who prepares for it), v.
    198.


 Xisisthrus = Noah, ii. 20, 25.


 Yá A’awaz = O, one eye (obscene meaning of the phrase), viii. 185.

 Yá Abati = O dear father mine, ix. 88.

 Yá Abú al-Lithámayn = O sire of the chin-veils twain, x. 20.

 Yá Abú Libdah = O father of a felt-calotte, iii. 62.

 Yá Abú Sumrah = O father of brownness, iii. 40.

 Yá Ahmak = O fool, ix. 271.

 Yá ’Ajúz = O old woman (now insulting), v. 163.

 Yá Bunayya = O dear (lit. little) my son, ix. 79.

 Yá Ba’íd = thou distant one, euphemism for gross abuse, i. 41.

 Yá Bárid = O fool, i. 313.

 Yá Dádatí = O my nurse, “ma mie,” vii. 372.

 Yá Fulán = O certain person, iii. 191; ix. 334.

 Yá Fulánah = O certain person (fem.), ix. 270.

 Yá Hájj = O Pilgrim, ii. 15.

 Yá házá = O this one, somewhat slightingly, i. 240.

 Yá hú = O he! Swift’s Yahoo? i. 240.

 Yá Jáhil = O ignorant, ix. 52.

 Yá Kawwád = O pimp, v. 129.

 Yá Khálatí = O mother’s sister, in addressing the old, i. 303.

 Yá Khawand = O Master, vii. 315.

 Yá Khwájah = O Master, viii. 18.

 Yá Kisrawi = O subject of the Kisrà, v. 26.

 Yá layta = would to heaven, viii. 48.

 Yá Ma’ashar al-Muslimín = Ho Moslems! iv. 149.

 Yá Mashúm = O unlucky one, i. 221.

 Yá Mauláya = O, my lord, ix. 228.

 Yá Miskín = O poor devil, vi. 219.

 Yá Mumátil = O Slow o’ Pay, viii. 169.

 Yá Nasrání = O Nazarene, iv. 199.

 Yá Sáki ’al-Dakan = O frosty-beard, v. 99.

 Yá Sáki ’al-Wajh = O false face, vii. 353.

 Yá Salám = O safety (a vulgar ejaculation), viii. 98.

 Yá Sátir = O veiler (of sins), iii. 41.

 Yá Sattár = O Thou who veilest the discreditable secrets of Thy
    creatures, i. 258.

 Yá Shátir = O clever one! (in a bad sense), iv. 209.

 Yá Shukayr = O little Tulip, viii. 168.

 Yá Taljí = O snowy one, iii. 40.

 Yá Tayyib al-Khál = O thou nephew of a good uncle, i. 303.

 Yá Ustá (for Ustáz) = O my master, vii. 192.

 Yá Wadúd = O loving one, iv. 54.

 Yá Sín (heart of the Koran, chapt. xxxvi.), iv. 50.

 Ya’arub (eponymus of an Oman tribe), vi. 260; vii. 25.

 Yáfis, Yáfat = Japhet, vii. 40.

 Yaftah Alláh = Allah will open, an offer being insufficient, ii. 149.

 Yahúdí for Jew, less polite than Banú Isráil, i. 210.

 Yají miat khwánjah = near a hundred chargers, vii. 345.

 Yájúj and Májúj, v. 318.

 Yakhní = stew, broth, vii. 186.

 Yákút = ruby, garnet, etc., v. 342.

 Yaman (Al-) = right-hand region, ii. 179.

 —— (lightning on the hills of), ii. 179.

 Yásamín = Jessamine (name of a slave-girl), viii. 176.

 Yashmak (chin-veil for women), ii. 31.

 Yasrib (ancient name of Al-Medínah), iv. 114.

 Yastaghíbúní = they take advantage of my absence, ix. 224.

 Yauh (conversationally Yehh) expression of astonishment, ii. 321.

 Yauh! Yauh! = Alas! vi. 235.

 Yathrib (old name of Al-Medinah), ix. 177, _see_ Yasrib.

 Yaum al-Íd = the great festival, i. 317.

 Yaum al-Tanádí = Resurrection Day, iii. 74.

 Yaum-i-Alast = Day of “am-I-not” (your Lord)? ii. 91.

 Yaum mubárak = a blessed day, vi. 215.

 Yellow girl (for light-coloured wine), x. 39.

 Yes, Yes! and No, No! trifles common amongst the Arabs, ii. 60; ix.
    250.

 Youth described in terms applying to women, i. 144.

 Yohanná = John, iv. 87.

 Yuhanná (Greek Physician), v. 154.

 Yúnán Yúnáníyah = Greece, ii. 82; iv. 100.

 Yúsuf bin Omar, ii. 170.

 Yúsuf (Grand Vizier, and his pelisse), vii. 323.


 Za’ar = a man with fair skin, red hair and blue eyes (Marocco), viii.
    297.

 Zabbah = lizard; bolt, vi. 247; vii. 182.

 Zabbál = dung-drawer, etc., i. 312; iii. 51.

 Zábít = Prefect of Police, i. 259.

 Zabiyah (Pr. N.) = roe, doe, v. 147.

 Zaffú (in the sense of “they displayed her”), ix. 245.

 Zaghab = the chick’s down, v. 165.

 Zaghzaghán (Abú Massáh = Father of the Sweeper), = magpie, vi. 182.

 Záhir bi ’llah (Al-) = one prominent by the decree of Allah, i. 317.

 Záhirí = plain honest Moslem, ii. 29.

 Zahra = the flowery, vi. 145.

 Zahr Sháh (Pr. N.), ii. 284.

 Zahrawíyah = lovely as the Venus-star, viii. 251.

 Zahwah = mid-time between sunrise and noon, vi. 35.

 Záka = he tasted, iv. 188.

 Zakar (penis) = that which betokens masculinity, iii. 3.

 Zakariyá and Zakar, iv. 51.

 Zakát = legal alms, i. 339.

 Zakhmah (Zukhmah) = strap, stirrup-leather, viii. 18.

 Zakkúm (Al-) tree of Hell, iv. 259.

 Zakzúk = young of the Shál, viii. 185.

 Zalábiyah bi- ’Asal = honey-fritters, vii. 164.

 Zalamah (Al-) = tyrants, oppressors (police and employés), i. 273; vi.
    214.

 Zalzál, son of Muzalzil = Earthquake, son of Ennosigaius, vii. 79.

 Zambúr = clitoris, i. 90; v. 279.

 Zamiyád = guardian angel of Bihisht, _see_ Rizwán, iii. 20, 233.

 Zanab Sirhán (wolf’s tail) = early dawn, iii. 146.

 Zand and Zandah = fire-sticks, v. 52.

 Zanj = negroes of Zanzibar, ii. 5; vi. 104.

 Zanzibar (cannibals etc.), iv. 168.

 Zarábín = slaves’ shoes, x. 1.

 Zarbu ’l-Nawákísí = striking of gongs (pun on the word), viii. 329.

 Zardah = rice dressed with honey and saffron, ii. 313; vii. 185.

 Zardakhánah = Zarad (Ar. for hauberk), Khanáh (Pers. for house), vii.
    363.

 Zarká = the blue-eyed (Cassandre of Yamámah), ii. 103.

 Zarr wa ’urwah = button and button-hole, v. 227.

 Zarráf = giraffe, vii. 51.

 Zarrat (vulg. Durrah) = co-wife, sister-wife, iii. 308.

 Zát al-Dawáhí = Lady of Calamities, ii. 87.

 Zau al-Makán = Light of the Place, ii. 81.

 Zaurà = the crooked, for woman, v. 66.

 Zaurá (Al-) = the bow (name of Baghdad), ix. 13.

 Zawí al-furúj = habentes rimam, ii. 49.

 Záwiyah = oratory, vi. 259; vii. 328.

 Zaybak (Al-) = the quicksilver, iv. 75.

 Zayn al-Abidín (grandson of Ali), ii. 202.

 Zayn al-Mawásif (Pr. N.) = Adornment of (good) qualities, viii. 205.

 Zaynab and Zayd (generic names for women and men), ix. 250.

 Zebra (daughter of Sa’adah), iii. 65.

 Zemzem (its water saltish), i. 284; ii. 272.

 Zí’ah = village, hamlet, farm, ix. 27.

 Zibl = dung, iii. 51.

 Zibl Khán = Le Roi Crotte, iii. 99.

 Zidd = opposite, contrary, v. 206.

 Zikr = litanies, i. 124.

 —— (and Edwin Arnold’s Pearls of Faith), ii. 28.

 Zimbíl (Zambíl) = limp basket of palm-leaves, iv. 119.

 Zimmí = a (Christian, Jewish or Majúsí) tributary, iv. 199.

 Zinád = fire-sticks, viii. 80.

 Zindík = Agnostic, atheist, v. 230; viii. 27.

 Zirbájah = meat dressed with cumin-seed, etc., i. 278.

 Zirt = broken wind; derivatives, ii. 88; ix. 291.

 Ziyád bin Abí Sufyán, ii. 163.

 Ziyárat = visit to a pious person or place, i. 125.

 —— = visiting the Prophet’s tomb, ix. 178.

 Zobabah (Zauba’ah?) = sand-storm in the desert, i. 114.

 Zú al-Autád = the contriver of the stakes (Pharaoh), vi. 118.

 Zú al-Kurá’a (Pr. N.) = Lord of cattle feet, iv. 95.

 Zubaydah (Pr. N.) = creamkin, iv. 48; viii. 56, 158.

 Zubb = penis, i. 92.

 “Zug” (draught) feared by Orientals, ii. 9.

 Zuhal = Saturn, ii. 75.

 Zuhrí (Al-), traditionist, ii. 198; v. 81.

 Zujáj bikr = unworked glass, viii. 342.

 Zukák al-Nakíb = Syndic street, ii. 325.

 Zukhruf = glitter, tinsel, ix. 86.

 Zulf = side-lock, i. 308.

 Zulm, injustice, tyranny; worst of a monarch’s crimes, i. 190.

 Zunnár = ζωνάριον confounded with the “Janeo,” ii. 215.

 Zur ghibban tazid hubban = call rarely that friendship last fairly, ix.
    273.

 Zurayk (dim. of Azrak = blue-eyed), viii. 195.

 Zurk = blue-eyed, dim-sighted, purblind, vii. 164.

 Zuwaylah gate, more correctly Báb Zawilah i. 269.


                            _INDEX III._—A.
   _ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF FIRST LINES (METRICAL PORTION) IN ENGLISH._

                      _Prepared by_ DR. STEINGASS.

 A beloved familiar o’erreigns my heart, viii. 70.

 A boy of twice ten is fit for a king!, iii. 303.

 A breeze of love on my soul did blow, viii. 222.

 A damsel ’twas the tirer’s art had decked with snares and sleight, i.
    219; x. 59.

 A dancer whose figure is like a willow-branch, ix. 222.

 A dancer whose form is like branch of Bán!, ix. 221.

 A dog, dog-fathered, by dog-grandsire bred, viii. 15.

 A fan whose breath is fraught with fragrant scent, viii. 273.

 A fair one, to idolaters if she her face should show, ix. 197.

 A friend in need is he who, ever true, iii. 149.

 A guest hath stolen on my head and honour may he lack, viii. 295.

 A hag to whom th’ unlawful lawfullest, i. 174.

 A heart bore thee off in chase of the fair, ix. 282.

 A heart by Allah! never soft to loverwight, vii. 222.

 A Houri, by whose charms my heart is moved to sore distress, vii. 105.

 A house where flowers from stones of granite grow, iii. 19.

 A Jinniyah this, with her Jinn, to show, v. 149.

 A King who when hosts of the foe invade, ii. 1.

 A lutanist to us inclined, viii. 283.

 A maiden ’twas, the dresser’s art had decked with cunning sleight,
    viii. 32.

 A merchant I spied whose lovers, viii. 264.

 A messenger from thee came bringing union-hope, iii. 188.

 A moon she rises, willow-wand she waves, iii. 237; viii. 303.

 A moon, when he bends him those eyes lay bare, viii. 284.

 A moon which blights you if you dare behold, ii. 4.

 A night whose stars refused to run their course, iii. 299.

 A palace whereon be blessings and praise, iv. 134.

 A place secure from every thought of fear, i. 114.

 A sage, I feel a fool before thy charms, iii. 272.

 A slave of slaves there standeth at thy door, i. 89.

 A sun on wand in knoll of sand she showed, i. 217; x. 58.

 A thin-waist maid who shames the willow-wand, ii. 285.

 A term decreed my lot I ’spy, viii. 83.

 A trifle this an his eyes be sore, v. 127.

 A tree whilere was I the Bulbul’s home, viii. 281.

 A wand uprising from a sandy knoll, ix. 250.

 A warrior showing such open hand, iv. 97.

 A wasted body, heart empierced to core, ii. 314.

 A youth slim waisted from whose locks and brow, i. 68.

 A zephyr bloweth from the lover’s site, viii. 90.

 Above the rose of cheek is thorn of lance, iii. 331.

 Act on sure grounds, nor hurry fast, iv. 189.

 Add other wit to thy wit, counsel craving, iv. 189.

 Affright me funerals at every time, v. 111.

 After thy faring never chanced I ’spy, viii. 142.

 Ah, fare thee not; for I’ve no force thy faring to endure, viii. 63.

 Ah! for lowe of love and longing suffer ye as suffer we?, viii. 68.

 Ah Khalid! this one is a slave of love distraught, iv. 158.

 Ah, often have I sought the fair! how often lief and fain, vii. 138.

 Alack and alas! Patience taketh flight, viii. 263.

 Alas, alack and wellaway for blamer’s calumny!, viii. 285.

 Albe by me I had through day and night, iii. 267.

 Albe to lover adverse be his love, iii. 266.

 Albeit my vitals quiver ’neath this ban, iii. 62.

 Alexandria’s a frontier, viii. 289.

 All crafts are like necklaces strung on a string, i. 308.

 All drinks wherein is blood the Law unclean Doth hold, i. 89.

 All sons of woman albe long preserved, iv. 63.

 “Allah assain those eyne! What streams of blood they shed!,” ii. 100.

 Allah be good to him that gives glad tidings of thy steps, i. 239.

 Allah holds Kingship! Whoso seeks without Him victory, iii. 86.

 Allah, my patience fails: I have no word, iii. 344.

 Allah save the rose which yellows amorn, viii. 276.

 Allah, where’er thou be, His aid impart, ii. 148.

 Allah’s peace on thee, House of Vacancy!, viii. 237.

 Although the Merciful be doubtless with me, ix. 278.

 Al-Yaman’s leven-gleam I see, ii. 179.

 An but the house could know who cometh ’twould rejoice, i. 176.

 An, by thy life, pass thee my funeral train, v. 70.

 An fail I of my thanks to thee, i. 56.

 An Fate afflict thee, with grief manifest, viii. 146.

 An Fate some person ’stablish o’er thy head, iii. 89.

 An faulty of one fault the beauty prove, ii. 96.

 An I be healed of disease in frame, viii. 70.

 An I quit Cairo and her pleasaunces, i. 290.

 An we behold a lover love-foredone, v. 73.

 An my palm be full of wealth and my wealth I ne’er bestow, ii. 11.

 An say I:—Patient I can bear his faring, iii. 187.

 An tears of blood for me, friend, thou hast shed, i. 89.

 An there be one who shares with me her love, i. 180.

 An thou but deign consent, A wish to heart affied, iv. 247.

 An thou of pious works a store neglect, ii. 202.

 An thou wouldst know my name, whose day is done, vi. 94.

 An through the whole of life, iv. 190.

 An Time my lover restore me I’ll blame him fain, ix. 192.

 An were it asked me when by hell-fire burnt, iii. 279.

 An what thou claimest were the real truth, v. 151.

 An wouldst be life-long safe, vaunt not delight, viii. 94.

 And Almond apricot suggesting swain, viii. 268.

 And dweller in the tomb whose food is at his head, v. 238.

 And eater lacking mouth and even maw, v. 240.

 And fairest Fawn, we said to him Portray, viii. 272.

 And haply whenas strait descends on lot of generous youth, iii. 131.

 And in brunettes is mystery, couldst thou but read it right, iv. 258.

 And in my liver higher flames the fire, vii. 366.

 And loveling weareth on his cheek a mole, v. 65.

 And pity one who erst in honour throve, ii. 149.

 And shaddock mid the garden paths, on bough, viii. 272.

 And Solomon, when Allah to him said, vi. 86.

 And the lips of girls, that are perfume sweet, v. 79.

 And the old man crept o’er the worldly ways, iv. 41.

 And trees of orange fruiting ferly fair, viii. 271.

 And wand-like Houri who can passion heal, v. 149.

 And ’ware her scorpions when pressing them, viii. 209.

 And when birdies o’er-warble its lakelet, it gars, ix. 6.

 And, when she announceth the will to sing, viii. 166.

 Albeit this thy case lack all resource, v. 69.

 Allah watered a land, and upsprang a tree, v. 244.

 Answer, by Allah! Sepulchre, are all his beauties gone?, i. 239.

 Appeared not my excuse till hair had clothed his cheek, iii. 57.

 Apple which joins hues twain and brings to mind, viii. 268.

 Apple whose hue combines in union mellow, i. 158.

 As a crescent-moon in the garth her form, viii. 207.

 As for me, of him I feel naught affright, vi. 98.

 As long as palms shall shift the flower, v. 136.

 As love waxt longer less met we tway, v. 78.

 As one of you who mounted mule, viii. 297.

 As she willed she was made, and in such a way that when, iv. 191.

 As the Sage watched the stars, the semblance clear, i. 206.

 As though ptisane of wine on her lips honey dew, iii. 57.

 Ask (if needs thou ask) the compassionate, ix. 29.

 Ask of my writ, what wrote my pen in dole, iii. 274.

 Ass and Umm Amr’ went their way, v. 118.


 Bare hills and camp-ground desolate, v. 130.

 Baulks me my Fate as tho’ she were my foe, viii. 130.

 Be as thou wilt, for Allah is bountiful, viii. 277.

 Be as thou wilt, for Allah still is bounteous Lord, ii. 202.

 Be mild to brother mingling, iv. 110.

 Be mild what time thou’rt ta’en with anger and despite, iv. 221.

 Be mild when rage shall come to afflict thy soul, iv. 54.

 Be praises mine to all-praiseworthy Thee, ii. 261.

 Be proud; I’ll crouch! Bully; I’ll bear! Despise; I’ll pray!, iii. 188.

 Be sure all are villains and so bide safe, iii. 142.

 Bear our salams, O Dove, from this our stead, viii. 236.

 Beareth for love a burden sore this soul of me, viii. 66.

 Beauty they brought with him to make compare, i. 144.

 Beguiled as Fortune who her guile displays, iv. 22.

 Behind the veil a damsel sits with gracious beauty dight, viii. 210.

 Behold a house that’s like the Dwelling of Delight, viii. 183.

 Behold this lovely garden! ’tis as though, ii. 240.

 Belike my Fortune may her bridle turn, i. 152.

 Belike Who Yúsuf to his kin restored, iv. 103.

 Beloved, why this strangeness, why this hate?, iv. 234.

 Bethink thee not of worldly state, iii. 328.

 Bid thou thy phantom distance keep, vii. 108.

 Better ye ’bide and I take my leave, i. 154.

 Beware her glance I rede thee ’tis like wizard wight, ii. 295.

 Beware of losing hearts of men by thine injurious deed, x. 50.

 Beware that eye-glance which hath magic might, iii. 252.

 Black girls in acts are white, and ’tis as though, iv. 251.

 Black girls not white are they, iv. 251.

 Blame not! said I to all who blamèd me, viii. 95.

 Blest be his beauty; blest the Lord’s decree, i. 177.

 Blighted by her yet am I not to blame, viii. 255.

 Blows from my lover’s land a zephyr cooly sweet, ii. 311.

 Boon fortune sought him in humblest way, viii. 301.

 Boy-like of back side, in the deed of kind, v. 157,

 Breeze of East who bringest me gentle air, vii. 122.

 Brighter than moon at full with kohl’d eyes she came, viii. 279.

 Bring gold and gear an a lover thou, viii. 214.

 By Allah, by th’ Almighty, by his right, vii. 366.

 By Allah, couldst thou but feel my pain, v. 77.

 By Allah, glance of mine, thou hast opprest, vii. 140.

 By Allah, heal, O my lords, the unwhole, viii. 144.

 By Allah, O thou house, if my beloved amorn go by, v. 38.

 By Allah, O tomb, have her beauties ceased, viii. 168.

 By Allah, set thy foot upon my soul, i. 222.

 By Allah this is th’ only alchemy, x. 40.

 By Allah! while the days endure ne’er shall forget her I, iv. 146.

 By Allah, wine shall not disturb me, while this soul of mine, iv. 190.

 By craft and sleight I snared him when he came, ii. 44.

 By his cheeks’ unfading damask and his smiling teeth I swear, viii.
    282.

 By his eyelash tendril curled, by his slender waist I swear, iii. 217.

 By his eyelids shedding perfume and his fine slim waist I swear, i.
    168.

 By His life who holds my guiding rein, I swear, iv. 2.

 By Love’s right! naught of farness thy slave can estrange, viii. 76.

 By means of toil man shall scale the height, vi. 5.

 By rights of you, this heart of mine could ne’er aby, viii. 110.

 By stress of parting, O beloved one, iii. 166.

 By th’ Abyssinian Pond, O day divine!, i. 291.

 By the Compassionate, I’m dazed about my case, for lo!, vii. 337.

 By the Five Shayks, O Lord, I pray deliver me, iii. 30.

 By the life o’ thy face, O thou life o’ my sprite!, viii. 284.

 By what thine eyelids show of kohl and coquetry!, ii. 296.


 Came a merchant to pay us a visit, viii. 265.

 Came Rayya’s phantom to grieve thy sight, vii. 91.

 Came the writ whose contents a new joy revealed, viii. 222.

 Came to match him in beauty and loveliness rare, viii. 298.

 Came to me care when came the love of thee, vii. 366.

 Came your writ to me in the dead of the night, ix. 2.

 Captured me six all bright with youthful blee, iv. 260.

 Carry the trust of him whom death awaits, v. 114.

 Cease then to blame me, for thy blame doth anger bring, x. 39.

 Cease ye this farness; ’bate this pride of you, iv. 136.

 Chide not the mourner for bemourning woe, iii. 291.

 Choice rose that gladdens heart to see her sight, viii. 275.

 Clear’s the wine, the cup’s fine, i. 349.

 Cleave fast to her thou lovest and let the envious rail amain, iv. 198.

 Close prest appear to him who views th’ inside, viii. 267.

 Clove through the shades and came to me in night so dark and sore, vii.
    138.

 Come back and so will I! i. 63.

 Come with us, friend, and enter thou, viii. 267.

 Confide thy case to Him, the Lord who made mankind, i. 68.

 Consider but thy Lord, His work shall bring, viii. 20.

 Consider thou, O man, what these places to thee showed, vi. 112.

 Console thy lover, fear no consequence, v. 74.

 Consort not with the Cyclops e’en a day, iv. 194.

 Containeth time a twain of days, i. 25.

 Converse with men hath scanty weal except, iv. 188.

 Count not that I your promises forgot, iii. 238.

 Cut short this strangeness, leave unruth of you, v. 245.

 Culvers of Liwa! to your nests return, vii. 115.


 Dark falls the night: my tears unaided rail, iii. 11.

 Dark falls the night and passion comes sore pains to gar me dree, ii.
    140.

 Daughter of nobles, who thine aim shalt gain, v. 54.

 Dawn heralds daylight: so wine pass round, viii. 276.

 Dear friend! ah leave thy loud reproach and blame, iii. 110.

 Dear friend, ask not what burneth in my breast, i. 265.

 Dear friend, my tears aye flow these cheeks adown, iii. 14.

 Deep in mine eyeballs ever dwells the phantom form of thee, viii. 61.

 Deign grant thy favours; since ’tis time I were engraced, v. 148.

 Describe me! a fair one said, viii. 265.

 Did Azzah deal behest to sun o’ noon, ii. 102.

 Did not in love-plight joys and sorrows meet, iii. 182.

 Dip thou with spoons in saucers four and gladden heart and eye, viii.
    223.

 Displaying that fair face, iv. 195.

 Divinely were inspired his words who brought me news of you, iv. 207.

 Do you threaten me wi’ death for my loving you so well?, vii. 221.

 Drain not the bowl, save from dear hand like thine, i. 88.

 Drain not the bowl but with lovely wight, viii. 209.

 Drain not the bowl save with a trusty friend, i. 88.

 Drawn in thy shoulders are and spine thrust out, viii. 297.

 Drink not pure wine except from hand of slender youth, ix. 198.

 Drink not strong wine save at the slender dearling’s hand, v. 66.

 Drink not upon thy food in haste but wait awhile, v. 222.

 Drink the clear draught, drink free and fain, i. 88.

 Drive off the ghost that ever shows, vii. 109.

 Dumb is my tongue and scant my speech for thee, viii. 258.


 Each portion of her charms we see, vii. 131.

 Each thing of things hath his appointed tide, v. 294.

 Easy, O Fate! how long this wrong, this injury, iii. 329.

 Eight glories meet, all, all conjoined in thee, iii. 271.

 Enough for lovers in this world their ban and bane, iv. 205.

 Enough of tears hath shed the loverwight, iii. 206.

 Enrobes with honour sands of camp her foot-step wandering lone, iv.
    204.

 Escape with thy life if oppression betide thee, i. 209.

 Even not beardless one with girl, nor heed, iii. 303.

 Ever thy pomp and pride, O House! display, viii. 207.


 Face that with Sol in Heaven lamping vies, iii. 167.

 Fain had I hid thy handwork, but it showed, iii. 280.

 Fain leaving life that fleets thou hast th’ eternal won, ii. 281.

 Fair youth shall die by stumbling of the tongue, iii. 221.

 Familiar with my heart are woes and with them I, vii. 340.

 Far is the fane and patience faileth me, v. 41.

 Fare safely, Masrúr! an her sanctuary, viii. 237.

 Farewell thy love, for see, the Cafilah’s on the move, iv. 254.

 Farewelling thee indeed is like to bidding life farewell, viii. 62.

 Fate the wolf’s soul snatched up from worldly stead, iii. 146.

 Fate frights us when the thing is past and gone, iii. 318.

 Fate hath commanded I become thy fere, iii. 312.

 Fie on this wretched world an so it be, i. 40.

 Fight for my mother (an I live) I’ll take, ii. 239.

 Fire is cooler than fires in my breast, iv. 245.

 Fly, fly with life whenas evils threat, vi. 62.

 Fly, fly with thy life if by ill overtaken, ii. 19.

 Folk have made moan of passion before me, of past years, viii. 65.

 For cup friends cup succeeding cup assign, v. 66.

 For eaters a table they brought and set, viii. 208.

 For her sins is a pleader that brow, ii. 97.

 For joys that are no more I want to weep, iii. 185.

 For Layla’s favour dost thou greed?, iii. 135.

 For loss of lover mine and stress of love I dree, viii. 75.

 For not a deed the hand can try, v. 188.

 For others these hardships and labours I bear, i. 17.

 For your love my patience fails, i. 74.

 Forbear, O troubles of the world, i. 39.

 Forgive me, thee-ward sinned I, but the wise, ii. 9.

 Forgive the sin ’neath which my limbs are trembling, iii. 249.

 Fortune had mercy on the soul of me, iii. 135.

 Fortune had ruth upon my plight, viii. 50.

 Four things that meet not, save they here unite, i. 116.

 Four things which ne’er conjoin, unless it be, iii. 237.

 Freest am I of all mankind fro’ meddling wight, ii. 200.

 Fro’ them inhale I scent of Attar of Bán, viii. 242.

 From her hair is night, from her forehead noon, viii. 303.

 From Love-stupor awake, O Masrur, ’twere best, viii. 214.

 From that liberal hand on his foes he rains, iv. 97.

 From the plain of his face springs a minaret, viii. 296.

 From wine I turn and whoso wine-cups swill, i. 208.

 Full many a reverend Shaykh feels sting of flesh, v. 64.

 Full many laugh at tears they see me shed, iii. 193.

 Full moon if unfreckled would favour thee, iv. 19.

 Full moon with sun in single mansion, i. 264.


 Gainsay women; he obeyeth Allah best, who saith them nay, ix. 282.

 Garb of Fakir, renouncement, lowliness, v. 297.

 Garth Heaven-watered wherein clusters waved, viii. 266.

 Get thee provaunt in this world ere thou wend upon thy way, ii. 139.

 Give back mine eyes their sleep long ravished, i. 99.

 Give me brunettes, so limber, lissom, lithe of sway, iv. 258.

 Give me brunettes; the Syrian spears so limber and so straight, viii.
    158.

 Give me the Fig sweet-flavoured, beauty clad, viii. 269.

 Give thou my message twice, iii. 166.

 Gladsome and gay forget thine every grief, i. 57.

 Glory to Him who guides the skies, vii. 78.

 Gnostic’s heart-homèd in the heavenly Garth, v. 264.

 Go, gossip! re-wed thee, for Prime draweth near, v. 135.

 Go, visit her thou lovest, and regard not, iii. 235; viii. 305.

 God make thy glory last in joy of life, viii. 99.

 Gone is my strength, told is my tale of days, iii. 55.

 Goodly of gifts is she, and charm those perfect eyes, iii. 57.

 Granados of finest skin, like the breasts, viii. 267.

 Grant me the kiss of that left hand ten times, iv. 129.

 Grape-bunches likest as they sway, viii. 266.

 Grapes tasting with the taste of wine, viii. 266.

 Grief, cark and care in my heart reside, iv. 19.

 Grow thy weal and thy welfare day by day, i. 204.


 Had I known of love in what fashion he, vii. 330.

 Had I wept before she did in my passion for Su’ada, vii. 275.

 Had she shown her shape to idolator’s sight, viii. 279.

 Hadst thou been leal in love’s loyalty, iii. 77.

 Had we known of thy coming we fain had dispread, i. 117.

 Had we wist of thy coming, thy way had been strown, i. 271.

 Haply and happily may Fortune bend her rein, viii. 67.

 Haply shall Allah deign us twain unite, viii. 141.

 Haply shall Fortune draw her rein, iii. 251.

 Happy is Eloquence when thou art named, i. 47.

 Hast quit the love of Moons or dost persist?, iv. 240.

 Hast seen a Citron-copse so weighed adown, viii. 272.

 Haste to do kindness thou dost intend, iv. 181.

 Haste to do kindness while thou hast the power, iii. 136.

 Have the doves that moan in the lotus-tree, vii. 91.

 He blames me for casting on him my sight, viii. 283.

 He came and cried they, Now be Allah blest!, iii. 215.

 He came in sable hued sacque, iv. 263.

 He came to see me, hiding ’neath the shirt of night, iv. 252.

 He comes; and fawn and branch and moon delight these eyne, iv. 142.

 He cometh robed and bending gracefully, ii. 287.

 He heads his arrows with piles of gold, iv. 97.

 He is Caliph of Beauty in Yusuf’s lieu, ii. 292.

 He is gone who when to this gate thou go’st, ii. 14.

 He is to thee that daily bread thou canst nor loose nor bind, i. 39.

 He’ll offer sweetmeats with his edgèd tongue, iii. 115.

 He made me drain his wine of honeyed lips, v. 72.

 He missed not who dubbed thee, “World’s delight,” v. 33.

 He pluckt fruits of her necklace in rivalry, ii. 103.

 He prayeth and he fasteth for an end he doth espy, ii. 264.

 He seized my heart and freed my tears to flow, viii. 259.

 He showed in garb anemone-red, iv. 263.

 He thou trustedst most is thy worst unfriend, iii. 143.

 He whom the randy motts entrap, iii. 216.

 Hearkening, obeying, with my dying mouth, ii. 321.

 Heavy and swollen like an urine-bladder blown, iv. 236.

 Her fair shape ravisheth, if face to face she did appear, v. 192.

 Her fore-arms, dight with their bangles, show, v. 89.

 Her golden yellow is the sheeny sun’s, iv. 257.

 Her lip-dews rival honey-sweets, that sweet virginity, viii. 33.

 Her smiles twin rows of pearls display, i. 86.

 Here! Here! by Allah, here! Cups of the sweet, the dear!, i. 89.

 Here the heart reads a chapter of devotion pure, iii. 18.

 Hind is an Arab filly purest bred, vii. 97.

 His cheek-down writeth (O fair fall the goodly scribe!), ii. 301.

 His cheek-down writeth on his cheek with ambergris on pearl, ii. 301.

 His eyelids sore and bleared, viii. 297.

 His face as the face of the young moon shines, i. 177.

 His honey-dew of lips is wine; his breath, iv. 195.

 His looks have made me drunken, not his wine, iii. 166.

 His lovers said, Unless he deign to give us all a drink, viii. 285.

 His lovers’ souls have drawn upon his cheek, iii. 58.

 His mole upon plain of cheek is like, viii. 265.

 His scent was musk and his cheek was rose, i. 203.

 Ho, lovers all! by Allah say me fair and sooth, ii. 309.

 Ho, lovers all! by Allah say me sooth, ii. 320.

 Ho say to men of wisdom, wit and lere, v. 239.

 Ho thou, Abrizah, mercy! leave me not for I, ii. 127.

 Ho, those heedless of Time and his sore despight!, vii. 221.

 Ho thou hound who art rotten with foulness in grain, iii. 108.

 Ho thou lion who broughtest thyself to woe, vii. 123.

 Ho thou my letter! when my friend shall see thee, iv. 57.

 Ho thou o’ the tabret, my heart takes flight, viii. 166.

 Ho thou the House! Grief never home in thee, viii. 206.

 Ho thou, the house, whose birds were singing gay, v. 57.

 Ho thou who grovellest low before the great, ii. 235.

 Ho thou, who past and bygone risks regardest with uncare!, iii. 28.

 Ho thou whose heart is melted down by force of Amor’s fire, v. 132.

 Ho ye mine eyes let prodigal tears go free, iv. 248.

 Ho ye my friends draw near, for I forthright, viii. 258.

 Hola, thou mansion! woe ne’er enter thee, iv. 140.

 Hold fast thy secret and to none unfold, i. 87.

 Hold to nobles, sons of nobles, ii. 2.

 Honour and glory wait on thee each morn, iv. 60.

 Hope not of our favours to make thy prey, viii. 208.

 Houris and high-born Dames who feel no fear of men, v. 148.

 How bitter to friends is a parting, iv. 222.

 How comes it that I fulfilled my vow the while that vow brake you?, iv.
    241.

 How dear is our day and how lucky our lot, i. 293.

 How fair is ruth the strong man deigns not smother, i. 103.

 How good is Almond green I view, viii. 270.

 How is this? Why should the blamer abuse thee in his pride, iii. 232.

 How joyously sweet are the nights that unite, v. 61.

 How long, rare beauty! wilt do wrong to me, ii. 63.

 How long shall I thy coyness and thy great aversion see, iv. 242.

 How long shall last, how long this rigour rife of woe, i. 101.

 How long this harshness, this unlove shall bide?, i. 78.

 How manifold nights have I passed with my wife, x. 1.

 How many a blooming bough in glee-girls hand is fain, viii. 166.

 How many a joy by Allah’s will hath fled, i. 150.

 How many a lover with his eyebrows speaketh, i. 122.

 How many a night have I spent in woes, ix. 316.

 How many a night I’ve passed with the beloved of me, iv. 252.

 How many boons conceals the Deity, v. 261.

 How many by my labours, that evermore endure, vi. 2.

 How oft bewailing the place shall be this coming and going, viii. 242.

 How oft have I fought and how many have slain!, vi. 91.

 How oft in the mellay I’ve cleft the array, ii. 109.

 How patient bide, with love in sprite of me, iv. 136.

 How shall he taste of sleep who lacks repose, viii. 49.

 How shall youth cure the care his life undo’th, ii. 320.

 Hunger is sated with a bone-dry scone, iv. 201.

 Hurry not, Prince of Faithful Men! with best of grace thy vow, vii.
    128.


 I am he who is known on the day of fight, vi. 262.

 I am distraught, yet verily, i. 138.

 I am going, O mammy, to fill up my pot, i. 311.

 I am not lost to prudence, but indeed, ii. 98.

 I am taken: my heart burns with living flame, viii. 225.

 I am the wone where mirth shall ever smile, i. 175.

 I am when friend would raise a rage that mote, iv. 109.

 I and my love in union were unite, viii. 247.

 I ask of you from every rising sun, i. 238.

 I asked of Bounty, “Art thou free?,” v. 93.

 I asked the author of mine ills, ii. 60.

 I bade adieu, my right hand wiped my tears away, ii. 113.

 I attained by my wits, x. 44.

 I bear a hurt heart, who will sell me for this, vii. 115.

 I call to mind the parting day that rent our loves in twain, viii. 125.

 I can’t forget him, since he rose and showed with fair design, ix. 253.

 I ceased not to kiss that cheek with budding roses dight, viii. 329.

 I clipt his form and wax’d drunk with his scent, ii. 292.

 I came to my dear friends door, of my hopes the goal, v. 58.

 I craved of her a kiss one day, but soon as she beheld, iv. 192.

 I cried, as the camels went off with them, viii. 63.

 I’d win good will of everyone, but whoso envies me, ix. 342.

 I deemed my brethren mail of strongest steel, i. 108.

 I deemed you coat-o’-mail that should withstand, i. 108.

 I die my death, but He alone is great who dieth not, ii. 9.

 I drank the sin till my reason fled, v. 224.

 I drink, but the draught of his glance, not wine, i. 100.

 I drooped my glance when seen thee on the way, iii. 331.

 I dyed what years have dyed, but this my staining, v. 164.

 I embrace him, yet after him yearns my soul, ix. 242.

 I’ve lost all patience by despite of you, i. 280.

 I ever ask for news of you from whatso breezes pass, viii. 53.

 I feed eyes on their stead by the valley’s side, iii. 234.

 I fix my glance on her, whene’er she wends, viii. 158.

 I fly the carper’s injury, ii. 183.

 I gave her brave old wine that like her cheeks blushed red, i. 89.

 I had a heart and with it lived my life, v. 131.

 I have a friend with a beard, viii. 298.

 I have a friend who hath a beard, iv. 194.

 I have a friend, whose form is fixed within mine eyes, iv. 246.

 I have a froward yard of temper ill, viii. 293.

 I have a lover and when drawing him, iv. 247.

 I have a sorrel steed, whose pride is fain to bear the rein, ii. 225.

 I have borne for thy love what never bore, iii. 183.

 I have fared content in my solitude, iii. 152.

 I have no words though folk would have me talk, ix. 276.

 I have won my wish and my need have scored, vii. 59.

 I have wronged mankind, and have ranged like wind, iii. 74.

 I have a yard that sleeps in base and shameful way, viii. 293.

 I have sorrowed on account of our disunion, viii. 128.

 I heard a ringdove chanting plaintively, v. 47.

 I hid what I endured of him and yet it came to light, i. 67.

 I hope for union with my love which I may ne’er obtain, viii. 347.

 I kissed him: darker grew those pupils, which, iii. 224.

 I lay in her arms all night, leaving him, v. 128.

 I’ll ransom that beauty-spot with my soul, v. 65.

 I long once more the love that was between us to regain, viii. 181.

 I longed for him I love; but, when we met, viii. 347.

 I longed for my beloved but when I saw his face, i. 240.

 I look to my money and keep it with care, ii. 11.

 I looked at her one look and that dazed me, ix. 197.

 I looked on her with longing eyne, v. 76.

 I love a fawn with gentle white-black eyes, iv. 50.

 I love a moon of comely shapely form, viii. 259.

 I love her madly for she is perfect fair, vii. 265.

 I love not black girls but because they show, iv. 251.

 I love not white girls blown with fat who puff and pant, iv. 252.

 I love Su’ád and unto all but her my love is dead, vii. 129.

 I love the nights of parting though I joy not in the same, ix. 198.

 I loved him, soon as his praise I heard, vii. 280.

 I’m Al-Kurajan, and my name is known, vii. 20.

 I’m estranged fro’ my folk and estrangement’s long, iii. 71.

 I’m Kurajan, of this age the Knight, vii. 23.

 I’m the noted Knight in the field of fight, vii. 18.

 I made my wrist her pillow and I lay with her in litter, vii. 243.

 I marvel at its pressers, how they died, x. 39.

 I marvel hearing people questioning, ii. 293.

 I marvel in Iblis such pride to see, vii. 139.

 I marvel seeing yon mole, ii. 292.

 I mind our union days when ye were nigh, vi. 278.

 I number nights; indeed I count night after night, ii. 308.

 I offered this weak hand as last farewell, iii. 173.

 I passed a beardless pair without compare, v. 64.

 I past by a broken tomb amid a garth right sheen, ii. 325.

 I plunge with my braves in the seething sea, vii. 18.

 I pray in Allah’s name, O Princess mine, be light on me, iv. 241.

 I pray some day that we reunion gain, iii. 124.

 I roam, and roaming hope I to return, iii. 64.

 I saw him strike the gong and asked of him straightway, viii. 329.

 I saw thee weep before the gates and ’plain, v. 283.

 I saw two charmers treading humble earth, iii. 18.

 I say to him, that while he slings his sword, ii. 230.

 I see all power of sleep from eyes of me hath flown, ii. 151.

 I see not happiness lies in gathering gold, ii. 166.

 I see the woes of the world abound, i. 298.

 I see thee and close not mine eyes for fear, ix. 221.

 I see thee full of song and plaint and love’s own ecstasy, iii. 263.

 I see their traces and with pain I melt, i. 230.

 I see you with my heart from far countrie, vii. 93.

 I sent to him a scroll that bore my plaint of love, ii. 300.

 I show my heart and thoughts to Thee, and Thou, v. 266.

 I sight their track and pine for longing love, viii. 103.

 I sooth my heart and my love repel, v. 35.

 I sought of a fair maid to kiss her lips, viii. 294.

 I speak and longing love upties me and unties me, ii. 104.

 I still had hoped to see thee and enjoy thy sight, i. 242.

 I stood and bewailed who their loads had bound, ix. 27.

 I swear by Allah’s name, fair Sir! no thief was I, i. 274.

 I swear by swayings of that form so fair, iv. 143.

 I swear by that fair face’s life I’ll love but thee, iv. 246.

 I thought of estrangement in her embrace, ix. 198.

 I’ve been shot by Fortune, and shaft of eye, iii. 175.

 I’ve sent the ring from off thy finger ta’en, iii. 274.

 I’ve sinned enormous sin, iv. 109.

 I view their traces and with pain I pine, viii. 320.

 I visit them and night black lendeth aid to me, iv. 252.

 I vow to Allah if at home I sight, ii. 186.

 I walk for fear of interview the weakling’s walk, v. 147.

 I wander ’mid these walls, my Layla’s walls, i. 238.

 I wander through the palace but I sight there not a soul, iv. 291.

 I was in bestest luck, but now my love goes contrary, v. 75.

 I was kind and ’scaped not, they were cruel and escaped, i. 58.

 I waved to and fro and he leaned to and fro, v. 239.

 I weep for one to whom a lonely death befel, v. 115.

 I weep for longing love’s own ardency, vii. 369.

 I weet not, whenas to a land I fare, ix. 328.

 I went to my patron some blood to let him, i. 306.

 I went to the house of the keeper-man, iii. 20.

 I will bear in patience estrangement of friend, viii. 345.

 I wot not, whenas to a land I fare, x. 53.

 I write thee, love, the while my tears pour down, iii. 24.

 I write to thee, O fondest hope, a writ, iii. 24.

 I write with heart devoted to thy thought, iii. 273.

 Ibn Síná in his canon doth opine, iii. 34.

 If a fool oppress thee bear patiently, vi. 214.

 If a man from destruction can save his head, ix. 314.

 If a man’s breast with bane he hides be straitened, ix. 292.

 If a sharp witted wight mankind e’er tried, iv. 188.

 If another share in the thing I love, iv. 234.

 If any sin I sinned, or did I aught, iii. 132.

 If aught I’ve sinned in sinful way, viii. 119.

 If generous youth be blessed with luck and wealth, ix. 291.

 If he of patience fail the truth to hide, ii. 320.

 If I liken thy shape to the bough when green, i. 92.

 If I to aught save you, O lords of me incline, vii. 369.

 If ill betide thee through thy slave, i. 194.

 If Kings would see their high emprize preserved, v. 106.

 If Naomi bless me with a single glance, iv. 12.

 If not master of manners or aught but discreet, i. 235.

 If thereby man can save his head from death, iv. 46.

 If thou crave our love, know that love’s a loan, v. 127.

 If thou should please a friend who pleaseth thee, v. 150.

 If Time unite us after absent while, i. 157.

 If your promise of personal call prove untrue, iii. 252.

 If we ’plain of absence what shall we say?, i. 100.

 If we saw a lover who pains as he ought, v. 164.

 Ill-omened hag! unshriven be her sins nor mercy visit her on dying bed,
    i. 174.

 In dream I saw a bird o’er speed (meseem’d), viii. 218.

 In her cheek cornered nine calamities, viii. 86.

 In his face-sky shineth the fullest moon, i. 205.

 In love they bore me further than my force would go, ii. 137.

 In patience, O my God, I endure my lot and fate, i. 77.

 In patience, O my God, Thy doom forecast, viii. 17.

 In ruth and mildness surety lies, ii. 160.

 In sleep came Su’adás shade and wakened me, iv. 267.

 In sooth the Nights and Days are charactered, iii. 319.

 In spite of enviers jealousy, at end, v. 62.

 In the morn I am richest of men, x. 40.

 In the towering forts Allah throned him King, ii. 291.

 In this world there is none thou mayst count upon, i. 207.

 In thought I see thy form when farthest far or nearest near, ii. 42.

 In thy whole world there is not one, iv. 187.

 In vest of saffron pale and safflower red, i. 219.

 Incline not to parting, I pray, viii. 314.

 Indeed afflicted sore are we and all distraught, viii. 48.

 Indeed I am consoled now and sleep without a tear, iv. 242.

 Indeed I deem thy favours might be bought, iii. 34.

 Indeed I hourly need thy choicest aid, v. 281.

 Indeed I’ll bear my love for thee with firmest soul, iv. 241.

 Indeed I longed to share unweal with thee, iii. 323.

 Indeed I’m heart-broken to see thee start, viii. 63.

 Indeed I’m strong to bear whatever befal, iii. 46.

 Indeed my heart loves all the lovely boys, ix. 253.

 Indeed, ran my tears on the severance day, vii. 64.

 Indeed, to watch the darkness-moon he blighted me, iii. 277.

 Irks me my fate and clean unknows that I, viii. 130.

 “Is Abu’s-Sakr of Shaybán” they asked, v. 100.

 Is it not strange one house us two contain, iv. 279.

 Is not her love a pledge by all mankind confest?, ii. 186.

 It behoveth folk who rule in our time, viii. 294.

 It happed one day a hawk pounced on a bird, iv. 103.

 It runs through every joint of them as runs, x. 39.

 It seems as though of Lot’s tribe were our days, iii. 301.

 It was as though the sable dye upon her palms, iii. 105.


 Jamil, in Holy War go fight! to me they say, ii. 102.

 Jahannam, next Lazá, and third Hatim, v. 240.

 Jamrkan am I! and a man of might, vii. 23.

 Joy from stroke of string doth to me incline, viii. 227.

 Joy is nigh, O Masrúr, so rejoice in true rede, viii. 221.

 “Joy needs shall come,” a prattler ’gan to prattle, iii. 7.

 Joy of boughs, bright branch of Myrobalan!, viii. 213.

 Joy so o’ercometh me, for stress of joy, v. 355.

 Joyance is come, dispelling cark and care, v. 61.


 Kingdom with none endures; if thou deny this truth, where be the Kings
    of earlier earth?, i. 129.

 Kinsmen of mine were those three men who came to thee, iv. 289.

 Kisras and Cæsars in a bygone day, ii. 41.

 Kiss then his fingers which no fingers are, iv. 147.


 Lack of good is exile to man at home, ix. 199.

 Lack-gold abaseth man and doth his worth away, ix. 290.

 Lady of beauty, say, who taught thee hard and harsh design, iii. 5.

 Laud not long hair, except it be dispread, ii. 230.

 Laud to my Lord who gave thee all of loveliness, iv. 143.

 Leave this blame, I will list to no enemy’s blame!, iii. 61.

 Leave this thy design and depart, O man!, viii. 212.

 Leave thou the days to breed their ban and bate, ii. 41.

 Leave thy home for abroad an wouldest rise on high, ix. 138.

 Let days their folds and plies deploy, ii. 309.

 Let destiny with slackened rein its course appointed fare!, viii. 70.

 Let Fate with slackened bridle fare her pace, iv. 173.

 Let Fortune have her wanton way, i. 107.

 Let thy thought be ill and none else but ill, iii. 142.

 Leyla’s phantom came by night, viii. 14.

 Life has no sweet for me since forth ye fared, iii. 177.

 Like are the orange hills when zephyr breathes, viii. 272.

 Like a tree is he who in wealth doth wone, ii. 14.

 Like fullest moon she shines on happiest night, v. 347.

 Like moon she shines amid the starry sky, v. 32.

 Like peach in vergier growing, viii. 270.

 Like the full moon she shineth in garments all of green, viii. 327.

 Lion of the wold wilt thou murder me, v. 40.

 Long as earth is earth, long as sky is sky, ix. 317.

 Long have I chid thee, but my chiding hindereth thee not, vii. 225.

 Long have I wept o’er severance ban and bane, i. 249.

 Long I lamented that we fell apart, ii. 187.

 Long, long have I bewailed the sev’rance of our loves, iii. 275.

 Long was my night for sleepless misery, iv. 263.

 Longsome is absence; Care and Fear are sore, ii. 295.

 Longsome is absence, restlessness increaseth, vii. 212.

 Look at the Lote-tree, note on boughs arrayed, viii. 271.

 Look at the apricot whose bloom contains, viii. 268.

 Look on the Pyramids and hear the twain, v. 106.

 Love, at first sight, is a spurt of spray, vii. 280.

 Love, at the first, is a spurt of spray, vii. 330.

 Love for my fair they chide in angry way, iii. 233.

 Love in my breast they lit and fared away, iii. 296.

 Love in my heart they lit and went their ways, i. 232.

 Love-longing urged me not except to trip in speech o’er free, ix. 322.

 Love smote my frame so sore on parting day, ii. 152.

 Love’s tongue within my heart speaks plain to thee, iv. 135.

 Love’s votaries I ceased not to oppose, iii. 290.

 Lover with his beloved loseth will and aim, v. 289.

 Lover, when parted from the thing he loves, viii. 36.

 Luck to the Rubber, whose deft hand o’erflies, iii. 17.


 Make me not (Allah save the Caliph!) one of the betrayed, vii. 129.

 Make thy game by guile for thou’rt born in a time, iii. 141.

 Man is known among men as his deeds attest, ix. 164.

 Man wills his wish to him accorded be, iv. 157.

 Many whose ankle rings are dumb have tinkling belts, iii. 302.

 Masrur joys life made fair by all delight of days, viii. 234.

 May Allah never make you parting dree, v. 74.

 May coins thou makest joy in heart instil, ix. 69.

 May God deny me boon of troth if I, viii. 34.

 May that Monarch’s life span a mighty span, ii. 75.

 Mazed with thy love no more I can feign patience, viii. 321.

 Melted pure gold in silvern bowl to drain, v. 66.

 Men and dogs together are all gone by, iv. 268.

 Men are a hidden malady, iv. 188.

 Men craving pardon will uplift their hands, iii. 304.

 Men have ’plained of pining before my time, iii. 183.

 Men in their purposes are much alike, vii. 169.

 Men’s turning unto bums of boys is bumptious, v. 162.

 Methought she was the forenoon sun until she donned the veil, viii.
    284.

 Mine ear forewent mine eye in loving him, ix. 222.

 Mine eyes I admire that can feed their fill, viii. 224.

 Mine eyes ne’er looked on aught the Almond like, viii. 270.

 Mine eyes were dragomans for my tongue betied, i. 121.

 Mine is a Chief who reached most haught estate, i. 253.

 ’Minish this blame I ever bear from you, iii. 60.

 Morn saith to Night, “withdraw and let me shine,” i. 132.

 Most beautiful is earth in budding bloom, ii. 86.

 Muawiyah, thou gen’rous lord, and best of men that be, vii. 125.

 My best salam to what that robe enrobes of symmetry, ix. 321.

 My blamers instant chid that I for her become consoled, viii. 171.

 My blamers say of me, He is consoled, And lie!, v. 158.

 My body bides the sad abode of grief and malady, iv. 230.

 My censors say, What means this pine for him?, v. 158.

 My charmer who spellest my piety, ix. 243.

 My coolth of eyes, the darling child of me, v. 260.

 My day of bliss is that when thou appearest, iii. 291.

 My friend I prithee tell me, ’neath the sky, v. 107.

 My friend who went hath returned once more, vi. 196.

 My friends, despite this distance and this cruelty, viii. 115.

 My friends, I yearn in heart distraught for him, vii. 212.

 My friends! if ye are banisht from mine eyes, iii. 340.

 My friends, Rayyá hath mounted soon as morning shone, vii. 93.

 My fondness, O my moon, for thee my foeman is, iii. 256.

 My heart disheartened is, my breast is strait, ii. 238.

 My heart is a thrall: my tears ne’er abate, viii. 346.

 My life for the scavenger! right well I love him, i. 312.

 My life is gone but love-longings remain, viii. 345.

 My longing bred of love with mine unease for ever grows, vii. 211.

 My Lord hath servants fain of piety, v. 277.

 My lord, this be the Sun, the Moon thou hadst before, vii. 143.

 My lord, this full moon takes in Heaven of thee new birth, vii. 143.

 My love a meeting promised me and kept it faithfully, iii. 195.

 My loved one’s name in cheerless solitude aye cheereth me, v. 59.

 My lover came in at the close of night, iv. 124.

 My lover came to me one night, iv. 252.

 My mind’s withdrawn from Zaynab and Nawár, iii. 239.

 My patience failed me when my lover went, viii. 259.

 My patience fails me and grows anxiety, viii. 14.

 My prickle is big and the little one said, iii. 302.

 My Salám to the Fawn in the garments concealed, iv. 50.

 My sin to thee is great, iv. 109.

 My sister said, as saw she how I stood, iii. 109.

 My sleeplessness would show I love to bide on wake, iii. 195.

 My soul and my folk I engage for the youth, vii. 111.

 My soul for loss of lover sped I sight, viii. 67.

 My soul be sacrifice for one, whose going, iii. 292.

 My soul thy sacrifice! I chose thee out, iii. 303.

 My soul to him who smiled back my salute, iii. 168.

 My tale, indeed, is tale unlief, iv. 265.

 My tears thus flowing rival with my wine, iii. 169.

 My tribe have slain that brother mine, Umaym, iv. 110.

 My wish, mine illness, mine unease! by Allah, own, viii. 68.

 My wrongs hide I, withal they show to sight, viii. 260.

 My yearning for thee though long is fresh, iv. 211.


 Naught came to salute me in sleep save his shade, vii. 111.

 Naught garred me weep save where and when of severance spake he, viii.
    63.

 Nears my parting fro’ my love, nigher draws the severance-day, viii.
    308.

 Need drives a man into devious roads, ii. 14.

 Needs must I bear the term by Fate decreed, ii. 41.

 Ne’er cease thy gate be Ka’abah to mankind, iv. 148.

 Ne’er dawn the severance-day on any wise, viii. 49.

 Ne’er incline thee to part, ii. 105.

 Ne’er was a man with beard grown overlong, viii. 298.

 News my wife wots is not a locket in a box!, i. 311.

 News of my love fill all the land, I swear, iii. 287.

 No breeze of Union to the lover blows, viii. 239.

 No! I declare by Him to whom all bow, v. 152.

 No longer beguile me, iii. 137.

 “No ring-dove moans from home on branch in morning light,” ii. 152.

 None but the good a secret keep And good men keep it unrevealed, i. 87.

 None but the men of worth a secret keep, iii. 289.

 None keepeth a secret but a faithful person, iv. 233.

 None other charms but thine shall greet mine eyes, i. 156.

 None wotteth best joyance but generous youth, v. 67.

 Not with his must I’m drunk, but verily, v. 158.

 Now an, by Allah, unto man were fully known, iii. 128.

 Now, an of woman ask ye, I reply, iii. 214.

 Now blame him not; for blame brings only vice and pain, ii. 297.

 Now, by my life, brown hue hath point of comeliness, iv. 258.

 Now, by thy life, and wert thou just my life thou hadst not ta’en, i.
    182.

 Now, by your love! your love I’ll ne’er forget, viii. 315.

 Now I indeed will hide desire and all repine, v. 267.

 Now is my dread to incur reproaches, which, iii. 59.

 Now love hast banished all that bred delight, iii. 259.

 Now with their says and said no more vex me the chiding race, iv. 207.


 O Adornment of beauties to thee write I, vii. 176.

 O beauty’s Union! love for thee’s my creed, iii. 303.

 O best of race to whom gave Hawwá boon of birth, v. 139.

 O bibber of liquor, art not ashamed, v. 224.

 O breeze that blowest from the land Irak, viii. 103.

 O child of Adam let not hope make mock and flyte at thee, vi. 116.

 O culver of the copse, with salams I greet, v. 49.

 O day of joys to either lover fain!, v. 63.

 O dwelling of my friends, say is there no return, viii. 319.

 O fair ones forth ye cast my faithful love, ix. 300.

 O fertile root and noble growth of trunk, ii. 43.

 O fisherman no care hast thou to fear, v. 51.

 O flier from thy home when foes affright!, v. 290.

 O friends of me one favour more I pray, v. 125.

 O glad news bearer well come!, ii. 326.

 O hail to him whose locks his cheeks o’ershade, x. 58.

 O Hayát al-Nufús be gen’rous and incline, vii. 217.

 O heart, an lover false thee, shun the parting bane, viii. 94.

 O heart! be not thy love confined to one, iii. 232.

 O hope of me! pursue me not with rigour and disdain, iii. 28.

 O joy of Hell and Heaven! whose tormentry, iii. 19.

 O Keener, O sweetheart, thou fallest not short, i. 311.

 O Kings of beauty, grace to prisoner ta’en, viii. 96.

 O Lord, by the Five Shaykhs, I pray deliver me, vii. 226.

 O Lord, how many a grief from me hast driven, v. 270.

 O Lord, my foes are fain to slay me in despight, viii. 117.

 O Lords of me, who fared but whom my heart e’er followeth, iv. 239.

 O Love, thou’rt instant in thy cruellest guise, iv. 204.

 O lover thou bringest to thought a tide, v. 50.

 O Maryam of beauty return for these eyne, viii. 321.

 O Miriam thy chiding I pray, forego, ix. 8.

 O moon for ever set this earth below, iii. 323.

 O Moslem! thou whose guide is Alcoràn, iv. 173.

 O most noble of men in this time and stound, iv. 20.

 O my censor who wakest amorn to see, viii. 343.

 O my friend, an I rendered my life, my sprite, ix. 214.

 O my friend! reft of rest no repose I command, ii. 35.

 O my friends, have ye seen or have ye heard, vi. 174.

 O my heart’s desire, grows my misery, vii. 248.

 O my Lord, well I weet thy puissant hand, vi. 97.

 O Night of Union, Time’s virginal prize, viii. 328.

 O my lords, shall he to your minds occur, ix. 299.

 O Night here I stay! I want no morning light, iv. 144.

 O passing Fair I have none else but thee, vii. 365.

 O pearl-set mouth of friend, iv. 231.

 O pearly mouth of friend, who set those pretty pearls in line, iv. 231.

 O Rose, thou rare of charms that dost contain, viii. 275.

 O sire, be not deceived by worldly joys, v. 114.

 O son of mine uncle! same sorrow I bear, iii. 61.

 O spare me, thou Ghazban, indeed enow for me, ii. 126.

 O Spring-camp have ruth on mine overthrowing, viii. 240.

 O thou Badi’a ’l-Jamál, show thou some clemency, vii. 368.

 O thou of generous seed and true nobility, vi. 252.

 O thou sheeniest Sun who in night dost shine, viii. 215.

 O Thou, the One, whose grace doth all the world embrace, v. 272.

 O thou tomb! O thou tomb! be his horrors set in blight?, i. 76.

 O thou to whom sad trembling wights in fear complain!, iii. 317.

 O thou who barest leg-calf better to suggest, ii. 327.

 O thou who claimest to be prey of love and ecstasy, vii. 220.

 O thou who deignest come at sorest syne, iii. 78.

 O thou who dost comprise all Beauty’s boons!, vii. 107.

 O thou who dyest hoariness with black, viii. 295.

 O Thou who fearest Fate, i. 56.

 O thou who for thy wakeful nights wouldst claim my love to boon, iii.
    26.

 O thou who givest to royal state sweet savour, ii. 3.

 O thou who gladdenest man by speech and rarest quality, ix. 322.

 O thou who seekest innocence to ’guile, iii. 137.

 O thou who seekest parting, safely fare!, ii. 319.

 O thou who seekest separation, act leisurely, iv. 200.

 O thou who seekest severance, i. 118.

 O thou who shamest sun in morning sheen, viii. 35.

 O thou who shunnest him thy love misled!, viii. 259.

 O thou who wooest Severance, easy fare!, iii. 278.

 O thou who woo’st a world unworthy learn, iii. 319.

 O thou whose boons to me are more than one, iii. 317.

 O thou whose favours have been out of compt, iii. 137.

 O thou whose forehead, like the radiant East, i. 210.

 O to whom I gave soul which thou torturest, iv. 19.

 O to whom now of my desire complaining sore shall I, v. 44.

 O toiler through the glooms of night in peril and in pain, i. 38.

 O turtle dove, like me art thou distraught?, v. 47.

 O waftings of musk from the Babel-land!, ix. 195.

 O who didst win my love in other date, v. 63.

 O who hast quitted these abodes and faredst lief and light, viii. 59.

 O who passest this doorway, by Allah, see, viii. 236.

 O who praisest Time with the fairest appraise, ix. 296.

 O who shamest the Moon and the sunny glow, vii. 248.

 O who suest Union, ne’er hope such delight, viii. 257.

 O whose heart by our beauty is captive ta’en, v. 36.

 O Wish of wistful men, for Thee I yearn, v. 269.

 O ye that can aid me, a wretched lover, ii. 30.

 O ye who fled and left my heart in pain low li’en, iii. 285.

 O ye who with my vitals fled, have ruth, viii. 258.

 O you whose mole on cheek enthroned recalls, i. 251.

 O Zephyr of Morn, an thou pass where the dear ones dwell, viii. 120.

 O Zephyr of Najd, when from Najd thou blow, vii. 115.

 Of dust was I created, and man did I become, v. 237.

 Of evil thing the folk suspect us twain, iii. 305.

 Of my sight I am jealous for thee, of me, ix. 248.

 Of Time and what befel me I complain, viii. 219.

 Of wit and wisdom is Maymúnah bare, i. 57.

 Oft hath a tender bough made lute for maid, v. 244.

 Oft hunchback added to his bunchy back, viii. 297.

 Oft times mischance shall straiten noble breast, viii. 117.

 Oft when thy case shows knotty and tangled skein, vi. 71.

 Oh a valiant race are the sons of Nu’umán, iii. 80.

 Oh soul of me, an thou accept my rede, ii. 210.

 Oh ye gone from the gaze of these lidded eyne, ii. 139.

 Old hag, of high degree in filthy life, v. 96.

 On earth’s surface we lived in rare ease and joy, vii. 123.

 On her fair bosom caskets twain I scanned, i. 156.

 On me and with me bides thy volunty, viii. 129.

 On Sun and Moon of palace cast thy sight, i. 85.

 On the brow of the World is a writ; an thereon thou look, ix. 297.

 On the fifth day at even-tide they went away from me, ii. 10.

 On the fifth day I quitted all my friends for evermore, ii. 10.

 On the glancing racer outracing glance, ii. 273.

 On the shaded woody island His showers Allah deign, x. 40.

 On these which once were chicks, iv. 235.

 One, I wish him in belt a thousand horns, v. 129.

 One craved my love and I gave all he craved of me, iii. 210.

 One wrote upon her cheek with musk, his name was Ja’afar hight, iv.
    292.

 Open the door! the leach now draweth near, v. 284.

 Oppression ambusheth in sprite of man, ix. 343.

 Our aim is only converse to enjoy, iv. 54.

 Our Fort is Tor, and flames the fire of fight, ii. 242.

 Our life to thee, O cup-boy Beauty-dight!, iii. 169.

 Our trysting-time is all too short, iii. 167.


 Pardon my fault, for ’tis the wise man’s wont, i. 126.

 Pardon the sinful ways I did pursue, ii. 38.

 Part not from one whose wont is not to part from you, iii. 295.

 Parting ran up to part from lover twain, iii. 209.

 Pass round the cup to the old and the young man, too, viii. 278.

 Pass o’er my fault, for ’tis the wise man’s wont, viii. 327.

 Patience hath fled, but passion fareth not, v. 358.

 Patience with sweet and with bitter Fate!, viii. 146.

 Patient I seemed, yet Patience shown by me, vii. 96.

 Patient, O Allah! to Thy destiny I bow, iii. 328.

 Pause ye and see his sorry state since when ye fain withdrew, viii. 66.

 Peace be to her who visits me in sleeping phantasy, viii. 241.

 Peace be to you from lover’s wasted love, vii. 368.

 Peace be with you, sans you naught compensateth me, viii. 320.

 Perfect were lover’s qualities in him was brought amorn, viii. 255.

 Pink cheeks and eyes enpupil’d black have dealt me sore despight, viii.
    69.

 Pleaseth me more the fig than every fruit, viii. 269.

 Pleaseth me yon Hazár of mocking strain, v. 48.

 Pleasure and health, good cheer, good appetite, ii. 102.

 Ply me and also my mate be plied, viii. 203.

 Poverty dims the sheen of man whate’er his wealth has been, i. 272.

 Pray’ee grant me some words from your lips, belike, iii. 274.

 Pray, tell me what hath Fate to do betwixt us twain?, v. 128.

 Preserve thy hoary hairs from soil and stain, iv. 43.

 Prove how love can degrade, v. 134.


 Quince every taste conjoins; in her are found, i. 158.

 Quoth I to a comrade one day, viii. 289.

 Quoth our Imam Abu Nowas, who was, v. 157.

 Quoth she (for I to lie with her forbare), iii. 303.

 Quoth she, “I see thee dye thy hoariness,” iv. 194.

 Quoth she to me,—and sore enraged, viii. 293.

 Quoth she to me—I see thou dy’st thy hoariness, viii. 295.

 Quoth they and I had trained my taste thereto, viii. 269.

 Quoth they, Black letters on his cheek are writ!, iv. 196.

 Quoth they, Maybe that Patience lend thee ease!, iii. 178.

 Quoth they, Thou rav’st on him thou lov’st, iii. 258.

 Quoth they, “Thou’rt surely raving mad for her thou lov’st,” viii. 326.


 Racked is my heart by parting fro’ my friends, i. 150.

 Rain showers of torrent tears, O Eyne, and see, viii. 250.

 Rebel against women and so shalt thou serve Allah the more, iii. 214.

 Red fruits that fill the hand, and shine with sheen, viii. 271.

 Rely not on women: Trust not to their hearts, i. 13.

 Reserve is a jewel, Silence safety is, i. 208.

 Restore my heart as ’twas within my breast, viii. 37.

 Right near at hand, Umaymah mine!, v. 75.

 Robe thee, O House, in richest raiment Time, viii. 206.

 Roll up thy days and they shall easy roll, iv. 220.

 Rosy red Wady hot with summer-glow, ix. 6.

 Round with big and little, the bowl and cup, ii. 29.


 Said I to slim-waist who the wine engraced, viii. 307.

 Salam from graces treasured by my Lord, iii. 273.

 Salams fro’ me to friends in every stead, iii. 256.

 Say, cans’t not come to us one momentling, iv. 43.

 Say, doth heart of my fair incline to him, v. 127.

 Say him who careless sleeps what while the shaft of Fortune flies, i.
    68.

 Say me, on Allah’s path has death not dealt to me, iv. 247.

 Say me, will Union after parting e’er return to be, viii. 320.

 Say then to skin “Be soft,” to face “Be fair,” i. 252.

 Say thou to the she-gazelle, who’s no gazelle, v. 130.

 Say to angry lover who turns away, v. 131.

 Say to the charmer in the dove-hued veil, i. 280.

 Say to the fair in the wroughten veil, viii. 291.

 Say to the pretty one in veil of blue, iv. 264.

 Say what shall solace one who hath nor home nor stable stead, ii. 124.

 Say, will to me and you the Ruthful union show, viii. 323.

 Scented with sandal and musk, right proudly doth she go, v. 192.

 Seeing thy looks wots she what thou desir’st, v. 226.

 Seest not how the hosts of the Rose display, viii. 276.

 Seest not that Almond plucked by hand, viii. 270.

 Seest not that musk, the nut-brown musk, e’er claims the highest price,
    iv. 253.

 Seest not that pearls are prized for milky hue, iv. 250.

 Seest not that rosery where Rose a-flowering displays, viii. 275.

 Seest not the bazar with its fruit in rows, iii. 302.

 Seest not the Lemon when it taketh form, viii. 272.

 Seest not we want for joy four things all told, i. 86.

 Semblance of full-moon Heaven bore, v. 192.

 Severance-grief nighmost, Union done to death, iv. 223.

 Shall I be consoled when Love hath mastered the secret of me, viii.
    261.

 Shall man experience-lectured ever care, vii. 144.

 Shall the beautiful hue of the Basil fail, i. 19.

 Shall the world oppress me when thou art in’t, ii. 18.

 Shall we e’er be united after severance-tide, viii. 322.

 Shamed is the bough of Bán by pace of her, viii. 223.

 She bade me farewell on our parting day, ii. 35.

 She beamed on my sight with a wondrous glance, ii. 87.

 She came apparelled in an azure vest, i. 218.

 She came apparelled in a vest of blue, viii. 280.

 She came out to gaze on the bridal at ease, v. 149.

 She came thick veiled, and cried I, O display, viii. 280.

 She comes apparelled in an azure vest, x. 58.

 She comes like fullest moon on happy night, i. 218; x. 59.

 She cried while played in her side Desire, ix. 197.

 She dispread the locks from her head one night, iii. 226.

 She drew near whenas death was departing us, v. 71.

 She gives her woman’s hand a force that fails the hand of me, iii. 176.

 She hath eyes whose babes wi’ their fingers sign, viii. 166.

 She hath those hips conjoined by thread of waist, iii. 226.

 She hath wrists which, did her bangles not contain, iii. 226.

 She is a sun which towereth high asky, iii. 163.

 She joineth charms were never seen conjoined in mortal dress, vii. 104.

 She lords it o’er our hearts in grass-green gown, ii. 318.

 She prayeth; the Lord of grace her prayer obeyed, v. 273.

 She proffered me a tender coynte, iii. 304.

 She rose like the morn as she shone through the night, i. 11.

 She saith sore hurt in sense the most acute, iii. 303.

 She shineth forth a moon, and bends a willow-wand, iv. 50.

 She shone out in the garden in garments all of green, v. 346.

 She shot my heart with shaft, then turned on heel, vii. 141.

 She sits it in lap like a mother fond, ix. 191.

 She ’spied the moon of Heaven reminding me, iv. 51.

 She split my casque of courage with eye-swords that sorely smite, iii.
    179.

 She spread three tresses of unplaited hair, iv. 51.

 She wears a pair of ringlets long let down, v. 240.

 She who my all of love by love of her hath won, viii. 254.

 Shoulder thy tray and go straight to thy goal, i. 278.

 Showed me Sir Such-an-one a sight, and what a sight!, iv. 193.

 Silent I woned and never owned my love, v. 151.

 Silky her skin and silk that zonèd waist, iii. 163.

 Since my toper-friend in my hand hath given, iv. 20.

 Since none will lend my love a helping hand, vii. 225.

 Since our Imam came forth from medicine, v. 154.

 Sleep fled me, by my side wake ever shows, viii. 68.

 Slept in mine arms full moon of brightest blee, x. 39.

 Slim-waist and boyish wits delight, v. 161.

 Slim-waist craved wine from her companeer, viii. 307.

 Slim-waisted loveling, from his hair and brow, viii. 299.

 Slim-waisted loveling, jetty hair encrowned, i. 116.

 Slim-waisted one whose looks with down of cheek, v. 158.

 Slim-waisted one, whose taste is sweetest sweet, v. 241.

 Sojourn of stranger, in whatever land, vii. 175.

 Sought me this heart’s dear love at gloom of night, vii. 253.

 Source of mine evils, truly, she alone’s, iii. 165.

 Sow kindness-seed in the unfittest stead, iii. 136.

 Stand by and see the derring-do which I to-day will show, iii. 107.

 Stand by the ruined home and ask of us, iii. 328.

 Stand thou and hear what fell to me, viii. 228.

 Stand thou by the homes and hail the lords of the ruined stead, ii.
    181.

 Stay! grant one parting look before we part, ii. 15.

 Steer ye your steps to none but me, v. 65.

 Still cleaves to this homestead mine ecstasy, viii. 243.

 Stint ye this blame, viii. 254.

 Straitenèd bosom; reveries dispread, iii. 182.

 Strange is my story, passing prodigy, iv. 139.

 Strange is the charm which dights her brows like Luna’s disk that
    shine, ii. 3.

 Strive he to cure his case, to hide the truth, ii. 320.

 Such is the world, so bear a patient heart, i. 183.

 Suffer mine eye-babes weep lost of love and tears express, viii. 112.

 Suffice thee death such marvels can enhance, iii. 56.

 Sun riseth sheen from her brilliant brow, vii. 246.

 Sweetest of nights the world can show to me, ii. 318.

 Sweetheart! How long must I await by so long suffering tried?, ii. 178.

 Sweetly discourses she on Persian string, viii. 166.


 Take all things easy; for all worldly things, iv. 220.

 Take thy life and fly whenas evils threat; let the ruined house tell
    its owner’s fate, i. 109.

 Take, O my lord to thee the Rose, viii. 275.

 Take patience which breeds good if patience thou can learn, iv. 221.

 Take warning, O proud, iv. 118.

 Tear-drops have chafed mine eyelids and rail down in wondrous wise, v.
    53.

 Tell her who turneth from our love to work it injury sore, i. 181.

 Tell whoso hath sorrow grief never shall last, i. 15.

 That cheek-mole’s spot they evened with a grain, i. 251.

 That jetty hair, that glossy brow, i. 203.

 That night th’ astrologer a scheme of planets drew, i. 167.

 That pair in image quits me not one single hour, ii. 173.

 That rarest beauty ever bides my foe, vii. 366.

 That sprouting hair upon his face took wreak, v. 161.

 The birds took flight at eve and winged their way, viii. 34.

 The blear-eyed scapes the pits, i. 265.

 The boy like his father shall surely show, i. 310.

 The breeze o’ morn blows uswards from her trace, viii. 206.

 The bushes of golden hued rose excite, viii. 276.

 The Bulbul’s note, whenas dawn is nigh, v. 48.

 The caravan-chief calleth loud o’ night, viii. 239.

 The chambers were like a bee-hive well stocked, ix. 292.

 The coming unto thee is blest, viii. 167.

 The company left with my love by night, ix. 27.

 The Compassionate show no ruth to the tomb where his bones shall lie,
    x. 47.

 The courser chargeth on battling foe, iii. 83.

 The day of my delight is the day when you draw near, i. 75.

 The day of parting cut my heart in twain, iii. 124.

 The fawn-like one a meeting promised me, iv. 195.

 The fawn of a maid hent her lute in hand, ii. 34.

 The feet of sturdy miscreants went trampling heavy tread, x. 38.

 The first in rank to kiss the ground shall deign, i. 250.

 The fragrance of musk from the breasts of the fair, viii. 209.

 The full moon groweth perfect once a month, vii. 271.

 The glasses are heavy when empty brought, x. 40.

 The hapless lover’s heart is of his wooing weary grown, iv. 144.

 The hearts of lovers have eyes I ken, iv. 238.

 The hue of dusty motes is hers, iv. 257.

 The house, sweetheart, is now no home to me, v. 381.

 The jujube tree each day, viii. 271.

 The Kings who fared before us showed, iii. 318.

 The land of lamping moon is bare and drear, viii. 126.

 The least of him is the being free, v. 156.

 The life of the bath is the joy of man’s life, iii. 19.

 The like of whatso feelest thou we feel, vii. 141.

 The longing of a Bedouin maid, whose folks are far away, iii. 172.

 The longing of an Arab lass forlorn of kith and kin, ii. 306.

 The Lord, empty House! to thee peace decree, viii. 238.

 The loved ones left thee in middle night, v. 150.

 The lover is drunken with love of friend, v. 39.

 The lover’s heart for his beloved must meet, ii. 62.

 The lover’s heart is like to break in twain, ii. 63.

 The mead is bright with what is on’t, ii. 86.

 The messenger who kept our commerce hid, iii. 189.

 The Moon o’ the Time shows unveilèd light, ix. 287.

 The Nadd is my wine-scented powder, my bread, viii. 209.

 The name of what drave me distraught, viii. 93.

 The Nile-flood this day is the gain you own, i. 290.

 The penis smooth and round was made with anus best to match it, iii.
    303.

 The phantom of Soada came by night to wake me, viii. 337.

 The poor man fares by everything opposed, ix. 291.

 The Prophet saw whatever eyes could see, v. 287.

 The return of the friend is the best of all boons, ix. 287.

 The Rose in highest stead I rate, viii. 274.

 The signs that here their mighty works portray, vi. 90.

 The slanderers said There is hair upon his cheeks, v. 157.

 The slippers that carry these fair young feet, viii. 320.

 The smack of parting’s myrrh to me, ii. 101.

 The solace of lovers is naught but far, viii. 143.

 The spring of the down on cheeks right clearly shows, v. 190.

 The stream’s a cheek by sunlight rosy dyed, ii. 240.

 The streamlet swings by branchy wood and aye, viii. 267.

 The sun of beauty she to all appears, x. 59.

 The sun of beauty she to sight appears, i. 218.

 The sun yellowed not in the murk gloom lien, viii. 285.

 The sword, the sworder and the blood-skin waiting me I sight, ii. 42.

 The tears of these eyes find easy release, v. 127.

 The tears run down his cheeks in double row, iii. 169.

 “The time of parting,” quoth they, “draweth nigh,” v. 280.

 The tongue of love from heart bespeaks my sprite, iv. 261.

 The tongue of Love within my vitals speaketh, viii. 319.

 The tooth-stick love I not; for when I say, iii. 275.

 The road is longsome; grow my grief and need, iii. 13.

 The weaver-wight wrote with gold-ore bright, viii. 210.

 The whiskers write upon his cheek with ambergris on pearl, vii. 277.

 The wide plain is narrowed before these eyes, viii. 28.

 The wise have said that the white of hair, viii. 294.

 The world hath shot me with its sorrow till, vii. 340.

 The world sware that for ever ’twould gar me grieve, viii. 243.

 The world tears man to shreds, so be thou not, ix. 295.

 The world tricks I admire betwixt me and her, ix. 242.

 The world’s best joys long be thy lot, my lord, i. 203.

 The zephyr breatheth o’er its branches, like, viii. 267.

 Their image bides with me, ne’er quits me, ne’er shall fly, viii. 66.

 Their tracts I see, and pine with pain and pang, i. 151.

 There be no writer who from death shall fleet, i. 128.

 There be rulers who have ruled with a foul tyrannic sway, i. 60.

 There remaineth not aught save a fluttering breath, viii. 124.

 There remains to him naught save a flitting breath, vii. 119.

 They blamed me for causing my tears to well, ix. 29.

 They bore him bier’d and all who followèd wept, ii. 281.

 They find me fault with her where I default ne’er find, v. 80.

 They have cruelly ta’en me from him my beloved, v. 51.

 They’re gone who when thou stoodest at their door, iv. 200.

 They ruled awhile and theirs was harsh tyrannic rule, iv. 220.

 They said, Thou ravest upon the person thou lovest, iv. 205.

 They say me, “Thou shinest a light to mankind,” i. 187.

 They shine fullest moons, unveil crescent bright, viii. 304.

 They talked of three beauties whose converse was quite, vii. 112.

 Thine image ever companies my sprite, iii. 259.

 Thine image in these eyne, a-lip thy name, iii. 179.

 Think not from her, of whom thou art enamoured, viii. 216.

 Thinkest thou thyself all prosperous, in days which prosp’rous be,
    viii. 309.

 This be his recompense who will, ix. 17.

 This day oppressor and oppressèd meet, v. 258.

 This garden and this lake in truth, viii. 207.

 This house, my lady, since you left is now a home no more, i. 211.

 This messenger shall give my news to thee, iii. 181.

 This is a thing wherein destruction lies, i. 118.

 This is she I will never forget till I die, viii. 304.

 This is thy friend perplexed for pain and pine, iv. 279.

 This one, whom hunger plagues, and rags enfold, vii. 129.

 Tho’ ’tis thy wont to hide thy love perforce, iii. 65.

 Thou art the cause that castest men in ban and bane, viii. 149.

 Thou camest and green grew the hills anew, iii. 18.

 Thou deemedst well of Time when days went well, ii. 12; iii. 253.

 Thou hast a reed of rede to every land, i. 128.

 Thou hast failed who would sink me in ruin-sea, iii. 108.

 Thou hast granted more favours than ever I crave, ii. 32.

 Thou hast restored my wealth, sans greed and ere, iv. 111.

 Thou hast some art the hearts of men to clip, i. 241.

 Thou hast won my heart by cheek and eye of thee, viii. 256.

 Thou liest, O foulest of Satans, thou art, iii. 108.

 Thou liest when speaking of “benefits,” while, iii. 108.

 Thou madest Beauty to spoil man’s sprite, ix. 249.

 Thou madest fair thy thought of Fate, viii. 130.

 Thou pacest the palace a marvel-sight, i. 176.

 Thou present, in the Heaven of Heavens I dwell, iii. 268.

 Thou seekest my death; naught else thy will can satisfy?, ii. 103.

 Thou wast all taken up with love of other man not me, i. 182.

 Thou wast create of dust and cam’st to life, iv. 190.

 Thou wast invested (woe to thee!) with rule for thee unfit, vii. 127.

 Though amorn I may awake with all happiness in hand, i. 75.

 Though now thou jeer, O Hind, how many a night, vii. 98.

 Three coats yon freshest form endue, viii. 270.

 Three lovely girls hold my bridle-rein, ix. 243.

 Three matters hinder her from visiting us, in fear, iii. 231.

 Three things for ever hinder her to visit us, viii. 279.

 Throne you on highmost stead, heart, ears and sight, viii. 258.

 Thy breast thou baredst sending back the gift, v. 153.

 Thy case commit to a Heavenly Lord and thou shalt safety see, viii.
    151.

 Thy folly drives thee on though long I chid, iii. 29.

 Thy note came: long lost fingers wrote that note, iv. 14.

 Thy phantom bid thou fleet and fly, vii. 108.

 Thy presence bringeth us a grace, i. 175.

 Thy shape with willow branch I dare compare, iv. 255.

 Thy shape’s temptation, eyes as Houri’s fain, viii. 47.

 Thy sight hath never seen a fairer sight, ii. 292.

 Thy writ, O Masrur, stirred my sprite to pine, viii. 245.

 Time falsed our union and divided who were one in tway, x. 26.

 Time gives me tremble, Ah, how sore the baulk!, i. 144.

 Time has recorded gifts she gave the great, i. 128.

 Time hath for his wont to upraise and debase, ii. 143.

 Time hath shattered all my frame, ii. 4.

 Time sware my life should fare in woeful waste, ii. 186.

 ’Tis as if wine and he who bears the bowl, x. 38.

 ’Tis as the Figs with clear white skins outthrown, viii. 268.

 ’Tis dark: my transport and unease now gather might and main, v. 45.

 ’Tis I am the stranger, visited by none, v. 116.

 ’Tis naught but this! When a-sudden I see her, ix. 235.

 ’Tis not at every time and tide unstable, iv. 188.

 ’Tis thou hast trodden coyness-path not I, iii. 332.

 To all who unknow my love for the May, viii. 332.

 To Allah will I make my moan of travail and of woe, iii. 106.

 To Allah’s charge I leave that moon-like Beauty in your tents, iv. 145.

 To even her with greeny bough were vain, i. 156.

 To grief leave a heart that to love ne’er ceased, viii. 215.

 To him I spake of coupling but he said to me, iii. 301.

 To him when the wine cup is near I declare, ix. 189.

 To Karím, the cream of men thou gavest me, ii. 35.

 To kith and kin bear thou sad tidings of our plight, iii. 111.

 To me restore my dear, v. 55.

 To our beloveds we moaned our length of night, iv. 106.

 To Rose quoth I, What gars thy thorns to be put forth, viii. 276.

 To severance you doom my love and all unmoved remain, i. 181.

 To slay my foes is chiefest bliss I wist, ii. 239.

 To th’ All-wise Subtle One trust worldly things, i. 56.

 To Thee be praise, O Thou who showest unremitting grace, viii. 183.

 To thee come I forth with my heart aflame, iii. 108.

 To win our favours still thy hopes are bent, vii. 224.

 Told us, ascribing to his Shaykhs, our Shaykh, iv. 47.

 Travel! and thou shalt find new friends for old ones left behind, i.
    197.

 Troubles familiar with my heart are grown and I with them, viii. 117.

 Trust not to man when thou hast raised his spleen, iii. 145.

 Truth best befits thee albeit truth, i. 298.

 Turn thee from grief nor care a jot!, i. 56.

 ’Twas as I feared the coming ills discerning, ii. 189.

 ’Twas by will of her she was create, viii. 291.

 ’Twas not of love that fared my feet to them, iv. 180.

 ’Twas not satiety bade me leave the dearling of my soul, i. 181.

 ’Twixt the close-tied and open-wide no medium Fortune knoweth, ii. 105.

 ’Twixt me and riding many a noble dame, v. 266.

 Two contraries and both concur in opposite charms, iv. 20.

 Two hosts fare fighting thee the livelong day, i. 132.

 Two lovers barred from every joy and bliss, v. 240.

 Two things there are, for which if eyes wept tear on tear, viii. 263.

 Two things there be, an blood-tears there-over, viii. 106.

 Two nests in one; blood flowing easiest wise, v. 239.

 Tyrannise not, if thou hast the power to do so, iv. 189.


 Umm Amr’, thy boons Allah repay!, v. 118.

 Under my raiment a waste body lies, v. 151.

 Under these domes how many a company, vi. 91.

 Union, this severance ended, shall I see some day?, iii. 12.

 Unjust it were to bid the world be just, i. 237.

 Uns al-Wujud dost deem me fancy free, v. 43.

 Unto thee, As’ad! I of passion pangs complain, iii. 312.

 Unto thy phantom deal behest, vii. 109.

 Upsprings from table of his lovely cheek, vii. 277.


 Veiling her cheeks with hair a-morn she comes, i. 218.

 Verily women are devils created for us, iii. 322.

 Vied the full moon for folly with her face, viii. 291.

 Virtue in hand of thee hath built a house, iv. 138.

 Visit thy lover, spurn what envy told, i. 223.

 Void are the private rooms of treasury, iv. 267.


 Wail for the little partridges on porringer and plate, i. 131.

 Wands of green chrysolite bare issue which, viii. 275.

 ’Ware how thou hurtest man with hurt of hearts, ii. 197.

 ’Ware that truth thou speak, albe sooth when said, x. 23.

 Was’t archer shot me, or was’t mine eyes, v. 33.

 Watch some tall ship she’ll joy the sight of thee, ii. 20.

 Watered steel-blade, the world perfection calls, vii. 173.

 Waters of beauty o’er his cheeks flow bright, viii. 299.

 We joy in full Moon who the wine bears round, viii. 227.

 We left not taking leave of thee (when bound to other goal), viii. 63.

 We lived on earth a life of fair content, v. 71.

 We lived till saw we all the marvels Love can bear, v. 54.

 We’ll drink and Allah pardon sinners all, viii. 277.

 We never heard of wight nor yet espied, viii. 296.

 We reck not, an our life escape from bane, vii. 99.

 We tread the path where Fate hath led, i. 107.

 We trod the steps appointed for us, x. 53.

 We trod the steps that for us were writ, ix. 226.

 We were and were the days enthralled to all our wills, ii. 182.

 We were like willow-boughs in garden shining, vii. 132.

 We wrought them weal, they met our weal with ill, i. 43.

 Welcome the Fig! To us it comes, viii. 269.

 Well Allah weets that since our severance-day, iii. 8.

 Well Allah wots that since my severance from thee, iii. 292.

 Well Allah wotteth I am sorely plagued, v. 139.

 Well learnt we, since you left, our grief and sorrow to sustain, iii.
    63.

 Wend to that pious prayerful Emir, v. 274.

 Were I to dwell on heart-consuming heat, iii. 310.

 Were it said to me while the flame is burning within me, vii. 282.

 Were not the Murk of gender male, x. 60.

 What ails the Beauty, she returneth not?, v. 137.

 What ails the Raven that he croaks my lover’s house hard by, viii. 242.

 What can the slave do when pursued by Fate, iii. 341.

 What fair excuse is this my pining plight, v. 52.

 What I left, I left it not for nobility of soul, vi. 92.

 What pathway find I my desire to obtain, v. 42.

 What sayest of one by a sickness caught, v. 164.

 What sayest thou of him by sickness waste, v. 73.

 What secret kept I these my tears have told, iii. 285.

 What’s life to me, unless I see the pearly sheen, iii. 65.

 What’s this? I pass by tombs, and fondly greet, iii. 46.

 What time Fate’s tyranny shall oppress thee, i. 119.

 Whate’er they say of grief to lovers came, iii. 33.

 Whatever needful thing thou undertake, i. 307.

 Whatso is not to be no sleight shall bring to pass, ii. 279.

 Whatso is not to be shall ne’er become, iii. 162.

 When a nickname or little name men design, i. 350.

 When Allah willeth aught befal a man, i. 275.

 When comes she slays she; and when back she turns, iv. 232.

 When drew she near to bid adieu with heart unstrung, i. 158.

 Whene’er the Lord ’gainst any man, viii. 314.

 When fails my wealth no friend will deign befriend, i. 208; iv. 189.

 When fortune weighs heavy on some of us, iii. 141.

 When forwards Allah’s aid a man’s intent, x. 53.

 When God upon a man possessed of reasoning, viii. 21.

 When he who is asked a favour saith “To-morrow,” i. 196.

 When his softly bending shape bid him close to my embrace, iii. 306.

 When I drew up her shift from the roof of her coynte, ii. 331.

 When I far-parted patience call and tears, vi. 279.

 When I nighted and dayed in Damascus town, i. 233.

 When I think of my love and our parting smart, i. 250.

 When I took up her shift and discovered the terrace-roof of her kaze,
    viii. 32.

 When in thy mother’s womb thou wast, viii. 119.

 When its birds in the lake make melody, vi. 277.

 When Khalid menaced off to strike my hand, iv. 156.

 When love and longing and regret are mine, ii. 34.

 When man keeps honour bright without a stain, iv. 106.

 When my blamer saw me beside my love, ix. 1.

 When oped the inkhorn of thy wealth and fame, i. 129.

 When saw I Pleiad-stars his glance escape, iii. 221.

 When shall be healed of thee this heart that ever bides in woe?, ii.
    296.

 When shall disunion and estrangement end?, iv. 137.

 When shall the disappointed heart be healed of severance, iii. 58.

 When shall the severance-fire be quenched by union, love, with you,
    viii. 62.

 When she’s incensed thou seest folk lie slain, viii. 165.

 When straitened is my breast I will of my Creator pray, viii. 149.

 When the Kings’ King giveth, in reverence pause, x. 35.

 When the slanderers only to part us cared, iv. 19.

 When the tyrant enters the lieges land, iii. 120.

 When the World heaps favours on thee, pass on, ii. 13.

 When they made their camels yellow-white kneel down at dawning grey, v.
    140.

 When they to me had brought the leach and surely showed, v. 286.

 When thou art seized of Evil Fate assume, i. 38.

 When thou seest parting be patient still, viii. 63.

 When to some parting Fate our love shall doom, to distant life by
    Destiny decreed, i. 129.

 When we drank the wine, and it crept its way, x. 37.

 When we met we complained, i. 249.

 When will time grant we meet, when shall we be, viii. 86.

 When wilt thou be wise and love-heat allay, v. 78.

 Whenas mine eyes behold her loveliness, vii. 244.

 Whenas on any land the oppressor doth alight, iii. 130.

 Where are the Kings earth-peopling, where are they?, vi. 103.

 Where be the Earth kings who from where they ’bode, vi. 105.

 Where be the Kings who ruled the Franks of old?, vi. 106.

 Where be the men who built and fortified, vi. 104.

 Where gone is Bounty since thy hand is turned to clay?, ii. 282.

 Where is the man who built the Pyramids?, v. 107.

 Where is the man who did those labours ply, vi. 105.

 Where is the way to Consolation’s door, viii. 240.

 Where is the wight who peopled in the past, vi. 104.

 While girl with softly rounded polished cheeks, iv. 249.

 While slanderers slumber, longsome is my night, iii. 221.

 While that fair-faced boy abode in the place, ix. 250.

 While thou’rt my lord whose bounty’s my estate, iv. 2.

 Who doth kindness to men shall be paid again, v. 104.

 Who loves not swan-neck and gazelle-like eyes, iii. 34.

 Who made all graces all collected He, iv. 111.

 Who saith that love at first of free will came, ii. 302.

 Who seeketh for pearl in the Deep dives deep, ii. 208.

 Who shall save me from love of a lovely gazelle, vii. 282.

 Who shall support me in calamities, ii. 40.

 Who trusteth secret to another’s hand, i. 87.

 Whom I irk let him fly fro’ me fast and faster, viii. 315.

 Whoso ne’er tasted of Love’s sweets and bitter-draught, iv. 237.

 Whoso shall see the death-day of his foe, ii. 41.

 Whoso two dirhams hath, his lips have learnt, iv. 171.

 Why dost thou weep when I depart and thou didst parting claim, v. 295.

 Why not incline me to that show of silky down, iv. 258.

 Why then waste I my time in grief, until, i. 256.

 Will Fate with joy of union ever bless our sight, v. 128.

 Wilt thou be just to others in thy love, and do, iv. 264.

 Wilt turn thy face from heart that’s all thine own, v. 278.

 Wilt tyrant play with truest friend who thinks of thee each hour, iii.
    269.

 Wine cup and ruby wine high worship claim, x. 41.

 With all my soul I’ll ransom him who came to me in gloom, vii. 253.

 With Allah take I refuge from whatever driveth me, iv. 254.

 With fire they boilèd me to loose my tongue, i. 132.

 With heavy back parts, high breasts delicate, ii. 98.

 With thee that pear agree, whose hue amorn, viii. 270.

 With you is my heart-cure a heart that goes, viii. 78.

 Wither thy right, O smith, which made her bear, viii. 246.

 Within my heart is fire, vii. 127.

 Witnesses unto love of thee I’ve four, viii. 106.

 Woe’s me! why should the blamer gar thee blaming trow?, ii. 305.

 Women are Satans made for woe o’ man, iii. 318.

 Women for all the chastity they claim, iii. 216.

 Women Satans are, made for woe of man, ix. 282.

 Would he come to my bed during sleep ’twere delight, vii. 111.

 Would Heaven I knew (but many are the shifts of joy and woe), v. 75.

 Would Heaven I saw at this hour, iii. 134.

 Would Heaven I wot, will ever Time bring our beloveds back again?,
    viii. 320.

 Would Heaven the phantom spared the friend at night, v. 348.

 Would I wot for what crime shot and pierced are we, viii. 238.

 Would they the lover seek without ado, viii. 281.

 Wrong not thy neighbour even if thou have power, iii. 136.


 Ye are the wish, the aim of me, i. 98.

 Ye promised us and will ye not keep plight?, iii. 282.

 Yea, Allah hath joined the parted twain, ix. 205.

 Yea, I will laud thee while the ringdove moans, viii. 100.

 Yellowness, tincturing her tho’ nowise sick or sorry, iv. 259.

 Yestre’en my love with slaughter menaced me, iii. 27.

 You are my wish, of creatures brightest light, viii. 76.

 You have honoured us visiting this our land, ii. 34.

 You’ve roused my desire and remain at rest, viii. 101.

 You’re far, yet to my heart you’re nearest near, viii. 111.

 Your faring on the parting day drew many a tear fro’ me, viii. 61.


                            _INDEX III._—B.
   _ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF FIRST LINES (METRICAL PORTION) IN ARABIC._

                      _Prepared by_ Dr. STEINGASS.

 NOTE.—_The first numbers refer to vol. and p. of the Mac. Edit.; those
                  in parentheses to the Translation._

 A-ahbábaná inní ’alà ’l-bu’di wa ’l-jafá (Tawíl) iv. 115 (viii. 115)

 A’ánikuhú wa ’l-nafsu ba’du mashúkatun (Tawíl) iv. 571 (ix. 242).

 A-arhalu ’an Misrin wa tíbi na’ímihi (Tawíl), i. 228 (i. 290).

 Aaslú ’llatí fí ’l-hubbi kad malakat asrí (Tawíl) iv. 243 (viii. 261).

 A-ba’da ’l-hibbi lazzátí tatíbu (Wáfir) i. 855 (iii. 259).

 Abà ’l-kalbu lí ’l-hubba illá Su’ádá (Mutakárib) iii. 402 (vii. 129).

 Abhà mina ’l-badri kahláu ’l-’uyúni badat (Basít) iv. 260 (viii. 279).

 Abkí gharíban atáhu ’l-mautu munfaridan (Basít) ii. 422 (v. 115).

 Ablà ’l-hawà asafan yauma ’l-nawà badaní (Basít) i. 424 (ii. 152).

 Abrazú wajhaka ’l-jamíl (Khafíf) ii. 219 (iv. 195).

 A’dà ’aduwwika adnà man wasikta bi-hi (Basít) i. 743 (iii. 143).

 Adáma ’lláhu ’izzaki fí surúrin (Wáfir) iv. 99 (viii. 99).

 ’Adimtu ’stibárí fí ’l-hawà (in?) aslá-kumu (Tawíl) i. 219 (i. 280).

 ’Adimtu ’stibárí fí ’l-hawà in salautumu (Tawíl) i. 49 (i. 74).

 ’Adimtu’stibárí yauma sára ahibbatí (Tawíl) iv. 241 (viii. 259).

 Adirhá bi ’l-kabíri wa bi ’l-saghíri (Wáfir) i. 304; iv. 259 (ii. 29;
    viii. 278).

 Adúru fí ’l-kasri lá arà ahadan (Munsarih) ii. 311 (iv. 291).

 ’Afá ’lláhu ’an ’aynayka kam safakat daman (Tawíl) i. 372 (ii. 100).

 A-fí ’l-’ishki wa ’l-tabríhi dintum kamá dinná (Tawíl) iv. 65 (viii.
    68).

 Agháru ’alayka min nazarí wa minní (Wáfir) iv. 575 (ix. 248).

 Ahbábuná in ghibtumú ’an názirí (Kámil) ii. 29 (iii. 340).

 Ahlan bi-tínin jáaná (Rajaz) iv. 250 (viii. 269).

 Ahnà layálí ’l-dahri ’indiya laylatun (Kámíl) i. 587 (ii. 318).

 Ahrakúní bi ’l-nári yastantikúní (Khafíf) i. 96 (i. 132).

 Ahsanta zannaka bi’l-ayyámi iz hasunat (Basít) i. 288; iv. 292 (ii. 12;
    viii. 309).

 Ahwà kamaran ’ádila ’l-kaddi rashík (?) iv. 240 (viii. 259).

 A’idi l-risálata sániyah (Kámil) i. 764 (iii. 166).

 ’Ajíbatu husnin wajhu-há badru kaukabin (Tawíl) i. 280 (ii. 3).

 ’Ajibtu bi-khálín ya’budu ’l-nára dáiman (Tawíl) i. 561 (ii. 292).

 ’Ajibtu la-hú in zára fí ’l-naumi mazja’í (Tawíl) iii. 386 (vii. 111).

 ’Ajibtu li-’ásiríhá kayfa mátú (Wáfir) iv. 715 (x. 39).

 ’Ajibtu li-’ayní an tamallà bi-milihá (Tawíl) iv. 203 (viii. 224).

 ’Ajibtu li-sa’í ’l-dahri bayní wa baynahá (Tawíl) iv. 570 (ix. 242).

 ’Ajibtu min Iblísa fí kibrihí (Sarí’) iii. 411 (vii. 139).

 ’Ajjala ’l-baynu bayna-ná bi ’l-firáki (Khafíf) i. 808 (iii. 209).

 Ajnà rakíbí min simári kaláidi (Kámil) i. 375 (ii. 103).

 ’Ajúza ’l-nahsi lá yurham sibáhá (Wáfir) i. 130 (i. 174).

 ’Ajúzun tawallat fí ’l-kabáihi mansiban (Tawíl) ii. 406 (v. 96).

 Akallu má fíhi min fazáilihí (Munsarih) ii. 458 (v. 156).

 Akamtum firáqí fí ’l-hawà wa qa’adtumu (Tawíl) i. 136 (i. 181).

 Akamtum gharámí fí ’l-hawà wa ka’adtumu (Tawíl) iv. 100 (viii. 101).

 Akámú ’l-wajda fí kalbí wa sárú (Wáfir) i. 179; i. 891 (i. 218; iii.
    296).

 A-kazá yujázà wuddu kulli karínin (Kámil) iv. 63 (viii. 66 verses from
    the Bresl. ed. instead).

 Akbalat fí ghilálatin zarkái (Khafíf) iv. 261 (viii. 280).

 Akbalat fí ghilálatin zurkatin (Khafíf) i. 167 (i. 218).

 Akbalta fa ’khzarrat ladayná ’l-rubà (Sarí’) i. 620 (iii. 18).

 Akbaltu amshí ’alà khaufin mujálisatan (Basít) ii. 449 (v. 147).

 A-Khálidu házá mustahámun mutayyamu (Tawíl) ii. 184 (iv. 158).

 Akhfaytu má alkáhu minka wa-kad zahar (Kámil) i. 44; i. 876; iv. 242
    (i. 67; iii. 280; viii. 260).

 Akhta-ta iz aradta khauza bahrí (Rajaz) i. 710 (iii. 108).

 Akhúzu bi-jayshí bahra kulli ’ajájatin (Tawíl) iii. 288 (vii. 18).

 Akillí mina ’l-laumi ’llazí lá yufáriku (Tawíl) i. 662 (iii. 60).

 Akúlu lahú lammá takallada zayfahu (Tawíl) i. 497 (ii. 230).

 Akúlu lahú wa kad hazara ’l-’ukáru (Wáfir) iv. 517 (ix. 189).

 Akúlu li-ahyafin huyyí bi-kásin (Wáfir) iv. 289 (viii. 307).

 Akúlu wa ’l-wajdu yatwíní wa yanshuruní (Basít) i. 375 (ii. 104).

 Akútu ma’hdahum bi-shatti ’l-wádí (Kámil) i. 830 (iii. 234).

 Alá ayyuhá ’l-laysu ’l-mughirru bi-nafsihi (Tawíl) iii. 397 (vii. 123).

 Alá ayyuhá ’l’-ushsháku bi-’lláhi khabbirú (Tawíl) i. 578, 588 (ii.
    309, 320).

 Alá fí sabíli ’lláhi má halla bí minka (Tawíl) ii. 270 (iv. 247).

 ’Alà fakdi hibbí ma’ tazáyudi sabwatí (Tawíl) iv. 73 (viii. 75).

 ’Alà ghayzi ’l hawásidi wa ’l-rakíbi (Wáfir) ii. 375 (v. 62).

 ’Alà ’l-bábi ’abdun min ’abídika wákifun (Tawíl) i. 62.

 Alá má li ’l-malíhati lá ta’údu (Wáfir) ii. 440 (v. 137).

 Alá man li-kalbin záibin bi ’l-nawáibi (Tawíl) ii. 437 (v. 132).

 Alá rubbamá zurtu ’l-miláha wa rubbamá (Tawíl) iii. 411 (vii. 138).

 Alá yá dáru lá yadkhulka huznun (Wáfir) ii. 168; iv. 192 (iv. 140;
    viii. 206).

 Alá yá hamáma ’l-dari balligh salámaná (Tawíl) iv. 216 (viii. 236).

 Alá yá hamámátu ’l liwá ’udna ’audatan (Tawíl) iii. 390 (vii. 115).

 Alá yá nafsu an tarzà bi-kaulí (Wáfir) i. 478 (ii. 210).

 Alá yá sabá Najdin matà hijta min Najdi (Tawíl) iii. 390 (vii. 115).

 Alá yá usayhábí ta’álau fa-innaní (Tawíl) iv. 239 (viii. 258).

 Al-’aklu li-ahli ’l-’ilmi wa ’l-’akli wa ’l-adab (Tawíl) ii. 530 (v.
    239).

 ’Alámátu zulli ’l-hawà (Mutakárib) ii. 439 (v. 134).

 ’Alayka bi ’l-sidki wa lau annahu (Sarí’) iv. 698 (x. 23).

 Al-badru yakmulu kulla shahrin marratan (Kámil) (vii. 271).

 Al-badru wa ’l-shamsu fí burjin kad ’ij tama’á (Basít) i. 205 (i. 264).

 Al-badru yahkíka laulá annahú kufalun (Basít) ii. 54 (iv. 19).

 Al-dahru aksama lá yazálu mukaddirí (Kámil) i. 457; iv. 245 (ii. 186;
    viii. 263; i. 457; ii. 186).

 Al-dahru má bayna matwiyyin wa-mabsútin (Basít) i. 375 (ii. 105).

 Al-dahru yafja’u ba’da ’l-’ayni bi ’l-asari (Basít) ii. 7 (iii. 318).

 Al-dahru yaftarisu ’l-rijála fa-lá takun (Kámil) iv. 621 (ix. 295).

 Al-dahru yaumáni zá amnun wa zá hazaru (Basít) i. 11 (i. 25).

 Al-fakru fí autániná ghurbatun (Sarí’) iv. 527 (ix. 199).

 Al-fakru yuzrí bi ’l-fatà dáiman (Sarí’) iv. 617 (ix. 290).

 Al-hammu mujtami’un wa l-shamlu muftariku (Basít) ii. 246 (iv. 223).

 Al-hisnu túrun wa náru ’l-harbi múkadatun (Basít) i. 509 (ii. 242).

 Al-hubbu awwalu má yakúnu majájatun (Kámil) iii. 611 (vii. 330).

 Al-’ishku awwalu má yakúnu majájatun (Kámil) iii. 557 (vii. 280).

 Al-jú’u yatruda bi ’l-raghífi ’l-yábisi (Kámil) ii. 224 (iv. 201).

 Al-kalbu mamlúkun wa ’ayní járiyah (Rajaz) iv. 332 (viii. 346).

 Al-kalbu min furkati ’l-ahbábi munsadi’un (Basít) i. 111 (i. 150).

 Al-kalbu munkabizun wa ’l-fikru munbasitu (Basít) i. 780 (iii. 182).

 Al-mar-u fí zamani ’l-ikbáli ka ’l-shajaru (Basít) i. 290 (ii. 14).

 Al-mar-u yu’rafu fi ’l-anámi bi-fi’lihi (Kámil) iv. 494 (ix. 164).

 Al-mulku li ’lláhi man yazhur bi-nayli munan (Basít) i. 687 (iii. 86).

 Al-nahru khaddun bi’l-sha’á’i muwarradun (Kámil) i. 507 (ii. 240).

 Al-náru abiadu min níráni ahsháí (Basít) ii. 267 (iv. 245).

 Al-násu dáun dafínun (Mujtass) ii. 213 (iv. 188).

 Al-samtu zaynun wa ’l-sukútu salámatun (Kámil) i. 159 (i. 208).

 Al-shamsu min wajhihá ’l-wazzáhi táli’atun (Basít) iii. 520 (vii. 244).

 Al-sirru ’indiya fí baytin la-hu ghalakun (Basít) i. 885 (iii. 289).

 Al-sumru dúna ’l-bízi hum (Rajaz) ii. 274 (iv. 251).

 Al-tínu yu’jibuní ’an kulli fákihatin (Basít) iv. 251 (viii. 269).

 Al-tulúlu ’l-dawáris (Khafíf) ii. 436 (v. 130).

 Al-yauma yujma’u mazlúmun wa man zalamá (Basít) ii. 546 (v. 258).

 Al-zulmu fí nafsi ’l-fatà káminun (Sarí’) iv. 671 (ix. 343).

 Alláhu khawwala minhu ájáma ’l-’ulà (Kámil) i. 559 (ii. 291).

 Alam tara anna junda ’l-wardi yazhú (Wáfir) iv. 257 (viii. 276).

 Alam tara anna ’l-durra yaghlú bi-launihi (Tawíl) ii. 273 (iv. 250).

 Alam tara anna ’l-miska ya’zumu kadruhu (Tawíl) ii. 275 (iv. 253).

 ’Alayhá ’sfirárun záda min ghayri ’illatin (Tawíl) ii. 281 (iv. 259).

 ’Alayka bi ’l-sidki walau annahu (Sarí’) i. 234 (i. 298).

 ’Alayka salámu ’lláhi yá manzilan khalá (Tawíl) iv. 217, 218 (viii.
    237, 238).

 A-laysa ’ajíban anna baytun yazummuná (Tawíl) ii. 299 (iv. 279).

 ’Alayya wa ’indí má turídu mina ’l-rizà (Tawíl) iv. 131 (viii. 129).

 Alifa ’l-hawádisu muhjatí wa aliftuhá (Kámil) iii. 622; iv. 118 (vii.
    340; viii. 117).

 ’Alimná bi-anná ba’da ghaybatikum nublà (Tawíl) i. 664 (iii. 63).

 Alláhu ya’lamu annaní kamidun (Kámil) ii. 442 (v. 139).

 Alláhu ya’lamuanní ba’da furkatikum (Basít) i. 669; i. 188 (iii. 8;
    iii. 292).

 Amá aná fa-lastu minhu kháif (Rajaz) iii. 95 (vi. 98).

 Amá tarà arba’an li ’l-lahwi kad jumi’at (Basít) i. 59 (i. 86).

 Amá tarà aykata ’l-utrajji musmiratan (Basít) iv. 254 (viii. 272).

 Amá tarà dauhata ’l-wardi ’llatí zaharat (Basít) iv. 256 (viii. 275).

 Amá tarà ’l-lauza hína tuzhiruhu (Munsarih) iv. 252 (viii. 270).

 Amá tarà ’l-laymúna lammá badá (Sarí’) iv. 254 (viii. 272).

 Amá tarà ’l-súka kad suffat fawákihuhu (Basít) i. 897 (iii. 302).

 Amá wa hawáhá hilfatun ’inda zí wajdin (Tawíl) i. 456 (ii. 186).

 Amá wa ’lláhi lau ’àlima ’l-anámu (Wáfir) i. 729 (iii. 128).

 Amá wa ’lláhi lau tajidína wajdí (Wáfir) ii. 389 (v. 77).

 A-mauláya házá ’l-badru sára li-ufkika (Tawíl) iii. 414 (vii. 143).

 A-mauláya hází ’l-shamsu wa ’l-badru awwalan (Tawíl) iii. 415 (vii.
    143).

 Amílu ilà má kána min-kum mina ’l-rizà (Tawíl) iv. 188 (viii. 181).

 Amílu ilaykum lá amílu li-ghayrikum (Tawíl) iii. 650.

 A-min ba’di ihkámi ’l-tajáribi yanbaghí (Tawíl) iii. 416 (vii. 144).

 Ammaltu wasla ahibbatí má niltuhu (Kámil) iv. 333 (viii. 347).

 Amsat tuhaddiduní bi ’l-katli wá harabí (Basít) i. 628 (iii. 27).

 A-mukhjilata ’l-shamsi ’l-munírati fí ’l-zuhà (Tawíl) iv. 31 (viii.
    35).

 Amurru ’alà ’l-diyári diyári Laylà (Wáfir) i. 184 (i. 238).

 Ana ’árifun bi-sifáti husnika jáhilun (Kámil) i. 868 (iii. 272).

 Ana dárun bunítu li ’l-afráhi (Khafíf) i. 131 (i. 175).

 Ana kad salautu wa luzza fí tarfí ’l-karà (Kámil) ii. 265 (iv. 242).

 ’Anákídun hakat lammá tadallat (Wáfir) iv. 248 (viii. 266).

 ’Ánaktuhu fa-sakartu min tíbi ’l-shazà (Kámil) i. 560 (ii. 292).

 Aná ’l-fárisu ’l-ma’rúfu fí haumati ’l-waghà (Tawíl) iii. 290 (vii.
    18).

 Aná ’l-gharíbu fa-lá áwí ilà ahadin (Basít) ii. 423 (v. 116).

 Aná ’l-Jamrakánu kawiyyu ’l-janáni (Mutakárib) iii. 296 (vii. 23).

 Aná ’l-Kúrajánu shají’u ’l-zamán (Mutakárib) iii. 296 (vii. 23).

 Aná ’l-Kúrajánu wa zikrí ’shtahar (Mutakárib) iii. 292 (vii. 20).

 Aná ’l-ma’rúfu fí yaumi ’l-majáli (Wáfir) iii. 241 (vi. 262).

 Ana maytun fa-jalla man lá yamútu (Khafíf) i. 285 (ii. 9).

 Anání ki ábun minkumú junha laylatin (Tawíl), iv. 335 (ix. 2).

 Anat ’alà ’l kasaráti ’l-kaysaríyyáti (Basít) i. 132 (i. 176).

 An’im bi-tínin tába tam’an wa ’ktasà (Kámil), iv. 250 (viii. 269).

 Anta ’llazí kad ramayta ’l-nása fí ta’abin (Basít) iv. 154 (viii. 149).

 Anta ’llazí salaka ’l-i’ráza lastu aná (Basít) ii. 20 (iii. 332).

 Antum murádí wa antum ahsanu ’l-bashari (Basít), iv. 74 (viii. 76).

 Antum murádí wa qasdí (?) i. 69 (i. 98).

 Arà ásárahum fa-azúbu shaukan (Wáfir) i. 112, 177; iv. 103, 305 (i.
    151, 230; viii. 103, 320).

 Arà ’ilala ’l-dunyá ’alayya kasíratan (Tawíl) i. 234 (i. 298).

 Aráka ’alà ’l-abwábi tabkí wa tashtakí (Tawíl) ii. 569 (v. 283).

 Aráka fa-lá aruddu ’l-tarfa kay lá (Wáfir) iv. 549 (ix. 221).

 Aráka tarúban zá shajin wa tarannumin (Tawíl) i. 859 (iii. 263).

 Arákum bi-kalbí min biládin ba’ídatin (Tawíl) iii. 369 (vii. 93).

 Arà ’l-nafsa-fí fikrin li-fakdi habíbihá (Tawíl) iv. 64 (viii. 67).

 (Inní?) arà ’l-nauma min aynayya kad nafará (Basít) i. 424 (ii. 151).

 Arà ’l-sayfa wa ’l-sayyáfa wa ’l-nit’a ahzarú (Tawíl) i. 317 (ii. 42).

 A-ramáníya ’l-kawwásu am jafnáki (Kámil) ii. 346 (v. 33).

 Ar’ashaní ’l-dahru ayya ra’shin (Basít) i. 280 (ii. 4).

 Arba’atun má (’jtama’at) kattu izá (Munsarih) i. 83 (i. 116).

 Arba’atun má ’jtama’na kattu siwà (Munsarih) i. 883 (iii. 237).

 Ariktu hattà ka-anní a’shiku ’l-araka (Basít) i. 793 (iii. 195).

 Arsaltu khátamaka ’llazí ’stabdaltuhu (Kámil) i. 870 (iii. 274).

 Asada ’l-baydái hal taktuluní (Ramal) ii. 352 (v. 40).

 A-salauta hubba Budúra am tatajalladu (Kámil) ii. 263 (iv. 240).

 ’Asà wa-la’alla ’l-dahru yalwí ’inánahu (Tawíl) i. 113, 848; iv. 65 (i.
    152; iii. 251; viii. 67).

 Asbahtu min aghnà ’l-warà (Rajaz) iv. 716 (x. 40).

 A-shajáka min Rayyá khayálun záiru (Kámil) iii. 368 (vii. 91).

 A-shajáka nauhu hamáimi ’l-sidri (Kámil) iii. 327 (vii. 91).

 Ashára ’l-kalbu nahwaka wa ’l-zamíru (Wáfir) ii. 554 (v. 266).

 ’Ashiktuhú ’inda má ausáfuhú zukirat (Basít) iii. 557 (vii. 280).

 Ashkú ’l-zamána wa má kad halla bí wa jarà (Basít) iv. 198 (viii. 219).

 ’Ashrakat fí ’l-dujà fa-láha ’l-naháru (Khafíf) i. 4 (i. 11).

 Astakhbiru ’l-shamsa ’ankum kullamá tala’at (Basít) i. 184 (i. 238).

 Asúnu daráhimí wa azubbu ’anhá (Wáfir) i. 287 (ii. 11).

 A-tabkí ’alà bu’dí wa min-ka jarà ’l-bu’du (Tawíl) ii. 580 (v. 295).

 A-tajfú muhibban má salá ’anka sá’atan (Tawíl) i. 865 (iii. 269).

 A-tarà ’l-zamána yasurruná bi-talákí (Kámil) ii. 433 (v. 128).

 Atathu ’l-sa’ádatu munkádatan (Mutakárib) iv. 283 (viii. 301).

 A-tatma’u min Laylà bi-waslin wa-innamá (Tawíl) i. 735 (iii. 135).

 Ataytu ilà dári ’l-ahibbati rájiyan (Tawíl) ii. 470 (v. 58).

 Ataytu ilà ’l-maulà li-inkási al-dami (Tawíl) i. 240 (i. 306).

 Ataytu zanban ’azíman (Mujtass) ii. 138 (iv. 109).

 A-tunsifu ghayrí fí hawáka wa tazlimu (Tawíl) ii. 286 (iv. 264).

 A-tu’rizu ’anní wa ’l-fuádu lakum yasbú (Tawíl) ii. 565 (v. 278).

 Atyabu ’l-tayyibáti katlu ’l-a’ádí (Khafíf) i. 506 (ii. 239).

 Audà ’l-zamánu bi-nafsi ’l-zíbi fa ’khtatafat (Basít) i. 746 (iii.
    146).

 A’uddu ’l-layálí laylatan ba’da laylatin (Tawíl) i. 576 (ii. 308).

 Au laytaní nu’mà abúhu bi-shukrihá (Kámil) i. 307 (ii. 32).

 A’úzu bi ’lláhi min ashyái tuhwijuní (Basít) ii. 277 (iv. 254).

 ’Awwádatun málat bi-ná (Rajaz) iv. 264 (viii. 283).

 Ayá Abrízatan lá tatrukíní (Wáfir) i. 399 (ii. 127).

 Ayá Badí’a ’l-jámáli ’sta’tifí bi-shajin (Basít), iii. 652 (vii. 368).

 Ayá bna ’l-’ammi ’indí min gharámí (Wáfir), i. 663 (iii. 61).

 Ayá gháfilan ’an hádisáti ’l-tawáriki (Tawíl), i. 629; iii. 493 (iii.
    28; vii. 221).

 Ayá ghazbánu da’ní kad kafáni (Wáfir), i. 399 (ii. 126).

 Ayá layta shi’rí wa ’l-hawádisu jammatun (Tawíl), ii. 386 (v. 75).

 Ayá man háza kulla ’l-husni turran (Wáfir), iii. 382 (vii. 107).

 Ayá man kad tamallakaní kadíman (Wáfir), ii. 376 (v. 63).

 Ayá man zakà aslan wa-tába wiládatan (Tawíl), i. 318 (ii. 43).

 Ayá manzila ’l-ahbábi hal laka ’audatun (Tawíl), iv. 303 (viii. 319).

 Ayá munyata ’l-kalbi záda ’shtighálí (Mutakárib), iii. 522 (vii. 248).

 Ayá nafaháti ’l-muski min arzi Bábilin (Tawíl) iv. 524 (ix. 195).

 Ayá rabbata ’l-husni ’llatí azhabat nuskí (Tawíl) iv. 571 (ix. 243).

 Ayá wáhidan ihsánuhú shamala ’l-khalka (Tawíl) ii. 559 (v. 272).

 Ayá wásilan bi ’l-bábi bi ’lláhi fa’nzurá (Tawíl) iv. 217 (viii. 236).

 Ayá yauma ’l-surúri ma’a ’l-tahání (Wáfir) ii. 375 (v. 63).

 Ayá zá ’l-tári kalbí tára shaukan (Wáfir) iv. 172 (viii. 166).

 A-yazlimuní ’l-zamánu wa anta fíhi (Wáfir) i. 294 (ii. 18).

 Ayna ’l-akásiratu ’l-jabábiratu ’l-ulà (Kámil) i. 316 (ii. 41).

 Ayna ’l-’atáu wa kaffu júdika fí ’l-sarà (Kámil) i. 550 (ii. 282).

 Ayna ll’azí ’amara ’l-biláda bi-asrihá (Kámil) iii. 100 (vi. 104).

 Ayna ’llazí ’l-harmáni min bunyánihi (Kámil) ii. 414 (v. 107).

 Ayna ’llazína banú li-záka wa shayyadú (Kámil) iii. 100 (vi. 104).

 Ayna ’l-mulúku wa man bi ’l-arzi kad ’amarú (Basít) iii. 99 (vi. 103).

 Ayna man assasa ’l-Zurà wa banáhá (Khafíf) iii. 101 (vi. 104).

 ’Ayní li-ghayri jamálikum lá tanzuru (Kámil) i. 116 (i. 156).

 Ayrí kabírun wa ’l-sagíru yakúlu lí (Kámil) i. 897 (iii. 302).

 A-yumkinu an tajía laná luhayzah (Wáfir) ii. 77 (iv. 43).

 ’Ayyarúní bi-an sabaktu dumú’í (Khafíf) iv. 362 (ix. 29).

 Ayyuhá ’l-’áshiku kad zakkartaní (Ramal) ii. 362 (v. 50).

 Ayyuhá ’l-dáru ’llatí atyáiuhá (Ramal) ii. 369 (v. 57).

 Ayyuhá ’l-gháibína an jafni ’ayní (Khafíf) i. 411 (ii. 139).

 Ayyuhá ’l-kamriyyu hal mislí tahím (Ramal) ii. 359 (v. 47).

 Azába ’l-tibra fí kási ’l-lujayni (Wáfir) i. 378 (v. 66).

 Azhà li-Yúsufa fí ’l-jamáli khalífatan (Kámil) i. 561 (ii. 292).

 Azhú ’alayya bi ’l-alházin badí’áti (Basít) i. 359 (ii. 87).

 Azúruhum wa sawádu ’l-layli yashfa’u lí (Basít) ii. 274 (iv. 252).


 Ba’astu ilayhi ashkú mina ’l-jawà (Tawíl) i. 569 (ii. 300).

 Badá fa-arání ’l-zabya wa ’l-ghusna wa ’l-badra (Tawíl) ii. 170 (iv.
    142).

 Badá fa-kálú tabáraka ’lláhu (Munsarih) i. 813 (iii. 215).

 Badá lí min fulánin má badá lí (Wáfir) ii. 217 (iv. 193).

 Badá ’l-sha’ru fí wajhihí fa ’ntakam (Mutakárib) ii. 462 (v. 161).

 Badá rabí’u ’l-’izári li ’l-hudaki (Munsarih) ii. 490 (v. 190).

 Badat kamaran wa málat ghusna bánin (Wáfir) i. 833; ii. 84 (iii. 237;
    iv. 50).

 Badat kamaran wa másat ghusna bánin (Wáfir) iv. 286 (viii. 303).

 Badat li-tuhákí husnahú wa jamálahu (Tawíl) iv. 281 (viii. 298).

 Badat liya fí ’l-bustáni bi ’l-hulali ’l-khuzri (Tawíl) ii. 639 (v.
    346).

 Badí ’al-husni kam házá ’l-tajanní (Wáfir) i. 338 (ii. 63).

 Badí’atu ’l-husni azhat bighyatí abadan (Basít) iii. 649 (vii. 366).

 Bádir bi-khayrin izá má kunta muktadiran (Basít) i. 737 (iii. 136).

 Bádir ilà ayyi ma’rúfin hamamta bi-hi (Basít) ii. 207 (iv. 181).

 Bakaytu gharáman wa ’shtiyákan wa lau’atan (Tawíl) iii. 653 (vii. 369).

 Bakíti fí ’l-izzi wa ’l-ikbáli yá dáru (Basít) iv. 193 (viii. 207).

 Balaghtu ’l-muráda wa zála ’l-’aná (Mutakárib) iii. 333 (vii. 59).

 Balligh amánata man wafat maniyyatuhu (Basít) ii. 421 (v. 114).

 Bána ’l-khalítu bi-man uhibbu fa-adlajú (Kámil) iv. 360 (ix. 27).

 Banati ’l-makárimu wasta kaffika manzilan (Kámíl) ii. 166 (iv. 138).

 Baniyya Ádama lá yahzá bi-ka ’l-amalu (Basít) iii. 110 (vi. 116).

 Bayzáu maskúlatu ’l-khaddayni ná’imatun (Basít) ii. 272 (iv. 249).

 Bi-akrabi dárin yá Umaymatu fa’lamí (Tawíl) ii. 386 (v. 75).

 Bi-’ayshiki in marrat ’alayki janázatí (Tawíl) ii. 382 (v. 70).

 Bi-bazlin wa hilmin sáda fí kaumihi ’l-fatà (Tawíl) i. 432 (ii. 159).

 Bi-gharámí ayyu ’uzrin wázihin (Ramal) ii. 364 (v. 52).

 Bi-kadri ’l-kaddi tuktasibu ’l-ma’álí (Wáfir) iii. 8 (vi. 5).

 Bi-’lláhi yá dáru in marra ’l-habíbu zuhan (Basít) ii. 350 (v. 38).

 Bi ’lláhi yá kabru hai zálat mahásinuhu (Basít) i. 185; iv. 174 (i.
    239; viii. 168).

 Bi ’lláhi yá muntahà sukmí wa amrází (Basít) iv. 65 (viii. 68).

 Bi ’lláhi yá sádati tibbú marízakumu (Basít) iv. 149 (viii. 144).

 Bi ’lláhi yá tarfiya ’l-jání ’alà kabidí (Basít) iii. 412 (vii. 140).

 Bi ’l-rúhi asmaru nutkatun min launihi (Kámil) ii. 280 (iv. 258).

 Bi-má bi-jafnika min ghunjin wa min kahali (Basít) i. 565 (ii. 296).

 Bi-ma ’l-ta’allulu lá ahlun wa lá watanu (Basít) i. 396 (ii. 124).

 Bi-ná mislu má tashkú fa-sabran la’allaná (Tawíl) iii. 413 (vii. 141).

 Bi-nafsí ’llazí kad zára fí ghasaki ’l-zujà (Tawíl) iii. 527 (vii.
    253).

 Bi-nafsí wa ahlí man arà kulla laylatin (Tawíl) iii. 386 (vii. 111).

 Bi-nafsiya man radda ’l-tahiyyata záhikan (Tawíl) i. 766 (iii. 168).

 Bi-rúhiya afdí khála-hú fauka khaddihi (Tawíl) ii. 378 (v. 65).

 Binta ’l-kirámi balaghti ’l-kasda wa ’l-arabá (Basít) ii. 366 (v. 54).

 Bittu fí dir’ihá wa báta rafíkí (Khafíf) ii. 434 (v. 128).

 Bulítu bi-há wa mislí lá yulámu (Wáfir) iv. 236 (viii. 255).

 Bushrà likayyimihí iz lámasat yaduhu (Basít) i. 619 (iii. 17).


 Da’at fa-ajába mauláhá du’áhá (Wáfir) ii. 560 (v. 273).

 Da’ ’anka laumí fa-inna ’l-laumu ighráu (Basít) iv. 715 (x. 39).

 Dabbartu amraka ’indamá (Kámil) iv. 120 (viii. 119).

 Da’i ’l-ayyáma ta’fal má tasháu (Wáfir) i. 316 (ii. 41).

 Da’i ’l-makádíra tajrí fí a’innatihá (Basít) ii. 199; iv. 67 (iv. 173;
    viii. 70).

 Da’ ’l-lauma lá asghí ilà kauli láimi (Tawíl) i. 663 (iii. 61).

 Dámat laka ’l-in’ámu yá sayyidí (Sarí’) sayyidiya (Rajaz) i. 155 (i.
    203).

 Da’ muhjatí tazdádu fí khafakánihi (Kámil) i. 663 (iii. 62).

 Daná firáku ’l-habíbi wa ’ktarabá (Munsarih) iv. 291 (viii. 308).

 Daná ’l-waslu yá Masrúru fa-’bshir bilà matlin (Tawíl) iv. 200 (viii.
    221).

 Danat hína hála ’l-mautu bayní wa baynahá (Tawíl) ii. 383 (v. 71).

 Dariji ’l-ayyáma tandarij (Kámil) i. 577 (ii. 309).

 Darriji ’l-ayyáma tandariju (Madíd) ii. 244 (iv. 220).

 Da’ú muklatí tabkí ’alà fakdi man ahwà (Tawíl) iv. 112 (viii. 112).

 Dujújiyyatu ’l-far’ayni mahzúmatu ’l-hashá (Tawíl) i. 83 (i. 116).

 Dumú’u ’ayní bi-há ’nfizázu (Basít) ii. 433 (v. 127).

 Dúnaka yá sayyidí wardatan (Mujtass?) iv. 256 (viii. 275).


 Fa’alná jamílan kábalúná biziddihi (Tawíl) i. 25 (i. 43).

 Fa-baynamá záka ’l-malíhu fí mahall (Rajaz) iv. 577 (ix. 250).

 Fadaytuka innamá ’khtarnáka ’amdan (Wáfir) i. 898 (iii. 303).

 Fa-fí ’l-hilmi itkánun wa fí ’l-’afwi haybatun (Tawíl) i. 432.

 Fa-hal ba’da hazá ’l-bu’di ’ayní tarákumu (Tawíl) iv. 305 (viii. 321).

 Fa-hal ba’da házá ’l-bu’di yurjà wisáluhá (Tawíl) iv. 306 (viii. 322).

 Fa-hal li-mauláya ’itfu kalbin (Basít) ii. 433 (v. 127).

 Fa-hal yajma’u ’l-rahmánu lí wa lakum shamlan (Tawíl) iv. 307 (viii.
    323).

 Fa-in lam yajid sabran li-kitmáni sirrihi (Tawíl) i. 589 (ii. 320).

 Fa-in tas-alúní bi ’l-nisái fa-innaní (Tawíl) i. 812 (iii. 214).

 Fa-in tazhakí yá Hindu yá rubba laylatin (Tawíl) iii. 373 (vii. 98).

 Fa-ka-annahá wa ka-anna hámila kásihá (Kámil) iv. 714 (x. 38).

 Fa-kam kad wakaftu wa kam kad fataktu (Mutakárib) iii. 88 (vi. 91).

 Fa-kam min shakiyyin bi-là ráhatin (Mutakárib) iii. 6 (vi. 2).

 Fa-khada’tuhú bikhadí’atin lammá atà (Kámil) i. 319 (ii. 44).

 Fakkartu sá’ata waslihá fí hajrihá (Kámil) iv. 526 (ix. 198).

 Fakru ’l-ganí yuzhabu anwárahu (Sarí’) i. 213 (i. 272).

 Fa-kultu li-’uzzalí lá ta’zilúní (Wáfir) iv. 94 (viii. 95).

 Fa-kuntu bi-khayrin summa bittu bi-ziddihi (Tawíl) ii. 386 (v. 75).

 Fa-la-asbiranna ’alà hawáka tajalludan (Kámil) ii. 264 (iv. 241).

 Fa-lá rahima ’l-rahmánu turbata ’azmihi (Tawíl) iv. 722 (x. 47).

 Fa-lá tas’au ilà ghayrí (Hazaj) ii. 377 (v. 65).

 Fa-lau kabla mabkáhá bakaytu sabábatan (Tawíl) iii. 552 (vii. 275).

 Fa-li’lláhi kalbun lá yalínu li-’áshikin (Tawíl) iii. 493 (vii. 222).

 Fa-lí sadíkun wa la-hú lihyatun (Sarí’) ii. 218 (iv. 194).

 Fa-má huwa illá an aráhu fajáatan (Tawíl) iv. 563 (ix. 235).

 Fa-min sha’rihá laylun wa min farkihá fajru (Tawíl) iv. 286 (viii.
    303).

 Fa-ríkuhú khamrun wa-anfásuhú (Sarí’) ii. 219 (iv. 195).

 Fa-tárat tuyúrun bi ’l-’ashái wa sáhú (Tawíl) iv. 30 (viii. 34).

 Fa-wakaftu andubu zá’inína tahammalú (Kámil) iv. 360 (ix. 27).

 Fa-yá munyatí lá tablaghí ’l-hajra wa ’l-jafá (Tawíl) i. 629 (iii. 28).

 Fa-yaumu ’l-amání yaumu fauzí bi-kurbikum (Tawíl) i. 50 (i. 75)

 Fa-yaumu amání yauma kurbikumú minní (Tawíl) i. 887 (iii. 291).

 Fa-yá záirí min ba’di farti sudúdihi (Tawíl) i. 679 (iii. 78).

 Fí jabhati ’l-dahri satrun lau nazarta lahu (Basít) iv. 623 (ix. 297).

 Fí ’l-kalbi minniya náru (Mujtass) iii. 400 (vii. 127).

 Fí ’l-záhibína ’l-awwalí(na) (Kámil) ii. 7 (iii. 318).

 Fí wajhihá sháfi’un yamhú isáatahá (Basít) i. 368 (ii. 97).


 Ghadara ’l-zamánu bi-shamliná fatafarraká (Kámil) iv. 702 (x. 26).

 Ghadara ’l-zamánu wa lam yazal ghaddáran (Kámil) ii. 57 (iv. 22).

 Ghammun wa huznun fí ’l-fuádi mukímu (Kamíl) ii. 55 (iv. 19).

 Gharáibu ’l-dam’i fí khaddayhi taztaribu (Basít) i. 767 (iii. 169).

 Gharámí fíka yá kamarí gharímí (Wáfir) i. 852 (iii. 256).

 Gharámí mina ’l-ashwáki wa ’l-sukmu záidun (Tawíl) iii. 482 (vii. 211).

 Ghulámiyyatu ’l-ardáfi tahtazzu fí ’l-sibá (Tawíl) ii. 459 (v. 157).


 Habasúní ’an habíbí kaswatan (Ramal) ii. 363 (v. 51).

 Habba ríhun mina ’l-himà wa nasímu (Khafíf) i. 580 (ii. 311).

 Habíbiya má házá ’l-tabá’udu wa ’l-kilá (Tawíl) ii. 257 (iv. 234).

 Habíbun kullamá fakkartu fíhi (Wáfir) i. 196 (i. 250).

 Hab lí janáyata má zallat bi-hi ’l-kadamu (Basít) i. 313; iv. 311 (ii.
    38; viii. 327).

 Habní janaytu fa-lam yazal ahlu ’l-nuhà (Kámil) i. 285 (ii. 9).

 Habú lí hadísan min hadísikumú ’asà (Tawíl) i. 870 (iii. 274).

 Hadassaná ’an ba’zi ashyákhihi (Sarí’) ii. 81 (iv. 47).

 Haddadaní Khálidun bi-kat’i yadí (Munsarih) ii. 183 (iv. 156).

 Hadísí ’ajíbun fáka kulla ’l-’ajáibi (Tawíl) ii. 166 (iv. 139).

 Hajama ’l-surúru ’alayya hattà annahu (Kámil) ii. 651 (v. 355).

 Hajara ’l-manámu wa wásala ’l-tashílu (Kámil) iv. 65 (viii. 68).

 Hakama ’l-zamánu bi-annaní laka ’áshikun (Kámil) i. 906 (iii. 312).

 Hanían laka ’l-málu ’llazí kad hawaytahu (Tawíl) ii. 381 (v. 69).

 Hanían marían ghayra dáin mukhámirin (Tawíl) i. 373 (ii. 102).

 Has btukumú dir’an hasíná li-tamna’ú (Tawíl) i. 77 (i. 108).

 Hassanta zannaka bi ’l-ayyámi iz hasunat (Basít) i. 849; iv. 132 (iii.
    253; viii. 130).

 Hatafa ’l-subhu bi ’l-dujà fa’skiníhá (Khafíf) i. 96 (i. 132).

 Hatafa ’l-fajru bi ’l-saná fa’ski khamran (Khafíf) iv. 258 (viii. 276).

 Hatakta ’l-zamíra bi-raddi ’l-tuhaf (Mutakárib) ii. 455 (v. 153).

 Hátihá bi-’lláhi háti (Ramal) i. 62 (i. 89).

 Hattà matà hazá ’l-sudúdu wa zá ’l-jafá (Kámil) i. 53; 71 (i. 78; 101).

 Hattà matà yamzí ’l-tahájuru wa ’l-kilá (Kámil) ii. 165 (iv. 137).

 Hawat mina ’l-husni má lam yahwihí basharun (Basít) iii. 379 (vii.
    104).

 Hawwin ’alayka fa-inna ’l-amúru (Mutakárib aslam) ii. 244 (iv. 220).

 Hayfáu tukhjilu ghusna ’l-báni kámatuhá (Basít) i. 553 (ii. 285).

 Haysumá kunta kad wakáka iláhí (Khafíf) i. 420 (ii. 148).

 Házá jazáu man ’asà (Kámil) iv. 351 (ix. 17).

 Házá ’l-safarjalu lazzáti ’l-warà fa-ghadá (Basít) i. 118 (i. 158).

 Házá muhibbuka matwiyyun ’alà kabadih (Basít) ii. 300 (iv. 279).

 Házá wa in kána fí jú’in wa izzári (Basít) iii. 403 (vii. 129).

 Házihi rauzatun wa hazá ghadírun (Khafíf) iv. 193 (viii. 207).

 Hazí ’llatí lá ’na túla ’l-dahri násíhá (Basít) iv. 287 (viii. 304).

 Himamu ’l-mulúki izá arádú zikrahá (Kámil) ii. 414 (v. 106).

 Hiya ’l-makádíru fa-má yughní ’l-hazar (Rajaz) iv. 298 (viii. 314).

 Hiya ’l-shamsu maskanuhá fí ’l-samái (Mutakárib) i. 761 (iii. 163).

 Hum hammalúní fí ’l-hawà ghayra tákatí (Tawíl aslam) i. 409 (ii. 137).

 Hum rahhalú yauma ’l-khamísi ’ashiyyatan (Tawíl) i. 286 (ii. 10).

 Hurimtu wafáa ’l-’ahdi in kuntu ba’dakum (Tawíl) iv. 29 (viii. 34).

 Húriyyatun hára kalbí fí mahásinihá (Basít) iii. 379 (vii. 105).

 Húrun haráiru má hamamna bi-ríbatin (Kámil) ii. 450 (v. 148).

 Huwa ’l-kalbu wa ’bnu ’l-kalbi wa ’l-kalbu jadduhu (Tawíl) iv. 11
    (viii. 15).

 Huwa ’l-rizku là hallun ladayka wa lá rabtu (Tawíl) i. 22 (i. 39)

 Huyyíta min malakin ’azími ’l-sháni (Kámil) i. 349 (ii. 75).

 Huzúrukum la-ná sharafun (Wáfir) i. 131 (i. 175).


 Ibnn ’l-liámi wa ’bnu kalbin máridu (Rajaz) iv. 11 (viii. 15, not
    translated).

 Iftahú ’l-bába fa-kad jáa ’l-tabíb (Ramal) ii. 570 (v. 284).

 Ihfaz mashíbaka min ’aybin yudannisuhu (Basít) ii. 77 (iv. 43).

 Ihris ’alà farti ’l-kulúbi mina ’l-azà (Kámil) i. 468; iv. 726 (ii.
    197; x. 50).

 Ij’al nadímaka akdáhan tuwásiluhá (Basít) ii. 378 (v. 66).

 Ikámatu ’l-gharíbi bi kulli arzin (Wáfir) iii. 447 (vii. 175).

 Ikran bi-ráyika ráya ghayrika wa ’stashir (Kámil) ii. 214 (iv. 189).

 Ilà kam zá ’l-dalálu wa zá ’l-tajanní (Wáfir) ii. 265 (iv. 242).

 Ilà ’l-ahli balligh inna zá ash-amu ’l-khabar (Tawíl) i. 712 (iii.
    111).

 Ilà ’lláhí askkú mihnatan wa kaábatan (Tawíl) i. 708 (iii. 106)

 Iláhí kalla sabrí wa ’htiyálí (Wáfir) ii. 43 (iii. 344).

 Ilayka akbaltu wa fí kalbí lahab (Rajaz) i. 710 (iii. 108).

 Ilayka As’adu ashkú min lahíbi jawan (Basít) i. 907 (iii. 312).

 Illá yá ’aynu bi ’l’-abaráti júdí (Wáfir) ii. 271 (iv. 248).

 Ilsim anámilahú fa-lasna anámilan (Kámil) ii. 175 (iv. 147).

 Ilzam yakínaka súa’l-zanni tanju bihi (Basít) i. 743 (iii. 142).

 In akbalat fatanat bi-husni kiwámihȧ (Basít) ii. 492 (v. 192).

 In akbalat katalat wa in hiya adbarat (Kámil) ii. 254 (iv. 232).

 In jía bi ’l-husni kay yukáyisahu (Munsarih) i. 107, 155 (i. 144).

 In kalla málí fa-lá khillun yusáhibuní (Basít) i. 160; ii. 214 (i. 208;
    iv. 189).

 In kána kasdí ghayrukum yá sádatí (Kámil) iii. 652 (vii. 369).

 In kána lí fí-man ahibbu mushárikun (Tawíl) i. 135 (i. 180).

 In kána wa’dukumú bi-’l-wasli tazwíru (Basít) i. 48 (iii. 252).

 In kistu kaddaka bi-’l-gusni ’l-ratíbi fakad (Basít) i. 64 (i. 92).

 In kunta dahraka kullahu (Kámil) ii. 215 (iv. 190).

 In kunta tahwà ’l-widáda minná (Basít) ii. 433 (v. 127).

 In kunta tazmaru má fí ’l-hubbi ishfákan (Basít) i. 667 (iii. 65).

 In kunta yá sáhi min ajlí bakayta daman (Basít) i. 62 (i. 89).

 In kuntu kad aznabtu zanban sálifan (Kámil) i. 733; 844 (iii. 132;
    249).

 In sahha minka ’l-razà yá man huwa ’l-talabu (Basít) ii. 270 (iv. 247).

 In shakauná bu’dan fa-má zá nakúlu (Khafíf) i. 70, 158 (i. 100).

 In tazkurúní ba’da túli zamání (Kámil) iii. 91 (vi. 94).

 In shíta taslam bi-túli ’l-dahri má tabrah (Basít) iv. 93 (viii. 94).

 In ’udti ’udná wa-in wáfayta wáfayná (Basít) i. 40, 41; 42 (i. 62, 64;
    65).

 In yabghi zú jahlin ’alayka fa-khallihí (Kámil) iii. 196 (vi. 214).

 ’Inabun ta’muhú ka-ta’m’i ’l-sharábi (Khafíf) iv. 248 (viii. 266).

 In’am bi-waslika lí fa-házá waktuhu (Kámil) ii. 451 (v. 148).

 ’Indí ’mina ’l-shauki wa’l-tizkárí wa’l-burahá (Basít) i. 310 (ii. 34).

 Inna ’aysha ’l-hammámi atyabu ’ayshin (Khafíf) i. 620 (iii. 19).

 Inna hází hiya ’btitáu sakámí (Khafíf) i. 763 (iii. 165).

 Inna kalbí yahwà ’l-miláha zukúran (Khafíf) iv. 580 (ix. 253).

 Inna ’l-hazára latífu ’l-sauti ya’jibuní (Basít) ii. 360 (v. 48).

 Inna li ’l-bulbuli sautan fí ’l-sahar (Ramal) ii. 361 (v. 48).

 Inna ’l-khiláfata lá tadúmu li-wáhidin (Kámil) i. 94 (i. 129).

 Inna ’llatí malakatní fí ’l-hawà malakat (Basít) iv. 235 (viii. 254).

 Inna ’l-layáliya wa’l-ayyáma kad tubi’at (Basít) ii. 7 (iii. 319).

 Inna ’llazi khalaka ’l-makárima házahá (Kámil) ii. 140 (iv. 111).

 Inna ’l-nisáa shayátínun khulikna la-ná (Basít) ii. 6, 11; iv. 609
    (iii. 318, 322; ix. 282).

 Inna ’l-nisaa wa-in du’ína li-’iffatin (Kámil) i. 814 (iii. 216).

 Inna ’l-rasúla ’llazí kánat rasáiluná (Basít) i. 787 (iii. 189).

 Inna ’l-rijála ’l-ulà jáúka min nasabí (Basít) ii. 309 (iv. 289).

 Inna Maymúnata lá ’akla lahá sikah (?) i. 35 (i. 57).

 Inna sadíka ’l-hakki man kána ma’ak (Rajaz) i. 748 (iii. 149).

 Inna shay-an haláku nafsika fíhi (Khafíf) i. 85 (i. 118).

 Inna yauma ’l-firáki katta’a kalbí (Khafíf) i. 726 (iii. 124).

 Inní ilayka mudà l-sá’áti muhtáju (Basít) ii. 567 (v. 281).

 Inní la-a’jubu min suáli ’l-nási ’an (Kámil) i. 561 (ii. 293).

 Isali ’l-’urfa in saalta karíman (Khafíf) iv. 363 (ix. 29).

 Isbir ’alà hulwi ’l-zamáni wa murrihi (Kámil) iv. 151 (viii. 146).

 Isbir fa-fí ’l-sabri khayrun lau ’alimta bi-hi (Basít) ii. 244 (iv.
    221).

 ’Ish bi ’l-khidá’i fa-anta fí (Kámil) i. 741 (iii. 141).

 ’Ishná ilà an raayná fí ’l-hawá ’ajabá (Basít) ii. 366 (v. 54).

 Ishrab haniyyan mumti’an bi-’l-’awáfí (Madíd makhzúm) i. 61 (i. 88).

 I’si ’l-nisáa fa-tilka ’l-’tá’atu ’l-hasanah (Basít) i. 812; iv. 600
    (iii. 214; ix. 282).

 Ismu ’llazí hayyaraní (Rajaz) iv. 93 (viii. 93).

 I’tabir vá ayyuhá ’l-maghrúru (Ramal) ii. 146 (iv. 118).

 Izá an’amat Nu’mun ’alayya bi-nazratin (Tawíl) ii. 47 (iv. 12).

 Izá anhat ilà ’l-qasdi ’l-aghání (Wáfir) iv. 172 (viii. 166).

 Izá anta lam yashibka zádun mina ’l-tukà (Tawíl) i. 472 (ii. 202).

 Izá aráda ’lláhu amran li’mriin (Rajaz) i. 215; iv. 17 (i. 275; viii.
    21).

 Izá fatahta dawáta ’l-izzi wa’l-ni’am (Basít) i. 95 (i. 129).

 Izá ghazabat raayta ’l-nása katlà (Wáfir) iv. 172 (viii. 165).

 Izá halla ’l-sakílu bi-arzi kaumin (Wáfir) i. 721; 731 (iii. 120; 130).

 Izá jáa ’l-musíbatu fí ghulámin (Wáfir) i. 148 (i. 194).

 Izá jádati ’l-dunyá ’alayka fa-jud bi-há (Tawíl) i. 289 (ii. 13).

 Izá kána ’aunu ’lláhi li ’l-mari musi’an (Tawíl) iv. 729 (x. 53).

 Izá kána fí ’l-hájáti mahlan ilà ghadin (Tawíl) i. 150 (i. 196).

 Izá kána lí fí man uhibbu mushárikun (Tawíl) ii. 257 (iv. 234).

 Izá kána sadru ’l-mari bi ’l-sirri zayyikun (Tawíl) iv. 619 (ix. 292).

 Izá kharaja ’l-imámu min’a ’l-dawái (Wáfir) ii. 456 (v. 154).

 Izá khiftu yauman ’itába ’llatí (Mutakarib) i. 660 (iii. 59).

 Izá kunta lí maulan a’íshu bi-fazlihi (Tawíl) ii. 38 (iv. 2).

 Izá kunta turzíhu wa yurzíka sáhibun (Tawíl) ii. 453 (v. 150).

 Izá lam akum fí ba’zi hakkika bi’l-shukri (Tawíl) i. 34 (i. 56).

 Izá lam yakun fí ’l-hubbi sukhtun wa lá rizan (Tawíl) i. 780 (iii.
    182.)

 Izá lam yakun lí fí ’l-hawá man yujírunf (Tawíl) iii. 496 (vii. 225).

 Izá lam yakun li ’l-amri ’indaka hílatun (Tawíl) ii. 381 (v. 69).

 Izá ’l-maru lam yudnis mina ’l-laumi ’irzahu (Tawíl) ii. 135 (iv. 106).

 Izá ’ltakayná ’shtakayná (Mujtass) i. 194 (i. 249).

 Izá má atáka ’l-dahru yauman bi-nakbatin (Tawíl) i. 87 (i. 119).

 Izá má ’azamta ’alà hájatin (Mutakárib) i. 241 (i. 307).

 Izá malakati ’l-mála kaffí wa-lam ajud (Tawíl) i. 287 (ii. 11).

 Izá má ’l-dahru jarra ’alà unásin (Wáfír) i. 741 (iii. 141).

 Izá má ’l-násu jarrabahum labíbun (Wáfír) ii. 213 (iv. 188).

 Izá má nadímí ’allaní summa ’allaní (Tawíl) ii. 56 (iv. 20).

 Izá má ramáka ’l-dahru minhu bi-nakbatin (Tawíl) iv. 151 (viii. 146).

 Izá raayná muhibban kad azarra bi-hi (Basít) ii. 385, 465 (v. 73, 164).

 Izá raayta ’l-wadá’a fa’sbir (Basit) iv. 60 (viii. 63).

 Izá rafa’u ’l-zamánu ’alayka shakhsan (Wáfir) i. 690 (iii. 89).

 Izá sadíkun sadda ’an ilfihi (Sarí’) i. 862 (iii. 266).

 Izá sahiba ’l-fatà ’izzan wa sa’dan (Wáfír) iv. 617 (ix. 291).

 Izá salimat hámu ’l-rijáli mina ’l-radà (Tawíl) ii. 80; iv. 641 (iv.
    46; ix. 314).

 Izá záka sadrí asta’ínu bi-khálikin (Tawíl) iv. 154 (viii. 149).

 Izra’ jamílan wa lau fí ghayri mauzi’ihi (Basít) i. 737 (iii. 136).

 Izrib bi-khanjarika ’l-’anídi wa lá takhaf (Kámil) iii. 445 (_see_ vii.
    173).


 Jáa ’l-rasúlu bi-waslin minka yatma’uní (Basít) i. 785 (iii. 188).

 Jáa ’l-surúru azáia ’l-hamma wa ’l-hazaná (Basít) ii. 373 (v. 61).

 Jáat bi-lá mau’idin fí zulmati ’l-ghasaki (Basít) ii. 322 (not
    translated).

 Jáat mubarki’atan fakultu lahá ’sfirí (Kámil) iv. 261 (viii. 280).

 Jáda ’l-zamánu bi-man uhibbu fa-a’tabá (Kámil), iv. 520 (ix. 192).

 Jádat bi-kussin ná’imin (Rajaz) i. 898 (iii. 304).

 Jahannamun wa lazan summa ’l-hatímu kazá (Basít), ii. 532 (v. 240).

 Jamí’u l-sanái’i mislu ’l-’ukúd (Mutakarib) i. 242 (i. 308).

 Jamí’u má kálati ’l-’ushsháku min kamadin (Basít) i. 635 (iii. 33).

 Janna’l-zalámu wa hája ’l-wajdu bi ’l-sakami (Basít), i. 413, 612; ii.
    357 (ii. 140; iii. 11; v. 45).

 Jasadun náhilun wa kalbun jaríhu (Khafíf) i. 582 (ii. 314).

 Jaysháni yaktatiláni túla nahárihim (Kámil) i. 97 (i. 132).

 Jinniyyatun wa lahá Jinnun tu’allimuhá (Basít) ii. 452 (v. 149).

 Jismí ghadá manzilu’l-askámi wa’l-mihani (Basit) Mukhammas ii. 253 (iv.
    230).


 Kaannahá misla má tahwáhu kad khulikat (Basít) iv. 272 (viii. 291).

 Kaannamá al-khaukhu fí rauzihi (Sarí’) iv. 252 (viii. 270).

 Kaanna ’l-khizábu ’alà kaffihá (Mutakárib) i. 707 (iii. 105).

 Kaannamá ’l-tinu yabdú min-hu abyazuhu (Basít) iv. 250 (viii. 268).

 Kaannamá tabsimu ’an lúluin (Sarí’) i. 58 (i. 86).

 Kaanna rubà ’l-nárinji iz habbati ’l-sabá (Tawíl) iv. 253 (viii. 272).

 Ka-anna suláfa ’l-khamri min mái ríkihá (Tawíl) i. 659 (iii. 57).

 Kaanna zamánaná min kaumi Lútin (Wáfir) i. 896 (iii. 301).

 Kabbaltuhú faswaddati ’l-mukulu ’llatí (Kámil) i. 821 (iii. 224).

 Kabidí ukábiduhu wa sadrí zayyiku (Kámil) i. 505 (ii. 238).

 Kad afsahat bi ’l-watari ’l-a’jamí (Sarí’) iv. 173 (viii. 166).

 Kad ar’asha ’l-dahru ayya ra’shin (Basít) i. 107 (i. 144).

 Kad ’áraza ’l-badru jahlan husna súratihá (Basít) iv. 273 (viii. 291.)

 Kad bakíná muwaswisína hayárà (Khafíf) iv. 44 (viii. 48).

 Kad hayyajatní ’l-khudúdu ’l-humru wa ’l-hadaku (Basít) iv. 66 (viii.
    69).

 Kad jáaka ’l-muhru ’llazí nazala ’l-waghà (Kámil) i. 684 (iii. 83).

 Kad karraha ’l-dam’u jafní fa’ktazà ’ajaban (Basít) ii. 365 (v. 53).

 Kad kultu muz sára ’l-siyáku bi-him (Kámil) iv. 60 (viii. 63).

 Kad kultu yauman li-khillin (Muytass) iv. 270 (viii. 289).

 Kad kuntu abkí ’alà má fáta min farahin (Basít) i. 783 (iii. 185).

 Kad kuntu ahsibu anna waslaka yushtarà (Kámil) i. 635 (iii. 34).

 Kad kuntu ahwà an ushátiraka ’l-radà (Kámil) ii. 12 (iii. 323).

 Kad kuntu arjú bi-anna ’al-shamla yajtami’u (Basít) i. 188 (i. 242).

 Kad kuntu fí wataní wa ’l-shamlu mujtami-*’un (Basít) iv. 228 (viii.
    247).

 Kad mála lí tarabun mina ’l-autári (Kámil) iv. 206 (viii. 227).

 Kad sábaka ’l-tarfa bi-tirfin sábikin (Rajaz) i. 541 (ii. 273).

 Kad sára sirrí bi ’l-dumú’i ’alániyah (Kámil) i. 887 (iii. 285).

 Kad yaslamu ’l-mutmasu min hufratin (Sarí’) i. 207 (i. 265).

 Kadamun ’alayka mubárakun (Kámil) iv. 173 (viii. 167).

 Kafáka bi-anna ’l-mauta bádí ’l-’ajáibi (Tawíl) i. 657 (iii. 56).

 Kafà ’l-muhibbína fí ’l-dunyá ’azábuhumu (Basít) ii. 228 (iv. 205).

 Kaffa ’l’-awázilu ’an kílin wa ’an kálin (Basít) ii. 230 (iv. 207).

 Kaffú ’l-maláma kafání múlimu ’l-sakami (Basít) iv. 235 (viii. 254).

 Kála ’l-’awázilu ’anní kad salá kazabú (Basít) ii. 460 (v. 158).

 Kála ’l-’awázilu má házá ’l-gharámu bi-hi (Basít) ii. 459 (v. 158).

 Kála ’l-imámu Abú Nuwásin wa-hwa fí (Kámil) ii. 458 (v. 157).

 Kála ’l-wushátu badá fí ’l-khaddi ’árizuhu (Basít) ii. 459 (v. 157).

 Kálat aráka khazabta ’l-shayba kultu la-há (Basít) ii. 218; iv. 277
    (iv. 194; viii. 295).

 Kálat wa kad ’araztu ’an ghishyánihá (Kámil) i. 898 (iii. 303).

 Kálat wa kad la’iba ’l-gharámu bi-’itfihá (Kámil), iv. 525 (ix. 197).

 Kálati ’l-’ushsháku in lam yuskiná (Kámil) makhzúm, iv. 267 (viii.
    285).

 Kalbu ’l-muhibbi ’alà ’l-ahbábi mat’úbu (Basít), i. 336; ii. 172 (ii.
    62; iv. 144).

 Kalbu ’l-mutayyimi káda an yatafattatá (Kámil), i. 337 (ii. 63).

 Kaliftu bi-há fattánata ’l-Turki wa ’l-’Arab (Tawíl), ii. 345 (v. 32,
    replaced by lines from Bresl. ed.).

 Kaliftu bi-há wa kad tammat bi-husnin (Wáfir) iii. 540 (vii. 265).

 Kálú Abú ’l-’Sakri min Shaybána kultu lahum (Basít) ii. 409 (v. 100).

 Kálú badá khattu ’l-’izári bi-khaddihi (Kámil) ii. 219 (iv. 196).

 Kálú bayázu ’l-sha’ri núrun sáti’un (Kámil) iv. 276 (viii. 295).

 Kálú juninta bi-man tahwà fa-kultu lahum (Basít) i. 854; ii. 228; iv.
    311 (iii. 258; iv. 205; viii. 326).

 Kálú wa kad alifat nafsí tafakkuhahá (Basít) iv. 251 (viii. 269).

 Kam ’Áshikin haddasa bi-ajfánihi (? second half is Mutakárib) i. 88 (i.
    122).

 Kam laylatin kad bittu ma’zaujatí (Sarí’) iv. 677 (x. 1).

 Kam ma’sharin fí kubábihá nazalú (Munsarih) iii. 88 (vi. 91).

 Kam zá ’l-taraddudu fí ’l-autáni tabkíhá (Basít) iv. 223 (viii. 242).

 Kamá raká ahadukum baghlah (Sarí’) iv. 279 (viii. 297).

 Kamá ’shtahat khulikat hattà izá kamalat (Basít) ii. 216 (iv. 191).

 Kamá ’shtahat khulikat hattà izá ’tadalat (Basít) iv. 549 (ix. 221).

 Kamaru ’l-zámani yalúhu fí isfárihi (Kámil) iv. 614 (ix. 287).

 Kamarun tabaddà fí badí’i mahásini (Kámil) iv. 193 (viii. 207).

 Kamarun takámala fí samái jamálihi (Kámil) i. 157 (i. 205).

 Kamarun yasullu mina ’l-jufúni izà ’nsanà (Kámil) iv. 265 (viii. 284).

 Kamarun yufattiku bi ’l-lawáhizi in raná (Kámil) i. 281 (ii. 4).

 Kamulat sifátu ’l-’áshikína li-man ghadá (Kámil) iv. 236 (viii. 255).

 Kána lí kalbun a’íshu bi-hi (Madíd) ii. 437 (v. 131).

 Kána ’llazí khiftu an yakúná (Basít) i. 460 (ii. 189).

 Kánat khaliyyatu nahlin wa’hya ’ámiratun (Basít) iii. 226; iv. 618 (vi.
    246; ix. 292).

 Kánat la-hú arjulu ’l-a’láji dáiratan (Basít) iv. 714 (x. 38).

 Kasaman bi-líni kiwámika ’l-mayyási (Kámil) ii. 170 (iv. 143).

 Kasaman bi-nishwati jafnihi wa bi-khasrihi (Kámil) i. 125 (i. 168).

 Kasaman bi-wajnatihi wa básimi saghrihi (Kamíl) i. 815; iv. 263 (iii.
    217; viii. 282).

 Kasaman la-kad malaat ahádísí ’l-fazá (Kámil) i. 883 (iii. 287).

 Kasrun alayhi tahiyyatun wa salámu (Kámil) ii. 162 (iv. 134).

 Kasurat manákibuhú wa tála fakáruhu (Kámil) iv. 279 (viii. 297).

 Kataba ’l-’izáru-bi-’anbarin fí lúluin (Kámil) i. 569; iii. 553 (ii.
    301; vii. 277).

 Kataba ’l-’izáru wa yá lahu min kátibin (Kamìl) i. 569 (ii. 301).

 Katabtu ilayka yá zína ’l-miláhi (Wáfir) iii. 448 (vii. 176).

 Katabtu ilayka wa’l-’abarátu tajrí (Wáfir) i. 625 (iii. 24).

 Katabtu ilayka yá súlí kitában (Wáfir) i. 625 (iii. 24).

 Katabtu walí kalbun bi-zikriki múla’un (Tawíl) i. 869 (iii. 293).

 Kaumí humú kalalú Umayma akhí (Kámil) ii. 139 (iv. 110).

 Kaumun taráhum ba’da má sana’ú (Sarí’) iii. 88.

 Kayfá ’l-julúsu ’alà nárin wa lá khamidat (Basít) i. 200 (i. 256).

 Kayfa ’l-sabílu ilà an ablugha ’l-arabá (Basít) ii. 354 (v. 42).

 Kayfa ’l-taríku ilà abwábi sulwáni (Basít) iv. 221 (viii. 240).

 Kayfa ’stibárí wa náru ’l-shauki fí kibadí (Basít) ii. 164 (iv. 136).

 Kazabta bísa anta min shaytáni (Rajaz) i. 710 (iii. 108).

 Kazabta fí kaulika min biláli (Rajaz) i. 709 (iii. 108).

 Khafarat bi-sayfi ’l-lahzi zimmata mighfarí (Kámil) i. 778 (iii. 179).

 Khajalat ghusúnu ’l-báni min khutwátihá (Kámil) iv. 202 (viii. 223).

 Khala’at hayákiluhá bi-jar’ái ’l-himà (Kámil) ii. 227 (iv. 240).

 Khalakta ’l-jamála la-ná fitnatan (Mutakárib) iv. 576 (ix. 249).

 Khalati’l-diyáru mina l-siráji ’l-táli’i (Kámil) iv. 128 (viii. 126).

 Khalati ’l-zawáyá min khabáyáhá kamá (Kámil) ii. 289 (iv. 267).

 Khalíláni mamnú’áni min kulli lazzatin (Tawíl) ii. 531 (v. 240).

 Khalílayya hal absartumá au sami’tumá (Tawíl) iii. 160 (vi. 174).

 Khalílayya hal tahta ’l-samái baniyyatun (Tawíl) ii. 414 (v. 107).

 Khalílayya káma ’l-kalbu wa ’l-dam’u sájimu (Tawíl) i. 615 (iii. 14).

 Khalílayya inní mughrimu ’l-kalbi háimu (Tawíl) iii. 483 (vii. 212).

 Khalílayya Rayyá kad ajadda bi-kaurihá (Tawíl) iii. 369 (vii. 93).

 Khalílí kuffa ’an laumí wa ’azlí (Wáfir) i. 711 (iii. 110).

 Khalíliya kam házá ’l-taanní wa-asbiru (Tawíl) i. 448 (ii. 178).

 Khalíliya lá tas-al ’alà má bi-muhjatí (Tawíl) i. 206 (i. 264).

 Kharajat tashhudu ’l-rifáka ruwaydan (Khafíf) ii. 451 (v. 149).

 Kharajtu wa fí amalí ’audatun (Mutakárib) i. 666 (iii. 64).

 Kharajú bi-hi wa li-kulli bákin khalfahu (Kámil) i. 541 (ii. 281).

 Kharasa ’l-lisánu wa kalla fí-ki kalámí (Kámil) iv. 240 (viii. 258).

 Khayáluhumá má laysa yabrihu sá’atan (Tawíl) i. 443 (ii. 173)

 Khayáluka bayna tábakati ’l-jufúni (Wáfir) iv. 58 (viii. 61).

 Khayáluka fí ’ayní wa zikruka fí famí (Tawíl) i. 778 (iii. 179).

 Khayáluka fí ’l-tabá’udi wa ’l-tadání (Wáfir) i. 318 (ii. 42).

 Khayáluki ’indí laysa yabrahu sá’atan (Tawíl) iv. 64 (viii. 66).

 Khazanathu ka ’l-ummi ’l-shafíkati bi-*’bnihá (Kámil) iv. 519 (ix.
    191).

 Khulikta min ’al-turábi fa-sirta hayyan (Wáfir) ii. 215 (iv. 190).

 Khuliktu mina ’l-turábi fa-sirtu shakhsan (Wáfir) ii. 529 (v. 237).

 Khuz malíkan fauka katfika wa ’rtahil (Kámil) i. 218 (i. 278).

 Khuzú hizrakum min tarfihá fa-hwa sáhirun (Tawíl) i. 564; i. 848; (ii.
    295; iii. 252).

 Kif bi ’l-diyári wa hayyi ’l-arbu’a ’l-durusá (Basít) i. 452 (ii. 181).

 Kif wa ’stami’ má jarà lí (Mujtass) iv. 207 (viii. 228).

 Kifí wa ’nzurí minní wakú’a ’ajáibi (Tawíl) i. 708 (iii. 107).

 Kifú bi-rusúmi ’l-dári wa ’stakhbirú ’an-ná (Tawíl) ii. 16 (iii. 328).

 Kifú wa ’nzurú hála ’llazí tahjurúnahu (Tawíl) iv. 63 (viii. 66).

 Kifú zawwidúní nazratan kabla baynikum (Tawíl) i. 290 (ii. 15).

 Kiláná sawáun fí ’l-hawà ghayra annahá (Tawíl) i. 457.

 Kissatí a’zamu kissah (Ramal) ii. 287 (iv. 265).

 Kitábuka yá Masrúru kad hayyaja ’l-balwà (Tawíl) iv. 225 (viii. 245).

 Kiwámuka fattánun wa tarfuka ahwaru (Tawíl) iv. 43 (viii. 47).

 Kul li-kaumin hum li-’ishkí jahilú (Ramal) iv. 317 (viii. 332).

 Kul li ’l-ghazálati wa-hya ghayru ghazálati (Kámil) ii. 436 (v. 130).

 Kul li ’l-malíhati fí ’l-khimári ’l-fákhití (Kámil) i. 219 (i. 280).

 Kul li ’l-malíhati fí ’l-khimári ’l-muzhabi (Kámil) iv. 273 (viii.
    291).

 Kul li ’l-malíhati fí ’l-kiná’i ’l-azraki (Kámil) ii. 286 (iv. 264).

 Kul li-man malla waslaná wa jafáná (Khafíf) i. 136 (i. 181).

 Kul li-man sadda ’átiban (Khafíf) ii. 436 (v. 131).

 Kul li-man yahmilu kamman (Ramal) i. 7 (i. 15).

 Kúlí li-tayfiki yansaní ✿ ’An mazja’í wakta ’l-hujú’ (Kámil) iii. 385
    (vii. 109).

 Kúlí li-tayfiki yansaní ✿ ’An mazja’í wakta ’l-manám (Kámil) iii. 383
    (vii. 108).

 Kúlí li-tayfiki yansaní ✿ ’An mazja’í wakta ’l-rukád (Kámil) iii. 383
    (vii. 109).

 Kúlí li-tayfiki yansaní ✿ ’An mazja’í wakta ’l-wasan (Kámil) iii. 383
    (vii. 108).

 Kullu ’bni unsà wa in tálat salámatuhu (Basít) ii. 96 (iv. 63).

 Kullu juz-in min mahásinihá (Madíd) iii. 404 (vii. 131).

 Kullu shay-in mina ’l-dimá-i harámun (Khafíf) i. 61 (i. 89).

 Kultu li ’l-wardi má li-shaukika yúzí (Khafíf) iv. 257 (viii. 276).

 Kúlú li-man náwama ’l-ayyámu lah rámat (Basít) i. 45 (i. 68).

 Kulúbu ’l-’áshikína la-há ’uyúnu (Wáfir) ii. 261 (iv. 238).

 Kun ’an humúmika mu’rizan (Kámil) i. 34 (i. 56).

 Kun ’an umúrika mu’rizan (Kámil) ii. 17 (iii. 328).

 Kun halíman izá bulíta bi-ghayzin (Khafíf) ii. 86, 244 (iv. 54, 221).

 Kun kayfa shíta fa-inna ’lláha zú karamin (Basít) i. 472; iv. 258 (ii.
    202; viii. 277).

 Kunná ’alà zahrihá wa’l ’ayshu fí raghadin (Basít) ii. 383; iii. 398
    (v. 71; vii. 123).

 Kunná wa kánat la-ná ’al-ayyámu khádimatan (Basít) i. 452 (ii. 182).

 Kurratu ’l-’ayni habíbí waladí (Ramal) ii. 548 (v. 260).

 Kuzubu ’l-zabarjadi kad humilna wa innamá (Kámil) iv. 257 (viii. 275).


 Lá a’shiku ’l-abyaza ’l-manfúkha min simani (Basít) ii. 275 (iv. 252).

 Lá budda lí min muddatin mahtúmatin (Kámil) i. 317; iv. 86 (ii. 41;
    viii. 83).

 Lá farraka ’lláhu túla’l-dahri baynakumá (Basít) ii. 385 (v. 74).

 Lá kána yaumu ’l-firáki aslan (Basít) iv. 45 (viii. 49).

 Lá tahjurú man lá ta’awwada hajrakum (Kámil) i. 890 (iii. 295).

 Lá tahsibú inní nasaytu ’uhúdakum (Kámil) i. 835 (iii. 238).

 Lá tahsunu’l-wafratu illá wa-hí (Sarí’) i. 497 (ii. 230).

 Lá ta’jalanna amíra ’l-mu-minína fa-kad (Basít) iii. 401 (vii. 128).

 Lá taj’alanní fadáka ’lláhu min malikin (Basít) iii. 402 (vii. 129).

 Lá takis amradan bi-unsà wa là tus(ghi) (Khafíf) i. 898 (iii. 303).

 Lá talka illá bi-laylin man tuwásiluhu (Basít) ii. 275 (not
    translated).

 Lá tamananna ’alà l-nisái (Kámil) i. 6 (i. 13).

 Lá tamananna fatan askanta muhjatahu (Basít) i. 746 (iii. 145).

 Lá tarhalanna fa-má lí ’an-kumú jaladun (Basít) iv. 59 (viii. 63).

 Lá tarkunanna ilà ’l-firáki (Kámil) i. 376 (ii. 105).

 Lá tartají wasla ’llatí ’ulliktahá (Kámil) iv. 194 (viii. 208).

 Lá tas-ali ’l-dahra insáfan fa-tazlimuhu (Basít) i. 183 (i. 237).

 Lá tashribi ’l-ráha illá min yaday rashain (Basít) i. 61; ii. 378; iv.
    527 (i. 88; v. 66; ix. 198).

 Lá tashriban min ba’da aklika ’ájilan (Kámil) ii. 516 (v. 222).

 Lá tazlimanna izá má kunta muktadiran (Basít) i. 737; ii. 214 (iii.
    136; iv. 189).

 Lá ta’zulíhi fa-inna ’l-’azla yúji’uhu (Basít) i. 566 (ii. 297).

 Lá ta’zulú ’l-mahzúna fí ahzánihi (Kámil) i. 886 (iii. 291).

 Lá tuksiranna khidá’í (Mujtass) i. 737 (iii. 137).

 Lá tushibi ’l-a’wara yauman wa kun (Sarí’) ii. 218 (iv. 194).

 Lá uhibbu ’l-siwáka min ajli anní (Khafíf) i. 871 (iii. 275).

 Lá wa ’llazí sajada ’l-jibáhu la-hu (Munsarih) ii. 455 (v. 152).

 Lá yaktumu ’l-sirra illá kullu zí sikatin (Basít) ii. 256 (iv. 233).

 Lá yakun zannuka illà sayyian (Ramal) i. 743 (iii. 142).

 Lá zála bábuka ka’batan maksúdatan (Kámil) ii. 175 (iv. 148).

 Lá ziltu mu’tarizan ’alà ahli ’l-hawà (Kámil) i. 885 (iii. 290).

 Lá ziltu alsama warda khaddin ghazzin (Kámil) iv. 314 (viii. 329).

 La-akhfà hubbahum má kána yakhfà (Wáfir) iv. 61 (not translated).

 La’alla ’lláha yajma’uná karíban (Wáfir) iv. 149 (viii. 141).

 La-’amriya lá yahlú liya ’l-’ayshu ba’dakum (Tawíl) i. 776 (iii. 177).

 La-ashkurannaka má náhat mutawwakatun (Basít) iv. 100 (viii. 100).

 La-atrukanna ilà ’l-firák (Kámil) iv. 298 (viii. 314).

 Ladaykum dawáu ’l-kalbi wa ’l-kalbu záhibun (Tawíl) iv. 76 (viii. 78).

 La-há a’yunun insánuhá bi-asábi’in (Tawíl) iv. 172 (viii. 166).

 La-há basharun míslu ’l-haríri wa mantiku (Tawíl) i. 761 (iii. 163).

 La-há fí zawáyá ’l-wajhi tis’u masáibi (Tawíl) iv. 85 (viii. 86).

 La-há kafalun ta’allaka fí za’ífin (Wáfir) i. 823 (iii. 226).

 La-há ’sfirárun ka-launi ’l-shamsi mubtahijun (Basít) ii. 279 (iv.
    257).

 La-hájatu ’l-mari fí ’l-idbári idbáru (Basít) ii. 463 (v. 162).

 Láhat ’alayka siyábu ’l-sa’di yá dáru (Basít) iv. 192 (viii. 206).

 La-hú kalamun ’amma ’l-akálíma naf’uhu (Tawíl) i. 94 (i. 128).

 La-hú khálun ’alà safháti khaddin (Wáfir) iv. 247 (viii. 265).

 La-hu wajhun kawajhi ’l-hiláli (?) i. 133 (i. 177).

 La-in ’ufítu min marazin bi-jismí (Wáfir) iv. 67 (viii. 70).

 La-in zammaná ba’da ’l-tanáí takarrubun (Tawíl) i. 117 (i. 157).

 La-ka fí ’l-kulúbi saríratun lá tazharu (Kámil) i. 187 (i. 241).

 La-ka ’l-hamdu yá man fazluhú mutawátirun (Tawíl) iv. 190 (viii. 183).

 La-ka ’l-hamdu yá mustaujiba ’l-hamdi wa ’l-shukri (Tawíl) i. 528 (ii.
    261).

 La-kad ’ásha Masrúrun zamánan muna’-’aman (Tawíl) iv. 214 (viii. 234).

 La-kad kafà má jarà li ’l-sabbi madma’uhu (Basít) i. 804 (iii. 206).

 La-kad kalla sabrí summa záda tamalmulí (Tawíl) iv. 10 (viii. 14).

 La-kad khiltuhá shamsa ’l-zuhà fa-tukhuyyilat (Tawíl) iv. 265 (viii.
    284).

 La-kad kataba ’l-dahru fazla ’l-kirámi (Mutakárib) i. 94 (i. 128).

 La-kad kuntu ’údan li ’l-balábili manzilan (Tawíl) iv. 262 (viii. 281).

 La-kad rá’aní badru ’l-dujà bi-sudúdihi (Tawíl) i. 873 (iii. 277).

 La-kad tála laylí wa ’l-wushátu hujú’u (Tawíl) i. 818 (iii. 221).

 La-kad zahaba ’l-himáru bi-ummi ’Amrin (Wáfir) ii. 424 (v. 118).

 Lam a’dimi ’l-hazma wa lákinnaní (Sarí’) i. 369 (ii. 98).

 Lam adri kaulan izá habbú mukálamatí (Basít) iv. 604 (ix. 276).

 Lam ansahú muz káma yakshifu ’ámidan (Kámil) iv. 580 (ix. 253).

 Lam a’shiki ’l-sumra illà min hiyázatihim (Basít) ii. 274 (iv. 251).

 Lam yabka illá nafasun háfitun (Sarí’) iv. 126; iii. 393 (vii. 119;
    viii. 124).

 Lam yubkiní illá hadísu firákihi (Kámil) iv. 59 (viii. 63).

 Lamá raání láimí fí ’l-hawà (Sarí’) iv. 334 (ix. 1).

 Lama’a ’l-barku ’l-yamání (Ramal) i. 449 (ii. 179).

 Lammá anákhú kubayla ’l-subhi ’ísahumu (Basít) ii. 442 (v. 140).

 Lammá da’athu ilà wisálí ’itfatun (Kámil) i. 900 (iii. 306).

 Lammá nubíná bi ’l-firáki wa hakkamat (Kámil) i. 94 (i. 129).

 Lammá raaytu ’l-najma sáhin tarfahu (Kámil) i. 819 (iii. 221).

 Lámú ’alà hubbi ’l-malíhi wa ’annafú (Kámil) i. 870 (iii. 233).

 La-ná ’indakum wa’dun fa-hallá wafaytumu (Tawíl) i. 878 (iii. 282).

 La-ná sadíkun wa la-hú lihyatun (Sarí’) iv. 280 (viii. 298).

 Lau ’alimná kudúmakum la-nasharná (Khafíf) i. 85, 211 (i. 117, 271).

 Lau anna ’azzata hákamat shamsa ’l-zuhà (Kámil) i. 373 (ii. 102).

 Lau annahum janahú li ’l-sabbi au zárú (Basít) iv. 263 (viii. 281).

 Lau annaní asbahtu fí kulli ni ’matin (Tawíl) i. 50 (i. 75).

 Lau kána má tadda’íhi hakkan (Basít) ii. 454 (v. 151).

 Lau kíla lí wa lahíbu ’l-nári muttakidun (Basít) iii. 559 (vii. 282).

 Lau kíla lí wa zafíru ’l-harri yattakidu (Basít) i. 874 (iii. 279).

 Lau kunta tasduku fí ’l-mahab(bati) (Kámil) i. 678 (iii. 77).

 Lau kuntu adrí bi ’l-mahabbati hákazá (Kámil) iii. 611 (vii. 330).

 Lau kuntu ashrahu má alkáhu min huraki (Basít) i. 904 (iii. 310).

 Lau ta’lamu ’l-dáru man kad zárahá farahat (Basít) i. 132 (i. 176).

 Laulá tádabuhú wa husnu sikátihi (Kámil) i. 182 (i. 235).

 Launu ’l-habábi la-há launun wa ghubratuhá (Basít) ii. 279 (iv. 257).

 Laysa fí kulli sá’atin wa awánin (Khafíf) ii. 213 (iv. 188).

 Layta ’l-khayálu ’alà ’l-ahbábi má taraká (Basít) ii. 641 (v. 348).

 Layta shir’í bi-ayyí zanbin rumíná (Khafíf) iv. 219 (viii. 238).

 Laytaní absartu házá’ (’l-wakta) (Ramal) i. 735 (iii. 134).

 Lí ashrakun samhu ’l’-ináni mugháirun (Kámil) i. 493 (ii. 225).

 Lí fí mahabbatikum shuhúdun arba’un (Kámil) iv. 106 (viii. 106).

 Lí habíbun izá zahartu ilayhi (Khafíf) ii. 270 (iv. 247).

 Lí habíbun khayáluhú nusbu ’ayni (Khafíf) ii. 269 (iv. 246).

 Lí humámun kad samá auja’l-’ulà (Ramal) i. 198 (i. 253).

 Likáu ’l-nási laysa yufídu shay-an (Wáfir) ii. 213 (iv. 188).

 Li-kulli shay-in mina ’l-ashyái míkátu (Basít) ii. 579 (v. 294).

 Li ’lláhi darru mubashsharí bi-kudúmihim (Kámil) i. 185; ii. 230 (i.
    239; iv. 207).

 Li ’l-wardi ’indí mahallun (Mujtass) iv. 256 (viii. 274).

 Lima lá amílu ilà ’l-izári izá badá (Kámil) ii. 280 (iv. 258).

 Lisánu ’l-hawà fí muhjatí la-ka nátikun (Tawíl) ii. 163, 283; iv. 303
    (iv. 135, 261; viii. 319).

 Liya ayrun yanámu lauman wa shúman (Khafíf) iv. 275 (viii. 293).

 Luz bi ’l-kirámi baní ’l-kirámí fa-innamá (Kámil) i. 279 (ii. 2).


 Má absarat ’aynáka ahsana manziran (Kámil) i. 561 (ii. 292).

 Má absarat ’aynáya misla ’l-lauzi fí (Kámil) iv. 252 (viii. 270).

 Má ahsana ’l-’afwa mina ’l-kádiri (Sarí’) i. 73 (i. 103).

 Má amarra ’l-firáka li ’l-ahbábi (Khafíf) ii. 246 (iv. 222).

 Má asfarat ’an muhayyá ’l-shamsi fi ’l-ghasaki (Basít) iv. 266 (viii.
    285).

 Má atyaba waktaná wa ahnà (Wáfir) i. 230 (i. 293).

 Má bána ’uzrí fíhi hattà ’azzará (Kámil) i. 659 (iii. 57).

 Má dámat al-arzu arzan wa ’l-samáu samá (Basít) iv. 644 (ix. 317).

 Má fí zamánika man tarjú muwaddatahu (Basít) i. 159; ii. 213 (i. 207;
    iv. 187).

 Má gharradat saharan warkáu fí fananin (Basít) i. 424 (ii. 152).

 Má habba ríhu ’l-kurbi li ’l-mushtáki (Kámil) iv. 220 (viii. 239).

 Má hazzaní ’l-shauku hattà tihtu ’an kalimí (Basít) iv. 741 (ix. 322).

 Má hílatu ’mar-i wa ’l-akdáru járiyatun (Basít) ii. 40 (iii. 341)

 Má kad taraktu fa-má khallaftuhú karaman (Basít) iii. 89 (vi. 92).

 Má khába man sammáka Unsa ’l-wujúd (Sarí’) ii. 346 (v. 33).

 Má lá yakúnu fa-lá yakúnu bi-hílatin (Kámil) i. 548, 760 (ii. 279; iii.
    162).

 Má l-’ayshu illá an yarà laka báriku (Kámil) i. 666 (iii. 65).

 Má ’l-dáru muz ghibtumú yá sádatí dárun (Basít) i. 162; ii. 682 (i.
    211; v. 381).

 Má li ’l-ghurábi bi-dári ’l-hibbi yabkíhá (Basít) iv. 223 (viii. 242).

 Má li ’l-muhibbi ma’a ’l-habíbi marámu (Kámil) ii. 574 (ii. 289).

 Má li ’l-zamáni wa ’li ’l-tahakkumi baynaná (Kámil) ii. 434 (v. 128).

 Má lí marartu ’alà ’l-kubúri musalliman (Kámil) i. 648 (iii. 46).

 Má lí usalliya nafsí bi ’l-muháli ilà (Basít) i. 199.

 Má lí wafaytu bi-’ahdikum fa-ghadartumú (Kámil) ii. 264 (iv. 241).

 Má lí wa-li ’l-láhí ’alayka yu’annifu (Kámil) i. 572, 829 (ii. 304;
    iii. 232).

 Má min suláfatihí sakartu wa innamá (Kámil) ii. 460 (v. 158).

 Má raayná wa lá sami’ná bi-shakhsin (Khafíf) iv. 278 (viii. 296).

 Má rajulun tálat la-hú lihyatun (Sarí’) iv. 280 (viii. 298).

 Má salwatu ’l-’ushsháki illá ba’ídun (Sarí’) iv. 148 (viii. 143).

 Má’stakmala ’l-lazzáti illá fatan (Sarí’) ii. 379 (v. 67).

 Má tahsunu ’l-arzu illá ’inda zahratihá (Basít) i. 358 (ii. 86).

 Má tarakná ’l-wadá’a yauma ’ftarakná (Khafíf) iv. 59 (viii. 63).

 Má tushrabu ’l-kásu illá ma’ akhí sikatin (Basít) i. 61 (i. 88).

 Má uhayláhá luyayláti ’l-wafá (Ramal) ii. 374 (v. 61).

 Má yaktumu ’l-sirra illá kullu zí sikatin (Basít) i. 60 (i. 87).

 Má zá takúlína fí-man shaffahú sakamun (Basít) ii. 385, 465 (v. 73,
    164).

 Madadtu ilà ’l-taudí’i kaffan zaífatan (Tawíl) i. 771 (iii. 173).

 Ma ínatun má bi-há li-sákinihá (Munsarih) i. 82 (i. 114).

 Mahmá lahazta ta’allamat má tabtaghí (Kámil) ii. 519 (v. 226).

 Majálu kulúbi ’l-’árifína bi-rauzatin (Tawíl) ii. 552 (v. 264).

 Makkiníní min búsi yusráki ’ashran (Khafíf) ii. 157 (iv. 129).

 Malaka ’l-salásu ’l-ghániyátu ’inání (Kámil) iv. 571 (ix. 243).

 Malakti kalbí bi-alházin wa wajnáti (Basít) iv. 238 (viii. 256).

 Malíhatu ’l-wasfi kad tammat mahásinuhá (Basít) i. 659 (iii. 57).

 Maliku ’l-mulúki izá wahab (Kámil) iv. 711 (x. 35).

 Malikun izá jálat ’alayhi mawákibun (Kámil) i. 278 (ii. 1).

 Mamshúkatu l-khasri ghulámiyyatun (Sarí’) ii. 462 (v. 161).

 Man’ásha ba’da ’aduwwihi (Kámil) i. 316 (ii. 41).

 Man atla’a ’l-nása ’alà sirrihi (Sarí’) i. 60 (i. 87).

 Man kádahu ’l’-áhirátu (Mujtass) i. 813 (iii. 216).

 Man kála awwalu ’l-hawà ’khtiyáru (Rajaz) i. 570 (ii. 302).

 Man kána lá ya’shiku ’l-ajyáda wa ’l-hudaka (Basít) i. 635 (iii. 34).

 Man kána yamliku dirhamayni ta’allamat (Kámil) ii. 197 (iv. 171).

 Man la-hú fí hizámihi alfu kamin (Khafíf) ii. 434 (v. 129).

 Man lam yazuk hulwa ’l-gharámi wa murrahu (Kámil) ii. 259 (iv. 237).

 Man lí bi-asmara turwà ’an ma’átifihi (Basít) iv. 164; ii. 280 (iv.
    258; viii. 158).

 Man lí yusá’iduní ’alà balwáí (Kámil) i. 315 (ii. 40).

 Man mallaní fa’lyumzi ’anní ’ámidan (Kámil) iv. 299 (viii. 315).

 Man mujírí min ’ishki zabyati insi (Khafíf) iii. 559 (vii. 282).

 Man yasna’i ’l-khayra bayna ’l-khulki yujza bi-hi (Basít) ii. 412 (v.
    104).

 Manáratu ’l-jámi’i fí wajhihi (Sarí’) iv. 278 (viii. 296).

 Marartu bi-amradayni fa-kultu inní (Wáfir) ii. 376 (v. 64).

 Marartu bi-kabrin dárisin wasta rauzatin (Tawíl) i. 593 (ii. 325).

 Mashaynáhá khuttan kutibat ’alayná (Wáfir) i. 77; iv. 554, 729 (i. 107;
    ix. 226; x. 53).

 Matà ’l-ayyámu tasmahu bi ’l-talákí (Wáfir) iv. 85 (viii. 86).

 Matà tantafí náru ’l-firáki bi-kurbikum (Tawíl) iv. 59 (viii. 62).

 Matà tas-hú wa kabluka mustatáru (Wáfir) ii. 389 (v. 78).

 Matà yashtafí minka ’l-fuádu ’l-mu ’azzabu (Tawíl) i. 565 (ii. 296).

 Matà yashtafí kalbu ’l-kaíbi mina ’l-bu’di (Tawíl) i. 660 (iii. 58).

 Mazà ’umrí wa ’umru ’l-wajdi báki (Wáfir) iv. 331 (viii. 345).

 Min ’ádati ’l-dahri idbárun wa ikbálun (Basít) i. 415 (ii. 143).

 Min ba’di yaumí fí Dimiskka wa laylatí (Kámil) i. 180 (i. 233).

 Min kasrati ’l-bu’di yá habíbí (Basít) i. 764 (iii. 166).

 Min makáni ’l-habíbi habba nasímu (Khafíf) iv. 89 (viii. 90).

 Mu’áwiya yá zá ’l-júdi wa ’l-hilmi wa ’l-fazli (Tawíl) iii. 399 (vii.
    125).

 Muhafhafatu ’l-azyáli ’azbu mazákihá (Tawíl) ii. 533 (v. 241).

 Muhibbun izá má bána ’anhu habíbuhu (Tawíl) iv. 32 (viii. 36).

 Mulamlamatun tubdí li-kásidi jaufihá (Tawíl) iv. 249 (viii. 267).

 Mulamlamatu ’l-jaybayni maurúdatu ’l-dami (Tawíl) ii. 530 (v. 239).


 Nádá ’l-rahíla suhayran fí ’l-dujà ’l-hádí (Kámil) iv. 219 (viii. 239).

 Nafsí ’l-fidáu li-zái-nína rahíluhum (Kámil) i. 887 (iii. 292).

 Nálat ’alà yadihá má lam tanalhu yadí (Basít) i. 774 (iii. 176).

 Nasahtu fa-lam uflah wa khánú fa-aflahú (Tawíl) i. 35 (i. 58).

 Nasakhat nufúsu ’l-’áshikína bi-khaddihi (Kámil) i. 659 (iii. 58).

 Nasharat salása zawá-ibin min sba’rihá (Kámil) i. 823; ii. 84 (iii.
    226; iv. 51).

 Nasímu ’l-sabá habbat la-ná min rusúmihá (Tawíl) iv. 191 (viii. 206).

 Nasíma ’l-sabá in juzta arza ahibbatí (Tawíl) iv. 120 (viii. 120).

 Náwaltahá shibha khaddayhá mu’attakatan (Basít) i. 62 (i. 89).

 Nazarat ’ayní li-hayní (Ramal) ii. 388 (v. 76).

 Nazartu, ilayhá nazratan fa-tahayyarat (Tawíl) iv. 526 (ix. 197).

 Nubítu anna ’l-báza ’allaka marratan (Kámil) ii. 132 (iv. 103).

 Nushabbihu bi ’l-ghusni ’l-ratíbi jahálatan (Tawíl) i. 116 (i. 156).


 Raà ’lláhu wardan ghadá asfará (Mutakárib) iv. 257 (viii. 276).

 Raà ’l-nabiyyu ’llazí kad kána bi ’l-basari (Basít) ii. 573 (v. 289).

 Raà’snayni ’ayní yamshiyání ’alà ’l-sarà (Tawíl) i. 619 (iii. 18).

 Raat kamara ’l-samái fa-azkaratní (Wáfir) ii. 84 (iv. 51).

 Raaytu bi-’ayní náimayni ’alà ’l-sarà (Wáfir) i. 828 (iii. 232).

 Raaytu fí sadrihá hukkayni kad khutimá (Basít) i. 116 (i. 156).

 Raaytu ghusnan ’alà kasíbin (Basít) iv. 577 (ix. 250).

 Raaytu tayran marra bí fí ’l-manám (Sarí’) iv. 196.

 Raaytuhú yȧzribu ’l-nákúsa kultu la-hu (Basít) iv. 313 (viii. 329).

 Raaytuka mukbilan fa-ghazaztu tarfí (Wáfir) ii. 20 (iii. 331).

 Radadta málí wa lam tabkhal ’alayya bi-hi (Basít) ii. 140 (iv. iii).

 Rakka ’l-zamánu li-hálatí (Kámil) i. 136; iv. 46 (iii. 135; viii. 50).

 Rakka ’l-zujáju wa-rakkati ’l-khamru (Kámil) i. 276 (i. 349).

 Ramání ’l-dahru bi ’l-azrái hattà (Wáfir) iii. 622 (vii. 340).

 Ramatní bi-sahmin afsada ’l-kalba wa ’nsanat (Tawíl) iii. 413 (vii.
    141).

 Ramidun bi-hí amrázuhu (Kámil) iv. 280 (viii. 297).

 Rasada ’l-munajjimu laylatan fa-badá lahu (Kámil) i. 125; 157 (i. 167;
    206).

 Rasúla ’l-rizà ahlan wa sahlan wa marhabá (Tawíl) i. 595 (ii. 326).

 Ríha ’l-sabá tuhdí ilayya nasíman (Kámil) iii. 396 (vii. 122).

 Ruddú ’alayya habíbí (Mujtass) ii. 367 (v. 55).

 Ruddú ’l-fuáda kamá ’ahidtu ilà ’l-hashà (Kámil) iv. 42 (viii. 37).

 Rúhí ’l-fidáu li-zabbáli shagiftu bi-hi (Basít) i. 244 (i. 312).

 Rumítu mina ’l-zamáni bi-sahmi lahzin (Wáfir) i. 773 (iii. 175).

 Ruwaydaka yá Masrúru in zurta dárahá (Tawíl) iv. 217 (viii. 237).


 Sa’ádátun tujaddidu kulla yaumin (Wáfir) i. 156 (i. 204).

 Sa-aktamu má bí min gharámí wa ashjání (Tawíl) ii. 555 (v. 267).

 Saaltuhá kublatan yauman wa kad nazarat (Basít) ii. 217 (iv. 192).

 Saaltukumú bi ’lláhi yá sádatí mahlan (Tawíl) ii. 263 (iv. 241).

 Saaltu ’llazí hal anta hurrun fa-kála lá (Tawíl) ii. 402 (v. 93).

 Saaltu man amrazaní (Rajaz) i. 334 (ii. 60).

 Sa-asbiru tautínan ’alà hajri sáhibí (Tawíl) iv. 331 (viii. 345).

 Sabáhatun li ’l-wajhi kul wa ’l-basharah (Rajaz) i. 196 (i. 252).

 Sabran li-hukmika yá Iláhí fí ’l-kazà (Kámil) i. 51; ii. 16; iv. 13 (i.
    77; iii. 328; viii. 17).

 Safá fí wajhihí máu ’l-jamáli (Wáfir) iv. 282 (viii. 299).

 Safarna budúran wa ’njalayna ahillatan (Tawíl) iv. 286 (viii. 304).

 Sáfir tajid ’iwazan ’amman tufárikuhu (Basít) i. 151 (i. 197).

 Sajana ’l-fuáda wa dam’a ’ayní atlaká (Kámil) iv. 241 (viii. 259).

 Sakà ’l-jazírata záta ’l-zilli wa ’l-shajari (Basít) iv. 715 (x. 40).

 Sakà ’lláhu arzan anbatat ’úda mutribin (Tawíl) ii. 535 (v. 244).

 Sakà ’lláhu bustánan tadallat kutúfuhu (Tawíl) iv. 248 (viii. 266).

 Sakání khamratan min ríki fíhi (Wáfir) ii. 384 (v. 72).

 Sakara ’l-’áshiku fí hubbi ’l-habíb (Ramal) ii. 351 (v. 39).

 Sakartu min lahzihí lá min mudámatihi (Basít) i. 764 (iii. 166).

 Sakattu wa lam akul inní muhibbun (Wáfir) ii. 454 (v. 151).

 Sakílatu ’l-ardáfi máilatun (Sarí’) i. 370 (ii. 98).

 Sakílatun mislu zakki ’l-bauli muntafikhun (Basít) ii. 274 (iv. 256).

 Sakulat zujájátun atayná furraghan (Kámil) iv. 716 (x. 40).

 Salabatní sittu miláhin hisáni (Khafíf) ii. 282 (iv. 260).

 Salà khátirí ’an Zaynabin wa Nawárí (Tawíl) i. 835 (iii. 239).

 Salaktu ’l-kaná’ata wa ’l-infiráda (Mutakárib) i. 751 (iii. 152).

 Salámí ’alà ’l-ahbábi fí kulli manzalin (Tawíl) i. 853 (iii. 256).

 Salámí ’alà man fí ’l-siyábi mina ’l-kaddi (Tawíl) ii. 83 (iv. 50).

 Salámun ’alà má fí ’l-siyábi mina ’l-kaddi (Tawíl) iv. 648 (ix. 321).

 Salámun ’alà man zára fí ’l-naumi tayfuhá (Tawíl) iv. 221 (viii. 241).

 Salámun ’alaykum laysa lí ’ankumú ghinà (Tawíl) iv. 305 (viii. 320).

 Salámun ’alaykum min muhibbin mutayyamin (Tawíl) iii. 652 (vii. 368).

 Salámun min khazáini lutfi rabbí (Wáfir) i. 869 (iii. 273).

 Salásatu aswábin ’alà jasadin ratbi (Tawíl) iv. 252 (viii. 270).

 Salásatun mana’athá ’an ziyáratiná (Basít) i. 828; iv. 260 (iii. 231;
    viii. 279).

 Salí kitábiya ’ammá khattahú kalamí (Basít) i. 870 (iii. 274).

 Sallà wa-sáma li-amrin kána yatlubuhu (Basít) i. 532 (ii. 264).

 Sallim umúraka li ’l-latífi ’l-álimi (Kámil) i. 34 (i. 56).

 Sallim umúrak ilà rabbi ’l-samá taslam (Basít) iv. 156 (viii. 151).

 Sallimi ’l-amra ilà rabbi ’l-bashar (Ramal) i. 45 (i. 68).

 Samániyatun fí ’l-majdi huzta jamí’ahá (Tawíl) i. 866 (iii. 271).

 Samati ’l-fazáilu iz du’íta lahá abá (Kámil) i. 28 (i. 47).

 Sámih akháka izá khalat (Kámil) ii. 139 (iv. 110)

 Sami’ná ata’ná summa mutná fa-ballighú (Tawíl) i. 589 (ii. 321).

 Sarà tayfu Su’dà tárikan fa ’stafazzaní (Tawíl) iv. 323 (viii. 337).

 Sarà tayfu Su’dà tárikan yastafizzuní (Tawíl) ii. 28 (iv. 267).

 Sarà tayfu Laylà ’inda má ghalaba ’l-karà (Tawíl) iv. 10 (viii. 14).

 Sarati ’l-nasímu ’alà ’l-ghusúni fa-shábahat (Kámil) iv. 249 (viii.
    267).

 Sarà yakta’u ’l-zalmáa wa ’l-laylu ’ákifun (Tawíl) iii. 410 (vii. 138).

 Saudáu bayzáu ’l-fi’áli kaannahá (Kámil) ii. 274 (iv. 251).

 Shabbahtu kaddaka bi ’l-kazíbi (Kámil) ii. 277 (iv. 255).

 Shabíhatu ’l-badri izá má mazà (Sarí’) ii. 492 (v. 192).

 Shajarátu wardin asfarin jazabat (Kámil) iv. 257 (viii. 276).

 Shaká alama ’l-firáki ’l-násu kablí (Wáfir) iv. 61 (viii. 65).

 Shaká alama ’l-gharámi ’l’-násu kablí (Wáfir) i. 781 (iii. 183).

 Shakauná ilà ahbábiná túla layliná (Tawíl) ii. 135 (iv. 106).

 Shallat yamínuka yá kaynun bi-má wasakat (Basít) iv. 227 (viii. 246).

 Sharibná wa ’afwu ’lláhi min kulli jánibin (Tawíl) iv. 259 (viii. 277).

 Sharibtu ’l-isma hattà zála ’aklí (Rajaz) ii. 518 (v. 224).

 Shatta ’l-mazáru wa ’anhum kalla mustabarí (Basít) ii. 353 (v. 41).

 Shaukí ilayka ’alà ’l-zamáni jadídu (Kámil) ii. 235 (iv. 211).

 Shayáni lau bakati ’l-dímáa ’alayhimá (Kámil) iv. 106, 245 (viii. 206,
    263).

 Silí muhibbaki lá takhshà mu’ákibatan (Basít) ii. 385 (v. 74).

 Subhána jabbári ’l-samá (Kámil) iv. 76 (viii. 78).

 Subhána rabbi jamí’a ’l-husni a’táki (Basít) ii. 171 (iv. 143).

 Suni ’l-sirra jahdak wa lá túdi’ih (Mutakárib) i. 59 (i. 86).


 Ta’allakati ’l-ámálu min-ka bi-waslina (Tawíl) iii. 496 (vii. 224).

 Taammul sun’a rabbika kayfa yátí (Wáfir) iv. 16 (viii. 20).

 Taanna wa lá ta’jal li-amrin turíduhu (Tawíl) i. 159, 242; ii. 214 (i.
    207; iv. 189).

 Ta’ashshaktu zabyan ná’isa ’l-tarfi ahwará (Tawíl) ii. 83 (iv. 50).

 Tabaddà fí kamísin min bayázin (Wáfir) ii. 284 (iv. 262).

 Tabaddà fí kamísin min sawádin (Wáfir) ii. 285 (iv. 263).

 Tabaddà fí kamísin min shakíki (Wáfir) ii. 284 (iv. 263).

 Tabaddat ka-badri ’l-timmi fí laylati ’l-sa’di (Tawíl) i. 168; ii. 640
    (i. 218; v. 347).

 Tabaddat ka-badri ’l-timmi fí ’l-hulali ’l-khuzri (Tawíl) iv. 312
    (viii. 327).

 Tabáraka bi-husnin tabáraka ’lláhu (?) i. 133 (i. 133).

 Tabu’dtum wa antum akrabu ’l-nási fí ’l-hashà (Tawíl) iv. 111 (viii.
    111).

 Tafánà kuwwatí ẃa mazà zamání (Wáfir) i. 656 (iii. 55).

 Tagharrab ’an al-autáni fí talabi ’l-’ulà (Tawíl) iv. 467 (ix. 138).

 Tagharrabtu ’an ahlí fa-yá túla ghurbatí (Tawíl) i. 672 (iii. 71).

 Tahá bi-ka kalbun fí ’l-hisáni tarábu (Tawíl) iv. 609 (ix. 282).

 Tahaddadúní bi-kátlí fí mahabbatikum (Basít) iii. 492 (vii. 221).

 Tahakkamú wa ’statálú fí tahakkumihim (Basít) i. 37; ii. 243 (i. 60;
    iv. 220).

 Tahayyartu wa ’l-Rahmáni lá shakka fí amrí (Tawíl) i. 102; iv. 605 (i.
    138; ix. 278).

 Tahta siyábí jasadun náhilun (Sarí’) ii. 454 (v. 151).

 Takhtálu bayna mu’asfarin wa mudannirin (Kámil) ii. 492 (v. 192).

 Takúlu lí wahya ghazbà min tazallulihá (Basít) i. 898; iv. 274; (iii.
    303; viii. 293).

 Takúlu wa kad raat fí ’l-harbi ukhtí (Wáfir) i. 711 (iii. 109).

 Tala’a ’l-’ízáru ’alà safíhati khaddihi (Kámil) iii. 553 (vii. 277).

 Talabtu kublatahá fí ’l-saghri káilatan (Basit) iv. 276 (viii. 294).

 Tála laylí bi ’l-’awádí wa ’l-sahar (Ramal) ii. 285 (iv. 263).

 Tála ’l-bi’ádu wa záda ’l-hammu wa ’l-kalaku (Basít) iii. 482 (vii.
    212).

 Tála ’l-firáku wa-dáma ’l-hammu wa ’l-wajalu (Basít) i. 564 (ii. 295).

 Tála ’l-’itábu wa fartu ’l-jahli aghráká (Basít) i. 630 (iii. 29).

 Tála ’l-’itábu wa lam tamna’ka ma’tibatun (Basít) iii. 497 (vii. 225).

 Tála ’l-masíru wa záda ’l-hammu wa ’l-kalaku (Basít) i. 615 (iii. 13).

 Ta’lláhi lá khámarat-ní ’l-khamru má ’alikat (Basít) ii. 214 (iv. 190).

 Ta’lláhí má ’l-kímiyá fí ghayrihá wujidat (Basít) iv. 716 (x. 40).

 Tamádà ’l-hubbu’ wa’nkata’a ’l-mazáru (Wáfir) ii. 389 (v. 78).

 Tamakkana min kalbí habíbun aliftuhu (Tawíl) iv. 68 (viii. 70).

 Tamannaytu ’l-wisála ya’údu yauman (Wáfir) i. 726 (iii. 124).

 Tamannaytu man ahwà fa-lammá raaytuhu (Tawíl) i. 186 (i. 240).

 Tamannaytu man ahwà fa-lammá lakaytuhu (Tawíl) iv. 334 (viii. 347).

 Ta’mu ’l-tafarruki murrun (Mujtass) i. 372 (ii. 101).

 Tanakkaraní dahrí wa lam yadri annaní (Tawíl) iv. 132 (viii. 130).

 Tanashshaktu min-hum fáiha ’l-’itri wa ’l-báni (Tawíl) iv. 222 (viii.
    242).

 Tarà hal la-ná ba’da ’l bi’ádi wusúlu (Tawíl) i. 614 (iii. 12).

 Tarà hal ya’údu ’l-shamlu ba’da tashattutí (Tawíl) iv. 304 (viii. 320).

 Tarahhal ’an makánin fí-hi zaymun (Wáfir) iii. 28 (vi. 62).

 Tarahhala sabrí wa ’l-gharámu mukímu (Tawíl) ii. 654 (v. 358).

 Tarakta ’llazí yafná wa-nilta ’llazí yabkà (Tawíl) i. 550 (ii. 281).

 Taraktu habíba ’l-kalbi lá ’an malálatin (Tawil) i. 136 (i. 181).

 Taraktu kulla láimin (Rajaz) i. 454 (ii. 183).

 Taraktu ’l-nabíza wa shurrábahu (Mutakárib) i. 160 (i. 208).

 Taribná ’alà badrin yudíru mudámatan (Tawíl) iv. 217 (viii. 227).

 Tasabbartu lá anní sabartu wa-innamá (Tawíl) iii. 371 (vii. 96).

 Tashágaltumú ’anná bi-suhbati gayriná (Tawíl) i. 137 (i. 182).

 Tashákala dam’í iz jarà wa mudámatí (Tawíl) i. 767 (iii. 169).

 Tatafaddáka sákiyan kad kasáka (Khafíf) i. 767 (iii. 169).

 Tatíhu ’alà ’l-’ushsháki fí hulalin khuzrin (Tawíl) i. 586 (ii. 318).

 Tawahhama fíná ’l-násu shay-an wa sammamat (Tawíl) i. 899 (iii. 305).

 Tawassadtuhá zandí wa bittu zají’ahá (Tawíl) iii. 517 (vii. 243).

 Tawwaktuhú tauka ’l-hamámi bi-sá’idí (Kámil) ii. 171 (iv. 144).

 Tazakkartu ayyáma ’l-wisáli bi-kurbikum (Tawíl) iii. 255 (vi. 278).

 Tazawwid mina ’l-dunyà fa-innaka ráhilun (Tawíl) i. 412 (ii. 139).

 Tazhú ’alayya bi-alházin badí’áti (Basít) i. 359.

 Tib wa ’nsharih wa ’nsa ’l-humúma jamí’ahá (Kámil) i. 34 (i. 57).

 Tih ahtamil wa ’statil asbir wa ’azzi ahun (Basít) i. 786 (iii. 188).

 Tuffáhatun jama’at launaini kad hakayá (Basít) iv. 250 (viii. 268).

 Tuffáhatun jama’at launayni khulkatuhá (Basít) i. 118 (i. 158).

 Tukallifuní ’l-sulwána ’anhá ’awázilí (Tawíl) iv. 177 (viii. 171).

 Tuljí ’l-zarúrátu fí ’l-umúri ilà (Munsaríh) i. 290 (ii. 14).

 Turawwi’uní ’l-janáizu kulla waktin (Wáfir) ii. 418 (v. 111).

 Tusabbihuka ’l-sa’ádatu kulla yaumin (Wáfír) ii. 93 (iv. 60).


 Udkhul bi-ná yá sáhi fí rauzatin (Sarí’) iv. 248 (viii. 267).

 Uffa li-’l-dunyá izá kánat kazá (Ramal) i. 22 (i. 40).

 Uhaddisu ’an khúdin tahaddasna marratan (Tawíl) iii. 386 (vii. 112).

 Uhibbu layálí ’l-hajri lá farahan bi-há (Tawíl) iv. 526 (ix. 198).

 U’illalu kalbí fí ’l-gharámi wa aktumu (Tawíl) ii. 348 (v. 35).

 Uj bi ’l-faráríji fí rab’i ’l-sakáríji (Basít) i. 96 (i. 131).

 ’Uj bi ’l-gharáníki fí rab’i ’l-sakáríji (Basít) ii. 258 (iv. 235).

 ’Uj bi ’l-malá’iki fí rab’i ’l-sakáríjí (Basít) iv. 203 (viii. 223).

 Uksud ilà ’l-sálihi ’l-amíri (Basít) ii. 561 (v. 274).

 Uksurú hajrakum wa kallú jafákum (Khafíf) ii. 164, 536 (iv. 136; v.
    245).

 Unsa l-wujúdi khalíy-ya ’l-báli tahsibuní (Basít) ii. 355 (v. 43).

 Unzur ilà ’l-haramayni wa ’sma’ minhumá (Kámil) ii. 414 (v. 106).

 Unzur ilà ’l-mishmishi fí zahrihi (Sarí’) iv. 250 (viii. 268).

 Unzur ilà ’l-nabki fí ’l-aghsáni muntaziman (Basít) iv. 252 (viii.
    271).

 Unzur ilà ’l-rauzi ’l-nazíri kaannamá (Kámíl) i. 507 (ii. 240).

 Unzur ilà markabin yasbíka manziruhu (Basít) i. 296 (ii. 20).

 Unzur ilà má tarà yá ayyuhá ’l-rajulu (Basít) iii. 106 (vi. 112).

 Unzur ilà shamsi ’l-kusúri wa badrihá (Kámil) i. 58 (i. 85).

 Unzur li-dárin shibhi dári ’l-na’ími (Sarí’) iv. 189 (viii. 183).

 Uraddidu ’l-tarfa fí-há kullamá safarat (Basít) iv. 163 (viii. 158).

 Usirtu wa fí kalbí lahíbun tazarramá (Tawíl) iv. 204 (viii. 225).

 Uwwáhu wá asafan kad khánaní jaladí (Basít) iv. 245 (viii. 263).

 Uzní la-kad sabakat fí’ishkihí basarí (Basít) iv. 550 (ix. 222).


 Wa’ada ’l-habíbu bi-waslihi wa wafà lí (Kamil) i. 793 (iii. 195).

 Wa ahwara ka ’l-ghusni yashfi ’l-jawà (Mutakárib) ii. 451 (v. 149).

 Wa ákilatin bi-ghayri famin wa batnin (Wáfír) ii. 531 (v. 240).

 Wa áli Nu’mána nahnu zú ’l-himami (Munsarih) i. 681 (iii. 80).

 Wa ’asà ’llazí ahdà li-Yúsufa ahlahu (Kámil) ii. 135 (iv. 105).

 Wa asalu ’l-ríha ’ankum kullamá khatarat (Basít) iv. 50 (viii. 53).

 Wa ashjári nárinjin ka-anna simárahá (Tawíl) iv. 253 (viii. 271).

 Wa báta badru tamámi ’l-husni mu’tanikí (Basít) iv. 715 (x. 39).

 Wa baytin lahú min jalmadi ’l-sakhri azháru (Tawíl) i. 621 (iii. 19).

 Wa dá’in da’ání li ’l-hawà fa-ajabtuhu (Tawíl) i. 809 (iii. 210).

 Wa dáraytu kulla ’l-nása lákinna hásidí (Tawíl) iv. 670 (ix. 342).

 Wa fákhitin kad kála fí nauhihi (Sarí’) ii. 357 (v. 49).

 Wa fí ’l-hilmi itkánun wa fí ’l-afwi haybatun (Tawíl) i. 432 (ii. 160).

 Wa fí ’l-sumri ma’nan lau’alimta bayánahu (Tawíl) ii. 280 (iv. 258).

 Wa fí Sulaymána iz kála ’l-iláhu la-hu (Basít) iii. 85 (vi. 86).

 Wa ghádatin masakat li ’l-’údi anmuluhá (Basít) i. 309 (ii. 34).

 Wa ghusnin ratíbin ’áda ’údan li-kaynatin (Tawíl) ii. 536; iv. 172 (v.
    244; viii. 166).

 Wa habba ’alà kalbí nasímun mina ’l-jawá (Tawíl) iv. 201 (viii. 222).

 Wa habi ’l-junáta fa-lam tazal ahlu ’l-nuhà (Kámil) i. 92 (i. 126).

 Wa hakki hawákum má salautu widádakum (Tawíl) iv. 299 (viii. 315).

 Wa hakkika lau insaftaní má kataltaní (Tawíl) i. 147 (i. 182).

 Wa hakkikum inna kalbí lam yutik jaladan (Basít) iv. 111 (viii. 110).

 Wa hakki ’l-hawà má ghayyara ’l-bu’du ahdakum (Tawíl) iv. 74 (viii.
    76).

 Wa hamráa milu ’l-kaffi tazhú bi-husnihá (Tawíl) iv. 253 (viii. 271).

 Wa hayáti man malakat yadáhu kiyádí (Kámil) ii. 38 (iv. 2).

 Wa hayáti wajhika lá uhibbu siwáka (Kámil) ii. 269 (iv. 246).

 Wa hayáti wajhika yá hayáta ’l-anfusi (Kámil) iv. 266 (viii. 284).

 Wa hayfáa tahwí ’l-ráha kálat li-sabbihá (Tawíl) iv. 290 (viii. 307).

 Wa-ikhwánun hasibtuhumú durú’an (Wáfir) i. 78 (i. 108).

 Wa inna li-rabbí safwatun min ’abídihi (Tawíl) ii. 564 (v. 277).

 Wa inní la-aghnà ’l-nási ’an mutakallifin (Tawíl) i. 471 (ii. 200).

 Wa ínní la-sabbárun ’alà kulli hádisin (Tawíl) i. 648 (iii. 46).

 Wa-in ’umirtu ja’altu ’l-harba wálidata (Basít) i. 506.

 Wa izá bulíta bi’-usratin fa-’lbas lahá (Kámil) i. 21 (i. 38).

 Wa izá janaytu jináyatan (Kámil) iv. 119 (viii. 119).

 Wa izá ’l-malíhu atà bi-zanbin wáhidi (Kámil) i. 368 (ii. 96).

 Wa izá tarannama tayruhú bi-ghadírihi (Kámil) iii. 254 (vi. 277).

 Wa izá tarannama tayruhú wa ghadíruhu (Kámil) iv. 340 (ix. 6).

 Wa járiyatin addabathá ’l-shatárah (Mutakárib) i. 169 (i. 219).

 Wa járiyatin fí nashátin badat (Mutakárib) iv. 27 (viii. 32).

 Wa kad yajma’u ’lláhu ’l-shatítayni ba’damá (Tawíl) iv. 534 (ix. 205).

 Wa káilin kála lí lá budda min farajin (Basít) i. 609 (iii. 7).

 Wa kallamá absarat aynáka zá lakabin (Basít) i. 277 (i. 350).

 Wa kálú kad daná minná rahílu (Wáfir) ii. 566 (v. 280).

 Wa kálú la’alla ’l-sabra ya’kibu ráhatan (Tawíl) i. 776 (iii. 178).

 Wa kam farraktu fí ’l-hayjái jam’an (Wáfir) i. 380 (ii. 109).

 Wa kam laylatin báta ’l habíbu mu’ánisí (Tawil) ii. 274 (iv. 252).

 Wa kam laylatin bittu fí kurbatin (Mutakárib) iv. 644 (ix. 316).

 Wa kam li ’lláhi min lutfin khafiyyin (Wáfir) i. 111; ii. 549 (i. 150;
    v. 261).

 Wa kánin lafhatu ’l-ramzá’i wádin (Wáfir) iv. 340 (ix. 6).

 Wa kátibatin bi ’l-miski fí ’l-khaddi Ja’faran (Tawíl) ii. 312 (iv.
    292).

 Wa kayfa yazúku ’l-nauma man ’adima ’l-karà (Tawíl) iv. 46 (viii. 49).

 Wa kayfa yudárí wa ’l-hawà kátilu ’l-fatà (Tawíl) i. 589.

 Wa khaudáa azhà ríkuhá hákiya ’l-shuhdi (Tawíl) iv. 29 (viii. 33).

 Wa kubbádatin bayna ’l-riyázi nazartuhá (Tawíl) iv. 254 (viii. 272).

 Wa kunná ka-ghusnay bánatin fauka rauzatin (Tawil) iii. 405 (vii. 132).

 Wa kuntu izá ’l-sadíku aráda ghayzí (Wáfir) ii. 138 (iv. 109).

 Wa kurbu ’l-habíbi tamámu ’l-surúr (Mutakárib) iv. 614 (ix. 287).

 Wa la-kad bakaytu ’alà tafarruki shamliná (Kámil) i. 194 (i. 249).

 Wa la-kad balaghtu bihílatí (Kámil) iv. 720 (x. 44).

 Wa la-kad jaza’tu li-bu’dikum wa firákikum (Kámil) iv. 60 (viii. 63).

 Wa la-kad jarat yauma ’l-firáki sawáfihí (Kámil) iv. 60 (viii. 64).

 Wa la-kad nadimtu ’alà tafarruki shamliná (Kámil) i. 871; iv. 130 (iii.
    275; viii. 128).

 Wa la-kad shurifná iz nazaltum arzaná (Kámil) i. 310 (ii. 34).

 Wa lakaytu min hubbíka má lam yalkahu (Kámil) i. 781.

 Wa lammá abà ’l-wáshúna illá firákaná (Tawíl) ii. 54 (iv. 19).

 Wa lammá atauní bi ’l-tabíbi wa kad badat (Tawíl) ii. 571 (v. 286).

 Wa lammá da’autu ’l-sabra ba’daka wa ’l-bukà (Tawíl) iii. 256 (vi.
    279).

 Wa lammá kashaftu ’l-sauba ’an sathi káfihá (Tawíl) iv. 27 (viii. 32).

 Wa lammá kashaftu ’l-sauba ’an sathi kussihá (Tawíl) i. 600 (ii. 331).

 Wa lammá raat ’ayní badí’a jamálihá (Tawíl) iii. 518 (vii. 244).

 Wa lammá sharibnáhá wa dabba dabíbuhá (Tawíl) iv. 712 (x. 37).

 Wa lammá tadánat li ’l-firáki wa kalbuhá (Tawíl) i. 117 (i. 158).

 Wa la-rubba ahdaba záda fí hadabátihi (Kámil) iv. 279 (viii. 297).

 Wa la-rubba názilatin yazíku lahá ’l-fatà (Kámil) i. 732; iv. 118 (iii.
    131; viii. 117).

 Wa lastu arà ’l-sa’ádata jam’a málin (Wáfir) i. 436 (ii. 166).

 Wa lau annahá li ’l-mushrikína ta’arrazat (Tawíl) iv. 260, 526 (viii.
    279; ix. 197).

 Wa lau anna lí fí kulli yaumin wa laylatin (Tawíl) i. 863 (iii. 267).

 Wa lau kultu inní sábirun ba’da bu’dihi (Tawíl) i. 784 (iii. 187).

 Wa laylin kawákibuhú lá tasíru (Mutakárib) i. 894 (iii. 299).

 Wa lí ayru súin kasíru ’l-jafá (Mutakárib) iv. 275 (viii. 293).

 Wa lí kabidun makrúhatun man yabí’uní (Tawíl) iii. 389 (vii. 115).

 Wa li ’l-kási wa ’l-sahbái hakkun mu-*’azzamun (Tawíl) iv. 716 (x. 41).

 Wa ’lláhi má kuntu lissan yá akhá sikatin (Basít) i. 214 (i. 274).

 Wa ’lláhi má kuntu túla ’l-dahri násíhá (Basít) ii. 174 (iv. 146).

 Wa ’lláhi wa ’lláhi ’l-’azími wa hakki man (Kámil) iii. 650 (vii. 366).

 Wa ’l-mishmishu ’l-lauziyyu yahkí ’áshikan (Kámil) iv. 250 (viii. 268).

 Wa ’l-nahru mudda ’alà ’l-ghusúni wa lam yazal (Kámil) iv. 249 (viii.
    267).

 Wa ’l-násu mushtabihúna fí írádihim (Kámil) iii. 441 (vii. 169).

 Wa má adrí izá yammamtu arzan (Wáfir) iv. 654, 729 (ix. 328; x. 53).

 Wa má Hindu illá muhratun ’arabiyyatun (Tawíl) iii. 372 (vii. 97).

 Wa má hubban sa’at kadamí ilayhim (Wáfir) ii. 206 (iv. 180).

 Wa má ’l dahru illá hákazá fa ’stabir bihi (Tawíl) i. 138 (i. 183).

 Wa má ’l-kasdu illá an yakúna ’jtimá’uná (Tawíl) ii. (iv. 54).

 Wa malíhin kála sifní (Ramal) iv. 247 (viii. 265).

 Wa má min kátibin illà sayafnà (Wáfir) i. 94 (i. 128).

 Wa má min yadin illá yadu ’lláhi faukahá (Tawíl) ii. 489 (i. 207; v.
    188).

 Wa má nazarat min ba’di bu’dika muklatí (Tawíl) iv. 147 (viii. 142).

 Wa má nubáliya iz arwáhuná salimat (Basít) iii. 373 (vii. 99).

 Wa má wajdu A’rábiyyatin bána ahluhá (Tawíl) i. 574, 771 (ii. 306; iii.
    172).

 Wa má záraní fí ’l-naumi illá khayáluhu (Tawíl) iii. 386 (vii. 111).

 Wa ma’shúkin lahú fí ’l-khaddi khálun (Wáfir) ii. 378 (v. 65).

 Wa min júdihi yarmí ’l-’idáta bi-ashumin (Tawíl) ii. 128 (iv. 97).

 Wa mirwahatin mu’attarati ’l-nasími (Wáfir) iv. 255 (viii. 273).

 Wa muhafhafin alházuhú wa ’izáruhu (Kámil) ii. 460 (v. 158).

 Wa muhafhafin min sha’rihi wa jabínihi (Kámil) i. 44, 155; iv. 281 (i.
    68, 203; viii. 299).

 Wa muháribin min farti júdi banánihi (Kámil) ii. 127 (iv. 97).

 Wa multammin (multamamin) bi ’l-sha’ri min fauki wajnatih (Tawíl) i.
    168 (i. 218).

 Wa nafsaka fuz bi-há in sibta zayman (Wáfir) i. 78, 161, 295 (i. 109,
    209; ii. 19).

 Wa nuktati khálin shabbahúhá bi-habbatin (Tawíl) i. 196 (i. 251).

 Wá rahmatá li-’azízatin (Kámil) i. 421 (ii. 149).

 Wa rákisin misli ghusni ’l-báni kámatuhu (Basít) iv. 550 (ix. 221).

 Wa rubba kabíratin má hála bayní (Wáfir) ii. 553 (v. 266).

 Wa rummánin rakíki ’l-kishri yahkí (Wáfir) iv. 249 (viii. 267).

 Wa sabaghtu má sabagha ’l-zamánu fa-lam yadum (Kámil) ii. 465 (v. 164).

 Wa saghru ’l-banáti la-hú nakhatun (Mutakárib) ii. 390 (v. 79).

 Wa sákini ramsin ta’mu-hú ’inda rásihi (Tawíl) ii. 530 (v. 238).

 Wa sámitati ’l-khalkháli rannat wusháhuhá (Tawíl) i. 897 (iii. 302).

 Wa sawá ’idin tazhú bi-husni asáwírin (Kámil) ii. 399 (v. 89).

 Wa shádinin bi-wisálin minhu wá’adaní (Basít) ii. 219 (iv. 195).

 Wa shádinin kulná lahú sif la-ná (Sarí’) iv. 253 (viii. 272).

 Wa shamsin fí kazíbin fí kasíbin (Wáfir) i. 167 (i. 217).

 Wa shamsu husnin badat li ’l-nási tanzuruhá (Basít) i. 168 (i. 218).

 Wa shaykhin fi jiháti ’l-arzi yamshí (Wáfir) ii. 75 (iv. 41).

 Wa shaykhin kabírin lahú sabwatun (Mutakárib) ii. 377 (v. 64).

 Wa sidratin kulla yaumin (Mujtass) iv. 253 (viii. 271).

 Wa tájirin ’áyantu ’ushshákahu (Sarí’) iv. 246 (viii. 264).

 Wa tájirin fí wasli-hí záraná (Sarí’) iv. 246 (viii. 265).

 Wa tamashshat fí mafásilihim (Kámil) iv. 715 (x. 39).

 Wa tamísu bayna muza’farin wa mu’asfarin (Kámil) i. 169 (i. 219).

 Wa yakhtú lí khayáluka fí zamírí (Wáfir) i. 856 (iii. 259).

 Wa záhikin min bakáí hína absaraní (Basít) i. 790 (iii. 193).

 Wa zá kalílun li-man da ’athu (Basít) ii. 433 (v. 127).

 Wa zakartu yauma ’l-bayni ba’da muwwad’í (Kámil) iv. 127 (viii. 125).

 Wa záraní fí kamísi ’l-layli mustatiran (Basít) ii. 274 (iv. 252).

 Wa zátu zawáibin tanjarru túlan (Wáfir) ii. 532 (v. 240).

 Wa zandáni lau-lá umsiká bi-asáwirin (Tawíl) i. 823 (iii. 226).

 Wadá’uka mislu wadá’i ’l-hayáti (Mutakárib) iv. 59 (viii. 62).

 Wadda’atní yauma ’l-firáki wa-kálat (Khafíf) i. 310 (ii. 35).

 Wadda’tuhá wa yadí ’l-yamínu li ’admu’í (Kámil) i. 384 (ii. 113).

 Waddi’ habíba ka inna ’l-rakba murtahilu (Basít) ii. 276 (iv. 254).

 Wáfà wa akbala fí ’l-ghaláili yansaní (Kámil) i. 556 (ii. 287).

 Wáfaytu manzilahu fa-lam ara hájiban (Kámil) i. 621.

 Wajdí ’alà tilka ’l-manázili báki (Kámil) iv. 224 (viii. 243).

 Wajhun li-misbáhi ’l-samái mubáhi (Kámil) i. 764 (iii. 167).

 Warada ’l-kitábu fa-lá ’adimta anámilan (Kámil) ii. 49 (iv. 14).

 Warada ’l-kitábu fa-sarraná mazmúnuhu (Kámil) iv. 201 (viii. 222).

 Wardu ’l-khudúdi wa dúnahá shauku ’l-kaná (Kámil) ii. 20 (iii. 331).

 Wardun nafísun tusirru ’l-kalba rúyatuhu (Basít) iv. 256 (viii. 275).

 Wassalatní ’l-humúmu wasla hawáki (Khafíf) iii. 650 (vii. 366).

 Wayka inna ’l-maláma yakwí ’l-malúmá (Khafíf) i. 6 (i. 13).

 Wayláhu waylí min malámati ’ázilin (Kámil) iv. 267 (viii. 285).

 Wisáluka ’indí na’ímun na’ím (Mutakárib) i. 864 (iii. 268).

 Wullíta wayhaka amran lasta tudrikuhu (Basít) iii. 401 (vii. 127).


 Yá ashrafa ’l-nási fi házá ’l-zamáni wa má (Basít) ii. 56 (iv. 20).

 Yá asílu ’l-judúdí samha ’l-sajáyá (Khafíf) iii. 232 (vi. 252.)

 Yá ’aynu suhhí ’l-dam’a ka ’l-túfáni (Kámil) iv. 231 (viii. 250).

 Yá ayyuhá ’l-kalbu rakhímu ’l-rijsi (Rajaz) i. 710 (iii. 108).

 Yá ayyuhá ’l-multamisu ’l-khadí’ah (Rajaz) i. 738 (iii. 137).

 Yá ayyuhá ’l-sayyádu lá takhshà ’l-kadar (Rajaz) ii. 363 (v. 51).

 Yá ’ázilan asbaha fí zátihi (Sarí’) iv. 329 (viii. 343).

 Yá Badí’a ’l-jamáli má lí siwáki (Khafíf) iii. 649 (vii. 365).

 Yá dahru mahlan kam tajúru wa ta’tadí (Kámil) ii. 17 (iii. 329).

 Yá durra saghri habíbí (Mujtass) ii. 254 (iv. 231).

 Yá durra saghri ’l-habíbi man nazamak (Munsarih) ii. 254 (iv. 231).

 Yá farída ’l-jamáli hubbuka díní (Khafíf) i. 898 (iii. 303).

 Yá gháibína wa kalbí záidu ’l-kalaki (Basít) i. 881 (iii. 285).

 Yá hamáma’l-ayki ukri-ka’l-salám (Ramal) ii. 361 (v. 49).

 Yá Hayáta ’l-nufúsí júdí bi-waslin (Khafíf) iii. 488 (vii. 217).

 Yá hurkata ’l dahri kuffí (Mujtass) i. 22 (i. 39).

 Yá husna lauzin akhzari (Rajaz) iv. 252 (viii. 270).

 Yá husna nárin wa ’l-na’ímu ’azábuhá (Kámil) i. 621 (iii. 19).

 Yá kabru yá kabru hal zálat mahásinuhu (Basít) i. 50 (i. 76) (twice).

 Yá kalbu in khánaka ’l-mahbúbu lá tudbir (Basít) iv. 93 (viii. 94).

 Yá kalbu lá ta’shak malíhan wáhidan (Kámil) i. 828 (iii. 232).

 Yá kamaran kad ghába tahta ’l-sarà (Sarí’) ii. 12 (iii. 323).

 Yá kháifan min dahrihi kun áminan (Kámil) i. 33 (i. 56).

 Yá kháizan fí zalámi ’l-layli wa ’l-halakah (Basít) i. 21 (i. 38).

 Yá khalílayya zidtumá taysíran (Khafíf) ii. 431 (v. 125).

 Yá khalílí inní hajartu rukádí (Khafíf) i. 311 (ii. 35).

 Yá khárijan khaufa ’l-’idà min dárihi (Kámil) ii. 575 (v. 290).

 Yá khayra man waladat Hawwáu min basharin (Basít) ii. 442 (v. 139).

 Yá kitábí izá raáka habíbí (Khafíf) ii. 90 (iv. 57).

 Yá laylata ’l-wasli wa bikra ’l-dahri (Rajaz) iv. 313 (viii. 328).

 Yá li-man ashtakí ’l-gharáma ’llazí bi (Khafíf) ii. 356 (v. 44).

 Yá man a’áda rusúma ’l-mulki manshúran (Basít) i. 279 (ii. 3).

 Yá man ayádíhi ’indí ghayru wáhidatin (Basít) i. 738; ii. 6 (iii. 137,
    317).

 Yá man hakà ’l-khálu ’alà khaddihi (Sarí’) i. 196 (i. 251).

 Yá man khalá ’an xí ’l-diyári wa sárá (Kámil) iv. 56 (viii. 59).

 Yá man lahú wajhun sharíkun (Kámil) i. 161 (i. 210).

 Yá man tasaffala li ’l-ghaniyyi mazillatan (Kámil) i. 501 (ii. 235).

 Yá man tawalla’a kalbuhú bi-jamáliná (Kámil) ii. 348 (v. 36).

 Yá man wahabtu la-hú rúhí fa-’azzabahá (Basít) ii. 55 (iv. 19).

 Yá man yukhazzibu bi ’l-sawádi mashíbahu (Kámil) iv. 277 (viii. 295).

 Yá man yushammiru ’an sákin li-ya’rizahu (Basít) i. 596 (ii. 327).

 Yá Maryama ’l-husni ’údí inna lí mukalan (Basít) iv. 306 (viii. 321).

 Yá Maryamu ’trahí alíma ’itábí (Kámil) iv. 342 (ix. 8).

 Yá miláhan azhabtumú sidka wuddí (Khafíf) iv. 626 (ix. 300).

 Yá mudda’í ’l-hubbi wa ’l-balwà ma’a ’l-sahari (Basít) i. 627; iii. 491
    (iii. 26; vii. 220).

 Yá muhsinan bi ’l-zamáni zannan (Basít) iv. 622 (ix. 296).

 Yá mukhjila ’l-badri wa shamsi ’l-nahár (Sarí’) iii. 521 (vii. 248).

 Yá mutlifí fí ’l-hubbi farta sudúdihi (Kámil) iv. 240 (viii. 259).

 Yá mulúka ’l-jamáli rifkan bi-asrà (Khafíf) iv. 95 (viii. 96).

 Yá muráda ’l-murídi anta murádí (Khafíf) ii. 556 (v. 269).

 Yá Musliman imámuhu ’l-kuránu (Rajaz) ii. 199 (iv. 173).

 Yá mutriban bi-lughátihí wa silátihi (Kámil) iv. 741 (ix. 322).

 Yá nasíman habba min arzi ’l-’Irák (Ramal) iv. 102 (viii. 103).

 Yá násirína masákínan muhibbíná (Basit) i. 306 (ii. 30).

 Yá rabbata ’l-husni man bi ’l-saddi aghráki (Basít) i. 606 (iii. 5).

 Yá rabbi bi ’l-khamsati ’l-ashyákhi tunkizuní (Basít) i. 631; iii. 498
    (iii. 30; viii. 226.)

 Yá rabbi inna ’l-idà yas’auna fí talafí (Basít) iv. 118 (viii. 117).

 Yá rabbi ínní ’árifun bi-kadrik (Rajaz) iii. 95 (vi. 97).

 Yá rabbi kam min baláin kad zahabta bi-hi (Basít) ii. 557 (v. 270).

 Yá rab’u rikka li-zillatí wa khuzú’í (Kámil) iv. 220 (viii. 240).

 Yá ráhilína bi-muhjatí rifkan ’alà (Kámil) iv. 240 (viii. 258).

 Yá sádatan rahalú wa ’l-kalbu yatba’ahum (Basít) ii. 262 (iv. 239).

 Yá sádatí hal yakhturanna bi-bálikum (Kámil) iv. 626 (ix. 299).

 Yá sáhibí lau badaltu ’l-rúha mujtahidan (Basít) iv. 542 (ix. 214).

 Yá sháribu ’l-khamri amá tastahí (Sarí’) ii. 517 (v. 224).

 Yá táliba ’l-dunyá ’l-daniyyati innahá (Kámil) ii. 8 (iii. 319).

 Yá táliba ’l-wasli lá yaghrurka bí amalu (Basít) iv. 238 (viii. 257).

 Yá táliban li ’l-firáki mahlan (Basít) i. 85, 588, 874; ii. 223 (i.
    118; ii. 319; iii. 278; iv. 200).

 Yá umma ’Amrin jazáki ’lláhu makrumatan (Basít) ii. 424 (v. 118).

 Yá wajdu lá tubkí ’alayya wa lá tazar (Kámil) ii. 227 (iv. 204).

 Yá wálidí lá taghtarir bi-tana”umin (Kámil) ii. 421 (v. 114).

 Yá wardatan li-badí’i ’l-husni kad jama’at (Basít) iv. 257 (viii. 275).

 Yahníka kummasrà ghadá launuhá (Sarí’) iv. 251 (viii. 270).

 Ya’íbúnahá ’indí wa lá ’ayba ’indahá (Tawíl) ii. 391 (v. 80).

 Yakúlúna ’jáhid yá Jamílu bi-ghazwatin (Tawíl) i. 394 (ii. 102).

 Yakúlúna lí anta bayna ’l-warà (Mutakárib) i. 141 (i. 187).

 Yamshí ’l-fakíru wa kullu shay-in zidduhu (Kámil) iv. 617 (ix. 291).

 Yamútu ’l-fatà min ’asratin min lisánihi (Tawíl) i. 819 (iii. 221).

 Yanshú ’l-saghíru ’alà má kána wáliduhu (Basít) i. 243 (i. 310).

 Yaslahu li ’l-hukkámi fí ’asrina (Sarí’) iv. 275 (viii. 294).

 Yastaghfiru ’l-násu bi-aydíhimi (Sarí’) i. 899 (iii. 304).

 Yauma ’l-firáki bi’ádukum abkání (Kámil) iv. 58 (viii. 61).

 Yauma ’l-khamísi la-kad fáraktu ahbábí (Basít) i. 286 (ii. 10).

 Yu’ániduní dahrí kaanní ’aduwwuhu (Tawíl) iv. 132 (viii. 130).

 Yuánisuní zikru ’l-habíbi bi-khalwatí (Tawíl) ii. 372 (v. 59).

 Yu’átibuní ’alà nazarí ilayhi (Wáfir) iv. 264 (viii. 283).

 Yudárí hawáhú summa yaktumu sirrahu (Tawíl) i. 588 (ii. 320).

 Yukabbilu ’l-arza man ’azzat marátibuhu (Basít) i. 195 (i. 250).

 Yunbíka házá ’l-rasúlu ’an khabarí (Munsarih) i. 779 (iii. 181).

 Yurakkibu fí ’l-sihámi nusúla tibrin (Wáfir) i. 127 (iv. 97).

 Yurídu ’l-mar-u an yu’tà munáhú (Wáfir) ii. 184 (iv. 157).

 Yushriku ’l-marju bi-má fí(hi) (Ramal) i. 359 (ii. 86).

 Yutáli’u ’l-kalbu bába ’l-ikhtisási bihi (Basít) i. 619 (iii. 18).

 Yutarjimu tarfí ’an lisání fa-ta’lamú (Tawíl) i. 88 (i. 121).

 Yu’tíka min tarafi ’l-lisáni haláwatan (Kámil) i. 717 (iii. 115).


 Za’ama ’bnu Síṅá fí usúli kalámihi (Kámil) i. 635 (iii. 34).

 Za’ana ’l-ahibbatu ’anka bi ’l-idláji (Kámil) ii. 453 (v. 150).

 Zahaba ’llazína izá wakafta bi-bábihim (Kámil) i. 289; ii. 223 (ii. 14;
    iv. 200).

 Zahaba ’l-násu wa ’l-kilábu jamí’an (Khafíf) ii. 290 (iv. 268).

 Záka ’l-fazáu jamí’uhu fí názirí (Kámil) iv. 24 (viii. 28).

 Zákartuhu ’ahda ’l-wisáli fa-kála lí (Kámil) i. 896 (iii. 301).

 Zalamtu ’l-’ibáda wa tuftu ’l-biláda (Mutakárib) i. 675 (iii. 74).

 Zamanu ’l-wisáli yazíku ’an (Kámil) i. 765 (iii. 167).

 Zanbi ilayka ’azímu (Mujtass) ii. 138 (iv. 109).

 Záraní ’l-mahbúbu laylan (Ramal) ii. 275 (iv. 252).

 Záraní mahbúbu kalbí fí ’l-ghalas (Ramal) iii. 326 (vii. 258).

 Zayfun alamma bi-rásí ghayra muhtashimi (Basít) iv. 276 (viii. 295).

 Ziddáni wa-’jtama’á ’ftirákan fí ’l-bahá (Kámil) ii. 55 (iv. 20).

 Ziyyu ’l-fakíri tabattulun wa wakáru (Kámil) ii. 582 (v. 297).

 Zur man tuhibbu wa da’ kaláma ’l-hásidi (Kámil) i. 172; ii. 222 (i.
    223; iv. 198).

 Zur man tuhibbu wa da’ makálata hásidi (Kámil) i. 832; iv. 288 (iii.
    235; viii. 306).

[Illustration]


                             _INDEX IV._—A.
 _TABLE OF CONTENTS OF THE UNFINISHED CALCUTTA (1814–18) EDITION (FIRST
TWO HUNDRED NIGHTS ONLY) OF THE ARABIC TEXT OF THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND
                         NIGHTS AND ONE NIGHT._

                                                                   Night

 INTRODUCTION—

      _a._ The Bull and the Ass.

   1. The Trader and the Jinni                                         i

      _a._ The First Old Man’s Story                                  ii

      _b._ The Second Old Man’s Story                                 iv

                (_The Third Old Man’s Story is wanting_).

   2. The Fisherman and the Jinni                                   viii

      _a._ The Physician Duban                                        xi

           _aa._ The Merchant and the Parrot                         xiv

           _ab._ The Prince and the Ogress                            xv

      _b._ The Ensorcelled Youth                                     xxi

   3. The Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad                  xxviii

      _a._ The First Kalandar’s Tale                               xxxix

      _b._ The Second Kalandar’s Tale                               xlii

           _ba._ The Envier and the Envied                          xlvi

      _c._ The Third Kalandar’s Tale                                liii

      _d._ The Eldest Lady’s Tale                                   lxiv

                (_The Story of the Portress is wanting._)

   4. The Three Apples                                            lxviii

   5. Nur al-Din Ali and his Son Badr al-Din Hassan                lxxii

   6. Isaac of Mosul’s Story of Khadijah and the Caliph             xciv
        Al-Maamun

   7. The Hunchback’s Tale                                            ci

      _a._ The Nazarene Broker’s Story                               cix

      _b._ The Cook’s Story                                         cxxi

 (_The Reeve or Comptroller’s Tale in the Bresl., Mac. and Bul. Edits._)

      _c._ The Jewish Physician’s Story                            cxxix

      _d._ Tale of the Tailor                                     cxxxvi

      _e._ The Barber’s Tale of himself                           cxliii

           _ea._ The Barber’s Tale of his First Brother             cxlv

           _eb._ The Barber’s Tale of his Second Brother         cxlviii

           _ec._ The Barber’s Tale of his Third Brother              cli

           _ed._ The Barber’s Tale of his Fourth Brother            clii

           _ee._ The Barber’s Tale of his Fifth Brother             cliv

           _ef._ Story of the Barber’s Sixth Brother              clviii

   8. Ali bin Bakkar and Shams Al-Nahar                            clxic

   9. Nur al-Din Ali and the Damsel Anis al-Jalis                 clxxxi

  10. Women’s Craft,                                             cxcv-ci

  11. Sindbad the Seaman and Hindbad the Hammal.

     (_In Mac. and Bresl. Edit.; “Sindbad the Sailor and Sindbad the
                               Hammal.”_)

      _a._ The First Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman.

      _b._ The Second Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman.

      _c._ The Third Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman.

      _d._ The Fourth Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman.

      _e._ The Fifth Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman.

      _f._ The Sixth Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman.

      _g._ The Seventh Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman.


                             _INDEX IV._—B.
_TABLE OF CONTENTS OF THE BRESLAU (TUNIS) EDITION OF THE ARABIC TEXT OF
    THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND ONE NIGHT, FROM MR. PAYNE’S
                               VERSION._

                                                                   Night

 INTRODUCTION.—Story of King Shehriyar and his Brother.

      _a._ Story of the Ox and the Ass

   1. The Merchant and the Genie                                       i

      _a._ The First Old Man’s Story                                  iv

      _b._ The Second Old Man’s Story                                 vi

      _c._ The Third Old Man’s Story                                viii

   2. The Fisherman and the Genie                                   viii

      _a._ Story of the Physician Duban                               xi

           _aa._ Story of the Jealous Man and the                    xiv
             Parrot[458]

           _ab._ Story of the King’s Son and the Ogress               xv

      _b._ Story of the Enchanted Youth                              xxi

   3. The Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad                  xxviii

      _a._ The First Calender’s Story                             xxxvii

      _b._ The Second Calender’s Story                                xl

           _ba._ The Envier and the Envied                          xlvi

      _c._ The Third Calender’s Story                               liii

      _d._ The Eldest Lady’s Story                                 lxiii

      _e._ Story of the Portress                                   lxvii

   4. The Three Apples                                              lxix

   5. Noureddin Ali of Cairo and his son Bedreddin Hassan          lxxii

   6. Story of the Hunchback                                         cii

      _a._ The Christian Broker’s Story                             cvii

      _b._ The Controller’s Story                                   cxix

      _c._ The Jewish Physician’s Story                            cxxix

      _d._ The Tailor’s Story                                    cxxxvii

      _e._ The Barber’s Story                                      cxlix

           _ea._ Story of the Barber’s First Brother                  cl

           _eb._ Story of the Barber’s Second Brother               cliv

           _ec._ Story of the Barber’s Third Brother               clvii

           _ed._ Story of the Barber’s Fourth Brother              clvii

           _ee._ Story of the Barber’s Fifth Brother                 clx

           _ef._ Story of the Barber’s Sixth Brother               clxiv

   7. Ali ben Bekkar and Shemsennehar                              clxix

   8. Noureddin Ali and the Damsel Enis el Jelis                   cxcix

   9. Kemerezzeman and Budour                                    ccxviii

  10. The Enchanted Horse                                         ccxliv

  11. The Voyages of Sindbad the Sailor                              ccl

      _a._ The First Voyage of Sindbad the Sailor                  cclii

      _b._ The Second Voyage of Sindbad the Sailor                ccliii

      _c._ The Third Voyage of Sindbad the Sailor                   cclv

      _d._ The Fourth Voyage of Sindbad the Sailor                 cclix

      _e._ The Fifth Voyage of Sindbad the Sailor                cclxiii

      _f._ The Sixth Voyage of Sindbad the Sailor                 cclxvi

      _g._ The Seventh Voyage of Sindbad the Sailor               cclxix

  12. Asleep and Awake                                            cclxxi

      _a._ The Lackpenny and the Cook                           cclxxiii

  13. Seif el Mulouk and Bediya el-Jemal                           ccxci

  14. Khelif the Fisherman[459]                                   cccxxi

  15. Ghanim ben Eyoub the Slave of Love                        cccxxxii

      _a._ Story of the Eunuch Sewab[460]                       cccxxxiv

      _b._ Story of the Eunuch Kafour                           cccxxxiv

  16. Uns el Wujoud and the Vizier’s Daughter Rose-in-bud         cccxli

  17. The Merchant of Oman                                        cccliv

  18. Ardeshir and Heyat en Nufous                               ccclxiv

  19. Hassan of Bassora and the King’s Daughter of the         ccclxxxvi
        Jinn

  20. Haroun er Rashid and the Three Poets                     ccccxxxii

  21. Omar ben Abdulaziz and the Poets                         ccccxxxii

  22. El Hejjaj and the Three Young Men                        ccccxxxiv

  23. Er Reshid and the Woman of the Barmecides                ccccxxxiv

  24. The Ten Viziers; or the History of King Azadbekht         ccccxxxv
        and his Son

      _a._ The Unlucky Merchant                                   ccccxl

      _b._ The Merchant and his Sons                            ccccxliv

      _c._ Abu Sabir                                          ccccxlviii

      _d._ Prince Bihzad                                        ccccliii

      _e._ King Dadbin and his Viziers                            cccclv

      _f._ King Bekhtzeman                                       cccclxi

      _g._ King Bihkerd                                         cccclxiv

      _h._ Ilan Shah and Abou Temam                             cccclxvi

      _i._ King Ibrahim and his Son                             cccclxxi

      _j._ King Suleiman Shah and his Sons                      cccclxxv

      _k._ The Prisoner and how God gave him Relief            cccclxxxv

  25. The City of Brass                                      cccclxxxvii

  26. Nimeh ben er Rebya and Num his Slave-girl                       di

  27. Alaeddin Abou es Shamat                                        dxx

  28. Hatim Tai; his Generosity after Death                        dxxxi

  29. Maan ben Zaïdeh and the three Girls                         dxxxii

  30. Maan ben Zaïdeh and the Bedouin                             dxxxii

  31. The City of Lebtait                                         dxxxii

  32. The Khalif Hisham and the Arab Youth                        dxxxiv

  33. Ibrahim ben el Mehdi and the Barber-Surgeon                 dxxxiv

  34. The City of Iram                                          dxxxviii

  35. Isaac of Mosul’s Story of Khedijeh and the Khalif              dxl
        Mamoun

  36. The Mock Khalif                                             dxliii

  37. The Imam Abou Yousuf with Er Reshid and Jaafar                 dlv

  38. The Lover who feigned himself a Thief to save his            dlvii
        Mistress’s Honour

  39. Abou Mohammed the Lazy                                      dlviii

  40. Jaafar ben Yehya and Abdulmelik ben Salih                     dlxv

  41. Jaafar ben Yehya[461] and the Man who forged a               dlxvi
        Letter in his Name

  42. Er Reshid and the Barmecides                                dlxvii

  43. Ibn es Semmak and Er Reshid                                dlxviii

  44. El Mamoun and Zubeideh                                     dlxviii

  45. Ali Shir[462] and Zummurrud                                  dlxix

  46. The Loves of Budour and Jubeir ben Umeir                  dlxxxvii

  47. The Man of Yemen and his Six Slave-girls                      dxcv

  48. Haroun Er Reshid with the Damsel and Abou Nuwas                 dc

  49. The Man who stole the Dog’s Dish of Gold                      dcii

  50. El Melik en Nasir and the Three Masters of Police            dciii

      _a._ Story of the Chief of the New Cairo Police               dciv

      _b._ Story of the Chief of the Boulac Police                   dcv

      _c._ Story of the Chief of the Old Cairo Police                dcv

  51. The Thief and the Money-changer                                dcv

  52. Ibrahim ben el Mehdi and the Merchant’s Sister                dcvi

  53. King Kelyaad[463] of Hind and his Vizier Shimas               dcix

      _a._ The Cat and the Mouse                                    dcix

      _b._ The Fakir and his Pot of Butter                           dcx

      _c._ The Fishes and the Crab                                  dcxi

      _d._ The Crow and the Serpent                                 dcxi

      _e._ The Fox and the Wild Ass                                 dcxi

      _f._ The Unjust King and the Pilgrim Prince                  dcxii

      _g._ The Crows and the Hawk                                 dcxiii

      _h._ The Serpent-Charmer and his Wife                        dcxiv

      _i._ The Spider and the Wind                                  dcxv

      _j._ The Two Kings                                           dcxvi

      _k._ The Blind Man and the Cripple                           dcxvi

      _l._ The Foolish Fisherman                                  dcxxvi

      _m._ The Boy and the Thieves                               dcxxvii

      _n._ The Man and his Wilful Wife                           dcxxvii

      _o._ The Merchant and the Thieves                           dcxxix

      _p._ The Foxes and the Wolf                                  dcxxx

      _q._ The Shepherd and the Thief                            dcxxxii

      _r._ The Heathcock and the Tortoises                       dcxxxiv

  54. The Woman whose Hands were cut off for Almsgiving            dcxli

  55. The Poor Man and His Generous Friend                       dcxliii

  56. The Ruined Man who became Rich again through a              dcxliv
        Dream

  57. Abou Nuwas with the Three Boys and the Khalif                dcxlv
        Haroun er Reshid

  58. The Lovers of the Benou Udhreh[464]                         dcxlvi

  59. El Mutelemmis and his Wife Umeimeh                        dcxlviii

  60. Haroun er Reshid and Zubeideh in the Bath                 dcxlviii

  61. Musab ben ez Zubeir and Aaïsheh his Wife                    dcxlix

  62. Aboulaswed and his Squinting Slave-girl                       dcli

  63. Haroun er Reshid and the Two Girls                            dcli

  64. Haroun er Reshid and the Three Girls                          dcli

  65. The Simpleton and the Sharper                                dclii

  66. The Imam Abou Yousuf with Er Reshid and Zubeideh             dclii

  67. The Khalif El Hakim and the Merchant                        dcliii

  68. Kisra Anoushirwan and the Village Damsel                    dcliii

  69. The Water-Carrier and the Goldsmith’s Wife                   dcliv

  70. Khusrau and Shirin and the Fisherman                         dclvi

  71. Yehya ben Khalid and the Poor Man                            dclvi

  72. Mohammed el Amin and Jaafar ben el Hadi                     dclvii

  73. The Woman’s Trick against her Husband                      dclviii

  74. The Devout Woman and the Two Wicked Elders                   dclix

  75. El Fezl ben Rebiya[465] and the Old Bedouin                   dclx

  76. En Numan and the Arab of the Benou Tai                        dclx

  77. The Draper and the Thief[466]                                dclxi

  78. Mesrour and Ibn el-Caribi                                   dclxii

  79. The Devout Prince                                           dclxiv

  80. The Schoolmaster who fell in Love by Report                  dclxv

  81. The Foolish Schoolmaster                                    dclxvi

  82. The Ignorant Man who set up for a Schoolmaster             dclxvii

  83. Adi ben Zeid and the Princess Hind                        dclxviii

  84. Dibil el Khuzaï with the Lady and Muslim ben el              dclxx
        Welid

  85. Isaac of Mosul and the Merchant                              dclxx

  86. The Three Unfortunate Lovers                               dclxxii

  87. The Lovers of the Benou Tai                               dclxxiii

  88. The Mad Lover                                              dclxxiv

  89. Firouz and his Wife                                         dclxxv

  90. The Apples of Paradise                                     dclxxvi

  91. The Loves of Abou Isa and Curret el Ain                  dclxxviii

  92. El Amin and his Uncle Ibrahim ben el Mehdi                dclxxxii

  93. El Feth ben Khacan and El Mutawekkil                     dclxxxiii

  94. The Man’s Dispute with the Learned Woman of the          dclxxxiii
        relative Excellence of the Sexes

  95. Abou Suweid and the Handsome Old Woman                   dclxxxvii

  96. Ali ben Tahir and the Girl Mounis                       dclxxxviii

  97. The Woman who had a Boy and the other who had a Man     dclxxxviii
        to Lover

  98. The Haunted House in Baghdad                            dclxxxviii

  99. The History of Gherib and his brother Agib                dcxcviii

 100. The Rogueries of Delileh the Crafty and her                 dcclvi
        daughter Zeyneb the Trickstress

 101. The Adventures of Quicksilver Ali of Cairo                 dcclxvi

 102. Joudar and his Brothers                                   dcclxxvi

 103. Julnar of the Sea and her Son King Bedr Basim of           dccxciv
        Persia

 104. Mesrour and Zein el Mewasif                                dcccxxi

 105. Ali Noureddin and the Frank King’s Daughter               dcccxxxi

 106. The Man of Upper Egypt and his Frank Wife                 dccclxii

 107. The Ruined Man of Baghdad and his Slave-girl              dccclxiv

 108. Aboukir the Dyer and Abousir the Barber                  dccclxvii

 109. Abdallah the Fisherman and Abdallah the Merman          dccclxxvii

 110. King Shah Bekht and his Vizier Er Rehwan                 dccclxxxv

      _a._ The Man of Khorassan, his Son and his Governor     dccclxxxvi

      _b._ The Singer and the Druggist                      dccclxxxviii

      _c._ The King who knew the Quintessence of Things          dcccxci

      _d._ The Rich Man who gave his Fair Daughter in           dcccxcii
             Marriage to the Poor Old Man

      _e._ The Rich Man and his Wasteful Son                   dcccxciii

      _f._ The King’s Son who fell in Love with the             dcccxciv
             Picture.

      _g._ The Fuller and his Wife                              dcccxcvi

      _h._ The Old Woman, the Merchant and the King             dcccxcvi

      _i._ The Credulous Husband                              dcccxcviii

      _j._ The Unjust King and the Tither                       dcccxcix

           _ja._ Story of David and Solomon                     dcccxcix

      _k._ The Thief and the Woman                              dcccxcix

      _l._ The Three Men and our Lord Jesus                       dcccci

           _la._ The Disciple’s Story                             dcccci

      _m._ The Dethroned King whose Kingdom and Good were         dcccci
             Restored to Him

      _n._ The Man whose Caution was the Cause of his           dcccciii
             Death.

      _o._ The Man who was lavish of his House and his           dcccciv
             Victual to one whom he knew not

      _p._ The Idiot and the Sharper                              dccccv

      _q._ Khelbes and his Wife and the Learned Man              dccccvi

      _r._ The Pious Woman accused of Lewdness                  dccccvii

      _s._ The Journeyman and the Girl                           dccccix

      _t._ The Weaver who became a Physician by his              dccccix
             Wife’s Commandment

      _u._ The Two Sharpers who cheated each his Fellow          dccccxi

      _v._ The Sharpers with the Money-Changer and the          dccccxiv
             Ass

      _w._ The Sharper and the Merchants                         dccccxv

           _wa._ The Hawk and the Locust                        dccccxvi

      _x._ The King and his Chamberlain’s Wife                 dccccxvii

           _xa._ The Old Woman and the Draper’s Wife           dccccxvii

      _y._ The foul-favoured Man and his Fair Wife            dccccxviii

      _z._ The King who lost Kingdom and Wife and Wealth        dccccxix
             and God restored them to him

           _za._ Selim and Selma                               dccccxxii

           _zb._ The King of Hind and his Vizier             dccccxxviii

 111. El Melik er Zahir Rukneddin Bibers el Bunducdari          dccccxxx
        and the Sixteen Officers of Police

      _a._ The First Officer’s Story                            dccccxxx

      _b._ The Second Officer’s Story                         dccccxxxii

      _c._ The Third Officer’s Story                          dccccxxxii

      _d._ The Fourth Officer’s Story                         dccccxxxiv

      _e._ The Fifth Officer’s Story                          dccccxxxiv

      _f._ The Sixth Officer’s Story                          dccccxxxiv

      _g._ The Seventh Officer’s Story                        dccccxxxiv

      _h._ The Eighth Officer’s Story                          dccccxxxv

           _ha._ The Thief’s Story                          dccccxxxviii

      _i._ The Ninth Officer’s Story                        dccccxxxviii

      _j._ The Tenth Officer’s Story                        dccccxxxviii

      _k._ The Eleventh Officer’s Story                     dccccxxxviii

      _l._ The Twelfth Officer’s Story                        dccccxxxix

      _m._ The Thirteenth Officer’s Story                     dccccxxxix

      _n._ The Fourteenth Officer’s Story                     dccccxxxix

           _na._ A Merry Jest of a Thief                         dccccxl

           _nb._ Story of the Old Sharper                        dccccxl

      _o._ The Fifteenth Officer’s Story                         dccccxl

      _p._ The Sixteenth Officer’s Story                         dccccxl

 112. Abdallah ben Nafi and the King’s Son of Cashghar          dccccxli

      _a._ Story of Tuhfet el Culoub and Haroun er Reshid      dccccxlii

 113. Noureddin Ali and Sitt el Milah                         dcccclviii

 114. El Abbas and the King’s Daughter of Baghdad              dcccclxvi

 115. The Malice of Women                                     dcccclxxix

      _a._ The King and his Vizier’s Wife                      dcccclxxx

      _b._ The Merchant’s Wife and the Parrot                  dcccclxxx

      _c._ The Fuller and his Son                              dcccclxxx

      _d._ The Lover’s Trick against the Chaste Wife           dcccclxxx

      _e._ The Niggard and the Loaves of Bread                 dcccclxxx

      _f._ The Lady and her Two Lovers                         dcccclxxx

      _g._ The King’s Son and the Ogress                      dcccclxxxv

      _h._ The Drop of Honey                                 dcccclxxxvi

      _i._ The Woman who made her Husband Sift Dust          dcccclxxxvi

      _j._ The Enchanted Springs                             dcccclxxxvi

      _k._ The Vizier’s Son and the Bathkeeper’s Wife      dcccclxxxviii

      _l._ The Wife’s Device to Cheat her Husband            dcccclxxxix

      _m._ The Goldsmith and the Cashmere Singing-Girl           dccccxc

      _n._ The Man who never Laughed again                      dccccxci

      _o._ The King’s Son and the Merchant’s Wife             dccccxciii

      _p._ The Man who saw the Night of Power                 dccccxciii

      _q._ The Stolen Necklace                                 dccccxciv

      _r._ Prince Behram of Persia and the Princess Ed         dccccxciv
             Detma.

      _s._ The House with the Belvedere                         dccccxcv

      _t._ The Sandal-wood Merchant and the Sharpers         dccccxcviii

      _u._ The Debauchee and the Three-year-old Child        dccccxcviii

      _v._ The Stolen Purse                                    dccccxcix

      _w._ The Fox and the Folk[467]                                   m

 116. The Two Kings and the Vizier’s Daughters                        mi

 117. The Favourite and her Lover                                     mi

 118. The Merchant of Cairo and the Favourite of the                  mi
        Khalif El Mamoun El Hakim bi Amrillah

      Conclusion.


                             _INDEX IV._—C.
_TABLE OF CONTENTS OF THE MACNAGHTEN OR TURNER-MACAN TEXT (1839–42) AND
BULAK EDITION (A.H. 1251 = A.D. 1835–36) OF THE ARABIC TEXT OF THE BOOK
 OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT; AS TRANSLATED BY MR. JOHN PAYNE._

                                                                   Night

 INTRODUCTION.—Story of King Shehriyar and his Brother

      _a._ Story of the Ox and the Ass

   1. The Merchant and the Genie                                       i

      _a._ The First Old Man’s Story                                   i

      _b._ The Second Old Man’s Story                                 ii

      _c._ The Third Old Man’s Story                                  ii

   2. The Fisherman and the Genie                                    iii

      _a._ Story of the Physician Douban                              iv

           _aa._ _Story of King Sindbad and his                        v
             Falcon_[468]

           _ab._ Story of the King’s Son and the Ogress                v

      _b._ Story of the Enchanted Youth                              vii

   3. The Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad                      ix

      _a._ The First Calender’s Story                                 xi

      _b._ The Second Calender’s Story                               xii

           _ba._ Story of the Envier and the Envied[469]            xiii

      _c._ The Third Calender’s Story                                xiv

      _d._ The Eldest Lady’s Story                                  xvii

      _e._ The Story of the Portress.                              xviii

   4. The Three Apples                                               xix

   5. Noureddin Ali of Cairo and his Son Bedreddin Hassan             xx

   6. Story of the Hunchback                                         xxv

      _a._ The Christian Broker’s Story                              xxv

      _b._ The Controller’s Story                                  xxvii

      _c._ The Jewish Physician’s Story                           xxviii

      _d._ The Tailor’s Story                                       xxix

      _e._ The Barber’s Story                                       xxxi

           _ea._ Story of the Barber’s First Brother                xxxi

           _eb._ Story of the Barber’s Second Brother               xxxi

           _ec._ Story of the Barber’s Third Brother               xxxii

           _ed._ Story of the Barber’s Fourth Brother              xxxii

           _ee._ Story of the Barber’s Fifth Brother               xxxii

           _ef._ Story of the Barber’s Sixth Brother              xxxiii

   7. Noureddin Ali and the Damsel Enis el Jelis                   xxxiv

   8. Ghanim ben Eyoub the Slave of Love                           xxxix

      _a._ Story of the Eunuch Bekhit                              xxxix

      _b._ Story of the Eunuch Kafour                              xxxix

   9. _The History of King Omar ben Ennuman and his Sons             xlv
        Sherkan and Zoulmekan_

      _a._ _Story of Taj el Mulouk and the Princess                 cvii
             Dunya_

           _aa._ _Story of Aziz and Azizeh_                         cxii

      _b._ _Bakoun’s Story of the Hashish-Eater_                  cxliii

      _c._ _Hemmad the Bedouin’s Story_                            cxliv

  10. _The Birds and Beasts and the Son of Adam_                   cxlvi

  11. _The Hermits_                                              cxlviii

  12. _The Water-fowl and the Tortoise_                          cxlviii

  13. _The Wolf and the Fox_                                     cxlviii

      _a._ _The Hawk and the Partridge_                            cxlix

  14. _The Mouse and the Weasel_                                      cl

  15. _The Cat and the Crow_                                          cl

  16. _The Fox and the Crow_                                          cl

      _a._ _The Mouse and the Flea_                                  cli

      _b._ _The Falcon and the Birds_                               clii

      _c._ _The Sparrow and the Eagle_                              clii

  17. _The Hedgehog and the Pigeons_                                clii

      _a._ _The Merchant and the Two Sharpers_                      clii

  18. _The Thief and his Monkey_                                    clii

      _a._ _The Foolish Weaver_                                     clii

  19. _The Sparrow and the Peacock_                                 clii

  20. Ali ben Bekkar and Shemsennehar                              cliii

  21. Kemerezzeman and Budour                                       clxx

      _a._ Nimeh ben er Rebya and Num his Slave-girl            ccxxxvii

  22. Alaeddin Abou esh Shamat                                       ccl

  23. Hatim et Taï; his Generosity after Death                     cclxx

  24. Maan ben Zaïdeh and the three Girls                         cclxxi

  25. Maan ben Zaïdeh and the Bedouin                             cclxxi

  26. The City of Lebtait                                        cclxxii

  27. The Khalif Hisham and the Arab Youth                       cclxxii

  28. Ibrahim ben el Mehdi and the Barber-surgeon               cclxxiii

  29. The City of Irem                                           cclxxvi

  30. Isaac of Mosul’s Story of Khedijeh and the Khalif          cclxxix
        Mamoun

  31. _The Scavenger and the Noble Lady of Baghdad_             cclxxxii

  32. The Mock Khalif                                           cclxxxvi

  33. _Ali the Persian and the Kurd Sharper_                      ccxciv

  34. The Imam Abou Yousuf with Haroun er Reshid and his          ccxcvi
        Vizier Jaafer

  35. The Lover who feigned himself a Thief to save his          ccxcvii
        Mistress’s Honour

  36. _Jaafer the Barmecide and the Bean-Seller_                  ccxcix

  37. Abou Mohammed the Lazy                                         ccc

  38. _Yehya ben Khalid and Mensour_                                cccv

  39. Yehya ben Khalid and the Man who forged a Letter in          cccvi
        his Name

  40. _The Khalif El Mamoun and the Strange Doctor_               cccvii

  41. Ali Shar and Zumurrud                                      cccviii

  42. The Loves of Jubeir ben Umeir and the Lady Budour         cccxxvii

  43. The Man of Yemen and his six Slave-girls                  cccxxxiv

  44. Haroun er Reshid with the Damsel and Abou Nuwas         cccxxxviii

  45. The Man who stole the Dog’s Dish of Gold                     cccxl

  46. _The Sharper of Alexandria and the Master of                cccxli
        Police_

  47. El Melik en Nasir and the three Masters of Police         cccxliii

      _a._ Story of the Chief of the New Cairo Police           cccxliii

      _b._ Story of the Chief of the Boulac Police               cccxliv

      _c._ Story of the Chief of the Old Cairo Police            cccxliv

  48. The Thief and the Money-Changer                            cccxliv

  49. The Chief of the Cous Police and the Sharper                cccxlv

  50. Ibrahim ben el Mehdi and the Merchant’s Sister             cccxlvi

  51. The Woman whose Hands were cut off for Almsgiving        cccxlviii

  52. _The Devout Israelite_                                   cccxlviii

  53. _Abou Hassan ez Ziyadi and the Man from Khorassan_         cccxlix

  54. The Poor Man and his Generous Friend                         cccli

  55. The Ruined Man who became Rich again through a               cccli
        Dream

  56. _El Mutawekkil and his Favourite Mehboubeh_                  cccli

  57. _Werdan the Butcher’s Adventure with the Lady and          cccliii
        the Bear_

  58. _The King’s Daughter and the Ape_                            ccclv

  59. The Enchanted Horse                                        ccclvii

  60. Uns el Wujoud and the Vizier’s Daughter Rose-in-bud        ccclxxi

  61. Abou Nuwas with the three Boys and the Khalif             ccclxxxi
        Haroun er Reshid

  62. _Abdallah ben Maamer with the Man of Bassora and        ccclxxxiii
        his Slave-girl_

  63. The Lovers of the Benou Udhreh                          ccclxxxiii

  64. _The Vizier of Yemen and his young Brother_              ccclxxxiv

  65. _The Loves of the Boy and Girl at School_                 ccclxxxv

  66. El Mutelemmis and his Wife Umeimeh                        ccclxxxv

  67. Haroun er Reshid and Zubeideh in the Bath                 ccclxxxv

  68. Haroun er Reshid and the three Poets                     ccclxxxvi

  69. Musab ben er Zubeir and Aaïsheh his Wife                 ccclxxxvi

  70. Aboulaswed and his squinting Slave-girl                 ccclxxxvii

  71. Haroun er Reshid and the two Girls                      ccclxxxvii

  72. Haroun er Reshid and the three Girls                    ccclxxxvii

  73. _The Miller and his Wife_                               ccclxxxvii

  74. The Simpleton and the Sharper                          ccclxxxviii

  75. The Imam Abou Yousuf with Haroun er Reshid and         ccclxxxviii
        Zubeideh

  76. The Khalif El Hakim and the Merchant                     ccclxxxix

  77. King Kisra Anoushirwan and the Village Damsel            ccclxxxix

  78. The Water-Carrier and the Goldsmith’s Wife                   cccxc

  79. Khusrau and Shirin and the Fisherman                        cccxci

  80. Yehya ben Khalid and the Poor Man                           cccxci

  81. Mohammed el Amin and Jaafer ben el Hadi                    cccxcii

  82. _Said ben Salim and the Barmecides_                        cccxcii

  83. The Woman’s Trick against her Husband                     cccxciii

  84. The Devout Woman and the two Wicked Elders                 cccxciv

  85. Jaafer the Barmecide and the Old Bedouin                    cccxcv

  86. Omar ben el Khettab and the Young Bedouin                   cccxcv

  87. _El Mamoun and the Pyramids of Egypt_                     cccxviii

  88. The Thief turned Merchant and the other Thief             cccxviii

  89. Mesrour and Ibn el Caribi                                  cccxcix

  90. The Devout Prince                                            cccci

  91. The Schoolmaster who Fell in Love by Report                 ccccii

  92. The Foolish Schoolmaster                                   cccciii

  93. The Ignorant Man who set up for a Schoolmaster             cccciii

  94. _The King and the Virtuous Wife_                            cccciv

  95. _Abdurrehman the Moor’s Story of the Roc_                   cccciv

  96. Adi ben Zeid and the Princess Hind                           ccccv

  97. Dibil el Khuzaï with the Lady and Muslim ben el            ccccvii
        Welid

  98. Isaac of Mosul and the Merchant                            ccccvii

  99. The Three Unfortunate Lovers[470]                           ccccix

 100. The Lovers of the Benou Tai                                  ccccx

 101. The Mad Lover                                               ccccxi

 102. The Apples of Paradise                                     ccccxii

 103. The Loves of Abou Isa and Curret el Ain                    ccccxiv

 104. El Amin and his Uncle Ibrahim ben el Mehdi               ccccxviii

 105. El Feth ben Khacan and El Mutawekkil                       ccccxix

 106. The Man’s Dispute with the Learned Woman of the            ccccxix
        relative Excellence of the Sexes

 107. Abou Suweid and the Handsome Old Woman                   ccccxxiii

 108. Ali ben Tahir and the Girl Mounis                         ccccxxiv

 109. The Woman who had a Boy and the other who had a Man       ccccxxiv
        to Lover

 110. The Haunted House in Baghdad                              ccccxxiv

 111. _The Pilgrim and the Old Woman who dwelt in the          ccccxxxiv
        Desert_

 112. _Aboulhusn and his Slave-girl Taweddud_                  ccccxxxvi

 113. _The Angel of Death with the Proud King and the           cccclxii
        Devout Man_

 114. _The Angel of Death and the Rich King_                    cccclxii

 115. _The Angel of Death and the King of the Children of      cccclxiii
        Israel_

 116. _Iskender Dhoulkernein and a certain Tribe of Poor        cccclxiv
        Folk_

 117. _The Righteousness of King Anoushirwan_                   cccclxiv

 118. _The Jewish Cadi and his Pious Wife_                       cccclxv

 119. _The Shipwrecked Woman and her Child_                     cccclxvi

 120. _The Pious Black Slave_                                  cccclxvii

 121. _The Devout Platter-maker and his Wife_                 cccclxviii

 122. _El Hejjaj ben Yousuf and the Pious Man_                   cccclxx

 123. _The Blacksmith who could Handle Fire without Hurt_       cccclxxi

 124. _The Saint to whom God gave a Cloud to serve Him        cccclxxiii
        and the Devout King_

 125. _The Muslim Champion and the Christian Lady_             cccclxxiv

 126. _Ibrahim ben el Khawwas and the Christian King’s        cccclxxvii
        Daughter_

 127. _The Justice of Providence_                            cccclxxviii

 128. _The Ferryman of the Nile and the Hermit_                cccclxxix

 129. _The King of the Island_                                 cccclxxix

 130. _Abulhusn ed Durraj and Abou Jaafer the Leper_           cccclxxxi

 131. _The Queen of the Serpents_                             cccclxxxii

      _a._ _The Adventures of Beloukiya_                      cccclxxxvi

      _b._ _The Story of Janshah_                               ccccxcix

 132. Sindbad the Sailor and Sindbad the Porter                   dxxxvi

      _a._ The First Voyage of Sindbad the Sailor               dxxxviii

      _b._ The Second Voyage of Sindbad the Sailor                dxliii

      _c._ The Third Voyage of Sindbad the Sailor                  dxlvi

      _d._ The Fourth Voyage of Sindbad the Sailor                    dl

      _e._ The Fifth Voyage of Sindbad the Sailor                   dlvi

      _f._ The Sixth Voyage of Sindbad the Sailor                   dlix

      _g._ The Seventh Voyage of Sindbad the Sailor               dlxiii

 133. The City of Brass                                            dlxvi

 134. The Malice of Women                                       dlxxviii

      _a._ The King and his Vizier’s Wife                       dlxxviii

      _b._ The Merchant’s Wife and the Parrot                     dlxxix

      _c._ The Fuller and his Son                                 dlxxix

      _d._ The Lover’s Trick against the Chaste Wife               dlxxx

      _e._ The Niggard and the Loaves of Bread                     dlxxx

      _f._ The Lady and her Two Lovers                            dlxxxi

      _g._ The King’s Son and the Ogress                          dlxxxi

      _h._ The Drop of Honey                                     dlxxxii

      _i._ The Woman who made her Husband sift Dust              dlxxxii

      _j._ The Enchanted Springs                                 dlxxxii

      _k._ The Vizier’s Son and the Bathkeeper’s Wife            dlxxxiv

      _l._ The Wife’s Device to Cheat her Husband                dlxxxiv

      _m._ The Goldsmith and the Cashmere Singing-girl           dlxxxvi

      _n._ The Man who never Laughed again                      dlxxxvii

      _o._ The King’s Son and the Merchant’s Wife                   dxci

      _p._ _The Page who feigned to know the Speech of             dxcii
             Birds_

      _q._ _The Lady and her five Suitors_                        dxciii

      _r._ The Man who saw the Night of Power                      dxcvi

      _s._ The Stolen Necklace                                     dxcvi

      _t._ _The two Pigeons_                                      dxcvii

      _u._ Prince Behram of Persia and the Princess Ed            dxcvii
             Detma

      _v._ The House with the Belvedere                          dxcviii

      _w._ _The King’s Son and the Afrit’s Mistress_                dcii

      _x._ The Sandal-wood Merchant and the Sharpers               dciii

      _y._ The Debauchee and the Three-year-old Child                dcv

      _z._ The Stolen Purse                                          dcv

 135. Jouder and his Brothers                                       dcvi

 136. The History of Gherib and his Brother Agib                  dcxxiv

 137. _Otbeh and Reyya_                                           dclxxx

 138. _Hind Daughter of En Numan and El Hejjaj_                  dclxxxi

 139. _Khuzeimeh ben Bishr and Ikrimeh el Feyyaz_               dclxxxii

 140. _Younus the Scribe and the Khalif Welid ben Sehl_         dclxxxiv

 141. _Haroun er Reshid and the Arab Girl_                       dclxxxv

 142. _El Asmaï and the three Girls of Bassora_                 dclxxxvi

 143. _Ibrahim of Mosul and the Devil_                         dclxxxvii

 144. _The Lovers of the Benou Udhreh_                        dclxxxviii

 145. _The Bedouin and his Wife_                                   dcxci

 146. _The Lovers of Bassora_                                    dcxciii

 147. _Isaac of Mosul and his Mistress and the Devil_              dcxcv

 148. _The Lovers of Medina_                                      dcxcvi

 149. _El Melik en Nasir and his Vizier_                         dcxcvii

 150. The Rogueries of Delileh the Crafty and her               dcxcviii
        Daughter Zeyneb the Trickstress

 151. The Adventures of Quicksilver Ali of Cairo: a              dccviii
        Sequel to the Rogueries of Delileh the Crafty

 152. Ardeshir and Heyat en Nufous                                dccxix

 153. Julnar of the Sea and her Son King Bedr Basim of        dccxxxviii
        Persia

 154. King Mohammed ben Sebaïk and the Merchant Hassan            dcclvi

      _a._ Story of Prince Seif el Mulouk and the               dcclviii
             Princess Bediya el Jemal

 155. Hassan of Bassora and the King’s Daughter of the        dcclxxviii
        Jinn

 156. Khelifeh the Fisherman of Baghdad                        dcccxxxii

 157. Mesrour and Zein el Mewasif                                dcccxlv

 158. Ali Noureddin and the Frank King’s Daughter              dccclxiii

 159. The Man of Upper Egypt and his Frank Wife                 dcccxciv

 160. The Ruined Man of Baghdad and his Slave-girl              dcccxcvi

 161. King Jelyaad of Hind and his Vizier Shimas:
        whereafter ensueth the History of King Wird Khan        dcccxcix
        son of King Jelyaad and his Women and Viziers

      _a._ The Cat and the Mouse                                   dcccc

      _b._ The Fakir and his Pot of Butter                       dccccii

      _c._ The Fishes and the Crab                              dcccciii

      _d._ The Crow and the Serpent                             dcccciii

      _e._ The Fox and the Wild Ass                              dcccciv

      _f._ The Unjust King and the Pilgrim Prince                 dccccv

      _g._ The Crows and the Hawk                                dccccvi

      _h._ The Serpent-Charmer and his Wife                     dccccvii

      _i._ The Spider and the Wind                             dccccviii

      _j._ The Two Kings                                         dccccix

      _k._ The Blind Man and the Cripple                          dccccx

      _l._ The Foolish Fisherman                              dccccxviii

      _m._ The Boy and the Thieves                            dccccxviii

      _n._ The Man and his Wilful Wife                          dccccxix

      _o._ The Merchant and the Thieves                          dccccxx

      _p._ The Foxes and the Wolf                               dccccxxi

      _q._ The Shepherd and the Thief                           dccccxxi

      _r._ The Heathcock and the Tortoises                     dccccxxiv

 162. Aboukir the Dyer and Abousir the Barber                   dccccxxx

 163. Abdallah the Fisherman and Abdallah the Merman             dccccxl

 164. The Merchant of Oman                                     dccccxlvi

 165. _Ibrahim and Jemileh_                                     dcccclii

 166. _Aboulhusn of Khorassan_                                  dcccclix

 167. _Kemerezzeman and the Jeweller’s Wife_                  dcccclxiii

 168. _Abdallah ben Fazil and his Brothers_                 dcccclxxviii

 169. _Marouf the Cobbler and his Wife Fatimeh_           dcccclxxxix-mi

                          Conclusion.


                             _INDEX IV._—D.
        _COMPARISON OF THE SAME WITH MR. LANE’S AND MY VERSION._

Introduction and

        Nos. 1 to 6 of the preceding list from Volume I. of my Edition.

        Nos. 7 to 9aa of the preceding list from Volume II. of my
           Edition.

        Nos. 9aa to 21 of the preceding list from Volume III. of my
           Edition.
            (_contd._)

        Nos. 21 to 58 of the preceding list from Volume IV. of my
           Edition.
            (_contd._)

        Nos. 59 to 131 of the preceding list from Volume V. of my
           Edition.

        Nos. 132 to 136 of the preceding list from Volume VI. of my
           Edition.

        Nos. 136 to 154a of the preceding list from Volume VII. of my
           Edition.
            (_contd._)

        Nos. 154a to 158 of the preceding list from Volume VIII. of my
           Edition.
            (_contd._)

        Nos. 158 to 168 of the preceding list from Volume IX. of my
           Edition.
            (_contd._)

        Nos. 169 and conclusion from Volume X. of my Edition.

For full details, see contents pages to each of the respective Volumes.

-----

Footnote 458:

  Calcutta (1839–42) and Boulac 134^b “The Merchant’s Wife and the
  Parrot.”

Footnote 459:

  This will be found translated in my “Book of the Thousand Nights and
  One Night,” vol. vii. p. 307, as an Appendix to the Calcutta (1839–42)
  and Boulac version of the story, from which it differs in detail.

Footnote 460:

  Called “Bekhit” in Calcutta (1839–42) and Boulac Editions.

Footnote 461:

  Yehya ben Khalid (Calcutta (1839–42) and Boulac).

Footnote 462:

  “Shar” (Calcutta (1839–42) and Boulac).

Footnote 463:

  “Jelyaad” (Calcutta (1839–42) and Boulac).

Footnote 464:

  Calcutta (1839–1842) and Boulac, No. 63. See my “Book of the Thousand
  Nights and One Night,” vol. iv. p. 211.

Footnote 465:

  Calcutta (1839–42) and Boulac, “Jaafar the Barmecide.”

Footnote 466:

  Calcutta (1839–42) and Boulac, “The Thief turned Merchant and the
  other Thief,” No. 88.

Footnote 467:

  This story will be found translated in my “Book of the Thousand Nights
  and One Night,” vol. v. p. 345.

Footnote 468:

  After this I introduce the Tale of the Husband and the Parrot.

Footnote 469:

  The Bulak Edition omits this story altogether.

Footnote 470:

  After this I introduce How Abu Hasan brake wind.




                              Appendix II.


 _CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE THOUSAND AND ONE NIGHTS, AND
  THEIR IMITATIONS, WITH A TABLE SHOWING THE CONTENTS OF THE PRINCIPAL
               EDITIONS AND TRANSLATIONS OF THE NIGHTS._

                             BY W. F. KIRBY,

 Author of “Ed-Dimiryaht: an Oriental Romance,” “The New Arabian Nights,”
                                   &c.

The European editions of the Thousand and One Nights, even excluding the
hundreds of popular editions which have nothing specially noticeable
about them, are very numerous; and the following Notes must, I am fully
aware, be incomplete, though they will, perhaps, be found useful to
persons interested in the subject. Although I believe that editions of
most of the English, French, and German versions of any importance have
passed through my hands, I have not had an opportunity of comparing many
in other languages, some of which at least may be independent editions,
not derived from Galland. The imitations and adaptations of The Nights
are, perhaps, more numerous than the editions of The Nights themselves,
if we exclude mere reprints of Galland; and many of them are even more
difficult of access.

In the following Notes, I have sometimes referred to tales by their
numbers in the Table.


                    _GALLAND’S MS. AND TRANSLATION._

The first MS. of The Nights known in Europe was brought to Paris by
Galland at the close of the 17th century; and his translation was
published in Paris, in twelve small volumes, under the title of “Les
Mille et une Nuit: Contes Arabes, traduits en Francois par M. Galland.”
These volumes appeared at intervals between 1704 and 1717. Galland
himself died in 1715, and it is uncertain how far he was responsible for
the latter part of the work. Only the first six of the twelve vols. are
divided into Nights, vol. 6 completing the story of Camaralzaman, and
ending with Night 234. The Voyages of Sindbad are not found in Galland’s
MS., though he has intercalated them as Nights 69–90 between Nos. 3 and
4. It should be mentioned, however, that in some texts (Bresl., for
instance) No. 133 is placed much earlier in the series than in others.

The stories in Galland’s last six vols. may be divided into two classes,
viz., those known to occur in genuine texts of The Nights, and those
which do not. To the first category belong Nos. 7, 8, 59, 153 and 170;
and some even of these are not found in Galland’s own MS., but were
derived by him from other sources. The remaining tales (Nos. 191–198) do
not really belong to The Nights; and, strange to say, although they are
certainly genuine Oriental tales, the actual originals have never been
found. I am inclined to think that Galland may, perhaps, have written
and adapted them from his recollection of stories which he himself heard
related during his own residence in the East, especially as most of
these tales appear to be derived rather from Persian or Turkish than
from Arabian sources.

The following Preface appeared in vol. 9 which I translate from
Talander’s German edition, as the original is not before me:

“The two stories with which the eighth volume concludes do not properly
belong to the Thousand and One Nights. They were added and printed
without the previous knowledge of the translator, who had not the
slightest idea of the trick that had been played upon him until the
eighth volume was actually on sale. The reader must not, therefore, be
surprised that the story of the Sleeper Awakened, which commences vol.
9, is written as if Scheherazade had related it immediately after the
story of Ganem, which forms the greater part of vol. 8. Care will be
taken to omit these two stories in a new edition, as not belonging to
the work.”

It is, perhaps, not to be wondered at that when the new edition was
actually published, subsequently to Galland’s death, the condemned
stories were retained, and the preface withdrawn; though No. 170 still
reads as if it followed No. 8.

The information I have been able to collect respecting the disputed
tales is very slight. I once saw a MS. advertised in an auction
catalogue (I think that of the library of the late Prof. H. H. Wilson)
as containing two of Galland’s doubtful tales, but which they were was
not stated. The fourth and last volume of the MS. used by Galland is
lost; but it is almost certain that it did not contain any of these
tales (compare Payne, ix. 265 note).

The story of Zeyn Alasnam (No. 191) is derived from the same source as
that of the Fourth Durwesh, in the well-known Hindustani reading-book,
the Bagh o Bahar. If it is based upon this, Galland has greatly altered
and improved it, and has given it the whole colouring of a European
moral fairy tale.

The story of Ali Baba (No. 195) is, I have been told, a Chinese tale. It
occurs under the title of the Two Brothers and the Forty-nine Dragons in
Geldart’s Modern Greek Tales. It has also been stated that the late
Prof. Palmer met with a very similar story among the Arabs of Sinai
(Payne, ix. 266).

The story of Sidi Nouman (No. 194b) may have been based partly upon the
Third Shaykh’s Story (No. 1c), which Galland omits. The feast of the
Ghools is, I believe, Greek or Turkish, rather than Arabic, in
character, as vampires, personified plague, and similar horrors are much
commoner in the folk-lore of the former peoples.

Many incidents of the doubtful, as well as of the genuine tales, are
common in European folk-lore (versions of Nos. 2 and 198, for instance,
occur in Grimm’s Kinder und Hausmärchen), and some of the doubtful tales
have their analogues in Scott’s MS., as will be noticed in due course.

I have not seen Galland’s original edition in 12 vols.; but the
Stadt-Bibliothek of Frankfort-on-Main contains a copy, published at La
Haye, in 12 vols. (with frontispieces), made up of two or more editions,
as follows:—

Vol. i. (ed. 6) 1729; vols. ii. iii. iv. (ed. 5) 1729; vols. v. vi.
viii. (ed. 5) 1728; vol. vii. (ed. 6) 1731; vols. ix. to xi. (ed. not
noted) 1730; and vol. xii. (ed. not noted) 1731.

The discrepancies in the dates of the various volumes looks (as Mr.
Clouston has suggested) as if separate volumes were reprinted as
required, independently of the others. This might account for vols. v.
vi. and viii. of the fifth edition having been apparently reprinted
before vols. ii. iii. and iv.

The oldest French version in the British Museum consists of the first
eight vols., published at La Haye, and likewise made up of different
editions, as follows:—

i. (ed. 5) 1714; ii. iii. iv. (ed. 4) 1714; v. vi. (ed. 5) 1728; vii.
(ed. 5) 1719; viii. (“suivant la copie imprimée à Paris”) 1714.

Most French editions (old and new) contain Galland’s Dedication, “À
Madame Madame la Marquise d’O., Dame du Palais de Madame la Duchesse de
Bourgogne,” followed by an “Avertissement.” In addition to these, the La
Haye copies have Fontenelle’s Approbation prefixed to several volumes,
but in slightly different words, and bearing different dates. December
27th, 1703 (vol. i.); April 14th, 1704 (vol. vi.); and October 4th, 1705
(vol. vii.). This is according to the British Museum copy; I did not
examine the Frankfort copy with reference to the Approbation. The
Approbation is translated in full in the old English version as follows:
“I have read, by Order of my Lord Chancellor, this Manuscript, wherein I
find nothing that ought to hinder its being Printed. And I am of opinion
that the Publick will be very well pleased with the Perusal of these
Oriental Stories. Paris, 27th December, 1705 [apparently a misprint for
1703] (Signed) FONTENELLE.”

In the Paris edition of 1726 (vide infrà), Galland says in his
Dedication, “Il a fallu le faire venir de Syrie, et mettre en François,
le premier volume que voici, de quatre seulement qui m’ont été envoyez.”
So, also, in a Paris edition (in eight vols. 12mo) of 1832; but in the
La Haye issue of 1714, we read not “quatre” but “six” volumes. The old
German edition of Talander (vide infrà) does not contain Galland’s
Dedication (Epitre) or Avertissement.

The earliest French editions were generally in 12 vols., or six; I
possess a copy of a six-volume edition, published at Paris in 1726. It
may be the second, as the title-page designates it as “nouvelle edition,
corrigée.”

Galland’s work was speedily translated into various European languages,
and even now forms the original of all the numerous popular editions.
The earliest English editions were in six volumes, corresponding to the
first six of Galland, and ending with the story of Camaralzaman; nor was
it till nearly the end of the 18th century that the remaining half of
the work was translated into English. The date of appearance of the
first edition is unknown to bibliographers; Lowndes quotes an edition of
1724 as the oldest; but the British Museum contains a set of six vols.,
made up of portions of the second, third and fourth editions, as
follows:—

Vols. i. ii. (ed. 4) 1713; vols. iii. iv. (ed. 2) 1712; and vols. v. vi.
(ed. 3) 1715.

Here likewise the separate volumes seem to have been reprinted
independently of each other; and it is not unlikely that the English
translation may have closely followed the French publication, being
issued volume by volume, as the French appeared, as far as vol. vi. The
title-page of this old edition is very quaint:

“Arabian-Nights Entertainments, consisting of One thousand and one
Stories, told by the Sultaness of the Indies to divert the Sultan from
the Execution of a Bloody Vow he had made, to marry a Lady every day,
and have her head cut off next Morning, to avenge himself for the
Disloyalty of the first Sultaness, also containing a better account of
the Customs, Manners and Religion of the Eastern Nations, viz., Tartars,
Persians and Indians than is to be met with in any Author hitherto
published. Translated into French from the Arabian MSS. by Mr. Galland
of the Royal Academy, and now done into English. Printed for Andrew Bell
at the Cross Keys and Bible, in Cornhill.”

The British Museum has an edition in 4to published in 1772, in farthing
numbers, every Monday, Wednesday and Friday. It extends to 79 numbers,
forming five volumes.

The various editions of the old English version appear to be rare, and
the set in the British Museum is very poor. The oldest edition which I
have seen containing the latter half of Galland’s version is called the
14th edition, and was published in London in four volumes, in 1778.
Curiously enough, the “13th edition,” also containing the conclusion,
was published at Edinburgh in three volumes in 1780. Perhaps it is a
reprint of a London edition published before that of 1778. The Scotch
appear to have been fond of The Nights, as there are many Scotch
editions both of The Nights and the imitations.

Revised or annotated editions by Piguenit (4 vols., London, 1792) and
Gough (4 vols., Edinburgh, 1798) may deserve a passing notice.

A new translation of Galland, by Rev. E. Forster, in five vols. 4to,
with engravings from pictures by Robert Smirke, R.A., appeared in 1802;
and now commands a higher price than any other edition of Galland. A new
edition in 8vo appeared in 1810. Most of the recent popular English
versions are based either upon Forster’s or Scott’s.

Another translation from Galland by G. S. Beaumont (four vols. 8vo),
appeared in 1811. (Lowndes writes _Wiliam_ Beaumont.)

Among the various popular editions of later date we may mention an
edition in two vols., 8vo, published at Liverpool (1813), and containing
Cazotte’s Continuation; an edition published by Griffin and Co., in
1866, to which Beckford’s “Vathek” is appended; an edition “arranged for
the perusal of youthful readers,” by the Hon. Mrs. Sugden (Whittaker &
Co., 1863); and “Five Favourite Tales from The Arabian Nights in words
of one syllable, by A. & E. Warner” (Lewis, 1871).

Some of the English editions of Galland aim at originality by arranging
the tales in a different order. The cheap edition published by Dicks in
1868 is one instance.

An English version of Galland was published at Lucknow, in four vols.,
8vo, in 1880.

I should, perhaps, mention that I have not noticed De Sacy’s “Mille et
une Nuit,” because it is simply a new edition of Galland; and I have not
seen either Destain’s French edition (mentioned by Sir R. F. Burton),
nor Cardonne’s Continuation (mentioned in Cabinet des Fées, xxxvii. p.
83). As Cardonne died in 1784, his Continuation, if genuine, would be
the earliest of all.

The oldest German version, by Talander, seems to have appeared in
volumes, as the French was issued; and these volumes were certainly
reprinted when required, without indication of separate editions; but in
slightly varied style, and with alteration of dates. The old German
version is said to be rarer than the French. It is in twelve parts—some,
however, being double. The set before me is clearly made up of different
reprints, and the first title-page is as follows: “Die Tausend und eine
Nacht, worinnen seltzame Arabische Historien und wunderbare
Begebenheiten, benebst artigen Liebes-Intriguen, auch Sitten und
Gewohnheiten der Morgenländer, auf sehr anmuthige Weise erzehlet werden;
Erstlich vom Hrn. Galland, der Königl. Academie Mitgliede aus der
Arabischen Sprache in die Französische und aus selbiger anitzo ins
Deutsche übersetzt: Erster und Anderer Theil. Mit der Vorrede Herrn
Talanders. Leipzig Verlegts Moritz Georg Weidmann Sr. Königl. Maj. in
Hohlen und Churfürstl. Durchl. zu Sachsen Buchhändler, Anno 1730.”
Talander’s Preface relates chiefly to the importance of the work as
illustrative of Arabian manners and customs, &c. It is dated from
“Liegnitz, den 7 Sept., Anno 1710,” which fixes the approximate date of
publication of the first part of this translation. Vols. i. and ii. of
my set (double vol. with frontispiece) are dated 1730, and have
Talander’s preface; vols. iii. and iv. (divided, but consecutively
paged, and with only one title-page and frontispiece and reprint of
Talander’s preface) are dated 1719; vols. v. and vi. (same remarks,
except that Talander’s preface is here dated 1717) are dated 1737; vol.
vii. (no frontispiece; preface dated 1710) is dated 1721; vol. 8 (no
frontispiece nor preface, nor does Talander’s name appear on the
title-page) is dated 1729; vols. ix. and x. (divided, but consecutively
paged, and with only one title-page and frontispiece; Talander’s name
and preface do not appear, but Galland’s preface to vol. ix., already
mentioned, is prefixed) are dated 1731; and vols. xi. and xii. (same
remarks, but no preface) are dated 1732.

Galland’s notes are translated, but not his preface and dedication.

There is a later German translation (6 vols. 8vo, Bremen, 1781–1785) by
J. H. Voss, the author of the standard German translation of Homer.

The British Museum has just acquired a Portuguese translation of
Galland, in 4 volumes: “As Mil e uma Noites, Contos Arabes,” published
by Ernesto Chardron, Editor, Porto e Braga, 1881.

There are two editions of a modern Greek work in the British Museum,
(1792 and 1804) published at Venice (Ενετιηριν) in three small volumes.
The first volume contains Galland (Nos. 1–6 of the table) and vols. ii.
and iii. chiefly contain the Thousand and One Days. It is, apparently,
translated from some Italian work.

Several editions in Italian (Mille ed una Notte) have appeared at Naples
and Milan; they are said by Sir R. F. Burton to be mere reprints of
Galland.

There are, also, several in Dutch, one of which, by C. Van der Post, in
3 vols. 8vo, published at Utrecht in 1848, purports, I believe, to be a
translation from the Arabic, and has been reprinted several times. The
Dutch editions are usually entitled, “Arabische Vertellinge.” A Danish
edition appeared at Copenhagen in 1818, under the title of “Prindsesses
Schehezerade. Fortällinger eller de saakatle Tusende og een Nat. Udgivna
paa Dansk vid Heelegaan.” Another, by Rasmassen, was commenced in 1824;
and a third Danish work, probably founded on the Thousand and One
Nights, and published in 1816, bears the title, “Digt og Eventyr fra
Osterland, af arabiska og persischen utrykta kilder.”

I have seen none of these Italian, Dutch or Danish editions; but there
is little doubt that most, if not all, are derived from Galland’s work.

The following is the title of a Javanese version, derived from one of
the Dutch editions, and published at Leyden in 1865, “Eenige
Vertellingen uit de Arabisch duizend en één Nacht. Naar de Nederduitsche
vertaling in het Javaansch vertaald, door Winter-Roorda.”

Mr. A. G. Ellis has shown me an edition of Galland’s Aladdin (No. 193)
in Malay, by M. Van der Lawan (?) printed in Batavia, A.D. 1869.


   _CAZOTTE’S CONTINUATION, AND THE COMPOSITE EDITIONS OF THE ARABIAN
                                NIGHTS._

We shall speak elsewhere of the Cabinet des Fées; but the last four
volumes of this great collection (38 to 41) published at Geneva from
1788 to 1793, contain a work entitled, “Les Veillées du Sultan Schahriar
avec la Sultane Scheherazade; histoires incroyables, amusantes et
morales, traduites de l’arabe par M. Cazotte et D. Chavis. Faisant suite
aux Mille et une Nuits.” Some copies bear the abridged title of “La
suite des Mille et une Nuits. Contes Arabes, traduits par Dom Chavis et
M. Cazotte.”

This collection of tales was pronounced to be spurious by many critics,
and even has been styled “a bare-faced forgery” by a writer in the
_Edinburgh Review_ of July, 1886. It is, however, certain that the
greater part, if not all, of these tales are founded on genuine Eastern
sources, though very few have any real claim to be regarded as actually
part of the Thousand and One Nights.

Translations of the originals of most of these tales have been published
by Caussin de Perceval and Gauttier; and a comparison clearly shows the
great extent to which Chavis and Cazotte have altered, amplified and (in
a literary sense) improved their materials.

It is rather surprising that no recent edition of this work seems to
have been issued, perhaps owing to the persistent doubts cast upon its
authenticity, only a few of the tales, and those not the best, having
appeared in different collections. My friend, Mr. A. G. Ellis, himself
an Oriental scholar, has remarked to me that he considers these tales as
good as the old “Arabian Nights;” and I quite agree with him that Chavis
and Cazotte’s Continuation is well worthy of re-publication in its
entirety.

The following are the principal tales comprised in this collection,
those included in our Table from later authors being indicated.

1. The Robber Caliph, or the Adventures of Haroun Alraschid with the
Princess of Persia, and the beautiful Zutulbe. (No. 246).

2. The Power of Destiny, being the History of the Journey of Giafar to
Damas, containing the Adventures of Chelih and his Family. (No. 280).

3. History of Halechalbe and the Unknown Lady. (No. 204c.).

4. Story of Xailoun the Idiot.

5. The Adventures of Simoustapha and the Princess Ilsetilsone. (No.
247).

6. History of Alibengiad, Sultan of Herak, and of the False Birds of
Paradise.

7. History of Sinkarib and his Two Viziers. (No. 249).

8. History of the Family of the Schebandad of Surat.

9. Story of Bohetzad and his Ten Viziers. (No. 174).

10. Story of Habib and Dorathil-Goase. (No. 251).

11. History of the Maugraby, or the Magician.

Of these, Nos. 4, 6, 8 and 11 only are not positively known in the
original. No. 11 is interesting, as it is the seed from which Southey’s
“Thalaba the Destroyer” was derived.

On the word Maugraby, which means simply Moor, Cazotte has the following
curious note: “Ce mot signifie barbare, barbaresque plus proprement. On
jure encore par lui en Provence, en Languedoc, et en Gascogne Maugraby;
ou ailleurs en France Meugrebleu.”

The Domdaniel, where Zatanai held his court with Maugraby and his
pupil-magicians, is described as being under the sea near Tunis. In
Weil’s story of Joodar and Mahmood (No. 201) the magician Mahmood is
always called the Moor of Tunis.

No. 3 (= our No. 204c) contains the additional incident of the door
opened only once a year which occurs in our No. 9a, aa.

Moore probably took the name Namouna from Cazotte’s No. 5, in which it
occurs. In the same story we find a curious name of a Jinniyah,
Setelpedour. Can it be a corruption of Sitt El Budoor?

For further remarks on Cazotte’s Continuation, compare Russell’s History
of Aleppo, i. p. 385; and Russell and Scott, Ouseley’s Oriental
Collections, i. pp. 246, 247; ii. p. 25; and the “Gentleman’s Magazine”
for February, 1779.

An English version under the title “Arabian Tales, or a Continuation of
the Arabian Nights’ Entertainments,” translated by Robert Heron, was
published in Edinburgh in 1792 in 4 vols., and in London in 1794 in 3
vols. It was reprinted in Weber’s “Tales of the East” (Edinburgh, 1812);
and, as already mentioned, is included in an edition of the Arabian
Nights, published in Liverpool in 1813.

A German translation forms vols. 5 to 8 of the “Blaue Bibliothek,”
published in Gotha in 1790 and 1791; and the British Museum possesses
vols. 3 and 4 of a Russian edition, published at Moscow in 1794 and
1795, which is erroneously entered in the catalogue as the Arabian
Nights in Russian.

Respecting the work of Chavis and Cazotte, Sir R. F. Burton remarks,
“Dom Dennis Chavis was a Syrian priest of the order of Saint Bazil, who
was invited to Paris by the learned minister, Baron Arteuil, and he was
assisted by M. Cazotte, a French author, then well known, but wholly
ignorant of Arabic. These tales are evidently derived from native
sources; the story of Bohetzad (King Bakhtiyar) and his Ten Wazirs is
taken bodily from the Bres. Edit. [not so; but the original Arabic had
long been known in the French libraries]. As regards the style and
treatment, it is sufficient to say that the authors out-Gallanded
Galland, while Heron exaggerates every fault of his original.”

The first enlarged edition of Galland in French was published by Caussin
de Perceval, at Paris, in 9 vols., 8vo (1806). In addition to Galland’s
version, he added four tales (Nos. 21a, 22, 32 and 37), with which he
had been furnished by Von Hammer. He also added a series of tales,
derived from MSS. in the Parisian libraries, most of which correspond to
those of Cazotte.

The most important of the later French editions was published by E.
Gauttier in 7 vols. in 1822; it contains much new matter. At the end,
the editor gives a list of all the tales which he includes, with
arguments. He has rather oddly distributed his material so as to make
only 568 nights. The full contents are given in our Table; the following
points require more special notice. Vol. i. Gauttier omits the Third
Shaykh’s story (No. 1c) on account of its indecency, although it is
really no worse than any other story in The Nights. In the story of the
Fisherman, he has fallen into a very curious series of errors. He has
misunderstood King Yunan’s reference to King Sindbad (Burton i. p. 50)
to refer to the Book of Sindibad (No. 135); and has confounded it with
the story of the Forty Vazirs, which he says exists in Arabic as well as
in Turkish. Of this latter, therefore, he gives an imperfect version,
embedded in the story of King Yunan (No. 2a). Here it may be observed
that another imperfect French version of the Forty Vazirs had previously
been published by Petis de la Croix under the title of Turkish Tales. A
complete German version by Dr. Walter F. A. Behrnauer was published at
Leipzig in 1851, and an English version by Mr. E. J. W. Gibb has
appeared while these sheets are passing through the press.

Vol. ii. After No. 6 Gauttier places versions of Nos. 32 and 184 by
Langlès. The Mock Caliph is here called Aly-Chah. The other three tales
given by Caussin de Perceval from Von Hammer’s MSS. are omitted by
Gauttier. Vol. v. (after No. 198) concludes with two additional tales
(Nos. 207h and 218) from Scott’s version. But the titles are changed,
No. 207h being called the Story of the Young Prince and the Green Bird,
and No. 218 the Story of Mahmood, although there is another story of
Mahmood in vol. i. (= No. 135m) included as part of the Forty Vazirs.

Vol. vi. includes the Ten Vazirs (No. 174) derived, however, not from
the Arabic, but from the Persian Bakhtyar Nameh. Three of the
subordinate tales in the Arabic version are wanting in Gauttier’s, and
another is transferred to his vol. vii., but he includes one, the King
and Queen of Abyssinia (No. 252), which appears to be wanting in the
Arabic. The remainder of the volume contains tales from Scott’s version,
the title of Mazin of Khorassaun (No. 215) being altered to the Story of
Azem and the Queen of the Genii.

Vol. vii. contains a series of tales of which different versions of six
only (Nos. 30, 174, 246, 248, 249 and 250) were previously published.
Though these have no claim to be considered part of The Nights, they are
of sufficient interest to receive a passing mention, especially as
Gauttier’s edition seems not to have been consulted by any later writer
on The Nights, except Habicht, who based his own edition mainly upon it.
Those peculiar to Gauttier’s edition are therefore briefly noticed.

_Princess Ameny_ (No. 253)—A princess who leaves home disguised as a
man, and delivers another princess from a black slave. The episode
(253b) is a story of enchantment similar to Nos. 1a-c.

_Aly Djohary_ (No. 254)—Story of a young man’s expedition in search of a
magical remedy.

_The Princes of Cochin China_ (No. 255)—The princes travel in search of
their sister who is married to a Jinni, who is under the curse of
Solomon. The second succeeds in breaking the spell, and thus rescues
both his brother, his sister, and the Jinni by killing a bird to which
the destiny of the last is attached. (This incident is common in
fiction; we find it in the genuine Nights in Nos. 154a and 201.)

_The Wife with Two Husbands_ (No. 256)—A well-known Eastern story; it
may be found in Wells’ “Mehemet the Kurd,” pp. 121–127, taken from the
Forty Vazirs. Compare Gibbs, the 24th Vazir’s Story, pp. 257–266.

_The Favourite_ (No. 257)—One of the ordinary tales of a man smuggled
into a royal harem in a chest (compare Nos. 6b and 166).

_Youssouf and the Indian Merchant_ (No. 258)—Story of a ruined man
travelling to regain his fortune.

_Prince Benazir_ (No. 258)—Story of a Prince promised at his birth, and
afterwards given up by his parents to an evil Jinni, whom he ultimately
destroys. (Such promises, especially, as here, in cases of difficult
labour, are extremely common in folk-tales; the idea probably originated
in the dedication of a child to the Gods.) Gauttier thinks that this
story may have suggested that of Maugraby to Cazotte; but it appears to
me rather doubtful whether it is quite elaborate enough for Cazotte to
have used it in this manner.

_Selim, Sultan of Egypt_ (No. 261)—This and its subordinate tales
chiefly relate to unfaithful wives; that of Adileh (No. 261b) is
curious; she is restored to life by Jesus (whom Gauttier, from motives
of religious delicacy, turns into a Jinni!) to console her disconsolate
husband, and immediately betrays the latter. These tales are apparently
from the Forty Vazirs; cf. Gibbs, the 10th Vazir’s Story, pp. 122–129 (=
our No. 261) and the Sixth Vazir’s Story, pp. 32–84 (= No. 261b.)

The bulk of the tales in Gauttier’s vol. vii. are derived from
posthumous MSS. of M. Langlès, and several have never been published in
English. Gauttier’s version of Heycar (No. 248) was contributed by M.
Agoub.

The best known modern German version (Tausend und Eine Nacht, Arabische
Erzahlungen, Deutsch von Max. Habicht, Fr. H. von der Hagen und Carl
Schall. Breslau, 15 vols. 12mo) is mainly based upon Gauttier’s edition,
but with extensive additions, chiefly derived from the Breslau text. An
important feature of this version is that it includes translations of
the prefaces of the various editions used by the editors, and therefore
supplies a good deal of information not always easily accessible
elsewhere. There are often brief notes at the end of the volumes.

The fifth edition of Habicht’s version is before me, dated 1840; but the
preface to vol. i is dated 1824, which maybe taken to represent the
approximate date of its first publication. The following points in the
various vols. may be specially noticed:—

Vol. i. commences with the preface of the German editor, setting forth
the object and scope of his edition; and the prefaces of Gauttier and
Galland follow. No. 1c, omitted by Gauttier, is inserted in its place.
Vols. ii. and iii. (No. 133), notes, chiefly from Langlès, are appended
to the Voyages of Sindbad; and the destinations of the first six are
given as follows:—

   I. Voyage to Sumatra.

  II. Voyage to Ceylon.

 III. Voyage to Selahath.

  IV. Voyage to the Sunda Islands.

   V. Voyage to the Sunda Islands.

  VI. Voyage to Zeilan.

Vol. v. contains an unimportant notice from Galland, with additional
remarks by the German editors, respecting the division of the work into
Nights.

Vol. vi. contains another unimportant preface respecting Nos. 191 and
192.

Vol. x. Here the preface is of more importance, relating to the contents
of the volume, and especially to the Ten Vazirs (No. 174).

Vol. xi. contains tales from Scott. The preface contains a full account
of his MSS., and the tales published in his vol. vi. This preface is
taken partly from Ouseley’s Oriental Collections, and partly from
Scott’s own preface.

Vol. xii. contains tales from Gauttier, vol. vii. The preface gives the
full contents of Clarke’s and Von Hammer’s MSS.

Vol. xiii. includes Caussin de Perceval’s Preface, the remaining tales
from Gauttier’s vol. vii. (ending with Night 568); and four tales from
Caussin which Gauttier omits (Nos. 21a, 22, 37 and 202).

Vols. xiv. and xv. (extending from Night 884 to Night 1001) consist of
tales from the Breslau edition, to which a short preface, signed by Dr.
Max. Habicht is prefixed. The first of these tales is a fragment of the
important Romance of Seyf Zul Yesn (so often referred to by Lane), which
seems to have been mixed with Habicht’s MS. of The Nights by mistake.
(Compare Payne, Tales, iii. 243.)

In this fragment we have several incidents resembling The Nights; there
is a statue which sounds an alarm when an enemy enters a city (cf. Nos.
59 and 137); Seyf himself is converted to the faith of Abraham, and
enters a city where a book written by Japhet is preserved. The text of
this story has lately been published; and Sir R. F. Burton informs me
that he thinks he has seen a complete version in some European language;
but I have not succeeded in obtaining any particulars concerning it.

On account of the interest and importance of the work, I append to this
section an English version of the fragment translated into German by
Habicht. (From the extreme simplicity of the style, which I have
preserved, I suspect that the translation is considerably abridged.)

There is an Icelandic version of The Nights (Þúsund og ein Nott.
Arabiskar Sögur. Kaupmannahöfn, 1857, 4 vols. roy. 8vo), which contains
Galland’s tales, and a selection of others, distributed into 1001
Nights, and apparently taken chiefly from Gauttier, but with the
addition of two or three which seem to be borrowed from Lane (Nos. 9a,
163, 165, &c.). It is possibly derived immediately from some Danish
edition.

There is one popular English version which may fairly be called a
composite edition; but it is not based upon Gauttier. This is the
“Select Library Edition. Arabian Nights’ Entertainments, selected and
revised for general use. To which are added other specimens of Eastern
Romance. London: James Burns, 1847. 2 vols.”

It contains the following tales from The Nights: Nos. 134, 3, 133, 162,
1, 2, 155, 191, 193, 192, 194, 194a, 194c, 21, 198, 170, 6.

No. 134 is called the City of Silence, instead of the City of Brass, and
is certainly based partly upon Lane. In No. 155, Manar Al Sana is called
Nur Al Nissa. One story, “The Wicked Dervise,” is taken from Dow’s
“Persian Tales of Inatulla;” another “The Enchanters, or the Story of
Misnar,” is taken from the “Tales of the Genii.” Four other tales,
“Jalaladdeen of Bagdad,” “The two Talismans,” “The Story of Haschem,”
and “Jussof, the Merchant of Balsora,” clearly German imitations, are
said to be translated from the German of Grimm, and there are two
others, “Abdullah and Balsora,” and “The King and his Servant,” the
origin of which I do not recognise, although I think I have read the
last before.

Grimm’s story of Haschem, concludes with the hero’s promotion to the
post of Grand Vizier to Haroun Al-Rashid, in consequence of the desire
of the aged “Giafar” to end his days in peaceful retirement! The
principal incident in Jalaladdeen, is that of the Old Woman in the
Chest, borrowed from the well-known story of the Merchant Abudah in the
“Tales of the Genii,” and it is thus an imitation of an imitation.


 _THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE STORY OF SAIF ZUL YEZN (ZU’L YAZAN) ACCORDING
                     TO HABICHT’S GERMAN VERSION._

In very ancient times, long before the age of Mohammed, there lived a
King of Yemen, named Zul Yezn. He was a Himyarite of the race of Fubbaa
(Tabbá’) and had large armies and a great capital. His Minister was
named Yottreb (Yathrab = Medinat), and was well skilled in the knowledge
of the ancients. He once had a vision in which the name of the Prophet
was revealed to him, with the announcement of his mission in later
times; and he was also informed that he would be the last of the
Prophets. In consequence of this vision he believed in the Prophet
before his advent; but he concealed his faith. One day the King held a
review of his troops, and was delighted with their number and handsome
appearance. He said to the Wazir, “Is there any person on earth whose
power can compare with mine?” “O yes,” answered the Wazir, “there is
King Baal-Beg, whose troops fill the deserts and the cultivated lands,
the plains and the valleys.” “I must make war upon him, then,” exclaimed
the King, “and destroy his power.” He immediately ordered the army to
prepare to march, and after a few days the drums and trumpets were
heard. The King and his Wazir set forth in magnificent array, and after
a rapid march, they arrived before the holy city Medina, which may God
keep in high renown! The Wazir then said to the King, “Here is the holy
house of God, and the place of great ceremonies. No one should enter
here who is not perfectly pure, and with head and feet bare. Pass around
it with your companions, according to the custom of the Arabs.” The King
was so pleased with the place that he determined to destroy it, to carry
the stones to his own country, and to rebuild it there, that the Arabs
might come to him on pilgrimage, and that he might thus exalt himself
above all Kings. He pondered over this plan all night, but next morning
he found his body fearfully swollen. He immediately sent for his Wazir,
and lamented over his misfortune. “This is a judgment sent upon you,”
replied the Wazir, “by the Lord of this house. If you alter your
intention of destroying the temple, you will be healed at once.” The
King gave up his project, and soon found himself cured. Soon afterwards
he said to himself, “This misfortune happened to me at night, and left
me next day of its own accord; but I will certainly destroy the house.”
But next morning his face was so covered with open ulcers that he could
no longer be recognised. The Wazir then approached him and said, “O
King, renounce your intention, for it would be rebellion against the
Lord of Heaven and Earth, who can destroy every one who opposes him.”
When the King heard this, he reflected awhile and said, “What would you
wish me to do?” The Wazir replied, “Cover the house with carpets from
Yemen.” The King resolved to do this, and when night came he retired to
rest. He then saw an apparition which ordered him not to march further
into the country of King Baal-Beg, but to turn towards Abyssinia and
Nigritia, adding, “Remain there, and choose it as thy residence, and
assuredly one of thy race will arise through whom the threat of Noah
shall be fulfilled.” When the King awoke next morning he related this to
the Wazir, who advised him to use his own judgment about it. The King
immediately gave orders to march. The army set forth, and after ten days
they arrived at a country the soil of which seemed to consist of chalk,
for it appeared quite white. The Wazir Yottreb then went to the King and
requested his permission to found a city here for his people. “Why so?”
asked the King. “Because,” replied the Wazir, “this will one day be the
place of Refuge of the Prophet Mohammed, who will be sent at the end of
time.” The King then gave his consent, and Yottreb immediately summoned
architects and surveyors, who dug out the ground, and reared the walls,
and erected beautiful palaces. They did not desist from the work until
the Wazir ordered a number of his people to remove to this city with
their families. This was done, and their posterity inhabit the city to
this day. He then gave them a scroll, and said, “He who comes to you as
a fugitive to this house will be the ruler of this city.” He then called
the city Yottreb after his own name, and the scroll descended from
father to son till the Apostle of God arrived as a fugitive from Mecca,
when the inhabitants went out to meet him, and presented him with it.
They afterwards became his auxiliaries and were known as the Ansar. But
we must now return to King Zul Yezn. He marched several days towards
Abyssinia, and at last arrived in a beautiful and fertile country where
he informed his Wazir that he would like to build a city for his
subjects. He gave the necessary orders, which were diligently executed;
canals were dug and the surrounding country cultivated; and the city was
named Medinat El-Hamra, the Red. At last the news reached the King of
Abyssinia, whose name was Saif Ar-Raad (Thunder-sword), and whose
capital was called Medinat ad-Durr (the Rich in Houses). Part of this
city was built on solid land and the other was built in the sea. This
prince could bring an army of 600,000 men into the field, and his
authority extended to the extremity of the then known world. When he was
informed of the invasion of Zul Yezn, he summoned his two Wazirs, who
were named Sikra Divas and Ar-Ryf. The latter was well versed in ancient
books, in which he had discovered that God would one day send a Prophet
who would be the last of the series. He believed this himself, but
concealed it from the Abyssinians, who were still worshippers of Saturn.
When the Wazirs came before the King, he said to them, “See how the
Arabs are advancing against us; I must fight them.” Sikra Divas opposed
this design, fearing lest the threat of Noah should be fulfilled. “I
would rather advise you,” said he, “to make the King a present and to
send with it the most beautiful maiden in your palace. But give her
poison secretly, and instruct her to poison the King when she is alone
with him. If he is once dead, his army will retire without a battle.”
The King adopted this advice, and prepared rich presents, and summoned a
beautiful girl, whose artfulness and malice were well known. Her name
was Kamrya (Moonlight.) The King said to her, “I have resolved to send
you as a present, for a secret object. I will give you poison, and when
you are alone with the Prince to whom I will send you, drop it into his
cup, and let him take it. As soon as he is dead, his army will leave us
in peace.” “Very well, my master,” replied the girl, “I will accomplish
your wish.” He then sent her with the other presents and a letter to the
city of Zul Yezn. But the Wazir Ar-Ryf had scarcely left the King’s
presence when he wrote a letter, and commanded a slave to carry it to
Zul Yezn. “If you can give it to him before the arrival of the
slave-girl,” added he, “I will give you your freedom.” The slave made
all possible haste to the Arab King, but yet the presents arrived before
him. A chamberlain went to the King and informed him that a messenger
had arrived at the gate with presents from the King of Abyssinia, and
requested permission to enter. Zul Yezn immediately ordered that he
should be admitted, and the presents and the maiden were at once
delivered to him. When he saw her, he was astonished at her beauty, and
was greatly delighted. He immediately ordered her to be conveyed to his
palace, and was very soon overcome with love for her. He was just about
to dissolve the assembly to visit Kamrya, when the Wazir Yottreb
detained him, saying, “Delay a while, O King, for I fear there is some
treachery hidden behind this present. The Abyssinians hate the Arabs
exceedingly, but are unwilling to make war with them, lest the threat of
Noah should be fulfilled. It happened one day that Noah was sleeping
when intoxicated with wine, and the wind uncovered him. His son Ham
laughed, and did not cover him; but his other son Seth [sic] came
forward, and covered him up. When Noah awoke, he exclaimed to Ham, ‘May
God blacken thy face!’ But to Seth he said, ‘May God make the posterity
of thy brother the servants of thine until the day of Resurrection!’
This is the threat which they dread as the posterity of Ham.” While the
King was still conversing with his Wazir, the Chamberlain announced the
arrival of a messenger with a letter. He was immediately admitted, and
delivered the letter, which was read by the Wazir Yottreb. Ar-Ryf had
written, “Be on your guard against Kamrya, O King, for she hath poison
with her, and is ordered to kill you when she is alone with you.” The
King now began loudly to praise the acuteness of his Wazir, and went
immediately to Kamrya with his drawn sword. When he entered, she rose
and kissed the ground, but he exclaimed, “You have come here to poison
me!” She was confounded, and took out the poison, and handed it to the
King, full of artifice, and thinking “If I tell him the truth, he will
have a better opinion of me, and if he confides in me, I can kill him in
some other manner than with this poison.” It fell out as she expected,
for the King loved her, gave her authority over his palace and his
female slaves, and found himself very happy in her possession. But she
herself found her life so pleasant that, although King Ar-Raad
frequently sent to ask her why she had not fulfilled her commission, she
always answered, “Wait a little; I am seeking an opportunity, for the
King is very suspicious.” Some time passed over, and at length she
became pregnant. Six months afterwards Zul Yezn fell ill; and as his
sickness increased, he assembled the chief men of his Court, informed
them of the condition of Kamrya, and after commending her to their
protection, he ordered that if she bore a son, he should succeed him.
They promised to fulfil his commands, and a few days afterwards Zul Yezn
died. Kamrya now governed the country, till she brought forth a son. He
was a child of uncommon beauty, and had a small mole on his cheek. When
she saw the child she envied him, and said to herself, “What, shall he
take away the kingdom from me? No, it shall never be;” and from this
time forward she determined to put him to death. After forty days, the
people requested to see their King. She showed him to them, and seated
him on the throne of the kingdom, whereupon they did homage to him, and
then dispersed. His mother took him back into the Palace, but her envy
increased so much that she had already grasped a sword to kill him, when
her nurse entered and asked what she was going to do? “I am about to
kill him,” answered she. “Have you not reflected?” said the nurse, “that
if you kill him the people will revolt, and may kill you also?” “Let me
kill him,” persisted she; “for even should they kill me too, I should at
least be released from my envy.” “Do not act thus,” warned the nurse,
“or you may repent it, when repentance cannot help you.” “It must be
done,” said Kamrya. “Nay, then,” said the nurse, “if it cannot be
avoided, let him at least be cast into the desert, and if he lives, so
much the better for him; but if he dies, you are rid of him for ever.”
She followed this advice and set out on the way at night time with the
child, and halted at a distance of four days’ journey, when she sat down
under a tree in the desert. She took him on her lap, and suckled him
once more, and then laid him on a bed, putting a purse under his head,
containing a thousand gold pieces and many jewels. “Whoever finds him,”
said she, “may use the money to bring him up;” and thus she left him.

It happened by the gracious decree of God, that hunters who were chasing
gazelles, surprised a female with a fawn; the former took to flight, and
the hunters carried off the little one. When the mother returned from
the pasture, and found her fawn gone, she traversed the desert in all
directions in search of it, and at length the crying of the deserted
child attracted her. She lay down by the child, and the child sucked
her. The gazelle left him again to go to graze, but always returned to
the little one when she was satisfied. This went on till it pleased God
that she should fall into the net of a hunter. But she became enraged,
tore the net, and fled. The hunter pursued her, and overtook her when
she reached the child, and was about to give him suck. But the arrival
of the hunter compelled the gazelle to take to flight, and the child
began to cry, because he was not yet satisfied. The hunter was
astonished at the sight, and when he lifted the child up, he saw the
purse under his head, and a string of jewels round his neck. He
immediately took the child with him, and went to a town belonging to an
Abyssinian king named Afrakh, who was a dependent of King Saif Ar-Raad.
He handed over the child to him, saying that he had found it in the lair
of a gazelle. When the King took the child into his care, it smiled at
him, and God awakened a feeling of love towards him in the King’s heart;
and he then noticed the mole on his cheek. But when his Wazir Sikar
Diun, the brother of Sikar Divas, who was Wazir to King Saif Ar-Raad,
entered and saw the child, God filled his heart with hate towards him.
“Do not believe what this man told you,” he said, when the King told him
the wonderful story of the discovery, “it can only be the child of a
mother who has come by it wrongly, and has abandoned it in the desert,
and it would be better to kill it.” “I cannot easily consent to this,”
said the King. But he had hardly spoken, when the palace was filled with
sounds of rejoicing, and he was informed that his wife had just been
safely delivered of a child. On this news he took the boy on his arm,
and went to his wife, and found that the new-born child was a girl, and
that she had a red mole on her cheek. He wondered when he saw this, and
said to Sikar Diun, “See how beautiful they are!” But when the Wazir saw
it, he slapped his face, and cast his cap on the ground, exclaiming,
“Should these two moles unite, I prophesy the downfall of Abyssinia, for
they presage a great calamity. It would be better to kill either the boy
or your daughter.” “I will kill neither of them,” replied the King, “for
they have been guilty of no crime.” He immediately provided nurses for
the two children, naming his daughter Shama (Mole) and the boy
Wakhs[471] El Fellat (Lonely one, or Desert); and he reared them in
separate apartments, that they might not see each other. When they were
ten years old, Wakhs El Fellat grew very strong, and soon became a
practised horseman, and surpassed all his companions in this
accomplishment, and in feats of arms. But when he was fifteen, he was so
superior to all others, that Sikar Diun threatened the King that he
would warn King Saif Ar-Raad that he was nurturing his enemy in his
house, if he did not immediately banish him from the country; and this
threat caused King Afrakh great alarm. It happened that he had a
general, who was called Gharag El Shaker (Tree-splitter), because he was
accustomed to hurl his javelin at trees, and thus to cleave them
asunder. He had a fortress three days’ journey from the town; and the
King said to him, “Take Wakhs El Fellat to your castle, and never let
him return to this neighbourhood.” He added privately, “Look well after
him and preserve him from all injury, and have him instructed in all
accomplishments.” The general withdrew, and took the boy with him to his
castle, and instructed him thoroughly in all accomplishments and
sciences. One day he said to him, “One warlike exercise is still unknown
to you.” “What is that?” said Wakhs El Fellat. “Come and see for
yourself,” replied he. The general then took him to a place where
several trees were growing, which were so thick that a man could not
embrace the trunk. He then took his javelin, hurled it at one of them,
and split the trunk. Wakhs El Fellat then asked for the javelin, and
performed the same feat, to the astonishment of his instructor. “Woe to
thee!” exclaimed he, “for I perceive that you are the man through whom
the threat of Noah will be fulfilled against us. Fly, and never let
yourself be seen again in our country, or I will kill you.” Wakhs El
Fellat then left the town, not knowing where to go. He subsisted for
three days on the plants of the earth, and at last he arrived at a town
encircled by high walls, the gates of which were closed. The inhabitants
were clothed in black, and uttered cries of lamentation. In the
foreground he saw a bridal tent, and a tent of mourning. This was the
city of King Afrakh who had reared him, and the cause of the mourning of
the inhabitants was as follows. Sikar Diun was very angry that the King
had refused to follow his advice, and put the boy to death, and had left
the town to visit one of his friends, who was a magician, to whom he
related the whole story. “What do you propose to do now?” asked the
magician. “I will attempt to bring about a separation between him and
his daughter,” said the Wazir. “I will assist you,” was the answer of
the magician. He immediately made the necessary preparations, and
summoned an evil Jinni named Mukhtatif (Ravisher) who inquired, “What do
you require of me?” “Go quickly to the city of King Afrakh, and contrive
that the inhabitants shall leave it.” In that age men had intercourse
with the more powerful Jinn, and each attained their ends by means of
the other. The Jinn did not withdraw themselves till after the advent of
the Prophet. The Magician continued, “When the inhabitants have left the
city, they will ask you what you want.” Then say, “Bring me out Shama,
the daughter of your King, adorned with all her jewels, and I will come
to-morrow and carry her away. But if you refuse, I will destroy your
city, and destroy you all together.” When Mukhtatif heard the words of
this priest of magis, he did as he was commanded, and rushed to the
city. When Sikar Diun saw this, he returned to King Afrakh to see what
would happen; but he had scarcely arrived when the voice of Mukhtatif
resounded above the city. The inhabitants went to the King, and said,
“You have heard what is commanded, and if you do not yield willingly,
you will be obliged to do so by force.” The King then went weeping to
the mother of the Princess, and informed her of the calamity. She could
scarcely contain herself for despair, and all in the palace wept at
parting from the Princess. Meantime Shama was richly attired, torn from
her parents, and hurried to the bridal tent before the town, to be
carried away by the evil Jinni. The inhabitants were all assembled on
the walls of the city, weeping. It was just at this moment that Wakhs El
Fellat arrived from the desert, and entered the tent to see what was
going on. When King Afrakh, who was also on the wall, saw him, he cried
out to him, but he did not listen, and dismounted, fastened his horse to
a tent-stake, and entered. Here he beheld a maiden of extraordinary
beauty and perfection, but she was weeping. While he was completely
bewildered by her beauty, she was no less struck by his appearance. “Who
art thou?” said the maiden to him. “Tell me rather who art thou?”
returned he. “I am Shama, the daughter of King Afrakh.” “Thou art
Shama?” he exclaimed, “and I am Wakhs El Fellat, who was reared by thy
father.” When they were thus acquainted, they sat down together to talk
over their affairs, and she took this opportunity of telling him what
had passed with the Jinni, and how he was coming to carry her away. “O,
you shall see how I will deal with him,” answered he, but at this moment
the evil Jinni approached, and his wings darkened the sun. The
inhabitants uttered a terrible cry, and the Jinni darted upon the tent,
and was about to raise it when he saw a man there, talking to the
daughter of the King. “Woe to thee, O son of earth,” he exclaimed, “What
authority have you to sit by my betrothed?” When Wakhs El Fellat saw the
terrible form of the Jinni, a shudder came over him, and he cried to God
for aid. He immediately drew his sword, and struck at the Jinni who had
just extended his right hand to seize him, and the blow was so violent
that it struck off the hand. “What, you would kill me?” exclaimed
Mukhtatif, and he took up his hand, put it under his arm, and flew away.
Upon this there was a loud cry of joy from the walls of the city. The
gates were thrown open, and King Afrakh approached, companied by a crowd
of people with musical instruments, playing joyful music; and Wakhs El
Fellat was invested with robes of honour: but when Sikar Diun saw it it
was gall to him. The King prepared an apartment expressly for Wakhs El
Fellat, and while Shama returned to her palace, he gave a great feast in
honour of her deliverance from the fiend. After seven days had passed,
Shama went to Wakhs El Fellat, and said to him, “Ask me of my father
to-morrow, for you have rescued me, and he will not be able to refuse
you.” He consented very willingly, and went to the King early next
morning. The King gave him a very favourable reception, and seated him
with him on the throne; but Wakhs El Fellat had not courage to prefer
his suit, and left him after a short interview. He had not long returned
to his own room, when Shama entered, saluted him, and asked, “Why did
you not demand me?” “I was too bashful,” he replied. “Lay this feeling
aside,” returned she, “and demand me.” “Well, I will certainly do so
to-morrow,” answered he. Thereupon she left him, and returned to her own
apartment. Early next morning Wakhs El Fellat went again to the King,
who gave him a friendly reception, and made him sit with him. But he was
still unable to prefer his suit, and returned to his own room. Soon
after Shama came to him and said, “How long is this bashfulness to last?
Take courage, and if not, request some one else to speak for you.” She
then left him, and next morning he repeated his visit to the King. “What
is your request?” asked the latter. “I am come as a suitor,” said Wakhs
El Fellat, “and ask the hand of your noble daughter Shama.” When Sikar
Diun heard this, he slapped his face. “What is the matter with you?”
asked the King. “This is what I have foreseen,” answered he, “for if
these two moles unite, the destruction of Abyssinia is accomplished.”
“How can I refuse him?” replied the King, “when he has just delivered
her from the fiend.” “Tell him,” answered Sikar Diun, “that you must
consult with your Wazir.” The King then turned to Wakhs El Fellat, and
said, “My son, your request is granted as far as I am concerned, but I
leave my Wazir to arrange it with you, so you must consult him about
it.” Wakhs El Fellat immediately turned to the Wazir, and repeated his
request to him. Sikar Diun answered him in a friendly manner. “The
affair is as good as arranged, no one else is suited for the King’s
daughter, but you know that the daughters of the Kings require a dowry.”
“Ask what you please,” returned Wakhs El Fellat. “We do not ask you for
money or money’s worth,” said the Wazir, “but for the head of a man
named Sudun, the Ethiopian.” “Where can I find him?” said the prince.
The Wazir replied, “He is said to dwell in the fortress of Reg, three
days’ journey from here.” “But what if I fail to bring the head of
Sudun?” asked he. “But you will have it,” returned the Wazir; and after
this understanding the audience ceased, and each returned to his
dwelling.

Now this Sudun had built his fortress on the summit of a high hill. It
was very secure, and he defended it with the edge of the sword. It was
his usual resort, from whence he sallied forth on plundering
expeditions, and rendered the roads unsafe. At length the news of him
reached King Saif Ar-Raad, who sent against him three thousand men, but
he routed and destroyed them all. Upon this, the King sent a larger
number against him, who experienced the same fate. He then despatched a
third army, upon which Sudun fortified himself afresh, and reared the
walls of his fortress so high that an eagle could scarcely pass them. We
will now return to Shama, who went to Wakhs El Fellat, and reproached
him with the conditions he had agreed to, and added, “It would be better
for you to leave this place, and take me with you, and we will put
ourselves under the protection of some powerful king.” “God forbid,”
replied he, “that I should take you with me in so dishonourable a
manner.” As he still positively refused to consent, she grew angry, and
left him. Wakhs El Fellat lay down to rest, but he could not sleep. So
he rose up, mounted his horse, and rode away at midnight; and in the
morning he met a horseman who stationed himself in his path, but who was
so completely armed that his face was concealed. When Wakhs El Fellat
saw him, he cried to him, “Who are you, and where are you going?” But
instead of replying, he pressed upon him, and aimed a blow which Wakhs
El Fellat successfully parried. A fight then commenced between them,
which lasted till nearly evening. At last the difference in their
strength became perceptible, and Wakhs El Fellet struck his adversary so
violent a blow with his javelin that his horse fell to the ground. He
then dismounted, and was about to slay him, when the horseman cried to
him, “Do not kill me, O brave warrior, or you will repent when
repentance will no more avail you.” “Tell me who you are?” returned
Wakhs El Fellat. “I am Shama, the daughter of King Afrakh,” replied the
horseman. “Why have you acted thus?” asked he. “I wished to try whether
you would be able to hold your own against Sudun’s people,” she replied.
“I have tried you now, and found you so valiant that I fear no longer on
your account. Take me with you, O hero.” “God forbid that I should do
so,” he returned; “what would Sikar Diun and the others say? They would
say that if Shama had not been with him, he would never have been able
to prevail against Sudun.” She then raised her eyes to heaven, and said,
“O God, permit him to fall into some danger from which I alone may
deliver him!” Upon this Wakhs El Fellat pursued his journey, without
giving any attention to her words. On the third day he arrived at the
valley where the fortress of Sudun was situated, when he began to work
his way along behind the trees; and towards evening he arrived at the
fortress itself, which he found to be surrounded with a moat; and the
gates were closed. He was still undecided what course to take, when he
heard the sound of an approaching caravan; and he hid himself in the
fosse of the fortress to watch it. He then saw that it was driven
forward by a large body of men, and that the merchants were bound on
their mules. When they arrived at the castle, they knocked at the gate;
and when the troop entered, Wakhs El Fellat entered with them; and they
unloaded the goods and bound the prisoners without noticing him. When
the armed men had finished their work, they ascended to the castle, but
he remained below. After a time, he wished to follow them, but when he
trod on the first step, it gave way under him, and a dagger flew out,
which struck him in the groin. Upon this his eyes filled with tears, and
he already looked upon his destruction as certain, when a form came
towards him from the entrance of the castle, to deliver him; and as it
drew nearer, he perceived that it was Shama. He was filled with
astonishment, and cried out, “God has heard your prayer! How did you
come here?” “I followed your traces,” she replied, “till you entered the
castle, when I imitated your example, and mingled with the troops. I
have now saved your life, although you have refused to take me with you;
but if you wish to advance further, do not neglect to try whether each
step is fixed, with the point of your sword.” He now again began to
ascend, feeling the way before him, and Shama followed, till they
arrived at the last stair, when they saw that the staircase ended in a
revolving wheel. “Spring higher,” advised Shama, “for I see a javelin
which magic art has placed here.” They sprang over it, and pursued their
way till they reached a large anteroom, lighted by a high cupola. They
stopped here awhile, and examined everything carefully. At last they
approached the door of a room, and on looking through the crevices, they
saw about a hundred armed negroes, among whom was a black slave who
looked as savage as a lion. The room was lighted by wax candles, placed
on gold and silver candlesticks. At this moment, the black said,
“Slaves, what have you done with the prisoners belonging to the
caravan?” “We have chained them up in the prison below, and left them in
the safest place,” was the reply. But he continued, “If one of them was
carelessly bound, he might be able to release himself and the others,
and to gain possession of the stairs. Let one of you therefore go down,
examine them carefully, and tighten their bonds.” One of them therefore
came out, and the two strangers hid themselves in the anteroom. When he
had passed them, Wakhs El Fellat stepped forward and pierced him through
with his sword; Shama dragged his body aside, and they both remained
quiet for a time. But as the slave remained away from his companions too
long, Sudun exclaimed, “Go and see why he does not return, for I have
been in great alarm ever since we entered the castle to-day.” A second
then rose and took his sword, and as he came into the anteroom, Wakhs El
Fellat clove him in twain at one blow and Shama dragged his body also on
one side. They again waited quietly for a time, when Sudun said, “It
seems as if hunters are watching our slaves, and are killing them one
after another.” A third then hastened out, and Wakhs El Fellat struck
him such a blow that he fell dead to the ground, and Shama dragged him
also away. But as he likewise remained absent so long, Sudun himself
stood up, and all the others with him, and he said, “Did I not warn and
caution you? There is a singing in my ears, and my heart trembles, for
there must be people here who are watching our men.” He himself now came
out, and the others followed him with lights and holding their hands on
their swords, when one of the foremost suddenly stopped. “Why do you not
advance!” cried the others. “How shall I go forward,” said he, “when he
who has slain our friends stands before us.” This answer was repeated to
Sudun when he called on them in a voice of thunder to advance. When he
heard this, he forced his way through them till he perceived Wakhs El
Fellat. “Who are you, Satan?” cried he, “and who brought you here?” “I
came here,” replied he, “to cut off your head, and destroy your memory.”
“Have you any blood-feud against me?” asked Sudun, “or any offence to
revenge upon me?” “I have no enmity against you in my heart,” said Wakhs
El Fellat, “and you have never injured me; but I have asked Shama in
marriage of her father, and he has demanded of me your head as a
condition. Be on your guard, that you may not say I acted foully towards
you.” “Madman,” cried Sudun, “I challenge you to a duel. Will you fight
inside or outside the fortress?” “I leave that to you,” returned Wakhs
El Fellat. “Well, then, await me here,” was the reply. Sudun then went
in, clothed himself in gilded armour, girt on a saw-like sword, and came
out holding a shining club in his hand. He was so enraged that he knew
not what to say, and at once attacked Wakhs El Fellat, who threw himself
on his adversary like a raging lion, and they fought together like
hungry wolves; but both despaired of victory. The swords spake a hard
language on the shields, and each of the combatants wished that he had
never been born. When this desperate fight had lasted a long time, Shama
was greatly troubled lest Sudun should prove victorious. So she seized a
dagger and struck at Sudun, wounding the nerves of his hand, so that he
dropped his sword, while she exclaimed to Wakhs El Fellat, “Make an end
of him.” “No,” replied Wakhs El Fellat, “I will make him my prisoner,
for he is a brave and valiant man.” “With whom are you speaking?” asked
Sudun. “With Shama,” answered he. “What,” said Sudun, “did she come with
you?” “Yes,” replied he. “Then let her come before me.” She came
forward, and Sudun said, “Is the world too narrow for your father that
he could demand nothing as your dowry but my head?” “This was his
desire,” answered she. Wakhs El Fellat then said, “Take your sword and
defend yourself, for I will not fight with you, now that it has fallen
out of your hand.” But Sudun replied, “I will not fight with you, for I
am wounded, so take my head, and go in peace with your bride.” He then
sat down and bowed his head. “If you speak truly,” said Wakhs El Fellat,
“separate yourself from your people.” “Why so?” “Because I fear lest
they may surround me, and compel me to fight with them, and there is no
need for me to shed their blood.” Sudun then left the castle, bowed his
head, and said, “Finish your work.” But Wakhs El Fellat said, “If you
speak truth, come with me across the fosse of the castle into the open
ground.” He did so, carefully barring the castle behind him, and said,
“Now take my head.”

When the slaves saw this, they mounted the walls, and wept and lamented.
But Shama cried out, “Take his head, and let us hasten our return before
morning dawns.” “What,” said Wakhs El Fellat, “should I kill so brave a
man in so treacherous a manner, when he is so noble and magnanimous?” He
then went up to Sudun, kissed his head, and said, “Rise up, O warrior of
the age, for you and your companions are safe from me.” They now all
embraced each other, and made an offensive and defensive compact. “Take
me with you alive, O brave man,” said Sudun, “and hand me over to the
King as his daughter’s dowry. If he consents, well; but if not, take my
head, and woo your wife.” “God forbid,” said Wakhs El Fellat, “that I
should act thus after your magnanimity. Rather return to the castle, and
assure your companions of your safety.” All this passed under the eyes
of the other armed men. They rejoiced at the knightly conduct of both,
and now came down, fell at the feet of Sudun and embraced him. They then
did the same to Wakhs El Fellat, whose hands they kissed and loaded him
with praises. After this, they all returned to the castle, and agreed to
set out presently. They took with them whatever treasures there were,
and Wakhs El Fellat commanded them to release the prisoners and restore
them their goods. They now all mounted their horses and journeyed to the
country of King Afrakh, greatly rejoiced at the mutual love of the
warriors. When they approached the town, Shama parted from them, that
nothing should be known of her absence in the company. During this time,
King Afrakh and Sikar Diun had amused themselves with hunting, jesting,
and sporting, and sent out scouts daily to look for Wakhs El Fellat.
“What can have become of him?” said the King once to Sikar Diun. “Sudun
has certainly killed him,” replied the latter, “and you will never see
him again.” While they were thus talking, they observed a great cloud of
dust, and as it drew nearer, they could see the armed men more
distinctly. The company was led by a black knight, by whose side rode a
younger white horseman. When the King saw this, he exclaimed, “Wakhs El
Fellat has returned, in company with Sudun and his host.” “Wait a
little,” replied Sikar Diun, “till we are certain of it.” But when they
drew nearer, and they could doubt no longer, Sikar Diun mounted his
horse and fled, accompanied by the King and his followers, till they
reached the town, and barred the gates. They then watched from the
walls, to see what would happen. When they saw that the strangers
dismounted and pitched tents, the King thought it was a good sign. He
therefore ordered the town to be decorated, and the gates to be opened,
and rode out, attended by a considerable escort, and approached the
tents. The other party now mounted their horses to go to meet them. When
they approached each other, King Afrakh was about to dismount, but Wakhs
El-Fellat would not allow it, and the King embraced him, and
congratulated him on his safety. He then saluted Sudun also, but the
latter did not return his salutation. He invited him to enter the town,
but he declined, as did Wakhs El Fellat likewise, who did not wish to
part from his companions. The King returned accompanied only by his own
people, and prepared the best reception for the new-comers. On the
following morning the King held a general council, at which Sikar Diun
appeared greatly depressed. “Did I not warn you beforehand,” said he to
the King, “what you now see for yourself of this evil-doer? Did we not
send him to bring the head of Sudun, and he returns with him safe and
sound, and on the best of terms, while our hearts are oppressed with
anxiety?” “You may be right,” replied the King, “but what are we to do
now?”

This conversation was interrupted by a tumult caused by the arrival of
Wakhs El Fellat and Sudun, who came to pay their respects to the King.
The King invited them to sit down, but Sudun remained standing, and when
he asked him again, he replied, “You craven, was the world too narrow
for you that you desired my head as your daughter’s dowry?” “Sit down,”
said the King, “for I know that you are angry.” “How can I sit down,”
returned Sudun, “when you have ordered my death?” “God forbid that I
should act so unjustly,” said the King; “it was Sikar Diun.” “What,”
said he, “do you accuse me of such an action in my presence?” “Did you
not make this condition with Wakhs El Fellat,” said the King, “and send
him on his errand?” Sikar Diun then turned to Sudun, and said, “Sit
down, brave warrior, for we only did so from love to you, that we might
be able to make a treaty with you, and that you might join our company.”
After this answer, Sudun concealed his anger, and sat down. Refreshments
were now brought in, and after partaking of them, Wakhs El Fellat and
Sudun returned to their tents. Several days passed in this manner, and
at length Sudun said to Wakhs El Fellat, “O my master, it is time for
you to demand Shama in marriage, now you have won her with the edge of
the sword. You have fulfilled their conditions long since by bringing
them my head, but you have made no further progress at present. Ask for
her once more, and if they will not give her up, I will fall upon them
with the sword, and we will carry Shama off, and then lay waste the
city.” “I will demand her as my wife again to-morrow,” replied the
other. When he went to the palace next day, he found the King and all
the court assembled. When they saw him, they all rose from their seats,
and when they sat down again, he alone remained standing. “Why do you
not sit down,” said the King, “for all your wishes are now fulfilled?”
“I have still to ask for Shama,” he replied. “You know,” returned the
King, “that ever since her birth I have allowed Sikar Diun to make all
arrangements for her.” He now turned to Sikar Diun, who replied in a
friendly tone, “She is yours, for you have fulfilled the conditions, and
you have only now to give her ornaments.” “What kind of ornaments?”
asked he. “Instead of ornaments,” replied the traitor, “we desire to
receive a book containing the history of the Nile. If you bring it us,
she is wholly yours, but if not, there is no marriage to be thought of.”
“Where is it to be found?” “I cannot tell you myself.” “Well then,”
returned Wakhs El Fellat, “if I do not bring you the book, Shama is lost
to me; all present are witnesses to this.” He went out with these words,
pushing his way through the crowded assembly, and Sudun behind him, till
they reached their tents. “Why did you promise that,” said Sudun, “let
us rather overcome them with the sword, and take Shama from them.” “Not
so,” replied Wakhs El Fellat, “I will only possess her honourably.” “And
yet you do not even know how to find the book,” said Sudun; “rather
listen to my advice, retire to my fortress, and leave me in their
power.” “I would never act thus,” said Wakhs El Fellat, “though I should
suffer death.” After these and similar speeches, supper was brought in,
and each retired to his sleeping apartment. But Wakhs El Fellat had
scarcely entered his room when Shama came in. “What have you done,” said
she, “and what engagement have you undertaken? How can you fulfil this
condition? Do you not see that their only object is to destroy you, or
at least to get rid of you? I have come to warn you again, and I say to
you once more, take me with you to Sudun’s castle, where we can live at
peace, and do not act as they tell you.” “I will carry out my
engagement,” he replied; “I will not possess you like a coward, even
though I should be cut to pieces with swords.” Upon this, Shama was
angry and left him, while he lay down to rest, but could not sleep. He
therefore rose up, saddled and mounted his horse and rode away, without
knowing where, abandoning himself wholly to the will of God. He wandered
about thus for several days, until he reached a lonely tower. He knocked
at the door, and a voice answered, “Welcome O thou who hast separated
thyself from thy companions; enter without fear, O brave Saif, son of
Zul Yezn.” When he pushed the door it opened, and his eyes beheld a
noble and venerable old man, from whose appearance it was at once
obvious that he busied himself with the strictest life and fear of God.
“Welcome,” cried he again; “if you had travelled from east to west you
would have found no one who could show you how to obtain the book you
seek as well as I can, for I have dwelt here awaiting your arrival for
sixty years.” “But that was before I was born,” said Wakhs El Fellat to
himself. He then asked aloud, “By what name did you address me just
now?” “O Saif,” answered the old man, “that is your true name, for you
are a sword (Saíf) to the Abyssinians: but whom do you worship?” “O my
master,” was the reply, “the Abyssinians worship Saturn (Sukhal) but I
am in perplexity, and know not whom to worship.” “My son,” replied the
old man, “worship Him who has reared the heavens over us without
pillars, and who has rested the earth on water; the only and eternal
God, the Lord who is only and alone to be reverenced. I worship Him and
none other beside him, for I follow the religion of Abraham.” “What is
your name?” asked Wakhs El Fellat. “I am called Shaikh Gyat.” “What
declaration must I make,” he asked the old man, “to embrace your
religion?” “Say ‘There is no God but God, and Abraham is the Friend of
God.’ If you make this profession, you will be numbered among the
believers.” He at once repeated the formula, and Shaikh Gyat was much
pleased, and devoted the night to teaching him the history of Abraham
and his religion, and the forms of worship. Towards morning he said, “O
my son, whenever you advance to battle, say, ’God is great, grant me
victory, O God, and destroy the infidels,’ and help will be near you.
Now pursue your journey, but leave your horse here until your return.
Enter the valley before you, under the protection of God, and after
three days you will meet some one who will aid you.” Wakhs El Fellat set
out on that road, and after three days he met a horseman who saluted
him, and exclaimed, “Welcome, Saif Zul Yezn, for you bring happiness to
this neighbourhood.” Saif returned his salutation, and asked, “How do
you know me, and how do you know my name?” “I am not a brave or renowned
warrior,” was the answer, “but one of the maidens of this country and my
mother taught me your name.” “What is your name and that of your
mother?” “My mother’s name is Alka,” answered she, “and I am called
Taka.” When he heard this he was greatly rejoiced, for he remembered
that Shaikh Gyat had said to him, “O thou, whose destiny will be decided
by Alka and Taka.” “O noble virgin,” said he, “where is your mother,
Alka?” “Look round,” she replied; and he saw a very large and lofty city
at some distance. “Know,” said she, “that 360 experienced philosophers
dwell in that city. My mother Alka is their superior, and directs all
their affairs and actions. She knew that you would come to this
neighbourhood in search of a book concerning the Nile, which was written
by Japhet, the son of Noah, and she wishes you to attain your end by her
means. She also informed me of your coming, and promised me to you,
saying, ‘You shall have no other husband but him.’ We expected you
to-day, and she sent me to meet you, adding, ‘Warn him not to enter the
town by daylight, or it will be his destruction.’ Wait here, therefore,
till nightfall, and only approach the city after dark. Turn to the right
along the wall, and stand still when you reach the third tower, where we
will await you. As soon as we see you we will throw you a rope; bind it
round your waist, and we will draw you up. The rest will be easy.” “But
why need you give yourselves all this trouble?” said Saif Zul Yezn.
“Know,” replied she, “that the inhabitants of this city have been
informed of your approaching arrival by their books, and are aware that
you are about to carry away their book, which they hold in superstitious
reverence. On the first day of each month they repair to the building
where it is preserved; and they adore it and seek counsel from it
respecting their affairs. They have also a king whose name is Kamrun.
When they knew that you were coming for the book they constructed a
talisman against you. They have made a copper statue, and fixed a brazen
horn in its hand, and have stationed it at the gate of the city. If you
enter, the statue will sound the horn, and it will only do so upon your
arrival. They would then seize you and put you to death. On this account
we desire to baffle their wisdom, by drawing you up to the walls of the
city at another place.” “May God reward you a thousandfold,” replied he;
“but go now, and announce my arrival to your mother.” She went away, and
he approached the city in the darkness of night, and turned towards the
third tower on the right, where he found Alka and Taka. When they
recognised him, they immediately threw him the rope, which he fastened
about him. When he was drawn up, they descended from the wall, and were
about to proceed to Alka’s house, when the talisman suddenly acted, and
the statue blew the horn loudly. “Hasten to our house,” cried Alka; and
they succeeded in reaching it safely and barred the doors, when the
noise increased. The whole population of the city rose up, and the
streets were filled. “What is this disturbance about?” asked Saif. “This
is all due,” replied Alka, “to the alarm sounded by the statue, because
you have entered the town. There will be a great meeting held to-morrow,
where all the wise men will assemble, to attempt to discover the
whereabouts of the intruder; but by God’s help, I will guide them wrong,
and confuse their counsels. Go to our neighbour the fisherman,” added
she to her daughter, “and see what he has caught.” She went, and brought
news that he had taken a large fish, of the size of a man. “Take this
piece of gold,” said her mother, “and bring us the fish” and when she
did so, she told her to clean it, which was done. Food was then brought
in, and they ate and talked. The night passed quietly, but on the
following morning Alka ordered Saif Zul Yezn to undress, and to hide in
the skin of the fish. She put her mouth to the mouth of the fish, and
took a long rope, which she fastened under Saif’s armpits. She then let
him down into a deep well, and fastened him there, saying, “Remain here,
till I come back.” She then left him, and went to the great hall of the
King, where the divan was already assembled, and the King had taken his
seat on the throne. All rose up when she entered, and when she had
seated herself, the King said to her, “O mother, did you not hear the
blast of the horn yesterday, and why did you not come out with us?” “I
did hear it,” she replied, “but I did not heed it.” “But you know,” said
he, “that the sound can only be heard upon the arrival of the stranger
who desires to take the book.” “I know it, O King; but permit me to
choose forty men from among those assembled here.” She did so, and
selected ten from among the forty again. She then said to them, “Take a
Trakhtramml (sandboard) on which the Arabs practise geomancy and
notation, and look and search.” They did so, but had scarcely finished
when they looked at each other in amazement. They destroyed their
calculation, and began a second, and confused this too, and began a
third, upon which they became quite confounded. “What are you doing
there?” asked the King at last. “You go on working and obliterating your
work; what have you discovered?” “O King,” replied they, “we find that
the stranger has entered the town, but not by any gate. He appears to
have passed in between Heaven and earth, like a bird. After this, a fish
swallowed him, and carried him down into some dark water.” “Are you
fools?” asked the King angrily; and turning to Alka, continued, “Have
you ever seen a man flying between Heaven and earth, and afterwards
swallowed by a fish, which descends with him into dark water?” “O King,”
replied she, “I always forbid the wise men to eat heavy food, for it
disturbs their understanding and weakens their penetration; but they
will not heed me.” At this the King was angry, and immediately drove
them from the hall. But Alka said, “It will be plain to-morrow what has
happened.” She left the hall, and when she reached home, she drew Saif
Zul Yezn out of the well, and he dressed himself again. They sat down,
and Alka said, “I have succeeded in confounding their deliberations
to-day! and there will be a great assembly to-morrow, when I must hide
you in a still more out-of-the-way place.” After this they supped, and
went to rest. Next morning Alka called her daughter, and said, “Bring me
the gazelle.” When it was brought her, she said, “Bring me the wings of
an eagle.” Taka gave them to her, and she bound them on the back of the
gazelle. She then took a pair of compasses, which she fixed in the
ceiling of the room. She next took two other pairs of compasses, and
tied one between the fore feet, and the other between the hind feet of
the gazelle. She then tied a rope to the compasses in the roof, and the
two ends to the other pairs. But she made Saif Zul Yezn lie down in such
a position that his head was between the feet of the gazelle. She then
said to him, “Remain here till I come back”; and went to the King; with
whom she found a very numerous assemblage of the wise men. As soon as
she entered, the King made her sit beside him on the throne. “O my
mother Alka,” he said, “I could not close an eye last night from anxiety
concerning yesterday’s events.” “Have you no wise men,” returned she,
“who eat the bread of the divan?” She then turned to them, saying,
“Select the wisest among you!” and they chose the wisest among them. She
ordered them to take the sandboard again, but they became so confused
that they were obliged to begin again three times from the beginning.
“What do you discover?” said the King angrily. “O our master,” replied
they, “he whom we seek has been carried away by a beast of the desert,
which is flying with him between Heaven and earth.” “How is this?” said
the King to Alka; “have you ever seen anything like it?” He seized his
sword in a rage, and three fled, and he killed four of the others. When
Alka went home, she released Saif, and told him what had happened. Next
morning Alka took the gazelle, and slaughtered it in a copper kettle.
She then took a golden mortar, and reversed it over it, and said to Saif
Zul Yezn, “Sit on this mortar till I come back.” She then went to the
divan, and chose out six wise men, who again took the sandboard, and
began again three times over in confusion. “Alas,” said the King, in
anger, “What misfortune do you perceive?” “O our master,” they exclaimed
in consternation, “our understanding is confused, for we see him sitting
on a golden mountain, which is in the midst of a sea of blood,
surrounded by a copper wall.” The King was enraged, and broke up the
assembly, saying, “O Alka, I will now depend on you alone.” “To-morrow I
will attempt to show you the stranger,” she replied. When she came home,
she related to Saif what had happened and said, “I shall know by
to-morrow what to tell the King to engage his attention, and prevent him
from pursuing you.” Next morning she found Taka speaking to Saif Zul
Yezn alone; and she asked her, “What does he wish?” “Mother,” replied
Taka, “he wishes to go to the King’s palace, to see him and the divan.”
“What you wish shall be done,” said she to Saif, “but you must not
speak.” He assented to the condition, and she dressed him as her
attendant, gave him a sandboard, and went with him to the King, who said
to her, “I could not sleep at all last night, for thinking of the
stranger for whom we are seeking.” “Now that the affair is in my hands,”
returned she, “you will find me a sufficient protection against him.”
She immediately ordered Saif to give her the sandboard. She took it, and
when she had made her calculations, she said joyfully to the King, “O my
lord, I can give you the welcome news of the flight of the stranger,
owing to his dread of you and your revenge.” When the King heard this,
he rent his clothes, slapped his face, and said, “He would not have
departed, without having taken the book.” “I cannot see if he has taken
anything,” replied she. “This is the first of the month,” said the King,
“come and let us see if it is missing.” He then went with a large
company to the building where the book was kept. Alka turned away from
the King for a moment to say to Saif, “Do not enter with us, for if you
enter, the case will open of itself, and the book will fall into your
hands. This would at once betray you, and you would be seized and put to
death, and all my labour would have been in vain.” She then left him,
and rejoined the King. When they reached the building, the doors were
opened, and when the King entered, they found the book. They immediately
paid it the customary honours, and protracted this species of worship,
while Saif stood at the door, debating with himself whether to enter or
not. At last his impatience overcame him, and he entered, and at the
same instant the casket was broken to pieces, and the book fell out. The
King then ordered all to stand up, and the book rolled to Saif Zul Yezn.
Upon this all drew their swords, and rushed upon him. Saif drew his
sword also, and cried “God is great!” as Shaikh Gyat had taught him. He
continued to fight and defend himself, and struggled to reach the door.
The entire town arose in tumult to pursue him, when he stumbled over a
dead body, and was seized. “Let me not see his face,” cried the King,
“but throw him into the mine.” This mine was eighty yards deep, and had
not been opened for sixty years. It was closed by a heavy leaden cover,
which they replaced, after they had loaded him with chains, and thrown
him in. Saif sat there in the darkness, greatly troubled, and lamenting
his condition to Him who never sleeps. Suddenly, a side wall of the mine
opened, and a figure came forth which approached and called him by his
name. “Who are you?” asked Saif. “I am a woman named Akissa, and inhabit
the mountain where the Nile rises. We are a nation who hold the faith of
Abraham. A very pious man lives below us in a beautiful palace. But an
evil Jinni named Mukhtatif lived near us also, who loved me, and
demanded me in marriage of my father. He consented from fear, but I was
unwilling to marry an evil being who was a worshipper of fire. ‘How can
you promise me in marriage to an infidel?’ said I to my father. ‘I shall
thereby escape his malice myself,’ replied he. I went out and wept, and
complained to the pious man about the affair. ‘Do you know who will kill
him?’ said he to me, and I answered, ‘No.’ ‘I will direct you to him who
has cut off his hand,’ said he. ‘His name is Saif Zul Yezn, and he is
now in the city of King Kamrun, in the mine.’ Thereupon he brought me to
you, and I come as you see me, to guide you to my country, that you may
kill Mukhtatif, and free the earth from his wickedness.” She then moved
him, and shook him, and all his chains fell off. She lifted him on her
shoulders, and carried him to the palace of the Shaikh, who was named
Abbas Salam. Here he heard a voice crying, “Enter, Saif Zul Yezn.” He
did so, and found a grave and venerable old man, who gave him a very
friendly reception; saying, “Wait till to-morrow, when Akissa will come
to guide you to the castle of Mukhtatif.” He remained with him for the
night, and when Akissa arrived next morning, the old man told her to
hasten, that the world might be soon rid of the monster. They then left
this venerable man, and when they had walked awhile, Akissa said to
Saif, “Look before you.” He did so, and perceived a black mass at some
distance. “This is the castle of the evil-doer,” said she, “but I cannot
advance a step further than this.” Saif therefore pursued his way alone,
and when he came near the castle, he walked round it to look for the
entrance. As he was noticing the extraordinary height of the castle,
which was founded on the earth, but appeared to overtop the clouds, he
saw a window open, and several people looked out, who pointed at him
with their fingers, exclaiming, “That is he, that is he!” They threw him
a rope, which they directed him to bind round him. They drew him up by
it, when he found himself in the presence of three hundred and sixty
damsels, who saluted him by his name.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                    (Here Habicht’s fragment ends.)


                    _SCOTT’S MSS. AND TRANSLATIONS._

In 1800, Jonathan Scott, LL.D., published a volume of “Tales, Anecdotes,
and Letters, translated from the Arabic and Persian,” based upon a
fragmentary MS., procured by J. Anderson in Bengal, which included the
commencement of the work (Nos. 1–3) in 29 Nights; two tales not divided
into Nights (Nos. 264 and 135) and No. 21.

Scott’s work includes these two new tales (since republished by Kirby
and Clouston), with the addition of various anecdotes, &c. derived from
other sources. The “Story of the Labourer and the Chair” has points of
resemblance to that of “Malek and the Princess Chirine” (Shirin?) in the
Thousand and One Days; and also to that of “Tuhfet El Culoub” (No. 183a)
in the Breslau Edition. The additional tales in this MS. and vol. of
translations are marked “A” under Scott in our Tables. Scott published
the following specimens (text and translation) in Ouseley’s Oriental
Collections (1797 and following years) No. 135m (i. pp. 245–257) and
Introduction (ii. pp. 160–172; 228–257). The contents are fully given in
Ouseley, vol. ii. pp. 34, 35.

Scott afterwards acquired an approximately complete MS. in 7 vols.,
written in 1764, which was brought from Turkey by E. Wortley Montague.
Scott published a table of contents (Ouseley, ii. pp. 25–34), in which,
however, the titles of some few of the shorter tales, which he
afterwards translated from it, are omitted, while the titles of others
are differently translated. Thus “Greece” of the Table becomes “Yemen”
in the translation; and “labourer” becomes “sharper.” As a specimen, he
subsequently printed the text and translation of No. 145 (Ouseley, ii.
pp. 349–367).

This MS., which differs very much from all others known, is now in the
Bodleian Library at Oxford.

In 1811, Scott published an edition of the Arabian Nights’
Entertainments, in 6 vols., vol. 1 containing a long introduction, and
vol. 6, including a series of new tales from the Oxford MS. (There is a
small paper edition; and also a large paper edition, the latter with
frontispieces). It had originally been Scott’s intention to retranslate
the MS.; but he appears to have found it beyond his powers. He therefore
contented himself with re-editing Galland, altering little except the
spelling of the names, and saying that Galland’s version is in the main
so correct that it would be useless repetition to go over the work
afresh. Although he says that he found many of the tales both immoral
and puerile, he translated most of those near the beginning, and omitted
much more (including several harmless and interesting tales, such as No.
152) towards the end of his MS. than near the beginning. The greater
part of Scott’s additional tales, published in vol. 6, are included in
the composite French and German editions of Gauttier and Habicht; but,
except Nos. 208, 209, and 215, republished in my “New Arabian Nights,”
they have not been reprinted in England, being omitted in all the many
popular versions which are professedly based upon Scott, even in the
edition in 4 vols., published in 1882, which reprints Scott’s Preface.

The edition of 1882 was published about the same time as one of the
latest re-issues of Lane’s Thousand and One Nights; and the _Saturday
Review_ of Nov. 4, 1882 (p. 609) published an article on the Arabian
Nights, containing the following amusing passage: “Then Jonathan Scott,
LL.D. Oxon, assures the world that he intended to retranslate the tales
given by Galland; but he found Galland so adequate on the whole that he
gave up the idea, and now reprints Galland, with etchings by M. Lalauze,
giving a French view of Arab life. Why Jonathan Scott, LL.D., should
have thought to better Galland, while Mr. Lane’s version is in
existence, and has just been reprinted, it is impossible to say.”

The most interesting of Scott’s additional tales, with reference to
ordinary editions of The Nights, are as follows:—

No. 204b is a variant of No. 37.

No. 204c is a variant of 3c, in which the wife, instead of the husband,
acts the part of a jealous tyrant. (Compare Cazotte’s story of
Halechalbe).

No. 204e. Here we have a reference to the Nesnás, which only appears
once in the ordinary versions of The Nights (No. 132b; Burton, v., p.
333).

No. 206b is a variant of No. 156.

No. 207c. This relates to a bird similar to that in the Jealous Sisters
(No. 198), and includes a variant of 3ba.

No. 207h. Another story of enchanted birds. The prince who seeks them
encounters an “Oone” under similar circumstances to those under which
Princess Parizade (No. 198) encounters the old durwesh. The description
is hardly that of a Marid, with which I imagine the Ons are wrongly
identified.

No. 208 contains the nucleus of the famous story of Aladdin (No. 193.)

No. 209 is similar to No. 162; but we have again the well incident of
No. 3ba, and the exposure of the children as in No. 198.

No. 215. Very similar to Hasan of Bassorah (No. 155). As Sir R. F.
Burton (vol. viii. p. 60, note), has called in question my
identification of the Islands of Wák-Wák, with the Aru Islands near New
Guinea, I will quote here the passages from Mr. A. R. Wallace’s Malay
Archipelago (chap. 31) on which I based it:—“The trees frequented by the
birds are very lofty.... One day I got under a tree where a number of
the Great Paradise birds were assembled, but they were high up in the
thickest of the foliage, and flying and jumping about so continually
that I could get no good view of them.... Their voice is most
extraordinary. At early morn, before the sun has risen, we hear a loud
cry of ‘Wawk—wawk—wawk, wŏk—wŏk—wŏk,’ which resounds through the forest,
changing its direction continually. This is the Great Bird of Paradise
going to seek his breakfast.... The birds had now commenced what the
people here call their ‘sacaleli,’ or dancing-parties, in certain trees
in the forest, which are not fruit-trees as I at first imagined, but
which have an immense head of spreading branches and large but scattered
leaves, giving a clear space for the birds to play and exhibit their
plumes. On one of these trees a dozen or twenty full-plumaged male birds
assemble together, raise up their wings, stretch out their necks, and
elevate their exquisite plumes, keeping them in a continual vibration.
Between whiles they fly across from branch to branch in great
excitement, so that the whole tree is filled with waving plumes in every
variety of attitude and motion.”

No. 216bc appears to be nearly the same as No. 42.

No. 225 is a variant of No. 135q.


                         _WEIL’S TRANSLATION._

The only approximately complete original German translation is “Tausend
und eine Nacht. Arabische Erzählungen. Zum Erstenmale aus dem Urtexte
vollständig und treu übersetzt von Dr. Gustav Weil,” four vols.,
Stuttgart. The first edition was in roy. 8vo, and was published at
Stuttgart and Pforzheim in 1839–1842; the last volume I have not seen;
it is wanting in the copy in the British Museum. This edition is divided
into Nights, and includes No. 25b. In the later editions, which are in
small square 8vo, but profusely illustrated, like the larger one, this
story is omitted (except No. 135m, which the French editors include with
it), though Galland’s doubtful stories are retained; and there is no
division into Nights. The work has been reprinted several times, and the
edition quoted in our Table is described as “Zweiter Abdruck der dritten
vollstandig umgearbeiteten, mit Anmerkungen und mit einer Einleitung
versehenen Auflage” (1872).

Weil has not stated from what sources he drew his work, except that No.
201 is taken from a MS. in the Ducal Library at Gotha. This is
unfortunate, as his version of the great transformation scene in No. 3b
(Burton, vol. i. pp. 134, 135), agrees more closely with Galland than
with any other original version. In other passages, as when speaking of
the punishment of Aziz (No. 9a, aa), Weil seems to have borrowed an
expression from Lane, who writes “a cruel wound;” Weil saying “a severe
(schwere) wound.”

Whereas Weil gives the only German version known to me of No. 9 (though
considerably abridged) he omits many tales contained in Zinserling and
Habicht, but whether because his own work was already too bulky, or
because his original MSS. did not contain them, I do not know; probably
the first supposition is correct, for in any case it was open to him to
have translated them from the printed texts, to which he refers in his
Preface.

Two important stories (Nos. 200 and 201) are not found in any other
version; but as they are translated in my “New Arabian Nights,” I need
not discuss them here. I will, however, quote a passage from the story
of Judar and Mahmood, which I omitted because it is not required by the
context, and because I thought it a little out of place in a book
published in a juvenile series. It is interesting from its analogy to
the story of Semele.

When King Kashuk (a jinni) is about to marry the daughter of King
Shamkoor, we read (New Arabian Nights, p. 182), “Shamkoor immediately
summoned my father, and said, ‘Take my daughter, for you have won her
heart.’ He immediately provided an outfit for his daughter, and when it
was completed, my father and his bride rode away on horseback, while the
trousseau of the Princess followed on three hundred camels.” The passage
proceeds (the narrator being Daruma, the offspring of the marriage),
“When my father had returned home, and was desirous of celebrating his
marriage (his Wazir) Kandarin said to him, ‘Your wife will be destroyed
if you touch her, for you are created of fire, and she is created of
earth, which the fire devours. You will then bewail her death when it is
too late. To-morrow,’ continued he, ‘I will bring you an ointment with
which you must rub both her and yourself; and you may then live long and
happily together.’ On the following day he brought him a white ointment,
and my father anointed himself and his bride with it, and consummated
his marriage without danger.”

I may add that this is the only omission of the smallest consequence in
my rendering of either story.

I have heard from more than one source that a complete German
translation of The Nights was published, and suppressed; but I have not
been able to discover the name of the author, the date, or any other
particulars relating to the subject.


       _VON HAMMER’S MS., AND THE TRANSLATIONS DERIVED FROM IT._

Several complete copies of The Nights were obtained by Europeans about
the close of the last or the beginning of the present century; and one
of these (in 4 vols.) fell into the hands of the great German
Orientalist, Joseph von Hammer. This MS. agrees closely with the printed
Bul. and Mac. texts, as well as with Dr. Clarke’s MS., though the names
of the tales sometimes vary a little. One story, “The two Wazirs,” given
in Von Hammer’s list as inedited, no doubt by an oversight, is evidently
No. 7, which bears a similar title in Torrens. One title, “Al Kavi,” a
story which Von Hammer says was published in “Mag. Encycl.,” and in
English (probably by Scott in Ouseley’s Oriental Collections, vide anteà
p. 491) puzzled me for some time; but from its position, and the title I
think I have identified it as No. 145, and have entered it as such. No.
9a in this as well as in several other MSS., bears the title of the Two
Lovers, or of the Lover and the Beloved.

Von Hammer made a French translation of the unpublished tales, which he
lent to Caussin de Perceval, who extracted from it four tales only (Nos.
21a, 22, 32 and 37), and only acknowledged his obligations in a general
way to a distinguished Orientalist, whose name he pointedly suppressed.
Von Hammer, naturally indignant, reclaimed his MS., and had it
translated into German by Zinserling. He then sent the French MS. to De
Sacy, in whose hands it remained for some time, although he does not
appear to have made any use of it, when it was despatched to England for
publication; but the courier lost it on the journey, and it was never
recovered.

Zinserling’s translation was published under the title, “Der Tausend und
einen Nacht noch nicht übersetzte Mährchen, Erzählungen und Anekdoten,
zum erstenmale aus dem Arabischen in’s Französische übersetzt von Joseph
von Hammer, und aus dem Französischen in’s Deutsche von Aug. E.
Zinserling, Professor.” (3 vols., Stuttgart and Tübingen, 1823.) The
introductory matter is of considerable importance, and includes notices
of 12 different MSS., and a list of contents of Von Hammer’s MS. The
tales begin with No. 23, Nos. 9–19 being omitted, because Von Hammer was
informed that they were about to be published in France. (This possibly
refers to Asselan Riche’s “Scharkan,” published in 1829.) The tales and
anecdotes in this edition follow the order of The Nights. No. 163 is
incomplete, Zinserling giving only the commencement; and two other tales
(Nos. 132b and 168) are related in such a confused manner as to be
unintelligible, the former from transposition (perhaps in the sheets of
the original MS.) and the latter from errors and omissions. On the other
hand, some of the tales (No. 137 for instance) are comparatively full
and accurate.

A selection from the longer tales was published in English in 3 vols. in
1826, under the title of “New Arabian Nights Entertainments, selected
from the original Oriental MS. by Jos. von Hammer, and now first
translated into English by the Rev. George Lamb.” I have only to remark
that No. 132b is here detached from its connection with No. 132, and is
given an independent existence.

A complete French re-translation of Zinserling’s work, also in 3 vols.,
by G. S. Trébutien (Contes inédits des Mille et une Nuits) was published
in Paris in 1828; but in this edition the long tales are placed first,
and all the anecdotes are placed together last.

The various MSS. mentioned by Von Hammer are as follows:—

    I. Galland’s MS. in Paris.

   II. Another Paris MS., containing 870 Nights. (No. 9 is specially
       noticed as occurring in it.) This seems to be the same as a MS.
       subsequently mentioned by Von Hammer as consulted by Habicht.

  III. Scott’s MS. (Wortley Montague).

   IV. Scott’s MS. (Anderson).

    V. Dr. Russell’s MS. from Aleppo (224 Nights).

   VI. Sir W. Jones’ MS., from which Richardson extracted No. 6ee for
       his grammar.

  VII. A MS. at Vienna (200 Nights).

 VIII. MS. in Italinski’s collection.

   IX. Clarke’s MS.

    X. An Egyptian MS. at Marseilles.

   XI. Von Hammer’s MS.

  XII. Habicht’s MS. (= Bres. text).

 XIII. Caussin’s MS.

  XIV. De Sacy’s MS.

   XV. One or more MSS. in the Vatican.


                  _TRANSLATIONS OF THE PRINTED TEXTS._

These are noticed by Sir R. F. Burton in his “Foreword” (vol. 1, pp.
xi.-xiii.) and consequently can be passed over with a brief mention
here.

Torrens’ edition (vol. 1) extends to the end of Night 50 (Burton, in p.
118).

Lane’s translation originally appeared in monthly half-crown parts, from
1839 to 1841. It is obvious that he felt himself terribly restricted in
space; for the third volume, although much thicker than the others, is
not only almost destitute of notes towards the end, but the author is
compelled to grasp at every excuse to omit tales, even excluding No.
168, which he himself considered “one of the most entertaining tales in
the work,” (chap. xxix., note 12) on account of its resemblance to Nos.
1b and 3d. Part of the matter in Lane’s own earlier notes is apparently
derived from No. 132a, which he probably did not at first intend to
omit. Sir R. F. Burton has taken 5 vols. to cover the same ground which
Lane has squeezed into his vol. 3. But it is only fair to Lane to remark
that in such cases the publisher is usually far more to blame than the
author.

In 1847 appeared a popular edition of Lane, entitled, “The Thousand and
One Nights, or the Arabian Nights Entertainments, translated and
arranged for family reading, with explanatory notes. Second edition.”
Here Galland’s old spelling is restored, and the “explanatory notes,”
ostentatiously mentioned on the title page are entirely omitted. This
edition was in 3 vols. I have seen a copy dated 1850; and think I have
heard of an issue in 1 vol.; and there is an American reprint in 2 vols.
The English issue was ultimately withdrawn from circulation in
consequence of Lane’s protests. (Mr. S. L. Poole’s Life of E. W. Lane,
p. 95). It contains the woodcut of the Flying Couch, which is wanting in
the later editions of the genuine work; but not Galland’s doubtful
tales, as Poole asserts.

Several editions of the original work, edited by Messrs. E. S. and S. L.
Poole, have appeared at intervals from 1859 to 1882. They differ little
from the original edition except in their slightly smaller size.

The short tales included in Lane’s notes were published separately as
one of Knight’s Weekly Volumes, in 1845, under the title of “Arabian
Tales and Anecdotes, being a selection from the notes to the new
translation of the Thousand and One Nights, by E. W. Lane, Esq.”

Finally, in 1883, Mr. Stanley Lane Poole published a classified and
arranged edition of Lane’s notes under the title of “Arabian Society in
the Middle Ages.”

Mr. John Payne’s version of the Mac. edition was issued in 9 vols. by
the Villon Society to subscribers only. It appeared from 1882 to 1884,
and only 500 copies were printed. Judging from the original prospectus,
it seems to have been the author’s intention to have completed the work
in 8 vols., and to have devoted vol. 9 to Galland’s doubtful tales; but
as they are omitted, he must have found that the work ran to a greater
length than he had anticipated, and that space failed him. He published
some preliminary papers on the Nights in the New Quarterly Magazine for
January and April, 1879.

Mr. Payne subsequently issued “Tales from the Arabic of the Breslau and
Calcutta (1814–18) editions of the Thousand Nights and One Night, not
occurring in the other printed texts of the work.” (Three vols., London,
1884). Of this work, issued, like the other, by the Villon Society, to
subscribers only, 750 copies were printed, besides 50 on large paper.
The third volume includes indices of all the tales in the four principal
printed texts.

Finally we have Sir R. F. Burton’s translation now in its entirety
before his subscribers. It is restricted to 1,000 copies. (Why not
1,001?) The five supplementary vols. are to include tales wanting in the
Mac. edition, but found in other texts (printed and MS.), while Lady
Burton’s popular edition will allow of the free circulation of Sir R. F.
Burton’s work among all classes of the reading public.


                    _COLLECTIONS OF SELECTED TALES._

There are many volumes of selections derived from Galland, but these
hardly require mention; the following may be noticed as derived from
other sources:

1. Caliphs and Sultans, being tales omitted in the usual editions of the
Arabian Nights’ Entertainments. Re-written and re-arranged by Sylvanus
Hanley, F.L.S., etc., London, 1868; 2nd edition 1870.

Consists of portions of tales chiefly selected from Scott, Lamb, Chavis
and Cazotte, Trébutien and Lane; much abridged, and frequently strung
together, as follows:—

Nos. 246, 41, 32 (including Nos. 111, 21a, and 89); 9a (including 9aa,
[which Hanley seems, by the way, to have borrowed from some version
which I do not recognise] 22 and 248); 155, 156, 136, 162; Xailonn the
Silly (from Cazotte); 132 and 132a; and 169 (including 134 and 135x).

2. Ilâm-en-Nâs. Historical tales and anecdotes of the time of the early
Kalîfahs. Translated from the Arabic and annotated by Mrs. Godfrey
Clerk, author of “The Antipodes, and Round the World.” London, 1873.

Many of these anecdotes, as is candidly admitted by the authoress in her
Preface, are found with variations in the Nights, though not translated
by her from this source.

3. The New Arabian Nights. Select tales not included by Galland or Lane.
By W. F. Kirby, London, 1882.

Includes the following tales, slightly abridged, from Weil and Scott:
Nos. 200, 201, 264, 215, 209, and 208.

Two editions have appeared in England, besides reprints in America and
Australia.


           _SEPARATE EDITIONS OF SINGLE OR COMPOSITE TALES._


                 6 e (ee).—THE BARBER’S FIFTH BROTHER.

Mr. W. R. Clouston (in litt.) calls attention to the version of this
story by Addison in the “Spectator,” No. 535, Nov. 13, 1712, after
Galland. There is good reason to suppose that this is subsequent to the
first English edition, which, however, Addison does not mention. There
is also an English version in Faris’ little Arabic Grammar (London,
1856), and likewise in Richardson’s Arabic Grammar. The latter author
extracted it from a MS. belonging to Sir W. Jones.


                  5.—NUR AL-DIN AND BADR AL-DIN HASAN.

There are two Paris editions of the “Histoire de Chems-Eddine et de
Nour-Eddine,” edited by Prof. Cherbonneau. The first (1852) contains
text and notes, and the second (1869) includes text, vocabulary and
translations.


                    7.—NUR AL DIN AND ANIS AL-JALIS.

An edition by Kasíwirski of “Enis’ el-Djelis, ou histoire de la belle
Persane,” appeared in Paris in 1867. It includes text, translation and
notes.


                      9.—KING OMAR BIN AL-NU’AMAN.

There is a French abridgment of this story entitled, “Scharkan, Conte
Arabe, suivi de quelques anecdotes orientales; traduit par M. Asselan
Riche, Membre de la Société Asiatique de Paris” (Paris and Marseilles,
12mo, 1829, pp. 240). The seven anecdotes appended are as follows: (1)
the well-known story of Omar’s prisoner and the glass of water; (2)
Elhedjadj and a young Arab; (3) = our No. 140; (4) Anecdote of Elhedjadj
and a story-teller; (5) = our No. 86; (6) King Bahman and the Moubed’s
parable of the Owls; (7) = our No. 145.


                        133.—SINDBAD THE SEAMAN.

This is the proper place to call attention to a work specially relating
to this story, “Remarks on the Arabian Nights Entertainments; in which
the origin of Sindbad’s Voyages and other Oriental Fictions is
particularly described. By Richard Hole, LL.D.” (London, 1797, pp. iv.
259).

It is an old book, but may still be consulted with advantage.

There are two important critical editions of No. 133, one in French and
one in German.

1. Les Voyages de Sind-bâd le marin et la ruse des Femmes. Contes
arabes. Traduction littérale, accompagnée du Texte et des Notes. Par L.
Langlès (Paris, 1814).

The second story is our No. 184.

2. Die beiden Sindbad oder Reiseabenteuer Sindbads des Seefabrers. Nach
einer zum ersten Male in Europa bedruckten Ægyptischen Handschrift
unmittelbar und wörtlich treu aus den Arabischen übersetzt und mit
erklärenden Anmerkungen, nebst zwei sprachlichen Beilagen zum Gebrauch
für abgehende Orientalisten herausgegeben von J. G. H. Reinsch (Breslau,
1826).


                  135.—THE CRAFT AND MALICE OF WOMEN.

The literature of this cluster of tales would require a volume in
itself, and I cannot do better than refer to Mr. W. A. Clouston’s “Book
of Sindibad” (8vo, Glasgow, 1884) for further information. This book,
though privately printed and limited to 300 copies, is not uncommon.


                      136.—JUDAR AND HIS BRETHREN.

An edition of this story, entitled “Histoire de Djouder le Pêcheur,”
edited by Prof. Houdas, was published in the Bibliothèque Algérienne, at
Algiers, in 1865. It includes text and vocabulary.


                          174.—THE TEN VAZIRS.

This collection of tales has also been frequently reprinted separately.
It is the Arabic version of the Persian Bakhtyar Nameh, of which Mr.
Clouston issued a privately-printed edition in 1883.

The following versions have come under my notice:—

1. Nouveaux Contes Arabes, ou Supplement aux Mille et une Nuits suivies
de Mélanges de Littérature orientale et de lettres, par l’Abbe ***
(Paris, 1788, pp. 425).

This work consists chiefly of a series of tales selected and adapted
from the Ten Vazirs. “Written in Europe by a European, and its interest
is found in the Terminal Essay, on the Mythologia Æsopica” (Burton in
litt.).

2. Historien om de ti Vezirer og hoorledes det gik dem med Kong Azád
Bachts Sön, oversat af Arabisk ved R. Rask (8vo, Kobenhavn, 1829).

3. Habicht, x. p. vi., refers to the following;—Historia decem Vezirorum
et filii regis Azad-Bacht insertis XIII. aliis narrationibus, in usum
tironum Cahirensem, edid. G. Knös, Göttingen, 1807, 8vo.

He also states that Knös published the commencement in 1805, in his
“Disquisitio de fide Herodoti, quo perhibet Phœnices Africam navibus
circumvectos esse cum recentiorum super hac re sententiis
excussis.—Adnexum est specimen sermonis Arabici vulgaris s. initium
historiæ filii regis Azad-Bacht e Codice inedito.”

4. Contes Arabes. Histoire des dix Vizirs (Bakhtyar Nameh). Traduite et
annotée par René Basset, Professeur à l’école superieure des lettres
d’Algérie. Paris, 1883.

Chavis and Cazotte (pp. 471, 472) included a version of the Ten Vazirs
in their work; and others are referred to in our Table of Tales.


                         248.—THE WISE HEYCAR.

Subsequently to the publication of Gauttier’s edition of The Nights,
Agoub republished his translation under the title of “Le sage Heycar,
conte Arabe” (Paris, 1824).

                  *       *       *       *       *

A few tales published by Scott in Ouseley’s Oriental Collections have
already been noticed (anteà, p. 491).


_TRANSLATIONS OF COGNATE ORIENTAL ROMANCES ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE NIGHTS._


               1 LES MILLE ET UN JOURS. CONTES PERSANES.

“In imitation of the Arabian Nights, was composed a Persian collection
entitled ‘Hazár Yek Rúz (‏روز يک رور‎) or the Thousand and One Days,’ of
which Petis de la Croix published a French rendering [in 1710], which
was done into English [by Dr. King, and published in 2 vols. (with the
Turkish Tales = Forty Vezirs) as early as 1714; and subsequently] by
Ambrose Phillips” (in 1738), (Clouston, in litt.). Here, and
occasionally elsewhere, I have quoted from some MSS. notes on The Nights
by Mr. W. A. Clouston, which Sir R. F. Burton kindly permitted me to
inspect. Mr. Clouston then quotes Cazotte’s Preface (not in my edition
of the Thousand and One Days), according to which the book was written
by the celebrated Dervis Moclès (Mukhlis) chief of the Sofis (Sufis?) of
Ispahan, founded upon certain Indian comedies. Petis de la Croix was on
friendly terms with Mukhlis, who allowed him to take a copy of his work
in 1675, during his residence in Ispahan. (I find these statements
confirmed in the Cabinet des Fées, xxxvii. pp. 266, 274, 278, and in
Weber’s “Tales of the East,” i. pp. xxxvi., xxxxii.)

The framework of the story is the same as Nos. 9a and 152: a Princess,
who conceives an aversion to men from dreaming of the self-devotion of a
doe, and the indifference and selfishness of a stag. Mr. Clouston refers
to Nakhshabí’s Tútí Náma (No. 33 of Káderí’s abridgment, and 39 of India
Office MS. 2,573); whence he thinks it probable that Mukhlis may have
taken the tale. But the tale itself is repeated over and over again in
many Arabic, Persian, and Turkish collections: in fact, there are few of
commoner occurrence.

The tales are told by the nurse in order to overcome the aversion of the
Princess to men. They are as follows:

Introduction and Conclusion: Story of the Princess of Cashmir.

  1. Story of Aboulcassem Bafry.

  2. Story of King Ruzvanchad and the Princess Cheheristani.

      _a._ Story of the young King of Thibet and the Princess of the
        Naimans.

      _b._ Story of the Vazir Cavercha.

    3. Story of Couloufe and the Beautiful Dilora.

    4. Story of Prince Calaf and the Princess of China.

      _a._ Story of Prince Fadlallah, son of Ben-Ortoc, King of
        Moussel.

    5. Story of King Bedreddin-Lolo, and his Vazir Atalmulk, surnamed
    the Sad Vazir.

      _a._ Story of Atalmulk and the Princess Zelica Beghume.

      _b._ Story of Prince Seyf-el-Molouk.

      _c._ Story of Malek and the Princess Chirine.

      _d._ Story of King Hormuz, surnamed the King without trouble.

          _d a._ Story of Avicenna.

        _e._ Story of the fair Arouya.

        _f._ Singular Adventures of Aboulfawaris, surnamed the Great
        Traveller (2 Voyages).

    6. Story of the Two Brother Genii, Adis and Dahy.

    7. Story of Nasiraddolé, King of Moussel, of Abderrahman, Merchant
    of Bagdad, and the Beautiful Zeineb.

    8. Story of Repsima.

This work has many times been reprinted in France, where it holds a
place only second to The Nights.

Sir R. F. Burton remarks, concerning the Persian and Turkish Tales of
Petis de la Crois (the latter of which form part of the Forty Vazirs,
No. 251.) “Both are weak and servile imitations of Galland by an
Orientalist who knew nothing of the East. In one passage in the story of
Fadlallah, we read of ‘Le Sacrifice du Mont Arafáte,’ which seems to
have become a fixture in the European brain. I found the work easy
writing and exceedingly hard reading.”

The following tales require a passing notice:—

1. _Story of Aboulcassem Bafry._—A story of concealed treasure; it has
also some resemblance to No. 31.

2. _Ruzvanchad and Cheheristani._—Cheheristani is a jinniyah, who is
pursued by the King, under the form of a white doe; marries him, and
becomes the mother of Balkis, the Queen of Sheba. She exacts a promise
from him never to rebuke her for any of her actions: he breaks it, and
she leaves him for a time.

2a. _The Young King of Thibet._—Two imposters obtain magic rings by
which they can assume the shapes of other persons.

2a, b. _The Vazir Cavercha._—This is one of Scott’s stories (No. 223 of
our Table). It goes back at least as far as the Ring of Polycrates. It
is the 8th Vezir’s Story in Mr. Gibbs’ Forty Vezirs (pp. 200–205.)

4. _Prince Calaf._—This story is well known, and is sometimes played as
a comedy. The Princess Turandot puts riddles to her suitors, and beheads
them if they fail to answer.

5b. _Story of Prince Seyf-el-Molouk._—This story is perhaps an older
version than that which appears in The Nights (No. 154a.) It is placed
long after the time of Solomon; Saad is devoured by ants; and when Seyf
enters the palace of Malika (= Daulet Khatoon), the jinni surprises
them, and is overpowered by Seyf’s ring. He then informs him of the
death of Saad; and that Bedy al-Jemal was one of the mistresses of
Solomon; and has also long been dead.

5b. _Malek and Chirine._—Resembles No. 264; Malek passes himself off as
the Prophet Mohammed; burns his box (not chair) with fireworks on his
wedding-day, and is thus prevented from ever returning to the Princess.

5f. _Adventures of Aboulfawaris._—Romantic travels, resembling Nos. 132a
and 133.

2. _Antar._—This is the most famous of the Badawi romances. It resembles
No. 137, in several particulars, but is destitute of supernaturalism. An
English abridgment in 4 vols. was published in 1820; and the substance
of vol. 1 had appeared, as a fragment, in the previous year, under the
title of “Antar, a Bedoueen Romance translated from the Arabic by
Terrick Hamilton, Esq., Oriental Secretary to the British Embassy at
Constantinople.” I have also seen vol. 1 of a French translation,
published about 1862, and extending to the death of Shas.

Lane (Modern Egyptians, ch. 21–23) describes several other Arab
romances, which have not yet been translated; viz. Aboo-Zeyd; Ez-Zahir,
and Delhemeh.

3. GLAIVE-DES-COURONNES (Seif el-Tidjân) ‏التچان التچبان‎ Roman traduit
de l’Arabe. Par M. le Dr. Perron (Paris, 1862).

A romantic story of Arab chivalry, less overloaded with supernaturalism
than No. 137; but more supernatural than Antar. The hero marries (among
other wives) two jinniyahs of the posterity of Iblis. In ch. 21 we have
an account of a magical city much resembling the City of Brass (No. 134)
and defended by similar talismans.

4. MEHEMET THE KURD, and other tales, from Eastern sources, by Charles
Wells, Turkish Prizeman of King’s College, London, and Member of the
Royal Asiatic Society (London, 1865).

The first story, taken from an Arabic MS., is a narrative of a handsome
simple-minded man, with whom Princesses fall in love, and who is raised
to a mighty throne by their enchantments. Some of the early incidents
are not unlike those in the well-known German story of Lucky Hans (Hans
im Glück). In one place there is an enchanted garden, where Princesses
disport themselves in feather-dresses (as in No. 155, &c.), and where
magic apples grow. (Note that apples are always held in extraordinary
estimation in The Nights, cf. Nos. 4 and 264). Among the shorter stories
we find No. 251h; a version of Nos. 9a and 152 (probably that referred
to by Mr. Clouston as in the Tuti Nama); a story “The Prince Tailor,”
resembling No. 251; No. 256, and one or two other tales not connected
with The Nights. (Most of Wells’ shorter tales are evidently taken from
the Forty Vezirs.)

5. RECUEIL DES CONTES POPULAIRES de la Kabylie du Djardjara, recueillis
et traduits par J. Rivière (Paris, 1882). I have not seen this book; but
it can hardly fail to illustrate The Nights.

6. THE STORY OF JEWAD, a Romance by ’Alī ’Azīz Efendi the Cretan.
Translated from the Turkish by E. J. W. Gibb, M.R.A.S., &c. (Glasgow,
1884).

A modern Turkish work, written in A.H. 1211 (1796–7). It contains the
following tales:—


                          THE STORY OF JEWAD.

1. The Story of Ebū-’Alī-Sīnā.

2. The Story of Monia Emīn.

3. The Story of Ferah-Nāz, the daughter of the King of China.

  _a._ The Story of Khoja ’Abdu-llah.

4. The Story told by Jewād to Iklilu’l Mulk.

  _a._ The Story of Shābūr and Humā.

  _c._ The Story of Ghazanfer and Rāhila.

5. The Story of Qara Khan.

The following deserve notice from our present point of view:—

_The Story of Jewād._—Here we have magical illusions, as in Nos. 247 and
251a. Such narratives are common in the East; Lane, (Nights, ch. i. note
15) is inclined to attribute such illusions to the influence of drugs;
but the narratives seem rather to point to so-called electro-biology, or
the Scotch Glamour, (such influences, as is notorious, acting far more
strongly upon Orientals than upon Europeans).

2. _The Story of Monia Emīn_ corresponds to the Story of Naerdan and
Guzulbec, in Caylus’ Oriental Tales. A story of magical illusions.

3. _The Story of Ferah Nāz._—Here again we have a variant of Nos. 9a and
152.

3a. _Khoja ’Abdu-ltab._—This is a version of the Story of Aboulcassem in
the Thousand and One Days.

4a. _Shābūr and Humā._—The commencement of this story might have
suggested to Southey the adventures of Thalaba and Oneida in the Gardens
of Aloadin; the remainder appears to be taken from the Story of the
young King of Thibet, in the Thousand and One Days.

5. _Qara Khan._—The principal part of this story is borrowed from the
First Voyage of Aboulfawaris in the Thousand and One Days; it has some
resemblance to the story of the Mountain of Loadstone in No. 3c.

7. FRÜCHTE DES ASIATISCHEN GEIST, von A. T. Hartmann. 2 vols., 12 mo.
(Münster) 1803. A collection of anecdotes, &c., from various Eastern
sources, Arabic, Indian, &c. I think it not impossible that this may be
the work referred to by Von Hammer in the preface to Zinserling’s “1001
Nacht” (p. xxvii. note) as “Asiatische Perlenschnur von Hartmann.” At
least I have not yet met with any work to which the scanty indication
would apply better.

8. TUTI-NAMA. I could hardly pass over the famous Persian and Turkish
“Parrot-Book” quite without notice; but its tales have rarely any direct
connection with those in The Nights, and I have not attempted to go into
its very extensive bibliography.


                           _DR. CLARKE’S MS._

Dr. Edward Daniel Clarke has given an account of an important MS. nearly
agreeing with Bul. and Mac., which he purchased in Egypt, in his
“Travels in various countries of Europe, Asia and Africa.” Part ii.
Greece, Egypt, and the Holy Land. Section i. (1812) App. iii., pp.
701–704. Unfortunately, this MS. was afterwards so damaged by water
during a shipwreck that it was rendered totally illegible. The list of
tales (as will be seen by the numbers in brackets, which correspond to
our Table, as far as the identifications are safe) will show the
approximate contents of the MS., but the list (which is translated into
German by Habicht in the preface to his vol. 12) was evidently compiled
carelessly by a person nearly ignorant of Arabic, perhaps with the aid
of an interpreter, Maltese, or other, and seems to abound with the most
absurd mistakes. The full text of Clarke’s App. iii. is as follows:
“List of One Hundred and Seventy-two Tales, contained in a manuscript
copy of The ‘Alif Lila va Lilin,’ or ‘Arabian Nights,’ as it was
procured by the Author in Egypt.”

N.B.—The Arabic words mentioned in this list are given as they appeared
to be pronounced in English characters, and of course, therefore,
adapted to English pronunciation.

The number of tales amounts to 172, but one tale is supposed to occupy
many nights in the recital, so that the whole number is divided into
“_One Thousand and One Nights_.” It rarely happens that any two copies
of the Alif Lila va Lilin resemble each other. This title is bestowed
upon any collection of Eastern tales divided into the same number of
parts. The compilation depends upon the taste, the caprice, and the
opportunities of the scribe, or the commands of his employer. Certain
popular stories are common to almost all copies of the Arabian Nights,
but almost every collection contains some tales which are not found in
every other. Much depends upon the locality of the scribe. The popular
stories of Egypt will be found to differ materially from those of
Constantinople. A nephew of the late Wortley Montague, living in
Rosetta, had a copy of the Arabian Nights, and upon comparing the two
manuscripts it appeared that out of the 172 tales here enumerated only
37 were found in his manuscript. In order to mark, therefore, the
stories which were common to the two manuscripts, an asterisk has been
prefixed to the thirty-seven tales which appeared in both copies.

     1. The Bull and the Ass (a).

     2. The Merchant and the Hobgoblin (1; Habicht translates Kobold!)

     3. The Man and the Antelope (1a).

     4. The Merchant and Two Dogs (1b).

     5. The Old Man and the Mule (1c).

    *6. The History of the Hunters (2).

 7 & 8. The History of King Unam and the Philosopher Reinan (2a).

    *9. History of King Sinbad and Elbase (2a, 2b).

   *10. History of the Porter (3).

   *11. History of Karānduli.

    12. Story of the Mirror.

    13. Story of the Three Apples (4).

   *14. Of Shensheddin Mohammed, and his Brother Noureddin (5).

   *15. Of the Taylor, Little Hunchback, the Jew and the Christian (6).

    16. The History of Noureddin Ali (7).

    17. Ditto of Gaumayub, &c. (8).

   *18. The History of King Omar and Oman and his Children. (This tale
          is extremely long, and occupies much of the manuscript) (9).

   *19. Of the Lover and the Beloved (9a).

    20. Story of the Peacock, the Goose, the Ass, the Horse, &c. (10).

    21. Of the Pious Man (11).

    22. Of the Pious Shepherd.

    23. Of the Bird and the Turtle (12).

    24. Of the Fox, the Hawk, &c. (13).

    25. Of the Lord of the Beasts.

   *26. Of the Mouse and the Partridge (14).

    27. Of the Raven and the Cat (15).

    28. Of the Raven, the Fox, the Mouse, the Flea, &c., &c. (16).

    29. Story of the Thief (18).

   *30. Of Aul Hassan and the Slave Shemsney Har (20).

   *31. Of Kamrasaman, &c. (21).

    32. Of Naam and Nameto la (21a).

   *33. Of Aladin Abuskelmat (22).

   *34. Of Hallina Die (23).

    35. Story of Maan Jaamnazida (24).

    36. History of the Town Litta (26).

    37. Story of Hassan Abdulmelac (27).

    38. Of Ibrahim Elmachde, Brother of Haroun al Raschid (28).

   *39. History of the Famous Garden Ezem (Paradise) (29).

    40. Of Isaac of Mossul (30).

    41. Of Hasli Hasli.

    42. Of Mohammed Eli Ali (32).

    43. Of Ali the Persian (33).

    44. History of the Raschid and his Judge (34).

    45. Of Haled Immi Abdullah.

    46. Of Jafaard the Bamasside (36).

    47. Of Abokohammed Kurlan (37).

    48. Of Haroun al-Raschid and Sala.

    49. History of Mamoan (40).

    50. Of Shar and the Slave Zemroud (41).

    51. Of the Lady Bedoor (_literally Mrs. Moon-face_) and Mr.
          Victorious (42).

    52. Of Mammon and Mohammed of Bassorah (43).

    53. Of Haroun al-Raschid and his Slave (44).

    54. Of the Merchant in Debt (45).

    55. Of Hassoun Medin, the Governor (46).

    56. Of King Nassir and his Three Children—the Governor of Cairo, the
          Governor of Bulac, and the Governor of Old Cairo (47).

    57. History of the Banker and the Thief (48).

    58. Of Aladin, Governor of Constantinople (49).

    59. Of Mamoon and Ibrahim (50).

    60. Of a certain King (51).

    61. Of a Pious Man (52).

    62. Of Abul Hassan Ezeada (53).

    63. Of a Merchant (54).

    64. Of a Man of Bagdad (55).

    65. Of Modavikil (56).

   *66. Of Virdan in the time of Hakim Veemrelack (N.B.—He built the
          Mosque in going from Cairo to Heliopolis) (57).

    67. Of a Slave and an Ape (58).

   *68. Story of the Horse of Ebony (59).

   *69. Of Insilvujud (60).

    70. Of Eban Vas (61).

    71. Of an Inhabitant of Bassora (62).

    72. History of a Man of the tribe of Arabs of Beucadda (63).

    73. History of Benriddin, Vizir of Yemen (64).

    74. Of a Boy and a Girl (65).

    75. Of Mutelmis (66).

    76. Of Haroun al Rashid and the Lady Zebeda (67).

    77. Of Mussa ab imni Zibir (69).

    78. Of the Black Father.

    79. Of Haroun al Raschid.

    80. Story of an Ass Keeper (74?).

    81. Of Haroun al Rashid and Eboo Yussuf (75).

    82. Of Hakim, Builder of the Mosque (76).

    83. Of Melikel Horrais.

    84. Of a Gilder and his Wife (78).

    85. Of Hashron, &c. (79).

    86. Of Yackyar, &c., the Barmadride (80).

    87. Of Mussa, &c.

    88. Of Said, &c.

    89. Of the Whore and the Good Woman.

    90. Of Raschid and Jacob his Favourite.

    91. Of Sherif Hussein.

    92. Of Mamoon, son of Haroun al Raschid (87).

    93. Of the repenting Thief (88).

    94. Of Haroun al Raschid (89).

    95. Of a Divine, &c. (90).

    96. Another story of a Divine.

    97. The Story of the Neighbours.

    98. Of Kings (94).

    99. Of Abdo Rackman (95).

   100. Of Hind, daughter of Nackinan (96).

   101. Of Tabal (97).

   102. Of Isaac son of Abraham (98).

   103. Of a Boy and a Girl.

   104. Story of Chassim Imni Addi.

   105. Of Abul Abass.

   106. Of Ebubecker Ben Mohammed.

   107. Of Ebi Evar.

   108. Of Emmin, brother of Mamon (105).

   109. Of six Scheiks of Bagdad.

   110. Of an Old Woman.

   111. Of a Wild Girl.

   112. Of Hasan Elgevire of Bagdad.

   113. Of certain Kings.

   114. Of a king of Israel (116).

   115. Of Alexander (117).

   116. Of King Nusharvian (118).

   117. Of a Judge and his Wife (119).

   118. Of an Emir.

   119. Of Malek Imnidinar.

   120. Of a devout man of the children of Israel (122).

   121. Of Hedjage Himni Yussuf (123).

   122. Of a Blacksmith (124).

   123. Of a devout man (125).

   124. Of Omar Imnilchatab.

   125. Of Ibrahim Elchaber.

   126. Of a Prophet (128).

   127. Of a Pious Man (129).

   128. Of a Man of the Children of Israel (130).

   129. Of Abul Hassan Duradge (131).

   130. Of Sultana Hayaat.

   131. Of the Philosopher Daniel (132).

  *132. Of Belukia (132a).

  *133. The Travels of Sinbad—certain seven voyages, &c. (133).

   134. Of the Town of Copper (134).

   135. Of the Seven Virgins and the Slave (135).

  *136. Story of Judais (136).

   137. The Wonderful History.

   138. Of Abdullah Imni Mohammi.

   139. Of Hind Imni Haman (139).

   140. Of Chazmimé Imni Bashés (140).

   141. Of Jonas the Secretary (141).

   142. Of Haroun al-Rashid (142).

   143. Of ditto.

   144. Of Ebon Isaac Ibrahim (144).

   145. Of Haroun al Raschid, Misroor and the Poet.

   146. Of the Caliph Moavia.

   147. Of Haroun al Raschid.

   148. Of Isaac Imni Ibrahim (148).

   149. Of Ebwi Amér.

  *150. Of Achmet Ezenth and the old Female Pimp.

   151. Of the three Brothers.

   152. Of Erdeshir and Hiaker, of Julmar El Bacharia (152).

   153. Of Mahomet, &c.

   154. Ditto (154?).

  *155. Story of Safil Moluki (154a).

  *156. Of Hassan, &c. (155).

  *157. Of Caliph the Hunter (156).

  *158. Of Mersir and his Mistress (157).

   159. Of Noureddin and Mary (158).

   160. Of a Bedouin and a Frank (159).

   161. Of a Man of Baghdad and his Female Slave (160).

   162. Of a King, his Son, and the Vizir Shemar (161).

  *163. Of a Merchant and the Thieves.

  *164. Of Abousir and Aboukir (162).

  *165. Abdulak El Beri and Abdulak El Backari (163).

  *166. Of Haroun al Raschid.

   167. Of the Merchant Abul Hassan al-Omani (164).

   168. Of Imnil Echarib (168).

   169. Of Moted Bila.

  *170. Of Kamasi Zemuan (167).

  *171. Of Abdulah Imni Fasil (168).

  *172. The Story of Maroof (169).


_IMITATIONS AND MISCELLANEOUS WORKS HAVING MORE OR LESS CONNECTION WITH
                              THE NIGHTS._

The success of Galland’s work led to the appearance of numerous works
more or less resembling it, chiefly in England and France. Similar
imitations, though now less numerous, have continued to appear down to
the present day.

The most important of the older works of this class were published in
French in the “Cabinet des Fées” (Amsterdam and Geneva, 1785–1793; 41
vols.); in English in “Tales of the East: comprising the most popular
Romances of Oriental origin, and the best imitations by European
authors, with new translations and additional tales never before
published, to which is prefixed an introductory dissertation, containing
an account of each work and of its author or translator. By Henry Weber,
Esq.” (Edinburgh, 1812, 3 vols.); and in German in “Tausend und ein Tag.
Morgenländische Erzählungen aus dem Persisch, Turkisch und Arabisch,
nach Petis de la Croix, Galland, Cardonne, Chavis und Cazotte, dem
Grafen Caylus, und Anderer. Übersetzt von F. H. von der Hagen”
(Prenzlau, 1827–1837, 11 vols.) In the “Cabinet des Fées” I find a
reference to an older collection of tales (partly Oriental) called the
“Bibliothèque des Fées et des Génies,” by the Abbé de la Porte, which I
have not seen, but which is, in part, incorporated in the “Cabinet.” It
formed only 2 vols. 12mo, and was published in 1765.

The examination of these tales is difficult, for they comprise several
classes, not always clearly defined:—

1. Satires on The Nights themselves (_e.g._ the Tales of the Count of
Hamilton.)

2. Satires in an Oriental garb (_e.g._ Beckford’s Vathek).

3. Moral tales in an Oriental garb (_e.g._ Mrs. Sheridan’s Nourjahad).

4. Fantastic tales with nothing Oriental about them but the name (_e.g._
Stevenson’s New Arabian Nights).

5. Imitations pure and simple (_e.g._ G. Meredith’s Shaving of Shagpat).

6. Imitations more or less founded on genuine Oriental sources (_e.g._
the Tales of the Comte de Caylus).

7. Genuine Oriental Tales (_e.g._ Mille et une Jours, translated by
Petis de la Croix).

Most of the tales belonging to Class 7 and some of those belonging to
Class 6 have been treated of in previous sections. The remaining tales
and imitations will generally need only a very brief notice; sometimes
only the title and the indication of the class to which they belong. We
will begin with an enumeration of the Oriental contents of the Cabinet
des Fées, adding W. i. ii. and iii. to show which are included in
Weber’s “Tales of the East”:—

7–11. 1001 Nuits (W. i.).

12, 13. Les Aventures d’Abdalla (W. iii.).

14, 15. 1001 Jours (Persian tales, W. ii.).

16. Histoire de la Sultane de Perse et des Visirs. Contes Turcs (Turkish
tales, W. iii. = our 251).

16. Les Voyages de Zulma dans le pays des Fées.

17, 18. Contes de Bidpai.

19. Contes Chinois, ou les Aventures merveilleuses du Mandarin Fum-Hoam
(W. iii.).

21, 22. Les Mille et un Quart d’Heures. Contes Tartares (W. iii.).

22, 23. Les Sultanes de Guzerath, ou les Songes des hommes éveillés.
Contes Moguls (W. iii.).

25. Nouveaux Contes Orientaux, par le Comte de Caylus (W. ii.).

29, 30. Les Contes des Génies (W. iii.).

30. Les Aventures de Zelondvit d’Amanzarifdine.

30. Contes Indiens par M. de Moncrif.

33. Nourjahad (W. ii.).

34. Contes de M. Pajon.

38–41. Les Veillées du Sultan Schahriar, &c. (Chavis and Cazotte; cf.
anteà p. 470; W. i. ii.).

(Weber also includes, in his vol. ii. Nos. 21a, 22, 32 and 37, after
Caussin de Perceval.)

12, 13. _The Adventures of Abdallah, the Son of Hanif_ (Class 5 or 6).

Originally published in 1713; attributed to M. de Bignon, a young Abbé.
A series of romantic travels, in which Eastern and Western fiction is
mixed; for instance, we have the story of the Rose-tree, which so far as
I know, has nothing Oriental about it.

16. _The Voyages of Zulma in Fairy Land_ (Class 4).

European fairy tales, with nothing Oriental about them but the names of
persons and places. The work is unfinished.

17, 18. _The Tales of Bidpai_ (translated by Galland) are Indian, and
therefore need no further notice here.

19–23. _Chinese, Tartarian and Mogul Tales_ (Class 6).

Published in 1723, and later by Thomas Simon Gueulette.

Concerning these tales, Mr. Clouston remarks (in litt.): “Much of the
groundwork of these clever imitations of the Arabian Nights has been,
directly or indirectly, derived from Eastern sources; for instance, in
the so-called Tartar tales, the adventures of the Young Calender find
parallels, (1) in the well-known Bidpai tale of the Bráhman, the
Sharpers and the Goat (Kalila and Dimna, Pánchatantra, Hitopadesa, &c.)
and (2) in the world-wide story of the Farmer who outwitted the Six Men
(Indian Antiquary, vol. 3) of which there are many versions current in
Europe, such as the Norse tale of Big Peter and Little Peter, the Danish
tale of Great Claus and Little Claus; the German tale (Grimm) of the
Little Farmer; the Irish tale of Little Fairy (Samuel Lover’s collection
of Irish Fairy Legends and Stories); four Gaelic versions in Campbell’s
Popular Tales of the West Highlands; a Kaba’il version in Rivière’s
French collection (Contes populaires Kabylies); Uncle Capriano in
Crane’s recently published Italian Popular Tales; and a Latin mediæval
version (written probably in the 11th century) in which the hero is
called ‘Unibos,’ because he had only one cow.”

25. _Oriental Tales_ (Class 6).

Mr. Clouston observes, “Appeared in 1749[472] and on the title page are
said to have been translated from MSS. in the Royal French Library. The
stories are, however, largely the composition of De Caylus himself, and
those elements of them which are traceable to Asiatic sources have been
considerably Frenchified.”

Nevertheless they are not without interest, and are nearly all of
obviously Oriental origin. One of the stories is a fantastic account of
the Birth of Mahomet, including romantic travels largely borrowed from
No. 132a. Another story is a version of that of the Seven Sleepers.
Other noteworthy tales are the story of the Dervish Abounader, which
resembles Nos. 193 and 216d.; and the story of Naerdan and Guzulbec,
which is a tale of magical illusions similar to that of Monia Emin, in
the Turkish story of Jewad.

The Count de Caylus was the author of various European as well as
Oriental fairy tales. Of his Oriental collection, Sir R. F. Burton
remarks:—“The stories are not Eastern but Western fairy tales proper,
with kings and queens, giants and dwarfs, and fairies, good and bad.
‘Barbets’ act as body guard and army. Written in good old style, and
free language, such as, for instance, son pétenlaire, with here and
there a touch of salt humour, as in Rosanie ’Charmante reine (car on n’a
jamais parlé autrement à une reine, quel que laide qu’elle ait été).’”

29, 30. _Tales of the Genii_ (Class 3.)

Written in the middle of the last century by Rev. James Ridley, but
purporting to be translated from the Persian of Horam, the son of Asmar,
by Sir Charles Morell.

These tales have been reprinted many times; but it is very doubtful if
they are based on any genuine Oriental sources. The amount of Oriental
colouring may be guessed from the story of Urad, who having consented to
become the bride of a Sultan on condition that he should dismiss all his
concubines, and make her his sole queen (like Harald Harfagr on his
marriage with Ragnhilda) is presented to his loving subjects as their
Sultána!

32. _Adventures of Zeloide and Amanzarifdine._ Indian Tales, by M. de
Moncrif (Class 4.)

Ordinary European Fairy Tales, with the scene laid in the East.

33. _Nourjahad_, by Mrs. Sheridan (Class 3.)

An unworthy favourite is reformed by a course of practical moral lessons
conveyed by the Sultan through supposed supernatural agencies. Mr.
Clouston regards it as “one of the very best of the imitations of
Eastern fiction. The plot is ingeniously conceived and well wrought out,
and the interest never flags throughout.”

34. _Pajon’s Oriental Tales_ (Class 5.). These demand no special notice.

In addition to the above, the following Oriental works are mentioned in
the Cabinet des Fées, but not reprinted:

  1. Apologues orientaux, par l’abbé Blanchet.

  2. Mélanges de littérature orientale, par Cardonne. (Paris, 2 vols.
       1770.)

  3. Neraïr et Meloe, roman oriental, par H. B. Deblanes (1759).

  4. Contes orientaux, par M. de la Dixmerie.

  5. Les Cinq Cent Matinées et une demie, contes Syriens, par le
       chevalier de Duclos.

  6. Abassâi, conte oriental, par Mademoiselle Fault (ou Fauques) 1752.

  7. Les Contes du Serail, par Mdlle. Fault (1753).

  8. Kara Mustapha, conte oriental, par Fromaget (1745).

  9. Zilia et Cénie, par Françoise d’Isembourg d’Hippincourt de
       Graffigny.

 10. Salned et Garalde, conte oriental, par A. H. De la Motte.

 11. Anecdotes orientales, par G. Mailhol (2 vols. 1752).

 12. Alzahel, traduit d’un manuscrit arabe, par Mdlle. Raigné de
       Malfontaine (Mercure, 1773).

 13. Mahmoud le Gasnevide, conte oriental, par J. F. Melon.

 14. Contes Orientaux, ou les récits du Sage Caleb, voyageur persan, par
       Mme. Mouet.

 15. Nadir, par A. G. de Montdorge.

 16. Lettres Persanes, de Montesquieu.

 17. Les Amusements de Jour, ou recueil de petits contes, par Mme. de
       Mortemar.

 18. Mirloh, conte oriental, par Martine de Morville (1769).

 19. Ladila, anecdote turque (par la même) 1769.

 20. Daïra, histoire orientale, par A. J. J. de la Riche de la
       Poupelinière (1761).

 21. Cara Mustapha, par de Preschat.

 22. Des trois Nations, conte oriental, par Marianne Robert (1760).

 23. Contes Orientaux, tirés des manuscrits de la Bibliothèque du Roi, 2
       vols. 12mo. (1749).

This is the same as the Count de Caylus’ Oriental Tales (vide anteà, p.
508). Sir R. F. Burton has received the following memorandum, respecting
a copy of an earlier edition of the same work: “Contes Orientaux, tirés
des manuscrits de la Bibliothèque du Roy de France, ornés de figures en
taille douce. À la Haye, 1743, 2 vols. 12mo, polished calf gilt, gilt
edges, arms in gilt on the sides.

“The Preface says, ‘M. Petit et M. Galland n’ont en aucune connaissance
des manuscrits dont cet ouvrage est tiré.’

“The Tales are from the MSS. and translations sent by those despatched
by the French Ministers to Constantinople to learn Arabic, &c., and so
become fit to act as Dragomans and Interpreters to the French Embassy.”

There is a copy of this work in the British Museum; it proves, as I
expected, to be the series of tales subsequently attributed to the Count
de Caylus.

In addition to the above, the following, of which I can only give the
names, are mentioned in the Cabinet des Fées, but not reprinted:—

                   1. Alma-Moulin, conte oriental, 1779.

                   2. Gengiskan, histoire orientale, par M. de St. M.

    From “les    { 3. Almanzor et Zelira, conte arabe, par M. Bret.
   mercures.”           (1772).

                 { 4. Almerine et Zelima, ou les Dangers de la Beauté,
                        conte orientale, 1773.

                 { 5. Les Ames, conte arabe, par M. B——.

                 { 6. Balky, conte oriental, 1768.

                 { 7. Mirza, ou la necessité d’etre utile (1774).

                 { 8. Zaman, histoire orientale, par M. B.

                   9. Anecdotes Orientales, par Mayol, 1752. 12mo.

                  10. Contes très moguls.

                  11. Foka ou les Metamorphoses, conte chinois. Derobé à
                        M. de V. 1777. 12mo.

                  12. Mahulem, histoire orientale. 12mo. 1776.

                  13. Mille et une heure, contes Peruviens. 4 vols.
                        12mo. 1733.

                  14. Histoire de Khedy. Hermite de Mont Ararat. Conte
                        orientale, traduit de l’Anglais, 12mo. 1777.

                  15. Zambeddin, histoire orientale. 12mo, 1768

                  16. Zelmoille et Zulmis et Turlableu. Par M. l’Abbé de
                        Voisem, 12mo, 1747.

                  17. Roman Oriental, Paris, 1753.

The remaining imitations, &c., known to me I shall place roughly in
chronological order, premising that I fear the list must be very
incomplete, and that I have met with very few except in English and
French.


                               A.—FRENCH.

1. _Zadig, ou la Destinée_, par Voltaire[473] probably partakes of
classes 2 and 6; said to be partly based on Gueulette’s “Soirées
Bretonnes,” published in 1712. The latter is included in Cabinet des
Fées, Vol. 32.

2. _Vathek, an Arabian Tale_, by William Beckford. I include this book
here because it was written and first published in French. Its
popularity was once very great, and it contains some effective passages,
though it belongs to Class 2, and is rather a parody than an imitation
of Oriental fiction. The Caliph Vathek, after committing many crimes at
the instance of his mother, the witch Carathis, in order to propitiate
Eblis, finally starts on an expedition to Istakar. On the way, he
seduces Nourounihar, the beautiful daughter of the Emir Fakreddin, and
carries her with him to the Palace of Eblis, where they are condemned to
wander eternally, with their hearts surrounded with flames.

This idea (which is certainly not Oriental, so far as I know) took the
fancy of Byron, who was a great admirer of Vathek, and he has mixed it
with genuine Oriental features in a powerful passage in the Giaour,
beginning:

                 “But thou, false Infidel! shalt writhe
                 Beneath avenging Monkir’s scythe;
                 And from its torment ’scape alone
                 To wander round lost Eblis’ throne;
                 And fire unquenched, unquenchable,
                 Around, within thy heart shall dwell;
                 Nor ear can hear, nor tongue can tell
                 The tortures of that inward hell!” &c.

How errors relative to Eastern matters are perpetuated is illustrated by
the fact that I have seen these lines quoted in some modern
philosophical work as descriptive of the hell in which the Mahommedans
believe!

Southey, in Thalaba, b. 1. speaks of the Sarsar, “the Icy Wind of
Death,” an expression which he probably borrowed from Vathek.

3. _The Count of Hamilton’s Fairy Tales._ Class 1.—There is an English
translation among Bohn’s Extra Volumes, written shortly after the first
publication of Galland’s work.

4. _Les Mille et un Fadaises_, par Cazotte. Class 1. I have not seen
them.

5. La Mille et deuxième Nuit, par Theophilus Gautier (Paris, 1880).
Probably Class 1 or 2; I have not seen it.


                              B.—ENGLISH.

1. _The Vision of Mirza_ (Addison in the “Spectator”) Class 3.

2. _The Story of Amurath._ Class 3. I do not know the author. I read it
in a juvenile book published about the end of last century, entitled the
Pleasing Instructor.

3. _The Persian Tales of Inatulla of Delhi._ Published in 1768, by
Colonel Alexander Dow at Edinburgh. A French translation appeared at
Amsterdam in two vols. and in Paris in one vol. (1769). Class 6. Chiefly
founded on a well-known Persian work, of which a more correct, though
still incomplete, version was published in 3 vols., by Jonathan Scott in
1799, under the title of Bahar Danush, or Garden of Knowledge.

5. _Rasselas_, by Samuel Johnson. Class 3. Too well known to need
comment.

6. _Almoran and Hamet_, by Dr. Hawksworth. Class 3. Very popular at the
beginning of the present century, but now forgotten.

7. _Oriental Fairy Tales_ (London, 1853) Class 4. A series of very
pretty fairy tales, by an anonymous author, in which the scene is laid
in the East (especially Egypt).

8. _The Shaving of Shagpat_, by George Meredith. (London, 1855). Class
5. I prefer this to most other imitations of an Oriental tale.

9. _The Thousand and One Humbugs._ Classes 1 and 2. Published in
“Household Words,” vol. xi. (1855) pp. 265–267, 289–292, 313–316.
Parodies on Nos. 1, 195, 6d, and 6e, f.

10. _Eastern Tales, by many story-tellers._ Compiled and edited from
ancient and modern authors by Mrs. Valentine, author of “Sea Fights and
Land Battles,” &c. (Chandos Classics).

In her preface, the authoress states that the tales “are gathered from
both ancient and modern French, Italian and English sources.”

Contains 14 tales, some genuine, others imitations. One “Alischar and
Smaragdine,” is a genuine story of The Nights (No. 41 of our Table), and
is probably taken from Trébutien. Three tales, “Jalaladeen,” “Haschem,”
and “Jussuf,” are Grimm’s imitations, taken probably from the composite
English edition of 1847, and with the same illustrations. “The Seven
Sleepers,” and the “Four Talismans,” are from the Count de Caylus’
tales; “Halechalbe” and “Bohetzad” (our No. 174) are from Chavis and
Cazotte; “The Enchanters,” and “Urad” are from the “Tales of the Genii;”
and “The Pantofles” is the well known story of the miser Casem and his
slippers, but I know not where it first appeared. The remaining three
tales are unknown to me, and as I have seen no volume of Italian
Oriental tales, some, no doubt, are derived from the Italian sources of
which the authoress spoke. They are the following: “The Prince and the
Lions,” “The City of the Demons” (a Jewish story purporting to have been
written in England) and “Sadik Beg.”

11. _New Arabian Nights_, by R. L. Stevenson. (London, 1882.)

12. _More New Arabian Nights. The Dynamiter._ By R. L. Stevenson and
Vander Grift (London, 1882). Class 4.

Of these tales, Sir R. F. Burton observes, “The only visible connection
with the old Nights is in the habit of seeking adventures under a
disguise. The method is to make the main idea possible and the details
extravagant. In another ‘New Arabian Nights,’ the joint production of
MM. Brookfield, Besant and Pollock, the reverse treatment is affected,
the leading idea being grotesque and impossible, and the details
accurate and life-like.”


                               C.—GERMAN.

It is quite possible that there are many imitations in German, but I
have not met with them. I can only mention one or two tales by Hauff
(the Caliph turned Stork, and the Adventures of Said); a story called
“Ali and Gulhindi,” by what author I do not now remember; and some
imitations said to be by Grimm, already mentioned in reference to the
English composite edition of 1847. They are all European fairy tales, in
an Eastern dress.


                             _CONCLUSION._

Among books specially interesting to the student of The Nights, I may
mention Weil’s “Biblische Legenden der Muselmänner, aus arabischen
Quellen zusammengetragen, und mit jüdischen Sagen verglichen”
(Frankfort-on-Main, 1845). An anonymous English translation appeared in
1846 under the title of “The Bible, the Koran, and the Talmud,” and it
also formed one of the sources from which the Rev. S. Baring-Gould
compiled his “Legends of Old Testament Characters” (2 vols., 1871). The
late Prof. Palmer’s “Life of Haroun Al-Raschid” (London, 1881), is not
much more than a brief popular sketch.

The references to The Nights in English and other European literatures
are innumerable; but I cannot refrain from quoting Mark Twain’s
identification of Henry the Eighth with Shahryar (Huckleberry Finn,
chap. xxiii.)

“Why, you ought to see old Henry the Eighth when he was in bloom. He
_was_ a blossom. He used to marry a new wife every day, and chop off her
head next morning. And he would do it just as indifferent as if he was
ordering up eggs. “Fetch up Nell Gwynne,” he says. They fetch her up.
Next morning, “Chop off her head.” And they chop it off. “Fetch up Jane
Shore,” he says; and up she comes. Next morning, “Chop off her head.”
And they chop it off. “Ring up Fair Rosamun.” Fair Rosamun answers the
bell. Next morning. “Chop off her head.” And he made every one of them
tell him a tale every night, and he kept that up till he had hogged a
thousand and one tales that way, and then he put them all in a book, and
called it Domesday Book—which was a good name, and stated the case. You
don’t know kings, Jim, but I know them, and this old rip of corn is one
of the cleanest I’ve struck in history. Well, Henry, he takes a notion
he wants to get up some trouble with this country. How does he do
it—give notice?—give the country a show? No. All of a sudden he heaves
all the tea in Boston Harbour overboard, and whacks out a declaration of
independence, and dares them to come on. That was _his_ style—he never
give anybody a chance. He had suspicions of his father, the Duke of
Wellington. Well, what did he do?—ask him to show up? No—drownded him in
a butt of mamsey, like a cat. Spose people left money laying around
where he was—what did he do? He collared it. Spose he contracted to do a
thing, and you paid him, and didn’t set down there and see that he done
it—what did he do? He always done the other thing. Spose he opened his
mouth—what then? If he didn’t shut it up powerful quick he’d lose a lie,
every time. That’s the kind of a bug Henry was.”


    _COMPARATIVE TABLE OF THE TALES IN THE PRINCIPAL EDITIONS OF THE
                    THOUSAND AND ONE NIGHTS, viz._:—

  1. Galland.

  2. Caussin de Perceval.

  3. Gauttier.

  4. Scott’s MS. (Wortley Montague).

  5. Scott’s MS. (Anderson; marked A).

  6. Scott’s Arabian Nights.

  7. Scott’s Tales and Anecdotes (marked A).

  8. Von Hammer’s MS.

  9. Zinserling.

 10. Lamb.

 11. Trébutien.

 12. Bul. text.

 13. Lane.

 14. Bres. text.

 15. Habicht.

 16. Weil.

 17. Mac. text.

 18. Torrens.

 19. Payne.

 20. Payne’s Tales from the Arabic (marked I. II. III.).

 21. Calc.

 22. Burton.

As nearly all editions of The Nights are in several volumes, the volumes
are indicated throughout, except in the case of some of the texts. Only
those tales in No. 5, not included in No. 4, are here indicated in the
same column. All tales which there is good reason to believe do not
belong to the genuine Nights are marked with an asterisk.

The blank column may be used to enter the contents of some other
edition.

 ═════════════════════════════╤════════╤═════════╤═════════╤════════
                              │        │ Caussin │         │
                              │        │   de    │         │Scott’s
                              │Galland.│Perceval.│Gauttier.│  MS.
 ─────────────────────────────┼────────┼─────────┼─────────┼────────
       Introduction           │   -    │         │         │   1
       Story of King Shahryar │        │         │         │
         and his brother      │        │         │         │
                              │        │         │         │
                              │        │         │         │
                              │        │         │         │
                              │        │         │         │
                              │        │         │         │
                              │        │         │         │
                              │   1    │    1    │    1    │   1
       _a._  Tale of the Bull │        │         │         │
               and the Ass    │   1    │    1    │    1    │   A
    1. Tale of the Trader and │        │         │         │
         the Jinni            │   1    │    1    │    1    │   1
       _a._  The First        │        │         │         │
               Shaykh’s Story │   1    │    1    │    1    │   1
       _b._  The Second       │        │         │         │
               Shaykh’s Story │   1    │    1    │    1    │   1
       _c._  The Third        │        │         │         │
               Shaykh’s Story │   -    │    -    │         │   1
    2. The Fisherman and the  │        │         │         │
         Jinni                │   1    │    1    │    1    │   1
       _a._  Tale of the Wazir│        │         │         │
               and the Sage   │        │         │         │
               Duban          │   1    │    1    │    1    │   1
             _ab._ Story of   │        │         │         │
               King Sindibad  │        │         │         │
               and his Falcon │   -    │    -    │         │   ?
             _ac._ Tale of the│        │         │         │
               Husband and the│        │         │         │
               Parrot         │   1    │    1    │    1    │   ?
             _ad._ Tale of the│        │         │         │
               Prince and the │        │         │         │
               Ogress         │   1    │    1    │    1    │   ?
       _b._  Tale of the      │        │         │         │
               Ensorcelled    │        │         │         │
               Prince         │   1    │    1    │    1    │   1
    3. The Porter and the     │        │         │         │
         Three Ladies of      │        │         │         │
         Baghdad              │   1    │    1    │    1    │   1
       _a._  The First        │        │         │         │
               Kalandar’s     │        │         │         │
               Tale.          │   2    │    1    │    1    │   1
       _b._  The Second       │        │         │         │
               Kalandar’s Tale│   2    │    1    │    1    │   1
             _ba._ Tale of the│        │         │         │
               Envier and the │        │         │         │
               Envied         │   2    │    1    │    1    │   ?
       _c._  The Third        │        │         │         │
               Kalandar’s     │        │         │         │
               Tale.          │   2    │    1    │    1    │   1
       _d._  The Eldest Lady’s│        │         │         │
               Tale           │   2    │    2    │    1    │   1
       _e._  Tale of the      │        │         │         │
               Portress       │   2    │    2    │    1    │   1
       Conclusion of the Story│        │         │         │
         of the Porter and    │        │         │         │
         three Ladies         │   2    │    2    │    1    │   1
    4. Tale of the Three      │        │         │         │
         Apples               │   3    │    2    │    2    │
    5. Tale of Nur Al-Din and │        │         │         │
         his Son Badr Al-Din  │        │         │         │
         Hasan                │  3, 4  │    2    │    2    │
    6. The Hunchback’s Tale   │   4    │    2    │    2    │   1
       _a._  The Nazarene     │        │         │         │
               Broker’s Story │   4    │    2    │    2    │   1
       _b._  The Reeve’s Tale │   4    │    2    │    2    │   1
       _c._  Tale of the      │        │         │         │
               Jewish Doctor  │   4    │    3    │    2    │   ?
       _d._  Tale of the      │        │         │         │
               Tailor         │  4, 5  │    3    │    2    │   1
       _e._  The Barber’s Tale│        │         │         │
               of Himself     │   5    │    3    │    2    │   1
             _ea._ The        │        │         │         │
               Barber’s Tale  │        │         │         │
               of his First   │        │         │         │
               Brother        │   5    │    3    │    2    │   1
             _eb._ The        │        │         │         │
               Barber’s Tale  │        │         │         │
               of his Second  │        │         │         │
               Brother        │   5    │    3    │    2    │   ?
             _ec._ The        │        │         │         │
               Barber’s Tale  │        │         │         │
               of his Third   │        │         │         │
               Brother        │   5    │    3    │    2    │   1
             _ed._ The        │        │         │         │
               Barber’s Tale  │        │         │         │
               of his Fourth  │        │         │         │
               Brother        │   5    │    3    │    2    │   1
             _ee._ The        │        │         │         │
               Barber’s Tale  │        │         │         │
               of his Fifth   │        │         │         │
               Brother        │   5    │    3    │    2    │   1
             _ef._ The        │        │         │         │
               Barber’s Tale  │        │         │         │
               of his Sixth   │        │         │         │
               Brother        │   5    │    3    │    2    │   1
       The End of the Tailor’s│        │         │         │
         Tale                 │   5    │    3    │    2    │   1
    7. Nur Al-Din Ali and the │        │         │         │
         Damsel Anis Al-Jalis │   7    │    4    │    3    │   1
    8. Tale of Ghanim Bin     │        │         │         │
         Ayyub, the           │        │         │         │
         Distraught, the      │        │         │         │
         Thrall o’ Love       │   8    │  4, 5   │    4    │
       _a._  Tale of the First│        │         │         │
               Eunuch, Bukhayt│        │         │         │
       _b._  Tale of the      │        │         │         │
               Second Eunuch, │        │         │         │
               Kafur          │        │         │         │
    9. Tale of King Omar Bin  │        │         │         │
         Al-Nu’uman, and his  │        │         │         │
         sons Sharrkan and Zau│        │         │         │
         Al-Makan             │        │         │         │
       _a._  Tale of Taj      │        │         │         │
               Al-Muluk and   │        │         │         │
               the Princess   │        │         │         │
               Dunya          │        │         │         │
             _aa._ Tale of    │        │         │         │
               Aziz and Azizah│        │         │         │
       _b._  Tale of the      │        │         │         │
               Hashish-Eater  │        │         │         │
       _c._  Tale of Hammad   │        │         │         │
               the Badawi     │        │         │         │
   10. The Birds and Beasts   │        │         │         │
         and the Carpenter    │        │         │         │
                              │        │         │         │
                              │        │         │         │
   11. The Hermits            │        │         │         │
   12. The Water-fowl and the │        │         │         │
         Tortoise             │        │         │         │
   13. The Wolf and the Fox   │        │         │         │
       _a._  Tale of the      │        │         │         │
               Falcon and the │        │         │         │
               Partridge      │        │         │         │
   14. The Mouse and the      │        │         │         │
         Ichneumon            │        │         │         │
   15. The Cat and the Crow   │        │         │         │
   16. The Fox and the Crow   │        │         │         │
       _a._  The Flea and the │        │         │         │
               Mouse          │        │         │         │
       _b._  The Saker and the│        │         │         │
               Birds          │        │         │         │
       _c._  The Sparrow and  │        │         │         │
               the Eagle      │        │         │         │
   17. The Hedgehog and the   │        │         │         │
         Wood Pigeons         │        │         │         │
       _a._  The Merchant and │        │         │         │
               the Two        │        │         │         │
               Sharpers       │        │         │         │
   18. The Thief and his      │        │         │         │
         Monkey               │        │         │         │
       _a._  The Foolish      │        │         │         │
               Weaver         │        │         │         │
   19. The Sparrow and the    │        │         │         │
         Peacock              │        │         │         │
   20. Ali Bin Bakkar and     │        │         │         │
         Shams Al-Nahar       │  5, 6  │    3    │    3    │
   21. Tale of Kamar Al-Zaman │   6    │  3, 4   │    3    │   2
       _a._  Ni’amah bin      │        │         │         │
               Al-Rabia and   │        │         │         │
               Naomi his      │        │         │         │
               Slave-girl     │        │    9    │         │
   22. Ala Al-Din Abu         │        │         │         │
         Al-Shamat            │        │    9    │         │
   23. Hatim of the Tribe of  │        │         │         │
         Tayy                 │        │         │         │
   24. Ma’an the son of Zaidah│        │         │         │
         and the three Girls  │        │         │         │
   25. Ma’an son of Zaidah and│        │         │         │
         the Badawi           │        │         │         │
   26. The City of Labtayt    │        │         │         │
   27. The Caliph Hisham and  │        │         │         │
         the Arab Youth       │        │         │         │
   28. Ibrahim bin Al-Mahdi   │        │         │         │
         and the              │        │         │         │
         Barber-Surgeon       │        │         │         │
   29. The City of            │        │         │         │
         Many-columned Iram   │        │         │         │
         and Abdullah son of  │        │         │         │
         Abi Kalabah          │        │         │         │
   30. Isaac of Mosul         │        │         │    7    │
   31. The Sweep and the Noble│        │         │         │
         Lady                 │        │         │         │
   32. The Mock Caliph        │        │    9    │    2    │
   33. Ali the Persian        │        │         │         │
   34. Harun Al-Rashid and the│        │         │         │
         Slave-Girl and the   │        │         │         │
         Imam Abu Yusuf       │        │         │         │
   35. The Lover who feigned  │        │         │         │
         himself a Thief      │        │         │         │
   36. Ja’afar the Barmecide  │        │         │         │
         and the Bean-Seller  │        │         │         │
   37. Abu Mohammed hight     │        │         │         │
         Lazybones            │        │    9    │         │
   38. Generous dealing of    │        │         │         │
         Yahya bin Khalid the │        │         │         │
         Barmecide with Mansur│        │         │         │
   39. Generous Dealing of    │        │         │         │
         Yahya son of Khalid  │        │         │         │
         with a man who forged│        │         │         │
         a letter in his name │        │         │         │
   40. Caliph Al-Maamun and   │        │         │         │
         the Strange Scholar  │        │         │         │
   41. Ali Shar and Zumurrud  │        │         │         │
   42. The Loves of Jubayr Bin│        │         │         │
         Umayr and the Lady   │        │         │         │
         Budur                │        │         │         │
   43. The Man of Al-Yaman and│        │         │         │
         his six Slave-Girls  │        │         │         │
   44. Harun Al-Rashid and the│        │         │         │
         Damsel and Abu Nowas │        │         │         │
   45. The Man who stole the  │        │         │         │
         dish of gold whereon │        │         │         │
         the dog ate          │        │         │         │
   46. The Sharper of         │        │         │         │
         Alexandria and the   │        │         │         │
         Chief of Police      │        │         │         │
   47. Al-Malik Al-Nasir and  │        │         │         │
         the three Chiefs of  │        │         │         │
         Police               │        │         │         │
       _a._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Chief of the   │        │         │         │
               new Cairo      │        │         │         │
               Police         │        │         │         │
       _b._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Chief of the   │        │         │         │
               Bulak Police   │        │         │         │
       _c._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Chief of the   │        │         │         │
               Old Cairo      │        │         │         │
               Police         │        │         │         │
   48. The Thief and the      │        │         │         │
         Shroff               │        │         │         │
   49. The Chief of the Kus   │        │         │         │
         Police and the       │        │         │         │
         Sharper              │        │         │         │
   50. Ibrahim bin al-Mahdi   │        │         │         │
         and the Merchant’s   │        │         │         │
         Sister               │        │         │         │
   51. The Woman whose hands  │        │         │         │
         were cut off for     │        │         │         │
         alms-giving          │        │         │         │
   52. The devout Israelite   │        │         │         │
   53. Abu Hassan Al-Ziyadi   │        │         │         │
         and the Khorasan Man │        │         │         │
   54. The Poor Man and his   │        │         │         │
         Friend in Need       │        │         │         │
   55. The Ruined Man who     │        │         │         │
         became rich again    │        │         │         │
         through a dream      │        │         │         │
   56. Caliph Al-Mutawakkil   │        │         │         │
         and his Concubine    │        │         │         │
         Mahbubah             │        │         │         │
   57. Wardan the Butcher’s   │        │         │         │
         Adventure with the   │        │         │         │
         Lady and the Bear    │        │         │         │
   58. The King’s Daughter and│        │         │         │
         the Ape              │        │         │         │
   59. The Ebony Horse        │   11   │    7    │    5    │
   60. Uns Al-Wujud and the   │        │         │         │
         Wazir’s Daughter     │        │         │         │
         Rose-in-Hood         │        │         │    6    │   4
   61. Abu Nowas with the     │        │         │         │
         Three Boys and the   │        │         │         │
         Caliph Harun         │        │         │         │
         Al-Rashid            │        │         │         │
   62. Abdullah bin Ma’amar   │        │         │         │
         with the Man of      │        │         │         │
         Bassorah and his     │        │         │         │
         Slave-Girl           │        │         │         │
   63. The Lovers of the Banu │        │         │         │
         Ozrah                │        │         │         │
   64. The Wazir of Al-Yaman  │        │         │         │
         and his young Brother│        │         │         │
   65. The Loves of the Boy   │        │         │         │
         and Girl at School   │        │         │         │
   66. Al-Mutalammis and his  │        │         │         │
         Wife Umaymah         │        │         │         │
   67. Harun Al-Rashid and    │        │         │         │
         Zubaydah in the Bath │        │         │         │
   68. Harun Al-Rashid and the│        │         │         │
         Three Poets          │        │         │         │
   69. Mus’ab bin Al-Zubayr   │        │         │         │
         and Ayishah his Wife │        │         │         │
   70. Abu Al-Aswad and his   │        │         │         │
         Slave-Girl           │        │         │         │
   71. Harun Al-Rashid and the│        │         │         │
         two Slave-Girls      │        │         │         │
   72. Harun Al-Rashid and the│        │         │         │
         Three Slave-Girls    │        │         │         │
   73. The Miller and his Wife│        │         │         │
   74. The Simpleton and the  │        │         │         │
         Sharper              │        │         │         │
   75. The Kazi Abu Yusuf with│        │         │         │
         Harun Al-Rashid and  │        │         │         │
         Queen Zubaydah       │        │         │         │   A
   76. The Caliph Al-Hakim and│        │         │         │
         the Merchant         │        │         │         │
   77. King Kisra Anushirwan  │        │         │         │
         and the Village      │        │         │         │
         Damsel               │        │         │         │
   78. The Water-carrier and  │        │         │         │
         the Goldsmith’s Wife │        │         │         │
   79. Khusrau and Shirin and │        │         │         │
         the Fisherman        │        │         │         │
   80. Yahya bin Khalid and   │        │         │         │
         the Poor Man         │        │         │         │
   81. Mohammed al-Amin and   │        │         │         │
         the Slave-Girl       │        │         │         │
   82. The Sons of Yahya bin  │        │         │         │
         Khalid and Said bin  │        │         │         │
         Salim                │        │         │         │
   83. The Woman’s Trick      │        │         │         │
         against her Husband  │        │         │         │
   84. The Devout Woman and   │        │         │         │
         the Two Wicked Elders│        │         │         │
   85. Ja’afar the Barmecide  │        │         │         │
         and the old Badawi   │        │         │         │
   86. Omar bin Al-Khattab and│        │         │         │
         the Young Badawi     │        │         │         │
   87. Al-Maamun and the      │        │         │         │
         Pyramids of Egypt    │        │         │         │
   88. The Thief and the      │        │         │         │
         Merchant             │        │         │         │
   89. Masrur the Eunuch and  │        │         │         │
         Ibn Al-Karibi        │        │         │         │
   90. The Devotee Prince     │        │         │         │
   91. The Schoolmaster who   │        │         │         │
         fell in Love by      │        │         │         │
         Report               │        │         │         │
   92. The Foolish Dominie    │        │         │         │
   93. The Illiterate who set │        │         │         │
         up for a Schoolmaster│        │         │         │
   94. The King and the       │        │         │         │
         Virtuous Wife        │        │         │         │
   95. Abd Al-Rahman the      │        │         │         │
         Maghribi’s story of  │        │         │         │
         the Rukh             │        │         │         │
   96. Adi bin Zayd and the   │        │         │         │
         Princess Hind        │        │         │         │
   97. Di’ibil Al-Khuza’i with│        │         │         │
         the Lady and Muslim  │        │         │         │
         bin Al-Walid         │        │         │         │
   98. Isaac of Mosul and the │        │         │         │
         Merchant             │        │         │         │
   99. The Three Unfortunate  │        │         │         │
         Lovers               │        │         │         │
  100. How Abu Hasan brake    │        │         │         │
         Wind                 │        │         │         │
  101. The Lovers of the Banu │        │         │         │
         Tayy                 │        │         │         │
  102. The Mad Lover          │        │         │         │
  103. The Prior who became a │        │         │         │
         Moslem               │        │         │         │
  104. The Loves of Abu Isa   │        │         │         │
         and Kurrat Al-Ayn    │        │         │         │
  105. Al-Amin and his Uncle  │        │         │         │
         Ibrahim bin Al-Mahdi │        │         │         │
  106. Al-Fath bin Khakan and │        │         │         │
         Al-Mutawakkil        │        │         │         │
  107. The Man’s dispute with │        │         │         │
         the Learned Woman    │        │         │         │
         concerning the       │        │         │         │
         relative excellence  │        │         │         │
         of male and female   │        │         │         │
  108. Abu Suwayd and the     │        │         │         │
         pretty Old Woman     │        │         │         │
  109. Ali bin Tahir and the  │        │         │         │
         girl Muunis          │        │         │         │
  110. The Woman who had a    │        │         │         │
         Boy, and the other   │        │         │         │
         who had a Man to     │        │         │         │
         lover                │        │         │         │
  111. Ali the Cairene and the│        │         │         │
         Haunted House in     │        │         │         │
         Baghdad              │        │         │         │
  112. The Pilgrim Man and the│        │         │         │
         Old Woman            │        │         │         │
  113. Abu Al-Husn and his    │        │         │         │
         Slave-girl Tawaddud  │        │         │         │
  114. The Angel of Death with│        │         │         │
         the Proud King and   │        │         │         │
         the Devout Man       │        │         │         │
  115. The Angel of Death and │        │         │         │
         the Rich King        │        │         │         │
  116. The Angel of Death and │        │         │         │
         the King of the      │        │         │         │
         Children of Israel   │        │         │         │
  117. Iskandar zu Al-Karnayn │        │         │         │
         and a certain Tribe  │        │         │         │
         of Poor Folk         │        │         │         │
  118. The Righteousness of   │        │         │         │
         King Anushirwan      │        │         │         │
  119. The Jewish Kazi and his│        │         │         │
         Pious Wife           │        │         │         │
  120. The Shipwrecked Woman  │        │         │         │
         and her Child        │        │         │         │
  121. The Pious Black Slave  │        │         │         │
  122. The Devout Tray-maker  │        │         │         │
         and his Wife         │        │         │         │
  123. Al-Hajjaj bin Yusuf and│        │         │         │
         the Pious Man        │        │         │         │
  124. The Blacksmith who     │        │         │         │
         could Handle Fire    │        │         │         │
         Without Hurt         │        │         │         │
  125. The Devotee to whom    │        │         │         │
         Allah gave a Cloud   │        │         │         │
         for Service and the  │        │         │         │
         Devout King          │        │         │         │
  126. The Moslem Champion and│        │         │         │
         the Christian Damsel │        │         │         │
  127. The Christian King’s   │        │         │         │
         Daughter and the     │        │         │         │
         Moslem               │        │         │         │
  128. The Prophet and the    │        │         │         │
         Justice of Providence│        │         │         │
  129. The Ferryman of the    │        │         │         │
         Nile and the Hermit  │        │         │         │
  130. The Island King and the│        │         │         │
         Pious Israelite      │        │         │    6    │
  131. Abu Al-Hasan and Abu   │        │         │         │
         Ja’afar the Leper    │        │         │         │
  132. The Queen of the       │        │         │         │
         Serpents:            │        │         │         │
       _a._  The Adventure of │        │         │         │
               Bulukiya       │        │         │         │
       _b._  The Story of     │        │         │         │
               Janshah        │        │         │         │
  133. Sindbad the Seaman and │        │         │         │
         Sindbad the Landsman │   3    │    2    │    2    │
       _a._  The First Voyage │        │         │         │
               of Sindbad the │        │         │         │
               Seaman         │   3    │    2    │    2    │
       _b._  The Second Voyage│        │         │         │
               of Sindbad the │        │         │         │
               Seaman         │   3    │    2    │    2    │
       _c._  The Third Voyage │        │         │         │
               of Sindbad the │        │         │         │
               Seaman         │   3    │    2    │    2    │
       _d._  The Fourth Voyage│        │         │         │
               of Sindbad the │        │         │         │
               Seaman         │   3    │    2    │    2    │
       _e._  The Fifth Voyage │        │         │         │
               of Sindbad the │        │         │         │
               Seaman         │   3    │    2    │    2    │
       _f._  The Sixth Voyage │        │         │         │
               of Sindbad the │        │         │         │
               Seaman         │   3    │    2    │    2    │
             _ff._ The Sixth  │        │         │         │
               Voyage of      │        │         │         │
               Sindbad the    │        │         │         │
               Seaman         │        │         │         │
       _g._  The Seventh      │        │         │         │
               Voyage of      │        │         │         │
               Sindbad the    │        │         │         │
               Seaman         │   3    │    2    │    2    │
             _gg._ The Seventh│        │         │         │
               Voyage of      │        │         │         │
               Sindbad the    │        │         │         │
               Seaman         │   -    │         │         │
  134. The City of Brass      │        │         │         │
  135. The Craft and Malice of│        │         │         │
         Women:               │        │         │         │   A
       _a._  The King and his │        │         │         │
               Wazir’s Wife   │        │         │         │   A
       _b._  The Confectioner,│        │         │         │
               his Wife and   │        │         │         │
               the Parrot     │        │         │         │
                              │        │         │         │   A
       _c._  The Fuller and   │        │         │         │
               his Son        │        │         │         │   A
       _d._  The Rake’s Trick │        │         │         │
               against the    │        │         │         │
               Chaste Wife    │        │         │         │
       _e._  The Miser and the│        │         │         │
               Loaves of Bread│        │         │         │
       _f._  The Lady and her │        │         │         │
               two Lovers     │        │         │         │   A
       _g._  The King’s Son   │        │         │         │
               and the Ogress │        │         │         │   A
       _h._  The Drop of Honey│        │         │         │   A
       _i._  The Woman who    │        │         │         │
               made her       │        │         │         │
               husband sift   │        │         │         │
               dust           │        │         │         │   A
       _j._  The Enchanted    │        │         │         │
               Spring         │        │         │         │   A
       _k._  The Wazir’s Son  │        │         │         │
               and the        │        │         │         │
               Hammam-keeper’s│        │         │         │
               Wife           │        │         │         │   A
       _l._  The Wife’s device│        │         │         │
               to cheat her   │        │         │         │
               Husband        │        │         │         │   A
       _m._  The Goldsmith and│        │         │         │
               the Cashmere   │        │         │         │
               Singing-girl   │        │    1    │         │   A
       _n._  The Man who never│        │         │         │
               laughed during │        │         │         │
               the rest of his│        │         │         │
               days           │        │         │         │   A
       _o._  The King’s Son   │        │         │         │
               and the        │        │         │         │
               Merchant’s Wife│        │         │         │   A
       _p._  The Page who     │        │         │         │
               feigned to know│        │         │         │
               the Speech of  │        │         │         │
               Birds          │        │         │         │
       _q._  The Lady and her │        │         │         │
               five Suitors   │        │         │         │   A
       _r._  The Three Wishes,│        │         │         │
               or the Man who │        │         │         │
               longed to see  │        │         │         │
               the Night of   │        │         │         │
               Power          │        │         │         │   A
       _s._  The Stolen       │        │         │         │
               Necklace       │        │         │         │   A
       _t._  The Two Pigeons  │        │         │         │
       _u._  Prince Behram and│        │         │         │
               the Princess   │        │         │         │
               Al-Datma       │        │         │         │   A
       _v._  The House with   │        │         │         │
               the Belvedere  │        │         │         │   A
       _w._  The King’s Son   │        │         │         │
               and the Ifrit’s│        │         │         │
               Mistress       │        │         │         │
       _x._  The Sandal-wood  │        │         │         │
               Merchant and   │        │         │         │
               the Sharpers   │        │         │         │
       _y._  The Debauchee and│        │         │         │
               the            │        │         │         │
               Three-year-old │        │         │         │
               Child          │        │         │         │
       _z._  The Stolen Purse │        │         │         │
             _aa._ The Fox and│        │         │         │
               the Folk       │        │         │         │
  136. Judar and his Brethren │        │         │         │
  137. The History of Gharib  │        │         │         │
         and his Brother Ajib │        │         │         │
  138. Otbah and Rayya        │        │         │         │
  139. Hind, daughter of      │        │         │         │
         Al-Nu’man and        │        │         │         │
         Al-Hajjaj            │        │         │         │
  140. Khuzaymah bin Bishr and│        │         │         │
         Ekrimah al-Fayyaz    │        │         │         │
  141. Yunus the Scribe and   │        │         │         │
         the Caliph Walid bin │        │         │         │
         Sahl                 │        │         │         │
  142. Harun Al-Rashid and the│        │         │         │
         Arab Girl            │        │         │         │
  143. Al-Asma’i and the three│        │         │         │
         girls of Bassorah    │        │         │         │
  144. Ibrahim of Mosul and   │        │         │         │
         the Devil            │        │         │         │
  145. The Lovers of the Banu │        │         │         │
         Uzrah                │        │         │    6    │   4
  146. The Badawi and his Wife│        │         │         │
  147. The Lovers of Bassorah │        │         │         │
  148. Ishak of Mosul and his │        │         │         │
         Mistress and the     │        │         │         │
         Devil                │        │         │         │
  149. The Lovers of          │        │         │         │
         Al-Medinah           │        │         │         │
  150. Al-Malik Al-Nasir and  │        │         │         │
         his Wazir            │        │         │         │
  151. The Rogueries of       │        │         │         │
         Dalilah the Crafty   │        │         │         │
         and her Daughter     │        │         │         │
         Zaynab the           │        │         │         │
         Coney-Catcher        │        │         │         │
       _a._  The Adventures of│        │         │         │
               Mercury Ali of │        │         │         │
               Cairo          │        │         │         │
  152. Ardashir and Hayat     │        │         │         │
         Al-Nufus             │        │         │         │   7
  153. Julnar the Sea-born and│        │         │         │
         her son King Badr    │        │         │         │
         Basim of Persia      │   7    │    4    │    3    │
  154. King Mohammed bin      │        │         │         │
         Sabaik and the       │        │         │         │
         Merchant Hasan       │        │         │         │   1
       _a._  Story of Prince  │        │         │         │
               Sayf Al-Muluk  │        │         │         │
               and the        │        │         │         │
               Princess Badi’a│        │         │         │
               Al-Jamal       │        │         │         │   1
  155. Hasan of Bassorah      │        │         │         │   3
  156. Khalifah the Fisherman │        │         │         │
         of Baghdad           │        │         │         │
       _a._  The same from the│        │         │         │
               Breslau Edition│        │         │         │
  157. Masrur and Zayn        │        │         │         │
         Al-Mawassif          │        │         │         │
  158. Ali Nur Al-Din and     │        │         │         │
         Miriam the           │        │         │         │
         Girdle-Girl          │        │         │         │
  159. The Man of Upper Egypt │        │         │         │
         and his Frankish Wife│        │         │         │
  160. The Ruined Man of      │        │         │         │
         Baghdad and his      │        │         │         │
         Slave-Girl           │        │         │         │
  161. King Jali’ad of Hind   │        │         │         │
         and his Wazir Shimas,│        │         │         │
         followed by the      │        │         │         │
         history of King Wird │        │         │         │
         Khan, son of King    │        │         │         │
         Jali’ad, with his    │        │         │         │
         Women and Wazirs     │        │         │         │
       _a._  The Mouse and the│        │         │         │
               Cat            │        │         │         │
       _b._  The Fakir and his│        │         │         │
               Jar of Butter  │        │         │         │
       _c._  The Fishes and   │        │         │         │
               the Crab       │        │         │         │
       _d._  The Crow and the │        │         │         │
               Serpent        │        │         │         │
       _e._  The Wild Ass and │        │         │         │
               the Jackal     │        │         │         │
       _f._  The Unjust King  │        │         │         │
               and the Pilgrim│        │         │         │
               Prince         │        │         │         │
       _g._  The Crows and the│        │         │         │
               Hawk           │        │         │         │
       _h._  The              │        │         │         │
               Serpent-Charmer│        │         │         │
               and his Wife   │        │         │         │
       _i._  The Spider and   │        │         │         │
               the Wind       │        │         │         │
       _j._  The Two Kings    │        │         │         │
       _k._  The Blind Man and│        │         │         │
               the Cripple    │        │         │         │
       _l._  The Foolish      │        │         │         │
               Fisherman      │        │         │         │
       _m._  The Boy and the  │        │         │         │
               Thieves        │        │         │         │
       _n._  The Man and his  │        │         │         │
               Wife           │        │         │         │
       _o._  The Merchant and │        │         │         │
               the Robbers    │        │         │         │
       _p._  The Jackals and  │        │         │         │
               the Wolf       │        │         │         │
       _q._  The Shepherd and │        │         │         │
               the Rogue      │        │         │         │
       _r._  The Francolin and│        │         │         │
               the Tortoises  │        │         │         │
  162. Abu Kir the Dyer and   │        │         │         │
         Abu Sir the Barber   │        │         │         │
  163. Abdullah the Fisherman │        │         │         │
         and Abdullah the     │        │         │         │
         Merman               │        │         │         │
  164. Harun Al-Rashid and Abu│        │         │         │
         Hasan, the Merchant  │        │         │         │
         of Oman              │        │         │         │
  165. Ibrahim and Jamilah    │        │         │         │
  166. Abu Al-Hasan of        │        │         │         │
         Khorasan             │        │         │         │
  167. Kamar Al-Zaman and the │        │         │         │
         Jeweller’s Wife      │        │         │         │
  168. Abdullah bin Fazil and │        │         │         │
         his Brothers         │        │         │         │
  169. Ma’aruf the Cobbler and│        │         │         │
         his wife Fatimah     │        │         │         │
  170. Asleep and Awake       │   9    │    5    │    4    │
       _a._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Lackpenny and  │        │         │         │
               the Cook       │        │         │         │
  171. The Caliph Omar ben    │        │         │         │
         Abdulaziz and the    │        │         │         │
         Poets                │        │         │         │
  172. El Hejjaj and the Three│        │         │         │
         Young Men            │        │         │         │
  173. Haroun Er Reshid and   │        │         │         │
         the Woman of the     │        │         │         │
         Barmecides           │        │         │         │
  174. The Ten Viziers, or the│        │         │         │
         History of King      │        │         │         │
         Azadbekht and his Son│        │    8    │    6    │
       _a._  Of the           │        │         │         │
               uselessness of │        │         │         │
               endeavour      │        │         │         │
               against        │        │         │         │
               persistent     │        │         │         │
               ill-fortune    │        │         │         │
             _aa._ Story of   │        │         │         │
               the Unlucky    │        │         │         │
               Merchant       │        │    8    │    6    │
       _b._  Of looking to the│        │         │         │
               issues of      │        │         │         │
               affairs        │        │         │         │
             _bb._ Story of   │        │         │         │
               the Merchant   │        │         │         │
               and his Sons   │        │    8    │    6    │
       _c._  Of the advantages│        │         │         │
               of Patience    │        │         │         │
             _cc._ Story of   │        │         │         │
               Abou Sabir     │        │    8    │    6    │
       _d._  Of the ill       │        │         │         │
               effects of     │        │         │         │
               Precipitation  │        │         │         │
             _dd._ Story of   │        │         │         │
               Prince Bihzad  │        │    8    │    6    │
       _e._  Of the issues of │        │         │         │
               good and evil  │        │         │         │
               actions        │        │         │         │
             _ee._ Story of   │        │         │         │
               King Dabdin and│        │         │         │
               his Viziers    │        │    8    │    6    │
       _f._  Of Trust in God  │        │         │         │
             _ff._ Story of   │        │         │         │
               King Bekhtzeman│        │    8    │         │
       _g._  Of Clemency      │        │         │         │
             _gg._ Story of   │        │         │         │
               King Bihkerd   │        │    8    │    6    │
       _h._  Of Envy and      │        │         │         │
               Malice         │        │         │         │
             _hh._ Story of   │        │         │         │
               Ilan Shah and  │        │         │         │
               Abou Temam     │        │    8    │    6    │
       _i._  Of Destiny, or   │        │         │         │
               that which is  │        │         │         │
               written on the │        │         │         │
               Forehead       │        │         │         │
             _ii._ Story of   │        │         │         │
               King Ibrahim   │        │         │         │
               and his Son    │        │    8    │    7    │
       _j._  Of the appointed │        │         │         │
               Term, which if │        │         │         │
               it be advanced,│        │         │         │
               may not be     │        │         │         │
               deferred, and  │        │         │         │
               if it be       │        │         │         │
               deferred, may  │        │         │         │
               not be advanced│        │         │         │
             _jj._ Story of   │        │         │         │
               King Suleiman  │        │         │         │
               Shah and his   │        │         │         │
               Sons           │        │    8    │         │
       _k._  Of the speedy    │        │         │         │
               Relief of God  │        │         │         │
             _kk._ Story of   │        │         │         │
               the Prisoner,  │        │         │         │
               and how God    │        │         │         │
               gave him relief│        │    8    │         │
  175. Jaafer Ben Zehya and   │        │         │         │
         Abdulmelik Ben Salih │        │         │         │
         the Abbaside         │        │         │         │
  176. Er Reshid and the      │        │         │         │
         Barmecides           │        │         │         │
  177. Ibn Es-Semmak and      │        │         │         │
         Er-Reshid            │        │         │         │
  178. El Mamoun and Zubeideh │        │         │         │
  179. En Numan and the Arab  │        │         │         │
         of the Benou Tai     │        │         │         │
  180. Firouz and his Wife    │        │         │         │
  181. King Shah Bekht and his│        │         │         │
         Vizier Er Rehwan     │        │         │         │
       _a._  Story of the Man │        │         │         │
               of Khorassan   │        │         │         │
               his son and his│        │         │         │
               governor       │        │         │         │
       _b._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Singer and the │        │         │         │
               Druggist       │        │         │         │
       _c._  Story of the King│        │         │         │
               who knew the   │        │         │         │
               quintessence of│        │         │         │
               things         │        │         │         │
       _d._  Story of the Rich│        │         │         │
               Man who gave   │        │         │         │
               his fair       │        │         │         │
               Daughter in    │        │         │         │
               Marriage to the│        │         │         │
               Poor Old Man   │        │         │         │
       _e._  Story of the Rich│        │         │         │
               Man and his    │        │         │         │
               Wasteful Son   │        │         │         │
       _f._  The King’s Son   │        │         │         │
               who fell in    │        │         │         │
               love with the  │        │         │         │
               Picture        │        │         │         │
       _g._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Fuller and his │        │         │         │
               Wife           │        │         │         │
       _h._  Story of the Old │        │         │         │
               Woman, the     │        │         │         │
               Merchant, and  │        │         │         │
               the King       │        │         │         │
       _i._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               credulous      │        │         │         │
               Husband        │        │         │         │
       _j._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Unjust King and│        │         │         │
               the Tither     │        │         │         │
             _jj._ Story of   │        │         │         │
               David and      │        │         │         │
               Solomon        │        │         │         │
       _k._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Thief and the  │        │         │         │
               Woman          │        │         │         │
       _l._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Three Men and  │        │         │         │
               our Lord Jesus │        │         │         │
             _ll._ The        │        │         │         │
               Disciple’s     │        │         │         │
               Story          │        │         │         │
       _m._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Dethroned King │        │         │         │
               whose kingdom  │        │         │         │
               and good were  │        │         │         │
               restored to him│        │         │         │
       _n._  Story of the Man │        │         │         │
               whose caution  │        │         │         │
               was the cause  │        │         │         │
               of his Death   │        │         │         │
       _o._  Story of the Man │        │         │         │
               who was lavish │        │         │         │
               of his house   │        │         │         │
               and his victual│        │         │         │
               to one whom he │        │         │         │
               knew not       │        │         │         │
       _p._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Idiot and the  │        │         │         │
               Sharper        │        │         │         │
       _q._  Story of Khelbes │        │         │         │
               and his Wife   │        │         │         │
               and the Learned│        │         │         │
               Man            │        │         │         │
       _r._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Pious Woman    │        │         │         │
               accused of     │        │         │         │
               lewdness       │        │         │         │
       _s._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Journeyman and │        │         │         │
               the Girl       │        │         │         │
       _t._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Weaver who     │        │         │         │
               became a       │        │         │         │
               Physician by   │        │         │         │
               his Wife’s     │        │         │         │
               commandment    │        │         │         │
       _u._  Story of the Two │        │         │         │
               Sharpers who   │        │         │         │
               cheated each   │        │         │         │
               his fellow     │        │         │         │
       _v._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Sharpers with  │        │         │         │
               the            │        │         │         │
               Money-changer  │        │         │         │
               and the Ass    │        │         │         │
       _w._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Sharper and the│        │         │         │
               Merchants      │        │         │         │
             _wa._ Story of   │        │         │         │
               the Hawk and   │        │         │         │
               the Locust     │        │         │         │
       _x._  Story of the King│        │         │         │
               and his        │        │         │         │
               Chamberlain’s  │        │         │         │
               Wife           │        │         │         │
             _xa._ Story of   │        │         │         │
               the Old Woman  │        │         │         │
               and the        │        │         │         │
               Draper’s Wife  │        │         │         │
       _y._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Foul-favoured  │        │         │         │
               Man and his    │        │         │         │
               Fair Wife      │        │         │         │
       _z._  Story of the King│        │         │         │
               who lost       │        │         │         │
               Kingdom and    │        │         │         │
               Wife and       │        │         │         │
               Wealth, and God│        │         │         │
               restored them  │        │         │         │
               to him         │        │         │         │
             _aa._ Story of   │        │         │         │
               Selim and Selma│        │         │         │
             _bb._ Story of   │        │         │         │
               the King of    │        │         │         │
               Hind and his   │        │         │         │
               Vizier         │        │         │         │
  182. El Melik Ez Zahir      │        │         │         │
         Rukneddin Bibers El  │        │         │         │
         Bunducdari, and the  │        │         │         │
         Sixteen Officers of  │        │         │         │
         Police               │        │         │         │
       _a._  The First        │        │         │         │
               Officer’s Story│        │         │         │
       _b._  The Second       │        │         │         │
               Officer’s Story│        │         │         │
       _c._  The Third        │        │         │         │
               Officer’s Story│        │         │         │
       _d._  The Fourth       │        │         │         │
               Officer’s Story│        │         │         │
       _e._  The Fifth        │        │         │         │
               Officer’s Story│        │         │         │
       _f._  The Sixth        │        │         │         │
               Officer’s Story│        │         │         │
       _g._  The Seventh      │        │         │         │
               Officer’s Story│        │         │         │
       _h._  The Eighth       │        │         │         │
               Officer’s Story│        │         │         │
             _ha._ The Thief’s│        │         │         │
               Story          │        │         │         │
       _i._  The Ninth        │        │         │         │
               Officer’s Story│        │         │         │
       _j._  The Tenth        │        │         │         │
               Officer’s Story│        │         │         │
       _k._  The Eleventh     │        │         │         │
               Officer’s Story│        │         │         │
       _l._  The Twelfth      │        │         │         │
               Officer’s Story│        │         │         │
       _m._  The Thirteenth   │        │         │         │
               Officer’s Story│        │         │         │
       _n._  The Fourteenth   │        │         │         │
               Officer’s Story│        │         │         │
             _na._ A Merry    │        │         │         │
               Jest of a Thief│        │         │         │
             _nb._ Story of   │        │         │         │
               the Old Sharper│        │         │         │
       _o._  The Fifteenth    │        │         │         │
               Officer’s Story│        │         │         │
       _p._  The Sixteenth    │        │         │         │
               Officer’s Story│        │         │         │
  183. Abdallah Ben Nafi, and │        │         │         │
         the King’s Son of    │        │         │         │
         Cashgbar             │        │         │         │
       _a._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Damsel Tuhfet  │        │         │         │
               El Culoub and  │        │         │         │
               Khalif Haroun  │        │         │         │
               Er Reshid      │        │         │         │
  184. Women’s Craft          │        │         │    2    │   3
  185. Noureddin Ali of       │        │         │         │
         Damascus and the     │        │         │         │
         Damsel Sitt El Milah │        │         │         │
  186. El Abbas and the King’s│        │         │         │
         Daughter of Baghdad  │        │         │         │
  187. The Two Kings and the  │        │         │         │
         Vizier’s Daughters   │        │         │         │
  188. The Favourite and her  │        │         │         │
         Lover                │        │         │         │
  189. The Merchant of Cairo  │        │         │         │
         and the Favourite of │        │         │         │
         the Khalif El Mamoun │        │         │         │
         El Hakim bi Amrillah │        │         │         │
  190. Conclusion             │        │         │         │
                              │        │         │         │
 *191. History of Prince Zeyn │        │         │         │
         Alasnam              │   8    │    5    │    4    │
 *192. History of Codadad and │        │         │         │
         his Brothers         │   8    │    5    │    4    │
       *_a._ History of the   │        │         │         │
               Princess of    │        │         │         │
               Deryabar       │   8    │    5    │    4    │
 *193. Story of Aladdin, or   │        │         │         │
         the Wonderful Lamp   │ 9, 10  │  5, 6   │    4    │
 *194. Adventures of the      │        │         │         │
         Caliph Harun         │        │         │         │
         Al-Rashid            │   10   │    6    │    5    │
       *_a._ Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Blind Man, Baba│        │         │         │
               Abdallah       │   10   │    6    │    5    │
       *_b._ Story of Sidi    │        │         │         │
               Numan          │   10   │    6    │    5    │
       *_c._ Story of Cogia   │        │         │         │
               Hassan Alhabbal│ 10, 11 │    6    │    5    │
 *195. Story of Ali Baba and  │        │         │         │
         the Forty Thieves    │   11   │    6    │    5    │
 *196. Story of Ali Cogia, a  │        │         │         │
         Merchant of Bagdad   │   11   │    7    │    5    │
 *197. Story of Prince Ahmed  │        │         │         │
         and the Fairy Peri   │        │         │         │
         Banou                │   12   │    7    │    5    │
 *198. Story of the Sisters   │        │         │         │
         who envied their     │        │         │         │
         younger sister       │   12   │    7    │    5    │
  199. (Anecdote of Jaafar the│        │         │         │
         Barmecide, = No. 39) │        │         │         │
  200. The Adventures of Ali  │        │         │         │
         and Zaher of Damascus│        │         │         │
  201. The Adventures of the  │        │         │         │
         Fisherman, Judar of  │        │         │         │
         Cairo, and his       │        │         │         │
         meeting with the Moor│        │         │         │
         Mahmood and the      │        │         │         │
         Sultan Beibars       │        │         │         │
  202. The Physician and the  │        │         │         │
         young man of Mosul   │        │         │         │   1
  203. Story of the Sultan of │        │         │         │
         Yemen and his three  │        │         │         │
         sons                 │        │         │    6    │   3
  204. Story of the Three     │        │         │         │
         Sharpers and the     │        │         │         │
         Sultan               │        │         │    6    │   3
       _a._  Adventures of the│        │         │         │
               Abdicated      │        │         │         │
               Sultan         │        │         │    6    │   3
       _b._  History of       │        │         │         │
               Mahummud,      │        │         │         │
               Sultan of Cairo│        │         │    6    │   3
       _c._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               First Lunatic  │        │    8    │    6    │   3
       _d._  (Story of the    │        │         │         │
               Second Lunatic │        │         │         │
               = No. 184)     │        │         │    2    │   3
       _e._  Story of the Sage│        │         │         │
               and his Pupil  │        │         │    6    │   3
       _f._  Night adventure  │        │         │         │
               of the Sultan  │        │         │    6    │   3
       _g._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               first foolish  │        │         │         │
               man            │        │         │         │   3
       _h._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               broken-backed  │        │         │         │
               Schoolmaster   │        │         │    6    │   3
       _i._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               wry-mouthed    │        │         │         │
               Schoolmaster   │        │         │    6    │   3
       _j._  The Sultan’s     │        │         │         │
               second visit to│        │         │         │
               the Sisters    │        │         │    6    │   3
       _k._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Sisters and the│        │         │         │
               Sultana, their │        │         │         │
               mother         │        │         │    6    │   3
  205. Story of the Avaricious│        │         │         │
         Cauzee and his wife  │        │         │    6    │   3
  206. Story of the Bang-Eater│        │         │         │
         and the Cauzee       │        │         │    6    │   3
       _a._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Bang-Eater and │        │         │         │
               his wife       │        │         │    6    │   3
       _b._  Continuation of  │        │         │         │
               the Fisherman, │        │         │         │
               or Bang-Eater’s│        │         │         │
               Adventures     │        │         │    6    │   3
  207. The Sultan and the     │        │         │         │
         Traveller Mhamood    │        │         │         │
         AlHyjemmee           │        │         │    6    │   3
       _a._  The Koord Robber │        │         │         │
               (= No. 33)     │        │         │         │   3
       _b._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Husbandman     │        │         │         │   3
       _c._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Three Princes  │        │         │         │
               and Enchanting │        │         │         │
               Bird           │        │         │    6    │   3
       _d._  Story of a Sultan│        │         │         │
               of Yemen and   │        │         │         │
               his three Sons │        │         │    6    │   4
       _e._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               first Sharper  │        │         │         │
               in the Cave    │        │         │         │   4
       _f._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               second Sharper │        │         │         │   4
       _g._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               third Sharper  │        │         │         │   4
       _h._  History of the   │        │         │         │
               Sultan of Hind │        │         │    5    │   4
  208. Story of the           │        │         │         │
         Fisherman’s Son      │        │         │         │   4
  209. Story of Abou Neeut and│        │         │         │
         Abou Neeuteen        │        │         │    6    │   4
  210. Story of the Prince of │        │         │         │
         Sind, and Fatima,    │        │         │         │
         daughter of Amir Bin │        │         │         │
         Naomaun              │        │         │    6    │   4
  211. Story of the Lovers of │        │         │         │
         Syria, or the Heroine│        │         │    6    │   4
  212. Story of Hyjauje, the  │        │         │         │
         tyrannical Governor  │        │         │         │
         of Confeh, and the   │        │         │         │
         young Syed           │        │         │         │   4
  213. Story of the Sultan    │        │         │         │
         Haieshe              │        │         │         │   4
  214. Story told by a        │        │         │         │
         Fisherman            │        │         │         │   4
  215. The Adventures of Mazin│        │         │         │
         of Khorassaun        │        │         │    6    │  4, 5
  216. Adventure of Haroon Al │        │         │         │
         Rusheed              │        │         │    6    │   5
       _a._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Sultan of      │        │         │         │
               Bussorah       │        │         │         │   5
       _b._  Nocturnal        │        │         │         │
               adventures of  │        │         │         │
               Haroon Al      │        │         │         │
               Rusheed        │        │         │         │   5
       _c._  Story related by │        │         │         │
               Munjaub        │        │         │         │   5
       _d._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Sultan, the    │        │         │         │
               Dirveshe and   │        │         │         │
               the Barber’s   │        │         │         │
               Son            │        │         │         │   5
       _e._  Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Bedouin’s Wife │        │         │         │   5
       _f._  Story of the Wife│        │         │         │
               and her two    │        │         │         │
               Gallants       │        │         │         │   5
  217. Adventures of Aleefa,  │        │         │         │
         daughter of          │        │         │         │
         Mherejaun, Sultan of │        │         │         │
         Hind, and Eusuff, son│        │         │         │
         of Sohul, Sultan of  │        │         │         │
         Sind                 │        │         │    6    │   5
  218. Adventures of the three│        │         │         │
         Princes, sons of the │        │         │         │
         Sultan of China      │        │         │    5    │   5
  219. Story of the Gallant   │        │         │         │
         Officer              │        │         │         │   5
  220. Story of another       │        │         │         │
         officer              │        │         │         │   5
  221. Story of the Idiot and │        │         │         │
         his Asses            │        │         │         │   5
  222. Story of the Lady of   │        │         │         │
         Cairo and the Three  │        │         │         │
         Debauchees           │        │         │         │   5
  223. Story of the Good      │        │         │         │
         Vizier unjustly      │        │         │         │
         imprisoned           │        │         │    6    │   5
  224. Story of the Prying    │        │         │         │
         Barber and the young │        │         │         │
         man of Cairo         │        │         │         │   5
  225. Story of the Lady of   │        │         │         │
         Cairo and her four   │        │         │         │
         Gallants             │        │         │    6    │   5
       _a._  The Cauzee’s     │        │         │         │
               Story          │        │         │         │   5
       _b._  The Syrian       │        │         │         │  5, 6
       _c._  The Caim-makaum’s│        │         │         │
               Wife           │        │         │         │   6
       _d._  Story told by the│        │         │         │
               Fourth Gallant │        │         │         │   6
  226. Story of a Hump-backed │        │         │         │
         Porter               │        │         │         │   6
  227. The Aged Porter of     │        │         │         │
         Cairo and the Artful │        │         │         │
         Female Thief         │        │         │         │   6
  228. Mhassun and his tried  │        │         │         │
         friend Mouseh        │        │         │         │   6
  229. Mahummud Julbee, son to│        │         │         │
         an Ameer of Cairo    │        │         │         │   6
  230. The Farmer’s Wife      │        │         │         │   6
  231. The Artful Wife        │        │         │         │   6
  232. The Cauzee’s Wife      │        │         │         │   6
  233. Story of the Merchant, │        │         │         │
         his Daughter, and the│        │         │         │
         Prince of Eerauk     │        │         │         │   6
  234. The Two Orphans        │        │         │         │   6
  235. Story of another       │        │         │         │
         Farmer’s Wife        │        │         │         │   6
  236. Story of the Son who   │        │         │         │
         attempted his        │        │         │         │
         Father’s Wives       │        │         │         │   6
  237. The Two Wits of Cairo  │        │         │         │
         and Syria            │        │         │         │   6
  238. Ibrahim and Mouseh     │        │         │         │   6
  239. The Viziers Ahmed and  │        │         │         │
         Mahummud             │        │         │         │  6, 7
  240. The Son addicted to    │        │         │         │
         Theft                │        │         │         │   7
  241. Adventures of the      │        │         │         │
         Cauzee, his Wife, &c.│        │         │    6    │   7
       _a._  The Sultan’s     │        │         │         │
               Story of       │        │         │         │
               Himself        │        │         │    6    │   7
  242. Story of Shaykh Nukheet│        │         │         │
         the Fisherman, who   │        │         │         │
         became favourite to a│        │         │         │
         Sultan               │        │         │         │   7
       _a._  Story of the King│        │         │         │
               of Andalusia   │        │         │         │   7
  243. Story of Teilone,      │        │         │         │
         Sultan of Egypt      │        │         │         │   7
  244. Story of the Retired   │        │         │         │
         Man and his Servant  │        │         │         │   7
  245. The Merchant’s Daughter│        │         │         │
         who married the      │        │         │         │
         Emperor of China     │        │         │         │   7
 *246. New Adventures of the  │        │         │         │
         Caliph Harun         │        │         │         │
         Al-Rashid            │        │    8    │    7    │
 *247. The Physician and the  │        │         │         │
         young Purveyor of    │        │         │         │
         Bagdad               │        │    8    │         │
 *248. The Wise Heycar        │        │    8    │    7    │
 *249. Attaf the Generous     │        │    9    │    7    │
 *250. Prince Habib and       │        │         │         │
         Dorrat-al-Gawas      │        │    9    │    7    │
 *251. The Forty Wazirs       │        │         │    1    │
       *_a._ Story of Shaykh  │        │         │         │
               Shahabeddin    │        │         │    1    │
       *_b._ Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Gardener, his  │        │         │         │
               Son, and the   │        │         │         │
               Ass            │        │         │    1    │
       *_c._ The Sultan       │        │         │         │
               Mahmoud and his│        │         │         │
               Wazir          │        │         │    1    │
       *_d._ Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Brahman        │        │         │         │
               Padmanaba and  │        │         │         │
               the young      │        │         │         │
               Fyquai         │        │         │    1    │
       *_e._ Story of Sultan  │        │         │         │
               Akshid         │        │         │    1    │
       *_f._ Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Husband, the   │        │         │         │
               Lover and the  │        │         │         │
               Thief          │        │         │    1    │
       *_g._ Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Prince of      │        │         │         │
               Carisme and the│        │         │         │
               Princess of    │        │         │         │
               Georgia        │        │         │    1    │
       *_h._ The Cobbler and  │        │         │         │
               the King’s     │        │         │         │
               Daughter       │        │         │    1    │
       *_i._ The Woodcutter   │        │         │         │
               and the Genius │        │         │    1    │
       *_j._ The Royal Parrot │        │         │    1    │
 *252. Story of the King and  │        │         │         │
         Queen of Abyssinia   │        │         │    6    │
 *253. Story of Princess Amina│        │         │    7    │
       *_a._ Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Princess of    │        │         │         │
               Tartary        │        │         │    7    │
       *_b._ Story told by the│        │         │         │
               Old Mans’ Wife │        │         │    7    │
 *254. Story of Ali Johari    │        │         │    7    │
 *255. Story of the two       │        │         │         │
         Princes of Cochin    │        │         │         │
         Chin                 │        │         │    7    │
 *256. Story of the Two       │        │         │         │
         Husbands             │        │         │    7    │
       *_a._ Story of Abdallah│        │         │    7    │
       *_b._ Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Favourite      │        │         │    7    │
 *257. Story of Yusuf and the │        │         │         │
         Indian Merchant      │        │         │    7    │
 *258. Story of Prince Benazir│        │         │    7    │
 *259. Story of Selim, Sultan │        │         │         │
         of Egypt             │        │         │    7    │
       *_a._ Story of the     │        │         │         │
               Cobbler’s Wife │        │         │    7    │
       *_b._ Story of Adileh  │        │         │    7    │
       *_c._ Story of the     │        │         │         │
               scarred        │        │         │         │
               Kalender       │        │         │    7    │
       *_d._ Continuation of  │        │         │         │
               the story of   │        │         │         │
               Selim          │        │         │    7    │
 *260. Story of Seif Sul Yesn │        │         │         │
  261. Story of the Labourer  │        │         │         │
         and the Chair        │        │         │         │   A
  262. Story of Ahmed the     │        │         │         │
         Orphan               │        │         │         │   A
 ═════════════════════════════╧════════╧═════════╧═════════╧════════

 ═════════════════════════════╤══════╤═══════════╤═══════════╤═════
                              │      │    Von    │           │
                              │      │ Hammer’s  │           │
                              │Scott.│    MS.    │Zinserling.│Lamb.
 ─────────────────────────────┼──────┼───────────┼───────────┼─────
       Introduction           │  -   │           │           │
       Story of King Shahryar │      │   (Full   │           │
         and his brother      │      │ contents  │           │
                              │      │   from    │           │
                              │      │Introd. to │           │
                              │      │ No. 4 not │           │
                              │      │ given: 3e │           │
                              │      │ and 4 are │           │
                              │      │apparently │           │
                              │  1   │ wanting.) │           │
       _a._  Tale of the Bull │      │           │           │
               and the Ass    │  1   │           │           │
    1. Tale of the Trader and │      │           │           │
         the Jinni            │  1   │           │           │
       _a._  The First        │      │           │           │
               Shaykh’s Story │  1   │           │           │
       _b._  The Second       │      │           │           │
               Shaykh’s Story │  1   │           │           │
       _c._  The Third        │      │           │           │
               Shaykh’s Story │  -   │           │           │
    2. The Fisherman and the  │      │           │           │
         Jinni                │  1   │           │           │
       _a._  Tale of the Wazir│      │           │           │
               and the Sage   │      │           │           │
               Duban          │  1   │           │           │
             _ab._ Story of   │      │           │           │
               King Sindibad  │      │           │           │
               and his Falcon │  -   │           │           │
             _ac._ Tale of the│      │           │           │
               Husband and the│      │           │           │
               Parrot         │  1   │           │           │
             _ad._ Tale of the│      │           │           │
               Prince and the │      │           │           │
               Ogress         │  1   │           │           │
       _b._  Tale of the      │      │           │           │
               Ensorcelled    │      │           │           │
               Prince         │  1   │           │           │
    3. The Porter and the     │      │           │           │
         Three Ladies of      │      │           │           │
         Baghdad              │  1   │           │           │
       _a._  The First        │      │           │           │
               Kalandar’s     │      │           │           │
               Tale.          │  1   │           │           │
       _b._  The Second       │      │           │           │
               Kalandar’s Tale│  1   │           │           │
             _ba._ Tale of the│      │           │           │
               Envier and the │      │           │           │
               Envied         │  1   │           │           │
       _c._  The Third        │      │           │           │
               Kalandar’s     │      │           │           │
               Tale.          │  1   │           │           │
       _d._  The Eldest Lady’s│      │           │           │
               Tale           │  1   │           │           │
       _e._  Tale of the      │      │           │           │
               Portress       │  1   │           │           │
       Conclusion of the Story│      │           │           │
         of the Porter and    │      │           │           │
         three Ladies         │  1   │           │           │
    4. Tale of the Three      │      │           │           │
         Apples               │  2   │           │           │
    5. Tale of Nur Al-Din and │      │           │           │
         his Son Badr Al-Din  │      │           │           │
         Hasan                │  2   │     1     │           │
    6. The Hunchback’s Tale   │  2   │     1     │           │
       _a._  The Nazarene     │      │           │           │
               Broker’s Story │  2   │     1     │           │
       _b._  The Reeve’s Tale │  2   │     1     │           │
       _c._  Tale of the      │      │           │           │
               Jewish Doctor  │  2   │     1     │           │
       _d._  Tale of the      │      │           │           │
               Tailor         │  2   │     1     │           │
       _e._  The Barber’s Tale│      │           │           │
               of Himself     │  2   │     1     │           │
             _ea._ The        │      │           │           │
               Barber’s Tale  │      │           │           │
               of his First   │      │           │           │
               Brother        │  2   │     1     │           │
             _eb._ The        │      │           │           │
               Barber’s Tale  │      │           │           │
               of his Second  │      │           │           │
               Brother        │  2   │     1     │           │
             _ec._ The        │      │           │           │
               Barber’s Tale  │      │           │           │
               of his Third   │      │           │           │
               Brother        │  2   │     1     │           │
             _ed._ The        │      │           │           │
               Barber’s Tale  │      │           │           │
               of his Fourth  │      │           │           │
               Brother        │  2   │     1     │           │
             _ee._ The        │      │           │           │
               Barber’s Tale  │      │           │           │
               of his Fifth   │      │           │           │
               Brother        │  2   │     1     │           │
             _ef._ The        │      │           │           │
               Barber’s Tale  │      │           │           │
               of his Sixth   │      │           │           │
               Brother        │  2   │     1     │           │
       The End of the Tailor’s│      │           │           │
         Tale                 │  2   │     1     │           │
    7. Nur Al-Din Ali and the │      │           │           │
         Damsel Anis Al-Jalis │  3   │     1     │           │
    8. Tale of Ghanim Bin     │      │           │           │
         Ayyub, the           │      │           │           │
         Distraught, the      │      │           │           │
         Thrall o’ Love       │  4   │     1     │           │
       _a._  Tale of the First│      │           │           │
               Eunuch, Bukhayt│      │     ?     │           │
       _b._  Tale of the      │      │           │           │
               Second Eunuch, │      │           │           │
               Kafur          │      │     ?     │           │
    9. Tale of King Omar Bin  │      │           │           │
         Al-Nu’uman, and his  │      │           │           │
         sons Sharrkan and Zau│      │           │           │
         Al-Makan             │      │     1     │           │
       _a._  Tale of Taj      │      │           │           │
               Al-Muluk and   │      │           │           │
               the Princess   │      │           │           │
               Dunya          │      │     1     │           │
             _aa._ Tale of    │      │           │           │
               Aziz and Azizah│      │     1     │           │
       _b._  Tale of the      │      │           │           │
               Hashish-Eater  │      │     ?     │           │
       _c._  Tale of Hammad   │      │           │           │
               the Badawi     │      │     1     │           │
   10. The Birds and Beasts   │      │(Nos. 10–19│           │
         and the Carpenter    │      │represented│           │
                              │      │   by 7    │           │
                              │      │ Fables.)  │           │
   11. The Hermits            │      │           │           │
   12. The Water-fowl and the │      │           │           │
         Tortoise             │      │           │           │
   13. The Wolf and the Fox   │      │           │           │
       _a._  Tale of the      │      │           │           │
               Falcon and the │      │           │           │
               Partridge      │      │           │           │
   14. The Mouse and the      │      │           │           │
         Ichneumon            │      │           │           │
   15. The Cat and the Crow   │      │           │           │
   16. The Fox and the Crow   │      │           │           │
       _a._  The Flea and the │      │           │           │
               Mouse          │      │           │           │
       _b._  The Saker and the│      │           │           │
               Birds          │      │           │           │
       _c._  The Sparrow and  │      │           │           │
               the Eagle      │      │           │           │
   17. The Hedgehog and the   │      │           │           │
         Wood Pigeons         │      │           │           │
       _a._  The Merchant and │      │           │           │
               the Two        │      │           │           │
               Sharpers       │      │           │           │
   18. The Thief and his      │      │           │           │
         Monkey               │      │           │           │
       _a._  The Foolish      │      │           │           │
               Weaver         │      │           │           │
   19. The Sparrow and the    │      │           │           │
         Peacock              │      │           │           │
   20. Ali Bin Bakkar and     │      │           │           │
         Shams Al-Nahar       │ 2, 3 │     1     │           │
   21. Tale of Kamar Al-Zaman │  3   │   1, 2    │           │
       _a._  Ni’amah bin      │      │           │           │
               Al-Rabia and   │      │           │           │
               Naomi his      │      │           │           │
               Slave-girl     │      │     ?     │           │
   22. Ala Al-Din Abu         │      │           │           │
         Al-Shamat            │      │     2     │           │
   23. Hatim of the Tribe of  │      │           │           │
         Tayy                 │      │     2     │     1     │
   24. Ma’an the son of Zaidah│      │           │           │
         and the three Girls  │      │     2     │     1     │
   25. Ma’an son of Zaidah and│      │           │           │
         the Badawi           │      │     2     │     1     │
   26. The City of Labtayt    │      │     2     │     1     │
   27. The Caliph Hisham and  │      │           │           │
         the Arab Youth       │      │     2     │     1     │
   28. Ibrahim bin Al-Mahdi   │      │           │           │
         and the              │      │           │           │
         Barber-Surgeon       │      │     2     │     1     │
   29. The City of            │      │           │           │
         Many-columned Iram   │      │           │           │
         and Abdullah son of  │      │           │           │
         Abi Kalabah          │      │     2     │     1     │
   30. Isaac of Mosul         │      │     2     │     1     │
   31. The Sweep and the Noble│      │           │           │
         Lady                 │      │     2     │     1     │
   32. The Mock Caliph        │      │     2     │     1     │
   33. Ali the Persian        │      │     2     │     1     │
   34. Harun Al-Rashid and the│      │           │           │
         Slave-Girl and the   │      │           │           │
         Imam Abu Yusuf       │      │     -     │     -     │
   35. The Lover who feigned  │      │           │           │
         himself a Thief      │      │     2     │     1     │
   36. Ja’afar the Barmecide  │      │           │           │
         and the Bean-Seller  │      │     2     │     -     │
   37. Abu Mohammed hight     │      │           │           │
         Lazybones            │      │     2     │     -     │
   38. Generous dealing of    │      │           │           │
         Yahya bin Khalid the │      │           │           │
         Barmecide with Mansur│      │     ?     │     -     │
   39. Generous Dealing of    │      │           │           │
         Yahya son of Khalid  │      │           │           │
         with a man who forged│      │           │           │
         a letter in his name │      │     ?     │     -     │
   40. Caliph Al-Maamun and   │      │           │           │
         the Strange Scholar  │      │     2     │     1     │
   41. Ali Shar and Zumurrud  │      │     2     │     1     │
   42. The Loves of Jubayr Bin│      │           │           │
         Umayr and the Lady   │      │           │           │
         Budur                │      │     2     │     1     │
   43. The Man of Al-Yaman and│      │           │           │
         his six Slave-Girls  │      │     2     │     1     │
   44. Harun Al-Rashid and the│      │           │           │
         Damsel and Abu Nowas │      │     2     │     1     │
   45. The Man who stole the  │      │           │           │
         dish of gold whereon │      │           │           │
         the dog ate          │      │     2     │     1     │
   46. The Sharper of         │      │           │           │
         Alexandria and the   │      │           │           │
         Chief of Police      │      │     2     │     1     │
   47. Al-Malik Al-Nasir and  │      │           │           │
         the three Chiefs of  │      │           │           │
         Police               │      │     2     │     1     │
       _a._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Chief of the   │      │           │           │
               new Cairo      │      │           │           │
               Police         │      │     2     │     1     │
       _b._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Chief of the   │      │           │           │
               Bulak Police   │      │     2     │     1     │
       _c._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Chief of the   │      │           │           │
               Old Cairo      │      │           │           │
               Police         │      │     2     │     1     │
   48. The Thief and the      │      │           │           │
         Shroff               │      │     -     │     -     │
   49. The Chief of the Kus   │      │           │           │
         Police and the       │      │           │           │
         Sharper              │      │     -     │     -     │
   50. Ibrahim bin al-Mahdi   │      │           │           │
         and the Merchant’s   │      │           │           │
         Sister               │      │     2     │     1     │
   51. The Woman whose hands  │      │           │           │
         were cut off for     │      │           │           │
         alms-giving          │      │     2     │     1     │
   52. The devout Israelite   │      │     2     │     1     │
   53. Abu Hassan Al-Ziyadi   │      │           │           │
         and the Khorasan Man │      │     2     │     1     │
   54. The Poor Man and his   │      │           │           │
         Friend in Need       │      │     -     │     -     │
   55. The Ruined Man who     │      │           │           │
         became rich again    │      │           │           │
         through a dream      │      │     2     │     1     │
   56. Caliph Al-Mutawakkil   │      │           │           │
         and his Concubine    │      │           │           │
         Mahbubah             │      │     2     │     1     │
   57. Wardan the Butcher’s   │      │           │           │
         Adventure with the   │      │           │           │
         Lady and the Bear    │      │     2     │     1     │
   58. The King’s Daughter and│      │           │           │
         the Ape              │      │     2     │     1     │
   59. The Ebony Horse        │  5   │     2     │     -     │
   60. Uns Al-Wujud and the   │      │           │           │
         Wazir’s Daughter     │      │           │           │
         Rose-in-Hood         │  6   │     2     │     1     │
   61. Abu Nowas with the     │      │           │           │
         Three Boys and the   │      │           │           │
         Caliph Harun         │      │           │           │
         Al-Rashid            │      │     2     │     1     │
   62. Abdullah bin Ma’amar   │      │           │           │
         with the Man of      │      │           │           │
         Bassorah and his     │      │           │           │
         Slave-Girl           │      │     2     │     1     │
   63. The Lovers of the Banu │      │           │           │
         Ozrah                │      │     -     │     -     │
   64. The Wazir of Al-Yaman  │      │           │           │
         and his young Brother│      │     2     │     1     │
   65. The Loves of the Boy   │      │           │           │
         and Girl at School   │      │     2     │     1     │
   66. Al-Mutalammis and his  │      │           │           │
         Wife Umaymah         │      │     -     │     -     │
   67. Harun Al-Rashid and    │      │           │           │
         Zubaydah in the Bath │      │     2     │     1     │
   68. Harun Al-Rashid and the│      │           │           │
         Three Poets          │      │     2     │     1     │
   69. Mus’ab bin Al-Zubayr   │      │           │           │
         and Ayishah his Wife │      │     2     │     1     │
   70. Abu Al-Aswad and his   │      │           │           │
         Slave-Girl           │      │     -     │     -     │
   71. Harun Al-Rashid and the│      │           │           │
         two Slave-Girls      │      │     2     │     1     │
   72. Harun Al-Rashid and the│      │           │           │
         Three Slave-Girls    │      │     -     │     -     │
   73. The Miller and his Wife│      │     2     │     1     │
   74. The Simpleton and the  │      │           │           │
         Sharper              │      │     -     │     -     │
   75. The Kazi Abu Yusuf with│      │           │           │
         Harun Al-Rashid and  │      │           │           │
         Queen Zubaydah       │  A   │     -     │     -     │
   76. The Caliph Al-Hakim and│      │           │           │
         the Merchant         │      │     2     │     1     │
   77. King Kisra Anushirwan  │      │           │           │
         and the Village      │      │           │           │
         Damsel               │      │     2     │     1     │
   78. The Water-carrier and  │      │           │           │
         the Goldsmith’s Wife │      │     2     │     1     │
   79. Khusrau and Shirin and │      │           │           │
         the Fisherman        │      │     2     │     1     │
   80. Yahya bin Khalid and   │      │           │           │
         the Poor Man         │      │     -     │     -     │
   81. Mohammed al-Amin and   │      │           │           │
         the Slave-Girl       │      │     -     │     -     │
   82. The Sons of Yahya bin  │      │           │           │
         Khalid and Said bin  │      │           │           │
         Salim                │      │     -     │     -     │
   83. The Woman’s Trick      │      │           │           │
         against her Husband  │      │     2     │     1     │
   84. The Devout Woman and   │      │           │           │
         the Two Wicked Elders│      │     2     │     1     │
   85. Ja’afar the Barmecide  │      │           │           │
         and the old Badawi   │      │     2     │     1     │
   86. Omar bin Al-Khattab and│      │           │           │
         the Young Badawi     │      │     2     │     1     │  1
   87. Al-Maamun and the      │      │           │           │
         Pyramids of Egypt    │      │     2     │     1     │
   88. The Thief and the      │      │           │           │
         Merchant             │      │     2     │     1     │
   89. Masrur the Eunuch and  │      │           │           │
         Ibn Al-Karibi        │      │     2     │     1     │
   90. The Devotee Prince     │      │     2     │     1     │  3
   91. The Schoolmaster who   │      │           │           │
         fell in Love by      │      │           │           │
         Report               │      │     2     │     1     │
   92. The Foolish Dominie    │      │     -     │     -     │
   93. The Illiterate who set │      │           │           │
         up for a Schoolmaster│      │     2     │     1     │
   94. The King and the       │      │           │           │
         Virtuous Wife        │      │     2     │     1     │
   95. Abd Al-Rahman the      │      │           │           │
         Maghribi’s story of  │      │           │           │
         the Rukh             │      │     2     │     1     │
   96. Adi bin Zayd and the   │      │           │           │
         Princess Hind        │      │     2     │     1     │
   97. Di’ibil Al-Khuza’i with│      │           │           │
         the Lady and Muslim  │      │           │           │
         bin Al-Walid         │      │     2     │     1     │
   98. Isaac of Mosul and the │      │           │           │
         Merchant             │      │     2     │     1     │
   99. The Three Unfortunate  │      │           │           │
         Lovers               │      │     2     │     1     │
  100. How Abu Hasan brake    │      │           │           │
         Wind                 │      │     -     │     -     │
  101. The Lovers of the Banu │      │           │           │
         Tayy                 │      │     2     │     1     │
  102. The Mad Lover          │      │     2     │     1     │
  103. The Prior who became a │      │           │           │
         Moslem               │      │     2     │     1     │  2
  104. The Loves of Abu Isa   │      │           │           │
         and Kurrat Al-Ayn    │      │     2     │     1     │
  105. Al-Amin and his Uncle  │      │           │           │
         Ibrahim bin Al-Mahdi │      │     2     │     1     │
  106. Al-Fath bin Khakan and │      │           │           │
         Al-Mutawakkil        │      │     2     │     1     │
  107. The Man’s dispute with │      │           │           │
         the Learned Woman    │      │           │           │
         concerning the       │      │           │           │
         relative excellence  │      │           │           │
         of male and female   │      │     2     │     1     │
  108. Abu Suwayd and the     │      │           │           │
         pretty Old Woman     │      │     2     │     1     │
  109. Ali bin Tahir and the  │      │           │           │
         girl Muunis          │      │     2     │     1     │
  110. The Woman who had a    │      │           │           │
         Boy, and the other   │      │           │           │
         who had a Man to     │      │           │           │
         lover                │      │     2     │     1     │
  111. Ali the Cairene and the│      │           │           │
         Haunted House in     │      │           │           │
         Baghdad              │      │     2     │     1     │
  112. The Pilgrim Man and the│      │           │           │
         Old Woman            │      │     2     │     1     │
  113. Abu Al-Husn and his    │      │           │           │
         Slave-girl Tawaddud  │      │     2     │     1     │
  114. The Angel of Death with│      │           │           │
         the Proud King and   │      │           │           │
         the Devout Man       │      │     2     │     1     │
  115. The Angel of Death and │      │           │           │
         the Rich King        │      │     2     │     1     │
  116. The Angel of Death and │      │           │           │
         the King of the      │      │           │           │
         Children of Israel   │      │     2     │     1     │  3
  117. Iskandar zu Al-Karnayn │      │           │           │
         and a certain Tribe  │      │           │           │
         of Poor Folk         │      │     2     │     1     │
  118. The Righteousness of   │      │           │           │
         King Anushirwan      │      │     2     │     1     │
  119. The Jewish Kazi and his│      │           │           │
         Pious Wife           │      │     2     │     1     │
  120. The Shipwrecked Woman  │      │           │           │
         and her Child        │      │     2     │     1     │
  121. The Pious Black Slave  │      │     2     │     1     │
  122. The Devout Tray-maker  │      │           │           │
         and his Wife         │      │     2     │     1     │
  123. Al-Hajjaj bin Yusuf and│      │           │           │
         the Pious Man        │      │     2     │     1     │
  124. The Blacksmith who     │      │           │           │
         could Handle Fire    │      │           │           │
         Without Hurt         │      │     2     │     1     │
  125. The Devotee to whom    │      │           │           │
         Allah gave a Cloud   │      │           │           │
         for Service and the  │      │           │           │
         Devout King          │      │     2     │     1     │
  126. The Moslem Champion and│      │           │           │
         the Christian Damsel │      │     2     │     1     │
  127. The Christian King’s   │      │           │           │
         Daughter and the     │      │           │           │
         Moslem               │      │     2     │     1     │
  128. The Prophet and the    │      │           │           │
         Justice of Providence│      │     2     │     1     │
  129. The Ferryman of the    │      │           │           │
         Nile and the Hermit  │      │     2     │     1     │
  130. The Island King and the│      │           │           │
         Pious Israelite      │      │     2     │     1     │
  131. Abu Al-Hasan and Abu   │      │           │           │
         Ja’afar the Leper    │      │     2     │     1     │
  132. The Queen of the       │      │           │           │
         Serpents:            │      │     2     │     1     │  3
       _a._  The Adventure of │      │           │           │
               Bulukiya       │      │     2     │     1     │  3
       _b._  The Story of     │      │           │           │
               Janshah        │      │     2     │     1     │  3
  133. Sindbad the Seaman and │      │           │           │
         Sindbad the Landsman │  2   │     3     │     -     │
       _a._  The First Voyage │      │           │           │
               of Sindbad the │      │           │           │
               Seaman         │  2   │     3     │     -     │
       _b._  The Second Voyage│      │           │           │
               of Sindbad the │      │           │           │
               Seaman         │  2   │     3     │     -     │
       _c._  The Third Voyage │      │           │           │
               of Sindbad the │      │           │           │
               Seaman         │  2   │     3     │     -     │
       _d._  The Fourth Voyage│      │           │           │
               of Sindbad the │      │           │           │
               Seaman         │  2   │     3     │     -     │
       _e._  The Fifth Voyage │      │           │           │
               of Sindbad the │      │           │           │
               Seaman         │  2   │     3     │     -     │
       _f._  The Sixth Voyage │      │           │           │
               of Sindbad the │      │           │           │
               Seaman         │  2   │     3     │     -     │
             _ff._ The Sixth  │      │           │           │
               Voyage of      │      │           │           │
               Sindbad the    │      │           │           │
               Seaman         │      │           │           │
       _g._  The Seventh      │      │           │           │
               Voyage of      │      │           │           │
               Sindbad the    │      │           │           │
               Seaman         │  2   │     3     │     -     │
             _gg._ The Seventh│      │           │           │
               Voyage of      │      │           │           │
               Sindbad the    │      │           │           │
               Seaman         │  -   │     -     │     -     │
  134. The City of Brass      │      │     3     │     2     │  1
  135. The Craft and Malice of│      │           │           │
         Women:               │  A   │     3     │     -     │
       _a._  The King and his │      │           │           │
               Wazir’s Wife   │  A   │           │     -     │
       _b._  The Confectioner,│      │  (Would   │           │
               his Wife and   │      │  include  │           │
               the Parrot     │      │subordinate│           │
                              │  A   │  tales.)  │     -     │
       _c._  The Fuller and   │      │           │           │
               his Son        │  A   │           │           │
       _d._  The Rake’s Trick │      │           │           │
               against the    │      │           │           │
               Chaste Wife    │      │           │           │
       _e._  The Miser and the│      │           │           │
               Loaves of Bread│      │           │           │
       _f._  The Lady and her │      │           │           │
               two Lovers     │  A   │           │           │
       _g._  The King’s Son   │      │           │           │
               and the Ogress │  A   │           │           │
       _h._  The Drop of Honey│  A   │           │           │
       _i._  The Woman who    │      │           │           │
               made her       │      │           │           │
               husband sift   │      │           │           │
               dust           │      │           │           │
       _j._  The Enchanted    │      │           │           │
               Spring         │  A   │           │           │
       _k._  The Wazir’s Son  │      │           │           │
               and the        │      │           │           │
               Hammam-keeper’s│      │           │           │
               Wife           │      │           │           │
       _l._  The Wife’s device│      │           │           │
               to cheat her   │      │           │           │
               Husband        │  A   │           │           │
       _m._  The Goldsmith and│      │           │           │
               the Cashmere   │      │           │           │
               Singing-girl   │  A   │           │           │
       _n._  The Man who never│      │           │           │
               laughed during │      │           │           │
               the rest of his│      │           │           │
               days           │  A   │           │           │
       _o._  The King’s Son   │      │           │           │
               and the        │      │           │           │
               Merchant’s Wife│  A   │           │           │
       _p._  The Page who     │      │           │           │
               feigned to know│      │           │           │
               the Speech of  │      │           │           │
               Birds          │      │           │           │
       _q._  The Lady and her │      │           │           │
               five Suitors   │  A   │           │           │
       _r._  The Three Wishes,│      │           │           │
               or the Man who │      │           │           │
               longed to see  │      │           │           │
               the Night of   │      │           │           │
               Power          │      │           │           │
       _s._  The Stolen       │      │           │           │
               Necklace       │  A   │           │           │
       _t._  The Two Pigeons  │      │           │           │
       _u._  Prince Behram and│      │           │           │
               the Princess   │      │           │           │
               Al-Datma       │  A   │           │           │
       _v._  The House with   │      │           │           │
               the Belvedere  │  A   │           │           │
       _w._  The King’s Son   │      │           │           │
               and the Ifrit’s│      │           │           │
               Mistress       │      │           │           │
       _x._  The Sandal-wood  │      │           │           │
               Merchant and   │      │           │           │
               the Sharpers   │      │           │           │
       _y._  The Debauchee and│      │           │           │
               the            │      │           │           │
               Three-year-old │      │           │           │
               Child          │      │           │           │
       _z._  The Stolen Purse │      │           │           │
             _aa._ The Fox and│      │           │           │
               the Folk       │      │           │           │
  136. Judar and his Brethren │      │     3     │     2     │  1
  137. The History of Gharib  │      │           │           │
         and his Brother Ajib │      │     3     │     2     │
  138. Otbah and Rayya        │      │     3     │     2     │
  139. Hind, daughter of      │      │           │           │
         Al-Nu’man and        │      │           │           │
         Al-Hajjaj            │      │     3     │     2     │
  140. Khuzaymah bin Bishr and│      │           │           │
         Ekrimah al-Fayyaz    │      │     3     │     2     │
  141. Yunus the Scribe and   │      │           │           │
         the Caliph Walid bin │      │           │           │
         Sahl                 │      │     3     │     2     │
  142. Harun Al-Rashid and the│      │           │           │
         Arab Girl            │      │     3     │     2     │
  143. Al-Asma’i and the three│      │           │           │
         girls of Bassorah    │      │     3     │     -     │
  144. Ibrahim of Mosul and   │      │           │           │
         the Devil            │      │     3     │     -     │
  145. The Lovers of the Banu │      │           │           │
         Uzrah                │  6   │     3     │     -     │
  146. The Badawi and his Wife│      │     3     │     2     │
  147. The Lovers of Bassorah │      │     3     │     2     │
  148. Ishak of Mosul and his │      │           │           │
         Mistress and the     │      │           │           │
         Devil                │      │     3     │     2     │
  149. The Lovers of          │      │           │           │
         Al-Medinah           │      │     3     │     2     │
  150. Al-Malik Al-Nasir and  │      │           │           │
         his Wazir            │      │     3     │     2     │
  151. The Rogueries of       │      │           │           │
         Dalilah the Crafty   │      │           │           │
         and her Daughter     │      │           │           │
         Zaynab the           │      │           │           │
         Coney-Catcher        │      │     3     │     2     │  2
       _a._  The Adventures of│      │           │           │
               Mercury Ali of │      │           │           │
               Cairo          │      │     3     │     2     │
  152. Ardashir and Hayat     │      │           │           │
         Al-Nufus             │      │     3     │     2     │  1
  153. Julnar the Sea-born and│      │           │           │
         her son King Badr    │      │           │           │
         Basim of Persia      │ 3, 4 │     3     │     -     │
  154. King Mohammed bin      │      │           │           │
         Sabaik and the       │      │           │           │
         Merchant Hasan       │      │     3     │     2     │
       _a._  Story of Prince  │      │           │           │
               Sayf Al-Muluk  │      │           │           │
               and the        │      │           │           │
               Princess Badi’a│      │           │           │
               Al-Jamal       │      │   3, 4    │     2     │
  155. Hasan of Bassorah      │      │     4     │     3     │  2
  156. Khalifah the Fisherman │      │           │           │
         of Baghdad           │      │     4     │     3     │
       _a._  The same from the│      │           │           │
               Breslau Edition│      │           │           │
  157. Masrur and Zayn        │      │           │           │
         Al-Mawassif          │      │     4     │     3     │  2
  158. Ali Nur Al-Din and     │      │           │           │
         Miriam the           │      │           │           │
         Girdle-Girl          │      │     4     │     3     │  2
  159. The Man of Upper Egypt │      │           │           │
         and his Frankish Wife│      │     4     │     3     │  -
  160. The Ruined Man of      │      │           │           │
         Baghdad and his      │      │           │           │
         Slave-Girl           │      │     4     │     3     │  -
  161. King Jali’ad of Hind   │      │           │           │
         and his Wazir Shimas,│      │           │           │
         followed by the      │      │           │           │
         history of King Wird │      │           │           │
         Khan, son of King    │      │           │           │
         Jali’ad, with his    │      │           │           │
         Women and Wazirs     │      │     4     │     3     │  3
       _a._  The Mouse and the│      │           │           │
               Cat            │      │     4     │     3     │  3
       _b._  The Fakir and his│      │           │           │
               Jar of Butter  │      │     4     │     3     │  3
       _c._  The Fishes and   │      │           │           │
               the Crab       │      │     4     │     3     │  3
       _d._  The Crow and the │      │           │           │
               Serpent        │      │     4     │     3     │  3
       _e._  The Wild Ass and │      │           │           │
               the Jackal     │      │     4     │     3     │  3
       _f._  The Unjust King  │      │           │           │
               and the Pilgrim│      │           │           │
               Prince         │      │     4     │     3     │  3
       _g._  The Crows and the│      │           │           │
               Hawk           │      │     4     │     3     │  3
       _h._  The              │      │           │           │
               Serpent-Charmer│      │           │           │
               and his Wife   │      │     4     │     3     │  3
       _i._  The Spider and   │      │           │           │
               the Wind       │      │     4     │     3     │  3
       _j._  The Two Kings    │      │     4     │     3     │  3
       _k._  The Blind Man and│      │           │           │
               the Cripple    │      │     4     │     3     │  3
       _l._  The Foolish      │      │           │           │
               Fisherman      │      │     4     │     3     │  3
       _m._  The Boy and the  │      │           │           │
               Thieves        │      │     4     │     3     │  3
       _n._  The Man and his  │      │           │           │
               Wife           │      │     4     │     3     │  3
       _o._  The Merchant and │      │           │           │
               the Robbers    │      │     4     │     3     │  3
       _p._  The Jackals and  │      │           │           │
               the Wolf       │      │     4     │     3     │  3
       _q._  The Shepherd and │      │           │           │
               the Rogue      │      │     4     │     3     │  3
       _r._  The Francolin and│      │           │           │
               the Tortoises  │      │     4     │     3     │  3
  162. Abu Kir the Dyer and   │      │           │           │
         Abu Sir the Barber   │      │     4     │     3     │  1
  163. Abdullah the Fisherman │      │           │           │
         and Abdullah the     │      │           │           │
         Merman               │      │     4     │     3     │  1
  164. Harun Al-Rashid and Abu│      │           │           │
         Hasan, the Merchant  │      │           │           │
         of Oman              │      │     4     │     3     │
  165. Ibrahim and Jamilah    │      │     4     │     3     │  1
  166. Abu Al-Hasan of        │      │           │           │
         Khorasan             │      │     4     │     3     │  1
  167. Kamar Al-Zaman and the │      │           │           │
         Jeweller’s Wife      │      │     4     │     3     │  1
  168. Abdullah bin Fazil and │      │           │           │
         his Brothers         │      │     4     │     3     │
  169. Ma’aruf the Cobbler and│      │           │           │
         his wife Fatimah     │      │     4     │     3     │  3
  170. Asleep and Awake       │  4   │           │           │
       _a._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Lackpenny and  │      │           │           │
               the Cook       │      │           │           │
  171. The Caliph Omar ben    │      │           │           │
         Abdulaziz and the    │      │           │           │
         Poets                │      │           │           │
  172. El Hejjaj and the Three│      │           │           │
         Young Men            │      │           │           │
  173. Haroun Er Reshid and   │      │           │           │
         the Woman of the     │      │           │           │
         Barmecides           │      │           │           │
  174. The Ten Viziers, or the│      │           │           │
         History of King      │      │           │           │
         Azadbekht and his Son│      │           │           │
       _a._  Of the           │      │           │           │
               uselessness of │      │           │           │
               endeavour      │      │           │           │
               against        │      │           │           │
               persistent     │      │           │           │
               ill-fortune    │      │           │           │
             _aa._ Story of   │      │           │           │
               the Unlucky    │      │           │           │
               Merchant       │      │           │           │
       _b._  Of looking to the│      │           │           │
               issues of      │      │           │           │
               affairs        │      │           │           │
             _bb._ Story of   │      │           │           │
               the Merchant   │      │           │           │
               and his Sons   │      │           │           │
       _c._  Of the advantages│      │           │           │
               of Patience    │      │           │           │
             _cc._ Story of   │      │           │           │
               Abou Sabir     │      │           │           │
       _d._  Of the ill       │      │           │           │
               effects of     │      │           │           │
               Precipitation  │      │           │           │
             _dd._ Story of   │      │           │           │
               Prince Bihzad  │      │           │           │
       _e._  Of the issues of │      │           │           │
               good and evil  │      │           │           │
               actions        │      │           │           │
             _ee._ Story of   │      │           │           │
               King Dabdin and│      │           │           │
               his Viziers    │      │           │           │
       _f._  Of Trust in God  │      │           │           │
             _ff._ Story of   │      │           │           │
               King Bekhtzeman│      │           │           │
       _g._  Of Clemency      │      │           │           │
             _gg._ Story of   │      │           │           │
               King Bihkerd   │      │           │           │
       _h._  Of Envy and      │      │           │           │
               Malice         │      │           │           │
             _hh._ Story of   │      │           │           │
               Ilan Shah and  │      │           │           │
               Abou Temam     │      │           │           │
       _i._  Of Destiny, or   │      │           │           │
               that which is  │      │           │           │
               written on the │      │           │           │
               Forehead       │      │           │           │
             _ii._ Story of   │      │           │           │
               King Ibrahim   │      │           │           │
               and his Son    │      │           │           │
       _j._  Of the appointed │      │           │           │
               Term, which if │      │           │           │
               it be advanced,│      │           │           │
               may not be     │      │           │           │
               deferred, and  │      │           │           │
               if it be       │      │           │           │
               deferred, may  │      │           │           │
               not be advanced│      │           │           │
             _jj._ Story of   │      │           │           │
               King Suleiman  │      │           │           │
               Shah and his   │      │           │           │
               Sons           │      │           │           │
       _k._  Of the speedy    │      │           │           │
               Relief of God  │      │           │           │
             _kk._ Story of   │      │           │           │
               the Prisoner,  │      │           │           │
               and how God    │      │           │           │
               gave him relief│      │           │           │
  175. Jaafer Ben Zehya and   │      │           │           │
         Abdulmelik Ben Salih │      │           │           │
         the Abbaside         │      │           │           │
  176. Er Reshid and the      │      │           │           │
         Barmecides           │      │           │           │
  177. Ibn Es-Semmak and      │      │           │           │
         Er-Reshid            │      │           │           │
  178. El Mamoun and Zubeideh │      │           │           │
  179. En Numan and the Arab  │      │           │           │
         of the Benou Tai     │      │           │           │
  180. Firouz and his Wife    │      │           │           │
  181. King Shah Bekht and his│      │           │           │
         Vizier Er Rehwan     │      │           │           │
       _a._  Story of the Man │      │           │           │
               of Khorassan   │      │           │           │
               his son and his│      │           │           │
               governor       │      │           │           │
       _b._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Singer and the │      │           │           │
               Druggist       │      │           │           │
       _c._  Story of the King│      │           │           │
               who knew the   │      │           │           │
               quintessence of│      │           │           │
               things         │      │           │           │
       _d._  Story of the Rich│      │           │           │
               Man who gave   │      │           │           │
               his fair       │      │           │           │
               Daughter in    │      │           │           │
               Marriage to the│      │           │           │
               Poor Old Man   │      │           │           │
       _e._  Story of the Rich│      │           │           │
               Man and his    │      │           │           │
               Wasteful Son   │      │           │           │
       _f._  The King’s Son   │      │           │           │
               who fell in    │      │           │           │
               love with the  │      │           │           │
               Picture        │      │           │           │
       _g._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Fuller and his │      │           │           │
               Wife           │      │           │           │
       _h._  Story of the Old │      │           │           │
               Woman, the     │      │           │           │
               Merchant, and  │      │           │           │
               the King       │      │           │           │
       _i._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               credulous      │      │           │           │
               Husband        │      │           │           │
       _j._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Unjust King and│      │           │           │
               the Tither     │      │           │           │
             _jj._ Story of   │      │           │           │
               David and      │      │           │           │
               Solomon        │      │           │           │
       _k._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Thief and the  │      │           │           │
               Woman          │      │           │           │
       _l._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Three Men and  │      │           │           │
               our Lord Jesus │      │           │           │
             _ll._ The        │      │           │           │
               Disciple’s     │      │           │           │
               Story          │      │           │           │
       _m._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Dethroned King │      │           │           │
               whose kingdom  │      │           │           │
               and good were  │      │           │           │
               restored to him│      │           │           │
       _n._  Story of the Man │      │           │           │
               whose caution  │      │           │           │
               was the cause  │      │           │           │
               of his Death   │      │           │           │
       _o._  Story of the Man │      │           │           │
               who was lavish │      │           │           │
               of his house   │      │           │           │
               and his victual│      │           │           │
               to one whom he │      │           │           │
               knew not       │      │           │           │
       _p._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Idiot and the  │      │           │           │
               Sharper        │      │           │           │
       _q._  Story of Khelbes │      │           │           │
               and his Wife   │      │           │           │
               and the Learned│      │           │           │
               Man            │      │           │           │
       _r._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Pious Woman    │      │           │           │
               accused of     │      │           │           │
               lewdness       │      │           │           │
       _s._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Journeyman and │      │           │           │
               the Girl       │      │           │           │
       _t._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Weaver who     │      │           │           │
               became a       │      │           │           │
               Physician by   │      │           │           │
               his Wife’s     │      │           │           │
               commandment    │      │           │           │
       _u._  Story of the Two │      │           │           │
               Sharpers who   │      │           │           │
               cheated each   │      │           │           │
               his fellow     │      │           │           │
       _v._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Sharpers with  │      │           │           │
               the            │      │           │           │
               Money-changer  │      │           │           │
               and the Ass    │      │           │           │
       _w._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Sharper and the│      │           │           │
               Merchants      │      │           │           │
             _wa._ Story of   │      │           │           │
               the Hawk and   │      │           │           │
               the Locust     │      │           │           │
       _x._  Story of the King│      │           │           │
               and his        │      │           │           │
               Chamberlain’s  │      │           │           │
               Wife           │      │           │           │
             _xa._ Story of   │      │           │           │
               the Old Woman  │      │           │           │
               and the        │      │           │           │
               Draper’s Wife  │      │           │           │
       _y._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Foul-favoured  │      │           │           │
               Man and his    │      │           │           │
               Fair Wife      │      │           │           │
       _z._  Story of the King│      │           │           │
               who lost       │      │           │           │
               Kingdom and    │      │           │           │
               Wife and       │      │           │           │
               Wealth, and God│      │           │           │
               restored them  │      │           │           │
               to him         │      │           │           │
             _aa._ Story of   │      │           │           │
               Selim and Selma│      │           │           │
             _bb._ Story of   │      │           │           │
               the King of    │      │           │           │
               Hind and his   │      │           │           │
               Vizier         │      │           │           │
  182. El Melik Ez Zahir      │      │           │           │
         Rukneddin Bibers El  │      │           │           │
         Bunducdari, and the  │      │           │           │
         Sixteen Officers of  │      │           │           │
         Police               │      │           │           │
       _a._  The First        │      │           │           │
               Officer’s Story│      │           │           │
       _b._  The Second       │      │           │           │
               Officer’s Story│      │           │           │
       _c._  The Third        │      │           │           │
               Officer’s Story│      │           │           │
       _d._  The Fourth       │      │           │           │
               Officer’s Story│      │           │           │
       _e._  The Fifth        │      │           │           │
               Officer’s Story│      │           │           │
       _f._  The Sixth        │      │           │           │
               Officer’s Story│      │           │           │
       _g._  The Seventh      │      │           │           │
               Officer’s Story│      │           │           │
       _h._  The Eighth       │      │           │           │
               Officer’s Story│      │           │           │
             _ha._ The Thief’s│      │           │           │
               Story          │      │           │           │
       _i._  The Ninth        │      │           │           │
               Officer’s Story│      │           │           │
       _j._  The Tenth        │      │           │           │
               Officer’s Story│      │           │           │
       _k._  The Eleventh     │      │           │           │
               Officer’s Story│      │           │           │
       _l._  The Twelfth      │      │           │           │
               Officer’s Story│      │           │           │
       _m._  The Thirteenth   │      │           │           │
               Officer’s Story│      │           │           │
       _n._  The Fourteenth   │      │           │           │
               Officer’s Story│      │           │           │
             _na._ A Merry    │      │           │           │
               Jest of a Thief│      │           │           │
             _nb._ Story of   │      │           │           │
               the Old Sharper│      │           │           │
       _o._  The Fifteenth    │      │           │           │
               Officer’s Story│      │           │           │
       _p._  The Sixteenth    │      │           │           │
               Officer’s Story│      │           │           │
  183. Abdallah Ben Nafi, and │      │           │           │
         the King’s Son of    │      │           │           │
         Cashgbar             │      │           │           │
       _a._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Damsel Tuhfet  │      │           │           │
               El Culoub and  │      │           │           │
               Khalif Haroun  │      │           │           │
               Er Reshid      │      │           │           │
  184. Women’s Craft          │  6   │           │           │
  185. Noureddin Ali of       │      │           │           │
         Damascus and the     │      │           │           │
         Damsel Sitt El Milah │      │           │           │
  186. El Abbas and the King’s│      │           │           │
         Daughter of Baghdad  │      │           │           │
  187. The Two Kings and the  │      │           │           │
         Vizier’s Daughters   │      │           │           │
  188. The Favourite and her  │      │           │           │
         Lover                │      │           │           │
  189. The Merchant of Cairo  │      │           │           │
         and the Favourite of │      │           │           │
         the Khalif El Mamoun │      │           │           │
         El Hakim bi Amrillah │      │           │           │
  190. Conclusion             │      │           │           │
                              │      │     4     │     3     │
 *191. History of Prince Zeyn │      │           │           │
         Alasnam              │  4   │           │           │
 *192. History of Codadad and │      │           │           │
         his Brothers         │  4   │           │           │
       *_a._ History of the   │      │           │           │
               Princess of    │      │           │           │
               Deryabar       │  4   │           │           │
 *193. Story of Aladdin, or   │      │           │           │
         the Wonderful Lamp   │ 4, 5 │           │           │
 *194. Adventures of the      │      │           │           │
         Caliph Harun         │      │           │           │
         Al-Rashid            │  5   │           │           │
       *_a._ Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Blind Man, Baba│      │           │           │
               Abdallah       │  5   │           │           │
       *_b._ Story of Sidi    │      │           │           │
               Numan          │  5   │           │           │
       *_c._ Story of Cogia   │      │           │           │
               Hassan Alhabbal│  5   │           │           │
 *195. Story of Ali Baba and  │      │           │           │
         the Forty Thieves    │  5   │           │           │
 *196. Story of Ali Cogia, a  │      │           │           │
         Merchant of Bagdad   │  5   │           │           │
 *197. Story of Prince Ahmed  │      │           │           │
         and the Fairy Peri   │      │           │           │
         Banou                │  5   │           │           │
 *198. Story of the Sisters   │      │           │           │
         who envied their     │      │           │           │
         younger sister       │  5   │           │           │
  199. (Anecdote of Jaafar the│      │           │           │
         Barmecide, = No. 39) │      │           │           │
  200. The Adventures of Ali  │      │           │           │
         and Zaher of Damascus│      │           │           │
  201. The Adventures of the  │      │           │           │
         Fisherman, Judar of  │      │           │           │
         Cairo, and his       │      │           │           │
         meeting with the Moor│      │           │           │
         Mahmood and the      │      │           │           │
         Sultan Beibars       │      │           │           │
  202. The Physician and the  │      │           │           │
         young man of Mosul   │      │           │           │
  203. Story of the Sultan of │      │           │           │
         Yemen and his three  │      │           │           │
         sons                 │  6   │           │           │
  204. Story of the Three     │      │           │           │
         Sharpers and the     │      │           │           │
         Sultan               │  6   │           │           │
       _a._  Adventures of the│      │           │           │
               Abdicated      │      │           │           │
               Sultan         │  6   │           │           │
       _b._  History of       │      │           │           │
               Mahummud,      │      │           │           │
               Sultan of Cairo│  6   │           │           │
       _c._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               First Lunatic  │  6   │           │           │
       _d._  (Story of the    │      │           │           │
               Second Lunatic │      │           │           │
               = No. 184)     │  6   │           │           │
       _e._  Story of the Sage│      │           │           │
               and his Pupil  │  6   │           │           │
       _f._  Night adventure  │      │           │           │
               of the Sultan  │  6   │           │           │
       _g._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               first foolish  │      │           │           │
               man            │      │           │           │
       _h._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               broken-backed  │      │           │           │
               Schoolmaster   │  6   │           │           │
       _i._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               wry-mouthed    │      │           │           │
               Schoolmaster   │  6   │           │           │
       _j._  The Sultan’s     │      │           │           │
               second visit to│      │           │           │
               the Sisters    │  6   │           │           │
       _k._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Sisters and the│      │           │           │
               Sultana, their │      │           │           │
               mother         │  6   │           │           │
  205. Story of the Avaricious│      │           │           │
         Cauzee and his wife  │  6   │           │           │
  206. Story of the Bang-Eater│      │           │           │
         and the Cauzee       │  6   │           │           │
       _a._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Bang-Eater and │      │           │           │
               his wife       │  6   │           │           │
       _b._  Continuation of  │      │           │           │
               the Fisherman, │      │           │           │
               or Bang-Eater’s│      │           │           │
               Adventures     │  6   │           │           │
  207. The Sultan and the     │      │           │           │
         Traveller Mhamood    │      │           │           │
         AlHyjemmee           │  6   │           │           │
       _a._  The Koord Robber │      │           │           │
               (= No. 33)     │  6   │           │           │
       _b._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Husbandman     │  6   │           │           │
       _c._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Three Princes  │      │           │           │
               and Enchanting │      │           │           │
               Bird           │  6   │           │           │
       _d._  Story of a Sultan│      │           │           │
               of Yemen and   │      │           │           │
               his three Sons │  6   │           │           │
       _e._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               first Sharper  │      │           │           │
               in the Cave    │  6   │           │           │
       _f._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               second Sharper │  -   │           │           │
       _g._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               third Sharper  │  -   │           │           │
       _h._  History of the   │      │           │           │
               Sultan of Hind │  6   │           │           │
  208. Story of the           │      │           │           │
         Fisherman’s Son      │  6   │           │           │
  209. Story of Abou Neeut and│      │           │           │
         Abou Neeuteen        │  6   │           │           │
  210. Story of the Prince of │      │           │           │
         Sind, and Fatima,    │      │           │           │
         daughter of Amir Bin │      │           │           │
         Naomaun              │  6   │           │           │
  211. Story of the Lovers of │      │           │           │
         Syria, or the Heroine│  6   │           │           │
  212. Story of Hyjauje, the  │      │           │           │
         tyrannical Governor  │      │           │           │
         of Confeh, and the   │      │           │           │
         young Syed           │  6   │           │           │
  213. Story of the Sultan    │      │           │           │
         Haieshe              │  -   │           │           │
  214. Story told by a        │      │           │           │
         Fisherman            │  -   │           │           │
  215. The Adventures of Mazin│      │           │           │
         of Khorassaun        │  6   │           │           │
  216. Adventure of Haroon Al │      │           │           │
         Rusheed              │  6   │           │           │
       _a._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Sultan of      │      │           │           │
               Bussorah       │  -   │           │           │
       _b._  Nocturnal        │      │           │           │
               adventures of  │      │           │           │
               Haroon Al      │      │           │           │
               Rusheed        │  6   │           │           │
       _c._  Story related by │      │           │           │
               Munjaub        │  6   │           │           │
       _d._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Sultan, the    │      │           │           │
               Dirveshe and   │      │           │           │
               the Barber’s   │      │           │           │
               Son            │  6   │           │           │
       _e._  Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Bedouin’s Wife │  -   │           │           │
       _f._  Story of the Wife│      │           │           │
               and her two    │      │           │           │
               Gallants       │  -   │           │           │
  217. Adventures of Aleefa,  │      │           │           │
         daughter of          │      │           │           │
         Mherejaun, Sultan of │      │           │           │
         Hind, and Eusuff, son│      │           │           │
         of Sohul, Sultan of  │      │           │           │
         Sind                 │  6   │           │           │
  218. Adventures of the three│      │           │           │
         Princes, sons of the │      │           │           │
         Sultan of China      │  6   │           │           │
  219. Story of the Gallant   │      │           │           │
         Officer              │  -   │           │           │
  220. Story of another       │      │           │           │
         officer              │  -   │           │           │
  221. Story of the Idiot and │      │           │           │
         his Asses            │  -   │           │           │
  222. Story of the Lady of   │      │           │           │
         Cairo and the Three  │      │           │           │
         Debauchees           │  -   │           │           │
  223. Story of the Good      │      │           │           │
         Vizier unjustly      │      │           │           │
         imprisoned           │  6   │           │           │
  224. Story of the Prying    │      │           │           │
         Barber and the young │      │           │           │
         man of Cairo         │  -   │           │           │
  225. Story of the Lady of   │      │           │           │
         Cairo and her four   │      │           │           │
         Gallants             │  6   │           │           │
       _a._  The Cauzee’s     │      │           │           │
               Story          │  6   │           │           │
       _b._  The Syrian       │  -   │           │           │
       _c._  The Caim-makaum’s│      │           │           │
               Wife           │  -   │           │           │
       _d._  Story told by the│      │           │           │
               Fourth Gallant │  -   │           │           │
  226. Story of a Hump-backed │      │           │           │
         Porter               │  -   │           │           │
  227. The Aged Porter of     │      │           │           │
         Cairo and the Artful │      │           │           │
         Female Thief         │  -   │           │           │
  228. Mhassun and his tried  │      │           │           │
         friend Mouseh        │  -   │           │           │
  229. Mahummud Julbee, son to│      │           │           │
         an Ameer of Cairo    │  -   │           │           │
  230. The Farmer’s Wife      │  -   │           │           │
  231. The Artful Wife        │  -   │           │           │
  232. The Cauzee’s Wife      │  -   │           │           │
  233. Story of the Merchant, │      │           │           │
         his Daughter, and the│      │           │           │
         Prince of Eerauk     │  6   │           │           │
  234. The Two Orphans        │  -   │           │           │
  235. Story of another       │      │           │           │
         Farmer’s Wife        │  -   │           │           │
  236. Story of the Son who   │      │           │           │
         attempted his        │      │           │           │
         Father’s Wives       │  -   │           │           │
  237. The Two Wits of Cairo  │      │           │           │
         and Syria            │  -   │           │           │
  238. Ibrahim and Mouseh     │  -   │           │           │
  239. The Viziers Ahmed and  │      │           │           │
         Mahummud             │  -   │           │           │
  240. The Son addicted to    │      │           │           │
         Theft                │  -   │           │           │
  241. Adventures of the      │      │           │           │
         Cauzee, his Wife, &c.│  6   │           │           │
       _a._  The Sultan’s     │      │           │           │
               Story of       │      │           │           │
               Himself        │  6   │           │           │
  242. Story of Shaykh Nukheet│      │           │           │
         the Fisherman, who   │      │           │           │
         became favourite to a│      │           │           │
         Sultan               │  -   │           │           │
       _a._  Story of the King│      │           │           │
               of Andalusia   │  -   │           │           │
  243. Story of Teilone,      │      │           │           │
         Sultan of Egypt      │  -   │           │           │
  244. Story of the Retired   │      │           │           │
         Man and his Servant  │  -   │           │           │
  245. The Merchant’s Daughter│      │           │           │
         who married the      │      │           │           │
         Emperor of China     │  -   │           │           │
 *246. New Adventures of the  │      │           │           │
         Caliph Harun         │      │           │           │
         Al-Rashid            │      │           │           │
 *247. The Physician and the  │      │           │           │
         young Purveyor of    │      │           │           │
         Bagdad               │      │           │           │
 *248. The Wise Heycar        │      │           │           │
 *249. Attaf the Generous     │      │           │           │
 *250. Prince Habib and       │      │           │           │
         Dorrat-al-Gawas      │      │           │           │
 *251. The Forty Wazirs       │      │           │           │
       *_a._ Story of Shaykh  │      │           │           │
               Shahabeddin    │      │           │           │
       *_b._ Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Gardener, his  │      │           │           │
               Son, and the   │      │           │           │
               Ass            │      │           │           │
       *_c._ The Sultan       │      │           │           │
               Mahmoud and his│      │           │           │
               Wazir          │      │           │           │
       *_d._ Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Brahman        │      │           │           │
               Padmanaba and  │      │           │           │
               the young      │      │           │           │
               Fyquai         │      │           │           │
       *_e._ Story of Sultan  │      │           │           │
               Akshid         │      │           │           │
       *_f._ Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Husband, the   │      │           │           │
               Lover and the  │      │           │           │
               Thief          │      │           │           │
       *_g._ Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Prince of      │      │           │           │
               Carisme and the│      │           │           │
               Princess of    │      │           │           │
               Georgia        │      │           │           │
       *_h._ The Cobbler and  │      │           │           │
               the King’s     │      │           │           │
               Daughter       │      │           │           │
       *_i._ The Woodcutter   │      │           │           │
               and the Genius │      │           │           │
       *_j._ The Royal Parrot │      │           │           │
 *252. Story of the King and  │      │           │           │
         Queen of Abyssinia   │      │           │           │
 *253. Story of Princess Amina│      │           │           │
       *_a._ Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Princess of    │      │           │           │
               Tartary        │      │           │           │
       *_b._ Story told by the│      │           │           │
               Old Mans’ Wife │      │           │           │
 *254. Story of Ali Johari    │      │           │           │
 *255. Story of the two       │      │           │           │
         Princes of Cochin    │      │           │           │
         Chin                 │      │           │           │
 *256. Story of the Two       │      │           │           │
         Husbands             │      │           │           │
       *_a._ Story of Abdallah│      │           │           │
       *_b._ Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Favourite      │      │           │           │
 *257. Story of Yusuf and the │      │           │           │
         Indian Merchant      │      │           │           │
 *258. Story of Prince Benazir│      │           │           │
 *259. Story of Selim, Sultan │      │           │           │
         of Egypt             │      │           │           │
       *_a._ Story of the     │      │           │           │
               Cobbler’s Wife │      │           │           │
       *_b._ Story of Adileh  │      │           │           │
       *_c._ Story of the     │      │           │           │
               scarred        │      │           │           │
               Kalender       │      │           │           │
       *_d._ Continuation of  │      │           │           │
               the story of   │      │           │           │
               Selim          │      │           │           │
 *260. Story of Seif Sul Yesn │      │           │           │
  261. Story of the Labourer  │      │           │           │
         and the Chair        │  A   │           │           │
  262. Story of Ahmed the     │      │           │           │
         Orphan               │  A   │           │           │
 ═════════════════════════════╧══════╧═══════════╧═══════════╧═════

 ═════════════════════════════╤══════════╤══════╤═════╤═══════╤════════
                              │          │      │     │       │
                              │          │“Bul.”│     │“Bres.”│
                              │Trébutien.│Text. │Lane.│ Text. │Habicht.
 ─────────────────────────────┼──────────┼──────┼─────┼───────┼────────
       Introduction           │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │
       Story of King Shahryar │          │      │     │       │
         and his brother      │          │      │     │       │
                              │          │      │     │       │
                              │          │      │     │       │
                              │          │      │     │       │
                              │          │      │     │       │
                              │          │      │     │       │
                              │          │      │     │       │
                              │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   1
       _a._  Tale of the Bull │          │      │     │       │
               and the Ass    │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   1
    1. Tale of the Trader and │          │      │     │       │
         the Jinni            │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   1
       _a._  The First        │          │      │     │       │
               Shaykh’s Story │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   1
       _b._  The Second       │          │      │     │       │
               Shaykh’s Story │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   1
       _c._  The Third        │          │      │     │       │
               Shaykh’s Story │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   1
    2. The Fisherman and the  │          │      │     │       │
         Jinni                │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   1
       _a._  Tale of the Wazir│          │      │     │       │
               and the Sage   │          │      │     │       │
               Duban          │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   1
             _ab._ Story of   │          │      │     │       │
               King Sindibad  │          │      │     │       │
               and his Falcon │          │  +   │  -  │   -   │   -
             _ac._ Tale of the│          │      │     │       │
               Husband and the│          │      │     │       │
               Parrot         │          │  -   │  1  │   +   │   1
             _ad._ Tale of the│          │      │     │       │
               Prince and the │          │      │     │       │
               Ogress         │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   1
       _b._  Tale of the      │          │      │     │       │
               Ensorcelled    │          │      │     │       │
               Prince         │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   1
    3. The Porter and the     │          │      │     │       │
         Three Ladies of      │          │      │     │       │
         Baghdad              │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   2
       _a._  The First        │          │      │     │       │
               Kalandar’s     │          │      │     │       │
               Tale.          │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   2
       _b._  The Second       │          │      │     │       │
               Kalandar’s Tale│          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   2
             _ba._ Tale of the│          │      │     │       │
               Envier and the │          │      │     │       │
               Envied         │          │  -   │  1  │   +   │   2
       _c._  The Third        │          │      │     │       │
               Kalandar’s     │          │      │     │       │
               Tale.          │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   2
       _d._  The Eldest Lady’s│          │      │     │       │
               Tale           │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   2
       _e._  Tale of the      │          │      │     │       │
               Portress       │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   2
       Conclusion of the Story│          │      │     │       │
         of the Porter and    │          │      │     │       │
         three Ladies         │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   2
    4. Tale of the Three      │          │      │     │       │
         Apples               │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   3
    5. Tale of Nur Al-Din and │          │      │     │       │
         his Son Badr Al-Din  │          │      │     │       │
         Hasan                │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   3
    6. The Hunchback’s Tale   │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   3
       _a._  The Nazarene     │          │      │     │       │
               Broker’s Story │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   3
       _b._  The Reeve’s Tale │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   3
       _c._  Tale of the      │          │      │     │       │
               Jewish Doctor  │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   3
       _d._  Tale of the      │          │      │     │       │
               Tailor         │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   3
       _e._  The Barber’s Tale│          │      │     │       │
               of Himself     │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   4
             _ea._ The        │          │      │     │       │
               Barber’s Tale  │          │      │     │       │
               of his First   │          │      │     │       │
               Brother        │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   4
             _eb._ The        │          │      │     │       │
               Barber’s Tale  │          │      │     │       │
               of his Second  │          │      │     │       │
               Brother        │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   4
             _ec._ The        │          │      │     │       │
               Barber’s Tale  │          │      │     │       │
               of his Third   │          │      │     │       │
               Brother        │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   4
             _ed._ The        │          │      │     │       │
               Barber’s Tale  │          │      │     │       │
               of his Fourth  │          │      │     │       │
               Brother        │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   4
             _ee._ The        │          │      │     │       │
               Barber’s Tale  │          │      │     │       │
               of his Fifth   │          │      │     │       │
               Brother        │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   4
             _ef._ The        │          │      │     │       │
               Barber’s Tale  │          │      │     │       │
               of his Sixth   │          │      │     │       │
               Brother        │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   4
       The End of the Tailor’s│          │      │     │       │
         Tale                 │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   4
    7. Nur Al-Din Ali and the │          │      │     │       │
         Damsel Anis Al-Jalis │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │  5, 6
    8. Tale of Ghanim Bin     │          │      │     │       │
         Ayyub, the           │          │      │     │       │
         Distraught, the      │          │      │     │       │
         Thrall o’ Love       │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │   8
       _a._  Tale of the First│          │      │     │       │
               Eunuch, Bukhayt│          │  +   │     │   +   │
       _b._  Tale of the      │          │      │     │       │
               Second Eunuch, │          │      │     │       │
               Kafur          │          │  +   │  1  │   +   │
    9. Tale of King Omar Bin  │          │      │     │       │
         Al-Nu’uman, and his  │          │      │     │       │
         sons Sharrkan and Zau│          │      │     │       │
         Al-Makan             │          │  +   │  -  │       │
       _a._  Tale of Taj      │          │      │     │       │
               Al-Muluk and   │          │      │     │       │
               the Princess   │          │      │     │       │
               Dunya          │          │  +   │  1  │       │
             _aa._ Tale of    │          │      │     │       │
               Aziz and Azizah│          │  +   │  1  │       │
       _b._  Tale of the      │          │      │     │       │
               Hashish-Eater  │          │  +   │  -  │       │
       _c._  Tale of Hammad   │          │      │     │       │
               the Badawi     │          │  +   │  -  │       │
   10. The Birds and Beasts   │          │      │     │       │
         and the Carpenter    │          │      │     │       │
                              │          │      │     │       │
                              │          │  +   │  2  │       │
   11. The Hermits            │          │  +   │  -  │       │
   12. The Water-fowl and the │          │      │     │       │
         Tortoise             │          │  +   │  -  │       │
   13. The Wolf and the Fox   │          │  +   │  2  │       │
       _a._  Tale of the      │          │      │     │       │
               Falcon and the │          │      │     │       │
               Partridge      │          │  +   │  2  │       │
   14. The Mouse and the      │          │      │     │       │
         Ichneumon            │          │  +   │  -  │       │
   15. The Cat and the Crow   │          │  +   │  -  │       │
   16. The Fox and the Crow   │          │  +   │  -  │       │
       _a._  The Flea and the │          │      │     │       │
               Mouse          │          │  +   │  -  │       │
       _b._  The Saker and the│          │      │     │       │
               Birds          │          │  +   │  -  │       │
       _c._  The Sparrow and  │          │      │     │       │
               the Eagle      │          │  +   │  -  │       │
   17. The Hedgehog and the   │          │      │     │       │
         Wood Pigeons         │          │  +   │  -  │       │
       _a._  The Merchant and │          │      │     │       │
               the Two        │          │      │     │       │
               Sharpers       │          │  +   │  -  │       │
   18. The Thief and his      │          │      │     │       │
         Monkey               │          │  +   │  -  │       │
       _a._  The Foolish      │          │      │     │       │
               Weaver         │          │  +   │  -  │       │
   19. The Sparrow and the    │          │      │     │       │
         Peacock              │          │  +   │  -  │       │
   20. Ali Bin Bakkar and     │          │      │     │       │
         Shams Al-Nahar       │          │  +   │  3  │   4   │   4
   21. Tale of Kamar Al-Zaman │          │  +   │  2  │   +   │   5
       _a._  Ni’amah bin      │          │      │     │       │
               Al-Rabia and   │          │      │     │       │
               Naomi his      │          │      │     │       │
               Slave-girl     │          │  +   │  2  │   +   │   13
   22. Ala Al-Din Abu         │          │      │     │       │
         Al-Shamat            │          │  +   │  2  │   +   │   13
   23. Hatim of the Tribe of  │          │      │     │       │
         Tayy                 │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   24. Ma’an the son of Zaidah│          │      │     │       │
         and the three Girls  │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   25. Ma’an son of Zaidah and│          │      │     │       │
         the Badawi           │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   26. The City of Labtayt    │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   27. The Caliph Hisham and  │          │      │     │       │
         the Arab Youth       │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   28. Ibrahim bin Al-Mahdi   │          │      │     │       │
         and the              │          │      │     │       │
         Barber-Surgeon       │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   29. The City of            │          │      │     │       │
         Many-columned Iram   │          │      │     │       │
         and Abdullah son of  │          │      │     │       │
         Abi Kalabah          │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   30. Isaac of Mosul         │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │   13
   31. The Sweep and the Noble│          │      │     │       │
         Lady                 │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
   32. The Mock Caliph        │    -     │  +   │  2  │   +   │   4
   33. Ali the Persian        │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
   34. Harun Al-Rashid and the│          │      │     │       │
         Slave-Girl and the   │          │      │     │       │
         Imam Abu Yusuf       │    -     │  +   │  -  │       │
   35. The Lover who feigned  │          │      │     │       │
         himself a Thief      │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   36. Ja’afar the Barmecide  │          │      │     │       │
         and the Bean-Seller  │    -     │  +   │  2  │       │
   37. Abu Mohammed hight     │          │      │     │       │
         Lazybones            │    -     │  +   │  2  │   +   │   13
   38. Generous dealing of    │          │      │     │       │
         Yahya bin Khalid the │          │      │     │       │
         Barmecide with Mansur│    -     │  +   │  2  │       │
   39. Generous Dealing of    │          │      │     │       │
         Yahya son of Khalid  │          │      │     │       │
         with a man who forged│          │      │     │       │
         a letter in his name │    -     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   40. Caliph Al-Maamun and   │          │      │     │       │
         the Strange Scholar  │    3     │  +   │  2  │       │
   41. Ali Shar and Zumurrud  │    1     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   42. The Loves of Jubayr Bin│          │      │     │       │
         Umayr and the Lady   │          │      │     │       │
         Budur                │    1     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   43. The Man of Al-Yaman and│          │      │     │       │
         his six Slave-Girls  │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   44. Harun Al-Rashid and the│          │      │     │       │
         Damsel and Abu Nowas │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   45. The Man who stole the  │          │      │     │       │
         dish of gold whereon │          │      │     │       │
         the dog ate          │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   46. The Sharper of         │          │      │     │       │
         Alexandria and the   │          │      │     │       │
         Chief of Police      │    3     │  +   │  2  │   4   │
   47. Al-Malik Al-Nasir and  │          │      │     │       │
         the three Chiefs of  │          │      │     │       │
         Police               │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
       _a._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Chief of the   │          │      │     │       │
               new Cairo      │          │      │     │       │
               Police         │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
       _b._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Chief of the   │          │      │     │       │
               Bulak Police   │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
       _c._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Chief of the   │          │      │     │       │
               Old Cairo      │          │      │     │       │
               Police         │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   48. The Thief and the      │          │      │     │       │
         Shroff               │    -     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   49. The Chief of the Kus   │          │      │     │       │
         Police and the       │          │      │     │       │
         Sharper              │    -     │  +   │  -  │       │
   50. Ibrahim bin al-Mahdi   │          │      │     │       │
         and the Merchant’s   │          │      │     │       │
         Sister               │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   51. The Woman whose hands  │          │      │     │       │
         were cut off for     │          │      │     │       │
         alms-giving          │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   52. The devout Israelite   │    3     │  +   │  2  │       │
   53. Abu Hassan Al-Ziyadi   │          │      │     │       │
         and the Khorasan Man │    3     │  +   │  2  │       │
   54. The Poor Man and his   │          │      │     │       │
         Friend in Need       │    -     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   55. The Ruined Man who     │          │      │     │       │
         became rich again    │          │      │     │       │
         through a dream      │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   56. Caliph Al-Mutawakkil   │          │      │     │       │
         and his Concubine    │          │      │     │       │
         Mahbubah             │    3     │  +   │  2  │       │
   57. Wardan the Butcher’s   │          │      │     │       │
         Adventure with the   │          │      │     │       │
         Lady and the Bear    │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
   58. The King’s Daughter and│          │      │     │       │
         the Ape              │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
   59. The Ebony Horse        │    -     │  +   │  2  │   +   │   9
   60. Uns Al-Wujud and the   │          │      │     │       │
         Wazir’s Daughter     │          │      │     │       │
         Rose-in-Hood         │    1     │  +   │  2  │   +   │   11
   61. Abu Nowas with the     │          │      │     │       │
         Three Boys and the   │          │      │     │       │
         Caliph Harun         │          │      │     │       │
         Al-Rashid            │    -     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   62. Abdullah bin Ma’amar   │          │      │     │       │
         with the Man of      │          │      │     │       │
         Bassorah and his     │          │      │     │       │
         Slave-Girl           │    3     │  +   │  2  │       │
   63. The Lovers of the Banu │          │      │     │       │
         Ozrah                │    -     │  +   │  2  │   +   │   11
   64. The Wazir of Al-Yaman  │          │      │     │       │
         and his young Brother│    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
   65. The Loves of the Boy   │          │      │     │       │
         and Girl at School   │    3     │  +   │  2  │       │
   66. Al-Mutalammis and his  │          │      │     │       │
         Wife Umaymah         │    -     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   67. Harun Al-Rashid and    │          │      │     │       │
         Zubaydah in the Bath │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   68. Harun Al-Rashid and the│          │      │     │       │
         Three Poets          │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   69. Mus’ab bin Al-Zubayr   │          │      │     │       │
         and Ayishah his Wife │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   70. Abu Al-Aswad and his   │          │      │     │       │
         Slave-Girl           │          │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   71. Harun Al-Rashid and the│          │      │     │       │
         two Slave-Girls      │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   72. Harun Al-Rashid and the│          │      │     │       │
         Three Slave-Girls    │          │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   73. The Miller and his Wife│    3     │  +   │  2  │       │
   74. The Simpleton and the  │          │      │     │       │
         Sharper              │    -     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   75. The Kazi Abu Yusuf with│          │      │     │       │
         Harun Al-Rashid and  │          │      │     │       │
         Queen Zubaydah       │    -     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   76. The Caliph Al-Hakim and│          │      │     │       │
         the Merchant         │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   77. King Kisra Anushirwan  │          │      │     │       │
         and the Village      │          │      │     │       │
         Damsel               │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   78. The Water-carrier and  │          │      │     │       │
         the Goldsmith’s Wife │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   79. Khusrau and Shirin and │          │      │     │       │
         the Fisherman        │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   80. Yahya bin Khalid and   │          │      │     │       │
         the Poor Man         │    -     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   81. Mohammed al-Amin and   │          │      │     │       │
         the Slave-Girl       │    -     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   82. The Sons of Yahya bin  │          │      │     │       │
         Khalid and Said bin  │          │      │     │       │
         Salim                │    -     │  +   │  2  │       │
   83. The Woman’s Trick      │          │      │     │       │
         against her Husband  │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   84. The Devout Woman and   │          │      │     │       │
         the Two Wicked Elders│    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   85. Ja’afar the Barmecide  │          │      │     │       │
         and the old Badawi   │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   86. Omar bin Al-Khattab and│          │      │     │       │
         the Young Badawi     │    3     │  +   │  2  │       │
   87. Al-Maamun and the      │          │      │     │       │
         Pyramids of Egypt    │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
   88. The Thief and the      │          │      │     │       │
         Merchant             │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   89. Masrur the Eunuch and  │          │      │     │       │
         Ibn Al-Karibi        │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   90. The Devotee Prince     │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   91. The Schoolmaster who   │          │      │     │       │
         fell in Love by      │          │      │     │       │
         Report               │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   92. The Foolish Dominie    │          │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   93. The Illiterate who set │          │      │     │       │
         up for a Schoolmaster│    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
   94. The King and the       │          │      │     │       │
         Virtuous Wife        │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
   95. Abd Al-Rahman the      │          │      │     │       │
         Maghribi’s story of  │          │      │     │       │
         the Rukh             │    3     │  +   │  2  │       │
   96. Adi bin Zayd and the   │          │      │     │       │
         Princess Hind        │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   97. Di’ibil Al-Khuza’i with│          │      │     │       │
         the Lady and Muslim  │          │      │     │       │
         bin Al-Walid         │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   98. Isaac of Mosul and the │          │      │     │       │
         Merchant             │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
   99. The Three Unfortunate  │          │      │     │       │
         Lovers               │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
  100. How Abu Hasan brake    │          │      │     │       │
         Wind                 │    -     │  ?   │  -  │       │
  101. The Lovers of the Banu │          │      │     │       │
         Tayy                 │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
  102. The Mad Lover          │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
  103. The Prior who became a │          │      │     │       │
         Moslem               │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
  104. The Loves of Abu Isa   │          │      │     │       │
         and Kurrat Al-Ayn    │    3     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
  105. Al-Amin and his Uncle  │          │      │     │       │
         Ibrahim bin Al-Mahdi │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
  106. Al-Fath bin Khakan and │          │      │     │       │
         Al-Mutawakkil        │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
  107. The Man’s dispute with │          │      │     │       │
         the Learned Woman    │          │      │     │       │
         concerning the       │          │      │     │       │
         relative excellence  │          │      │     │       │
         of male and female   │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
  108. Abu Suwayd and the     │          │      │     │       │
         pretty Old Woman     │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
  109. Ali bin Tahir and the  │          │      │     │       │
         girl Muunis          │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
  110. The Woman who had a    │          │      │     │       │
         Boy, and the other   │          │      │     │       │
         who had a Man to     │          │      │     │       │
         lover                │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
  111. Ali the Cairene and the│          │      │     │       │
         Haunted House in     │          │      │     │       │
         Baghdad              │    1     │  +   │  2  │   +   │
  112. The Pilgrim Man and the│          │      │     │       │
         Old Woman            │    3     │  +   │  2  │       │
  113. Abu Al-Husn and his    │          │      │     │       │
         Slave-girl Tawaddud  │    1     │  +   │  -  │       │
  114. The Angel of Death with│          │      │     │       │
         the Proud King and   │          │      │     │       │
         the Devout Man       │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  115. The Angel of Death and │          │      │     │       │
         the Rich King        │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  116. The Angel of Death and │          │      │     │       │
         the King of the      │          │      │     │       │
         Children of Israel   │    3     │  +   │  2  │       │
  117. Iskandar zu Al-Karnayn │          │      │     │       │
         and a certain Tribe  │          │      │     │       │
         of Poor Folk         │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  118. The Righteousness of   │          │      │     │       │
         King Anushirwan      │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  119. The Jewish Kazi and his│          │      │     │       │
         Pious Wife           │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  120. The Shipwrecked Woman  │          │      │     │       │
         and her Child        │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  121. The Pious Black Slave  │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  122. The Devout Tray-maker  │          │      │     │       │
         and his Wife         │    3     │  +   │  2  │       │
  123. Al-Hajjaj bin Yusuf and│          │      │     │       │
         the Pious Man        │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  124. The Blacksmith who     │          │      │     │       │
         could Handle Fire    │          │      │     │       │
         Without Hurt         │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  125. The Devotee to whom    │          │      │     │       │
         Allah gave a Cloud   │          │      │     │       │
         for Service and the  │          │      │     │       │
         Devout King          │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  126. The Moslem Champion and│          │      │     │       │
         the Christian Damsel │    3     │  +   │  2  │       │
  127. The Christian King’s   │          │      │     │       │
         Daughter and the     │          │      │     │       │
         Moslem               │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  128. The Prophet and the    │          │      │     │       │
         Justice of Providence│    3     │  +   │  2  │       │
  129. The Ferryman of the    │          │      │     │       │
         Nile and the Hermit  │    -     │  +   │  -  │       │
  130. The Island King and the│          │      │     │       │
         Pious Israelite      │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │   10
  131. Abu Al-Hasan and Abu   │          │      │     │       │
         Ja’afar the Leper    │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  132. The Queen of the       │          │      │     │       │
         Serpents:            │    1     │  +   │  -  │       │
       _a._  The Adventure of │          │      │     │       │
               Bulukiya       │    1     │  +   │  -  │       │
       _b._  The Story of     │          │      │     │       │
               Janshah        │    1     │  +   │  -  │       │
  133. Sindbad the Seaman and │          │      │     │       │
         Sindbad the Landsman │    -     │  +   │  3  │   +   │   2
       _a._  The First Voyage │          │      │     │       │
               of Sindbad the │          │      │     │       │
               Seaman         │    -     │  +   │  3  │   +   │   2
       _b._  The Second Voyage│          │      │     │       │
               of Sindbad the │          │      │     │       │
               Seaman         │    -     │  +   │  3  │   +   │   2
       _c._  The Third Voyage │          │      │     │       │
               of Sindbad the │          │      │     │       │
               Seaman         │    -     │  +   │  3  │   +   │   2
       _d._  The Fourth Voyage│          │      │     │       │
               of Sindbad the │          │      │     │       │
               Seaman         │    -     │  +   │  3  │   +   │   2
       _e._  The Fifth Voyage │          │      │     │       │
               of Sindbad the │          │      │     │       │
               Seaman         │    -     │  +   │  3  │   +   │   3
       _f._  The Sixth Voyage │          │      │     │       │
               of Sindbad the │          │      │     │       │
               Seaman         │    -     │  +   │  3  │   +   │   3
             _ff._ The Sixth  │          │      │     │       │
               Voyage of      │          │      │     │       │
               Sindbad the    │          │      │     │       │
               Seaman         │          │  -   │  3  │   -   │
       _g._  The Seventh      │          │      │     │       │
               Voyage of      │          │      │     │       │
               Sindbad the    │          │      │     │       │
               Seaman         │    -     │  +   │  3  │   +   │   3
             _gg._ The Seventh│          │      │     │       │
               Voyage of      │          │      │     │       │
               Sindbad the    │          │      │     │       │
               Seaman         │    -     │  -   │  3  │   -   │
  134. The City of Brass      │    1     │  +   │  3  │   +   │
  135. The Craft and Malice of│          │      │     │       │
         Women:               │    -     │  +   │  3  │   +   │   15
       _a._  The King and his │          │      │     │       │
               Wazir’s Wife   │    -     │  +   │  3  │   +   │   15
       _b._  The Confectioner,│          │      │     │       │
               his Wife and   │          │      │     │       │
               the Parrot     │          │      │     │       │
                              │    -     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
       _c._  The Fuller and   │          │      │     │       │
               his Son        │          │  +   │  -  │   +   │   15
       _d._  The Rake’s Trick │          │      │     │       │
               against the    │          │      │     │       │
               Chaste Wife    │          │  +   │  -  │   +   │   15
       _e._  The Miser and the│          │      │     │       │
               Loaves of Bread│          │  +   │  -  │   +   │   15
       _f._  The Lady and her │          │      │     │       │
               two Lovers     │          │  +   │  3  │   +   │   15
       _g._  The King’s Son   │          │      │     │       │
               and the Ogress │          │  +   │  -  │   +   │   15
       _h._  The Drop of Honey│          │  +   │  3  │   +   │   15
       _i._  The Woman who    │          │      │     │       │
               made her       │          │      │     │       │
               husband sift   │          │      │     │       │
               dust           │          │  +   │  3  │   +   │   15
       _j._  The Enchanted    │          │      │     │       │
               Spring         │          │  +   │  3  │   +   │   15
       _k._  The Wazir’s Son  │          │      │     │       │
               and the        │          │      │     │       │
               Hammam-keeper’s│          │      │     │       │
               Wife           │          │  +   │  -  │   +   │
       _l._  The Wife’s device│          │      │     │       │
               to cheat her   │          │      │     │       │
               Husband        │          │  +   │  3  │   +   │   15
       _m._  The Goldsmith and│          │      │     │       │
               the Cashmere   │          │      │     │       │
               Singing-girl   │          │  +   │  3  │   +   │   1
       _n._  The Man who never│          │      │     │       │
               laughed during │          │      │     │       │
               the rest of his│          │      │     │       │
               days           │          │  +   │  3  │   +   │   15
       _o._  The King’s Son   │          │      │     │       │
               and the        │          │      │     │       │
               Merchant’s Wife│          │  +   │  -  │   +   │   15
       _p._  The Page who     │          │      │     │       │
               feigned to know│          │      │     │       │
               the Speech of  │          │      │     │       │
               Birds          │          │  +   │  -  │       │
       _q._  The Lady and her │          │      │     │       │
               five Suitors   │          │  +   │  -  │       │
       _r._  The Three Wishes,│          │      │     │       │
               or the Man who │          │      │     │       │
               longed to see  │          │      │     │       │
               the Night of   │          │      │     │       │
               Power          │          │  +   │  -  │   +   │
       _s._  The Stolen       │          │      │     │       │
               Necklace       │          │  +   │  3  │   +   │   15
       _t._  The Two Pigeons  │          │  +   │  3  │       │
       _u._  Prince Behram and│          │      │     │       │
               the Princess   │          │      │     │       │
               Al-Datma       │          │  +   │  3  │   +   │   15
       _v._  The House with   │          │      │     │       │
               the Belvedere  │          │  +   │  3  │   +   │   15
       _w._  The King’s Son   │          │      │     │       │
               and the Ifrit’s│          │      │     │       │
               Mistress       │          │  +   │  -  │       │
       _x._  The Sandal-wood  │          │      │     │       │
               Merchant and   │          │      │     │       │
               the Sharpers   │          │  +   │  3  │   +   │   15
       _y._  The Debauchee and│          │      │     │       │
               the            │          │      │     │       │
               Three-year-old │          │      │     │       │
               Child          │          │  +   │  -  │   +   │
       _z._  The Stolen Purse │          │  +   │  3  │   +   │   15
             _aa._ The Fox and│          │      │     │       │
               the Folk       │          │  -   │  -  │   +   │   15
  136. Judar and his Brethren │    1     │  +   │  3  │   +   │
  137. The History of Gharib  │          │      │     │       │
         and his Brother Ajib │    1     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
  138. Otbah and Rayya        │    3     │  +   │  3  │       │
  139. Hind, daughter of      │          │      │     │       │
         Al-Nu’man and        │          │      │     │       │
         Al-Hajjaj            │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  140. Khuzaymah bin Bishr and│          │      │     │       │
         Ekrimah al-Fayyaz    │    3     │  +   │  3  │       │
  141. Yunus the Scribe and   │          │      │     │       │
         the Caliph Walid bin │          │      │     │       │
         Sahl                 │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  142. Harun Al-Rashid and the│          │      │     │       │
         Arab Girl            │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  143. Al-Asma’i and the three│          │      │     │       │
         girls of Bassorah    │    -     │  +   │  -  │       │
  144. Ibrahim of Mosul and   │          │      │     │       │
         the Devil            │          │  +   │  -  │       │
  145. The Lovers of the Banu │          │      │     │       │
         Uzrah                │          │  +   │  3  │       │   11
  146. The Badawi and his Wife│    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  147. The Lovers of Bassorah │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  148. Ishak of Mosul and his │          │      │     │       │
         Mistress and the     │          │      │     │       │
         Devil                │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  149. The Lovers of          │          │      │     │       │
         Al-Medinah           │    3     │  +   │  3  │       │
  150. Al-Malik Al-Nasir and  │          │      │     │       │
         his Wazir            │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  151. The Rogueries of       │          │      │     │       │
         Dalilah the Crafty   │          │      │     │       │
         and her Daughter     │          │      │     │       │
         Zaynab the           │          │      │     │       │
         Coney-Catcher        │          │  +   │  -  │   +   │
       _a._  The Adventures of│          │      │     │       │
               Mercury Ali of │          │      │     │       │
               Cairo          │    2     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
  152. Ardashir and Hayat     │          │      │     │       │
         Al-Nufus             │    2     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
  153. Julnar the Sea-born and│          │      │     │       │
         her son King Badr    │          │      │     │       │
         Basim of Persia      │    -     │  +   │  3  │       │   6
  154. King Mohammed bin      │          │      │     │       │
         Sabaik and the       │          │      │     │       │
         Merchant Hasan       │    2     │  +   │  3  │   +   │
       _a._  Story of Prince  │          │      │     │       │
               Sayf Al-Muluk  │          │      │     │       │
               and the        │          │      │     │       │
               Princess Badi’a│          │      │     │       │
               Al-Jamal       │    2     │  +   │  3  │   +   │
  155. Hasan of Bassorah      │    2     │  +   │     │   +   │
  156. Khalifah the Fisherman │          │      │     │       │
         of Baghdad           │    2     │  +   │  3  │   -   │
       _a._  The same from the│          │      │     │       │
               Breslau Edition│          │      │  -  │   +   │
  157. Masrur and Zayn        │          │      │     │       │
         Al-Mawassif          │    2     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
  158. Ali Nur Al-Din and     │          │      │     │       │
         Miriam the           │          │      │     │       │
         Girdle-Girl          │    2     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
  159. The Man of Upper Egypt │          │      │     │       │
         and his Frankish Wife│    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
  160. The Ruined Man of      │          │      │     │       │
         Baghdad and his      │          │      │     │       │
         Slave-Girl           │    3     │  +   │  3  │   +   │
  161. King Jali’ad of Hind   │          │      │     │       │
         and his Wazir Shimas,│          │      │     │       │
         followed by the      │          │      │     │       │
         history of King Wird │          │      │     │       │
         Khan, son of King    │          │      │     │       │
         Jali’ad, with his    │          │      │     │       │
         Women and Wazirs     │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
       _a._  The Mouse and the│          │      │     │       │
               Cat            │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
       _b._  The Fakir and his│          │      │     │       │
               Jar of Butter  │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
       _c._  The Fishes and   │          │      │     │       │
               the Crab       │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
       _d._  The Crow and the │          │      │     │       │
               Serpent        │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
       _e._  The Wild Ass and │          │      │     │       │
               the Jackal     │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
       _f._  The Unjust King  │          │      │     │       │
               and the Pilgrim│          │      │     │       │
               Prince         │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
       _g._  The Crows and the│          │      │     │       │
               Hawk           │    3     │  +   │     │   +   │
       _h._  The              │          │      │     │       │
               Serpent-Charmer│          │      │     │       │
               and his Wife   │    3     │  +   │     │   +   │
       _i._  The Spider and   │          │      │     │       │
               the Wind       │    3     │  +   │     │   +   │
       _j._  The Two Kings    │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
       _k._  The Blind Man and│          │      │     │       │
               the Cripple    │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
       _l._  The Foolish      │          │      │     │       │
               Fisherman      │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
       _m._  The Boy and the  │          │      │     │       │
               Thieves        │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
       _n._  The Man and his  │          │      │     │       │
               Wife           │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
       _o._  The Merchant and │          │      │     │       │
               the Robbers    │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
       _p._  The Jackals and  │          │      │     │       │
               the Wolf       │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
       _q._  The Shepherd and │          │      │     │       │
               the Rogue      │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
       _r._  The Francolin and│          │      │     │       │
               the Tortoises  │    3     │  +   │  -  │   +   │
  162. Abu Kir the Dyer and   │          │      │     │       │
         Abu Sir the Barber   │    3     │  +   │  3  │   +   │
  163. Abdullah the Fisherman │          │      │     │       │
         and Abdullah the     │          │      │     │       │
         Merman               │    3     │  +   │  3  │   +   │
  164. Harun Al-Rashid and Abu│          │      │     │       │
         Hasan, the Merchant  │          │      │     │       │
         of Oman              │    3     │  +   │     │   +   │
  165. Ibrahim and Jamilah    │    3     │  +   │  3  │       │
  166. Abu Al-Hasan of        │          │      │     │       │
         Khorasan             │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  167. Kamar Al-Zaman and the │          │      │     │       │
         Jeweller’s Wife      │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  168. Abdullah bin Fazil and │          │      │     │       │
         his Brothers         │    3     │  +   │  -  │       │
  169. Ma’aruf the Cobbler and│          │      │     │       │
         his wife Fatimah     │    3     │  +   │  3  │       │
  170. Asleep and Awake       │          │      │  2  │   +   │   7
       _a._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Lackpenny and  │          │      │     │       │
               the Cook       │          │      │  -  │   +   │
  171. The Caliph Omar ben    │          │      │     │       │
         Abdulaziz and the    │          │      │     │       │
         Poets                │          │      │  -  │   +   │
  172. El Hejjaj and the Three│          │      │     │       │
         Young Men            │          │      │  -  │   +   │
  173. Haroun Er Reshid and   │          │      │     │       │
         the Woman of the     │          │      │     │       │
         Barmecides           │          │      │  -  │   +   │
  174. The Ten Viziers, or the│          │      │     │       │
         History of King      │          │      │     │       │
         Azadbekht and his Son│          │      │  -  │   +   │   10
       _a._  Of the           │          │      │     │       │
               uselessness of │          │      │     │       │
               endeavour      │          │      │     │       │
               against        │          │      │     │       │
               persistent     │          │      │     │       │
               ill-fortune    │          │      │     │       │
             _aa._ Story of   │          │      │     │       │
               the Unlucky    │          │      │     │       │
               Merchant       │          │      │  -  │   +   │   10
       _b._  Of looking to the│          │      │     │       │
               issues of      │          │      │     │       │
               affairs        │          │      │     │       │
             _bb._ Story of   │          │      │     │       │
               the Merchant   │          │      │     │       │
               and his Sons   │          │      │     │   +   │   10
       _c._  Of the advantages│          │      │     │       │
               of Patience    │          │      │     │       │
             _cc._ Story of   │          │      │     │       │
               Abou Sabir     │          │      │     │   +   │   10
       _d._  Of the ill       │          │      │     │       │
               effects of     │          │      │     │       │
               Precipitation  │          │      │     │       │
             _dd._ Story of   │          │      │     │       │
               Prince Bihzad  │          │      │     │   +   │   10
       _e._  Of the issues of │          │      │     │       │
               good and evil  │          │      │     │       │
               actions        │          │      │     │       │
             _ee._ Story of   │          │      │     │       │
               King Dabdin and│          │      │     │       │
               his Viziers    │          │      │     │   +   │   10
       _f._  Of Trust in God  │          │      │     │       │
             _ff._ Story of   │          │      │     │       │
               King Bekhtzeman│          │      │     │   +   │
       _g._  Of Clemency      │          │      │     │       │
             _gg._ Story of   │          │      │     │       │
               King Bihkerd   │          │      │     │   +   │   10
       _h._  Of Envy and      │          │      │     │       │
               Malice         │          │      │     │       │
             _hh._ Story of   │          │      │     │       │
               Ilan Shah and  │          │      │     │       │
               Abou Temam     │          │      │     │   +   │   10
       _i._  Of Destiny, or   │          │      │     │       │
               that which is  │          │      │     │       │
               written on the │          │      │     │       │
               Forehead       │          │      │     │       │
             _ii._ Story of   │          │      │     │       │
               King Ibrahim   │          │      │     │       │
               and his Son    │          │      │     │   +   │   13
       _j._  Of the appointed │          │      │     │       │
               Term, which if │          │      │     │       │
               it be advanced,│          │      │     │       │
               may not be     │          │      │     │       │
               deferred, and  │          │      │     │       │
               if it be       │          │      │     │       │
               deferred, may  │          │      │     │       │
               not be advanced│          │      │     │       │
             _jj._ Story of   │          │      │     │       │
               King Suleiman  │          │      │     │       │
               Shah and his   │          │      │     │       │
               Sons           │          │      │     │   +   │
       _k._  Of the speedy    │          │      │     │       │
               Relief of God  │          │      │     │       │
             _kk._ Story of   │          │      │     │       │
               the Prisoner,  │          │      │     │       │
               and how God    │          │      │     │       │
               gave him relief│          │      │     │   +   │
  175. Jaafer Ben Zehya and   │          │      │     │       │
         Abdulmelik Ben Salih │          │      │     │       │
         the Abbaside         │          │      │     │   +   │
  176. Er Reshid and the      │          │      │     │       │
         Barmecides           │          │      │     │   +   │
  177. Ibn Es-Semmak and      │          │      │     │       │
         Er-Reshid            │          │      │     │   +   │
  178. El Mamoun and Zubeideh │          │      │     │   +   │
  179. En Numan and the Arab  │          │      │     │       │
         of the Benou Tai     │          │      │     │   +   │
  180. Firouz and his Wife    │          │      │     │   +   │
  181. King Shah Bekht and his│          │      │     │       │
         Vizier Er Rehwan     │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _a._  Story of the Man │          │      │     │       │
               of Khorassan   │          │      │     │       │
               his son and his│          │      │     │       │
               governor       │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _b._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Singer and the │          │      │     │       │
               Druggist       │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _c._  Story of the King│          │      │     │       │
               who knew the   │          │      │     │       │
               quintessence of│          │      │     │       │
               things         │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _d._  Story of the Rich│          │      │     │       │
               Man who gave   │          │      │     │       │
               his fair       │          │      │     │       │
               Daughter in    │          │      │     │       │
               Marriage to the│          │      │     │       │
               Poor Old Man   │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _e._  Story of the Rich│          │      │     │       │
               Man and his    │          │      │     │       │
               Wasteful Son   │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _f._  The King’s Son   │          │      │     │       │
               who fell in    │          │      │     │       │
               love with the  │          │      │     │       │
               Picture        │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _g._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Fuller and his │          │      │     │       │
               Wife           │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _h._  Story of the Old │          │      │     │       │
               Woman, the     │          │      │     │       │
               Merchant, and  │          │      │     │       │
               the King       │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _i._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               credulous      │          │      │     │       │
               Husband        │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _j._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Unjust King and│          │      │     │       │
               the Tither     │          │      │     │   +   │   14
             _jj._ Story of   │          │      │     │       │
               David and      │          │      │     │       │
               Solomon        │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _k._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Thief and the  │          │      │     │       │
               Woman          │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _l._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Three Men and  │          │      │     │       │
               our Lord Jesus │          │      │     │   +   │   14
             _ll._ The        │          │      │     │       │
               Disciple’s     │          │      │     │       │
               Story          │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _m._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Dethroned King │          │      │     │       │
               whose kingdom  │          │      │     │       │
               and good were  │          │      │     │       │
               restored to him│          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _n._  Story of the Man │          │      │     │       │
               whose caution  │          │      │     │       │
               was the cause  │          │      │     │       │
               of his Death   │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _o._  Story of the Man │          │      │     │       │
               who was lavish │          │      │     │       │
               of his house   │          │      │     │       │
               and his victual│          │      │     │       │
               to one whom he │          │      │     │       │
               knew not       │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _p._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Idiot and the  │          │      │     │       │
               Sharper        │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _q._  Story of Khelbes │          │      │     │       │
               and his Wife   │          │      │     │       │
               and the Learned│          │      │     │       │
               Man            │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _r._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Pious Woman    │          │      │     │       │
               accused of     │          │      │     │       │
               lewdness       │          │      │     │   +   │
       _s._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Journeyman and │          │      │     │       │
               the Girl       │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _t._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Weaver who     │          │      │     │       │
               became a       │          │      │     │       │
               Physician by   │          │      │     │       │
               his Wife’s     │          │      │     │       │
               commandment    │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _u._  Story of the Two │          │      │     │       │
               Sharpers who   │          │      │     │       │
               cheated each   │          │      │     │       │
               his fellow     │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _v._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Sharpers with  │          │      │     │       │
               the            │          │      │     │       │
               Money-changer  │          │      │     │       │
               and the Ass    │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _w._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Sharper and the│          │      │     │       │
               Merchants      │          │      │     │   +   │   14
             _wa._ Story of   │          │      │     │       │
               the Hawk and   │          │      │     │       │
               the Locust     │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _x._  Story of the King│          │      │     │       │
               and his        │          │      │     │       │
               Chamberlain’s  │          │      │     │       │
               Wife           │          │      │     │   +   │   14
             _xa._ Story of   │          │      │     │       │
               the Old Woman  │          │      │     │       │
               and the        │          │      │     │       │
               Draper’s Wife  │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _y._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Foul-favoured  │          │      │     │       │
               Man and his    │          │      │     │       │
               Fair Wife      │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _z._  Story of the King│          │      │     │       │
               who lost       │          │      │     │       │
               Kingdom and    │          │      │     │       │
               Wife and       │          │      │     │       │
               Wealth, and God│          │      │     │       │
               restored them  │          │      │     │       │
               to him         │          │      │     │   +   │   14
             _aa._ Story of   │          │      │     │       │
               Selim and Selma│          │      │     │   +   │   14
             _bb._ Story of   │          │      │     │       │
               the King of    │          │      │     │       │
               Hind and his   │          │      │     │       │
               Vizier         │          │      │     │   +   │   14
  182. El Melik Ez Zahir      │          │      │     │       │
         Rukneddin Bibers El  │          │      │     │       │
         Bunducdari, and the  │          │      │     │       │
         Sixteen Officers of  │          │      │     │       │
         Police               │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _a._  The First        │          │      │     │       │
               Officer’s Story│          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _b._  The Second       │          │      │     │       │
               Officer’s Story│          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _c._  The Third        │          │      │     │       │
               Officer’s Story│          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _d._  The Fourth       │          │      │     │       │
               Officer’s Story│          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _e._  The Fifth        │          │      │     │       │
               Officer’s Story│          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _f._  The Sixth        │          │      │     │       │
               Officer’s Story│          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _g._  The Seventh      │          │      │     │       │
               Officer’s Story│          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _h._  The Eighth       │          │      │     │       │
               Officer’s Story│          │      │     │   +   │   14
             _ha._ The Thief’s│          │      │     │       │
               Story          │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _i._  The Ninth        │          │      │     │       │
               Officer’s Story│          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _j._  The Tenth        │          │      │     │       │
               Officer’s Story│          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _k._  The Eleventh     │          │      │     │       │
               Officer’s Story│          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _l._  The Twelfth      │          │      │     │       │
               Officer’s Story│          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _m._  The Thirteenth   │          │      │     │       │
               Officer’s Story│          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _n._  The Fourteenth   │          │      │     │       │
               Officer’s Story│          │      │     │   +   │   14
             _na._ A Merry    │          │      │     │       │
               Jest of a Thief│          │      │     │   +   │   14
             _nb._ Story of   │          │      │     │       │
               the Old Sharper│          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _o._  The Fifteenth    │          │      │     │       │
               Officer’s Story│          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _p._  The Sixteenth    │          │      │     │       │
               Officer’s Story│          │      │     │   +   │   14
  183. Abdallah Ben Nafi, and │          │      │     │       │
         the King’s Son of    │          │      │     │       │
         Cashgbar             │          │      │     │   +   │   14
       _a._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Damsel Tuhfet  │          │      │     │       │
               El Culoub and  │          │      │     │       │
               Khalif Haroun  │          │      │     │       │
               Er Reshid      │          │      │     │   +   │   14
  184. Women’s Craft          │          │      │     │       │   4
  185. Noureddin Ali of       │          │      │     │       │
         Damascus and the     │          │      │     │       │
         Damsel Sitt El Milah │          │      │     │   +   │   15
  186. El Abbas and the King’s│          │      │     │       │
         Daughter of Baghdad  │          │      │     │   +   │   15
  187. The Two Kings and the  │          │      │     │       │
         Vizier’s Daughters   │          │      │     │   +   │   15
  188. The Favourite and her  │          │      │     │       │
         Lover                │          │      │     │   +   │   15
  189. The Merchant of Cairo  │          │      │     │       │
         and the Favourite of │          │      │     │       │
         the Khalif El Mamoun │          │      │     │       │
         El Hakim bi Amrillah │          │      │     │   +   │   15
  190. Conclusion             │          │      │     │       │
                              │    3     │  +   │  3  │   +   │   15
 *191. History of Prince Zeyn │          │      │     │       │
         Alasnam              │          │      │     │       │   6
 *192. History of Codadad and │          │      │     │       │
         his Brothers         │          │      │     │       │   6
       *_a._ History of the   │          │      │     │       │
               Princess of    │          │      │     │       │
               Deryabar       │          │      │     │       │   6
 *193. Story of Aladdin, or   │          │      │     │       │
         the Wonderful Lamp   │          │      │     │       │  7, 8
 *194. Adventures of the      │          │      │     │       │
         Caliph Harun         │          │      │     │       │
         Al-Rashid            │          │      │     │       │   8
       *_a._ Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Blind Man, Baba│          │      │     │       │
               Abdallah       │          │      │     │       │   8
       *_b._ Story of Sidi    │          │      │     │       │
               Numan          │          │      │     │       │   8
       *_c._ Story of Cogia   │          │      │     │       │
               Hassan Alhabbal│          │      │     │       │   8
 *195. Story of Ali Baba and  │          │      │     │       │
         the Forty Thieves    │          │      │     │       │   9
 *196. Story of Ali Cogia, a  │          │      │     │       │
         Merchant of Bagdad   │          │      │     │       │   9
 *197. Story of Prince Ahmed  │          │      │     │       │
         and the Fairy Peri   │          │      │     │       │
         Banou                │          │      │     │       │   9
 *198. Story of the Sisters   │          │      │     │       │
         who envied their     │          │      │     │       │
         younger sister       │          │      │     │       │   10
  199. (Anecdote of Jaafar the│          │      │     │       │
         Barmecide, = No. 39) │          │      │     │       │
  200. The Adventures of Ali  │          │      │     │       │
         and Zaher of Damascus│          │      │     │       │
  201. The Adventures of the  │          │      │     │       │
         Fisherman, Judar of  │          │      │     │       │
         Cairo, and his       │          │      │     │       │
         meeting with the Moor│          │      │     │       │
         Mahmood and the      │          │      │     │       │
         Sultan Beibars       │          │      │     │       │
  202. The Physician and the  │          │      │     │       │
         young man of Mosul   │          │      │     │       │
  203. Story of the Sultan of │          │      │     │       │
         Yemen and his three  │          │      │     │       │
         sons                 │          │      │     │       │   11
  204. Story of the Three     │          │      │     │       │
         Sharpers and the     │          │      │     │       │
         Sultan               │          │      │     │       │   11
       _a._  Adventures of the│          │      │     │       │
               Abdicated      │          │      │     │       │
               Sultan         │          │      │     │       │   11
       _b._  History of       │          │      │     │       │
               Mahummud,      │          │      │     │       │
               Sultan of Cairo│          │      │     │       │   11
       _c._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               First Lunatic  │          │      │     │       │   11
       _d._  (Story of the    │          │      │     │       │
               Second Lunatic │          │      │     │       │
               = No. 184)     │          │      │     │       │   11
       _e._  Story of the Sage│          │      │     │       │
               and his Pupil  │          │      │     │       │   11
       _f._  Night adventure  │          │      │     │       │
               of the Sultan  │          │      │     │       │   11
       _g._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               first foolish  │          │      │     │       │
               man            │          │      │     │       │
       _h._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               broken-backed  │          │      │     │       │
               Schoolmaster   │          │      │     │       │   11
       _i._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               wry-mouthed    │          │      │     │       │
               Schoolmaster   │          │      │     │       │   11
       _j._  The Sultan’s     │          │      │     │       │
               second visit to│          │      │     │       │
               the Sisters    │          │      │     │       │   11
       _k._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Sisters and the│          │      │     │       │
               Sultana, their │          │      │     │       │
               mother         │          │      │     │       │   11
  205. Story of the Avaricious│          │      │     │       │
         Cauzee and his wife  │          │      │     │       │   11
  206. Story of the Bang-Eater│          │      │     │       │
         and the Cauzee       │          │      │     │       │   11
       _a._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Bang-Eater and │          │      │     │       │
               his wife       │          │      │     │       │   11
       _b._  Continuation of  │          │      │     │       │
               the Fisherman, │          │      │     │       │
               or Bang-Eater’s│          │      │     │       │
               Adventures     │          │      │     │       │   11
  207. The Sultan and the     │          │      │     │       │
         Traveller Mhamood    │          │      │     │       │
         AlHyjemmee           │          │      │     │       │   11
       _a._  The Koord Robber │          │      │     │       │
               (= No. 33)     │          │      │     │       │
       _b._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Husbandman     │          │      │     │       │
       _c._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Three Princes  │          │      │     │       │
               and Enchanting │          │      │     │       │
               Bird           │          │      │     │       │   11
       _d._  Story of a Sultan│          │      │     │       │
               of Yemen and   │          │      │     │       │
               his three Sons │          │      │     │       │   11
       _e._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               first Sharper  │          │      │     │       │
               in the Cave    │          │      │     │       │
       _f._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               second Sharper │          │      │     │       │
       _g._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               third Sharper  │          │      │     │       │
       _h._  History of the   │          │      │     │       │
               Sultan of Hind │          │      │     │       │   10
  208. Story of the           │          │      │     │       │
         Fisherman’s Son      │          │      │     │       │
  209. Story of Abou Neeut and│          │      │     │       │
         Abou Neeuteen        │          │      │     │       │   11
  210. Story of the Prince of │          │      │     │       │
         Sind, and Fatima,    │          │      │     │       │
         daughter of Amir Bin │          │      │     │       │
         Naomaun              │          │      │     │       │   11
  211. Story of the Lovers of │          │      │     │       │
         Syria, or the Heroine│          │      │     │       │   11
  212. Story of Hyjauje, the  │          │      │     │       │
         tyrannical Governor  │          │      │     │       │
         of Confeh, and the   │          │      │     │       │
         young Syed           │          │      │     │       │
  213. Story of the Sultan    │          │      │     │       │
         Haieshe              │          │      │     │       │
  214. Story told by a        │          │      │     │       │
         Fisherman            │          │      │     │       │
  215. The Adventures of Mazin│          │      │     │       │
         of Khorassaun        │          │      │     │       │
  216. Adventure of Haroon Al │          │      │     │       │
         Rusheed              │          │      │     │       │
       _a._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Sultan of      │          │      │     │       │
               Bussorah       │          │      │     │       │
       _b._  Nocturnal        │          │      │     │       │
               adventures of  │          │      │     │       │
               Haroon Al      │          │      │     │       │
               Rusheed        │          │      │     │       │
       _c._  Story related by │          │      │     │       │
               Munjaub        │          │      │     │       │
       _d._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Sultan, the    │          │      │     │       │
               Dirveshe and   │          │      │     │       │
               the Barber’s   │          │      │     │       │
               Son            │          │      │     │       │
       _e._  Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Bedouin’s Wife │          │      │     │       │
       _f._  Story of the Wife│          │      │     │       │
               and her two    │          │      │     │       │
               Gallants       │          │      │     │       │
  217. Adventures of Aleefa,  │          │      │     │       │
         daughter of          │          │      │     │       │
         Mherejaun, Sultan of │          │      │     │       │
         Hind, and Eusuff, son│          │      │     │       │
         of Sohul, Sultan of  │          │      │     │       │
         Sind                 │          │      │     │       │
  218. Adventures of the three│          │      │     │       │
         Princes, sons of the │          │      │     │       │
         Sultan of China      │          │      │     │       │
  219. Story of the Gallant   │          │      │     │       │
         Officer              │          │      │     │       │
  220. Story of another       │          │      │     │       │
         officer              │          │      │     │       │
  221. Story of the Idiot and │          │      │     │       │
         his Asses            │          │      │     │       │
  222. Story of the Lady of   │          │      │     │       │
         Cairo and the Three  │          │      │     │       │
         Debauchees           │          │      │     │       │
  223. Story of the Good      │          │      │     │       │
         Vizier unjustly      │          │      │     │       │
         imprisoned           │          │      │     │       │
  224. Story of the Prying    │          │      │     │       │
         Barber and the young │          │      │     │       │
         man of Cairo         │          │      │     │       │
  225. Story of the Lady of   │          │      │     │       │
         Cairo and her four   │          │      │     │       │
         Gallants             │          │      │     │       │
       _a._  The Cauzee’s     │          │      │     │       │
               Story          │          │      │     │       │
       _b._  The Syrian       │          │      │     │       │
       _c._  The Caim-makaum’s│          │      │     │       │
               Wife           │          │      │     │       │
       _d._  Story told by the│          │      │     │       │
               Fourth Gallant │          │      │     │       │
  226. Story of a Hump-backed │          │      │     │       │
         Porter               │          │      │     │       │
  227. The Aged Porter of     │          │      │     │       │
         Cairo and the Artful │          │      │     │       │
         Female Thief         │          │      │     │       │
  228. Mhassun and his tried  │          │      │     │       │
         friend Mouseh        │          │      │     │       │
  229. Mahummud Julbee, son to│          │      │     │       │
         an Ameer of Cairo    │          │      │     │       │
  230. The Farmer’s Wife      │          │      │     │       │
  231. The Artful Wife        │          │      │     │       │
  232. The Cauzee’s Wife      │          │      │     │       │
  233. Story of the Merchant, │          │      │     │       │
         his Daughter, and the│          │      │     │       │
         Prince of Eerauk     │          │      │     │       │
  234. The Two Orphans        │          │      │     │       │
  235. Story of another       │          │      │     │       │
         Farmer’s Wife        │          │      │     │       │
  236. Story of the Son who   │          │      │     │       │
         attempted his        │          │      │     │       │
         Father’s Wives       │          │      │     │       │
  237. The Two Wits of Cairo  │          │      │     │       │
         and Syria            │          │      │     │       │
  238. Ibrahim and Mouseh     │          │      │     │       │
  239. The Viziers Ahmed and  │          │      │     │       │
         Mahummud             │          │      │     │       │
  240. The Son addicted to    │          │      │     │       │
         Theft                │          │      │     │       │
  241. Adventures of the      │          │      │     │       │
         Cauzee, his Wife, &c.│          │      │     │       │   11
       _a._  The Sultan’s     │          │      │     │       │
               Story of       │          │      │     │       │
               Himself        │          │      │     │       │   11
  242. Story of Shaykh Nukheet│          │      │     │       │
         the Fisherman, who   │          │      │     │       │
         became favourite to a│          │      │     │       │
         Sultan               │          │      │     │       │
       _a._  Story of the King│          │      │     │       │
               of Andalusia   │          │      │     │       │
  243. Story of Teilone,      │          │      │     │       │
         Sultan of Egypt      │          │      │     │       │
  244. Story of the Retired   │          │      │     │       │
         Man and his Servant  │          │      │     │       │
  245. The Merchant’s Daughter│          │      │     │       │
         who married the      │          │      │     │       │
         Emperor of China     │          │      │     │       │
 *246. New Adventures of the  │          │      │     │       │
         Caliph Harun         │          │      │     │       │
         Al-Rashid            │          │      │     │       │   12
 *247. The Physician and the  │          │      │     │       │
         young Purveyor of    │          │      │     │       │
         Bagdad               │          │      │     │       │   13
 *248. The Wise Heycar        │          │      │     │       │   13
 *249. Attaf the Generous     │          │      │     │       │   13
 *250. Prince Habib and       │          │      │     │       │
         Dorrat-al-Gawas      │          │      │     │       │   12
 *251. The Forty Wazirs       │          │      │     │       │   1
       *_a._ Story of Shaykh  │          │      │     │       │
               Shahabeddin    │          │      │     │       │   1
       *_b._ Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Gardener, his  │          │      │     │       │
               Son, and the   │          │      │     │       │
               Ass            │          │      │     │       │   1
       *_c._ The Sultan       │          │      │     │       │
               Mahmoud and his│          │      │     │       │
               Wazir          │          │      │     │       │   1
       *_d._ Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Brahman        │          │      │     │       │
               Padmanaba and  │          │      │     │       │
               the young      │          │      │     │       │
               Fyquai         │          │      │     │       │   1
       *_e._ Story of Sultan  │          │      │     │       │
               Akshid         │          │      │     │       │   1
       *_f._ Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Husband, the   │          │      │     │       │
               Lover and the  │          │      │     │       │
               Thief          │          │      │     │       │   1
       *_g._ Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Prince of      │          │      │     │       │
               Carisme and the│          │      │     │       │
               Princess of    │          │      │     │       │
               Georgia        │          │      │     │       │   1
       *_h._ The Cobbler and  │          │      │     │       │
               the King’s     │          │      │     │       │
               Daughter       │          │      │     │       │   1
       *_i._ The Woodcutter   │          │      │     │       │
               and the Genius │          │      │     │       │   1
       *_j._ The Royal Parrot │          │      │     │       │   1
 *252. Story of the King and  │          │      │     │       │
         Queen of Abyssinia   │          │      │     │       │   10
 *253. Story of Princess Amina│          │      │     │       │   12
       *_a._ Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Princess of    │          │      │     │       │
               Tartary        │          │      │     │       │   12
       *_b._ Story told by the│          │      │     │       │
               Old Mans’ Wife │          │      │     │       │   12
 *254. Story of Ali Johari    │          │      │     │       │   12
 *255. Story of the two       │          │      │     │       │
         Princes of Cochin    │          │      │     │       │
         Chin                 │          │      │     │       │   12
 *256. Story of the Two       │          │      │     │       │
         Husbands             │          │      │     │       │   12
       *_a._ Story of Abdallah│          │      │     │       │   12
       *_b._ Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Favourite      │          │      │     │       │   12
 *257. Story of Yusuf and the │          │      │     │       │
         Indian Merchant      │          │      │     │       │   12
 *258. Story of Prince Benazir│          │      │     │       │   12
 *259. Story of Selim, Sultan │          │      │     │       │
         of Egypt             │          │      │     │       │   13
       *_a._ Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               Cobbler’s Wife │          │      │     │       │   13
       *_b._ Story of Adileh  │          │      │     │       │   13
       *_c._ Story of the     │          │      │     │       │
               scarred        │          │      │     │       │
               Kalender       │          │      │     │       │   13
       *_d._ Continuation of  │          │      │     │       │
               the story of   │          │      │     │       │
               Selim          │          │      │     │       │   13
 *260. Story of Seif Sul Yesn │          │      │     │       │   14
  261. Story of the Labourer  │          │      │     │       │
         and the Chair        │          │      │     │       │
  262. Story of Ahmed the     │          │      │     │       │
         Orphan               │          │      │     │       │
 ═════════════════════════════╧══════════╧══════╧═════╧═══════╧════════

 ═════════════════════════════╤═════╤══════╤════════╤══════╤═════╤═╤═══════
                              │     │      │        │      │     │ │
                              │     │“Mac.”│        │      │     │ │
                              │Weil.│Text. │Torrens.│Payne.│Calc.│ │Burton.
 ─────────────────────────────┼─────┼──────┼────────┼──────┼─────┼─┼───────
       Introduction           │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
       Story of King Shahryar │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and his brother      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
                              │     │      │        │      │     │ │
                              │     │      │        │      │     │ │
                              │     │      │        │      │     │ │
                              │     │      │        │      │     │ │
                              │     │      │        │      │     │ │
                              │     │      │        │      │     │ │
                              │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
       _a._  Tale of the Bull │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and the Ass    │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
    1. Tale of the Trader and │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Jinni            │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
       _a._  The First        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Shaykh’s Story │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
       _b._  The Second       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Shaykh’s Story │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
       _c._  The Third        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Shaykh’s Story │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  -  │ │   1
    2. The Fisherman and the  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Jinni                │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
       _a._  Tale of the Wazir│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and the Sage   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Duban          │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
             _ab._ Story of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               King Sindibad  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and his Falcon │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  -  │ │   1
             _ac._ Tale of the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Husband and the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Parrot         │  1  │  -   │   -    │  -   │  +  │ │   1
             _ad._ Tale of the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Prince and the │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Ogress         │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
       _b._  Tale of the      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Ensorcelled    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Prince         │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
    3. The Porter and the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Three Ladies of      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Baghdad              │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
       _a._  The First        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Kalandar’s     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Tale.          │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
       _b._  The Second       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Kalandar’s Tale│  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
             _ba._ Tale of the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Envier and the │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Envied         │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
       _c._  The Third        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Kalandar’s     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Tale.          │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
       _d._  The Eldest Lady’s│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Tale           │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
       _e._  Tale of the      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Portress       │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  -  │ │   1
       Conclusion of the Story│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         of the Porter and    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         three Ladies         │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
    4. Tale of the Three      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Apples               │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
    5. Tale of Nur Al-Din and │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         his Son Badr Al-Din  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Hasan                │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
    6. The Hunchback’s Tale   │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
       _a._  The Nazarene     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Broker’s Story │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
       _b._  The Reeve’s Tale │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
       _c._  Tale of the      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Jewish Doctor  │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
       _d._  Tale of the      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Tailor         │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
       _e._  The Barber’s Tale│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               of Himself     │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
             _ea._ The        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Barber’s Tale  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               of his First   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Brother        │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
             _eb._ The        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Barber’s Tale  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               of his Second  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Brother        │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
             _ec._ The        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Barber’s Tale  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               of his Third   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Brother        │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
             _ed._ The        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Barber’s Tale  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               of his Fourth  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Brother        │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
             _ee._ The        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Barber’s Tale  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               of his Fifth   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Brother        │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
             _ef._ The        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Barber’s Tale  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               of his Sixth   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Brother        │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
       The End of the Tailor’s│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Tale                 │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   1
    7. Nur Al-Din Ali and the │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Damsel Anis Al-Jalis │  1  │  +   │   1    │  1   │  +  │ │   2
    8. Tale of Ghanim Bin     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Ayyub, the           │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Distraught, the      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Thrall o’ Love       │  2  │  +   │   1    │  1   │     │ │   2
       _a._  Tale of the First│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Eunuch, Bukhayt│  2  │  +   │   1    │  1   │     │ │   2
       _b._  Tale of the      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Second Eunuch, │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Kafur          │  2  │  +   │   1    │  1   │     │ │   2
    9. Tale of King Omar Bin  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Al-Nu’uman, and his  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         sons Sharrkan and Zau│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Al-Makan             │  3  │  +   │  1(p)  │  2   │     │ │ 2, 3
       _a._  Tale of Taj      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Al-Muluk and   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Princess   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Dunya          │  3  │  +   │        │  2   │     │ │ 2, 3
             _aa._ Tale of    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Aziz and Azizah│  3  │  +   │        │  2   │     │ │ 2, 3
       _b._  Tale of the      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Hashish-Eater  │  -  │  +   │        │  2   │     │ │   3
       _c._  Tale of Hammad   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Badawi     │  -  │  +   │        │  2   │     │ │   3
   10. The Birds and Beasts   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and the Carpenter    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
                              │     │      │        │      │     │ │
                              │  2  │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   3
   11. The Hermits            │  2  │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   3
   12. The Water-fowl and the │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Tortoise             │     │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   3
   13. The Wolf and the Fox   │     │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   3
       _a._  Tale of the      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Falcon and the │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Partridge      │     │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   3
   14. The Mouse and the      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Ichneumon            │     │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   3
   15. The Cat and the Crow   │  2  │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   3
   16. The Fox and the Crow   │     │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   3
       _a._  The Flea and the │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Mouse          │     │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   3
       _b._  The Saker and the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Birds          │     │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   3
       _c._  The Sparrow and  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Eagle      │     │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   3
   17. The Hedgehog and the   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Wood Pigeons         │     │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   3
       _a._  The Merchant and │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Two        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Sharpers       │     │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   3
   18. The Thief and his      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Monkey               │     │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   3
       _a._  The Foolish      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Weaver         │     │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   3
   19. The Sparrow and the    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Peacock              │     │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   3
   20. Ali Bin Bakkar and     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Shams Al-Nahar       │  1  │  +   │        │  3   │  +  │ │   3
   21. Tale of Kamar Al-Zaman │  1  │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │ 3, 4
       _a._  Ni’amah bin      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Al-Rabia and   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Naomi his      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Slave-girl     │  2  │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   4
   22. Ala Al-Din Abu         │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Al-Shamat            │  2  │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   4
   23. Hatim of the Tribe of  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Tayy                 │  2  │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   4
   24. Ma’an the son of Zaidah│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and the three Girls  │  2  │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   4
   25. Ma’an son of Zaidah and│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Badawi           │  2  │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   4
   26. The City of Labtayt    │  2  │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   4
   27. The Caliph Hisham and  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Arab Youth       │  2  │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   4
   28. Ibrahim bin Al-Mahdi   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and the              │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Barber-Surgeon       │  2  │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   4
   29. The City of            │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Many-columned Iram   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and Abdullah son of  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Abi Kalabah          │  2  │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   4
   30. Isaac of Mosul         │  2  │  +   │        │  3   │  +  │ │   4
   31. The Sweep and the Noble│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Lady                 │  4  │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   4
   32. The Mock Caliph        │  2  │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   4
   33. Ali the Persian        │  4  │  +   │        │  3   │     │ │   4
   34. Harun Al-Rashid and the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Slave-Girl and the   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Imam Abu Yusuf       │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   35. The Lover who feigned  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         himself a Thief      │  2  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   36. Ja’afar the Barmecide  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and the Bean-Seller  │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   37. Abu Mohammed hight     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Lazybones            │  2  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   38. Generous dealing of    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Yahya bin Khalid the │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Barmecide with Mansur│     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   39. Generous Dealing of    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Yahya son of Khalid  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         with a man who forged│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         a letter in his name │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   40. Caliph Al-Maamun and   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Strange Scholar  │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   41. Ali Shar and Zumurrud  │  2  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   42. The Loves of Jubayr Bin│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Umayr and the Lady   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Budur                │  2  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   43. The Man of Al-Yaman and│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         his six Slave-Girls  │  2  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   44. Harun Al-Rashid and the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Damsel and Abu Nowas │  2  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   45. The Man who stole the  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         dish of gold whereon │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the dog ate          │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   46. The Sharper of         │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Alexandria and the   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Chief of Police      │  +  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   47. Al-Malik Al-Nasir and  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the three Chiefs of  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Police               │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
       _a._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Chief of the   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               new Cairo      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Police         │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
       _b._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Chief of the   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Bulak Police   │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
       _c._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Chief of the   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Old Cairo      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Police         │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   48. The Thief and the      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Shroff               │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   49. The Chief of the Kus   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Police and the       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Sharper              │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   50. Ibrahim bin al-Mahdi   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and the Merchant’s   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Sister               │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   51. The Woman whose hands  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         were cut off for     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         alms-giving          │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   52. The devout Israelite   │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   53. Abu Hassan Al-Ziyadi   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and the Khorasan Man │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   54. The Poor Man and his   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Friend in Need       │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   55. The Ruined Man who     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         became rich again    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         through a dream      │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   56. Caliph Al-Mutawakkil   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and his Concubine    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Mahbubah             │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   57. Wardan the Butcher’s   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Adventure with the   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Lady and the Bear    │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   58. The King’s Daughter and│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Ape              │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   4
   59. The Ebony Horse        │  1  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   60. Uns Al-Wujud and the   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Wazir’s Daughter     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Rose-in-Hood         │  2  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   61. Abu Nowas with the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Three Boys and the   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Caliph Harun         │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Al-Rashid            │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   62. Abdullah bin Ma’amar   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         with the Man of      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Bassorah and his     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Slave-Girl           │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   63. The Lovers of the Banu │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Ozrah                │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   64. The Wazir of Al-Yaman  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and his young Brother│     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   65. The Loves of the Boy   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and Girl at School   │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   66. Al-Mutalammis and his  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Wife Umaymah         │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   67. Harun Al-Rashid and    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Zubaydah in the Bath │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   68. Harun Al-Rashid and the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Three Poets          │  2  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   69. Mus’ab bin Al-Zubayr   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and Ayishah his Wife │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   70. Abu Al-Aswad and his   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Slave-Girl           │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   71. Harun Al-Rashid and the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         two Slave-Girls      │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   72. Harun Al-Rashid and the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Three Slave-Girls    │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   73. The Miller and his Wife│     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   74. The Simpleton and the  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Sharper              │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   75. The Kazi Abu Yusuf with│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Harun Al-Rashid and  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Queen Zubaydah       │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   76. The Caliph Al-Hakim and│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Merchant         │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   77. King Kisra Anushirwan  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and the Village      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Damsel               │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   78. The Water-carrier and  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Goldsmith’s Wife │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   79. Khusrau and Shirin and │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Fisherman        │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   80. Yahya bin Khalid and   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Poor Man         │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   81. Mohammed al-Amin and   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Slave-Girl       │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   82. The Sons of Yahya bin  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Khalid and Said bin  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Salim                │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   83. The Woman’s Trick      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         against her Husband  │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   84. The Devout Woman and   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Two Wicked Elders│  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   85. Ja’afar the Barmecide  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and the old Badawi   │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   86. Omar bin Al-Khattab and│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Young Badawi     │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   87. Al-Maamun and the      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Pyramids of Egypt    │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   88. The Thief and the      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Merchant             │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   89. Masrur the Eunuch and  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Ibn Al-Karibi        │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   90. The Devotee Prince     │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   91. The Schoolmaster who   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         fell in Love by      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Report               │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   92. The Foolish Dominie    │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   93. The Illiterate who set │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         up for a Schoolmaster│     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   94. The King and the       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Virtuous Wife        │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   95. Abd Al-Rahman the      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Maghribi’s story of  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Rukh             │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   96. Adi bin Zayd and the   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Princess Hind        │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   97. Di’ibil Al-Khuza’i with│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Lady and Muslim  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         bin Al-Walid         │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   98. Isaac of Mosul and the │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Merchant             │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
   99. The Three Unfortunate  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Lovers               │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
  100. How Abu Hasan brake    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Wind                 │     │  ?   │        │  -   │     │ │   5
  101. The Lovers of the Banu │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Tayy                 │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
  102. The Mad Lover          │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
  103. The Prior who became a │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Moslem               │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
  104. The Loves of Abu Isa   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and Kurrat Al-Ayn    │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
  105. Al-Amin and his Uncle  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Ibrahim bin Al-Mahdi │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
  106. Al-Fath bin Khakan and │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Al-Mutawakkil        │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
  107. The Man’s dispute with │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Learned Woman    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         concerning the       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         relative excellence  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         of male and female   │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
  108. Abu Suwayd and the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         pretty Old Woman     │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
  109. Ali bin Tahir and the  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         girl Muunis          │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
  110. The Woman who had a    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Boy, and the other   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         who had a Man to     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         lover                │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
  111. Ali the Cairene and the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Haunted House in     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Baghdad              │  4  │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
  112. The Pilgrim Man and the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Old Woman            │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
  113. Abu Al-Husn and his    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Slave-girl Tawaddud  │     │  +   │        │  4   │     │ │   5
  114. The Angel of Death with│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Proud King and   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Devout Man       │  4  │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
  115. The Angel of Death and │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Rich King        │  4  │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
  116. The Angel of Death and │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the King of the      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Children of Israel   │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
  117. Iskandar zu Al-Karnayn │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and a certain Tribe  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         of Poor Folk         │  4  │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
  118. The Righteousness of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         King Anushirwan      │  4  │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
  119. The Jewish Kazi and his│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Pious Wife           │  4  │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
  120. The Shipwrecked Woman  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and her Child        │  4  │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
  121. The Pious Black Slave  │  4  │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
  122. The Devout Tray-maker  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and his Wife         │  4  │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
  123. Al-Hajjaj bin Yusuf and│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Pious Man        │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
  124. The Blacksmith who     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         could Handle Fire    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Without Hurt         │  4  │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
  125. The Devotee to whom    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Allah gave a Cloud   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         for Service and the  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Devout King          │  4  │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
  126. The Moslem Champion and│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Christian Damsel │  4  │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
  127. The Christian King’s   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Daughter and the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Moslem               │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
  128. The Prophet and the    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Justice of Providence│  4  │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
  129. The Ferryman of the    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Nile and the Hermit  │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
  130. The Island King and the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Pious Israelite      │  4  │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
  131. Abu Al-Hasan and Abu   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Ja’afar the Leper    │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
  132. The Queen of the       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Serpents:            │  4  │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
       _a._  The Adventure of │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Bulukiya       │  4  │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
       _b._  The Story of     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Janshah        │  4  │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   5
  133. Sindbad the Seaman and │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Sindbad the Landsman │  1  │  +   │        │  5   │  +  │ │   6
       _a._  The First Voyage │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               of Sindbad the │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Seaman         │  1  │  +   │        │  5   │  +  │ │   6
       _b._  The Second Voyage│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               of Sindbad the │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Seaman         │  1  │  +   │        │  5   │  +  │ │   6
       _c._  The Third Voyage │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               of Sindbad the │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Seaman         │  1  │  +   │        │  5   │  +  │ │   6
       _d._  The Fourth Voyage│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               of Sindbad the │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Seaman         │  1  │  +   │        │  5   │  +  │ │   6
       _e._  The Fifth Voyage │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               of Sindbad the │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Seaman         │  1  │  +   │        │  5   │  +  │ │   6
       _f._  The Sixth Voyage │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               of Sindbad the │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Seaman         │  1  │  +   │        │  5   │  -  │ │   6
             _ff._ The Sixth  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Voyage of      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Sindbad the    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Seaman         │     │  -   │        │ III  │  +  │ │   -
       _g._  The Seventh      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Voyage of      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Sindbad the    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Seaman         │  1  │  +   │        │  5   │  -  │ │   6
             _gg._ The Seventh│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Voyage of      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Sindbad the    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Seaman         │  -  │  -   │        │ III  │  +  │ │   6
  134. The City of Brass      │  2  │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
  135. The Craft and Malice of│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Women:               │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _a._  The King and his │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Wazir’s Wife   │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _b._  The Confectioner,│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               his Wife and   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Parrot     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
                              │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _c._  The Fuller and   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               his Son        │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _d._  The Rake’s Trick │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               against the    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Chaste Wife    │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _e._  The Miser and the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Loaves of Bread│     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _f._  The Lady and her │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               two Lovers     │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _g._  The King’s Son   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and the Ogress │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _h._  The Drop of Honey│     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _i._  The Woman who    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               made her       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               husband sift   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               dust           │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _j._  The Enchanted    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Spring         │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _k._  The Wazir’s Son  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and the        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Hammam-keeper’s│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Wife           │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _l._  The Wife’s device│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               to cheat her   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Husband        │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _m._  The Goldsmith and│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Cashmere   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Singing-girl   │  1  │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _n._  The Man who never│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               laughed during │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the rest of his│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               days           │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _o._  The King’s Son   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and the        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Merchant’s Wife│     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _p._  The Page who     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               feigned to know│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Speech of  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Birds          │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _q._  The Lady and her │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               five Suitors   │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _r._  The Three Wishes,│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               or the Man who │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               longed to see  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Night of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Power          │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _s._  The Stolen       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Necklace       │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _t._  The Two Pigeons  │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _u._  Prince Behram and│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Princess   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Al-Datma       │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _v._  The House with   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Belvedere  │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _w._  The King’s Son   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and the Ifrit’s│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Mistress       │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _x._  The Sandal-wood  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Merchant and   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Sharpers   │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _y._  The Debauchee and│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the            │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Three-year-old │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Child          │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
       _z._  The Stolen Purse │     │  +   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
             _aa._ The Fox and│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Folk       │     │  -   │        │  5   │     │ │   6
  136. Judar and his Brethren │  2  │  +   │        │  6   │     │ │   6
  137. The History of Gharib  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and his Brother Ajib │     │  +   │        │  6   │     │ │ 6, 7
  138. Otbah and Rayya        │     │  +   │        │  6   │     │ │   7
  139. Hind, daughter of      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Al-Nu’man and        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Al-Hajjaj            │     │  +   │        │  6   │     │ │   7
  140. Khuzaymah bin Bishr and│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Ekrimah al-Fayyaz    │  4  │  +   │        │  6   │     │ │   7
  141. Yunus the Scribe and   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Caliph Walid bin │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Sahl                 │  4  │  +   │        │  6   │     │ │   7
  142. Harun Al-Rashid and the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Arab Girl            │     │  +   │        │  6   │     │ │   7
  143. Al-Asma’i and the three│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         girls of Bassorah    │     │  +   │        │  6   │     │ │   7
  144. Ibrahim of Mosul and   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Devil            │     │  +   │        │  6   │     │ │   7
  145. The Lovers of the Banu │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Uzrah                │     │  +   │        │  6   │     │ │   7
  146. The Badawi and his Wife│     │  +   │        │  6   │     │ │   7
  147. The Lovers of Bassorah │     │  +   │        │  6   │     │ │   7
  148. Ishak of Mosul and his │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Mistress and the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Devil                │     │  +   │        │  6   │     │ │   7
  149. The Lovers of          │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Al-Medinah           │     │  +   │        │  6   │     │ │   7
  150. Al-Malik Al-Nasir and  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         his Wazir            │     │  +   │        │  6   │     │ │   7
  151. The Rogueries of       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Dalilah the Crafty   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and her Daughter     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Zaynab the           │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Coney-Catcher        │  4  │  +   │        │  6   │     │ │   7
       _a._  The Adventures of│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Mercury Ali of │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Cairo          │  4  │  +   │        │  6   │     │ │   7
  152. Ardashir and Hayat     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Al-Nufus             │  2  │  +   │        │  6   │     │ │   7
  153. Julnar the Sea-born and│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         her son King Badr    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Basim of Persia      │  3  │  +   │        │  7   │     │ │   7
  154. King Mohammed bin      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Sabaik and the       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Merchant Hasan       │  -  │  +   │        │  7   │     │ │   7
       _a._  Story of Prince  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Sayf Al-Muluk  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and the        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Princess Badi’a│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Al-Jamal       │  2  │  +   │        │  7   │     │ │ 7, 8
  155. Hasan of Bassorah      │  2  │  +   │        │  7   │     │ │   8
  156. Khalifah the Fisherman │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         of Baghdad           │  2  │  +   │        │  7   │     │ │   8
       _a._  The same from the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Breslau Edition│     │      │        │  7   │     │ │   8
  157. Masrur and Zayn        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Al-Mawassif          │     │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   8
  158. Ali Nur Al-Din and     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Miriam the           │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Girdle-Girl          │     │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │ 8, 9
  159. The Man of Upper Egypt │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and his Frankish Wife│     │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
  160. The Ruined Man of      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Baghdad and his      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Slave-Girl           │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
  161. King Jali’ad of Hind   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and his Wazir Shimas,│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         followed by the      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         history of King Wird │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Khan, son of King    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Jali’ad, with his    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Women and Wazirs     │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
       _a._  The Mouse and the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Cat            │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
       _b._  The Fakir and his│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Jar of Butter  │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
       _c._  The Fishes and   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Crab       │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
       _d._  The Crow and the │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Serpent        │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
       _e._  The Wild Ass and │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Jackal     │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
       _f._  The Unjust King  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and the Pilgrim│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Prince         │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
       _g._  The Crows and the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Hawk           │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
       _h._  The              │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Serpent-Charmer│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and his Wife   │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
       _i._  The Spider and   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Wind       │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
       _j._  The Two Kings    │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
       _k._  The Blind Man and│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Cripple    │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
       _l._  The Foolish      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Fisherman      │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
       _m._  The Boy and the  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Thieves        │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
       _n._  The Man and his  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Wife           │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
       _o._  The Merchant and │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Robbers    │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
       _p._  The Jackals and  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Wolf       │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
       _q._  The Shepherd and │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Rogue      │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
       _r._  The Francolin and│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Tortoises  │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
  162. Abu Kir the Dyer and   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Abu Sir the Barber   │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
  163. Abdullah the Fisherman │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and Abdullah the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Merman               │  4  │  +   │        │  8   │     │ │   9
  164. Harun Al-Rashid and Abu│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Hasan, the Merchant  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         of Oman              │  2  │  +   │        │  9   │     │ │   9
  165. Ibrahim and Jamilah    │     │  +   │        │  9   │     │ │   9
  166. Abu Al-Hasan of        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Khorasan             │     │  +   │        │  9   │     │ │   9
  167. Kamar Al-Zaman and the │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Jeweller’s Wife      │  4  │  +   │        │  9   │     │ │   9
  168. Abdullah bin Fazil and │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         his Brothers         │     │  +   │        │  9   │     │ │   9
  169. Ma’aruf the Cobbler and│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         his wife Fatimah     │  4  │  +   │        │  9   │     │ │  10
  170. Asleep and Awake       │  1  │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _a._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Lackpenny and  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Cook       │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
  171. The Caliph Omar ben    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Abdulaziz and the    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Poets                │  2  │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
  172. El Hejjaj and the Three│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Young Men            │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
  173. Haroun Er Reshid and   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Woman of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Barmecides           │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
  174. The Ten Viziers, or the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         History of King      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Azadbekht and his Son│  2  │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _a._  Of the           │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               uselessness of │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               endeavour      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               against        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               persistent     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               ill-fortune    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
             _aa._ Story of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Unlucky    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Merchant       │  2  │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _b._  Of looking to the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               issues of      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               affairs        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
             _bb._ Story of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Merchant   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and his Sons   │  2  │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _c._  Of the advantages│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               of Patience    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
             _cc._ Story of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Abou Sabir     │  2  │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _d._  Of the ill       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               effects of     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Precipitation  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
             _dd._ Story of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Prince Bihzad  │  2  │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _e._  Of the issues of │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               good and evil  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               actions        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
             _ee._ Story of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               King Dabdin and│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               his Viziers    │  2  │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _f._  Of Trust in God  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
             _ff._ Story of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               King Bekhtzeman│  2  │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _g._  Of Clemency      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
             _gg._ Story of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               King Bihkerd   │  2  │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _h._  Of Envy and      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Malice         │     │      │        │      │     │ │
             _hh._ Story of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Ilan Shah and  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Abou Temam     │  2  │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _i._  Of Destiny, or   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               that which is  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               written on the │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Forehead       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
             _ii._ Story of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               King Ibrahim   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and his Son    │  2  │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _j._  Of the appointed │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Term, which if │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               it be advanced,│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               may not be     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               deferred, and  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               if it be       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               deferred, may  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               not be advanced│     │      │        │      │     │ │
             _jj._ Story of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               King Suleiman  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Shah and his   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Sons           │  2  │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _k._  Of the speedy    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Relief of God  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
             _kk._ Story of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Prisoner,  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and how God    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               gave him relief│  2  │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
  175. Jaafer Ben Zehya and   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Abdulmelik Ben Salih │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Abbaside         │  2  │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
  176. Er Reshid and the      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Barmecides           │  2  │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
  177. Ibn Es-Semmak and      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Er-Reshid            │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
  178. El Mamoun and Zubeideh │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
  179. En Numan and the Arab  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         of the Benou Tai     │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
  180. Firouz and his Wife    │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
  181. King Shah Bekht and his│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Vizier Er Rehwan     │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _a._  Story of the Man │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               of Khorassan   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               his son and his│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               governor       │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _b._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Singer and the │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Druggist       │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _c._  Story of the King│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               who knew the   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               quintessence of│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               things         │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _d._  Story of the Rich│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Man who gave   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               his fair       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Daughter in    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Marriage to the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Poor Old Man   │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _e._  Story of the Rich│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Man and his    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Wasteful Son   │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _f._  The King’s Son   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               who fell in    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               love with the  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Picture        │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _g._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Fuller and his │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Wife           │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _h._  Story of the Old │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Woman, the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Merchant, and  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the King       │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _i._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               credulous      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Husband        │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _j._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Unjust King and│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Tither     │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
             _jj._ Story of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               David and      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Solomon        │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _k._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Thief and the  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Woman          │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _l._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Three Men and  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               our Lord Jesus │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
             _ll._ The        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Disciple’s     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Story          │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _m._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Dethroned King │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               whose kingdom  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and good were  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               restored to him│     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _n._  Story of the Man │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               whose caution  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               was the cause  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               of his Death   │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _o._  Story of the Man │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               who was lavish │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               of his house   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and his victual│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               to one whom he │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               knew not       │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _p._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Idiot and the  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Sharper        │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _q._  Story of Khelbes │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and his Wife   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and the Learned│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Man            │     │      │        │  I.  │     │ │
       _r._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Pious Woman    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               accused of     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               lewdness       │     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _s._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Journeyman and │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Girl       │     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _t._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Weaver who     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               became a       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Physician by   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               his Wife’s     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               commandment    │     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _u._  Story of the Two │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Sharpers who   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               cheated each   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               his fellow     │     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _v._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Sharpers with  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the            │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Money-changer  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and the Ass    │     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _w._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Sharper and the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Merchants      │     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
             _wa._ Story of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Hawk and   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Locust     │     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _x._  Story of the King│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and his        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Chamberlain’s  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Wife           │     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
             _xa._ Story of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Old Woman  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and the        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Draper’s Wife  │     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _y._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Foul-favoured  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Man and his    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Fair Wife      │     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _z._  Story of the King│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               who lost       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Kingdom and    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Wife and       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Wealth, and God│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               restored them  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               to him         │     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
             _aa._ Story of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Selim and Selma│     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
             _bb._ Story of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the King of    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Hind and his   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Vizier         │     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
  182. El Melik Ez Zahir      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Rukneddin Bibers El  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Bunducdari, and the  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Sixteen Officers of  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Police               │     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _a._  The First        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Officer’s Story│     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _b._  The Second       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Officer’s Story│     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _c._  The Third        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Officer’s Story│     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _d._  The Fourth       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Officer’s Story│     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _e._  The Fifth        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Officer’s Story│     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _f._  The Sixth        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Officer’s Story│     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _g._  The Seventh      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Officer’s Story│     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _h._  The Eighth       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Officer’s Story│     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
             _ha._ The Thief’s│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Story          │     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _i._  The Ninth        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Officer’s Story│     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _j._  The Tenth        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Officer’s Story│     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _k._  The Eleventh     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Officer’s Story│     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _l._  The Twelfth      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Officer’s Story│     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _m._  The Thirteenth   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Officer’s Story│     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _n._  The Fourteenth   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Officer’s Story│     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
             _na._ A Merry    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Jest of a Thief│     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
             _nb._ Story of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Old Sharper│     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _o._  The Fifteenth    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Officer’s Story│     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _p._  The Sixteenth    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Officer’s Story│     │      │        │      │     │ │
  183. Abdallah Ben Nafi, and │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the King’s Son of    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Cashgbar             │     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
       _a._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Damsel Tuhfet  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               El Culoub and  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Khalif Haroun  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Er Reshid      │     │      │        │ II.  │     │ │
  184. Women’s Craft          │     │      │        │ II.  │  +  │ │
  185. Noureddin Ali of       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Damascus and the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Damsel Sitt El Milah │     │      │        │ III. │     │ │
  186. El Abbas and the King’s│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Daughter of Baghdad  │     │      │        │ III. │     │ │
  187. The Two Kings and the  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Vizier’s Daughters   │     │      │        │ III. │     │ │
  188. The Favourite and her  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Lover                │     │      │        │ III. │     │ │
  189. The Merchant of Cairo  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and the Favourite of │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Khalif El Mamoun │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         El Hakim bi Amrillah │     │      │        │ III. │     │ │
  190. Conclusion             │     │      │        │ 9 &  │     │ │
                              │     │  +   │        │ III. │     │ │  10
 *191. History of Prince Zeyn │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Alasnam              │  3  │      │        │      │     │ │
 *192. History of Codadad and │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         his Brothers         │  3  │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_a._ History of the   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Princess of    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Deryabar       │  3  │      │        │      │     │ │
 *193. Story of Aladdin, or   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Wonderful Lamp   │  3  │      │        │      │     │ │
 *194. Adventures of the      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Caliph Harun         │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Al-Rashid            │  3  │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_a._ Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Blind Man, Baba│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Abdallah       │  3  │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_b._ Story of Sidi    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Numan          │  3  │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_c._ Story of Cogia   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Hassan Alhabbal│  3  │      │        │      │     │ │
 *195. Story of Ali Baba and  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Forty Thieves    │  3  │      │        │      │     │ │
 *196. Story of Ali Cogia, a  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Merchant of Bagdad   │  3  │      │        │      │     │ │
 *197. Story of Prince Ahmed  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and the Fairy Peri   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Banou                │  3  │      │        │      │     │ │
 *198. Story of the Sisters   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         who envied their     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         younger sister       │  3  │      │        │      │     │ │
  199. (Anecdote of Jaafar the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Barmecide, = No. 39) │  2  │      │        │      │     │ │
  200. The Adventures of Ali  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and Zaher of Damascus│  4  │      │        │      │     │ │
  201. The Adventures of the  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Fisherman, Judar of  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Cairo, and his       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         meeting with the Moor│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Mahmood and the      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Sultan Beibars       │  4  │      │        │      │     │ │
  202. The Physician and the  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         young man of Mosul   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  203. Story of the Sultan of │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Yemen and his three  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         sons                 │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  204. Story of the Three     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Sharpers and the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Sultan               │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _a._  Adventures of the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Abdicated      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Sultan         │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _b._  History of       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Mahummud,      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Sultan of Cairo│     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _c._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               First Lunatic  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _d._  (Story of the    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Second Lunatic │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               = No. 184)     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _e._  Story of the Sage│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and his Pupil  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _f._  Night adventure  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               of the Sultan  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _g._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               first foolish  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               man            │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _h._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               broken-backed  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Schoolmaster   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _i._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               wry-mouthed    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Schoolmaster   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _j._  The Sultan’s     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               second visit to│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Sisters    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _k._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Sisters and the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Sultana, their │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               mother         │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  205. Story of the Avaricious│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Cauzee and his wife  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  206. Story of the Bang-Eater│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and the Cauzee       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _a._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Bang-Eater and │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               his wife       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _b._  Continuation of  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Fisherman, │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               or Bang-Eater’s│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Adventures     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  207. The Sultan and the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Traveller Mhamood    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         AlHyjemmee           │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _a._  The Koord Robber │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               (= No. 33)     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _b._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Husbandman     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _c._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Three Princes  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and Enchanting │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Bird           │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _d._  Story of a Sultan│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               of Yemen and   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               his three Sons │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _e._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               first Sharper  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               in the Cave    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _f._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               second Sharper │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _g._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               third Sharper  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _h._  History of the   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Sultan of Hind │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  208. Story of the           │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Fisherman’s Son      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  209. Story of Abou Neeut and│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Abou Neeuteen        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  210. Story of the Prince of │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Sind, and Fatima,    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         daughter of Amir Bin │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Naomaun              │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  211. Story of the Lovers of │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Syria, or the Heroine│     │      │        │      │     │ │
  212. Story of Hyjauje, the  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         tyrannical Governor  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         of Confeh, and the   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         young Syed           │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  213. Story of the Sultan    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Haieshe              │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  214. Story told by a        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Fisherman            │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  215. The Adventures of Mazin│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         of Khorassaun        │ 10  │      │        │      │     │ │
  216. Adventure of Haroon Al │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Rusheed              │ 11  │      │        │      │     │ │
       _a._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Sultan of      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Bussorah       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _b._  Nocturnal        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               adventures of  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Haroon Al      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Rusheed        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _c._  Story related by │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Munjaub        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _d._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Sultan, the    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Dirveshe and   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the Barber’s   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Son            │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _e._  Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Bedouin’s Wife │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _f._  Story of the Wife│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and her two    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Gallants       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  217. Adventures of Aleefa,  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         daughter of          │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Mherejaun, Sultan of │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Hind, and Eusuff, son│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         of Sohul, Sultan of  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Sind                 │ 11  │      │        │      │     │ │
  218. Adventures of the three│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Princes, sons of the │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Sultan of China      │ 10  │      │        │      │     │ │
  219. Story of the Gallant   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Officer              │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  220. Story of another       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         officer              │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  221. Story of the Idiot and │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         his Asses            │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  222. Story of the Lady of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Cairo and the Three  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Debauchees           │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  223. Story of the Good      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Vizier unjustly      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         imprisoned           │ 11  │      │        │      │     │ │
  224. Story of the Prying    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Barber and the young │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         man of Cairo         │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  225. Story of the Lady of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Cairo and her four   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Gallants             │ 11  │      │        │      │     │ │
       _a._  The Cauzee’s     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Story          │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _b._  The Syrian       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _c._  The Caim-makaum’s│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Wife           │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _d._  Story told by the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Fourth Gallant │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  226. Story of a Hump-backed │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Porter               │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  227. The Aged Porter of     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Cairo and the Artful │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Female Thief         │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  228. Mhassun and his tried  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         friend Mouseh        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  229. Mahummud Julbee, son to│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         an Ameer of Cairo    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  230. The Farmer’s Wife      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  231. The Artful Wife        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  232. The Cauzee’s Wife      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  233. Story of the Merchant, │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         his Daughter, and the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Prince of Eerauk     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  234. The Two Orphans        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  235. Story of another       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Farmer’s Wife        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  236. Story of the Son who   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         attempted his        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Father’s Wives       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  237. The Two Wits of Cairo  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and Syria            │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  238. Ibrahim and Mouseh     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  239. The Viziers Ahmed and  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Mahummud             │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  240. The Son addicted to    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Theft                │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  241. Adventures of the      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Cauzee, his Wife, &c.│     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _a._  The Sultan’s     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Story of       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Himself        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  242. Story of Shaykh Nukheet│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         the Fisherman, who   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         became favourite to a│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Sultan               │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       _a._  Story of the King│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               of Andalusia   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  243. Story of Teilone,      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Sultan of Egypt      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  244. Story of the Retired   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Man and his Servant  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  245. The Merchant’s Daughter│     │      │        │      │     │ │
         who married the      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Emperor of China     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
 *246. New Adventures of the  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Caliph Harun         │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Al-Rashid            │     │      │        │      │     │ │
 *247. The Physician and the  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         young Purveyor of    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Bagdad               │     │      │        │      │     │ │
 *248. The Wise Heycar        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
 *249. Attaf the Generous     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
 *250. Prince Habib and       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Dorrat-al-Gawas      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
 *251. The Forty Wazirs       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_a._ Story of Shaykh  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Shahabeddin    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_b._ Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Gardener, his  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Son, and the   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Ass            │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_c._ The Sultan       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Mahmoud and his│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Wazir          │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_d._ Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Brahman        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Padmanaba and  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the young      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Fyquai         │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_e._ Story of Sultan  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Akshid         │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_f._ Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Husband, the   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Lover and the  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Thief          │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_g._ Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Prince of      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Carisme and the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Princess of    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Georgia        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_h._ The Cobbler and  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the King’s     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Daughter       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_i._ The Woodcutter   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               and the Genius │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_j._ The Royal Parrot │     │      │        │      │     │ │
 *252. Story of the King and  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Queen of Abyssinia   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
 *253. Story of Princess Amina│     │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_a._ Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Princess of    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Tartary        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_b._ Story told by the│     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Old Mans’ Wife │     │      │        │      │     │ │
 *254. Story of Ali Johari    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
 *255. Story of the two       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Princes of Cochin    │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Chin                 │     │      │        │      │     │ │
 *256. Story of the Two       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Husbands             │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_a._ Story of Abdallah│     │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_b._ Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Favourite      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
 *257. Story of Yusuf and the │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Indian Merchant      │     │      │        │      │     │ │
 *258. Story of Prince Benazir│     │      │        │      │     │ │
 *259. Story of Selim, Sultan │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         of Egypt             │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_a._ Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Cobbler’s Wife │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_b._ Story of Adileh  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_c._ Story of the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               scarred        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Kalender       │     │      │        │      │     │ │
       *_d._ Continuation of  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               the story of   │     │      │        │      │     │ │
               Selim          │     │      │        │      │     │ │
 *260. Story of Seif Sul Yesn │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  261. Story of the Labourer  │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         and the Chair        │     │      │        │      │     │ │
  262. Story of Ahmed the     │     │      │        │      │     │ │
         Orphan               │     │      │        │      │     │ │
 ═════════════════════════════╧═════╧══════╧════════╧══════╧═════╧═╧═══════

  N. B.—In using this Table, some allowance must be made for
    differences in the titles of many of the tales in different
    editions. For the contents of the printed text, I have followed
    the lists in Mr. Payne’s “Tales from the Arabic,” vol. iii.

And here I end this long volume with repeating in other words and other
tongue what was said in “L’Envoi”:—

            ان تجد عيبا فسدّ الخلاه ✿ جلّ من لا عيب فيه و علا

            Hide thou whatever here is found of fault;
            And laud The Faultless and His might exalt!

After which I have only to make my bow and to say


[Illustration: ‏وٱلسلام‎]

-----

Footnote 471:

  Probably Wakksh al-Falák = Feral of the Wild.

Footnote 472:

  This is the date of the Paris edition. There was an earlier edition
  published at La Haye in 1743.

Footnote 473:

  There are two other Oriental romances by Voltaire; viz. Babouc, and
  the Princess of Babylon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Added missing footnote anchor on p. 20.
 2. Changed “for daïses” to “four daïses” on p. 28.
 3. Added missing footnote number on p. 54.
 4. Changed “admit”, “que”, & “du” to “admît”, “qui”, & “de” on p. 99.
 5. Changed “insignificantes” & “lecon” to “insignifiantes” & “leçon” on
    p. 100.
 6. Changed “elegance” to “élégance” on p. 103.
 7. Changed “Pilgrimage” to “Pilgrimages” on p. 103.
 8. Changed “resembler” to “ressembler” on p. 108.
 9. Changed “contrabande” to “contrebande” on p. 114.
10. Changed “une” & “italíana” to “una” & “italiana” on p. 114.
11. Changed “may assumed” ot “may be assumed” on p. 115.
12. Changed “etendez” & “nécessaries” to “étendez” & “nécessaires” on p.
    134.
13. Changed “I am reproacher” to “I am reproached” on p. 134.
14. Changed “un” to “une” on p. 203.
15. Changed “Medico” to “Médico” on p. 210.
16. Changed “Lustseuche” to “Lustsuche” on p. 211.
17. Changed “ἀἴτης” to “ἀΐτης” on p. 212.
18. Changed “mangaient” to “mangeaient” on p. 245.
19. Changed “personelle” to “personnelle” on p. 248.
20. Changed “Francais a” to “Français à” on p. 249.
21. Changed “qui” to “que” on p. 250.
22. Changed “ob. 427” to “ob. A.H. 427” on p. 269.
23. Changed all of the opening “Do.” to “——” for the Appendix Index I.
    beginning on p. 309 to be consistent with the other indexes.
24. Changed “‏هزار يک رور‎” to “‏روز يک رور‎” on p. 499.
25. Changed “‏سيف التچبان‎” to “‏التچان التچبان‎” on p. 501.
26. Changed “Perleuschnur” to “Perlenschnur” on p. 502.
27. Changed “52. Of Mammon and Mohammed of Bassorah” to “52. Of Mammon
    and Mohammed of Bassorah (43).” and “58. Of Aladin, Governor of
    Constantinople.” to “58. Of Aladin, Governor of Constantinople (49)”
    on p. 504.
28. Changed “140. Of Chazmimé Imni Bashés (160).” to “140. Of Chazmimé
    Imni Bashés (140).” on p. 506.
29. Changed “eveillés” to “éveillés” on p. 508.
30. Changed “recits” to “récits” on p. 510.
31. Silently corrected simple spelling, grammar, and typographical
    errors.
32. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
33. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
34. Superscripts are denoted by a caret before a single superscript
    character or a series of superscripted characters enclosed in curly
    braces, e.g. M^r. or M^{ister}.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT — VOLUME 10 (OF 10) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


